Supernormal Faculties in Man (Eugène Osty, 1923)
==========================================================
Osty's 1923 study of supernormal faculties; the French psychical researcher's experiments. Public domain. Digitized from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/OstySupernormal).

SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES
IN MAN


AN EXPERIMENTAL STUDY

BY

EUGENE OSTY

TRANSLATED FROM THE FRENCH BY

STANLEY UE BRATH, M.Inst.C.E.


"We live on the surface of our being."

William James


7Wj Tr**sU*<m mi Ftwst Publish** tn J921


PRINTED IS GREAT BRITAIN

Los Angeles State College Library


TRANSLATOR'S NOTE


IT is the bounoVn duty <>f I translator to give to tfcfl utmost
of his power the meaning of the author who entrusts him
with this responsible task, without introducing any colMT
from his own thought.
This is doubly imperative in the case of a scientific work on a
highly controversial subject, one, moreover, to which the applica-
tion of the experimental and non-controversial method followed in
this book is so highly desirable.

I have endeavoured to avoid every kind of locution that might
tend to colour the author's meaning in any way. I have kept in
*OSe touch with I>r Osty durinq thr |»r<>gr«ss <>f work, and
ave retained the terms meta-normal, para-normal, and super-
normal—which he uses as signifying " beyond," " outside," and
11 above " thought, but not as implying separate modes of
cognition. I have been asked by a distinguished psychologist
why the word u cognition " has been used in some places and
" knowledge " in others. As 1 understand it 11 cognition " refers
to the process, 11 knowledge " to the result.

w Thought M is used in its psychological sense to include all
mental action, conscious, subconscious, and transcendental to
Time and Space. * Modality " is used as it is by Oird in the
of H collective modes."
u Psychism " is used to cover the psychic activity in a human
being ; " dynamo-psychism," as used by Geley, a psychic energy
rvading Nature and individualised in man — a dynamic psychic
wer. Synergy " is used as synchronic and connected energy.
As this very important study of a special function is intended
for students as well as for the general public, the references to
other French works have been left as in the original, where no
English translation is available : to translate them would be to
give a false impression and to debar them from reference by those
who may wish to consult them.

Some readers may consider that the words " metagnomy " and
M metagnomic " occur more often than literary style requires j
but l>r. Osty has not only to bear in mind the scientific accuracy
of his sentences, but also the misrepresentations of a certain class
of critics who do not scruple to detach from their context passages
which, standing alone, would convert into general statements


vi SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


those which are only applicable to metagnomic sensitives ; i.e.
persons whose special faculty is the delineation of human lives.
For this reason he has found it necessary to stress very frequently
the special characteristic of the faculty in action. Dealing with
subject-matter that excites the violent and unreasoning hostility
that perverts every unwelcome fact, I think it due to the author to
retain his purpose by stressing that the whole work is upon one
aspect only of the whole faculty.

M Cryptesthesia " and M Metagnomy."

The author writes to me :

" Cryptesthesia signifies ' a hidden sense ' and therefore implies
a sensory system registering vibrations unperceived by the normal
senses. This may be correct for telepathy, vision at a distance,
discovery of hidden water-springs, etc., for we naturally imagine
these phenomena as resulting from sensations. But when a
percipient reveals an event that happened yesterday or a hundred
years ago ; still more when that event has not yet taken place, it
is no longer possible to suppose that his faculty is registering
vibrations of any kind.

"I am aware that the term I have chosen is strange and may
seem uncouth, but I use it because it implies no more than the
fact of supernormal cognition of human lives."

Stanley De Brath.

Weybridge, August 1 2th, 1923.


PREFACE


IN 1913 I summed up in my book, Lucidity and Intuition,
the results of three years' experimental work on the strange
faculty possessed by certain persons of revealing the
sequences of individual lives independently of normal
intelligence, of normal sensorial information, and also of the
unavoidable obstacles which Time and Space place in the way
of ordinary perceptions.

In succeeding years I have continued to explore this department
of an unknown psychology. The book, which in 1913 reflected
my knowledge of the subject, satisfies me no longer though it
contains many observed psychological facts that remain un-
changed. It will not be reissued.

Wishing to resume this study and to define its foundations
before proceeding to the mysterious origins of human thought,
I found myself obliged to start altogether afresh.

By way of introduction I first wrote a book, Le sens de la vie
humaine, in which I endeavoured to trace the progressive mental
evolution of humanity and to show how Man appears to impartial
and informed Reason under the aspect of his " thought-function."

I now present to informed readers this new book, which has a
double purpose — to trace the main outlines of the problem of
supernormal cognition, and to make a general psychological study
of the conditions under which that study is most fertile ; namely
when a person endowed with supernormal faculty, exercises
it upon a human personality. Readers of Lucidity and In-
tuition will not find the present work merely an enlarged,
pruned, and corrected edition of the former book ; but an
entirely new summary of the results of twelve years' investiga-
tions, just as if I had written nothing previously on the subject.

Except in the first part, in which I pass rapidly over the various
manifestations of supernormal faculties, I shall not cite authorities.
The book is not a work of erudition, but an entirely original study
of personal experiment, independent of reading, and conducted
without intentional reference to any influence but that of the
observed facts. In face of phenomena that have been affirmed,
denied, distorted, and very diversely explained and interpreted,
I have set aside all that has already been said, being resolved to
accept no suggestions but those of the experimental facts them-
selves

vii


viii SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN

The book is not a summary of other men's work with additions
of my own, but is my contribution of personal research in Meta-
normal psychology.

The biological problem set forth is so important in itself and in
its implications, that I do not doubt that the scientific world will
wish to verify the exactitude of my experimental data. I hope
that men of science will not remain indifferent or merely
passively interested spectators of the psychological drama
exhibited in the following pages.

The phenomenon of supernormal cognition is, as will be seen,
reproducible at will, provided that its processes are known. It
does not depend on any faith in the witnesses, nor on any beliefs,
whether positive or negative, but on exact observations and on
experiments that can be renewed at any time. It is not to be
judged by any dicta such as / believe or / do not believe, but by
precise verification of the facts.

In publishing these results of personal research, I take the
whole responsibility of placing the scientific world in a position
to reproduce the series of experiments from which I have received
data on one of the most profoundly interesting problems pre-
sented to mankind.

I hope that a committee of unbiassed men of science only
desirous of truth and holding such positions as will make their
verdict decisive, may, after reading this book, verify experi-
mentally the soundness of its conclusions.

Such a confirmation of my observations would result in bringing
into the realm of science phenomena that have hitherto lain out-
side its purview because they have been considered (without
examination) to be absurd. Treated as scientific data they
should receive investigation at the hands of many competent
experimenters, and speedily lead to fruitful results.

PMtIS, July, l9 22.


CONTENTS

TAGg

Translator's Note v

Preface .......... vii

PART I

SUPERNORMAL COGNITION UNDER ITS DIFFERENT

ASPECTS

CM AFTER

L Man, Known and Unknown x

II. Normal and Supernormal Cognition .... ft

III. The Diverse Aspects of Supernormal Cognition . 12

1. Supernormal Self-cognition —

(a) Autoscopy . . . . . . .12

(b) Pre-cognitive diagnosis of the self ... 16

2. Supernormal Cognition of the External —
(a) Supernormal cognition of the immediate environ-
ment . 23

(6) Supernormal cognition of the environment distant

in space ....... 29

(c) Supernormal cognition of the environment distant
in time 31

3. The Limits of Supernormal Cognition ... 44

IV. Supernormal Cognition Directed upon a Human Per-

sonality 46

V. Method of Investigation of Supernormal Cognition

Directed upon a Human Personality ... 49

PART II

THE SEQUENCE OF PHENOMENA IN SUPERNORMAL
COGNITION APPLIED TO A HUMAN OBJECTIVE

I. Supernormal Cognition of the Organic States of a

Human Personality . . . . . -54


II. Supernormal Cognition of the Emotional and Intel

lectual States of a Human Personality . . 64


x SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN

en Am * pack

III. Supernormal Cognition of a Human Personality in the

External Sequence of a Life .... 73

1. The Person Cognized is in Presence of the Meta-

gnomic Percipient ...... 74

2. The Person Cognized is Distant in Space from the

Percipient ....... 90

3. The Person Cognized is Distant in Time from the

Percipient ....... 99

PART III

METAGNOMIC PERCIPIENTS IN THE EXERCISE OF
THEIR FACULTY

I. The Dawn of the Faculty of Supernormal Cognition . 113

II. The General Psychological Conditions for Supernormal

Cognition . . . . . . . .118

1. The Functional Dissociation of Psychic Activity . 119


2. The Para-normal Sense . . . . . .121

3. How the Special Sense of Metagnomic Subjects is

connected with Human Beings presented to it 123

4. Fluctuations of the Metagnomic Faculty during

Experiment ....... 134

III. The Psychological Sequences of Metagnomy in Action 136

PART IV

THE INFORMATIVE SOURCES OF SUPERNORMAL
COGNITION IN METAGNOMY ON A HUMAN
PERSONALITY

I. The Problem of the Informative Sources in Metagnomy 162

1. The General Problem ...... 162

2. The Problem Restricted to the Informative Sources

of Metagnomy on a Human Objective . .163

II. When a Metagnomic Subject takes Cognizance of thb

States of Life of a Human Being in Presence, whence
does he draw his Information ? 168

III. When a Metagnomic Subject takes Cognizance of the
States of Life of a Human Being Distant in Space,
whence does he draw his Information ? . . . 188


CONTENTS xi

MAtffl PAGK

IV. When a Metagnomic Subject takes Cognizance of the
States of Life of a Human Being Distant in Time,

whence does he draw his information ? . . . i95

V. Sketch of a Study on the Psychological Determinism
of Errors in Metagnomy in Operation on a Human

Personality . 205

1 . On Errors in the Exercise of Supernormal Cognition 205

2. Errors arising from Defective Functioning of the
Psychism of Metagnomic Subjects . . . 206

3. Errors originating in the Personality assigned for
Metagnomic Cognition 231

4. Errors originating with the Experimenter . . 232

. " Experimental Reasoning " and a Working Hypothesis 239

Index ........... 243


SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES
IN MAN


PART I

SUPERNORMAL COGNITION UNDER ITS
DIFFERENT ASPECTS

CHAPTER I

MAN, KNOWN AND UNKNOWN

( ROM a view of mankind emerging from the depths of the
past, it is easy to perceive that the concept Man has
formed of his own personality has grown pari passu with
the progressive stages of his thought.
Until modern times, through lack of intellectual discipline in
observation and research, his concepts have been built up under
the suggestion of introspective observation and emotional and
mystical tendencies. His desires and beliefs have taken form in
various religious and philosophic systems. Religious and philo-
sophical explanations have the quality of the epochs and of the
nations in which they appeared ; they are at the level of the
mentality of those who conceived them and of the human groups
that accepted them.

By long training of thought, Man has in these present times
been led to the discovery of exact rules for investigation and
inference in research. He has invented the experimental method
of physical science beginning with the study of facts and inferring
laws which allow of phenomena being foreseen and often of being
reproduced.

Successively applied to astronomy, physics, chemistry, and all
dynamic manifestations of Matter, this method has brought about
a vast development of these sciences from their early rudimentary
forms.

We are now, it may be said, beginning to apply this experi-
mental method to the study of human beings,

Man has ceased to consider himself as an exception in the
universe, but rather as an integral part of it Henceforth he
i


oUl hh M U( MAI* r AvUiiTUfiS JN MAN


studies humanity from outside, no longer projecting upon his
fellows the results of his introspective observation. And at this
point cognition splits into two } irts— on the one side the
speculations which ultimate in opinions and beliefs, but not in
knowledge ; and on the other demonstrable, verifiable and
communicable knowledge proceeding from scientific method and
fruitful in useful applications.

Scientific research is closed to sentiment and to the traditions
that are so tenacious of life because born of our desires and
illusions. The man of science now studies life without taking
any account of the aspect which beliefs may have given to it.
The human being has become an object of study on the same
basis as all other forms of organized matter ; only more complex
than others because at the summit of the series of animal evolu-
tion, and therefore having a larger number of inherited and
acquired aptitudes.

For about a century, anatomists, physiologists, biologists,
anthropologists and psychologists, have undertaken the study
of physical man, convinced that there is within him much that
is unknown but nothing unknowable.

What stage has this knowledge now reached ?

I shall not here endeavour to draw up a balance sheet of that
knowledge which has grown almost entirely under the eyes of the
present generation. Its total is large, and even astonishing if we
compare the long period that man has existed with the progress
made in one century.

General human structure, its functional mechanism, and the
constituent elements of the tissues, have been explored up to the
limits that instrumentation allows. This is the easier part and
the most advanced.

The processus of activity in the diverse functions has been
studied in its main outlines, and general laws have been established
governing digestion, assimilation, excretion, respiration, the
secretions, sensibility and motricity, which throw light upon one
another and lead to conclusions on the functional co-ordination
of the human body, variable indeed, but increasingly clear and
useful.

The most complex of all those functions— the function of
thought — has-been studied in the same manner, integrating it
with the general functioning of the organism. Analysis has
endeavoured to disentangle its confused and interwoven elements.
Starting from the study of simple sensori-motor reflexes, analysis
has proceeded to psychic-reflexes, association-reflexes of increasing
complexity, and to the method by which psycho-physiological
habits are formed. Cerebro-psychic inter-relations — the reactions
of organic states on the function of thought, and of thought on the


MAN, KNOWN AND UNKNOWN 3

organism — have been closely studied. This study has been
comparative, having regard to age, race, health, sickness, and the
different stages in physical life.

These positive investigations have resulted in an important
total of knowledge which has led to many useful discoveries in
many directions and given greater security to life.

Nevertheless this total, so large considering the time during
which it has been amassed, still leaves the mystery of man
unsolved. That still remains to be discovered.

The organising energy in the fertilised ovum concealing so
many potential activities and heredities, which transform that
microscopic complex into a human being with all its human
intricacies and capacity for thought, still remains entirely
mysterious.

The intimate detail of sickness, old age, and death are still
unexplored biological secrets. We cannot give even the beginning
of an explanation how individual life originates nor how it ceases.

And what shall we say concerning that function of thought
which through succeeding centuries has been developed and
adapted to life under the influence of life, and, after its long
infancy, has, almost in our own days, discovered the method of
research that leads to permanent and useful acquirement ?
What can we say of that thought-function which has formulated
so many hypotheses on the meaning of life, has surmised so many
aspects of the possible, and desiring to satisfy every curiosity has
sought to explain itself and all else ? What can be said of a force
that presses so persistently against the bounds of the small
aggregation of matter in which it is confined ?

Man is himself the profoundest enigma yet encountered, the
more insoluble as knowledge increases. The increasing data do
but extend the problem of life beyond any limits that we can
foresee.

Man in fact only knows himself and the external world by the
senses that systematize the information he receives, more especially
by sight— the most informing of any. Whence comes the difficulty
unsurmounted, despite the most ingenious ancillary instruments,
of penetrating the actualities of life which we imagine to be
reducible to that incomprehensible thing — Energy ?

Life, its associated dynamisms, their nature, their modalities,
their laws and their interactions are realities of which our normal
or assisted vision can only perceive the results — cells, organs,
muscular movements, chemical products, and the like. Life, in
its fundamental reality, beyond sensorial appearances, escapes us,
and, seemingly, will continue to escape us. Our intelligence is
only equipped for the perception of forms and relations.

Scientific men of to-day are usually fully aware of this : they


4 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


know that man, under the limitations of his senses cannot hope
to know anything beyond M phenomena " and that his sciences
deal with " appearances." There are, however, men of science,
some of high repute, who have thought well to give a biologic
explanation of the human being, based on the very restricted
information now available and the data furnished by a psycho-
physiology still in its earliest stages and as yet uncertain what
line to take. Having only as yet been able to study the common
manifestations of the principal organic functions, and unable
to penetrate deeper, they have imprisoned human life within the
circle of their few superficial acquirements. They have treated
human personality, raised so far above other living forms by
religions and philosophies, as a mere machine for the transforma-
tion of energy differing from all other organisms only in being
more complex. They have made the thought-function nothing
more than the sum of accumulated reflexes co-ordinated and
maintained as organic habits reacting to external stimuli. They
have judged Consciousness— that amazing enigma — to be a re-
sultant, a sensation superadded to other sensations, a potentiality
dominating the physico-chemical reactions of the body, an
epi-phenomenon.

Certainly the method of scientific study has had the merit of
leading to positive knowledge, to useful acquirements and to the
hope of more and more fruitful research, while the subjective
methods of former times were biologically sterile ; but why
should we retain the same temper as our predecessors and become
in some sort a priestly hierarchy in science ? Why, after having
destroyed the useless and misleading speculative metaphysic,
should we forthwith begin to speculate with the few results
attained ? Certainly we must endeavour to build up a complete
positive biology, a positive and progressive science of Man ; but
why clog the first steps to that knowledge by definitions assigning
limits to what Man is ? How much infantile simplicity underlies
the self-sufficiency of many scientific men ! No man worthy of
that name is a doctrinaire, he earns the name by the scientific
temper disciplined by research and the criticism which accepts
what is demonstrated, and that alone.

Entering on a scientific study of Man, all phenomena of Nature
must be looked upon with a mind alive to the immensity of the
problem of Life and the slenderness of our means of knowledge,
which only touch realities under the very restricted modes of what
they appear to be. It is necessary to purge our minds resolutely
of all prejudgments and all beliefs which involve hasty, and neces-
sarily erroneous explanations. .We should accept nothing that
is not demonstrated, but should venture on no denials.

Such is the prudent attitude. If man of the ordinary type is


MAN, KNOWN AND UNKNOWN


0


still so enigmatical, if his life has attained a complexity that makes
him a little world in himself — a thought issuing from matter
which has grown eager to explain itself and the universe — a far
more astonishing spectacle is presented to our eyes when we find
ourselves in presence of human individuals endowed with psycho-
physiological faculties so unexpected from the point of view of
ordinary psycho-physiology. This spectacle reveals to us in a
flash our profound ignorance of what life is and should fill us with
pity for the self-sufficiency of doctrinaires.

The few scientific men who during the last fifty years have
extended their curiosity to research on the supernormal phenomena
produced by certain human beings generally called " magnetisers,"
" occultists," spiritualists, and the like, have found themselves
faced with a category of dynamo-psychic manifestations which
have obliged them to abandon their previous concepts of life and
made them almost despair of being able to construct others.

They have observed beings endowed with ability to act on
matter by a power emanating from them not reducible to any
known force, but enabling them to move objects by mere apposi-
tion of their hands, or at a distance without any contact at all.

They have observed beings who in hypnosis and sometimes,
though more rarely, in a waking state, can produce nebulous,
quasi-vaporous matter developing in a few seconds, under the
eyes of the observers, to a solid state plastic to some indeterminate
power which creates forms, usually human (hands, heads, etc.)
having all the characteristics of life.

They have observed beings connected with their environment
by channels of cognition other than any known sensorial means,
and, under certain conditions, able to discern water, minerals,
metals, or subterranean cavities, to reveal the contents of closed
boxes and sealed letters, or to perceive distant occurrences as if
present to their eyes.

They have observed beings having the faculty to reveal the
consecutive events in the individual lives of others— past events
subsisting only as memories, and future events incalculable by
reason. From these experiences, repeated for some thirty years
past, they have been led to certitude that the human being is a
focus of psycho-physical energy with potentialities far surpassing
its ordinary manifestations in daily life.

Reverting to the history of past ages, they have recognized here
and there supernormal manifestations analogous to those now
observed, but deformed by superstitions. Only from the phases
of humanity near to our own day have they been able to recon-
struct a history of the supernormal with some degree of precision.
Prior to that time the subject is a chaos in which the real
supernormal is buried under innumerable creations of mystical


6 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


imagination. The true cannot be disentangled from the merely
probable or the certainly false. On the confines of history the
human supernormal is immersed in legend. In the age of mythos
there is no distinction between the natural and the supernatural ;
all nature is one marvel, Gods and men intermingle their lives in
daily affairs. These are the dreams of nations with the mentality
of childhood.

Diverse aspects taken by the human supernormal succeed
these — Hindu wonder-workers, Hebrew prophets, pythonesses,
sibyls, Chaldean magi, Christian ascetics of old time . . . sorcerers,
inspired persons, demoniacs, occultists of the Middle Ages . . .
initiates and occultists of all eras, trying to wrest from Nature
the secret of superhuman power.

In our own day since the Fox sisters attributed their pow f er of
unconsciously moving objects by mere contact or at a distance to
discarnate spirits, the diffusion of theoretical and practical
spiritualism has produced conditions eminently favourable to
the release and cultivation of the dynamo-psychism latent in man.
These mystical marvels showed so many verifiable facts capable
of being reproduced, that they drew the attention of some
scientific men. After making all allowances for illusion and
fraud, there still remained an output of phenomena of the highest
importance to the study of the human dynamo-psychism.

The received explanation of supernormal human faculty, like
that of normal human faculty, has been parallel with growing
mentality. It comes from the past on two currents — credulity
and undisciplined research — resembling one another so closely
as to seem identical.

Divine influence was the first explanation of human super-
normality, at least this is the first recorded in history. Apollo,
enamoured of Cassandra, gives her the gift of prophecy. Sibyls
and pythonesses writhed under the possession of a god speaking
by their mouth. The Hebrew prophet was the voice of Jehovah
to his people. Evil spirits also endowed men with supernormal
power : it is related that Simon of Samaria, called the Magus,
celebrated and venerated in the Roman world, was precipitated
from the air into which two demons had raised him, at the
prayer of Simon Cephas, our Saint Peter.

Sooner than is usually recognized, the spiritist concept appears.
In the second century a.d. Tertullian affirmed before the Roman
Senate the existence of divination by tables, and spoke of it as
a current practice. According to Plutarch a phantom w T arned
Brutus of his approaching defeat and death at Philippi.

Catholic orthodoxy in the Middle Ages divided the possessors
of supernormal powers into two groups — those divinely inspired,
receiving during adoration or ecstasy the power of rising from the


MAN, KNOWN AND UNKNOWN 7

earth, of vision at a distance or into the future ; and those

posses
by th
were i


possessed by the devil, obtaining their powers by that possession,
by the dark practices of the Kabbala or by sorcery. The former
were venerated as saints ; the latter were persecuted and expiated
in torments the possession of exceptional but human faculties.

To-day the mystical explanation remains on the level of pre-
vailing human mentality. It finds its sustenance in classified
and recorded phenomena that can be reproduced. These
phenomena, still inexplicable by any known physiology, are
necessarily presented under an aspect pertaining to the theo-
sophical or spiritualist doctrines held by most of those from
whom they proceed, and are thought to be due to the inter-
vention of human discarnate spirits or to thought projected by
impulse from certain psychical conditions on to the spiritual
plane.

Side by side with this explanation by beliefs has grown the
explanation by research. Psychical researchers, repelled by
mystical suggestions, have sought a less naive solution to the
phenomena observed ; but in the absence of directing method
they have followed where chance has led and marked time
without progressing, collecting indeed some observed facts
worthy of retention, but heaping up an enormous mass of fanciful
matter unadaptable to human realities, and therefore useless.
This is the balance sheet of the M occult " and " esoteric "
sciences. They were probably engendered in the ancient civiliza-
tion of India, and passed from temple to temple, from nation to
nation, and from age to age, added to, distorted, re-edited, and
transformed in each. Fabre d'Olivet has recently been at the
pains of reconstructing them.

They still have adepts. In the modern world we still find
" magi," kabbalists, and astrologers, etc., who think to acquire
supernormal power or knowledge by applying the chaotic doc-
trines of these 11 sciences." Any man disciplined by real science
who touches on these things is amazed that time and labour
should be given to these pseudo-sciences whose history is one
long demonstration of their futility. No useful discovery has
ever come from them.

Esoteric sciences and mystical explanations will continue until
experimental science succeeds in explaining human super-
normality.

Attracted by curiosity or impelled by mystical desire, many
have recently been led to cultivate the supernormal, and they
have brought to light phenomena of exceptional import. Sub-
jects have appeared, called 41 mediums " (because thought to be
intermediaries), who have come under the observation of some
of the elite of the modern scientific world. In England, William


8


SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


Crookes, Oliver Lodge, Alfred Russel Wallace, and others ; in
Germany, the astronomer Zollner, the psychologist Schrenck-
Notzing ; in Italy, Lombroso, Morselli, and others ; in Poland,
Ochorowicz ; in Russia, Aksakoff ; in France, Charles Richet,
Arnould de Gramont, Camille Flammarion, Joseph Maxwell, de
Watteville, de Rochas, £mile Boirac ; to cite only a few of the
early pioneers who have undertaken to verify and classify super-
normal phenomena without troubling themselves about the
hostility excited. They have created a science dealing with the
forces latent in man and given a strong impetus to it. This
science, still unrecognized by the universities, grows by the
labours of isolated experimenters ; it will soon be a branch of
psycho-physiology.

Henceforward, despite the tendency to hasty mystical explana-
tions that sterilize research, and despite the ridiculous obstinacy
of scientific dogmatism, the supernormal is an admitted reality,
and will remain under scrutiny by men of science firmly resolved
to study these aspects of human life (new to them), and will seek
their applications.

Thus human supernormality has gone through the evolutionary
phases of all human knowledge. Just as astrology, alchemy, the
notions of Hermetic forces, and miraculous cures, have become
astronomy, chemistry, physics, and medical science, so human
supernormality has become a chapter in human biology. The
occult gestation is complete and a new science is born whose
development will bring many surprises.


CHAPTER II


NORMAL AND SUPERNORMAL COGNITION

HOWEVER dissimilar in their aspects, normal and
supernormal phenomena proceed from the same
dynamo-genetic focus— the human being. As far as
I know no one sensitive has been discovered capable
to presenting every aspect. No doubt in the end some will
appear having all the physiological conditions favouring all kinds
of supernormal manifestations, but up to the present these
faculties are, as it were, specialized. This compels the student
to separate both the phenomena and the human subjects into
classes, and to define the exact ground on which his research must
be localized.

For convenience of statement psychists arbitrarily divide
supernormal phenomena, always more or less intermingled, into
two principal classes : (i) physical or objective phenomena ; in
which the human being acts on matter by physiological processes
other than those known to science, and (2) mental or subjective
phenomena ; in which thought functions and cognizes under
conditions that official psychology cannot explain.

This book deals with the latter class. To close observation
this class is really but one supernormal faculty with diverse
manifestations. I purpose to take a survey of these manifesta-
tions and to determine exactly the point at which, ceasing to
explore them superficially, I shall endeavour to go deeper.

In the first place — what is to be understood by " supernormal
cognition ? " It is best defined by stating the limits of normal
cognition, since the former begins where the latter ends. It
is therefore necessary to recall some points of elementary
psychology.

In men of the ordinary type M knowledge " is the result of a
process initiated by sensation, and ending, by the specific action
of the brain, in concrete reflections of external things, and
general images and ideas resulting from the process of abstraction.

11 To know " is therefore, definitely, to have in thought the
sensorial representation of things, or their conceptual trans-
formation into the symbolism of internal language.

Whatever the capacity for abstraction possessed by a human

9


10 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


mind, and whatever its constructive power, permitting it to
develop its thought far beyond the raw material of sensation, the
fundamental psychological fact, and first condition of mental
work, is Sensation — the transposition in the brain of impressions
into sensations corresponding to the five vibratory classes
registered by our five senses, under some unknown mode of
energy. This psychological necessity limits both the field of
information and the functional activity of thought.

Man, of course, now knows how to supplement his senses. He
extends and adds to them by instruments, and thus indirectly
comes to perceive forms of energy of which, without those
instruments he would be unaware. He takes cognizance of the
dynamic modes of ultra-sensorial vibrations — the infra-red, the
ultra-violet rays of the spectrum, the X-rays, radiation from
matter, etc. etc. He has become aware of worlds too distant and
too small for unaided vision. Inventive ingenuity will extend
the field of sensorial perception beyond any limit that we can
foresee ; but we cannot hope to extend it outside the modes of the
sensorial system. This sensorial determinism limits knowledge.

The man of the ordinary type only knows such realities as he
perceives directly, or which others perceive and transmit to him
by gesture and expression. Of the past he knows only the content
of his own memory or that brought to him by his fellows through
spoken or written language, or by archaeological remains, and the
like. This always resolves knowledge into present sensations
reproducing vanished sensations.

Of the future he can perceive nothing, and therefore, strictly
speaking, he can know nothing. The unknowable treads close
upon the actual. But we must not confuse dissimilar things by
verbal analogies.

We speak of scientific foresight. The astronomer knows the
year, day, and minute when a planet will pass a given point of
the zodiac, he knows the time of return of a comet, and the
moment of an eclipse. The chemist and the physicist foresee the
phenomenon whose conditions they have prepared. The physician
foresees the death of a patient. These are previsions of the same
kind as that which foresees in the night the return of day — it is
the experience of the past projected into the future, it is an
extension into the future by repetition of past perceptions. Should
some cosmic or medical discovery supervene, prevision is no longer
adaptable to the actual past. Science foresees on the hypothesis
that the environment will remain in the future what it has always
been.

Moreover, we customarily reckon on the future of nations,
families, and individuals, from their past. According to what we
have already perceived, we presume what will occur. How often


NORMAL AND SUPERNORMAL COGNITION 11


our conjectures play us false ! The human being is a dynamo-
psychic focus in perpetual reaction to external things, and infers
consequences according to changing impressions of causes. Our
suppositions of the future are but frail hypotheses. u Destiny 11
— that regent of the unrealized — symbolizes the certitude that
man has acquired of his inability to penetrate beyond the actual,
— beyond sensation.

Closely bound up with sensorial information, human knowledge
is brought up short against limits that it can enlarge, but cannot
cross — limits of " space " which confine perception to the field
of vision ; limits of " time M which stop it on the threshold of
that which has not yet occurred. These, at any rate, are words
which we place on the frontiers of our field of information.

We can therefore take as " supernormal M all knowledge which
reaches us by other means than by the activity of the mind
working on the direct or indirect reports of the known senses.


CHAPTER III


THE DIVERSE ASPECTS OF SUPERNORMAL
COGNITION

(i) Supernormal Self-cognition

(a) Autoscopy.

SOME years ago psychologists and psychiatrists have added
to the five known senses another specialization of sensi-
bility to which they have given the name of M ccenesthesia "
— a sort of vital or interior sense by which impressions
arising from the intimate connection of bodily conditions reach
the brain, (apparently) through the sympathetic nervous system.

Of all the influences originating in the different tissues and
organs, the part that normally reaches consciousness is very
restricted ; it amounts to those dim and undefinable sensations
which sum up a state of health in one synthetic sensation of
physical alacrity, general well-being, or the reverse, by disturbed
physiological equilibrium, uneasiness, suffering, diffused or local
pain, and so on. Ordinarily the mental representation of the
body and of its intimate conditions is very feeble.

But when, from this point of view we place ourselves in a con-
dition to observe the function of thought outside its conscious
exercise, we perceive that impressions originating in the viscera
furnish to the subconscious brain constant impulses which arouse
very little or no consciousness. We can verify, for instance, that
in sleep ccenesthetic impressions may provoke and direct dreams.
This has given rise to the idea that the illusions of dream might
reveal obscure bodily conditions, and more particularly latent
pathological processes at the beginnings of maladies. 1

It is chiefly under hypnosis and in mental affections causing
increased subconscious psychic activity that the most curious
phenomena of supernormal cognition of the organism have been
observed. The increased sensitiveness developed under these
conditions gives exceptional acuteness to the ccenesthetic sense,
and the cerebral mechanism unchecked by will or attention to
other things, gives a mental representation so complete that it
passes into hallucination. In these para-physiological states
some persons have been found capable of taking momentary

1 Vaschide and Perron. w La psychologie du r£ve au point de vue medical."
ActuahUs medicates, 1902.

12


DIVERSE ASPECTS OF SUPERNORMAL COGNITION 13


cognizance of the exterior form of their body as if they saw it
before them (external autoscopy), and of the interior of their
body as if they saw into it (internal autoscopy). 1

Dr. P. Sollier has communicated to the Psychological Society, 3
twelve cases of external autoscopy, representing almost every
degree and variety of the phenomenon, from simple ccenesthetic
representation in which the double is felt and recognized as
identical with the subject without being seen, up to visual
autoscopy in which the phantom is identical with the subject
who sees himself as in a mirror.

Observation II. . . . A case of major hysteria (Marie F ). Various

disturbances of sensibility, both general, sensorial and visceral; with
frequent and profound variations of personality. At nightfall, but never
in the daytime, she saw about three yards distant, a phantom resembling
herself and dressed similarly but smaller. This terrified her and she
stopped still, and if she was alone it sometimes lasted an hour. Then the
phantom turned to the right always keeping its distance and disappeared
behind her ; she said, " It is like a shadow turning with the sun." This
agitated her, and interfered with her breathing. The autoscopic phantom
disappeared as soon as light was thrown on it.

Observation X. ... A young girl of twenty-two, Jeanne O ,

major hysteria . . . one evening when sitting by a table on which
was a small lamp, doing nothing and musing, she suddenly saw herself
as in a mirror, same dress, hands and face. But what terrified her was
to see the frightened look in the eyes. She saw herself breathing and
living in unison with herself. It was a perfect case of visual hallucina-
tion. This lasted for about an hour, then all became dark, and she found
herself numbed and trembling in her arm-chair.

Sollier assimilates these facts of autoscopic hallucination with
the case of Guy de Maupassant.

. . one of his intimate friends reported to me that in 1889, when he
was entering on a state of general paralysis, that he had this same hallu-
cination very clearly one afternoon and told me of it the same evening.
Seated at the table in his study, into which his servant had been forbidden
to enter, he seemed to hear the door open. He turned round and was not
a little surprised to see his double come in, sit down facing him, the head
resting on one hand, and began to dictate to him what he was engaged in
writing. When he had finished he got up, and the hallucination
vanished. ..."

1 Fere. " Note sur les hallucinations autoscopiques ou sp&ulaircs et sur les
hallucinations altruistes." Compte rendu de la Societe de Biologie, p. 451 .

Lemaitre (Geneva). " Hallucinations autoscopiques et automatismes divers
chez les ecoliers." Archives de Psychologie, Vol. I, 1.

Dr. Comar. " L'autosuggestion de l'organisme chez quelques hysteriques."
Revue de Neurologie, 1 901 , p. 491 .

" L'auto-rdpresentation chez les hysteriques." Presse medicals, Jan. 17, 1900.

Dr. Buvat. " L'auto-representation organique ou hallucinations cenes-
thesiques chez les hysteriques." Gazette des Hopttaux, Nov. 25, 1902.

Dr. Bain. " L'auto-representation des hysteriques." Thesis, 1903.

Dr. Paul Sollier. " Les phenomenes d'autoscopie (Alcan)," a monograph
summing up the preceding with personal observations and an explanatory study.

1 " Les hallucinations autoscopiques." Bulletin de VInstitut general d§
Psychologie, 1902, 1.


SITERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


From his study of these phenomena Sollier concludes that the
subject does not see himself by visual hallucination, as would
seem to be the case, but that ccenesthetic sensations are ob-
jectified and projected externally.

This para-normal power of perceiving one's own external
aspect is verified and explained by that of perceiving the internal
aspect, both modalities being sometimes co-existent in the same
person.

It was in the application of hypnosis to hysterical subjects to
restore normal sensibility, and without any intention of research,
that Drs. Comar, Buvat, and Sollier observed internal autoscopy.

One of Sollier's patients (Obs. IV, loc. cit.) saw and described,
in her own way, " her veins, heart, lungs, bronchia down to the
pulmonary vesicles, intestines, ovaries, Fallopian tubes, uterus
and appendages, muscles, tendons, and skeleton, including that
of the face, and finally the brain. She had no (normal) know-
ledge of the outer forms of these organs nor of their structure ;
nor of the ovaries and the brain, of which she described the
microscopic structure."

A patient of Dr. Comar described to him the form and function-
ing of her heart. Another, an uneducated country girl, saw the
articulation of her hip and described its perfect state, when under
treatment for iliac tuberculosis. In the sequel he satisfied him-
self that disease was hysterical, it was cured by awakening the
patient s normal sensibility. Another patient described the heart,
the circulatory system, lungs, stomach, intestines, kidneys, liver,
pancreas, and brain, without technical terms, just as her
thought translated the visual impressions of the moment.

A quotation from Dr. Comar's M L'auto-reprcscntation chez
hysteriques (Pressc Medicate, Jan. 17, 1900) will give some idea
of the precision that the brain can obtain concerning the organism
with which its nerves connect it.

(Major hysteria.) M , a patient whom I was treating by mechano-
therapy to reawaken normal sensibility, was suddenly taken ill with fever.
The temperature went up to 40°C, the only symptom being pain in the
right iliac region. ... In the absence of anything that could explain such
a temperature, I expected to find hysterical fever, with some peritonitis
in the coecal region. The febrile condition subsided in three weeks. During
this time the patient (under hypnosis) spoke to me several times of the
little skin surrounding the intestines, which was very red, especially in one
place. With rest and ice the symptoms abated ; the patient got up, but
did not return to normal food. 1 left her on liquids, and after some days
the same symptoms reappeared more strongly, with nausea, swelling of
the abdomen, constipation, lancinating pain at the level of the appendix,
and fever.

When the temperature rose to 40 0 C. I put her into a cool bath. The
movements caused an increase of pain, and on the third day a paroxysm,
in the course of which the patient told me that the little skin was redder


DIVERSE ASPECTS OF SUPERNORMAL COGNITION 15


than ever, and that the little end of the intestine was very bad. I availed
myself of the hypnotic state to question her, and ask her what she saw.
" I do not see the little end very well, I don't know where it ends."
94 Why don't you sec it ? " "I cannot see it because I don't feel it. I
see ray bowel and the skin around it because I feel them, but I have never
felt that little end." " Weil," I said, " feel it." She made abdominal
movements accompanied by sharp pain, outcries, and words that I tran-
scribe. " Oh, it will be pierced, it is very thin ; the little skin sticks, it
is double ; and between the folds there is a sort of thick, dirty liquid ;
it sticks and unsticks when I move ; it will come apart, it is like a whitlow
on the linger, it suppurates ; that gives me fever, and all round that place
is red. All the little skin is red in the whole belly, but especially on the
right side." I said, " Feel more." She made more movements ; the pain
seemed to increase, and she said, " Oh ! the little end is full of dirty
matter ; oh, how dirty ! but it has been like that a long time. It is what
hurts me ; it can't get away." ..." Feel more." ..." Ah ! I sec the
end now." She made a quick movement and stopped on a sudden, saying,
" It pricks me." ..." What pricks you ? " . . . There is something in
the end." ..." What ? " . . . " I can't see very well, it is buried in
dirty stuff ; it hurts me, and I dare not move lest it should burst." . . .
" Lest what should burst ? " . . . " Why, the little end ; there is some
pointed thing irritating it, but it is full of dirt, and I can't well see what
it is, but if I move I am afraid that the point may pierce the bowel." . . .
" Well, go on feeling slowly, taking care that the point does not pierce."
. . . She then continued to make gentle abdominal movements which she
had previously made to feel the bowel, and said, " It is moving ; the little
end of the bowel twists about like a worm, it moves the stuff in it . . . that
goes up ... it scrapes me in passing ; now it is out of the little end . . .
it is in the large bowel."

She continued to make some movements, but stopped, saying that it
hurt her too much. I thought it inadvisable to go further on that day,
fearing more serious developments ; and since the patient stopped of her-
self, I thought it better to follow than to guide her. Having no proof that
what she had said was false, I thought it more prudent to take it for true.
In the evening the temperature had gone down two-tenths. Next day I
put her under hypnosis again and asked if she could still see the intestine.
She said, " Yes ; and the little point that hurt me yesterday is still in the
same place." ..." Well, wake up your bowel." . . . She then made
fresh movements, and said that the whole intestine was moving, that the
little point was displaced, and the dirt round it less thick. ..." Feel
more." ... A moment later she said, " I begin to see better, but I only
see one end — it is like a bit of bone about a centimetre long pointed at
one end." She then indicated a place corresponding to the transverse
colon. ..." Feel more." . . . The movements went on. ... " Where
do you see it now ? " . . . She indicated her left iliac fossa. ..." Are
you sure ? " . . . "I see it quite well." ..." Then stop, and don't try
to feel more." I then administered an injection of water while she was
still under hypnosis. On filtering the water I found a small piece of bone
of the form and size that the patient had described. I then asked her if
she still saw the little point. " No," she said, " it has gone out with the
water."

From that day the temperature continued to fall. The patient when
questioned under hypnosis declared that the peritoneum was less red, that
the foulness which caused adherence was getting less. She seemed to
follow from day to day the diminution of the inflammation and the
absorption of the exuded matter. . . .


16 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


This group of autoscopic phenomena, though far beyond
normal senorial possibility, is, however, that in which super-
normal self-cognition is the easiest to study and explain, because
it consists in a mental representation of tissues, viscera, and
organic functions— that is to say, the transformation of tactile
into visual impressions, the tactile impressions not being strong
enough to reach consciousness and to be translated into cognition.
As soon as we begin to deal with higher degrees of supernormal
cognition than these, the source of the information is no longer
apparent, and in the present state of knowledge no exact explana-
tion is possible.

(b) Pre-cognitivc diagnosis of future developments.

Psychical literature abounds in facts showing that a human
being is occasionally aware of events in his life inaccessible to
reason. Some of these facts indicate a mental dualism ; they
imply an anticipatory cognition of his life quite beyond normal
thought-functions.

If we wish to begin to understand something of the mass of
phenomena known as " presentiments " we must set them in
some kind of order by classification. This, no doubt, can only be
done arbitrarily, as for all analytical dissociations of functional
unities, but we thus bring out some sort of gradation according
to the complexity of the supernormal cognition they imply.
Some degree of clarity then appears on the mysterious origins of
human thought.

A first stage in this pre-cognition of the self consists in a strong
and persistent sense of satisfaction or anxiety, which occasionally
reflects an event in course of development in a sense contrary to
what reason would expect. One may be, for instance, happy at
a success close at hand, but the field of consciousness becomes
clouded with a dull, illogical, and absurd apprehension. Circum-
stances develop and an unfortunate sequel follows in place of the
anticipated satisfaction. Most men never feel this, and therefore
deny it ; some verify it at rare intervals ; some continually
experience this kind of duplication of their lives.

This first degree of pre-cognition is most usually provoked by
anticipation of death. In the course of professional practice, a
doctor finds patients who speak of approaching death. One says,
11 Doctor, am I going to die ? " in a quiet voice and with a half-
smile. One answers with a jest. Says another, " Doctor, I do
not think I shall recover M ; this is a timid patient who wants a
positive assurance that he will be cured. A third will say, 11 1
shall not recover/' 1 reply, " Why should you not recover from
a trifling ailment ? " and am answered, M Why ? I do not know,
but I feel that this illness is my last."


DIVERSE ASPECTS OF SUPERNORMAL COGNITION 17


Like all physicians at the beginning of their practice I failed to
distinguish between these three modes of expression, with their
respective tones of voice and varying look in the eyes. But not
for long. I soon learned that some patients feel approaching
death without there being any clinical indication of the gravity
of their case. When I find myself in presence of the resigned
attitude that I know so well, the eyes fixed on a certainty, hearing
words that no suggestion can alter — however slight the ailment
may seem — I begin my diagnosis afresh and look out for the
symptoms that may reveal some serious organic weakening.
Since I became aware of this I have verified this presentiment of
death at the beginning of sickness, and witnessed the inexorable
progress of lesion often enough to make me certain that pre-
cognition of organic developments is possible.

It may be thought that in such cases ccenesthesia carries to
the brain such clear information of the morbid state of the organs
that it passes into the state of conscious thought in the form of
an anxiety such as to compel conviction of approaching death.
That would be a phenomenon analogous to internal autoscopy,
less precise because not in hypnosis, but abnormal because it
passes the limits of non-perception of actuality.

I regret that I have not kept statistics of the cases I have
observed, and I wish to call the attention of medical readers to
the value of such psycho-physiological records.

The following is an instance of this class of phenomena :

Miss C. M , aged about thirty, a teacher in a girls' school, went for

the Easter holidays (191 1) to her family in the Puy-de-Dome. She arrived
in good health, but felt rather tired in the days preceding her return to
duty. On parting with her people deep sadness came over her ; she
embraced her parents with unusual warmth, and said, " I feel we shall
not see each other again." They were much astonished at these words,

and Miss C also could not understand how this depression had come

to her.

She reached the school on April 24th, somewhat tired, and told her
friends about her farewells, blaming herself for having foolishly saddened
her parents.

On the 2nd of May I was called to see her. General pain in the back
and heaviness of the head made teaching difficult. I had to insist on her
keeping in bed.

During the succeeding days there appeared typhoid symptoms of a light
type — temperature 38°-39°C., pulse 80, no functional disturbance, barely
observable tightness of the abdomen, no diarrhoea, general state quite
satisfactory.

The illness took a form from which the patient nearly always recovers,
I had never seen a typhoid case which gave less anxiety. The girl only
felt a vague lassitude.

Nevertheless she had the conviction of approaching death. The sug-
gestive power of the presentiment remained strong and was reinforced by
the continuance of tiie disease. To my optimistic words she answered


18 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN

gently but immovably, " Doctor, I shall not recover." One of her fellow-
teachers explained this persistence by telling me of her parting with her
family.

As may be imagined, I thenceforward gave most particular attention
and caution to the treatment, though the organism as a whole seemed
hardly permeated by the infection.

During the afternoon of May i ith, without any previous warning, with

out any imprudence by the patient or in the nursing, Miss C had a

sudden intestinal haemorrhage, so serious that, coming at an urgent call,
I found the patient pulseless and her heart beating its last. The bed was
inundated with blood, dropping through the mattress and making a pool
on the floor. None remained in the body.

Her parents, who had thought it needless to come from so far at the
beginning of what seemed a slight illness, were stupefied at the rapid and
precise fulfilment of this, the only presentiment that their daughter had
ever had. An apparently slight illness and a complication of unusual
severity had connected the presentiment with the fact, and justified the
words, " I feel we shall not see each other again."

By giving an example of each class, it is easy to graduate the
scale of presentiment from the kind above-named in which the
latent faculty is aware from the actual state of a human being of
what will eventuate (which one may suppose due to increased
interior sensation), up to those in which the latent psychism
knows the future without any sensorial perception at the moment,
and therefore by channels of information and mental processes
unknown to us.

I will now give a case in which the supernormal cognition is so
much higher in type than the last that only a fanatic in scholastic
psycho-pathology could try to explain it by an interior sense. It
shows the progressive completion of a presentiment, starting from
mere conviction of approaching death and extending to pre-
cognition of its date and hour. This fact was related to me by the
daughter of M. Dencausse a few days after the event. Dr. Geley,
who witnessed the last phase, has thus reported it :

M. Dencausse, aged seventy-six, died on October 31st, 1916. About six
months before, although then in good health, he told his family that he
would not live to see the winter. . . . From that time forward he re-
affirmed his conviction daily. At first the family gave little heed to these
" dark forebodings," which seemed to have no foundation. But as his
appetite failed, and he became visibly thinner, they became anxious and
wished to put him under medical care. M. Dencausse opposed this ener-
getically, declaring all care useless. He added that he would not consent
to see a doctor till he knew his last days approaching, and then only for
form's sake. About eight to ten days before his death he declared that
he knew the exact date of the event, which would be on All Saints' Day.

Very soon, agreeably to his promise, he consented to see a doctor. I
saw him for the first time on October 28th. The family had already told
me of his obsession. I found the old man very thin, but alert and leading
his usual life, and showing no signs of death. I examined him minutely.
There was no organic lesion, his heart was good, there w f as no fever. The
only morbid symptom that I could find, a symptom in no way alarming,


DIVERSE ASPECTS OF SUPERNORMAL COGNITION 19


consisted in some signs of slight chronic bronchitis from which he had
suffered each winter without its ever causing him to take to his bed.

I tried to reassure the old man, but the suggestion failed completely.
He looked forward to his death, which he judged to be very near, with
perfect serenity. He said simply that he was glad to see me, that he would
follow my prescriptions, but that this would be useless, and he maintained
his conviction absolutely.

After my examination — negative from the medical point of view — I was
able in some degree to reassure the family ; with the reservation that
unless nutrition should markedly improve the old man, whose innutrition
was obvious, would end by falling seriously ill.

The next day. October 29th, he completed his predictions in a sur-
prisingly exact manner. He said, " I shall die on All Saints' Day, on the
stroke of midnight, without suffering or death throes. I shall talk up to
the last. At midnight I shall seem to fall asleep, but it will not be sleep,
it will be the end. After my death one of you " (the family included his
wife, his daughter, and his grand-daughter) " will make an outcry and
will have a nervous breakdown. This will impede my release."

Monday, October 30th, passed without incidents.

On All Saints' Day, Tuesday, October 31st, during the morning, M. Den-
causse felt a pain in his left side. He went to bed, saying he would get
up no more. I saw him in the evening and examined him. There was
incipient pneumonia at the base of the left lung, and a temperature of

4 o 0 . 3 C.

The situation was changing, and henceforward the realization of his
prediction became probable, but not at the time foretold, for in cases of
pneumonia death does not supervene in the early days. Nevertheless,
everything came to pass as announced. He did not suffer ; he talked
quietly up to the last, giving his final instructions to his family. At
11.30 p.m. he asked his wife, "What is the time? " She, hoping to
deceive him, replied, " Two o'clock in the morning." He answered, 9 No,
it is not yet midnight. I shall die at midnight."

At twelve o'clock he turned to the wall and seemed to fall asleep. His
wife bent over him ; but, raising his hand, he pointed to the clock, which
was then striking twelve. His hand fell back on the bed, and he died
without a sigh.

Only his wife and daughter were in the room, the grand-daughter being
in a neighbouring chamber. They went to break it to her ; but the girl,
highly intelligent and instructed, and usually quite mistress of herself,
had a violent attack of " nerves," made an outcry, and remained till day
in a lamentable state.

The premonition of M. Dencausse was therefore exactly verified. 1

The series of phenomenal self-cognition will appear in its
various degrees from the subjoined examples which show the
ascending scale.

A human being in full health, without any data from normal
perception feels the approach of accidental death :

M. Domenico Flerte, a barrister of the Court of Appeal at Palermo, was
taking a holiday in the country at Banso with his wife, his daughter, and
her little girl. At the end of the time the two latter, who lived at Mestina,
returned there. When taking leave, the child kissed her grandmother,

1 Annales des Sciences psychiqucs, No. 8, 191 6.


20 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


insisting that she would not see her again. No great attention was paid
to this childish saying. On the evening of December 27th the mother was
undressing the child for the night, and when putting on her night-socks
the child said, M Mother, you are putting on my death-slippers ! M She
repeated this, despite her mother's protestations and sadness, till she fell
asleep.

Some hours later the terrible Messina earthquake supervened. The
child was crushed in the ruins of the house. 1

A human being in complete health, without any data from normal
perception feels the approach of death and takes cognizance of
the place where it will occur :

Six weeks before the night-attack by which Admiral Togo began the
Russo-Japanese War the celebrated battle-painter Verestchagin was at
Port Arthur, where the German doctor, Armgaard Karl Graves, was on
a secret mission. This latter writes in his Souvenirs : " I am proud to
think that he called me his friend. I had attended him during an attack
of malaria, and we were drawn together by literary and artistic tastes.
I have met many artists and writers in the course of my life, but
Verestchagin will be unforgettable.

" One night we were sitting on the verandah of the Casino. It was one
of those nearly tropical crystalline, silent nights peculiar to those regions.
The wonderful harbour of Port Arthur lay before us under fairy moon-
light, and the great ironclads anchored in the bay stood out clear like huge
marine monsters sleeping on the waters. We were smoking while we
talked, and, after having recalled the history of the old Manchu and Tartar
dynasties, we spoke of the barbaric invasion of Goths, Huns, and Vandals.
Verestchagin laid before me all the treasures of his wonderful and pictur-
esque erudition, and the night was far advanced when I took leave of him,
saying that I feared to abuse his welcome. Stepping close to me, he placed
his hand familiarly on my shoulder and said, * My dear doctor, you are
doing me a kindness in staying by me. I feel nervous this evening. I have
a presentiment that these mountains will echo the sound of cannon. . . J
He added, low, as if speaking to himself, 1 And Russia will be defeated,
but I shall not see it.'

M He stood up and shook himself, as if to chase away an oppressive
thought : 4 1 feel I shall meet my death here.'

" An undefinable melancholy came over me. I am not impressionable,
but 1 had to make an effort to tell him that these forebodings arose from
the fever which was still upon him, and from the strong doses of quinine
I had made him take. ' No doubt you are right, doctor/ he replied, with
a curious smile.

" Before leaving me he gave me a little sketch of Port Arthur, which I
preserve carefully in memory of one of the most remarkable men I have
met. Verestchagin, it is well known, was not mistaken. He perished a
short time after in the ironclad commanded by Admiral Makaroff."

A human being in complete health, without any data from normal
perception has circumstantial cognizance of his approaching
death as if witnessing the event :

At the beginning of the year 1895, Mme Lukawski, the wife of a high
functionary at the Russian Admiralty, was awaked one night by the wails

1 Reported by Dr. CaldeVone and abridged by Dr. Gelcy. Annates des Scienc
psychiques, Aug. -Sept., 191 6.


DIVERSE ASPECTS OF SUPERNORMAL COGNITION 2


of her husband, who in his sleep was crying out, H Help I Save me I M
and was struggling like a drowning man. He was dreaming of a terrible
accident at sea, and when completely awake told how he seemed to be on
board a large vessel which foundered after collision with another : he had
felt himself thrown into the sea and swallowed up by the water.

On completing his tale, he added, " I am sure that the sea will cause
my death." So strong was his conviction that he began to put his affairs
in order, like a man who knows that his days are numbered. Two months
passed, during which the impression of the dream was weakening, when
he received an order from the Admiralty to be ready to leave with all his
staff for a port on the Black Sea.

When taking leave of his wife at the Petersburg station, Lukawski said
to her, " You remember my dream ?"..." Oh, why do you ask me ? M
..." Because I am sure I shall not come back ; we shall not see each
other again." Mme Lukawski tried to persuade him, but in a tone of
great sadness he said, " You may say what you will, my conviction will
not change. I feel that my end is near and that nothing can stop it. . . •
Yes, I see the port, the ship and the moment of collision, the panic on
board, and my end ... all returns before my eyes. . . ." And after a
short pause he added, " When the telegram announcing my death reaches
you and you go into mourning, I beseech you not to wear that long veil
that I dislike." Unable to reply, Mme Lukawski broke into sobs. The
whistle of the train gave the signal for starting, M. Lukawski kissed his
wife tenderly, and the train left.

After two weeks of acute anxiety, Mme Lukawski learned from the
newspapers that there had been a collision between two ships in the Black
Sea — the Vladimir and the Sineus. In great grief she telegraphed to
Admiral Zelenoi at Odessa to get news, and received the answer : " No
news of your husband up to the present, but it is certain he was on board
the Vladimir." News of the death reached her a week later.

It must be added that in his dream M. Lukawski had seen himself
struggling for life with a passenger. The incident was realized with exacti-
tude. In the accident, a passenger on the Vladimir — a M. Henicke — had
leapt into the sea with a life-buoy. M. Lukawski, already in the water,
tried to reach the buoy as soon as he saw it, and the other cried out,
" Don't take hold, it won't hold two ; we shall both be drowned." Never-
theless, Lukawski grasped it, saying he could not swim. M Then take it."
said Henicke. " I am a good swimmer, and I will do without it." A
great wave separated them. Henicke was saved, but Lukawski met his
fate. 1

It will be noticed that the foregoing facts all relate to death.
This is a remark which naturally occurs to all who compile a
collection of these phenomena — that death or danger of death
are the most frequent themes in supernormal self -cognition, no
doubt because the cessation of life is the capital event of it. All
the serious episodes in a life are, however, capable of being the
subject of occasional presentiment or precognition.

As soon as the reality of phenomena of this kind is assured, it
becomes evident that the human being is a psychic personality
which has two aspects.

1 Narrated by Baron Joseph Kronhelm of Podolia (Russia), published in
Light, 1899, p. 45. Reproduced by M. Bozzano in Les Phfnomtves ptimcmitoites,
p. 77 (Alcan).


22


SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


We ordinarily know it under one aspect only, by the exercise
of thought working on the reports of the classified senses and
according to a determinate mental process ; but the ordinary
condition of mental working which seems to be the whole of
thought is far from being its totality. There is, one may say,
another plane on which thought functions ; a plane on which a
latent intelligence receives information from sources other than
the sensorial, and constructs its cognitions by other processes than
those of the conscious mind. From this point of view it is
14 supernormal."

This super-rational thought, latent in all human beings,
manifests itself here and there on the occasion of some important
event in a life. Although a large number of such instances have
been collected, 1 these occasional manifestations are relatively
rare. It would seem that this kind of thought finds great difficulty
in entering the field of consciousness. Its effort to reach con-
sciousness ultimates differently in different cases. It may
appear as a vague sentiment of mental pain accompanied by an
unreasoned conviction of approaching death. It may also, as
we have seen above, be translated into a real pre-cognition, the
reflect of an anticipated reality.

Certain states of consciousness as yet inexplicable will be better
understood when the experimental conditions (of which this book
is an analysis) and the determinism of these occasional phenomena
have been brought to light by study of those conditions. It will
be seen that those persons who are called M intuitive " are those
in whom certain cognizances, built up in the para-conscious stage,
pass into consciousness with varying degrees of facility and with
varying results. It will be seen that certain M melancholies " are
sensitives troubled by a painful future. It will be seen that there
are fixed ideas that disturb mental equilibrium, proceeding from
the super-rational plane of the mind which should be examined
in order to effect a cure by methods other than those which apply
ot fixed ideas resulting from the normal ; though the known causes
of fluctuation in emotional consciousness will be supplemented by
the notion of another cause when joy and sadness shall have been
demonstrated to be connected, more often than is supposed,
with events not yet come to birth.

To consider the human being as a sentient body which proceeds
through life responsive only to the rhythm of passing phenomena,
feeling only the immediate present and knowing only what has
been fulfilled, is to condemn oneself to failure to understand the

1 See the Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research (London). Camille
Flammarion, L'Inconnuetles Probltmes psychiques, La Mort etson Mysttre (Avant
la mort), English translation by Latrobe Carroll (Fisher Unwin), and E. Bozzano,
Les Phinomtnes primomtoires.


DIVERSE ASPECTS OF SUPERNORMAL COGNITION 23


interior life of the mind and the complex activity of thought
working not only on the reports of the senses, but also on that
which arises more or less dimly from a super-rational gestation.
Intuition and reason are in constant collaboration.

Most men are still in the stages of ignorance, of systematic
denial, of indifference, or mere astonishment in face of the
manifestations of supernormal thought.

(2) Supernormal Cognizance of the External

(a) Supernormal cognition of the immediate environment.

Para-normal perception by the sense of touch. In this, as at the
beginning of the study of supernormal self -cognition, we are at
the outset so close to ordinary physiology that the first class of
phenomena, despite their unusual nature, may seem if not ex-
plicable, at least intelligible and rational. As the hypnotic state
increases sensorial acuity in certain persons and under certain
conditions, it is understandable that tactile impressions, uncon-
scious in the normal "working of the nervous system, should
occasionally be perceived and interpreted.

I borrow the following typical example of para-normal cognition
external things, physiologically analogous to the facts of auto-
, from the experiments of £mile Boirac, the late rector of
Academy of Dijon, recounted in his book La psychologie
inconnu (p. 245).

M. Boirac had occasion to see in Faris Mme V , who claimed, when

hypnotized, the faculty of reading by her finger-tips. He verified that
when her eyelids were closed by gummed paper and a thick bandage placed
over that she could not only read visiting cards and printed papers, but
letters written in ink or pencil in characters so small as to be almost
imperceptible. She could similarly describe photographs, and even tell the
time by a watch by simply passing her hand over the glass. She also took
the precaution of wrapping the watch-case in a handkerchief, because, as
she said, the gold gave her a sense of burning.

This experiment gave him the idea and the wish to reproduce this
phenomenon with a new subject who had never heard speak of such a
thing, who had no idea of it, and whom no one had previously hypnotized.

" Chance brought me such an one at the beginning of the winter of 1904.
Ludovic S , aged twenty, was a designer in a large factory. I experi-
mented with him mainly in November and December, 1904, and in the six
or seven early months of 1905.

H In the course of our first sittings I tried to reproduce the phenomena

observed with Mme V , and asked him if he would try to reproduce

them. 1 Do you think that I could read with closed eyes ?' he said. 1 I
do not know,' I answered, 1 but let us try/

" Taking a letter from the file at random, I put it in his hands and, at

his request, explained how to set about it. ' Do as Mme V did. Pass

your fingers over the paper, put it to your forehead and to the pit of your
stomach till you feel something.' After trying for some time he said, ' I


24 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


feel nothing ; it is an impossible thing. There must have been some trick.'
I pointed out that he was giving up too soon ; no doubt time and effort
would be necessary, and invited him to begin afresh. He began feeling
and pressing the paper very attentively, and then suddenly gave a shiver.
* What is it ? 1 I said. 1 Nothing,' he replied. 1 But it must be something
to have made you shiver.' . . . 1 No ; it is impossible, absurd.' . . .
Well, it seemed to me that there must be written 'Mon cher Camille.' . . .
1 It is not M Mon cher Camille," it is M Mon cher £mile." Perhaps it is
but a coincidence ; let us try again.'

11 Remembering that Mme V had said that it is well to begin with

large printed letters, I put a newspaper into his hands, and said, 'Read the
title of this paper.' He asked me to indicate the exact place, passed his
fingers over it, and said, 1 Is it not Le Progris de Lyon ? ' * Very good,'
I replied ; 1 but perhaps it is another coincidence, for the paper has a con-
siderable circulation hereabouts. Here is another.' . . . ' Is it not Le
hi oniteur des Tirages financiers ? ' . . . 1 Now doubt is impossible ; bravo,
my friend 1 you see you can read with closed eyes.'

" To my great surprise he answered, 1 No, sir, I do not read.' . . .
1 What, then, do you do ? ' . . . 1 I feel nothing under my lingers, I see
nothing before my eyes ; only it comes into my mind, I cannot say how,
that it must be this or that ; I fancy that your thought suggests it to me.'
1 After all,' I said, ' that is possible, though I do not think so. We will
try to clear it up another time.' With that I awakened him, and he took
his leave.

"It was only at the third trial that I could discover the part that 1
personally had in the phenomenon. At this sitting a large number of
persons were present, to whom I first showed the fact of reading by the
finger-tips as above described. One of them asked whether the reading
were really done by the fingers or by thought-transference from me. I
answered that I did not know, that the subject himself had that idea,
and the occasion was a good one to test it. I therefore asked my inter-
locutor to write a phrase of his own composition on a piece of paper. This
was folded, so that I should not know the contents, and was given by me

to S , who opened it and read it without difficulty, except that he

made one mistake in the initial letter of one word. Indeed, owing to
peculiarity in the writing a person reading with open eyes might equally
have made this mistake.

" But another experiment made at this same time showed still more
certainly that the subject perceived directly and not by transmission of
any outside influence. One of those present took a book and, opening it

at random, placed it in the hands of the percipient S , who began to

read the page at which the book had been opened. This time neither I
nor anyone else knew the text, so that there could be no mental suggestion
nor transmission of thought.

" In ail my subsequent experiments I tried to analyse this curious
phenomenon."

Proceeding to explanatory research, Boirac was led to verify that the
subject did not seem to be affected by colours nor by a shape to which
there might adhere a greater or less amount of printer's ink :
That he described photographs by passing his hand over the surface,

and could even distinguish details through glass :
That he came to be able to read with his fingers a paper placed at a
distance, provided that his sensibility were suppressed according to
de Rochas' method :
That all results were positive and conclusive in complete darkness ; and,
more strange still, that the interposition of another person between


DIVERSE ASPECTS OF SUPERNORMAL COGNITION 25

the subject and the writing did not impede the phenomenon j just as
if that person were a conductor of the impressions.
From this well-devised series of experiments M. Boirac concluded that

the results were due to supernormal conscious interpretation of tactile

impressions habitually unperceived.

Perception, whether awake or under hypnosis, of " fluidic
emanations" from magnets, electric currents or human bodies,
etc., notified by some observers, would find their place in this
class of phenomena.

Para-normal cognition of hidden material things. The next
higher grade in supernormal cognition of the environment is the
group of facts by which a human being shows a capacity for per-
ceiving without contact, forms of Matter under conditions when
they seem entirely remote from normal sensorial perceptions.

The " dowser with his hazel twig, until recently disdained
by the scientific world, is the representative of this physiological
power.

More or less everywhere men of science, stimulated by the
incessant repetition of the facts, have at last had the courage
to brave the superstitious dogmatism of their fellows by attempt-
ing the solution of this enigma. Their observations have already
had the effect of revealing a new field for study which has also
a practical value.

They have verified that some persons are really endowed with
the power to discern the existence of a subterranean stream when
they approach it or pass above it, by the movements of a rod held
in their hands. 1

They have verified that the traditional forked stick is only an
instrument translating unconscious perception of the sheet of
water into involuntary movements, and that the phenomenon
occurs with rods of all kinds— different woods or metals, and with
other instruments— a ring or a watch oscillating at the end of a
string (pendulum), even, according to Marage, "with Marey's
recording cylinder, whose lever registers the movement of the two
hands each in an india-rubber sheath."

They have verified that by these methods some persons can not
only indicate the underground flow, but its direction, depths and
volume. They have verified that in this manner some persons can
discern underground cavities, strata of coal, oil, and metallic
masses, distinguishing one kind of metal from another.

Before 1910 the German Government employed dowsers in its
African colonies. In 1913 the French Minister of Agriculture in

1 This faculty would seem to be so general that Dr. Marage, particularly
fitted by his studies on dowsing and his own gift of this kind, estimates the
number of persons capable of being influenced by underground water, at 50 per
cent of the normal.


26


SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


the first place, and afterwards the Academy of Sciences, named
two commissions of investigation. The second Congress of
Experimental Psychology brought together a number of dowsers
under conditions so unfavourable that it is a marvel that the
result of the enquiry was not entirely negative.

On November 17th, 1913, M. d'Arsonval communicated to the
Academy of Sciences the work of Dr. Marage on dowsing with rod
and pendulum by M. Landesque, an engineering expert (Ponts et
Chauss6es) in Tunisia, who though denying the facts, wished to
make a personal trial, and to his great astonishment found
himself to be an excellent dowser. Out of nine experiments
followed by borings— seven on the road from Enlidaville to Kair
Kairouan over 31 kilometres (about 18 miles) ; two between
Enfidaville and Zaghouan over 19 kilometres (11 miles) — M.
Lanesque had nine succseses as to location, seven being very
remarkable, and two errors as to depth. 1 In 1913 M. d'Arsonval
read to the Academy of Sciences a communication by M. Armand
Vire, professor of subterranean geology at the Paris Museum, of
which an extract here follows :

We experimented (1) on metals, (2) on bones, (3) on water and under-
ground cavities.

We examined various persons : professionals, such as Messrs. Probst,
P£laprat, the Abbe Mermet ; and amateurs, such as M. Prodel and others.
We followed and confirmed their indications with the hazel rod.

Metals.

At Luzech (department Lot), within the wall of the old Gallic town
Impernal, M. Pciaprat and myself felt, at a point which we carefully
marked, some unknown body, not water, four yards underground. On
digging there was found at that depth a small heap of iron dross, some
iron arrow-points, and some bronze rings : excavation for some yards
round yielded nothing.

In another place an iron arrow-head was announced by M. P61aprat at
65 cm. underground and was duly found. The same took place at baume-
les-messieurs (Jura). It was found, as stated, 45 cm. down.

Skeletons.

At Puy-d'Issolud, in the Commune Vayrac (Lot), M. Pelaprat announced
two graves at 1 m. and 3 m. depth. A third, 2 m. deep, contained, accord-
ing to the dowser, a piece of iron. Excavation yielded a skeleton and a
sceax or large knife of Frankish origin.

At Limogne (Lot) he indicated a skeleton buried 1 J m. deep, the upper
part of which lay under the foundation wall of the church, which was
found correct. At Luzech he indicated at the same depth bones which
were found as stated.

One inexact description was given : at Puy-d'Issolud he indicated a
deposit of bones near the spring of Oulie\ at 24 m. deep. Excavation to
this depth revealed a layer of pottery with some bones of animals.

1 Lecture by Dr. Marage at the Colldge de France. Bulletin de VInstUut
general psychologique, 1 9 1 9.

Dr. Marage. " Ce qu'il faut penser de la baguette des sourciers." Revue
seientifique, Feb. 14, 1920.


DIVERSE ASPECTS OF SUPERNORMAL COGNITION 27


Water, and Subterranean Cavities.

The experiment at the grottos of Lacave (Lot) by Messrs. Probst,
Pelaprat, and the Abb6 Mermet was very characteristic.

We had an unpublished plan from a careful survey made ten years
before by an engineer, Mr. E. Brunet, which had been kept quite secret.
A partial and mutilated version of it to a small scale had been published,
sufficient for the use of tourists, but which, if studied by fraudulent
dowsers, would have misled them by several hundred yards. We had there-
fore a quite ideal test. The dowsers, working independently of each other,
began by marking out on the surface of the ground over a length of 350 m.
an artificial tunnel 2 5 m. wide and 2 m. high leading to the grottos. It
had an elbow turn, and was at a depth of 75 to 100 m. beneath their feet.
They followed all its bends, down to the smallest, and arriving at the
natural galleries, they followed their walls.

A very exact plan was drawn after the experiments to the same scale
(1 : 1000) as M. Brunet's plan, with which it coincided to a millimetre.

The experiment was repeated with equal success by M. Probst.

These gentlemen also marked out two kilometres of unknown caves
which will be sought for, and also a subterranean stream, followed for
1200 m. of its course. The upstream side could not be verified, but the
lower part, which, according to M. Probst, bifurcated twice, was indicated
by him along its course, ending at the cliff fronting the Dordogne, just
over four intermittent springs, which at that moment were dry, but were
well known to us, and began to flow after the October rains.

Supernormal cognition of human perso7ialities. Under this
aspect supernormal cognition takes on an entirely different aspect
from the preceding, dealing no longer with para-normal perception
of things, but with the revelation of past events in human lives.
This class consists of cases in which one person in presence of
another shows a faculty of cognizing facts that normal senses and
reason could not suggest concerning the latter.

As I have decided in this first part of my work to quote most
of my instances from the works of others, I will illustrate this order
of facts by the case of Professor Bert Keese, whose strange and
rare faculties have been verified by some eminent men of science
in America, and by many highly placed persons in other countries. 1

I give below an extract from the report of a stance that Mr,
Hereward Carrington had with Reese, May 3rd, 191 1 :

Mr. Bert Reese visited me to-day, saying that he would give me a
demonstration of his powers. He remained in one room under observation
by Mrs. Carrington, while I went into the adjoining room. I closed the
door and wrote my questions, sitting at my desk. The paper on which
I wrote was an old envelope torn into small pieces.

Mr. Reese asked me to write the name of the first woman I had loved,
and that of one of my former professors. The other four questions were
left to me. At my own desk and on my own paper I wrote :

1. Will our journey to Canada be successful ?

2. Will the Magazine succeed ?

1 Reese possessed an extensive scale of hyper-cognition. Besides his gift of
revealing character, he was a remarkable dowser, to whom Mr. Rockfeller Lb said
to owa the discovery of some of his most valuable oil deposits.


28


SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


3. Shall I continue my literary work ?

4. Shall I ever become rich ?

5. Alfred Sansom (name of a former teacher).

6. Winifred Vale (my first M flame ").
I folded and mixed these papers so as to be undistinguishable one from

another, pressed them closely in my hand, and re-entered the room where
Mrs. Reese and Mrs. Carrington were talking.

At his request I placed one each of the folded papers in a separate
drawer of a bureau which stood at the end of the room, opposite Reese.
I emphasize the fact that Reese never touched the papers at all. I myself
placed them in the drawers without their having left my hand. Mr. Reese
did not touch one of them, and I never approached him within a yard.

Having placed one paper in each of the five drawers, I gave the sixth
to him at his request. I saw that he had no papers in his hands, and,
having taken those that I gave him, he struck a match and burnt it before
my eyes. He then asked me to designate any one of the drawers. I
pointed to the second, and put my hand on the handle, so that it could
not be opened unperceived by me. Rising from his chair, Mr. Reese
advanced towards the bureau, stopping about two feet from it, and con-
centrated his attention on the drawer.

He asked me to place my hands on his head, which I did. I did not
know which paper had been burned, nor which might be in the second
drawer or in any of the others. He then asked Mrs. Carrington to write
down what he would dictate, and said as follows :

"The Magazine, which has caused you much disquietude, is not yet
settled. You will continue to act as you have done in the past ; the clouds
will disperse, and you will not have much to complain of."

When the drawer was opened, neither by me nor by Mr. Reese, who
stood about a yard distant, while I continued to hold my hands on his
head, but by Mrs. Carrington, it was found that the paper contained the
question, " Will the Magazine succeed ? "

Mr. Reese then asked me to choose another drawer, which I did. He
fixed his attention upon it. Without the drawer being opened in any way
he said, 11 You will remain faithful to literature and will have nothing to
complain of." The drawer was opened, and we read, " Shall I coritinue
my literary work ? "

I indicated a third drawer. Mr. Reese then asked me to sit at the table,
while he took a chair facing me and dictated the following lines :

M You are planning a journey, not exactly in this country, I think in
Canada. This will succeed better than you think, and in 122 days (that is,
September 2nd) you will realize a project that has been maturing in your
mind for some time. In the course of your travels you will meet a man
named Peters, against whom you must be on your guard, for he will ask
you to join him in an enterprise from which you will gain no advantage.
He will not be acting in good faith. You will end by acquiring reputation
and money, but this Peters will only cause difficulties."

He finally advised us to leave the house in which we were living at th«
first opportunity.

Mrs. Carrington then opened the drawer, took out the paper, and read :
" Will our journey to Canada be successful ? "

Mr. Reese again asked me to designate a drawer. I did so, he standing
about a yard away. He looked at the closed drawer and spelt out, letter
by letter, " W-i-n-i-f-r-e-d V-a-l-e."

When the paper was taken out it rerd, " Winifred Vale."

There remained only one drawer. Mrs. Carrington, at Mr. Reese's


)

DIVERSE ASPECTS OF SUPERNORMAL COGNITION 29

request, took the paper out and held it in her hand. He then said, " Oh,
there is only a name, an easy one : Alfred Sansom."

While saying the last word he took the paper from Mrs. Carrington's
hand ; it bore the name Alfred Sansom. This was the only paper that
he touched except that which he burned, and it was not opened till after
the words were given.

He then said that he would answer the question on the burnt paper in
a general way. " Later on you will be independent financially. The ioth
of February will be the happiest day of your life. Something that you
have long awaited will then come to pass."

He had then answered all my questions. I placed the bits of paper on
the table before him and placed them so as to reconstruct the envelope
from which only the burnt portion was missing. 1

(b) Supernormal cognition of environment distant in Space.

In manifestations of this class the percipients show an
occasional or permanent faculty for cognition of facts and events
which could not come to them through their normal senses.
The subjoined facts will give three aspects under which this
psycho-physiological possibility is realized.

Occasional and confused perception of an event unknown to the
percipient and to those present :

On July 31st, 1914, Count Ugo Baschieri, a Brazilian doctor well known
for his supernormal faculties, was passing through Paris ; and at 9 in
the evening was giving a seance at the house of Madame J. M., a literary
lady who lived in St. Charles Street, not far from the fortifications.

The stance had been in progress for 25 minutes, and Count Baschieri
had been making predictions as to the impending war. Suddenly he said,
" To-night or to-morrow some one of importance will be murdered." Then,
greatly agitated. . . " To-night, much blood ! Look at the time."

The room being nearly dark, some one struck a match — it was 940-
Continuing to show much agitation, he said, " Something is happening
towards the Boulevard des Italiens."*

As is well known, Jaures was assassinated by Villain in the restaurant
where he was dining at the corner of the Rue Montmartre and the Rue du
Croissant, between 9.35 and 9.40, about 300 yards in a straight line from
the Boulevard des Italiens. 1

Exceptional and precise perception of a very distant event affecting
the life of the percipient :

On the 17th March, 1863, in a flat No. 26 Rue Pasquier, Baroness de
Boislev6 was giving a dinner to several persons, among whom were General
Fleury, Master of the Horse to Napoleon III ; M. Devienne, Judge of the

1 Annates des Sciences psychiques, Nov., 1913. See also in the same Review
an account of similar stances at Paris, Mr. Reese being on a visit there, by Drs.
J. Maxwell and Schrenck-Notzing.

In the August number (1913) of the same Review an account of his seances
with Edison, the American physicist ; and in the September number the article
by Felix Hollocnder, " Le voyant Reese."

■ Annales des Sciences psychiques, Nov., Dec, 191 5. Le Cotntc Ugo Baschie'ri,
by C. de Vesme.


80 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


High Court ; and M. Delesvaux, President of the Chamber (Tribunal of
the Seine) . During dinner conversation turned on the expedition to Mexico
which had been in progress for a year. The son of the baroness, Honor6
de Boislev6, a lieutenant of Chasseurs, was in the expedition, and his
mother had not failed to ask General Fleury if there were any news of him.
There were none — " no news is good news." The dinner went well and

the guests remained at table till 9 o'clock. Madame B. then got up and

went into the drawing-room to order coffee. She had hardly reached it
when a loud cry alarmed the guests, who found the baroness in a faint
on the floor.

When she recovered she told an extraordinary story. When crossing
the threshold she had seen at the other end of the room her son Honor6
In uniform, but without arms and without his cap. His face was very pale,
and his left eye was a bleeding and empty socket ; a stream of blood
covered his cheek and ran on to the lace of his collar. She was in a state
of mortal terror. The guests sought to comfort her, saying that she must
be a victim of hallucination, had had a waking dream ; but as she was
much prostrated they sent for her medical attendant, who happened to
be the celebrated Dr. Ndlaton. He was told of the strange adventure,
prescribed sedatives, and retired. The next day she had recovered health,
but was still much disturbed in mind. She sent daily to the War Office
for news.

A week later she was officially informed that on March 17th at 2.50 in
the afternoon, at the assault of Puebla, Honor6 de Boisleve had been killed
by a Mexican bullet in the left eye. The difference of longitude was worked
out, and the hour of death was found exactly corresponding with the time
of the apparition in the Rue Pasquier.

Dr. Nelaton presented a statement to the Academy of Sciences, drawn
up by the hand of President Devienne, and signed by all the guests of
the evening. 1

Perception of a remote event relative to life of a person present, but
not the percipient :

Mme R , in September, 1920, missed a platinum brooch. She ques-
tioned her servants about it. Soon after, the housemaid, Anna-Theresa
H., aged 18, told her of certain suspicions. " Madame, it is your maid
who has stolen it. I found her in your room yesterday, and she seemed
fluttered when she saw me."

The maid in her turn (a war-widow with three children) came to Mme

R and said, " Madame, I am sure that Anna-Theresa is the thief, and

I don't wonder at it, I never liked her."

Mme R , perplexed between the two statements, put the police on

the track, and an enquiry began. Some days passed.

By the advice of a friend, Mme R went to the Metapsychic Institute,

expecting to find mediums there. Dr. Geley named Mme Morel as a clair-
Toyante who might possibly be useful, she having already given proofs of
supernormal faculty in similar cases.

Mme R went to Mme Morel on October 5th with a friend. This

friend interviewed Mme Morel alone, putting into her hands a fur cape

belonging to Mme R , and asking what she could say concerning a

jewel lost by the lady to whom the cape belonged.

Mme Morel said, "It has been stolen. ... I see a long article . . .
very bright . . . like a brooch ... it has not left the house ... a
woman has taken it ; she is not very tall, young, chestnut hair . . . she

1 Camille Flammarion. La Mori tt son Mystire. Vol. II, p. 180.


DIVERSE ASPECTS OF SUPERNORMAL COGNITION 31


is very worried . . . you must go back home quickly . . . the lady must
go back home and say nothing about it. If nothing is said, and she
behaves naturally, the thief will be still more worried. I see her wrapping
the jewel in an old newspaper and throwing it under a table in a long
room like a hall. If nothing is said, the jewel will be brought to her in
a few hours. Go at once ... it is the youngest woman in the house who
is the thief, not the other."

Mme K returned home to Neuilly. At eight the same evening, she

being in the dining-room, another servant came and said, " Madame, here
is your brooch. 1 have just found it in the hall in an old newspaper."

The police inspector arrived at the same time. Mme R told him

what Mme Morel had said and the conclusion of the affair.

Soon after If, Krug-Bass, the magistrate, had the housemaid arrested,
her bearing seeming suspicious to him. She vehemently denied the theft.
Ignorant of all supernormality, he suspected the clairvoyante of com-
plicity in the theft, went to see her, and threatened her. In the Middle
Ages she would have been put to the torture and perhaps sent to the stake.

A month later M. Krug-Bass extorted a confession from the housemaid
and declared himself convinced of the existence of transcendental faculties.

The Press gave wide notice to the story of the brooch, the accounts
being devoid of any sort of accuracy.

These phenomena are totally inexplicable by psychology, and
without confounding them with H thought-transference/' these
latter may be placed in the same class. All supernormal phenomena
partake in this influence. Its experimental demonstration is easy
and has often been made. 1

(c) Supernormal cognitio7i of a n environment distant in Time.

Time, as well as Space, is penetrable by the faculty of super-
normal cognition, just as if Time were but an illusory creation of
the human mind.

An instance of para-normal cognition in the mode of Time called
u present " and in a recent past :

Dr. Dufay, of Blois, had occasion to verify the faculty of hyper-

cognitipn in a young servant of Mme D. during hypnosis. Her liability

to somnambulic crises led to her imprisonment on an accusation of stealing
her mistress's jewellery. Dr. Dufay put her to sleep, awakened her
memory, and proved her innocence. While awaiting her release, the
opportunity for an exact and conclusive experiment presented itself.

■ On the next day," Dr. Dufay writes, in the Revue philosophique, 1889,
Vol. I, p. 205, H I was called very early on account of a suicide in the
prison. A prisoner, accused of murder, had strangled himself with his
cravat, which he had tied to his bed. Lying flat on the floor of his cell,

1 Experiments by Dr. P. Janet and Dr. Gilbert. Revue de Philosophie, 1886,
Vols. I and II.

Experiments by E. Boirac, Psychologic inconnue and Avenir des Sciences
psychiques (Alcan).

Experiments by Dr. Ochorowicz. La Suggestion mentale (Alcan) and Revue de
Philosophie, Vol. I, p. 208.

Warcollicr. La TMpathic (Alcan).


32


SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


he had pushed himself back with his hands till the slip-knot produced
strangulation. The body was already cold when I arrived simultaneously
with the magistrate. The Public Prosecutor, to whom the magistrate had
told the story of the experiment with the girl on the preceding day, desired
to see Marie, and I suggested that we should try an experiment with
reference to the suicide. Both magistrates eagerly accepted the proposal.
I cut off a piece of the cravat and wrapped it in several folds of paper,
tying it up with string.

" Going to the female ward, we found the prisoners just out of the
dormitory, and asked the Sister in charge to place her room at our dis-
posal. I signed to Marie to follow us, and without saying a single word
to her I hypnotized her by simply placing my hand on her forehead. I
then took the paper from my pocket and put it into her hands. The poor
girl started violently, pushed away the packet, saying she would not touch
it. Of course, it is the custom that suicides in prisons are kept secret as
long as possible. Nothing had transpired in the prison, and the Sister was
herself in ignorance of the matter.

" 1 What do you think there is in the packet ? 1 I asked when quiet was
restored.

" ' It is a thing which has killed a man.' . . . ' Is it a knife or a pistol ?
1 No, no ... I see, I see ... it is a cravat ... he hanged himself.
Make the gentleman behind me sit down ; his legs tremble so that he can
hardly stand.' (One of the magistrates was, in fact, so moved that he was
trembling all over.)

" 1 Can you tell me where this has occurred ? '

" 1 Why, here, you know quite well. ... It is one of the prisoners.'
" 1 For what was he in prison ?'...' For murdering a man who had
asked to get into his cart.'

■ 1 How did he kill him ?'...' With a goueL*

H In this part of the country (Loir et Cher) a bill-hook is called by this
name ; it is a tool much used by woodcutters and coopers, and I had
mentioned such a tool in my report as being most likely the instrument
with which the murder had been committed.

M Up to this point Marie's answers had told us nothing that we did not
already know. At this moment the judge of first instance drew me apart
and whispered that the bill-hook had not been found.

" I asked, 1 What did he do with his bill-hook ? 1

" 1 What did he do ? . . . wait a moment ... he threw it into a pond.
... I see it quite well at the bottom of the water.'

n She designated the position of the pond well enough to enable it to
be dragged the same day in presence of an officer of the constabulary.
The bill-hook was found there. We only heard of the result in the even-
ing, but the scepticism of the magistrates was already much shaken.

To satisfy their curiosity, I asked the Sister to borrow from some of
the convicts some small objects belonging to them — an ear-ring, a ring,
etc. — and to wrap them in papers so as to conceal their nature effectively.
Marie gave us an exact statement of the facts which had determined each
conviction.

Instances of supernormal cognition in the far distant past.

I. Mr. William Denton, professor of geology, published in London in
1863 a book entitled Nature's Secrets, or Psychometric Researches, 1 in which
he gave his own experiments suggested by the work of Buchanan, a pro-
fessor of anthropology, on the faculty called by him " psychometry " ;

1 A Manual of Psychometry, quoted by the Journal sur V Homme, Vol. I, No. 2.


DIVERSE ASPECTS OF SUPERNORMAL COGNITION 33


meaning by this term the faculty possessed by some persons of recon-
stituting past scenes by touching an object connected with tlx m.

Mr. Denton had the good fortune to find in his sister, Mrs. Anne Denton
Cridge, a remarkably good subject and one sufficiently educated to describe
her visions accurately.

After testing the validity of her hyper-cognitions by using (like
Buchanan) letters or familiar objects, by contact with which she described
the appearance of the writer or possessor, his character, life, and sur-
roundings, he conceived the idea of using this faculty on geological and
paLeontological questions. Tor this purpose he used metallic fragments,
minerals, fossils, and archaeological remains from various countries, which
his profession provided him with in plenty. In numerous stances Mrs.
Anne Denton, in contact with various objects, seemed to witness great
scenes in geologic epochs and in the life of primitive men, and prehistoric
groups in different centres of civilization. A single instance will give an
idea of the working of the faculty.

She was given a piece of volcanic tufa from Pompeii, all precautions
having been taken that she should be in entire ignorance of the nature
and origin of the object. She said : " I see mural paintings — large frescoes
which seem to decorate the walls of a comfortable house. . . . Then I sec
... a place pertaining to an ancient country and a time long past. The
time-impression is very clear. I perceive the detail of buildings of a past
age. . . . The wings of the frontage towards the sea are flanked by square
towers. I hear the swish of long curtains within the house, moved by the
wind. In front of me and to the left, at the end of an enclosure which
looks like an inner courtyard, I see some obstacle whose nature I am trying
to determine. It seems that this obstacle is a huge mountain, imme-
diately contiguous to this house. Its summit is so high that I have to
raise my head to see it. It seems to be a volcano, for now I see smoke
coming from it, fiery stones, and steam. The violence of the eruption is
such that from a distance it looks like a vast chimney which at a certain
height flattens out, and extends over the whole country.

1 The mountain presents the appearance of an immense rounded sheath
in which is a cavity of unknown depth. The orifice of the actual crater
seems to me much smaller than the internal cavity. A second crater
develops, and this, though smaller than the other, is much more active.
... 1 am now between the two, and am ascending towards the higher
of the two. ... I hear thunders inside the mountain. From what depths
does this terrible eruption come ? The impression I receive now is not
the same as at first. ... It seems strange that I should not have per-
ceived this at first, for nothing can be compared to what is now given to
my sight. The volume of ejected matter is terrible and passes all imagina-
tion. It is not lava, quite different, a growing black, inky cloud dropping
huge black flakes over the whole country round. I can hardly realize the
reality of what 1 see ; it seems so fantastical and unprecedented. It seems
to me the work of destruction must be at its height, there is nothing left
to be swallowed up. It shrieks like a tempest let loose, boils, and passes
like whirlwind.

" Now it seems as if torrents of boiling water are thrown out by the
volcano ; at first there was only a gigantic eruption of scoria and burning
stones, but now great masses of boiling water flow down into the plain,
sweeping away everything in their path — cinders, melted lava, and rocks —
scooping out a ravine between the two craters. What a devastation of
this miserable country ! It is no mere earthquake, but an unprecedented
cataclysm full of horror and irremediable. All the lower part of the moun-
tain is buried under it, and the shroud of death extends for miles round.


3


34 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


All is covered in thick darkness, wlu< li adds to the horror of the seen
Now and then Mashes of lightning start from the mountain and are lo
in the thick clouds with detonations that shake the whole. 1 can on
attribute this fearful power to electro-magnetic force which alone coul<
produce such tremendous effects." 1

Interesting as arc experiments of this kind, they are not valid evidenc
for supernormal cognition of the past. They were made without reckonii
on a factor which must always be borne in mind when conducting sue
studies. I allude to unconscious mental communication. This is alway
present to vitiate investigations.

Mr. Denton was only concerned to keep his subject in ignorance of the
object placed in her hands. He does not seem to have known that his
own thought might be a much more potent suggestive influence, and that
the subject might thence draw not only the main features of a pseudo-
reconstruction of the events, but a quantity of technical detail. Moreove
it is fatal to the positive value of experiments of this sort that we have
no means of ascertaining whether the indications given are conformable
to the ancient facts.

From this point of view tlve only experiment that could be held
conclusive would be one in which the subject should reveal events
unknown to the experimenter and to any other living person,
which details should be confirmed by some document till then
unknown to all.

Such conditions must be extremely rare ; I have long sough
one in vain. There is, however, one already rendered interests
by a beginning of corroboration, w r hich will, I think, interest the
reader, though I do not know if there w ill be any conclusion, or
if such would be confirmative.

II. On March 15th, 1921, M. Lucien Galloy, an engineer, on his return
from a commercial mission in Syria, gave me, for experimental purposes,
a photograph representing an ill-defined ovoid mass about four inches wide
and two inches high. He said : " This is an object whose contents are
unknown to anyone. Would you try to obtain information upon it by
any of the subjects with whom you have experimented ? "

On March 16th, at 9.30 a.m., I placed this photograph in the hands of
Mme Morel in a state of hypnosis.

No other person than M. Galloy in Paris had seen this photograph.
Only as the result of a casual conversation, and on searching his portfolio,
had the idea come to him that it might be used for an experiment.

The photograph, a bad one, suggested nothing as to the object ; none
of those to whom I subsequently showed it could make anything of it.
I said to Mme Morel. " Tell me what the thing which I put into your
hand causes you to see."

" I see a form, and in a fog an inanimate figure ... a being disengages
itself as a shadow, rather tall, the forehead quite clear. ... I see some-
thing without life like a dead face. ... It is very far off. ... I only
see dead people ... it is far. ... I seem to see groups of persons in a
distant land (un cadre iloigni). ... I see there more especially a man
with a young face . . . several persons. Ah ! now an old man appears
more clearly . . . what am I to look for in him ?"

1 Quoted from a study by Mr. Joseph Peter, translated from Die ucber-sinn»
Uche Welt (Munich). Annates de Sciences psychiqucs, Aug. 1910.


DIVERSE ASPECTS OF SUPERNORMAL COGNITION 35

" Look for his mode of life, his surroundings and his profession."

" I see a habitation of unusual form, very large — how large ! ... it is
not an ordinary habitation. ... I see a vaulted roof ... it is immense
. . . cold, very ancient ... it seems deserted. ... I sec nothing
present — (rien d'actuel) ... it is almost like a church. ... I see gloom
everywhere ... it is immense . . . the ground is cold, the roof very
high . . . there are lights in the sides. I see what seems to be coloured
windows . . . many stones ... it is immense . . . the form of the
house is round, like a cloister ... it is immense, immense.

" This man does no manual work, his brain only is active. ... I see
his bff&in, high above the normal ... a life entirely of the brain . . .
vast thought, vast. . . . I see what looks like a vast field in his brain. . . .
I get glimpses of many men around him. He speaks, as if his words were
above (the comprehension of) all these people.

" I see this form, sad . . . many thoughts. . . . How remote in time
it all is ! Very far.

" This man gathers others to him . . . he speaks; his mere words are an
action . . . written characters come into his brain almost daily. ... I
see coloured things . . . how abundant is his imagination ! He is highly
placed ... at the head of many . . . higher than the normal . . . like
a man distinguished above others ... he gives out much thought.

" Something very sudden and violent stops all this. One would think
that a violent death has supervened . . . this man is choking. I see
blood. ... It is sudden ! ... he is not alone . . . many persons are
round him . . . how violent ! I see a block of stone . . . suddenly I see
him on the ground . . . there is a man there, I do not distinguish what
he is doing. ... I only see the other extended on the ground ... all
vanishes."

" What became of this man's body ? "

" Oh, what a number of people ! It is strange, I see a large concourse,
but in their brains I do not see the face of that man . . . there are many
there whom he did not know. ...

" I see a great crowd of unknown persons. ... I hear much noise . . .
one would say a whole nation behind that man ... an immense crowd
. . . then something military . . . what a concourse, they come from
everywhere. ... I hear cries. ... I see something very high ... it is
like a strange funeral scene."

" See a few of the crowd ?"

" I see people in light-coloured garments ... it is unusual at a funeral
... all round that man I see bright colours . . . red on both sides of
him . . . then a group dressed in- white . . . what a number in white,
all together, in groups . . . then I see uniforms . . . then the crowd
follows ... all very bright . . . bright sunlight.

" The uniforms are worn by soldiers, some are very dark, with gold upon
the dark colour. ... I see large head-dresses white, like white plumes . . .
others have robes."

" Look for the place where this man is buried."

M 1 don't see any earth, it is like a small underground house . . . I see a
large vault, no earth . . . this man is suspended as it were, placed on
something, not on the ground really . . . there seems an empty space
underneath, he is placed as if sleeping. ... I see other dead about him."

M Now look for the object of which you are holding a photograph."

" 1 see what looks like a large ball, but bigger on one side than the other
. . . white, milky, a kind of agate tint. There is a liquid in it, nearly
half full, no, nearer a quarter. ... I see a rusty coloured liquid, like
reddened water, thick ... it is not water . . . there, now I see better


86 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


... a quarter full or more, a reddish liquid like clayey water. ... A
it is like blood with a rusty tint, and above it is a thin layer rather thicker
than below ... it is like blood ... its colour is like blood somewhat
discoloured."

" Look under what circumstances this liquid was put into the object."

H Oh, it is very far in the past, very, very far! . . . while I look at it I
see some one dying . . . how far away it is ... an infinite distance . . .
an age which is not ours. It is the moment of his death, as if it were some
of his blood. It is not in the surroundings in which that object was
placed ; it is in quite a different place. ... I see mountains and water
. . . forests, uncultivated land. . . . How strange . . . how far away !
I see some one bleeding ... it is his death . . . what a number of
people ... it seems to be in a stone building. ... I see men around
another ... he has a large wound in his neck ... a savage scene, a
human being martyrised, much martyrised as if they were injuring another,
one only . . . these people do not speak the same language. ... 1 see
wounds, blood, a savage act. . . . Oh, these men ! . . . robes . . .
bronze-coloured. ... 1 see one especially with large bright eyes. . . .
What a strange face I ... a bleeding body.

H Now I see a mountain . . . that man goes up it . . . there is suffering
... he seems to be going up a bare mountain dragging some heavy thing,
black and heavy . . . there is a shock, like some one falling. ... I see
pain and blood. I see blood round his head.

" I see men who gather this blood, first in some vessel, then in that which
I am holding . . . this travels far, it is shut up with the body, as one
places a memento. . . .

n The blood was put in when the object itself was made. ... 1 see sand,
then a strong heat to make it ... it has no opening ... it is rather
hastily finished in one place . . . the air cannot enter."

Verification.

1. What I knew at the time of the experiment. Nothing at all.

2. What M. Galloy knew. He was not present and told me some hours
later :

M. Eddet, living at Beyrout, a landowner in the valley of Bekaa (Syria),
told him in January, 1921, that he had a sort of little closed bottle, ovoid
in shape, of nearly opaque glass allowing the level of liquid inside to be
seen. This liquid must have been put in when the glass was blown, for no
orifice or place of sealing is visible.

This ovoid is one- third larger than the photograph.

It was found in a necropolis near Baalbec, where are the ruins of the
temple of Heliopolis. It appears to be the only object of the kind found
in the necropolis of this place or anywhere else.

M. Maspero, custodian of the Museum at Cairo, having seen this object
when visiting Baalbec, before 191 4, is said to have declared it unique
never before seen by him, probably the only specimen in the world, and
dating probably from the Roman occupation slightly before the Christian
era.

The knowledge thus gained of its rarity caused the object to be deposited
in a bank at Beyrout, pending the chance of speaking of it to some
archaeologist.

The photograph was given by M. Eddet to M. Galloy that he might
interest French archaeologists in the ovoid and its mysterious contents.

M. Eddet considered that it must contain some rare and precious liquid,
having been placed in the tomb of an important personage.

M. Galloy, who had not seen the ampulla, had made no guess at its


DIVERSE ASPECTS OF SUPERNORMAL COGNITION 87


contents. He was much astonished to hear that the voyante had stated
it to be blood.

III. Letter fromM. Eddet, posted at Beyrout, April 4th, 1921, answering
a request for more precise information :

u You ask me for very precise details regarding the antique ampulla.
I haste to give you the details here following :

" The bottle was found in a village now called Kerak, close to the
Malaaka Railway Station on the road to Baalbec. There is at Kerak
itself a tomb of Roman times, which the Metoualis, since they came into
these parts, call 1 the tomb of Noah.'

" The tomb in which this bottle was found is situated close to the ruins
of an ancient necropolis. The proprietor of this ground, in 1895, wishing
to make a nursery for silkworms, brought workmen to dig the foundations.

11 While carrying out this work they came upon a large stone closing a
cavity. There was a tomb in the middle of this vaulted cavity. On this
tomb lay a plate of massive gold on which this bottle rested. Round
the tomb were many urns of different sizes symmetrically placed.

" At sight of the plate and the urns, the workmen hastened to seize them
and abandoned the tomb. The bottle was carried off and handed over
to the proprietor. In these urns were found gold pieces bearing the effigy
of Alexander the Great.

" Some hours after the discovery, the Caimakam, the Governor of the
Sandjak, having been informed, came to the spot accompanied by the
police. He and his companions took away such urns as the workmen had
left. No other tomb was found near, no excavations were made. The
distance from the temple of Baalbec to the ruins of Kerak is about
eighteen miles. I could not tell you whether there were or are any inscrip-
tions in the tomb, the cavity has been covered with earth. No fragments
of glass or stone, and no inscriptions were found, and I much regret
inability to send you specimens. ..."

IV. Letter from M. Eddet, in reply to a request for permission to
examine the liquid in the ampulla, or its purchase:

"... Only the sale of this object is contemplated, and I cannot permit
the examination of the contents for its value lies in this substance which
was affirmed by the London and Cairo Museums. I said, therefore, that its
sale will be considered, and I ask /5000 (Egyptian) as its price. If your
friend intends purchase, I would beg you to let him know that the sale
will be made at the French Consulate in Beyrout at a time to be indicated
by him."

Nothing followed on the transaction proposed.

It is desirable, however, to clear up the whole significance of the
experiment.

With only a very bad photograph, giving no notion of the object
portrayed, Mme Morel takes cognizance of the life, death, and funeral
rites of an ancient personage ; she describes the form, dimensions, and
appearance of the ancient ampulla of glass and the state of the liquid it
contains.

It is obviously impossible to reach any certitude how far her vision
corresponds to reality. The events cannot be brought back to our eyes.
Compared, however, with the usual checks on the accuracy of past events,
these here applicable are exceptionally valuable.

To begin with, the description by the subject is confirmed by the know-
ledge of Messrs. Galloy and Eddet as far as this goes. The ampulla is
actually as described, ajid was found in a vaulted chamber in a necropolis
in the East. This part of the experiment is instructive because it limits the
phenomenon to one of two possibilities — supernormal cognition of the


88


SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


past, or, mental intercommunication at a distance. As in all experiments
not specifically repeatable, the good faith of the experimenter and the
witnesses must be assumed.

But in addition (and herein lies the interest of the facts) the subject
described an event — the dramatic and sanguinary death of an ancient
personage, of which unrevealed evidence that can be verified by the senses
exists. The real contents of the ampulla are unknown to any living being.
Those who know of the existence of the vessel think its contents quite
different to that indicated by the subject. It then should be verified that
the liquid is other than blood, that would prove that the veridical part of
Mme Morel's vision is due to intercommunication of thought, and that
alone would, by reason of the distance, be a very remarkable fact. The
rest would be mere fabulation.

If the contents should in the future be found to be blood, the probability
that the whole events described were true would approach certainty.

I hope that some day the affair will be brought to a conclusion ; mean-
while, it is well that the narrative of the facts should precede their
verification.

An instance of supernormal cognition of the future of a human
person and incidentally, of an event affecting many. 1

Dr. Tardieu writes : "This remarkable prediction, of which there are
several witnesses still living and whose accuracy I guarantee on my word
of honour, occurred in the month of July, 1869.

" My friend L£on Sonrel — a former student at the higher Normal School,
and then employed in the Paris Observatory — and myself were often
together and became intimate friends. He was a scientific man of the
highest type. Thanks to him, when I was on the Paris hospital staff, I
became acquainted with many men of science, more especially with
Charles Sainte-Clair-Deville and Marie-Davy. I was one of the four
founders of the Observatory of Montsouris, along with Sonrel, and by his
assistance.

M lAon Sonrel had often astonished me by a kind of hypnotic state that
occurred from time to time in the course of conversation when he was
quiet and suitably disposed. I listened to him and could verify the fact
that he often predicted events which in the sequel proved correct. I should,
however, mention that I paid no very particular attention to these
states, which I regarded as an access of somnambulism, though his eyes
remained open and his countenance underwent no change.

" But on the 23rd or 24th of July, 1869, we were walking in the Luxem-
burg gardens facing the Pharmaceutical School, when he made the
following prediction, which lasted three hours and made a very strong
impression upon me. He continued his walk, looking upwards and
stopping from time to time :

" ' Oh 1 What is this ? It is war. You are on the Boulevards—in
command. How surprising. You are counting money at the Gare du
Nord. . . . Now you are in the train with a number of others. . . . You
stop at Aulnoy ! Now you come to Hirson. You are at Hirson. You are
at M^zidres; but where are you going ? Se*dan. . . . Oh, what a battlel
You are in great danger. . . . Oh, my poor country ! What a disaster !
What a misfortune ! Oh, my God ! my God 1 ' He stopped a moment
and wept.

1 The facts are reported by M. Amcdee Tardieu, consulting physician at Mont-
Dore. Published by M. de Vesme in the Annates des Sciences psychiques, 191 5,
No. 3 ; and abbreviated by Professor Richet in his Trait* de Meiapsychtque.


DIVERSE ASPECTS OF SUPERNORMAL COGNITION 89


" He walked on and I followed. He raised his head and seemed looking
into space, making some gestures with his arm. He went on :

" 1 Oh, what a defeat 1 what a disaster I Oh, my poor country 1 1 He
continued :

" 1 You are besieged in Paris. . . . Why I I am a superior officer !
What ? I shall die in three days ! ' He seemed to wake up, and turning
to me, said, 1 I am dying, dying, but of what ? '

M For one moment he looked at me normally, and I replied, ' Yes, old
man, you were dying at the Siege of Paris, and were a superior officer. That
is all right.'

" He returned to the hypnotic state : 1 1 am dying, dying in the siege of
Paris in three days.' He seemed to wake up three times, and went on . . .

• Oh, my God I My poor wife is pregnant of a child whom I shall never see.'
He wept. ' Oh, but you are there I You take care of them. How good
you are.' He snowed great anguish and continued to predict the disasters
of the Siege and the dangers I should incur. . . . Then, speaking to me,
'Ah, you think to remain in Paris and work with the Medical School I you
are in the provinces — politically employed, but you do not forget my wife
and children ! Ah, you marry and have children ! Ah, my poor friend,
how you suffer I you are weeping at the bedside of a dying woman whom
you love. . . . Courage, courage, my friend ; you will win through your
troubles. How sorry I am for you, my poor friend ! '

For more than two hours Sonrel revealed his friend's future, and, coming
to the revelation of a certain scientific fact which made an epoch in
M. Tardieu's life, he broke out :

M 1 Another disaster for France. Oh, my God 1 my country is lost !
France is slain 1 '

" Sonrel wept for some minutes, and was silent. Then he raised his
head and, looking up us if inspired, cried out : ' Ah, she is saved ; she goes
to the Rhine ! Oh, France ! oh, my dearly loved country, she triumphs,
queen of the nations 1 Her genius shines throughout the world. . . . All
admire her ! ' "

Dr. Tardieu sums up the sequel :

w Appointed to medical charge of the 8th Red Cross Ambulance, by
my respected chiefs, Drs. N£laton and Larrey, about August 20th, 1870,
I left with three ambulances under orders for the army of Mac-Mahon,
who was to leave Chalons to join Bazaine at Metz. But no one knew where
Mac-Mahon might be. I thought to follow the valley of the Meuse, and so
to find his army somewhere on the way to Metz. The 8th Ambulance was
specially attached to the 7th Army Corps under Felix-Douay.

11 We passed along the boulevards amid great excitement. I told two of
my doctors to solicit help for the wounded. From the Opera to the station
we collected 36,000 francs. I counted over this money in the station to
the cashier of the Society. At that moment the prediction by my friend
came back to me.

M In the train my doctors asked me where we were going, and I replied,

• Towards the northern part of the valley of the Meuse ; we shall pass by
Auinoy, Hirson and Mezieres to Sedan. Moreover,' I told them, ' 1 will
tell you of a prediction made to me : In ten to fifteen days we return to
Paris after a terrible defeat.'

M On August 31st, after traversing Auinoy, Hirson, Mezicres and Sedan,
we came to Raucourt by way of Ch£mery. We had picked up several
hundred wounded from the battle of Beaumont. The French Army filed
past : the Prussians in pursuit camped at Raucourt and round about. In
the evening of August 31st, about 10 p.m., I told my doctors of the


40 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


prediction by Leon and said that after the defeat on the morrow, we should
return to Paris, which would be besieged.

H All my ambulance staff met my friend Sonrel at Arcueil, where he came
and dined with me. They said, 1 Now we shall see whether he is appointed
a superior officer and dies in three days.'

" Leon was gazetted major in the subsidiary corps of Engineers under
the orders of Colonel Laussedat. . . . Fifteen or twenty days later he
took black small-pox and died in three days. His wife was in the third
month of pregnancy.

11 The 8th Ambulance, which was then at Arcueil, was dumbfounded.
Together with M. Delaunay, presiding over the Observatory, and President
of the Academy of Sciences, I directed the obsequies at the church of
Montrouge and the cemetery of Mont par nasse.

"It is needless to mention that I thought it my duty to assist the sorrow-
ing widow in every way that I could.

" After the Siege I returned to Auvergne, and was appointed Councill
in the Puy-de-D6me.

* In his prophecy Leon always spoke of his children. In 1869 he had
but one son. The second — Jacques — was born seven months after his
father's death, in 1871.

11 As Councillor of Puy-de-D6me, in 1873, I secured the vote for the
foundation of the Observatory there. When bringing the project for
confirmation I took the opportunity of asking the General Council to
support my application to the Minister Jules Simon for a pension to the
widow of my friend Sonrel. The Minister granted a pension of 1200 francs.

u I married in 1874. My wife faded slowly from an encysted liver
during six years, leaving me with two little girls.

" W hen, in 191 2, the episode of a scientific kind predicted by Son
forty- three years before came to pass. M. Tardieu judged the time of the
new trials of France to be near. He warned his friends, and in April, 1914,
certain that terrible events were near, went to Professor Richet, com-
municated to him the whole of the Sonrel prediction, and at his request
gave it to him written out for publication in the Annates des Sciences
psychiques. On June 13th I had personal knowledge of it at a reunion of
psychical enquiries, and only circumstances connected with the war
delayed the publication till August, 1915, when the issue of the war was
still very doubtful."

An instance of supernormal cognition of a collective future.

The instance I am about to quote is of a kind which would leave
the reader resolutely sceptical if it were not supported by numerous
honourable witnesses. No premonitory facts as yet known are
at all comparable to it. By its precision in names, dates, and
places, and the accuracy of the information given, it is perfect.
I envy those who, having been present at the successive phases of
this experiment, have acquired absolute certainty that so complete
a precognition of the future is possible.

Here follows the premonition as reproduced in the Rev
Metapsychique, No. 7 of 192 1 :

Extraordinary predictions, made during the course of the last Russo-
Polish War by an auditory medium, Madame Przybylska.

Madame Przybylska is not a professional medium ; she gives only
private seances to friends. She " hears " the messages transmitted to her,


DIVERSE ASPECTS OF SUPERNORMAL COGNITION 41


and dictates their contents, which those present take down as uttered. All
the following communications were read and recorded by the Central
Committee of the S.P.R., Warsaw, immediately after the s6ances with
Mme Przybylska, long before the realization of the predicted events.

The first message, obtained June ioth, 1920, was read at the sitting of
the Central Committee on June 16th, 1920, under the presidency of
M. Lebiedzinski, and the other members then present — Colonel Okolowicz,
Mr. Rose, Dr. Sokolowski, Mr. Niemojeviki, Dr. Guirard, Mr. L. Grabowski,
Mr. K. Bokowski, Mr. P. Smurlo, Mme Jastrzembska, Mme Wodzinska,
Mr. Knechowicz, and Mme Gordon de Jurgielewicz.

The same procedure was followed with all the other messages whose
genuineness is certified by numerous and competent witnesses.

The first of the documents reproduced below was obtained June 10th,
1920, at a private stance given by the medium, in presence of the Countesses
Marie and Jeanne de Walesska. It was read, as before stated, to the
Central Committee of the S.P.R., Warsaw, on June 16th. At that time the
Poles seemed completely victorious ; they occupied an important part of
Russia, and had taken Kieff.

The Bolshevists were everywhere in full retreat. On June 9th the line
of the River Socha had been forced, and on the 10th the victory of the
Beresina was officially announced.

The message 1 was received with stupefaction and entire incredulity.

The messages received and the events that came to pass are here printed
in parallel columns.


Message of June 10th, 1920.

The Council of Ministers is not
yet constituted, but sooner or later
you will hear of Witos.

What misfortunes 1 What dis-
asters I How many dead on the
battlefields ! A disaster to your
troops.

During this month there will be a
great change in the Council. Witos
will be Prime Minister.

A greater man than your Min-
isters will give you his friendly
help. In August everything will
change. A stranger arrives with
whom Pilsudski takes counsel ; he
will have much influence.

The systematic strikes will come
to an end. Towards the middle
of August your misfortunes will
change, but up to that time there
will be nothing but disasters.


Events realized.

The disaster predicted, though
quite unexpected, did not fail to
come about.

A general offensive by the Bol-
shevists began June 28th on the
northern front. On J uly 8th the line
of the Upper Beresina (550 kil. from
Warsaw) was abandoned. Minsk
was lost on the 12th, Vilna (440 kil.
from Warsaw) was lost on the 16th,
and Lida (350 kil.) on the 18th.

The attack on Warsaw began
August 13th and 14th, and on the
15th the battle began to go in
favour of the Poles.

On the 1 8th the victory of the
Vistula was complete and the
Asiatic hordes were routed : but up
to the 15th the Polish armies had
only defeats.

The arrival of a stranger (General
Weygand) and his co-operation
with Pilsudsky, had a great share in
saving Poland. Victory declared
for the Poles in the middle of August
(the 15th).

Mr. Witos, till then almost
unknown, became Prime Minister
July 24th.

1 The word " message " is used here as in spiritualist circles, as if the subject
received her information from an exterior entity.


42 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


Events realized.

The events came to pass exactly.
The invasion of Poland by the
Bolsheviks began and was closely
followed up.

Events realized.

Minsk, Kowel, and Vilna were
lost in the weeks following.


It was on August 15th exactly
that victory changed sides and
Warsaw was saved.


Message of July 6th , read to the

Central Council July 12th.

A great disaster. You will soon
get orders to abandon the right
bank of the Vistula.

Disasters all through this month.

Message of July nth, read to the

Central Committee July 21st.

Minsk, Kowel, and Vilna are lost.
Near Kowel many rich people have
been shot. Terrible news comes
from that province. But after a
month all will change.

The number of your defenders
increases.

By the end of July your forces
will be greater than those of the
Bolsheviks. They will invade your
land and there will be terrible
disasters.

But the troops of Lenin are
dispersed in the month of August.
The great change is on August 15th.

A ray of joy comes from your
greatest friend. The word for the
present is — No disunion, and count
on your own strength. That will
have much influence at the Peace
Conference.

Message of July 21st.

A visitant from Paris brings you
an unexpected change. Your pa-
triotism and heroism make a great
impression on him.

Great changes in August.

Your strength is in the victories
of Kowel and Kovno.

Discord between the Bolshevist
leaders and a great and unexpected
change.

You will re- take your lost ground
more quickly than you lost it, and
many guns and prisoners. A great
victory towards Vilna and Lida.

Vilna will be occBpied by your
troops more quickly than it was
lost.

On the 1 st of August the medium left for Zakopane, a small
health resort in the mountains. The communications were sent
by post to the S.P.R., read and countersigned by the members.

The five messages received at Zakopane were taken down in
presence of Dr. Sochaki, Mr. Cienski, and Mme. Cienska, Mme.
Abgarowicz, Count Dzieduszycki, and Countess Dzieduszycka.


Events realized.

All these events came to pass.
After the victory on the Vistula
followed those at Kowel, Kovno,
Vilna, and Lida.


The rout of the Bolsheviks was
complete. They lost most of their
artillery and 100,000 prisoners.


DIVERSE ASPECTS OF SUPERNORMAL COGNITION 43


Messages received August 6th at Events realized.

Zakopan*. Exact fulfilment of all details.

Russia is victorious and the chief
forces are towards Minsk and
Terespol. The Polish forces have
been beaten everywhere. Sud-
denly, aid from France, and much
joy on the 15th of August. Warsaw
will not be taken. Your dispersed
armies will draw together again. A
great victory for the Poles. The
soldiers of the Soviets will be routed
and driven out. You know that
Warsaw is in despair. All the
country round is occupied by the
enemy. Every day brings horrible
news. At Warsaw they expect the
Bolsheviks, but fear will be changed
into joy.

At the time of greatest distress it was reported in Zakopane
that Warsaw had been occupied by the enemy.


August 13/A.

Great changes. France comes to
your aid. The Bolsheviks have been
driven out of the town of Prznyss.
Your old chief takes command and
leads you to victory. It is Monday,
August 15th. The enemy will not
take your town. You are strong.
Wait till Monday. Do not despair.
Seven more days and you will have
great victories. Your love for your
country, your heroism and a miracle
by the Holy Virgin have saved the
town. Pray to the Holy Virgin for
strength to wait these seven days.

Message of August 14/A, 1920.

What joy ! the enemy is dis-
persed.


Events realized.

Exact fulfilment of all.


Message of August 15th, 1920.

A betrayal and a misfortune at
Dzialdovo (Soldau). There is a
fraud by the Bolsheviks and the
Prussians. Warsaw is jubilant,
suddenly overjoyed and radiant.
She is marvellously strong. How
she fights I The whole world looks
on and wonders at her victory.

To-day is the great change : a
bridge taken near Modlin. To-
morrow a new ray of hope, and after
to-morrow such joy and hope.
Your country is cleared of her


Events realized.

The event was not yet realized,
but was imminent.

Events realized.

Impossible to be more exact and
definite. All is absolutely true.
The details of the battle of the
Vistula, the alarm at Lemberg, the
complicity of the Prussians at
Soldau giving passage to the routed
army through East Prussia.

The inverted order of this episode
should be remarked ; it is men-
tioned first.


44 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


enemies more quickly than one
could have hoped.

The Bolsheviks try to surround
Lemberg ; they pass the Strypa.
But, I repeat, they will not take
Lemberg. They have sworn they
will be at Lemberg on Tuesday, but
it is not true. Budienny's army is
dispersed near that town.

Message of August 19M, 1920.

In a month great victories and
a new disaster for the Bolsheviks.
Complete defeat of the enemy.


Events realized.

This was the victory of Rovno.


(3) The Limits of Supernormal Cognition

1 have wished to give a general notion of para-normal cognition
by the instances above cited from other men's works to show what
manifestations have been recorded up to the present. I have
taken these instances at first in close connection with Psycho-
physiological science, and it will have been noticed that they
diverge from this latter and soon lose, even theoretical contact
with it.

In our survey of all these artificially grouped facts, have we
explored the whole extent of supernormal cognition ?

Those who undertake experimental research in supra-normality
soon, acquire the certainty, based on scientific grounds, that the
human being seems endowed with a duplicate psychic personality :
the one — the conscious mind, continually functioning on the
reports of the senses in a sequence progressing towards knowledge
by comparison, abstraction, deduction, induction, and generalisa-
tion ; the other latent, rarely manifested, disposing of sources of
information, and working by mental processes that have no rela-
tion to the normal.

In the great majority of human beings the supernormal psychic
personality remains always latent — quite latent ; nothing ever
shows its presence.

In other cases, perhaps, only once in a life-time, on the occasion
of some important event, the supernormal psychism informs the
plane of conscious thought.

With others this occurs repe^teril y^ _ .

Only in a few rare cases, the 'physiological veil that divides the
apparent from the latent seems to be raised. With these persons
the passage from the stage of sensorial thought to the tran-
scendental is so easy that a true para-normal faculty is mani-
fest, co-existent with ordinary intelligence, and occasionally
coming into action spontaneously, but also at will of the subject.

Study of this faculty of hyper-cognition soon reveals that those


DIVERSE ASPECTS OF SUPERNORMAL COGNITION 45


who possess it differ so much in their individual powers that no
two are alike. It would seem that by reason of shades in psycholo-
gical constitution, each seizes on some fragmentary part of the
whole reality, the part cognized being variable in its nature and
extent.

The artificial gradation of phenomena that I have made for
convenience of description does not seem to exist for the faculty
itself. A subject who is capable of the greater manifestations is
not necessarily capable of the lesser. One person may be a dowser
and nothing more. Another, having remarkable powers of per-
ception of human personalities and for whom other lives have no
secrets, can grasp no other reality. Madame Przybylska, endowed
with a semi-divine faculty of perceiving the future, is perhaps
incapable of saying what is happening in the next room or of
finding a bit of copper buried in the ground.

Those who show hyper-cognition are, up to the present at least,
specialized as it were. Supernormal cognition is therefore a
function of the temperament of those who are endowed with it ;
but to assign limits to its extent and acuity would be to generalise
on insufficient data. During the fifty years that a small number
of observers have interested themselves in para-normal cognition
the phenomena brought to light are so amazing that few perhaps
feel able to admit them till they have seen them.

Now that men of science, trained by study of the facts, are on
the look out for uprushes from the transcendental plane of human
thought ; now that the diffusion of metanormal psychology has
multiplied the number of observers, we may expect to discover
and record manifestations of supernormal cognition of an order
w r hose existence we do not yet suspect.


SUPERNORMAL COGNITION


Directed upon a Human Personality

INVESTIGATION of supernormal cognition in its principal
manifestations reveals this psychic faculty under widely
different aspects. It is with considerable surprise that the
psychologist will note its fragmentary character. Theoretic-
ally a psycho-physiological unity can be assigned to the faculty of
hyper-cognition by referring all its varieties to the potentialities
of the human dynamo-psychism ; but in practice it is found that
the range of faculty in each subject possesing this power is very
restricted, and specialised. The sequences artificially made
among the phenomena do not correspond to progressive degrees in
actual hyper-cognition. As before said, a subject capable of the
higher manifestations is not necessarily capable of presenting the
lower. Subjects who present the most puzzling phenomena,
entirely inexplicable by physiological science, are not generally
able to produce those other minor manifestations which seem
almost intelligible from physiological data.

This fact is not unimportant : each variety of specialization
of individual metanormal faculty gives us as many human subjects
for study as there are specialized capacities.

I would particularly emphasize this fact of specialization,
because neglect of this fact (of which I come across many instances)
sterilizes enquiry. It is scientifically useless to undertake
investigations into the nature of hyper-cognition by endeavouring
to obtain a prearranged set of phenomena, without previously
ascertaining the type of human subject employed. Every person
possessing the faculty is a special instrument for the investigator
who, if he is to get reliable results, must know its modes of working
and the conditions under which it can be employed. Investigation
of supernormal faculty cannot come to fruition by the study of
any single individual however highly gifted ; many human subjects
of differing types must be separately studied.

Moreover, the attempt to work from the known to the unknown
and from the simple to the complex as in ordinary science is but
to create illusions and to lose time. In this matter nothing is
simple and nothing can be said to be " known," everything is

46


COGNITION AND HUMAN PERSONALITY 47


complex and obscure. Even what seems akin to our sciences is
really as inexplicable as that which seems remote from them, for
our knowledge of the psycho-physiology of the human subject
may be taken as nil, despite the naive self-sufficiency of certain
scientists.

We have to accommodate ourselves to this state of things.
As variations in faculty determine the diversity of the phenomena,
it is useless to attempt to generalise, and research must necessarily
be confined to the particular class of phenomena obtainable with
each particular subject suited to that restricted enquiry.

It is for this reason that I have in this book confined myself to
one single aspect of supernormal cognition ; and it was in order
to lead up to this restricted analysis that I have cursorily surveyed
the whole area of hyper-cognition in its many forms, without
enlarging on any. The only aspect I now intend to develop is
that in which supernormal cognition is directed upon a human
personality as its objective.

But in order to define still more precisely this limited field of
research, it is necessary to remember that phenomena of this class,
may, as we have already seen, be accidental ; that is, may
appear fortuitously a few times or once only in the lives of certain
rare personalities. I put these aside, they cannot be evoked,
they are not reproducible and belong to the historic data. The
branch of study that I here undertake is that in which the psycho-
logist has at his disposal a certain class of sensitives as his human
instruments of research, who are endowed with the permanent
faculty (when put in contact with other individuals) of taking
para-normal cognition of their personalities and the content of
their lives.

No misapprehension on the part of the reader should be
possible. And to avoid exposing myself in the future as in the
past to objections arising simply from the want of precision
attaching to terms commonly used in psychic literature, I
deliberately set aside the whole of that misleading terminology
which invests the diverse manifestations of supernormal cognition
with names which prejudge the method of their production, or
allow anyone to interpret them in any sense that he may prefer.
" Double sight," "second sight," " vision at a distance," "audition
atadistance," "telepathy," "clairvoyance," " lucidity," and the
like, are all words which mean too much or mean nothing ; they
should disappear from use.

The luminous mind of Emile Boirac justly said, " At their
outset nearly all sciences start by taking all their terms from
ordinary language ; they speak, one may say, as everyone speaks.
But ordinary language is too poor and narrow to describe all the
objects and the aspects of these objects which appear to scientific


48 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


view as the circle of research extends. . . . Those who have
entered upon psychic investigations have not always realized
the importance of framing a really appropriate terminology. On
the contrary, they have (as indeed was natural) endeavoured to
adapt the ordinary vocabulary to needs arising from new facts
or to express new ideas ; and these words already carrying old
associations, now are obstacles in the way of a more appropriate
terminology. . . . Many of the difficulties that arise have no
other cause than the insufficiency of the verbal instrumentation."

In his Avcnir des Sciences psychiques (p. 223), Boirac has
proposed (though with an unduly restricted meaning) the word
1 metagnomy " (/xrra = beyond, yw/Kif = intelligence) to designate
the phenomenon of supernormal cognition. It means therefore
w knowledge of things that we cannot normally know."

I suggest that this term (etymologically correct) should be
accepted by psychologists in its full moaning. It presents the
advantage that it is adaptable to the ideas to be expressed—
" metagnomic information, 11 a 11 metagnomic subject "—are
brief and explicit, and do not go beyond the essential idea.

The investigation here following, labelled with this term till a
more definite one applicable to this group only shall be invented,
is then—" Metagnomy applied to a human objective."


CHAPTER V


THE METHOD OF INVESTIGATION OF SUPERNORMAL
COGNITION DIRECTED UPON A HUMAN
PERSONALITY

BY reason of the permanent faculty possessed by some
subjects of cognizing human personalities, phenomena
of this class can be evoked and reproduced, and are
therefore amenable to an experimental treatment
adapted to their special nature. Only this kind of disciplined
study can produce useful results. Apart from experimental
method, investigation remains in the stage of semi-passive obser-
vation, and can only accumulate a superabundance of facts. In
this, as in other branches of Natural Science, the aim is to dis-
cover the causes of phenomena in order to acquire knowledge
satisfying to the mind and leading to useful applications.

The stages of development should succeed one another in the
order stated by Claude Bernard : (i) Verified facts (phase of
observation) ; (2) Provisional interpretation (phase of hypothesis) ;

(3) Verification (phase of experiment directed by hypothesis) ;

(4) Definition (phase of discovery of laws).

Let us now take a general glance at the manner in which
experimental method should be adapted to psychological study
in which the subjective factor seems to play so large a part.

When my attention was attracted to " metagnomy with a
human objective/' I found this future department of psychology
hardly outlined, for the work done by those interested in it had
chiefly consisted in verifying phenomena and showing thei
genuineness. Some had obtained metagnomic facts from some
subjects by taking down their words and comparing these with
the event. Others had collected and compared facts with the
purpose of inferring their genesis. As no rigorous investigation
had clearly pointed to any one hypothesis, all possible sup-
positions had been made ; some going to the extreme limits of
fancifulness. It may be said, that if the accumulation of facts
tended to compel conviction, the ingenuity shown in explaining
them did not, for the most part, keep pace with the mass of
material.

Moreover, it is useless to waste time in convincing people of


4


49


50


SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


the reality of phenomena which their reason does not grasp,
which, moreover, most of them have never witnessed. The
important thing is to push as far as possible the study of meta-
gnomic phenomena and to acquire precise and extended knowledge
of them ; it will then be easy to demonstrate their genesis as f
as that is demonstrable at all.

To attain this object, however, observation — that first phase
of exact knowledge — must be understood somewhat differently
than I have, up to the present, found it to be.

The informing words of a metagnomic subject, when th
faculty is in action, are the result of a very complex psychi
process. This is the really instructive part of the study, as will
be apparent in the two latter parts of this book. A fact of
metagnomy applied to a human objective passes through three
successive phases : its genesis, which is cryptic, its manifestation
by spoken or written words, and the period of verification and
check.

To fix on paper the words of a subject and then to check ho
far they are well founded is easy enough, but has the sam
degree of value as if one were to take cognizance of a type
motor only by verifying its output. The valuable and very
difficult thing is to observe the parts played by the two principal
factors in the period during which the phenomenon arises.
These two factors are, the metagnomic sensitive and the hum
object of metagnomic perception.

Both these factors deserve the same attention and the same
effort at analysis. Without a metagnomic subject there can, of
course, be no manifestations of supernormal cognition, and
therefore in the class of phenomena to which I have confined
myself, the metagnomic subject seems to play a preponderant if
not a unique part ; but it must also be recognized that without
a human individual as objective, connected after a certain
manner with the sensitive, there is also no metagnomic output.
The percipient isolated from other human beings would remain
in ignorance of his potential faculty. Every metagnomic fact
must therefore be studied as a function of the percipient who
seems to be its sole originator, as a function of the human
individuality that is its object, and also of the experimenter who
evokes the manifestation. To limit oneself to recording the
words of the sensitive is to look only at the close of the pheno-
menon and to make its comprehension impossible.

To make this clearer, I will indicate how a metagnomic obser-
vation should be taken in the following manner :

A given person is placed in presence of a metagnomic sensitive
for the purpose of studying the quality and processus of super-
normal perception.


INVESTIGATION OF SUPERNORMAL COGNITION 51

1. The words of the percipient must be exactly recorded.

2. What the sensitive knew relative to what has been said, or
might have known, previously to the experiment, should be
ascertained.

3. What the percipient might suppose under the given condi-
tions should be taken account of.

4. The thought-content of the person observed at the outset
of the experiment and also that of the experimenter with reference
to metagnomic information generally, should receive attention.

5. The changes in the thoughts of the person (objective) and
of the experimenter brought about by the metagnomic informa-
tion derived from the sensitive, must not be lost sight of.

6. Comparison of the words of the percipient with reality.

7. Critical examination (censorship) of the metagnomic infor-
mation relatively to actualities and to the mental content and
thought-movements of the person described and of the experi-
menter.

In dealing with this entirely subjective phenomenon, whose
objectivity only consists in its relation to facts, it is of primary
importance that the mental contents should be recorded as care-
fully and thoroughly as the words by which the subject expresses
the metagnomic information. All the thought-factors during the
production of thought-phenomena should be known as completely
as possible.

Observation limited by a plan laid down in advance would
seem to leave so much to human testimony that we might well
despair of bringing the study of such phenomena within the
rigid bounds of experimental method if it were not feasible to
make them more objective by causing variations in the meta-
gnomic product by varying its factors. No one who has not
conducted such researches can imagine the quantity and pre-
cision of the inferences furnished by systematic experiment in
every direction by which Nature may be questioned and, in the
words of Claude Bernard, be made to speak. To place the same
human person at one moment of his life, or at intervals, in
presence of a series of percipients of all kinds ; to give to one
percipient a series of personalities to delineate ; to arouse per-
ception of an event in which several persons share, by meta-
gnomic delineation by the percipient of the lives of each of them ;
and so on, is to approach the psychological problem of super-
normal cognition from its many sides and its numerous applica-
tions ; it is to throw light upon the respective parts played by
the delineators and delineated ; and it is also to become ac-
quainted with the vicissitudes involved in the genesis of super-
normal faculty and its errors. Thus we may penetrate from the
apparent and incomprehensible part of metagnomic phenomena


52 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


to the deeper latent part that contains the clue to the enigma,
search into the obscure mental process, and get a glimpse of the
sources of hyper-cognition. Thus it is possible to reach the stage
of provisional interpretation which leads to fruitful experiment
and exact knowledge, without delaying over the facile and
unproductive accumulation of facts that can be evoked at will.

My purpose in this book is to cover the two first phases of
knowledge in the general psychologic study of mctagnomic
phenomena with a human objective ; firstly, to present the prin-
cipal authenticated facts acquired by experimental investigation,
and secondly, to establish on scientifically observed data the
explanatory hypothesis that they suggest.


PART II


THE SEQUENCE OF PHENOMENA IN SUPER-
NORMAL COGNITION APPLIED TO A
HUMAN OBJECTIVE


A MONOGRAPH on the application of the method
sketched in the preceding pages, ought to be an exact
report of the stances showing the vicissitudes of every
experiment- By reason of its bulk such a work would
find no publisher and scarcely any readers. It is therefore
necessary to condense the results of observation into an artificial
presentment of some kind. This, if less complete, has at least
the advantage that the experimental results can be placed in a
logical order which brings out their salient points and makes them
more intelligible.

In this second part of the book I shall show what experimental
production of metagnomy applied to a human objective brings out.

In Part III I shall draw the main outlines of a psychological
study on the functioning of this faculty ; and in Part IV, I shall
endeavour to elucidate the hidden source whence this faculty
gains its information. — — *
Analysis, on whatever it is brought to bear, breaks up Life and ■
immobilizes it in intellectual compartments. Everything falls
into set schemes, and is petrified within factitious limits. To
give a brief but sufficient notion of the results of metagnomy on
a human objective, I am therefore constrained to split up the
human personality — to speak of delineation of character, of
intellectuality, organic life, relativity, and so on, when in point
of fact, all these are fused in the complex whole of a personality
and in the information furnished by the percipients. But there

is no better means of being understood. J

\\ ith this purpose of better elucidation, and with that alone,
I shall give such instances as may be necessary. I shall choose
those that are short but distinctive of their kind. Although I
affirm their absolute correctness, and all are open to examination,
the reader is not required to take them on faith. My desire is to
make him aware of " what can be obtained from metagnomic
subjects/ 1 When, in the sequel, he has learned N how they may
be obtained," he will no longer need to put faith in the witnesses ;
his own convictions will be established by the only satisfactory
method — personal experiment and observation.

53


CHAPTER I


SUPERNORMAL COGNITION OF THE ORGANIC STATES
OF A HUMAN PERSONALITY

WHAT are the limits within which metagnomic sub-
jects can take cognizance of the organic states of a
human being ? What is the quality and nature of
the information they can give on the state of organs,
their functional derangements, on the means of cure, on the
future development of pathological causes and, more generally,
of a human body ?

To these questions I shall give two answers : one in principle,
and the other the result of my personal experience.

In principle no limit can be assigned to supernormal percep-
tion of the human organism observed. In the first part of this
book the facts of internal autoscopy and auto-precognition have
shown to what precision metagnomic faculty can attain. There
is no reason to think that the few known facts give a notion of
the whole perceptive capacity of cognition. The quality of the
metagnomic results depends on the powers of the percipients
employed. What has already been obtained cannot prejudice
what may be reached in the future with other percipients,
especially with those that have been trained.

I shall now give the answer to which experience has led me,
prefacing this with some remarks on the psychic instruments
usually met with and those that have been at my disposal.

Metagnomic subjects, whose metanormal faculties are of the
kind specialized for human cognition, are usually able to perceive
human personality under all the aspects of life, but they tend to
take cognizance of some of these aspects more easily and readily
than of others. Some prefer to penetrate into the moral and
intellectual side of human personality : others seize upon the
events of a life in relation to other persons : others again show
particular facility in diagnosing the state of organic health. It
is therefore necessary to take account of this sub-specialization
in choosing as instruments for experiment those subjects best
fitted to the special purpose of enquiry.

From the point of view here taken there is another factor that
affects the quality of metagnomic perception — the technical
knowledge possessed by the percipient. It is worth while to

54


ORGANIC STATES OF A HUMAN PERSONALITY 55


touch upon this matter, for in it we discover an important cause
of imperfections in the human instruments and obtain indications
of the conditions under which they can be rationally used.

By the detail of psychological analysis to be given in the sequel,
the reader will learn that the passage of metagnomic information
from the latent plane of thought to the plane called M conscious,"
is a sort of welling-up of concrete or symbolical mental images,
frequently hallucinatory, and of some one or other sensorial type
— visual, auditory, tactile, motor, or verbal. This psychological
pm essus impels the latent intelligence to use the resources stored
up in the brain as the only method of communicating what it
wishes to make known.

Now, at the outset of this science, in which each investigator
is limited by the capacity of his human subjects, these subjects
have not the scientific knowledge and technical terms by which
the subconscious might communicate exact information to a
consciousness able to understand them. They have not acquired
visual images of healthy and morbid organs, nor of the sympto-
matic indications of disease, nor of the words that describe them.
The percipients must be used as they are found — unfitted for the
precision we desire.

I here give some instances of the manner in which metagnomic
subjects without medical knowledge describe pathological states.
These will make more intelligible what I shall say later on of
the output of these imperfect subjects and of what might be
expected if they were rationally trained.

On July 29th, 1920, I asked Mme Jeanne If,, suffering from one of
obscure affections of which accurate diagnosis seems impossible, and on
win* li every consultant gives a different opinion, to write a few lines on
a piece of paper. She copied four lines from a newspaper on a leaf from
a school exercise book and signed her first name — Jean no

Some hours later, at the end of a sitting directed to other researches,
I put this paper into the hands of Mile de Berly, a metagnomic subject
in the waking state, only saying, " Look into the state of this person's
health."

The writing was well formed and gave no graphological information
which might indicate illness or physical or mental depression. Mdlle de
Berly was not aware even of the existence of this patient.

As soon as her eyes fell on the writing, and she had nervously crumpled
the paper in her hands, she made some slightly convulsive movements,
and without reflection or stop, without a word or gesture on my part,
she said the following words, which I wrote down as dictated :

" How feeble this person is . . . everything about her is weak . . .
what weakness. She must have fever from time to time, for I am
thirsty. She falls asleep suddenly, but that does not last ... she is weak,
very weak . . . what a curious brain, heavy and giddy. ... I should
think her used up whatever her age may be . . . her nervous system is
HChamted ... it the blood that weakens all her organs . . . there
is illness of the blood, much water in the blood.


50 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


" Her mouth is dry, she is very ill . . . it varies, one thing brings on
another ... an illness of exhaustion . . . she seems used up.

M She has been long predisposed to illness . . . has been incubating
it a long time . . . her blood is not healthy. . . . An operation has
already been made . . . unhealthy blood . . . lassitude ... an unusual
weakening of the blood . . . she makes starts, has some recuperative
power, but it does not last. She seems old ... a used-up woman. She
is nervous sometimes, this makes her eccentric. . . . She complains of
her stomach, her back, her abdomen. ... I sec that she has two children
living.

" The trouble is of long standing . . . her blood is vitiated ... she
is very impressionable. She sometimes finds it difficult to blow her nose
. . . she is nervous . . . the bowels do not act . . . she tends to be
infected . . . the whole organism is in a bad state . . . she is difficult
to prescribe for because many organs require attention. . . . Her water
is rather loaded, thick and reddish . . . loss of phosphates exhausts
her brain.

" There are times when she seems about to die. . . . Her stomach is
wrong . . . the abdominal organs are so weak that they do not act
properly ... all by reason of the blood. She is near her end ... the
heart works with difficulty.

M The whole illness comes from the heart and the stomach, from
digestion, and above all from impure blood.

M She should have light massage of the abdomen . . . strengthen
her . . . some depuratives . . . something to strengthen and purify
. . . refreshing drinks . . . disinfect her. ... No poisons, they intoxi-
cate her, she is liable to intoxication. It is an organism hard to prescribe
for, so many organs are defective.

" Avoid tasking the kidneys, which are not strong. Alimentation is
very necessary . . . she gets poisoned by trilles . . . she needs continual
care ... a long chair in the open air.

" Great weakness of the heart, the nerves and the blood . . . tone up
the heart gradually, that will lead to better functioning of the kidneys
aid other organs . . . tone up the nerves and give the phosphates that
are lost . . . tone up the blood.

" She may be relieved, but not cured.

" You can strengthen her . . . her life may be prolonged, but death
will be premature in any case.

M Independently of her present illness she is incubating another. The
existing illness must first be treated, then look for the other.

" In the future an operation will be suggested. ... I wonder will
she have cancer. ... I see her living for some years still, but she is
menaced by a cancerous affection . . . the blood is predisposed to cancer
as well as to tuberculosis. You may prolong life, but she is menaced
by premature death."

Censorship. What Mile de B. — « — could have known before the stance.

Nothing, absolutely nothing. She had no indication beyond my request.
Look into the health of the person who wrote these lines, and four lines
of writing which would convey no intimation of illness to a graphologist.

The content of my own thought at the beginning of the stance on the meta-
gnomic indications.

Mine M. was a woman of about fifty, in delicate health for many years.

From 1919 there had been still further weakening. Many symptoms
concurred to indicate neurasthenia — notable loss of appetite, very
difficult digestion, sensation of cerebral emptiness, general exhaustion,


necessitating long rest on a couch, cardiac attacks coming on suddenly,
occasional improvements, anaemia, slight emaciation, the patient being
constitutionally thin.

The cause of the organic disturbance was never satisfactorily deter-
mined. The various consultants who saw the woman considered the
case one of neuropathic digestive trouble. No treatment succeeded in
bettering the case. Strong tonics, strychnine especially, increased the
functional disorders, sometimes violently. All suitable examinations
were made without revealing the cause. Everything that could reason-
ably be supposed applicable to the disease had been tried in vain.

For my own part I thought it one of those unclassified affections of
the nervous system restricting the output of nervous energy, due to
impoverishment of the blood by reason of failure in the tissues generating
red corpuscles ; and I hoped that sooner or later some happier remedial
measures or natural tendency to normality might restore Mme M. to her
previous delicate health. No reason for fatal prognosis existed, and no
doctor had made any such.

I knew, however, that more than twenty years previously she had had
a surgical operation for uterine prolapsus.
Comparison of the words of the subject with the actuality.

Mile de B. stated exactly the symptoms of the disease, according

to the nature of her knowledge, expressing them in ordinary language.

Given this simplicity in delineation it is to be remarked that the subject
was able in a few minutes, and under the conditions stated, to sum up
a very difficult pathological case which I mention because of its obscurity.
Whatever may have been the source whence the subject drew her
unconscious information — whether from the thought of the distant
patient, from my thoughts or from elsewhere, the fact is a fine instance
of metanormal faculty.

But there is one part of the metagnomic information which has no
reference to what I already knew, and diverged from my opinion. This
is the precognition of the issue. The sequel was as follows : it should
be compared with the words of the subject :

" From July 29th, 1920, the day of the stance, to June, 1921, Mme M.'s
illness remained much the same, with alternating improvements and
relapses, but on the whole neither better nor worse.

"Onjune 14th, 1921, obstinate constipation, accompanied by local pain,
led me to ask for a consultation with Surgeon T. His diagnosis was —
Neuropathic state, and much anaemia due to innutrition. His advice
was to increase the nutrition fearlessly.

" To have her under better observation he had her brought to his
hospital. Radiograms only showed prolapse of the stomach and adhesion
along the principal curve to the left iliac fossa. In view of the long
duration of the case and the possibility of finding and remedying the
cause, he proposed an operation. Mme M. refused and returned home.

u From the first days of August the constipation became so severe and
caused so much pain that the family decided to accept surgical aid,
which alone held out hopes of avoiding the danger from prolonged arrest
of nutrition.

w Dr. T. operated August 19th, without much hope, the weakness of the
patient rendering the operation risky. There was found :

" Transverse colon prolapsed and adherent in its median part to the
parietal peritoneum at the level of the pubis, duodenum thickened and
nodulous to the touch. Some mesenteric ganglions somewhat enlarged.

"Dr. T. (like Mile de B. a year previously) said, 4 1 wonder if there is
cancerous infiltration from the duodenum ? '


58 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


"To give the patient a better chance and to shorten the operation, he
made a second opening to the jejunum from the stomach. The whole
abdomen was explored without anything more being discovered.

"The immediate sequel was unhoped for. On August 20th and 21st,
Mme M. was better, but during the 22nd there was collapse and she died
in a few hours."

I will now give a brief and simple instance of supernormal
ption of disease unperceived by any of the persons interested.

In September, 1920, Mme de D., a young war-widow, came for the
time to Mile de Berly, who had never seen her and did not know
her even by name. The latter proceeded in her usual way to give a
delineation of the life, spoke of Mme de D.'s recent loss and happened
to say, " What a charming child you have ! I see by you a little boy
about eight years old . . . (physical and moral description here followed)
... his health seems good and you have had no anxiety on this score
. . . but, believe me ; have the child's blood examined and put him
under medical care ... his blood is affected and great trouble
arise in the future."

Mme de D. took her child to Dr. N., asking him to examine the blood.
A very positive Bordet-Wasserman reaction was found. There wa
nothing to lead the mother to apprehend a syphilitic taint. It was
painful surprise to her.

Another instance of metagnomic diagnosis. I beg to
excused for quoting it ; I do so because its brevity and nat
shows the manner in which certain metagnomic subjects percer
organic life in those present.

M. Louis M., very curious on metanormal psychology and a
observer, was with Mile de B., completely absorbed by the revelat
ie and the need of rapid writing so as not to lose any of her words.
While continuing to speak, Mile de B., unperceived by Mr. M., touched
the bell. A servant came, and was told, M Therese, show Mr. M.
W.C."

Mr. M. looked up much astonished, but was quickly aware of his n~
He laughed and obeyed, and returned relieved.

Mile de B. had felt, as if the case were her own, what Mr.

absorbed in what he was doing, was not yet conscious of. It will be
in later chapters that metagnomic subjects often take cognizance
pathological states by ccenesthetic mental images.

I will now give two examples of metagnomic prognosis, one 0
cure and one of death, neither being expected by the family nor
by the doctors.

1. In August, 1920, I received an urgent call to visit Mme A.-C,
somewhat tired during the preceding days and suddenly prostrated.
I found this woman, aged about thirty-eight, in a state of collapse,
pulse 120, temperature 36 0 , tendency to syncope, unable to raise her
head from the pillow. The patient could hardly speak, and the family
could give no useful information. Methodical examination of the
disclosed nothing abnormal. Strong tonics improved the patient*
tion.


ORGANIC STATES OF A HUMAN PERSONALITY 59

On the following clay the improvement continued.
Next day, August 17th, about 5 p.m., another urgent call, the patient
much worse, her family fearing immediate death. I found her pulseless,
soft, quick cardiac sounds, state near to syncope, patient unable to speak
or even to make a gesture. Another examination, made when she was
better, revealed nothing on the cause of the heart failure.

On the 18th Mme A.-C. was better, though fatigued. I got her to
write a few lines, intending to submit them to Mdlle de Berly. I asked
the family to take the patient's temperature as nearly as possible every
hour till my next visit.

The same evening, about 9 p.m., after a stance, I placed the paper in
the hands of Mile de B., asking her to tell me briefly whatever might
come to her on the state of health of the writer.

She looked at the writing, crumpled the paper, held it to her forehead
a moment and said :

" How feeble she is . . . deadly weak ... a frail body that does
not react against her illness . . . the whole nervous system relaxed,
especially the heart. . . . The body is infected, there is inward fever. . . .
You will soon know what is the matter . . . they will think her about
to die . . . but you will discover the cause of the trouble and will cure
her quickly."

On the morning of the 19th August I went to see her. Under the
influence of tonics her general state had become good. Temperature
had remained normal since the previous day. A fresh examination
disclosed nothing but a rather more extended area of dull sound over the
spleen. I left the patient and the family reassured.

But on the same day, at 6 p.m., in response to a very urgent call, I
found her worse than ever — pulse imperceptible, profuse sweat, in almost
a dying state. I took hasty restorative measures, and made inquiries
as to their observations of the temperature. At noon 36-6°, at 1 p.m.
40-5°, then varying round about 40 0 up to 5 p.m., and collapse soon
after.

All became clear. Close inquiry revealed the origin of the previous
crises. The case was one of tertian malaria ending by a sharp fall of
temperature bringing on heart-failure in a patient predisposed to this.
Appropriate treatment was immediately begun and no further crisis
supervened. During the following days the spleen was much enlarged
and painful. Mme A.-C. had never had malarial attacks and lived in a
place where such were unknown before the war.

Now, after two years, her condition is quite satisfactory ; prolonged
treatment has probably got rid of the malarial taint.

2. In August, 1913. Mme C, aged about thirty-five, and living in
the country, had severe hepatic colic. On coming to Paris soon after
she had herself examined by Dr. T., a hospital surgeon, who called
in Dr. G. These two eminent practitioners verified a gall-bladder
enlarged by gall-stones, and considered an operation for their extraction
necessary.

Dr. G. advised Mme C. to go back to the country, to ride, and even
to hunt, intending to operate after the holidays, "the case not being
pressing. On the eve of a hunting party, September 8th, 1913. th«
severe pain in the region of the liver returned. I was called in, and found,
below the liver, on a line with the gall-bladder, a swelling of the size of
a small pear, clearly defined and painful to the touch. No other abdominal
symptoms, no peritonitis. Temperature 39-2°. pulse 80.

Knowing that an operation had been decided on and thinking that
this recrudescence might make it desirable to advance the date, I advised


60 SUPERNOR


that the patient should return to Paris as soon as th
This was done the same day.

Drs. T. and G. examined her on her arrival. Tin
thinking that there was biliary cystitis provoked by the
the action of physical exercise. They decided that she sh
in Pahs, but that there was no occasion to advance the date of operation
fixed for September 23rd. The case seemed benignant, and Dr. G.
would not be resuming his surgical practice till about that date. During
the ensuing days Mme C. grew better. The doctors, the family, and
the patient herself were optimistic. The resection of the gall-bladder
was an easy task for so experienced a surgeon as Dr. G.

Mme C.'s husband, unanxious about the issue, and deeply interested
in my researches on supernormal cognition, asked me to name a subject
whom he might visit to obtain personal evidence. I dissuaded him
from the attempt, seeing no scientific end in view, and thinking that he
might hear painful anticipations, false or true ; but on his insistence
I gave him the addresses of some very good professional subjects. On
September 10th he visited Mme Fraya, and asked her to speak of his
life, without putting to her any precise question. Among other things,
she said, " I feel you are in anxiety, concerning the illness of some one
dear to you — your wife. . . . She is to undergo an operation soon. . . .
I fear that things will not go as well as expected. There will be an
unfortunate surprise. . . . Days of great sorrow are approaching . . .
you will not keep your wife long . . . etc."

From the 19th to the 23rd all went well. The operation took place
on that day and there was indeed a painful surprise. Instead of the
gall-stones the gall-bladder and vessels were full of pus and the whole
outlook was different.

On November 13th I was present at her death. She succumbed, with
great serenity of mind, to failure of the liver and kidneys, due to infection
from the biliary ducts.

These few examples give but a vague notion of what super-
normal cognition applied to organic life do actually produce and
might produce. In a single chapter of a book it is impossible to
give a systematized view, one is limited to a few special instances.

Metagnomic diagnosis is not separable from the medical know-
ledge possessed by the subjects. This psychological fact must
again be emphasized. Subjects medically untrained are devoid of
special knowledge and can use only the current phraseology.
Their metagnomic perceptions outrange the scale of their language
and their power of expression. This furnishes a general explana-
tion of the manner in which they behave when applying their
faculty to medical purposes.

Sometimes they name the trouble. They have often spoken to
me of appendicitis, cancer, diabetes, pregnancy, meningitis,
rehumatism, etc., in the course of experiments in which I some-
times knew the ailment, but more often did not.

This strange faculty is even capable of diagnosing far ahead
of the appearance of disease. Thus, in the winter of 1914, Mme
Fraya predicted to Dr. N. Vaschide, joint-director of the labora-
tory of pathological psychology, that he would die of pneumonia


ORGANIC STATES OF A HUMAN PERSONALITY 61

in his thirty-third year. He was then thirty years old. On the
13th October, 1907, the prediction was fulfilled. Such precision
is far from being the rule. The experimenter often observes fruit-
less efforts of the double psychic function — the latent and the
conscious — to understand and to be understood.

Thought on the conscious plane endeavours to reach the mean-
ing of defective mental images— inexact because usually sym-
bolical—and the indications given do not always result in useful
information.

Except for errors whose causes will be studied later, in most
of these experimental cases the function of the metagnomic
percipient, untrained in science, may be compared to that of the
sportsman's dog. The percipient brings the physician to the
disease, as the dog brings his master to the game. It is for the
physician to know the psychic instrument he is using sufficiently
well to judge of the quality of indications given, to understand
them and make his deductions. Thus understood, metagnomic
subjects may sometimes be of very great assistance.

Among the ailments in which such assistance is most valuable
I would name psycho-neuroses.

In the chaos of organic and mental disturbance of neuropathic
patients, it is often difficult to perceive the causes which originate
or maintain the general depression, and a metagnomic subject,
skilfully used, can often reveal this. If the indications given are
not always quite clear, because words and technical knowledge
are alike wanting, they are often sufficiently impressive to enable
the preponderant pathogenetic cause to be discerned among the
symptoms that complicate or mask it.

Fixed ideas, the latent parasites of thought, which disturb
mentality, unbalance it, and fill it with evil impulses, phobias,
and apprehensions, can be revealed by this means, and can be
brought within the field of consciousness in which normal reason
can disperse the injurious action they have while in their occult
condition. One or two stances with a metagnomic subject may
reveal what is rarely gained by hypnotism, and much less often
than has been claimed by the untrustworthy and somewhat
ridiculous artifice of psycho-analysis.
This mode of investigation also leads at times to the revelation
the circumstances that brought about the toxic emotions with
lich the depression or mental upset is connected J circumstances
that the patient does not avow, whether because he does not
connect it with his troubles and is unwilling to make useless
confidences, or for other reasons.

A further field of usefulness is opened by the power of meta-
gnomic subjects to cognize character, and to make in a few
minutes an analysis far more complete than the best psychologist


could do after long hours of study and minute conversati
By revealing the mental reactions of a sensation, the subject c
often furnish both the explanation of the want of moral adap
tion to circumstances, and indicate the method by which c~
and harmony may be restored to the unbalanced mind.

From such considerations it will appear that the metagnomic
subject is a far more useful auxiliary in the treatment of psycho-
neurosis than in other ailments. The revelation of the initiatory
cause, usually psychic, and the profound analysis of character
are data which, judiciously used, economize time, avoid errors
in research or interpretation, and may lead to the cure of neuro-
pathic states whose obstinacy distresses the patient and family,
and wearies the physician.

The medical value of supernormal cognition is less for other
kinds of disease, the technical ignorance of the subject being an
insuperable bar. From the best of them only an indication of
the general trend that treatment should take can be expected.

Where the metagnomic subject excels is in prognosis. Scien-
tific words and knowledge are no longer required when the ulti-
mate issue is indicated ; ordinary language suffices. It is und
standable that it should be as easy for the subject to anticipa
the issue of an organic derangement as that of some external
event in a life. And here, as in the case of auto-presentiments,
the event most readily perceived by the subjects is death. A
fatal issue is the easiest of precognition and one on which they
make fewest errors, always excepting dates, in which errors are
frequent.

These conclusions are valid for subjects untrained in medical
knowledge. The quality and extent of the possible usefulness of
supernormal faculty must not be prejudiced by existing con-
ditions, for these are not such as they ought to be. The really
favourable conditions which would produce the best output (and,
doubtless, unexpected results) would be that a physician well
acquainted with metagnomic processes should have at his disposal
subjects chosen and specially trained for the part they have to
play.

When, however, the purpose is to verify the reality and the
modes of metagnomy applied to perception of organic conditions,
the percipient is put in relations with a pathological case entirely
unknown to the experimenter, so as to eliminate thought-
transference. In this simple case a given percipient is placed in
relations with a given patient to ascertain what can be revealed
by the percipient.

But this method, satisfactory in a certain stage of psychological
study, does not by any means furnish the best obtainable. The
most full and precise metagnomic information is obtained


ORGANIC STATES OF A HUMAN PERSONALITY 68


the subject works first in relation with the patient and then with
the physician who has previously examined the patient with all
the means at his disposal.

I am fully aware that this assertion, based on the sura of my
researches, will not be fully intelligible to the reader at the
present stage. After reading the whole book it will be more
comprehensible. Later on I hope to make a complete and exact
statement of the method of using metagnomic subjects for the
healing art.


CHAPTLK II


SUPERNORMAL COGNITION OF EMOTIONAL AND
INTELLECTUAL STATES OF A HUMAN
PERSONALITY

MAN is born with strongly individualized psychic
potentialities that determine his reactions to external
things. At whatever instant his life may be con-
sidered, that moment represents a point in the develop-
ment of his emotional and intellectual potentiality under the
influence of circumstances that diminish and deviate, or amplify
and develop constitutional tendencies.

Whether or not the person contemplated be in a quiet back-
water of life, his psychic temperament is always extremely
complex. The environment by its innumerable succession of forms
brings about an uninterrupted sequence of reactions that make
mentality at each successive impression a little different from
what it was before.

According to the masterly demonstrations of Henry Bergson
man is a psychic being developing from birth to death to the
rhythm of world-evolution. He is not to-day what he was yester-
day or what he will be to-morrow. His emotional and intellectual
stages cannot be foreseen by reason.

This incessant transformation of the constitutional psychic
basis in response to external influences renders psychological
analysis of a human being difficult if not impossible if we aim at
something more than a superficial appreciation of momentary
psychic states. The introspective data given by the person
studied depend on his clear-sightedness, his impartiality, his
frankness. These qualities are seldom very prominent, they are
severally rare and still more rarely united in one person. On the
other hand, scrutiny by another demands much time and favour-
able conditions if it is to be instructive, and in any case must be
incomplete. Under the latter condition analysis can only deal
with the external life of the person observed — his acts and words.
From these obvious reactions we infer his inner motives, his

64


EMOTIONAL AND INTELLECTUAL STATES 65


hical tendencies, his intellectuality and his character. But
to reach this end he must be studied throughout a considerable
part of his life. A man cannot be known in a short time. Having
witnessed some of his reactions, we generalize on his behaviour
and think we hold the key to his mentality. New circumstances
arise and produce unexpected reactions ; we are surprised and
find we do not understand him. The personality we thought we
knew and on whom our judgment was formed, was that of a
special moment and due to special circumstances. Another
moment and other circumstances have modified it.

The changes that have taken place in the estimates formed of
historical personages, immobilised as they are in the past, illustrates
the difficulties of psychological analysis. Especially at the present
time we see the verdict of eminent historians and of contem-
poraries favourably placed to form opinions, reversed on men
whose notoriety should have made them easier to know than
most men. This collapse of estimates once thought to be final,
comes about because they think themselves more able to re-
construct the mentality of a statesman or other public man from
his letters, memoirs, and suchlike data ; but these vestiges do not
necessarily reflect psychological actualities, but rather momentary
ects and attitudes of mind deliberately assumed.
le know little of the dead, and still less of the living who are
constantly adapting themselves to the events of life. We know
owti selves but little, and especially others are little under-
Such and such a man seems worthy of honour or contempt
according as our view of him is distant or intimate. Acts and words
are very fallacious bases for an estimate, we imagine their psychic
motives without directly perceiving those motives, whence much
error arises.

But this cognition of character which is so difficult for the
cautious and informed psychologist, is easy to some metagnomic
subjects. Their supernormal information comes from a plane
which is other than that of appearances. Their supernormal
cognitions arise from a sense which pierces down to the intimate
constitution of a human personality in the whole course of its
growth. It is immediate, without any other conscious effort
than the will to see.

This facility in perceiving the life of the mind caused £mile
Boirac to say :

M Certain subjects are able to disentangle all the potentialities
— latent, emotional, intellectual and active — which go to make
up the 1 character ' of a person when, without previous data, and
without any apparent reflection, they make in a few minutes an
analysis of that person's character far more complete and exact
than any professional psychologist with all the resources of science


51 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


at his command and w ith minute information at his disposal could
possibly make." (Avenir des Sciences psychiques, p. 198.)

I will now give some instances of diverse kinds and values.

Ex. 1. An episode in the moral life of a child, dimly perceived by
a subject during delineation of the life of its mother.

Conditiofis of the experiment.

Mme M , a Swedish lady, came to live in Paris in 1921. Living alone

for the time, she went on January 14th, 1922, to Mme Fraya for a mat*
gnomic delineation of her life. Mme Fraya did not know her, and no words
were exchanged but those of ordinary courtesy.

According to her custom, Mme F. took the hands of Mme M , and,

speaking of the time then present, said, " There is a woman in your life
whom you love deeply, she lives far away (here an exact description)
. . . she is near your child . . . yes, a charming child, intelligent, quiet,
and very fond of play-acting. She is not with you ; you have left her with
your friend. . . . Well, believe me, you must not leave her there, she
ought not to be playing with other children, it is better that she should
not play with others. How much I wish that you would take her away
as soon as possible. She will soon come back to you in any case. This
separation will soon cease — a very good thing."

Mme Fraya could not say what kind of danger the child was incurring.

Censorship.

Mme M had in fact left her little girl, aged ten, at Brussels, with

a dear friend who looked after her like a mother. She knew the child
to be as well cared for as if with herself. Mme Fraya's words suggested
an illness or an accident at the school the child was attending. Much
impressed by the seance, excellent in all matters that she could verify,
she wrote to her friend to take every possible precaution. The answer
she received quieted her fears.

Nearly three months went by. The anxiety was forgotten, when on

April 13th Mme M received a letter from her friend at Brussels,

asking her to come. Some days after the mother learned that the child
had made to the housemaid some naive confidences which showed sexual
knowledge really abnormal, obtained from one of her school companions.

The child's morals were so affected that Mme M found it necessary

to remove her child.

Ex. 2. Monition of the evolution of a child s character. M eta-
gnomic cognition of a latent tendency.

Circumstances and conditions.

In March, 1919, there was placed in the hands of Mme Morel, hypno-
tized, the visiting card of M. £mile D ; in order to obtain a

delineation of his life at the time. The subject did not know M. D ;

the experimenter was his friend and familiar with his surroundings.

Speaking of his father s life, Mme M., passed of her own accord to his
famdy, and said :

II There is a woman in his surroundings, she scarcely exists, so to say,
she is so insignificant that she does neither good nor harm — brainless.
I see a little girl, the eldest of the children, whom her father loves much
more than the others. How mistaken he is ! He does not know her . . .
the child is ill-disposed . . . violent and passionate, shaking and striking


EMOTIONAL AND INTELLECTUAL STATES 67


her brothers and sisters. She is full of spite. Oh, what a wicked child !
No one must excel her in anything, she wants always to be first. She is
very haughty. But destiny walks in strange paths and cannot be
avoided ..."

Censorship.

The child of whom the subject was speaking, whom we will call Denise,
was the eldest of three, and ten years old. Her parents, who were wealthy,
accustomed her to a personal luxury such as it is unusual to allow to
children. But Denise was a most attractive little being, gentle, amiable,
without any arrogance, very sympathetic, and charming by her grace
of manner.

The experimenter considered that the subject had not seen aright.

What seemed false at ten, became true at thirteen. Mme Morel had
taken cognizance of a latent tendency which came out at one of the
periods that transform personality — at puberty.

The first Denise, whose appearance was still maintained before her
parents and adult friends, was succeeded by another Denise at the end
of 192 1, who was characterized by outrageous and increasing egoism.
There appeared a personality infatuated with herself, discontented with
her childish surroundings, meanly spiteful, despotic, imposing her will
on all her companions, and jealous of all around her , for instance, hiding
books, exercise-books, and music belonging to her sister, in order that
she herself might excel ... a plague of a child, with a perverted
character, as yet unperceived by her parents, which they made no attempt
to correct by suitable mental training.

Only for purposes of comparison with Mme Morel's presage (for it is
a premonition which only the future can verify), it is psychologically
interesting to report here an accidental vision of Mme dc Berly which
came a few days since when the name of Denise (whom she did not know)
was mentioned in her presence :

She exclaimed — 11 What a haughty child ! How vain she is of her
wealth of her prettily dressed hair ! What airs she gives herself ! Fortune's
wheel turns. One day she will be glad if anyone will give her a mantle.
Her marriage will bring her to misery. She will have a dreadful life I *

Ex. 3. Mctagnomic delineation of latent intellectual tendency in
a child.

In April, 1919, Mme Hellene C was with Mme Morel, who, speaking

of her life, said to her : "By you I see one of your children, a little girl
who looks older than she is. This child is musical and will have a brilliant
usical career. Her talent will develop marvellously ; you will be
tonished at it. She will pass an examination. I see her received into
a great house, a special school. Later on she will play in public."

1 his little girl was then eight years old. Her parents were well-to-do,
and were educating her like most children of her social class, giving her
general instruction and having her taught music (piano). The child
showed but moderate taste for it and no special aptitude.

This continued till February, 1922. On a change of teacher, the
latent faculty, aided no doubt by better instruction, and also having
matured, came out so strongly that the child in a few months made such
unusual progress as to cause astonishment, and was considered so excep-
nal that, on the advice of the professor, her parents, despite their
, did not hesitate to place her in the Conservatoire, for which she
brilliantly.


68 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


Ex. 4. Another instance.

On February 15th, 1909, I brought to Mme Auroux a metagnomic

subject in the waking state, a little boy of four, Alfred B , the son

of my friend, Dr. B . Mme Auroux gave a very good description of

the child's character. She did not know either the boy or his parents,
and described the direction his mind would take, as follows :

"This child will have very marked mathematical and mechanical
talent. He will be an engineer."

I will now extract from stances extending over ten years what
has been said by different subjects on the child and his parents
who have always allowed me to have delineations of their person-
alities.

March 8th, 1912. The child was seven years old. Mme Fraya said
to his mother, whom she did not know, " Your eldest boy is very intelli-
gent, you will be anxious for a long time about his studies, but in the
end he will give you great satisfaction."

On December 17th (eight years) M. de Fleuriere, describing his father s
hfe, said, " I see one of your children, the eldest, holding a post half
intellectual, half material. He will be a certificated engineer, and, perhaps,
engaged in manufacture."

December 18th, 1913. Mme dc Berly also said to the father (no question
at all having been put to her or to "any other person), " You have an
eldest boy, eight or nine years old, very intelligent and particularly well-
endowed for mathematical and mechanical science. You must make him
an engineer."

May 14th, 1915. (Ten years.) Mme Fraya said to Dr. B , " One

of your sons, the eldest, will have a real talent, a special faculty which
will make him a remarkable man. His first school years will not be re-
markable, and you will fear mere mediocrity. You will be uneasy for a
long while and will wonder what you can do with him. . . . At a certain
age his intelligence will develop in an unexpected manner, and in a direc-
tion in which he will excel. You will be very proud of him."

November, 191 9. (Fourteen years.) Mile de Berly said to Dr. B

in course of a sitting, " Your eldest boy is idle, and you are uneasy about
him. He cannot help it, but it is only for a time. His brain is, as it were,
in a tangle, and will suddenly develop mathematical ability. You must
make him an engineer . . .**

The boy's intellectual development.

From five to ten years of age Alfred B went through his primary

school. He was hardly up to the average — idle, showing no inclination for
any kind of study.

From ten to fifteen at the secondary school it was much the same ;
he was idle and interested in nothing. His parents were discouraged, and
were thinking of withdrawing him from school and putting him into
commerce. Only towards the end of his fifteenth year this distressing
mediocrity came to an end, and he developed a taste for science which
raised hopes. The budding talent grew so fast that in a few months he
became the most promising pupil in his class.

When the test for his B.A. in Latin and science came, he was the only
one out of thirty-six candidates who solved correctly the difficult problem
in mathematics given in the examination that year. This caused him to
be recognized in spite of a deplorably bad piece of Latin. But his weakness


EMOTIONAL AND INTELLECTUAL STATES 69


in literary subjects led to failure three times in the oral examination, and
decided him to try no more for his degree.

On this day in June, 1922, as I write these lines, Alfred B is nearly

seventeen. He is passionately devoted to science, especially to mathe-
matics. The intellectual tendency noted by the metagnomic subjects
has taken great development. After a single year in preparation for the
Central School of Arts and Manufactures, his teachers consider that he
has an excellent chance of getting in by open competition. In any case
it is probable that he will be admitted in his eighteenth year.

Hence 1 think it is allowable to conclude : (1) That metagnomic subjects
hout any normal data and without knowing the boy, perceived an in-
ectual tendency twelve years before his parents. (2) That these
tellectual tendencies are psychic potentialities that are released some-
es precociously, sometimes tardily; and that to select the quickest
ong young children with a view to directing their education accordingly
reject some that are remarkably endowed and deprive them of the
ity of showing their talents.

Ex. 5. Delineation of character for domestic employment.

Circumstances and condition of the experiment.
On December 30th, 1921, Mme H.C. of Paris received a short letter

in which a woman living in the Ardennes, Mdlle Kmilie V , offered

-If as cook, having learned through a friend that Mme H.C. wanted one.
On January 4th, 1922, Mme H.C. put this letter into the hands of Mme

ya. Mme C knew absolutely nothing about Emily V , had

ver seen her and never heard of her.

Mme Fraya's only data were the sight of the writing, the contact with
the letter and the knowledge that the matter concerned the possible
gagement of a servant.

'hat the subject said.

" This young person is very honest and painstaking. Sh« will be
devoted to her employers. I can assure you of her mentality. She is
not one of those who will give trouble with lovers, you may be sure ; she
is afraid of men I .

M She is ana?mic and will often complain of being tired, even tired of
life. She tends to think herself unlucky, even when she is not. How
distrustful she is 1 She is honest, though fond of money. She has little
intelligence and no memory. It will take time to accustom her to new
ways. Very reserved, obstinate and slow to learn, but there is an ideal
in her simple mind.

"In spite of all this I advise you to engage her ; she is not the perfect
at, but she is very sincere."

Censorship.

Not much encouraged by Mme Fraya's words, Mme C nevertheless

ed to engage the girl, and she came to Paris January 15th. She proved
as described — about twenty, anamic and needing care. Very
tful, speaking very little except to complain of being tired. Very
tful, with many consequent slips in the housekeeping : so slow in

g the run of things that six months later Mme C was doubtful

ether she could possibly keep her on. Dominant characteristics, an
tual terror of men and an idealism manifest by assiduous attendance
at the Salvation Army, Bible-reading in her leisure time and constant
hymn-singing.


70 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


Ex. 6. Delineation of character for curative purposes.

Circumstances and conditions.

In October, 192 1, a young lady of twenty-seven, Mile Christiane X

was brought to me for obstinate insomnia. 1 found a person radiating
calmness, her gestures polished and quiet, soft and dreamy eyes, her words
clear, prudent, and measured.

Behind this serenity I suspected a different personality, which, if I
could know it, would allow of a more rapid and durable cure, which cure
might also ameliorate a deeper functional disequilibrium in the psychic
constitution.

In the two first consultations, one accompanied, the other alone, she
defended herself skilfully against the leading questions by which I sought,
however discreetly, to discern her true mentality. Accustomed to medical
questions, she had acquired the art of keeping psychological enquiries to
the surface of her personality. Aware of the service to be done her by
fishing out her real mentality in spite of herself, and perceiving that
normal methods would take too much time, I decided to use metagnomy,
She very willingly gave me the few lines of writing that I asked for,
unsigned.

October 25th, I put these in the hands of Mile de Berly, who did not
know even the existence of this young lady. One only question was put,
M Please tell me the character of' the writer of these lines."

What was said.

Mademoiselle crumpled the paper in her hands, then looked at it some*
what vacantly, and said :

" What a nervous woman ! A curious kind of woman 1 A strange
mentality . . . false and hypocritical. She is a mental hysteric. Some
what idealist at times, however. She lives a strange life. She always has
a romance in her head, that helps her to live. She looks for adventures
and finds them . . . she bores herself . . . she changes husbands in her
mind. What a strange woman . . . she seems to me half insane.

" She is most imprudent ! a hypocrite and a liar . . . the more
dangerous that when she takes up with an idea nothing stops her. She is
unbalanced, and believes her own falsehoods. The basis of her character
is invention, hypocrisy and intrigue.

How unbalanced ! her eyes are calm, seems vary quiet, no one would
think it of her. She gives her intimates many surprises. What a strange
woman I She is wild on adventures and morally inconsequent ; a bad
case. Steady at times, she will occasionally do the most foolish things.
She was born when her parents were old. Apparently she is amiable and
inclined to flatter. She is wanting in judgment and good sense; no
heart ; she will have rough adventures. She fears nothing, and is never
frightened. She wants her liberty and independence. The longer she
lives the less sense she shows. ... A dangerous woman, very
dangerous. Her imagination runs riot; she has dangerous caprices, more
dangerous than those of an insane because people take her seriously.
Her insanity turns on men, women, and amorous intrigues — that is the
only thing that interests her.

" She is much bored, obstinate, but devoid of rial will. I should not
like to be her husband.

" 1 see several men round her; she provokes them, but there are no
consequences because she is so changeable. But she will marry. I see a
little boy later on. One of her lady fnrmis will try to get her married.

* She has a sister who is steadier than she is. Her mother us sad and tired,


speaks but little. She is there, quiet and reflective. She will have much
trouble with her daughter.

M Sooner or later she will get into trouble with her adventures. She is
morally unstable, and her future will be disturbed accordingly. 1 do
not like her future.

" Her brain is impenetrable. She has feeling occasionally, she might
be obliging, she occasionally has good impulses . . . they last five
minutes. She dozes from time to time but does not really sleep. She is
whimsical. Men, flirtation, and indulgence are all she lives for; she is
as dangerous as a snake.

" She looks at you with wide eyes and a vague expression. A sensual
woman and chronically melancholic. She is not a neurasthenic; she
weaves romances and eujoys them mentally more than by her senses.

M She seeks a master. She is the kind of woman that must be dominated,
and even be beaten if necessary ! "

Censorship.

These indications if not false appeared to me exaggerated, and it was
only with the greatest caution that 1 used them at all. My advice, how-
ever, took a direction that mystified the patient and then astonished her.
Feeling her real nature known, she became confidential. Masked by the
calm of her eyes and manner, she was full of amorous imaginings, always
dreaming of some new love ami busy with some intrigue, without fear of
compromising herself or injuring others, but never going to extremes.

Knowing her mentality and the disturbing cause, I was able to quiet
her and restore her sleep.

Ex. 7. Delineation of character for personal defence.

My friend, M. Frederic G , engaged two months before to a beautiful

and very attractive woman of thirty, whose acquaintance he had made
on his travels, asked me to give him my impressions of his prospective

bride,

1 told him that I could not judge of anyone on an hour's conversation,
but if he had anything written by her it would be a good opportunity to
test Mme Fraya's faculty and so improve his chances if he had made a

good choice.

On May 12th, 1921, part of a letter written by Mme Lucie V was

placed in Mme Fraya's hands J she knew neither the person nor her hand-
writing. She was only asked to describe the character of the writer.

What was said.

" This person is imperious, overbearing, and devoured by pride and
bition. Her amiable and simple manners do not betray her dominating
re for a brilliant life. It would be well to distrust her gentle and
ful manners, for these show a great power of dissimulation and a
to win confidence in order to attain self-interested ends.
In intimacy this manner gives place to an irritable and despotic
temper. Too satisfied with herself to doubt her own charm, and too
accustomed to homage to think that anyone can resist her, she acts
with capricious independence. Changeable, impulsive, and incapable of
leration, she follows the impulses of her imagination and her taste
adventure leads her to extravagant actions. She is disturbing and
dangerous, and marriage with her would be a great risk.

" She constantly twists the truth, is disposed to calumniate others,
and has no scruples in clearing herscll by accusing others.


72 SUPERNORMAL


N Audacious, violent, and nervous, and rat
disposes her to cruelty and intense egotism.

M Her understanding is unquiet and her judgmen
incoherence."

Censorship.

Mr. G was stupefied, and entirely refused to believe the portrait.

I told him M Metagnomy is a human faculty, and as such liable to error.
Still, marriage is a serious matter. You know no more of this lady
what she allows you to see. Apart from what you have heard, m
prudence should lead you to make a cautious investigation into h
character." Mr. G declared that he trusted his fiancee entirely.

A month later he told me that the engagement had been suddenly

broken otf. An incident occurred in which Mme Lucie V showed

unexpected traits, which Mr. G recognized as those described by Mrne

Fraya. He made enquiries, and to his surprise found that she had been
divorced from her husband, whom she had wounded with a revolver and
whose life she had ruined. In order to choose the richer of the two, she
was at this very time engaged to a manufacturer, and her whole life was
a tissue of intrigue to secure luxury.

I regret that space does not permit of my giving a typical
example of each of the many aspects under which moral
dispositions can be revealed. But by those given, some of the
useful applications of metagnomy may be perceived if it be em-
ployed by competent experimenters, and if the results of super
normal cognition are accepted only as indications to be verified
by the facts.

Hetagnomy would give valuable information on the latent
intellectual capacities of children and would enable parents aware
of these to give opportunities favourable to their development
It would also indicate predispositions to moral perversion an.
mental want of balance so that without loss of time it might be
possible to avoid the formation of habits which, once formed,
are so difficult to correct. Instruction and education would be
under the guidance of knowledge of the psychic latencies at th
outset of life.

By a wise use of metagnomy the character of persons in our
mediate surroundings who come into intimate contact with
our lives would be known. We should take care whom we admit
as a servant to our home, or as a partner in our business. The
risks of marriage would be lessened. We should become awar
of the causes for seemingly unreasonable and persistent anti
pathies to certain persons.

In police cases useful information on the moral character, and
sometimes on the acts, of suspected persons might be obtained.

Later on when metagnomy is a faculty admitted by all an
judged by its practical results, I am confident that highly gift
subjects will become of very great social value.


CHAPTER III


SUPERNORMAL COGNITION OF HUMAN PERSONALITY
IN THE EXTERNAL SEQUENCE OF A LIFE

IN the preceding chapters I have considered metagnomy in
its localized applications to various aspects of human
personality. I am fully conscious of the arbitrary nature of
this course and have adopted it solely for convenience of
analysis. In point of fact metagnomic subjects take cognizance
of the human being developing in his environment and trans-
formed according to external circumstances and his own
tendencies, by reaction upon that environment. By a kind of
spontaneous mental specialization each percipient is drawn by
preference to apprehend some one aspect more readily than others
— bodily states, moral character, or social relations. But all
delineate individual lives as integrated in a general whole. I shall
now endeavour to show what they can cognize, giving a summary
supported by enlightening examples.

It is, I repeat, impossible to inter-relate the series of experi-
ments devised to a particular end by giving full reports of each
stance. This might please some scientific readers, but the huge
mass of documentary evidence that has gone to the production of
this book makes such method impossible. Only a synthesis of
metagnomic results is practicable.

There is a temptation to classify the facts according to the phase
prevailing at the time referred to by the cognition, to distinguish
those concerning the past, the present, and the future. A narrative
of actualities would at once show that such distinctions are only
concepts of our sensorial intelligence and that the subjects are
endowed with a faculty whereby a human life seems integrally
present, or rather as an integration of states cognized indepen-
dently of our notions of Time. One might with the best of motiv. s
be led to group the facts according to a seeming gradation in the
kind of cognition expressed by the subjects, comparing this with
what the person delineated knew at the time of the experiments.
This method of statement would be too narrow, and, moreover,
would suggest that metagnomic information differs in its origin
and nature according as it draws its cognitions from known or
unknown data in the mind of the person under analysis.
Deliberate choice leads me to the only really logical grouping of

73


74


SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


the facts, a grouping which considers the metagnomic reports
according to the relation of delineator and delineated in space and
time, and superimposes these factors on the primary conditions
of the special experiment. This is, indeed, only to follow in the
statement of the fact, the same sequence as should govern the
experimental research— to consider (i) the case in which the
person delineated is in presence of the metagnomic delineator ;
(2) when distant in Space, and (3), when distant in Time. 1

t The Person Cognized is in Presence of the
Metagnomic Percipient

Those who study metagnomy experimentally, with persever-
ance and from a sufficiently large variety of percipients, will
discover, if their experience coincides with mine, that it can take
cognizance of the whole content of a life.

To this faculty an individual life is universal life looked at in
connection with a particular person, it is therefore a whole com-
plex of persons and things, including the relation of other lives
in tangential contact. In practice, this potentiality of hyper-
cognition is manifest by a great diversity in specialized pow
So different is the faculty in different subjects that there
scarcely two alike.

One percipient who can in a single sitting give an outline of a
whole life, is unable to foretell a theft, an accident or an illness of
which the delineated person will be the victim. He states an
event in the far distant future, or long past, and is not weighted
by any preoccupation with the present. A single sitting exhar
all that his faculty can reveal on the life he delineates ; 0
sittings will add very little to the first.

1 This is the place to emphasize a fact which will be readily understood by
those who have published or will publish results of nu I atomic cognition applie "
to human persons.

The number of facts that can be selected and presented in a book, bears
extremely small proportion to the data collected. Only fragments, or M it 1
balance sheets of lives, can be given ; and the experimenter to whose knowle
they have been brought, is bound, it may be, to secret y, or at 1. nsl ton disrrcti< n
compelling him to maintain anonymity in such as he quotes. The author is in
the position of a confessor fearing to betray confidences. So very exceptional
are those who are indifferent to the opinions of others that, up to the present, 1
have met but one man who, of his own accord, authorized me to quote this
with reference to a fact concerning himself ; and, moreover, in this case, his
asked mc to suppress her name, thus nullifying her husband's frankness.

The fear of a public confession of great or little things, < on fines (he nmrc salient
facts to private records, from which it is only i «»ssil l< t<> sele< t ihose which are
colourless enough not to betray the identity beneath the anonymous veil.

But as this book is a study of experimental phenomena that can be repeated,
it is only vital that the l.t. lt*d should be typical of the kind of information
given, and it is from this point of view that they must he < onsidered.

As with ettskal olmrVitltllH. no patient's name must be given. In
gnomy as in medical i.m's, the only important thing is the bare fact, alwa
provided that this he verifiable afterwards.


cated,

nation

meta-
dwa


THE EXTERNAL SEQUENCE OF A LIFE 75

Another, on the contrary, is impelled to perceive an individual
life under a succession of small details. I use one who sifts with
so fine a mesh that none of the little circumstances through which
I have lived in the previous ten months escapes her. Projected on
the future her faculty is like a lantern carried on a dark road,
revealing all that is immediately near.

There are, therefore, percipients who take the panoramic view
of individual lives, and those who go through them with a lantern ;
and between these two groups there are all intermediate degrees.

The type of metagnomic subject most frequently met with
participates in both extremes. If his faculty is strong and well-
developed, in a first sitting he will strike a general balance on the
life given him to delineate, sketching the main stages of the past,
and indicating the future trajectory. In later stances, variable
in output, knowledge of episodes in the life will come to
him spontaneously, and more or less circumstantially. The
faculty is permanent in the sense that it can always be called
into action, but occasional or fanciful as regards what it may
express. For this reason the same person confronted with several
subjects on the same day will get from them dissimilar fragments
in the episodes of the life they are scrutinising. The same events
are viewed from different angles, and some open to one percipient
arc not grasped by another. On one day and with one subject,
metagnomy brings into focus some little fragment of a life labori-
ously and with difficulty ; on another day the same subject easily
reaches important information. This illogical faculty must be
left to follow its fancies.

If, therefore, it can be said that a human life is cognizable in all
its details by this faculty, that knowledge is not to be reached by
any one percipient in R limited numberof trials.

Ex. i. Mttagnomic delineation of a person : an instance of the
summary of a life by supernormal cognition.
Circumstances and conditions of the experiment.

This experiment was made at the time of writing these pages, and in
order to indicate what a gifted percipient can grasp, in a single sitting,
concerning a person casually brought to him.

On June 5th, 1922, 1 said to M. de Fleuriere : " With your permission
I shall shortly bring to you some person whom I shall choose. I shall
ask you to reveal all you can concerning that person at a single sitting.
I shall take down your exact words and publish them. Do you agree ? "
The orTer was accepted, and we fixed the seance for June 12th.

My difficulty was to find anyone of strong personality willing to have
his life revealed before a witness, willing also to make frank avowal of the
facts, and to allow them to be published.

Only one person came forward, her interest in metapsychic science
overcoming the natural reluctance everyone feels to lay bare the intimate
events of their lives. This lady, whom I will call Madame Magdalena
Duplex, Rlftda one condition— that her name, which is borne by others,
should not be given.


SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


Detail of the sitting.

On June 12th, at 9.45 a.m., I arrived with Mmc Duplex at M. de
Fleuriere's house. Nothing was said but the usual courtesies, fit, de
Fleuriere and Mine Duplex had never seen each other before. I had
known her for about two months, superficially, as a mere acquaintance.

Mme D. sat down by M. de F. who, as his custom was, placed his left
hand on one of hers, remained in meditation for a minute with half-closed
eyes, and then, without stopping, as if he were narrating a known incident,
ke these words that I took down in abbreviated writing just as die-
ted, and wrote out in full immediately after the seance.
" Your essential fluid is that of a nervous-sensitive, with the addit
of a sanguine-bilious-muscular fluid tempered by the emotion al-sensitiv
fluid. In a word it is a fluid of essentially feminine nature, but exalted 1
a kind of masculine fluid more vigorous and energetic.

M Activity, impulsiveness, and vivacity predominate, and there is |
power of physical and moral control.

M Through this fluid can be distinguished a lively natural intelligence,
quickened by many general ideas derived from study, reading, intercourse
with the world and experience of life. Easily to be discerned are a taste
for the beautiful and the good, high aspirations, great cerebral activit
almost too great, somewhat feverish, a passionate interest in philosophica
psychic, and metapsychic questions, and desire to know whatever go
beyond the ordinary and the commonplace, whatever pertains to
transcendental and the marvellous.

" I see that before coming to me you have visited many persons hav
certain gifts or a certain notoriety. You have a secret desire to express
your ideas and impressions on these matters whether by speech or writing.
You will write articles for the papers.

" Unfortunately there has always been opposition between your specu-
lative ideals and the positive realities of your life, which up to the present
has been full of struggles. These discords have been most frequent in
matters of the heart, in your family, and in the pecuniary prospects and
professional career of your husband, a career which, I may remark, *
certainly been of a liberal and intellectual kind.

u Happily the vital or fluidic energies of your physical and moral per-
sonality art* still considerable, and give me the impression of a long life.
This life will not be without some rough shocks, your health especially
will experience some passing ailments, cerebro-nervous amrmia, arthritis,
and excess of biliary secretion.

Nevertheless, on following out the evolution of your life to its decline
there is comfort, for it seems crowned as if with a rainbow of four bright
colours, indicating favourable conditions from the moral, physical, family,
and material points of view. There will be greater tranquillity than in
the past, for your past has been disturbed by many preoccupations and
shocks, and by a number of deaths, some of which have brought you
much pain, especially those of your father, your mother, and of
your husband.

" I will not hide from you that there are still clouds on your horizon
and anxieties which are even now causing you trouble. They relate more
especially to the future of your children, and to a somewhat precarious
pecuniary position, and failing resources.

M It might be compared to a pond of no great depth, whose surface is
further reduced by dry weather and is now at its lowest. But in the fut
I see its level sensibly raised by little streams that flow into it. In ot
words, the situation will be maintained without disaster and will


THE EXTERNAL SEQUENCE OF A LIFE 77


improved by your personal efforts, by certain advantageous transactions,
and by usin^ certain fortunate opportunities that will come to you.

" In this connection I see shaping itself a happy development by the
moral and material help of some devoted friends, among whom women
play no appreciable part, men only being in action and predominating.
In this relation 1 sec round you many links with the world by reason of
the professional and social standing of your deceased husband. The
feminine element shows duller and thinner, while the masculine is dotted
with brighter spots, 1 mean with more characteristic figures. One among
them is more accentuated and interesting to you. There is a gentleman,
who is married, and whose pecuniary condition is impaired and causes him
much disquiet. Fundamentally he is good, sensible, affectionate, and
intelligent, but at times cold, variable, and almost insane : and you suffer
sometimes from his changeable, wounding, and enigmatical attitude.
Nevertheless there are profound affinities between you, and links that
will cause him to play a part more and more decisive in your life. As to
your family, your children are visibly your chief care. These children
appear like a bouquet of three buds, among which are distinguishable
two feminine and one masculine. Their establishment in life is still in-
complete, and none of them has reached a settlement. But I see events in
preparation, notably marriages which will be favourable from different
points of view. 1 1 seems that the life of one of your daughters will contain
two gTeat emotions ; two men will play preponderant parts in it ; one might
conclude that she will be married twice. In any case you will have several
grandchildren.

" Without wishing to give you pain by speaking of doleful anticipations,
I know that you will be affected by two deaths, directly or indirectly, but
in this 1 do not allude to your children.

" Your name signifies ' duality,' and your first name is curious, it comes
to my ear as ' Lena,' the last two syllables of Magdaleine, the Latin form
of your name Madeleine. Your maiden name seems foreign and might
come from Alsace, Germany, or Austria, as Miiller is of German origin.

" I have said that your children showed like three buds, but there must
have been a fourth, for another bud is fallen ; you must have lost a child.

" As to your husband, I have said that he belonged to a liberal pro-
fession, he was a barrister and also in politics ; sometimes he incurred
much hostility, there have been dangers, threats, rancour, and excitement
against him with reference to a lawsuit, which seems to have been a
struggle in his professional life.

" He died some years ago, but relatively not very long since, towards
the end of the war."

Censorship.

Analysis of the indications given classifies them as follows : Ten deal
with the future and cannot be pronounced upon. Fifty-live are concerned
with the moral temperament, the personal conditions or the surroundings
of Mme Duplex. Out of these, fifty-four were recognized as exactly true,
and she confided to me the realities to which they referred. 1

One only seemed to her doubtful : the monetary worries of her friend,
who seemed a very rich man. I have, however, heard from her over the
telephone that, contrary to what she thought, M. de Fleuriere was right
on this point also.

I draw the reader's attention to the correctness with which the subject

1 I will here mention only one. Mr. P., a barrister and Member of Parliament,
WtM on the CommisMon of the Ffesam enquiry, and became the target for threats
ami keen hostility from compromised persons.


has reproduced the names: Alfred (the husband's name), Magdalena, that
of Mme D. herself, and the diminutive Lena, with which she was accus-
tomed to sign her letters ; and I can add that her maiden name is of
Austrian origin, as M. de Fleuriere said.

Before leaving this excellent instance of metagnomy, I think it
useful to record an observation M. de Fleuriere allows me to make.
In our conversations on supernormal faculty, he has several times
confided to me that he is endowed with an impeccable memory of
what he has read and of his metagnomic stances, the words
returning to him under the form of large printed letters that he
has the sensation of reading as one reads a book. This occasion
seemed a suitable one to prove what he had stated. Said he,
" V«i\i have written down my words one by one ; to-morrow I
will bring you a copy of them from memory, and you can compare
Ihetwo. He did as he said. The two corresponded exactly word
for word.

Moreover, I had already observed that good metagnomic sub-
jects whose faculty is exercised in the waking state have exceptional
memories. It would seem that mental representation is stronger
than with most men, enabling them to recall these more vigorous
images.

Metagnomic delineation of the episodes in a life.

Ex. 2. Delineation of the menial content.

Circt instances and conditions of experiment.

On May nth, 1921, M.Claude Lef6bvre,at the end of a stance, presented
to M. de Fleuriere a small piece of cloth, and asked if he could speak of
the person from whose clothing it was taken.

M. de Fleuriere consented to try, without much hope of success. He
took the piece of stuff, placed it to his forehead, shut his eyes for a Few
minutes, then opened them and said :

"The fluid is intense and wonderful, proceeding from a pious and
saintly soul. This is not recent, it goes back far. This person seems to
have lived under the First Empire and to have died between 1853 and
1863. The person who gave you this piece of stuff has lived for some
time west or north-west of Paris, Brittany or Normandy, and has lived
in Italy or travelled there. . . .

w The person from whom the stuff came has been much talked of and
has even performed some sort of miracles. Rightly or wrongly, soldiers
during the war have attributed their safety to him.

" This man had a physical resemblance to Voltaire, but it is not he,
for his character is markedly saintly. Who can it be ? "

At this point If. de Fleuriere meditated for a few seconds, and then getting
up, staggered like adrunken man, turned round, and taking a medal hanging
from the wall of his study, held it out, saying, " That is the man."

The medal represented the Abb6 Vianney, the famous Cure d'Ars.

Censorship.

In April, 1921, M. Letebvre had met Mile J at the house of mutual

friends. This lady had, at one time in her life, looked after an old priest
in a nursing home in Normandy (Orne). There was there an old gardener


THE EXTERNAL SEQUENCE OF A LIFE 79


who had assisted at the exhumation of the body of the Cure d'Ars at the
time of the Beatification proceedings, and had secretly taken from the

body an undervest which he kept as a precious relic. He gave Mile J

f of this.

After the death of the old priest Mile J left the nursing home.

followed. She cut the relic into pieces and gave them to soldiers,
bsequently attributed their immunity to them.

what remained in 1921 Mile J gave half to M. Lefebvre, and

i* was cut the little piece given to M. de Fleuriere.

-ke the story complete, it may be noted that Mile J had lived

, having been appointed as maid of honour in the Royal Family.

This metagnomic fact shows that the subject grasped and
revealed the content of M. Lefebvre's mind, and added nothing
to it. This fact seems to be the cognizance of conscious knowledge
in another mind there present, and as such I cite it here.

Examples of delineation of episodes in a life, partly known and
partly unknown not normally cognizable.

Ex. 3.

ircumstances and conditions of experhncnt.

In May, 192 1, Mme S went to Versailles for the day to visit several

friends. She went in the morning, wearing a diamond star of great value.
On returning home to Paris she missed the jewel. She was distracted.

She told her husband of her loss. The Mayor of Versailles was informed,
but the star had not been brought to the Town Hall.

Mme S was taken to see Mme Morel, a metagnomic subject when

hypnotized, and sat in a corner of the room during the seance. One of
her gloves was given to the percipient.

Details of the sitting.

On taking the glove, the percipient described Mme S as her custom

was, and then asked, " What am 1 to see about this woman ? "

H Look for what is troubling her at this moment."

" She is distracted over the loss of something . . . It is a large jewel.
. . . How it shines ... it is very valuable. . . . She may be at ease,
it is not lost, it is hidden and will be restored. 1 see that she will wear
it again."

" Look for what happened when this lady ceased to wear the ornament,
d what has since become of it."

ow I follow this lady as she leaves her house. I see her leaving in
mobile with another person and go to another town near to where
are. I cannot tell its name ; I see her go to three different houses,
en return here to this town where we are. The jewel has fallen near
e of those houses. ... I see it picked up by a woman, young, very
tout, short, and blonde, with light eyes and hair.

" The ornament has been well hidden in a small piece of furniture and
locked up. The finder thought of keeping it, but is afraid . . . she is
uneasy and will restore it."

H What should be done to get it back ? "

M Nothing at all, especially not the measures that are thought of. In
a few days, four or five at most, they will write to ask her to come. It
will be given back. At that time there will be some small disagreeables,
but nothing to signify. 1 affirm that the jewd \m11 be returned before a
week. There is no fear. 1 see that the lady will wear it again."


Censorship.

Four days after this sitting Mr. S was requested to go to Versailles

on a matter that concerned him. It was said that a workman had found
a diamond brooch, seeming to correspond with the description furnished,
but that it could not be given him because another person in that town
claimed to have lost a similar ornament and enquiry must be made. There

was some angry conversation between Mr. S and the workman, w" '

was the disagreeable incident referred to by Mme Morel. Finally the
was surrendered.

Some days later Mr. S returned to Versailles to give the reward to

the finder. The man thanked him, but said, " In fact, Sir, it was not I
who found it but my sister, who picked it up as she came home from

work." The man was big and very fair. Mr. S did not ascertain

whether his sister resembled him, he took that for granted,

Ex. 4.

Conditions of experiment and the words of the percipient.

On September 30th, 1913, Count C. de 13 was in presence of

Morel who was hypnotized. She knew nothing of his life, and was
acquainted with him. After having detailed events about to ha
his life, she said : " To-day, after some unimportant visits, you \
denly be called upon to take some action on a political matter. You
will see a number of men in uniform. They seem to belong to something
that will be. ... I then see a great concourse . . . you are speaking to
this crowd and others speak also. ... It will be a success. I see many
men in uniform in open country, many people, and there is water in the
landscape."

Count B could not connect this event, said to be imminent, with

anything likely to happen to him. The words did not awake in his mind
any logical possibility.

In the evening of the same day while conversing with a friend, he was
led to speak of an aerodrome with garages recently erected which he
intended to present to Savoy, and spoke of his intention soon to make
the presentation to the local authorities.

On the following day this friend, of his own accord (the conversa
not having been intended to lead to anything), approached the Min'
for War.

On October 2nd, Count C was called to the National Committee

Aviation, where the General Secretary proposed to him an official opening
to take place as soon as possible. October 26th was fixed upon as the date.
This opening of the aviation ground atChalles-les-Eaux, which he thought
distant and, to use his own expression, nothing more than some congratu-
lations round a bottle of champagne, became by this unexpected inter-
vention a salient event in his life. It was only after recognizing this sudden
transformation of his anticipations of the future that he connected it
with Mme Morel's visions, astonished that an event brought about by so
casual a circumstance should have been foreseen.

Curious to find out what details the percipient was capable of for-
he went again to Mme Morel, asking her to say all she could on the
event in his life.

" You will shortly," she said, " take a journey for a gathering, a
ceremony. ... I see a great concourse. ... I hear much music. .
I see many flowers and flags . . . many bright colours, very fine wea'
It will give much joy. The public will be much pleased.

" I see several things in the air, like aeroplanes of different forms. One of


THE EXTERNAL SEQUENCE OF A LIFE 81


them will fall, but it will not be serious ; no one will be hurt. There will
be no trouble or hitches in the organization of the festivities . . . except
for a defect in the construction of the buildings, the sheds, which should
be put right beforehand."

Censorship.

Mme Morel's words were taken down as she spoke them by Count C .

She was working on matters absolutely unknown to her and unreachable
by any ordinary play of thought.

In this s6ance of October 3rd, Count C , whose mind was aware of

the incidents of the previous day, foresaw the probable sequence of the
ceremony ; but there were three indications made by the percipient that
his mental content could not have suggested — that the day would be fine ;
that one aeroplane would fail, but that no one would be hurt ; and that
there was a fault in the construction of the sheds.

The two former would, he thought, have to be verified by the event ; as
for the last, he judged it mistaken : the sheds were finished, and passed
as being well built conformably to the plans.

Now it so happened that an aeroplane on passage had to descend at
Challes for engine trouble. It was decided to place it in garage, but on
trying to enter it was found that the doors of entry were too low and
must be raised without delay.

The 26th of October — the day for opening the aerodrome — was a beau-
tiful day. Count C made a speech which was replied to by other

speeches. It was an imposing ceremony such as Count C had never

thought of before October 3rd.

At the end of the proceedings Count C returned home, everything

having gone off as Mme Morel had foreseen except the accident.

Towards 5 p.m. Count C was informed that an aviator had taken

a machine from one of the sheds for a flight with a passenger, and that
on coming down the aeroplane had capsized, damaging the machine
badly, but that he and his friend were uninjured except for some bruises.

Examples of supernormal delineation of episodes in a life
totally unknown to the person interested, that could not be
reached by reasoning.

Ex. 5. Premonition of an event common to several lives.

Circumstances, conditions of experiment and words uttered.

From 1916 to 1920 my friend, M. Louis M , undertook by himself

and through friends a long series of metagnomic enquiries with several
subjects in order to obtain information that might be useful on his eldest
son severely wounded and missing at the battle of Verdun. This serits
is of great psychological interest and will be given in detail in a later
chapter. The premonition here following is given because it foretold an
event in the family surroundings of the missing officer.

One of the persons who gave enlightened help to M. Louis M was

Mine G , a friend of the family, who had several seances with Mme

Morel (hypnotized) in 1916-17-18, using letters, pieces of clothing, and other
objects. In a stance of 1916, after having spoken of the wounded and
missing officer, she said :

M I see in this family another young man, younger than he, a brother
... he wiU contract a union, ardently desired, and will be very happy."

M. Louis M 's second son, Pierre, was then seventeen and destined

for the medical profession. His age, the length of the curriculum probably

6


82


SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


still further lengthened by tho war, caused Mme G to judge this pre-
diction erroneous, and that if true it could only apply to some student's
union of which it would be inadvisable to speak to the parents. She there-
fore suppressed this information in the copy of the proceedings at the
stance that she gave to the parents, till October 6th, 191 8, when the form
of the forecast seemed more suitable. The percipient said on that day:
" This young man is a student . . . there is, however, an approaching
marriage. He will continue his studies after his marriage."

In October, 1917, M. Pierre M , commissioned by his father to have

a stance with M. de Fleuriere, with whom he was unacquainted, in order
to verify what might be said on the missing brother in connection with a
delineation of Pierre's own life.

I detach the words concerning the particular event now under discussion
from the context of which it formed but a very small part. With reference
to that event, concerning which he had not been informed of the previous
predictions, he was told :

" I see for you a speedy union with a young lady who is in your im-
mediate surroundings. This marriage will change nothing in your mode
of life or your occupations. You will continue to live as at present."

To M. Louis M , the father of the young man, Mme Morel, in a long

series of seances from March, 1916, to November, 1918, said nothing of
the marriage of this son, though she mentioned it at nearly all the seances

with Mme G . On November 6th, 191 8, she said to his father for the

first time :

" Your youngest son will not remain long where he is at present (he was
at Grenoble going through his military service), he will return to Paris
to resume his interrupted studies ... he will be deeply in love ; then there
will be a marriage, and family life."

Censorship. Mental content of the persons relative to the premonition.

Madame G thought the anticipation false or implying some

temporary student's union.

M. Louis II wrote down the prediction and told it me with the rest

of his account of that s6ance, saying that he saw no reason for it.

M. Pierre M chiefly concerned, was aged nineteen in 1917, and saw

nothing at that time supporting the anticipation made.

What came to pass.

Demobilized in 1919, M. Pierre M returned to Paris and resumed

his studies. M. and Mme G , friends of his father from childhood,

kept an hotel. He lived there en pension.

M. and Mme G had two daughters. The elder was married the same

year. Pierre was deeply in love with the younger, aged eighteen. His
affection was returned, and the families consented to the marriage, which
took place August 20th, 192 1. The bridegroom was twenty-two and only
in the second year of his medical studies.

Mme G never suspected five years before that the " union " she
apprehended would be with her own daughter.

Thus all came to pass exactly as foretold by M. de Fleuriere. Nothing
in the young man's life was changed.

This fact of premonition had a curious epilogue.

After his son's marriage M. Louis M came to read over the note-
books in which he had written down the accounts of s6ances held by him
with various percipients. Under the date May 4th, 1916, he found his
first seance with Mile de Berly. She gave him the physical, moral, and
social descriptions of a score of the persons in his surroundings, among


THE EXTERNAL SEQUENCE OF A LIFE 83


were M. and Mine G and their daughters. As to these latter

id : M Both children will marry early, first the elder (here followed a
of the bridegroom) and the younger not long afterwards. ... I
husband of the younger ... he is there, very clear before me • • .
tall, rather stout, with a thick lower lip. . .
1 92 1 this description applied to M. Louis M *s younger son.

Ex. 6. A premonition in which the percipient described an event
common to two lives in brief and temporary contact.

On January 10th, 1922, Mrs. M visited Mile de Berly, who said to

her among other things, as follows :

M You will very shortly get the flat that you have been vainly looking
for and despair of rinding. You will not even have to seek it, it will be
offered to you. You will be pleased when you see it. It is a small flat,
very white, very clean, very bright . . . very white; that specially strikes
. . . There is no house fronting it . . . one sees trees, there is plenty
ht. . . .

he people who live there have a stroke of luck ... a letter comes
em from a foreign country, far away ... the envelope has five
. . . they are offered a brilliant situation over there . . . that will
c them to go . . . they will have money to gain and business to
do . . . much money will pass into their hands . . . they will become
very rich . . . they will remain over there for some time . . . their
mother is there, she is ill. . . .

" You do not know these people, but this will come to pass thr
persons that you know, who will tell you, 1 Take that flat ; it is just wh
you want.' And I see they will leave some little things in it."

Censorship.

Mrs. M , an American teacher of singing, who had been in Paris

for some months, had sought in vain for a flat, and despaired at finding
one. Her mind necessarily contained nothing relative to the prediction.

Mile de Berly knew that Mrs. M was seeking a flat, but neces-
sarily could know nothing normally of the facts predicted.

What came to pass.

M. and Mme S , living in the Rue Lafontainc (Paris), unknown to

Mrs. M and to Mile de Berly, received on February 25th, 1922, a

letter from Mexico, in which their father-in-law, M. d'Y , the owner

of immense properties, proposed to his son-in-law the general direction
of these properties under such favourable terms that no hesitation was
possible.

Mme S announced their intended departure to her friend, M.

Helene C . This lady, to whom Mrs. M had been introduced,

interested herself in the trials of a foreigner to gain remunerative work

and thought at once that this flat would exactly suit Mrs. M , and

asked Mme S to reserve it for her. Mrs. M visited the flat

found it exactly to her taste and took possession May 20th. M. ana

Mme S embarked for Mexico on the 30th. All MUe de Berly's

premonitions were exactly verified.

Ex. 7.

Mme Helene C visited Mme Fraya on June 28th, who, among

other things, said to her :
N Your second child, the boy, has fallen ill ; but that is not ail. Your


84


SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


little girl will be ill in her turn. ... I see her all red and her throat sore.
You will be anxious about her, more so than for her brother ; but you
must not worry, the illness will be bad but will end favourably, and
convalescence will be short.

" You will soon leave Paris, and pass the holiday months a long way
off. A curious holiday ! in two parts. ... I see what looks like two
removals. The first stay will be dull and depressing. You will be unable
to settle, you seem to be always changing your room.

M The latter part will be much brighter . . . you will not be in the
same place. I see you in a lovely place where you will find friends. You
will be near water all the time. You go a good deal in an auto-car with
charming people. You will be very happy. 1 see you for a moment in
a splendid domain, where there are wide green lawns down to the water
... to the sea. You will come back to Faris delighted with your
holiday."

The mental content of Mmc Helene C , and of Mme Fraya.

Mme H. C s little boy had scarlatina from June 4th, and had

quickly recovered. On the 26th a very careful disinfection had been
carried out in the flat. The sister of the patient, having been removed
from the contagion at its beginning, was in excellent health, and the
medical attendant, Dr. Bergeron, considered that the brother would be
no danger to his sister.

Mme H. C had decided on June 28th to leave for Switzerland.

Tickets were taken, and rooms were reserved in an hotel at Villars. She
intended to remain there for the holidays and then to return to Paris.

Mme Fraya knew that Mme H. C 's son had had scarlatina. She

knew also that the doctor had pronounced him free from infection.
Regarding the content of her premonition she could know nothing
normally.

What came to pass.

On the 10th of July the family took up their quarters in the Hotel P ,

at Villars. Mme H. C was entirely satisfied with the place, the rooms,

and the pleasure of her children, and was delighted to find Mme Fraya
wrong. Her satisfaction lasted ten days.

On the morning of July 20th, the governess came to her and said that
the little girl was complaining of sore throat and was feverish. On the
21st, Dr. Testez of Bex, diagnosed scarlatina.

Thenceforward the family had to be isolated. Their rooms were
changed for others in a distant wing of the building, and for twenty days

Mme H. C did not leave the sick room, full of anxiety about the

issue and lamenting that she was in a mountain resort, far from medical
aid.

The origin of the infection was obscure. All that could be gathered
was that a niece of the hotel-keeper had died of scarlatina in April, that
the disinfection had been summary, and that two other cases of scarlatina
had broken out in the house in May.

As soon as the child was well Mme H. C lost no time in leaving

the place.

She was led by circumstances to go to Lausanne, about the 20th of
August, to the hotel Beau-site, on the shore of the lake. She there met

her friend Mme Ch , owner of the chateau de Bossey, near Lausanne.

Its beautiful lawns extend to Lake Leman. This led to her residence
with a charming family, and the days passed as pleasantly as Mme Fraya
had foretold. The mass of water in Mme Fraya's vision was not the sea,
but the lake.


THE EXTERNAL SEQUENCE OF A LIFE 85


I will now give some instances by which the reader can form an
idea of the extreme minuteness with which some percipients can
cognize coming events in individual lives.

Ex. 8.

During the autumn holidays of 1921, in the department of Cher, I
was brought into relations with Mme Jean Peyroutet, a person endowed
with the faculty of taking para-normal cognizance of individual lives,
in (apparently) a waking state. A fanciful handling of cards or looking
at the forms created by the white of an egg poured into a glass of water,
are the methods she prefers for arousing her faculty. On September 8th,
in the course of a sitting in which I was testing her powers, she told me
that I should go to Paris and live there. I told her that this allowed of
an easy and simple test, and asked her to describe my future apartments
there.

I had already decided to establish myself in Paris. It matters little

whether Mme Jeanne P knew this or not. What she could not know

was that, after vain seeking for more than a year, I had, in June, 1921,
the promise of a house in the Rue de Longchamp, occupied by an English
lady, Mrs. W., whose lease had expired two years before, but which she
was inhabiting till the end of the moratorium.

In September, therefore, I was awaiting her vacation of the premiadj
in January, 1922, and, tired of useless search, I held to this expectation^
In order to make the sequel fully intelligible, I should say that in July I
had had an interview with Mrs. W. to discuss a temporary let of her house,
furnished, while she went for six months to join her husband, who was
an officer in the Indian Army.

With reference to the experiment, this was all that was in my thoughts
on September 8th, 1921, taking " thought " in its accepted psychological
meaning.

After having turned over a pack of cards, Mme J. P answered,

"... you will not be leaving here at once, there is an obstacle. There
will be a change of domicile soon, but not immediately, and this will be
to your advantage, for there will be unexpected proposals.

" You will not get the house you are expecting. Some one must leave,
and that will not take place at once. . . .

M When next in Paris you will see something suitable, but not the house
you are expecting. . . . The lady there does not vacate it yet. ... Is
she ill ? . . . She wants to leave ... she has to cross the sea to reach
her destination ; she ought to go . . . she will go, but not at once ....
But you will not get that house. . . . Change, but to another house."

II Then describe the unexpected house."

"... (after efforts) I don't see it. We will try with white of egg on
another day."

On September 13th we had another sitting. My mental content as on

the 8th. Mme J . P threw the raw white of an egg into a glass of water

and looked hard into it. Then, in short phrases, with long intervals of
silence, she said :

" On your approaching visit to Paris you will be enlightened as to
the house. . . . Some people will look out on your account. . . . You
will get a letter asking you to go at once to see it. ... A signature will
be needed. . . . The house will be taken forthwith. . . . You will have
a house with trees in front, like a small square or private garden. ... I
see a statue there. It is a detached house. . . .

" There are flowers round. ... I see much ivy . . . there are two


86 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


entrance-doors, the door does not open on the street, there is an iron gate
first, the house is approached by a covered way. . . . You will not be far
from water . . . nor from the Bois dc Boulogne. ... I should like to
give you the name of the street . . . (efforts to get this) ... it won't
come. I can see only one letter, B ; the name of the street begins with
Before living in this "house you will go to the seaside with a lady. . . ."

What came to pass.

On the afternoon of September 15th, I returned home and found

ung lady, Mile Fl , lately come on a holiday, visiting us. T

'ersation in progress caused her to greet me with the words :
We were speaking of marriage, Doctor, and I was saying how dim
is now to find a husband."

M Not so difficult," I said, " as to find a house in Paris."
Such was the little incident which steered events to the conr

realization of Mme P 's prediction.

A conversation ensued, which informed Mile Suzanne Fl of

intention to take up my abode in Paris and the difficulty of finding a
house.

She spoke of the matter that evening to her uncle, a distinguished
Parisian genealogist, who at once placed at my disposal his influence
with agents. He wrote to such of his relations as might be expected to
help in the matter, but the answers received were all of the same kind —

regrets, nothing now vacant, and none in prospect. If. Fl returned

to Paris promising to keep in touch with the agents.

On October 8th, I received the following letter from him :

" Dear Doctor,

" One of the agents I applied to indicates some premises in the
Rue Boulainvillcrs, on the side of the Chaussee de la Muette, occupied
by Mme D., living at Lorient.

u Mme D. was thinking of living altogether in Paris, but has decided
to remain at Lorient. A few days ago she applied to the agent to find her
t. This is to let you know that the property is available. A
the question whetheT that part of Paris will suit you, I think
is the rata avis you will do well to snatch at."

On the 9th I was in Paris, and went to see the house. It suited me,
and I thought it better to close with that than to wait for the other. 1
at once notified my willingness to take over the lease."

Censorship.

All the indications given me on September 13th by Mme Jeanne P

were found correct. I put the predictions and their verification in
parallel columns.


On your approaching visit to
Paris you will be enlightened as to
the house.


Some people will look out on
your account.

You will get a letter asking you
to go at once to see it.
P A signature will be needed, and
the house will be taken forthwith.


I used to go to Paris every month,
and stayed there a while. It was on
my next visit that I received the
assurance of the lodging I had been
vainly seeking.

I received this assistance.

Such a letter, given above,

sent me by M. Fl .

So it was.


THE EXTERNAL SEQUENCE OF A LIFE 87


take a house with trees
in front, like a small square or
private garden.

I see a statue there.

It is a detached house.
There are llowcrs round it.


I see much ivy.


There are two entrance doors, the
door does not open on the street ;
there is an iron gate first ; the house
is approached by a covered way.

You will not be far from water,
nor from the Bois de Boulogne.


The name
with M B."


of the street begins


Before living in this house you
will go to the seaside with a lady.


I had asked M. Fl for a house

nr a flat, preferably the latter. The
house ottered is embellished with a
small garden planted with trees.

In front of the house on the
garden side there is a statue.
Die house touches no other.
It is surrounded with garden-beds
that have been, and will be, planted
with tlowers.

The palings on the side of the
street are garnished with ivy. The
walls of the adjoining houses have
ivy up to their third storey.

The house stands back from the
street and is separated from it by
an iron paling in which there is a
gate. A glazed covered way extends
from this gate to the house-door.

The house is about 500 yards
from the Seine and about 900 from
the Bois. The description would
apply to only about one-thirtieth
of the Paris area.

There are approximately 5,7c
streets in Paris, 37 in this dii
that begin with B.

On October 20th, for final signa-
ture and to settle about the contents

of the house, I had to visit Mme

at Lorient. One of my sisters-in-law,
who had arranged preliminaries,
went with me.


Ex. 9.

After the above facts had enlghtened me on the quality and mode of

the faculty possessed by Mme Jeanne P , I continued to test this in

a long series of experiments. Besides those instituted for several pu
I caused her to predict the sequences of my own life in seances held at
such short intervals that no important event would be omitted if he
faculty were really capable of passing nothing by unannounced. At the
time of writing these lines the trials have covered ten months, and during
this period all events, however small, have been predicted : and by " small
events M I do not mean the acts and occurences that are repeated daily,
but those which diversify the uniformity of a life — a letter producing
unusual pleasure or annoyance, the visit of a friend not seen for a long
while, a little unexpected trip, a little plan given up or changed,
I here give some of these predictions and their realization.


November 26th, 1920. " I see the
letter 1 L.' There is someone in your
family whose name begins with L,
who at the present moment is on a
journey.


On November 26th my brother-
in-law, M. Lucien G., disembarked
from Morocco, where he had
for five months, intending to
three years. . . .


SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


"He is on the sea. I see him at sea.
He brings you something. ... It
is rather bright, it is curious, there
are different sorts. He will say, * I
wished to bring you something else
but could not find anything.' He
will have thought about it. Oh,
he has just reached France ! the
journey is past. You are going to
change your house ; L. also : both
ies are nearly at the same


November 30th. " Your two sons
at school will go for the
5 holidays into the country,
near you. One of them will have no
luck, he will pass his vacation
lying down. ... It will not be


December 2nd.
have a dog."


" You will soon


31st. M Have you not got
yet ? You will soon have


During the days following his
return he distributed in his family
leather cushions of native work of
several kinds, some of them covered
with bright ornament. He said,
N These are not what I thought to
bring you. I intended to go to
Marrakesh, but my hurried depar-
ture prevented my doing so.

On the 25th of January we moved
from the country to Paris. M.
Lucien G. changed from Paris to
the country.

At that time I thought to be in
Paris before Christmas, but circum-
stances prevented this.

My two sons came for their
holidays to Cher, and arrived in
good health.

December 24th. Both were
strong boys and had never been ill.
On the 26th the elder said that his
leg hurt him. A boil developed,
and was at once attended to. On
the 27th it had become a large
carbuncle. On the 28th it was
surrounded by lymphangitis, and
on the 29th a painful subcutaneous
swelling made an incision under
anesthetic necessary. The boy
passed his holidays lying down.

I had not had a dog for fifteen
years. Nothing seemed more un-
likely than that I should get a dog
just when I was intending to live in
Paris.

April nth. During cold rain a
passer by rang the bell, and said,

You should take in your little
dog, which is shivering with cold in
the garden. It is sad to see."

The parlourmaid went into the
garden, and saw there a little black
terrier, which had come into the
garden through the palings. Her
collar bore the words : 1 Burnel.
Camp Boismont." We took in the
little animal, meaning to inform its
master, but no one could say where
Boismont Camp might be. The
children begged that the little
creature should be adopted. I
allowed this after a good deal of
resistance.


SEQUENCE OF A LIFE


14th. " There is something
your house ; have you a
? I should be surprised if it
an animal — a dog. There is a
: about it ... it has not been
nor bought. One would say
: it has been found. It is happy
with you. I say * a dog/ but it is a
bitch I She is delicate and affec-
tionate. Don't let her go out. You
don't know her name. You should
:all her Finette. ' 1


The little dog received her mc
psychic baptism the same eve
and was called Finette. No
answering to any other of the name
we tried, she responded to that l
readily.

Was that her name ?


April 24th. ' Why!
og is ill, very ill."


Your little


fay 2nd. 11 The little dog is
much better."

May 13th. M Surely the dog has
not been stolen ? I don't see her
any more. I think the poor little
thing has been stolen."


Since the 22nd the little
had lost appetite and
symptoms of enteritis.

Finette seemed quite cured.

On May nth Finette went out
as usual through the backdoor set
ajar for her. She was never
again.


The reader should compare this perception of small circum-
stances of life by a percipient such as Mme. Peyroutet, with those
described by such as Fleurtere. He will then have a good idea
of these two extreme types of metagnomic faculty both as to their
extent and penetration. Using each simultaneously on the same
personality is like using alternately the low and the high power
of a microscope. The low-powered object-glass gives the biologist
a large field, but only leading structures, as Mme. de Fleuri£re
gives to the psychologist ; while the high power gives a much
more restricted field, but reveals the smallest details. This
difference in cognitive capacity in the same faculty of hyper-
cognition gives an acute observer much to think over.

The foregoing specimens show what may be expected from
percipients when their faculties are directed to persons presented
to them : and because each percipient's special faculty is always
y to come into action, metagnomy with a human personality
ts objective is fruitful of experimental results.
The experimental conditions which obtain when some person
is placed in relation with a metagnomic subject and supernormal
indications result, is continually taking place in ordinary life.
In presence of persons who approach them, the subjects remain
merely receptive. They do not take analytic cognizance of them,
but receive a notion synthesized in a feeling, and often son
circumstantial information. They are conscious of what comes tc

1 Needless to say that with this percipient, as with any other that
used, I have always written down the words said, without ever ;


question, and without furnishing any indication, whether before or after, \
would have caused subsequent sittings to !


> lose all value.


SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN

in this way and retain it as if it came to them in the i
process of thought.

Occasionally this spontaneous metagnomic information dc
with trivial events of very slight importance in the lives
cerned ; the percipient mentions these or suppresses them accord-
ing to his own judgment of the persons and the nature of the
event perceived. In other casus the information provoked by
the approach of some very serious circumstance springs up
with such vehemence that it takes the form of a hallucinatory
impression and produces such strong emotions that it cannot be


II. The Human Person Cognized is Distant in Spa
from the Percipient

In our experiences of the strange fact of metagnomy, everything
runs counter to our ordinary ideas of cognition. We are amazed
by the power of foretelling things that cannot before seen by
reason, and now we are faced with facts that show the same power
of metagnomic penetration even when the human object of per-
sption is distant in space from the percipient.
It matters little that this is inexplicable to us. It is a fact that
. be verified experimentally and at will, just as in the case when
the person delineated is present : and this fact is the prime
consideration for every truth-seeking mind, and supersedes all
other considerations. The general functional processus of meta-
gnomic faculty and of its output is the same whether exercised
on a present or an absent person, as will be seen by the examples
given ; but when applied to one at a distance some special con-
ditions must be supplied, and I describe these without insisting
on them further, because I shall analyse them in later chapters.

In order that a metagnomic subject should be able to delineate
some distant person he must be given some knowledge possessed
by the experimenter (mental link) ; or something belonging to
or touched by the person (physical link). At present it is only
necessary to mention this essential ; we shall see later how these
enable the subject to localize their faculty on a human being.

Ex. L Metagnomic delineation proceeding partly on a
mental link, partly on a weak physical link.

Circumstances and conditions.

In May, 1922, M. Germain D. gave me a letter from his friend,
M. Augustin F.-M., with the purpose of verifying what could be obtained
by way of information on the liie of the latter with which he was very
fully acquainted.

On May 23rd I profited by this opportunity to discover whether
faculty possessed by Mme J. Peyroutet of perceiving minor 1


THE EXTERNAL SEQUENCE OF A LIFE 91


events in a life would be competent to delineate the main outlines already

past.

1 knew that the letter was from M. Augustin F.-M., and was aware
of his name, his profession, and place of abode.

Mme Peyroutet was ignorant of his existence. He had been living for
a long while in a distant colony.

On the day of the experiment, M. Germain D. was in Paris, about
three and a half miles from where we were, and M. Augustin F.-M. was
in Indo-China.

At Mme Peyroutct's request, the letter was placed in the middle of
the table. She did not touch it till towards the end of the sitting. At
first she spoke while manipulating cards ; subsequently she looked at
some white of egg that she had poured into a glass of water at the begin-
ning of the sitting. Finally she took the letter, turning it about in her
hands.

She has found that she gets her notions of the moral state and general
course of life by the fall of the cards, and the forms, aspects of places,
things and people from the glass of water.

It is of psychological interest to note that her metagnomic perceptions
arrive by fits and starts, in unconnected phrases, without any co-ordinat-
ing idea. In one she will speak of the character, in another of the illness
of a child ; another speaks of a voyage, etc. etc., reverting by comple-
mentary phrases till she has accumulated enlightening matter in the chaos
of her words. In giving the example I shall rearrange these chaotic
phrases according to the matters on which they bear. With this percipient
it is necessary to do this.

The words o] Mme Peyroutet,

" This is about a gentleman. I think he is very dark ... or rather his
hair is of two colours ; it is getting grey, grey and dark. ... He holds
himself very upright ... a good carriage.

u He is rather nervous, lively, whimsical, good-hearted, but changeable
in mood. Not avaricious, but very orderly. Methodical. Rather
dictatorial. Not always easy to get on with. Strong-willed. Not proud.
He is a man who has made his own position.

"What an adventurous life. Many travels.

M His mother was widowed when he was quite young, and soon after
there were several widows among his near relations.

" He had a mistress who affected his life deeply. She spent much of his
money. ... He seems to have speculated, and owed money. While
still young he was threatened by the law, with imprisonment. He had
money lent him. ... He left the country when young, of his own accord.
... He has passed through much trouble . . . has had to do much work
before succeeding. He has striven, and not always been lucky. . . .
What troubles, what surprises, changes and chances.

" A death of some one, a sudden death of a near relation, by apoplexy.
He seems to be married now, and has recently lost a child.

"He has a kind of administrative post, travels, engaged in enterprises;
he is associated with other men of business.

" It is very far from Paris ; I should not like to have to walk there. He
is living in a town, a little outside it . . . there is what looks like a river
— water round it. An isolated house standing by itself.

" He often takes a boat ; he seems to have a little boat of his own.

94 He has to do with products from the ground.

M Now the whole surroundings change, I do not see many houses now ;
those that are there, are built on pillars.


92 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


"He is thinking of getting married, as if he were going to marry
mistress. A little child is playing there.

" He is thinking of returning to France. I think he means to
house near Paris.

"On his journey he will be ill, likely to die."

■orship.

The record of this sitting was communicated to M. Germain D.,
was surprised at the accuracy of the information as far as he knew
facts.

The history of his friend's life is as follows, in brief :

When about eighteen he was enamoured of a young woman, and the
need of money led to malversation of funds that led to a threat of legal
proceedings, from which he was saved by the help of a friend.

Resolved to expiate his misconduct, he enlisted in the colonial infantry,
and when his time had expired he settled in the colony.

His place in a large carrying company was precarious, but his activity
and intelligence in subordinate duties led in the end, after much hard
work, to an assistant managership, and then to being manager.

He is a man of fifty-two, his hair is brown and getting grey. He has
become a person of some importance in the colony. He travels much
and has a steam launch.

Living in the maritime town where the principal offices of his Com_
are situated, he has often to go into the interior, to the rice-fields
plantations, where the native houses are built on piles.

He is, in fact, anxious to return to France, and rest after thirty
of hard work in a tropical climate.

The marriage with a mistress is a possibility. He has lived long wi
a woman of the country, by whom he has had two children. One
two years since.

As to the voyage to France and a serious illness on the way,
a premonition still to be verified .

Ex. 2. Metagnomic delineation of a distant person, weak mental
link.

Circumstances and conditions.

In May, 1922, I tried a number of experiments with Mme Peyroutet,
with the intention of discovering how much and what kind of knowledge
in the experimenter of the person to be described is necessary to start
the metagnomic faculty into useful action.

M. and Mme Germain D. suggested to me their intimate friend Mme F.,
of whose strongly characterized past very few persons had any knowledge,
and who, for this reason, would certainly authorize publication, provided
her name were suppressed, a condition that I here comply with.

On May 12th, pen in hand, I put Mme Peyroutet the single question,
"Please give me the outline of the life of the person of whom I am thinking. 11

I had met Mme F. for a few moments at the house of mutual friends.
I knew vaguely that she had recently made an unexpected marriage and
that her past life was characterized by events which If revealed by meta-
gnomy would exclude any possibility of mere coincidence.

The words of the percipient (rearranged as before).
This is a woman with auburn hair, good-looking, decidedly good-
ng. I thiqk her frank and sincere, but she knows how to be oth
occasion. She is gay, amiable, sympathetic, rather depressed


THE EXTERNAL SEQUENCE OF A LIFE 93


times, and then exuberant . . . she is liable to these ups and downs, as
if there were two natures in her.
She has a strong will . . . although nervous, she can control herself.

She is conscious of the North.

She is fond of music, gaiety, but of work too. Her past has been cloudy,
there are things in it that are not clear. ... I think she was illegitimate,
there was some secret about her birth . . . some personage is concerned
. . . could he have been her father ? Her father seems to have been a
well-known personage, and important person.

There is a widow . . . her mother was a widow when her daughter
was born. She was attended by a very few persons. It was a difficult
birth; there was a doctor and a priest. Her mother had two other chil-
dren. She was a light woman, had lovers . . . not worth much ... is
still coquettish and does not trouble herself to see her daughter.

The poor child lived away from her mother. What changes and
travels. I see her with a wicked woman. She must have gone abroad
when quite young. . . . There is a woman near her who has been in
prison. Oh ! Thefts and imprisonment — what surroundings ? She
has been beaten and roughly treated. No worse people could be found
than those among whom she grew up ; they were capable of anything,
would have made her a lost woman. Happily the child had an honest
nature. She has wept much. Many changes from one town to another.

Her mother came back to her. They wrote to each other and met
about her marriage. Her mother will make a little revelation before
she dies. The young woman is married now and very happy. Her
husband is good and clever ... he seems to be a chief over others . . .
he wears a uniform and is much at sea — has travelled much and will
travel more.

Censorship.

The foregoing was read to M. and Mme Germain D. on the evening of
the 1 2th May. I subjoin a summary of the story they told me.

She was born in Paris, at the house of a midwife, where her mother,
more than a year widowed, gave birth to her secretly. Whether the
birth necessitated a doctor and a priest is still the mother's secret, as
also the identity of the father. The mother is still living.

On her recovery, the mother resumed her life in good society in a
country town, leaving her child with the midwife on annual payments.
The child was four years old when the daughter of the midwife took her
ay to live with her in Turkey. A bad woman and bad surroundings.
Towards her tenth year, the girl passed into the hands of another
son, who took her to England. This woman taught her to steal, got
she could out of her and used to beat her when the child resisted.
When in her thirteenth year she returned to France, the mother
_nded her to a woman comparatively better than the others, who
merely got all she could from the mother under threats of revealing her
secret.

Having grown into a beautiful girl, she became a nurse during the
war; she attracted the notice of a naval officer in hospital, who
married her, and was glad to make her forget the miseries of her past,
which was told to him.

The mother saw her daughter on the occasion of her marriage. When
I went to Mme Peyroutet I was entirely ignorant of all these facts. M. and
Mme G. knew them, but had never been brought into contact with the
percipient. It will be readily understood that these were secrets not
often spoken of.


SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


Ex. 3. Mctagnomic delineation of an episode in the life of a
distant person ; the percipient working on a mental link.

Circumstances and conditions.

Mile Mathilde V. and M. Raoul B., aged twenty and twenty-five
years, had been engaged two years and were to be married in July, 1922.

In March, 1922, the man wrote to the father of the girl, that it would
be to his daughter's happiness that the marriage should not take place.
The letter gave no reason. This abrupt and unexpected change, coming
from a young man who was usually courteous, very polite, and rather
timid, astonished them all. They were stupefied and could not under-
stand it.

I learnt of this rupture almost at once from a member of the family
and this seemed a favourable occasion to test the metagnomic
when only a mental link was available.

Conditions of the experiment.

My mental content was that just described J and I may add that I
knew the families interested very superficially.

At the time M. and Mme V. were in Paris with their daughter. They
had read the letter from the young man, and another from his father
(of which I was, of course, ignorant) answering vaguely a request to be
enlightened.

M. and Mme B. were 180 miles distant from Paris, and knew the motives
for breaking off the engagement, since they were concerned in them.

Mme Peyroutet was practising in Paris and did not know even of the
existence of the six persons concerned. All that was said to her
I am thinking of a young girl, speak of her present life.


Words of the percipient.

This is a fair girl — no, dark. She
was engaged. There is a rupture, a
breaking off . . . quite unex-
pected, like a lightning stroke.

There was a betrothal dinner.
The ring was given. The marriage
was close at hand.

It is her first disappointment.

Ah, now the young man appears !
He is of a fair complexion.

He has not done his military
service.

He has broken it off. He has
caused it. A letter has come from
him not long since.

He seems distracted and nervous
just now. He loved the girl. He
is not bad at the bottom.

He does not live in Paris. I see
in the country sometimes.


Censorship.
Correct.


This took place in 192 1.
marriage was fixed for July, 1922.

Aged twenty. First love and
first disillusion.

He was blond ; his fiancee being
dark like a Creole. He was dis-
charged for constitutional delicacy.

Correct. The letter had come
less than ten days before the sitting.

Unverifiable, but likely,
seemed good and kind.

The family lives in the country ;
the young man came to Paris to
study.


THE EXTERNAL SEQUENCE OF A LIFE 95


He had an operation not long
ago.

At this moment he is with his
parents in the country. They live
in the country.

There have been discussions be-
tween them.

They are false, and difficult
people, of dark complexions, one
especially. The mother is despotic.

There is water near the house.

The parents know everything.

They dictated the young man's
letter.

The parents have been asked for
an explanation. They have given
reasons that do not exist. They
have spoken of reasons of health.

There are many motives. The
parents thought there was not
enough money, though the young
lady had some.

But there is a mistress and her
"d behind all this. This woman
seems to have sworn to kill the
young man or to do something
serious. He is timid ; on the one
side, he is influenced by his parents,
and on the other by his mistress,
who is a bad woman. H is vexed,
d will be sorry.


The young lady has nothing to
regret. She will marry later on, and
better.
The episode is closed.
She will soon leave Paris. They
will take her away somewhere, a
way off.


Operated on for appendicitis,
January, 1922, in a Paris clinic.

He had left Paris and was con-
valescing with his parents in the
country.

Un verifiable.

Intentionally unanswered.

The mother is dark and unques-
tionably the head of the family.

A river flows at the end of the
garden.

This is morally certain, the young
man being very submissive.
Unverifiable, but likely.

Correct.


Unverifiable, but very probable.


The motives that the parents
may have had are unverifiable.
When I read the tenor of the
message to M. V., three days after
the sitting, he said: "That is
really curious; up to the present
we have found out nothing explan-
atory. This morning, my partner
said : * Do you know my wife's
maid, who comes from the same
part of the country as your son-in-
law that was to be, received the
news of the rupture ? 1 She said :
' How glad I am, for the young
lady's sake. I did not dare say
anything before, but now I can tell
you that M. Raoul 6. has had
Mile X. as his mistress all the time
he has been engaged. I know her,
and she has had a child by him.' "

Mr. V. did not verify this, as he
took no further interest in the
affair,

"At the end of March her parents
will take her on a trip in North
Africa, for change of scene."


96 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


Ex. 4. Re-constitution of an episode in a life obtained by the
percipient through the touch of an object belonging to the person
concerned.

Circumstance and conditions of the stance.

On April 12th, 1916, my friend, M. Louis Mirault, happened to |
a refugee from the invaded provinces, whom he met at the house
M. G. Bd. ( of Strasburg, express his fear as to certain bonds that he 1
hidden in a wall, when the Germans were approaching. Being due
a stance with Mme Morel a few hours later, he asked the man to give 1
something of his, as he might be able to give him news of his pap
Quite astounded at such a proposition the refugee allowed him to
the little knot of ribbon from the interior of his hatband.

At the end of the s6ance (which concerned other things), M. Mirault
placed the tiny piece of ribbon in the hands of Mme Morel in her hypnotic
state, and to shorten the time and not to fatigue the subject, said : "The
person to whom this thing belongs. left his house some hours before the
arrival of the Germans. See what has happened for him since."
The percipient gave his exact description (which I omit), and said :
" What big hands he has 1 enormous, like no one else. I see him mu
disturbed. . . He goes down into a cellar by a stone stair ... he t
down seventeen or eighteen steps. He is carrying a packet containing
valuables, and a little pot containing gold. ... He lights a candle,
displaces some empty kegs and pieces of wood. ... He digs at the foot
of the wall in some yellowish sand, and then into the wall itself, and puts
the packet and the little pot into the hole . . . closes up the masonry,
levels the soil and replaces the barrels and the wood. ... He hears a
noise . . . blows out his candle. . . . The noise ceases ... he relights
his candle . . . leaves cellar and comes up the stair with staring eyes
and an evil face, like some one who has done a bad action. ..."
u What has become of the gold and the papers ? "
" I see, some time later, but before this present time, wrinkled ]
seeking and finding, displacing all that . . . but . . . surprising.
I see also, later ... the man who hid the things quite happy, in |
sion of all . . . yes, all."

Censorship.

Some hours later, M. Mirault, in presence of his friend, M. G., read
these lines to the refugee, who was stupefied and revealed what, except
for these circumstances, he would have told to no one.

The scene described by Mme Morel was exact. The stair has sevent
steps, the sand at foot of the wall is yellowish, the bonds were in a packet,
and he had put the gold, not in a pot, but in a little round iron saucepan.
He had been frightened by a noise, had put out the candle and relighted
it. As to the ferocious looks when he went up the stairs, this, he said,
was probably true — the noise he had heard had irritated him, and he
said, "HI had met anyone on the stairs I would have strangled him."

At this moment M. Mirault looked for the first time at the man's hands;
they were extraordinarily big, with thick fingers such as he had never
seen before.

M. Mirault heard from his friend that this man was violent and liable
to terrible fits of anger.

After the armistice, a letter from the refugee told him that the cellar
had certainly been searched, but, he thought, not the wall, for he found
the packet and the money exactly as he had hidden them.


THE EXTERNAL SEQUENCE OF A LIFE 97


. 5. Delineation of an episode in the life of two persons, one
absent and the other present to the percipient.

In 1916 Count X. left for South America with a power-of-attorncy
from his wife authorizing him to sell her property.

For two years the Countess, who had remained in France, heard from
her husband regularly. He said that he was unexpectedly detained by
the difficulties in the transactions. But from January, 19 18, the letters
ceased, and the silence produced anxiety in the first place, and then
apprehension. Dreading some great misfortune, Mme de X. desired to
try what metagnomy would reveal. She was taken to Mme Morel, into
whose hands, under hypnosis, she gave a letter from her husband asking
what could be told of his health.

le percipient said, M I see this person, a rather tall gentleman, big,
getting grey, hair nearly white. ... He is married to you
are uneasy about him . . . there is no need to be ... he is quite ■
" Please tell me where lie is now."
" Not far off, I see him in this town, in Paris. . .
Mme de X. wished to hear no more. She had the percipient awakened,
lying she could get nothing from her.

Eight days later Mme de X. tried again, with another letter of more
ecent date, which she thought might improve conditions.

ae Morel still said, " I tell you that this gentleman is in this town,
been far away, beyond sea, but has returned some time ago.
it, he is here."

tie de X., without experience of metagnomic subjects, thought this
nust be wrong and asked no more. She cabled to one of her family in
outh America, and received the reply that the Count had left for France
some months before.

Much astonished, she made inquiries and learned that her husband
was living in Paris at a certain address and under conditions exactly
described. Very much hurt, she began proceedings for a separation,
employing Mr. Ch. as her lawyer.

The suit remained unheard for two years for lack of written or tangible
evidence.

During this time, Count X., quite at ease as to the lawsuit, enjoyed a
luxurious life on the proceeds of the joint income, allotting to his wife, who
refused to live with him, a relatively small sum.

Mr. Ch. advised his client to abandon a suit which could lead to nothing,
and could not understand her obstinacy in keeping open pleas that could
end in nothing.

The distinguished lawyer did not know that his client's motive was
not only wounded pride. Having become over-confident in the accuracy
of Mme Morel's visions, she took counsel from her metagnomic faculty
every week, and always received the prediction :

You will win your suit ... it may take some time, but you will
aly regain your property when you are free, for judgment will
be given in your favour. . . . At the last moment, when all seems lost,
proofs of your husband's infidelity will be brought to you ... a packet
of letters, by a woman ; like a servant. You will do nothing towards
getting them, they will be brought to you."

Weeks followed without the prediction being realized. Mme de X.
lost hope. Her husband was so sure that the suit must fail that he
returned to South America on his own business. During this voyage
took an entirely different turn.


98


SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


Besides the conjugal residence, Count X. had a second establishme
where, before and after his marriage, he had a mistress. This won
disappeared from his life, but he kept on the rooms and the servant wh
cleaned them. During her master's absence she ferreted in the furniture
and found a bundle of letters written by the Count to his mistress fifteen
years before. She thought to make a profit out of these, took them to
the Countess, saying, " I know that you cannot succeed in your suit, and
here are some letters that will be useful to you."

Mme de X. and her lawyer looked through the letters, which contained
more than was needed to convince the judge of the husband's dereliction.
The suit was pressed, and ended with a judicial separation. Count X.
was amazed at the unexpected issue. He had no recollection of the old
letters, which he thought had been destroyed long ago. He was, on that
lay at least, a chivalrous gamester. He went to Mme Morel and said,
Without intending it you have been my mortal enemy. You hav
jined me ; but all the same, 1 congratulate you."

To pile up instances would serve no psychological purpose,
^hose that 1 have quoted are sufficient to show that metagnomy
can penetrate individual lives far or near, provided only that in
the latter case contact with some personal belonging or some
knowledge in the mind of the experimenter must be given to
enable the percipient to localize para-normal the f acu ty i
person.

From one point of view there may be legitimate uneasiness that
private lives should be so easily unveiled. The number of ill-
disposed men is so great that one fears to think of the
that might result from general employment of metagnc
subjects.

But from the standpoint of science, the secret history of Mr.
of Mrs. Z. are matters of no interest. The only important matter,
and that which takes precedence of all others, is that certain
individuals are endowed with means of cognition through
psychic channels so different from those which we call normal,
that we cannot, even in theory, find any common measure between
the two modes.

I can imagine a time when the days of mysticism and absurd
scepticism are past, good metagnomic subjects shall be taken
out of the trade of fortune-telling, and selected, judiciously
trained, and rationally prepared, will become, in the hands of men
of science who understand their use, valuable psychic instruments
for the exploration of the latent transcendental basis of human
beings, and perhaps of all that lives.


THE EXTERNAL SEQUENCE OF A LIFE 99


III. The Human Person Cognized is Distant from the
Percipient in Time.

Ex. i. Delineation of a fragment of a deceased personality by
means of a photograph taken some years before death.

Circumstances and conditions.

In 191 2, in the course of experiments to ascertain the function of the
object placed in the hands of metagnomic subjects to connect them with
distant persons, I received from Canon Berthucat, the Principal of the
College of Lourdoueix-Saint-Michel (Indre), a letter containing a photo-
graph in a separate envelope, without any particulars of the person
represented, with a request to ascertain what it could convey to the
metagnomic subject that I was then experimenting with.

On March 8th, Mme Morel being under hypnosis, I took the photograph
from the envelope, and without looking at it, placed it face downwards
in her hand.

My thought can therefore have conveyed nothing ; but having looked
at the photograph at the end of the seance, I am able to say that I learned
nothing from it.

Detail of the sitting.

I said to the percipient, " Speak of the person represented on this
photograph."

" A woman appears to me . . . she vanishes. ... Ah ! there is a man
in her place, over there, very clear ... a dark man appears before me,
he is ill . . . his brain is troubled ... his face is very sad ... he is
ill and in pain ... his head is tired. ... I see him often surrounded
y many persons, quite boys. ... I see hundreds of faces fluttering
und him, all quite young, in uniforms."

I perceived that Mme Morel had directed her metagnomy on the
who had sent me the letter, living among the boys of his college
suffering from digestive troubles and neurasthenic depression.
I said to the subject, " It is not of the person who sent the photograph
at I want you to speak, but of the one photographed."
" Then I go back to the time when the photograph was taken. ... I
see a young man with chestnut hair, very lively, a quick brain, much
imagination, keen looking, full of curiosity, deep. ... I see at a certain
e much struggle . . . great crises. ... I see a man profoundly
uraged and very tired, extremely tired.

Later on I see him ill. I see his head affected and one limb. . . .
Then, very strange, I do not see him like other people ; his image becomes
vague, undefined, fading away . . . now it is nearly invisible. ... I see
an inanimate body. . .

Then she cried out, "I see all the hands, all the heads of those who
have touched this thing. Take it away, I am frightened."

I took the photograph and placed it in my pocket. The subject went
on, "1 see this man stretched out ; he is pale ; strangely pale ; he passes
before me as a body without thought or movement. He is dead ; I now
see him quite close."
w Look at the death scene. See what he died of."
11 1 cannot tell that exactly because I have nothing belonging to him
he has not touched the photograph.

have a strong nervous feeling in my limbs, and in my head. I look


SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN

nto his body ... I see no organ diseased ... I feel fever in the 1
that is all ... a sudden fever . . . the body is burning hot . . . the
cold. It is a sudden illness, a quick transition from full life to death,
feel a nervous pain, something in the head."

On March 17th the Canon sent me the information given below after
reading my account of the stance.

M Herewith the information I have to check Mmc Morel's visions :

H The original of the photograph is dead, as she has seen and said,
was Mr. A , and died aged thirty-eight.

" His character was briefly as described.

"As to the material struggles of which she speaks I know nothing
This gentleman had bought a stockbroker s business.then in very low water.
He made it successful by dint of work and energy. It is possible that he
had times of lassitude and discouragement. During that time he made
it efforts for two years to save the life of his young wife. As to I'
less, that began with violent headache. His brain was affected and I
while one limb was paralysed. He died of meningitis or some acu
ebral disease, the doctors could not quite say. Death came in fift)


Ex. 2. Metagnomic delineation of the final episode in the life of
a para-normal by contact with an object touched some
before death.

circumstances and conditions.

On March 13th, 1915, M. £mile Boirac, Rector of the Academy of Dijon,
asked me in course of conversation to give him an instance of Mme Morel's
metagnomic output.

I said, " The best example would be an impromptu experiment. Hav
you anything belonging to a person known to you well enough to j
you to judge of what she may say ? M

Boirac took some papers from - his pocket, hesitated in his choice,
finally handed to me a little manual of Esperanto.

Detail of the stances.

In absolute ignorance of the person whose book this might be, I put
it into the hands of Mme Morel, hypnotized, asking her to speak of the
life of the person to whom it belonged.

She said, M A young man appears to me, tall and rather slight. There
is nothing very characteristic in his appearance but his eyes, which are
not like those of other people. There is nothing wrong with them, but
their form is peculiar. . . .

" I see this young man for a long while in a place where there is
danger . . . he was there with many other men. . . . Then one day, one
morning, he departs with others ... a long march ... he then goes
a train. I see him a little later with others in a kind of hole ... he is
standing up with shining eyes. ... I hear much noise. ... I
in his brain ; he goes up. . . . What a notet I hear ! He feels a blow
falls . . . gets up . . . receives another blow, and falls afresh with oth<
on a road ... on one side I see grass and cultivated land, on the other
side grey mud. He is wounded in the throat and head by a piece of iron.
... I see a hole on one side ... he is in pain ... he remains long on
the ground. ... I see him white and pale . . . then there is quiet . . .
there are men there who take him up gently ... he is tall and heavy
, then they wrap him up . . . he moves a little . . , they take him


m


THE EXTERNAL SEQUENCE OF A LIFE 101


away in a kind of carriage with other wounded men . . . there is con-
fusion ... a man bends over him and takes some papers and something
round and hard . . . they are keeping this wounded man as a prisoner
. . . he still lives . . . then everything is blurred. ... I no longer hear
his breath. ... I see no more. He is not far from the place where h«
fell. . . . His body will be found ... it is near a church. ... I see
vaults near him . . . like a quarry. ... To right and left there are
woods. One can walk under these stones, they are as it were vaults. . . .
To find him one must go towards the frontage of the church, going up the
road nearly facing the church, and looking in the wood . . . there are
many there ... he is there. . . . There is no stream there ; the earth
is dry."

Censorship.

On March 15th I sent M. Boirac the account above. On the 24th he
wrote to me :

" The little manual of Esperanto that I gave you was taken from the
civilian clothing left at my house by the son of one of my friends. The
young man was afterwards a second lieutenant in the 27th Regiment,
killed or missing on December 12th in a trench attack at the Bois- Brule.
G. M. was aged twenty-five or twenty-six, tall, slight, face rather long,
his eyelids had a slight fold, like the Chinese, serious and quiet expres-
.... As far as is known he was wounded leading the attack, but
inued at the head of his men, then fell at the edge of the German
trench which is still in the hands of the enemy.

" The first wound seems to have been in the shoulder, the second in the
head. The body is supposed to have been taken up by the Germans and
buried by them, but there is no certainty. He was returned as 1 missing.'
The vision is therefore correct, with some particulars that cannot be
ascertained. I can state that the little book was touched by G. M. some
months before the scene to which it gave rise. It had remained with
M. Boirac while this young man passed through the last stages of his life."

This simple fact (touch of the object), which recurs again and
again in most cases of metagnomy of this kind, is to be borne in
d on account of its importance when we come to consider
function of the articles placed in the hands of percipients.

Ex. 3. Metagnomic delineations by two percipients under different
experimental conditions of a deceased human personality.

Circumstances and conditions.

While proceeding with a series of experiments with different per-
cipients on deceased human personalities, Captain C gave me on

May 17th, 1922, a letter in a closed envelope only telling me that it con-
tained a letter written by a man now dead. This with the intention that
the sensitive should not bring her faculty to bear on anyone but the
writer of the letter, as often happens when the experimenter operates
entirely unknown matter.

never knew the actual contents of the letter either before or after

seance ; and Captain C told me that it would not have shown me

connection between it and the revelations made by the percipient.

s7 of ths stance.

May 1 8th I placed the letter in the hands of Mme Viviana, hypno-
. She does not know Captain C nor the writer of the letter. I


All that was said was, " Tell me all that you can
letter."

After having crumpled the letter in her hands, she said :
* 4 Instead of feeling moisture as when I touch your hand, I feel a (
impression of dryness, like a dry hand. It is curious what I feel. 1 1
go back into the past. ... If I were awake and wished to see this person
1 could not ... it is not a living person . . . that person does not
exist now. . . . It is annihilation. ... I have a cold sweat, as in a fever
It is a dead man. Oh, this fever ! He was a soldier . . . yes, in the war.
It is a man rather swarthy, sun-burnt. I do not say that was his usual
appearance, but I see him bronzed. The eyes are notable ; I have th«
impression of a very direct gaze.

" He was combative, strong-willed, having some authority, a person-
ality . . . unsentimental. . . . Intelligent and good . . . energetic, ami-
, and correct in his manner. He was a believer, a Catholic, a man witl
tendency to mysticism. When he was sad or troubled he used
ly. Oh, not bigoted. A high-minded man, not undii

is a basis of faith, he was brought up to that.
" I have the feeling of some one brought up in a religious family, with
convictions and religious habits . . . and in a country where they give
their boats the names of saints, as in Brittany.

" He had a brother rather older than himself in whom he placed great
confidence.

"He had one cause of disquiet. ... A woman whom he dearly loved.
. . She was his only anxiety . . . there was a little child too, but th§
child was not uppermost in his thoughts. ... I have the feeling of
swaying, rolling, humidity and water in the surroundings, as if he were
on the water ; my lips are salt, as if I were on the sea.

M He would seem to have the chevrons of an officer, but few ; he was
young. The war was not ended, but the end was near ; it was just at
end. Just when all was clearing up, death and night came for him.
" He did not die from a blow or a wound. ... It is suffocation
Jden pain in the head. ... He does not die in a bed. . . . 19 ;
looking after him ? ... In any case it is too late ... it is finished ; it I
night.

Round him I see small houses being built . . . there are men, soldiers,
that . . . what do you call the — engineers . . . pickaxes and
tents; yes, there are tents. ..."

Censorship.

The letter that Captain C had given me had been written by his

ther in May, 1918, a lieutenant in the Chasseurs d'Afrique on the
transport Saint- Anne, in the Mediterranean, as he was rejoining his corps
in Macedonia from leave.

The correspondences with reality are as under, in the order spoken
by the percipient :

Lieut. C was born in Brittany in a family of strong religious

ictions, and from his training he had firm Christian beliefs.
He had a brother rather older than himself — the captain who gave me
the letter — and also a wife and one child. He was very anxious about
her by reason of the risks of the war.

His letter was written on the Saint- Anne in a rough sea, well described
by the percipient.

He was taken ill, they think of influenza, when the Eastern Army


n of


was


THE EXTERNAL SEQUENCE OF A LIFE 108


advancing to the Danube, and died at Semendria (Serbia), November
28th, 1918, just when the armistice had been declared and military opera-
tions in the Balkans were about to cease.

The family knew indirectly that he had died from a febrile disease with
pulmonary complications, under circumstances that left him practically
without medical aid. Whether he died on a stretcher or in a tent is not
ascertainable. Numerically, the analysis is as follows :


Circumstances and conditions.

On May 22nd, that is four days after the seance above described, I put

Mme C , the sister-in-law of Lieut. C , in presence of another

metagnomic percipient in order to compare the number and quality of
details that might be obtainable under such different conditions.

The percipient selected was Mme Payroutet, who was left in ignorance
that I was bringing anyone to her till the time of the stance. All that she
knew was that I should be with her at 3 p.m. on May 22nd.

Detail of the stance.

After the usual courtesies, I said, " You will tell me to-day about a

relation of this lady." Mme C and the percipient did not know each

other, and had never met.

According to her custom, Mme Peyroutet threw the raw white of an
egg into a glass of water, and after a moment contemplated this little world
of light and forms. She soon exclaimed :

" Why ! I again see what I saw before your arrival. About an hour
ago I was amusing myself by looking for the purpose of your experiment
to-day, and I saw a dead soldier and a widow . . . you want me to speak
for the widow."

The relation towards whom we wished to direct her faculty was certainly
the officer's widow ; our intention was to verify what the percipient
would say relative to the dead man in connection with a living person.
Mme Peyroutet continued her metagnomic perceptions partly by looking
in the glass of water, partly by manipulating the cards. (The reader
being aware of what is under discussion, I shall give such censorship as
may be necessary along with the narrative.)

" This widow lady has troubles . . . many troubles . . . there was
the death ... of a military man. ... I see by her a son, a boy, who
has been ill. (A boy five years old just recovering from whooping-cough.)
The dead soldier is sunburnt ; chestnut hair . . . The lower part of the
face is wilful ... he had a beautiful smile which corrected the hardness
of the chin. (Correct.)

" He was not born in Paris . . . there was water, the sea. (Coast ot
Brittany.) His family was pious. He was brought up by religious persons
or by priests, then in a place from which he was not allowed out. (His
family was very religious. He was brought up in a clerical school and then
in a special kind of military college.)


" What changes he has had ! Many travels ; an active youth. (He
~t to Tunis in his eighteenth year.)

' He rode well. Oh, what gallops! (Much equitation, military service
the cavalry.)


Characteristic details given by the percipient
TJnverifiable ......

Verified as correct .
Found erroneous .


29
4

25


Ex 4.


104 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


u Now I see the form of a ship. He must have gone overseas. I see
hammocks round him. Then I see a country with plains and heights ;
water. I see an ' M * ; did the name of the country he went to begin with
1 M 1 ? He went about much there, and developed there. (In the second
phase of the war he went by sea to join the Eastern Army ; a long stay
in Macedonia.) Oh ! he has been in battle, many battles I He has often
escaped death. (He took part in the war on the French front, then in the
East from the beginning to the end.)

n He managed his affairs well. Before leaving his wife and child he
arranged everything in writing. (Correct.) When he died he had just
come to another town ; he came to a town where I see much water. (He
fell ill and died on his arrival in Semendria on the Danube ; the French
Army had just passed through Serbia.)

"The notification of death took some time to arrive. He died abroad.
It was almost a sudden death. His widow received the notification of
death before hearing of his illness. (The notification reached the widow
two months after the death, and she never heard of the illness.)

"Oh, what fever! ... his head was affected ... a congestion or
something in the head. An operation was spoken of, but was not carried
out. (The family had no details of the illness. The diagnosis was ' in-
fluenza with pulmonary congestion ' : the word ' influenza ' covers many
uncertainties.)

" He was buried far away, where he died. (Correct.)

" He was robbed after his death." (None of his possessions reached
his family. It was said that the Serbs took all he had.)

The rest of the seance had reference to the widow, the brother, and the
sister-in-law then present.

Summary of results :


Two percipients have therefore given information describing

the personality of Lieut. C , in certain episodes of his life, and

more particularly of his death ; the one by a letter written by
him and without any possible mental suggestion by the experi-
menter, and the other by the presence of a relation of the
deceased officer.

In the latter case, as in other similar ones; transmission of
thought suggests itself as the explanation. But the second
experiment shows clearly that the metagnomic perception is
practically the same when the experimenter is in complete
ignorance of the personality delineated.

Ex. 5. Delineation of the last episode in the life of a deceased
person, the experimenter and any other living person being
absolutely ignorant of it.

In the facts previously quoted, whether the experimenter knew or did
not know the person concerned, there is always a disposition to think
that the phenomenon may have consisted in an unconscious transmission
of thought between the living, near or far, since the matter revealed was
in the thoughts of some living person or other.


Characteristic details given by the percipient
Un verifiable ......

Details verified as correct ....

Considered erroneous ....


.jo

3

37


o


I shall now cite a fact which will prove :

i) That mctagnomy does not need the thoughts of the living to

eate the life of the deceased.
(2) That the function of the objects touched by the percipients to
their faculties upon a person living or dead, is not, as some have
vely imagined, that the object registers some scene like a photographic
te, nor by some obscure memory resident in matter. The object used
the instance subjoined was not at the scene which it, nevertheless, was
the means of revealing.

On March 18th, 1914, M. Louis Mirault, manager of the estates of Baron
Jaubert, living in the Chateau de Givry, near Cours-les-Barres (Cher),
wrote to me to enquire whether it might be possible to trace an old man
who had disappeared since March 2nd, and of whom no trace could be
found, despite long and active search.

I accepted, and M. Mirault brought me a neck-wrapper belonging to
the old man taken from a wardrobe. In order not to complicate the experi-
ment I asked him to tell me nothing about the old man's disappearance,
but only to give me an exact description of him, so that I might be able
to recognize the details that the sensitive might give, and to distinguish
these from perceptions relating to other people who had touched the
neckerchief. He only told me that the man was eighty- two years of age
and walked with a stoop. Nothing more.

I was up to that time ignorant of the old man's existence. Concerning
the estate of Baron Jaubert, which covers about 2750 acres of woods,
I knew no more than can be seen from the road to the chateau.
These were the conditions under which on Monday, March 23rd, I
the neck-wrapper in the hands of Mme Morel, in deep hypnosis,
Paris. She had never been into the department of Cher.
" Look, I said, for the person whose neckerchief I place in your hand."
Morel first described a person whom I recognized as myself, then
another man who seemed to be M. Mirault, then that of a woman
om I thought might be the daughter-in-law of the old man, and, lastly,
t of the old man himself. Here are her words, verbatim.
" I see a man lying at full length, his eyes are closed, as if sleeping,
but he does not breathe ... he is dead. ... He is not in bed, but on the
ground . . . the ground is damp, very damp . . . flat ground, uncul-
tivated. . . . There is water not far off ... a large tree . . . some very
big thing quite near . . . something very bushy — a wood."

■ ' Follow that man on the day he went there. Look for the way he went."
'* I see a country house. . . . He leaves that ... he walks. . . . He
is ill, his breathing is difficult . . . and his brain is confused. ... He
leaves the path . . . goes into a thicket, a wood ... he sees much
water near by . . . he falls on the damp ground . . . then after a little
time he breathes no more. It is not far from the house to the place where
he is lying. . . . Follow the path from the house towards the water.
There are two paths from the house, one goes up and the other down
towards the water. The latter is the one to take : he went that way."

" Describe the place where he is lying and give a description so as to
find the place."

" I see blocks of stone . . . very large trees . . . and water. ... I
the body ... it is lying on the wet ground. ... He is bald, has a
nose ... a little white hair above his ears and at the back of his
. wearing a long coat . . . soft shirt . . . hands closed. ... I
• finger which has been hurt . . . very old and wrinkled . . . pendant
. . Forehead much furrowed, very high and open ... he is lying
his right side, one leg bent under him."


106 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


"Why did he fall there?"

" He threw himself down . . . confused ideas. ... He fled from his
house ■ a troubled brain ... he had a notion of dying ... he wished to
die and lay down on the ground ... it was then damp, but the rains have
made it much wetter."

" Blocks of stone " in a chalky district where rocks are not common,
M large trees," and " a piece of water " : I thought that these data should
enable M. Mirault to find the body if the description tallied with the facts.
The percipient, moreover, had exhausted all she could give at a first trial.
I gave her a rest, and directed her lucidity to other matters.

These details sent by letter caused great astonishment at the exact
description of the man, but they did not help. No rocks were known.
There were several ponds on the estate which had been dragged and whose
borders had been minutely explored. Large trees were very numerous in
these woods. But the assertion that the body was not far from the old
man's house stimulated fresh search, which yielded no results. Not till
then did M. Mirault tell me the circumstances attending the old man's
disappearance and the sequel.

M. £tienne Lerasle, aged eighty-two, but still active though mentally
enfeebled by age, had left his son's house on March 2nd for his daily walk.
When he had not returned by nightfall, which had never happened before,
the family and their neighbours searched and shouted, but to no purpose.
During the following days the villagers searched the more willingly that
they thought the old man lost or ill, but still living. This went on for
several days. On Sunday, March 5th, at the request of the Mayor of
Cours-les-Barres, eighty men searched the forest and the neighbouring
district without success. Nothing was found to indicate the way M.
Lerasle had gone.

M. Mirault, who had been absent from Givry before the old man's dis-
appearance, caused fresh search to be made on his return March 13th.
Ponds were dragged, but nothing found. On the 18th he asked for meta-
gnomic help.

The results of the first sitting were interesting, but of no assistance.
All parts of the forest are more or less alike ; they are large quadrilaterals
of thick undergrowth, divided by rides and paths all much alike. The
visit that I then made to the place, already so thoroughly explored, made
me despair of getting from the percipient anything that would distinguish
one part of the woods from another. It was not my convictions that led
to ultimate success, but that of M. Mirault, who thought that as the
description of the man himself was so accurate the other data should
be equally so. The difficulty was to find some landmarks, and this I
thought insurmountable.

My interest in the matter was not very strong ; it seemed to me less
striking than others, and, being very busy, I entrusted M. Lucien Galloy,
my brother-in-law, an engineer in Arts and Manufactures, with further
enquiries through Mme Morel, with whose faculty he was well acquainted,
and was also familiar with metagnomic psychology.

He received from M. Mirault the map of the district to a scale of
1 /so.ooo and a plan of the estate to a scale of 1 /5000, on which to follow
Mme Morel's indications. M. Galloy knew neither the old man nor his
family, and as concerning the place, only, like myself, as much as can be
seen from the principal road from Cours-les-Barres to the chateau — the
mass of forest on the one side and the landscape of the valley of the
Loire on the other. The second sitting took place on March 30th, and
gave the following results :

" Look for the old man to whom this neckerchief belongs."


THE EXTERNAL SEQUENCE OF A LIFE 107

"I see an aged man ... his face is much spoiled, decayed, blackish
. . . he is lying down, stretched out on his right side, one leg bent . . .
dead. He is lying in a thicket, in a thick wood. ... By him I see a great
stone, a small rock ... a little further there are other stones. . . ."

" Look for the road he followed when he left his house for the last
time."

" I see large buildings, several houses. . . . There is a wide avenue
towards these houses. . . . The man comes from these houses . . . he
takes a small path which goes downwards. . . . He walks along it and
comes to a pond . . . goes straight on . . . passes in front of other
buildings . . . turns slightly to the left. . . . In front he sees many trees
and thickets . . . from the road he follows there is a wide landscape. . . .
He passes near a small house. . . . There is a barrier and a place where
three paths meet ... he takes to the left, follows that left-hand road,
and goes into the wood by a little path that is by the nearest of the small
houses. . . .

" On this left-hand road there is a hut containing tools . . . and beside
it a pile of cut wood. . . . This hut was a woodman's house . . . between
it and the house at the cross-roads there is a bare space. . . . The man
took a small path that leaves the road. ... He is an old man with an
elligent, furrowed face . . . tufts of white hair, hanging lips ... he

not go far into the wood . . . he feels ill, lies down, sleeps and dies.
" The hut is not visible from where he is, it is hidden by the trees; to
the body one must follow that path ... the corpse will soon be

s second stance confirmed the previous one and gave surprisingly
minute details of the direction taken by the old man till he left the main
road. As neither the plan nor the map gave the side-paths, M. Galloy
did not ask for more, thinking the data given sufficient. This was to be
regretted, for when the detail was followed out it was found that two paths
started at the same point of the road, one to the right, the other to the
left. The data of the stones was of no use, no one knew of any. The
M water " was equally useless, for the heavy rains had made many pools
which might correspond to the visions. On the other hand, the son of the
deceased refused to accept the itinerary said to have been followed during
all day on March 2nd ; he had been working near the house at the cross-
roads, and that his father, who walked very slowly, could not have passed
without being seen. All the people of the house confirmed this. In
ault of more exact description it was decided to do nothing ; the old
man was dead and there was no reason for haste. The particulars to be
given at a third sitting were awaited. This took place April 6th, M. Galloy

" Look for the person to whom this belongs."

see a man of ordinary height . . . white hair . . . rather bald . . .
tuce . . . long nose . . . toothless . . . pendant lips . . . dead . . .
g on his right side . . . blackish face, one leg bent . . . very wet . . .
ter on his face. ... He is not in the water, but there is much water
there in round pools . . . many trees ... a large stone near him . . .
big trees. ... He has a flannel shirt in two colours . . . open collar. . . .
I see it quite well ... he is surrounded with undergrowth."
" Look for the exact way he took when he left the house."
"He leaves the houses . . . passes by the side of them . . . goes
towards the other houses . . . reaches the cross-ways where three roads
meet, in front of which there is a house. ... He passes a barrier . . .
hesitates ... he has an old stick in his hand ... he taps the ground
with it . . . his mind is confused . . . he goes to the right on a descending


108 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


road . . . hesitates . . . returns to the cross-ways leaning on his stick
. . . takes the left-hand road . . . walks on its right side, holding his
stick and a check handkerchief . . . passes near a fence and goes into
the wood by a path whicli is barely visible on a level with the road . . .
goes there with the intention of hiding. . . .

" From where the body is, the house and the hut are not visible J one
must go back to the road to see them. . . . He did not go far into the
wood . . . near the place where the ground slopes down somewhat. . . ."

This time the search was restricted to the square of undergrowth
served by the path so exactly indicated, and if the visions were correct,
the body should easily be found. A large brook goes through this thicket,
swelled here and there into round pools after heavy rain. M. Mirault
ordered five men to search this part of the wood, following the brook.
Soon one of them, seeing a projecting rock, cried out, " There is the stone
she saw . . . there is water close by ; the body might be there."

A few yards further on he saw the body, quite in the open, though a
whole number of villagers who knew the ground well, searching for a month,
had failed to find it.

Informed by telephone, I reached the place an hour later ; and in
company with M. Mirault and other persons, made a minute investigation.

The details have been fully described in the Annates des Sciences
fsychiques for April, i«>ia, with a plan of the ground and nine photographs.
I therefore here give it abbreviated.

Place where the body was found.

It was stretched out in the middle of the thicket. Ten yards away
one can see what looks like a moss-covered rock, but is really a huge
tree-stump quite out of the ground. The ground where the body is lying
is flat. Four yards away it slopes to a pool in a brook, the only brook in
this part of the forest. On the further bank there are other moss-grown
masses, smaller than the other, but also resembling stones.

A few yards distant several large trees, and forty yards away a tree,
said by M. Mirault to be the biggest in the whole torest.

The surroundings are exactly as described by Mine Morel.

The corpse.

The face is exactly as described. The old man wears a long coat, soft
shirt, turn-down collar, in two colours, black stripes on white. Large
check handkerchief.

The itinerary taken.

Easily verified it cannot have been any other than that described.
From the house where the old man lived to the place where the body
was found the distance is about 650 yards in a straight line, and
about three-fifths of a mile by the road and path. 14 Not far," said the
percipient.

I have chosen this instance rather than others more sensational,
because it is simple, typical of the class of these perceptions, undeniable,
and because I can quote names and places, and the facts were witnessed
by a large number of persons.
The reader should particularly notice the power of percipients to seize
the detail regarding a dead man otherwise than through the thoughts
the living or an obscure memory contained by objects presented.
I emphasize that the neckerchief, taken from a wardrobe and not from
the corpse, enabled Mme Morel to answer the questions put to her, concern-
ing the last moments of M. Lerasle ; but from this same link there could


THE EXTERNAL SEQUENCE OF A LIFE 100


have been gathered manv other episodes in his life, known (or unknown)
to living persons. I make this statement having verified it in analogous
cases.

And I say further (having experienced the fact) that the mere presence
of a member of his family would have aroused the same perceptions,
without any material object being handed to the percipient. Such objects
(as will be seen in the sequel), localize the metagnomic perception on a
human subject and do not act as a register of events at which for the
most part they were not present, as in the case above cited.

T be foregoing facts, like others that are scattered through this
book, have been chosen only as examples out of many which
would make several volumes. They are not selected to convince
people of the reality of the faculty of hypercognition which
anyone can verify, but to give examples of the types of meta-
gnomic output on human personalities.

From these few examples it will haw Urn noted that per-
cipients present very diverse aspects. Some exert their faculty
under hypnosis ; others, and mostly, in (apparently) a waking
state.

When working on an individual close at hand, some need to
touch the person ; for others mere proximity suffices ; oth
find an object or a paper from that person more satisfactory.

When they work on a person distant in space or time, m
percipients require an object coming from the individual to
cognized ; w r ith some few it is enough that the experimenter
should be thinking of the person. Among percipients working in
what seems a waking state some only need their own mental
impulse. Others excite the faculty by endless devices, of which
a mere list gives but a slight notion. Some look at the hands,
some the writing, others use playing-cards, a crystal ball, a glass
of water, a candle-flame, coffee-grounds spilt on a plate, a heap
of pins thrown on the carpet, etc. etc. I was told of an Arab
who was one of the attractions of Biskra, whose proceeding
gives the essence of all others. He spreads on the ground a layer
of sand from the desert, which he keeps in a bag, asking the
person of whom he is to speak to place a hand upon it. With his
forefinger he then makes a number of little holes, rubs the whole
out, begins afresh, and then makes precise and often stupefying
revelations.

I merely mention in passing these strange aspects of meta-
gnomy at work ; it will be seen later what they consist in, and
I now pass to other considerations with which I close this
chapter.

Among the manifestations of supernormal cognition, there is
one from which we revolt, partly by reason of the specific function
of our intelligence and partly from opinions and beliefs that have
many sources. It is Precognition of the Future.


110 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


Yet nothing is easier to verify by exact experiment if anyone
ill give time and an open mind to the subject. It is worth the
trouble.

In his Traite dc Mci(tpsyciu\/ne Professor Charles Richet 1
closes his chapter on Premonition with these words : "A
definite conclusion follows from these facts. . . . Premonition
is a demonstrated verity, It is a strange, paradoxical, and
jly absurd fact, but one that we are compelled to admit
. . the explanation will come (or will not come) later. The
acts are none the less authentic and undeniable. There are
premonitions. 11

Twelve years of personal experiment with many metagnomic
percipients and a considerable number of persons have given me
absolute certainty that there are human beings who can foretell
the future of other persons. I say the future of other persons,
I do not say the future in general, which I have not verified
personally. 1 am certain of this just as I am certain of what we
call the earth, the sun, the stars, minerals, vegetables, and
animals. It is a fact verifiable by experiment against which our
^judgments will not avail now that men of science have the
urage to investigate the fact.

In this connection I think it useful to show where intellectual
ystematisation of scientific dogmas may lead. The instance
11 serve as one covering all systematisations on all varieties of
opinion.

Two men, eminent alike for their intelligence, their knowledge
and their position in the University, had, towards the end
1907, the good fortune (which they misused) — the opportune
of experimenting with Madame Fraya, a highly gifted meta-
gnomic subject now well known. These two men were Alfred
Hi net, a professor in charge of the laboratory of Experimental
Psychology at the Sorbonne, and N. Vaschide, director of the
laboratory of Pathological Psychology in the School of Higher
tudies. A. Binet thought that Madame Fraya drew her
formation from palmistry, and after the manner of the ancients,
started off from a speculative opinion, and put on one side every-
thing else, not even verifying the reality of the premonition.
He said :

" If we are compelled to admit that events in the life of a person which
we may conjecture to be the direct consequences of his character can be
predicted or guessed, it is no longer the same for events which are not
effects of the personality. We live in a physical and moral world in which
we are both active and passive ; we produce effects on others and
influenced by them. We act and are acted upon. Very often our liv

1 Traiti de Metapsychique ( Alcan) , 1 022, pp. 509-5 1 o. Translation published
Messrs. Collins under the title Thirty Years of Psychical Research.


THE EXTERNAL SEQUENCE OF A LIFE 111


are disturbed by external events which are as unforeseen and as foreign to
our moral character as the lightning that strikes a house. Therefore a
person who knows our psychology would be incapable of foreseeing such
an event. Palmists are therefore taking a wrong road. They ought to
follow the reasoning given above. But nothing stops them ; these im-
prudent persons predict the future of their clients, the whole of their
future, without discrimination." (Binet, L' Annie psycholog\quc % 1908,
P. 393 )

Having thought thus, it did not even occur to him to verify
experimentally whether or not precognition of the events in a
life -so pregnant with biological and philosophical consequences
that there is no other to be compared with it— were true. The
only use that he knew how to make of the conspicuously endowed
percipient introduced to him by M. Jean Finot, was to ask her
to say from the aspect of the hands of some children shown her
through a curtain, which were intelligent and which were back-
ward. His conclusion was that their is some truth in palmistry.
To apply rules of Cheiromancy to a subject like Madame Fraya is
to invite an endless series of errors. Vaschide, younger and less
petrified in mind by scholastic prejudgments, saw that palmistry
is not everything, and that behind the few indications suggested
by the hands, there was something more, which he called intui-
tion." But he was much embarrassed when he had to formulate
a considered judgment on precognition in his book, £ssai dc la
Psychologic dc la Main. He says :

" Predictions of the future must be received with caution (p. 473).
I have seen Mme Fraya and others reveal the past of persons she did not
know and make wonderful prophecies as to their future . . . there are
persons endowed with a special intuitive sensitiveness who can perhaps
anticipate the capricious laws of chance ... it may therefore be that
nervous subjects endowed with the mysterious faculty of ' intuition 1
may seize upon unknown data, data coming from the unknown (p. 483).
Formerly I used to smile when listening to the prophecies of fortune-
tellers ; but since I have studied these problems, I still smile at the con-
j^ctural predictions and the naive affirmations of future events ; never-
theless, 1 have verified the large amount of knowledge and psychological
data that an organ so complex as the hand may furnish " (p. 487).

After reading the thirty-five pages that this excellent psychol-
ogist has devoted to precognition it is not possible to be sure
whether he holds this phenomenon to be true or not. He says
he has seen wonderful predictions, but he speaks as though he
had not verified them. Vaschide feared the ill-natured remarks
of his fellows at the University. What he dared not say has
been unfortunately verified by his destiny : at the foot of one
of the pages in which he has clothed his hesitation in a multi-
tude of phrases, there is this note :

Mme Fraya predicted to the author of this work during the winter of
1904 that he would die of pneumonia in his thirty-third year. The


112 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN

Countess tie Noailles, who was present, Mme Fraya, and N. Vaschide
himself confirmed this prediction, which, unhappily, came true October
13th, 1907. A year before his death, a gipsy from Roumania told him
in 1906 that he would die in the following year. (Note by his widow.)

Precognition of the future of a human individual is an experi-
mental fact. It is so contrary to our mutable opinions that
I readily understand that it should not be accepted till after
severe experimental test. Btrt 1 own that I am astonished that
on the grounds of our paltry " knowledge," men should refuse
d priori to verify that human beings possess a transcendental
plane of thought not bounded by cerebral functions, and therefore
perhaps not extinguished by the death of the body.

We now know what kind of phenomena mctagnomic subjects
can produce when their faculty is directed upon a human
objective. We shall next study :

(1) The psychological process by which the phenomena
produced ;

(2) From what source percipients draw their information ;

(3) What are the psychological causes of error in the function-
ing of their faculty.


1


PART III

METAGNOMIC PERCIPIENTS IN THE EXERCISE
OF THEIR FACULTY

CHAPTER I

THE DAWN OF THE FACULTY OF SUPERNORMAL

COGNITION

THE faculty of supernormal cognition, in persons highly
endowed and exercising it in what seems to be a waking
state and without artificial aids, usually appears
spontaneously. One day, in presence of some person,
the percipient finds himself suddenly aware, whether by means
of strongly representative mental images or by hallucinations
(visions, words mentally heard, phrases impulsively spoken, or
otherwise) of moral or material facts in the past, in course of
development, or in the future, more or less closely concerning
the person present, under conditions such that these facts could
not be normally known.

The recurrence of such phenomena, especially in the presence
of persons oppressed by anxieties, makes the sensitive aware
of his exceptional aptitude, and if he cultivates it voluntarily,
he becomes able to use it at will, provided that he places himself
in conditions more or less similar to those under which it was
first discovered.

Bert Reese, the celebrated German- American percipient,
manifested his extraordinary gifts from the age of six years.

M His marvellous faculties so terrified the people of the little town
where he was born that they deserted the shop where his father
sold miscellaneous goods, and to avoid ruin he had to send his
son away to Posen. The people of the country town were filled
with horror ; they considered the child a wizard and possessed
by the devil " (Felix Hollaender, Ann. Set. psych., Sept., 1913).

Reese was precocious. Most of the metagnomic subjects that
I have met with only show their faculty after adolescence, and
sometimes much later.

Sometimes the appearance of the faculty of hypercognition
is accidental and involuntary.

8 113


114 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


A person may be predisposed to hypnosis, and some day some-
one, for amusement, curiosity, study, or for curative purposes,
puts him into the hypnotic state. The usual tests of somnambulic
suggestion are made, and if by chance he is questioned about some
individual there present, or if absent known to the subject or to
the questioner, surprising information is received, which is not,
as in most cases of such, mere guesswork, but the delineation of
facts admitting of verification. Such persons, though devoid of
exceptional psychic faculty in their waking state, show them-
selves possessed of real metanormal faculty when hypnotized.

Moreover (and this fact is worth noting), subjects who show
strong metagnomic faculty when hypnotized are so prone to
somnambulism that their faculty often comes to the surface
during a spontaneous access of such sleep. Afterwards it can be
used at will, by hypnosis producing artificial somnambulism.

Another noteworthy cause of the dawn of hypercognition is
the practice of the so-called occult sciences for purposes of
divination. Cartomancy, cheiromancy ... all the 11 — mancies,"
place those who practise them in a condition to exercise their
minds in penetrating individual human lives. It is readily
understandable that this should bring latent metagnomic facul-
ties into action, and also that those who so operate should think
that they draw from the fall of the cards, from the lines of the
hand, etc. etc., information that really comes from elsewhere,
as we shall see in the sequel.

Other metagnomic subjects have intentionally superinduced
the latent faculty by methods which they have seen others use.
They use, and continue to use, the crystal ball, or the mirror to
excite visual hallucination, automatic writing, and so forth.

But at the present day the capital cause which brings meta-
gnomic faculty to light is the belief in spiritualism and endeavours
at communication between the living and the dead.

By using the table and raps, the planchette whose point moves
over an alphabet, by automatic writing, and so on, spiritualists
think to put their subconscious mind at the disposal of dis-
carnate spirits, when they are really placing it, in all cases of
truly metanormal output, under the same influence which directs
metagnomic faculty exercised on a human objective, without
any spiritist cultivation.

The spiritualist practices give nothing that admits of positive
checks, more than are given by phenomena obtained by meta-
gnomy scientifically used : they are the means of revealing
faculties which would otherwise remain latent.

According then as a person is capable of becoming a
metagnomic subject while awake, under hypnosis or by the
help of artifices, the first manifestations of the faculty may be


FACULTY OF SUPERNORMAL COGNITION 115


spontaneous, or the result of a happy conjunction of circum-
stances, or the end of endeavours to acquire it.

The greater number of metagnomic subjects leave their
faculties unused. Some make a trade of them, and if highly
endowed these are (for those who know how to use them) psychic
1 struments for verifying the existence and ascertaining the
al functioning of supernormal cognition.


1 1
tl

o


Neurosis and Metagnomic Subjects

Among men of science who have verified certain phenomena
of supernormal cognition the opinion is widespread that this
para-physiological power is a result of neuroses. This opinion
has arisen among medical men whose profession has brought
them unexpectedly in contact with patients who during their
malady, and in consequence of that malady, have developed
metagnomic manifestations. True for such cases and for analo-
gous cases, it is not valid as a generalization. This point must be
closely looked into.

Nearly all the facts of supernormal cognition directed to a
human objective whose details I have read in the scientific or
hilosophic Reviews have been related by physicians, and have
produced by patients suffering from pathological disturb-
of a neuropathic nature.
The cases of autoscopy cited by Drs. Sollier, Comar, Buvat
d others, the case of delineation of the murder cited by Dr.
Duffay, quoted in the first part of this book, were all observed
with hysterical patients placed under hypnosis for remedial or
other purposes. It seems undeniable that neuroses can generate
metagnomy. But this must not be made into a generalisation
that every person endowed with the faculty of hypercognition
owes it to a pathological state of the brain.
Among the pathological states known by the name of
neuroses," there is one which sometimes, though seldom,
originates hypercognition — it is that more or less profound and
more or less extensive sleep of the cerebral functions, misnamed
" hysteria" ; this sleep sometimes goes so far as to produce local
paralysis or even general lethargy, but sometimes takes the som-
nambulic form in which the central psychic control is eclipsed,
leaving the cerebral mechanism to work unchecked.

When hysteria takes the somnambulic form it may produce
etagnomic manifestations if the patient also receives a special
xtension of sensitiveness due to the morbid state.
The psycho-physiological conditions for metagnomy are very
y found in hysterical somnambulism, since alienists, Bernheim


116 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


among others, have never met with it ; and on that account,
and that only, deny its existence and even its possibility.

On the other hand, what is frequently met with in pathological
somnambulism is fantastical creation and hysterical romance.

How many inconsistent judgments would be avoided if these
two functional modes of thought were known and differentiated

Hysterical somnambulism, as many current works have estab-
lished, is shown by the more or less complete eclipse of the
psychic functions that are called 11 superior " — voluntary direc-
tion and conscious control in the exercise of thought. The
psychism of the somnambulist left to the undisciplined genesis
of ideas, works uncontrolled under the influences that come to it
from within or from without.

In some very rare cases the patient has, either by reason of
the malady, or as a native potentiality, an extension of sensi-
tiveness beyond the ordinary scale of sensorial registration,
connecting him more closely with the environment or with his
own organism. In such cases the psychic activity, released from
all control, is moved by sensations paranormally received, and
elaborates them into cognitions that are translated into mental
images, and then into spoken or written words. Manifestations
of supernormal cognition are then observed.

But if the somnambulic patient possesses no more than the
ordinary sensorial differentia of consciousness, the brain functions
on its own resources. The excited imagination constructs
fables round genuine or fanciful ideas, and generates the hysteri-
cal romance which occasionally looks like metagnomy if the
central idea round which the whole crystallizes corresponds to
some reality.

These two types of hysterical utterances should be well known :
confusion between them has caused many negations and un-
founded beliefs. Doctors have so often experienced cases of
hysterical romance that they deny the metagnomic fact they have
not come across ; and the public by an opposite impulse, takes
for true all hysterical imaginings because neuropathic somnam-
bulism has sometimes led to metagnomy.

It is true that hysterical neurosis sometimes, though very rarely,
brings about the psycho-physiological conditions that determine
metagnomic phenomena, but in such cases the faculty of hyper-
cognition lasts as long as, and no longer than, the neuropathic
state that produced it. It arises from a morbid condition and
passes away with it.

Such is not the case with metagnomic subjects whose faculty
is permanent. These are the usual type and those whom I have
been able to study. I know some remarkable percipients who
have never suffered from any neuropathic troubles and show no


THE FA


)F SUPERNORMAL COGNITION 117


is of hysteria. Outside the exercise of their special faculty,
whether under hypnosis or in the waking state, they show no
special physical or moral characteristics. Some are more emo-
tional and have quicker reactions than most persons, but their
cerebral functions are well balanced.
If hysterical neurosis may produce metagnomy, it is only
ly that metagnomic subjects are neuropaths ; they
I not necessarily so.


CHAPTER II


•NERAL PSYCHOLOGICAL CONDITIONS F(
SUPERNORMAL COGNITION

HATEVER the appearances that a metagnon
subject may present in the exercise of the faculty,
he is not functioning according to the modes of
normal thought. His mentation, when elaborating
the supernormal cognition, is not the same as when he reflects,
decides, and acts.

The magnetisers at the beginning of the nineteenth century
called this functional transformation a " secondary- state/' signi-
fying thereby that a new mental personality supervened, differ-
ing from that normal mental personality by peculiar prop

M. de Fleuriere, a metagnomic subject in the waking state,
describes his psychic condition when using this special faculty :

" In what concerns myself, I am fully aware that my mental state has
nothing in common with my usual psychic condition. I instantly enter
a kind of second state. I am no longer the same man ; I neither see nor
feel after the same manner. I experience a kind of duplication of per-
sonality ; or rather, it is as if a personality hidden in the deepest part
my being rose up and took the place of my normal personality. Nevi
theless, it does not seem to me that my habitual psychism is completely
evicted or abolished. Not so ; but under the conscious mind that directs
my ordinary life, I feel the working of a subconscious intelligence quicker
and better informed than the former, which has therefore a right to
direct, to enlighten, and to complete it.

N If this state is prolonged, I feel myself literally intoxicated, as if by the
rapture that is felt in musical or poetic composition, and to such a point
that I often lose entirely the notion of the place where I am and of the
objects that interest me. I enter and leave this state very quickly, almost
as quickly as one opens or shuts one's eyes, so as to open or close contact
ith the external world.
M After long seances I am not in a condition less favourable to the
exercise of this faculty, but quite contrariwise. I feel the rapture growing,
and the more it grows, the greater is the mental exaltation which intensi-
fies my faculty of supernormal vision." (Extract from a manuscript note
by M. de Fleuriere to Dr. Osty, May 22nd, 1922.)

In what does this second state consist, psycho-physiologically ?
What happens in the nerve-centres of a metagnomic subject at
the moment when the conscious mind ceases to work and the
metanormal faculty comes into play ? Perhaps in the distant
future this will be known.


THE GENERAL PSYCHOLOGICAL CONDITIONS 119

All that can be said as yet is, that as soon as the second state
comes into action, it manifests two paranormal psycho-physio-
logical factors, (i) personal dissociation from psychic activity,
and (2) a special sense— a differentiation of sensibilities other than
those of the normal sensorial perceptions.

1. The Functional Dissociation of Psychic Activity

The normal genesis of ideas takes place under the impulse or
the control of mental consciousness, which directs its activity,
assigns its object, judges its products, and accepting or rejecting
these, decides for or against an act. In the second state of
metagnomic subjects the directing function of thought, attention,
and will — in short, what modern psychologists call " the superior
psychism," no longer directs and controls the formation of
ideas. Knowledge comes to the thought of the percipient by a
functional system in which the conscious mind registers something
already worked out, and then interprets and explains it. Some-
times its action is confined to taking cognizance of supernormal
information unconsciously expressed.

There is not, as in the hypnotic state of ordinary persons, a
diminution of consciousness which may extend to vanishing point,
but only a rupture of the functional synergy between the con-
scious and subconscious planes of thought, transposing their
activity.

A double psychic personality seems to be formed — the one
which is connected by paranormal sensibility with the environ-
ment, and on data derived from it while in that condition, con-
structs knowledge inaccessible by ordinary sensorial channels ;
the other, the conscious psychic personality which knows
nothing of the mental elaboration in progress and only intervenes
to state and express its results.

This markedly differentiates the second state of metagnomic
subjects, even those whose faculty is manifest only in a profound
stage of artificial sleep, from the second state of normal persons
brought to the same degree of hypnosis. These Matter seem
automata whose psychism is without volition and obeys every
suggestion of the hypnotiser, whereas the mind of metagnomic
subjects retains its full activity, its freedom of judgment, resists
verbal suggestions, and keeps its spontaneity of expression.

This functional dissociation of psychic activities is a necessary
condition for metagnomic faculty to come into action. Hysterical
somnambulism occasionally brings this about, and for this reason
it sometimes shows supernormal cognition. Similarly, natural
sleep, somnolence, absorbing preoccupation, physical and mental
fatigue, may bring about that dissociation, and occasionally


120 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


present accidental phenomena of hypercognition — presentiments,
information called M telepathic," and so on. The dissociation
of psychic functions takes place according to modalities wh
vary with mental conditions.

Some percipients reach that state without effort or with very
little effort : it suffices that they should voluntarily divert their
attention for a moment, for them to become as it were spectators
of hallucinations like those of a dream. By arresting for a
moment their controlled thought they have waking dreams of
past, present, and future actualities in the life of the human
individual on whom their faculty is directed. Externally
nothing of this paranormal mental activity appears ; they
to think their supernormal thoughts just as anyone thinks,
they express them as one expresses ordinary thought.

For other subjects, also in the waking state, mental dissociati
is less easy, and they reach it by artifices. Some concentrat
their attention by looking at the lines of the hand, playing-cards,
writing, a crystal ball, or some other object. Others start th
psychic action of the subconscious by practising automatisms-
table-rapping, planchette and alphabet, or automatic writing,
etc.

There is another class of metagnomic subjects with whom
functional liberation of the psychism appears only under hypnc
of different degrees of intensity.

With some the faculty appears in a slight degree of artificial
sleep which they can themselves induce. As soon as they
concentrate their thought on " going to sleep " motor react ior
supervene, shown by agitation of the eyelids, slight starts,
quickened breathing ; then calmness succeeds, the eyelids close,
and the voice says, M I am there; you can ask me questions.'
From that moment except for the closed eyes, they act as d
metagnomic subjects in the waking state, presenting like them,
normal and paranormal functions of thought simultaneously.
The experimenter can converse with them on anything in the
intervals of metagnomic perception ; the transposition of functio
takes place along with the change in the objective offered to th
thought. The transition from normal to paranormal mentation
is marked by a short pause and some spasmodic motor reactions.

Some few subjects, much more rarely met with, only show tl
faculty when in profound hypnosis. Madame Morel, from whom
I have obtained several of the results quoted in this book, is of
this type. She is hypnotized by the direct gaze, and suddenly
falls into a sleep so profound that all mental life seems extinct
in her brain ; she seems a body without thought or spontaneity,
keeping any attitude in which she may be placed. But as soon
as her psychism is called into activity bj^mjfcions, one is amazed


THE GENERAL PSYCHOLOGICAL CONDITIONS 121

to find, in spite of the cataleptic state, the same intellectual
activity as in the subjects whose faculty appears under light
hypnosis or in the waking state.

As compared with the normal states of sleeping and waking
common to all persons, these sensitives, according to each kind,
appear to be sleeping or waking, whereas in reality there should
be no reference to sleep, for the psychic functions are in full activity.
Between the two extremes of seeming wakefulness and seeming
sleep, the powers of other sensitives hold an intermediate place,
sometimes approximating to sleep, sometimes very near to full
wakefulness. A type often met with is as follows :

Pausing in the midst of a conversation, the subject wishes to
use the faculty. He looks fixedly or closes his eyes, his eyelids
flutter a little and his hands jerk slightly. Soon the informing
mental images rise and he interprets them. This slight hypnoid
trance 1 has brought a whole number of supernormal cognitions.
But as soon as he has translated these into words, the subject is
under the necessity of inducing a fresh trance, followed again
by others if he desires to push his permetagnomic perceptions
further ; so with such subjects the stance becomes an alternation
of hypnoid and waking states. This is manifestly what takes place,
though less obviously ,with those who seem to exercise their special
faculty under the normal conditions of mentation.

We may sum up the above considerations by saying that the
metagnomic faculty appears and becomes active in a psycho-
logical condition in which the psychism works under other incite-
ment than those of normal control and consciousness, and that
this condition is reached by means, and in mental states, which
vary with the subjects, giving multiple semblances to the same
process.

2. The Paranormal Sense

The differentiations of sensibility in normal modes of sensorial
perception do not exhaust the capacity of human nerve-substance
to receive impressions, for observation shows, and experiment
demonstrates, that there are individuals sensitive to modes of
energy that do not affect the large majority of mankind.

Certain individuals manifest a sensibility beyond the normal
sensorial scale by a kind of metanormal sense which, according
to their psychological diversities, is subdifferentiated into
secondary modes which allow of paranormal perception in
different fields of activity.

It would be superfluous to enter here into long discussion on
the metanormal forms of sensibility. The reader will have
acquired the conviction of their actuality and some notion of

> Trance (L^^nsire) , passage from normal to paranormal state.


122 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


the kind of information they convey, in having read the foregoing
artificial gradation of the phenomena of supernormal cognition.

Limiting our consideration to the single and principal case
when the metanormal sense receives impressions from the focus
of energy represented by a human personality, that metanormal
sense is seen to be governed by forces that produce different
effects.

Adopting part of the experiments of the magnetizers of the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, Emile Boirac has verified
that certain persons are sensitive to dynamic emanations from
human beings (more especially to some who radiate more freely),
and that those persons react differently to that stimulus, by
hypnotic sleep among other modes.

In M. de Fleuriere I have met with a subject who, in addition
to the more usual metagnomic activity, has the power of perceiving
w r hat he calls M the fluid " of persons whom he touches. These
fluidic emanations enter his consciousness under the semblance
of coloured visions and tactile sensations so precise and sharply
characterised that they are to him complexes which delineate
human individualities. The touch of no two persons gives him
the same total sensation. A customary proceeding of his is to
distinguish, by mere contact of hands, the personal " fluid "
from those of others present, whom he recognizes if they have
previously been presented to the test of his faculty, and whom
he can even name if the names are known to him.

Another functional mode of the metanormal sense, well known
to psychologists, is impressionability to the radiations of energy
from human thought, ultimating in the reconstruction of ideas
and feelings in words.

Receptivity to voluntarily suggested thought is very rare in-
deed. Rather less rare is sensibility to thought not voluntarily
suggested, but under the dominance of conscious attention.
Much more frequently met with is impressionability to thought
not suggested, nor formulated, nor consciously remembered,
especially when it lies, as if statically, in the reservoirs of memory.

This latter mode of metanormal receptive sensibility connects
immediately with the special sensorial system of metagnomic
rcipients cognizing individual lives. Their metagnomic sense
so impressionable to subconscious thought (so-called) that in
experiments directed to obtain information which that thought
(as usually understood) could not supply, its transmission from
the individual cognized to the cognizing subject is a stumbling-
block very difficult to avoid, and, as will be seen further on, a
chief cause of error.

In what does the special sense of metagnomic subjects consist ?
The answer to this question must be left to the future. We must


THE GENERAL PSYCHOLOGICAL CONDITIONS 123


begin at the beginning and consider under what conditions it
functions, how it is connected with the forces that impress it,
and from what mysterious source it derives information that
none of the normal senses can directly register.

3. How the Special Sense of Metagnomic Subjects is
Connected with Human Beings Presented to It

Three experimental conditions enable one to gather a general
notion how the metanormal sense can be placed in relations with
the human individuality presented for cognizance.

1. The personality to be cognized is present.

2. This personality is distant in space.

3. When it is distant both in space and time.

The human personality on whom the supernormal faculty is
directed is in presence of the percipient.

Under this condition different percipients will behave in differ-
ent ways, or each may have his own according to his particular
aptitudes. A visible link between the percipient and the person
to be cognized is not always required, mere proximity is sufficient ;
the former desires to be informed concerning the life of the person
near him, and the faculty comes into action more or less quickly
and more or less effectively. Percipients who act in this way
usually ask that only the one person besides the experimenter
may be present. It is a fact full of meaning and of high psycho-
physiological significance that when a number of persons are
present at an experiment the information that reaches the subject
does not necessarily apply to the person assigned for cognition,
but may apply, even occasionally by preference, to one of the
others. The percipient as a psychic instrument seems to be
connected with many sources of information, and must make an
effort, not always successful, to concentrate on the personality
assigned for cognition. This is specially the case with waking
subjects ; those who are hypnotized are more easily linked to the
person they have been ordered to study.

But with whatever degree of facility the percipient concentrates
on the one, the presence of others brings about a lessening of his
perceptive powers and causes great fatigue, as if by keeping to
the objective assigned him he were constrained to an exhausting
mental effort.

Most subjects, too, are under a physiological compulsion to
connect themselves directly with the person to be cognized, at
least at the beginning of a stance and often during its whole course.
Contact with the hand is the method generally used. Another


124 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


fact worthy of remark which completes the lesson above suggested
is that the subject rarely strays from the one with whom contact
is maintained, even though others be present ; and the stances
are also less exhausting.

There are some subjects, when exercising metagnomy on
persons close to them, who prefer indirect to direct contact.
Mile de Berly asks the person to be cognized to cover a piece
of paper with writing, or any kind of drawing or signs. She looks
at this or crushes it in her hands, and if the mental images are
slow to form, she places it to her forehead, an action which
seems the most effective mode of arousing the faculty. By
proceeding in this manner she directs her faculty entirely upon
the writer, whereas with nothing in her hands she would fall
under the influence of one of the other persons present. The
written paper links her to the person to be delineated.

Subjects of this kind could act by direct touch if they wished.
When they have recourse to an intermediary object writing or
any other, it is because experience has shown them that their
metanormal sense is more effectively impressed in that way,
direct contact disturbing their sensibility overmuch.

The human personality on whom the supernormal faculty is
directed is distant in space.

Under this condition the sensibility of metagnomic subjects
manifests in different ways according to circumstances or to
special methods peculiar to the subject. These can be reduced
to a few leading types. A percipient sometimes finds himself
unexpectedly linked to some human being at a distance, known
or unknown to him or to any other person present. In cases of
this kind percipients are generally in a state of functional psychic
dissociation ; that is, they are using their metanormal sense at
the moment that this phenomenon supervenes.

The reader will remember that it was during a stance of super-
normal cognition and while in hypnoid trance that Count Hugo
Baschi£ri was suddenly informed, and made the unexpected
revelation of the assassination of Jaur6s, near the Boulevard des
Italiens. Count Baschi6ri was in a reunion of psychists at a con-
siderable distance from the scene of the crime (vide p. 37).

This fact, which I have quoted in my book, Lucidite et Intuition,
comes out in its full significance here. I reproduce it because it
is very representative of similar incidents in the lives of meta-
gnomic sensitives.

" Having gone to bed late one night, Mme Fraya had, towards morning,
a dream in which she seemed to be exercising her faculty.

M Opening the door between her private room and the drawing-room,
she sees approaching her a lady with a face worn by suffering. She begs


THE GENERAL PSYCHOLOGICAL CONDITIONS 125

her to sit down, takes her hands, and begins to delineate the sorrows of
her present life : 1 Great suffering dominates you ; you are stricken in
one who is most dear to you — your son. . . . Without any apparent cause
he has latterly been mentally afflicted, and so seriously that internment
has been considered necessary. He is now in an asylum.' "

At this stage in her dream Mme Fray* was awakened by her maid,
who came to say that the postman required her signature. She got up,
put on a dressing-gown, signed, and then went back to sleep. The dream
was resumed at the point broken off . . . . " The doctors who advised
the internment and those at the asylum think the case incurable . . .
and the grief due to this has overwhelmed you with despair. I shall,
however, give you some consolation by telling you that after a few months
your son will be given back to you entirely cured. . . . You will be told
of his cure, and you will yourself go to fetch him. . . ."

On waking, this professional dream remained so vividly in remembrance
that Mme Fraya could have repeated the words almost textually. She
wondered at the creative power of imagination to invent scenes so like
reality. Some days passed, and her many engagements caused the dream
to pass into the background of memory.

About a week later, during one of her busy afternoons, when she went
to open the door of her room to admit one of her clients, the lady who
came towards her was the lady of her dream. Mme Fraya then, without
hiving recourse to her metagnomic faculty and without any intermediary
hallucination, only had to repeat from memory the consultation made in
dream. The sorrowing mother was absolutely stupefied with amaze.

Phenomena of this kind are so usual with M. de Fleuriere that
he always has a pencil and paper on his night-table to note down
the knowledge that comes to him either in dreams or during
insomnia, concerning persons whom he may or may not have
seen, and arc known or unknown to him. And it sometimes
happens that this wonderful percipient meets in his reception
room some one coming to him for the first time, and without
preamble places before him a written answer to the preoccupa-
tions that have caused the visit.

For comparison, and to show that this kind of phenomena
were known to antiquity, I will recall that, according to Philo-
stratus, the biographer of Apollonius of Tyana, the latter when at
Ephesus in Asia Minor revealed the assassination of the Emperor
Domitian at Rome at the very moment of its occurrence. 1

Such facts lead us to compare metagnomic subjects to our
receivers of electric vibrations without any perceptible links
with the source of energy. Wireless telegraphy may be taken as
an analogue to telepathy, in view of our ignorance of the physical
mechanism of human thought.

There are, however, other conditions under which metagnomic
faculty is exercised on distant individuals and without any visible
link, but under aspects which make the phenomena appear so
complex that there is no scientific instrument with which we can
compare them.

i Apollonius of Tyana. by Chassang (Didier, 1862).


126 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


Experimenting with a human personality placed in presenc
of a metagnomic percipient we constantly observe that in addi-
tion to the particular life cognized, knowledge is shown of other
lives connected with the first, and more especially we see the power
of taking cognition of some one of these, however far distant, as
if he were there present. Proximity to some one human being
is, for some percipients, a sufficient link to enable their faculties
to act upon distant persons.

One is then tempted to think the phenomenon an unconscious
transmission of thought between percipient and the person
there present, because the details given are usually known to
that person or to the experimenter ; but when the revelations
made on the distant person are unknown and unknowable by th
and investigation confirms them as veridical, some other ex;
tion must be sought.

This mental cognition, whose sole link is the proximity to the
thought of a person close by, is so easy to certain percipients that
it occurs spontaneously in their ordinary lives, giving a curio
ect.

Mile de Berly, a metagnomic percipient in the waking state,
has given me, especially on holidays passed in the same place,
a standing instance of immediate and spontaneous insight in'
individual lives.

In the course of conversations when some person is alluded t
whom I have known or met, or whom I am intending to s
Mile de Berly, as soon as such a person is thought of, will bre
in :

" This gentleman is sympathetic . . . medium height, bnr
hair, dark eyes ... in a conspicuous situation . . . and wha
a nice family circle ... a grown-up girl who is about to be
married . . . two young boys ... his wife ... I see his wife.
Her health is very poor . . . poor health in the future ..."

For hours her conversation is dotted with metagnomic perce
tions of distant persons who often count for nothing in the lif
of the person she is speaking to, or even have never been and never
will be in contact with it. A thought passing over the ment
screen, or a few words that express it, are the slender basis fro
which the faculty seizes at once on a distant person. The mind
of the percipient seems able to communicate on the instant with
any human being provided that some slight hint be given.

And in this condition the cognizance which is possible for human
individuals living and distant in space, is also possible for those
who are dead and distant in time.

A spoken phrase, the sight of a photograph or a tomb, calls
up a vision of the defunct and reflects his living form. Her
faculty takes hold of a vanished life whose general course


THE GENERAL PSYCHOLOGICAL CONDITIONS 127


delineates, or seizes on various episodes at the fancy of the
metagnomy.

Here is one instance of supernormal cognition of a deceased
person which arose from a word or a thought. 1 I quote it only
because the circumstances under which it came allowed me to
take it down word for word.


On July 27th, 1920, towards 9 p.m. some members of my family were
conversing with Mile de Berly on spiritualism, and asked her if she had
ever tried table-rapping — the ordinary means of spirit-communication.
She said, " Yes, but very little ; it tires me to very little purpose." This
conversation took place in my study where I was writing some letters
before a seance with this subject.

I said, M I have never seen you use the table ; will you try this now ? M
This was done. All placed themselves round a small table, and placed their
hands on it. I remained at my writing-table to take down the letters
corresponding to the raps.

As soon as the table moved I said, " Call one of my relations who died
a short time since."

This gave no clue to Mile de Berly, who had never seen the person of
whom I was thinking ; and none of the members of my family guessed
who this might be.

The table began to rap ; but the first word was scarcely spelt out before
Mile de Berly took her hands off, saying, "This tires me, and it is very slow.
What is the use of a table ? I see this gentleman . . . rather stout, big
eyes, round face, strongly marked eyebrows, thickish lips . . . ears rather
large and flat ... a heavy walk ... he was about fifty-one, yellow
complexion and bilious-looking eyes.

M An honest gentleman, good and kindly ... a good husband . . .
rather susceptible . . . good-natured, but his nerves were shaken towards
the end of his life and he was liable to anger. Very particular about his
clothes. He has been ill a long time— at least ten years ; thought of nothing
but his ailments.

M Heart weak, kidneys ill . . . legs swelled. Poor man, he suffered
much ; and how chilly he was ; feet always cold. Giddy at times, and
sore throat. He has a son, a tall young man : the upper part of his face
resembles his father, but he takes his character from his mother. His
wife is pleasant-mannered and kind, rather economical . . . likes order
. . . rather weak in health. She is rather sad just now ... she is giving
up her house. . . .

M This gentleman had much confidence in you. He tells me to say that in
a short time some one will replace him in his business ; it will be sold to
advantage. That person will be good-natured and rather lively . . .
thirty-seven to thirty-eight years of age. He will be a married man,
medium height; will be recommended by some one. . . ."


1 The reader should understand from the first, that Mile de Berly, having
a visual hallucination of the persons evoked by her thoughts, whether living or
not, is persuaded that in the case of the dead, their surviving personalities appear
to her and inspire her. Hence her spiritualistic diction.

I note, passim, that in the case of hallucination of a living person she does not
think that person to be before her.

I note also that the appearances under which she sees the deceased are thost
of corporeal life, and vary according to the periods in their lives of which her
faculty is cognizant.


128


SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


I said, " Ask that friend to give me some convincing proof that it is
tally this personality that communicates through you."

After a few moments of silence Mile de B. said, " He tells me to tell you
*iat you stopped his smoking." We could get no further proof of identity.
I had thought of a man with whom I was much in sympathy, a notary,
died in June, 1920, from an indisposition known medically for ten
past. Appearance, malady, and character all correctly described.

wife, Mme P , left the house in which she had lived with her

husband for twenty-five years on January 12th, 1921.

The business had just been made over to a substitute who in no way
corresponded to the person described. But as I write these lines the present
successor not having been officially accepted, the premonition cannot be
verified. 1

I had certainly induced Mr. P to give up smoking. He was a great

smoker, so much so that in spite of my constantly repeated embargo, that
in the last years of his life when suffering from much depression he begged
for one or two cigarettes. He found it very hard to give up tobacco.*

I have experienced under many forms this incomprehensible
sistance given to metagnomic faculty by more or less formed
id more or less accurate knowledge in some person present,
enabling the percipient to delineate the state of a distant person.

So also, when one experiments in successive periodical stances
with one percipient on the same distant person, it is easy,
however little one may be aware of it beforehand, to verify that
what one learns concerning the person between two stances
allows the percipient, in the next stance, to correct, improve,
id develop the previous revelations and to progress a little
ther into the unknown. In presence of the thought, hyper-
cognition is further informed and stimulated. It is by reason of
this mental aid that some subjects whose metagnomic perceptions
are awakened by the artifice of laying cards, ask that one should
concentrate thought on the absent person as to whom informa-
tion is required through the cards. I have verified, by chance in
the first place, and afterwards by deliberate intention, a change
in the metagnomic perceptions from one person to another by
changing my own mental representation from the one to the
other when I had acquired the certainty that cartomancy conveys
nothing to the percipient, but that the thoughts of the experi-
menter can place the sensibility in contact with the informing
sources of supernormal cognition.

1 In Jan., 1922, the first successor, not having been acceptable to the Chamber
of Notaries, had to retire, and was replaced by a young lawyer of thirty-six.
married, and agreeing with the description given.

■ About a month before his death, Mr. P., in course of a conversation in which
I endeavoured to raise his hopes of cure, said to me, M My dear doctor, I know
that I am about to die. If there is an after-life I promise to do ail I can to let you
know."

If Mr. P., deceased, had really been the inspiring source of Mile de Berly's
information, as her manner of speaking suggests.therc were so many characteristic
elations that he might have made that he would never have stopped at the
1 given, commonplace and proving nothing.


THE GENERAL PSYCHOLOGICAL CONDITIONS 129

Besides the conditions described above, in which the percipient
is connected with individual lives by the link of the corporeal
presence or the thoughts of a given person, there is another means
of cognition which seems more material — the contact with some
object belonging to, or touched by, an absent person. The
percipient then behaves as if that person were present. 1

Our knowledge of Physics is too imperfect to give a hint of the
mechanism of this strange fact. We can as yet only have a
surface knowledge of it— can only take cognizance of verifiable
connections between the sensibility of percipient and the material
objects which serve as links for the exercise of their metagnomic
faculty in space and time.

The objects that stimulate the faculty vary with different
percipients ; they have preferences and incompatibilities. On
an extended experience it would seem possible to grade the
effectiveness of such objects : at any rate the link seems stronger
or weaker according to the special sensibility of each subject.
The method most usually favourable for stimulation of hyper-
lition, is to put into the hands of the percipient some object
possessed by (or, rather, habitually touched by) the distant
person to be described. Any kind of object will serve, success
turns on degrees of sensitiveness. The faculty is best excited in
some subjects by contact with some actual organic part of the
distant person— hair, nail-parings, a tooth, blood, or a fragment
from an amputation ; or again by a piece of underclothing, of a
coat, a jewel, or any other object which has been habitually
touched much by one person and little by any other. Others
prefer a WTitten paper, provided it has not been much handled
since it was first written, etc.

But even with percipients who habitually proceed in this
manner, it is not always necessary that the object should pertain
intimately and exclusively to one person. The link may be so
slight that I have sometimes been able to induce perception by a
hypnotized subject on distant persons by giving a book from my
shelves which has been read by the person in question months
before, or even by touching the arm of a chair in which that
person has sat.

The link seems still more tenuous when the object successfully
used has never been actually touched by the person but only
formed a part of their intimate surroundings.

1 This experimental condition is known in mctapsychic literature under the
of 11 psychometry," a name given, I think, by Buchanan, a professor of
opology. about the middle of the nineteenth century.
This term should be abolished. Its etymology has nothing to do with the
oomenon described. It is rightly used ip. psychology to indicate the system of
surements for intellectual and moral Qualities. Two meanings to the sa
I create a confusion which should be avoided,
i

9


180


SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


We may think to go still further in inconsistency when dealing
with a photograph. The image, which is but the result of light
reflected from a human being on unstable chemical compounds, is
occasionally a sufficient link with the distant person.

Yet more : metagnomic perception of a distant person unknown
to the experimenter, has been obtained by putting into the hand
of the percipient a card from which a photograph of that person
had previously been unstuck. This has been stated to have come
about by accident, and I have reproduced the effect.

Pushing investigation on this special sense of percipients still
further, 1 have been able to release metagnomic faculty by the
touch of a photograph of some object belonging to the distant
person. The reader may refer back to the case in which Mme
Morel gave a fragmentary and not improbable reconstruction
of a person and scene very remote in time from the photograph
of a glass ampulla taken from a tomb. Under these conditions
she might well have been led to speak of many other things having
no relation with the object.

I may add that manual touch, though usual, is not always
necessary ; some percipients receive metagnomic information by
merely looking at the object. Mile de Berly gives supernormal
cognitions by merely looking at a photograph.

Observed thus in its several manifestations, the faculty of
receiving metanormal impressions seems fantastic. Experiments
must be frequent, exact, and rigorously directed to a definite
purpose, before one can be sure of being in contact with a reality
and not in any way illusionised.
What is it that links the faculty of supernormal cognition with
le intermediary object ? It is useless to look for this by observ-
ing most percipients.
All of them are not capable of working on distant persons,
hose who are, can rarely be used for any effective study of the
phenomenon itself. One, for instance, will look at or touch a bit
of writing and will reveal the physical state of the writer ; another
presses a lock of hair to the forehead and speaks of the person
" dm whom it was taken ; and there the experiment ends and
research is brought to a standstill. Nothing more can be learned.

By thinking over the many ways by which different percipients
obtain cognition of a person distant in space, comparisons are
drawn which shed no light on one another, and the experimenter
can only avow his complete inability to understand the fact.

I might be myself in this state of discouragement if I had not
met, in Mme Morel, a percipient with whom the study of the part
played by the intermediary object is really fertile in results. This
study is assisted both by the state of deep hypnosis in which her
faculty acts, and by the fact that it is specially excited by that


PSYCHOLOGICAL CONDITIONS 181


modality of energy whereby each of us impregnates whatever he
touches or things about him, which is the stimulus to metagnomic
perception of distant persons. At this stage of our exploration of
supernormal cognition I cannot delay to set out in detail the
series of experiments instituted with the limited view of discover-
ing exactly what sort of stimulus an object touched by a human
being affords to metagnomic subjects.

I can only summarize the results, whose accuracy can be
checked by repeating the experiments. They are true for that
particular percipient, and are of value also as bearing on the
intelligibility of the behaviour of metagnomic subjects in their
differing use of intermediary objects.

t Any object placed in the hands of Mme Morel almost immediately
arouses the mental perception of one of the persons who have previously
touched it, and allow of her receiving knowledge concerning that person's
life.

II. Each human individual who has touched the object may be evoked
and cognized. The experimenter cannot know in advance which of the
personalities will first come up. To reach the personality on whom
investigation is desired it is sometimes necessary to dismiss a varying
number of those that are not required.

III. Human individuals connected with the lives of the persons who
have touched the object may also, though more rarely, be cognized. This
fact has caused some persons to take for errors revelations that were only
misdirection of the faculty.

IV. Each of the persons thus evoked Is perceived distinctly, without
there ever being transpositions or confusion of the physical states of the
different persons who have touched the object.

V. As soon as mental evocation of the personality has been obtained
the object that called it up may be taken from the percipient and de-
stroyed. The percipient, nevertheless, continues to describe the states of
life in the distant person just as if he were present, or at any rate as if the
object were still being held.

VI. Every one of the personalities which have been evoked by contact
can be cognized with reference to the totality of his being, in its whole
duration and extension ; at whatever moment in the life contact may
have been made. For instance, with an object touched twenty years
before and never since, the percipient can cognize the life as it is at present
and can recognize its course.

VII. The physical and chemical nature of the objects is not a percep-
tible factor in their usefulness. With Mme M., however, the objects that
stimulate best are those with which contact has been frequent and pro-
longed, and which have not been touched by others.

VIII. Duration of contact between an object and a human being does
give to the former a proportional degree of stimulating power. The
rtiveness of the object practically resides in its having been touched ;

but the preponderant factor in its effect would seem to he in the quality
of the person who has touched it, and also in some kind of physical
sympathy between the sensibility of the subject and some emanation
included in the object. The same object that has been touched by several
persons does not arouse perception of any one preponderant individuality
in various percipients.


182 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


IX. Lapse of time does not seem to lessen the stimulative power of an
ject, as far as can be judged by experiments that admit of real check.

X. Placing in contact diverse things intended to serve as objects for
experiment on different persons at a distance does not in any way modify

respective values as means of evocation. Practically objects do not
unicate to one another whatever it is that we communicate to them,
at eventually puts us in relation with the metanormal faculty.

XI. Errors in a metagnomic experiment on a present person may recur
in the same form in further experiments made with an intermediary
object and by an experimenter who knows neither the personality
described nor the revelations previously made.

Examination under parallel experimental conditions of what
is given in presence or in absence of the person delineated soon
shows the parity in the exercise of the faculty in either case. The
percipient acts in the same manner, working along his own lines
of sensibility, whether without any visible link, by direct contact
or by indirect contact, nothing differing but the distance in space
separating the cognizer from the cognized.

I will not labour the point. No comment on the conclusions
given above would be complete at this stage. I will deduce in due
time from experimental cases the nature of the support which
intermediary objects give to the faculty of the percipients.

The human personality on whom the supernormal faculty is

directed is distant in Time.
Under these conditions the metagnomic subject acts exactly
as in the last case, and is connected with the lives of persons
deceased, or living and distant by the same methods.

The presence and thought of some living person who has known
the deceased or an object touched by him, a photograph, or what
not, starts the metagnomic faculty into action on a personality
deceased a long or a short time ago.

All that has been said as to supernormal perception of persons
distant in space applies to those distant in time. The psychic
processus is precisely the same. Experimental investigation does
not show the difference that our minds obstinately persist in
making between the case of the living and that of the dead. As
far as the faculty of supernormal cognition is concerned, to be
living or to have lived is the same.

When a percipient is put to work on a living person there
present, he may perceive, from the same starting-point and in
the same mental manner, different persons that have taken part
in the life delineated.

He may speak of those still living, of dead acquaintances, and
also of unknown progenitors. Living and dead, those distant in
pace or time are mentally evoked in connection with the one
delineated and by the same psychic process.


THE GENERAL PSYCHOLOGICAL CONDITIONS 133


When the percipient is working on the life of a deceased person
by means of an intermediary object, he receives the same know-
ledge as if that person were living and at a distance.

With a subject devoid of any notions as to the nature of his
powers, the metagnomic phenomenon, under all conditions of
research, presents itself unalloyed ; it remains the same under
varied experimental conditions. The psychic instrument exempt
from any mental deformations, functions correctly and produces
unalloyed supernormal cognitions. With such subjects pure
metagnomic activity can be studied.

But when using percipients who have ideas on the subject,
spiritist notions for instance, the aspect of their mctagnomy is
changed ; the regular play of the faculty is masked by illusionary
semblances which sterilise research.

If the spiritist percipient receives visual cognitions, is clair-
voyant as it is called, he takes the mental hallucinatory image of
the deceased for a real phantasmal manifestation. In describing
the form, the character, the manner of speaking of the deceased,
he thinks he is describing his present condition. Hence comes
the persistence of individual defects in the spiritualist Beyond,
round which so much vain discussion has centred. The per-
cipient speaks to his apparition (which is an excellent way of
getting information upon it), and he attributes the mental
informing images that he gets in reply to conscious inspiration
from the dead. Hence, too, come those dialogues between mediums
and defunct entities which often result in supernormal cognitions,
but more often in mediocre romances on the after-life.

When these spiritualist percipients receive their information from
auditive, tactile and motor sources, the result of the doctrinal
ucation is the same ; it is thought to be deceased personalities
o consciously and voluntarily give information on their own
past lives and even on those of other persons there present.

This mistake has given birth, especially of late years, to many
facile books which have conveyed premature consolations to
humanity. The enthusiastic reception that some of these have
received are a sad and discouraging spectacle for those who give
themselves up to the difficult pursuit of truth.

1 not insist further on these mystical deformations of
,«*ic faculty. Born of ignorance and accepted by
ignorance, they will disappear as exact research introduces light
and order into the metapsychic chaos in which aspirations,
frustrated elsewhere, are incautiously put forward. 1

* I do not deny the survival of human personality. I neither deny nor assert
it. It remains to be demonstrated experimentally. I only say that the secrets
of Nature are not to be penetrated by unconsciously falsifying Nature. A
trine is only legitimate when it follows on research. The writers to whom I
■« have not investigated scientifically. They have been misled by the spiritist
in the mentality of the mediums with whom they have experimented.


JORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN

IV. Fluctuations of the Metagnomic Faculty di

Experiment

When a metagnomic subject has entered the psychological
state which hands over the subconscious play of his mind to
informing influences and he has been placed in connection with a
personality, his metanormal faculty is in a condition
iter into action.

This action would certainly follow if the percipient were not a
living psychic instrument, and therefore unstable, and if the
personality to be delineated were not also living and unstable.

This inference from experiment explains the variations in the
quality of metagnomic faculty. In the chapter devoted t
errors I will complete my critical examination of these functio:
vicissitudes.

If metagnomy were the result of inspiration from an after
these two factors of variation — the psycho-physiological state
the percipient and the psycho-physiological state of the
perceived, would have no place. The function of the pers<
whom the metagnomy is directed would be to listen, to serve as
an objective, and to register a phenomenon produced upon him
but without his active participation. But the facts are not so,
The remainder of this book will be an analytical study of the
connected activities of the cognizing and cognized psychisms
working out the metagnomic result.

As with other functional modalities of the psychic constit
tion the faculty of hypercognition is liable to many inhibi
influences which diminish it more or less strongly, for a longer or
shorter time, and may suppress it for considerable periods,
even entirely.

Everything that affects the brain unfavourably causes v
tions in metagnomic faculty — strong or persistent emotion
anxiety, moral disquiet, violent passions, and the like ;
physical exhaustion — overwork, mental or bodily ; illness in an
form, more especially digestive affections, which sensitives
which are so disturbing to the higher

at. 1

But besides persistent moral and organic causes which
bring about persistent weakening of metagnomic faculty, this
faculty is found to vary from day to day and even from hour t
hour under the influence of petty and undefinable causes
internal and external : the weather, insufficient sleep,

1 There are, however, some maladies, such as hysteria, which mon
depress the higher functions of psychic control, and thus give rise to a 1
hyper cogni ti on .


f the
is in

;titu-
iting


/ana-


THE GENERAL PSYCHOLOGICAL CONDITIONS 185


unpleasant news, vexation, slight digestive difficulty— any of
these little things may produce psychic trouble sufficient to vary
the metagnomic faculty from day to day quite disproportion-
ately to the cause. An excellent percipient is sometimes very
imperfect, or even destitute of power.

The experimenter using a subject on fixed days and times is
soon convinced that in contrast with the physicist who finds his
instruments always in the same state, he can never foresee in
what state he will find his subject.

The best output is obtained when the percipient is morally
quiet, in the best possible health, and if experiment is confined
to those times when the subject feels most disposed to work.

To these causes of metagnomic variation, inherent in psycho-
physiological condition of percipients, must be added other causes
connected with the personalities assigned as objectives.

However little the attitude or the words of another person may
express ill-will, if that ill-will exists, the hypersensitive mentality
of percipients is disturbed, and the work of hypercognition
proceeds imperfectly or is inhibited.

It is not even necessary that any antagonism should be mani-
fested. The antipathy of a percipient for some other person is
sometimes intuitive and reacts on the psychic faculty. A few
more seances generally allow of this repulsion being overcome.

Though secondary, these causes are none the less operative in
many experiments \vhich are more or less vitiated thereby.

But the princip&l cause of variations on the side of the
cognized person is to be found in his psycho-physical qualities,
unknown but inferable from results, which cause the same human
personality to be differently sensed by percipients.

When a series of persons are presented to the supernormal
perception of a single subject, or when the same person is
presented to a series of percipients, it is always observable that
some persons are easily delineated by all the percipients, but most
are described well, moderately well, or badly according to the
percipient used. Some very few personalities are found difficult
by all the percipients.

This very important fact, to which we shall have to return,
seems comparable with the correlation between transmitting,
receiving, and transforming physical instruments, the receiver
being only capable of working on dynamic modes corresponding
to its functional construction.

This brief survey of some factors in the fluctuations of meta-
gnomic faculty is sufficient to show the delicacy required for
experiment in a matter where both the instrument used and the
object upon which it is directed are living and unstable psychic
constitutions.


CHAPTER III


THE PSYCHOLOGICAL SEQUENCES OF METAGNOMY

IN ACTION

WHAT comes to pass in the psychism of a metagnomic
subject in action may be represented diagrammat-
ically as follows :
The first phase is the subconscious elaboration of
the supernormal cognitions.

In a second phase, these elaborated cognitions are manifest
under the form of mental images of different sensorial kinds,
more or less accurately representative, and often extending to
hallucinatory objectification.

Finally, the intellectual function called ''conscious' 1 comes
into play, interprets the images that have arisen from the
depths of thought, and translates them into words.

The first phase of the process generative of supernormal
cognition is very obscure ; hidden from direct observation by the
experimenter and even from the subject. It begins as soon as
contact is established between the percipient and the person to be
cognized, and ends when the informative mental images arouse
the attention of the former. According to the acuity of the
percipient and to some psycho-physical quality in the person
cognized, the duration of this first phase varies from one to a few
seconds.

While it is progress, percipients usually take a thoughtful
attitude, which may or may not be accompanied by more or less
strong motor reflexes— muscular jerks in the hand touching the
person to be delineated, slight convulsive movements of the
eyelids, shivers of the body, and the like. Their consciousness of
this phase is confused and amounts to varied sensations which
reveal nothing on the latent processes of thought, but indicate
to the percipient that the metagnomic work is being done and
that mental images will project it upon the psychic screen.
Mme Morel (a hypnotic subject) has the sensation of light super-
vening on the darkness of her sleep as soon as her faculty begins
to operate. M. de Fleuri6re (a waking subject) on contact with a
person feels " a fluid " mounting to his brain like a mild electric
current, there lighting up various colours whose associations


PSYCHOLOGICAL SEQUENCES OF METAGNOMY 187

differ according to the persons. Some subjects only feel the
visible motor action. Others feel a giddiness, a kind of intoxica-
tion. It is rare to find any for whom this obscure phase is only
an awaiting, without any special sensation. Many subjects,
especially those who work in the waking state, have a feeling of
sadness, of suffering, or of joy, anticipating what the mental
images will reveal in detail ; a synthesis of the supernormal
cognition in course of development.

During this obscure phase, externally imperceptible, and of
which the percipients themselves can grasp nothing, which only
lasts a few seconds at most, cognizer and cognized are placed in
relations : during this phase the elaboration of supernormal
cognitions takes place : and in it the mental images most fitted
to transfer cognition from the unconscious to the conscious are
sought, found, organized, and developed into representations.
This complicated mental work is instantaneous— very different
from the classical analysis of the functions of thought !

The metagnomic phenomenon becomes apparent at the moment
when the mental representations arise. It then seems to begin,
whereas it is really completed. The work of supernormal cognition
is fully accomplished outside the consciousness of the percipient, in
an area of thought of which he is unaware and would remain in
ignorance of, but for the special revelations it brings.

This first phase, wherein resides the whole secret of super-
normal cognition and also that of human personality, cannot as
yet be studied directly. Only by working round it can we form
some idea of what takes place within it. Long and difficult
investigation will at some future day give the answer to this
psychological enigma. I shall here only take up an analytic study
from the moment that the process that generated metagnomy
becomes apparent. A clear view of all that is actually open to
observation defines the limits of obscurity, and prepares the way
for further attempts at solution.

Before going further, it must be thoroughly understood that
the sequence of mental work as above described does not repre-
sent the succession of events at an experimental seance. The
emergence of a set of cognitions marks the completion of the
cycle of psychologic action which generates the metagnomic
phenomenon. A stance is made up of repetitions of these triple
phases.

Some consideration of the functioning of thought are here
required. It is admitted and taught that thought functions
under two conditions ! (i) accompanied by a feeling by which
thought is directed on itself and is able to direct and control
itself ; and, (2) without this feeling.


188 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


Under the first condition mental work is said to be conscious,
and under the second subconscious or sublimenal.

Our intellectual tendency to make partitions in the continuous
and to petrify life in diagrams, has distinguished two stages in the
human mind — a superior psychism which directs and an inferior

, psychism which is directed ; or is automatic, according to

I circumstances.

A few years ago the work of the subconscious mind began to be
studied ; and observation of the facts of so-called mental dis-
sociation — physiological states (dreams and abstraction . . .),
pathological states (neuroses, delirium, mental affection . . .),
para-physiological states (hypnosis . . .) has revealed psychic
activities in which conscious and voluntary direction is absent.
There really appeared to be two functional systems of thought
ordinarily in synergetic action, but able to function separately.
As this concept of a gradation of function made intelligible
pathological and physiological states till then obscure, the study
of those states and the concept that arose from it, led men to
think that they had probed thought to the bottom and taken the
measure of its extent. It was spoken of as a mechanism, complex
indeed, but relatively easy to take to pieces by analysis, and put
together again by synthesis, thus explaining its regular function-
ing and its perturbations. It was not perceived that to study
human thought in neurotics, insane, and hypnotized persons was
indeed a means of knowing some modes of its function, but only
the modes that are conditioned by those special states.

This early and very useful information derived from experi-
mental method applied to the study of thought, fairly enslaved
many minds. Most teachers of psychology are still imprisoned
in this structure raised around one restricted aspect of mental
activity, and do not seek to look further. As soon, however, as
we begin to observe the output of thought apart from its ordinary
exercise and from the special states which have given rise to the
concept described above, modern psychological knowledge is
assessible at its true value — precarious, teaching nothing,
absolutely nothing, on the nature, the extent, and the capacities
of thought.

The !I! superior psychism/' the " inferior psychism," the
Conscious, the Subconscious — what are these but words pro-
claiming our ignorance, mere didacticisms always found totally
wanting in power, and inadequate to explain realities.

To read works on " the inferior psychism " is to be aware of a
distressing effort to justify this false distinction. The attributes
of the superior psychism are set aside by the definition, but in the
course of analysis they are given back one by one, without any
exception at all. The inferior psychism is allowed to have will.


►LOGICAL SEQUENCES OF METAGNOMY 139

spontaneity, consciousness of its work, memory of its output,
direction in the genesis of ideas, a constructive power yielding i

ellous creations, and so on. In short, if the psycholog'
were to be deprived of the verbal labels affixed to unre
he would, when confronted with certain cases of mej

unable to distinguish the conscious from the subconscious, or |
to perceive two psychisms at all.

We arc in presence of illusions resulting from limited observa-
tion and naive generalisations arising from mere verbalism. Let


PSYCHO

spont
direct
marv<

:

tio

us not be misled by them.

Already our schematic gradations split all to pieces when we
study the functions of thought in cases where eclipse of conscious
atten* ;

Ar<
scien.
andc

m

wl


attention increases creative power instead of lessening it.
Are not the creations of artists, literary men, and innovators in
ce elaborated in a region removed from all feeling of control
direction, deep below the surface of the mind ? Do they not
rise fully formed into the field of consciousness ? The inspiration
of the artist, the intuition of the man of science, the mysterious
source of genius, ... all these are the results of latent mental
work by the pseudo-inferior psychism, so rich in its capacities that
most leaders of thought try to stimulate it by artificial aids, of
hich fact the monographs on illustrious men furnish some
curious instances.

When we approach the study of the supernormal manifesta-
tions of thought, our psychological certitudes are of no use
whatsoever. Useful as explanations of a disordered mind or of a
hypnoidal state, they are here empty of all meaning. The avowal
of ignorance comes from the researcher half automatically, like

a reflex action.

It is no longer possible to consider the human being as an j
aggregate of thought-producing mechanism. The evidence
compels admission that we are in presence of a dynamo-psychic,
focus whence emanate manifestations of a power whose limits we
ot define. Beyond consciousness we discover the power to
>form living matter, to deprive it of form, to exteriorise it
from the body and make it into new and living (ectoplasmic)
forms. Beyond the Conscious is found ability to perceive the
(normally) imperceptible and to know the (normally) unknow-
able. Deep in the human being are found in miniature the
attributes with which philosophies have adorned the God-
concept — creative power and knowledge outside Space and Time.
1 none can presume to say how much more may yet be
_ overed by exact, methodical, and progressive investigation.
There are no stags* m human thought, there are but different
ns and many purposes in its functioning.
,g on the ordinary sensorial data it usually arrives at


canno
trans*


140 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN

that comparison of appearances and notion of interrelations
which are the only definitely useful ideas in practical life. That
is its constant and usual function.

But under exceptional conditions and with exceptional persons,
it is capable of far more, and this shows that in working on the
reports of the senses it is only adapting itself to the more immedi-
ately useful and pressing demands of life. The facts of telepathy
that appear now and again, reveal unexpected psychical faculties
in persons who showed nothing exceptional. Moreover, the
faculty in regular metagnomic subjects shows a permanent
manifestation of transcendental thought : and we certainly
cannot know, in the short time that this has been observed
and considering the small number of percipients, how far
supernormal manifestations may extend nor whether other
forms of it may not be expected.

Therefore, when we speak of the functions of thought, we are
speaking of a psychic power of unknown extent and capacity,
and we ought not to shackle ourselves with the words, the
doctrines, and the concepts of a passing day.

How does cognition represent itself to a psychism acting
transcendentally ? That is a question whose answer is beyond
our present means of investigation, and we cannot even guess
how to set about acquiring this knowledge.

In metagnomic subjects we only perceive the results of this
latent mode of thought at the moment when they enter the
field of attention by the interplay of mental images. The
emergence of these images follows so close on the entry into
action of the metagnomic faculty that it seems automatic,
whereas in reality the choice of mental images is an act of will,
made so that knowledge paranormal in its origin, may enter
easily and fully into that play of thought which we call conscious.

It is by using the stock of mental imagery — concrete images,
abstract images, symbols and allegories — and by utilizing the
whole constructive power of imagination and all the resources of
interior language, that the transcendental mode of thought con-
veys information to the mode that we call conscious.

This psychic process is of the highest interest. It shows the
two modalities collaborating towards the realization of the same
phenomenon. The transcendental modality seems fully conscious
of the end to be attained and to have real genius in trans-
posing its cognitions into clearly intelligible mental images ;
and we can observe the so-called conscious intelligence interpret-
ing the symbols, the allegories, and the successive hallucinatory .
appearances, with an ease and certainty which it could not have
were it engaged in representing thoughts external to itself.


^^^^ «

PSYCHOLOGY


ICAL SEQUENCES OF METAGNOMY 141

This observable phase in the psychological processus of meta-
gnomy is diversely accessible to the psychologist according to the
class of mental images used by the subject. If the mental
resentation is by motor images (see p. 156), the processus
be observed directly, and is as objective as can be expected
in this kind of study. When representation is effected by other
kinds of sensorial images, all that we can know is derived from
ective statements of the percipients, and especially in
hypnotic subjects, by skilful interrogation.

Among the many ways of showing the metagnomic psychism
in the act of producing its observable results, the most fruitful
consists in analytical examination how the different kinds of
sensorial mental images are used.
All varieties of sensorial images can serve the turn, but the
ustatory and olfactory forms are merely accessory and comple-
mentary. I merely mention these here to avoid further reference
to them : their field is so restricted that only passing notice is
necessary.

Utilization of visual mental images.

There are some metagnomic subjects with whom supernormal
cognition always comes in the form of visual images, other
>rial varieties being only complementary. This purely
isual type occurs chiefly in those subjects whose faculty of
hypercognition functions in the hypnotic state.

Most metagnomic subjects use all the various sensorial cate-
gories of mental images, only partly the visual ones.

The power of representation possessed by visual imagery
varies according to mental temperament. The images evoked
may be only simple subjective representations similar to those of
normal thought. In the great majority of cases they have the
force of actual sensations, they are objectified, hallucinatory, and
the subjects think that they actually see.

Those who start their visions by looking into a crystal, a mirror,
a lens, a glass of water, etc., see the phantoms of their imagination
in the luminous field of these things, after the same manner
which objects are seen in a spherical mirror; persons and things
are seen in miniature.

Those whose hallucinations arise without any such artifice or
any special stimulation of the sense of sight, see them at different
distances. M. de Fleuri&re and Mile de Berly, for instance,
them one or two yards away. Mme Morel sees them more or
near according to their meaning. When they refer to things
it in time, they are seen afar and of a size proportioned to
perspective, and this apparent distance makes them more
to interpret. When, on the contrary, the information


sensor
visual
h

X


142 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


refers to things near at hand in time or very prominent in a
life, they seem close before her eyes and within reach of her hand.
M It is so near coming to pass that I touch them/' she says.

M. de Fleuriere tells me as follows : "In my secqnjstate my vision takes
most diverse forms. Sometimes it seems to develop in a kind of cerebral
vapour, sometimes under the top of the head, or behind the forehead, or
behind the eyes. At other times it seems exteriorized and presents itself
before me a yard or a yard and a half distant. Then I often have the
strange sensation as if my cerebro-psychic interior were divided like the
cranial cavity into two hemispheres with a narrow median line touching
each but quite different from either. Things pertaining to the past,
present, or seem to present, themselves in the left hemisphere, those that
occur in the present on the median line, and in the right hemisphere those
that relate to the future. When I describe metapsychic visions, internal
or external, and make a gesture accompanying my words, this gesture
instinctively is to the left when dealing with events which are, or seem to
be, past ; it is straight before me if in the present, and to the right if in
the future." (Extract from a MS. note, M. de Fleuriere to Dr. Osty,
May 20th, 1922.)

Variable, too, is the intensity of hallucinatory mental
representation according to the disposition of the subject
and his psycho-physical sympathy with the personality to be
delineated. Sometimes the objectified images are as clear as to
normal vision, and the conscious intelligence of the percipient
interprets them easily and quickly: at other times they are
more or less vague, fluctuating and inexpressive ; the percipients
make efforts to grasp the image and its meaning ; they hesitate,
their words are doubtful ; this is an inferior output, fertile in
mistakes.

It is curious to see the transcendental modality of thought
using all the resources of imagination to make itself understood
by thought working from sensorial data.

The exposition of this activity in mental representation deserves
a detailed analysis. 1 shall try to give some idea of it.

Every mental image remains objectified for a very short time.
It develops in a second or two, attains its greatest intensity,
and then vanishes as a hallucination, but remains as a memory.
By this brevity in the time of representation and the rapidly
succeeding images, the percipient translates the supernormal
information into words, in the same manner as we express the
results of ordinary thought— step by step as it comes to
fruition.

The informative hallucinations take every form that can convey
the knowledge intended. With some subjects, more especially
those who only perceive visually, these hallucinatory forms are
endowed with movement and colour, they follow one another so
quickly and are so different that the subject readily compares


PSYCHOLOGICAL SEQUENCES OF METAGNOMY 143


them to a cinematographic display. With others they are still,
like flat pictures, each furnishing some element necessary to the
information to be consciously conveyed, by orderly sequence
and in regular succession.

It is of primary psychological import to establish precisely
the correspondence between these mental representations by |
" visual " percipients and the reality. Misunderstanding of the
relativity of mental representation in metagnomy has given
rise to so many errors that sterilise research that it is necessary
to be exact on this point. Facts of sporadic metagnomy have been
cited, mostly from memory, and long afterwards, in which the
H clairvoyant " has had so clear a vision or prevision of some
scene, place, or event, that when he came to the actual place or
took part in the event, he behaved as if he were seeing the thing i
for a second time, or living over again some incident of the |
past. 1

If we were to take the language of permanently metagnomic
subjects literally, one might think that it is always so, and that
they perceive realities as if by a paranormal optical sense outside
time and space, or that they grasp from an ultramaterial plane,
enduring or anticipatory reflects of phenomena pertaining to
individual lives.

But on every occasion when I have endeavoured to discover
the mental representations from which the subjects drew their
information, I have been aware that the informative mental
images, whether hallucinatory or not x were not exact reflects of
realities, but representations building up a fanciful interior
language intended to bring the supernormal cognition into,
consciousness by all kinds of imaginative means. In the course <
of my study of metagnomic subjects I have never yet come across ,
veridical hallucinations, i.e. those which are identical with an )
external reality and give the same sensations as that reality./
The visual images have always seemed to be reconstructions of
ideas, of notions, and of cognitions. If I have no warrant for
denying the possibility of veridical hallucinations (understood as
exact representations of reality), I am at least entitled, in virtue
of a long, active investigation, to say that in practical research
it is very rare, or at any rate only occurs with exceptional
subjects.

If there is an experimental condition in which the subject
appears as an actual seer it is when the state of health of some
person is given for delineation ; and if the revelations made are
subsequently found to be true, the superficial observer is con-
vinced that the subject can scrutinize the interior of the body.
The hallucinations give this illusion to the percipient, whose
language conveys it. But in point of fact the percipient does not


144 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN

see the body. Information comes to him which are represented


v^ented

to his thought by images which do not correspond with the reality

— w*


iv lAia iiiuugiu uy mia-^^o >um u uui ^uiicapuilU Willi 111C If

of which they, nevertheless, give a certain degree of knowl
For instance *


I said to Mme Morel, M Look into the state of health of the person who
is holding your hand."

II . . . I go over her body . . . examine each organ . . . none seems
to me ailing . . . but I feel a strange lassitude. ... Ah ! now I see the
cause, it is an early stage of pregnancy, etc."

The diagnosis was correct, pregnancy of one month (as ultimately
proved the case) and seemed to be the result of an actual physical examin
ation. To show those present that this was not the metagnomic process,
I only had to make an objection to induce the subject to justify her words
by description of her visions.

I said, " I think you are making a mistake."

" No, it is certainly a pregnancy that I saw . . . the whole body of
this person appears to me afresh. ... I see it there, quite close, and
can see every organ quite well . . . none is out of condition. ... I
now come to the ovary, which is turgid ; I see it like a bunch of
grapes, of which one is much larger than the rest ; so it is a case of
pregnancy . . . but it is only at the beginning, for that 1 grape ' is but
little developed. . .

" Look at the state of health of the child."

u Oh, the child is in very poor health . . . lymphatic . . . one li
affected. Take care of his chest."

M Are you sure ? "

M Yes, I see his blood without power or movement, whitish as if it
contained some humour. . . . Now I see the lungs, one is smaD, dark,
sickly."

Not being equipped with technical knowledge the thought
the subject represents to her the ailment by modifications of form
and colour in organs imagined quite otherwise than they really
are. As description of a reality it is false, but suffices to
the true, which is what is required.

Here are some further instances which show the usual manner
in which transcendental modalities of sensorial thought collab-
orate in bringing supernormal cognizance into the plane
consciousness :

" I see this person's bladder ... its walls are covered with cryst
... I feel a sugary taste in my mouth . . . the person is diabetic.

u Why ! this lady has something abnormal in her head. She does not
see like others. ... I see a black hole in her right eye ...
does not see."

The person of whom this was said appeared to be normal -
looked at things as all persons do ; there was no black hole in her
right eye, but a year before its sight had been destroyed by
grain of shot penetrating it.

The greater the number of extracts I might make from


PSYCHOLOGICAL SEQUENCES OF METAGNOMY 145

notes, the more obvious would be this progression towards true
knowledge by means of false mental images. 1

It is the same as regards cognition of places, scenes, and events.
It is by successive mental representations ; not by vision of a
whole, but by hallucinations which do not convey the sensations
that would be given by the reality, that the metagnomic psychism
reaches the revelation of a truth.

Although interpreting successive hallucinations, the subject
expresses himself like one looking at a picture and telling another
what he sees ; he can only do so by successive descriptions.
The analogy of language in both cases leads to the supposition of
analogous perception. That, however, is not the case.

Some " visual 11 subjects, especially those in hypnosis, because
they are more strongly hallucinated, seem by their manner of
speaking to be active, to be seeking, and to direct themselves in
their research, suggesting a spirit freed from space and time.
But if we set aside their language and turn to the mental process,
we soon perceive that their apparent activity is nothing but the
effort to interpret the meaning of their hallucinations. It is in
course of translating the informative mental images into words
that the subject says, 11 I see a road, I follow it. ... I see a
long, low house, etc.," or, " I leave that place and come into a
large town. ... I am following that man. ... I go from the
north to the south, etc." But his mind is no more exteriorised
in such cases than that of other subjects revealing the same
cognitions by the interpretation of tactile or auditory mental
images. The use of visual mental images rather than any other
sensorial form of mental representation does not in any way
modify the psychological processus of metagnomy. There
is no difference in the mental process, whether the subject
uses visual or auditory means, automatic speaking or writing,
or rapping; all that varies is the sensorial category of the
hallucinations.

As the psychism of seers receives its cognitions by visual
images that do not correspond to realities, so they also represent
intellectual and moral states of a human personality by visual
hallucinations. For this reason they make use of symbolical

1 The following is a specimen of what people deduce when neither the psychic
agents used nor the psychological sequences of metagnomy are understood.

In 191 1, at request of the Belgian Congress at Charleroi, desiring to verify the
advantages that physicians might derive from diagnosis by mediums, Professor
Heysmans, director of the pharmacological annexe to the University of Ghent,
offered to make in his laboratory experiments on direct vision of the inner organs
of living animals which would be dissected post-mortem to verify the diagnosis.

The International Bureau of Spiritism, located at Liege, sent him Mile
Teanpierre, of Seraing, blind from birth but a clairvoyant medium ( ? ). Professor
Hevsman examined her for three consecutive days, and then wrote to the Bureau
that the results were entirely unfavourable. Without any further remarks I

10


146 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


and allegorical visions, which constitute a mental language
having no relation to the aspect of things that they cognize.

Nothing exhibits better the aptitude of visual symbolism to
represent all kinds of knowledge than the imaginative proceeding
by which Mme Morel places events in time. In her metagnomic
dream during profound hypnosis she has the sensation of occupy-
ing a point in the imaginary space where her hallucinations arise.
According to the place where the hallucinations appear, she
judges whether she is dealing with past, present, or future. Those
of the past appear as if behind her, those of the future before her,
and those of the present by her side. By this simple mental
artifice this subject obtains so sure an idea of relative place in
time that this is the only kind of error that I have never known
her make. In her language these perceptions are translated in
phrases such as : " This event will not come to pass soon ; I

see it far from me " " Yes, this will happen soon ; it is

close to me, I can touch it. . . N Some change is taking p
in the life of this person ; I sec it round me ; it surro*
me.

Other subjects obtain the same cognitions by other symbolical
representations; and it is easy to understand that if on
interpretation of images so imprecise, they risk an approximat
to actual dates, either spontaneously or because the experimem
insists, error is the rule.

It occasionally happens, however, that supernormal cognition
takes the form of visual images of words or phrases. In such
cases an exact date may be given. 1 This is exceptional, but in
the course of numerous seances I have obtained the first names
(often), the ages, names of persons, countries, and towns, a
telephone number, etc.

But the imaginative working is usually less direct ; it progresses
from symbol to symbol and thus leads the conscious mind to
precise knowledge. The following is a typical example :

* I see in the family circle of this gentleman a young girl ... a
appears . . . Stephanos * . . . Stephanie . . . Fanny . . . she is
Fanny."

With some subjects similar precise informations are scattered
through their stances, whether they are in the mind of
person present, or (not more frequently, however), if
are.

Every metagnomic subject uses visual symbolism and allegory
after his own fashion ; it depends on intellectual culture and

1 Audition of words, automatic writing and speaking, arc other representative
modalities which give the same results.

• Stephanos in Greek is " a crown." M. de Fleuriere, who gave this impression
is a highly educated man and knows Greek.


ical
the
ion
iter


:ered


PSYCHOLOGICAL SEQUENCES OF METAGNOMY 147


imaginative tendency. With Mme Morel, in whom the study of
mental representation is particularly easy and fertile in results,
the symbolism borders on the concrete. A character, an
intelligence, a sentiment, for instance, will be revealed to her by
hallucinatory human figure verging on a caricature. The head
of a man with bright eyes, lively, mobile, with an exceptionally
large skull radiating light— will be translated as " He is a man of
great intelligence," or, describing her vision directly, she may say,
" I see that man ; how intelligent he looks ; what a large and
luminous brain."

A dull look, as if resigned to ignorance ; a slow, hesitating
image ; then only a small, dark brain visible, will cause her to
say, " He is unintelligent, ignorant, material, etc."

To arrive at the same cognition, the psychism of this subject
often uses visions devoid of movement, composed of principal
and adventitious images, these latter containing the sense of the
knowledge to be built up. The subject will say, "I see round
this person people who are in pain. ... I see blood . . . sick
persons . . . he is interested in the sick and looks after them . . .
he is a physician."

A man of science appears to her surrounded with thousands
of images, and in the midst of all these he is calm, satisfied, and
there is a look of knowledge in his eyes .... whence results
description of this kind : "He has a powerful brain. ... I see
much light in him . . . round him I see figures, designs, plans
of every kind. . . . This man's interests are scientific, but in
constructive science, like an engineer or an architect." Or
again, " She is intellectual ; a very intelligent woman . . .
artistic. ... I see round her many images of still life . . .
they are pictures. . . . She is fond of painting."

There are as many modes of using visual perceptions as there
are sensitives. Here is another kind, by another percipient :

" Everything is black in this person's life ; fate is persistently against
her. Near at hand, however, is a ray of light which pierces the darkness ;
then a greater and growing light . . . better days are near."

" This person seems to me like a stream which divides and fills different
reservoirs ... his goodness upholds many human beings round him."

M The whole life of this person appears to me in vision. I see him
bound round by bonds which restrain and immobilize him. ... He makes
muscular efforts to break them, but in vain. Everything that he has
hitherto tried has failed . . . but he is near the time when a greater
effort will break his bonds . . . circumstances will assist his undertakings."

Sometimes the allegory is by very simple symbolism. M. de
Fleurtere, for instance, takes cognizance of organic or psychic life
or of external action by seeing mere lines whose directions, tints,
size, and other characters give him synthetised indications to be


148 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN

later on completed by more concrete visions. This percip
will sometimes express himself thus :

" The life of this man seems to me like a luminous ray which ascend
^ntinuously, broadening out . . . without check or depression
'e will expand without hindrances. ..."

N This gentleman's life looks to me like a dark ray which has for some
time been getting thinner. ... It is still thinner in the future
it break . . . death will come before long. 1 '

There are uneducated 11 visual " metagnomic subjects whose
imagination uses only allegorical images and who only describe
their visions. They speak in parables after the manner of
orientals. Those who do not know the psychological compulsion
under which they act, are apt to disdain manifestations of faculty
which can, however, produce some remarkable phenomena.

To reinforce an exposition, necessarily brief and imperfect
how mental visual images are used, it seems useful to quote '
a fragment of auto-analysis given me in 1913 by M. de Fleuriere.
It is given in full in my book, Lucidiie et Intuition, pages 437-456.

"My intuitive mental images occasionally correspond with the objectiv
reality in the present or the future. Thus, the vision of a cradle in whr-
is a smiling child, of a person extended on a death-bed, a vessel sink
at sea, a building in flames, are natural images thrown on the screen of 1
soul which describe facts past, present, or future, according to the ; 1
of vision.

M At other times the visions are figurative, so to speak, they are of a
symbolical type. Thus, in current language and by traditional meaning,
an olive branch does not signify the branch of a tree, but peace ; a dove
does not stand for the bird, but the idea of gentleness ; a lily is not a
flower, but an image of candour and purity. These are, substantially,
metaphors, and such artifices must, so it seems to me, be frequently used
by lucidity.

" In my own case they continually recur when I take the trouble to
analyse the visual, auditory, tactile, and olfactory images which constitute
one form of direct vision or telepathic intuition. Symbolism always plays
a very large part.

"Thus, the vision of a dead man, instead of presenting itself under
the natural form of a corpse in a coffin, it may appear under twenty
different forms. Sometimes I have the impression of a branch which
cracks, breaks, and fails (especially in cases of sudden death), and then
there is both the vision of the fact and the auditory supplement, all
referring not to the material object, but the event signified.

" Occasionally I have this vision of death under the form of a black
line cleaving a grey crystal or extending into a cloudy sky : or it may be
a light which is slowly extinguished, or a meteor vanishing on the horiic
or again, it may appear under the form of a gaping chasm by the side
a person into which some one dear to him disappears.

99 These few examples will show how much images which convey the
same idea may differ.

" In another order of ideas when the life of an individual is very m
disturbed, morally and materially, but better and more peaceful ti
are approaching, the situation is manifest to me in the lucid state by


PSYCHOLOGICAL SEQUENCES OF METAGNOMY 149


very expressive image of a rough sea or a wind-driven lake on which the
tempest is succeeded by calm, the water becoming a mirror in which
blue sky and sunshine are reflected. Or I may have before me the image
of a tempestuous sky and heavy clouds with flashes of lightning succeeded
by calm, silence, and serene light.

" Under a different symbolism, when the future is to be mild and sweet
I see a verdant plain dotted with flowers, which stretches far beyond the
person, beautiful and smiling, over which blow the breezes of springtime.

" If the matter concerns great material and pecuniary success, the
result of personal effort and assisting circumstances, the interior sensation
is that of swelling out, plenitude, marked relief, and the corresponding
images are swelling billows, rounded hills that rise, or a fertile slope on
which there are gilded heaps like masses of gold or ripe wheat. (The most
curious of these symbols is that a swelling on my left arm above the
metacarpal bones and on the forearm a little above the inner articulation
of the wrist always corresponds to this kind of future — increased material
advantages.)

" If unexpected good fortune, due to chance, happening suddenly — an
inheritance, lottery prize, discovery of treasure, etc. — is to come to pass,
I have the same sensation of plenitude, extension, and swelling, but the
image is usually different — a golden rain or sparkling light falling on the
person.

" We may now consider another kind of success — moral achievement,
notoriety, social relief, celebrity, distinction, renown. In such cases I
feel a sensation of light, and the image is that of an aureole more or less
bright shining on and around the person. The colour will be according
to the case, will be white, golden or rose, or harmonious blendings of
these. (I note in passing that in these cases I have never seen blue or
green.)

" If the renown is to come from literary success, intellectual effort, or
brain-work, I have observed that the aureole tends to red, more or less
tinged with violet. I have further observed that more or less red pertains
to cerebral activity, as if the red colour were the result of its ebullition
as of melted metal or a burning substance.

M I do not claim that this is so ; I mean that by such a colour I have
the vision or the sensation of cerebral activity and of the kind of luminous
vapour that proceeds from it, just as white or green flames play over
melted silver or copper. ,

"In my visions or sensations of colour this red becomes empurpled
and changes into pure violet when the cerebral activity tends towards or
is bent upon the transcendental, psychical problems, research into the
Beyond, solution of philosophical problems and all that is called the domain
of the marvellous.

" If it be permissible I could give you the names of very well-known

persons who have given me this colour-sensation — notably, Mme de V ,

M. Max , Leon D , Mme Ag , Mme Dr. J-M , and others.

I have always observed it more or less characteristically with priests,
doctors, men of science, highly cultured spiritualists, and some en-
lightened mystics.

" Now to speak of success of a sentimental kind. When a life holds,
or will hold, joys of the heart and love, this state of things presents to my
intuition the image of an azure nimbus, or a surrounding atmosphere of
blue (or blue-green) above and around the person predestined to such joy,
" (In the exercise of my humble powers, bright blue, bluish, or blue and
green mixed have always appeared to me as the special colours relating
to the heart and its influences.)


150 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


" On the other hand, if the life is to be overshadowed by a deep and
unhappy love, torn by shocks and crises, I see the blue atmosphere
intersected by grey, dark, fire-red, or dark-red rays and blots of strange
shapes flung together. In such cases the vision gives me a sensation of
something at once sweet, grand, and painful.

" If a person is in physical or moral danger I see quagmires and chasms
opening under his steps or round about him. I could quote many such
cases.

" If a person is menaced by perfidy, falsehood, and equivocal proceed-
ings I could quote instances in which this intuition is given by the image
of serpents that I see creeping and hissing about the person in danger,
insidious and threatening.

" Here is an example of symbolical imagery drawn from physical and
the moral sources, having to do with a passion such as anger :

" I have often found myself in intuitive contact with choleric
violent by nature or actually angry. The image revealing this sta 1
often very striking, for it shows the projection of bUck, or gr*y,
or steaming vapour from the brain or the chest, nearly always
with a bilious yellow ; these came chiefly from the head and chest,
dark, concentric sheaves, like fireworks of ill-assorted colours.

" On the other hand, a gentle, calm, and good disposition is shown by
the visual image of a rosy transparence, slightly warm (tactile image or
sensation) with a sort of magnetic attraction which draws and retains.
This is a physical and moral sensation which I can hardly describe, but
appears to me fluidic.

" With respect to the magnetic attraction which I have just mentioned,
I have observed that a few men and many women, especially in the realm
of passion, have this undefinable quasi-magnetic property which at once
attracts, captivates, and retains. In the intuitive perception of such
women, charming and fatal, I have several times had a sensation as if
I saw deep in their being an eye with the power of fascination, and also
from the forehead and the heart a sort of magnetic radiation proceeding
from their whole being attracting all that is near them, as a magnet attracts
certain metals. By this magnetic sensation I feel that I am in presence of
one of those heart-vampires who burn and devour all affection approach-
ing them, an attraction from which none can escape.

M I could multiply these symbolical images for direct or telepa
intuition indefinitely."

It would be fundamental to the study of supernormal cognition,
and full of deep implications, if it were well proved that meta-
gnomic subjects who work by mental representations of the visual
and other sensorial categories, receive and reconstitute informa-
tive ideas, and not direct perceptions of realities beyond sp
and time, when they are working on a human objective.

Utilization of tactile mental images.

The varieties of such images. The sense of touch, which
evolutionists take to be the primordial sense in animal life, seems
the most simple in its mechanism, but is really complex. It
informs us of our own body and of the external world by diverse
sensations which have long been distinguished in practice and


PSYCHOLOGICAL SEQUENCES OF METAGNOMY 151


which pathological anatomy has begun to differentiate and refer
to separate mechanisms of sensation.

Stimulus of the nerves of touch according to their kind, and
also according to the particular nerves affected, produce four
elementary tactile impressions represented by four varieties of
tactile mental images.

(1) When we pass our fingers over an object to perceive its
shape, its dimensions, its texture, etc., we have sensations of
touch properly so called, and the sensations that so come to us
are those of active and voluntary touch for which the hand is
the peripheral organ specially adapted. We thus acquire tactile
representations that reflect the forms, sizes, and texture of
external things.

(2) If some object leans against any part of the body, the tactile
impression so produced is one of pressure. This is the passive
touch by which we receive tactile images of weight.

(3) Some nerve-filaments and the sensitive mechanism that
connects them with the external world are impressed by the
thermal mode of energy and give the impression of variations in
temperature.

(4) Our internal impressions that proceed from all parts of the
body, from all its organs and tissues, end in a general psychic
sensation of health or uneasiness, or it may be in a sensation of
pain or pleasure which permits of localization at some place
in the body, at some organ of functional system. These are
the origin of the images called coenesthetic, recalling internal
impressions ; they are totally distinct from the preceding tactile
images.

(5) From this last category of tactile images are derived
another variety — the images that represent emotions; and in
view of the extended use that metagnomic subjects make of
these, it is necessary to define clearly in what this order of mental
images consists.

Whatever the cause may be, emotion is a psychic state char-
acterized by a coenesthetic complex and the motor reactions that
accompany it.

When the emotive stimulus is external it is emotion properly
so called : w r hen it is internal and springs from an idea, emotion
takes the more durable form of sentiment, or if strongly predomi-
nant in the mental region it becomes N passion." But whatever
its origin the emotion determines a psycho-physiological change
differing according to the emotion and always the same for each
kind.

The feeling of "sadness," for instance, is associated with 1
cardiac pain, epigastric constriction, and intellectual, muscular,
and moral depression. " Anger," on the other hand, causes a f


152 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN

state of muscular contraction, more or less discernible, as if the
body were mobilizing its energies for strife ; the vaso-motor
reactions make the face pale or red, the heart quickens, the brain
is confused, and clarity of thought vanishes in the chaos produced
by the emotional shock*

Consideration of each variety of emotion would show that
each differs from others in the reaction-complex produced. This
can easily be analysed in the case of sudden or strong emotions,
but is more difficult in the case of lasting and gentle sentiments ;
but a brain which has lived through all kinds of emotions would
have no difficulty in recognizing the nature of a sentiment by
the nature of the sensation it produces. Is it not a matter of
unquestioned observation that attitudes reawaken the emotions
that gave rise to them ? For instance, it suffices to mimic anger
to feel that emotion by reversal of its external phenomena.

The specific reactions of the organism to each variety of
emotion create as many coenesthetic images ; and these are
associated with motor images. These emotional images are
those that metagnomic psychisms chiefly use, whether isolated
and momentary or ancillary to other coincident representations.

According to the use that percipients make of them, the
tactile mental images can be reduced to three groups :

1. Images of touch properly so called, of weight, thermal varia-
tion ; representing the quality of things relatively to the sense of
touch, form, texture, extension, weight, and heat.

2. Ccenesthetic images, representing organic impressions.


Utilization of tactile hallucinations rightly so called.

The sum of cognitions on persons and things which can be given
by hallucinations of touch is restricted, and this variety is mostly
complementary to other kinds, chiefly visual.

Mme Morel reaches the notion of an oriental town in the follow-
ing manner : " ... I see a number of white houses . . .
vegetation which is not that of our country . . . very bright
sunshine . . . oppressive heat . . . etc." She perceives a
commercial change thus : 11 This gentleman will change his
factory ... he is now busy on an industry concerned with liquids.
... I see him soon in another manufactory where other things
are made that I cannot name. . . . They are hard, flat, and cold
to the touch/' (This was a brick factory.)

Percipients often locate events in time by help of thermal
sensations giving the seasonal notions : "I feel that this event
took place when it was cold ; it was during the winter or in cold
weather." More frequently employed than gustatory or olfactory
hallucinations, being of a more intellectual type, nevertheless


PSYCHOLOGICAL SEQUENCES OF METAGNOMY 153


tactile images can be only accessory, since by themselves they
do not suffice to reconstruct perceptions in their entirety. They
collaborate towards a mental representation.

Utilization of coenesthetic hallucinations.

These are the mental images which more especially furnish
cognitions of organic states, whether associated with visual
images by seers, or projected singly on the mental screen.

In this latter case the subjects describe what they feel bit by
bit, and thus approximate to the seat and nature of an ailment
with very unequal results. They thus live through the momentary
objectification of the notion of an illness presented to conscious
understanding by the transcendental thought. This passing
possession of the mind by the notion of illness becomes pictorial
among those percipients who not only describe their sensations
but mimic some of them.

On touching a written paper, Mile de Berly will start yawning
and will show signs of nausea : u How this poor man yawns !
His stomach is affected/ 1 she will say. With another paper in
her hands, she rises from her chair, takes a few slow steps, and
sits down again heavily, saying, " Oh, how tired my back is ; I
am weary ; my abdomen is painful. . . . Ah, how good it is to
sit down. . . . Oh, w r hat a relief I I advise you to examine this
patient's abdomen ; there is certainly something abnormal."
The patient in question was in the fourth month of pregnancy,
cheerfully endured. The coenesthetic hallucination was excessive,
but correct in its meaning.

In another stance, on putting her hand on an object, she had
so violent an attack of sneezing and running at the nose that I
feared she had a bad cold and urged her to put on a shawl. She
said, 11 Do not be anxious, this will pass, but the lady will not
recover as soon as I shall ; she has a kind of chronic coryza . . .
she makes me want to blow my nose."

I have met with percipients so completely under the objectifi-
cation of coenesthetic images that their mental representations
become actualities — colic, vomiting, diarrhoea, cough, oppression
in breathing, etc., just as hypnotized persons give full effect to
suggestion.

In exceptional cases the coenesthetic hallucination is so strong
that the organic disturbance lasts for some time instead of ceasing
suddenly as it usually does.

On touching the hand of a sick man, M. de FleuriSre had one
day the immediate sensation of a swollen liver and violent
nausea. Other mental images being accordant, he warned this
man of the grave nature of his illness, though softening the
prognosis. The man died of cancer of the liver; but the


154 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


sensations induced in the percipient by the contact lasted for
ten days ; his liver felt tender and he had to be treated.

All subjects who obtain cognitions of organic states by
ccenesthetic impressions do not experience this strong objectifica-
tion of their mental images. Most of them are aware of an
ailment and its seat by the mere sensation of local pain, more or
less intense— a kind of tactile diagrammatic representation.
The relativity in these representations is here most strongly
marked, for just as visions, inexact from the anatomical and
pathological point of view, give to the percipients correct notions
of the disease, so also coenesthetic images which do not correspond
to the actual sensations of the patient, allow of cognition of real
existent maladies.

The sensation of pain by which a subject is made aware of
organic trouble is very often not felt by the patient, either not
at all, or different in kind, acuteness, or even locality. Sometimes
the person cognized is not aware of being ill. Sometimes the ill-
ness cognized is in the future. The mental representation is not
intended to reproduce actuality, but only to give the notion— the
cognition.

This psychological sequence in metagnomy has given the idea
of transfer of disease from one person to another, the former
ceasing to suffer and the latter taking on the ailment. When a
patient ceases to feel pain and the percipient had prolonged
coenesthetic symptoms there is a semblance of transfer.

Utilization of emotional hallucinations.

Among all mental images, those of an emotional nature are
the most used. A little reflection will easily show the diversity
of cognition which this kind of image can furnish, whether
associated with other sensorial images or not.

Percipients obtain cognition of emotional and intellectual
states by a duplicate hallucination, both visual and emotional.
Some subjects, however, cognize these states under the form of
imaginary emotions. They feel the sentiments, the intellectual
and moral tendencies of others as if they were their own ; and
they translate the interior life of the person cognized by analysing
what they themselves feel and by their interior sensations.
Emotional hallucination has as much power of representation as
the sentiment itself at the moment of its appearance under its
generating idea : sometimes even more. It is by these emotional
representations that many subjects when in presence of another
human being are immediately aware of his preoccupations, his
leading passion, his personal worth, the quality of his life, and
so on. At the first contact a feeling of discomfort or contentment


PSYCHOLOGICAL SEQUENCES OF METAGNOMY 155


synthesises what will be explained in detail by the series of
hallucinations in other sensorial modes.

This emotional sense at first contact is sometimes so violent
that percipients sometimes experience acute psycho-physical
shock which may be unbearable and insurmountable. In
presence of one of those unhappy persons who are victims of
unceasing misfortunes, some percipients seem to feel the
accumulated weight of the sufferings that have taken place at
intervals in a life — the heart contracts, their breathing quickens,
and imperious need for the open air obliges them to close the
seance. Such sensitives experience evenings when their peace of
mind is gravely affected by having lived through the troubles of
others whose bitterness remains with them. On the other hand,
they are strengthened and feel themselves in pleasant conditions
when they have cognized a life which is loyal and happy.

Utilization of auditive mental images.

Auditive mental images represent noises, sounds, or the con-
ventional assemblages of sounds — spoken words.

Representations of noises and sounds, other than spoken words,
are of slight use to metagnomic faculty, which only uses them as
accessories as it uses gustatory, olfactory, and tactile images.

Mme Morel, for instance, reaches the notion of the sea by the
vision of a great expanse of water accompanied by the noise of
waves and a salt taste.

M. de Fleuri&re, hearing five detonations, is aware of the nature
of a criminal attempt of which fuller cognition is given by a
succession of concrete and allegorical visual hallucinations.

Verbal auditive hallucinations play a much more important part,
since they can represent all knowledge, even the most abstract, by
articulate language. The percipients hear a voice, and repeat what
they believe they have heard. The sense of the informative images
does not in this case need interpretation, which removes one
source of error.

Subjects who receive multi-sensorial representations are often
informed by verbal auditive images. According to their imagina-
tive tendencies and the psychological needs of the moment, they
hear single words, phrases, or a succession of phrases dictated by
a voice, and reproduce these. The words seem sometimes to
come from a coexistent phantasmal vision ; in other cases they
follow unexpectedly on other kinds of hallucinations and arrest
attention.

When the mind of a percipient is directed to the cognition of an
ini'-^dual life, that which is called his consciousness docs not know
■toe of images will arise nor which of his senses will be


156 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN

hallucinated. Transcendental thought seems skilful in using the
psychic resources. According to mental proclivities and the
nature of the cognition to be aroused transcendental thought
selects some one or other of existing images, creates another at
need, reinforces one by others, or accentuates meaning by a
sequence of representations expressing the same significance
under diverse forms. All methods seem good which serve the
end — to be understood by normal thought.

Percipients who name a town, a locality, or a person, or who
indicate a date, often do this by simply repeating a verbal
audition.

Utilization of motor mental images.

Theoretically all mental motor representations suitable to
express a thought can be used by the metagnomic psychism ;
but practically the co-ordinated movements which can bring
ideas into consciousness have been specialized by custom. The
images representative of such movements may be placed in two
groups :

1. Motor images by expressive gestures (mimicry).

2. Verbal motor images.

Motor images by expressive gestures.

Gestures are so rarely used that up to the present I have met
only one subject, Mile de Berly, whose psychism uses these as
complementary to other kinds of images. She is a subject who
receives many sensorial impressions : she sees, she hears, and
she feels the metagnomic information, but her diverse hallucina-
tions are from time to time associated with gestures pointing to
the same meaning. So at the same time that she states what she
sees, hears, or feels, she will mimic the action, living through the
supernormal perceptions as an actor on the stage lives through
the drama. There are but few of her good seances in which
mimicry does not, to a variable extent, supplement her mental
sources of information.

She may, for instance, rise from her chair and sketch some
movements of a foreign dance, while she is speaking to a friend
of her mother, who belonged to an oriental court and was during
her lifetime a brilliant dancer.

At another time she will get up and scrape the carpet with her
foot, saying : " We shall find this jewel in the sand where it is
buried." Whether the human personality on whom her faculty
is working be present or distant, or dead, once her imagination
is stimulated to use this procedure, she may mimic approxi-
mately the sound and rhythm of his voice ; she may say what


PSYCHOLOGICAL SEQUENCES OF METAGNOMY 157


he might say or might have said ; she may take his customary
attitudes, reproducing them after the fashion of caricaturists who
express a physiognomy by exaggerating its principal feature.

In the special case when the person cognized is defunct, ignor-
ance of the mental procedure that determines this motor form of
representation gives rise to the notion of a real temporary in-
carnation of a spirit in a medium— a spirit-possession. The
possession is really by cognitions and ideas.

Verbal motor images.

These are of many kinds, and metagnomic subjects use one
or another, according to their imaginative proclivities. Some
use images representing articulate language ; others use the
co-ordinated movements representing written words ; others
again, and not a few, have recourse to images representing
co-ordinated movements producing words by prior conventions —
verbal motor images with hand-movements other than writing.

These different kinds have in common that they are not felt
directly ; they elude subjective observation and are the mental
representations that are named " subconscious," which have,
moreover, only been revealed and well verified since the use of
new experimental psychological methods, and the searching
studies of aphasias that have been made.

Objectified in metagnomic output, like all other kinds of mental
images, they make real the movements of which they are repre-
sentations ; their latency gives them the semblance of automatism,
the transcendental thought translating its knowledge directly
into spoken or written thought without invoking the help of the
thought that we call " conscious."

Verbal motor hallucinations producing articulation.

The verbal motor representations of articulation determine, by
their objectification, involuntary, impulsive speech. The subjects
speak as if moved by an internal, uncontrollable power, and are
only aware of supernormal cognition after they have expressed
it in words.

In the psychic process conscious thought has only to remain
passive, the tendency of motor representations to objectify
themselves is so strong that the subjects speak without having
previously willed to do so.

It is in this manner that Dr. N. Vaschide received the point-
blank prediction of his death. Vaschide, who was much inter-
ested in the psychological correspondences between palmistry
and intuition, often made experiments with Mme Fraya, and
sometimes jestingly asked her, "Tell me when I shall die."


158 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN

To this question Mme Fraya, feeling the answer to be painful,
replied by a forced smile and a promise of many years of life.
But one day, in the winter of 1904, the imprudent quest
released the motor mechanism, and drew the answer, " You
die of pneumonia when thirty-three years old." Frightened
at the words that she had not intended to utter, she excused
herself as well as she could, and tried to minimize their effect ;
but as has been mentioned in a previous chapter, Vaschide
October 13th, 1907, of pneumonia, aged thirty-three.

I give below another fragment of auto-analysis in which
M. de Fleuri6re described to me the part played by imp
speech in his own metagnomic work.

Involuntary speech is not usual with me, but still it often
Then I do not know at the moment what impels me to speak and to
some prediction : I am astonished and sometimes frightened of wl
have said, especially if the prediction is painful. But I have the f<
that my whole psychism — my whole interior being — is in a supernoi
or paranormal state, and, hearing the sound of my own voice, there are
times when there is another person in me, hidden in the depths of my being,
that then reveals himself, speaking by my lips, feeling, seeing, and saying
things that my normal consciousness does not immediately grasp.

To take two examples out of a thousand :

One day a gentleman unknown to me came to see me. He was living
in the Rue Demours, Paris. In the course of my investigation of his future,
I was as much surprised as he to hear myself saying to him, " My God I
what a sorrow for you : the sad death of such a charming child, and so
young." I stopped there, brought up sharply, my consciousness being
aware of the import of these words resulting from an instantaneous sub-
conscious impression. I tried to explain away and minimize, but in vain,
the blow had been struck. Whether he believed the prophecy or not, he
went away much disturbed. . . . Fifteen days later he sent a friend to
me with the news that his boy of fourteen had just died.

Recently, on receiving a lady, I said to her impulsively : " Your aspect
is very calm, but there is a drama in your past ! One, two, three revolver
shots at another woman — your enemy I Fortunately not much damage
done, only a scandal and imprisonment. ..."

In the exceptional cases when words outrun the conscious image (or if
you like, the actual normal consciousness), I think that fundamentally
nothing is really spontaneous nor absolutely involuntary. Below the
normal consciousness, which does not realize, or only realizes later, there
is certainly a more rapid subconsciousness which has a vision or a sensation,
seizes on the relation between things and circumstances, and determines
speech before direct cognition has been able to discern the reason. For
there can be no effect without its cause, and this cause, to my thinking,
must be in the quick perception by this mysterious subconsciousness
which perceives immediately certain things that normal consciousness
only perceives later on hearing the words that have been pronounced.

It is, apparently, by an analogous psychological mechanism
that in certain neuropathic states patients speak without
previous consciousness of what they say. Their intellectuality
is in a state of effervescence, uncontrolled and undirected, and


PSYCHOLOGICAL SEQUENCES OF METAGNOMY LS9

—

expresses at once what it has elaborated. This phenomenon of
psycho-pathology is called ^ai^om^ic speaking " ; but this
term is not suitable to metagnomy arising from a motor repre-
sentation, for despite appearances it is not automatic.

The verbal motor image that produces articulation is one of
the forms of mental representation employed by transcendental
thought, in the same way as in all other uses of sensorial forms,
i.e. in full consciousness of what it desires to convey and the
means of conveying it.

Although I do not know subjects whose psychisms thus express
all the information that reaches them, there may be such, and
probably they will be met with when metapsychic studies are
more prevalent and experimenters are accustomed to study
thoroughly their human psychic instruments before putting them
into action.

In most metagnomic subjects who work in a waking state and
by means of multi-sensorial imaginations, the verbal motor
hallucination leading to articulation takes an important place
in the sequences of other sensorial hallucinations. A third or a
fourth part of the revelations made by certain sensitives takes
this form. It is almost entirely by this mental process, for
instance, that Mme Fraya translates the intellectual and moral
side of a human personality. She makes analyses of character
that are masterpieces of penetration and psychological detail
by means of the flexible and exact symbolism of words, and the
perfect images they convey.

Verbal motor hallucinations expressed by writing.

Graphic verbal representations are objectified by impulsive
writing. The metagnomic information is written on paper as
a receiving instrument writes a telegraphic message.

Impulsive speech and impulsive writing are two psychical
processes that differ only by the kind of motor verbal image used :
but from this diversity in kind, there result dissimilar aspects,
according as the percipients use one or other of these subclasses
of images.

Those who speak by impulse nearly always receive their im-
pressions through many sensorial forms — seeing, hearing, feeling
— and utter their paranormal cognitions. Externally they re-
semble any ordinary person expressing normal thought ; but
those who have the impulse to write mostly confine themselves
to that sole mode of mental representation which takes on the
appearance of automatism.

Experimentally, this kind of metagnomic subjects generally
act in the following manner : As soon as metagnomic perception
on a given personality is at work, the hand of the percipient


160 SUPERNORMAL FACULT

begins to write words expressing the supernormal cognii
Some write in pencil (a pen being too easily broken), and
become aware of what they have written on reading it over.
Others are impelled to trace words with a finger on a smooth
surface, for neither pen nor pencil would stand the abrupt
movements that they make. These become aware of the words
they thus trace out, and translate into speech as each graphic
movement is made. The kind of movement made by the hand
varies according to the strength of the mental representations.
Sometimes the words are written slowly and hesitatingly, and
some phrases are left unfinished. Sometimes, on the contr;
the hand is moved so very fast that the percipient, if
is aware of the words as he writes them, speaks as quickly as if
he were expressing his thought directly in speech. The more
rapid the writing, the more precise are the words, and, as a rule,
the better the construction of the phrases.

While the hand is writing the subject usually has no other
mental representation of the metagnomic cognition ; and if it
should happen that he mentally completes sentences nearly
finished, the words that his hand traces will not be those con-
sciously thought of, but rather some synonym. This phenomenon
is explained by the fact that in the special state of metagnomic
function the hand is not obeying the mental representation that
is called conscious, but is moved by the transcendental thought.
There is another mode of graphic motor images akin to those
described: it is the motor image representing co-ordinated
movements of drawing. I have not observed any subject thus
expressing his revelations, but I mention the possibility. The
drawing so produced might be either an approximation to reality,
or symbolical forms.

Motor hallucinations of other movements for the conventio
expression by words. By their particular preferences, but more
especially by the conditions under which they are called upon to
act, some metagnomic psychisms are capable of using motor
images representative of words other than the spoken or written.
For instance, if it be agreed that raps by the foot of a table shall
stand for letters of the alphabet by a numerical code, or that a
pointer pivoted so as to indicate the letters of the alphabet on a
board shall point to the letters to make words — in such cases the
transcendental thought can, with some subjects, use these motor
representations to objectify by the conventional movements, the
informing words that reach the supernormal perceptions.

These modes of expression, now known throughout the world
by the practice of spiritualism, have caused some latent
gnomic faculties to emerge, but also many more manifestat
true psychological automatism that are devoid of value.


The
ility,

ional


J» > —

PSYCHOLOGICAL SEQUENCES OF METAGNOMY 161

The study of metagnomic faculty in action leads to certain
psychological conclusions which are fundamental in the sense
that further researches must necessarily be founded on them.
They may be summed up as under :

1. The known sensorial mechanisms are not the channel for
supernormal cognition, nor is it originated by that function of
thought which is known as " conscious."

2. Despite appearances to the contrary in certain cases,
metagnomic subjects are not passive psychic instruments, receiv-
ing supernormal knowledge and automatically transposing it
into written or spoken language.

It is undeniable that their cerebral mechanisms are moved by
latent thought differing from know r n intellectual modalities.
This latent thought can, by an effort akin to genius, use the
resources of mental representation and the aptitudes of the mind
for comprehension of the latent thought, to make its cognitions
known.

3. This latent thought which transmits its cognitions so
ingeniously, is of a kind whose exact nature is unknown ; and
may therefore be called transcendental, because it cognizes
without sensorial data and in advance of all experience, being
freed from the intellectual constraints of time and space.

If I have succeeded in condensing into this book all the results
of long and patient experiment, no objections against these
conclusions will arise in the mind of the reader. They should
appear as the outcome of exact demonstration, with the reserva-
tion that their soundness should be verified by repetition of the
experimental investigations from which they are derived.

These psychological points of departure being laid down, it is
now desirable to seek for the sources whence the transcetulental
thought of metagnomic subjects draws its knowledge.


PART IV

THE INFORMATIVE SOURCES OF
SUPERNORMAL COGNITION IN METAGNOMY
DIRECTED UPON A HUMAN PERSONALITY


CHAPTER I

THE PROBLEM OF THE INFORMATIVE SOURCES

METAGNOMY


I. The General Problem


I


F the diverse kinds of supernormal cognition were attrit
of one single mind, their possessor would excite the stup
amazement of other men.


His body would be permeated by his consciousness in the
smallest action of its tissues and all the vicissitudes of its future
development. At any moment the succession of events that
weave the web of his personal life both in the past and in the
future, would be accessible to representation in his conscioi
as memories are in ordinary thought.

Neither his birth nor his death, nor the field of direct and
indirect sensorial perception, would limit his environment in
time and space. He would know a part of the contents of the soil
on which he treads — its subterranean waters, its coal strata, its
veins of ore, and its caves. The human beings that he might
meet would reveal to him by their mere presence, their thoughts
of the moment, the secrets of their intellectual moral and organic
personalities, of their relations with others and the knowledge of
their whole surroundings, both of persons and things.

According to circumstances and the movements of his o
thought or that of others, he would be connected in space
persons known and unknown to him and would to some extent
take cognizance of their characters and lives. He would know
and could tell, the details of events happening at great distam
from himself.

Extending his strange psychic power in what we call Time,
could ascend the stream of human history, stopping at any


any personality or any scene of the past,
actualities to be realized in the future.

Such a being, superhuman to our ideas, is so far removed from
any religious, philosophical, or scientific concept that the most
romantic fancy has not, so far as I know, dared to imagine such
a man. Nevertheless, such an one is a logical possibility, since he
would be no more than the possessor of all the latent psychic
powers whose different phenomenal forms are found isolated and
scattered.

If it were given to us to behold such a man he would be so
enigmatical that we have not a glimmer how it might be possible
to penetrate to the sources of his knowledge.

Considered as a whole, the problem of the informative sources
of metagnomy is scientifically unattainable. Knowledge is only
gained by comparison, and our actual acquisitions have nothing
with which to compare transcendental human thought. What is
offered to experimental methods of research is novel to mankind.

Nevertheless, though metagnomic faculty in all the com-
plexities of its known and unknown possibilities, produces a
mental vertigo, and is a discouraging object for study, we know
it it is parcelled out into specialized manifestations and that
the metagnomic subjects available are each capable of only partial
metanormal psychic power ; and thus the general problem
splits up into secondary problems whose solution is within our

reach. '

In the actual state of our knowledge, having no hope of
"jhtenment from a general view, I have limited the present
ivestigation on the origin of supernormal cognition to the
Dlitary case of a metagnomic subject operating on a human
personality.


[I. The Problem Restricted to the Informative Sources
of Metagnomy on a Human Objective

Even when thus restricted to a single one of its conditions,
this problem is of capital import : to resolve it would be to pass
from the initial stage of accumulation of facts by mere observa-
tion, and to enter on that of experiment which begins as soon
as we become acquainted with the determinism of a given
phenomenon, and results in more extended knowledge that can
be usefully applied.

Does the present stage of psychological science furnish us with
the means of reaching this end ?

Three of its latest acquirements are the only ones that can even
pretend to suggest the semblance of a partial solution. It is
lecessary here to define them.


164 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN

I. Experimental investigation adapted to abnormal or
morbid psychological states (suggestion, hypnosis, or hysteria)
has caused the discovery of a latent life of thought hitherto
unsuspected. It has been recognized that mental lSe is double,
and that behind the 11 sensations, perceptions, ideas, judg-
ments, and reasonings of which we are conscious, there exist,
or may exist, other sensations, perceptions, ideas, judgments,
and reasonings of which we are not conscious, and even that
these latter can co-ordinate themselves and organize
selves in a manner sufficiently systematic to constitute
looks like a secondary personality more or less distinct
and independent of the principal personality." (E. Boirac
Psychologic Inconnue, p. 117.)

Behind the exercise of thought that claims our attention
there is another mental action, elaborating by its special
sensations, knowledge that conscious thought is not aware of

1. To this mental work, outside what we call conscious
the name " subconsciousness " has been given, covering at
once the psychic phenomena which gave rise to the word, and
also all the non-conscious possibilities of a phenomenal kind
that cannot be reduced to the psychological concept of sub-
consciousness. Boirac has proposed the term ' ^cryptopsychy^"
to designate the hidden work of thought taken as a whole.

2. The same researches which revealed the hidden activi"
of thought discovered behind the ordinary manifestation*
memory, a latent memory in which are registered, exactly and
indelibly, all the sensations and all the psychic elaborations
both conscious and unconscious.

This integral remembrance of all that has acted on sensibility
in all its various sensorial forms, and of all the mental o
tions that directly or indirectly have resulted therefrom,
received the name of Cryptomnesia.

Thence has arisen the notion that the human personality
conceals an immutable storehouse of knowledge built up
the exercise of conscious and subconscious thought.

3. The two acquirements above named may now be c
fully admitted and classical." The practice of hypnosis and
the clinical study of mental affections in which the functions
of conscious thought are eclipsed, or momentarily detached (as
in febrile or insane delirium, hysterical states, etc.) hav
furnished verifications so abundant that these two conclusi
have now become uncontrovertible.

This is not yet the case with the third of the psychologi
acquirements whose content is pertinent to the aim before
The Universities have not as yet consecrated its validity ;


THE INFORMATIVE SOURCES IN METAGNOMY 165


is still to be awaited. I am referring to the phenomenon
designated by disparate and quasi-explanatory terms — com-
munication of thought, transmission of thought, thought-reading,
mental suggestion, and the like. These phenomena are more
rationally expressed by E. Boirac's term diapsychy — the passage
from one psychism to another, and is in effect the direct passage
of the content of one mind into another mind without the inter-
mediary of language or any expressive gestures.

It may be said that this phenomenon is universally known,
although not yet definitely accepted. Those who have desired to
study it experimentally and have known how to do this, know
it for a psychological fact just as accurately and much more
easily demonstrable than the two preceding ones.

It is important that it should be thoroughly known, for it
takes on diverse aspects according to the conscious or sub-
conscious quality of the thought that so passes.

Sometimes an experimenter, near by or at a distance, volun-
tarily transmits his mental representations of acts and ideas to
a percipient who translates them into reactions, acts, or words.
In such a case, the experimenter seems an active agent and the
subject a passive recipient, and the thought communicated is of
the quality called conscious. This aspect of diapsychy is that
which best answers to the label " mental suggestion." It is the
most difficult kind to reproduce, subjects capable of being
impressed by conscious thought voluntarily suggested, being
very rarely met with.

At other times it is observed that percipients reveal what is in
the mind of a person who neither wills nor even knows what is
transmitted. In this case the psychism cognized appears to be
passive and the percipient active ; the phenomenon seems to
answer to a penetration of thought.

Under this latter condition the passage of conscious thought is
still rare, though less so than when mental suggestion is voluntary,
as if attention fixed on the radiation of thought diminished its
power. — y

On the other hand, the passage of subconscious thought is]
found to take place so frequently that intermental communica-
tion (which is so difficult to verify) becomes a phenomenon i
constantly met with in the experimental practice of metanormal
psychology. When we are using subjects sensitive to the
subconscious modality of thought, rigorously scientific demon-j
stration of diapsychy becomes mere play. ^

Such are the resources that psychological science places at our
disposal for exploring the sources of supernormal cognition when
a metagnomic subject works on a human objective. WTiat
explanatory aids do these give us ?


166


SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


Given that the subconsciousness can perceive the intimate
relations of organic life (as cases of internal autoscopy have
proved), and also that there are persons who translate these
modalities of thought into words, one is led to suppose that each
of us knows subconsciously the state of his own organism, and
that it is this cryptic knowledge that passes arid represents itself
in different mental images in the psychism of metagnomic
subjects.

And this notion of the processus would explain in the same way
that there passes to the metagnomic subject the whole content o'
our latent thought — character and emotional life, tendencies and
intellectual life, the events which have made our past and make
our present— in a word all that the sensorium has registered and
all that the mind has consciously and unconsciously elaborated
out of sensations.

We might well think to possess in this a most logical hypo-
thesis, and confidently await its confirmation by experiment, if
metagnomic information consisted only in the revelation o
knowledge organized by sensorial exercise of thought, whether
conscious or unconscious ; but this is not the experimental fact
as we know it, and our hypothesis, as soon as built up, crum
down under the impact of facts too great for its capacity.

It is certainly not in latent and integral memories, records of
sensorial activity in conscious and subconscious thought, tha
metagnomic subjects find cognizance of what could never ha
been in that thought. Such are the cases in which percipien
reveal episodes tangential to some moment of our past lives, of
which our senses have certainly perceived nothing at all. Su
also are the cases when percipients draw up the balance-sheet
a whole life from one part of it on data necessarily unknown.

And, above all, it is not in our thought, at least as hitherto
conceived and delimited by science, that percipients find antici-
patory cognition of the future course of a particular life. The
phenomenon of precognition is a psychic product that has no
common measure with the products of the sensorial exercise of
thought ; it arises from other means of information and other
processes of cognition.

At the outset of metapsychic science it would be a false start
to strive to explain the genesis of supernormal cognition, even
when restricted to the delineation of a human personality. As
in all other branches of science, we must begin at the beginning ;
and before useless enquiry how supernormal knowledge is built up,
we must determine what is the source whence that cognition is
drawn.

It is to this question that I shall devote the following chapters,
taking care not to lose touch with facts, and accepting on


suggestions but those of strict observation and of experiment
directed to this end.

Three experimental conditions, dissimilar in appearance, will
be successively examined from this point of view :

1. A metagnomic subject delineates the states of being of a
living person there present ;

2. A metagnomic subject delineates the states of being of a
person distant in space ;

A metagnomic subject delineates the states of being of one
is dead or yet to be born.


CHAPTER II


WHEN A METAGNOMIC SUBJECT TAKES COGNIZANCE
OF THE STATES OF LIFE OF A HUMAN BEING
IN PRESENCE, WHENCE DOES HE DRAW HIS
INFORMATION ?


S soon as we place in juxtaposition and co-ordinate
the facts verified in the course of analytical study of
metagnomy working on a human objective, the answer
to this question seems to present itself at once.


A lesson of primordial importance is given us by the act of
bodily contact between cognizer and cognized- This lesson is so
full of meaning that it is in itself sufficient to localize the source
of information.

In this is to be found the full significance of the diverse results
of experiment described in some of the preceding chapters. The
reader has there learned that most metagnomic subjects, in order
to set their paranormal faculty to work, are accustomed to touch
the hand of the personality to be delineated ; i.e. to put the two
organisms— the two nervous systems as it would seem— into
contact.

This procedure is an absolute psycho-physiological necessity
for some subjects. As soon as contact is established, their faculty
enters on its task : without contact it remains potential and
inoperative.

Some, however, who can exert metagnomy without corporeal
contact, would seem by this manner of proceeding to annul the
significance of the contact that others find necessary, if it were
not easily to be seen that they also link themselves physically,
though by imperceptible bonds, with the persons whose states of
being they reveal. This is at once obvious if they are set to work
in presence of several persons. An exception must be made in the
case of some who work in profound hypnosis, and are kept to a
given personality by an imperative order ; but other subjects
under such conditions of experiment behave as if they were
psychic instruments receiving and acted on by the influences of
many informative sources. The information that reaches them
does not necessarily come from the selected personality, they
refer sometimes to any one of the persons present at random, or

168


THE STATES OF LIFE OF A HUMAN BEING 169


sometimes by some kind of elective preference, to one of them.
Not infrequently it is observed that the subjects do not connect
their revelations to the person to whom they pertain. Experi-
mental conditions when several persons are present are unfavour-
able to good working of the faculty, and the subject is constraint J
to make considerable efforts to resist the tendency to deviate
from the personality prescribed. Much fatigue results from this,
and the percipient seeks to avoid it, and then by instinct or by
experience, will often go to the person whose delineation was
required, take his hand or seize upon some object belonging to him
and hold it or press it to the forehead.

Moreover, percipients who can exert their metagnomy without
contact have found that information comes to them so much
more easily and more fully when such contact is made, that they
often have recourse to it even when only one person is present
with them.

It is also often observable that some percipient whose custom
is to touch the person to be delineated only at the beginning of
a stance and then to continue in proximity, have recourse to
momentary contacts when they feel the mental images which
bring paranormal cognition weaken or slow down.

Further, it is also frequently observed that subjects who can
cognize certain persons without contact, find such contact
necessary with others, failing which they get no information.

This first group of facts, easily verifiable by a few days'
experiment, forcibly suggests the notion : That percipients receive
some influence useful to the functioning of their powers from
contact with the human personality that they wish to delineate.

It should be remembered that metagnomic subjects " feel 11
this modality of informative energy that passes to them from all
persons, and that from it they take variable knowledge according
to the sensorial effects that it produces.

Nearly all percipients, not to say all, react at first to this force
by motor response that can be measured by recording instru-
ments, and are usually quite visible— jerks of the body, fibrillary
muscular contractions of the arm or the hand by which contact is
made, blinking of the eyelids, movements of the eyeballs, etc.,
whilst they feel themselves permeated by a dynamic influence
which some liken to a slight electric current proceeding from the
hand to the brain.

This sensation of fluidic emanation (to use their own term)
varies from one percipient to another for contact with the same
person ; it also varies for each percipient according to the person
touched. In some cases it only amounts to a vague and hardly
noticeable feeling, while in others it is so strong as to cause


170 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


unendurable discomfort, and there is every degree between these
two extremes. To this sensation of fluidic intensity there is added
that of quality, this latter expressing the physiological adequacy
of the paranormal sense of the percipient to the stimulus received.

All percipients agree in perceiving a relation between the
sensation produced by the fluidic emanation and the clarity of
the metagnomic information that immediately arises. Their
sensations aroused on first contact with, or by proximity to
another person, give them a general idea of the value of the
stance to follow.

There are some u fluids " too strong for the sensitiveness of some
percipients and these at first inhibit their faculties, to which the
faculties must be adapted gradually. There are fluids of different
intensities but inharmonious with the percipient's register of
sensitiveness. There are fluids so weak as to be perceived only
by certain percipients, other subjects being unaffected by them.
Subjects express this state of things by saying : M Nothing comes
to me from this person, I cannot feel his fluid " ; or again, " This
goes easily; this person is very fluidic," and so on. By this we
can appreciate the elective metagnomic sensations when the
subject is working in presence of several persons.

M. de FleuriSre thus analyses his sensations and reactions to
fluidic emanations :

When I am in proximity to an unknown person, and especially when a
light touch places us in contact, I feel as though I were permeated by an
indefinable fluid that radiates from his whole person. This physical and
psychic fluid seems tq me to be composed of several elements in which
there is light and heat, vibration, electric or magnetic currents^ and some-
times even odoriferous effluvia. \

But these elements never present themselves equally, so to say ; their
proportions vary enormously with different persons : usually one or two,
or rarely three, predominate, the others being faint or barely perceptible.

The impression of light is localized in the eyes, the forehead, and the
brain*; the impression of warmth in the breast, the heart, and the larger
arteries^ the impression of vibratory movement in the arms, the nervous
system^ ancTfiliaTIy the sensation of a kind of electric or magnetic current
in the cerebellum, the solar plexus,%nd especially in the papilla of the

"""Just as one cannot find two faces absolutely alike, I think that I have
never found two fluids that have given me exactly the same impressions ;
there are those that seem to me gentle, agreeable, sympathetic, and even
pleasant like spring breezes, light and transparent like the blue of the sky ;
they seem endowed with calming and beneficent power. On the other hand,
there are some that are keen, sharp, violent, and repellent, pricking like
needle-points, hard and piercing like winter winds ; these carry what feels
like an antipathetic and discomforting principle. When I desire to fathom
the intimate personality of one who projects a fluid into me, there are
cases in which the psychic interior of that person appears to me illumined
like a large room flooded with light, in which all the contents are to be
discerned in order and in strong relief. On the other hand, there are cases


pro,
repi

pen


THE STATES OF LIFE OF A HUMAN BEING 171

which the fluid is quite different in essence, and when I seek to penetrate
teriorly the person to whom it pertains, I have the impression of looking
darkness, as into a dark cellar where at first nothing can be distin-
and things appear but slowly as the eye becomes used to the
. This explains, too, why the sequence of intuitive or telepathic
r.s is so variable ; why some are easy and some difficult, quicker or
wer, clear or vague, complete or incomplete. I do not remember any
fluid, however, that has been to me purely negative : the most disturbing
always clears up a little by harmonizing with and reacting on my own
ore or less, and in the end with time and patience gives some interesting
cations. (Extract from a MS. note, M. de Fleuriere to Dr. Osty,
th, 1922.)

future will doubtless reveal in what this emanation of
consists that releases the spring of metagnomic function,
w and on what it acts ; but henceforward the surface-
study of this phenomenon leads to the following general conclu-
sions :

A modality of energy of an unknown kind emanates from <
human being revealed by its power to set in motion the special
faculty of metagnomic subjects.

This force passes to certain percipients by mere proximity, not
necessarily by corporeal contact, either at the first trial, or by
progressive impulses on the sensitiveness of the subject, or by
repetition of stances on the same personality.

But the passage of this force only takes place with certain
cipients if intercorporeal communication is established. This
physiological necessity has a precise meaning, for the gesture
made by the percipient implies, 11 The source whence I draw the
information that I transmit is there, in the person that I touch."

It is in fact there, under the experimental condition of
propinquity ; it is there for the most part. But the ensuing
chapters will show that it is also elsewhere, in time and space, in
other persons than the one touched, in other thoughts. The
metagnomic phenomenon is of extreme, even terrifying, com-

ty.


This is the place to recall the other conclusions, corollaries to
those above stated, which even a short and superficial experi-
mental study brings out.

1. When a metagnomic subject is put to act on a series of
human individuals, all the stances being under the same condi-
tions, it is noticeable that the faculty varies in output according
the personality submitted to it, from excellent to nil.

When the same person is submitted to a series of percipients
>roximately equal power, we equally observe that the
omic output with reference to that person also varies
excellent to nil.


172 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN

3. When a series of persons are submitted to a series of
percipients one of those persons being given for cognition to each
percipient, it is observable that some persons are well delineated
by all the percipients, others are well or ill delineated according
to the percipient, and that there are found some nearly unanalys-
able by all.

This variation in metagnomic output considered as a function
of the metagnomic subject and the personal object, demonstrates
clearly, in the simplest experimental case, that both these two
beings have a part, apparent in the one and unapparent in the
other, but both necessary to the genesis of the metagnomic
phenomenon.

Under whatever aspect we consider experimental practice, the
same inference results and the same conclusion appears.

In confirmation of the preceding paragraphs, I will mention
only two others (for the sake of brevity), resulting from direct
observation.

They may be formulated as under :

1. Increased normal knowledge in the person cognized
augments the supernormal cognition both in quality and
quantity.

2. Some kinds of error originate in the passage of erroneous
notions from the psychism of the cognized to that of the
cognizer.

This needs some commentary.

In the first place there is one fact that emerges from the
very beginning of experiments in metagnomy with a human
objective :

When a metagnomic subject works on a given person, his
revelations deal partly with what that person knows and partly
with what he does not know ; and the metagnomic faculty deals
with each part in a different manner.

It is from the known past that there proceeds the most detailed
and circumstantial knowledge, which extends to the most precise
descriptions of persons, houses, rooms and their furnishing ;
sometimes giving a personal or family name, a telephone number,
an age, a date, etc.

It is not thus for what is unknown to the person cognized.
None of the percipients I have yet met with have given me
descriptions equal in quality to those that one gives of an
occurrence actually seen or of a conversation actually heard.
While they give indications often very clear and admitting (after
censorship) of sure identification, most of their information deals
with the situations described in a general way, with outstanding
characteristics, giving the idea of a specific event, a place, an


THE STATES OF LIFE OF A HUMAN BEING 173

illness, a character, of intellectual pursuits, etc. J and if in that
single stance we press the percipient to more detailed cognition
and he yields to the request, he is led to intersperse with partial
errors information that is quite correct as a whole.

That which a person placed in presence of a sensitive knows
conformably to an actuality, increases the precision and the amount
of metagnomic information.

There is no manner of discovering the influence of knowledge
sensorially acquired by the cognized person in building up super-
normal knowledge in the percipient, that is equal to a series of
experiments at intervals in time, bearing on precognition of the
course of an individual life.

Since igio I have followed out an experiment which has
already become a bulky record. This experiment consists in
giving the course of my own life for anticipatory cognition to an
increasing number of metagnomic subjects, and more par-
ticularly to some who have proved the best endowed with
precognition in relation to myself.

To those researchers who desire to assure themselves that the
truly distressing phenomenon of precognition of the future is a
reality, I recommend this means of conviction. It will satisfy
them more effectively than reading about facts necessarily
associated with the uncertainties of human testimony, and will
be much more profitable than the philosophical speculations long

since canalised in opinions, doctrines, and words.

Nothing escapes observation from this standpoint, everything
is instructive ; and experiment delivers its whole content.

Each subject at each stance is placed in a position to draw up
the balance-sheet up to that date and to follow out the ulterior
development of the life cognized. His words are fixed on paper.
With reference to the revelations of the percipient, the experi-
menter notes the contents of his own thought, what he knows, and
what (strictly speaking) he might subconsciously know. His
ensuing life gives impartial judgment, discriminates the shades of
exactitude, what approximates to fact, what is omitted, ahnd wat
is erroneous ; also the diverse aspects of the errors and their
origins. Thus one may advance through Time comparing the
transformations in the content of thought with the consecutive
evolution of metagnomic information. The view of a psychic
life so given, its marvellous complexity and unexpected signifi-
cance, inspires one with energy to persevere in an enterprise full
of difficulties, fertile in mistakes, and in emotions that are
sometimes painful.

I intend to carry on this experimental research on precognition
of the course of an individual life to the twentieth year and
it for a monograph.


ULTIES IN MAN


At present 1 shall draw from it only some reflections regarding
the influence of the personality cognized on the elaboration of
paranormal information concerning him.

Those who have collected facts of prediction on a human li
without having themselves called it forth for purposes of study ;
those who from mere curiosity have once or several times enquired
concerning their own future from metagnomic percipients ; those
who have approached the problem by reading only ; all these
believe precognition to be unalterable, like an unchangeabl
memory. They attribute fixity to the events that diversify
individual lives, and confer on metagnomic subjects the power
of perceiving ideal images which the future will bring into reality.

Now this belief in the fixity of precognition is born of specu-
lative dreams on premonitions of fact for which only authentica-
tion by testimony has been sought, and this belief— built up in
complete absence of methodical investigation — is false.

When an experimenter places himself as an impartial and
attentive observer, taking a share by incessant experimentation
in the metagnomic output, he speedily perceives that fore-
knowledge is variable knowledge, constantly and progressively
elaborated ; that like life, it is evolutionary and living ; as if the
transcendental mode of thought of each man, aware of the general
direction and outstanding events of existence, were progressively
informed of the events circumstantial to its foreknowledge as the
human personality takes its way through the current of surround-^
ing lives.

A first group of experiments enables us to observe that that
precognition of the evolutionary states of a life is variable accord-
ing to the moment in that life when a metagnomic percipient
is invoked. -

The records of stances for premonitory metagnomy on a
human objective, though varying as to their narrative content,
resemble one another in the perspective taken by the quality of
supernormal cognition, for according as it refers to states of life
more or less distant in the future, that cognition differs
penetration and extent.

Dealing with emotional modifications, new directions, n
intellectual activity, organic perturbations, and events, it shows
itself best able to produce circumstantial and co-ordinated infor-
mation when touching on states of life then in actual course of
realization, that is, already become partly actual and kno
although often unforeseeable as to their issue.

That which is known, however slightly , is of powerful assistance
to fuller precognition of the future, quite independently of
rational suppositions by the person affected.

The precognition becomes less full and abundant in detail,


THE STATES OF LIFE OF A HUMAN BEING 175


able to co-ordinate conditions in a life when those conditions are
near but quite unexpected, or are slightly more distant in time
and unconnected with any causes as yet in operation.

And in proportion as precognition endeavours to disclose more
distant aspects in a life, its imperfection becomes more marked.
Starting from a few years ahead, only the general trend of a life is
revealed and only a few salient episodes are given.

Here follows a simple and brief instance of precognition of the
same event given at two different periods. Two years before its
occurrence the percipient expressed it thus :

" Oh ! Peril of death after a while . . . perhaps an accident
. . . but you will be saved, your life continues. ..."

Four months before :

" Take care, you will soon have a serious accident. ... I hear
a violent shock ... a loud noise . . . you will be very near
death . . . what luck ! you will take no hurt ! I see a man
bleeding on the ground ; he is moaning, and all round him some
things are strewn, I can't say what." 1

It will be seen therefore that supernormal cognition proceeds
from general notions to increasing knowledge, of detail, con
versely to normal knowledge which proceeds from analysis to
synthesis.

Study of the records of experiments shows clearly this gradual
evolution of prevision, but it takes full significance by experi-
ment at regular intervals of time with the same percipients and
the same object of cognition.

I can find no better way of describing the position of an
experimenter who is making these experiments on premonition
as his course of life proceeds than to compare him to a traveller
passing through new country. Looking to the far horizon he sees
colours and forms in blurred masses which give a vague general
idea. Somewhat less far the distances take clearer colour and
shape, principal objects appear — a hill, a wood, or a town. |
Nearer he sees a village, a tower, a mansion, and scattered houses
appear clearly on an undefined background. Still nearer the
eye can perceive many things and the connections between
them.

This perspective reveals its component parts as the traveller

1 The second of these previsions was given me in March, 191 1, by Mile de
Berly. It was fulfilled Aug. 1 5th of the same year. I was going at an easy pace
in my car when a drunken baker, driving furiously, pulled the wrong rein and
collided. The shock was such that the shafts, which struck the frame of the front
glass .were shivered to pieces, and one wheel mounted the bonnet and crushed it in.

My friend.Th. Stenuit, who was with me, and I also, were stricken with amaze
at the suddenness of the accident and our good fortune in being unhurt. Turning
round we saw the horse galloping off, the cart in the ditch, wheels uppermost,
and the baker stretched moanine and bleeding in the middle of the road with a
number of loaves scattered round him.


176 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


advances. All comes nearer to his eye ; optical illusions disappear,
mistaken impressions are corrected, the knowledge of things in-
creases in extent and precision, which is, however, never quite so
complete as the places he has passed and has therefore fully
perceived.

In the same manner the experimenter goes through life pre-
ceded by the hypercognition. The metagnomic subject is the
eye whereby he sees his future, a human instrument of vision
with all its marvellous possibilities and its imperfections.

If he is content with an easy explanation, his advance into the
foreknown will lead him to think that the events constituting the
course of his life are pre-existent in an ideal world in which the
percipient can distinguish them by some paranormal faculty, and
that they are more easily perceived at the moment when they
are passing from the world of potentialities into that of phe-
nomena. By doing this he has certainly obtained a simple
explanation, but one that is inapplicable to the progressive nature
of precognition.

But if he does not hold by this suggestion of premonitory
revelations, preferring to regard the variation of metagnomic
information as a function of the percipient and of the person
cognized, he then comes to perceive that in this experiment,
restricted to two human beings, the percipient is, so to speak, the
unvarying factor, furnishing at every seance the same faculty,
while the personality delineated is continually varying.

To explain more fully :

If the experiments are properly conducted, the percipient,
from seance to seance, remains equally ignorant of the life
presented for cognition ; he is the same psychic instrument put
to work in the same way and only affected by his own relative
conditions.

It is otherwise with the personality cognized, who has lived
between seances for weeks or months, changing according to the
pressure of outside circumstances and under his own mental
evolution. Many modifications, sometimes very important, have
taken place in himself and his environment ; the future has
become the past and many anticipations have been realized or
have been found illusory : in short, though the same individu-
ality is presented to the percipient, the personality has been
modified by all that the senses have registered, by all the know-
ledge that conscious and subconscious thought has brought into
knowledge, modified also by new desires, new projects, judg-
ments, tendencies and new modes of reaction.

It cannot be said that these variations in the person cognized
at each stance determine the new tenor of the premonitory
information, they certainly do not, since precognition deals with


discei
is km
unkn

55


111 11

erroi

is cc
after

obsei

w

?

VL

in1
to


THE STATES OF LIFE OF A HUMAN BEING 177

things not yet registered, with that which is imperceptible by the
senses, with things unknowable by reason and often opposed to
anticipations.

t what we can say, and what experiment constantly shows,
,t each new section of life that has been lived through gives
a new starting-point for metagnomy from which it can better
discern the next events in the stream of existence and that what
is known collaborates in organizing the premonition of what is
owable by reason.
It is not without astonishment that at each seance we observe
that the percipient, envisaging the future only, does not speak
of the phases of life recently passed through that he perceived as
future in the previous stance ; or, that if he happens to speak of
them, he places them unerringly in the past. He seizes also the
diverse preoccupations and organic disturbances, the projects
recently formed and never before announced by him, and follows
their outcome, linking to them and by them episodes near at
hand in the chronicle of a life.

The source of the inspiration is revealed when the desires of the
moment — projects and anticipations reached later, which are but
passing states of mind and will never become concrete realities
in the future — introduce error in the metagnomic output. This
error, obviously transmitted from the one psychism to the other,
is corrected and disappears from subsequent stances, but only
" er these corrections have been made in the personality under
rvation.

If we desire to emphasize the notion that metagnomic subjects
when working on a human personality are not, as it might
appear, direct percipients of actualities outside human indi-
iduals, but are receiving a varying influence from one individual
o another and giving diverse premonitory information ; that can
very easily be done. In place of presenting to the percipient at
tervals in time the future of one person only, it is only necessary
cause the sensitive to work on the development of several
persons affected by events common to all their lives : e.g.
members of the same family, it being understood that the subject
is kept in ignorance of the family links. Under such circum-
stances it is rare (I have not myself observed a case) in which the
percipient recognizes in one the event also perceived in the case
of another. It is always observed (that is at any rate my
experience) that the event common to all is only precognized in
its relation to each several person.

It is because the metagnomic subjects ordinarily met with are
delineators of individual lives, and not percipients of virtual
representations of future realities, that they show themselves
to precognize the development of human personalities and

fj


178 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


are unable to predict the future in a general sense, that is, the
events apart from the points where they touch the individual. 1
What abundant documentation might have been given in the
years preceding 1914 if the study of metagnomy had been more
extensively known and experimentally applied. If there were
one event common to many human lives and having widely
different reaction, it was this bestial madness for mutual
slaughter. What prophet proclaimed its coming, its circum-
stances, and its results ? One only, as far as I know, and as f
as one may rely on human testimony — M. Leon Sonrel, who, 0
July 2 1 st, 1869, in a kind of spontaneous ecstatic state, seized
upon the whole future development of the life of his friend,
Amed<5e Tardieu, and announced to him the second great war
its relation to an episode of Dr. Tardieu's life. It was in relation
to an individual life that Sonrel took cognizance of the war still
far distant in time. It would seem that if Dr. Tardieu had not
had to live through the war, Sonrel would have had no knowledge
of its coming. (See p. 38 ante, for the summary of this predic-
tion.)

But no metagnomic subject seems to have foreseen the war
a collective fact, none predicted its development, and when
had begun none were found to give information on its successive
phases. Those who esteemed themselves prophets and tried
do this, contradicted each other, and all were wrong,
detractors of psychic science were triumphant, psychists
confounded and did not understand.

Very briefly summarized, the following is the aspect taken b
the event— the war of 1 914— in the documents at my
disposal.

From 1910 to July, 1914, none of the metagnomic subj

1 Ignorance of the psychological determining factors in metagnomy and of
the diversity in paranormal capacity in percipients, has given rise to and main-
tained an error which will only cease when men cease to think of and discuss
narratives of premonitory facts without the basis on which they were founded.

Anyone who, by reading only, desires to form an opinion on precognition, will
find in metapsychic literature many quotations of fact authenticated by testimon"
In these reviews, and in some books, he will find statements of this kind : ' 4
seems to me that if prediction were possible, we should have manifest and
deniable proof of it. Let a medium tell us what the weather will be like in eight
days, and which horse will win in the next race-meeting. Or, still more
simply : here is a roulette, let him tell us, while it spins, at which number it
will stop. No medium can do this " (P. Heuze\ M Enquiry on the present state of
psychic science." L'Opinion). On the one hand, narratives of facts devoid of
complete certainty ; on the other, a challenge not taken up : much interchange
of polemic — words, words without any possible conclusion. When psychists
will condescend to admit that the experimental ground favourable for a demon-
stration of foreknowledge is that of metagnomic work on individual human lives,
and wiU give up the spiritist and theosophical hypotheses by which they believe
in possibilities that exist very rarely or not at all, they will speedily gain many
undeniable proofs of premonition, and they will be able to acquire the best of
proofs— premonitory facts on themselves, independent of all testimony.


OF LIFE OF A HUMAN BEING 179


whom I put to work on definite experiences or in the free exercise
of their faculty, and none of those who were used by other
persons who reported to me the tenor of the stances, signified
explicitly the coming of the war. But if this impending catastrophe
did not inspire the percipients it was otherwise with regard to
its effects on individuals. Some instances, selected for brevity,
will show the manner of these.


On December 30th, 191 3, in the course of a metagnomic sdance
Mme Fraya said to Mme D. :

M I 6ee near you a young man whom you love and who is a near relation
a fine nature, intelligent, gentle, and gracious ... he is not so
mg as he seems. ... I see him ill presently, just at the time of his
nation. ... I cannot see him entering the school for which he is
... he will lead a very active life, but will die young, as if
a battle-field."

A few days latter Mme D. told me this premonition relating to her
only nephew, Paul M., aged eighteen, a brilliant student preparing for
competition to the Polytechnic, a most agreeable young man. for whom
I had much regard. In February, 1914, he had an acute attack of angina
when called upon to pass the test for physical fitness, but nerved himself
to pass the test.

In July, 1 91 4, he entered for competition for the Polytechnic, which was
interrupted by the war.

He then made himself as useful as possible and was certainly very active,
being in turn an interpreter, a chemical assistant and motor driver. He
soon expressed an intention to enlist. His parents opposed this as much
ley could. His aunt, haunted by the prediction, and saw how her
liew, despite his remarkable intellectual gifts, might indeed never
the Polytechnic, said to him, " Believe me, Paul, you are too young ;
don't enlist, I have a foreboding you would not come back to us."

His resolution, however, was taken, and on December 1st he was
appointed to the 13th Regiment of Artillery. December 13th he fell ill
* died, not on the field, but of cerebrospinal meningitis brought on
the war.

In May, 1914, Count R. de P., aged thirty-one, had this prediction
during a seance with Mile de Berly.

"... I am uneasy about you : take care, I see you in peril of death
. . you are being fired at . . . but have nothing to fear."
In June, 19 14, the same percipient said to him regarding a project of
marriage much favoured by his family, "... You will not marry this
lady. ... I see you turning your back ... a certain event will take
you away. ... I see you wearing a costume . . . sometimes on horse-
giving orders to men to dig galleries, long galleries I What
: of digging ! How foul the earth is and what a lot of it I
" Only after having worn this costume and carried out these works
will you be married . . . but not till you have passed your thirty-fifth
year. . . . You will marry elsewhere a dark young lady, with dark hair
done low down, with foreign blood in her veins."

The May prediction gave M. de P. the idea of a night attack on Paris ;
it, made in June, made him think of a possible colonial enterprise,
said so to the percipient, who could only reply, " Perhaps. I see
jig more."

M. de P., who was due to pass the month of August in the family of


180 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


his fiancee, a fair girl of French birth, was mobilized on the declaration
of war.

As lieutenant, he certainly had to get many trenches dug, and was
certainly much fired upon ; three succeeding wounds in the arm in Septem-
ber, 1915, brought him his captaincy and the cross of the Legion of Honour,
and at Douaumont. seven months later, a bullet broke his nose and blinded
one eye, which did not prevent this brave officer from carrying on his
command till exhausted, and brought him promotion to officer's grade
in the Legion of Honour.

After the war, when he was thirty-six, he married a dark young lady,
described, of Italian birth.

In January, 1914. Mile de Berly, speaking to M. de P. of his younger
brother, said : " His life will be short ... he will die a violent death
... let him be cautious in the shooting-field. ... He will die b
gunshot."

In December, 1914, M. Charles de P. was killed by a bullet in
forehead.

In face of facts of this kind, I could, did space allow, give a
series of facts that might be called negative, suggesting the
conclusions I have stated above. For in my experimental
practice the persons to whom no revelation of their part in the
war was made, were more numerous than the others. As to them,
precognition worked out as if the war were only a general incident
without importance for that particular life ; and indeed this was
so without exception, for each took up again their previous course
of life as if it had been only interrupted. Serious invalidation and
especially the death of a single one of these would have left the
predictions made as questionable. This did not take place. As
some of these persons held very dangerous military posts (officers
in the infantry, artillery, and aviation ; one was three and a half
years an aviator) I am inclined to see in this something more than
a coincidence, and to claim that it shows that the field of
cognition only covers what a human being will become, rather
than any perception of an impersonal future, a fact which I have
not yet been able to observe, though I do not on that
deny its possibility.

For my own part, no metagnomic subject from 1910 to July,
1914, announced the war to me, nor took account of that event
my life, though I was an assiduous investigator. One only, M
Loni-Feignez, foresaw one of the aspects in the earlier stages of the
war. In May, 1912, she, thinking to describe my then occupa-
tions, said : —

H You are living in a little town in central France. I see your ho
facing a small open space . . . but your work is not there . . . you
for your work to a large house where you have an office . . . there ,
handle a mass of papers . . . what a number of sheets you touch *
they bring them to you from another office alongside of yours, w
many men are writing . . . they are continually passing from
office to yours . . , you look at the papers they bring and return


THE STATES OF LIFE OF A HUMAN BE


. . . other people, too, bring you papers from outside; you look
and give them back . . . what a number of pieces of paper !"

All this had no relation whatever to my then mode of life ; but from
August, 1914, this became one of the aspects of my daily life as chief
medical officer of the hospital and the circle. I lived in a snowstorm of
administrative papers.

The isolated nature of these previsions makes it clear that the
sensitive does not perceive a part of the life by direct perception
as if he had a paranormal sense functioning outside Time ; for
in that case the chief characteristics of the situation would have
been cognized — the uniform, care of the wounded, and so on.

As soon as the war had begun, when the event was in my mind
and I was taking a part in it, then the sensitives consulted at
irregular intervals, foreknew the general course of my existence
during the war (it was as they said) and some of them were
preinformed of episodes that came to pass. The following is an
example of such prevision.

On July 29th, 1916, my turn having come to replace one of the doctors
with the army, I received an order from the Minister directing me to join,
without delay, the reserve of the medical staff at Gray.

This centre, like others distributed behind the front, had the duty of
placing medical officers according to their several aptitudes and the
vacancies that might occur.

Passing through Paris on August 1st, I sought to profit by the unknown
future by making an experiment on exact prevision. Here is an extract
from the stance that I had with Mme Loni-Feignez, who was unaware
of what my military duties might be, and more especially that I was in
transit between one appointment and another, whose duties could not
be foreseen by reasoning.

As soon as she was in the hypnoid state, she asked, M What must I
sec ? "

M Look," I said, " for the next events in ray life."

"... at the present moment you are doing something of the nature
of a change, as if you were moving to interchange with some one. . . .

" You are changing your place . . . you are going to a town through
which there is a largish river . . . water is passing at the side. ... It
seems that you are being questioned, as if you were submitting various
matters . . . and decision will be given according to your answers . . .
a group of gentlemen will give a decision that will please you ; you will
be satisfied with it. . . .

"In the town to which they will send you I see two parts, one high
and one low . . . you will be in the lower part, you will work and live
there . . . you will have nothing to do with the upper town ... a
small town, old and dirty . . . with small ill-paved streets; a little
manufacturing town, of some importance, perhaps, by the number of
inhabitants, but small. . . .

" Facing the house in which you will practise, there is an open space
you will work on the first floor ... a large staircase . . . one
would think it an old convent . . . very wide staircase . . . heavy
wooden handrail ... a large landing . . . two large rooms on the same
floor with a door between them . . . ceilings very high ... it is an old
house. . . . When you leave it to go to your lodging you will cross the


UPERNl


CULTIES IN MAN


place and go to a house not old like the other . . . there are trees
the door and a wide road . . . you do not go upstairs, you lodge on
ground-floor ; you will be not far from the river, which can be seen
your rooms although it is not before the door. . . .

" You will not stay there long . . , perhaps a couple of months. . . .
Just when you think yourself fixed, you will change."

What came to pass.

On August 3rd I was at Gray, on the Saone. The assistant m
staff officer asked me my preferences.

On the 8th I was attached to the 7 /76th Ambulance at Moyon (M
et Moselle), where I was to replace Dr. R., called elsewhere.

During the 9th I reached Moyon, a town of about one thousand
habitants; an upper town on the slope of the hill, with dirty, worn, and
narrow streets, always full of soldiers on passage, and a lower town, much
better built and clean, where they told me I should find the ambulance.

A soldier took me to a large house, old, and of the type of the monastery
schools that are to be found more or less everywhere in the country, some
forty yards back from the road, the open space being flanked by houses
on both sides.

The administrative office was on the first floor, approached by a wide
staircase with a heavy wooden balustrade. On the wide landing one
door was lettered " Ambulance 7/76." I entered a large room, very high,
where carboys, folded stretchers, medical canteens, dressings, etc., were
scattered. The principal medical officer was in the adjoining room, and
I was introduced.

" Where is the ambulance ? " I soon inquired.

M It is all here," he answered with a laugh, " in these two rooms that
you see : this one is the office that 1 share with the management, and
the other you have just passed through. We have been here at Moyon
for a month, on return from Verdun, in reserve, but we have to supervise
the construction of huts near the station as an evacuation hospital, which
we shall have to work in two or three months."

Really, this ambulance, by its peculiar situation, would seem to have
been the only one in the whole French army which would tally with

Mme L. F 's prediction. Usually an ambulance in working order

in 1916 would have from 100 to 300 beds and a large establishment.

I was much astonished, and thought that if the lodgings corresponded
as thoroughly with the prediction, the premonitory fact would be of
first quality.

Being desirous of beginning my work I asked to be shown my room.

'•To-morrow," I was told, "you will have the room occupied by Dr. R.,
who you are replacing. For to-night you will lodge far from us." My
first night was passed in a house of the upper town. On the next day
Dr. R. took me to the house where he lodged, a good and newly-built
citizen's house ; he did not stop on the ground-floor but went to the
first landing. Curious as to what I should see, I went to the window.
Two lines of trees divided the house from the road and about a hun
yards away I could see the river Mortagne.

Weeks passed, the construction of the evacuation hospital wen
briskly. My comrades and I were planning the organization, wh
army inspector learned that the wife of the chief medical officer
living at Moyon. Reports to the Staff of the Army of Lorraine, san
etc., whence resulted some changes in the medical staff, and I was
to another ambulance about forty-six days after my arrival.

Only two small errors " a small, open place," which turned out
a large courtyard, and the first floor instead of the gTound-floor.


THE STATES OF LIFE OF A HUMAN BEING 188


From these facts and from many others with which I do not
wish to overload this book, it is clear to me that if precognition
of general events is a rarity for which there are very few unques-
tionable cases cited, foreknowledge of individual conditions come
about by external causes is as frequent as one may like to make
the experiment.

The frequency of precognition of condition of a human person-
ality, contrasted with the extreme rarity of foreknowledge of
general events, is a fact that I desire to emphasize as suggesting
the origin of metagnomic information when it has a human
objective.

Error is to metagnomy what pathologic psychology is to
normal psychology — the indirect and illuminating condition for
understanding normal mental working by the study of its
perturbations. It follows that the study of errors in the function-
ing of metagnomy is another valuable factor in research for the
source whence subjects draw their information.

Although the study of the determinants of error would find its
logical place here by reason of the lessons that it brings, its
development is of sufficient importance to demand a chapter to
itself, and is therefore deferred to a later place. When this has
been perused the reader will kindly apply to this present chapter
the notions that he will there find on the inter-mental collabora-
tion between cognizer and cognized.

I will, however, so far anticipate as to say that among the many
causes of errors one of the most frequent is the involuntary and
unconscious transmission of beliefs and mistaken suppositions
from the persons delineated to the percipients, and that the later
spontaneous rectifications of these errors follow the conscious
rectifications made by the former.

And, further, I note here that the frequency of error in meta-
gnomic output is very different according as the revelations deal
with what is known or unknown to the person cognized. With
good subjects dealing with what is known, there are omissions, but
little positive error, whereas dealing with the unknown, especially
the future, approximations, partial error, and distinct mistakes
frequently occur. So that the two psychisms of observer and
observed are here found in communication and inter-mental
collaboration.

Practical experiment, undertaken without any a priori theories
which deform results by systematization, brings out clearly, under
whatever aspect it may be regarded, that w/ten a metagnomic
subject reveals the states of life in a person placed in his presence, his
paranormal knowledge comes from that person.


84


SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


This is the psychological fact whose reality is shown by the
whole evidence, and with which nothing, unless it be our
prejudices, conflicts.

This conclusion, imperatively suggested by investigation,
meets, however, with almost invincible resistance from most
minds trained under the influence of a psychology which is
still in its infancy. The opposition, based entirely on the
subjective operations of the mind, usually finds expression as
follows :

" A human being cannot, by mental intercommunication, supply
a metagnomic subject with anything that is not and cannot be
in his mind ; such as a past that he does not know and, more
especially, a future governed by fortuitous, accidental, and
external reactions."

If one would understand and discover anything in this depart-
ment of metapsychics this prejudgment must be set aside along
with all others.

In the exploration of the paranormal we must expect to find
anormal and seemingly absurd things, not comparable with
knowledge and the sensorial exercise of our intelligence,
ish to conform Nature to our own mental content is t
condemn ourselves to illusion and to sterilize research, whereas
progress towards truth is never anything but a laborious and
progressive modification of the human mind in face of immuta
realities.

Here, in the restricted experimental field selected, we must
heed Nature speaking by the language of facts. Now impartial
experiment from whatever direction it attacks the problem
whence the metagnomic information is derived, heaps proof upon
m roof that it is resident in the human personality delineated. All
speculative opinions whatsoever will not make that which is
not to be.

Accepting this fundamental psychological conclusion which
could be invalidated only by experiment compelling a different
inference, there follows the corollary — that given, on the one hand,
that metagnomic subjects draw from the delineated person the
information that concerns him ; and, on the other hand, that
great part of this information outranges his apparent ment
content, and all known possibilities of his perception and know-
ledge, it must be admitted, subject to later experimental verifica-
tion, that human personality possesses a latent modality of
thought endowed with faculties adequate to the working-up of
supernormal knowledge ; that is to say, informed by other
channels than those of the normal senses, understanding by other
processes than reasoning, and, moreover, freed from the intel-
lectual limitations of Time and Space.


THE STATES OF LIFE OF A HUMAN BEING 185


This experimental truth, hard of acceptation because nothing
in our modern knowledge has prepared lis for it, simplifies greatly
the determinism of the metagnomic phenomenon in the case of
paranormal cognition of man by man. We are no longer
confronted by the incomprehensible spectacle of a sensitive who
knows the lives of other men. Every human being knows his
own entire life according to laws that are still to be discovered,
and metagnomic subjects are psychic instruments of variable
quality that reveal what each human being knows concerning
himself without being aware consciously, or even subconsciously,
that he has this knowledge.

Henceforward this is the aspect under which the problem of
supernormal knowledge of man by man presents itself.


Aspect from the side of the cognized personality.

Besides the modality of thought called conscious, known from
all time ; besides the modality called subconscious, recently 1 0
discovered, the human being possesses a " transcendental jy/vy
modality " whose means of information, processes of cognition//, y
and extent of knowledge, remain yet to be explored, but which
through the intermediary of the metagnomic subjects that it
inspires, shows that it is aware of the general course of the
individual life and is capable of foreknowing its circumstantial
development. "" y •

Exceptionally and accidentally, knowledge passes from the
transcendental modality of thought into subconscious modalities
(dreams, hysterical states, etc.) and even into the conscious,
determining one of the phenomena (vague or precise presenti-
ments, unexpected information of some event strongly affecting
a life, etc.) many of which have been observed and authenticated
by testimony. —

Ordinarily, the transcendental modality of thought remains
latent, nothing passes from it into the sensorial exercise of
intelligence, and nothing reveals its existence, human beings act
as if they had it not. Between the transcendental and the
conscious there would seem to be an almost insurmountable
physiological barrier.

Aspect from the side of the metagnomic subject.

The sensitives called " metagnomic " are endowed with the
permanent faculty of being impressed by the transcendental
modality of thought latent in every human being, and are able
to bring the suggestions of that modality on to the conscious
plane.


What does that faculty consi:
discovered. As yet we only know it in its obvious
manifestations and by its output.

The output that comes most easily and instinctively
presence of the person cognized, is the revelation of the i
of an individual life in its past and its future

Is this all that metagnomic subjects are able to receive from
the transcendental modality of individual psychisms ? That
also is matter for investigation. Subjects who can be influenced
by transcendental modalities of thought are very highly endowed.

Most of them, however, show themselves to be equall;
sensitive to the conscious and the subconscious content of thi
psychisms also, and this sensitiveness determines the suggestion
of information conformable to the mental states of the cognized
without necessarily being in accord with external realities.

Endowed with the faculty of taking cognizance of the tran-
scendental knowledge in others, metagnomic subjects are not
therefore capable of knowing their own. They are, for the most
part, as ignorant of their own future as any one of us. Such
have moderately accurate and frequent presentiments are rare.

Metagnomy with a human objective, thus understood, for
its seemingly fanciful and chaotic content, becomes intelligil
and falls into order in the mind.

It is easy to understand why the subjects in order to exercise
their faculty get into a psychological state that releases mental
activity from conscious and voluntary control, a state which
gives the best condition for suggestibility.

It is comprehensible why they find bodily contact favour the
transmission of psychic energy that is the vehicle of the inspiring
thought.

It is understandable that the presence of several persons,
making a plurality of influencing foci, should vitiate metagnomic
output by total or partial inhibition, by transpositions and
interpositions in the information received.

Comprehensible also is that which is inexplicable on any other
hypothesis, that metagnomic output should vary according to
the quality of the dynamo-psychism influencing the receptive
sensitiveness of the percipient.

Such would seem to be the determining factors of metagm
perception of a human personality in its simplest case— !
delineation of a human being there present.

But in practice, the phenomenon is rarely as simple as I have


-The


1 If these subjects drew their paranormal knowledge direct from lat<
actualities outside time and space, or if they received it from extra-hu
inspiration, their faculty would as readily inform them of their own future i
others.


THE STATES OF LIFE OF A HUMAN BEING 187


made it for convenience of analytic statement. In delineating
the states of life of a person in presence, the subject is always led
to speak of other persons who have touched, or will touch, the
individual life in one way or another ; and the metagnomic
output is then complicated by the interposition of other possible
foci of information and by the entry into action of an extension
of receptivity in time and space, as the next chapters will
show.


CHAPTER III


EN A METAGNOMIC SUBJECT TAKES COGNIZANCE
OF THE STATES OF LIFE OF A LIVING HUMAN
BEING DISTANT IN SPACE, WHENCE DOES HE
DRAW HIS INFORMATIONS?

If this case the metagnomic process becomes so complex that
if we consider the phenomena only in their narrative aspect
and under the conditions of their production, one is impelled
towards extravagant explanatory hypotheses unless prudence
lead us to avow ignorance and to leave to future generations the
task of clearing up that which can, nevertheless, be
elucidated in the present.

Let us recall that metagnomic subjects are sometimes capable
of receiving spontaneous and accidental information of states of
existence concerning distant persons, and that, independently of
the influence of those then present. Let us also remember that
when they delineate the states of life of a present individuality
they are always led, in connection with that person, to reveal the
states of life of other persons at a distance ; and that though
these informations are, for the most part, conformable to what
is known to the person present, they are also in part unknown
to him.

Let us remember, too, that the utterance of a first name, or
even a mental representation of an absent person, often suffices
for some specially endowed percipients to become informed of
his bodily aspect, his character, the state of his health, his social
standing, and his future development. Confronted with such
manifestations we are unable to perceive whence metagnomic
subjects draw their paranormal knowledge. We reckon that the
person present cannot unconsciously suggest the revelations
made, because he does not know their substance : and as nothing
in our scientific attainments has prepared us for that, we hold it
highly improbable that a subject should be able to place himself
immediately and at any distance, in interpsychic relation with
another human being, and still more with human beings in other
widely separated places.

But if phenomena of this kind go too far beyond our concepts

188


LIFE OF A HUMAN BEING DISTANT IN SPACE 189


of man as thinker and the capacities of our instruments of
registration to lead to scientific explanation in the near future,
the subjects unconsciously lead even the inexperienced investi-
gator to a proceeding eminently favourable to discovery of the
informative source at a distance, for as soon as they are asked for
more abundant and precise details on a living absent person,
they say: Nothing more comes to me; "I want something
belonging to the person to enable me to say more."

It is, in fact, in this thing belonging to the person that the field
of instructive investigation is to be sought. The experimenter
is no longer in presence of a subject who draws information from
an unreachable source ; he has before him one who is influenced
by an object that some one has touched or possessed : and from
that point of departure, he leaves pure subjectivity on one side
to study the relations with a relatively fixed factor. He has the
metagnomic subject and the objective factor, which latter he can
vary at pleasure as to its nature and the different uses to which
he puts it. The experimental method works as it did in the case
of personal presence. We are no longer passive spectators of a
paranormal phenomenon without any common measure between
our knowledge and our means of perception, we are active
observers of experimental vicissitudes that can be varied till the
obscurity clears. We are not concerned to imagine theories
according to preconceived opinions and intellectual tendencies,
but to make Nature speak.

In the case of metagnomy on a human subject distant in space
the research on the informative source then becomes : — What is
the function of the object placed in the hands of the percipient ?

Obviously our present knowledge in physics and physiology
does not permit of direct research on the part played by this
object ; but indirectly, under clear inferences from certain
experimental facts, it is possible to arrive at the nature of their
function, and this is what is of import in the statement of the
general problem of the informative sources of metagnomy.

Here, as in the preceding chapter, it will suffice to collect and
compare some verifications scattered through this book which
will show the explanation that flows from the facts and is adapted
to them all.

By the narrative, and under the conditions of production of the
metagnomic facts that have been quoted, and by the analysis of
the psychological processus of the faculty, the reader will have
learned how an object placed in the hand or on the forehead of
certain sensitives sets in motion their special faculty with
reference to the person to whom that object pertains.


190 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN

This at least is how the phenomenon appears, taking the
totality of cases into account. It happens sometimes, however,
that a subject instead of receiving and revealing knowledge
concerning the individual desired, reveals states of life of another
person, usually belonging to the same surroundings, or whom
enquiry enables us easily to identify. Psychists who have
observed this saw in this apparent diversion from the assigned
end, an error of direction.

Now it is not an error of direction, but ignorance on the part
of the observer of the general determinism of metagnomy when
an intermediate object is used. I should myself doubtless have
fallen into the same mistake had I not met with a metagnomic
subject working in deep hypnosis, Mme Morel, who is specially
endowed with faculty adapted to this type of experiment, and
thereby favours a study nearly impossible with most subjects ;
at any rate with such as I have observed.

The many diverse experiments that I have made with Mme
Morel have taught me that the object placed in her hands avails
to set her faculty in action not by the fact of having belonged to
such and such a person, but by having been touched by that
person.

This appears so clearly from the output of this sensitive that
one is impelled to think her capable of placing her faculty at the
service of each human being who has touched the object given
to her.

Each of my experiments by contact with some article pertain-
ing to persons unknown to me, has nearly always proceeded on
the following lines :

" Look for the person to whom this object belongs."

To which the sensitive replied by the physical or moral
description of some one in whom I had no difficulty in recognizing
myself or the person who had brought the article to me.

I then said, " I don't want you to speak of me or of the person
who brought this ; look (e.g. in the case of a written paper) for
the person who wrote this paper, carry back to the time when it
was written."

Sometimes the subject thus directed, would fix at once upon
the individual desired ; at other times some other person who had
touched the thing would be called to her mind, and on censoring,
the matter (negative as regards the personality given as objective)
would be exact for some other in that person's surroundings.
Occasionally no conclusion could be reached, the experimenter
being unable to make sufficiently extensive enquiries.

If the sensitiveness of Mme Morel, so delicate that the mere
contact of an object places it at the service of one or other of
the persons who have touched it, has furnished me with stances


LIFE OF A HUMAN

rich in material on persons at a distance, I soon avoided the
heavy and irksome work that such experiments involve by
taking the precaution to ask from occasional collaborators some
datum such as not to vitiate results by bringing my own mental
content into the matter and yet sufficient to eliminate useless
deviations as soon as the sensitive expressed such. 1

My work with Mmc Morel soon satisfied me that a metagnomic
subject specially sensitive to the modalities of energy with which
we impregnate the things that we touch, is able to cognize each
of those who have touched an object as if that person were there
present. And in the sequel it was not difficult to ascertain that
Mme Morel never confused the respective states of life brought to
her mind by manual contact with the same object. Every
feeling, act, scene, and event were ascribed to the individual to
whom they pertained ; it was even the same as regards errors. ^}

As soon as these two fundamental conclusions were fixed in my
mind by simple, or I might say passive, observation, I completed
the lesson they carried by active observations directed to a
particular end. I thus verified to satiety, by repetition of experi-
ments, that in metagnomy on a distant person, the function of the
article used is transitory, and for some percipients is not even
necessary.

Transitory, because though indispensable at the beginning of
the first stance, the thing can be taken from the hand of Mme
Morel and destroyed without interfering with her faculty : and
also because it becomes useless in later stances on the same
person.

Not necessary, because some sensitives behave towards the
distant person as if he were near, and that without the need for
touching a thing coming from that person, but always under the
condition that there should be in the mind of the experimenter
some notion, however slight, of the given personality.

This is sufficient to enable us to say that in metagnomy on a
distant person the function of the object put in the hand of the
sensitive is not that of conveying the mysterious substance of
their informations. It seems to be a means, provisionally
necessary to some but not to others, to connect them with the
real source of their cognition.

If this conclusion should not seem justified by the data given
by experience, here is another verified fact which should remove
all doubt :

With an article possessed or touched by a person taken as

» Thus, before proceeding on the task of discovering a missing man (see
p. i *3). I obtained from M. Mirault only two data— the man was old and walked
with a stoop.


102 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


objective for paranormal cognition, that article having never again
been touched by the person, an experimenter can {personally or
through others) have as many metagnomic seances as he may choose.
The article retains its informative potentiality.

Thus a thing invariable from the first to the n th seance in its
power to generate phenomena, sets in motion paranormal know-
ledge which increases from one stance to another, as I have
described in the preceding chapter, since at each new stance new
states of life are revealed, errors are rectified or not repeated,
and the events previously spoken of as being in the future are
relegated to the past by the percipients.

This is known to every psychist who has made even a slight
experimental study of metagnomy on an absent person by means
of an intermediary object. Everyone can easily verify this, it is a
fact which soon commands attention.

Its significance is no doubt less obvious, for I have not yet
heard or read that the inference involved, as to the informative
sources, has been deduced from it. But if submitted to close
attention and reason, is it not strictly logical that an object when
it is the invariable factor in a metagnomy that is in constant
variation, cannot be the focus that contains and supplies per-
cipients with the matter of their revelations ?

Having reached this conclusion, rooted in experimental practice,
an induction at once follows. Since metagnomy on an absent
person in stances at intervals of time always varies pro-
gressively, the informative source should logically be placed in
that which isalso progressively varying and not in that which
is unvarying.

Experimental production of the metagnomic phenomenon of the
kind here under discussion is governed by three factors :

The object that stimulates, invariable from one stance to another
in its function and its mysterious content.

The metagnomic subject, a psychic instrument, invariable as
regards his psycho-physiological position with reference to the
object and to the person to be cognized.

The personality assigned as objective, progressively varying by
the activity of moral and intellectual tendencies and in the organic
and social current of his life.

If the source whence the sensitive draws his revelations is in the
place where there is a progressive evolution agreeing with the
progressive metagnomic information, it can only be in the human
being, more or less distant in space, whose states of life the
sensitive delineates.

Experiment therefore leads us to consider the case of


LIFE OF A HUMAN BEING DISTANT IN SPACE 198

metagnomy on a distant person as analogous to that when that
person is in presence. The two cases differ only by distance in
ice. The intermediary object appears as one mode of linking
two psychisms, a psycho-physiological means of enabling the
subject to distinguish one human being in the crowd of other
human beings, and to exercise his paranormal faculty upon
that one.

This notion is confirmed on thinking over certain modes of
lomic function on a person present. Some sensitives prefer
Duch an object coming from the person to be delineated
rather than to have bodily contact, having remarked that their
faculty works better so. The fluids, they say, are more favour-
able in this way. This obviously means that their sensitiveness
to whatever it is that emanates from human beings is such that
it is sufficiently and more effectively moved at a slight distance
J, ian by continuous bodily conduction.

This notion is further confirmed by the fact that a sensitive
working in the midst of several persons, remains at the service of
one if he holds in his hand something belonging to that one, but
easily deviates to another person if this material link is taken
away.

Such experimental cases may be looked upon as examples at
slight distance of what metagnomy is at all distances. The psycho-
physiological processus is the same, only the amount of space
between the sensitive and the person delineated differs.

Under what authority do we demur to this ? Certainly not
that of science which is equally unable to explain paranormal
ition whether near or far.

It is nevertheless to be desired that this localization of the
informative source, based partly on experimental conclusions
and partly on logic, should be supported by direct experimental
demonstration by which it would indubitably appear that the
metagnomic subject and the distant human being whose states
of life are delineated, produce the metagnomic phenomenon by
ental collaboration. This wish arises from a legitimate respect
the experimental method, but it is based on a complete
eading of the phenomenon. It must be remembered that the
collaborating factors, the cognizer and the cognized, are
from the metagnomic point of view both unconscious. The
person at a distance is ignorant of his own thought-content and
of what takes place when metagnomy is exercised upon him.
Similarly the sensitive knows neither how nor whence the
knowledge that he expresses comes to him. Confronted with this
interpsychic latent work, the experimenter stands without any
'ing instrument, without any means of direct control, and


JORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN

lout any subjective indications. His only means
investigation are indirect. Study of the function of the inter-
mediary object is one of them. Another is the analysis (in
letagnoray at a distance) of the transmission of mistaken beliefs,
of projects that have no sequel, and the like, from the person to
the sensitive and the transformations of these in successive
ices. This belongs to another chapter.

Among all the hypotheses which we can conceive and accept,
that of interpsychic communication at a distance is the only one
suggested by practical experiment, and the only one which when
applied to the genesis of the phenomena, makes them generally
intelligible.

And if it should be admitted as probable or possible that
metagnomic sensitives have the faculty (on the slightest psycho-
physical link) to connect themselves instantaneously with human
individualities distant in space, the case of metagnomy in
propinquity, which seemed at first the simplest, becomes strangely
complex, for it would seem to be made up of unanalysable
contributions from the latent thought of the person present, of
the experimenter, of the sensitive himself, and of the absent
persons to whom references crop up.

Beyond the human individualities that our senses detach from
the continuity of Nature, we glimpse an immense mental world
subjacent to appearances in which particular identities seem to be
linked in an inconceivable collective psychic life. It is from this
vast latent life of thoughts, of thought, that sensitives uncon-
sciously draw the substance of their revelations, being endowed
with a sense that enables them to distinguish the evolving schemes
of individual lives. Metagnomy on persons distant in time will
appear to us still more strange and complex.


CHAPTER IV


WHEN A METAGNOMIC SUBJECT TAKES COGNIZANCE
OF THE STATES OF LIFE OF A HUMAN BEING
DISTANT IN TIME, WHENCE DOES HE DRAW
HIS INFORMATION ?

DESPITE their apparently fundamental similarity,
raetagnomy on a person distant in space and that
on a person distant in time present a difference from
the experimental point of view which it is important
to understand thoroughly. This difference lies entirely in the
position of the experimenter in the last phase of experiment — the
censorship. For if it is nearly always possible, if not easy, to censor
metagnomy in Space, its difficulty is nearly always insurmoun table
in Time, as a brief statement of the useful types of experiment
will show.

I. Experiments in which the hutnan objective is entirely in the
future.

Two experimental types are to be distinguished here.

The first includes the cases in which the subject takes
cognizance of a future human individuality with reference to the
future of a living person and the ulterior connection of the two
lives. Take as an instance, when a sensitive announces to a
mother the approaching birth of her child, delineating its physical,
moral and mental characters, and describing its development more
or less completely. It is obvious that this is not (indubitably at
any rate) , a case of direct cognition ; the unborn child being
cognized in the life-sequence of an existing personality. Cases of
this kind belong to the types described in preceding chapters.

A second experimental type — the only one which finds its
proper place here — would answer to cases in which the sensitive
would seem to perceive directly a human being as yet unborn ;
if, for instance, a sensitive were to describe the physical aspect,
character, mode, and sequence of the life of a man not yet born
at the time of the forecast, but foreknown because he would
inhabit such and such a house or lodging.

A considerable number of trials of this kind would be the way
to prepare (for our successors) a well-founded judgment on the

i95


196


SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


capacity or incapacity of the faculty (at least so far as possessed
by the sensitives employed) to show foreknowledge of human
lives entirely in the future as it seems they can of those entirely
in the past. But while the claims of investigations whose results
verifiable at once or at short date are so pressing, who would
accept the task of undertaking a series of experiments who:
conclusion must be left to a future generation, and migh
ver, be entirely useless ?


uuu

sets
the


II. Experiments in which the hum an objective has lived in a
relatively distant past.

In this category of facts metagnomic output is as easy to obtain
as for persons distant in space. Contact with an object sets

le faculty to work on the whole individuality as it was in
past. But it is scarcely ever possible to censor completely
result.

I have not yet had one case in which it was possible to do this.
For a valid experiment it is not sufficient that the percipient
should be ignorant what the object placed in his hand represents,
and then to judge of the value of his indications by their agree-
ment with what is known, or by their verisimilitude. However
interesting this may be, this result allows of the supposition that
it is constructed by the imagination of the percipient from the
mental content of the experimenter— a phenomenon that I have
sometimes verified.

Only an experiment in which percipient and experimenter were
alike entirely ignorant of the historical meaning of the object
given as stimulus, and in which the metagnomic information
could be checked in part or in whole against the objective
evidence of vestiges, of documents unknown to every living
person till the moment of verification, would be really valid. Only
thus one might believe, with some chance of being correct, that
one is in presence of direct cognition of an individual human life
entirely completed in the past. I have long searched in vain for
such a proof. It came to me spontaneously, as detailed in
Chapter III, Part I.

Mme Morel on handling the photograph of an ampulla of opaque
glass told me that it contained blood from a man in the ancient
East whose mode of life, violent death, and funeral ceremonies
she briefly described.

As this sealed vessel (according to its possessor) contains a
liquid whose nature no one can know till the vessel is opened, I
rejoiced at this conjunction of circumstances in which conformity
of the vision by the sensitive with the antique reality would have
undeniable support. The reader knows why the verification
remains in suspense.


LIFE OF A HUMAN BEING DISTANT IN TIME 197


For want of any certainty that a metagnomic subject can take
cognizance of individual human lives in a relatively distant past,
apart from what is represented by living psychisms, I can only
state the problem as to what the informative sources may he in
these as in the type of cases last mentioned.

III. Experiments in which the human objective is in a recent past.

The field of useful experiment is in fact confined to the quite
recent past on account of the possibility of censoring results
exactly. Even then it is necessary to know what experimental
conditions make an experiment really conclusive. It is not
enough that a sensitive should reveal the states of life of a
deceased person for us to believe that we are in presence of a
direct metagnomic fact concerning a human being of the past :
everything depends on the circumstances under which the
perception occurred.

When a sensitive delineates the states of life of a person
present, and describes, for instance, the bodily aspect, character,
and episodes in the life of a father or grandfather deceased,whom
that person has known or heard much about, one can never be
certain that these personalities themselves are cognized, beyond
what the living person may reveal, even perhaps when the matter
revealed seems necessarily unknown to him.

When Myers in January, 1891, sent to Sir Oliver Lodge a
sealed envelope whose contents, written by himself, he alone
knew, asking that it should only be opened after his death when
a medium should have revealed its tenor, he thought he had
given a means of revealing the informative source and of proving
survival after death. The result is well known. Myers died in
1901. The letter was opened in 1904, after Mrs. Verrall, a
spiritualist medium of repute, was sure that she had obtained the
content under the inspiration of its author. But there was no
agreement between the two texts, either in wording or ideas. The
experiment was, moreover, radically vitiated for the purpose
intended. Even if it had been fully successful it would not have
justified the conclusion that Myers wished, since in order to be
able to affirm inspiration by the deceased it would be necessary
to be certain that knowledge of the content of a sealed letter is
impossible to a living person, even to those who are sensitive to
written matter by means outside the normal senses. There are,
however, in metapsychic literature facts which deprive experi-
ments such as Myers devised of all value as to the source of
information. 1

* E. Boirac led his subject Ludovic to read in the dark, a text unknown to
both, by passing a finger over the paper {La Psychologi* Inconnus, p. 245).

Hereward Carrington, Edison, J. Maxwell, and Schrenck-Notzing all verified


198


SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


Even cases analogous to that cited, page 162 ante, when
experimenter and percipient were both ignorant of the matter in
hand, are not indicative of the sources of the information given,
for the percipient revealed a life known in great part to two living
persons, and no one at the present time can know the limits to
mental intercommunication in metagnomic working.

Without further examples the reader will easily perceive how
difficult it is when metagnomy is being exercised on completed
human lives to devise an experiment in which no explanatory
hypothesis other than direct perception from the individuality
concerned can be advanced.

In my personal researches I have met with information on
missing persons found in the sequel to be dead, as the only data
on metagnomy dealing with past human lives without any
probable action of living psychisms.

It is rarely that such facts do not carry some impediments to
that to which they might be related. I have published one on
which silence was not demanded. 1 It is simple, unsensational,
but quite typical, and will serve to state the problem of
informative source in the case of metagnomy on a person \"
in time.

From the standpoint taken in this book (the only one no\
question), the case resolves itself into this complex of circ
stances :

On March 2nd, 1914, a man who lived in the outbuildings 1
country-house in the department of Cher, left his house
was seen no more. He was sought for during twenty days. Tl
was no slightest clue to what had become of him. No one
anything of his life since he left his home. I did not know even
that the man existed, and I used a metagnomic subject under
hypnosis, to whom the man and his place of habitation were
totally unknown. Under these conditions, where no influence
from any living person could be alleged, the percipient reconsti-
tuted the last episodes in the life of the missing man, indicating
step by step the path he had taken, the things he saw, his gestures
(some of which were said by members of his family to be character-
istic), his thoughts and the place where he awaited death, and
his body was found ; this place being accurately described
detail. In this case, and in others of the same kind (which woi

in turn that Bert Reese easily revealed what they had written on folded pap
mixed together, hidden, and some burned before the percipient spoke of
(Annales des Sciences Psychiques, March and Nov., 191 3). Dr. Geley in S
1 92 1, and Professor Richet proved by conclusive experiments that the Pohsh
engineer Stephan Ossowiecki could read the sense, and sometimes the phrases, (
letters in sealed envelopes {Revue Metapsy chique, 1921, No. 8, and 1922, No
3 and 4).

> In this book, p. 105. and the AnnaJes des Sci. Pys., in extenso, April, 1914.


LIFE OF A HUMAN BEING DISTANT IN TIME 199

be common were they sought for among percipients of the same
type), one is confronted with a metagnomic phenomenon that
proves that episodes known only to a dead man are revealed by
a sensitive as if by direct knowledge.
In such cases, whence do sensitives draw their information ?

Shall we find the answer from what practical experiment can
teach us ?

It should be noted that the enquirer loses nearly all his means
of investigation.

In metagnomy on living persons study is concentrated on two
constantly varying factors— the sensitive, varying from stance
to stance in the quality and extent of perception ; and from the
person cognized, varying from one seance to another by the
objectification of his states of life and in his mental content.
Observation, taking account of the changing relativity of these
two factors, has many data that can be diversified at will to trace
the paranormal knowledge to its source.

But in metagnomy on a deceased person the second factor has
become invariable ; it is a completed life, unchangeable, which
would appear to be only a representation permanently immobi-
lised in a vast and inconceivable memory. Experiment loses
nearly all power of investigation and is reduced to the registration
of indications and subsequent censorship of their agreement with
fact, a process that can throw no light on the genesis of the
metagnomic phenomenon under these conditions.

Although the field of research is thus restricted, there still
remain some facts that may direct us in the darkness and show
a way from the metagnomic fact towards the source of the know-
ledge it brings.

Accumulated experiment shows that sensitives deal with a dead
personality in the same way as with a living one. The elective action
of their faculty takes place in the same manner. The information
they receive and express are of the same kind and refer to the same
matters.

Their faculty is stimulated into action just as in distant cases,
whether by a physical link (using some intermediary object) or by
a mental link — the presence of some person belonging to, or more
or less representing the person to be cognized. It was by the
touch of a neckerchief belonging to M. Lerasle that Mme Morel
reconstituted the last stages of his life. And this piece of stuff
(1 emphasize this fact) was taken from a wardrobe for trans-
mission to me, and therefore had only been in contact with
the missing man long before the paranormal knowledge that it
instigated. The mere presence of a member of M. Lerasle's
family would have served the same purpose as I have verified in


200 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN

other cases of the kind. The presence of a living person from the
environment of the deceased play the same part in producing the
phenomenon, with this difference that the living person may be
the involuntary and unconscious agent of error by transmission
of his mental content.

Moreover, metagnomy on the dead human personality furnishes
the same kind of knowledge as of the living. What the sensitive
reveals in both cases is the object ification of the human person-
ality by the successive constituent states of life. The percipient
takes cognizance of a particular existence under the same
informative aspects, whether it be entirely completed or in course
of completion : time does not enter qualitatively as a factor
modifying the faculty.

Since the same experimental conditions allow of the same
cognitions on the human individuality, whether living or dead,
we are not led to think— I do not say to conclude, since the
experimental data are too few to warrant definite conclusion—
but to suppose that the determining factors of the metagnomic
phenomenon are similar whether the personality cognized be
near at hand, distant in space or distant in time ?

Confronted with the supposition that a human personality
buried in the past should be the reality directly influencing the
faculty of metagnomic subjects, we stand stupefied, unable to
understand, and disposed to reject this inference from observation
and logic as a paradox. When, in the previous chapter, the only
hypothesis resulting from experimental facts was offered to us —
that the informative influence was that of the person distant in
space whose life is delineated by the percipient, we found it hard
to accommodate our minds to that idea. This psychic pheno-
menon, however, seemed in some degree intelligible by comparison
with some recent acquisitions of physical science such as wireless
telephony and telegraphy : but we have nothing to compare
with metagnomy on dead personality. That which seemed
theoretically possible in space seems to us absurd in time. We
oppose the possibility of direct perception of a past reality
with all the power of our mental constitution adapted to function
analytically by the succession of sensations.

Nevertheless, the facts bear witness that metagnomy on human
individuality in time is a verifiable fact ; and experimental obser-
vation suggests that the informative source is the same whether
the personality in question be living or deceased. If that is
opposed to our modes of thinking, that is because our modes of
thinking have to adapt themselves to an order of phenomena
manifested indeed on the material plane of our ordinary sensa-
tions, but originating on another plane of which our physics can
give us no idea. Metagnomy deals with knowledge reached by


LIFE OF A HUMAN BEING DISTANT IN TIME 201


other channels than those of the known senses, and elaborated
by other processes than reason. And further, this paranormal
knowledge, incomprehensible in its nature, has as its object
u the human personality," which also is an enigma.

What is human personality ? It is important that we should
fully realize that we do not know. To be aware that we do not
know is the best preparation for research.

Very numerous and diverse are the definitions of human per-
sonality ; some are in essential contradiction with others : they
depend on the standpoint from which a human being is looked
at and on the opinions with which we approach the question.
I think, however, that they all may be reconciled in this : A
human personality is an individuality distinct from other beings
of the species by a sum of physical, moral, social and other
characteristics, and by a peculiar manner of feeling, acting an<J
reacting ; by a memory connecting successive states of conscious4
ness, giving the sensation of the Self, i.e. of unity in the midst of
the moving multiplicities of the environment. - — '

The human personality then appears to us as a system of
converging functions determining bodily individuality and
mental individuality, in whatever manner the latter may be
understood.

But as soon as a mind disciplined by positive experimental
method begins to explore human personality, it does not fail
to discover behind the seeming individual fixity, a constant
movement of variation with episodic accelerations more or less
strong and with more or less durable perturbations that deter-
mine correlated modifications of the whole.

As soon as men had developed some acuity of judgment, mere
observation of the course of particular lives had already taught
them that the human being objectifies an evolution with many
diverse vicissitudes, which render him sometimes, and in what-
soever way, so changed in the course of ten or twenty years that
he would not be recognized by his contemporaries if the con-
formation of his body did not maintain his identity ; and he
would not even recognize himself if his memory did not bring
both aspects of his existence into mental continuity.

As soon as psychology ceased to be an introspective analysis
generalized on the species, and became experimental, psychol-
ogists were obliged to admit, coexistent in human personality,
two psychic individualities interacting functionally, but spon-
taneously and experimentally separable. They thought to
describe them by calling the one conscious and the other
subconscious or unconscious ; and, in the sequel were obliged
to discern the same attributes in each — memory, spontaneity,
constructive power, will consciousness, etc. A great many


202 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


psycho-pathological states showing disequilibrium of thought,
were referred to rupture of the functional synergy of these
two psychisms. That gave the idea of using hypnosis to analyse
the respective functioning of each.

By this method of cleaving the personality, it appeared that
the function called conscious was in some sort the creator and
guardian of personality, and that its momentary passivity
under hypnosis allowed of an impromptu and temporary as-
sumption of any other suggested personality with consequent
modification of the whole moral being, including the hand-
writing. 1

The facility with which the instantaneous formation of new
personalities could be brought about by hypnotic suggestion was
the experimental explanation of the abrupt and spontaneous
transformations observed in certain neuroses, such as the cases
called ambulatory somnambulism in which a person suddenly
becomes someone else with other tendencies, another character
and another memory, for days, weeks, or months. (See Pierre
Janet, Nevroses et idees fixes, Vol. II.)

Such also is the celebrated case of Feiida, who lived for thirty
years in two alternating personalities distinct from one another. 1
In another field of observation the momentary transformation
of personality, and even the creation of personalities additional
to and coexistent with the first, have been abundantly observed
in the production of paranormal phenomena called tnediumship.
M It is remarkable," says Charles Richet, u that in nearly every
experiment, mediums, even when very slightly acquainted with
spiritualist literature (sometimes none at all when at the begin-
ning of their mediumship), attribute to another personality than
themselves the origin of the thoughts transmitted by the table
or planchette in writing. In nearly all spiritist experiments there
is personification. The personalities are often multiple, but there
is usually one that takes precedence and excludes others. In
spiritualist parlance this is called a Guide. The remarkable
objective phenomena presented by Eusapia Paladino were re-
ferred by her to John King. Similarly Mrs. Piper's subjective
phenomena were attributed by her to Phinuit." (Charles Richet,
Traite de Metapsychique.)
Everything happens in fact, as if the subconsciousness of the

1 Ferrari, Hericourt, Charles Richet. " La personnalit^ de l'ecriture." (Fetus
philosophique. i836.)

Charles Richet. L'homme et V intelligence .

Le Dantec. " L'individualite et l'erreur individualiste." (Biblio. philos. con-
temporaine.)

Bmet. " Les alterations de la personnalite." (Btbl. Scient. Internationale.)

Taine. V Intelligence.

Grassct. Hypnotisme et Suggestion.

• Hypnotisme. Double Conscience et alterations de la personnaliU. (Azam, 1887 )


LIFE OF A HUMAN BEING DISTANT IN TIME 208


medium fabricates a fixed or variable personality, invested with
historical name, or with an imaginary one, or with none at all.
This additional personality is often seen to be variable in its
, in its character, its language, and its knowledge, with
it sitters. This has been observed and reported in the
writings of most persons who have assisted at mediumistic
sittings where there have been several sitters. 1

All the vicissitudes of personality, whether artificial or spon-
taneous, mentioned above, are modifications or provisional
eclipses of the first or conscious personality, which reappears as
soon as the mental synergy is reconstituted.^'* I L fiC A^£tn

And these are only the least of the disasters that may happen
to that personality when it is altered beyond those modifications
which may bfe called its normal evolution ; for lesions of the
tral nervous system may lead to worse things — for instance,
coexistence with a new and delirious personality, temporary
permanent, as in lunacy ; or to its definite replacement by
secondary personality. We should also remember that per-
nality proper is not even formed at all in the case of some
constitutional degenerates, despite the normal morphological
development of their bodies they remain in mental childhood.
And, to say no more, it is also to be borne in mind that dementia
may submerge a normally evolved personality in similar childish-
ness.

This human personality, so unstable that it is incessantly
odified, so little homogeneous that strong emotion, intoxication
t suggestion can dissociate it, so little constructed to endure
that it may even die before the death of the body, so precarious
d so obviously perishable, is not, as we have seen in the pre-
J 'ng pages, the informing centre whence metagnomic subjects
draw their knowledge when they work on a life in progress.
A fortiori it cannot be the informing centre when death has
extinguished it.

It appears really, as its etymology designates it (Lat. persona
= a mask worn by actors — a part played), or, after death, the
story of a particular life in the universal life.

This story, however, subsists somewhere, since metagnomic ^
bjects are able to reconstruct it ; and how can it be imagined/
subsist if it is not in a thought or a memory ?

1 J. Maxwell. Les Phtnomines psychiques (Alcan). " I have remarked that
the part played by the personification varies with the composition of the circle.
With spiritualists it will always be the spirit of a deceased or of a living person.
There is more variety in the intellectual phenomena when the circle is composed
of persons who are not spiritualists. In this case it happens sometimes that the
communications allege that they emanate from the sitters themselves. I am
inclined to think that this generally is so. and that some sort ol collective
consciousness is formed.


204 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


In what thought ? In what memory ? This is to be sought
for : not by sterile flights of imagination ; but by facts, by
experiment, by study of the living, in biology pure and simple in
its paranormal section. Is there behind individual seeming a
collective consciousness, a thought outside time and space,
where every reality is represented, of which all phenomena
known to us are reflected by our senses ; a mysterious well-spring
whose knowledge flows through the particular psychisms within
the limits that pertain to each ?

Is there behind the apparent human personality a real per-
sonality, a transcendental individuality clothed in matter playing
a part in the life of the world, whose persistence would be the
memory containing a life-story, from whom the metagnomic
subject draws after death that which he drew before death ?
Or is the source of supernormal knowledge so unreachable by
c very constitution of our intelligence that our actual concepts
ust necessarily be foreign to it ?
Some definite facts impress me with a notion that it would be
premature to enlarge upon, that this problem can be solved.
What metaphysical speculation has only debated, may possibly
be established by persevering, practical experiment.


CHAPTER V


SKETCH OF A STUDY ON THE PSYCHOLOGICAL DE-
TERMINISM OF ERRORS IN METAGNOMY IN
OPERATION ON HUMAN PERSONALITY

i. On Errors in the Exercise of Supernormal
Cognition

SO far this book has been a study of metagnomy in its
correct operation ; that is, as producing knowledge of
reality under conditions when normal intelligence could
reveal nothing. But if, instead of having set forth a
statement at once analytical and synthetical, of the processus of
this faculty in its active phases, I had restricted myself to inter-
minable details of experimental seances, the reader would at
once have perceived that unalloyed metagnomy is rare and that
it presents itself more or less infected by error.

Error and supernormal knowledge should be studied together,
they are two products of mental working on several planes and
of connected functions. The arbitrary separation is therefore
necessary for clarity of statement.

This department of human biology is like others in which the
observer approaches complex phenomena — life is understood
by studying its perturbations. Just as the state which we call
health is understood differently as we progress in our knowledge
of disease ; just the function of an organ is best known when we
know all the troubles that cause it to vary ; just as psycho-
pathology has enabled us to penetrate into the complexities of
mental life ; so, in the same way, an analysis of errors instructs
us on metagnomy by tracing the outline of this phenomenon
whose fundamental nature is beyond our present knowledge, by
separating that which is from that which is not.

Errors pervade metagnomic sdances in variable proportions
according to the psycho-physiological factors that condition
them. Some stances contain scarcely any, others contain a few,
others many. But to work out a percentage of the true and the
false and to judge of the value of a stance from that, as I have
sometimes read, is to satisfy oneself with an illogical and sum-
mary judgment, sterile also, because the psychological complexity


>ERNORMAL FACULTIES

the matter in hand has no numerical equivalents. Instead of
merely comparing two totals it is more useful to find out the
causes of errors.

Even if the observer should be so short-sighted as to be incap-
able of seeing anything beyond the crude fact of error, he ought
to consider that errors differ greatly in what one might call their
mass- value. When a percipient, for instance, calls a dark-haired
person fair, he is not committing an error of the same degree as
if he were attributing humility to a proud nature, genius to a
degenerate whose evolution is arrested, good health to one
dying of chronic disease, etc. He should also reflect that errors
differ in their relation to reality. Some are total, having no
correspondence with fact ; others are approximations more or
less distant from truth ; others are total or partial omissions ;
others are exaggerations with an optimist or pessimist bias, and
so on. In short, errors are not intercomparable unities, they
are ideas of different content and almost infinitely diverse. To
turn them into figures is useless, and, moreover, teaches nothing.
The only useful procedure is to trace the error to its cause ;
this I shall endeavour to do by classing errors in their relation
to the psychological factors that determine them.

2. Errors Originating in Defective Functioning of the
psychism of metagnomic percipients

As we have seen, in metagnomic work on a human personality
everything happens as if the percipient drew information by
latent intelligence of a transcendental kind, from the similar
plane of another psychism, and exerted himself to transmit
the knowledge so acquired to conscious thought by an ingenious
use of the processes of mental representation.

As soon as the metagnomic sensitive ceases to think in the
ordinary way and his special faculty comes into operation, his
psychic activity is transformed. A latent intelligence comes into
action, and the apparent functions of conscious and subconscious
thought reverse their parts. The subconscious modality of the
psychism is liberated from the conscious modality, and seems to
become sensitive to influence from the transcendental plane of
other psychisms ; and the conscious, abandoning the directive L
function, becomes a spectator, whether it merely registers super- )(
normal information already completely expressed in spoken words
or by automatic writing, or whether it has to interpret the
artifices of mental representation.

The general processus of correct metagnomy on a human
personality may be thus described when the factors that govern
it are under favourable conditions.


YCHOLOGICAL DETERMINISM OF ERRORS 207

But for many reasons, inherent in or exterior to the percipients,
these favourable conditions are not always realized by a long way.
Hence come errors.

The same psychological method will show us their many
diverse aspects and their causes.


The psychism of the metagnomic subject may be insensitive to
the transcendental thought of the object-personality.

When the psychism of the subject is not influenced by the
transcendental modality of the person given for delineation, by
reason of unfavourable conditions at the time or on account
some inter-mentaJ relations, different results come to pass,
ding to circumstances,
etimes the psychism of the subject remains inert, no
informative mental image arises. M Nothing comes to me," the
percipient says. This is a failed seance. And it may be said
that when perception is perturbed this is a fortunate aspect :
the experiment with the same percipient and the same personality
must be renewed or abandoned if one or two further trials should
show this mental couple refractory to the production of super-
al knowledge.

But sometimes it happens that the subconscious functional
e of the subject, liberated from conscious direction and re-
iving no stimulus from outside, begins to work on its own
unt, and constructs a romance unrelated to the personality
to be delineated, round some other perception. This error of
complete fabulation, rare with good subjects, but frequent in those
of middling and uncertain quality, may nevertheless occur with
subjects capable at another time of excellent metagnomic output.
Here is an instance of this kind of error produced August 2nd,

1916, by Mme L.-F , the same percipient who had the previous

day given me a very correct prevision of an episode in my military
life (p. 291 ante).

On August 2nd, 191 6, Captain Lucien G., an aviator, squadron-leader
in the army of the East (Macedonia), was preparing to rejoin at the end
of his leave. He was ignorant what the military contingencies might

have in store as to his duties. I took him to Mme L.-F , who did not

know him and could normally know nothing but that he was in the Air
Service, by reason of his uniform.

She said, M You are returning to the place you left . . . you will be
sent elsewhere, but not towards France. . . . You will like the place you
are now going to better than that to which you wiU be sent.

"In the country to which you will be sent I see nothing but water . . .
like an island which is difficult of access, and that only by boat. . . .
There is something like a thick grey cloud, and when one has passed through
this it is clearer on the other side.

" You will 9ee a great fire . . . you will be surprised and much moved
by seeing great flames on the earth. Part oi a building that shelters you


208 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN

will be partially destroyed by the flames . . . many will die there . .
something falls ... an explosion . . . fire . . . buildings destroyed.

M At the moment of the explosion I see you standing, dressed in white
and wearing a helmet, looking at something on the ground ; that will
save you, because it will have made you go out of the building,
bombed by an aeroplane ? You will say. ' I must go and look into thisl
You go out and something explodes in the place you have left. . . .
" You will, in the sequel, be taken prisoner, not in battle, but
staken direction . . . you will make a mistake in direction. You
interned in a sort of fort . . . four columns ... a terrace on
you will walk . . . vaults underneath for shelter. . . .

M Four of you will escape in a boat, by water, and without being
detected, but on coming to land in a country where they will have to
detain you. You will not be long a prisoner and will be well treated. . . .

" After the war you will do something connected with a large admini-
stration of the State perhaps . . . something very important. ... In
le place where you will be 1 see a long corridor representing offices . . .
everything goes by organized direction ... a settled career for life, free
from all anxieties.

" You will make acquaintances or have preliminary interviews which
will point the way before the end of the war. You will be the chief over
e offices . . . men will come to you for orders. . . . After one or
years, perhaps longer, you make some sort of discovery . . . you
get no money for it, but some share in the profits of the thing m
under your direction. . . . Once there, you will not change, and
become a personage in this affair. The gentleman who will bring yo
into this will be tall, fresh complexion, very white hair, not stout I
thick-set ; he will be the manager when you enter, you will take his pi-
later on."

What came to pass.

Captain Lucien G. returned to his squadron in Macedonia, and had
several changes ; but there was no fire in which he might have perished.

Recalled to France in May, 1917. he commanded a squadron in several
places on the French front. The only time in which he was in peril of
fire was in the summer of 191 8, during the German offensive towards the
Marne. When piloting an observer at 2000 metres the oil-tank took fire.
Death was certain if bold decision and clever manoevuring had not brought
the machine to earth immediately. The landing, necessarily somewhat
violent, threw the two aviators on to the ground, where they remained
some minutes half stunned by the shock, while the machine burnt out ne
them. That was the only episode in the war in which M. G. was in dang
by fire, and it in no way resembles the prediction. He was in i
employ from the beginning of the war to its end and was never
prisoner.

Returning to civil life, nothing in his professional career during the
last four years at all resembles the visions told him.

This instance is therefore pure fabulation arising from consciou
perception that an aviator was concerned.

So circumstantial a fabulation, constructed without any basis
in reality or in thought, is rare among subjects capable of meta-
gnomy. When their subconscious mind works on nothing it
generally produces vague and ill-co-ordinated indications, ex-
pressed by hesitating phrases, while the face of the sensitive


PSYCHOLOGICAL DETERMINISM OF ERRORS 209


shows effort, nervousness, and disquiet. An experimenter with
practical experience then stops the sitting, knowing that no
supernormal results are to be looked for.

Fabulation based on some informative influence from the per-
sonality to be delineated or derived thence, is relatively more
common than total fabulation. The subconscious mind of the
subject, sensitized to the external mental influence, remains un-
influenced by the transcendental mode, but grasps (on the plane
of sensorial thought in the individual to be delineated) some
project, belief, or desire on which it builds a romance. Until
scrutinized by comparison with fact this kind of fabulation takes
on an aspect of verisimilitude and supernormality by reason of
its mental basis.

My records abound in errors of this kind to which some
subjects, especially those in hypnosis, are specially prone. I will
give one instance :

In December, 191 5, when I was chief medical officer in the hospital
of Yierzan, it was agreed between myself and Dr. C, the surgeon at a
military hospital of the same town, that we would apply to be posted
together to one of the automobile surgical ambulances which the Medical
Department was starting at that time. Having sent in our applications,
we each busied ourselves in pressing our request on the notice of persons
who could prevent the application being lost in the mass of official
papers.

During the first fortnight of February, 1916, it seemed that our efforts
would shortly be successful. It was in this state of mind that on May 13th
I said to Mme M., u Look for the next events in my life, starting from
to-day."

" I see," she said, M a very important event for you at the present
moment. ... I see a transfer, followed by another. ... I see danger
... it is an order . . . you must go. . . . This order comes and changes
the order of your work and your habits at present.

" 1 see three persons affected by the same order. ... I see them in a
painful situation, among men who are suffering. ... I hear much noise.
... I see you surrounded by accidents. It is very soon, very soon,
hurried."

" Look for the circumstances preparing this departure."

" The circumstances are foreseen . . . the thing is prepared ... it
is done. . . . There is an order, you have to go . . . the matter is
finished long since, the order comes . . . then the moment has come.
All is prepared, only the destination has to be settled.

" For this departure I see a group of three persons ; a tallish man,
strong, dark, and well-known to you (this applied to my friend Dr. G.) ;
another, older, not known to you, who comes from a larger town. . . .
You will meet at a place to be named . . . you two will leave together
from where you now are."

" Look for the department in which I shall work."

M It is not in a house, it seems to be a kind of carriage ... it is made
like a carriage ... a long grey carriage without horses. ... In it I
see men lying down, stained with blood, resting. . . . The carriage often
goes from place to place, but stays many hours in one place. ... I see
also long wooden buildings, very long.

M


210 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


" I see this carriage mostly. ... I see also a wrecked wood ... the
soil is dry and white ... it is not snow, it is like chalk. . . .

M There are many carriages of the same kind, all alike, about four
yards long and two yards wide.

M I see numbers of carriages ... in groups of three. There are five
doctors. The chief is an elderly man who passes and repasses, he does
not stay in the carriages."

What came to pass.

Weeks went by. At the end of April we learned that the last surgical
automobiles had been equipped and had left.

At the end of July in the same year I left Vierzon alone for service
with the armies, and at no time was I in surroundings as described by
Mme M.

Dr. G. also left for army service some months later, and was never
attached to the automobile service. We did not meet again.

Mme M. had taken from my thoughts the idea of a posting to the
automobile service, and had dressed it up in her own way.

It was a case of tabulation on my mental content.

It may also happen that the psychism of the subject, liberated
from the usual conscious direction, unheeding its proper function
and only occupied with the result, works under the sole and
complete influence of the sensorial plane (conscious and sub-
conscious) of thought in the person concerned, as if the mental
content of the latter were transferred to that of the former, and
were there reconstituted by the dramatic representation of mental
images. In such cases we hear revelations of fragments of past
and present life such as they are in our minds, and states of life
in the future as we imagine them on present data. As in such
cases there is much that can easily be verified, and the indica-
tions as to the future seem probable (since they are our own
suppositions), these seances are impressive and seemingly
excellent : but the sequel ultimately shows that the subject has
not grasped the reality but has only translated what was repre-
sented more or less consciously and clearly in our thoughts —
our knowledge of past facts, our fears, our projects, our desires
and hopes.

There are many such cases in my notes. I extract from them
a single case, short, and very typical, which I specially commend
to those who enter on metagnomy with selfish motives by curiosity
to learn their own future.

In December, 1910, M. Louis D., manager of some factories in Northern
France, was in desperate straits by the failure of some speculations on
the Stock Exchange. All that he possessed was swallowed up in paving
differences between the price of his purchases and sales. Other purchases
falling due after some months gave him hopes of minimizing his losses,
but the brokers demanded a deposit against the securities in their hands.
In this state of mind M. Louis D. went to visit Mme M. on December 20th,
1910.


PSYCHOLOGICAL DETERMINISM OF ERRORS 211


hvii
die |

a m
aloo


Look," he said, " for my present situation and what will be the

outcome."

She said, " I see a terrible situation ; a fortune swallowed up, and great
xiety at inability to pay debts ... a fear of utter ruin.
" But I see that all this will be wiped out . . . things will turn out
better ... the lost fortune will be regained."
" How is this to occur ? "

"... by assistance, money lent . . . operations now in suspense
hich will be more lucky. ... 1 see also unforeseen inheritances."
" Look to see where the money lent will come from."
"... I see you writing to a widow, tall and getting grey, gentle and
pious . . . she seems to belong to your family by marriage, for I do not
sec links of blood relationship. ... I see her living near Nancy. . . .
ou will ask her to help you . . . she will come to you and lend you the
ul money : so you will be able to deposit the sums required.
There will be more difficulties in January and February, but you will
make fresh arrangements. . . . You will not give up your business, and
by summer you will have made good."

" Now see the legacies of which you spoke."

"... There will be an important legacy following on the death of a
man who is still young, clean-shaven and fair-haired, very tall. He is
living with an older woman, who appears to be his mother . . . she will
die almost immediately after. Both deaths will occur this year.

1 NG a little later another legacy by the death of another relation . . .
an who, however, is not old, hair hardly grey yet, tall, living abroad
one . . . also a relation by marriage . . . seems in good health . . .
but is not really so. His life will not be long, only one or two years at
most."


What ccune to pass.

In the descriptions given him by Mme M., M. Louis D. easily recog-
zed the relations by marriage indicated — an aunt of his wife, living
ir Nancy, two more relations of hers (mother and son) living at Epernay,
nd a bachelor cousin living abroad, alone.

He had already thought of writing to the aunt, but had put the idea
ie for fear of letting the family know a state of things that he had
reason to conceal. But encouraged by the surprising promises of
^ient, he wrote to this lady, showing the great service that a
Id be to him. Some days later he received a sympathetic and
reply, but no offer of assistance.

leless, M. D., despite the urgent advice I gave him to count
ling and to undertake nothing on the faith of predictions that
not be verified at the time, borrowed the money elsewhere, and
made sure that his later purchases should stand till they fell

The losses increased, and not only had the fortune disappeared, but
debts mounted up. This was the end of the race for money.
Twelve years have passed since then.

The young man and his mother are still in good health and do not know
f their death-sentence.

The tall bachelor living abroad went ahead of the part assigned to
him : he died in 191 4, but left his money to a friend.

Such was the sequel to the seance which filled M. D. with astonishment
on December 20th, 1910.

The sensitive had only taken in M. D.'s thought that which she found
represented, whether consciously or subconsciously | the notion


212


SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


of his terrible situation and the means by which he might logically expect
to get clear.

And consider, in this connection, the morality of our subconcious
thought. M. D. is honest, generous, devoted, and possessed of qualities
such that 1 esteem him greatly : nevertheless, his subconscious thought
did not hesitate to imagine the death of those relations by which he
i£ht profit.

When he reads these lines he will be astonished that his thought
these homicidal desires.

These are the psychological dramas which are constantly taking place
in us when from the depths of thought there rise up judgments, desire
and formulated suggestions which our consciousness rejects with sha
at their baseness.

Our psychism does not react in the same manner on all its
functional planes to stimuli from outside. Its conscious exercise
tends to adapt thought to realities and to control itself, whereas
its chief latent work is imaginative. The subconscious is a
wonderful builder of fables. Collaborating in the total psychic
orking, it ceaselessly brings forward schemes few of which are
worth retaining, and most should be put aside because of their
fancifulness or their inopportune nature. Abandoned to its
proper action, as in reverie, it builds romances. Turned towards
a literary end it constructs situations, combinations of form and
olour without end ; and these are only manifestations which
into consciousness. No limits can be assigned to its latent
working. As soon as methodical study (as in psycho-pathological
cases) has explored it, an amazing intensity of creative power
has been revealed. The imaginative power of the subconscious
is such that it extends to creating a new personality coexisting
or alternating with the normal personality.

What the subconscious mind is capable of constructing on
sensorial data which conscious intelligence uses differently, how
manifold the creations that its memory contains, is known to
none of us in matters that concern ourselves. Nevertheless all
this latent mental life accompanies us when we present ourselves
for metagnomic cognition.

When then a metagnomic subject tells us of states of life
to us and of other states, such as the future, unknown to us,
should not (as we are almost unavoidably led to do) say, 11 This
is in my thought, that is not/' As we do not know all that is in
our thought it is impossible for us to be certain what is and what
is not in our mental content.

If we are not fully persuaded of this psychological truth
shall not understand metagnomy nor its errors.

How much naive astonishment 1 have seen in men of scienti:
acquirements who were curious as to metapsychic phenomena
How many feminine confidences have I listened to on various
themes, but always coming to the same point common to them


PSYCHOLOGICAL DETERMINISM OF ERRORS 213

all! "A consultation, doctor? Well, ten years ago I consulted
Mme X., the lucid percipient. Among other things she de-
scribed my inner feelings and a man that I loved and still love
passionately, etc. This astonished me to some extent, but as
it was in myself I knew it. But what 1 of course could not know,
and was an unexpected revelation, was that my husband would
shortly die, and I should marry my lover. But my husband lives,
and is in good health ; and as for my lover, everything goes to
show that I shall lose him ; I hear that he is about to marry.
What is to be thought of that ? Why was everything true
except the end ? "

The answer to that question is that the subconscious mind
of the lady imagined the death of her husband as the most
favourable means of realizing her sentimental attachment, just
as Mr. D. imagined the death of the people from whom he might
inherit. 1

It is therefore impossible to judge of the origin and the quality
of metagnomic information at the time of a stance. Unless
they carry in themselves the proofs of origin or are obviously
inapplicable to the person delineated, there is one only mode
of estimating their value — to write down the tenor of the words
spoken and compare them with facts. ^


This being thoroughly understood and admitted, it is important
to know that the passage of latent mental content into the
psychism of a sensitive engenders an error which is not always
without results. The object-personality is modified by it and is
in some degree vitiated as a factor for metagnomic output. 1
will explain :

If, at the time of a stance that has produced errors, the person
had been brought into contact with genuine metagnomy, the
subconscious fabulation would have remained latent and know-
ledge conformable to reality would have appeared instead of it ;
the person cognized would only have differed from what he was
before the stance by having registered new information con
formable to reality.

Whereas by having received through the sensitive a fabulation
derived from his own subconsciousness, he carries henceforward
on the conscious plane of thought an inner erroneous belief whose
suggestive power has been reinforced thereby ; and this may, in
later stances, pass to the psychisms of other percipients who
might have been insensitive to it in its first and weaker state.
Hence it may often be observed that an error originating in


1 I commend to my fellow-practitioners in psychiatry the utilization of meta-
gnomic subjects even in erroneous exercise of their faculty as more reliable and
speedy methods of psycho-analysis than the tedious procedure recommended by


214


SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


defective mental working of one sensitive, is reproduced by
others with better powers. 1

I do not here insist further on this fact, which is of primary
importance, because I shall shortly bring out its full meaning
by a most illustrative example (p. 215).

From the preceding analysis of the principal cause of error,
the true nature of metagnomy will appear and take its proper
place. It is not what modern psychology calls u thought
reading," mental suggestion, or transmission of thought. It is
not even that and something more, as I have so often heard said.
It is not that at all, since the passage of what we conceive as
"thought" is only a semblance, and is in reality an uncertain
product of other mental energy. Knowledge of the normally
unknowable comes to the sensitives from a plane of personality
other than that which is apparent ; it is endowed with channels
of information and methods of cognition wliich are at pr<
quite impossible to explain.


The transcendental modality of knowledge passes into the
of metagnomic subjects, but polluted by errors from
sources.

The peculiar state of the subconscious mentality of a meta
gnomic subject in the exercise of his function consists in its
liberation from conscious direction and in a special sense by which
it becomes sensitive to external psychic influences ; and thus it
happens that in one and the same seance all possibilities involved
in the two factors, cognizer and cognized, may come into realiza-
tion. From the cognized there may pass to the sensitive both
thought of a sensorial kind (the conscious and the subconscious
of classical psychology) known and unknown, and also knowledge
from the transcendental plane of thought ; and the subconscious
mind of the sensitive may at certain moments fabulate on the
basis of information coming from one or other of the mental
modalities of the person to be delineated.

This interpsychic collaboration on different planes is very
frequent. In experimental practice there occur sometimes whole
stances of pure metagnomy ; in other cases the supernormal is

smaAl in amount and mixed with many errors. There are all

/ * - * . • .« .

1 All that has been said above shows that metagnomic subjects in the defective
exercise of their faculty, when they do not receive the influence that produces
supernormal knowledge, yet abundantly demonstrate the psychological faculty—
widely admitted but still questioned in some quarters—direct communication
of thought.

I bring to the notice of psychologists desirous of studying this phenomenon
that they will find excellent instruments for their purposes of demonstration and
research in pseudo- metagnomic subjects who have only the faculty of translating
what a human personality knows by sensorial exercise of his thought, and also
in metagnomic subjects of poor quality, among whom error due to transmission
of thought abounds.


PSYCHOLOGICAL DETERMINISM OF ERRORS 215


degrees between these two extremes. The output of metagnomic
faculty being a function of the two factors — subject and object —
the ideal percipient would be one only sensitive to the transcen-
dental plane of all personalities.

Though I have had ideally good seances, I have not met with
any impeccable percipient The best are those who give much
supernormal information on the greatest number of individuals,
but even these are liable to error according to their state at the
moment, and the person in contact with them. To give a very
clear idea of this 1 shall quote an example pregnant with useful
teaching. All the kinds of error analysed above will be found in
it conjoined with real metagnomy. As it extended over more
than eighty stances, from March 14th, 1916, to April 13th, 1922,
held by ten persons with eleven percipients, and as the complete
record would make a large book, I shall abbreviate by taking
extracts from the record of each stance, taking care not to
diminish its evidential value more than can be helped. I was a
witness of the whole of this long experiment, being fully informed
after each stance ; and also took an active part when circum-
stances permitted. I thank my excellent friend M. Louis M.
for the permission to make public an episode which was the most
painful in his whole life, for the sake of the instruction contained.

March 8th, 191 6.

My friend, M. Louis M., received from the Abb6 Pavillard, chaplain
to the 15th Infantry Division of the 8th Corps, a letter nearly as follows :

" I have the painful duty of informing you that you son, Jean, lieu-
tenant in the 56th Regiment of Infantry, was wounded in the head by a
bullet on February 24th, in the battle of Verdun. The Germans having
occupied the ground, we could not bury his body, but death is, unhappily,
certain.' 1

In this state of mind M. Louis M. went on March 14th, 1916, to M. de PL a
a remarkable metagnomic subject in the waking state, whom he only
knew by name, and to whom he was quite unknown. In the course of a
delineation of his life, the subject said to him, no question having been

asked :

"... I see one of your two sons seriously wounded in the war, in the
forehead, on the right and across . . . perhaps also in the left shoulder.
... I do not see death, perhaps he may be a prisoner ? "

Amazed at this, as he had come in full conviction of the death of his
son, M. M. could not shut out a ray of hope, especially as on thinking over
the chaplain's letter he perceived that it only inferred death from the
head-wound, and that his son had seemed dead.

Wishing to compare what M. de Fl. had said with what another subject
might say, he went, in the afternoon of the same day, to Mme M., who
worked under hypnotism, put into her hands the last letter received
from his son and asked her to speak of the actual life of the writer. 1

1 It is scarcely necessary to state that all seances were taken with scrupulous
care that the subjects should be in absolute ignorance of what they had to speak
on. Their words were always taken down on the spot. M. M., instructed by
me for several years on how to use these sensitives, always took all precautions
to secure reliable results.


216 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


She said, " I see a young man of moderate height, dark hair, small
moustache, a cicatrice behind his left ear. . . . He has been wounded
in the head. ... I see his head bandaged, his brain injured. ... He
will recover completely and will come back next summer."

April 2nd, 1916.

M. Louis M. received official notice of his son's death ; and at the same
time he learned that his comrades had seen him fall in the action, struck
by a bullet in the forehead, that the Germans had occupied the ground
during the night, and that in the morning a French counter-attack retook
the ground. All the dead belonging to the M. Jean's battalion were found,
including the colonel, only the body of Jean M. being missing.

It is easy to understand that M. M.'s hope became stronger.

April 14th, 1916.

M. M. asked one of his friends to have a stance with Mme M , putting

into her hands an article belonging to his son. She said :

" I see a young man (described) ... he has been wounded in the head
quite recently, his brain is injured ... he is in a cold place ... he
will recover and will write. M

May 4/A, 1916.

M. M. went to Mile deB , an excellent subject in the waking state.

They had never before met, and did not know each other. Without any
question being put, she said :

H One of your sons has recently been wounded by a bullet in the fore-
head, about 4 p.m., above the left eye ... he had no other wound . . .
he has not been trodden upon ... he fell on his back at once in coma,
without suffering pain. . . . He must have been taken up four hours later,
towards 8p.m. His name was taken from his papers by a big, surly German,
not ill-natured ... he has been in high fever. . . . Snow fell on him,
covering his body and staunching the blood from his wound. Others
who are thought to be dead are round him, but are not dead. ... He
is now in the invaded region, in a flying ambulance, his head bandaged.
He must have got the goodwill of some one in the ambulance, he is not
unhappy. He will soon be removed, perhaps towards Germany. Evacua-
tion lists are being prepared, and official news will come from Germany,
perhaps in June, in July at latest. He will recover completely, there will
be no brain-trouble. No Frenchman touched him after he fell ... the
witnesses who thought him dead have hardly seen him. ..."

May 5/A, 1916.

M. M. had a seance with Mme M at 1 1 a.m. She said :

* I see a young man in a comatose state, one would say that he breathes
no more. . . . His hearts beats, however, and he moves his hand a little.
... I see him in a well-lit room, stretched on something soft, his head
covered with bandages. . . . He is surrounded by strangers . . . you
will soon have indirect news of him. ... He will write later. ... I see
him walking ... he will surely come back. The wound is crosswise
above the left eye, going into his hair ... the wound will leave a scar.
His brain will recover."

On the same day, at 2 p.m., M. M. went for the first time to Mme Fr.,
a very good subject in the waking state.

On the preceding day I had put into Mme Fr.'s hands a letter from
Lieut. Jean M., asking her to state the future of the writer. Her answer
was :

H There is no future for this person, he is dead."


PSYCHOLOGICAL DETERMINISM OF ERRORS 217


I could not be so cruel as to repeat this to M. M. I let him think that
I had been unable to meet Mme. Fr., and advised him to let her use her
powers for himself. This is what she said to him :

" Your son has been wounded in the head a short time since, above
the left eye, on the forehead. There is also some injury to the right
shoulder, a wound or a blow.

M He is now in a well-lit room, and facing his window there is a large
black wall which depresses him. He was moved far at first, in a flying
ambulance ... he is now in quiet, not having been moved for fifteen
days.

" His recovery will be slow, despite an appearance of rapid recovery
after his return. His understanding will be clear, but he will long remain
irritable, nervous and unequal.

M Just now he is very thin. You will get official news in the middle of
the summer. A little later he will write a card. The official news from
Germany will be incomplete and will only say that your son was picked
up and cared for from the first, without saying what has happened to
him since. They will leave this unsaid. Proceedings will be taken to
restore him before the end of the war, and will probably come to fruition
at the close of summer or at the end of the year. You will go to meet him. ' 1

As it is impossible to give in this book stance by stance, all
that was said on this painful matter, 1 shall only mark the prin-
cipal stages, taking extracts from those stances which gave most
information.

August 4th, iqi6.

The sister of a friend of M. M. (who knew nothing of the affair), put a
letter-card from Lieut. Jean M. into the hands of Mme B., a sensitive,
who lived at Carcassone. This lady had been expressly warned to take
no initiative other than writing down the words of the percipient. On
touching the paper Mme B. said :

M A young man has written this ... a young man with chestnut
hair, middle height, fresh complexion, upstanding — a fine lad, very gentle,
loyal, and kind . . . full of courage and good spirits. . . . There seems
to be in his family a boy of whom he is very fond " (correct). M He has been
wounded by a shell-splinter during a battle ... he was taken up, put
down, and taken up again . . . severely wounded . . . has been looked
after in several places. ... I hear the word Cologne . . . make inquiries
there. ... He seems to have been trepanned. ... I do not see him
dead. ... I hear 4 Jean.* You must hope. His brain is confused. Hm
is living, he will come back. . .

December iBth, 191 6.

M. M. put a photograph of his son into the hands of Mme A., of Bourges,
till then unknown to him. After feeling the thing for a few moments,
she said :

M There has been a wound in the forehead, not mortal, and some injury
to the shoulder and right arm ; he would seem to have been trodden on.
He has been taken up and treated. He is far away in a country to which
you cannot write ... it is not in Germany. . . . His brain Is affected

. . you will have no news for four months. Towards the end of April
or the beginning of May they wiU come by a letter from him, which
get through almost by a miracle. . . ."


SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN

► 26th t 1917.

M. M. placed in the hands of Mrae M„ at Paris, an object
to Jean.

" He had had an operation. . . . When he opened his eyes afterwards
his memory failed for past things, but only exists for present ones. Only
his habits remain, which are instinctive. They are busy with his re-
iucation. He replies when spoken to : if in French, he answers in French ;
in German, in German. He has not newly learned the latter language,
he knew it already and it has come back to his ear like the instinct to
He begins to remember in fugitive gleams. He does not remember
and, therefore, does not surfer. ... He is to others as they
if he is spoken to merrily, he smiles ; if sadly, he is sad ; he
le influences of those who speak to him. He is still in that state;
will be complete but lengthy . . . with his parents first, then
elsewhere, in pleasant travel. The cure will be completed by a medical
riend of the family " (here a description of myself). "This doctor will take
at care of him, etc. ..."

June 22nd, 1917.

Madame G., a friend of M. M., puts into the hands of Mine M a

thing belonging to Jean. The sensitive sees progressive amelioration in the
young man's mental state, describes correctly the room in which he
should sleep when he returns to his family, and describes the objects
that were on the table in that room in December, I9M» antl those that
were there at the time of the stance. (This was quite unknown to Mme G.,
and quite correct.)

In the same stance, Mme G. placed in the hands of Mme M. a letter
an officer who fell a minute before Lieut. Jean M., quite near
1 said : M He is dead, his wife is suffering from a blow from which !
will not recover ; he was mortally wounded."

July 27th, 1917.

Seance of M. M. with Mile de B , at Paris.

94 I see your wounded son in Germany, in a northern town. It is
known who he is. . . . Papers, identification badge, and money ha\
been stolen. ... I see him sitting in a garden, inert, looking vaguely
about him. . . . Memory will return by degrees. ... It is a house for
convalescents . . . there are good doctors about him . . . they say
that his memory will return sooner or later. He has some returns of
lucidity, slight and recently. ... He often repeats what is said round
him . . . his own thought does not often lead to speech. . . . Some-
times they say to him, 1 Do you remember ? 1 and he replies 1 The sky is
blue.' He had several operations at first, washings out, a wound reopened
several times. ... He will write ... he will return . . . before very
long."

On the same day M. M. had a stance with Mme Fr.
You eldest son is not dead . . . nervous exhaustion that will
long to get well. He will return much enfeebled, but will recover."

September 18//1, 191 7.

Mme G. placed an object belonging to Jean in the hands of Mme M-
The sensitive gave a long series of visions going over all that had happ
to the young man since the beginning of the war (correct in all that cou
be verified) and ended by saving, "He has written ... his return
near. His memory is improving ... he thinks of his younger brother,
who is not now a child, but he thinks of him as he was when a child . . .


PSYCHOLOGICAL DETERMINISM OF ERRORS 219


he thinks of a fall and an illness of this brother when he was quite a child,
that he thought much of at the time." (Mmc G. did not know this; it
is correct.)

November yd, 1917.

A friend of a sister-in-law of a friend of M. M.'s, who knew nothing of
the circumstances and was not acquainted with M. M.'s family, was
asked to interview Mile A. B., a metagnomic subject at Charentes,
with an article belonging to Jean.

" This young man is very weak ... he is called Jean. ... He is in
a large house. ... I see many sick persons there. The doctors give him
much attention ... a little less, however, than at his first arrival . . .
his comrades are kind to him ... he has lost his memory. . . . They
say, ' What is your name ? 1 He has forgotten it ; he who was so intelli-
gent cannot count five . . . but his memory will return when he sees
his parents."

November 15th, 191 7.

M. Pierre M., younger brother of Lieut. Jean, aged nineteen, went for
the first time to M. de Fl., and put no question. M. de Fl. has seen his
father twice, but had had no confidences from him. Pierre M. does not
resemble his father at all. In the course of a delineation of Pierre's life,
the percipient said :

11 Your brother is in grave danger. ... I see a great circle with red
flashes ; this indicates something very serious, but it is not fatal. . . .
I have no impression of deathlike cold. This man must have been a long
while comatose . . . there will be no news for a long while. ... I do
not see a final separation between you and him. It seems to me that you
should see him again."

June 24/A, 1918.

Mme G., stance with Mme M. ; she gave her an object belonging to
the lieutenant. (The same object has never been used twice, during the
long series of trials and with any of the sensitives.)

" This man is lying down, he is not ill . . . they will see him again
soon, very soon. His memory is returning. I see him soon to be happy.
Oh, yes. quite happy. He will return. I see a series of moves, long and
trying, stoppages; then he comes into a hilly country . . . there is rest
and great joy to find his own people again . . . then, after some days, he
returns home."

Mme G. then put into her hands a letter from Pierre (Pierre M., the
lieutenant's brother, was a medical student recently mobilized, and at
the time of the seance was in garrison at Grenoble).

The sensitive described Pierre and the military life he was leading.
Then she said, M The most salient fact about this young man is that he
is in relation with the one I have just seen. ... I have a clear vision
of the person I have just before spoken of ... he seems to be a relation,
a brother. But he will not see that brother in the town where he now
is ... he will go to meet him. He cannot pass the frontier. ..."

November 25M, 1918.

Mme G. places in the hands of Mme M an object belonging to the

lieutenant.

" This young man is now in a mountainous country, he has arrived
there quite recently. ... He returns very soon ... he will write. . . .
1 see his early return, then his meeting with a man, like his father . . .


220 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


then there comes a very young man, like his brother. Then he finds all
his own people."

Mme G. places in her hands a letter from Pierre.

The sensitive gives perfectly correct details of Pierre's present life,
and continues to see great joy over the return of a brother and mentions
also another happiness, a project of marriage.

This latter much disquieted Mme G., who dared not speak of it to
M. M., fearing some student's escapade. But the fact was that Pierrt
was deeply in love with Mme G.'s own daughter, unknown to the whole
family, and married her in 1921. This struck a happy note in the family
tragedy.

March 20th, 1919.

I had a small piece of leather from the lining of a hat belonging to
Jean put in the hands of Mile L., who knew nothing of the family of
M. Louis M. As soon as she had this, she described the missing man
and said :

" He is ill in a frontier town, suffering from loss of memory; his brain
is affected . . . amnesia ... he does a daily exercise to restore memory
... as soon as he remembers he will speak."

August, 1919.

M. Louis M. puts an object belonging to Jean in the hands of Mme
M .

M This man is living, but suffering from amnesia . . . round him there
is a small group of three or four similar cases. He speaks strangely from
time to time. He speaks several languages. The brain is sick but living,
a drowsy brain now waking up.

N The house where he is being cared for is a large building, not ancient,
but like a large family hotel or convent . . . very large, not a private
house. In front there is a large courtyard. I go in. . . . I see many
small, narrow windows ; I go out and see all round it a smiling country-
side, ponds, much water here and there, like lakes, a valley on one side,
and on the other white mountain tops, lit up by the sunshine. . . . The
house where he is living is in the east, close to the frontier. ... He has
come to himself. There will be much indirect statement, but he will
give his name and nationality.

M He will not stay there long ; his time there seems to me nearly ended ;
there is no more time.

" I see him travelling later, not with strangers, but with the person
now here present ... a sojourn in a large town where there is water
. . . several persons join him there. . . . Later, I see him in his family
. . . they take much pains to restore his mental health. He is looked
after by a man, who feels as a friend towards him, and dominates him . . .
this man seems to tear away the veils of the brain and restores him to
complete life ; then family life is resumed as it formerly was."

October, 1919.

M. Louis M. had one stance with Mme M , one with Mile de B ,

and one with a Mme G., a metagnomic subject under hypnosis, never before
tried by him. All the information given may be summed up as — your
wounded son still suffers from loss of memory, but will soon rejoin you.

Epilogue.

Lieutenant Jean M. has not returned. He has never written. The
most strenuous researches have revealed nothing. There is no trace of
him in the hospitals of Germany, Switzerland, and France. No grave on


PSYCHOLOGICAL DETERMINISM OF ERRORS 221


the battlefields shows his burial-place. All tends to show that the bullet
that struck his forehead in the battle of Verdun killed him. His body
was probably buried by earth thrown up by the shells.

February, 2o(h, 1922.

M. Louis M., passing through Paris, was curious to have his life
delineated by Mme P., a metagnomic subject (waking), with whom I
had experimented for some months with very good results. Among
other things relating to him she said this :

" You fear that your dark-haired son is dead . . . a sudden death . . .
he was wounded in the head ... he was far away ... he might have
been saved. He had recently seen you, and had written just before he
was killed. You would like to think that he is not dead . . . your wife
sometimes thinks him dead and sometimes that he may be living . . .
he might have been saved."

March 25/A, 1922.

M. Pierre M. visited the same sensitive for the first time, and in the
course of the delineation of his life she only said these few words relating
to his brother :

"... There has been a death in your family, in a foreign country . . .
or in battle. ..."

On finding quite recently a page from a notebook by Lieut. Jean,

written when he was a law-student, 1 wished to know what Mme M

would sav now that all hope is extinct ; and I asked Mile Fanny G. to
put this paper into the hands of the sensitive and write down exactly
what she might say.

April Ijll, 1922.

Mile F. G. gave, in the first place, a letter from M. Louis M., the father.

Mme M said, " I see a man, light hair, grey-blue eyes, clear com-

plexion ... he has been in great trouble ... a break in his life, much
sorrow ... a sudden blow ... the death of some one near him, a tragic
death, as if accidental ... a terrible shock.

" I see a road, a great extent of landscape, and soldiers ; yes, uniforms
round that man ... it is not really a death ... he fell."

(At this moment the sensitive stopped speaking and made fruitless
efforts. Mile F. G. took away M. M. s letter and replaced it by the
page from Jean's notebook.)

"... I see him quite clearly, they carry him away; he is living. His eyes
are empty of thought, there seems to be a wound on the side of his head,
his face is reddened with blood . . . they carry him slowly . . . strangers
are carrying him ... he is with these people a long time ... he does
not see them, his brain is vacant ... it is now long since. I see snow
... it is far in the past . . . but there is a present, a return . . . his
life returns to full daylight."

" Where is this person, describe the place and his surroundings ? "

" It is cold, he is with several others suffering like himself. I affirm this.
... I see gleams of clearer thought in his brain, then great joy in the
brain of the other person, a near relation, like a father. . . . The whole
family is overjoyed. ... I see a young man who is like him, and a whole
group. This snow country is connected with what is happening just
now." (The Genoa Conference had then been announced.) "What is
happening will decide much for these sufferers ... it seems to be a sad
pa^e from the story of the war ... his father suffers, but he has a
slight hope ... he doubts, and sometimes thinks there is no hope. But


222


SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


he should keep that hope, otherwise I should say, ' you must mourn for
him.' There are strangers round him, but not strangers only. ... 1 see
him well, darker complexion and darker hair than his father. . . . There
are Sisters of Mercy, or seem such, blue and white dresses ... he speaks,
he remembers the past ... his return will be not by his own act. . . .
There is a group of young Frenchmen like him ... he was 22 or 24
years old when he fell ... he remembers that it was cold when he was
wounded. . . ."

" I remember to have seen this man . . . but I never had this vision
of him ... it is the last place before his return. ..."

Conclusion.

This abbreviated summary gives only a slight idea of the psychological
importance of this long series of experiments, with its abundant psychic
output from many sources.

It contains a very large amount of supernormal knowledge. The
sensitives gave many descriptions of the scene of Lieut. Jean's wound
that were unknown at the time, and afterwards verified. They announced
beforehand misleading news, which came ; and other things. They
predicted to M. Louis M. different secondary matters in his life, which
came to pass. They predicted the changes in the military career of his
second son, Pierre, and revealed the dawning love that he alone knew,
and also his approaching marriage. (He was married at twenty-two,
almost at the beginning of his medical courses.)

But all referring to the time after the wound of Lieut. Jean M. was
a fabulation marvellously co-ordinated and adapted to the circumstances.
I very willingly explain the genesis of this romance which started from
a hope and went on for six years :

When M. Louis M. presented himself before M. de Ft., he was not quite
certain of his son's death. No official notice had reached him. A bullet
in the head is not always fatal, even though there may be the appearance
of death for some time. This frail ray of hope in his subconscious thought
must have passed to the sensitive and have influenced his mental repre-
sentation. It will have been observed that the first metagnomic answer
affirmed very little.

But as soon as the hope became conscious, after this first revelation,
M. Louis M. was in a state of mind apt to give stronger suggestion, and
he presented himself the same afternoon to Mine M., a hypnotic subject
particularly open to mental suggestion. And from that time forth, his
subconscious mental creations were reflected in the minds of all the
sensitives employed. All the information given was concordant and
followed the same sequence. His subconsciousness imagined ail possi-
bilities regarding his son's return. Though he did not in person undertake
the seances with the eleven sensitives employed, it was always he who
furnished the intermediary objects, and he touched these. And on that
account the sensitives behaved as they do when working on a person
distant in space ; that is, they acted as if M. M. were there present with
the whole content of his thought.

This supposition is supported by the fact that in all this long series of
seances all the indications given by the sensitives were true except those
which wert contrary to the death of his son.

Whatever the explanation may be, there was an amazing fabulation
on this last point.

From which we must conclude :

That the revelations made by metagnomic subjects are as concordant
in the case of error as in the case of truth.


PSYCHOLOGICAL DETERMINISM OF ERRORS 223


That these subjects are psychic instruments particularly fitted to give
to psychologists who study transmission of thought abundant demon-
stration of its verity.

Errors arising from defective functioning of the psychism of
metagnomic subjects.

Setting aside the cases in which supernormal cognition ex-
presses itself directly by automatic speaking or writing, or by
other modes of direct action— table-rapping, planchettes indicat-
ing an alphabet, etc. — the conscious mind of the sensitive may,
by fulfilling its task badly, introduce error, even though the
subconscious imaginative work has been correct. In this class
of errors, the most frequent arises from a misinterpretation of
the informative mental images.

The reader is aware that during the metagnomic working of
the sensitive the function of the conscious mind is to attend to
the wanderings of mental representation and to reconstitute
their meaning. It knows, too, how diverse this representation
may be. Sometimes a picture arises, disappears, and the mind
has instantaneously to perceive and understand the meaning of
the picture. Sometimes it is a long series of still or moving
images whose indications must be co-ordinated. Sometimes it
is in words and phrases, more or less distinctly heard, that must
be repeated. Sometimes it is by feelings that must be defined,
and related to their purpose. Sometimes it is by coenesthetic
sensations (pains, uneasiness, etc.) from which the nature and
locality of an ailment has to be deduced. Sometimes symbols
or allegories appear, for which meanings are to be found.

In short, given the want of precision and the multiplicity of the
artifices by which the metagnomic subconsciousness informs the
conscious mind, it is easy to see why this latter may not always
play its part correctly and what kind of errors it may introduce.

If metagnomic sensitives received an exact representation of
realities as we call them up by an effort of memory, they would
only have to describe what they " see," but the informative
mental images, whether hallucinatory or not, are intended to
suggest notions only ; to give an idea of things, and the words
that express this are not always an exact translation of reality.
Hence result errors of approximation, the sensitives getting more
or less near to actuality ; and errors of application, the sensitive
giving correct indications but referred to the wrong person or
event ; and errors of modality and lime.

The following is a very distinct error of application, confided
to me by M. Maurice R :

In 191 3, Mile de B , a metagnomic subject in the waking state, said

to him, in course of a s6ance, that he would die towards the age of fifty,


224 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


and described the scene of his death — the painful breathing of the dying
man, whose respiration she imitated, his son bending over him, a woman
at his side speaking English, all in a room on the ground floor, with a
certain arrangement of furniture. Four years later, in 1 91 8, M. Maurice

R went through the whole of this painful drama on the occasion of his

father's death, who died of pneumonia, aged about fifty.

The conscious mind of the sensitive, perceiving a scene conformable
to a future event and having had no indication fixing its relation to
another person, thought it must refer to Maurice R .

If errors of application are somewhat rare, errors of time are
much more common ; for except in the few cases in which
mental representation or automatic expression of a date and a
number of days or years arises spontaneously, the sensitive has
to estimate time, both as to its mode and extent, by interpreting
the artifices of the imagination, variable in different sensitives
and always of doubtful import.

M. de Fleurtere, for instance, derives his ideas of time by
vision on a semicircular screen on which the events of a life are
symbolically projected. The events pertaining to the present
are in the middle, straight before the eye, those of the past to
the left, and those of the future to the right ; and the distances
from the centre indicate their approximate position in the life.

Mme Morel, as we have seen ante, knows that an event is in the
past when her informative hallucinations are, as it were, behind
her ; a present event is at her side and a future one in front, all
in a perspective corresponding to some sort of spacing in time.
This symbolism, however, suffices so well to her conscious inter-
pretation that during twelve years I have never known her place
an event in the wrong mode of time.

But the imaginative processes of other sensitives are less
reliable. Not infrequently they state past or future events as

present. I have mentioned (p. 180) how Mme L.-F , in May,

1912, thinking to give the nature of my professional employment
at the moment, described what took place in the war between
August, 1914, and July, 1916.

In the bulk of cases, however, errors in the modality of time
are exceptional ; but errors as to its duration are the rule. In
twelve years I have had from percipients a good number of
events placed in the past with reference to the ages of a person,
but only twice, precognition of events giving an exact date
turned out to be correct.

On the other hand, I have just experienced, during the winter
of 1921-22, an event concerning myself which Mme Morel
announced in December, 1910, as " so near that it ought not to
be more than a month distant."

The conscious mind is also responsible for another kind of
error— intentional omission— partial or complete. Except when


PSYCHOLOGICAL DETERMINISM OF ERRORS 225

expressing themselves automatically, sensitives are in the same
kind of relation with supernormal knowledge that we all are with
regard to our inward thoughts ; they can modify the meaning
or they can suppress it. This is allowable when it is done to
spare pain which would result from over-grievous announce-
lents.

When Mmc Fraya predicted the time and manner of his death
Dr. Vaschide this was involuntary, and after having been
repeatedly asked the question that she at first left unanswered,

feeling that the reply would be painful.

There is yet one more kind of error by the conscious mind of
the sensitive. It consists in demanding more from the meta-
gnomic faculty than it can produce.

A typical case of the kind is when the subject, aware of the
power to foretell the future of a person, thinks himself also able
to foretell future events and life in general — the future. When
he endeavours to do this, either by request or on his own initia-
tive, either nothing answers to the effort or the subconscious
mind begins to work and builds up a romance on data supplied
by the conscious mind. This may chance to agree with the event,
but more often proves mistaken.

Errors that have their origin in the general functioning processus
of metagnomic faculty.

Though metagnomic faculty is permanent with certain persons
in the sense that it is always ready to come into play on demand
nevertheless the supernormal knowledge that it reflects is acci
dental in respect of the information given.

Certain subjects possessed of rare gifts are able, at a first
stance with a given person, to delineate his general course of life
both past and future. But when in subsequent seances they are
summoned to enter into the details of which go to make up that
life, especially in the unknown and in the future, the output of
metagnomic information seems to proceed from a whimsical
lental working : and this fact, which is soon apparent with
st-rate sensitives, is much more obvious with those of but
middling quality.

To verify how much there is that is fortuitous in the meta-
lomic output, it is sufficient to place the same person before
everal percipients on the same day ; it will be found that even if
Dne of the revelations are contradictory and some are concor-
dant, one subject will tell things that another does not mention,
i one and the same person in stance at intervals with the same
sitive, will elicit information that varies in its purpose and
has not always any apparent connection from one occasion to
another. Each subject at each seance seems to grasp one portion
15


3ns
nd,
xi-


220


SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


of the life to the exclusion of all others. Repetition of sdances
with different percipients accumulates a total which indicates
the course of life and co-ordinates its events.

This parcelled knowledge of human lives may be explained by
the complexity of each life and the large number of evolutionary
factors that go to its completion. There is therefore for each
sensitive, and in each stance, an unavoidable limitation to the
metagnomic delineation, so that involuntary omissions are readily
taken for errors when we find one percipient, for instance,
describing the circumstances of some event in the distant future
and silent on one that is near at hand and of much greater
import.

From this point of view experimental practice leads us to re-
mark that sensitives make omissions more frequently with repard
to certain aspects of human personality, which for some reason
or other are less easily grasped according to their personal idio-
syncrasies. For the most part they act as specialists— some
readily perceiving changes in organic life ; others emotional or
intellectual states ; and others, again, the course of social relations,
etc., as if these notions had different dynamic qualities influencing
percipients differently according to their shades of sensitiveness.

I will cite one instance, error of involuntary omission (if one
must call that " error " which is a functional necessity of the
faculty), very typical in that it shows a metagnomic subject
describing circumstantially an event five years before it took
place, and not mentioning intermediate events on the eve of
realization, known, moreover, to the person concerned.

When the war of 191 4 broke out, M. Antoinc W. was manager of a
factory in Central France. As an officer of artillery, then as an aviator,
and also squadron leader, lie had occasion, when passing through Paris, to

use the special faculty of Mine M (in hypnosis), who on each occasion

told him (in substance) that despite the constant risks to which he was
exposed, he would have no serious wound, and that he would resume his
life under other conditions, that a situation would be ofiered him by a
tall, thin, grey-headed man, well known to him, living in a country house
in the middle of France, who would need his talent for organization,
etc. . . .

M. A. W. recognized M. Henri D. in the description given.
In July, 1919. M. W. was demobilized. Circumstances fell out so that
he did not resume his pre-war employment. He remained in Paris.

August 16/A, 1920.

He asked Mme M to foretell his professional future, which could

not be normally foreseen.

At that moment he was in negotiation with his brother and the brother's
partner with respect to the restoration of a group of factories in Northern
France that belonged to them. His mental content was that he would
accept the direction of this restoration, it being understood that he
would retain the right to resign if he had a better offer.


PSYCHOLOGICAL DETERMINISM OF ERRORS 227


Mme M. said to him :

" Your actual situation is vague, it does not exist. Many negotiations
will lead to a result, but you will give up everything for a special business,
a new situation. . . . "

" Look for the circumstances leading to this new situation."
11 You will receive a call from a man who is interested in you. You
will first take a journey of a few hours to a family, and then another
displacement near by, with this man ... a tall man, thin, getting grey,
known to you. I see you mounting a hill, coming to a large house, going
upstairs, and entering a large room . . . and there I hear a long conversa-
tion with that man. ... A man belonging to your family takes part in
the conversation a little later. . . . During this conversation the lady of
the house comes in — a little woman. ... A man also comes in ; he belongs
to the house, and interrupts the talk. He is of no consequence, goes out
quickly, and the conversation is resumed.

" All the surroundings are well known to you."

November yd, 1920.

M.W. is in stance with Mme M . He was then occupied in the recon-
struction of the northern factories belonging to his brother and partner.
Difficulties of one kind and another delayed the work, and different
projects were put forward. M. W. found no advantage in the work and
intended to give it up.

Replying to the question, " Look for my present professional pro-
spects," she said, " Your present position is undefined, but I see a speedy
change ... it is even now in progress . . . the man who will bring it
about lives in the country, he is tall, etc. He will act in his own interest,
and will offer a situation . . . you will receive a letter and a telegram
calling you, coming into your family circle . . . there will be a lady,
your wife, and a dark young girl belonging to the family."

November 27/A, 1920.

M. W. had given up the work in the North. Five offers were made to
, which he was thinking over.

"me M , asked to state his professional situation, said to him :

I see an immediate change of place ... a certain man wants some-
body ... he thinks much of you, he offers a situation with an interesting
future . . . you will receive a telegram and a letter . . . calling you
into the country where the man is living ... it is in the country . . .
you go up a hill, you come to a large open space . . . into a large house
. . . you get an offer of an interesting post which you accept on the spot.
. . . This change is already in progress . . . the letter is written. . . .
I see a new situation very near ... all is arranged."

During this stance M. W. placed a letter from one of his sisters in the

hands of Mme M and asked certain questions concerning her. Among

other things, Mme M said :

" At the time that the events I have just seen come to pass this person
be in your family circle. ... I see her connected with all this."

December 24/A, 1920.

M. and Mme W. hold a stance with Mme M . At that time he was in

negotiation with a financial group who were proposing to him a mission
to Syria to make a study of conditions for investment of capital. M. W.
was much interested in this and was preparing for an immediate start.
" Look for my present professional prospects."
... I see many projects at the present moment . . . projects that


228 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES lis MAN


you will abandon for a new offer . . . you will receive a letter and a
telegram in a few hours, containing the offer of a post.

M A letter arrives in your family circle . . . that lady who is there
will be present . . . there is also another member of the family, a young
girl . . . you are absent ... the affair is proposed by a tall, thin man,
greyish, with a small face . . . who wants a man to look after his interests
... an interesting post that promises a future. The present post is to
be given up at once for the new offer."

January 17th, 192 1.

I was with M. W. at the house of Mme M . He was to leave Paris for

Syria the next day. He had in his pocket his rail and steamer tickets
and his passport. Only some serious event could prevent his departure.
No proposition of a new post could now stop him. I directed the seance.

u Look for the professional situation of the gentleman holding your
hand."

"... I see this gentleman's habits change very shortly by reason of
the receipt of a letter. ... He must go, but not very far. ... I see a
decisive moment for his living with a grey-haired man. ... I hear long
conversations in a large room . . . then I see coming and going, that
solution is the only one."

" Look for the situation of this gentleman during to-morrow."

"I see nothing unusual ... a little later I see a call to him . . .
almo6t immediately. ... I see again what I saw before. . . ."

" What will he do after to-morrow ? "

" I see a departure, a road, a hill, a large house . . . the interview is
very near ... at a few hours from Paris."

" Look carefully for the next events in his life."

" I see a thousand things offered him . . . one rather more precise
than the others. ... I see a project for a distant journey, which will
not come about . . . this journey seems to be settled to take place in a
few hours. . . . Nevertheless, I see the same man as before ; it will be on
his account that the new situation will not continue . . . there is an
immediate departure and return ... it is short, very short . . . there
is this project, but the intervention stops it. The journey is a long one,
to a country different from this where we are. I do not see that man. . . .
It is to a place where the language is different . . . there is much water,
it is very warm. It is only a project ... it will not come to pass. . . ."

M. W. left Paris next day, and embarked at Marseilles, two days later for
Alexandretta.

February 1921.

M. W. is in Syria. His sister Mile Fanny W. puts a letter from him

into the hand of Mme M (hypnosis) and asks, " Look for the writer

of this letter."

" I see him in the country ... in a small town . . . seems far off
... he has made several changes to reach that place . . . railway and
boat ... he came to a port.

" I see him quite well. . . . He has brown hair, height about 5ft. 6in.
... he has gone on business. ... I see a success, but he gives it up ; he is
recalled . . . everything ends abruptly, he will come back. ... He will
not stay with these people ... he leaves by his own desire ... a
grey-haired man calls him back to take charge of his interests. ... He
knows him. . .

Mme Fanny W. thought the percipient possessed by a fixed idea; she
left this matter and passed to other questions.


PSYCHOLOGICAL DETERMINISM OF ERRORS 229


March 5th, 192 1.

M. W. had returned from Syria since March 2nd. The financial group
wa6 considering what could be done on various projects. M. W. said
toMmeM , " Look for my present situation and what will come of it."

"I see many events . . . meetings . . . the beginnings of a solution
. . . details that come to nothing . . . negotiations stop because another
post is offered . . . there is a project that seems to end satisfactorily
. . . that is all. A new post will come from a tall, thin man, greyish. . . .
He will write to you about it ... he has many projects in his head,
etc. . . ."

After sketching out several plans, the financial group found it necessary
to abandon the Syrian enterprise on account of the course of exchange
with Egypt.

May gth, 1921.

The financial group decided to hold over all the Syrian projects, but
offered M. W. a post as engineer in enterprises in Morocco, asking of him
a three years' agreement. M. W. asked for time to consider the matter
before answering.

On May 9th his sister put an object belonging to him in the hands of
Mme M , in hypnosis, and asked her concerning her brother's profes-
sional future.

" I see a change for him . . . someone wants this change. This gentle-
man has plans to travel ; he will not go . . . there will be a change
before that. ... I see an exchange of papers with a man that he knows
... it takes place at once ; it is the first event. . . ."

In May M. W. accepted the Moroccan appointment. In the course of

of June he had a stance with Mme M (I have no records of this),

in which she said that he intended to go far away, but would not leave
because another post would be offered him by a gentleman who is tall,
thin, etc. . . .

He, nevertheless, left at the end of June, intending to return to fetch his
family after the hot season. He thought to stay for three years at least,
and this idea was shared by his family.

July 27/A, 1 92 1.

Mile Fanny W. put a letter from her brother into the hands of Mme

M . " Look for the person who has written this letter, and speak to me

of his life."

" I see a man ... far off .. . very far ... I see him in beautiful
surroundings, bright sunshine ... I see a kind of vapour round him
. . . water . . . the sea. It is only an incident in his life ... his return
is near. ... He has had great hopes and disappointments ; it is hollow,
empty ... his destiny is not over there . . . return is near. . . .


thin, deep-set eyes, hair partly white. ... I do not see his family over
there . . . he will return. . . ."

Mile Fanny stopped the sensitive, being convinced that a false mental
image was inevitably reproduced by the continuous hypnotic memory.

October 18/A, 1921.

M. W. was still in Morocco ; his family at Paris waiting to join him.

In the course of a stance with Mme M , MUe Fanny asked her to see

the present life of her brother.

Mine M showed signs of annoyance and fatigue. ". . . He is far


A man taller than most,


230 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


away, there will be a change soon . . . but not over there, that goes for
nothing. Here, by the will of another man a post will be offered him . . .
a grey-headed man who can at last do something. He comes back,
recalled by that gentleman ... it will be soon."

Mile Fanny closed the seance, resolving to ask no more on this point,
and more convinced than ever that the percipient was under the domina-
tion of a fixed idea.

Summary of the foregoing stances.

From all these stances, obtained by correct use of a percipient
whom M. W. and his sister have had much experience, it appears

that Mme M behaved as if one only event were of importance in the

professional life of M. W. She never predicted any of the intervening
events in the two years, but she always took notice of them as soon as
they were come to pass. Grouping all the indications given, the general
outlines of the prediction may be taken as follows :

A certain man was unexpectedly to offer a post. That man was specified
exactly by his appearance, his place of residence, and by the declaration
that he was well known to It, W. These indications applied exactly
to M. Henri D. The proposal was to be made by letter and telegram. It
was to arrive in M. W.'s family circle during his absence; would be
received by his wife and sister, the latter being in Paris only at irregular
intervals. Following the receipt of the written proposition, M.
aid travel for a few hours with certain of his family, and there
I another change of place near to M. Henri D.
During the interview in the house of the latter, the conv
would be in two parts ; one between M. D. and M. W. and another
in which a man of M. W.'s family would intervene ; that during the
interview a man belonging to the house, but of no import to the ma
in hand, would interrupt the conversation and quickly depart ; and
there would come in a small woman, the mistress of the house.

The motive of the proposition would be that M. D. would
someone to look after his business interests.

What came to pass.

On October 16th, 1921, M. Henri D., living in Chateau L , in the

department of the Cher, asked by telephone for the address of M. W.
from one of his sisters living in the same department. This lady did
give the Morocco address, but the Paris address.

On October 20th Mme W. received at Paris a letter from M. D., in
for her husband, proposing that he should take the direction of a
in which M. D. had invested money, and should develop the business.

Mile Fanny W., who had been absent from Paris since June, had
returned there on the 16th to return home on the 25th. She was present
when the letter came.

On the same day a telegram was sent to M. W., and also the letter from
M. Henri D. (Telegram and letter.)

Whilst these unexpected events were happening in France, M. W.,
ignorant of what was taking place, asked the representative of the financial
group, then visiting Morocco, to accept his resignation with a friendly
cancellation of his engagement, the crisis in public affairs suspending all
operations for a time whose end could not be foreseen. He was therefor
free when, on October 22nd, he received the telegram summarizing
situation, and, a few days later, the letter.

On November 28th he was in Paris. M. D. asked for an in
before the meeting of the directors.


PSYCHOLOGICAL DETERMINISM OF ERRORS 231


M. W. left Paris in company with his brother-in-law, and by force of
circumstances passed two days with the latter.

On December 5th his brother-in-law went with him to visit Mr. D.,
reaching his house towards 5 p.m.

During half an hour M. D. and M. W. talked over the factory and how
it might be improved. The conversation deviated into other matters in
which M. W.'s brother-in-law took part.

A little later a footman came into the room (the man of the house, of
no importance) to close the shutters and see to the lamps, etc., and delayed
conversation, so that M. D. told him to hasten and leave the room.

At half-past rive Mme D. returned from visits she had been paying
at a distance. At six, M. W. and his brother-in-law left M. D. The whole

scene was neither more nor less than had been foreseen by Mme M

sixteen months before.

To these facts, of whose whole course I was continuously aware, I will
only add one remark : that the journeys to Syria and Morocco which

Mrne M did not perceive, would certainly have been cognized by other

percipients had M. W. consulted several instead of one alone.


$.\ Errors Originating in the Personality Assigned for
Metagnomic Cognition

Considering now errors in production referable to the other
co-generative source of paranormal knowledge — the person
cognized — there are found the same kinds of error as those
analysed above, but these are no longer attributable only to the
metagnomic subjects. What has been already said with reference
to errors will allow of brief treatment here, and I need consider
only those that are inherent in the personalities given for
cognition.

As has several times been observed in the course of this book,
there are persons who do not influence the psychism of per-
cipients to whom they are presented. Are there really some on
whom no percipient can say anything at all ? Not having con-
ducted any experiments specially devised to answer this question
1 cannot give a categorical reply, but I am, nevertheless, inclined
to think that there are no persons so refractory to delineation
that a sensitive could not be met with in harmony with the
given psychism, if the latter were presented to a sufficient number
of good percipients, the seances being repeated often enough to
allow of inter-mental adaptation.

But from psycho-physiological disharmonies there certainly
result either paralysis of the metagnomic faculty or activity in
the subconsciousness of the sensitive, giving rise to tabulation.

If those persons who do not influence sensitives were to found
their opinions of metagnomy on personal experiences referring
to their own lives, they would necessarily be led to deny the exist-
ence of the real faculty, and to consider percipients as making


232 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


up romances ; thus making a wide generalization on their
rare and casual particular experiences.

There are, however, other persons, often met with, whose
conscious thought has a sort of radiating power that imposes
its content by suggestion to the sensitive. They transmit know-
ledge conformable to actualities, and also latent tabulations
relative to their own fears, hopes, desires, and projects. Such
persons seem to bring to percipients nothing but error, especially
as regards the future. The inter-mental collaboration is on the
superficial plane of thought.

There are also those who radiate superficial thought in a 1
degree, transmitting knowledge normally acquired and that
which comes from the transcendental plane in variable propor-
tions.

There are also those who transmit occasional suggestions,
radiating some belief, some hope, desire, or project, which may
or may not be dressed up as a fable, because some passing in-
tensity of psychical elective action has given to these subconscious
mental representations an exceptional power. It is thus that

M. Louis II (p. 215) projected into the psychism of Mme M —

the hope that his son might have survived a wound, thought but
not absolutely proved, to have been fatal. It is thus that M.

Louis 1) (p. 210) transmitted to the same percipient all the

lucky chances by which his ruin might be averted.

When a metagnomic percipient seems to be in error it is o
because he reflects the errors in the mentality of the person
delineation.

4. Errors Originating with the Experimenter

Whether the experimenter himself be the person cognized,
whether he be supplementary to the mental couple who generate
the metagnomic output, he may intervene as a disturbing factor
in many ways ; all, however, due to imperfect knowledge of
the faculty he is using and consequent inability to use the per-
cipients in the right manner. Ignorance of the general determin-
ing sequences of metagnomic phenomena will lead to error and
he will not know how to protect percipients from it. The
perimenter incites to error if he does not thoroughly know
sensitives he is employing.

Metagnomic subjects are persons adapted to live the ordinary
life. They have brains fitted to normal thought ; their para-
normal mental work, though exercisable at will, is nevertheless
an accident in their daily life even though often repeated. This
simultaneous normal and supernormal life renders such subjects
much more difficult to use satisfactorily than one would


PSYCHOLOGICAL DETERMINISM OF ERRORS 233


In order to secure good output it is necessary to know both the
mental processes common to all of them, the causes of the infor-
mation received, and the psychological peculiarities of each sen-
sitive employed. There are no two alike. The experimenter
must know and adapt himself to the mental habits, the defects,
and the possibilities of each.

Metagnomy is vitiated by asking from subjects what they are
not able to give. Because a percipient has shown ability to per-
ceive the future of a human being there are those who will ask
for the future of a nation, the chances and the issue of a war,
the future price of stocks and so on. Because a sensitive shows
knowledge that does not come through the normal senses there
are those who will ask for information beyond this life. Such
demands give rise to romances elaborated in the subconscious
mind of the sensitive or reflected in it.

The metagnomic faculty of a sensitive may also be vitiated by
asking under unfavourable conditions for what it can produce
when conditions are good. Error is produced in this way when a
subject is made to hold public stances, or even private stances
at which several persons are present. Very few percipients can
accommodate themselves to this condition. Similarly error is
produced by asking a sensitive whose faculty only extends to
delineating a person there present, for details on those distant in
space or time, contact with some intermediary object not being
a stimulus to him. Error will result if a subject with spiritualist
proclivities is opposed in his appeals to the inspiring personifica-
tion — the guide ; or by opposition to any of the modes habitually
selected to induce the trance condition— laying the cards, contact
and inspection of the hands, touch, and appearance of writing, etc.

Metagnomy is also vitiated when its working is interrupted by
questions or exclamations whose tenor leads to mental repre-
sentations of hallucinatory images caused by verbal suggestions,
which he may mistake for metagnomic information. For instance,
to say to a percipient, 11 I am thinking of taking a journey to
Africa ; shall I go ? " is to arouse images of the sea- voyage,
African landscape, and so on ; and the subject is likely to think
that what he sees is the representation of things to be.

A simple instance of error arising from the interference of an
experimenter in metagnomic sequence is as follows :

In June, 1917, during one of the stances with reference to the disappear-
ance of his son. If, Louis M. had from Mile de Berly the prediction :

M . . . very shortly you will be asked to undertake the sale of a large
forest area . . . the matter will be spun out at first, but will afterwards
be conducted with two men whom 1 clearly see coming to you ; one a
big fair man, and the other dark and thin. . . . The matter will be decided
quickly and settled at once to the satisfaction of the vendor.

" M. M., who had never before been asked to conduct a negotiation


284 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


of this kind, was surprised, and then as soon as two buyers were men-
tioned, he thought at once of the brothers C of N overs, one of whom

was a big man and the other slight in person, but both were dark. His
mind being busy writing down the words of the sensitive he paid no atten-
tion to the colour of the hair named, and murmured — * the brothers C ,

no doubt.' M

Immediately Mile de Berly resumed : H I see the two men you spoke of ;
they live in a little town, at the water's edge . . . the thin one became a
widower very soon, etc. ..." (All details given were correct.)

The premonition then took the form to the mind of M. M. ; he would
unexpectedly be asked to undertake the sale of forest land, and that the
buyers would be the brothers C of Nevers.

The years 191 7 and 1918 passed without any such proposal being made,
but in 1919 M. Louis M. received from M. de D. a letter asking him to
find a buyer for some woodlands in his neighbourhood, woods that he
knew very well. M. M. advertised the matter.

The brothers C of Nevers did not visit him, but asked to see the

woods. They made an offer which was not accepted. Nothing more
followed, and M. M. told me of the prediction true as to the beginning
and false in sequel. But in April, 1920, two representatives of the firm

G of Paris came in an automobile, one big and fair, and the other dark

and small. They visited the forest and bought it very soon after.

Finally, the metagnomic output may be falsified by uncon-
scious alteration of the words of the sensitive whether by trusting
to memory before writing them down or by attributing to them
some particular meaning and paraphrasing them by words
judged equivalent and clearer. If one does not take down the
exact words of the subject, error will certainly be introduced in
these phenomena which are already liable to so many forms
of error.

To the errors which the experimenter may induce must be
added those that he does not know how to guard against, but
from which he might protect the sensitive if he were well-
informed on the determinism of metagnomic production. To
enter into this at length would be to repeat in brief what has
already been analysed in previous chapters. I will here therefore
mention that among the errors that can easily be avoided is error
of direction : that is, when the subject perceives details concern-
ing another person than that given for delineation. Knowledge
of the function of an intermediary object will lead the experi-
menter to provide himself with some simple and unsuggestive
datum by which to eliminate references to any person other than
the proper objective. In seeking fcxr traces of Mr. Lerasle (p. 104)

I was able to eliminate the image of Louis M , from whom I

had received the neckerchief, and of the daughter-in-law of the
missing man from whom he had received it, by knowledge that
the person to be cognized was a very old man. Many errors of
tabulation can be avoided in the same way.
The following is a curious instance how very easily error may


PSYCHOLOGICAL DETERMINISM OF ERRORS 285


arise and how a little knowledge of the event to be delineated
may transform the mental working of the sensitive.

Passing through Bourges in the morning of January ioth, 1019, and
visiting ray sister-in-law. Mile F. G., a member of the American
: ation for help to refugees, I found great excitement in the Central
where the offices of administration were installed on the ground
. Between midnight and 8 a.m. the cupboard in the office had been
opened by use of a tool whose traces were visible, and a metal box,
containing 5000 francs in money amd 2000 francs in cheques, had been
stolen.

The French police suspected some employee of the hotel, thinking that
the theft could only have been committed by someone in the house, and
because on searching the servants' quarters they had found some packets
.1 cigarettes of an uncommon American brand (these having come from
the same cupboard a few days before, without its having been broken
into), a ring, and a note for 1000 francs.

As I was leaving for Paris next day I thought this might be a good
example for testing metagnomy. I cut about fifteen inches of a thin
string stretched between two nails inside the cupboard. It was in these
circumstances that I put the string into the hands of Mme Morel on
January 12th, asking her : " See what was witnessed by this object on
the night between the 9th and ioth of January."

". . . I see a man, not very young, very grieved, anxious, and vexed
. . . not very tall, his hair is light and thin, rather fresh complexion. . . .
I see something shining over his eye. . . ."

I then perceived that Mme Morel was referring to M. Louis M., for
whose son she had held so many stances. I said : " No, that is not the
person. I want to know what happened on the night of the 9-ioth
January in the room where I took this thing."

"... Ah I I see a terrible drama ... a death passes before me . . .
someone asphyxiated and stifled ... I see a person whose eyes are closed ;
he does not breathe ... he is dead ... it is not a voluntary death,
sudden, not natural . .

The thin string suggested a vision of strangulation. If I had not known
the matter in hand I should have let this fabulation develop, although I
should have been much astonished that so thin a string could have served
such a purpose. But acting on what I knew and to put the subject on the
right track without giving any suggestive matter, and to avoid any
further objectless mental working, I said : "I took this string from a
cupboard where there has been a theft. See the scene of the theft."

"... Yes, I see a cupboard. ... It has been forced ... I see two
persons like two shadows . . . they are not strangers to the room, they
know it. . . . f hey do not go back into the house by the door ... I do
not see them go in . . . they are in the house. . . .

H They go out by an opening, close by the cupboard ... it is a large
opening, a window. It is in the morning, it is not yet daylight . . . the
cupboard was forced in order to steal. . . . Papers and money have been
taken. . . . He who did the active part is a man with light chestnut hair,
dark eyes, irregular features, a square and rather flat face; his clothing is
like unbleached serge ... he seems to have a long cloak of the same
colour. . . . The other does not move, so to speak ... he is quite young,
or seems quite young, a mere youth, looks cunning. He has a subordinate
part; he touches nothing. ..."

On January 15th the American police, warned about the theft, took up
affair. They arrested a young American chauffeur, J , aged


286 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


seventeen, who had disappeared with his car a few days before. Some
days later they issued a warrant against an American, Captain S., the
suspected thief. He was arrested at J3rest at the end of January.

In June, 1919. an American court-martial tried both men at Nevers.
Captain S. was sentenced to two years' imprisonment for the theft at
Bourges. According to the evidence he had passed most of the night
enjoying himself in the hotel, and must have gone into the office about
3 a.m., forced the cupboard, and left by the window, which was found
partly open by the night porter, at daybreak.

The chauffeur, J , was acquitted of the theft, but had to avow that

on the morning of the nth he had taken Captain S. to Paris and had
received 1000 francs for so doing.

The physical characteristics of these two men were as given by Mm.
Morel.

It was stated in evidence that Captain S. was assiduous in attendance
at the American Red Cross. No one would have thought of suspecting him.
When Mile G. received the account of the stance on January 14th she held
the visions of the sensitive to be an error.

Here, then, is a stance which began with imaginary matter and ended
with exact cognizance of an event, because I was able to give a slight
indication enabling the subject to perceive the facts by a clue leading
to the source of transcendental cognition.

If an experimenter does not wish to give passive encouragement
to error he should avoid working on the entirely unknown and
acquire some datum which, without leading him to any know-
ledge of the end to be reached, will give him a clue whether the
sensitive is making a good or a bad start.

To let a sensitive go on with verified error, or not to place
oneself in a position to guard against it, is to show ignorance of
the psychology of percipients and will alw r ays result in inferior
output.

It is unnecessary to do more than allude passim to fraud. This
can take but two forms — conscious tabulation, or previous
collection of information.

Nothing is easier than to keep the sensitive in absolute
ignorance of the objects given for their cognizance. As to
romances that they might consciously invent, such are. for
practical purposes, the same as error and could not deceive.

Among all the phenomena of Metapsychics, these, subjective
in their origin, furnish the best evidence and the most convincing
proof of the reality of metapsychic faculty. The words of the
sensitive are objectified in writing and verified by comparison
with the realities to which they refer. There is no room for
that doubt with which ectoplasmic phenomena and those of
movement without contact are received by different minds
despite all the means of registration devised to convince of their
reality.

Will it now be understood, after this review of causes of error,
under what difficult conditions professional metagnomic subjects


PSYCHOLOGICAL DETERMINISM OF ERRORS 237


work, given over to their own mentalities and worked upon by all
kinds of ignorant curiosity.

It is among professionals, however, that I have found the best
subjects. Apparently, persistent use gives their faculty all the
development of which it is capable, and renders it adaptable to a
growing number of personalities.

By reason of the defective conditions under which they work,
they are of necessity liable to many errors, yet their faculty
becomes more acute by use, and they can furnish abundant
supernormal knowledge of a quality such as to compel conviction
in anyone who will submit his own personality to delineation by
three or four good sensitives.

All the various kinds of error considered one by one above, and
correlated with their causes, are mingled and combined in practice.
One subject may tabulate because he is working on a personality
does not much influence him, and because the experimenter
A s on pressing him.
So numerous are the causes of error in the practice of meta-
gnomy in which several functional planes of two or more
psychisms are in simultaneous activity, that it would be marvel-
lous that any impeccable metagnomic subject should be found.
Metagnomy is a human faculty and therefore always imperfect,
sometimes much more so, sometimes less.

With some excellent percipients available to-day, error is
generally restricted to details of a life, and to the circumstances
representing the episodes of its course. It is rare that they do
i t give correctly the general course of a life in a first stance,
less there should be some irreducible psycho-physical dis-
harmony with the personality to be cognized.

Moreover, with well-endowed subjects, errors usually last a
very short time. The human personality that serves as objective
presents itself at each successive stance slightly changed by its
senses and by other unknown means as the stream of its life
flows on. That which has been learned by the means called
11 normal " and by those that are hidden, brings it about that
earlier errors are rectified and are replaced by knowledge con-
formable to facts, even when that knowledge deals with a future
just as inaccessible to conscious thought in the second as in the
first case.

The reader will now understand how essential the study of
errors is to a comprehension of metagnomy. It confirms what
experimental practice suggests as to the means of producing
uncontaminated metagnomic output. Seen as a whole, meta-
cognition is an occult collaboration between two or more


238 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN

human beings which is stimulated when one is presented to the
other for delineation.

The nature of the collaboration and how it is effected is still to
be discovered. But the first step to that end is to verify the
existence and the various modes of the faculty. This is the
purpose of the present work.


CHAPTER VI


"EXPERIMENTAL REASONING" AND A WORKING

HYPOTHESIS


1HAVE sometimes read that as regards an infant science
such as metapsychics, the proper course is to amass facts,
many facts and always more facts, and leave their explana-
tion to future generations. This is wilful acceptance of
sterility. Those who adopt this course undertake an easy task,
but one of small utility, which, moreover, becomes entirely super-
fluous from the moment when the fresh facts are mere repetitions
of the kind already recorded.

I think, on the contrary, in studying the latent powers of man
that in this, as in other branches of experimental science, it is
rable to direct investigation as soon as possible towards a
^visional explanation, and to marshal facts in such a manner
to suggest what Claude Bernard called " experimental
reasoning " or "a working hypothesis." For the really fruitful
work is that which tests provisional hypothesis by experiment
and uses all that is true and useful that it may contain.

This is the stage of experimental investigation, guided by a
directing idea towards definite conclusions, that I have desired to
reach in this study of metagnomic phenomena exercised upon a
human personality.

I present the results of my personal experiences as a working
lesis and a provisional explanation hoping that it may
fr^sh experiments and open up new paths of exploration.

Experimental study of quasi-intuitive cognition of man, by
man, has led me to consider subjects endowed with this para-
normal power as intermediaries transposing into conscious
thought knowledge which they have drawn partly from the plane
of cerebral exercise of thought in the living personalities whose
cites of life they delineate, but more especially from a tran-
scendental plane of thought which knows the nature of the parts
played by individuals in the general life and acquires knowledge
Df the details of coming events as these gradually come into
ition.

I have detailed in the chapter on informative sources, it is

M 2 &


4fr


240 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN

this explanation (and no other) that is imperatively suggested by
all practical experiment under the conditions most feasible for
the interrogation of Nature ; that is, in the simplest case when
the metagnomic subject exercises the faculty on a person there
present.

There remain the more obscure cases in which the faculty is
exercised on those who are distant in space and, more especially,
who are distant in time. Here the hypothesis put forward does
not proceed directly from the facts, but from the complete
analogy in the conditions and the nature of their production.
Analogy, however, is not identity, and if it were not for the
inference resulting from the study of metagnomy on persons near
by, this question would be entirely open. I nevertheless propose
that the same hypothesis should be accepted for the more obscure
cases as for the less obscure. It is the only one rooted in many
facts and, by reason of the definite purpose offered to experiment,
it may transform the provisional explanation into a definite
solution and an acquired truth.

In the unexplored region of human thought we advance with
hesitating steps. Feeling in the dark for contact with things, the
searching hand meets a thread which seems to connect the things
already experienced, and it may possibly prove the guiding clue
by which our advance may become quicker and more sure. Is it
not better to hold this and see whither it leads, than to risk
straying under the influence of fancies ?

" There are two kinds of hypotheses," Emile Boirac used to
say, M one kind inert and idle, in the sense that whatever
satisfaction they may afford to the mind by their simplicity,
their coherence, and their verisimilitude, they open no way
towards action, suggest no experiment and no research to
discover other facts beyond those whose explanation they claim
to furnish. The other kind, on the contrary, are active and
laborious, in the sense that tending to immediate realization by
effective experiment, they are less directed to the explanation of
known facts than to the discovery of new facts, and of others
following on these in an unending progression 99 (E. Boirac,
L'Avcnir des Sciences Psychiques).
r Hypotheses which would make metagnomic sensitives the sole
factor for supernormal cognition of man by man, are scientifically
inert.

The theosophical hypothesis — that the sensitive has the
property of duplicating his personality and thus of communicating
on his spiritual plane with the spiritual plane of the universe,
and is able to draw from thence representative knowledge of
phenomenal realities of which our senses can give us only


successive perceptions — is not this to limit ourselves to the
continual repetition of this plunge into the universal conscious-
ness, to restrict ourselves to seeking better means of reaching
that consciousness, and, in short, to place ourselves in the
position of never verifying the truth of the hypothesis itself ?

Or, otherwise, to suppose that the metagnomic sensitive has
the faculty of abandoning the cerebral mechanism of thought to
the influence of dematerialized entities, or, more generally of
spirits, who from their plane of higher knowledge, voluntarily
inform the living — is not this to imprison oneself in an interpreta-
tion that asks nothing of experiment but to identify the inspiring
spirit, to judge of its nature by the quality of the revelation made,
and to demonstrate the survival of the human personality ?

I do not pretend to weigh the explanatory value of these two
/ariants of a single hypothesis. But from the experimental point
lew, I can say that the thcosophical variant is so wide that it
jests no experiment relating to the supernormal cognition of
man by man ; and that the spiritualist variant omits enquiry into
the possibilities of cognition latent in the human being, and
restricts its enquiry to a problem which is perhaps insoluble and
is certainly more difficult ; thus beginning, so to speak, at the end.

The hypothesis which considers the phenomenon of metagnomy
on a human personality as the product of an unconscious psychic
3llaboration on various planes between cognizer and cognized,
ithout prejudging the nature of a deceased or an unborn
personality — this hypothesis, on the contrary, is intensely active.

In the first place (and this is not its least merit) it obliges us to
begin at the beginning — to enter on the unknown by the more
easily discoverable — experiment on the living.

Not considering the metagnomic subject as supernaturally
inspired (by which nothing but the matter actually revealed
would be knowable), this hypothesis insists that this psychic
intermediary should be closely scrutinized in the working of his
peculiar faculty before making use of it in experimentation.

It presents for research an experimental programme whose wide
extent will be apparent from the mere enumeration of its principal
elements.

It suggests study of the plane of the sensorial action of thought
'conscious M and " subconscious " — under psycho-physio-
logical conditions in which its capacities for acquiring information,
its power of transmitting its content and of associating itself in
collaboration with other similar planes, can be stated and
Jysed.

It suggests exploration of the latent transcendental psychic
plane by stimulating its manifestations by all possible methods. 2
It suggests experimental enquiry on the psycho-physics of
16


242 SUPERNORMAL FACULTIES IN MAN


mutually interacting psychic influences in Space, and perhaps in
Time.

It hints at experiments, following on those above mentioned,
to determine the relations between brain and thought, and
ultimately, the possibility of the survival of human personality,
whether as a persisting individuality or as a memory-representa-
tion in the cosmic consciousness.

In short, this hypothesis seeks for a solution of the problem of
real human personality by experimental exploration of the living
being. It transfers what has hitherto been a speculation of the
mind to the domain of experimental science.

1 put it forward for the sake of the fruitful work that it suggests,
and also because emanating from active and intentional observa-
tion, it is a guide to research, to be verified and developed.

At the conclusion of this study, I offer my excuses that it can
give only partial satisfaction to scientific minds.

A series of special experiments would be necessary before the
question as to the identity of the informative source in the cases
(i) when the personality is close to the percipient, and (2) when
it is distant in space or in time, could be answered with precision.

More especially I have not had opportunity to discover whether
the unborn personality can be cognized by metagnomy, as it can
when deceased.

The answer to that question possibly involves a complete
transformation of all our opinions on the human being and on
life.

I might have filled in these serious gaps by continuing my
solitary work ; but the matter of this study is so extensive and of
such high interest, that I have thought it better to publish at once
the verifications hitherto made, and thus to indicate to other
experimenters a main line and various branches of research, by
which they may, without waste of time and effort, proceed to the
exploration of the latent and transcendental zones of human
thought.

Paris,

July, 1922.


INDEX


A.-C, Madame, 58
Aerodrome ceremony, 80
Aksakoff, 8

American Red Cross, theft, 235
Ampulla delineated by photo, 34, 196
Antoino, W., deferred prediction, 224
Apollonius and Domitian, 125
Attitudes of percipients, 136
Augustin, F.-M. (Indo-China), 91
Automatic writing, 159

Baschicri, Count Ugo, 29, 124
Bergson, on changes, 64
Berly, Mile de, on J. M., 56
on Mme de D., 58

— coenesthetic, 58
Bernard, Claude, 49, 51
Binet, Dr., no

Boirac, £mile, 23, 47, 100, 122

— on finger-reading, 23

— on hypotheses, 240

— on Ludovic S., 23
Boisleve, Baroness de, 29
Buchanan on psychometry, 129
Buvat, Dr., on autoscopy, 14, 115

Cases of Metagnomic Cognition —
Auto-precognition (typhoid), 17
— of death, 18, 19, 20, 21
Autoscopy (hysterical), 13, 14
By fragment of tufa (Pompeii), 33
Character, 66, 67, 68, 69. 70, 71, 76,
78

From photograph, 99
From card without photograph, 130
From Esperanto manual, 100
Gambling followed by ruin, 211
In dream, 125

Mistakes in delineation, 144, 207,
209

Mixed true and false, 215
Of distant event, 29, 30, 31
Of wars of 1870 and 1914, 38
Of Russo-Polish War, 4 1
Of lost article, 79

Of future events, 80. 81, 83, 85, 86,

Of whole life, 91, 92
Of broken engagement, 94
Of malversation of funds, 97
Of mode of death, 101, 104


Cases of Metagnomic Cognition —
Of death of a child, 158
Of death in war, 179, 180
Of occupations in the war, 181 1|
Pathological, 55, 58, 59
Quasi-spiritist, 127
Sale of forest, 233

Theft from American Red Cross, 235
Carrington. H., on Reese. 27
Catholicism on psychic facta, 7
Character delineated by caricature, 147
Cheiromancy, in, 114
Coenesthetic hallucination, 153
Cognizer and cognized, 185
Colour images, 149
Comar, Dr., on autoscopy, 14, 115
Crookes, Sir William, 8
Cryptesthesia, vi
Cryptomnesia, 164
Crystal vision, metagnomic, 141

Dangers of metagnomic prediction, 233
d'Arsonval on dowsing, 26
Dead body located, 104

— personality, how dealt with, 199
de Gramont. Count, 8
Delineation by mental link, 94

— of a whole life, 75, 93

— by two percipients compared, 10 1
Denca usse, hour of death predicted, 18
Denton on psychometry, 32

de Rochas, 8

— Watteville, 8
Diamond star found, 79
Diapsychy, 164
Dissociation, modes of, 119
Diversities in sensitives, 75
Divorce, Countess', 97
Double personality formed, 119
Dowsing, verified, 5, 26
Dreams, precognitive, 125
Dufay, Dr., 31

Ectoplasm, remarks on, 5
— production of, 139
Emotional hallucination. 155
Error, how to diminish, 234, 235
Esoteric M sciences," 7
Esperanto manual (link), 101
Estimates by historians, 65
Gtienne Lerasle, case of, 104


243


BRNORMAL FACTTL1


Eusapia and * John King/ 202
Evolution of cliaracter foretold, 66
Experimental method, 1
Experimentation, how conducted, 51

Fabre d'Olivet, 7
Fabulation, complete, 207

— partial, 209

— on money speculations, 211
Felida, duplicate personality, 202
Finot, Jean, 111
Flammarion, C, 8
Flares, of Palermo, 19
Fleurtere, self -description, 118, 122

— modes of imagery, 122, 148, 170
Forest, sale predicted, 233
Fox sisters, 6

Fraud, noticed passim, 236
Freud (psycho-analysis), 213

Galloy, M. Lucien, 34
Geley. Dr., 18

General prediction rare, 178
Graves, A. K., 20

Hallucinatory images, 142, 147, 148
Heysmans, Professor, 145
Hidden treasure, 96
Hypotheses, two kinds of, 240

Intellectual tendency foretold, 67
Interference causing error, 233

Janet, P., on duplicate personality, 202
Jaubert, Baron, 105
Jaures, assassination of, 29
Jeanpierre, Mile, 145

Lerasle case, inferences, 198, 199
Lieut. Jean M.'s case, 216, 222
Life-record experiment, 173
Lodge, Sir Oliver, 8
Lombroso, 8

Long-deferred prediction, 227
Louis Mirault, 96, 105

— M. t marriage foretold, 81
Ludovio. S., finger-reading, 23
Lukawski. premonition, 21

Maupassant, Guy de, 13
Maurice, R., 223
Maxwell, J., 8

Medical staff appointment foreseen, 181
Mental content elimination, 78
Mermet, Abbe, on dowsing, 27
Metagnomy defined, 47, 48

— dangers attending, 98

— factors of, 192. 194

— if attributes of a single mind, 162

— is transcendental, 200

— limitations of. 54

— perspective, 175

— power variable, 172


Misdescriptions, 144
Misdirection of vision, 224
Money losses on false prediction, :
Moral dangers foretold, 66
Morel, Mme, detects theft, 31

— on photo of ovoid, 35
Morsclli, Professor, 8

Neuroses and hysteria, 115

Objective metagnomic link, 189

— transitory influence, 191

— not impaired by use, 192
Ochorowicz, Professor, 8
Ovoid found in tomb, 38

Pavillard, Abbe, 215
Pelaprat, M., 27
Personalities, factitious, 203
Personality defined, 201

— unstable, 203
Photograph, delineation from, 99

— unstuck from card, 130
Piper, Mrs. (Phinuit), 202
Plutarch on apparitions, 6
Prediction of illness, 83

— of a residence, 83, 85

— as to a dog, 88
Pregnancy misdescribcd, 144
Probst, M., 27
Przybylska, Mme, 40, 45
Psychism, Superior and Inferior,
Psychology, official. 10, 138
M Psychometry," 129

Reese, Mr. Bert, 27, 113
Results, summary of, 131
Richet, Professor, 8, 202
Rockfeller, 27

Russo-Polish War, prediction,

Schrenck-Notzing, Baron von, 8
Second states (percipients), 119
Sensitives, how to use, 62
Servant's character told, 69
Simon of Samaria. 6
Sollier, Dr., on Marie F., 13, 14, 115
Sonrel prediction, 39
Speech, uncontrolled, 157, 158, 225
Spiritualist deformations, 133
— hypothesis, 241
Stephanos, a crown, 146
Subconscious mind, 138

interference by, 213

Suicide case, 32
Supernormal defined, xi
Super-rational thought, 22

Table-tilting, 160
Tactile images (four kinds), 151
Tardieu, Dr. (Sonrel prediction),
Tertullian on divination, 6
Tbcosophical hypothesis, 240


INDEX


245


Thought, psychological definition, v. 2

— functions of, 137, 140

Time, how represented in vision, 141

Two variable factors, 174

Typhoid case, 17


Varieties in metagnomic output, 171
Vaschide, N., 6o, in, 225
Verbal motor images, 1 57


Verbalism— its illusions, 139

Verestchagin's premonition, 20

Wallace, A. R., 8

War, cases in the, 179, 181

— prediction of, 39

Zelenoi, Admiral, 21
Zollner, 8

Zones of personality, 242
