================================================================================
The Fasti, Tristia, Pontic Epistles, Ibis, and Halieuticon of Ovid
Ovid | Literally translated into English prose by Henry T. Riley (Bohn's Classical Library, 1876)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Internet Archive: Bohn's Classical Library, Ovid vol. 3 (1876)
Source URL: https://archive.org/details/fastitristiapon00ovidgoog
Rights: Public Domain (U.S.)
Staged: 2026-10-09 | Tower of Babel Library, Batch 09a (classical-literature lane)
================================================================================

THE  FASTI,

TRISTIA,  PONTIC  EPISTLES,
IBIS,  AND  HALIEUTICON


OVID.


LITERALLY TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH  PRO  S  E,
WITH  COPIOUS  NOTES,

BY HENRY T. RILEY, B.A.

OP  CLARE HALL,  CAMBBIDaK.


LONDON:
H.  G. BOHN,  YORK  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN.


MDCCCLI.


y  Google


J.  BILLING,

FBINTER AKD STEREOTYPER,

WOKING,  SURREY.


y  Google


PA
652^


PREFACE.


Ii  the  following  pages  shall  be  found  to  express  the  meaning
of  the  author,  with  fidelity  and  tolerable  neatness  of  diction,
the  object  proposed  will  have  been  accomplished.

Some  few  deviations  have  been  made  from  the  strict  letter
of  the  text,  in  cases  where  usage,  or  the  idiom  of  our  lan-
guage, seemed  to  render  such  a  course  desirable.  From  the
peculiar  nature  of  Elegiac  compositions,  which  mostly  run  in
detached  couplets,  the  use  of  the  conjunction  copulative  oc-
curs much  more  frequently  than  would  be  consistent  with
our  ideas  of  euphony ;  and  we  often  find  the  poet  employing
in  the  same  sentence  the  present,  perfect,  and  pluperfect  tenses
almost  indiscriminately,  a  strict  adherence  to  which,  in  the
English  language,  would  be  extremely  inelegant.  In  many
iiwtances  of  this  nature,  and  in  several,  where  the  only  alter-
native has  been  either  a  departure  from  the  exact  words  of  the

a2

Digitized  by  LjOOQ IC


IV  PEEFACE.

author,  or  a  violation  of  decorum,  the  former  course  has  been
adopted.  The  distinction  between  the  use  of  the  pronoun
"you,"  and  the  more  sententious  "thou,"  which  has  been
very  generally  neglected  in  prose  translations  of  the  classical
writers,  has  been  carefully  observed  throughout.

The  several  critical  editions  of  the  original  text  vary  much
in  respect  to  punctuation ;  the  translator  has  therefore  adopted
one  or  the  other,  according  as  it  appeared  to  him  the  most
clearly  to  elucidate  the  author's  meaning.  In  the  Fasti  the
text  of  Krebs  has  been  followed,  excepting  in  a  few  passages.
In  the  Tristia  and  Pontic  Epistles,  he  has  used  that  given  in
Valpy's  classics.

The  Varionim  editions,  especially  Burmann's  magnum  opus,
and  the  editions  of  the  '  Fasti'  by  Keightley,  Thynne,  and
Stanford  (productions  which  reflect  considerable  credit  on
their  respective  editors),  have  been  carefully  consulted,  and
many  notes  of  especial  value  to  the  student  selected  there-
from. Dr.  Smith's  Dictionary  of  Greek  and  Roman  Anti-
quities, and  Mr.  Keightley's  Mythology  of  Ancient  Greece  and
Italy,  have  also  proved  fertile  sources  of  information.

A  translation  of  the  Fasti,  by  Dr.  Butt,  of  Trinity  College,
Dublin,  was  published  some  years  since ;  and  the  first  three
Books  have  been  translated  by  Mr.  Thynne,  the  editor  of  the
Latin  text.  The  former  of  these  is  unaccompanied  by  notes,
and  the  annotations  given  in  Mr.  Thynne's  translation  are
scarcely  sufficient  in  the  hands  of  the  English  reader,  for
the  elucidation  of  a  work  so  replete  with  allusions  to  the
manners,  customs,  superstitions,  and  traditions  of  antiquity,


y  Google


PEEFACE.  V

and  so  abounding in passages  of obscure and doubtful
meaning.

A  poetical  translation  of  the  Fasti,  by  John  Gower,  "Master
of  Arts,  and  sometime  of  Jesus  CoUedge,"  was  published  at
Cambridge  by  Roger  Daniel,  the  University  printer,  in  1640.
It  is  an  attempt  to  translate  the  poem  into  English  Terse,  line
for  line.  How  the  translator  has  performed  his  task  will  be
seen  from  the  accompanying  specimens,  which  have  been
culled  here  and  there  from  his  work.  The  almost  burlesque
style  generally  employed  by  him,  forcibly  reminds  us  of  Cot-
ton's more  famous  Travesty  of  the  first  and  fourth  books  of
the  iEneid,  while  the  taste  displayed  is  certainly  not  superior
to  that  of  Stemhold  and  Hopkins.

A  poetical  translation  of  the  Fasti,  assuming  to  be  nearly
literal,  was  published  in  1757,  by  William  Massey,  "Master
of  a  boarding-school  at  Wandsworth."  So  far  as  mere  versi-
fication IB  concerned,  it  is  somewhat  better  than  Gower' s  trans-
lation, though  it  is  by  no  means  so  faithful.

A  poetical  translation  of  the  Tristia,  by  Wye  Saltonstall,
was  published  in  the  earlier  part  of  the  seventeenth  cen-
tury; and  by  its  fidelity,  and  the  terseness  and  fluency  of
its  language,  does  considerable  credit  to  its  now  forgotten
author.

The  Pontic  Episties  do  not  appear  to  have  been  ever  pub-
lished in  an  English  form,  either  verse  or  prose.

The  Invective  against  the  Ibis  was  "  faithfully  translated
into  English  verse  by  John  Jones,  M.A.,  teacher  of  a  private


y  Google


yi  PEEFACE.

school  in  the  city  of  Hereford,"  in  1658.  The  style  is  not
much  superior  to  that  of  Gower,  and  the  book,  with  its  notes
and  deductions,  is  a  curious  medley,  to  use  the  Translator's
own  words,  of  "Natural,  Moral,  Poetical,  Political,  Mathema-
tical, and  Theological  AppHcations."


y  Google


INTRODUCTION.


THE LIFE  AND  WRITINGS  OF  OVID.

The  little  that  is  known  to  us  of  the  personal  history  of  this
poet  has  been  principally  gathered  by  the  research  of  various
scholars  from  detached  passages  in  his  works,  which  inci-
dentally bear  reference  to  himself  or  to  his  family.  From
contemporary  writers  we  learn  nothing  of  his  history ;  and
those  of  the  succeeding  age  are  almost  equally  silent  respect-
ing him.  •

Publius  Ovidius  Naso  was  bom  at  Sulmo,  a  small  town  of
Peligmim,  situated  in  the  Apennines,  and  about  ninety  miles
firom  Rome,  on  the  20th  of  March,  a.tj.c.  711,  or  B.C.  43,
being  the  year  in  which  the  consuls  Hirtius  and  Pansa  fell
at  the  battle  of  Mutina.  He  was  of  Equestrian  family,  and
had  one  brother,  who  was  his  senior  by  exactly  a  year,  and
who  died  at  the  early  age  of  twenty.

The  patrimonial  property  of  his  family  appears  to  have
been  of  limited  extent ;  and  he  was  trained  by  his  parents  to
habits  of  strict  frugality.  In  his  writings  he  speaks  of  his
hereditary  estate  at  Sulmo,  and  of  his  house  in  the  neigh-
bourhood of  the  Capitol ;  and  he  also  makes  mention  of  his
orchards  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Claudian  Way.

By  the  desire  of  his  father  he  proceeded  to  Rome,  and,
with  his  brother,  commenced  the  study  of  law  and  rhetoric ;
but,  finding  that  he  was  Uttle  fitted  for  these  pursuits,  and
that  his  poetical  tendencies  iU-accorded  with  them,  he  neg-
lected them  as  soon  as  he  had  adopted  the  "  toga  virilis,"
and  thereby  became  his  own  master.  Contrary  to  the  advice
of  his  father,  who,  as  he  tells  us,  often  represented  to  him


y  Google


VIU  INTBODrCTION.

that  poetry  was  a  worthless  pursuit,  and  that  Homer  himself
died  in  poverty,  he  devoted  himself  entirely  to  poetical  com-
position, and  the  Muses  thenceforth  became  the  chief  objects
of  his  veneration.

To  complete  his  education,  in  conformity  with  the  custom
of  the  time,  he  proceeded  to  Athens,  the  great  school  of
philosophy ;  and  it  was  probably  in  his  early  years  that  he
visited  Sicily  and  Asia  Minor.

With  the  view,  perhaps,  of  obtaining  political  preferment,
he  assumed  the  senatorial  badge  of  the  "broad  hem,"  or
"  Laticlave,"  a  right  which  seems  to  have  been  conferred  by
Augustus  on  the  sons  of  persons  of  Equestrian  rank,  as  a
prelude  to  their  entering  the  Senate ;  and  he  soon  after  took
office  as  one  of  the  "  Vigintiviri,"  or  city  magistrates.  He
afterwards  acted  as  one  of  the  **  Centumviri,"  a  body  of  one
hundred  and  five  officers  elected  fipom  the  thirty-five  tribes  of
Rome,  and  whose  duty  was  to  assist  the  Praetor  in  questions
where  the  right  to  property  was  litigated.  He  also  occasion-
ally acted  as  a  private  judge  or  arbitrator.

He  was  thre^  times  married ;  to  his  first  wife,  when,  as  he
says,  he  was  almost  a  boy ;  but  neither  that  marriage  nor  his
succeeding  one  was  of  long  duration  ;  and  it  is  supposed  that  in
both  instances  he  had  recourse  to  the  then  existing  facilities
of  divorce.  His  last  wife  was  of  the  Fabian  family,  and  was
a  favourite  of  Marcia,  the  cousin  of  the  Emperor  Augustas.
At  the  time  of  her  marriage  she  was  a  widow,  and  had  a
daughter,  who  became  the  wife  of  Suilius,  a  friend  of  Ger-
manicus.  It  was  probably  by  her  that  the  poet  had  a  daughter,
who,  in  his  lifetime,  was  twice  married,  her  second  husband
being  Fidus  Cornelius,  a  senator.  It  is  not  known  whether
he  had  any  other  children.

In  the  fifty-first  year  of  his  age  he  was  banished  from  Rome
by  the  edict  of  the  Emperor  Augustus.  By  the  terms  of  his
"  relegatio,"  or  banishment,  he  was  ordered  to  reside  at  Tomi
(sometimes  called  Tomis,  or  Tomos),  the  principal  city  of
Pontus  ;  but  his  rights^as  a  citizen,  he  teUs  us,  remained  un-
impaired. The  place,  whose  site  is  now  unknown,  was  situated
in  a  bleak,  inhospitable,  climate,  near  the  mouth  of  the  Danube,
a  spot,  in  those  days,  on  the  very  confines  of  civilization.  The
poet  tells  us  that  the  people  were  immersed  in  barbarism,  spoke
the  Getic  language  mingled  with  Greek,  and  wore  "  braccse,"


y  Google


IKTBODrCTION.  IX

or  "  trowsers/ '  after  the  manner  of  the  Patthians.  Having  soon
learned  their  language,  he  wrote  a  poem  in  it,  which  secured  to
him  the  esteem  and  sympathy  of  the  natives.  The  immoral
nature  of  some  of  his  earlier  writings  is  said  to  have  been  the
cause  of  his  exile  ;  and  he  informs  us  that  they  were  excluded
from  the  puhlic  hbraries  of  Rome.  There  seems,  however,  to
have  been  another  and  a  more  influential  reason  for  his  punish-
ment, which  he  repeatedly  hints  at  in  his  Pontic  writings,  but
which  he  nowhere  reveals.  From  his  remarks  it  has  been  sup-
posed by  some  that  he  had  inadvertently  been  witness  of  an  im-
moral act  of  a  member  of  the  family  of  Augustus.  Perhaps,  as
Julia,  the  Emperor's  grand-daughter,  was  about  that  period
banished  for  her  extreme  profligacy,  he  had,  prematurely  and
by  accident,  become  acquainted  with  her  guilt,  and  had  failed
to  keep  silence  on  the  subject  Other  writers  suggest  that  he
had  an  intrigue  with  Julia,  which  was  discovered  by  Augustus  ;
but  there  seem  to  be  no  good  grounds  for  such  a  conjecture.
The  reason  was,  very  probably,  a  pohtical  one.

His  departure  from  Rome  was  very  precipitate,  being  in  the
midst  of  winter.  He  embarked  at  Brundisium  for  Greece,
whence  he  took  ship  to  the  coast  of  Thrace,  and  completed
his  journey  by  land.

He  afterwards  made  repeated  applications  to  Augustus  and
his  successor,  Tiberius,  for  a  remission  of  his  sentence  ;  but
bis  entreaties  were  in  vain,  for  he  died  at  Tomi,  in  the  ninth
year  of  his  exile,  and  the  sixtieth  of  his  age.  We  learn  from
Eusebius  that  his  remains  were  buried  at  tibat  place.

His  "Amores,"  or  "Amours,"  were  the  work  of  his  youth,
and  it  is  supposed  that  he  destroyed  the  more  objectionable
portion  of  them.  The  "  Epistolse  Heroidum,"  or  **  Epistles  of
the  Heroines,"  were  written  by  him  in  about  his  thirty-second
year.  He  next  produced  his  "  Ars  Amatoria,"  or  **  Art  of
Love,"  which  was  quickly  succeeded  by  his  "Remedium
Amoris,"  or  "Cure  of  Love."  He  then  devoted  himself
to  the  "  Metamorphoses,"  his  principal  work  ;  which,  when
he  received  his  sentence  of  e^ole,  he  committed,  in  an  un-
finished state,  to  the  flames.  Duplies  copies  of  that  poem
were,  however,  in  the  hands  of  his  friends,  and  to  this  fact  we
are  indebted  for  its  preservation.  It  is  uncertain  whether  the
poet  wrote  six  or  twelve  books  of  the  "  Fasti,"  or  Roman
Calendar. From  a  remark  in  his  epistle  to  Augustus,  in  the


y  Google


X  INTRODUCTION.

sceond  book  of  the  "  Tristia,"  it  would  appear,  according  to
one  mode  of  translating  the  passage,  that  he  had  written
twelve  books,  one  for  each  month,  and  that  he  was  inter-
rupted in  the  completion  or  revision  of  the  work  by  his
exile .  Another  meaning  for  the  words  there  used  by  him,
is,  however,  suggested  in  this  Translation.  Masson  would
interpret  the  passage  as  meaning  that  he  had  collected
materials  for  the  first  six  months  only,  and  that  he  had
worked  them  into  a  poem  of  six  books.  From  the  fact  that
allusions  are  made,  in  the  Fasti,  to  poHtical  events  which
occurred  very  near  to  the  close  of  his  life,  and  the  more  striking
circumstance,  that  among  the  very  numerous  quotations  from
that  work  by  ancient  writers,  there  is  not  one  that  is  not  to  be
found  in  the  six  books  now  possessed  by  us,  we  shall  probably
not  err  in  the  conclusion  that  either  he  wrote  but  six  books,
which  he  revised  in  his  latter  years,  or  that,  if  he  wrote  twelve,
the  last  six  were  lost  at  his  death.  The  four  lines  which  are
sometimes  appended  to  the  end  of  the  sixth  book  of  that  work
are  placed  in  one  of  the  Vatican  MSS.  as  the  commencement  of
a  seventh  book ;  but  they  are  universally  regarded  as  spurious.
Gronovius,  indeed,  informed  Heinsius  that  he  had  seen  an  old
copy  of  Ovid,  in  which  Celtes  Protacius,  an  eminent  German
scholar,  had  written  to  the  effect  that  the  remaining  six  books
of  the  Fasti  were  in  the  possession  of  a  clergyman  near  Ulm,
and  that  the  commencement  of  the  seventh  book  was —

"  Tu  quoque  mutati  causas  et  nomine  mensis,
"  A  te,  qui  sequitur,  maxime  Caesar,  babes."

But  Heinsius  expresses  it  as  his  decided  opinion  that  Protacius
had  been  either  misinformed  6r  wilfully  imposed  upon.

During  his  journey  to  Tomi  Ovid  wrote  the  first  book  of  his
"Tristia,"  or  "Lament:"  the  next  two  books  were  com-
posed in  the  second  and  third  years  of  his  exile,  and  the
others  in  the  following  years.  After  the  latter  period  he  ad-
dressed his  friends  in  his  "  Pontic  Epistles."  .

His  poem,  "  In  Ibin,"  "  against  the  Ibis,"  and  his  "  Halieu-
ticon,"  or  "  Treatise  on  Fishes,"  were  also  composed  during
his  exile.  Two  other  trifling  poems  of  his  also  exist,  which
are  supposed  to  have  been  the  productions  of  his  youth-
fid  years.  Among  his  lost  works  we  have  to  include  his  Getic
composition  in  praise  of  Augustus,  his  tragedy  of  Medea,  his


y  Google


rNTBODUCTION.  XI

Elegy  on  the  Death  of  Messala  Corvinus,  his  Epigrams,  a
version  of  the  Phsenomena  of  Aratus,  a  Poem  on  Bad  Poets,
one  on  the  Battle  of  Actium,  and  another  on  the  Illyrian  Vic-
tories of  Tiberius.

We  are  told  that  the  poet  was  of  dehcate  health,  sHght  in
figure,  and  of  graceful  manners.  Like  Horace,  he  was  no  lover
of  war;  and  he  was  moderate  in  his  diet,  while  he  tempered
his  wine  with  copious  dilutions  of  water.  Though  too  sus-
ceptible of  the  tender  passion,  we  do  not  learn  that  he  ever  de-
graded himself  by  sensual  indulgences,  and  his  kind  and  gentle
demeanour  rendered  him  geneJally  beloved  by  his  friends.

The  servility  which  he  appears  to  manifest  when  address-
ing Augustus  and  Tiberius  would  certainly  reflect  much  dis-
credit on  him,  if  it  could  be  shown  to  be  the  spontaneous
effusion  of  his  breast ;  but,  in  justice  to  him,  we  ought  to
remember  that  adulation  was  the  universal  fashion  of  the  day,
and  that,  while  he  naturally  longed  for  a  return  to  his  kin-
dred, his  friends,  and  his  country,  he  was  too  sensible  that
he  and  his  family  were  at  the  mercy  of  persons  of  no  for-
giying  temper,  and  who  would  be  satisfied  with  no  homage
short  of  servility.  We  shall,  then,  find  some  reason  for  pal-
liating his  conduct  in  this  respect,  and  for,  at  least,  considering
him  more  excusable  than  many  of  his  more  ennobled  and  more
favoured  contemporaries,  who  did  not  disdain  to  sweU  the
crowd  of  flatterers  by  which  Augustus  was  surrounded.


ON  THE  RECKONING  OF  TIME  AMONG  THE
ROMANS.

AccoRDiiTG  to  Ovid,  the  year  of  Romulus  consisted  of  ten
months,  commencing  with  the  month  of  Martins,  or  March,
and  ending  with  December.  Numa  is  said  to  have  inserted
two  additional  months,  and  we  learn  from  the  poet  (in  which
statement,  however,  he  is  not  confirmed  by  wiy  other  writer)
that  he  prefixed  January  to  March,  and  subjoined  February  to
lumber,  which  order  continued  till  the  Decemviri  placed
February  in  its  present  position.  The  year  of  Romulus  is
supposed  to  have  contained  six  months  of  thirty  days,  and
four  of  thirty-one,  making  in  all  304  days.  The  year  of
Numa  originally  consisted  of  355  days,  which  falling  short


y  Google


XU  rSTTBODTTCTIOK.

of  the  solar  year,  he  sapplied  the  defect  by  adding  to  every
second  year  an  intercalary  month,  which  he  called  Mercedonius,
consisting  of  twenty-two  and  twenty-three  days  alternately.
This  month  was  thrown  in  at  the  end  of  February  in  each
year,  and  by  this  plan  four  years  contained  1465  days,  maMng
an  average  annual  excess  of  one  day.  This  was  corrected  by
reducing  the  number  of  days  in  the  intercalarated  month  in
every  tWrd  "  octennium,"  or  period  of  eight  years,  by  which
means,  in  a  cycle  of  twenty-four  years,  the  Calendar  was  re-
duced to  the  same  state  as  if  every  year  had  consisted  of  365
days  and  a  quarter.

The  direction  of  the  intercalations  was  left  with  the  Ponti-
fices,  and  it  is  supposed  that  they  frequently  lengthened  or
shortened  the  year  at  their  own  option,  for  the  benefit  or
detriment  of  the  Consuls  and  other  public  officers,  and  the
farmers  of  the  revenue,  according  as  they  were  friendly  or
hostile  to  them.

These  abuses,  and  the  fact,  that,  as  the  fixed  part  of  the
year  of  Numa  was  not  adapted  to  the  sun's  revolution,  while
the  intercalary  part  did  not  observe  the  phases  of  the  moon,
the  places  of  tiie  seasons  on  the  calendar  were  not  exactly  the
same  in  any  two  consecutive  years,  influenced  Juhus  Csesar,
when  Pontifex  Maximus,  to  reform  the  Calendar,  as  by  virtue
of  his  office  he  was  empowered  to  do.  This  was  the  more
necessary,  when  we  consider  that  the  fijrst  of  January  had
at  that  time  retrograded  nearly  to  the  Autumnal  equinox.  To
bring  that  day  to  its  proper  place,  he  made  the  current  year
to  consist  of  445  days,  by  adding  two  intercalary  months  of
sixty-seven  days  to  the  usual  intercalary  month  Mercedonius.
This  year  is  generally  called  "the  year  of  confusion."  His
chief  alteration  was,  the  abohtion  of  the  month  Mercedonius,
and  the  distribution  of  the  ten  days,  which  thereby  became
wanting,  among  some  of  the  other  months;  and  by  this
means  the  months  became  of  their  present  length.  As,  how-
ever, this  year  was  still  too  short  by  about  a  quarter  of  a  day,
he  provided  for  the  deficiency  by  the  insertion,  every  fourth
year,  of  an  extra  day  immediately  after  the  23rd  of  February,
which  was  to  be  esteemed  as  a  duplicate  of  the  24th  of
February,  or,  as  the  Romans  called  it,  the  sixth  of  the
Calends  of  March.  It  is  this  double  day  which  gave  the  name
of  "  Bissextile"  to  the  Leap  year. The  months,  which  had


y  Google


rNTBODTTCTIOK.  XIU

previonsly  been  called  Quintilis  and  Sextilis,  then  received  the
names  of  Julius  and  Augustus^  in  honour  of  the  first  two
emperors.  The  Pontifices,  soon  after,  mistook  the  proper
method  of  intercalation,  by  making  it  every  third  year ;  but
Aiigustos  finally  corrected  the  results  of  this  error  by  omitting
the  mtercalary  day  during  twelve  years.

The  Romans  did  not,  as  we  do,  count  the  days  of  the  month
in  a  regular  numerical  succession,  but  reckoned  them  with
reference  to  three  principal  points  of  time — the  Calends,
the  Nones,  and  Ides.  The  first  day  of  every  month  was
entitled  its  Calends.  In  March,  May,  July,  and  October  the
Nones  were  the  seventh,  and  the  Ides  the  fifteenth  of  the
month ;  in  all  the  other  months  the  Nones  were  the  fifth  and
the  Ides  the  thirteenth ;  and  thus  the  Nones  were  always  eight
days  before  the  Ides.  After  passing  over  one  of  these  points,
the  Romans  counted  forward  to  the  next,  calling  the  day
after  the  Calends  so  many  days  before  the  Nones,  the  day  after
the  Nones  so  many  days  before  the  Ides,  and  the  day  after  the
Ides  so  many  days  before  the  Calends  of  the  next  month.  The
days  were  accordingly  entitled  with  reference  to  the  number
backwards  from,  each  point  to  the  preceding  one ;  thus  the
thirty-first  of  January  was  "  Pridie  Calendas  Februarias,"  or
"the  day  before  the  Calends  of  February ;"  the  day  before
that  was  reckoned  as  the  third  day  before  the  Calends  of
Febmary  (^  the  Romans  included  both  extremes  in  counting),
andwascimed  "Tertio  Calendas  Februarias,"  or  "Calendarum
Februariarum,"  which  we  translate  "  the  third  of  the  Calends
of  February/'  though  it  really  means  "the  third  day  before
the  Calends  of  February."  Pursuing  this  mode  of  enumera-
tion, we  find  the  fourteenth  of  January  (the  day  after  the  Ides)
to  be  the  nineteenth  "  before,"  or,  as  we  say,  "  of  the  Calends  of
February."  So  the  day  before  the  Ides  of  January  was
"Pridie  Idus  Januarias,"  and  so  on  backwards  to  the  Nones,
the  day  before  which  was  "  Pridie  Nonas,"  and  the  day  before
that  was  "  Tertio  Nonas  Januarias."  It  should  be  remembered
that  the  space  between  the  Nones  and  Ides  was  the  same  in  all
the  months;  while  those  between  the  Calends  and  Nones
and  the  Ides  and  Calends  varied.  The  Calends  weye
originally  the  day  of  the  new  moon,  which  received  its
name  from  the  fact  that  on  that  day  the  Pontifex  addressed
the  moon  in  presence  of  the  people,  in  the  words  "  Calo  te.


y  Google


XIV  IKTEODUCTION.

Jana  Novella,"  "I  call  upon  thee,  new  moon,"  which  was
repeated  as  many  times  as  intimated  to  his  hearers  the
numher  of  days  before  the  arrival  of  the  Nones.  The  Nones
were  so  called  from  being  always  nine  days  before  the  Ides  (in-
cluding in  the  enumeration,  according  to  the  Roman  custom,
both  the  day  of  the  Nones  and  the  day  of  the  Ides).  The
Ides  derived  their  appellation  from  the  Etrurian  verb  "iduare,"
"  to  divide,"  their  place  being  in  the  middle  of  the  month ;
and  they  originally  represented  the  day  about  which  the  moon
was  full.  In  Caesar's  Calendar  the  year  was  divided  into  eight
periods ;  the  points  which  marked  them  were  thus  named: —

Bruma The  Winter  Solstice . .  25th  December.

Veris  Iiiitium . . .  The  beginning  of  Spring .  9th  February.

iEquinoctium  Vemum  .  The  Vernal  Equinox . .  25th  March.

iEstatis  Initium  . . .  The  beginning  of  Summer  13th  May.

Solstitium ....  The  Summer  Sohtice  . .  26th  June.

Autumni  Initium . .  The  beginning  of  Autumn  11th  August.

iEquinoctium  Autumni  The  Autumnal  Equinox .  24th  September.

Hiemis  Initium . . .  The  beginning  of  Winter  11th  November.

The  civil  day  began  at  midnight.  The  artificial  day  was
from  sunrise  to  sunset,  and  was  divided  into  twelve  parts,
called  "  horse,"  which,  though  usually  translated  by  our  word
"  hours,"  really  varied  with  the  seasons.  The  night  (from
sunset  to  sunrise)  was  divided  into  four  watches,  of  three
"horse"  each.

The  Romans  had  no  week  of  seven  days  like  ours ;  but
from  the  recurrence  of  the  "  Nundinse,"  or  market-day,  every
eighth  day,  on  which  the  citizens  in  the  neighbouring  country
repaired  to  the  city,  they  may  be  considered  to  have  had  a
week  of  eight  days.  The  "  Nundinse"  were  sacred  to  Jupiter,
and^originally  no  legal  business  could  be  dispatched  on  them ;
but  the  necessity,  from  the  increase  of  numbers,  of  enlarging
the  *'  dies  fasti,"  which  alone  were  originally  devoted  to  liti-
gation, and  a  wish  to  promote  the  convenience  of  the  residents
in  the  country,  induced  the  Consul,  Hortensius,  to  make  these
days  "fasti,"  or  days  of  sitting  in  judgment  for  the  Prsetor.

The  days  were  distinguished  into  "fasti,"  "nefasti,"  and
"  endotercisi"  or  "intercisi,"  which  were  marked  in  the  Calen-
dars with  the  letters  F.  N.  and  EN.  The  "  dies  fasti"  were
those  on  which  the  courts  sat,  and  tjie  Prsetor,  who  was  the


y  Google


nfTRODrCTION.  XV

chief  judge,  gave  his  decisions,  which  contained  three  words
which  were  essential  to  his  power  of  adjudication,  "do,"  "  I
give,"  or  "  appoint,"  judges  and  the  form  of  the  writ ;
"dico,"  **  I  pronounce"  sentence ;  "addico,"  "I  adjudge"  the
property  in  dispute.  On  the  "dies  nefasti,"  these  wordb
were  not  allowed  to  be  uttered ;  the  praetor  was  consequently
forbidden  to  adjudicate,  and  the  courts  of  law  were  closed.
These  were  the  days  set  apart  for  religious  ceremonials.  The
word  "fasti"  is  derived  from  "for,"  or  from  the  old  Greek
verb  0aw,both  signifying  "to  speak;"  consequently  the  "dies
fasti"  were  Hterally  "the  speaking  days,"  and  the  "dies
nefesti"  the  "  non-speaking  days,"  in  allusion  to  the  restric-
tions put  upon  the  judgments  of  the  Prsetor.

The  "dies  intercisi,"  or  " endotercisi,"  ("endo"  being  an
old  form  for  '*in,")  were  certain  days,  partly  "fasti"  and
partly  "  nefasti,"  on  only  a  part  of  which  the  courts  might  sit
and  justice  be  administered.  Thus,  some  days  were  "nefasti,"
while  the  victim  was  being  killed ;  "  fasti,"  from  the  minute
of  its  death  until  the  laying  out  of  the  entrails  on  the  altar  ;
and  "nefasti,"  while  the  victim  was  being  consumed.

The  Romans  had  three  kinds  of  pubHc  "  Ferise,"  or  "holy-
days,"  which  aU  belonged  to  the  "  dies  nefasti,"  and  were
observed  by  the  whole  nation.  These  were  the  **  Ferise  sta-
tivae,"  "  conceptivse,"  and  "  imperativse."  The  first  were  held
regidarktag^d  on  stated  days,  marked  in  the  Calendar.  To
these  boSHfed  the  "  Lupercalia,"  "  Carmentalia,"  and  "  Ago-
naha."  The  "Ferise  conceptivse,"  or  "conceptse,"  were
moveable  feasts,  held  at  certain  seasons  every  year,  but  not  on
fixed  days ;  the  time  being  annually  appointed  by  the  magis-
trates or  priests.  Among  these  we  find  the  "  Ferise  Latinse,"*
the  "  Sementivse,"  the  "Faganalia,"  and  the  "Compitaha."
The  "  Ferise  imperativse"  were  appointed  on  certain  emer-
gencies by  tjie  order  of  the  Consuls,  Prsetors,  or  Dictator ;  and
were  mostly  held,  either  to  avert  national  calamities,  or  to  cele-
brate great  victories.

In  reckoning  longer  periods  than  a  year,  the  Romans  used
a  measure  of  time  called  a  "lustrum,"  which  signified  the
period  intervening  between  each  Census  or  review  of  the
people  by  the  Censors.  This  interval  averaged  about  five
years,  which  was,  consequently,  the  usual  measiire  of  a
"lustrom." Sometimes,  however,  as  in  the  Fasti  (Book  iii.


y  Google


XVI  INTEODUCTION.

1.  165),  a  "lustrum"  denotes  only  four  years,  and  sometimes
an  indefinite  number  of  years.  Twenty-two  "  lustra"  made
a  "  seculum"  of  110  years,  the  largest  measure  of  time  exist-
ing among  the  Romans.


ON  THE  RISING  AND  S^ETTING  OF  THE  STARS.

Befobe  the  age  of  Thales,  the  astronomer,  only  the  settings
and  risings  of  the  stars,  as  they  were  visible  to  the  naked  eye,
were  the  subject  of  observation.  Ever  since  that  period,  however,
astronomers  have  divided  these  phsenomena,  with  reference  to
the  sun,  into  three  classes.  They  are  termed  the  cosmical,
acronychal,  and  hehacal  risings  and  settings.  The  cosmical
rising  or  setting  is  the  true  one  in  the  morning;  the  acronychal,
the  true  one  in  the  evening ;  and  the  heliacal  the  apparent
rising  in  the  morning  or  setting  in  the  evening.  A  star  or
Constellation  is  said  to  rise  cosmically  when  it  rises  at  the
same  time  with  the  sun  ;  and  to  set  cosmically,  when  it  sets
in  the  west,  as  the  sun  rises  in  the  east.  It  rises  or  sets
acronychally  when  it  rises  or  sets  at  sunset.  When  it  rises
heliacaUy  it  emerges  to  the  sight  from  the  lustre  of  the  sun's
rays,  where  before  it  was  hidden,  and  it  arrives  to  such  a  distance
from  him  as  to  be  seen  in  the  morning  before  the  sun's  rising ;
and  when  it  sets  heliacaUy,  approaching  the  su^t  is  lost
sight  of  in  his  superior  brightness.  The  hHjPp  rising
of  a  star  takes  place  from  twelve  to  fifteen  days  aller  the  cos-
mical rising,  and  the  heliacal  setting  the  same  time  before  the
acronychal  setting.  From  the  time  of  its  heliacal  setting  to
•its  heliacal  rising,  the  star  is  over  the  horizon  by  daylight  only,
and  is  therefore  invisible.

Thus  we  find  that  there  are  three  risings  and  as  many
settings  of  a  star,  two  of  each  of  which  are  real  and  one
apparent,  namely : —

The  true  morning  rising the  cosmical.

The  apparent  morning  rising the  heliacal.

The  true  evening  rising the  acronychal.

The  true  morning  setting the  cosmical.

The  apparent  evening  setting the  heliacal.

The  true  evening  setting  .......  the  acronychal.


y  Google


INTJttODTJOnOK.  XVli

ITiese  few  observations  may  be  of  some  utility  in  the  eluci-
dation of  the  remarks  which  will  be  found  in  the  Notes  to  the
Fasti  on  the  risings  and  settings  of  theyarious  Constellations.

It  is  also  worthy  of  notice  that  Julius  Csesar,  in  his  arrange-
ment of  the  year,  intended  to  make  the  beginning  of  summer
correspond  with  the  hehacal  rising  of  the  Pleiades ;  that  of
winter,  with  the  cosmical  setting  of  the  same  Constellation  ;
and  that  of  autumn,  with  the  cosmical  setting  of  the  Lyre.
The  blowing  of  Favonius  or  Zephyrus,  the  West  wind,  was,
with  the  Romans,  the  sign  of  the  arrival  of  spring.


THE  ROMAN  FASTI.

The  complex  state  of  the  Roman  Calendar  long  remained  on^
of  the  sources  from  which  the  priesthood  and  the  Patrician
order  derived  their  power  and  influence  over  the  Plebeians.
For  a  long  period  of  time,  having  no  other  method  of  ascer-
taining what  days  were  "fasti,"  and  what  were  "nefasti,"  the
lower  classes  were  obliged  either  to  apply  to  the  priests  for
information,  or  to  await  their  proclamation  of  the  various
festivals  whicli  were  about  to  take  place.  The  priesthood  also,
in  early  times  had  the  sole  privilege  of  proclaiming  what  was
to  be  the  length  of  the  ensuing  month,  and  in  their  hands
^&8  th«M  right  of  intercalating.  The  difficulties  and  un-
certainl^Hmenced  by  the  commonalty  very  naturally  tended
to  rendlWnem  dependent  upon  the  Patricians,  who,  by  their
superior  opportunities  for  gaining  knowledge  on  these  subjects,
were  enabled  to  give  them  advice  and  assistance  in  all  points,
(especially  legal  matters),  which  in  any  way  depended  upon
the  effluxion  of  time.

At  length,  in  the  year  a.u.c.  440,  or  B.C.  334,  Flavins,  the
secretary  of  Appius  Claudius  Csecus,  made  a  code  of  forms
for  the  regulation  of  litigation,  and  secretly  transcribed  the
tables  of  the  Calendar  or  plan  of  the  year,  and  set  them  up  in
the  Forum.  Though  this  step  gave  considerable  oflFence  to  the
Senate,  the  people,  in  their  gratitude  to  one  who  had  rendered
them  so  essential  a  service,  elected  him  to  the  -^dileship,  and
subsequently  to  the  Prsetorship.  These  tables  were  called
"  Fasti,"  probably  because  this  was  the  first  word  of  their  title ;
and,  in  time,  this  name  was  extended  to  aU  plans  of  the  year,

h


y  Google


XTIU  INTBODITCTIOK.

whether  in  reference  to  religious  ceremoniab  or  to  matters  of
a  purely  civil  or  military  nature.  Of  the  latter  kind^  the
most  distinguished  seem  to  have  heen  the  "  Fasti  Consulares,"'
which,  so  far  firom  containing  directions  and  instructions
intended  for  all  future  time,  were  simply  records  formed  from
year  to  year,  containing  the  names  of  &e  yearly  magistrates,
and  especially  the  Consuls.  Events,  as  they  occurred,  heing
set  down  in  them,  formed^  when  grouped  together,  a  series
of  annals;  and  though  they  had  no  character  in  common
with  the  "  Fasti  sacri,"  or  "  Calendares,"  they  became,  as
authentic  records,  of  the  greatest  use  to  the  statesmen  and
historians  of  Rome  for  chronological  reference ;  to  these,  con-
sequently^ we  are  indebted  for  much  of  the  knowledge  that  we
possess,  after  the  lapse  of  2,000  years,  relative  to  the  his-
tory of  that  wonderfdl  RepubUc.


M


y  Google


THE  ROMAN  CALENDAR

FOR  THE FIRST  SIX  MONTHS OF THE  YEAR,

ACCORDING  TO  THE  FASTI  OF  OVID.


(Those  days  are  omitted  on  which  there  is  nothing  worthy  of
remark,)


JANUARY.— Book  I.


The  Calends.


3  III. Nones.
5 Th«
9  V.

10  IV.

11  ni. Ides.


badfanes


13 The  Ides.


15  XVIII.  Calends  of

February.

16  XVII. Calends.

17  XVI. Calends.

23  X.  Calends.

24  IX. Calends.


27  VI. Calends.
30  III. Calends.


The  Consular  procession,  75.  The  festival  of  Janus,
89.  -The  dedication  of  the  temples  of  Jupiter
and  ^sculapius,  on  the  Sacred  Island,  290.

The  setting  of  the  Crab,  311.

The  rising  of  the  Lyre,  315.

The  Agonalia,  317- The  rising  of  the  Dolphin,  457.

The  middle  of  Winter,  459.

The  Carmentaha,  461.  The  dedication  of  the  temple
of  Jutuma,  on  the  Campus  Martins,  463.

A  wether  is  slain  to  Jupiter  Stator,  587.  The  Pro-
vinces are  restored  to  the  government  of  the  people,
589.  Octavius  receives  the  surname  of  Augustus,
590.

The  Carmentalia.  are  repeated,  617.  The  sacred
rites  of  the  Deities  Porrima  and  Postverta,  631.

The  dedication  of  the  temple  of  Concord  in  the  Ca-
pitol, 637.

The  Sun  enters  Aquarius,  651.

The  Lyre  sets,  653.

The  star  on  the  breast  of  the  Lion  sets,  655.  The
Sementive  moveable  feast  is  proclaimed  about  this
period,  657. The  feast  of  the  Paganalia,  669.

The  dedication  of  the  temple  to  Castor  and  Pollux,
near  the  Lake  of  Jutuma,  705.

The  dedication  of  an  altar  to  Peace.

62


y  Google


INTEODUCTIOIf.


FEBRUARY.— Book  II.


The  Calends.


2  IV. Nones.

3  III. Nones.
5 The  Nones.

9  V. Ides.
11  III. Ides.

13  The  Ides.

14  XVI. Calends  of

March.

15  XV. Calends.


17  XIII.  Calends.

19  XI.  Calends.

22  VIII.  Calends.

23  VII.  Calends.

24  VI.  Calends.

27  III.  Calends.


A  temple  is  dedicated  to  Juno  Sospita,  55. The

people  resort  to  the  grove  of  the  Asylum,  67. A

sheep  is  sacrificed  to  Jupiter  Tonans,  69.
The  setting  of  the  Lyre,  73. The  middle  of  the

Lion  sets,  77.
The  Dolphin  sets,  79.
Augustus  is  entitled  the  Father  of  his  Country,  119.

The  middle  of  Aquarius  rises,  145.
The  beginning  of  Spring,  149.
Arctophylax  rises,  153.
The  rites  of  Faunus,  193. The  anniyersary  of  the

slaughter  of  the  Fabii,  195.
The  rising  of  the  Crow,  the  Snake,  and  the  Cup,

243.
The  Lupercalia  are  celebrated  in  honour  of  Faunus,

267. The  winds  are  changeable  for  six  days,  453.

The  Sun  leaves  Aquarius,  and  enters  the  Fishes,

457.
The  sacrifice  to Quirinius, 475. The  festival  of

Fools,  513. The  Fomacalia,  527.
The  Feralia,  or  last  day  for  propitiation  of  the  Manes,

567. The  rites  of  Muta,  571.
The  Caristia,  or  feast  of  the  relations,  617.
The  Terminalia,  639.
The  banishment  of  the  Kings,  685. The  arrival  of

the  swallow,  853.
The  Equiria,  or  horse-races  in  honoitt  of  Mars,  857.


y  Google


INTEODIJCTIOir.


XXI


MARCH.— Book  III.


1 The  Calends


3  V. Nones.

5  lU. Nones.

6  Day  before

Nones.

7  The  Nones.

8  VIII. Ides.

14  Day  before

15  The  Ides  of

April.

16  XVII. Calends

April.

17  XVI. Calends.


19  XIV. Calends,


20  XIII. Calends,


22  XI.

23  X.

25  VIII.
29  IV.


Calends.
Calends.

Calends.
Calends.


31 Day  before
Calends.


The  laurels  are  replaced  in  the  houses  of  the  Flamens,
the  temple  of  Vesta,  and  other  public  buildings,
and  the  fire  of  Vesta  is  rekindled,  137.  The  Ma-
tronalia,  170. The  festival  of  the  Salii,  259.

One  of  the  Fishes  sets,  399.

Arctophylax  sets,  403.

Sacrifices  to  Vesta ;  the  anniversary  of  the  appoint-
ment of  Augustus  Caesar  to  be  Pontifex  Maximus,
415.

The  temple  of  Vejovis  is  consecrated,  429.  The
neck  of  Pegasus  rises,  449.

The  Crown  of  Ariadne  rises,  459.

The  Equiria  are  repeated  in  the  Campus  Martins,
517. Or  on  the  Caehan  HiU,  521.

The  rites  of  Anna  Perenna,  523. The  death  of  Julius
Caesar,  697.
of  The  Scorpion  partly  sets,  711. The  Ai^ei  are  visited
on  this  and  the  following  day,  791.

The  Liberalia  are  celebrated  in  honour  of  Bacchus,
713.  The  assumption  of  the  Toga  Virilis,  771.
The  rising  of  the  Kite,  793.

The  Quinquatrus,  in  honour  of  Minerva,  809.  The
birth-day  of  Minerva,  811.  The  Miuerval,  or
schoolmaster's  fee,  is  paid,  829.  The  dedication
of  the  temple  to  Minei-va  Capta,  835.

The  second  and  three  following  days  of  the  Quin-
quatrus celebrated  with  gladiatorial  shows,  818.

The  Sun  enters  the  Constellation  of  the  Ram,  851.

The  fifth  and  last  day  of  the  Quinquatrus ;  and  the
Tubilustria,  849.

The  Vernal  Equinox,  877.

The  festival  of  Janus,  Concord,  Health,  and  Peace,
879.

The  rites  of  Diana  on  the  Aventine  Hill,  833.


y  Google


rNiTEODUCTIOK.


APRIL.— Book  IV.


The  Calends.


2  IV. Nones.

4  Day  beforej

Nones.

5  The  Nones.

6  VIII. Ides.

9  V. Ides.
10  IV. Ides.

12  Day  before

Ides.  J

13  The  Ides.

14  XVIII.  Calends  of

May.

15  XVII. Calends.

16  XVI. Calends.

19  XIII. Calends.


20  XII.

21  XI.

Calends.
Calends.

23  IX.

Calends.

25  VII.

Calends.

28  IV. Calends.


The  sacred  rites  of  Venus,  133. The  females  bathe

in  honour  of  her,  139. Fortuna  VirOis,  145,  and

Venus  VerticoTdia are propitiated, 151. The

Scorpion  sets,  163.
The  Pleiades  begin  to  set,  165.
The  Megalesia,  in  honour  of  the  Mother  of  the  Gods,

179. Her  games  are  celebrated  for  several  days,

387.
A  temple  is  dedicated  to  Fortuna  Publica,  on  the

Quirinal  Hill,  373.
Juba  is  conquered  by  Caesar,  377.^  Libra  brings

showers,  385.
Orion  sets,  387.
The  games  in  the  Circus,  389.

The  games  of  Ceres,  393.

A  temple  is  dedicated  to  Jupiter  Victor,  621 .  A
temple  to  Liberty  is  built,  623.

Westerly  winds  prevail,  with  hail,  625.  The  vic-
tory of  Augustus  at  Mutina,  627.

A  pregnant  cow  is  sacrificed  to  Tellus,  629.

Augustus  is  saluted  Imperator,  675.  The  Hyades
set,  677.

The  horse-races  in  the  Circus  in  honour  of  Ceres^
679.  Foxes  are  set  fire  to  on  the  last  day  of  the
Cerealia,  681.

T&e  Sun  enters  the  Constellation  of  the  Bull,  713.

The  Palilia,  721.  The  anniversary  of  the  founda-
tion of  Rome,  806.

The  Vinalia,  863.  The  rites  of  Venus,  865  ;  and  of
Jupiter,  878.

The  middle  of  Spring,  901.  The  setting  of  the  Ram,
903.  The  rising  of  the  Dog-star,  904.  The  Ro-
bi^a,  905.

The  commencement  of  the  Floralia,  943.  Vesta  is
received  in  the  Palatium  by  Augustus,  949.  This
day  is  also  partly  dedicated  to  Apollo,  951 ;  and
partly  to  Augustus,  952.


y  Google


DTTEODUCTIOir.  XKlil


MAY.— Book  V.


1  The  Calends. The  She-goat  rises,  111. An  altar  is  erected  to  the

Guardian  Lares,  130. The  sacred  rites  of  Bona
Dea,  148.

2  VI. Nones. Argestes  blows  ;  the  Hyades  rise,  163.

3  V. Nones. The  last  day  of  the  Boralia,  183. The  Centaur

rises,  379.
5  III. Nones. The  Lyre  rises,  415.

^ ^^^l^nS. The  middle  of  the  Scorpion  sets,  417.

9  VII. Ides.  .  The  Lemuria  are  celebrated,  419.

11  V. Ides.  The  Lemuria  are  continued,  419. Orion  sets,  493.

12  IV. Ides.  A  temple  is  dedicated  to  Mars  UHor,  545. Games

are  held  in  the  Circus  in  honour  of  Mars,  597.

13  III. Ides.  The  Lemuria  are  concluded,  591. The  Pleiades  rise,

599. The  begmning  of  Summer,  601.

14  Day  before The  BuU  rises,  603. Images  made  of  rushes  are

Ides.  thrown  into  the  Tiber,  621.

15  The  Ides.  A  temple  is  dedicated  to  Mercury,  on  his  festival,

663.

20  XIII. Calends  of  The  Sun  enters  Gemini,  693.

June.

21  XII. Calends.  The  second  Agonia,  721.

22  XI. Calends.  The  Dog-star  rises  [sets],  723.

23  X. Calends*  The  Tubilustria,  in  honour  of  Vulcan,  726.

24  IX. Calends.  The  day  marked  Q.  R.  C.  F.  727.

; 25  Vlll. Calends. A  temple  is  built  to  Fortuna  PubUca,  7^9. The  beak
of  the  Eagle  appeairs,  731.

26  VII. Calends. Bootes  sets,  733.

27  VL Calends. Hyas  rises,  734,  ■;,


y  Google


xnv  rNTEODFCTIOK.


JUNE.— Book  VI.


3  III. Nones.

4  Day  before

Nones.

5  The  Nones.

7  VII.

Ides.

8  VI.

9  V.

Ides.
Ides.

10  IV.

11  III.

Ides.
Ides.

1  The  Calends. The  rites  of  the  Goddess  Cama,  101. Beans  are

eaten,  180.  A  temple  is  consecrated  to  Juno  Mo-
neta,  183.  Sacrifice  is  offered  to  Mars  near  the
Capenian  gate,  191.  A  temple  is  dedicated  to
Tempest,  193. The  Eagle  disappears,  196.

2  IV. Nones. The  rising  of  the  Hyades  and  of  the  horns  of  the
Bull,  mth  rain,  197.

A  temple  is  dedicated  to  Bellona,  199.

The  temple  in  the  Circus  Flaminiiis  is  dedicated  to
Hercules  Custos,  209.

A  temple  is  dedicated  to  Sancus,  Fidius,  or  Father
Semo,  209.

Arctophylax  sets,  235.  The  fishermen's  games  in
honour  of  the  Tiber,  237.

A  temple  dedicated  to  the  Mind,  241.

The  rites  of  Vesta,  249.  An  altar  to  Jupiter  Pistor
is  dedicated,  349.  Brutus  conquers  the  Callaici,
461. Crassus  is  conquered  by  the  Parthians,  465.

The  Dolphin  rises,  469.

The  Matralia,  in  honour  of  Mater  Matuta,  473.  The
temple  of  Matuta  built  by  Servius  TuUius,  479.
Rutilius  and  Didius  are  slain,  563.  The  temple  of
Fortune  is  built  by  Servius  Tullius,  569.  A  tem-
ple is  dedicated  to  Concord  by  Livia,  637.
13 The  Ides.  A  temple  is  dedicated  to  Jupiter  Invictus,  450.  The

lesser  Quinquatrus,  in  honour  of  Minerva,  651.

15  XVII. Calends  of  Thyene  rises  in  the  forehead  of  the  Bull,  711. The

July.  temple  of  Vesta  is  cleansed,  713.

16  XVI. Calends. Zephyrus  blows,  715. Orion  rises,  717.

17  XV. Calends. The  .whole  of  the  Dolphin  is  seen,  723. Posthumius

Tubertus  conquers  the  uEquiandthe  Volsci,  721.

19  XIII. Calends. The  Sun  leaves  Gemini,  and  enters  the  sign  of  the

Crab,  725.  Pallas  is  first  worshipped  on  the  Aven-
tine  hill,  728.

20  XII. Calends. A  temple  is  erected  to  Summanus,  729. Ophiuchus

rises,  733.

23  IX. Calends. Flaminius  is  defeated  at  Lake  Thrasymenus,  765.

24  VIII. Calends. Syphax  is  conquered,  769. Hasdrubal  is  slain,  770.

The  rites  of  Fors  Fortuna,  771.

26  VI. Calends. The  Belt  of  Orion  is  seen,  785. The  Summer  Sol-

stice, 789.

27  V. Calends. A  temple  is  dedicated  to  the  Lares,  791. The  tem-

ple of  Jupiter  Stator  is  built,  793.

28  IV. Calends. A  temple  is  erected  to  Quirinus,  795.

30 Day  before A  temple  is  consecrated  to  Hercules  and  the  Muses,
Calends. 797.


y  Google


THE FASTI;


OB,


CALENDAR OF OVID.


BOOK  THE  FIRST.


CONTENTS.


Thi  nature  of  the  subject,  and  the  Dedication,  ver.  X— 26,  The  divi-
sion of  the  year  by  Romulus  and  Numa,  27 — 44.  The  different  quali-
ties of  the  days,  45 — 62.  The  calends  oi  January,  the  invocation  of
Janus,  and  ft  prayer  that  the  author  may  commence  auspiciously,  63 — 74.
The  consuls  enter  upon  their  office  in  au  assemblage  of  the  people ,  75 —
88.  The  mythology  of  Janus :  who  presents  himself  before  the  author
with  his  badges  of  office,  89 — 99,  and  states,  first,  his  origin,  and  the  fact
of  his  two-formed  ^gure,  100 — 114 ;  then,  his  duties  and  his  various
names  derived  therefirom,  115 — 132 ;  then,  the  reasons  for  his  peculiar
form,  133 — 144.  He  next  explains  some  matters  relative  to  the  calends
of  January ;  why  the  new  year  begins  in  the  middle  of  winter,  and
not  in  the  spring,  145 — 164 ;  why  on  that  day  causes  are  pleaded,
165^-170  ;  why  sacred  rites  are  performed  in  his  honour  the  first  of  all
the  Gods,  171 — 174 ;  why  words  of  good  om^n  should  be  used,  175 —
182 ;  why  presents  are  made  at  the  beginning  of  th^  new  year,  183 — 226 ;
why  the  ancient  coin  bore  the  figures  of  a  ship  and  a  double-head,
227 — 254 ;  why  he  himself  has  his  statue  in  one  temple  only,  255 — >
277 ;  why  his  temple  is  open  in  time  of  war,  278 — 288.  The  author
then  proceeds  to  examine  the  calendar.  The  dedication  of  the  two
temples  of  ^Esculapius  and  of  Jupiter,  259 — 294.  Before  treating
of  the  rising  and  setting  of  the  constellations,  he  commences  with  the
pruses  of  those  who  cultivate  the  science  of  astronomy,  295 — ^310.  The
setting  of  the  Crab  and  l^e  Lyre,  311 — ^316.  The  origin  and  meaning
of  the  Agonalia,  317 — 334,  An  inquiry  into  the  meaning  of  the  terms
'Victima'  and  'Hostia;'  the  ancient  sacred  rites  and  origin  of  the
sacrifice  of  anknals,  in  which  he  introduces  the  story  of  Aristaeus,  335-*
456. The  rirang  of  the  Dolphin,  457 — 8. The  middle  day  of  winter,

459 ,60. The  Carmentalia,  which  introduces  the  arrival  in  Italy  of

Cannenta,  Evander,  and  Hercules,  together  with  t^e  death  of  Cacus  by
Henmles.  461 — 586. The  sacred  rites  of  Jupiter,  587—8. Octavius

B


y  Google


2  THE  ITASTI ;  [a.  i.  1—8.

is  graced  with  the  title  of  '  Augostus/  the  meaning  of  which  word
he  explains.  590 — 616.  The  return  of  the  Carmentalia,  on  which
Porrima  and  Postvcrta  are  propitiated,  617^-636.  The  Temple
of  Concord  rebuilt  by  Tiberius,  to  which  livia  is  a  contributor,
637 — 650.  The  Sun  enters  Aquarius;  the  Lyre  and  the  constel-
lation of  the  Lion  set,  651 — 656.  The  Sementive  festivals ;  cessation
from  field  labour,  the  rural  rejoicings  thereupon,  the  prayers  of  the
husbandman  for  good  crops,  and  the  great  blessing  of  Peace,  657 — 704.
The  temple  of  Castor  and  Pollux  dedicated  by  Tiberius,  705—708.  The
altar  of  Peace  is  erected.  The  poet  concludes  with  a  prayer  for  eternal
peace,  and  for  the  house  of  Caesar,  709 — 726.

The  festivals,*  arranged  throughout  the  Latian  year,'*  toge-
ther with  their  origin  and  the  constellations  as  they  set
beneath  the  earth  and  rise,  I  will  celebrate.  Receive,  Csesar
Germanicus,'  this  work  with  benignant  aspect,  and  direct
the  course  of  my  timid  bark;^  and  not  disdaining  a  mark
of  attention  thus  slight,  be  propitious  to  this  act  of  duty  con-
secrated to  thee.  Thou  wilt  here  review  the  sacred  rites
brought  to  light  from  the  ancient  annals,'  and  see  by  what
memorable  fact  each  day  has  been  distinguished. Here,  too,

*  The  festivals.'] — ^Ver.  1.  Literally,  *  The  times,'  as  set  out  for  ob-
servance, and  arranged  for  particular  purposes.

2  The  Latian  year."] — ^Ver.  1.  The  Latian  year  here  spoken  of  was  the
Julian  or  solar  year  of  365  days  and  a  quarter ;  so  called  because  insti-
tuted by  Julius  Csesar.  (See  Introduction.)  The  month  of  January
received  its  name  from  the  god  Janus,  and  has  retained  it  from  the
days  of  Numa  to  the  present  time,  with  an  interval  only  in  the  reign
of  the  Emperor  Commodus,  who  called  it  *  Amazonius,'  in  honour  of  las
mistress ;  but  on  his  death  the  former  name  was  restored  by  a  decree  of
the  senate.  Latium  was  the  name  of  that  part  of  Italy  in  which  Rome
was  situated.

'  Cissar  OermanieusA — Ver.  3.  He  was  the  son  of  Drusus  Claudius
Nero,  and  was  adopted  by  his  uncle  Tiberius,  at  the  express  request  of
the  Emperor  Augustus.  Drusus,  the  father  of  Germanicus  having  died
shortly  after  his  victory  over  the  Germans,  the  senate  conferred  the  title  of
Germanicus  on  his  descendants.  Germanicus  died  at  an  early  age,  and  was
the  father  of  the  Emperor  Caligula.

*  Timid  bark."] — ^Ver.  4.  Gower  translates  these  lines  in  the  following
manner —

*  Germanic  Caesar !  0 !  accept  our  charge
With  smooth  aspect,  and  guide  my  feeble  barge.'

Massey  gives  them  in  a  single  line —

*  Support  Germanicus,  my  feeble  wing.

While  the  one  caricatures  the  metaphor,  the  other  abandons  it  altogether.

*  Andent  anwa/*.]— *  Annalibus — priscis.'  Ver.  7. The  Roman  annals


y  Google


B.  1. 8—21.]  OB, CALEKDAR  OP  OTTD.  3

thou  wilt  find  the  household  festivals  peculiar  to  thy  own
fiunily.*  Often  must  thy  sire,  often  thy  grandsire,^  hecome
the  Bubjects  of  thy  perusal.  The  rewards  of  honour  dis-
tingaiBmng  the  painted  calendar,®  which  they  bear,  thou,
too,  with  thy  brother  Drusus,*  shalt  obtain. ^^  Let  others  sing
the  arms  of  Caesar ;  we  will  sing  the  altars  ^^  of  Ceesar,  and
those  days  which  he  has  added  ^'  to  the  festiyals.  Do  thou
&vour  me  while  endeavouring  to  recount  the  praises  of  thy
kindred,  and  dispel  from  my  breast  its  trembling  fears.  Show
thyself  propitious  to  me ;  then  wilt  thou  have  given  me  energy
for  my  verses,  for  according  to  thy  countenance  does  my
genios  stand  or  fall.  My  page,"  about  to  be  submitted  to  the
judgment  of  a  prince  thus  learned,  is  moved  with  awe,  as
though  sent  to  the  Clanan  God^*  to  be  perused. For  we

before  the  time  of  Ovid,  were  compiled  by  Hemina,  Claudius,  Afranius,
Eimiiis,  Attius,  Quadrigarius,  Piso,  Fannins,  Fenestella,  Laberius,  and
I'icinius.  The  principal  annals  were  named  *  Annales  Maximi.'  They
were  open  to  jmblic  inspection,  and  were  kept  by  the  Pontifex  Maximus.
At  their  discontinuance,  in  the  time  of  Sylla,  they  amounted  to  eighty
Tdomes.

•  Tky  own  family.] — *Vobis.*  Ver.  9.  Either  the  Claudii,  his  family
by  birth,  or  the  Julii,  his  family  by  adoption.

'  Thy  grandrire.'] — Ver.  10.  Augustus,  who  had  adopted  Tiberius.

*  The  painted  calendar.]— Yer.  11.  'Pictos  Fastos.'  The  Roman  books
were  often  decorated  with  colours,  especially  red;  whence  our  word
'  robfic'  These  were  most  probably  the  '  Fasti  Consulares,'  kept  in  the
temple  of  Janus,  and  not  the  *  Fasti  Calendares,'  which  were  originally  only
a  csdendar  marking  the  days  of  religious  observance.

'  Drusua.] — ^Ver.  12.  Drusus  was  the  son  of  Tiberius,  and  the  adoptive
brother  of  Germanicus.  The  superior  merits  of  the  latter  are  supposed
to  have  excited  the  jealousy  of  Tiberius,  and  to  have  caused  his  death  by
poison.

*®  SbaU  obtain.]— 'Ver.  12.  *  Feres.'  Literally,  *  shalt  bear.'  It  was  a
bi^  honour  to  be  mentioned  in  the  *  Fasti,'  or  annals ;  and  the  erasure
of  t  name  from  them  was  a  mark  of  extreme  degradation.

"  Altars,] — ^Ver.  13.  Built  and  consecrated  by  Augustus ;  the  passage
most  probably  refers  to  the  dedication  by  that  Emperor  of  the  altar  of
Concord.

"  He  has  added.] — ^Ver.  14.  Either  by  the  revival  of  festivals ;  or  by
the  institution  of  them  in  honour  of  the  gods  or  of  himself.

"  My  P^e.] — ^Ver.  19.  *  Pagina.'  This  word  is  very  appropriate,
•s  paged  books  had  been  recently  introduced  into  common  use  by  Julius
Ci^,  m  substitution  for  those  of  the  scroll  form.

^*  The  Clarian  God.]— Yer.  20.  The  oracle  of  the  Clarian  Apollo  was  at
Cltros,  near  Colophon,  in  Asia  Minor.  According  to  Tacitus,  it  was  con-
nlted  by  Germanicus,  to  which  circumstance  the  poet  probably  here  alludes.

B  2


y  Google


4  THE  FASTI ;  [b.  i.  21—36.

have  felt  how  great  is  the  fluency  of  thy  polished  elo'
quence,  wh&n  it  bore  civic  arms^'*  in  behalf  of  the  trembling
accused.  We  know,  too,  when  inclination  has  impelled  thee
towards  our  arts,^*  how  copious  the  streams  of  thy  genius
flow.  If  it  is  lawful  and  right,"  do  thou  a  poet  guide
the  reins  of  a  poet,  so  that  under  thy  auspices  the  whole  year
may  proceed  favourably.

When  the  founder^*  of  the  city  divided  the  periods,  he
appointed  that  there  should  be  twice  five  mondis  in  his
year.  In  good  truth,  Romulus,  thou  wast  better  ac-
quainted with  arms  than  with  the  stars,  and  thy  greater
care  was  to  conquer  tiiy  neighbours.  Yet,  Csesar,  there  is
a  reason  which  may  have  influenced  him,  and  he  has  a  ground
on  which  he  may  defend  his  error.  That  period  wMch  is
sufficient  to  elapse  until  the  infant  can  come  forth  from
the  womb  of  its  mother,  he  determined  to  be  sufficient"  for
the  year.  During  so  many  months  after  the  funeral  of  her
husband,  does  the  wife  keep  up*°  the  sad  emblems  of  moum-

^^  Civic  anna."] — ^Ver.  22.  According  to  Suetonius  and  Dio  Cassius,
Germanicus  had  pleaded  in  public  with  considerable  success;  indeed,  every
young  man  of  the  patrician  class  who  pretended  to  any  talent  pleaded  for
his  friends. Gower  translates  these  lines  thus —

*  For  we  did  taste  those  sweets  your  lips  let  fall,
When  you  did  plead  in  causes  criminall.'

^«  Oitr  arts.] — ^Ver.  23.  Germanicus  made  a  Latin  version  of  the  astro-
nomic poem  of  Aratus,  which  is  still  extant,  and,  according  to  Suetonius,
he  wrote  several  Greek  comedies.

"  Right.] — ^Ver.  25.  *  Si  licet  et  fas  est.'  This  expression  is  strictly
equivalent  to,  *  as  far  as  consists  with  laws,  human  and  divine,'  or,  *  with
law  and  good  conscience.'

i«  T%e  founder.] — ^Ver.  26.  Romulus.  On  the  year  of  Romulus,  see
Introduction.

'9  To  be  efficient.] — Ver.  34.  That  is  to  say,  ten  lunar  months.
Ovid  is  here  in  error ;  as  ten  lunar  months  would  be  at  least  fourteen  days
less  than  the  ten  complete  months  of  the  original  Roman  year.

20  Keep  up.] — ^Ver.  36.  *  Sustinet  in  vidua  tristia  signa  domo/
*  Sustinet'  may  mean  either  that  she  *  wears*  the  mourning  garments,  or
that  she  *  keeps  up'  the  emblems  of  mourning,  such  as  the  cypress  branches
hung  up  in  the  house,  and  exclusion  from  society.  Numa  regiilated  the  time
of  mourning  by  the  degree  of  kindred,  and  appointed  to  the  widow  the
longest  period,  that  of  ten  months,  because  that  was  the  length  of  the
original  year,  so  that  the  poet  has,  in  fact,  here  put  the  effect  for  the
cause. Gower  thus  translates  these  lines —

*  That  time  the  widow,  from  the  fatal  burning

Of  her  dead  mute,  did  wear  the  signs  of  mourning/


y  Google


B.  1.  36—43.]  OB, CALENDAE  01"  OTTD.  5

ing  in  her  widowed  home.  This  then  the  care  of  Quirinus,
arrayed  in  the  regal  robe,*^  regarded  when  he  gave  to  the  rude
people**  the  ordinances  pertaining  to  the  year.^  The  first
month  was  that  of  Mars  ;^  the  second  that  of  Venus ;  she,  the
origin^  of  his  family,  he,  the  sire  of  Romuliis  himself.  The
third  month  was  so  called  ^m  the  aged,^  the  fourth  from
the  name  of  the  young  ;*^  the  rest  that  follow  were  denoted
by  their  numerical  place.^ But  Numa**  passed  by  neither

«'-  Clad  in  the  regal  ro6c.]— Ver.  37.  '  Trabeati.'  Literally,  *  clad  in
the  trabea.'  The  *  trabea*  was  a  *  toga,'  or  robe,  ornamented  with  purple
horizontal  stripes,  and  was  worn  by  kings,  consuls,  and  augurs.  It  very
probably  derived  its  naine  ftom  the  bars,  or  stripes,  *  trabes.'  Servius
(Comm.  Jiln.  VII.,  612)  mentions  three  kinds— one  wholly  of  purple,  sacred
to  the  gods ;  another  of  purple  and  white ;  and  another  of  purple  and  red,
or  safii^n,  worn  by  the  augurs.  The  purple  and  white  was  the  royal  robe,
and  is  assigned  especially  to  Romulus,  who  is  supposed  to  have  derived
the  use  of  it  from  the  Latin  kings.  It  was  worn  by  the  consuls  on
festivals  and  public  solemnities,  such,  for  instance,  as  the  opening  of  the
temple  of  Janus.  The  *  equites,'  or  equestrian  order,  wore  it  on  public  fes-
tivals. The  emperors,  of  whom  Julius  Caesar  was  the  first  who  assumed  it,
wore  it  entirely  of  purple.

**  Rude  people.] — Ver.  38.  *Populis,'  perhaps,  means  'tribes,'  or
'  clans,'  not  yet  fused  into  one  people.

^  Pertaining  to  the  year."] — ^Ver.  38.  This  may  mean  the  rules  and
ordinances  which  were  to  be  observed  during  the  succeeding  year  till  Ro«
mulus  again  met  his  people,  or  the  general  regulations  regarding  the  year,
iot  future  observance. The  latter  is  the  preferable  sense.

**  Of  Mara."] — Ver.  39. The  Roman  year  originally  began  in  March.

^  She^  the  origin,'] — ^Ver.  40.  Venus,  the  mother  of  -fineas,  was  the
ancestress  of  Romulus ;  Mars  was  his  father.  The  poet  here  derives  the
name  of  March  from  '  Mars,'  and  the  month  of  April  (anciently  written
'Aphrilis')  from  'Aphrodite,'  the  Greek  name  of  Venus,  and  formed
from  it^pbg,  *  sea-foam,'  whence  she  is  fabled  to  have  sprung.  He,  per-
haps, coined  this  very  £Eur-fetched  derivation  to  please  the.  Caesars,  who
were  said  to  have  sprung  from  Venus  through  ^neas.

^  From  the  aged.] — Ver.  41.  May — *  Mains,*  or  *  Majus,'  as  anciently
spelt,  he  derives  from  '  the  aged,'  who  were  called  *  majores  natu.*  *  More
stricken, '  or  *  greater  in  age,'  would  be  the  nearest  literal  translation.

"  The  name  of  the  young,] — ^Ver.  41.  June,  *  Junius,'  he  derives  from
the  young,  who  were  <^ed  *  juniores,'  or  '  jnvenes.'

*•  Numerical  place."] — ^Ver.  42.  July,  in  the  old  year  here  spoken  of,
was  *  QuintiJifl,'  '  fifth  month.'  August  was  •  Sextilis,'  *  sixth  month,'  and
the  names  September,  October,  November,  and  December  are  respectively
compounds  of  the  numericals  Septem,  Octo,  Novem,  Decern,  seven,  eight,
■ioe^  and  ten.

»  yuma.] Ver.  43.  Numa  Pompilius  was  a  Sabine  by  birth,  and  the


y  Google


6  THE  FASTI ;  [*.  i.  43—54.

JanoB  nor  the  shades'"  of  his  ancestors,  and  added  two  to  the
ancient  months.  That,  however,  you  may  not  he  ignorant  of
the  priyileges**  of  the  various  days,  every  hght-hearing  day^^  has
not  the  same  office  ;  that  will  be  inauspicious  throughout  which
the  three  words'*  are  not  spoken,  that  auspicious  throughout
which  it  will  be  allowable  for  suits  to  be  pleaded  by  law.  But  do
not  suppose  that  its  own  privileges  last  throughout  the  whole
day ;  that  which  now  will  be  auspicious,  in  the  morning  was
inauspicious.  For  as  soon  as  the  entrails  have  been  offered  to
the  Peity,  it  is  lawful  to  speak  upon  every  subject,^  and  the
Prsetor,  honoured  by  his  office^  then  has  his  decrees  unob-
structed. There  is  also  the  day  on  which  it  is  the  usage  to
shut  the  people  within  the  'polling  inclosures**  for  the  pur-
poses of  election. There  is  also  the  market  day^  which  always

second  king  of  Rome.  He  added  two  months,  January  and  February,
to  the  year  of  Romulus.

2»  The  shades,]— Yer,  43.  *  Avitas  umbras.'  This  alludes  to  the  *feralia'
or  rites  to  appease  the  *  Manes,'  or  shades  of  the  dead,  described  in  the
second  book,  ver.  533,  and  following.

^^  The  privilegts.'] — ^Ver.  45.  The  *.Jura'  were  the  distinctive  rights
or  privileges  given  to  certain  days  by  public  order.

3^  Light-bearing  day."] — Ver.  46.  *  Lucifer'  is  properly  *the  morning
star.' As  introducing  the  day,  it  is  here  put  for  the  day  itself.

3'  The  three  words."] — Ver.  47.  On  the  subject  of  the  *  auspicious  and
inauspicious  days,'  and  the  '  three  words,'  ('  dies  fasti '  and  '  nefasti,'  and
the  *  tria  verba,')  see  Introduction.

33  Speak  upon  every  subject.'] — Ver.  51.  On  this  subject  see  Introduc-
tion, in  which  reference  is  also  made  to  the  office  of  the  PraBtor,  alluded
to  in  the  next  line.

3*  Honoured  by  his  office.] — ^Ver.  52.  *  Honoratus,'  *  Honored,'  or,  as
we  should  say,  *  Right  worshipful,  or  right  honourable.'  This  was  the
peculiar  title  oif  the  *  Pnetor  Urbanus,*  or  city  praetor.

*5  The  polling  inclosttres.'} — ^Ver.  53. Allusion  is  here  made  to  the

*  Dies  Comitialis,'  or  day  of  Comitia,  for  making  laws  and  electing  ma-
gistrates. The  *  Septum'  was  a  boaj^ded  enclosure  near  the  tribunal  of
the  Consul,  into  which  the  *  centurii '  went  in  their  proper  order  when
summoned  by  the  herald.  There  was  a  plank  called  *  pons,'  *  the  bridge,'
leading  to  the  *  Septum,'  over  which  each  century  passed  in  succession.

3«  The  market  day.] — ^Ver.  54. The *  Nundinae,' so called  from

*  nonas'  *  ninth,'  *  dies'  *  day,'  returned  every  dghth  diay,  according  to  our
reckoning ;  but,  according  to  the  Romans,  who,  in  counting,  included  both
extremes,  every  ninth  day,  whence  the  name.  On  this  day  the  country-
people  came  into  the  city  to  sell  their  wares,  make  their  purchases,  hear
the  new  laws  read,  and  learn  the  news. By  the  Hortensian  law,  the

*  Nundinae/  (which  before  were  only  *  feriae,'  or  *  holidays,')  were  made


y  Google


B.  I.  54—68.]  OB, CALENDAB  01* OTID.  7

tetoms  after  the  ninth  reyolution.  The  care  of  Juno  claims
for  itself  the  Ausonian*'  calends;'*  on  the  ides,  a  white
lamb,'*  of  laiger  growth,  falls  in  honour  of  Jupiter.  The
goardianshq)  of  the  Nones  is  without  the  care  of  a  Deity  ;*®
of  all  these  (beware  that  you  be  not  deceived)  the  morrow
wiU  be  inauspicious/^  The  omen  is  derived  from  the  event
itself,^  for  on  those  days  Rome  sustained  sad  losses  in  adverse
warfieure.  These  drcumstanoes,  as  being  inherent  to  the  whole
of  the  festiyala,  will  be  here  stated  by  me  once  for  aU,  that  I
may  not  be  forced  to  interrupt  the  order  of  the  matters  treated
of  by  me.

Lo,  Germanicus !  Janus  announces  to  thee  a  prosperous
year,^  and  is  present  at  the  outset  in  my  verse.  0,  Janus,
thou  of  the  two  heads !  origin  of  the  year  silently  rolling  on,
thou  who  alone  of  the  Gods  above,  dost  behold  thy  own  back,
be  thou  propitious  to  our  princes,**  through  whose  toils  both

' h&a*  or  c(»irt  days,  that  the  country-people  then  in  town  might  have
their  lawsuits  determined.

^  Ausonian.'] — ^Ver.  35.  Ausoniawas  properly  the  land  of  the  Ausonet,
in  the  southern  part  of  Italy ;  hut  the  poets  use  it  to  signify  the  whole
of  Italy.

^  Calends,'} — ^Ver.  55.  For  an  account  of  the  Calends,  Ides,  and  Nones,
see  Introduction.  On  all  the  Calends,  the  Pcmtifex  minor  and  the  Regina
Sacrarum  sacrificed  to  Juno.

^  A  UfkUe  lamh.'\ — ^Ver.  56.  A  sacrifice  of  a  lamb,  called  the  '  ovis
idolis,'  was  offered  in  the  eapitol  to  Jupiter,  on  the  Ides  of  each  month.
On  the  Ides  of  January,  the  victim  was  always  a  wether.

*®  IstnthetU  the  care  of  a  i>«t/y.]— Ver.  57.  He  means  that  on  those
days  there  are  no  sacrifices  to  any  of  the  Gods.

"  WiU  be  *nau6piciou8.']'^\er.  58.  '  Ater,'  Uterally  *  bkck.'  The
epithet  was  perhaps  derived  from  the  custom  of  reconhng  unlucky  days
by  blade  marks  set  against  them,  as  being  '  carbone  notandi,'  <  to  be
marked  in  charcoaL'

^  From  the  even*  t/««{^.]— Ver.  59.  The  Romans  had  '  pneliares'  and
'  non  pneliuesy'  *  fighting'  and  *  non-fighting'  days.  The  days  after  the
caknds,  nones,  and  ides,  were  ^  non-praeliares,'  as  they  believed  that  there
was  of  necessity  something  unlucky  in  the  idea  of  ^  post,*  after.  So  a
puUic  calamity  on  any  particular  day  of  a  month  rendered  that  day '  ater,'
or  *  ne£istus/  in  every  month.  Many  of  their  most  memorable  defeats
happened  on  the  Nones,  which  thence  derived  their  inauspicious  cha-
racter.

^  PropUioue  year."] — ^Ver.  63.  As  we  should  say  in  the  present  day,
'  wishes  you  a  hapipy  new  year.*

**  Toowr  pn«»§.]--Ver.  68. The  princes  here  alluded  to  are  probably


y  Google


8  THB  rABTl ;  [b,  1. 68—79.

the  fertile  earth  and  the  sea  enjoy  undisturbed  peace.  Be  thou,
0  Qoirinus,^  propitious  to  thy  senators,  and  to  thy  people,  and
by  thy  nod  o/  approbation  unlock  the  white  temples.**  A
favourable  day  is  dawning,  be  ye  propitious  both  in  your  lan-
guage*^ and  in  your  feelings ;  now  on  the  auspicious  day  must
auspicious  language  be  used.  Let  our  ears  be  reheyed  from
strife,  and  forthwith  let  maddening  discords  be  fax  away ;  and
thou  envious  tongue,  postpone  thy  occupation.  Do  you  perceive
how  the  sky  is  gleaming  with  the  per^mie-bearing  fires,*^  and
how  the  Cilician  ear*'  is  crackling^  on  the  kindled  hearths  ?  The
flame  with  its  brightness  irradiates  the  gold  of  the  temples,  and
diffuses  its  tremulous  beam  throughout  the  highest  part  of  the
building. With  unpolluted  garments  they  go'^^  to  the  Tarpeian

Tiberius  and  Gennaiiicus.  He  may  perhaps  allude  to  the  victory  of
Germanicus  over  the  Catti,  Cherusd  and  other  German  tribes,  a.  u.  c.
770.

**  O  Qttirtntt*.]— Ver.  69.  The  readmg  is  *Quiiini;'  but  I  have
adopted  Gierig's  suggestion,  ^Qnirine.'  The  poet  is  addressing  Janus,
one  of  whose  names  was  Quirinus,  and  would  not  ask  him  to  *  be  propitious
to  his  own  people.'  Romulus  also  was  called  Quirinus,  but  it  does  not
seem  likely  that  allusion  is  here  made  to  him.

^  White  temples.'] — ^Ver.  70.  Either  white,  as  being  built  of  marble,
or  whitened  in  appearance  by  the  new  white  clothes  of  the  worshippers.
The  temple  of  Janus  only  remained  open  during  war ;  but  the  i>oet  must
not  be  imderstood  as  wishing  it  to  be  opened  for  that  reason ;  but  only
that  the  gates  of  all  the  temples  being  open  for  sacrifice,  the  gate  of  that
too  might  be  opened  for  such  a  purpose.  The  Roman  doors  were  fastened
with  a  chain,  at  the  end  of  which  the  *  sera,'  or  bolt,  was  fixed.  When
the  door  was  shut  the  bolt  was  fastened  in  the  door-post ;  when  open  it
was  drawn  back.

*■'  In  your  language,"] — Yer.  71.  *  Favete  Unguis,'  *  be  propitious  in
your  language,'  was  an  usual  injunction  at  sacrifices,  as  a  word  of  ill  omen
spoken  during  their  celebration  on  the  calends  of  January,  was  considered
to  have  an  influence  on  the  whole  year.

**  Perfume-hearing  fires,] — ^Ver.  75.  Frankincense,  cinnamon,  saffiron,
and  cassia,  used  to  be  thrown  on  the  altars  during  the  time  of  sacrifice.

*»  7%e  Cilician  ear,] — ^Ver.  76.  <  Spica  Cilissa '  means  the  filaments  of
saffiron  from  Mount  Corycus,  in  Cilicia.

^  /«  crackling,] — ^Ver.  76.  When  the  8affi*on  was  good,  according  to
Pliny  the  Elder,  it  crackled  while  burning.  Probably  from  this,  as  from
the  crackling  of  laurel  (which  was  frequently  burnt  for  the  purpose),
omen^  were  derived

*i  They  ^0.]— Ver  79.  On  the  calends  of  January  the  new  consuls,
accompanied  by  the  senate  and  the  people,  went  in  procession  to  the
Capitolium,  to  solicit  the  protection  of  Jupiter  fox  the  state.


y  Google


k.  1.  79—92.]  OE, CALENDAE  OP  OTID.  9

heights,^  and  the  people  itself  harmonizes  by  the  colour  of
its  dress  with  the  festiyal.  And  now  the  new  nuces"  precede,
the  new  purple^  glistens,  and  the  much  distinguished  chair  of
ivory"  is  sensible  of  new  weights.  The  steers  unacquainted  with
toil,  which  the  Faliscan  herbage  has  fed  on  its  own  fields,
offer^  their  necks  to  the  blow.  Jupiter,  when  he  looks  from
his  height  over  the  whole  earth,  has  nothing  which  he  can
behold  but  that  which  is  under  Roman  sway.  Hail !  joyous
day,  and  ever  return  more  happy,  worthy  to  .be  honoured
by  a  people  all-powerful  throughout  the  world.  But,  0
Janus,  thou  of  the  double  form,  what  kind  of  deity  shall
1  pronounce  thee  to  be?  for  Greece  has  no  divinity  cor-
responding to  thee."  Do  thou,  at  the  same  time,  declare  tiie
I'eason  why  thou  alone  of  aU  the  inhabitants  of  heaven  lookest

"  The  Tarpeian  heights.'] — ^Ver.  79.  The  capitolian  hill,  on  which  the
Ciqritol,  or  temple  of  Jupiter,  was  erected,  was  originally  called  *  Satur-
nins,'  in  honour  of  Saturn.  It  was  afterwards  called  *  Tarpeius,'  from  the
vestal  vffgin  Tarpeia,  whose  ftte  is  narrated  below,  line  261,  and  was  the
quarter  idlotted  to  the  Sabines  after  they  were  incorporated  with  the
peq)le.  The  *  arx,'  properly  speaking,  was  the  highest  of  the  Roman
hills,  and  the  inferior  part  of  the  declivity  was  the  *Capitolium,*  or  *mons
Tarpeius.'  The  latter  name  was  more  especially  applied  to  a  steep  rock
on  one  side,  whence  criminals  were  thrown.

^  The  new  *fasc€s.*']'-Yer.  81.  The  *  fasces'  were  a  bundle  of  rods
tied  together,  with  an  axe  inserted  in  the  middle.  They  were  borne  by
the  lictors,  as  the  insignia  of  the  consular  dignity.

**  The  new  purple.} — ^Ver.  81. The  *  praetexta,'  or  consular  robe.

*  CTutir  qf  ivory.'] — ^Ver.  82.  The  *  sella  cunilis,'  was  a  seat  inlaid
with  ivory,  and  at  first  used  only  by  the  kings,  but  afterwards  by  the
consols,  pnetors,  censors,  and  the  higher  aediles,  when  employed  in  their
official  ciq[>acity.  These  officers  were  from  this  circumstance  named
*cnnile.'  The  name  of  the  chair  was  perhaps  derived  from  its  being
carried  on  the  '  cmrrus,'  or  '  chariot,'  to  be  at  hand  when  required  by  the
officer  in  his  official  capacity,  either  in  the  senate-house,  or  at  the  tribunal
of  justice.  It  was  borrowed  from  the  Tuscans,  and  was  in  the  form  of
the  letter  X,  for  the  convenience  of  folding  up.

*  Offer.] — ^Ver.  83.  As  though  of  their  ovni  accord ;  for  if  the  victim
toggled,  it  was  not  considered  to  be  an  appropriate  offering  to  the  god.
The  Falisd  were  a  people  of  Etruria :  the  fertility  of  the  soil  rendered
their  pastures  greatly  esteemed,  and  victims  for  saoifice  were  sought  from
their  fields.  Their  country  was  also  famous  for  a  stream  which  imparted
extreme  whiteness  to  the  oxen  that  drank  of  it.

"  No  divinity  corresponding  to  thee.] — ^Ver.  90.  Janus  was  probably
the  same  deity  as  *  Dianus,'  who  represented  the  sun.  If  so,  we  must  only
imderstand  by  this,  that  the  Greeks  had  no  god  corresponding  to  him  in
fonn  and  attributes.


y  Google


10  TEE  FASTI;  [b.  I.  92— 110.

upon"  that  which  is  behind  thee,  and  that  which  is  before
thee  at  the  same  time.  While  I  was  reyolving  these  things
in  my  mind,  my  tablets^'  being  taken  in  hand,  the  house
seemed  to  be  bnghter  than  it  was  before.  Then  the  divine
Janus,  wondrous  with  his  double  form,  suddenly  presented
his  two-fold  features  to  my  eyes.  I  was  struck  with  amaze-
ment, and  felt  my  hair  stiffen  with  terror,  and  my  breast  was
frozen  with  a  sudden  chill.  He,  holding  in  his  right  hand
a  staff,  and  in  his  left  a  key,®*  uttered  these  accents  to  me  from
the  mouth  of  his  front  face,  "  Having  laid  aside  thy  terror,
thou  poet,  labouring  at  the  history  of  the  days,  learn  what
thou  dost  ask,  and  in  thy  mind  understand  my  words.  The
ancients  (for  I  am  a  being  of  the  olden  time)  called  me
Chaos  ;®^ — behold,  of  how  remote  a  period  I  shall  sing  the
transactions.  This  air,  full  of  light,  and  the  other  three
elementary  bodies  which  remain,  fire,  the  waters,  and  the
earth,  were  one  confused  heap.  When  once  this  mass  was
broken  up  by  the  discord  of  its  component  parts,  and,
dissolving,  passed  away  into  new  abodes,  flame  soared  on
high,  the  nearer  place  received  the  air,  and  the  earth  and  sea
settled  in  a  middle  position. Then  I,  who  had  been  but  a

**  Thou,  lookest  upon,  ^c] — Ver.  92,  93. Gower  translates  these  lines,

*  Rehearse  the  reason  why  thou  hast  such  odds.
Of  lookmg  both  ways  more  than  all  the  gods.'

5»  My  tablets.']— Yer.  93.  The  *  tabulae/  or  *  tabellae,'  were  thin  pieces
of  wood,  usually  of  an  oblong  shape,  covered  over  with  war,  upon  which
the  ancients  wrote  with  the  *  stylus,'  or  *  pen'  of  steel.

«>  In  Mm  left  a  Ar^y.]— Ver.  99.  The  staft  and  key  were  the  usual
badges  of  office  of  the  '  janitores,'  or  porters,  among  the  Romans.  Massey
thus  renders  these  lines —

'  In  his  right  hand  a  long  battoon  I  see,
And  in  his  left  he  grasps  a  pond'rous  key.'

**  Called  me  Chaos,'] — ^Ver.  103.  The  name  Chaos  is  derived  either
from  xdtoy  *  to  gape,*  or  x^w,  *  to  pour.'  By  it  was  signified  that  con-
fused heap  of  matter  which  the  ancients  in  general  believed  to  have  existed
from  all  eternity. Ovid,  Metam.  book  i.  ver.  6,  7,  says,

*  Unus  erat  toto  naturae  vultus  in  orbe

Quem  dixere  Chaos :  rudis  indigestaque  moles.'

'  There  was  but  one  aspect  of  nature  throughout  the  whole  world,  which
they  called  chaos :  an  unwrought  and  crude  mass.'  This,  in  their  idea,  the
supreme  power  reduced  to  the  state  of  order  and  harmony  which  prevails
in  the  visible  world.


y  Google


1.1.111—121]  OB, OALEKDAB  OF OYID.  11

mass  and  bulk  without  form,  passed  into  a  shape  and  hmbs
befitting  a  god.  And  even  now,  in  me  that  part  which  is
before,  and  that  which  is  behind,  appears  to  be  the  same,
a  slight  mark  of  my  former  shapeless  fisure.  Hear,  too,
what  is  another  cause  of  the  form  thus  mquired  after  by
thee,  that  thou  mayest  at  the  same  time  learn  this  and
my  office.  Whatever  thou  beholdest  around  thee,  the  sky,
the  sea,  the  air,^  the  earth,  all  these  hare  been  shut  up
and  are  opened  by  my  hand.  In  my  power  alone  is  the
guardianship  of  the  rast  uniTcrse,  and  the  prerogative  of
taming  the  hinge  is  entirely  my  own.  When  it  has  been  my
pleasure  to  send  forth  Peace"  ^m  her  tranquil  habitation,
then  at  liberty  she  treads  her  paths  unobstructed  by  the
restrcnnts  of  war.  The  whole  world  would  be  thrown  into
confusion  in  deadly  bloodshed,  did  not  my  rigid  bolts  confine
imprisoned  warfare.  Together  with  the  gentle  seasons**  I  pre-
side over  the  portals  of  Heaven  ;  through  my  agency  Jupiter
himself  doth  pass**  and  repass.  Thence  am  I  called  Janus,**
to  whom,  when  the  priest  lays  on  the  altar  the  offering  cake

««  *  The  air,'*'] — ^Ver.  117.  *Nubila'  generally  means  *cloads,*  'mist/
'  dondy  sky.' Here,  however,  it  means  the  *air/  or  *  aether.'

"  To  send  forth  Peace.'] — ^Ver.  121.  He  here  personifies  Peace  and
'War,  and  represents  them  as  committed  to  the  .custody  of  Janus.  Some
hive  supposed  that  the  story  of  Janus  is  the  corruption  of  a  tradition  that
an  Italian  chief  named  Janus  constructed  doors  and  locks  for  the  protec-
tion of  the  person  and  of  property,  and  that  from  him  doors  received  the
name  of  *  januae.'

•*  The  gentle  seaeofu,] — ^Ver.  125.  The  *  seasons,'  or  *  hours,'  are  men-
tioned by  Hesiod,  Theog.  903,  as  three  goddesses,  the  daughters  of
Jupiter  or  Zeus,  and  Themis.  He  calls  them  Eunomia  (good  order),
Dik^  (justice),  and  Eir^ne  (peace),  and  represents  them  as  watching
over  the  affiiirs  of  men.  They  appear  to  have  been  originally  considered
as  the  presidents  of  the  three  seasons,  into  which  the  ancient  Greeks
divided  the  year.  The  day  being  similarly  divided,  they  were  regarded  as
|H«siding  over  its  parts  idso ;  and,  when  it  was  afterwards  divided  into
hours,  these  also  were  placed  under  their  charge,  and  named  from  them.
They  presided  over  law,  peace,  and  justice,  and  were  the  guardians  of
order  and  harmony  among  mankind.

*^  JupUer  himself  doth  paes'.] — ^Ver.  126.  It  has  been  suggested,  and
with  some  probability,  that  allusion  is  here  made  to  the  etymology  of  his
naiDe,  as  Cicero  derives  the  name  '  Janus,  or  '  Eanus,'  from  *  Eundo,'  the
act  of  gmng  or  passing.— De  Nat.  Deor.  Book  2.

«  TAeneeam  I  caUed  •/oniM.]— Ver.  127.  Either  from  the  root  men-
tioned in  the  last  note,  or  from  *  janua,'  a  'door'  or  *  gate.'


y  Google


12  THE  riiSTI;  [8.1.128—141.

of  bread  corn*'  and  the  spelt  mixed  with  salt, — (thou  wilt
smile  at  my  epithets,)  for  I,  the  same  deity,  am  at  one  time
called  Patulcius,^  and  at  another  time  Clusius,^  by  the
lips  of  the  sacnficer.  In  good  truth,  that  nide  anti-
quity wished  by  the  changes  of  my  name  to  express  my
different  duties.  My  power  has  now  been  related.  Next
learn  the  reason  of  my  shape,  although  thou  already  perr
ceivest  it,  in  some  degree,  at  least,  from  what  I  have  already
said.  Every  gate  has  two  fronts,  one  on  either  side,  of  which
the  one  looks  out  upon  the  people,  but  the  other  looAs  inward
upon  the  houseUold  shrine  ;^^  and  as  the  gate-keeper  among
you  mortals,  sitting  near  the  threshold  of  the  front  of  the
building,  sees  both  the  goings  out  and  the  comings  in,  so  do  I,
the  door-keeper  of  the  vestibule  of  heaven,  at  the  same  time
look  forth  upon  the  regions  of  the  east  and  the  west."^^  Thou
seeest  the  faces  of  Hecate^  turned  in  three  directions,  that

"  Cake  of  bread  com.]— Ver.  127,  128.  *Libiim  Cereale.'  Lite-
rally, '  the  cake  pertaining  to  Ceres.*  Ceres  was  the  goddess  of  com
and  husbandry,  the  daughter  of  Saturn  and  Ops,  and  the  sister  of  Jupiter.
She  was  especially  worshipped  in  Sicily,  and  at  Eleusis,  in  Attica,  where
the  Eleusianian  mysteries  were  celebrated.  The  *  libum,'  or  cake,  here
mentioned,  was  of  a  peculiar  kind,  offered  exclusively  to  Janus,  and  thence
called  *  Janual.'  The  spelt,  mixed  with  salt,  was  coarsely  ground,  and
then  strewed  over  the  victim.

•8  Patulcius,}—YeT.  129.  From  the  verb  *  pateo,  patere,'  *  to  lie
open.'

®  At  another  time  Clunu8,]—\eT,  130.  Prom  the  verb  *  claudo,
claudere,  clausus,'  *  to  shut.'

'0  The  household  8hrine,]—-Yet,  136.  Literally  *  thekr,'  or,  (the  plural
being  denoted  by  the  singular),  'the  lares.'  It  may  either  mean  literally
the  spot  in  the  house  where  the  *  lar,'  or  *  household  god,'  stood ;  or,
figuratively,  *  the  family,'  as  opposed  to  the  *  populus,*  the  people,  outside.
These  little  idols  were  kept  near  the  hearth,  and  in  the  *  lanuium'  (here
probably  referred  to,)  wMch  was  a  recess  formed  for  that  purpose,  and
in  Which  prayers  were  offered  up  by  the  Romans  on  rising  in  the  morning.

■'i  East  and  the  west.] — ^Ver.  140.  *  Eoas  partes  Hesperiasque.*  Literally
*  the  parts  pertaining  to  the  eastern  star  and  the  western  star.'

'»  The  faces  of  Hecate.}— -Yer.  141.  This  goddess,  who  was  the  patro-
ness of  magic,  is  sometimes  confounded  with  Diana.  She*  was  in-
voked as  potent  to  avert  evil,  and  was  regarded  as  a  beneficent  deity.
Her  triple  statues  were  set  up  before  houses  and  in  places  where  three
ways  met ;  hence  the  name  '  Trivia,'  one  of  her  titles.  This  office  was
conferred  on  her  by  reason  of  a  tradition,  that  when  an  infant  she  was
exposed  by  her  mother  at  such  a  spot.  According  to  Uesiod,  in  his
Theogony,  she  was  the  daughter  of  Coeus  and  Phoebe.


y  Google


B.L141— 166.]  OE, CALEITDAB  OF  OTCD.  13

she  may  watch  the  cross  roads  where  they  are  cut  into  three
ptthways ;  to  me,  too,  it  is  giyen,  in  order  that  I  may  not
lose  time  in  the  bending  of  my  neck,  to  look  two  ways  without
moYing  my  body."  He  had  said  thus  far,  and  by  his  conn-
tenance  acknowledged  that  he  would  not  be  difficult  to  be
moved  by  me,  if  I  wished  to  make  further  inquiries.  I  took
courage,  and,  undismayed,  gaye  thanks  to  the  deity,  and
looking  upon  the  ground,  spoke  a  few  words.  "  Say,  now,
I  pray  thee,  why  the  new  year  b^ins  with  the  frost  of  winter,
which  might  better  haye  been  begun  in  the  spring  ?  Then
aU  tilings  are  blooming,  then  is  &e  youthful  season  pf  the
year,  and  the  young  bud  is  swelling  from  the  teeming
shoot.  Then  ike  tree  is  covered  wi^  the  newly  formed
leaves,  the  com  blade  shoots  from  the  seed  to  the  surface  of
the  ground;  the  birds,  with  their  melodies,  soothe  the  genial  air,
and  the  flocks  gambol  and  disport  in  the  meadows.  Then  is
the  sunshine  refreshing;  and  the  stranger  swallow^  comes
forth,  and  builds  her  fabric  of  clay  beneath  the  lofty  rafter.
Then,  too,  is  the  field  subjected  to  cultivation,'*  and  re-
newed by  the  plough.  This,  in  justice,  should  have  been
called  the  opening  of  the  year."  I  had  made  my  inquiry  in
many  words;  he  causing  no  del^iy^  by  many,  thus  compressed
his  words  into  two  lines.  "  The  winter  solstice'*  is  the  first  day
of  the  new,  and  the  last  of  the  old  sun;  Phoebus'*  and  the
year  take  the  same  period  for  commencement."  After  these
things  I  was  wondering,  and  inquired  why  the  first  day  was
not  exempt  from  the  htigation  of  the  courts,"" "  Understand

''  The  stranger  swallow.'] — ^Ver.157.  The  poet  here  refers  to  the  martin
or  window  swallow,  which  builds  in  the  comer  of  windows,  under  roofs,  or
against  rockyplaces,  and  returns  year  after  year  to  the  situation  it  has  once
adopted,  only  repairing  its  nest.  It  mixes  earth  and  straw,  and  after
moistening  it  with  its  mouth,  sticks  it  against  the  wall  as  a  foundation
for  its  nest.  At  noon  it  ceases  work,  that  the  portion  built  may  dry  by
next  morning,  and  in  about  a  fortnight  its  nest  is  completed.

'*  Subjected  to  cultivation.]— -Yer,  159.  ^  Patitur,*  literally  *  suffers,*
or  *  endores.*  This  term  is  appropriately  used ;  for  the  ground,  before
this  period,  has  been  so  hard,  that  it  would  not,  literally  speaking,  suffer
or  endore  cultivation.  Now,  however,  the  crumbling  soil  is  ready  to  admit
the  plough  and  spade.

'*  The  winter  solstice. ]'^\tt.  163.  *  Bruma.'  The  winter  solstice  is
the  time  when  the  sun  has  completed  his  progress  northward  on  the
ecliptic,  and  begins  to  return.

"  Pkf^ms.] — ^Ver.  164.  Phcebus,  or  *  the  shining,'  was  one  of  the
titles  (tf  ApoUoy  the  god  of  the  sun.

"  LitiffaUon  of  the  courto.]— Ver.  165.  See  Introduction,


y  Google


14  THE  TASTI;  [b.  I.  166— 181.

the  reaaon,"  says  Janus ;  "  I  have  assigned  the  very  earliest
hours  of  the  year  for  the  transaction  of  business,  lest  the
whole  year  mi^t  be  spent  in  idleness  from  a  had  precedent.
For  the  same  reason,  each  person  takes  a  slight  taste  of  his
calling  by  doing  something  on  that  day,  but  does  no  more
than  merely  give  evidence  of  his  ordinary  employment."'*
After  that  I  asked, ''  Why,  although  I  am  propitiating  the
power  of  other  gods,  do  I,  O  Janus,  present  the  frankincense
and  the  wine  to  thee,  the  first  of  all  *"  "  That  by  means  of
me,'*  who  guard  the  threshold,  thou  mayst  have,"  says  he,
'^  access  towards  whatever  deities  thou  mayst  wish."  "But  why
are  congratulatory  expressions^  uttered  in  thy  calends,  and  why
do  we  then  ghre  and  receive  in  return  good  wishes  ?"  Then
the  god,  leaning  on  the  staff  which  his  right  hand  bore,  an-
swers, "Omens  of  the  future  are  wont  to  be  derived  from
beginnings.  To  the  .word  first  spoken,  ye  mortals,  turn  your
timid  ears:  and  the  augur^^  obs^res  the  bird  that  is  first
seen  by  him. Then  the  temples  and  the  earj  of  the  gods

'^  Evidence  of  his  ordinary  employment.] — ^Ver.  170.  It  was  usual  with
the  Romans  for  all  classes  of  people  in  the  calends  of  January,  as  an  omen
of  future  prosperity  and  industry,  and  not  for  lucre,  to  practise  a  little  at
their  respective  'callings.  The  mechanic  did  some  trifling  job,  the  farmer
a  little  work  in  the  fidds,  and  the  pleader  exercised  his  lungs  a  little  in
the  forum.

^*  By  means  of  me.] — ^Ver.  173.  Fahius  Pictor,  an  ancient  Roman  his-
torian, says  that  the  reason  was,  because  Janus  first  taught  the  Latins  to
use  spelt,  *  farra,'  and  wine  in  sacrifice.  Macrobius  says  it  was  because
he  first  erected  temples  to  the  gods  in  Italy.

80  Congratulatory  expressioru.] — Ver.  175.  It  was  the  Roman  custom
on  the  calends  of  January  to  express  good  wishes  and  anxious  prayers  for
the  safety  of  firiends.  Our  practice  of  wishing  each  other  a  happy  new
year,  and  the  Fren<^  custom  of  making  presents  on  that  day,  are,  no
doubt,  derived  from  this  origin.

81  The  augur.] — ^Ver.  180.  The  aug^,  or  diviner  by  birds,  derived  his
name  from  '  avis,'  a  '  bird,'  and  '  gero,'  to  *  carry,'  or  from  some  unknown
Etrurian  origin.  According  to  Plutarch,  .in  his  life  of  Romulus,  they
were  anciently  called  *  auspices,'  and  are  supposed  to  have  been  three  in
number,  one  for  each  tribe.  They  were  confirmed  in  their  oflice  by
Numa,  and  a  fourth  was  afterwards  added,  probably  by  Servius  TuUius,
when  he  divided  the  city  into  four  tribes.  They  derived  the  *  signa,'  or
*  tokens  of  futurity,'  from  five  sources— celestial  phenomena,  (such  as
thunder  and  lightning), — the  singing  and  flight  of  birds, — ^the  quantity  eaten
by  the  sacred  chicken8,--quadrupeds, — and  frt)m  extraordinary  accidents
and  casualties,  called  '  dirae,  or  '  dira.'  Among  the  birds  which  gave  omens
by  the  voice,  *  oscines,'  were  the  raven,  the  crow,  the  cock,  the  owl,  &c.
Those  giving  omens  by  flight,  *  praepetes,'  were  the  eagle,  vulture,  &c


y  Google


B.  I.  181—195.]  OB, CAL£ia)AB  OF  OVID.  15

are  c^n,  no  tongue  utters  unheeded  prayers,  and  all  that
is  said  has  its  due  weight."  Janus  had  concluded,  and  I
made  no  long  silence,  hut  with  my  words  followed  close
on  his  last  accents.  ''What  means,"  said  I,  ''the  pahn-
date,  and  the  shriyelled  dried  fig,  and  the  white  honey  given
as  a  presentf^  in  the  snow-white  jar?""  *'A  fair  omen,"
said  he,  "  is  the  reason,  that  the  like  grateful  flavour  may
attend  upon  our  transactions,  and  that  the  year  may  in
sweetness  go  through  the  course  which  it  has  hegun."  "  I
see,"  said  I,  "why  sweets  are  given  as  presents:  add  the
meaning  of  the  httle  coin^  also  given^  that  no  part  of  thy  fes-
tival may  he  imperfectly  understood  hy  me."  He  smiled  and
said,  "  Uh  !  how  little  are  the  habits  of  thy  own  times  known
to  thee,  who  canst  suppose  that  honey  is  sweeter  than  the
acquisition  of  money.  Scarcely  did  I  see  any  one,  even  when
Saturn  reigned,^  to  whose  spirit  gain  was  not  sweet. With

•*  Cfiven  as  a  present,] — ^Ver.  186. These  new  year's  gifts  were  called

*  strens.'  They  consisted  of  fruit,  occasitHially  covered  with  gold-leaf,
honey,  and  sometimes  a  trifling  piece  of  coin. The  fig  derived  its  name

*  carica,'  from  Caria,  now  Anatolia,  in  Asia  Minor.

"  In  the  stiow-white  Jar.] — ^Ver.  186.  The  hest  honey  was  white,
and  was  especially  given  on  this  day  in  a  white  jar,  as  bearing  the  best
omen.  Honey  was  more  frequently  yellow,  and  the  '  cadus,'  or  jar,  of
red  earthenware,  according  to  Martial,  i.  56.  10.  Pliny  tells  us  that
a  white  *cadus'  was  sometimes  made  from  a  kind  of  whitish  stone.
Gower  senders  these  lines,

'  What  means  dry  figs  and  palm.fruit  I  wot  not.
And  honey  offered  in  a  fine  white  pot.'

"  The  little  coin,] — ^Vcr.  189.  The  *  stips'  was  a  trifling  coin  of  the
sniaHest  value,  given  frequently  to  beggars,  and  sent  as  a  new  year's
present,  merely  by  way  of  good  omen,  and  not  for  any  intrinsic  value'  The
nominative '  stips'  does  not  occur  in  any  of  the  Latin  classics.  According
to  Suetonius,  book  v.  ch.  42,  Augustus  condescended  to  take  new  year's
gifts,  and  to  receive  the  *  stips,'  and  in  such  quantities  that  his  new  year's
presents  must  have  been  not  only  of  good  omen,  but  of  great  value.  *  He
proclaimed  that  he  too  at  the  beginning  of  the  year  would  receive  new'
year's  gifts  (strenae),  and  stood  in  the  vestibule  of  the  temples  on  the
calends  of  January,  to  receive  the  coin  (stipes),  which  a  crowd  of  all
classes  showered  before  him  from  their  hands  and  laps.'  Queen  Eliza-
beth and  James  the  First,  and  others  of  our  sovereigns,  expected  a
new  year's  gifl  (generally  a  piece  of  plate)  from  each  member  of  the
nobility,  and  gave  a  present  in  return,  though  the  balance  of  gain  was
generally  on  the  side  of  the  sovereign.

**  When  Saturn  reigned.] — ^Ver.  193. Saturn,  the  god  of  Time,  was
the  son  of  Uranus  and  Terra,  or  Vesta. When  detkroned  by  his  son


y  Google


16  THE  TASTI;  [b.  I.  195—209.

time,  increased  that  love  of  acquiring,  which  is  now  at  its
height,  and  has  scarcely  a  further  point  to  which  it  can  proceed.
W^th  now  is  more  valued  than  in  the  years  of  the  olden
time,  while  the  people  still  were  poor,  while  Rome  was  but
newly  built,  while  a  little  cottage  received  Quinnus,*^  the
begotten  of  Mars,  and  the  sedge  of  the  stream  afforded
him  a  scanty  pouch.  In  those  times  scarcely  could  Jupi-
ter stand  at  full  length  in  his  narrow  temple,"  and  in
his  right  hand  was  a  thunderbolt  of  clay.^  Then  used
they  to  adorn  the  capitol  with  boughs,  which  now  they  adorn
witiii  gems  ;^  and  the  senator  himself  used  to  tend  lus  own
sheep.  Nor  was  it  then  reckoned  a  disgrace  to  have  enjoyed
undisturbed  slumber  on  the  bed  of  straw,  and  to  have  heaped
the  hay  as  a  pillow  under  one's  head.  The  consul  used  to
give  laws  to  the  people,  the  plough  being  but  just  laid
aside,  and  the  possession  of  a  small  ingot  of  sUver  was
deemed  a  crime.** But  after the Fortune  of  this place

Jupiter,  he  fled  into  Italy,  and  gave  name  toLatium,  because  he  was  con-
cealed there,  from  *  lateo/  to  lie  hid.  Janus,  who  was  the  king  of  Etmria
at  the  time,  received  him  hospitably,  and  Saturn  afterwards  reigned  on
the  Latian  side  of  the  Tiber.  Under  Saturn  was  the  golden  age,  which,
as  Janus  here  tells  us,  was  not  entirely  proof  against  the  charms  of  lucre.

•^  Quirirms.] — Ver.  199.  This  was  a  name  of  Romulus,  as  well  as  an
epithet  of  Janus.  According  to  Macrobius,  in  his  Saturnalia,  it  was  de-
rived from  the  Sabine  word  *  curis,'  *  a  spear,*  and  signified  one  skilled
in  the  use  of  that  weapon.

^  In  his  narrow  temple,'] — ^Ver.  201.  Either  the  temple  of  Jupiter
Feretrius,  built  by  Romans  on  the  Capitol,  which  was  not  sixteen  feet
long,  or  that  built  by  Numa.  However,  the  sitting  posture  was  fre-
quently assigned  to  the  god  by  the  taste  of  the  artist,  and  the  reverential
feelings  of  the  worshippers,  as  an  attitude  of  repose  and  nuyestic  dignity,
irrespectively  of  the  limits  of  the  temple.

«8  A  thunderbolt  of  c/ay.]— Ver.  ?02.  *  Fictile,'  of  balked  clay.  In  the
early  times  the  images  of  the  gods  were  of  baked  clay,  'tarquinius
Priscus  employed  Etrurian  a^ts  to  make  a  Jupiter  of  pottery  for  the
Capitohum ;  and  the  four-horse  chariot,  which  was  placed  on  the  Capi-
tohne  Temple  when  first  built,  was  of  biiked  clay.

89  They  adorn  with  gems,'] — Yer.  203.  Augustus,  at  one  time,  presented
sixteen  thousand  pounds  weight  of  gold  and  jewels  of  an  enormous  value .
to  the  temple  of  Jupiter  Capitolinus,

^  A  crime,]  —  Ver.  208.  There  was  an  ancient  law  which  pro-
hibited the  possession  by  the  same  person  of  more  than  five  pounds  of
silver.  Fabricius,  the  censor,  in  the  year  a.u.c.  478,  expelled  from  the
senate  Cornelius  Rufinus,  who  had  been  dictator  and  twice  consul,  for
haTin^  t^n  poipids'  weight  of  silver  plate  in  his  possession.


y  Google


1.1.  209—224.]  OB, CALBin)AB  OP  OVU).  17

nised  on  high  her  head,  and  Rome  reached  with  her  height"
to  the  gods  ahoTOy  hoth  wealth  increased  and  the  maddening
lost  for  wealth;  and  although  men  possess  yery  much  they  still
desire  more.  They  struggle  to  acquire,  in  order  that  they  may
layish  ;  and  then  to  obtain  again  ^''  that  which  they  have  la-
virfied ;  and  the  very  changes,  from  wealth  to  poverty,  afford
nourishment  to  their  vices.  So  totth  those  whofie  stomach  has
swelled  with  the  suffusion  of  water;  the  more  that  water  that
has  been  drunk,  the  more  is  it  thirsted  for.**  Money  now  is
the  only  thing  prized ;"  wealth^  alone  gives  honours  ;  wealth
gives  friendships :  the  poor  man  every  where  hes  prostrate.
Bat  thou  askest  me  why  the  omen  of  the  smaQ  coin  is  deemed
desirable,  and  why  the  ancient  pieces  of  brass**  are  welcome
to  oiir  hands.  In  olden  times  they  used  to  give  pieces  of
brass ;  at  the  present  day  there  is  a  better  omen  in  gold,  and
the  ancient  coinage  beaten  out  of  the  field,  yields  to  the
new.  Us  deities,  too,  though  we  approve  of  the  temples  of
ancient  fashion,  golden  ones  plcfise  right  well ;  that  grandeur

*^  Reached  with  her  height,]— Yer,  209,  210.  These  two  lines  are  thus
translated  by  Gower: —

*  But  when  proud  fate  this  place's  head  had  reared,
And  Rome's  top-gallant  near  the  gods  appeared/
• ^  To  obtain  again,] — ^Ver.  213. This  reminds  us  of  the  old  proverb,
which  tells  greedy  people  that  *they  cannot  both  eat  theur  cake  and  have  it.'
•^  Is  thirsted  for.] — ^Ver.  216.  The  common  comparison  of  the  state  of
the  avaricious  man  to  that  of  a  person  afflicted  with  the  dropsy.

•*  Money  now  is  the  only  thing  prized.] — ^Ver.  217.  *  In  pretio  pre-
tiom  est/  equivalent  to  our  con^mon  expression,  '  Money  only  makes  the
man.'

•^  Wealth.] — Ver.  217.  '  Census '  literally  means  the  valuation  on  oath

of  the  present  value  of  one's  possessions  for  the  purposes  of  taxation — in

UxA,  the  Roman  return  for  the  income-tax. Hence  it  came  to  signify  the

property  itself.  Perhaps  it  might  be  rendered  by  *  the  reputation  of  wealth/

••  Ancient  pieces  of  brass.] — Ver.  220. The  ancient  pieces'  of  brass

Were  welcome  to  the  hands  of  Romans,  as  commemorating  the  arrival  of

Saturn  in  Italy,  by  the  prow  of  a  ship  on  the  reverse  of  the  coin. These

pieces  were,  doubtless,  the  large  and  heavy  coins  of  copper,  or  rather,

bronze,  and  hence  termed  the  as  or  aes,  which  originally  weighed  1  lb.,

but  were  gradually reduced  till  they  scarcely  exceeded  1  oz.  in  weight.

The  ases  of  the  early  kings  are  supposed  to  have  consisted  merely  of  square

ingots  of  bronze  of  1  lb.  weight  without  impress,  and  Servius  Tullius  is

stated  by  Pb'ny,  to  have  first  placed  the  impress  of  an  ox  on  them. In

^he  early  times  of  the  republic,  they  were  coined  in  a  circular  form,  with

the  types  alluded  to  by  Ovid. The  heaviest  that  have  reached  us  are  about

^J  oz.  in  weirht. These  massive  coins  were  distinpuished  by  the  Romans

^om  the  wnaller  and  more  modem  money,  by  the  title  ttra  gravia,  'heavy

0


y  Google


18  THE  FASTI;  [b.1.  224 — ^242.

is  suited  to  a  divinity.  We  praise  the  olden  times,  but  adopt
the  manners  of  our  own  day ;  yet  the  habits  of  either  age  are
equally  worthy^  to  be  adopted.  He  had  finished  his  instruc-
tions ;  then  once  again,  as  before,  in  mild  accents  I  thus  ad-
dressed the  key-bearing  god: — ''Many  things, indeed,  I  have
learned,  but  why  on  the  brass  coin  is  there  stamped  on  one  side
the  figure  of  a  ship,  and  on  the  other,  a  two-headed /on»  ?'*^
'"Thou  mightst,"  said  he,  ''  recognise  me  in  the  two-fold  form,
had  not  the  very  length  of  time  worn  away  the  workmanship.
The  cause  of  the  ship  inscribed  remains  to  he  told.  In  a  ship,
the  scythe-wielding  God**  having  first  wandered  over  the  whole
world,  came  up  the  Etrurian  river.  ^  I  remember  the  reception
of  Saturn  in  this  land ;  he  had  been  expelled  by  Jupiter  from
the  realms  of  heaven.  Thence  for  a  long  time  did  the  name
of  Saturn^  aUde  with  that  nation ;  the  country  also  was  called
Latium  from  the  god  being  there  latent.  Moreover  pious
posterity  preserved  the  ship  upon  the  brass  coin,  attesting  the
arrival  of  the  god,  their  guest.  I  myself  inhabited  the  soil
along  which,  on  its  left  side,'  ghdes  the  most  gently  flow-
money.'  The  omen  of  the  trntiU  coin,  is,  no  donht,  an  allusion  to  the  silver
and  gold  coins  of  a  later  period;  the  silver  introduced,  in  269  b.c.,  by
coined  pieces  called  denarii  (from  being  of  the  value  of  ten  asses),  and  the
gold,  in  209  b.c.,  in  pieces  of  twenty  denarii.  It  is  probable  that,  afte^
these  epochs,  omens  were  sought  in  preference  from  coins  of  the  more  pre-
cious metals. — See  Bohn*8  Coin  CoUector's  Guide,

^  Equally  worthy.'] — Ver.  226.  As  being  the  most  suitable  to  the
feelings,  and  the  best  adapted  to  the  wants  and  comforts  of  the  people  of
those  respective  times.

»*  A  two-headed  form.'] — ^Ver.  230.  It  has  been  stated  in  note  96,
when  coins  with  these  types  were  probably  first  issued.  They  disappeared
altogether  towards  the  end  of  the  republic,  some  of  the  last,  with  the  an-
cient types  of  the  bifrontal  head  of  Janus  and  the  prow  of  a  ship,  being
those  issued  by  Pompey.  In  these,  one  of  the  profiles  of  Janus  was  made
to  represent  Pompey  himself,  and  the  other  Cneius,  his  father.  Macrobius
relates  that  the  boys  of  ancient  Rome  played  a  game  similar  to  our  modern
toss-hal^nny,  crying  'capita  aut  navim/  'heads  or  ship,'  just  as  our
boys  do  *  heads  or  tails.' — See  BohtCe  Coin  Collector* 8  Guide,

•*  Scythe-wieldinff,] — ^Ver.  234.  Saturn  is  always  represented  Vfith
a  scythe  in  his  hand,  as  emblematical  of  the  ruthless  and  unsparing
power  of  Time.

1  The  Etrurian  nDer.]— Ver.  234.  The  river  Tiber,  which  flowed  with
Etruria  on  its  left,  and  Latium  on  the  right  side,  into  the  fitrurian  sea.

»  The  name  of  Saturn,}— -Y a.  237.  *  Saturnia'  was  one  of  the  old
appellations  of  the  Latian  nation.

*  Along  whose  Wt  Mcftf.]— Ver.  242.  The  Etrurian  bank  of  the  Tiber,
where  the  Janiculom  was  situated.


y  Google


B.L  242—258.]  OB, OALEKDaB  OF  OTID.  19

ing  wave  of  the  sandy  Tiber.  Here,  where  now  Rome  is,  a
forest,  untouched  by  the  axe,  used  to  flourish,  and  this  state  so
mighty  was  a  place  of  pasturage  for  a  few  oxen.  My  place
of  retreat  was  that  hill,  which  this  age,  paying  me  all  adora-
tion, denominates  after  my  name,  and  calls  it  the  Janiculum.^
Then,  too,  was  I  reigning,  when  the  earth  was  fit  to  receive
the  gods,  and  the  divinities  were  interspersed  among  the  abodes
of  men.  Not  as  yet  had  mortal  crime*  driven  Justice  away.*
She  was  the  last  of  the  deities  that  left  the  earth  ;  and  instead
of  fear,  a  sense  of  propriety  used  then  without  any  other
restraint  to  govern  the  people :  it  was  no  difficulty  to  enforce
JQstice  among  the  just.  I  had  no  concern  with  warfare ;  I
used  then  to  have  but  peace  and  the  thresholds  under  my
protection;  and,"  shewing  his  key,  "these,"  says  he,  "are  the
arms  which  I  properly  bear."  The  god  had  closed  his  lips ;
then  thus  I  open  mine,  my  words  eliciting  those  of  the  divi-
nity— "  Since  there  are  so  many  vaulted  archways,^,  why  dost
thou  stand  consecrated  hy  a  statue  in  one  alone,®  here  where

*  The  Janiculum.'] — ^Ver.  246.  The  temple  of  Janus  was  boilt  on  the
'  Janicnlum/  one  of  the  seven  hills  of  Rome.  In  time  a  small  town  arose
roiind  it,  until  the  whole  was  included  in  the  immensity  of  the  city  of
later  times.  From  the  dwellings  of  princes  heing  in  the  early  ages  erected
on  the  summit  of  a  hill,  which  was  called  the  '  arx/  the  residence  itself
subsequently  obtained  the  same  title.  So,  too,  the  baronial  castles  of
the  feudal  times  were,  perched  on  an  eminence  generally  for  the  double
purpose  of  overawing  the  vassals,  and  being  prepared  against  a  surprise  by  the
enemy.  In  later  times  the  Roman  patricians  had  their  palaces  on  the  hills,
and  when  they  mingled  with  the  plebeian  crowd  it  was  said  of  them  that

*  descendebant,'  *  they  came  down.'  Thus,  Horace  Od. — *  descendat  in
campum  petitor.'  Our  word  '  descend'  has  a  similar  meaning,  adapted
in  a  figurative  sense  from  this  latter  use  of  the  Latin  word.

*  Mortal  crime.'] — Ver.  249. *  Facinus  mortale '  may  either  signify

*  deadly  crime,'  or  *  the  crime  of  bloodshed,'  or  *  crime  committed  by
mortals.'

«  Driven  Justice  away.] — ^Ver.  249.  Her  name  was  also  Astraea.
Odd  in  his  Metamorphoses  says, '  Ultima  ccelestum  terras  Astrsea  reUquit,'
'  Astnea  was  the  last  of  the  celestial  deities  to  leave  the  earth.'

^  Faulted  archways.] — ^Ver.  257.  *  Jani,'  covered  passages,  having
a  look-out  on  either  side,  were  so  called  from  Janus.  The  poet  asks
the  ddty  why  he  is  honoured  with  a  statue  in  only  one  'janus,'  or
arched  temple,  when  there  are  so  many  places  in  Rome  named  after  him.
These  passages  were  always  double,  for  the  convenience  of  people  passing
both  ways.

*  In  one  alone.] — ^Ver.  257. According  to  Varro,  this  temple  was  the

*  porta  Janualis,'  or  *  gate  of  Janus,'  built  by  Romulus.  Numa  placed  a
statue  of  Janus  in  the  temple,  which  was  live  cubits  in  height.

C2


y  Google


20  THE  FASTI;  [B.I.  258—277.

thou  hast  a  shrine  adjoining  to  the  two  market  places.^  He,
with  his  hand  stroking  the  heard  that  flowed  down  upon  his
breast,  forthwith  related  the  warfare  of  the  CEbalian  Tatius,**
and  how  the  faithless  guard,^*  captivated  with  the  Sabine  brace-
lets, conducted  Tatius  to  the  approaches  of  the  lofty  citadel.
"  From  that,"  said  he,  "  there  was,  as  there  is  now,  a  steep
path  by  which  you  descend  to  the  yalHes  and  the  markeft
places.  And  now  had  he  reached  the  gate**  whose  resisting
bolts  Juno  the  daughter  of  Saturn  had  insidiously  removed :
when  fearing  to  enter  on  a  contest  with  a  deity  so  power-
ful, 1  slily  put  in  practice  the  resources  of  my  peculiar
art.  *^  I  opened  the  mouths  of  the  fountains,  in  which  kind
of  aid  I  am  distinguished,  and  I  showered  forth  sudden  streams
of  water.  But  first  I  mingled  sulphur  in  the  hot  streamlets,
that  the  boihng  flood  might  obstruct  the  passage  of  Tatius.
When  the  useful  quality  of  this  stream,  after  the  repulse  of
the  Sabines,  was  perceived,  and  the  appearance  which  it
formerly  had  was  restored  to  the  place  now  secure  from  the
enemy,  an  altar  was  erected  to  me,  united  with  a  little
chapel :  this  with  its  flames  consumes  die  spelt  meal  with  the
salt  flwc?  flour  cake  of  sacrifice,^' ^^ "But  why  dost  thou  lie

•  The  two  market-places,'] — ^Ver.  258.  These  were  the  *  Boarium/  or
ox-market,  and  the  *Pi8carimu,'  or  fish-market;

10  The  (Ehalian  ra^iw.]— Ver.  260.  (Ebalos  was  a  Spartan  prince,
the  grandfather  of  Helen.  The  Sabines,  who  are  here  alluded  to,  were
reputed  to  have  been  a  Spartan  colony.  Titus  Tatius  was  the  king  of  the
Sabines  in  their  wars  with  Romulus.

11  The  faithless  guard.'] — ^Ver.  261.  Tarpeia,  the  daughter  of  Tarpeius,
agreed  to  betray  the  Roman  citadel  (of  which  her  father  was  the  com-
mander) for  the  golden  bracielets  worn  by  the  Sabine  warriors.  When  she
had  fulfilled  her  promise,  she  received  the  just  reward  of  her  treachery,  for
each  soldier,  as  he  gave  his  bracelet,  threw  also  his  shield  upon  her,  and  she
was  soon  crushed  to  death  by  the  weight.  This  circumstance  is  comme-
morated on  a  denarius  of  the  family.

12  Reached  the  gate.] — Ver.  265.  It  was  the  *  Porta  viminalis'  that
Juno  on  this  occasion  opened  for  the  admission  of  the  Sabines.  It
was  so  called  from  the  quantity  of  osiers,  *  vimina,*  that  grew  in  the
neighbourhood.

!•»  My  peculiar  art.] — ^Ver.  268.  That  is,  of  opening,  suited  to  my
guardiai!ship  of  all  entrances  and  exits.  These  two  lines  are  translated  by
Gower  :-t-

*  I,  loth  to  thwart  it  with  so  high  a  power,
Did  slily  help  them  with  a  feat  of  our.'
1*  Cake  of  sacrifice.] — ^Ver.  276. These  were  small  cakes  made  in  the
shape  of  fingers  joined  together,  and  laid  in  heaps  for  the  purpose?  pt
sacrifice,  whence  the  name  *  strues,'  from  *  struo,'  *  to  buijd.'  or  *  pile  up.*


y  Google


B.  I.  277—301.]  OB, CALENDAR  OF OVID.  21

concealed**  in  time  of  peace,  and  why  art  thon  revealed,
when  arms  are  taken  up  ?"  There  was  no  delay,  the  cause
of  the  circumstance  inquired  after  was  told  me  in  answer.
"  In  order  that  the  means  of  returning  may  lie  open  in  readi-
ness for  the  people  when  they  have  gone  forth  to  war,  the  whole
of  my  gate  stands  wide  open,  the  bolt  being  removed.  In
times  of  peace  I  bar  my  doors,  that  she  may  by  no  means  be
enabled  to  depart ;  and  imder  the  eway  of  Csesaur's  name  long
shall  I  remain  shut  up."  He  spoke,  and  raising  his  eyes  that
looked  both  before  and  behind,  he  looked  upon  whatever
tliere  was  in  the  whole  world.  There  was  peace :  and  the
Rhine, "  the  occasion  of  thy  triumph,  Grermismicus,  had  now
surrendered  to  thee  its  subservient  streams.  0  Janus,  make
peace  everlasting,  and  them  to  be  the  ministers*^  of  peace,  and
grant  that  the  author  of  this  change  may  not  abandon  his  office.
But,  as  I  was  enabled  to  learn  from  the  list  of  the  festivals,
on  this  day  our  forefathers  consecrated  two  temples."  The
sacred  Island  which  the  river  surrounds  with  its  divided
stream,  received  the  son  of  Phcebus  and  the  nymph  Coronis.^^
Jupiter  occupies  a  share ;  one  place  received  them  both,  and  the
temple  of  the  grandson  is  joined  to  that  of  his  mighty  grandsire.
What  forbids  me,  also,  to  mention  the  stars,  how  each
of  them  rises  and  sets?  That,  too,  was  a  part  of  my
promised  undertaking.  Blessed  spirits  ft?^e  they  to  whom
first  it  was  a  care  to  learn  these  things,  and  to  ascend
to  the  mansions  on  high.  It  is  worthy  of  behef  that  they
raised  their  heads  equally  above  the  vices  and  the  haunts
of  mortals. Neither  lust  nor  wine  enfeebled  their  exalted

**  Lie  concealedJ]—\eT.  277.  AUuding  fo  the  closmg  of  the  temple
of  Janus  in  time  of  peace,  and  the  opening  of  it  in  time  of  war.

**  JTie  Jfhine.] — ^Ver.  286.  He  alludes  to  the  triumph  of  Germanicus
over  the  Catti,  Cherusci,  and  Angrivarii,  a.u.c.  770.

*'  The  ndniaters.'] — ^Ver.  287. Tiberius  and  Germanicus.

*8  Two  temples.'] — ^Ver.  290.  One  to  Jupiter,  consecrated  by  Gains
Servilius,  and  the  other  dedicated  to  .£sculapiu8,  the  son  of  Apollo.

'*  The  nymph  Coroma.] — ^Ver.  291.  .^sculapius  was  the  son  of
Apollo  and  Coronis,  the  daughter  of  Phlegias  and  Leucippus.  She  was
slain  in  a  fit  of  jealousy  by  Apollo,  who  gave  i£sculapius  into  the  charge
of  the  centaur  Chiron;  he  instructed  ffis  charge  in  the  art  of  medicine,  of
which  he  afterwards  became  the  tutelar  divinity.  In  consequence  of  a
)>lagae  at  Rome,  an  embassy  was  sent  to  Epidaurus,  in  Peloponnesus,
where  i£sculapiu8  was  worshipped,  and  one  of  the  serpents  sacred  to  him
WIS  brought  to  Rome,  on  which  the  temple  mentioned  by  the  poet  was
bailt  to  the  god  on  the  *  sacred  Isle'  in  the  Hber.


y  Google


22  THE  FASTI ;  [b.  I.  301—319.

minds,  nor  the  duties  of  the  Forum,  nor  the  toils  of  warfiftre.
Nor  did  giddy  ambition,  nor  glory  overspread  with  artificial
glare,**  nor  the  Graying  for  vast  riches,  disquiet  them.  It
is  they  who  have  brought  the  far  distant  stars  to  our  eyes,  and
have  subjected  the  heaVens  to  their  intellect.  Thus  is  heaven
won,  not  that  Olympus  for  that  purpose  should  bear  Ossa,**
and  the  peak  of  Pdion  touch  the  loftiest  stars.  We,  too,
under  the  guidance  of  these,  will  apportion  out  the  skies,
and  will  assign  their  own  peculiar  days  according  to  the  ap-
pointed constellations.  When,  therefore,  the  third  night  before
the  approaching  nones  shall  come,  and  the  ground  shall  grow
damp,  besprinkled  with  the  dew  of  heaven,  in  vain  will  the
claws  of  the  eight*footed  Crab^  be  sought  for ;  he  has  sunk
headlong  beneath  the  western  waters.  When  the  nones  are
just  arriving,  the  showers  issuing  from  the  black  clouds  will
give  you  indications  as  the  Lyre  rises."

Add  four  days  passed  in  regular  succession,  to  the  nones,
Janus  will  have  to  be  appeased  on  the  Agonalian  day.**  The
aproned priest^  may  perhaps  be  the  origin  of  the  appel-

^^  Artificial  glare.] — Ver.  303.  *Pucu8'  is,  literally,  a  marine  shrub,
or  sea-weed,  red  alkanet,  which  was  used  for  the  purposes  of  dyeing  and
painting.

21  Should  hear  Ossa."] — ^Ver.  307.  Ossa  (now  Kissova),  Pelion  (now
Flesnid),  and  Olympus  which  is  still  called  by  its  ancient  name,  were  high
mountains  in  Thessaly.  He  alludes  to  the  attempt  by  the  giants  O^
and  Ephialtes,  sons  of  Neptune  and  Iphimedeia,  to  scale  heaven  when  they
were  but  nine  years  old,  by  heaping  the  mountains  one  upon  the  other.

22  The  eight-footed  eraft.]— Ver.  313.  Because  on  the  third  day  of
January,  at  sun-rise,  is  the  acronychal  setting  of  the  constellation  Cancer,
the  Crab.  In  the  mythology,  it  is  said  to  have  been  placed  among  the
constellations  by  Juno,  after  it  had  been  crushed  by  the  foot  of  Hercules,
which  it  had  bitten  while  the  hero  was  engaged  in  combat  with  the
Hydra  in  the  Lemaean  marsh.

^  The  Lyre  rises,'] — Ver.  316.  The  cosmical  rising  of  Lyra,  usually
accompanied  with  rain.  This  is  feigned  to  be  the  lyre  on  which  Orpheus
played  when  he  descended  to  the  infernal  regions-.

2*  The  Agonalian  day.]— Ver.  318.  The  festival  of  Janus  called  *  Ago-
nalia,'  or  'Agonia;'  the  meaning  of  which  name  the  poet  proceeds  to
describe.

**  The  aproned  priesW] — Ver.  319.  The  *  minister*  here  mentioned
was  the  *  rex  sacrorum,^  or  *  king  of  the  sacrifices,'  who  was  in  religious
matters  the  representative  of  the  ancient  kings ;  higher  in  rank  than  the
'pontifex  maximus,'  but  inferior  in  power  and  infiuence.  His  duties
were,  to  perform  sacrifice,  to  propitiate  the  deities,  and  to  proclaim  the
festivals.  While  sacrificing,  the  priests  and  their  assistants  used  to  wear
small  aprons.


y  Google


B.  I.  319—338.]  OE, CALXITDJLB  OF  OTID.  23

ktion,  xoideT  the  blow  of  whom  the  yictim  falls  in  honour
of  the  celestial  gods ;  for  he,  when  about  to  stain  with
reeking  gore  the  knives  already  nnsheathed,  always  asks
the  question,  "  Do  I  proceed?"''  Nor  does  he  proceed
nnless  commanded  so  to  do.  Some  think  that  the  day  has
the  naaie  of  Agonal,  i^m  the  act  of  drivings  because  the
sheep  do  not  come  of  their  oumjree  unU  to  the  aacrijice,  but  are
Iriven."  Some  thmk  that  this  festiyal  was  called  "  A^ialia"  ^
by  the  ancients,  although  by  that  deriyation  one  letter  is  re-
BiOTed  from  its  proper  pkce;  or  is  that  day  thus  named
from  the  agony  of  the  sheep,^  because  the  victim  shud-
ders at  the  knives  perceived  by  it  as  they  he  in  the  water  ?^
Some,  too,  think  that  the  day  derived  a  Grecian  e][nthet
from  the  games^^  that  were  wont  to  be  celebrated  in  the
time  of  our  forefathers.  The  ancient  dialect,  too,  called
sheep  by  the  name  of  "  Agonia ;"  and  in  my  opinion  the  last
is  the  true  reason  for  the  name,  and  to  this  extent  that  reason  is
ascertained  for  certain,  that  the  king  of  the  sacred  rites  is  in
duty  bound  to  propitiate  the  divinities  with  the  mate  of  the
fleece-bearing  ewe.  That  sacrifice  which  has  fallen  by  the
light  hand  of  the  victor  is  called  the  victim  :**  when  the  hostile
troops  are  driven  far  away  then  the  sacrifice  is  called  the  host.^
In  days  of  old,  it  was  plain  spelt,  and  the  sparkling  grain  "  of

••  Do  I  proceed  f] — ^Ver.  322.  Ago  ne.  Two  Latin  words,  fonninge.
trisyllable,  and  signifying  *  do  I  ?'  or  *  am  I  to  proceed  V

"  Are  driven,'^ — ^Vcr.  323.  *  Agor*  is  '  to  be  driven,'  whence  this  fimd-
ful  derivation.

^  Agmalia.'i — ^Ver.  325.  From  '  Agmts,'  *  a  lamb,'  as  sheep  were  then
sacrificed.

»  Agonp  of  the  #*eq5.]— Ver.  327.  'Aywvw,  (agonia),  the  Greek  for
'  terror,'  whence  our  word  '  agony ;'  implying  pain,  and,  in  this  instance,
*  extreme  horror.'

*>  In  the  toa^rr.]— Ver.  327.  The  kniyes  placed  in  basins  of  water,
near  the  altar,  for  the  purposes  of  ablution.

'1  From  the  games.'] — ^Ver.  330.  'Ayfivic,  ^  agones,'  is  the  Greek  term
for  public  games  or  contests.

5*  Is  called  the  vietim] — Ver.  335.  So  called,  accfmling  to  the  poet,
as  being  the  offering  sacrificed  by  him  who  is  the  '  victor,'  or  conquering
party,  deriving  its  name  from  *  vinco,'  *  to  conquer.'

^  The  host,'] — ^Ver.  336.  The  sacrifice  is  so  called,  according  to  the
poet,  when  it  is  offered  on  the  retreat  of  the  enemy ;  as  it  would  appear,  in
contradistinction  to  his  death ;  <  hostis'  being  the  Latin  word  for  '  enemy/

w  Sparkling  grain.'] — ^Ver.  338.  Salt  was  held  in  high  esteem  by  the
ancients. The  lares  and  the  salt-cellars  were  with  equal  care  ];daced  oa


y  Google


24  TIEE  FASTI ;  [b.  i.  338—359.

unadulterated  salt  that  had  efficacy  to  render  the  gods  pro-
pitious to  man.  Not  yet  had  the  stranger  ship,  impelled
through  the  waters  of  the  ocean^  imported  &e  myrrh**  that  is
distilled  from  the  bark  in  tear-like  drops.  In  those  days
neither  Euphrates  had  sent  its  firankincense,'^  nor  India  its
zedoary,**  nor  were  the  filaments  of  the  ruddy  crocus  then
known.  The  altar  used  to  send  forth  its  smoke^  contented
with  the  Sabine  herbs,^  and  the  laurel  was  burned  with  no
small  crackling  noise.  If  there  was  any  one  who  could  add
violets  to  the  chaplets  wrought  from  the  flowers  of  the  mea-
dow, that  person  was  a  rich  man.  The  knife  of  the  present
day,  which  opens  the  entrails  of  the  stricken  bull,  had  in
those  times  no  employment  in  the  sacred  rites.  Ceres^  was
the  first  who  took  pleasure  in  the  blood  of  an  animal — namely ,
the  ravenous  sow,  avenging  the  injury  done  to  her  property
by  the  merited  death  of  the  transgressor.  For  in  the  early  part
of  the  spring  she  found  that  the  crops  of  com,  swelling  with
their  young  milky  juice,  were  rooted  up  by  the  snout  of  the
bristly  swine.  From  that  day  the  swine  paid  the  penalty.
You,  he-goat,  warned  by  her  example,  wish  that  you  had  ab-
stained from  the  shoot  of  the  vine.  A  person  looking  upon
him  while  imprinting  his  teeth  upon  the  vine  would  naturally
utter  some  such  expression  as  this,  with  no  silent  indignation.
'  WeU,  gnaw  away  at  the  vine.  Master  goat ;  there  will  still  be
enough  juice  in  it  to  be  sprinkled  upon  your  horns,  when  you
shall  be  standing a victim at the  altar.' Truth attends

their  tables.  The  family  salt-cellar  was  an  heir-loom,  presenred  with  the
greatest  care. Horace,  Odes,  book  2,  Ode  1 6,  mentions  the  salinum.

^  Imported  the  myrrh,'] — ^Ver.  339.  The  myrrh  is  a  shrub  that  either,
with  or  without  an  incision  in  the  baric,  distils  a  sweet  gum  in  tear-like
drops.

*'  FranJtmeense.'] — ^Ver.  341.  This  was  a  perfume  which  was  imported
into  Europe  from  Arabia.

*^  It8  zedoary.'] — Ver.  341.  *  Costum'  was  a  shrub  growing  in
Palestine  and  Syria,  and  prized  for  its  powerful  aromatic  smelT.  The
Euphrates,  running  through  Mesopotamia  and  the  northern  part  of
Arabia  into  the  Persian  Gulf,  bore  thither  for  the  use  of  the  western  world
the  riches  and  spices  of  the  east.

^  The  SoHm  herbs,] — ^Ver.  343.  This  was  the  savin,  a  herb  resembling
the  cypress.  Pliny,  Nat.  Hist,  book  24,  mentions  the  occasional  use  of
it  in  the  place  of  frankincense.

^  Ceres,] — ^Ver.  349.  For  some  account  of  this  goddess  see  note  on
line  127  of  this  book.  •


y  Google


».  I.  359 — 378.]  OB,  CALENDAE  OP  OVID.  25

Mb  words.  Bacchus,**  thy  foe  given  up  to  thee  for  punish-
ment, has  his  horns  sprinkled  with  the  outpoured  wine.**
Her  guilt  was  fatal  to  the  bow — fatal,  too,  was  his  guilt  to
the  goat.  But  what  didst  thm^  0  ox,  and  what  did  ye,  O
gentle  sheep,  to  deserve  a  Uke  fate  ?

Aristseus*^  was  weeping,  because  he  had  seen  that  his  bees,

destroyed  together  with  their  progeny, had deserted the

unfinished honeycombs. Him, then,  while grieving, his

Cserulean  mother**  with  difficulty  consoled,  and  added  to  what

she  had  said  these  last  words :  '*  Cease  thy  tears,  my  son,

Proteus**  will  alleviate  thy  losses,  and  will  teach  thee  in  what

manner  thou  mayst  recover  what  has  been  lost. That  however,

he  may  not  deceive  thee  by  his  transformations,  let  strong

fetters  bind  both  his  hands."*®  The  youth  comes  to  the  prophet,

and  seizing  the  arms  relaxed  in  sleep  of  the  watery  sire,  binds

them  together.  He,  versatile  in  form,  by  his  peculiar  art  changes

his  appearance,  but  afterwards,  overcome  by  the  fetters,  he

retoms  to  his  natural  shape,  and,  raising  his  countenance  all

streaming,  with  his  azure-coloured  beard,  he  said,  "  Dost  thou

seek  to  know  by  what  art  thou  mayst  recover  thy  bees  ?  Bury  in

the  earth  the  carcase  of  a  slaughtered  ox  :  he,  when  so  buned,

**  Bacckus,'\ — ^Ver.  360.  The  god  of  wine  and  revelry.  He  was  the
SOB  of  Jupiter  and  Semele.

**  Tilt  out-poured  ivine."] — Ver.  360.  Alluding  to  the  pouring  the  wine
between  the  horns  of  the  victim  before  it  was  slain.

*5  ^rwtott*.]— Ver.  363.  He  was  son  of  Apollo  and  the  nymph
Gyrene,  and  followed  the  occupation  of  .a  shepherd,  according  to  Virgil,
who,  in  the  fourth  book  of  his  Georgics,  relates  this  story  at  much  greater
leng;th,  and  in  more  poetical  language.

**  His  Carttlean  mother.] — ^Ver.  365.  Or  *of  azure/  or  'light  blue
colour/  Cyrene  being  a  nymph  of  the  waters ;  she  was  daughter  of  the
river  Peneius,  and  is  said  by  Pindar  to  have  given  name  to  the  town  of
Cyrene,  m  Africa.— Pythia  Ode  9.

**  ProteuaJ] — Ver.  367. He  was  a  deity  of  the  sea,  son  of  Oceanus
and  Tethys,  or,  according  to  some  writers,  of  Neptune  and  Phoenice.
Neptune  bestowed  on  him,  as  the  keeper  of  the  ocean  monsters,  the  gift
of  prophecy. He  resided  chiefly  in  the  Carpathian  Sea,  and  on  the  coast
of  Egypt. When  reposing  on  the  shore,  he  was  much  resorted  to  by
persons  wishing  to  test  his  prophetic  powers. Menelaus  and  Hercules  are
said  to  have  consulted  him.
*•  Bind  both  his  Aflmto.]— Ver.  369,  370.  Gower  translates  these  lines—
<  But  bind  him  sure,  in  fetters  strong,  lest  he
With  his  transformed  shapes,  should  coosen  thee.'


y  Google


26  THE  FASTI ;  [b.  I.  378—391.

will  supply  what  thou  now  askest  of  me."  The  shepherd
perfonns  his  commands.  The  swarms  throng  from  the  pu-
trefying ox.  The  death  of  a  single  heing  has  produced  a
thousand  new  lives.  Fate,  too,  demands  the  sheep.  She
in  her  impiety  once  cropped  the  sacred  plants,^^  which  a
pious  old  dame  was  accustomed  to  o&r  to  the  rustic
deities.  What  remains  in  safety,  when  both  the  sheep  that
bear  the  fleece,  and  the  oxen  that  till  the  fields,  resign
their  lives  upon  the  altars  ?  Persia  propitiates  by  the  sacrifice
of  the  horse,  Hyperion**  begirt  widi  rays  of  l^ht,  that  no
sluggish  victim  may  be  offered  to  the  swift  god.  Because  the
hind  was  once  slain  in  honour  of  the  triune  Diana*^  in  the
stead  of  a  virgin,'^  at  the  present  day  she  is  sacrificed  though
not  in  the  stead  of  a  virgin.  I  have  seen  the  Sapseans^^
and  him  who  dwells  near  thy  snows,  0  Heemus,  offer  to
Trivia  the  entrails  of  dogs.
The  ass  too  is  slain  for  the  lustful  guardian^  of  the  fields.

*^  The  tacred  p/onto.]— Ver.  381.  *  Verbense'  here  means  the  seven]
plants  used  in  sacrifice,  such  as  the  laurel,  olive,  myrtle,  cypress,  tamarisk,
and  rose.  In  the  sacred  rites  they  were  either  used  as  garlands  for  the
head,  or  yf&re  borne  in  the  hands  of  suppliants,  or  were  laid  on  the  altars.
Some  legend  is  probably  here  referred  to,  the  particulars  of  which  have
not  come  down  to  us.

"  Hyperion.] — ^Ver.  385.  A  title  of  the  sun  among  the  Greeks.  The
Persians  worshipped  him  by  the  name  of  Mithras.  According  to  some
mythologists,  Hyperion  was  the^'son  of  Uranus  and  Terra  (heaven  and
earth),  and  father  of  the  sun  and  moon  and  of  Aurora,  the  goddess  of  the
morning.

*»  Diana.]— Yer,  387. See  note  to  line  141,  above.

^  In  the  stead  of  a  virgin.]-— Ver.  387.  This  was  Iphigenia,  the
daughter  of  Agamemnon  and  Clytemnestra.  The  Greeks,  when  going
to  Troy,  were  detained  at  Aulis  by  contrary  winds.  Chalcas  declared
that  this  was  through  the  anger  of  Diana  at  the  loss  of  a  favourite  stag,
killed  by  Agamemnon ;  but  that  the  goddess  would  be  appeased  by  the
death  of  the  daughter  of  the  offender.  When  about  to  be  sacrificed,  she
disappeared,  and  a  goat  or  a  hind  was  substituted  for  her,  though  accord-
ing to  some  accounts  she  really  was  slain.

**  The  Sapaans.] — ^Ver.  389.  A  people  of  Thrace,  probably  visited
by  the  poet  when  an  exile  in  that  country.  Dogs  were  sacrificed  to
Diana,  because  by  their  barking  they  scared  away  the  spectres  which  she
summoned  to  earth.  These  sacrifices  took  place  at  Zerinthus,  near  mount
Haemus,  in  Thrace.

*'  Lus^l  guardian.] — Ver.  391.  Priapus,  an  obscene  god,  was  the
son  of  Venus  and  Bacchus  (a  befitting  parentage),  and  was  principally


y  Google


B.I.  391—411.]  OB,  CALUTDAB  07  OTU).  27

The  reason  is  indeed  one  that  must  caose  shame^  but  qtiite
suited  to  the  chiuracter  of  this  divinity. Greece  was  celebrat-
ing the  festiTals  of  ivy-crowned  Bacchus,  which  every  third
winter  brings  round^  at  the  established  period.  The  guardian
deities  of  cool  Lycseum^  came  thither,  and  any  one  besides  that
was  no  enemy  to  mirth ; the  Pans,  and  the  youthful  troop
of  Satyrs  prone  to  lust,  and  the  goddesses"  who  inhabit  the
streams  and  lonely  fields. The  aged  Silenus^  too,  had  ar-
rived upon  his  ass  with  bending  back,  and  Priapus,  who  with
ruddy  aspect  scares  away  the  timorous  birds. They,  having
found  a  grove  well  suited  for  their  merry  carousals,  reclined
on  the  couches  bestrewed  with grass. Bacchus  gave  the
wine; each  had  brought  a  chaplet  for  himself; a  rivulet
rolled  by  its  waters,  to  be  but  sparingly  mixed  .^^ The  Naiad
nymphs  were  there,  some  with  locks  dishevelled  without  the
application  of  the  comb,  others  with  their  hair  arranged  both
with  taste  and  labour. This  one  waits  upon  them  with  her
robe  gathered  up"  above  the  middle  of  the  leg,  another  exposed
as  to  her  breast,  with  the  bosom  of  her  dress  slashed  asunder.
This  one  bares  her  shoulder,  another  sweeps  her  robe  along
the  grass — ^no  sandals  confine  their  delicate  feet. On  this
side  some  are  kindling  the  gentle  flames  of  desire  in  the  Satyrs,

worshipped  at  Lampsacns  in  Mysia,  on  the  Hellespont.  He  presided
over  fields  and  gardens,  which  he  protected  from  thieves  and  blight.

»»  Brings  roicnrf.]— Ver.  394.  This  was  the  •  Trieterica,'  or  ♦  thiee-year
feast.'  It  was  really  an  annual  festival,  but  was  celebrated  with  greater
solemnity  every  third  year,  to  commemorate  the  expedition  of  Bacchus
into  India.  Probably  the  year  aUuded  to  in  the  poem  was  the  ancient  one
of  four  months  only.

M  Cool  Jjycaum,'] — Ver.  395.  A  mountain  in  Arcadia  sacred  to  Pan
and  Jupiter.  The  gods  mentioned  were  the  several  Pans,  fswns,  and
•atyrs,  the  deities  of  Arcadia.

^  The  goddesses."] — Ver.  398. The  Naiads,  or  water.nymt>hs.

M  i^t/emtf.]— Ver.  399.  He  was  the  foster-father  of  Bacchus,  and,
according  to  Pindar,  was  bom  at  Males,  in  Lesbos.  He  had  a  bald  head,
flat  nose,  and  thick  beard.  He  was  the  leader  of  the  Satyrs,  and  was
always  drunk ;  yet,  singularly  enough,  he  was  considered  as  conspicuous
fM'his  wisdom.

^^  'Sparingly  mixed^ — Ver.  404.  Moderate  drinkers  mixed  three  parts
of  water  with  two  of  wine ;  but  the  present  company  preferred  their  liquors
nest,  or  nearly  so. Perhaps  the  ladies  formed  the  exception.

^  Robe  gathered  tijo.]— Ver.  407.  The  female  tunic  reached  the
ancles ;  but  when  expedition  was  required,  it  was  tucked  up  as  far  as  the
mid-leg.


y  Google


28  THE  FASTI;  [b.  i.  411—444.

some  in  thee  who  hast  thy  temples  wreathed  with  pine.  *•  Thee
too,  Silenus,  of  lost  inextinguishable,  they  inflame.  It  k
lost  alone  that  precludes  thee  from  being  aged.  But  the
ruddy  Priapus,  tiie  deity  and  guardian  of  the  gardens,  was
charmed  by  Lotis  above  them  all.  Her  he  desires — her  he
longs  after — ^for  her  alone  he  sighs ;  he  signifies  his  wishes
by  his  nods,^  and  entreats  her  by  signs.  Cold  disdain  is
innate  in  the  fidr,  and  haughtiness  accompanies  beauty.  By
her  countenance,  she  despises  and  she  scorns*^  him.

It  was  night,  and,  wine  producing  slumber,  their  bodies  lay
overpowered  by  drowsiness,  in  various  places.  Lotis,  as  she
was  wearied  with  sport,  lay,  the  most  remote  of  all,  on  the
grassy  earth,  beneath  the  overshadowing  boughs  of  a  maple.
Her  lover  rises,  and,  holding  his  breath,  stealthily  advances  his
silent  footsteps,  treading  on  tiptoe.  When  now  he  had  reached
the  sequestered  resting  place  of  the  nymph,  fair  as  snow,
he  takes  care  lest  the  very  drawing  of  his  breath  should  make
a  noise.  And  now  was  he  poising  his  body  on  the  grass  close
by  her,  yet  still  was  she  sunk  in  deep  sleep.  He  is  oveijoyed,
and  drawing  aside  her  garment  from  her  feet,  began  to  pro-
ceed along  the  blissful  path  to  the  accomplishment  of  his  de-
sires. When,  lo!  braying  with  hoarse  throat,  the  ass  that  bore
Silenus  sent  forth  unseasonable  sounds.  Alarmed,  the  nymph
starts  up,  and  with  her  hands  flings  back  Priapus,  and  then  fly-
ing® arouses  the  whole  grove.  The  god,  already  too  well  prepared
for  his  lustful  attempt,  was  an  object  of  ridicule  to  all  by  the
Hght  of  the  moon.  The  author  of  the  outcry  paid  the  penalty
by  death,  and  hence  is  an  acceptable  victim  to  the  god  of
the  Hellespont.  You,  ye  birds,  charmers  of  the  fields,  a  race
accustomed  to  the  groves,  and  guiltless,  had  been  as  yet  un-
harmed ;  you,  who  build  your  nests,  who  cherish  your  eggs

«»  With  ptM.^—Yer,  412.  i.  e.  Pan.

^  By  his  nod*.]— Ver.  417,  418.  These  lines  remind  us  of  those  of
Milton,  in  L'Allegro : —

*  Quips  and  cranks,  and  wanton  wiles ;
Nods  and  becks,  and  wreathed  smiles.'

«*  And  tneera,} — ^Ver.  420.  As  we  should  say  in  common  parlance,
*  She  turns  up  her  nose  at  him.'

««  Thenjlying.'] — Ver.  436.  The  gods,  in  compassion  for  this  gross
attempt  on  the  nymph,  changed  her  into  the  lotus  tiee.


y  Google


B.  1.  444—458.]  OB, CALE^TPAB  OP  OVID.  29

with  joui  plumage,  and  warble  delightful  straing  from  your
ready  throats.  But  these  things  aviul  you  nothing,  because
you  are  accused  of  the  power  of  utterance,  and  the  gods
beUeve  that  you  disclose  their  purposes.  And  this  chaise  not
entirely  groundless ;  for,  as  each  is  most  familiar  with  the
gods,  at  one  time,  by  yoipr  wings,  at  another,  by  your  voices,
you  give  true  indications.®**  The  race  of  the  fowls,  for  so  long
a  time  secure,  at  length  came  to  be  slain  in  its  turn,  and  the
entrails  of  the  informer  against  them  then  dehghted  the  gods.
For  that  reason,  often  is  the  white  ring-dove,  the  consort,
torn  from  her  mate,  burned  on  the  glowing  hearths.  Nor
does  the  defence  of  the  capitoP  avail,  to  prevent  the  goose
from  affording  its  liver  for  thy  dishes,  0  dainty  daughter  of
Inachus.^  On  the  night  of  this  day,  the  crested  bird  is  slaii^
iQ  honour  of  the  goddess  Night,  ^  because  with  watchful  throat
he  calls  forth  the  warm  day.  In  the  mean  time  the  Dol-
phin,^ a  bright  constellation,  rises  over  the  deep,  and  puts
forth  his  head  from  his  native  waters.

®*  True  indicationt.'] — ^Ver.  447.  The  poet  refers  to  the  omens  obtained
frpm  the  flight  and  voices  of  birds.

•*  Defence  of  the  eapitol.'] — ^Ver.  453.  The  city  of  Rome  being  taken
by  the  Gauls,  Marcus  Manlius,  Yfith  a  body  of  men,  retired  into  the
cxpitolt  which  during  the  night  was  attacked  by  the  enemy.  Their  ap-
proach was  discovered  in  time,  through  the  cackling  of  some  geese  that
were  kept  in  the  temple  of  Juno,  and  from  that  time  geese  were  held
sac^  with  the  Romans.

•*  DaugMer  of  Jnachus.'] — ^Ver.  453,  454.  Inachis,  supposed  to  have
been  the  same  with  lo,  daughter  of  Inachus,  the  river  god.  From  the
epicurean  taste  which  she  is  here  represented  as  indulging,  she  would
probably  have  been  more  than  usually  pleased  by  a  taste  of  the  *  pate  de
foies  gras'  of  the  present  day. (lower  translates  these  lines  thus,

*  Nor  can  the  guarded  eapitol  release
The  goose's  liver  from  choice  Inach's  mess.'

^  Goddess  iVt^A^.]— Ver.  455.  '  Nox,'  *  Night/  vas  one  of  the  most
ancient  deities,  being  a  daughter  of  Chaos.  Py  her  brother  Erebus  she
produced  the  Day  and  the  Light.  She  was  the  mother  of  the  Fates,
Dreams,  Discord,  Deat|i,  Momus,  and  others,  and  ^as  worshipped  in  the
temple  of  Diana  at  Ephiesus.

**  The  Dolphin  ] — Ver.  457.  The  cosmic  rising  of  the  Dolphin  on
the  9th  of  January ;  being  the  fifth  of  the  Ides.  In  Book  ii.  the  poet
relates  bow  the  Dolphin  carried  Arion  to  Taenarus,  when  the  minstre^
had  been  thrown  into  the  sea  by  the  sailors  anxious  to  obtain  his  wealth,
I*'  was  also  said  that  the  Dolphin  was  thus  honoured  for  having  gained
the  band  of  Aniphitrite  for  Neptune.


y  Google


30  THE  FASTI ;  [b.  i.  459—476.

The  next  day  marks  the  winter  by  a  central  line,*'  and  the
pwrt  of  it  which  will  then  remain,  will  be  equal  to  that  whidi
is  past.

The  next  dawn,**  Tithonns  haying  been  left  by  her,  shall
look  upon  the  pontifical  ceremonies  of  the  Arcadian  goddess.
Thee  too,  sister  of  Tumus,**  the  same  day  received  in  thy
temple,  here  where  the  Plain  of  Mars  is  traversed  by  the
aqueduct  of  the  Virgin.  Whence  shall  I  derive  the  causes
and  the  forms  of  these  sacred  rites  ?^  Who  can  guide  my
sails  in  the  midst  of  the  deep.  Instruct  me  thyself,  thou  who
hast  a  name  derived  i^m  song,  and  favour  my  undertaking,
lest  thy  glory  be  lost  in  uncertainty.  Having  an  origin
before  that  bf  the  moon'*  (if  we  credit  it  when  speaking  of
itself),  the  land  derives  its  name  from  the  great  Areas. '^
Here  was  Evander,^  who,  although  on  either  side  of  illustrious
origin,  was  more  noble  in  the  line  of  his  sacred  mother :  who,
as  soon  as  she  had  conceived  the  inspiration  of  heaven  in  her
soul,  used  to  utter  from  her  unerring  lips  verses  redolent  of
the  divinity. She  had  told  her  son  that  troubles  were  im-

«'  Central  fin«.]— Ver.  459.  Ovid  makes  the  10th  of  January  the
middle  day  of  winter. Columella  makes  it  the  4ch  of  that  month.

«®  The  next  dawnJ] — Ver.  461.  Aurora  was  the  goddess  of  the  morning,
and  the  daughter  of  Hyperion,  or  of  Titan.  She  became  enamoured  of
Tithonus,  son  of  Laomedon,  king  of  Troy,  and  took  him  with  her  to
heaven.

«*  Sister  of  Tumua,'] — ^Ver.  463.  Jutuma  was  a  water  nymph,  who,
according  to  VirgU,  i£neid  xii.,  was  beguiled  by  Jupiter,  and  by  him  made
a  goddess  of  the  streams.  Her  temple  stood  in  the  Campus  Martins  at
Rome. She  is  again  mentioned  in  the  next  book.

'0  These  sacred  rites.'] — ^Ver.  465.  The  Carmentalia,  in  honour  of  Car-
menta,  a  goddess  of  Arcadian  origin,  called  also  Nicostrata  and  Themis.
It  is  said  below  by  the  poet,  that  the  name  Carmenta  was  derived  from
her  prophetic  powers,  *  carmen'  being  the  Latin  word  for  *  prophecy,'
which  being  originally  given  in  verse,  the  term  *  carmen '  afterwards
became  applicable  to  all  kinds  of  verse.  Carmenta  had  a  temple  in  the
forum  consecrated  to  her  by  the  Roman  matrons.

^^  Tfiat  of  the  moon,'] — Ver.  469.  Indeed  all  the  Arcadians  styled  them-
selves 7rpo<r<Xi}vot,  *  existing  before  the  moon/  or  *  Praelunites.*  This
circumstance  is  mentioned  in  the  next  book.

'2  Areas,] — ^Ver.  470.  Areas  was  son  of  Jupiter  and  Calisto,  and  trans-
ferred to  heaven  as  a  constellation  after  his  death.  Arcadia,  to  which  he
gave  name,  was  in  the  centre  of  Peloponnesus,  bounded  by  Achaia,  Messenia,
Elis,  and  Argolis.

^^  Evander.] — ^Ver.  471.  He  was  son  of  Carmenta,  by  Mercury,  or,  ac-
cording to  others,  by  Echemus.


y  Google


B.  I.  476—501.]  OK,  C^XEKDAK  OT  OVID.  31

pending  oyer  bim  and  herself,  and  many  things  besides,  which
obtained  their  fulfilment  in  the  lapse  of  time.  For  now  the
jonth  exiled  with  his  mother,  too  true  a  propkete99,  leaves
Arcadia  and  his  Parrhasian^*  home.  To  hhn,  as  he  wept,
his  mother  said,  **  Stay  thy  tears,  my  son,  this  turn  of  fortune
must  be  borne  by  thee  with  manfiu  spirit.  This  was  thy
destiny ;  it  is  no  guilt  of  thy  own  that  has  exiled  thee,  but  a
god ;  thou  hast  been  banished  from  thy  citjr  by  the  anger  of
a  divinity.  Thou  art  now  enduring,  not  the  penalty  of  a
misdeed,  but  the  wrath  of  a  deity;  it  is  some  consolation
that  guilt  does  not  accompany  thy  great  misfortunes.  As  the
mind  of  each  man  is  conscious  of  good  or  evil,  so  does  he  con-
ceive within  his  breast  hope  or  fear,  according  to  his  actions.
Mourn  not  as  though  thou  wert  the  first  that  had  suffered
such  ills ;  the  same  storm  has  borne  down  many  a  mighty
man.  The  same  did  Cadmus"  suffer,  who  long  ago,  when
banished  from  the  Tyrian  shores,  took  up  his  abode,  an  out-
east,  on  the  Aonian  soil.  The  same  did  Tydeus,'*  the  same
did  Pagass^m  Jason^  suffer ;  and  others  besides,  whom  to
enumerate  would  be  a  task  too  tedious.  To  the  brave  man
every  land  is  a  country,  as,  to  the  fishes  the  ocean,  and  as,  to
the  bird  the  whole  extent  of  space  in  the  world  of  air.  Nor
does  bleak  winter  freeze  throughout  the  whole  of  the  year ;
to  thee  too— believe  me — ^the  hours  of  spring  will  yet  eome.*'
Evander,  with  mind  emboldened  by  the  words  of  his  parent,
cuts  the  waves  with  his  bark,  and  reaches  Hesperia.''^

'*  Parrhasian.'] — Ver.  478.  Parrhasia  was  a  town  of  Arcadia.

'*  Cadmus.'] — ^Ver.  490.  Son  of  Agenor,  king  of  Phoenicia.  His  sister
Europa  having  been  carried  off  by  Jupiter,  he  was  sent  in  search  of  her,
and  founded  the  colony  of  Boeotia,  one  of  the  ancient  names  of  which
was  Aonia. These  lines  are  thus  translated  by  Gower : —

'  This  Cadmus,  banished  from  the  Tyrian  Bay,
Endur'd,  then  settled  in  Aonia.'

'•  Tydeu*,'] — ^Ver.  491.  He  was  son  of  (Eneus,  king  of  Calydon.  Having
accidentally  slain  one  of  his  friends,  he  fled  to  the  court  of  Adrastus,  king
of  Argos,  whose  danghter  Deiphyle  he  married.

''  Pagaaaan  Jason  A — Ver.  491.  Pagasse  was  a  sea-port  of  Thessaly.
Jason  was  the  son  of  i£son,  king  of  lolchos,  who  headed  the  expedition
to  Colchis,  in  pursuit  of  the  golden  fleece,  which  he  gained  by  the  aid  of
Medea.

^«  Hesperia.'y—\et.  498.  So  called  from  *  Hesperus,'  or  *  Vesper,*  the
evening  star,  as  Italy  was  to  the  west  of  Greece,  where  it  first  received  that
ippeUttion. Evander  arrived  in  Italy  in  the  reign  d  Faunas.


y  Google


32  THB  TJUSTI ;  [b.  I.  501—521.

And  now,  by  tlie  advice  of  the  skilled  Carmentis,  he  had
directed  his  bieurk  into  the  liyer,  and  was  proceeding  against
the  stream  of  the  Etrurian  current.  She  beholds  the  bank
of  the  river,  to  which  the  fords  of  Terentus^®  are  adjacent,
and  the  cottages  scattered  over  the  lonesome  districts.  And  as
she  was,  with  her  locks  all  dishevelled,  she  stood  before  the  poop,
and  with  stem  look  withheld  the  hand  of  him  who  was  guiding
the  vessel's  course.  Then  stretching  forth  her  arms  towards  the
right  bank  afar,  she  thrice  strikes  the  pine  wood  deck  with  frantic
foot.  Scarcely,  yes,  scarcely,  was  she  restrained  by  the  hand
of  Evander  from  springing  forward,  in  her  haste  to  stand  upon
the  shore.  "  Hail,  gods  of  the  regions  sought  by  us,"  she
said,  "  and  thou  country  that  shalt  hereafter  give  new  gods  to
Heaven,  and  ye  rivers  and  fountains,  which  this  strange  land
enjoys ;  ye  too,  nymphs  of  the  groves,  and  ye  choirs  of  the
Naiads.**  With  favouring  omens  be  ye  seen  by  my  son  and
by  me,  and  may  that  bank  be  trodden  with  an  auspicious  step.
Am  I  deceived  I  or  shall  these  hills  ^^  become  a  vast  city,  and
shall  the  rest  of  the  world  seek  laws  from  this  land  ?  To
these  mountains  the  sway  of  the  whole  earth  is  promised
one  day ;  who  could  suppose  the  place  to  have  so  high  a
destiny?  And  soon  shall  the  Dardanian  ships ^  touch  at
these  shores ;  here  too  shall  a  woman  be  the  cause  ^  of  a  fresh
war. Pallas,®*  my  beloved  grandson,  why  dost  thou  put  on

'•  T€TefntusJ\ — ^Ver.  501.  This  was  a  place  at  the  end  of  the  Campos
Martins,  where  was  a  subterranean  altar  to  the  infernal  deities.

80  The  iVaiarf*.]-— Ver.  512.  The  Naiads  were  deities  who  presided
over  rivers,  springs,  and  fountains.  They  were  represented  as  beauteous
damsels,  naked  to  the  waist,  and  reclining  on  a  vase,  which  was  pouring
forth  a  stream  of  water.  Goats  and  lambs  were  offered  to  them,  with
wine,  oil,  milk,  honey,  fruits,  and  flowers.  Gower  translates  these  lines : —
'  Ye  springs  and  rivers  of  this  lai^d  hospitious.
Ye  fairies  feat,  and  w&ter-nymphs  delicious.'

®*  These  hUls.] — ^Ver.  515.  Alluding  prophetically  to  the  future  desti-
nies of  Rome.  The  heights  on  which  it  was  built  were  the  Palatine,
Gapitoline,  Janiculan,  Cslian,  Esquiline,  Viminal,  and  Quirinal  Hills.

*"^  Dardanian  ahipa.] — ^Ver.  519.  Trojan.  Dardanus  was  the  son  of
Jupiter  and  Electra,  and  was  considered  as  the  founder  of  Troy.  She
alludes  to  the  arrival  of  vEneas  about  sixty  years  after.  His  travels  and
his  arrival  in  Italy,  when  rendered  homeless  by  the  destruction  of  Troy,
form  the  subject  of  the  iEneid  of  Virgil.

^  A  woman  he  the  cause."] — Ver.  520.  Lavinia,  the  daughter  of  Latinus,
was  the  cause  of  the  war  between  iEneas  and  Tumus.  Helen,  the  wife  of
Menelai^s,  had  previously  been  the  cause  of  the  Trojan  war.

8*  Pallas."] — Ver.  621.  Son  of  Evander. He  led  the  auxiliaries  which


y  Google


B.  1. 521—533.]  OB, CALEKDAB  OF  OYID.  33

those  £Bital  arms? Tet  put  them  on; thou  wilt  be  slain
vith  no  mean  avenger  of  thy  death. Troy ! although  con-
quered, thou  ahalt  conquer,  and  overthrown,  thou  shalt  rise
again  ;^  that  same  ruin  shall  overwhelm  the  homes  of  thy
foes.* Bum  Neptunian  Pergamus,"  ye  triumphant  flames;
is  not  that  heap  of  ashes  more  exalted^  than  the  whole  world  ?
Presently  shall  pious  ^neas  bring  hither  the  sacred  relics,
md  his  father,"*  a  second  sacred  charge  ;  receive,  O  Vesta,**  the
gods  of  nium.  The  time  will  come,  when  the  same  person  shall
have  the  charge  of  thee  and  of  the  world  as  well,  and  thy
sacred  rites  ^^  shall  be  performed  by  a  worshipper,  himself  a
god. In  the  hands  of  the  Augusti  shall  remain  the  guardian-
ship of  their  native  country ;  it  is  the  decree  of  heaven  that
this  house  should  hold  the  reins  of  empire. One  thence  sprvngy
the  grandson  and  the  son^  of  a  god, though  he  himself

his  father  supplied  to  ^neas,  and  was  killed  by  Tumus,  who  was  slain  by
iEneas

*^  Shalt  rise  offain."] — Ver.  523.  Namely,  in  Rome,  founded  by  the  de-
scendants of  thy  people.

^  Homes  qf  thy  foes."] — ^Ver.  524.  She  alludes  to  the  future  subjection
of  the  Grecian  provinces  by  Rome.

^  Neptunian  Pergamus.] — Ver.  625.  Pergamus  was  properly  the  Citadel
of  Troy,  but  the  word  is  often  used  by  the  poets  for  the  entire  dty.  Troy
was  called  *  Neptunian,'  because,  when  banished  from  Heaven,  Neptune,
with  Apollo,  assisted  King  Laomedon  in  building  it.

«•  More  exalted.'] — ^Ver.  526.  That  is  to  say,  *  in  its  consequences,'  if
we  consider  with  the  poet  that  the  foundation  of  Rome  was  owing  to  the
destruction  of  Troy.

•»  His  father.]— Ver.  527.  Anchises,  the  father  of  iEneas,  did  not,  ac-
cording to  Virgil  and  other  writers,  reach  Italy,  but  died  in  Sicily;  though
Ovid,  Cato,  Strabo,  and  Dio  Cassius,  say  the  contrary.  The  relics  alluded
to,  are  the  images  of  the  Trojan  gods,  the  sacred  fire  of  Vesta,  and,  accord-
ing to  some  writers,  the  Palladium.

*>  HeeeivefOVesta.^ — Ver.  528.  Vesta  was  the  goddess  of  fire,  and  had
a  temple  in  Rome,  which  was  built  by  Numa.  In  her  sanctuary  was  pre-
served the  Palladium  of  Troy,  and  a  fire  kept  constantly  burning  by  the
Vestal  virgins.  The  goddess  received  her  name  from  the  Gredc  word
'ivria,  a  *  hearth/

•»  Thy  sacred  rites,]  -^Ver.  530.  Julius  Caesar  was  the  *  Pontifex
Maximus,'  or  chief  priest,  and  after  his  death  was  deified.  Allusion  is
here  made  to  him,  or  to  the  Emperor  Augustus,  who  also  received  divine
honours,  and  in  his  lifetime  united  the  imperial  with  the  pontifical
office.

'^  Grandson  and  the  son.] — ^Ver.  533.  Either  one  person,  Tiberius,  the
adopted  son  of  the  god  Augustus,  and  grandson  of  the  god  Julius ;  or
two  persons,  Tiberius,  the  son,  and  Germauicus,  the  grandson  of  Augustus.


y  Google


34  THE  TABTI ;  [b.  i.  533—548.

refuse  it,  shall  bear  with  godlike  mind  the  burden  which  his
father  bore.  And  as  I  shall,  in  times  to  come,  be  conse-
crated in  eyerlasting  shrines,  so  shall  Augusta  Julia''  be  a
new  divinity.

When,  with  such  sayings  as  the^  she  came  down  to  onr
own  times,  her  prophetic  tongue  stopped  short  in  the  yery
midst  of  her  accents.  Landing  from  his  ship,  the  exile  stood
on  the  Latian  herbage ;  happy  the  xs^an^  to  whom  that  coun-
try was  a  {^ace  of  exile  \  ^d  no  long  delay  was  there ;  new
habitations  were  erected,  and  throughout  the  Ausonian  hills
there  was  no  one  greater  than  the  Arcadian.  Lo,  the  club-
bearing  hero  hither  drives  the  kine  of  Erythsea,*^  having
travelled  over  the  length  of  the  vast  world.  And  now  while
the  Teg^eean^  house  is  his  place  of  entertainment,  his  kine  un-
rended  wander  through  the  luxuriant  fields.  It  was  dawn ;
startled  from  his  slumber,  the  Tirynthian'^  guest  perceives  that

Tiberius  alone  is  probably  referred  to,  as  he  did  reign,  which  Germaoicus
did  not ;  and  we  are  told  that  he  affected  to  show  great  reluctance  to  as-
sume the  reins  of  government  on  the  death  of  Augustus.

9»  Augusta  Julia.] — ^Ver.  536.  This  was  Livia  DrusiUa,  daughter  of
L.  Drusus  Calidmitts,  and  wife  of  Tiberius  Nero,  by  whom  she  had  Tiberius
and  Drusus  Germanicus.  Augustus,  in  order  to  marry  her,  divorced  his
wife  Scribonia,  and,  on  his  death,  she  received  the  name  of  Julia  by  virtue
of  his  will.  Though  Ovid  is  here  deifying  the  lady  in  a  spirit  of  anticipa-
tion, and  though  she  survived  him  several  years,  it  actually  was  the  fact,
that  she  was  deified  by  her  grandson  Claudius,  as  Suetonius  and  Tacitus
inform  us.  She  was  a  woman  of  bad  and  unscrupulous  character.
Gower  renders  these  lines : —

*  As  sure  as  altars  me  perpetually
Shall  worship,  Julia  shall  a  goddess  be.'

^  Happy  the  man,} — Ver.  540.  If,  as  is  generally  supposed,  these  lines
were  written  by  Ovid  when  himself  in  banishment,  this  expression  perhaps
was  accompanied  by  a  sigh  for  his  far-distant  home.

*>  EfytJusa.'] — ^Ver.  543.  Erythea  vras  an  island  near  Gades,  now  Cadiz,
in  Spain.  Geryon,  a  three-bodied  monster,  lived  there,  possessing  nu-
merous herds  and  flocks ;  Hercules  destroyed  him,  and  droVe  his  flocks
and  herds  to  Tirynthus.

•*  Tegeteanl. — ^Ver.  545.  Tegesea  was  a  city  of  Arcadia,  near  the  Eurotss.
Gow^  thus  translates  these  lines : —

*  And  being  here  entertained  by  King  Evander,
His  beasts  unkept  about  the  plains  do  vrander.'

•■^  Tirt/nthian,] — ^Ver.  547.  Hercules  vras  said  to  have  been  nursed
and  brought  up  at  Tirynthus,  a  town  of  Argolis,  in  Peloponnesus.


y  Google


B.  1. 548— 565.]  OB, CALEITDAE  OF  OTH).  35

two  bulls  are  missing  from  his  number.  He  seeks  them,  and
he  sees  not  a  trace  of  the  noiseless  theft ;  the  fierce  Cacus  had
dragged  them  backwards  into  his  cave ;  Caous,^  the  dread  and
disgrace  of  the  Aventine  forest,*®  no  slight  curse  to  both
neighbours  and  travellers.  Hideous  was  the  appearance  of
the  creature  ;^  his  strength  was  in  proportion  to  his  bulk,  his
body  was  huge  :  Mulciber*  was  the  sire  of  this  monster,  and
for  his  habitation  there  was  a  mighty  cavern  made  secret  by
long  passages  retreating  within,  a  den  that  could  hardly  be
found  by  the  wild  be^ts  themselves.  Human  heads  and  arms
hang  nailed  over  the  lintels,  and  the  ground  is  quite  blanched,
frightful  with  the  bones  of  men.  'fiie  son  ot  Jove  was  de-
partmg,  a  part  of  his  oxen  having  heen  thus  carelessly  tended
by  him,  when  the  stolen  animals  uttered  a  lowing  with  a
hoarse  voice.  "I  accept  the  recall,"*  he  says  ;  and  tracing  the
sound,  the  avenger  comes  through  the  woods  to  the  accursed
cave.  The  other  had  obstructed  the  approach  by  the  barrier
of  a  mountain  firagment ;  hardly  could  twice  five  yokes  of  oxen
have  moved  that  mass.  The  Hero  strains  with  his  shoulders,
(the  heavens,  I  should  tell  you,  had  once  rested*  on  them),

"  Cacui.l — ^Ver.  551.  Fabled  to  have  been  the  son  of  Vulcan  and  Me-
dusa. According  to  some  accounts,  he  was  a  dishonest  servant  of  Evander.

^  AvefUine  forest.'] — Ver.  551.  The  Aventine  was  the  most  extensive
of  the  Roman  hills,  and  was  called  by  that  name  after  an  Alban  lung,
who  was  buried  upon  it.  It  was  called  Murcius,  from  Murcia,  the  goddess
of  sleep,  who  had  a  temple  there,  and  Remonius,  from  Remus,  who  wished
to  found  the  Roman  city  there.

*  Of  the  creature.] — Ver.  553.  *  Viro*  signifies  literaBy,  either  *  the
man,'  or  the  *  hero ;'  and  Cacus,  by  birth,  belonged  to  the  class  of  heroes
or  demigods.  But  inasmuch  as  he  does  not  seem  to  have  been  worthy  of
the  name,  according  to  our  conception  of  its  import  and  as,  by  reason
of  his  birth,  he  could  not  be  called  a  man,  the  appellation  used  in  the  text
seems  to  be  the  most  approp^te.

^  Mulciber.} — ^Ver.  554.  This  was  one  of  the  names  of  Vulcan,  derived
from  '  mulceo/  *  to  soften  ,'  because,  by  his  art,  he  softened  iron ;  being
the  god  of  fire  and  the  patron  of  blacksmiths.  He  was  the  son  of  Juno,
and  the  husband  of  Venus.

^  The  recall.]^ — ^Ver.  561.  To  be  called  back  when  setting  out  on  a
journey  was  generally  considered  a  bad  omen.  H^ules,  however,  here
thought  it  a  good  one.

*  Had  once  rested.'} — Ver.  565.  He  reheved  Atlas,  who  supported  the
heavens,  that  he  might  go  and  pluck  the  golden  fruit  of  the  Hesperides  for
him.  On  his  return  with  the  apples,  Hercules  requested  Atlas  to  hold  the
load  for  a  moment  while  he  made  a  pad  fw  his  head.  Atlas  resiuned  the


y  Google


36  THE  FASTI ;  [b.  I.  566->587.

and  moving  it  dislodges  the  mighty  weight.  As  soon  as  it
was  uptom,  the  crash  startled  the  yery  sky,  and  the  earth  sank
down,  struck  by  the  weight  of  the  mass.  Cacus  begins  the  at-
tack hand  to  hand,  and  fiercely  maintains  the  combat  with  stones
and  stakes ;  and  when  he  fails  in  the  use  of  these  resources,
with  but  Httle  courage  left,  he  resorts  to  the  arts  of  his
father,  and  yomits  forth  flames  firom  his  resounding  throat.
Often  as  he  blows  them  forth,  you  would  believe  that
Typhoeus'  is  breathing,  and  that  the  rapid  flash  is  hurled
ftx)m  the  flres  of  MtnsL.  Alcides  grapples  vnth  him,  and  his
trebly  knotted  club,  swung  back  thr^e  or  four  times,  was  planted
full  upon  the  face*  of  him  opposing.  He  falls,  and  belches  forth
smoke  mingled  with  blood ;  and  dying,  with  his  broad  chest,  he
beats  the  ground.  Of  those  bulls,  the  conqueror  offers  one  to
thee,  0  Jupiter,  and  invites  Evander  and  the  inhabitants  of  the
country  ;  he  builds  an  altar  to  himself,  which  is  styled  "  the
Greatest,"  in  the  spot'  where  a  part  of  the  city  has  its  name
derived  from  an  ox.®  And  now  the  mother  of  Evander  is  not
silent  on  the  fact,  that  the  time  is  near  at  hand  when  the  earth
shaU.  have  si^ciently  enjoyed  the  presence  of  her  own  Her-
cules. But,  as  in  her  life  she  was  most  pleasing  to  the  gods,
so,  now  herself  a  goddess,  the  blessed  prophetess  possesses
this  day  as  her  own  in  the  month  of  Janus.

burden,  and  Hercules  forthwith  walked  away  with  the  apples.  The  story
bears  some  aUusion,  doubtless,  to  the  fact,  that  Atlas  was  one  of  the
first  to  give  some  knowledge  of  astronomy,  and  perhaps  geography.

^  Tpphceus.] — Ver.  575.  A  giant  called  also  Typhon,  son  of  Tartarus
and  Terra.  Flames  darted  from  his  mouth  and  eyes,  and  he  had  a  hundred
heads,  like  those  of  a  dragon.  Waging  war  upon  the  gods,  he  so
frightened  them,  that  they  fled  in  the  shape  of  various  animals.  Jupiter
at  length  conquered  him  by  his  thunderbolts,  and  placed  him  under  iEtna,
a  volcanic  mountain  of  Sicily.

®  Upon  the  face.'] — Ver.  575,  6. Gower  renders  these  lines  thus : —

*  Alcides  drives  on,  and,  with  knotty  bat.
Three  or  four  times  doth  dash  him  o*er  the  pate.'

'  .*  The  Greatest.*]— Ver.  581.  This  alfar,  according  to  Ldvy,  and
Dionysius,  was  built  by  Evander  in  honour  of  Hercules,  and  not  by  Her-
cules himself.  According  to  them,  Carmenta  suggested  the  dedication,
and  the  priests  who  superintended  the  sacred  rites  were  the  Potitii  and
the  Pinarii,  two  illustrious  families  of  the  neighbourhood.

^  From  an  ox.] — Ver.  582.  'The  Forum  Boarium,'  or  ox-market,  called
so  from  '  bos,' '  an  ox,'  and  applied  to  that  use  on  account  of  the  sacrifice
there  offered  by  Hercules,  as  mentioned  in  the  text.


y  Google


B.I.587— W8.]  OB, OALSSTDAJEt,  OF  OVU).  ^7

On  the  Ides,  the  undefiled  priest  in  the  temple  of  /upiter,
offers  on  the  fliunes  the  entrails  of  a  wether ;  then  every  province
was  restored  to  our  people^"  and  thy  grandsire  was  called  by  the
title  of  Angostos.  Pass  in  review  the  waxen  images'  as  they  are
distributed  througli  tbe  halls  of  the  ennobled ;  titles  so  great
&8  bis  never  fell  to  tbe  lot  of  any  one  man.  Africa  calls  her
conqueror^^  after  herself ;  another  hero  in  his  title  records  the
subjection  of  the  Isaurian  power,^^  another  the  subjection  of
the  Cretans. ^^  The  Numidians  ^  render  one  man  titled,  Mes-
sana^^  makes  another  ffreat  in  story — another  has  derived  his
distinction  from  the  city  of  Numantia."  Germany  gave  to
Drusus"  both  death  and  a  title. Ah  me !  how  short-lived  was

•  Restored  to  our  peopfe.]— Ver.  589.  On  the  Ides  of  January,  b.c.
27,  and  A.n.c.  726,  Augustus  offered  to  resign  bis  power.  Being  pressed
to  retain  it,  he  consented,  on  condition  of  handing  over  the  tranquil  pro-
mces  to  the  people,  to  retain  the  unsettled  ones  and  the  army,  under  his
entire  control.  The. senate,  nominally,  at  least,  took  the  management
of  an  the  tranquil  provinces,  and  to  this  fact  allusion  is  here  made.
Odarius  on  this  occasion  received  the  title  of  Augustus.

'  The  waxen  images.'] — Ver.  591.  These  waxen  images  represented
those  persons  who  had  the  privilege  of  using  them.  Those  who  were
called  *  nobiles,'  having  filled  the  office  of  Consul,  Pnetor,  Censor,  or  Curule
MMtf  had  this  privilege,  which  was  called  *  jus  imaginum,'  and  they  were
kept  with  great  care  by  their  posterity,  and  carried  before  them  at  their
Amerals.  They  were  painted  busts  as  far  as  the  shoulders,  made  in  wax ;  and
they  were  placed  in  the  *  atria,'  or  halls,  carefully  enclosed  in  wooden  cases,
supplying  much  the  same  place  as  our  family  pictures.  Titles  and
inscriptions  were  written  below  them,  describing  the  honours  and
achievements  of  the  persons  thereby  represented.

*®  Colli  her  conqueror.'] — Ver.  593.  The  Ronians  occasionally  took
an  additional  name, '  agnomen,'  or  *  cognomen,*  from  some  illustrious  deed
or  great  event.  P.  Cornelius  Scipio,  after  his  victory  over  Syphax,  king
of  Numidia,  in  Africa,  received  the  cognomen  of  Africanus.

"  Isaurian  power.] — Ver.  593.  Publius  Servilius,  the  pro-consul  of
Asia,  conquered  the  Isaurii,  a  people  near  mount  Taurus.  He  received  a
trimnph,  and  was  honoured  with  the  *  agnomen'  of  Isauricus.

"  The  Cretans.] — ^Ver.  594.  Q.  Metellus  was  sumamed  Creticur,
from  the  island  of  Crete,  now  Candia,  which  he  subdued.

**  The  Numidians,] — Ver.  595.  Q.  Caedlius  Metellus  conquered  the
Numidians,  under  their  king  Jugurtha ;  whence  his  title  *  Numidicus.'

^*  Mesaana.] — Ver.  595.  '  Messana,'  or  *  Messala,'  in  Sicily,  was  con-
quered by  Valerius  Corvinus  Maximus,  who  assumed  the  agnomen  of
'Messala.'

"  Numantia.] — ^Ver.  596.  A  tower  in  Spain,  which,  after  a  fourteen
years'  war,  was  destroyed  by  the  Romans  under  Scipio  ^milianus,  thencfe
called  Numantinus,  a.u.c.  622.

*•  Drttwi*.]— Ver.  597. See  note  online  3  above.


y  Google


38  THX  FASTI ;  [b.  i.  598—612.

that  heroic  career !  Were  Csesar  to  seek  his  names  from  the
conquered,  he  would  have  to  assume  as  many  in  number  as
the  vast  world  contains  nations.  Some  celebrated  by  one
circumstance  derive  their  titles  therefram^—for  instance,  the
title  gained  from  a  breast-chain"  won,  or  the  assistance  af-
forded by  a  raven. ^"  O  thou  entitled  *  Great,' ^*  thy  title  is  the
fiill  measure  of  thy  achievements;  but  he  who  overcame
thee  was  too  great  for  any  title.  And  there  is  no  grada-
tion of  epithet  beyond  the  Fabii  ;^  that  house  was  entitled
'  the  greatest,'  for  their  services.  But  yet  all  these  are  rendered
illustrious  by  honours  merely  human ;  he,  however,  has  a  title
in  common  with  supreme  Jove.  Our  forefathers  style  the
sacred  rites  *  august ;'  *^  the  temples  are  called  '  august'  when
consecrated  in  due  form  by  the  hand  of  the  Pontiffs.  Augury
too  is  derived  from  the  source  of  this  word,**  and  whatsoever

^"^  Br&ut'fhwn^ — Ver.  601.  Titus  Manlius  conquered  a  gigantic
Gaul  in  single  combat,  and  stripping  him  of  his  collar,  or  breast-chain,

*  torques,'  obtained  the  title  of  Torquatus  from  the  circumstance.

'^^  By  a  ratjcn.] — Ver.  602.  Marcus  Valerius,  a  military  tribune  under
Camillus,  fighting  with  a  champion  of  the  Senones  in  single  combat,  was
aided  by  a  raven,  which,  attacking  his  enemy  in  the  face  with  beak  and
claws,  enabled  him  to  gain  an  easy  victory.  From  '  conrus,'  *  a  raven,'  he
obtained  the  surname  *■  Gorvinus.'

^'  EntUled  *  G^reo^.']— Ver.  603.  Gneius  Pompeius,  sumamed  'Magnus,'
or  *  the  Great,'  from  his  great  successes.  He  was  son  of  Pompeius  Strabo,
who. was  distinguished  in  the  Italic  war.  He  is  generally  cdled  Pompey
the  Great,  by  an  adaptation  of  his  name  to  our  ideas  of  euphony.  He  was
conquered  by  Giesar  st  Pharsalia,  and  was  treacherously  stain.

^  The  /Vz&ii.]— Ver.  605.  Q.  Fabius  Rutilianus,  according  to  Livy,
book  ix.  c.  46,  for  his  efforts  in  restoring  concord,  and  lessening  the  power
of  the  populace  during  dvic  elections,  received  the  surname  of  *  Maximus,'
or  *  Greatest,'  as  a  benefactor  to  his  country,  which  name  his  descendants
bore.  According  to  the  genealogists,  our  gracious  Queen  is  a  descendant
of  the  Fabii,  and,  if  so,  she  has,  perhaps,  a  double  claim  to  the  name  of

*  Maxima.'  In  the  next  book  Ovid  mentions  the  tradition  that  the  Fabii
were  descended  from  Hercules.

^^  AuffUit.] — ^Ver.  609.  He  seems  to  imply  that  the  word  *  Augustus '  is
derived  from  the  same  root,  *  augurium,'  *  an  omen,'  as  though  'consecrated
by  augury,'  or  *omen,'  or  'understood  by  means  of  the  birds.'  This  name,
an  epithet  of  divinity,  was  considered  beyond  any  human  title.  The
Greeks  translated  it  by  ffipdaroi:  from  <rcj3a», '  to  worship.'

^  Source  qf  this  word."] — ^Ver.  611.  The  ppet  seems  to  mean,  that
'  augurium '  and  '  augustus '  come  from  one  origin,  connected  with  '  avis,'
'  a  bird,'  and  perhaps, '  gero,' '  to  bear.'  He  also  appears  obscurely  to  hint.


y  Google


B  1. 612— 628.]  OB, OALBNDAE  Or  OTID.  39

Jupiter  blesses  with  increase  by  his  aid.  May  he  increase
the  sway  of  our  chief,  may  he  increase  his  years ;  and,  Caesar,
long  may  the  chaplet  of  oak-leaves^  shade  thy  doors.  The  gods
being  propitious,  may  the  inheritor  of  a  title  so  illustrious
take  upon  himself  the  burden  of  the  world  with  the  same
auffluees  that  his  father  did.

When  the  third  Titan^  shall  look  back  upon  the  by-gone
Ides,  there  will  be  a  repetition  of  the  sacred  rites  of  the
Parrhasian  goddess.  For  in  former  days,  before  the  circum"
stances  to  which  I  allitde,  covered  chariots  used  to  carry  the
Ausonian  matrons  ;  (these,  too,  I  beheve  to  have  been  named^
after  the  parent  of  Evander.)  In  after-times  this  honour
being  withdrawn  from  them,  each  matron  formed  the  de-
tonnination  by  no  issue  to  renew  the  image  of  her  hated
lord ;  and  that  she  might  yield  no  offspring,  reckless,  with
secret  blows^  she  was  in  the  habit  of  loosening  from  her
womb  the  growing  burden.  They  say  that  the  senate  repri-
manded the  matrons  who  had  dared  to  perpetrate  these  in-
human deeds,  but  that  nevertheless  they  restored  the  privilege
that  had  been  taken  from  them.  And  they  now  order  two
sets  of  festivals  to  be  kept  in  honour  of  the  Tegeean  mother,

that  *augeo/  *to  increase,*  is  derived  from  the  same  source,  per.
baps  meaning  that  *'  increase '  was  portended  by,  and  the  necessary  con-
sequence of,  good  omens.  The  612th  line  is  of  somewhat  obscure  sig-
nification. *

*  Chaplet  of  oak-leavea."] — Ver.  614.  This  was  the  civic  crown,  and
^f^  presented  to  him  who  had  saved  the  life  of  a  Roman  citizen.  When
the  senate  decreed  the  title  of  Augustus  to  Octavius,  they  ordered,  in
their  adulation,  that  a  civic  crown  should  be  suspended  from  his  house,
between  two  laurel  branches  which  were  set  on  either  side  of  his  gate.

**  ri/an.]— Ver.  617.  An  epithet  of  the  sun.  The  Cannentalia  now
return,  not  in  honour  oi  Carmenta,  but  of  her  two  sisters,  Porrima  and
Postverta.

^  To  have  been  named,] — ^Ver.  620.  He  suggests  a  silly  derivation  of
'carpentum,'  'a  chariot,*  from  the  name  of  Carmenta.  The  Roman
matrons  received  the  privilege  of  the  chariot  for  their  generosity  after  the
capture  of  the  city  of  Veii,  when  they  contributed  their  jewels  to  aid
Camfllus  in  performing  his  vow  to  ApoUo.

2»  With  secret  Woip5.]— Ver.  622-3.  These  lines  are  thus  rendered
by  Gower : —

*  And  to  prevent  her  embryon,  every  mother
Forced  from  her  womb  by  some  close  means  or  ether.'


y  Google


40  THE  TASn ;  [b.  I.  628—643.

both  for  the  boys  and  the  girls.^  It  is  not  allowed  to  kruig
within  her  holy  place  any  thing  made  of  hide,*^  that  anb^
stances  depriyed  of  life,  by  dying  a  natural  deaths  may  not
defile  the  unpolluted  heajrth.  If  you  are  one  who  have  any
taste  for  ancient  ceremonies,  stand  by  the  priest  who  is  pray-
ing ;  you  will  then  catch  names  which  were  unknown  to  you
before.'*  Porrima  and  Postverta  are  bein  propitiated,  eidier
thy  sisters,  O  Maenalian  nymph,  or  companions  of  thy  exile.
The  one  is  beheved  to  have  sung  of  that  which  was  long  past,*
the  other  to  have  prophecied  what  would  happen  hereafter  in
the  revolution  of  time.

Fair  Concord,'*  the  succeeding  day  placed  in  thee  in  a  snow^
white  shrine,  where  elevated  Moneta"  raises  her  steps  on
high :  now  with  ease  wilt  thou  look  down  upon  the  Latian
crowd ;  now  have  the  august  hands  of  Ccesar  replaced  thee.

Furius,  the  conqueror  of  the  Etrurian  people,  vowed  the
ancient  temple,  and  long  since  discharged  die  obligations
of  his  vow. llie  occasion  was,  that  the  commonalty  having

*'  Boys  and  the  girl8.'\ — Ver.  628.  By  way  of  expiation  for  the
children  of  both  sexes  that  had  been  so  made  away  with.

*®  Made  qf  hide^ — ^Ver.  629.  It  was  forbidden  to  bring  leather  arti-
cles not  only  into  this  temple,  but  all  others.  At  the  same  time  the  rule
was  confined  to  the  skins  of  animals  which  had  died  a  natural  death.  The
priests  were  allowed  to  wear  leather  sandals,  made  £rom  the  hides  of
beasts  that  had  been  killed  by  them  for  sacrifice.

^  Unknoum  to  you  before,'] — Ver.  632.  He  seems  to  imply  that  these
deities,  Porrima  and  Postverta,  were  but  little  known,  and  the  origin  of
their  worship  little  enquired  into.  Porrima  is  so  called  only  in  this  place,
and  by  Servius  (on  the  i£neid.  Book  viii.  line  336).  Macrobius  (Sat.
i.  7)  calls  her  'Antevorta;'  and  Aulus  Grellius  (Attic  Nights,  Book  xvi.  6),
*  Prosa,'  or  'Prorsa.'  The  name  of  the  first  signifies  'turning,'  or  'looking
before;'  of  the  other,  'looking  behind.'  Though  the  poet  does  not  say  so,
from  what  we  learn  from  A.  Gellius,  there  is  no  doubt  that  they  Were
obstetrical  deities,  to  be  invoked  against  the  perils  of  difilcult  partu-
rition.

*°  Long  past,"] — Ver.  635.  *Porro'  generally  signifies  'the  future;'
but  its  original  meaning  might  have  been  '  afar  off,'  in  either  sense.

2*  Fair  Concord.]— Ver,  637-39.  He  says  that  on  the  following  day,
the  17th  of  the  calends  of  February,  the  most  ancient  of  the  temples  of
the  goddess  of  Peace  has  been  vowed  by  Furius  Camillus,  the  Roman
general,  when  he  had  conquered  the  Veienses,  a  people  of  Etruria.

3»  Afone/a.]— Ver.  638.  The  temple  of  Juno  Moneta  stood  in  the
Capitol :  a  flight  of  one  hundred  steps  led  to  it  from  the  temple  of  Con-
cord. It  was  the  Mint,  or  place  of  coinage.


y  Google


B.  1. 643— €54.]  OB, CALEimAR  or  OVID.  41

taken  np  arms^  had  seceded"  from  the  senators,  and  Rome
lier8elf  was  in  dread  of  her  own  strength.  The  late  occasion
is  a  more  happy**  one ;  (Germany,  venerated  chief,  extends
her  dishevelled  locks,**  vanquished  under  thy  auspices.  Thence
it  is  that  thou  hast  offered^  the  first  fruits  of  a  nation,  and
hast  constructed  a  temple  to  the  goddess,  the  peculiar  ohject  of
thy  veneration.  This,  thy  ancestress*'  has  endowed  both  with
property  and  with  its  altar,  the  only  woman  found  worthy  of
the  couch  of  our  great  Jove.

When  this  festival  shall  have  passed  by,  then,  0  Phoebus,
Capricorn  being  left,  thou  wilt  run  thy  course  through  the
constellation  of  the  youth  that  carries  the  water.**

When  the  seventh  Orient  iun  from  this  shall  have  plunged  him-
self into  the  waves,  then  shall  no  Lyre**  be  gUttermg  through-

**  Had  seceded,'] — Ver.  643.  The  dissension  of  the  patrician  and
plebeiaQ  orders  respecting  the  election  of  the  consuls  ended  in  the  election
of  one  plebeian  consul,  Lucius  Sextus,  a.u.c.  328.  This  arrangement
was  brought  about  by  Camillus,  in  his  fifth  dictatorship.

**  A  more  happy  one.']  — Ver.  645.  This  is  a  compliment  to  Tibe-
rius. The  first  temple  was  b^lt  in  consequence  of  dvil  commotion ;  the
second  on  the  conquest  of  Germany.

**  Her  dishevelled  locks.] — Ver.  646.  It  was  the  custom  to  shave  the
heads  of  captives.  Ovid  may  here  be  speaking  figuratively,  or  perhaps
literally.  The  hair  of  Germany  was  much  valued  by  the  Roman  ladies
for  midclng  false  tresses ;  and  perhaps  a  supply  of  hair  for  the  wig-makers
'^^as  exacted  from  the  conquered  people.  Gower's  translation  of  these
lines  is,

*  Brave  prince,  thy  thundering  knocks
Made  Germany  cut  short  her  dangling  locks.'

*•  Hast  offered.] — Ver.  647.  Tiberius  repulsed  the  Germans,  and
conquered  Illyrium.  On  his  triumph  he  entertained  the  people  at  1000
tables,  and  gave  to  each  man  300  sestertii.  The  poet  may  here  aUude  to
this,  or  more  probably  to  the  ofifering  ojf  the  first-fruits  of  conquest  to  the
deities,  and  especially  to  the  rebuilding  of  the  temple  of  Concord  by
Tiberias.

•^  Ancestress.] — ^Ver.  649.  Livia,  the  mother  of  Tiberius,  and  the
grandmother  of  Germanicus.

w  That  carries  the  water.]-~VtT.  652.  On  the  16th  of  the  calends  of
Fdnnary  the  sun  leaves  the  constellation  of  Capricorn,  and  enters  that
of  Aquarius,  *  the  Water-bearer.*  Ganymede,  the  cup-bearer  of  Jupiter,
is  said  by  Ovid  to  have  been  translated  to  this  constellation.  Govrer
transUtes  these  lines,

« These  things  thus  past,  Sol  leaving  Capricorn,
His  race-horse  to  the  water-boy  doth  turn.'

»  No  Lyre  ]— Ver.  654.  On  the  10th  of  the  calends  of  February  the
Lyre  sets  heliacally.


y  Google


42  THE  FiJTI ;  [b.  I.  654—672.

out  tlie  whole  heayens. After  the  setting  of  this  constelhu
*  tion,  at  the  approach  of  night,  the  fire  which  twinkles*"  in  the
centre  of  the  lion's  hreast  shall  he  plunged  into  the  deep.

Three  or  four  times  had  I  turned*^  oyer  the  calendar  that
marks  out  the  seasons  of  observance,  and  yet  no  Sementiye
hoHday "  was  found  by  me ;  when  the  Muse  (for  she  perceiyed
my  difficulty)  says,  "  This  festiyal  is  announced  by  proclama-
tion ;  why  dost  thou  seek  from  the  calendar  to  find  a  moyeable
feast  I  And  yet,  although  the  day  of  the  festival  is  unfixed,
the  season  is  fixed;  it  is  when  the  ground  is  impregnated
with  the  scattered  seed.  Bedecked  with  garlands,  stand  at
the  well-fiUed  stall,  ye  oxen ;  with  the  warm  spring  your  task
shall  return.  Let  the  fEurmer  hang  on  its  peg  the  plough
discharged  from  service;**  the  cold  ground  shudders  at  an
incision.  Do,  farmer,  give  some  rest  to  the  earth,  now  that
seed-time  is  past ;  give  some  rest  to  the  men,  too,  who  have
tiUed  the  ground.  Let  the  hamlet**  keep  holiday ;  purify  the
^^e,  ye  swains,  and  to  the  hamlet's  altars  give  your  yearly
cakes.**  Let  Ceres  and  Tellus,  mothers  of  the  fruits,  be  pro-
pitiated with  their  own  com,  and  the  entrails  of  a  preg-

*o  The  fire  which  tmnkle8.'\—\et.  656.  The  star  Regulus,  in  the  con-
stellation Leo,  on  the  ninth  of  the  calends  of  February,  about  nightfall,
sets  acronically.  Columella  says,  it  sets  on  the  sixth  of  the  calends  of
February.

*i  /  turned  o»cr.]— Ver.  657.  Literally,  *  I  rolled  over.'  If  this  is  to
be  read  Uterally,  it  would  rather  apply  to  the  scroll  form  of  book  than  the
paged  book  of  more  recent  introduction,  and  which  we  have  noticed  in
the  note  to  line  19  above.

**  Sementive  holiday.^ — Ver.  658.  For  an  account  of  the  *  dies  stativte'
and  ^conceptivae,'  see  the  Introduction.

**  Discharged  from  serviceJl — Ver.  665.  'Emeritus'  is  properly  applied
to  the  soldier,  discharged  when  the  time  of  military  service  has  expired.

**  The  Aamfe<.]— Ver.  669.  *Pagu8.'  Servius  TuUius  divided  the
Roman  territory  into  '  pagi.'  There  was  in  each  '  pagus '  an  altar,  on
which,  during  the  'paganalia,'  a  yearly  sacrifice  was  offered  by  the
*  Pagani,'  or  people  of  the  *  pagus.'  This  feast  was  in  honour  of  the  rustic
gods,  and  was  instituted  by  Servius  Tullius.  As  the  country  people  were
in  general  the  last  to  adopt  Christianity,  the  name  of  '  Pagan'  came  in
time  to  be  equivalent  to  the  term  '  heathen.'

4*  Yearly  cakes. "^  —  \  er.  670.  These  were  called  irkXavoi  by  the
Greeks.  They  were  made  of  eggs,  flour,  milk,  and  oil,  and  were  offered
by  the  different  families  of  the  'pagus.'  The  purification  was  made  by
sending  the  victims  round  the  '  pagus  *  before  they  were  sacrificed.


y  Google


1. 1. 672— 70&.]  OB, CALEITDAE  OF  OVID.  43

nant  sow.  Ceres  and  the  earth^  dischai^  an  united  duty.
The  one  supplies  the  origin  of  the  crops,  the  other  the  situation.
Partners  in  toil  cere  they^  hy  whom  antiquity  was  civilized,  and
the  acorn  from  the  oak-tree  was  replaced  hy  a  more  wholesome
food.  Glut  the  greedy  hushandmen  with  boundless  crops,
that  they  may  receive  rewards  worthy  of  their  tiUage.  Give
ye  uninterrtipted  growth  to  the  tender  seed,  and  let  not  the
shooting  blade  be  vnthered  during  the  cold  snows.  While
we  are  sowing,  clear  the  skies  with  cloudless  breezes ;  when
the  seed  is  covered  in,  besprinkle  it  with  the  rain  of  heaven.
And  do  ye  take  heed  that  the  birds,  a  nuisance  to  the  tilled
fields,  do  not  in  mischievous  flocks  Lay  waste  the  gifts  of  Ceres.
Ton,  too,  ye  ants,  spbre  the  grain  when  sown ;  after  the  har-
vest there  wiU  be  a  better  opportunity  for  plunder.  Mean-
while, let  the  standing  com  spring  up  free  horn  the  leprous
miMew,  and  let  not  the  sickly  crop  grow  wan  horn  the  dis-
tempered atmosphere ;  neither  let  it  pine  away  from  meagre-
ness,  nor  let  h^  too  luxuriant  and  all  run  to  bkde,  perish  by
its  own  rankness.  Let  the  fields  also  be  clear  of  darnel  that
weakens  the  eyes,  and  let  not  the  sterile  wild  oat  rise  in  the
cultivated  soil.  Let  the  land  return,  vrith  heavy  interest,  the
produce  of  the  wheat  and  the  barley,  and  the  spelt  destined
twice  to  endure*"'  the  fire.  These  vdshes  do  I  entertain  for  you,
these  wishes  entertain  for  yourselves,  ye  husbandmen,  and
may  either  goddess  render  these  prayers  efficient.  Wars  long
engaged  mankind;  the  sword  was  more  handy  than  the
plooghshare,  and  the  ploughing  bull  gave  place  to  the  charger.
Then  the  hoes  used  to  he  idle,  the  spades  were  turned  into
pikes,  and  from  the  pondrous  harrow  the  helmet  was  wrought.
Thanks  to  the  gods  and  to  thy  house !  wars  long  since  bound
in  chains  He  prostrate  under  our  feet.  Let  the  ox  come  be-
neath tiie  yoke,  and  the  seed  beneath  the  ploughed  soil.  Peacie
nurtures  Ceres ;  Ceres  is  the  nursling  of  Peace.
But  on  the  day  which  is  the  sixth  before  the  approaching

*•  The  earth.'] — Ver.  673.  Worshipped  by  the  Romans  under  the
name  of  *  Tellus/  *  Ops,'  *  TeUumo/  and  *  Bona  Dea,'  *  the  good  goddess/
According  to  Varro,  the  Earth  was  male  in  producing  s€Med,  female  in
nourishing  it.  She  is  sometimes  confounded  with  her  partner,  Ceres.
Thev  are  here  represented  as  teaching  the  ahorigines  to  abandon  the  acorn
for  the  cultivation  of  wheat.

*^  Twice  to  endure.] — Ver.  693.  The  ancients  used  to  parch  their
com  before  they  ground  it.


y  Google


44  THE  rAATI ;  [b.  I.  705—724.

calends,  their  temple  was  dedicated  to  the  gods,  the  sons  of
Leda.^  The  brothers  sprung  from  the  race  of  the  gods
erected  it  in  honour  of  the  divine  brothers,  near  the  lake  of
Jutoma.  My  song  itself  now  brings  me  to  the  altar  of  Peace.
This  will  be  Uie  second  day  from  the  end  of  the  month.  Come
hither,  0  Peace,  with  thy  well  arranged  tresses  encircled  with
Actian  bonghs*,^  and  in  thy  gentleness  take  up  thy  abode
through  the  whole  world.  While  there  are  no  foes,  let  there
be  no  occasion  for  triumph ;  thou  shalt  be  to  our  chieftains
a  boast  greater  than  war.  Let  the  soldier  bear  arms,  only  for
the  purpose  of  putting  down  the  use  of  arms.  By  tiie  wildly
sounding  trumpet  let  no  blast  be  sounded  but  that  of  the
pageant.  Let  all  the  earth,  far  and  near,  dread  the  descend-
ants of  ^neas  ;  and  if  there  shall  be  any  land  that  dreads  not
Rome,  then  let  it  love  her.  Throw,  ye  priests,  the  incense  on
the  fires  Hghted  in  honour  of  Peace,  and  let  the  white  victim
fall,  with  stricken  forehead.  Entreat  too,  the  gods  inclining
to  your  hallowed  prayers,  that  the  family  which  gives  us  peace
may  equal  her  in  eternal  duration.  But  now  the  first  portion
of  my  task  is  completed,  and  together  with  its  month  my
little  book  comes  to  a  close.

*'  Sons  of  Leda."] — Ver.  706.  Castor  and  Pollux  were  the  twin  sons
of  Leda  by  Jupiter.  a.u.c.  769,  Tiberius  built  a  temple  in  their  honour,
in  his  own  name  and  that  of  his  brother  Drusus.  The  divinities  were
called  'Dioscuri/  'sons  of  Jove.'  Their  temple  was  built  near  lake
Jutuma  and  the  temple  of  Vesta.

*9  Actian  hougha,'] — Ver.  711.  Augustus  gained  a  great  naval  victory
over  Antony  and  Cleopatra  near  Actium,  a  town  of  Epirus,  A.n.c.  723.  He
soon  after  closed  the  temple  of  Janus,  in  token  of  univeraal  peace.


y  Google


S.  n.  1—5,]  OB, CALENDAR  OF  OTID.  45


BOOK  THE  SECOND.


CONTENTS.


The  nature  of  the  subject  and  the  dedication,  Ter.  1 — 18.  Some  rem\rkt
on  the  ?ebraa,  from  which  the'  month  derives  its  name,  19 — 34.  The
common  opinion  on  the  efficacy  of  pm^tions,  35-— 46.  On  the  ancient
place  of  February  among  the  months,  and  the  change  in  its  position,
47 — 54.  The  i^ends  of  February  distinguished  by  the  dedication  of
the  temple  of  Juno  Sospita ;  the  praises  of  Csesar ;  the  ceremony  in
the  grove  of  the  asylum;  the  sacred  rites  of  Jupiter,  55 — 70.  The
cause  of  tempests  at  this  season,  70 — 72.  The  setting  of  the  Lyre  and
of  the  Lion  midway,  73 — 78.  The  setting  of  the  Dolphin  and  the  story
of  Anon,  whose  Dolphin  is  placed  among  the  constellations,  79 — 118.
Augustus  styled  the  £fither  of  his  country;  his  great  virtues,  and  a
comparison  of  him  vrith  Romulus,.  119 — 144.  The  rising  of  Aqua-
rius, and  the  milder  breezes  consequent  thereon,  145 — 148.  The  be*
ginning  of  spring,  149 — 152.  Arctophylax  rises ;  the  story  connected
vrith  it,  1 53-— 192.  The  sacred  rites  of  Faunus  and  the  slaughter  of
the  Fabii,  193 — 242.  The  constellations  of  the  Crow,  the  Snake,  and
the  Cup  rise,  and  their  story  is  related,  243 — ^266.  The  rites  of  the
Lupercalia  and  their  origin,  with  the  story  of  Hercules,  Omphale,  and
Faunus,  and  the  exposure  and  preservation  of  Romulus  and  Remus,
267 — 452.  The  changeableness  of  the  weather,  453 — 156.  The  entry
of  the  Sun  into  the  Fishes ;  their  story  is  related,  457 — 474.  The  Qui-
rinalia  and  the  deification  of  Romulus ;  the  festival  of  Fools  and  of  the
goddess  Fornax,  475 — 532.  The  propitiation  of  the  Manes,  533 — 570.
The  sacred  rites  of  Mutaor  Tacita,  571—616.  The  Caristia,  617—618.
the  Terminalia,  639 — 684.  The  rape  of  Lucretia  and  the  expulsion  of
the  kings,  685 — 852.  The  return  of  the  swallow,  853—856.  The
Eqmria,  857—864.

The  month  of  Janus  is  bronght  to  a  close  ;  with  my  song  the
year  grows  apaee.  As  a  second  month  progresses,  so  let  a
second  book  proceed.  Now  for  the  first  time,  elegiac  strains,
do  ye  speed  onward  with  more  stately  sail ;  yod  were,  I  re-
member, but  lately  of  trifling  account.'  I  myself  have  employed

'  Of  tri/Ung  account. 1 — Ver,  4.  The  Elegiac  measure,  which  Ovid  uses
in  this  poem,  was  usually  employed  on  subjects  of  a  trifling  nature. This


y  Google


46  THE  TASTI ;  [b.  ii.  5—29.

you  as  ready  agents  in  lore,  when  my  early  youth  sported  in
numbers  adapted  to  it.  I  am  the  same  who  now  sing  of  sacred
subjects  and  the  days  of  observance  as  they  are  marked  in  the
calendar.  Who  could  beheve  that  such  could  have  proved-  a
path  to  these  subjects  ?  This  is  my  line  of  service ;  what  arms
I  can,  I  bear,  and  •my  right  hand  is  not  destitute  of  every  skill.
If  javelins  are  not  hurled  by  me  with  mighty  arm,  ani  if  by
me  the  back  of  the  warrior  steed  is  not  pressed  ;  if  I  am  not
cased  in  the  helmet,  nor  ^ded  with  the  sharp  sword,  (any  one,
forsooth,  may  be  skilled  in  such  arms  as  these),  still,  Caesar,
with  zealous  breast  I  trace  onwards  thy  deeds  of  glory,  and
proceed  on  my  path  through  the  recital  of  thy  titles.  Be
thou  then  present,  and  reward  with  benign  aspect  my  services,
if  but  for  a  moment ;  if  thou  hast  any  leisure  firom  thy  task
of  forcing  the  enemy  to  sue  for  peace.

Our  Roman  forefathers  called  atoning  sacrifices  by  the  name
of  '  Februa ;' '  and  even  now  many  traces  of  its  meaning  confirm
this  signification  of  the  expression.  The  Pontiffs  ask  wool  of  the
king  of  the  sacrifices  and  of  the  Flamen*,  the  name  of  which  in
the  ancient  dialect  was  *  Februa ;'  and  the  purifying  substances
which  the  lictor  takes  for  the  houses  when  ascertained  as  being
impure^  the  parched  spelt  with  the  grain  of  salty  are  called  by
the  same  name.  This  too  is  the  name  of  the  bough,  which,
lopped  from  a  consecrated  tree,  covers  with  its  foliage  the
holy  temples  of  the  priests.  I  myself  have  seen  the  Flaminica
asking  for  the  *  Februa ;'  a  bough  of  pine  was  presented  to
her  making  this  request  for  the  '  Febnia '  by  name. In  a

was  the  character  of  many  of  his  previous  compositions  in  thU  kind  of
verse. Gower  translates  these  lines : —

*  NoWy  Elegiet,  your  sails  you  'gin  display,
Methougfats  you  were  but  little  flags  to-day.'

*  Such  could  have  proved,'] — ^Ver.  8.  Namely,  his  *  Amours  *  and  *  the
Art  of  Love/  upon  which  he  had  formerly  employed  the  Elegiac  measure.

5*  Februa.'] — ^Ver.  19.  According  to  Varro  (on  Rustic  Matters,  Book  5),
this  word  was  of  Sahine  origin.  It  probably  came  from  '  ferveo,*  *  to  be
hot,'  inasmuch  as  purification  was  effected  through  the  medium  of  heat.

*  Flamen.]— Ntv,  21.  The  '  Pontifex'  was  a  priest  who  sacrificed  to  all
the  gods ;  the '  Flaraen '  dedicated  his  service  to  but  one  deity ;  the  '  Flamen
Dialis,'  or  priest  of  Jupiter,  held  the  highest  oflSce  among  the  Flamens.
Among  other  privileges,  that  of  being  attended  by  a  lictor  wa»  one.  The
*  Flaminica*  was  the  wife  of  the  Flamen  Dialis,  Her  assistance  was  essential
in  the  performance  of  certain  sacred  duties ;  and,  as  the  Flamen  was  re-
stricted to  one  maniage,  if  the  Flaminica  died  he  was  obh'ged  to  resign.


y  Google


B.  II.  29—40.]  OB, CALENDAJEL  OF  OVID.  47

▼ord,  whatever  there  is  bjrnieaiis  of  whieh  our  breasts  are  puri-
fied, it  had  with  our  unshaven  ancestoif*  this  name.  From  these
circumstances  the  month  daives  its  name,*  either  because  the
Lnperci'  with  thongs  of  hide,  purify  all  the  country,  and  con-
sider that  rite  an  expiation;  or  because  the  season  is  purified,  the
shades  of  the  dead  being  appeased  when  tjie  days  deyoted  to
their  offerings  have  passed  by.  Our  ancients  believed  that  purifi-
cation was  efficacious  to  remove  every  curse,  and  every  cause  of
e?il.  Greece  was  the  originator  of  the  custom ;  she  belieyes  that
the  guilty,  when  -pwn&ed,  forthmth  divest  themselyes  of  guilt.
Peleus  rid  of  guilt  the  grandson  of  Actor,  ^  as  Acastus  by  the
agency  of  the  Hsemonian*  waters  released  Peleus  himself  from

^  Unshaven  ancestors,'] — ^Ver.  ZO.  The  Romans  did  not  shaTe  until  the
Tear  454  a.  u.  c,  about  300  yean  before  Christ.  According  to  Pliny  the
Elder,  Nat.  Hist.  p.  59,  Tidnius  Mena  first  introduced  a  barber  into  Rome.
According  to  others  it  was  Sdpio.  In  the  sixth  Book  of  the  Fasti,  line
*^264,  Ovid  calls  Noma  '  intonsus/  '  unshaven.'  Horace  calls  Cato  by  the
same  iqypellation.  Odes,  Book  2,  ode  16,

*  Derives  its  name.] — ^Ver.  31.  He  says  that  February  is  so  called  from
'  Febma,'  *  purifying  objects/  either  because  the  Luperci  purify  by  their
rites  in  honour  of  Fanmis :  or  because  in  this  month  the  graves' are  pu-
rified by  the  propitiation  of  the  shades  of  the  dead.

'  2%e  iMpercu] — ^Ver.31.  The  Luperci,  whose  rites  are  described  in  the
present  book,  were  priests  of  Pan,  and  were  so  called  from  '  lupus,*  a
•  wolf,'  as  Pan  was  supposed  to  protect  the  flocks  from  wolves.  Hence  his
place  of  worship  was  called  *  Lupercal,'  and  his  rites  were  the  '  Lupercalia.'
Tbey  ran  through  the  city  naked,  with  the  exception  of  a  girdle  of  goat-
skin round  the  waist;  and  they  carried  thongs  of  the  same  in  their  hands,
striking  whomsoever  they  met,  and  in  particular  married  women,  who
were  supposed  to  be  rendered  prolific  thereby.  There  vrere  of  the  Luperci
three  divisions,  two  ancient,  the  Fabiani,  and  the  Quintiliani,  and  a  third  in
honour  of  Julius  Caesar.  They  were  not  abolished  until  the  time  of
Anastasius,  in  the  commencement  of  the  sixth  century  after  Christ.

*  The  grandson  of  Actor,] — ^Ver.  39.  Patroclus,  son  of  Menaetius,  was
forced  to  fly  from  Opus,  where  his  father  reigned,  having  accidentally
slain  Cbrysonomus,  son  of  Ampliidamus,  and  retired  to  the  court  of  Peleus,
king  of  Thessaly,  and  the  father  of  Achilles,  where  he  was  kindly  enter-
tained. He  was  slain  by  Hector  in  tile  Trojan  war.  Peleus  was  the  son
of  i£acus:  he  and  Telamon  having  slain  Phocus,  their  half-brother,
Peleus  fled  to  Phthia,  where  he  was  purified  by  Eurytion,  or  by  the
fiither  of  Eurytion.  Having  in  the  chase  of  the  Calydonian  boar  acci-
dentally slain  Eurytion,  he  was  purified  a  second  time  by  Acastus,  the
king  of  lolchos.  Thb  poet  is  mistaken  in  saying  that  it  was  Acastus  who
absdved  Peleus  from  the  murder  of  l^ocus.

*  Htemonian.] — ^Ver.40.  So  called  either  from  Mount  Hsemtl^,  in  Thes-
saly, or  from  Haemon.  son  of  Deucalion.  The  ancients  considered  sea
water  more  efiScacious  for  this  purpose  than  fresh  or  spring  v^ater.


y  Google


48  THB  FASTI;  [b. II. 40— 54.

the  blood  of  Phocus.^The  too  easily  persuaded  ^gens"^
assisted  with  ill-deservA  aid  the  Phasian  borne  on  her  luuv
nessed  dragons  through  the  air.  The  son  of  Amphiaraus"  said
to  the  Naupactan  Achelous*^  "absolve  me  of  my  goilt."
Whereupon  he  did  absolve  him  of  his  guilt.  Ah !  too  credulous
mortals,  who  imagine  that  the  guilt  of  bloodshed  can  be
removed  by  the  waters  of  the  stream.

But,  however,  that  thou  mayst  not  be  perplexed  through
ignorance  of  the  ancient  arrangement ;  the  month  of  Janus,
as  now  it  is,  so  formerly  it  was  the  first  month.  The  month
that  follows  that  of  Janus  was  by  name  the  last^  of  the  ancient
year ;  thou  also,  0  Terminus,  didst  conclude  the  sacred  rites.
For  the  month  of  Janus  is  first,  because  the  gate  is  at  the
very  entrance ;  the  last  month  was  that  which  is  consecrated
to  die  shades  of  the  dead  below.  In  times  after,  the  Decem-
virs'* are  thought  to  have  placed  in  succession,  the  periods
before  separated  by  so  long  an  interval.

^®  Mgeu8.\—Vet.  41.  ^geus  was  king  of  Athens,  and  son  of  Pimdion.
Medea  having  revenged  herself  npon  Jason  by  the  slaughter  of  his  chil-
dren, fled  in  a  chariot,  drawn  by  dragons,  to  the  court  of  iEgeus,  whose
protection  she  obtained  by  promising  to  instruct  him  how  to  raise  issue.
She  is  called  *  the  Phasian,'  from  Phasis,  a  river  of  Colchis,  her  native
country.

^^  The  son  of  Amphiaraus,] — ^Ver.  43.  Alcmteon.  Amphiaraos,  the
prophet,  concealed  hunself,  in  order  that  he  might  not  accompany  the
Argive  expedition  against  Thebes,  as  he  knew  that  he  was  doomed  to
perish  there.  His  wiSFe  Eriphyle,  bribed  by  Polynices  with  a  golden  neck-
lace, betrayed  him.  On  going  to  the  war  he  charged  his  son  Alcmseon  to
avenge  his  death,  who,  on  hearing  that  his  father  had  fallen,  slew  his
mother,  and  was  purified  by  Pheggeus  in  Arcadia,  but  being  still  per-
secuted by  the  Furies,  was  purified  by  the  river  Achelous  a  second  time.

*2  Jchelous.] — Ver.  43.  A  river  of  Acarnania,  near  Mount  Pindns,
which  falls  into  the  gulf  of  Corinth.  Naupactus,  now  Lepanto,  was  a
town  in  iEtolia,  which  derived  its  name  from  ship-building  there  carried
on. Gower  translates  the  two  following  Unes : —

*  Ah,  too,  too  silly,  who  imagine  water
Can  wash  away  that  heavy  crime  of  slaughter.'

^^  The  last,] — Ver.  49.  Ovid  is  the  only  author  that  mentions  the  fact,
that  when  Numa  added  the  two  months  tb  the  year,  he  placed  January
first  and  February  last,  or  twelfth,  and  that  as  being  last  or  lowest  of  the
months,  he  dedicated  it  to  the  shades  below.  According  to  him,  the
Decemviri  transposed  its  place  frt)m  after  December  to  after  January,  from
twelfth  to  second,  thus  joining  the  periods  that  before,  counting  onwards,
had  been  separated  by  a  long  intervad.

"  The  Decemvirs.} — Ver.  54.  Bis  quini  viri.  Literally,  *  the  twice  five


y  Google


B.  II.  55— 69]  OB, CALEia)AE  OF  OVID.  49

In  the  beginning  of  the  month,  the  temple  of  the  Goddess
the  Preserver,  ^  adjoining  to  that  of  the  Phrygian  Mother,  is
said  to  have  been  enriched  by  new  shrines.  You  ask,  where  is
now  the  temple  consecrated  to  the  Goddess  on  those  calends  ?  it
has  perished  by  length  of  time.  The  watchful  care  of  our  sacred
chief  has  provided  that  the  other  temples  should  not  fall  down,
tottering  with  similar  ruin  ;  under  him  the  temples  feel  not  the
ravages  of  time  ;  it  is  not  enough  to  grant  favours  to  us  mortals,
he  lays  the  very  Gods  under  obligations  to  him.  Thou  builder
of  the  temples,  thou  holy  restorer  of  our  shrines,  may  the
Deities,  I  pray,  have  a  reciprocal  regard  for  thee.  May  the
dwellers  in  heaven  grant  thee  as  many  years  as  thOu  hast  be-
stowed on  them,  and  may  they  ever  be  the  watchful  guardians  ^^
<rf  thy  house.

On  that  day  too,  the  grove  of  the  neighbouring  Asylum"  is
reported  to  by  the  crowds,  where  the  Tiber  from  afar  rolls  on-
ward to  the  ocean  waters. At  the  abode  of  Numa,  ^^  and  the

quiries  having  been  made  by  decree  of  the  senate  into  the  nature  of  the
Credan  laws,  and  the  code  of  Solon,  on  the  return  of  the  commission  in
the  year  b.c.  451.  Ten  men,  called  the  *  Decemviri/  were  chosen,  with
supreme  power  to  draw  up  a  code  of  laws,  all  the  other  magistrates
harlng  abdicated  their  offices.  They  were  appointed  the  following  year,
tnd  were  discontinued  in  consequence  of  their  oppressive  conduct  and
the  unjust  decision  of  Appius  Claudius,  which  occasioned  the  death  of
Virginia  by  the  hand  of  her  father,  to  save  her  from  prostitution.

"  The  Preserver.']— y&c,  57.  It  is  not.  known  when,  or  by  whom,  this
temple  to  Juno  *  Sospita,'  or  *  the  Preserver,'  was  built.  It  must  have
stood  on  the  Palatine  Hill,  as  the  temple  of  Cybele,  the  Phrygian
mother  was  there.  *  Sospita'  comes  from  *  sospes,'  '  safe,'  and  that  word
is  derived  from  *  <rw^w,'  *  to  save.'

^*  The  watcf^l  guardians.] — Ver.  65.  *  Maneant  in  statione,'  literally,
'  remain  at  their  post ;'  a  military  phrase.

^  Asylum.] — Ver.  67.  Romidus  constituted  an  asylum  in  a  grove  near
the  Tiber*  as  a  place  of  refuge  from  punishment  for  guilty  persons.  He  also
opened  it  to  the  criminals  of  other  states,  that  he  might  thereby  augment
the  number  of  his  own  citizens.  In  later  times  it  was  walled  in.  It  seems
from  this  passage  that  it  skirted  the  Capitelium,  running  down  to  the
banks  of  the  Tiber.

»*  Abode  of  JViiwa.]— Ver.  69.  *  Penetrale'  is  literally  *  the  court-
yard' or  '  halL'  Ovid  tells  us,  in  the  sixth  book,  1.  264,  that  Numa  re-
eled in  the  temple  of  Vesta.  But  other  vniters,  with  more  accuracy,
tell  01  that  he  only  lived  near  her  Temple.  It  stood  opposite  the  Capi.
tolium.  The  temple  of  Jupiter  Tonans,  '  the  Thunderer,*  stood  on  the
lowest  ridge  of  the  CapitoUne  Hill,  and  was  built  by  Augustus. This

£


y  Google


50  THE  FASTI ;  [b.  li.  69 — 90.

temple  of  the  Thunderer,  on  the  Capitoline  Hilly  and  oi^  the
loftiest  height  of  Jove,  a  sheep  of  two  years  cdd  is  slain.  Oft^
times  the  south  wind  enwrapped  in  clouds  summons  together
the  heavy  rains,  or  the  earth  is  hidden  beneath  the  fedlen
snow.

When  the  next  day's  sun,  about  to  retire  into  the  western
waves,  removes  the  jewelled  collars  from  his  purple  steeds^
on  the  same  night  many  a  one,  raising  his  face  to  the  stars,
shall  say,  where,  I  wonder,  is  to-day  the  constellation  of  the
Lyre,^^  which  was  shining  yesterday?  and  while  he  is  seeking
for  the  Lyre,  he  shall  observe  the  back  of  the  Lion  as  far  as
his  middle*®  suddenly  plunged  into  the  flowing  waters.

The  Dolphin,  whom  of  late  you  were  in  the  habit  of  seeing
bespangled  with  stars,  on  the  following  night  shall  pass  from
our  sight.  He  either  was  a  successful  spokesman  in  loves  con-
cealed,'* or  it  was  he  that  bore  the  Lesbian^  Lyre  with  its
master.  What  sea  has  not  known,  what  land  does  not  know
of  Arion?  He  with  his  song  used  to  detain  the  running
streams.  Often  has  the  wolf  been  stayed  by  his  voice,  as  he
was  chasing  the  lamb ;  oft  has  the  Isonb,  when  fleeing  from
the  ravenous  wolf,  stopped  short  in  her  flight ;  oft  have  the
hounds  and  the  hare  reclined  beneath  the  same  shade ;  and
the  hind  has  stood  still  on  the  mountain  crag  close  to  the
lioness ;  without  strife  the  chattering  crow  has  sat  in  com-
pany with  the  bird  of  Pallas,^  and  the  pigeon  has been

must  not  be  confounded  with  the  *  Capttolium/  or  more  ancient  temple  of
Jupiter  Capitolinus.  The  temple  '  of  the  Thunderer  on  the  Capitoline
Hill'  seems  to  he  the  last,  and  '  the  loftiest  height  of  Jove'  appears  to
'refer  to  the  former.

i»  The  LyreJ] — Ver.  76.  The  cosmical  setting  of  the  Lyre  on  the  night
of  the  second  of  February.

^  As  far  as  his  micW/c.]— Ver.  77.  This  must  be  the  hindmost  half,  as
the  foremost  had  already  set,  Book  1,  line  591.

21  Loffea  concealed.'] — ^Ver,  81.  The  secret  love  of  Neptune  for  Am-
phitrite ;  though,  according  to  some  accounts,  the  god  was  far  too  pressing
in  his  attentions  to  make  a  favourable  impression  on  the  goddess.

2^  Lesbian.'] — Yer.  82.  Arion  was  a  native  of  Methymna,  a  town  in
Lesbos.  The  Dolphin  is  said  to  have  landed  him  on  the  promontory  of
Tsenarus.

»  The  bird  qf  Pallas.] — ^Ver.  89.  The  solemn  and  taciturn  owl,  which
was  not  likely  in  general  to  form  any  intimate  acquaintanceship  with  the
garrulous  crow.


y  Google


B.  II.  90—112.]  OB^  CAI^WDAS  OF OTID.  51

eonpled  with  the  hawk.  Tuneful  Arion  !  Cynthia^  is  said
ofit-times  to  have  been  spell-bound  by  thy  strains  as  though  by
those  of  her  brother  Apollo.  The  name  of  Arion  had  filled
the  cideB  of  Sicily,  and  the  coast  of  Ausonia  had  been  charmed
by  the  tones  of  his  lyre.  Returning  homeward  ^ence  Arion
embarked,  and  was  bringing  with  him  the  treasures  thus  ac-
quired by  his  skill.  Perchance,  hapless  one,  thou  wast  in
fear  of  the  winds^  and  the  waves,  but  yet  did  the  ocean
prove  more  safe  to  thee  than  thy  own  vessel.  For  now  the
helmsman  stood  by  him  with  sword  unsheathed,  and  the  rest
of  the  crew  conspiring  with  arms  in  their  hands.  What
hast  thou  to  do  witii  that  sword  ?  Sailor,  guide  the  veerine
bark.  These  are  not  the  implements  that  should  be  grasped
by  thy  fingers.  And  now,  guessing  their  purpose,  struck
with  terror,  he  says,  "  I  deprecate  not  death,  but  let  me  take
my  lyre  and  recall  but  a  few  notes."  They  give  him  leave,
but  laugh  at  this  pretext  for  delay.  He  takes  a  chaplet  which,
Phoebus,  might  grace  even  thy  tresses ;  he  was  arrayed  too
in  a  mantle  twice  steeped  in  Tyrian  purple.**  Struck  by
his  thumb  the  chord  returned  its  usual  notes ;  just  as  the
swan  when  pierced  in  his  grey  temples^  by  the  cruel  feathered
shaft,  sings  in  mournful  numbers.  Instantly,  in  his  bright  array>
he  leaps  forth  into  the  midst  of  the  waves ;  the  azure  bark  is

*•  Cynthia.'] — ^Ver.  91.  Diana  was  thus  called  from  Cynthus,  a  moun-
tain  of  Delos,  which  overshadowed  that  island,  the  birth-place  of  Apollo
and  Diana. The  poet  here  speaks  of  her  as  the  moon.

**  In  fear  of  the  tvinda."] — Ver.  97.  Implying  that  he  had  no  suspicion
of  the  quarter  in  which  his  danger  lay;  but  Herodotus,  who,  in  his
History,  book  i.  cap.  23,  gives  the  story,  says  that  he  was  apprehensive
of  danger,  and  purposely  hired  a  Corinthian  vessel.

»•  Tyrian  purple  ] — Ver.  107.  Vests  twice  dyed  were  called  *  dibapha,'
from  the  Greek  ^ic,  'twice,'  and  /SaTrrw,  *to  dip.*  The  purple  dye,  for
which  Tyre  was  so  famous,  was  obtained  from  the  '  murex,*  a  kind  of
sheU-fish. Garments  dyed  therewith  were  very  costly.

"  Pierced  in  his  grey  temples.] — Ver.  110.  Gower  thus  translates  this
and  the  following  lines : —

'  He  sings  in  mournful  numbers  like  a  swan,
Whose  hardened  quills  have  pierced  his  aged  brain-pan.
Then  into  water  thus  assured  doth  skip ;
The  battered  billows  all  bedash  the  ship.'
As  IVavesty  nothing  could  be  more  successful  than  this. He  seems  here,
by  his  translation  of  '  penna,'  to  adopt  the  idea  that  swans  were  supposed
bvthe  andents,  in  their  old  age,  to  have  their  brain  pierced  by  their
own  feathers. It  seems  rather  to  mean  *  the  feathered  arrow.'

£  2


y  Google


52  THE  FASTI;  [b.  ii.  112- 135.

splashed  by  the  spray  of  the  water.  Then — too  wondrous
for  beUef — they  tell  how  the  dolphin,  with  curving  back,  placed
himself  beneath  his  unusual  burden.  He,  as  he  sits,  holds
the  lyre,  and  sings  in  requital  for  his  conveyance,  and  calms  by
his  strains  the  ocean  waters.  The  Gods  are  witnesses  of  this
act  of  kindness ;  Jupiter  admitted  the  Dolphin  among  the  Con-
stellations, and  desired  him  to  become  the  owner  of  nine  stars.
Now  could  I  wish  that  I  had  a  thousand  voices,  and  thy
genius,  0  Mseonian  bard,^^  by  which  Achilles^  has  been
celebrated.  While  I  am  singing  in  alternating  verse ^  those
sacred  nones,  the  greatest  honour^*  of  all  is  heaped  upon  my
Calendar ;  my  genius  fails  me,  and  a  subject  too  great  for
my  strength  quite  overpowers  me.  This  day  must  be  sung
by  me  in  a  distinguished  strain.  Why  in  my  infatuation  did  I
wish  to  impose  on  elegiac  strains  a  burden  so  vast  cls  this  ?  This
indeed  were  a  proper  subject  for  heroic  metre.  Sacred  Father
of  thy  country  !  on  thee  the  people,  on  thee  the  senate  con-
ferred this  title.  This  too  we  of'  equestrian  rank^^  conferred
upon  thee.  But  reahty  conferred  this  title  long  previously  ;
and  late  indeed  was  it  that  thou  didst  receive  thy  true  ap-
pellation ;  long  since  wast  thou  the  father  of  the  whole  world.
Thou  bearest  throughout  the  earth  the  name  that  Jupiter  bears
in  the  lofty  heavens ;  thou  art  the  father  of  men,  he  of  the
gods.  Romulus,  thou  must  give  way,  for  'tis  he  who  makes
thy  walls  great  by  defending  them ;  while  thou  hadst  left  them
so  low  as  to  he  overleapt  by  Remus. Thee  indeed,  Tatius^  felt,

^  Maonian  bard.'] — Ver.  120.  Homer  was  so  cafied  firom  Mieonia,  a
mountain  in  Lydia,  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Tmolus,  where  he  is  said  to  have
been  born.  Others  suppose  the  epithet  to  have  been  derived  from  Mseon,
which  is  said  to  have  been  the  name  of  his  father.

»  Achilles.']— Yer.  119.  It  is  difficult  to  say  whether  Achilles  or
Hector  is  the  hero  of  the  Iliad,  in  which  they  are  both  celebrated.  The
latter,  at  least,  is  represented  as  a  man  of  better  morals,  and  of  less  ungo-
vernable temper,  than  his  antagonist.

^  Alternating  verse.] — Ver.  121.  His  lines  are  the  heroic  hexameter,
or  six-feet  line,  alternating  with  the  elegiac  pentameter,  or  fivcrfeet  line.

^  Greatest  honour,] — Ver.  122.  Augustus  having  on  this  day  received
the  title  of  *  Pater  Patriae,'  or  *  Father  of  his  Country,'  a.u.c.  758,  seven
years  after  his  13th  consulate.

82  We  of  equestrian  rank  ] — Ver.  128.  Ovid  was  of  the  rank  of
'  equites,'  or  knights.  The  patricians,  knights,  and  plebeians,  formed  the
three  classes  of  the  Roman  people  who  were  freemen.

®  Tatius.] — ^Ver.  135. He  was  the  king  of  the  Sabines. Cures  and


y  Google


B  II.  135—148.]  0% CALENDJLE  Or OVID.  53

and  hnmble  Cures,  and  Csenina ;  but  tinder  this  chief
each  region^  of  the  sun  is  Roman.  Thou  didst  possess  a
trifling  piece  of  conquered  ground.  Over  all  that  is  beneath
supreme  Jove,  does  Csesar  hold  sway.  Thou  actest  the
ravisher's  part :  he  bids  wives  to  be  virtuous**  under  his
rule.  Thou  shelterest  the  guilty  in  the  asylum  of  the
grove ;  he  removes  afar  all  guilt.  Violence  was  thy  dehght ;
under  Caesar  the  laws  are  in  force.  Thou  hadst  the  name  of
Master,  he  has  that  of  chief  citizen.^  Remus  upbraids  thee
with  murder ;  he  has  forgiven  even  his  enemies.  Thy  sire*''
raised  thee  to  the  skies,  it  is  he  who  has  raised  his  father.
And  now  the  Idsean  youth^  appears  above  the  wave  as  far  as
the  middle,  and  pours  forth  the  liquid  waters  with  the  com-
mingled nectar.^  And  lo  !  if  any  one  used  to  shiver  at  the
northern  blast,  let  him  now  he  glad;  a  milder  breeze  is  coming
from  the  Zephyrs.*®

Cieniua  were  small  towns  of  Latium,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Rome  Ro-
mulus slew  Acron,  king  of  Caenina,  and  thereby  gained  the  first  *  spolia
opima.' At  Cures  Numa  was  bom.

^  Each  region.^ — Ver.  136.  The  limits  of  his  empire  at  his  death  were,
the  Atlantic  ocean  and  the  Euphrates,  on  the  west  and  east ;  the  Danube
and  the  Rhine  on  the  north ;  and  the  cataracts  of  the  Nile  and  Mount
Atlas  on  the  south ;  they  included  nearly  all  the  then  known  world.

^  To  be  virtuotts.'] — Ver.  139.  On  the  absence  of  their  husbands  for
a  certain  time,  the  Roman  women  were  at  Uberty  to  marry  again.  This
right  degenerated  into  a  source  of  Ucentiousness  and  infidelity,  whereupon
Augustus  by  law  restricted  it. To  this,  probably,  allusion  is  here  made.

*»  CAi^  citizen.'] — Ver.  142.  Tlie  name  *  Dominus,'  here  translated
*  master,'  comes  from  *  domo,'  *  to  govern,'  as  a  master  ruled  his  slaves.
According  to  Suetonius,  Augustus  would  not  be  called  by  a  title  iivhich  re-
presented him  as  the  slave-master  of  the  Roman  people,  and  was  on  one
occasion  highly  offended  on  being  saluted  in  the  theatre  by  that  name.
*Princeps,'  the  chief,'  was  the  title  which  the  senate  conferred  on  him  as
being  entitled  to  the  first  place  there.

^  Thy  sire.l — Ver.  142.  Mars.  Julius  Csesar,  the  father  of  Augustus
by  adoption,  was  deified  by  him.

®  Idaan  youth.'] — Ver.  145. The  cosmical  rising  of  the  constellation

Aquarius. Ganymede,  son  of  Tros,  king  of  Troy,  while  hunting  on  Mount

Ida,  was  seized  by  the  eagle  of  Jupiter,  and  carried  to  heaven.  He  took  the

place  of  Hebe,  as  cup-bearer  to  the  gods,  and  was  afterwards  enrolled  among

.  the  signs  of  the  zodiac  under  the  name  of  'Aquarius,'  the  *  water-bearer.'

*  Nectar.] — Ver.  146.  Nectar  was  the  peculiar  beverage  of  the  gods,
as  'ambrosia'  was  their  food.

«  Zephyrs.] — Ver.  148.  The  zephyr,  or  Favonius,  was  the  western
TTind,  which  announced  the  opening  of  spring.


y  Google


54  TH£  FASTI ;  [b.  n.  149— 176w

The  fifth  light-bearing  mom  has  raised  his  glitteriii^  beam
from  the  waves  of  the  ocean,  and  the  hours  of  early  luring  are
at  hand;  but  be  not  deceiyed ;  the  cold  still  remains,  yes,  too
true,  it  remains,  and  winter  while  departing  has  left  its  deqp
traces  behind.

Be  the  third  night  of  the  Ides  now  arriyed,  then  forthwith
yon  will  see  that  tiie  keeper  of  the  Bear^^  has  put  forth  his
two  feet.  Among  the  Hamadryads^  and  Diana  the  thrower
of  the  jayelin,  Callisto  was  one  of  the  sacred  company.
Laying  her  hand  on  the  bow^  oi  the  Goddess,  she  says,  "  Be
this  bow  which  I  touch  the  witness  of  my  tww  of  yii^inity."
Cynthia  praised  her,  and  said,  '*  only  keep  tiiy  ple<j^ged  contract,
and  then  thou  ^lalt  be  the  chief  of  my  companions."  Had
she  not  been  beautiful,  she  would  haye  kept  her  compact.
She  was  on  her  guard  against  mortals ;  from  Joye  it  is  that
she  incurred  her  guilt.  Haying  hunted  in  the  woods  a  thou-
sand beasts  of  chase,  Phoebe  was  on  her  return,  while  the
sun  was  in  its  midday  course,  or  stiU  further  advanced.  When
she  reached  the  sacred  grove — (the  groye  was  thick  with  many
an  holm-oak,  and  in  the  midst  there  was  a  pond  of  ice  cold
water).  "  In  this  wood,"  said  she,  "  maid  of  Tegeaea,^  let  us
bathe."  At  the  untrue  name  of  'maid'  the  omer  blushed.
She  said  the  same  also  to  her  Nymphs ;  whereon  the  Nymphs
put  off  their  garments.  Callisto  is  ashamed,  and  giyes  un-
happy proofs  of  a  purposed  tardiness  and  delay.  She  had
stripped  oflP  her  robes ;  conyicted  by  the  size  of  her  person,
she  is  betrayed  by  the  eyidence  of  her  burden.  To  whom,  the
Goddess,  "  Forsworn  daughter  of  Lycaon!  quit  the  yirgin  txoop
and  defile  not  these  chaste  waters."  Ten  times  had  &e  moon
completed  her  orb  between  her  horns,  arid  she,  who  had  been

^  Keeper  of  the  Bear,"] — Vcr.  153.  The  achronycal  rismg  of  Bootes
on  the  11th  of  February.  Bootes,  or  Arctophylax,  the  Bearward,  was  the
constellation  into  which  Areas,  the  son  of  Jupiter  and  Callisto,  as  here
mentioned,  was  changed.

^  Hamadryads.'] — ^Ver.  155.  These  were  nymphs  who  presided  over
individual  trees,  with  which  they  were  said  to  live  and  die.  Theii  name
was  derived  from  the  Greek  &fiaj  ^together,*  and  ^p^c»  *an  oak.'

«  On  the  bow.] — ^Ver.  157. With  the  ancients  it  was  the  usage  to
touch  any  thing  they  swore  by.  Thus  Hannibal  touched  the  altar  when  he
vowed  eternal  enmity  against  Rome. See  livy,  book  21,  c.  1;  and  Cor-*
neHus  Nepos,  in  his  Life  of  HannibaL

^  Maid  of  Tegeaa-^—y d.  167.  Callisto  being  the  daughter  of  Lycaon,
Icing  of  Arcadia,  of  which  country  Tegesea  was  a  town.


yGopgle


B.  If.  176—202.]  OB, CAI«8ZrDAB  07  OTID.  55

supposed  a  maid,  was  now  a  mother.  Offended  Juno  is  filled
with  TtLge,  and  changes  the  form  of  the  damsel.  Chddeu  !
niiat  art  thou  doing?  It  was  with  reluctant  spirit  that  she
leceired  the  embrace  of  Jupiter.  And  when  she  heheld  the
hideous  face  of  a  wild  heast  in  the  former  favourite,  *'  Let
Jupiter,*"  says  she,  **now  rush  into  her  embraces."  A
Iri^tfiil  she-bear,  she  roamed  along  the  wild  mountains,  she
jiio  had  lately  been  an  object  of  love  to  almighty  Jove.  Just
three  times  fiye  years  had  the  boy,  coneeired  in  secret,  now
passed,  when  the  mother  was  thrown  in  the  way  of  her  son.
Infatuated  she  stood  still,  as  though  she  would  recognize  him,
and  moaned  :  that  moan  was  the  address  of  a  parent.  The
boy  unknowing  would  have  pierced  her  with  his  sharp  javelin,
had  not  eacb  been  snatched  away  to  the  mansions  above.  As
neighbouring  Constellations  they  now  shine;  the  first  one
ii  she  whom  we  call  the  'Bear;'  the  'Bear- ward'  has  the
attitude  of  one  following  her  behind.  Still  is  the  daughter
of  Saturn  incensed,  and  requests  the  hoary  Tethys^  not  to
bve  the  Msenalian  Bear  by  the  contact  of  the  waters.

On  the  Ides  the  altars  of  the  rustic  Faunus^  smoke,  here
where  the  island  breaks  the  parted  waters.  This  was  that
day  on  which,  on  the  plains  of  Veii,  three  hundred  and  six
Fabii^  fell.  One  house  had  taken  upon  itself  the  strength
and  burden  of  the  whole  city ;  the  hands  of  one  family  ttJce
up  arms  volunteered  by  them  ;  each  goes  forth  a  high-bom
soldier  from  that  camp  out  of  which  each  one  was  fitted  to  go
forth  a  general.  The  nearest  route  is  by  the  right-hand  side
passage^  of  the  gate  of  Carmenta. Whoever  you  are,  pass

**  Tetkya.'i — ^Ver.  191.  Tethys  was  one  of  the  most  ancient  deities.
She  was  the  wife  of  Oceanus,  daughter  of  Coelus  and  Vesta,  and  the  foster-
mother  of  Juno.

«  Fownw.]— Ver.  193.  The  'Insula  sacra,'  on  the  Tiber,  contamed  the
temple  of  Faunus,  as  also  those  of  Jupiter  and  iEsculapius.  It  was  built
by  the  .£diles,  a.u.c.  509.

'  '•7  Fabu.l — Ver.  196. Ovid  places  this  event  on  the  15th  of  February.
Livy,  book  6,  c.  1,  places  it  on  the  18th  of  July.

^  Right-hand  side  paasageJ] — Ver.  201.  *Dextro — Jano.'  It  has  been
already  mentioned,  that  the  janus  was  the  arched  or  covered  passage  of  a
gateway.  Many  of  those  at  Rome  had  two  passages  for  the  convenience
of  people  passing  each  way — similar  to  the  plan  of  our  Thames  Tunnel.
After  this  day  no  one  went  out  by  the  passage  through  which  the  Fabii
had  passed.  The  way  was  called  the  'via  scelerata,'  or  'infelix,'  the  'ac-
cuned,'  or  'unlucky  way.'


y  Google


56  THE  FASTI ;  [b.  ii.  202—233.

not  through  it ;  it  has  an  evil  omen. Tradition  says,  that  by
that  ffate  the  three  hundred  Fabii  went  forth. The  gate  is  free
from  blame,  but  yet  it  has  a  bad  omen. When  with  rapid  step
they  reached  the  swiftly  rolling  Cremera,**  (it  was  .flowing
swollen  by  the  rains  of  the  winter)  ;  they  pitch  their  camp  on
the  plain ;  they  themselves,  with  drawn  swords,  rush'through
the  Tuscan  Hues  with  vigorous  onset. Just  as  when,  from  the
Libyan^  crag,  the  Uons  rush  upon  the  flocks  scattered  through-
out the  wide  fields.  The  enemy  fly  in  all  directions,  and  on  their
backs  receive  disgraceful  wounds  ;  the  earth  is  reddened  with
Etrurian  blood. Once  more,  and  again  they  fall.  When  it  is
not  possible  for  them  to  conquer  in  open  fight,  they  prepare
a  stratagem,  and  the  resources  of  ambush. There  was  a  plain ;
hills,  and a  forest  well  fitted  to  harbour  the  wild  beasts  of
the  mountain,  shut  in  the  extremities  of  it. In  the  midst  of
this  plain  they  leave  a  few  men,  and  the  herds  scattered  here
and  there ;  the  rest  of  the  troops  he  hid,  concealed  in  the  un-
derwood. Lo !  as  a  torrent,  swollen  by  a  deluge  of  rain,  or
by  the  snow  which  flows  melted  by  the  warmth  of  the  Zephyr,
is  borne  over  the  sown  fields  and  the  highways,  and  no  longer,
as  it  was  wont,  confines  its  current  bounded  by  the  margin  of
its  banks ;  so  do  the  Fabii  fill  the  valley  with  their  straggling
sallies,  and  the  few  they  see  they  despise ;  they  have  no  appre-
hension from  any  other  quarter. Whither  rush  ye,  noble
house  ? It  is  unsafe  to  trust  a  foe,  unsuspecting  nobles,
beware  of  the  weapons  of  treachery — ^valour  perishes  by  strat-
agem ;  from  every  part  the  enemy  springs  forth  into  the  open
plain,  and  encompasses  every,  side. What  can  a  few  brave
men  do  against  so  many  thousands  ?  or  what  expedient  have
they  that  they  can  avail  themselves  of  in  the  moment  of  dis-
tress ? As  the  wild  boar  chased  in  the  Laurentine'^  woods
afar  scatters  with  his tusk like the lightning the  swift
hounds,  yet  soon  he  dies  himself;  so  do  they  perish,  but

*^  Cremera.']—'VeT,  205.  A  Tuscan  river,  falling  into  the  Tiber  a  little
to  the  north  of  Rome,  and  not  far  from  Veil.

^  Libyan.'] — ^Ver.  209.  Mauritania,  a  district  of  Libya,  in  Africa,  was
remarkable  for  the  fierceness  and  voracity  of  its  lions.

51  Laurentine.'] — Ver.  231.  Laurentum  was  a  town  of  Latium,  supposed
to  be  the  residence  of  the  ancient  kings,  Picus,  Faunus,  and  Latinus.  Its
name  was  derived  from  a  grove  of  bay-trees,  'lauri,'  between  Ostia  and  An-
tium. It  was  remarkable  for  its  breed  of  boars.


y  Google


B.  n.  233— 258.]  OB, CALElTDUt  OT  OTID.  57

not  Tmavenged  ;  and  they  deal  and  suffer  wounds  with  mutual
blows.

One  day  had  sent  forth  to  battle  all  the  Fabii ;  one  day  cut
off  those  sent,  yet  it  is  worthy  of  behef  that  the  Gt>ds  them-
selyes  provided  that  there  should  survive  some  seed  of  the
house  of  Hercules/^  For  a  boy  of  tender  years"  and  unser-
viceable for  war  alone  of  the  Fabian  house  had  been  left  be-
bind;  doubtless  to  the  end  that  thou  Fabius  Maximus'^  mightest
in  fatore  times  be  bom ;  by  whom,  through  procrastination,
the  republic  might  be  preserved.

Contiguous  in  position  are  three  Constellations,'^  the  Raven,
and  the  Snake,  and  the  Groblet,  that  lies  between  them  both.
On  the  Ides  they  are  hidden,  they^  rise  on  the  following  night ;
I  will  sing  why  the  three  are  thus  connected  together.

It  happened  that  Phoebus  was  preparing  a  solemn  festival
for  Jupiter  (my  story  shall  cause  no  very  long  delay).  "Go,
my  bird,""  said  he,  "  that  nothing  may  retard  my  rites  of  duty,
and  bring  a  Uttle  water  from  the  gushing  fountains."  The  raven
lifts  with  his  hooked  claws  a  gilded  goblet,*^  and  wings  on
high  his  aerial  route.  There  stood  a  fig-tree  loaded  with  fruit,
still  hard  and  unripe.  He  tries  it  with  his  beak — the  fruit
was  not  fit  to  be  gathered.  Heedless  of  his  commands,  he  is
said  to  have  sat  down  beneath  that  tree,  until  in  the  slowly
passing  lapse  of  time  the  fruit  became  sweet.  And  at
last,  having  satiated  his  appetite,  he  seizes  in  his  black  claws  a
long  water-snake,  and  then  returns  to  his  master  and  makes  a

*  UeTmleB,'\ — Ver.  237.  It  was  a  tradition,  that  the  Fabii  were  de-
scended from  Hercules,  hy  a  daughter  of  Evander.

**  Of  tender  years.'] — Ver.  239.  Niebuhr,  in  his  Roman  History,  book  2,
says  tluit  the  Fabius  who  remained  at  home  must  have  then  been  a  grown
num. He  gives  a  political  solution  of  the  whole  story.

^  Fabius  A/adrtmtt«.]— Ver.  241.  From  the  single  survivor  sprang
Q.  Fabius  Maximus,  who,  in  the  second  Punic  war,  after  the  defeat  of  the
consul  Flaminius  at  Lake  Thrasymenus,  was  appointed  pro-dictator.  By
coonter-marches  and  ambuscades  he  harassed  and  weakened  the  army  of
Hannibal,  and  eventually  saved  Rome.  Hence  he  was  called  *the  Delayer,'
•Cunctator.'

*  Three  Constellations,'] — Ver.  243.  He  gives  the  achronycal  rising  of
ttiese  three  constellations  on  the  14th  of  February. *

**  My  htrd.] — Ver.  249. The  poets  considered  the  crow  sacred  to
Apollo  on  account  of  its  supposed  efficacy  in  augury  and  divination.
^  A  gilded  gohlet.] — ^Ver.  251-2. Gower  translates  these  lines  thus —
*  The  golden  tanker  in  his  claws  the  crow
Takes,  and  through  air  with  waving  wings  doth  row.'


y  Google


58  THE  -EAWa ;  [b.  ii.  258—282.

feigned  excnae.  "  This  creature  was  the  cause  oi  my  delay,
watching  at  the  running  stream ;  'tis  he  that  withheld  the
waters  and  the  fulfilment  oi  my  task."  Phoehus  answers,
"  Dost  thou  add  to  thy  £ault  a  lie,  and  darest  thou  by  thy
stories  to  attempt  to  impose  upon  the  God  of  oracles?
And  now  so  long  as  the  green  %  shall  be  firm^  on  the  tree,
be  no  cooling  water  drunk  by  thee  from  any  spring."  He
spoke,  and  as  a  lasting  memorial  of  this  ancient  a£fair,  the
Snake,  the  Bird,  and  tiie  Gbblet  glitter  as  contiguous  Constel-
lations.

The  third  dawn  after  the  Ides  beholds  the  naked  Luperci,
and  the  sacred  rites  of  the  two-homed  Faunus^  will  pro-
ceed. Tell,  ye  Pierian  maids,  what  is  the  origin  of  these  rites,
and  whence  derived  they  reached  the  abodes  of  Latium.  The
ancient  Arcadians  are  said  to  have  worshipped  Pan  m  God  of
cattle ;  he  most  Jrequenis  the  Arcadian  mountains.  Phidoe"^
will  attest  it,  the  streams  of  St3naiphalus,  and  Ladon,  which
with  rapid  current  flows  into  the  sea,  will  attest  it,  and
the  ridges  of  the  forest  of  Nonacris  encircled  with  groves
of  pine,  and  the  lofty  Cyllene  and  the  snows  of  Parrhasia.
Pan  was  the  guardian  of  the  herd,  Pan,  the  God  of  the
mares  ;  he  used  to  receive  offerings  for  the  preservation  of  the
sheep.  Evander  brought  over  with  him  the  woodland  divinities.
Here,  where  now  the  City  stands,  was  then  but  the  city's
site.  Thence  do  we  reverence  this  God,  and  the  rites  imported
from  the  Pelasgians.^ By  ancient  usage  the  Flamen  Dialis

*8  Shall  be/irm,']—\er,  263.  'Lactens*  is  literally  'waxing  full  of
milk.'  *Lac,'  'milk/  was  the  name  given  to  the  juice  of  the  unripe  fig,
while  it  is  yet  in  a  hard  state.

"  Faunu8.'\ — Vcr.  267.  He  was  one  of  the  ancient  kings  of  Latium,
and  heing  deified,  in  time  became  confounded  with  the  Arcadian  deity  Pan.
As  Pan  was  attended  hy  numerous  minor  Pans,  so  there  were  numerous
Fauni.

^  Pkoloe.'] — Ver.  273.  'Pholoe,*  and  the  several  places  here  men-
tioned, were  in  Arcadia.  Pholo€  was  a  mountain ;  Stymphalus  was  the  name
of  a  city  and  a  lake  there,  whence  Hercules,  as  his  sixth  labour,  chased
the  Stymphalian  birds,  and  slew  them.  The  river  Ladon  falls  into  the
Aipheus,  and  not  into  the  sea;  it  was  remarkable  for  the  excellent
quality  of  its  water.  Nonacris  was  a  town  of  Arcadia,  near  which  wis
the  river  Styx,  whose  waters  were  so  pestilential  that  they  could  be  carried
in  no  vessel  whatever,  except  one  msule  of  the  hoof  of  a  mule.  Cyllene
was  a  mountain  of  Arcadia. Parrhasia  was  a  town  of  the  same  country.

**  PeUugians.'] — Ver.  281.  The  Arcadians  were  generally  deemed  to  be
of  the  Pelagian  raoo,  who  seem  to  have  been  the  aborigines  of  Greece.


y  Google


I.  IL  282— 3080  OB, CALSHDAS  OT  OTID.  59

attended  ibeae  sacrifices.  Ton  ask,  then,  why  they  run  and
why  (for  thus  to  run  is  their  practice,)  they  have  their  bodies
nsked,  having  stripped  off  their  garments.  The  fleet  God
himself  loTes  to  run  at  hurge  on  the  lofhr  hills,  and  starts  on  a
sudden  the  seared  wild  beasts.  The  Qoi,  naked  himself,  com-
mands his  attendants^  to  go  naked ;  for  dress  was  not  very
convenient  for  running.  The  Arcadians  are  said  to  have
tenanted  the  earth  before  the  birth  of  Jupiter,  and  that  nation
existed  before  the  moon.  Their  mode  of  life  was  like  that  of
the  beasts  of  the  field,  spent  amid  no  coinforts ;  the^  were  still  a
multitude  unsldlled  in  arts  and  uncivilized .  For  habitations,  they
knew  of  the  boughs  of  trees  alone,  for  com  the  blades  of
grass  ;  water  taken  up  with  their  two  palms  was  nectar  to  them.
No  steer  then  panted  under  the  crooked  plough;  no  land
was  then  under  the  control  of  the  husbandmen.  As  ^et
the  use  of  the  horse*^  was  not  known ;  each  one  earned
himself;  the  sheep  then  used  to  go  clothed  with  its  own
fleece.  They  dwelt  in  the  open  air,  and  had  their  bodies
naked,  taught  to  endure  the  heavy  showers  and  the  southern
blasts.  S^  do  the  naked  priests  recall  to  mind  the  vestiges
of  ancient  usage,^  and  testify  the  humble  resources  of  olden
times.  But  there  is  a  story  uAd,  full  of  old-fashioned  hu-
mour, why  Faunus  has  a  particular  aversion  to  garments.
It  chanced  that  the  Tirynthiian  youth  was  travelling  in  the
company  of  his  mistress,^  Omphale.  Faunus,  from  a  lofty
hill-top,  saw  them  both.  He  saw,  and  caught  the  flame — '  ye
mountain  Goddesses,'  said  he,  'farewell;  tins  ^«?y  shall  hence-

«  Commands  Ms  attendants.'] — Ver.  287. Gower  gives  this  version,

*  The  god  self-naked,  naked  makes  his  frie ;
Clothes  are  a  hindrance  to  agility/

•»  Use  of  the  horse.'] — Ver.  297. Bellerophon  is  said  to  have  been  the
first  to  teach  mankind  the  use  of  the  horse.
•*  Ancient  usage.] — Ver.  301-2. Gower  translates  these  lines,

*  ThCTcfwe  they  naked  nm,  in  sign  and  honor
Of  hardiness,  and  that  old  bare-skinn'd  manner.'

"  His  mistress.] — Ver,  305.  Hercules  had  been  sold  by  Mercmy,  to  serve
as  a  slave  for  three  years,  to  Omphale,  queen  of  Lydia  or  Maeonia,  in  order
that  the  purchase-money  might  be  paid  to  Eurytus,  as  a  compensation  for  the
loss  of  Iphytus,  his  son,  who  had  been  slain  by  Hercules.  That  he  was
taken  into  the  especial  fevour  of  Omphale  we  may  perceive  from  this  story.


y  Google


60  THE  PASTI ;  [b.  ii.  308—330.

forth  be  my  love." "  The  Maeonian  qi^een  was  walking  on-
wardy  distiDguished  by  her  gold  embroidered  vestment,  her
perfumed  tresses  flowing  over  her  shoulders.  A  golden  screen
repelled  the  scorching  sunbeams,  which  yet  the  hands  of
Hercules,  strong  as  they  were,  supported.  And  now  had
she  reached  the  grove  of  Bacchus,  the  vineyards  of  Tmolus,
and  the  dewy  Hesperus  was  running  his  course  on  his
dusky  steed.*^  She  enters  a  grotto  whose  roof  was  fretted
with  porous  pebbles,  and  the  natural  pumice  stone ;  at  its
entrance  ran  a  bubbling  streamlet.  And  now  while  the  at-
tendants are  preparing  the  repast,  and  the  wine  for  them  to
quaff,  she  arrays  Alcides  in  her  own  attire.  She  gives  bim
her  fine  wrought  gown,  dyed  with  Gaetuhan  purple  ;  she  gives
him  the  net-work  zone,  with  which  just  now  she  had  been  girt.
The  zone  is  too  small  for  his  girth ;  she  unlooses  the  laces
of  the  gown,  that  he  may  get  his  huge  hands  through.  Her
armlets  he  had  already  broken,  not  made  for  such  arms  as
those.  His  big  feet^  were  bursting  asunder  the  scanty  ties  of
her  sandals.  She  herself  takes  the  ponderous  club,  and  the
spoil  of  the  Hon,  and  his  lesser  weapons  stored  in  their  quiver.
In  this  dress  they  partake  of  the  repast ;  in  this  dress  they
resign  their  bodies  to  sleep,  and  lie  apart  upon  couches  placed
closed  to  one  another.  The  reason  was,  that  they  were  about
to  prepare  a  pious  sacrifice  to  the  discoverer  of  the  vine,  which
they  ought  to  perform  in  a  state  of  purity®^  when  the  day  had

^  Be  my  love.'] — Ver.  307-8.  The  quaint  translation  given  by  Grower
of  these  two  lines  is,

*  He  eyes  and  fries,  and  "country  lasses"  cries,
None  for  my  diet ;  here  my  Cupid  lies.'

67  Dusky  steed."]— Ver,  314.  He  has  a  dusky  steed  assigned  him,  as  the
sky  on  his  approach  becomes  darker.  For  the  opposite  reason  a  white  horse
is  assigned  to  Lucifer,  the  morning  star.

^  His  biff  feet,] — Ver.  324. Dower's  version  of  this  line  is,

*  His  huge  plaice-foot  her  pretty  sandals  rent.*

The  Gsetulian,  or  African  purple,  mentioned  a  few  lines  before,  was  proba-
bly of  inferior  quality.  Alcides  was  one  of  the  epithets  of  Hercules,  fi-om
the  Greek  word  dXic^,  'strength.'

^  Ina  state  qf  purity.] — Ver.  330.  The  sacrifice  was  to  be  to  Bacchus,
god  of  the  vine. Sacrifices  to  the  gods  were  expected  to  be  performed  by
the  attendant  devotees  in  a  state  of  perfect  purity,  and  uncontaminated  by
a  breach  of  chastity.  Gower's  version  of  this  and  the  preceding  line  is —
•  *  Because,  next  day,  some  rites  to  Jove's  wine  son
They  should  perform,  which  must  be  purely  done.'


y  Google


B.  II.  330— 357.]  OB, CAXENDAR OF OYtD.  Cl

dawned.  'Twas  midnight.  What  does  not  unscrupulous
passion  dare  ?  Amid  the  shades  of  the  night,  Faunus  comes  to
the  dewy  grotto,  and  when  he  sees  the  attendants  relaxed  with
sleep  and  wine,  he  conceives  hopes  that  in  their  master  and  mis-
tress there  is  the  same  drowsiness.  He  enters,  and  the  daring
ravisher  wanders  to  this  side  and  that,  and  stretches  forth  his
cautious  hands  and  follows  their  direction.  And  now  he  had
come  to  the  bedding  of  a  spread  couch  which  he  had  found  by
groping^  and  as  he  thought ,  was  about  to  be  successful  in  his  first
venture.  When  he  touched  the  hide  of  the  tawny  Hon  all
shaggy  with  its  coarse  hair,  he  was  alarmed  and  withdrew  his
hand,  and  terrified  he  shuddered  with  fear ;  as  of t  the  tra-
veller has  withdrawn  his  startled  foot  on  seeing  a  serpent.
He  next  feels  the  soft  coverings  of  the  couch  which  was
close  by,  and  is  deceived  by  the  false  indication.  He  climbs
the  bed,  and  lies  down  on  the  side  nearest  to  him.  His
passions  are  at  the  highest  pitch — ^meantime  he  draws  up  the
bed-clothes  from  the  bottom  ;  the  legs  he  finds  are  all  brist-
ling, rough  vrith  thick  hair.  The  Tyrinthian  hero  flings  him
back"**  with  his  arm ^2^^  as  he  is  making  further  attempt^ ;  he
tumbles  from  the  top  of  the  couch.  An  uproar  is  the  con-
sequence, the  Mseonian  qaeen  summons  her  attendants  aloud,
and  calls  for  lights  ;'*  the  lights  being  brought,  the  transac-
tion is  discovered.  Faunus  is  groaning  aloud,  tiunbled  vio-
lently from  the  lofty  couch,  and  with  diflficulty  he  raises  his
limbs  from  the  hard  ground.  Both  Alcides  laughs,  and  those
who  see  him  lie  sprawling ;  the  Lydian  damsel  laughs  too  at
her  gallant. The  God,  thus  deceived  through  a  dress,  thence-

^  Flmga  him  hackJ] — ^Ver.  349-50.  Gower  translates  this  and  the  fol-
lowing lines —

*  Attempting  more,  Alcides  firom  the  couch
Throws  him  quite  off. Down  lumps  the  lustful  slouch.
Masonia  at  the  noise  for  lights  doth  cry,
Which,  brought  there,  make  a  strange  discovery.
He,  with  his  fall  much  bruised,  grones  and  mones.
And,  much  ado,  heaves  up  his  heavy  bones.
Alcides  laugh'd,  and  all  at  that  night-rover.
And  Omphale  laughs  at  her  goodly  lover.'

'»  Calls  for  Ughts.'\ — Ver.  351.  The  servants,  who  slept  just  outside  of
the  chamber  of  their  master  or  mistress,  usually  kept  a  lamp  burning ;
therefore  the  light  was  brought  even  before  Faunus  could  rise  from  the
floor.


y  Google


62  THE  FASTI ;  [b.  n.  357—381.

forth  hates  garments  that  impose  apon  the  sight,  and  snm-
mons  hu  offieiaU  to  his  rites  in  a  state  of  naJ^edness.  To
these  causes  imported  from  afar,  add,  my  Muse,  the  Latin  ones,
and  let  my  courser  now  pace  his  native  dust.

A  she-goat  heing  slain,  according  to  custom,  to  the  homy-
footed  Faunus,  a  crowd  came  by  invitation  to  the  scanty
repast,  and  while  Ihe  priests  were  making  ready  the  entrails
transfixed  with  spits  of  willow,  the  sun  now  reaching  his  mid
course,  Romulus  and  his  brother,  and  the  shepherd  youth,
were  exposing  Iheir  naked  bodies  to  the  sun  and  the  dust  of
the  plam.^  They  gave  exercise  to  their  arms  in  sport  with
the  boxing-gloves,^'  and  the  javelin,  and  Ihe  weight  of  the  cast-
ing stone.  A  shepherd  from  an  eminence  exclaimed — '*  Romu-
lus! the  robbers  are  driving  away  the  oxen  through  the
sequestered  fields ;  to  the  rescue !"  'Twould  take  too  long  a
time  to  put  on  arms  ;  each  rushes  forth  in  a  different  direc-
tion :  by  the  spear  of  Remus  the  spoil  was  recovered.  As
soon  as  he  returned,  he  takes  off  from  the  spits  the  hissing
entrails,  and  says,  "  These,  in  truth,  none  but  a  conqueror
shall  eat."  As  he  says  he  does,  and  so  do  the  Fabii.  Ro-
mulus arrives  there  too  late,  and  sees  nothing  but  the  board
and  the  picked  bones.  He  smiled,  but  was  annoyed  that  the
Fabii  and  Remus  had  been  able  to  gain  a  victory,  and  that  his
own  Quinctilii'^*  could  not.  The  fame  of  the  transaction  still
abides  with  us ;  they  still  run  without  a  garment,  and  be-
cause the  result  was  favourable,  it  has  a  lasting  celebrity.

Perhaps  too,  you  may  ask,  why  that  place  is  called  the

^  The  p/aiw.]-— Vcr.  366.  Probably  the  *  Campus  Martius,'  or  *  field
of  Mars/  which  was  a  plain  of  great  extent,  near  the  Tiber,  where  the
Romans  used  to  exercise.  It  was  the  private  property  of  the  Tarquins,
and  on  their  expulsion  was  consecrated  to  Mars,  as  the  patron  of  warlike
exercises.

^  TAe  boxing-gloves.'] — ^Ver.  367.  This  is  the  nearest  translation  that
can  be  given  to  the  word  'caestus/  which  were  coverings  of  leather  for  the
hand,  with  lead  or  iron  sewed  on  them  to  render  the  weight  of  the  blow
more  effective.  On  the  other  hand,  with  us,  the  boxing-glove  is  used  for
the  opposite  purpose,  to  diminish  the  weight  of  the  blow.  The  casting-
stone  was  thrown  either  from  the  hand  or  the  sling.  It  does  not  appear
which,  in  this  instance.

7*  Hts  own  QuineHlH.'] — Ver.  378.  The  Fabii  are  said  to  have  been
the  companions  of  Kdlnus,  and  the  Quinctilii,  the  associates  of  Romulus.
The  Fabii  were  of  Sabine  origin,  while  the  Quinctilii  were  a  Roman
family.


y  Google


B.  II.  381—398.] OK, CALENDAB  OF  OTID.  63

'Lupercal,'  or  what  reason  marks  the  day  with  a  siinilar
name.  The  Vestal  Ilia^^  had  given  birth  to  her  heayenly
progeny,  while  her  uncle  held  the  sovereign  sway.  He  orders
the  children  to  be  taken  away  ind  to  be  (Lrowned  in  the  river.
What  art  thou  doing  ?  one  or  other  of  these  will  be  Romulus
hereafter.  His  servants  with  reluctance  perform  his  cruel
commands :  they  weep  and  bear  the  twins  to  ihe  commanded
place.  Albula,'*  that  stream,  whose  name,  Tiberinus  drowned
in  its  waters,  changed  into  that  of  Tiber,  by  chance  was  swollen
by  the  floods  of  winter.  Here,  where  the  market-places^^  now
are,  vou  might  see  boats  wanderine  about ;  where,  too,  thy
valley  now  lies,  O  Circus  Maidmus.^  When  they  had  come
hither,  and  could  advance  no  farther,  first  one  and  then  the
other  of  them  says,  "  And  see  how  like  they  are  !  and  how
lovely  is  each !  yet  of  the  two  that  one  has  more  life  in  him.
If  origin  is  to  be  indicated  by  looks,  if  the  likeness  deceives  me
not,  I  suspect  some  God  (whom,  I  know  not)  to  be  your  father.

^  The  vestal  Ilia. — Ver.  383.  Hia,  or  Khea  Silvia,  whose  story  is  told
more  at  length  in  the  next  hook,  was  the  daughter  of  Numitor,  king  of
Mba  Longa.  In  order  that  she  might  not,  hy  becommg  a  mother,  endanger
the  sovereignty  of  Amulins,  her  uncle,  who  had  nsm^ped  the  throne  and
buuihed  his  brother,  he  devoted  her  to  the  service  of  Vesta,  and,  in  con-
sequence, to  perpetual  chastity.  Mars  haying  become  enamoured  of  her,
she  conceived  twins  by  him,  whose  history  is  here  told,  and  is  repeated  in
the  next  hook.  She  was  huried  alive;  the  punishment  invariably  inflicted
on  Vestal  virg^  when  convicted  of  a  violation  of  their  vow  of  chastity.

••  Albula.}--\eT.  389.  This  was  anciently  the  name  of  the  Tiber.
'  Albus'  is  the  Latin  for  *  white,'  and  the  river  was  so  called  from  the  white-
ness of  its  waters.  It  was  called  Tiber  after  Tiberinus  Sylvius,  the  suc-
cessor of  Capetius,  king  of  Alba,  and  who  was  drowned  in  its  stream.

"^Market-places."] — Ver.  391.  There  were  two  kinds  of  *fora*  at
Rome— the  *  forum'  ifor  litigation  and  process  at  law,  and  the  *  forum,*  or
'market-place,'  such  as  the  *forum  boarum,'  or  'cattle-market ; '  'piscarium,'
or  *  fish-market ; '  *oKtorium,'  or  'herb-market ; '  'suarium,'  or  'pig-market'

^  O  Circus  Maximus,^—Wer.  392.  This,  *  the  Greatest  Circus,'  was
originally  built  by  Tarquinius  Priscus,  and  was  situate  in  a  prolonged
▼alley  between  the  Palatine  and  Aventine  Hills:  It  was  a  mile  in  circum-
ference, and  received  great  improvements  from  Julius  Caesar.  It  was  able
to  contain  at  least  150,000  persons ;  Pliny  says  250,000 ;  perhaps  the  former
nmnber  when  sitting,  the  latter  when  standing.  There  the  public  games
and  shews  were  celebrated,  which  formed  the  favourite  recreation  of  the
Romans  of  all  classes.  It  was  called  *  Maximus,'  *  greatest,'  because  there
*ere  several  other  *crrci'  at  Rome,  as  the  Chrcus  Flaminius,  Circus  Vati-
cuias,  and  others  were  built  in  later  times  by  Nero,  Caracalla,  and  other
emperors.


y  Google


64  THE  FASTI ;  [b.  ii.  399 — 422.

But  if  any  God  really  was  the  author  of  your  birth,  he  would
surely  bring  you  aid  at  so  perilous  a  moment. Your mother
for  certain  would  bring  you  aid,  were  she  not  herself  in  need
of  help,  who  in  one  day  has  become  a  mother  and  has been
made  childless. Babes !  bom  together,  together  to  die  I sink
together  beneath  the  waters." He  had  ceased  speaking,  and
laid  them  down,  having  first  taken  them  horn,  his  bosom. The
infants  screamed  with  a  similar  cry  ;  you  would  imagine that
they  were  conscious  of  their  fate. With  tearful  cheeks the
servants  return  to  their  homes. A  hollowed  ark^®  h^ars  them
placed  therein  on  the  surface  of  the  stream.  Ah !  what  a  weight
of  aestiny  did  that  one  sUght  plank  support ! The  ark  driven
by  the  breeze  into  the  shady  woods  settles  in  the  slime  as  the
river  subsides  by  degrees. There  was  a  tree,  the  remains  of
11  are  still  in  existence ; and  that  which  is  now  called  the
Ruminal,'*  was  once  the  Romulan  fig-tree.  Wondrous  torelate,
a  she-wolf  that  had  just  brought  forth  came  to  the  twins  thus
exposed ;  who  would  believe  that  the  wild  beast  did  not  hurt
the  babes  ? To  do  them  no  injury  is  not  enough  for  Jier^
she  even  aids  them ;  and  those,  whom  a  she-wolf  is  nourish-
ing, the  hands  of  a  relation  could  brook  to  destroy. She
stands  still,  and  with  her  tail  she  fawns  upon  her  tender  foster-
lings, and  with  her  tongue  forms  their  two  bodies  into  shape.
You  might  know  that  they  were  begotten  by  Mars  ;  they  have
no  fear ;  they  draw  her  udder,  and  are  nourished  by  tiie  aid
of  milk  not  destiued  for  them  by  nature.  She  gave  a  name  to
the  place — the  place ^  to  the  Luperci. The  nurse  has  a  high

^  A  hollowed  ark.l — Ver.  407.  *  Alveus*  is  *  a  hollow  wooden  vessel/
or  *  a  tub.'  It  may  here  mean  an  acrk  which  the  servant  had  provided  for
the  purpose ;  or  more  probably  the  wooden  cradle  in  which  the  children
had  been  laid,  and  which,  with  the  view  of  giving  them  a  chance  of  safety,
he  purposely  set  afloat,  instead  of  drowning  them,  as  he  had  been  ordered.

'9  Ruminal.'l — ^Ver.  412.  The  author  supposes  this  word  to  be  a  cor-
ruption from  *  Romula,*  which  derivation  is  unworthy  of  attention.  It  is,
with  much  more  probability,  supposed  to  have  been  so  i^amed  from
*rumis,*  or  *ruma,*  the  ancient  name  for  the  breast,  from  the  infants
having  been  there  suckled  by  the  wolf.  According  to  some,  it  took  its
name  from  '  rumen,*  the  *  throat,'  because  under  this  tree  the  cattle  used
to  chew  the  cud,  or  ruminate.  Tacitus  tells  us  that  the  tree,  in  his  time,
was  still  standing  in  the  Comitium.  Others  say  that  the  tree  referred  to
by  him  was  planted  by  Attius  Naevius.  Perhaps  it  was  propagated  from
the  one  under  which  the  infants  were  said  to  have  been  found.

*  The  place,"} — Ver.  421. The  Lupercal,  where  Pan  was  worshipped,


y  Google


B.n.  422 — 447.] OB, CALENDAR  Or  OVU).  65

reward  for  the  milk  she  gave. What  prevents  that  the  La-
perd  should  derive  their  name  from  the  Arcadian  mountain  ?

The  Lycaean  Fannns  has  his  temple  in  Arcadia.  Bride  newly
made,  what  dost  thon  await  ?  not  by  potent  herbs,  not  by
pnyen(,  not  by  the  magic  incantation — ^wilt  thou  become  a
motiier ;  with  patience  await  the  blows  of  the  right  hand  that
fractifies;  soon  shall  thy  father-in-hiw  have  the  wished-for
epithet  of  grandfather.^  For  it  was  that  period,  when  by  a
cmel  fate  the  matrons  were  affording  but  few  pledges  of  their
fhntfubiess.  "  What  avails  it  me,"  exclaimed  Romulus,  "  to
have  carried  off  the  Sabine  women  (this  took  place  while  he
held  the  sceptre)  if  my  violence  has  produced  for  me,  not
strength,  but  only  war  in  return  ;  it  had  been  better  for  me  to
have  had  no  daughters-in-law  at  such  a  price.  At  the  base  of
the  Esquilian  hill,  there  was  a  grove,  uncut  for  many  a  year,
and  caUed  by  the  name  of  the  mighty  Juno.  When  they
came  thither,  both  the  matrons  and  Ihe  men  wilh  bent  knees
prostrated  themselves  in  supphcation.  Then  lo !  suddenly
the  tops  of  the  shaken  wood  trembled,  and  the  Goddess  uttered
these  wondrous  words  through  her  sacred  grove,  ''Let  a  sacred
he-goat  halve  access  to  the  Italian  matrons."  The  multitude,
alarmed  by  this  ambiguous  oracle,  was  confounded.  There  was
an  augur,  whose  name  has  been  lost  in  the  lengthened  lapse
of  years ;  he  had  lately  come  an  exile  from  the  Etrurian  soU.^
He  sacrifices  a  he-goat.  The  matrons  at  his  bidding  sub-
mitted Iheir  backs  to  be  smitten  by  the  hide  that  had  been
cat  into  thongs. The  moon  was  resuming  her  new  horns

the  author  here  says  was  so  called  firom  Mupa,'  a  she-wolf/  and  gave  its
name  to  the  '  Liqierci,'  the  priests  of  Pan.  It  was  a  cave  in  the  Palatine
Hill,  and  is  said  to  have  been  consecrated  to  the  worship  of  Pan  by
Svander.  He  also  suggests  that  the  Lupercal  may  have  been  so  called
from  the>  name  *  Lycaeus/  which  Pan  derived  from  Mount  Lycsum,  in
Arcadia,  which  name  being  Avxaiov,  meaning  'of/  or  'infested  by  wolves/
would  be  rendered  in  Latin  by '  Lupercum/  a  word  of  similar  import.  Per-
haps the  festival  was  so  called  from  the  words  *  luo/  to  sacrifice  or  'expiate/
and  '  caper/  a  '  he-goat,'  as  a  goat  was  sacrificed  to  Pan  on  this  occasion.
^  Cfrandfather.'] — Ver.  427-8. Gower*s  version  of  these  lines  is—

*  Take  patiently  stripes  from  the  fruitful  hand ;
Thy  father  then  shall  be  a  father  grand.'

®  The  Etrurian  soil,"] — ^Ver.  444.  Etruria  was  the  country  which  sup-
plied Rome  both  with  rites  and  priests  in  the  earlier  ages,  and  was  espe-
cially renowned  A»  its  skill  in  the  arts  of  augury  and  divination.


y  Google


66  THE  FASTI ;  [b.  li.  447—465.

in  h^  tenth  cawne/rom  that  time,  and  suddenly  the  husband
became  a  fSather,  the  vife  a  mother.  Thanks  were  gioen  to
Lncina ;"  this  epithet  the  grove  gaye  to  thee,  0  Goddess ;  or  it
was  beeaose  thou  hast  under  thy  care  <mr  introduction  to  the
light.  Spare,  I  pray,  gentle  Luona,  the  pr^;nant  females,  and
without  pain  bring  forth  firom  the  womb  its  matured  burden.

The  next  day  has  now  dawned ;  do  thou  cease  to  rely  on  the
winds ;  the  gales  atjiihis  season  of  the  year  are  not  to  be  trusted.
The  breezes  are  unsteady ;  and  for  six  days  the  loosened  gate
of  the  prison  of  McAjoa^  all  unbolted  stands  wide  open.

Now,  lightened  of  his  burden,  the  Waterbearer  has  sunk
on  his  knee,  with  his  urn  obliquely  sloped ;  be  tiiou,  the  Fish,
the  next  to  receive  the  heavenly  steeds.  They  say  that
thou  and  thy  brother^  (for  ye  glitter  as  contiguous  con-
stellations) bore  on  your  backs  two  gods.  Once  on  a  time,
Dione^  flying  from  the  firightfdl  Typhon,  at  that  period  when
Jupiter  bore  arms  in  defence  of  heaven,  accompanied  by  the
infant  Cupid,  came  to  the  Euj^irates,  and  sat  on  the  margin
of  tiie  river  of  Palestine.*^  The  poplar  and  the  reeds  clothed
the  top  of  the  banks,  and  the  willows  afforded  a  hope  that

«  ittfltna.]— Ver.  449.  A  title  of  Diana,  as  presidiiig  over  the  birth  of
mortals,  derived  from  the  Latin  '  Inx/  luds,  *  light,'  or  from  '  Incus,'  *■  a
grove,'  the  place  of  her  worship,  as  the  poet  explains  in  this  and  the  next
line.

**  Prison  of  ^ohis,"] — Ver.  456.  JEolm  was  the  son  of  Jupiter  and
Acesta,  or  Sergesta,  daughter  of  Hippotas,  a  Trojan.  He  was  king  of
Lipara  and  Ihe  adjacent  islands  (celled  from  him  .foUan),  near  Italy  and
Sicily.  Strongyle,  now  Stromboli,  was  one  of  these.  It  was  a  volcanic
mountain,  and,  as  it  was  believed  that  the  inhabitants  could  tell  from  its
smoke,  three  days  before,  what  wind  would  blow,  the  fable  became  current
that  iEolus  was  the  god  of  the  winds,  and  that  he  held  them  imprisoned  in
his  dominions.

*  Thp  brotherJ] — ^Ver.  458.  The  one  looking  towards  the  north  was
called  *  Boreus,'  and  was  situated  under  the  arm  of  Andromeda. '  The  one
looking  towards  the  south  was  called  *  Notius,'  and  was  below  the  shoulder
of  the  constellation  Equus.

^  Diono.'] — ^Ver.  461.  According  to  Homer,  this  goddess  was  the
mo^er  of  Venus ;  but  the  poet,  by  here  introducing  her  in  company  with
Cupid,  evidently  confounds  her  with  that  goddess.  Typhon,  or  Typhaeus,
has  been  noticed  in  the  note  to  line  523  of  the  first  book.  According  to
Hyginus,  Typhon  did  present  himself,  whereon  Venus  and  her  son  were
turned  into  fishes.

^  PolsatiM.'] — Ver.  464.  Palestine  was  only  a  small  portion  of  Syria,
of  which  the  river  Euphrates  farmed  the  eastern  boundary.


y  Google


1.II.46S— 489.] OB,  OALEKJDAB  OF  OTCD.  67

by  tiieia  tiiey  might  be  concealed.  While  she  is  in  her  plmoe
of  eoncealment,  the  groye  roan  with  the  blast ;  she  tarns
pale  with  terror,  and  ^cies  that  the  forces  of  the  enemy"  are
It  hand.  And  as  she  clasps  her  son  to  her  boson^  she  says,
"Assist,  ye  nymphs,  and  give  aid  to  t»  two  Diyinities."  Im-
mediately, she  plnnged  into  the  stream.  Two  fishes  bore
than  np ;  for  which  they  now  haye  Constelkfeions  as  a  merited
reward.  In  ccmseqnence,  ^e  saperstitions  Syrians  deem  it
impioiis  to  place  this  kind  of  animal  on  their  tables,  nor  do
Hhey  profiine  their  lips  with  fish. ^

The  next  day  is  without  any  mark  of  distinction  ;  but  the
one  after  it  has  been  consecrated  to  Quirinus.  He  who  now
bears  Ihis  name  was  formerly  Romulus ;  either  because  by  the
mdent  Sabines  a  spear  was  called  'curis'  (from  his  spear
the  warrior  God  came  to  ^e  stars),  or  because  the  Quirites
gave  thmr  own  name  to  tiieir  king,  or  because  he  had  joined
the  Curians*^  to  the  Roman  people.  For  his  father  that
bean  sway  oyer  all  arms,  after  he  beheld  ihe  new  walls,  and
many  a  war  finished  by  the  hand  of  Romulus,  said,  ''0  Jupiter,
the  Roman  power  has  strei^th  of  its  awn,  and  needs  not  the
service  of  my  offspring.  Restore  the  son  to  the  father;
though  one  is  cut  off,  he  that  remains  shall  be  to  me  in  place
of  Remus  and  himself.  Thou  didst  tell  me  that  there  shall
be  one,  whom  thou  wilt  raise  to  the  azure  rault  of  heayen :
let  the  words  of  Jove  be  fulfilled."  Jupiter  nodded  assent ;

"  Forces  qf  the  enemy.]— Ver.  468.  '  Hostfles  maniu'  may  mean  either
the  troops  or  forces  of  the  giants,  who  were  aiding  their  kinsman  in  the
gittit  war,  or  Hhe  hands  of  her  enemy'  himself.  In  the  hitter  case  the  trans-
lation wonld  he,  'fancies  that  the  hands  of  her  enemy  are  even  now  upon  her/

*  Prqfane  their  It/M.]— Ver.  473-4.  The  Syrians  had  a  notion  that
iwdhng  of  the  hody  and  ulceration  would  he  the  consequence  of  eating
fish,  and  this  was  perhaps  the  true  reason  of  theur  abstinence  from  that
diet.  They  offered  either  fish  or  representations  of  them  in  metal  to  the
Soddess,  Atergatis,  who  was  their  deity  corresponding  to  Venus.  Gower
thus  translates  thrae  lines—

'  Hence  Syrians  hate  to  eat  that  kind  of  fishes ;
Nor  is  it  fit  to  make  their  gods  their  dishes.'

^  The  Curtant.]— Ver.  480.  When  Romulus  agreed  with  Tatius,
king  of  the  town  of  Cures,  to  incorporate  his  subjects  into  the  Roman
itate,  it  was  settied  that  the  Romans  should  be  called  <CuriteS|'  or
'Qokites,'  in  honour  of  their  new  associates,  theCnrites  or  Curiana,  as
irdl  as  *  Romani,'  from  the  name  of  Romulus.

1*2


y  Google


66  THX  FASTI ;  [b.  II.  489--505.

at  his  nod  either  pole  was  shaken,  and  AUas'^  fblt  the  presa-
ing  weight  of  the  heavens.  There  is  a  place ;  the  people  of
old  caDed  it  the  fen  of  Caprea  ;**  it  chanced  that  there,  O
Romulus,  thon  wast  dispensing  justice  to  thy  snhjects.  The
sun  Tanishes,  the  interyening  clouds  conceal  the  sky,  and
the  heayy  shower  descends  wiUi  pouring  torrents.  It  thun-
ders, and  the  heavens  are  rent  asunder  with  the  sent  forth
lightnings.  The  people  disperse  in  flight,  the  wkUe  the  mo-
narch on  the  steeds  of  his  sire  is  speeding  to  the  stars.
There  was  mourning,  and  the  senate  was  under  a  charge  of
murder  fiilsely  imputed  to  it:  and  possihly  that  persuasion
might  have  remained  fixed  in  the  minds  of  men.  But  Julius
Proculus**  was  on  bis  way  from  Alba  Longa  ;^  the  moon  was
shining,  and  there  was  no  need  of  a  torch,  when,  with  a  sudden
peal,  me  clouds  thundered  on  his  left  hand.  He  started  back,
and  his  hair  stood  on  an  end  with  terror.^  Romulus,  graceful^
and  larger  than  the  human  size,  arrayed  too  in  his  kingly
robe,  seemed  to  stand  before  him  in  the  middle  of  the  way,
and  at  the  same  time  to  say,  **  Forbid  the  Quirites  to  lament,

'1  AiUu.'\ — ^Ver.  490.  He  was  the  son  of  Jupiter,  and  was  the  fiither  of
the  Pleiades,  who  were  placed  hy  Jopiter  among  the  constellations.  He  is
also  said  to  have  been  the  £ither  of  the  Hyades,  who  received  a  similar
honour.  Atlas  was  the  name  of  a  mountain  in  the  country  of  Mauritania,
in  Africa,  so  high  that  its  summit  was  not  visible;  hence  the  fable,  that  a
king  of  that  region  supported  the  heavens.  The  most  probable  solution  of
the  fable,  is  that  he  was  an  astronomer  of  Libya,  who  frequented  that
mountain  for  the  purpose  of  making  astronomical  observations.

«2  The  fen  qf  Caprea-^—yet.  491.  This  *  fen  of  Caprea,'  or  *  Capra,'
the  *  she-goat/  was  a  marsh  near  Bome,  in  the  Campus  Martins.  Romulus
is  said  to  have  been  promulgating  the  laws  or  reviewing  his  army  here
when  he  was  translate  Some  accounts  represent  him  as  having  been
assassinated  while  holding  the  senate  in  the  Temple  of  Vulcan.

^  JuUue  Proadui.'l'^yer.  499.  Dionysius  says  that  he  was  a  citizen
of  Alba  Longa.

^  Alba  Longa.'] — Yer.  499.  This  was  originally  a  colony  from  Lavi-
nium,  in  Latium,  and  was  founded  by  Ascanius,  the  son  of  ^neas,  at  the
foot  of  the  Alban  Mount.  It  was  so  named  from  the  discovery  in  that
spot,  of  a  white  sow  and  her  titter,  as  obscurely  foretold  by  Helenus  in
his  prophecy,  mentioned  in  the  JSneid,  Book  3, 1.  389.  From  its  length
it  was  called  Longa.  It  was  destroyed,  with  th&  exception  of  its  temple,
by  Tullus  UostiUus,  who  removed  its  inhabitants  to  Rome.

95  With  terror,'] — ^Ver.  501*2. Gower's  translation  of  this  passage  is,
'  IjOI  suddenly  the  left.hand  hedges  quake ;
He  with  his  hairs  turned  bolt  upright  starts  back.'


y  Google


1.  n.  506— 527.] OB,  CALElfTDAB  OF  OTID.  69

and  let  them  not  offend  my  Godhead  with  their  tears.  Let
them  offer  me  frankincense,  and  let  ihe  pious  multitude  pay
adoration  to  Quirmus,  their  new  God,  and  let  them  practise  my
father's  arts  and  waifare."  He  gave  these  commands,  ana
Tanished  into  the  thin  air.  Proculus  calls  the  two  peoples
together,  and  reports  to  them  the  words  enjoined  upon  mm.
A  temple  is  raised  to  ihe  Diyinity ;  the  hill  too**  is  named
from  him,  and  appointed  days^  bring  back  the  religious
services  of  the  Roman  father.

Why  the  same  day  is  also  called  the  festiyal  of  fools,^  ^'^ow
learn ;  a  reason,  trijflvig  indeed,  but  still  appropriate,  is  sug-
gested. The  earth  in  ancient  times  had  no  experienced  hus-
bandmen ;  the  toils  of  war  used  to  weary  the  active  men  of  tho9e
days.  There  was  more  of  glory  mihtwe  of  the  sword  than  of
the  curved  plough ;  neglected  by  its  owner,  the  fields  used  to
bear  but  little.  Yet  did  the  ancients  sow  the  spelt,  and  reajped
it,  and  gave  the  same  when  cut  down,  to  Ceres  as  the  first-fruits.
T^ght  by  experience  they  exposed  it  to  the  flames  to  be  parched,
and  by  their  mistakes  they  suffered  many  a  loss.  For  sometimes,
thjey  used  to  sweep  up  smutty  ashes  instead  of  grain ;  some-
times the  flames  set  fire  to  their  cottages.  Fornax,  the  Goddess
of  the  Kiln,^  was  deified ;  pleased  with  Fornax  as  a  Goddess,
the  husbandmen  pray  that  she  will  moderate  the  heat  to  the
grain  while  parching. Still  does  the  chief  Curio^  appoint  the

*  Tke  kia  /oo.]— Ver.  511.  The  Qmrinal  bill.  But  Festus  supposes
it  to  have  derived  iti  name  firom  the  Sabines  of  the  town  of  Cures,  who
settled  there  and  on  the  Ci^itoline  hiU.  Niebuhr  thinks  there  was  a  town
on  it  called  'Qoirium,'  whence  the  name  'Quirites,'  at  first  peculiar  to
the  Sabine  people.

V  AppokUed  daft.]— Ver.  512.  The  Qmrinalia  were  stativae,  or  'set'
festivals.

«  2^/0il»oa/Qf/oo£».]— Ver.513.  'Stultorum  festa,'  or  'Ferise.'  This
was  another  name  <rf  the  Quirinalia,  because  those  who  firom  want  of  time,
or  being  on  a  journey,  or,  as  the  poet  says  further  on,  who  were  unable  to
team  tl^  time  when  their  own  Cuiria  performed  the  rites,  and  had  not  sacri-
fteed  with  the  rest  of  the  people  on  the  Fomacalia,'did  so  on  the  Qmri-
naha,  which  was  the  last  day  for  that  purpose.

•  6odde$a  qf  tks  JTOpi.]— Ver.  525.  Pliny  (Nat  Hist.  Book  18)  says
that  Numa  deified  the  goddess  Fwnax.  He  says,  *Numa  taught  his  people
to  propitiate  the  gods  with  the  produce  of  the  earth,  to  offer  the  salt  cakes,
and  to  parch  the  tpelt,  as  when  parched  it  was  more  wholesome  for  food.
He  also  institated  the  Fomacalia.'

^  Citrio.2 Ver.  527.  Romulus  divided  the  people  into  three  tribes,  and

(icb  tribe  into  ten  'cariae.' Each  'curia*  had  a  temple  of  its  own  for  the


y  Google


70  ,  THB  FASTI ;  [b.  ii.  528 — 544.

festiTals  of  Fornax  in  form  prescribed  by  law,  but  offers  no
sacrifices  at  a  fixed  period :  and  in  the  Forum,  irhere  many  a
tablet'  is  suspended  around,  each  ward  is  denoted  by  a  certain
mark.  The  foolish  part  of  the  people  do  not  know  which  is
their  own  ward,  but  perform  a  repetition  of  the  sacrifice  on
the  last  day.

Honour  also  is  pidd  to  the  graves'  of  the  dead.  Appease
the  spirits  of  your  forefathers,  and  offer  small  presents  on  the
pyres  that  are  long  since  cold.*  The  shades  of  the  dead^  ask
but  humble  offerings :  affection  rather  than  a  costly  ^£t  is
pleasing  to  them;  Styx  below  has  no  greedy  Divinities.  Enoneh
for  them  is  the  covering  of  their  tomb  overshadowed  with,  me
chaplets  laid  there,  and  the  scattered  fruits  and  the  little  grain
of  salt ;  and  com  soaked  in  wine,  and  violets  loosened  j^om
the  stem  ;  these  gifts  let  a  jar  contain,  left  in  the  middle  of
the  way.  I  do  not  forbid  more  costly  offerings,  but  by  these
the  shade  may  be  appeased ;  add  prayers  and  suitable  words,
the  altars  htm^  first  erected.  This  custom  did  ^neas,  no  nn-
suitable  teacher  of  the  duties  of  affection,  introduce  into  thy

performatice  of  the  sacred  rites,  and  was  presided  over  by  its  oWn  'curio,'
so  called  because  he  took  care  of  (*curabat')  the  sacred  rites.  Over  them  all
presided  the  'curio  maximus/  or  chief  curio.  Down  to  a.u.c.  544,  lie  was
chosen  from  the  patricians;  after  that  period,  from  the  plebeians.

2  Many  a  tableW] — ^Ver.  529.  In  the  Forum  the  names  of  the  curue
were  written  on  tablets,  which  stated  when  and  where  they  were  about
to  perform  such  rites  as  were  not  of  the  class  of  *statiyse,'  or  set  feasts,  but
'imperatiTae,'  appointed  by  order  of  the  Consul,  the  Pnetw,  or  Pontifex
Maximus.

»  Paid  to  the  ^ratje*.]— Ver.  533.  The  'Feralia,'  in  honour  of  the  dead,
were  celebrated  on  the  19th  of  February,  as  it  was  formerly  the  last  montH
of  the  year.  Offerings  were  then  Made  to  propitiate  the  manes  or  abjuies  of
the  dead.  Festus  derives  the  word  from  *  fero,'  *  to  bear,'  because  they « bear
offerings;'  or  from  *ferio,*  *to  slay,'  because  sheep  were  slain  for  sacrifice.
Varro  derives  it  from  *iniEieri,'  *the  inhabitants  of  the  infernal  regions,'  'the
dead.'

*  Long  since  coW.]— Ver.  534.  Literally,  'ertingtdshed.'  The  pfle,
before  being  lighted,  was  called  'pyrus;'  when  lighted  for  burning  the  dead,
*rogus ;'  when  extinguished,  *bustum.'

<  Shades  cf  the  dead.'l^Yer,  535.  Literally,  'Manes.'  Acoordmg  to
some  writers,  the  souls  of  the  good,  after  death,  became '  Lares;'  those  of  ti^e
wicked  *Lemures,'  or  'Larvae ;'  and  the  *  Manes'  were  those  whose  state  was
as  yet  uncertain.  The  name  is  also  appUed  to  the  two  Genii,  Good  and.
Evil,  who  were  supposed  ever  to  attend  each  individual,  and  to  inhabit  his
tomb  after  death.  By  others  the  *  Manes'  are  considered  to  have  been  tl^s
deities  of  the  infernal  regions.


y  Google


IUII.544 — 566.} OB, CALEITBAB  07  OTTD.  71

lands,  O  just  Latmus.  He  used  to  aSer  the  annual  gifts  to
the  Gemns  of  his  father :  hence  did  the  adjoining  nations
leani  the  affectionate  ceremonial.  But  at  one  time,  while  they
were  engaged  in  a  lengthened  war  with  contentious  arms,
they  n^ected  the  Parental  days.^^  It  was  not  with  impunity
that  they  did  so ;  for,  hy  reascm  of  that  cauae  of  ill  omen,
IU>me  is  said  to  have  felt  the  heat  of  the  funeral  fires  in  the
suburbs/  For  my  part  I  scarcdy  believe  it,  but  their  dead
forc^liers  are  said  to  have  come  forth  from  their  tombs,  and
to  have  uttered  their  complaints  in  the  hours  of  the  still  night;
and  they  say  that  appalling  ghosts,  a  phantom  crowd,  howled
through  the  streets  of  the  city  and  the  fields  of  Latium.
Afterwards,  the  omitted  honours  were  paid  at  the  graves,  and
^lere  cam^e  an  end  of  these  portentous  s^hts,  and  of  the
BKMrtatity  eis  well.  But  while  these  rites  are  being  per*
formed,  remain  unwedded,  ye  damsels ;  let  the  torch  of  pine
wood  await  anspidous  days.  And  let  not  the  curved  spear^
part  thy  virgin  ringlets,  maiden,  who  appearest  to  thy  im-
psident  mother  alreaiih/  o£  marriageable  yeajrs.  Conceal  thy
torches,  Hymenseus,'  and  remove  them  afar  from  thete  diftmal
files,  the  gloomy  tombs  have  other  torches  than  these.  Let
the  Divinities  too  be  concealed,^^  with  the  doors  <^  their  temples
closed;  be  the  altars  without  incense,  and  let  the  hearths
stand  without  fire.  Now  phantom  spirits  wander  abroad,  and
bodies  that  have  been  committed  to  Uie  tombs ;  now  does  the

*  Parenktl  datfs.'] — Ver.  548.  So  called  from  'parens,*  'a  parent,^'an.
cestor/  or  'relaticm/  on  behalf  of  tke  spirits  of  whom  sacrifice  was  made
Qi  these  days.

"^  In  ike  aubwrha."] — Ver.  650.  It  was  fcHrlnddea  by  law  to  bum  the
dead  within  the  walls  of  the  city,  that  the  priests  might  not  be  defiled  hy
tty  easttal  eontact  with  them,  and  that  the  houses  might  not  be  endan-
8oed  by  the  flames  of  the  fimeral  piles.

'  The  curved  j|8«w.]— Ver.  560.  The  hair  of  the  bride  was  adjusted
hj  the  Imsband  into  six  locks,  with  the  point  of  a  needle  made  into  the
i^)e<tf  a  spear,  or,  as  some  sn^^pose,  with  the  point  of  an  actual  spear.  Fes-
to*  says,  that  this  cearemony  was  typical  of  the  guardianship  of  the  matrons
by  *  Juno  Curitis,'  or  Juno  'of  the  lance.'  Perhaps  it  may  have  been  typi-
Oil  d  the  dominion  intended  hy  the  hushand  to  be  exercised  over  his  wife.

•  Bymmaue,'] — ^Ver.  561.  Hymen,  or  Hymenaeus,  was  the  tutehir  deity
of  monriage.  He  was  son  of  Bacchus  and  Venus,  or  of  Apollo  and  Calliope,
Urmia,  or  Clio. By  some  he  is  said  to  have  heen  the  son  of  Magncs.

^  Be  concealed.'} — Ver.  564.  Let  the  doors  be  closed,  that  the  deities
way  not  see  any  inauspicious  sights,  such  as  funerals,  which  were  especially
objects  of  aversion  to  the  gods.


y  Google


72  THB  FJL8TI ;  [b.  II.  566 — 586.

ghost  feed  upon"  the  viands  left 'for  it.  But  vet  these  rites
are  to  last  no  longer^  than  to  allow  that  there  should  remain
of  the  month  as  many  days  as  my  verses  have  feet.""*"  This
day,  hecaose  on  it  they  perform  the  due  offerings  to  the  dead,
they  have  called  *  the  Feralia ;'  it  is  the  last  day  for  appeasing
the  shades.

See,  an  old  woman  stricken  in  years,  sitting  in  the  midst  c^
the  girls,  is  performing  the  sacred  rites  of  Tadta,''  yet  she  is
not  quite  silent  herself:"  with  tiiree  fingers  she  places  three
cloves  of  frankincense  under  the  tiireshold,  where  the  little
mouse  has  made  for  himself  a  hidden  way :  then  she  binds
the  enchanted  threads  with  tiie  dark  coloured  spindle  ;  then
she  roasts  on  the  fire  the  sewed-up  head  of  a  pilchard^^  which
she  has  first  sealed  up  with  pitch,  and  pierced  with  a  brazen
needle.  Wine  too  she  drops  on  it ;  whatever  of  the  wine  is
left,  she  either  drinks  it  herself,  or  her  attendants,  yet  she
herself  take9  the  greater  part.  ''  We  have  tied  up  the  tongnes
of  our  foes,  and  the  mouths  of  our  enemies,''  says  she>  in  the
act  of  going  out,  and  then  the  dnmken  hag  goes  forth.  Ton
will  at  once  ask  oil  me,  who  is  the  silent  Goddess  ?  learn  what  is
known  to  me  through  the  men  of  old  times.  Jupiter,  smitten
by  an  unconquerable  passion  for  Jutoma,  endured  many  things

^^  The  ghoHfeed  upctu] — Ver.  566.  At  this  period,  viands  were  placed
near  the  tombs,  on  which  the  Manes  were  8iipp<»ed  to  feed.  It  was  siqi-
posed  that  they  delighted  in  blood,  and  in  consequence,  aniinals  were  fre-
quently slain  at  the  funeral  pile.

"*  Veraet  havefeei,y-Yet,  568.  There  are  eleren  feet  in  an  Hexa-
meter and  Pentameter  couplet,  and  as  the  Feralia  were  held  on  the  12th  of
the  calends  of  Mareh,  there  would  be  only  eleven  days  left  in  the  month;
the  poet  means,  that  the  Feralia  must  be^  and  end  on  the  12th  of  the
calends  of  March.

^  Toctta.] — ^Ver.  572.  Tadta  was  also  worshipped  under  the  name  of
Mania  or  Muta,  besides  the  name  Lara,  here  mentioned.  Neapolis,  an  old
commentator  on  this  author,  thinks  that  these  rites  accompanied  the  Feralia,
as  expressiTe  of  the  maxim,  'De  mcnrtuis  nil  nisi  bonum,'  'Be  silent  over
the  faults  of  the  AeaAJ  The  rites  here  described  are  evidently  of  magieal
tendency,  but  are  replete  with  absurdity.  Some  writers  say  thai  Numa
worshipped  one  of  the  Muses  under  this  name.

u  QuiU  silent  herself.']— Yer,  572.  The  editor  of  the  Delphin  e^tion
most  imgallantly  remarks  on  this  passage,  'An  old  woman  be  silent?  She
could  just  as  soon  hold  a  red  hot  coal  in  her  mouth!'

1*  A  pilchard,']— 'Ver,  678.  The  'maena'  was  a  small  sea-fish  of  little
value,  which  was  eaten  salted  by  the  poorer  classes.  It  was  periuips
sacrificed  to  the  goddess  because  its  name  resembled  her  name,  Mania.  Iti
mouth  being  sewed  up  v^as  typical  of  silence.


y  Google


B.  II.  58^—615.] OB,  GALKNBAB  OW  OTIB.  73

tfaat  ought  not  to  have  heen  endured  by  so  great  a  God. At  one
tinie  she  naed  to  lie  hid  in  ihe  wood  among  the  hacel  copses,  at
another  time  she  nsed  to  plnnge  into  the  londred  streams. He
calls  tc^ether  the  Nymphs,  which  then  firequented  Tjatinm,  and
otters  such  words  as  these  in  the  midst  of  their  company.
*'  This  sister  of  yonrs  is  only  spiting  herself,  and  shuns  that
wbich  is  for  her  good,  to  lock  herself  in  the  embrace  of.  the
highest  God. Consult  ye  for  us  both ;  for  that  which  will  be  my
Invest  pleasure,  the  same  shall  prore  the  great  advantage  of
your  sister.  Prevent  her,  at  ^e  very  brink,  as  she  flies,  in  order
lltat  she  may  not  plunge  her  body  beneath  ihe  waters  of  the
stream.^'  He  had  said ;  all  the  water  Nymphsof  the  Tiber  nodded
their  assent,  and  those  who  dwell  in  thy  chambers,-  0  Gk)ddess
Hia. It  chanced  there  was  a  Naiad  Nymph^  Lura  by  name ;
but  her  ancient  name  was  the  first  syllable  twice  repeated,^*
given  to  her  for  her  infirmity  of  talkativeneta.  Many  a  time  had
Ahno^  said  to  her,  **  Daughter,  do  hold  your  tonffue ;" but
she  did  not  hold  it. She,  soon  as  she  reached  me  lake  of
her  sister  Jutuma,  says,  ''Avoid  the  banks,"  and  repeats  the
words  of  Jupiter. She  also  went  to  Juno,  and  expressing  pity
for  her  as  a  wife,  says, ''That  husband  of  thine  is  now
smitten  by  the  Naiad  Jutuma." Jupiter  was  furious ;  he  de-
prived her  of  the  tongue  which  she  had  used  with  so  Utde
caution,  and  charged  Mercury,^  "Take  her  to  the  shades  below;
it  is  a  proper  place  for  the  silent ;  a  Nymph  she  is,  but  a  Nymph
of  the  infernal  lake  shall  she  be." ■  The  commands  of  Jove  are
now  being  executed ;  a  grove  receives  them  on  the  road ;  she  is
said  to  have  taken  the  fmcy  of  the  God  who  conducted  her.  He
prepares  to  offer  violence ;  with  her  looks  in  the  place  of
wonls  she  intreats  him,  and  in  vain  with  her  voiceless  mouUi  does
she  strug^e  to  speak. She  becomes  pregnant,  and  gives  birth

^  Tky  chambers.'] — ^Ver.  598.  Dia,  when  buried  alive  on  the  banks  of
the  Tiber,  was  ftbled  to  have  become  wedded  to  the  god  of  the  river.

^  Twice  repeated,'] — ^Ver.  599.  This  name  was  'Lala,'  from  the  Qretk
XaKtiv,  *io  talk,'  'to  chatter.' Another  of  her  names  was  Lanmda.

V  Almo.] — Ver.  601.  The  father  of  Lara,  a  rivulet  in  the  Roman  ter-
ritoiy,  fanning  from  the  Appian  way  into  the  Tiber  near  the  city.

"  Mercury. 2 — Ver.  608.  The  son  (tf  Jiqdter  and  Maia,  and  the  mea-
KDger  of  the  gods.  His  name  was  probably  derived  from  '  merx,'  'mer.
chandize,'  as  he  was  the  god  of  trade  and  gain.  He  was  represented  with
winged  cap  and  vringed  sandals.


y  Google


74  THI  FABTI ;  [b.  a.  615—630.

to  twins,  the  Lares/*  irho  guard  die  cross  ways,  and  ever  keep
their  watch  in  our  houses.

The  kinsfolk,  full  of  affection,  have  named  the  next  day  the
"  Caiistia,"  ^  and  the  company  of  relations  assemble  at  the
family  feast.  In  good  truth,  it  is  a  pleasant  thing  to  turn  our
attention  from  the  tombs  and  our  relatirea  who  are  dead,  to
those  who  survire ;  and  after  so  many  are  lost,  to  see  all  that
remains  of  our  fiimily,  and  to  reckon  the  degrees  of  relation-
ship. Let  the  guiltless  come;  fSur,  far  hence  be  the  azina-
tural  brother,  and  the  mother  cruel  to  her  own  offspring ;  the
son  for  whom  the  father  is  too  long-lived,  and  he  who  counts
his  mother's  years;  the  cruel  mother-in-law,  toOy  who  hates  and
oppresses  her  daughter-in-law.  Far  hence  be  the  brothers^
the  descendants  of  Tantalus,  and  the  wife  of  Jason,  and  she
who  gave  to  the  husbandman  the  parched  seed-corn  ;^  Progne
too,  and  her  sister,^  and  Tereus,  cruel  to  them  both ;  and

^  The  LareaJ] — Ver.  616.  These  deities  were  divided  into  the  pnbHc
and  private  Lares.  The  private,  or  fomiMars,  are  by  some  supposed  ta  have
been  the  same  with  the  *  Manes'  or  'shades'  of  the  ancestcn^  of  the  family
occupying  the  house.  The  public  'Lares'  were,  the  'urbani,'  presiding  over
cities;  'rustici,'  over  the  country;  *compitales/  over  cross-roads;  'marini,*
over  the  sea. Lar  is  an  Etrurian  word,  signifying  'lord/  or  'noble.'

*  Carittia.'] — ^Ver.  617.  From  'carus,'  'dear,*  ag  these  festivals  weie
for  the  purpose  of  maintaining  fimiily  love,  and  oi  healing  misunderstand-
ings by  meeting  again.

»  The  brotheri.]  —Ver.  627.  Atreus  and  Thyestes,  sons  of  Pelops  and
Hippodamia,  killed  their  half-brother  Chrysippus.  Thyestes  having  seduced
Aerope,  the  wife  of  Atreus,  sent'Pleisthenes,  the  son  of  Atreus,  whom  he
had  brought  up,  to  murder  his  father.  Atreus,  supposing  him  to  be  the
son  of  Thyestes,  stew  him.  According  to  another  version  of  the  stoay,
Atreus,  feigning  areconciliation,  invited  Thyestes  to  his  kingdom,  and  killed
and  dressed  the  bodies  of  Tantalus  and  Pleisthenes,  the  sons  of  Thyestes ;
and  while  the  latter  was  enjoying  the  meal,  Atreus  had  their  hands  and
heads  brought  in  and  shown  to  the  father,  on  which  Thyestes  fled  to  the
court  of  Thesprotus. Medea,  the  wife  of  Jason,  slew  her  own  children.

^  T?ie  parched  seed'^om.'\ — Ver.  628.  Ino,  daughter  of  Cadmus,  mar-
ried Athamas,  who  had  Phrixus  and  Helle  by  a  former  marriage.  These
Ino  resolved  to  destroy.  She  persuaded  the  women  to  jMurch  the  seed-corn,
imknown  to  their  husbands.  The  crop  failing,  the  oracle  at  Delphi  was
consulted  how  consequent  famine  might  be  averted.  Ino  persuaded  the
messengers  to  say  that  Apollo  directed  Phrixus  to  be  sacrificed  to  Jupiter.
By  celestial  interference  Phrixus  was  saved,  and  Athamas  becoming  mad,
f  no  rushed  into  the  sea,  and  was  made  a  sea-goddess  mider  the  name  of
Leucothea.

2*  Proffne.'] — ^Ver.  629.  Tereus,  king  of  Thrace,  married  Progne,  and
at  her  request  went  to  Athens  to  biding  Philomela  to  see  her  sister,  and,


y  Google


B  u.  630—650.] OB, CAIiSin>AB  OF  OTU).  75

whoeyer  increases  his  wealth  by  the  perpetration  of  crime.
Offer  the  frankincense  to  the  propitious  wd»  of  the  family :
Concord  is  said  on  this  day  to  he  present  with  extreme  be-
nigDity ;  offer,  too,  a  share  of  the  yiands,  that  ^e  presented
platter,  testiniony  of  the  pleasing  honour,  may  feed  the  well*
girt  Lares  .^  And  now  when  night,  far  advanced,  shall  invite
you  to  balmy  slumbers,  when  ye  are  about  to  pray,  take  wine  in
abundance  in  your  hand,  and  say,  **  Well  may  it  be  with  us,  and
▼ell  with  thee,* most  excellent  Csesar,  father  of  thy  countiy,"*
the  wine  being  poured  forth  as  ycu  repeat  the  holy  words.

When  the  night  shall  have  passed  away,  let  the  God,  who
by  his  landmark  divides  the  fields,  be  worshipped  with  the
accustomed  honours.  Terminus,^  whether  thou  art  a  stone,
or  whether  a  stock  sunk  deep  in  the  field  by  the  ancients,
yet  even  in  this  form  ^ou  dost  possess  divinity.  Thee,  the
two  owners  of  the  fields  crown  mth  chaplets  from  their  <^
posite  sides,  and  present  with  two  sarlands  aud  two  cakea.
An  altar  is  erected ;  to  this  the  female  peasant  herself  bri^s
in  a  broken^  pan  the  fire  taken  from  the  burning  hearths.
An  old  man  cuts  up  the  firewood,  and  piles  it  on  hi^  when
chopped,  and  strives  hard  to  drive  the  branches  into  the
resistmg  ground.  While  he  is  exdtii^  the  kindling  Uaze
▼ith  dried  bark,  a  boy^  stands  by  and  holds  in  his  bmds  a

having  layished  her  by  the  way,  he  cut  out  her  tongue.  Of  this  Progne
was  informed  by  a  robe  which  Philomehi  sent  her,  on  which  was  described
the  conduct  of  Tereus.  Progne,  on  this,  killed  Itys,  the  son  of  Tereus,
and  served  him  np  to  his  father.  Tereus  would  Yam  slain  her,  but  the
gods  changed  him  into  a  hoopoe,  Progne  into  a  swallow,  and  Philomela
into  a  nightingale.
^  Well-giri  Lares,"] — ^Ver.  634.  The  Lares  were  represented  in  ^  Ga-
^nosxa.  habit,  which  covered  the  left  shoulder,  leaving  the  right  bare.  The
'patella,'  or  platter,  was  a  broad  vessel  or  dish,  used  in  sacrifices.

^  Father  of  thy  emniry.'\—'\&[,  637.  The  health  of  Augustus  was
"hrays  given  at  private  and  pubtic  entertainments,  according  to  a  decree
of  the  senate  to  that  effect.

*  TermUms.'\-~yet.  641.  This  god  was  represented  by  a  stcme  or
B^Pt  and  not  vrith  human  features.  Lactantius  says  he  was  the  stone
which  Saturn  svnillowed,  mistaking  him  for  Jupiter.  His  worship  was
ordained  by  Numa,  and  his  emblems  were  a'owned  with  wreaths  of
flowers  on  his  yearly  festivals.

^  Ina  hrokeru]'—\fx.  645.  'Curta.'  It  is  difficuH  to  say  whether  the
word  *CQrtuB'  means,  'broken,'  or  'small,'  here.  Perhaps  the  former,  as
1)^  a  mark  of  the  poverty  of  the  person  sacrificing.

*  A  %.]— Ver.  650. Boys  and  girls,  called  'camilli,'  and  'camiflw,'


y  Google


76  THB  FASTI ;  [b.  n.  650—670.

broad  basket.  Oat  of  this,  when  he  has  thrice  thrown  the
prodnoe  of  the  earth  into  Uie  midst  of  the  flames,  his  little
daughter  offers  the  sliced  honeycombs.  Others  hold  tmie ;
a  portion  of  eadi  thing  is  thrown  into  the  fire ;  the  crowd,
all  arrayed  in  white,  look  on,  and  maintain  religious  silence.
The  common  landmark  also  is  sprinkled  with  the  blood  of
a  slain  lamb ;  he  makes,  too,  no  complaint  when  a  sucking-
pig  is  offered  to  him.  The  neighbours  meet  in  supplication,
and  they  celebrate  the  feast  and  sing  thy  praises,  holy  Ter-
minus. It  is  thou  that  dost  set  the  limits  to  nations,  and
dties,  and  mighty  kingdoms;  without  thee  all  the  country
would  be  steeped  in  litigation.  In  thee  there  is  no  ambi-
tion— by  no  gold  art  thou  bribed;  ma^st  thou  with  law
and  integrity  preserve  the  fields  committed  to  thy- care.
Hadst  thou  in  times  of  old  marked  out  the  land  of  Thyrea,"
then  three  hundred  persons  would  not  have  been  consigned
to  death,  and  then,  the  name  of  Othryades  would  not  have
been  read  on  the  piled-up  armour.  Ah !  how  much  of  his
blood  did  he  expend  in  his  country's  cause !  What,  too,  hap-
pened when  the  new  Capitol  was  building  f  This,  namely ;  the
whole  multitude  of  Diyinities  withdrew,**^  and  gave  place  to
Jupiter.  Terminus,  as  the  ancients  tell,  being  there  {o\md,  re-
mained in  his  shrine,  and  «^t7/ possesses  the  temple  in  common

assitted  at  the  Roman  sacrifices.  They  were  required  to  he  sound  in  health,
peffect  in  limh,  free  horn,  and  with  hoth  parents  living.  Some  suppose
that  they  corresponded  with  the  KadfuKot  of  the  Curetes  and  Coryhantes,
others  with  Cadmilus,  one  of  the  Cahiri  of  Samothrace.  Others  again  sup-
pose that  'camillus'  was  merely  an  old  Etrurian  word,  signifying  'a  boy.'

*  I%lfrea,] — Ver.  663.  Thyrea  was  a  town  on  the  confines  of  Laconia
and  Argolis.  It  was  consequently  claimed  by  the  people  of  both  countries,
and  th^  agreed  to  decide  the  didm  by  the  sword.  Three  hundred  men
were  chosen  as  champions  on  each  side.  Of  these  only  three  survived.  The
two  surviving  Argives  hastened  home  triamphantly  to  announce  their  suc-
cess ;  but  oSiryades,  the  Spartan  leader,  who  was  still  living,  arose  from
the  ground,  and  erected  a  trophy  of  arms,  and,  according  to  Statins,  in-
scribed it  with  his  own  name,  written  in  his  own  blood,  in  honour  of  Jupi-
ter  Tropoeuchus,  Hhe  possessor  of  trophies;'  and  then  slew  himself.  Each
party  claimed  the  victory,  and  hostilities  being  renewed,  the  Spartans
ultimately  prevailed.  The  poet  mentions  three  hundred,  but  the  story  is,
that  six  hundred  men  were  engaged  in  the  conflict.

*^  Dhhdtiet  withdrew,] — Ver.  668.  They  were  consulted  by  Tarqui-
nius  Superbus,  by  auguries,  and  all  but  Terminus  consented  to  be  removed,
which  circumstance  was  regarded  as  an  omen  oi  the  future  stability  of  the
Boman  empire.


y  Google


B.  n.  670—695.] OB,  CALEBSAB  01*  OYID.  71

-with  mighty  Jove.  Now,  too,  that  he  may  see  nothing  but
the  stars  above  him«  the  roof  of  his  temple  has  a  little  opening.
After  Uiat  circamstancey  Terminus,  no  inconstancy  was  per-
mitted thee ;  in  whatever  situation  thon  hast  been  placed,
there  abide,  and  do  not  yield  one  jot  to  any  neighbour  asking
thee ;  that  thou  mayst  not  appear  to  £&your  a  mortal  rather
than  Jove.  And  whether  thou  shalt  be  struck  by  the  plough-
shares, or  whether  by  the  harrows,  cry  aloud,  "This  is  my  field,"
that  is  yours."  There  is  a  road  which  leads  the  citizens  to
the  fields  of  the  Laurentines,  realms  once  sought  by  ^e  Dar-
danian  chief.  On  that  road,  the  sixth  ntt/e-stone  from  the
city  is  accustomed  to  witness  the  sacrifices  made  to  thee,  0
Terminus,  wi^  the  entrails  of  a  sheep.  To  other  nations,  land
has  been  allotted  with  Bome  fixed  limits ;  the  extent  of  the
Boman  City  and  of  the  earth  is  the  same.

Now  must  I  tell  of  the  banishment^  of  the  king  Tarqainiue.
From  that  event  the  sixth  day  firom  the  end  of  the  month  has
derived  its  name.  Tarquinius  was  the  last  that  held  sove-
reign sway  over  the  Roman  people,  a  wicked  man,"  but  brave
in  arms.  Some  cities  he  had  taken,  others  he  had  rased  to
the  ground,  and  Gahii^  he  had  made  his  own  by  a  dis-
graceful stratagem.  For  the  youngest  of  his  three  iCfM^
plainly  the  offspring^  of  Superbus,  came  in  the  silence  of  the
night  into  the  midst  of  the  enemy.  On  the  moment,  they  un-
sheathed their  swords,  "  Strike,"  said  he,  "an unarmed  man ;
this,  my  brothers^  and  my  father  Tarquinius  would  wish ;  he

^  This  ia  my^Sdtf.]— Ver.  677-8. Gower  translates  these  lines  thus—

*  And  maugre  thou  art  scratched  with  rake  and  plow,
Cry,  this  is  yours,  and  this  belongs  to  you.'

s  The  banishment,]— Yer.  685.  This  festival  was  called  the  Regifug^um,
or  'Royal  flight/

^  A  wicked  man.]— Yer.  688.  He  had  murdered  his  father-in-law,
Servius  TuDius,  and  then  usurped  his  throne.  He  had  been  successful
against  the  Volsd,  and  had  taken  Suessa  Pometia,  their  principal  town.

^  &a6it.]— Yer.  690.  This  was  a  town  of  Latium,  nearfy  half  way
between  Rome  and-Ftseneste.

^  Pitting  the  4^Sprfng.]~-Yer.  691.  Showing  himself  to  be  so  by
his  unpiincipled  conduct.  Gower  tranalatea  this  and  the  fidlowing  line
thus —

'  For  lo!  his  young  son,  and  his  own  son  right,
Came  into  their  foes'  garrison  by  night.'

^  My  brothers.'i'^Vei.  694.  Titus  and  Amns.  Sextus  was  the
youngest. Dionysius,  howeyer,  makes  Sextus  to  have  been  the  eldest.


y  Google


78  THB  PAin;  [B. n. 69f»— 717»

who  has  mangled  my  back  with  the  cruel  jaah.'*  That  he
mig^t  be  enabled  to  aaj  thiay  he  had  aubmitted  to  atripea.  It
waa  moonli^ity  they  look  upon  the  youth  and  aheadie  their
aworda ;  and,  having  drawn  hia  dreaa  on  one  side,  they  see
hia  back  all  coTered  wUh  weala.  They  go  ao  far  aa  to  weep,
and  they  he^  that  he  will  aoperintend  ihs  managonent  of  the
war;  he,  in  his  canning,  concnn  with  these  unaoapecting
men.  And  now  grown  powerfol,  he  aenda  a  frigid,  and  aaka
lua  fiUher  what  meana  he  coohl  pcnnt  out  to  him  for  betraying
GabiL  There  ia  near  at  hand  a  garden  well  stocked  with
aweet-acented  plants,  haying  its  scnl  divided  by  a  gently  mur-
mnring  streamlet  of  water.  There  Tarqnmina  receiyea  the
secret  despatdiea  of  hia  son,  and  with  a  ataff  he  knocks  <^  the
faeada  of  the  tallest  lilies.  When  the  messenger  retnma  and
mentions  to  him  the  striking  down  of  the  hlies,*^  the  son  says,
"  I  understand  what  are  the  orders  of  my  &ther."  There  is
no  delay ;  the  principal  men  of  the  town  of  Gabii  bdng  fi'st
alain,  me  walla,  depriyed  of  their  chiefs,  are  deliyered  up.
lio!  dreadM  to  be  seen!  a  aerpent  iasues  forth  from  the
midst  of  the  altars,  and  drags  the  entrails  from  the  extin-
j^hedflames*  Phoebus  is  conralted."  An  oracular  response
IS  returned  in  these  words : — "  He  shall  be  the  conqueror  who
first  shall  kiss  his  mother.''  Then  hastened  they  each  man  to
Idas'*  his  mother,  a  set  who  put  fiEdth  in  the  Deity  whom  really
they  did  not  understand. Brutus^  was  a  wise  man,  who

^  The  fi«e».]— Vcr.  707.  Herodotus  (book  5.  c  92.)  tells  us  that
Thmybuliis,  tyrant  of  Miletus,  employed  the  same  mode  ci  giyiug  counsel
to  Periander  of  Corinth.  Gower  translates  this  and  the  next  line  in  the
following  manner: —

'  The  scout  brings  word  he  cropt  the  highest  lilies :
"  I  know,"  saith  Sextus,  •*  what  my  father's  will  is." '

liyy  lays  that  the  heads  of  the  highest  poppies,  Uumma  papayemm/  were
struck  off.

^  Phabtti  it  eormtlted,'] — Ver.  710.  Titus  and  Aruns  went  to  Delphi  for
this  purpose,  and  at  the  same  time  they  enquired  who  should  succeed  their
father  as  ruler  of  lUune.  The  poet  does  not  allude  to  this  query;  but  to
it  was  giyen  the  answer  mentioned  in  the  text

*>  Each  man  to  kiaa,"] — Ver.  715.  Dionysius  says,  that  they  agreed  to
conceal  the  oracle,  and  that,  kissing  their  parent  at  the  same  time,  they
should  reign  jointly.  Livy  states,,  that  they  left  it  to  chance,  by  drawing
lots  which  should  salute  his  parent  first.

^  £rutnt.]^Yer,  717. His  father,  M.  Junius,  and  his  elder  broth«r,


y  Google


B.  n.  717—741.] OB, CALENDAB  OP  OVID.  79

feigned  the  part  of  a  fool,  in  order  that  he  might  be  in  safety
from  thy  machinations,  0  cmel  Superbus !  He,  falling  on
his  face,  kissed  his  mother  earth,  while  he  was  supposed  to
have  fallen  down  by  reason  of  his  foot  stumblii^.  In  the
mean  time  Ardea^^  is  being  beleaguered  by  the  standards  of
Rome,  and,  under  blockade,  endures  tedious  delay.  While
they  are  unoccupied,  and  the  enemy  fears  to  join  battle,  they
amuse  themselTes  in  camp,  and  the  soldier  spends  his  time  in
idleness.  The  young  Tarquinius  entertains  his  comrades
with  feasting  and  wine,  and  the  son  of  the  king  says  to  them,
"  While  this  stubborn  Ardea  detains  us  by  its  tedious  war,
and  permits  us  not  to  carry  back  our  arms  to  the  Gods  of  our
countsry,  think  you,  are  the  partners  of  our  beds  faithful  to  us  ?
and  are  we  objects  of  reciprocal  love  to  our  wives  V*  They
extol,  each  inan  his  own  wife  ;  the  dispute  increases  with  their
earnestness,  and  both  tongue  and  affection  wax  warm  with
much  wine.  He,  to  whom  CoUatia^  had  given  an  honoured
name,  rises.  *'  There  is  no  occasion  for  words,"  says  he ;
'*  put  faith  in  fiacts  altme.  Abundance  of  the  niffht  remains,
let  us  mount  our  horses,  and  make  for  the  city."^  His  words
meet  with  their  approval  on^  their  horses  are  bridled.  These
had  now  borne  their  masters  to  the  end  of  the  journey.  Forth-
with they  repaired  to  the  royal  abode ;  there  was  no  sentinel  at
the  door.^  Behold !  they  find  the  daughter-in-law  of  the  king
sitting  up  and  spending  the  night  widi  wine  before  her ;  the
chaplets  having  fallen  down^  on  her  neck. Going  thence  with

were  slain  by  Tarqmn  to  obtain  their  wealth.  To  escape  a  similar  fste,
L.  J.  Brutus  counterfeited  idiotcy,  and  was  retained  by  Tarquin  in  his
court  for  the  amusement  of  his  sons.

*^  Ardea,"] — ^Ver.  721.  A  town  of  Latium,  twenty-three  miles  distant
from  Rome,  so  called  either  from  'ardea,'  'a  heron/  from  an  augury  taken
therefrom ;  or  from  '  ardeo/  *  to  be  hot/  on  account  of  the  extreme  heat
of  the  country.  Tarquin  besieged  it,  on  the  pretext  that  it  was  conspiring
to  effect  the  return  of  certain  Roman  exiles.

'  CoUaUa.'] — Ver.  733.  A  Sabine  town,  situated  on  an  eminence
about  four  miles  to  the  east  of  Rome.  Tarquinius  was  called  CoUatinus,
as  his  &t^ier  Egerins  had  been  appointed  governor  of  CoUatia,  when  cap-
tured by  his  uncle  Tarquinius  Priscus.

^  Far  the  cUif.'] — Ver.  735.  After  that,  they  would  have  to  ride  some
miles  to  Collatia,  where  the  abode  of  C<dlatinus  was.

^  No  sentinel  at  the  </oor.]— Ver.  738.  Meamng  that  all  neglected  their
duties  by  reason  of  the  neglect  and  inebriety  of  their  mistress.

*  Having  fallen  d^Mrfs.]— Ver.  739.  It  was  not  deemed  consistent  with


y  Google


80  THE  FASTI ;  [b.  ii.  741—770,

rapid  pace,  Lucretaa  is  visited.  She  was  employed  in  spinning ;
before  her  bed  were  the  work-baskets  and  the  soft  wool.  By
the  lamp's  dim  hght  her  handmaids  were  spinning  their  as-
signed tasks,  among  whom  she  tiins  spoke  with  gentle  voice :
— "With  all  speed  there  must  be  sent  to  your  master  a  cloak^
made  with  our  hands ;  now,  at  this  moment,  hasten  on,  my
girls.  But  what  news  have  ye  heard  7  for  you  are  in  the  way
of  hearing  more  than  I;  how  much  of  the  war  do  they  say
still  remains  ?  Soon  shalt  thou  be  conquered,  and  fall«  vexa-
tious Ardea ;  thou  art  resisting  better  men,  while  thus  com-
pelling our  husbands  to  be  from  home ;  only  may  they  return
in  safety.  But  rash  is  that  husband  of  mine,  and  recklessly  he
rushes  on  when  the  sword  is  drawn.  My  senses  fail  me,  and
I  faint,  offc  as  the  image  of  him  engaged  in  battle  occurs  to  my
mind ;  and  a  chilling  coldness  pervades  my  breast."  She  ends
in  tears,  and  drops  the  tight-drawn  threads,  and  hides  her
face  in  her  bosom.  Even  this  became  her ;  her  tears  became
a  woman  so  chaste,  and  her  countenance  was  worthy  of,  and
suited  to,  her  nature.  "Lay  aside  your  fears;  I  am  here,''
said  her  husband.  She  revived,  and  hung,  a  sweet  burden,
upon  her  husband's  neck.  Meanwhile  the  royal  youth  con-
eeives  a  frantic  passion,  and,  hurried  onwards  by  blind  desire,
loses  all  control  of  himself.  Her  figare  charms  him,  her
complexion,  white  as  snoW,  her  auburn  hair,  and  the  grace
which  atttends  her,  adorned  by  no  art.  Her  words  charm
him,  her  voice,  and  her  very  chastity ;  and  the  less  hope  there
is,  the  more  intensely  does  he  desire.  And  now  the  bird,  the
harbinger  of  dawn,  had  sent  forth  his  note,  when  the  young
men  are  on  their  return  to  the  camp.  His  wonder-stricken
feelings  are  preyed  on  by  ^e  image  of  her  absent^  and  as  he
recalls  her  to  his  mind,  more  charms  are  discovered,  and

female  delicacy  to  wear  chaplets  at  all ;  but  it  was  a  plain  proof  of  inebriety
"when  they  had  fallen  firom  the  head  on  to  the  neck.  It  is  to  be  observed,
that  this  demirep  had  'meram/  *pure  wine/  and,  undiluted,  before
her.

^  A  cl/iak.'] — Ver.  746.  By  this  line  we  may  see  that  both  industry
and  economy  were  Lucretia's  virtues.  The  *  lacerna'  was  a  military  doak
of  thick  texture,  worn  over  the  *  toga/  or  tunic,  open  in  front,  and
fastened  ynth  clasps.  Gower  thus  translates  this  and  the  preceding
line —

*  Maids,  you  must  make  (plie,  pUe  your  business  faster)
A  coat  to  send  in  haste  unto  your  master.'


y  Google


B.  U.  770— 801.]  OB, CiXE2n)iJt  OF  OYID.  81

the  more  they  engage  him.  Thus  it  was  she  sat,  thus  was  she
attired,  thus  did  she  spin  the  warp,  thus  lay  on  her  neck  her
neglected  tresses.  These  were  her  features,  these  were  her
words ;  this  her  expression,  this  her  make,  tl^s  the  complexion
of  her  face.  As  die  billow  is  wont  to  ab^te  after  a  great
storm,  but  yet  from  the  wind  that  has  raged  the  waves  swell
cffi;  so,  though  the  presence  of  her  charming  form  was
wanting,  the  passion  still  remained,  which  that  form  when
present  had  inspired.  He  bums,  and,  urged  on  by  the  goads
of  unlawful  desire,  he  plans  violence  and  treachery  against  a  bed
undeserving  of  it.  "  The  result  is  doubtful — we  will  dare  the
utmost,"  said  he.  "  Be  it  chance,  or  be  it  a  providence  that
aids  the  bold,  let  him  see  to  it.  It  was  by  daring,  too,  that
Gabii  we  won."  Thus  having  said,  he  girds  his  side  with  his
sword,  and  presses  the  back  of  his  steed.  CoUatia  receives
the  youth  within  her  brass-barred  portal  just  as  the  sun  is
preparing  to  hide  his  disk.  An  enemy,^  in  the  guise  of  a  guest,
he  enters  the  house  of  Collatinus ;  he  is  kindly  received,  for
he  was  connected  by  blood.  What  ignorance  is  there  in  the
minds  of  mortals  !  She,  hapless  one,  unsuspicious  of  the  world,
makes  ready  the  entertainment  for  her  enemy.  He  had  now
finished  the  repast,  and  slumber  demands  its  hour.  It  was  night,
and  there  were  no  hghts^  in  the  whole  house.  He  arises,  and
draws  from  its  sheath  the  golden-hilted  sword,  and  he  comes
to  thy  chamber,  virtuous  matron ;  and  when  he  now  presses
the  bed,  he  says,  "I  have  my  sword  here  with  me,  Lucretia ;
'tis  I,  Tarquinius,**  the  son  of  the  king,  who  address  thee.*'
She  answers  not,  for  she  has  no  voice,  no  power  of  speech,  or
any  sense  left  in  her  breast.  But  she  trembles,  as  when
sometinie  the  little  lambkin,  seized  upon  after  it  has  left  the
fold,  lies  under  the  wolf,  its  deadly  foe. What  can  she  do  ?  Can

^  An  enemp,"] — ^Ver.  787.  The  words  are,  *  Hostis  ut  liospes,'  *  an
enemy  as  a  guest.'  There  is  evidently  a  play  upon  the  similar  sound  of
the  two  woi^is. Livy  also  employs  the  same  collocation  of  these  words.

*  No  HffhtsJ] — Ver.  792.  This  shews  the  confidence  that  Lucretia  had
in  tlie  pn^riety  of  her  guest's  conduct,  and  her  own  unsuspecting  and  in-
nocent nature,  as  it  was  generally  the  custom  for  a  servant  near  the  cham-
ber to  keep  a  lamp  burning.

^f  *JUIt  Targuinitts. ^—Yer,  796.  Gower  trknslates  this  and  the  pre-
ceding line:

'  Laid  on  the  bed. Lucretia,  no  denia.1 ;
Here  is  nay  sword ;  Fm  Tarquina  of  blood  royalL'


y  Google


82  THB  FA.8TI;  [b.  II.  801— 8^7.

«be  retist?  A  woman,  in  the  oontest  the  will  naiely  be  oyer-
come.  Cry  out  ?  Bat  in  his  right  hand  tiiMre  is  the  sword  to
sky  her.  Fly  ?  Her  breast  is  held  down  by  his  hands  placed
on  it ;  a  breast  now  for  the&irt  time  tooched  by  the  hand  of  a
atranger.  Her  foe,  inflamed  wif^  passum,  urges  her  with  entrea-
ties, with  bribes,  and  with  threats.  By  entreaties,  by  bribes,  by
threats,  he  moyes  her  not.  *'  Thou  dost  avail  nothing,"  he  said ;
*'  I  will  talce  thy  life  for  tiie  purpose  of  criminating  thee.  I,  an
adulterer,  will  be  the  false  witness  of  thy  adultery.  I  will  rilay
the  servant;,  in  whose  company  thou  i^lt  be  said  to  have  been
detected."  The  matron  yielded,  overcome  bv  fear  for  her
good  fame.  Why,  concj^ueror,  dost  thou  exult  f  This  victory
shall  prove  thy  destruction.  Ah!  what  a  price  did  that  one
night  cost  to  my  sovereignty !  And  now  the  day  had  dawned ;
she  sits  with  her  hair  dishevelled,  just  as  a  mothar  is  wont  to  do
when  about  to  go  to  the  funeral  pile  of  her  son ;  she  sumnMNis
from  the  camp  her  aged  Mher,  with  her  faithful  husband ;  and
without  any  delay  t^^ey  both  come.  And  when  they  see  the
state  of  her  attire^  they  ask  what  is  the  cause  of  h^  mourning,
whose  obsequies  it  is  that  she  is  pr^aring,  or  with  what
calamity  she  is  afflicted.  For  a  long  time  she  is  silent,  and,
Med  with  shame,  she  conceals  her  face  with  her  dress.  Her
tears  flow  like  an  everspringing  stream.  On  one  side,  her
father,  on  the  other,  her  husband  console  her  tears,  and
entreat  of  her  to  tell  them ;  and  they  weep  and  feel  alarm  with
an  undefined  dread.  Thrice  did  she  attempt  to  speak,  thrice
did  she  fail,  and  again  a  fourth  time  did  she  attempt  it,  and
even  then  she  raised  not  her  eyes.  "  Shall  I  owe  tins  4119-
^race  too  to  Tarquinius ?  I  wffl  speak  out,"  says  she;  "I,
wretched  that  I  am,  will  speak  out  my  own  disgrace.'*  And
what  she  can,  she  relates.  The  conclusion  remain^  untoldi  i^e
wept,  and  the  cheeks  of  the  matron  were  suffused  with  crim>
son.  Her  father  and  her  husband  excuse  her  as  the  victim  of
compulsion.  *'  That  pardon  which  ye  give,"  she  said,  *'  do  I
deny  to  myself."  There  is  no  pause :  with  a  poniard  that
she  had  concealed  she  pierces  her  breast,  and,  streaming  with
blood,  she  falls  at  her  father*s  feet.  And  even  then,  in  the
moment  of  death,  she  uses  caution  that  she  may  fall  in  no
unseemly  manner, — this  was  her  care  even  as  she  fell.

Behold !  over  her  body,  forgetful  of  their  dignity,  lie  both  her
husband  and  her  father,  bewailing  their  common  loss. Brutus


y  Google


B  n.«S7-861.] OB,  CALENDAB  OH  OTID.  83

is  there,  mid  now  at  last  by  his  spirit  fidsifies*^  his  name,  and
nttches  from  her  dying  body  the  piercing  blade ;  then  holding
tke  knife  dripping  with  noble  blood,  widi  threatening  hps  he
Titters  these  fearless  words :  ^  By  this  noble  and  diaste  bloody
I  swear  to  thee,  and  by  thy  spirit  which  shall  be  to  me  a  deity,
that  Tarquinius,  with  his  exiled  honse,  shall  pay  the  penalty  of
this ;  now  long  enon^  has  the  energy  of  my  mind  lain  con-
ceiled."  She,  as  she  lay,  at  this  exclamation,  turned  her
^ee,  Yoid  of  the  light  of  life,  and  seemed,  by  shaking  her
locks,  to  express  her  approTal  of  his  words.  TAm  matrmi
(tf  hermc  mind  is  borne  to  her  burial,  and  carries  with  her
tears  and  popular  indignation.  The  gash,  all  gaping  wide,  is
exposed  to  yiew.  Brutus,  with  loud  voice,  arouses  the  Quirites,
and  recounts  the  dreadful  crimes  of  the  king.  Tarquinius
flies,  with  his  children.*'  The  Consul*'  undertakes  the  Am^in^l
jnrisdiction. This  was  the  last  day  of  royalty.

Am  I  deceived,  or  is  the  swallow  come,  the  harbinger  of
epring  ?  and  does  she  fear  lest  perchance  returning  winter  may
rrtnice  his  course  ?  Yet  ofttimes,  Progne,  wilt  thou  complain
^t  thou  didst  make  too  great  haste,  and  thy  husband  Tereus
shall  be  gladdened*®  by  thy  shivering  in  the  cold.

And  now  two  nights  of  the  second  month  are  remaining,  and
^^  with  harnessed  chariot  drives  his  swift  steeds.  The  name
of  Equina,"  derived  from  feet,  has  adhered  to  the  games,  which
the  God  himself  witnesses  on  his  own  plain.  Rightly,  Gradivus,**

"  Paiti/Us,] — Ver.  837.  The  name  Brutus  was  given  to  him  fipom
^  supposed  idiotcy.  He  now  shows  his  real  character  as  a  hero,  a  pa-
triot, anid  a  man  of  feeling.  The  father  of  Lucretia  was  Spurius  Lucrethis
Tridpitinui,

WUh  kia  childTen.'] — ^Ver.  851.  Titus  and  Aruns  retired  with  their
™^«cr  to  Caere,  m  Etruria.  Sextus  returned  to  Gabii,  where  he  was  put
to  death  in  return  for  his  treachery  and  numerous  acts  of  cruelty.

^  CoimtZ.] — ^Ver.  851. The  kings  being  expelled  a.u.c.  244,  two

y***^  officers,  with  an  equal,  degree  of  authority,  were  appointed,  called

«0Mul8.  Brutus  and  Collatinus  were  the  first  persons  nam^  to  that  office.

^«  gladdened.']— \er.  856. On  account  of  his  old  enmity  to  Progne.

^the  note  to  line  629  of  this  book.

* -Eyttlria.']— Ver.  859.  These  were  chariot  races,  instituted  by
■wnuhii  in  honour  of  Mars.  They  were  celebrated  on  the  third  of  the
^*^^  of  March,  on  the  Campus  Martins ;  or  if  that  place  was  flooded,  as
^^■^metimes  the  case  at  that  season,  then  on  a  part  of  the  Cselian  Hill,
**^w  by  Catullus  «  Campus  Minor/  *  the  lesser  plain.'

RifhUy^  Gradivus] — ^Ver.  861. Because  the  poet  is  about  to  com-
fit 2


y  Google


84  THE  FASTI ;  [b.  n.  861—864.

dost  thou  come  ;  thy  season  demands  its  place,  and  the  month,
marked  by  thy  name,  is  at  hand.  We  have  now  reached  the
harbour,  our  book  being  concluded  with  the  month ;  next,  it  is
upon  other  waters  that  my  bark  must  sail.

mence  the  month  <rf  March,  which  was  dedicated  to  him.  Man  was
called  GradiTus  from  '  gradior/  *  to  go/  or  '  march'  to  the  battle,  or  from
the  Greek  word  KpaSdivia,  '  to  shake/  because  he  shakes  the  lance ;  or  from
*  gramen/  because  he  was  said  to  have  been  produced  by  the  agency  of  a
herb  through  the  aid  of  Flora.  According  to  Servius,  in  his  Commentary
on  the  ^neid,  book  i,  L  296,  he  was  called  Quirinus,  when  peaceable,  hat
GradiTus,  when  unappeased ;  he  therefore  had  two  temples,  one  ¥rithin  the
city,  as  its  protector  in  peace ;  the  other  without,  on  the  Appian  road,  as
its  defender  in  war.


y  Google


B.  m.  1—5.]  OB, CAXIENDAB  OF  OTID.  85


BOOK  THE  THIRD.


CONTENTS.


Thi  inyocatioii  of  Mars,  ver.  1 — 8.  The  history  of  Romulus  and
Bemus,  firom  their  birth  to  the  foundation  of  the  city ;  the  worship
of  Mars ;  the  t>rigin  of  the  name  of  March,  9—86.  The  position  of
this  month  in  the  calendars  of  other  nations,  87 — 98.  The  number
of  the  Koman  months  before  the  tinie  of  Numa,  and  his  addition  to
that  number ;  the  institution  of  the  solar  year  by  Caesar,  99 — 104.  The
Matronalia  described ;  the  rape  of  the  Sabine  women ;  the  beauties
of  the  spring,  167 — 258.  The  origin  and  festival  of  the  Salii ;  the
descent  from  heaven  of  the  Ancile,  259 — 398.  The  setting  of  the  second
Rsh,  399—402.  The  setting  of  Arctophylax,  and  the  rising  of  the  Vin.
tager,  403—414.  The  sacred  rites  of  Vesta,  and  the  Pontificate  of
Augustus,  415 — 428.  The  Temple  of  Vejovis  dedicated,  429—448.
The  neck  of  Pegasus  rises,  449—458.  The  rising  of  the  Crown,  and  the
story  of  Theseus  and  Ariadne,  459 — ^516.  The  second  Equiria,  517 —
522.  The  sacred  rites  of  Anna  Perenna ;  the  story  of  Dido  and  Anna,
with  the  arrival  of  the  latter  in  Latium ;  and  the  secession  of  the  Roman
commonalty,  523 — 696.  The  death  of  Julius  Caesar,  697—710.  The
Scorpion  partly  sets,  711-712.  The  origin  and  description  of  the
Liberalia;  the  time  for  assuming  the  Toga  virilis;  the  praises  of
Bacchus,  713—790.  The  procession  to  the  Argei,  791-2.  The  origin
of  the  Constellation  of  the  Kite,  and  the  battle  of  the  Giants,  793—^08.
The  Quinquatria,  or  five-day  festival  of  Minerva,  809 — 850.  The  sun
enters  the  Ram;  the  story  of  Helle  and  Phryxus,  851—876.  The
▼emal  ^uinox,  877-8.  The  festival  of  Janus,  Health,  Concord,  and
Peace,  879—882. The  worship  of  the  Moon  on  the  Aventine  Hill,  883.

Mabs,  thou  warlike  Gody  awhile  laying  aside  thy  shield  and
spear,  approach,  and  from  the  helmet's  pressure  Hberate  thy
glossy  hair.  Perchance  thou  mayst  ask  what  a  poet  has  to
do*  with  Mars ;  my  ansioer  is,  the  month  which  is  now  being
celebrated  by  me,  derives  from  thee  its  name. Thou  thyself

*  Has  to  do,} — ^Ver.  3-4. Gower*s  translation  of  these  lines  is —

*  Perchance  thoult  say,  with  Mars,  what  make  the  Muses  ?
This  month  we  sing  his  name  from  thee  deduces.'


y  Google


96  THE  TABTl ;  [»,  ui.  4--30.

■eeest  that  fierce  batdes  are  waged  by  the  hand  of  Mmerra ;
has  she  an  that  account  less  leisure  for  the  liberal  arts?
After  the  example  of  Pallas,  do  thou  take  an  opportanitj
for  laying  aside  thy  lance;  even  when  unarmed  thou  wilt
find  somewhat  for  thee  to  do.  Then,  too,  wast  thou  un-
armed when  the  Roman  priestess'  captivated  thee,  that  thoa
mightst  provide  for  this  city  an  origm  worthy  of  it.  Silvia,
the  Vestal  maid — for  what  forbids  me  to  commence  ^m  that
point, — early  in  the  morning,  was  fetching  water  toith  which
to  wash'  the  sacred  utensils.  She  had  now  reached  the  bank
sloping  with  a  path  easy  of  descent,  and  her  earthen  pitcher
is  set  down  from  o£f  her  head.  Wearied,  she  has  now  seated
herself  on  the  ground,  and  with  her  bosom  open  she  admits
the  breeze,  and  re-arranges  her  disordered  tresses.  While
she  sits,  the  shading  willows,  the  songs  (^  the  birdi,  and  the
gentle  murmuring  of  the  stream,  invite  slumber.  Soft  sleep
stealthily  creeps  upon  her  overpowered  eyes,  and  her  hand,
become  powerless,  falls  j&om  her  side.  Mars  sees  her,  seeing
he  desires,  desiring  he  enjoys  her;  and  then  by  his  divine
power  he  conceals  the  stealthy  deed.  Sleep  departs ;  she
lies  there,  now  pregnant;  for  now,  founder  of  me  Roman
city^  thou  wast  witfun  her  womb !  She  nses  languid,  nor
knows  she  why  thus  languid  she  rises  ;  and  leaning  against  a
tree,  she  utters  such  words  as  these :  *'  May  that  prove  fayour-
able  and  fortunate,  I  pray,  which  in  a  vision  of  my  slumbers
I  have  beheld !  or  was  it  too  distinct  for  a  vision  ?  I  was
standing  near  the  Ihan  fires,^  when  the  wooUen  fillet  drop-

2  The  Roman  prieHetsJ] — Yer.  9.  Heinrius  suggests  *  Trojans,'  inas-
much  as  Rome  was  not  then  founded,  and  she  was  a  native  of  Mba  Longa.
The  poet,  however,  may  mean  to  say  that  in  her  progeny  she  became  en-
titled to  the  epithet  *  Romana.'  Her  name  is  sometimes  Ilia,  sometimes
Rhea  Silvia;  in  poetry  the  first  is  most  frequently  used.  Ovid,  however,
makes  use  of  both  names.

'  To  ti>a»A.]— Ver.  11 — 13.  One  of  the  duties  of  the  Vestals  was  to
draw  water,  with  whic^  to  wash  and  sprinkle  the  temple,  and  cleanse  the
sacred  vessels.  Among  these,  were  the  'acerra,'  or  '  thuribulum,'  a  oenser
for  holding  the  incense, '  simpulum,'  *  capis,'  or  '  capedo,'  *  g^ttus,'  and
*  patera,'  used  in  libations ; '  oihe,'  pots  of  various  descriptions;  the  tripods,
&c Gofer's  version  is —

'  Now,  Sylvia,  (here  our  sail  we  hoise,)  something  ^

To  wash  Vih*  morning  went  unto  the  spring.
No^  when  she  came  unto  the  wriggling  brook.'

*  The  Ilian  firet,"] — Ver.  29.  Having  been  originally  brought  finm
Ilium  or  Troy  by  Jlneas.


y  Google


B.III.  30— 49.]  OB,  CALEKDAB  OP  OTID.  97

[Hug  from  o£f  my  hair,  fell  down'  before  the  sacred  heath.
Thence,  wondrous  to  be  seen,  two  palni-trees  shoot  up  toge-
ther ;  of  these,  one  was  greater  than  the  other,  and  with  its
heavy  branches  it  overshadowed  the  whole  earth,  and  with  its
new  grown  foliage  reached  the  highest  stars.  And  now,  lo !
my  unde  brandishes  the  axe*  against  them ;  I  shudder  at
the  recoUectioB,  and  my  heart  palpitates  with  dread.  A  wood-
pecker,^ bird  of  Mars,  anda  sh&rwolf  fight  in  defence  of  the  two
trees;  byjneans  of  these  both  the  palm-trees  are  preserved
in  safety."  She  i^ke ;  and  with  Mtering  strength  she
raised  the  pitcher ;  she  had  filled  it  while  relating  her  vision.
Meantime,  aa  Remns  grew,  as  Quinnus  grew,  her  womb  was
heavy  vrith  the  celestial  burden.  There  now  remained  to  the
God  of  light  but  two  signs^,^  him  to  traverse  ere  the  year
shonld  take  ita  departure,  its  course  being  duly  performed.
Silvia  becomes  a  mother ;  the  images  of  vesta'  are  said  at
that  time  to  have  placed  their  virgin  hands  before  their  eyes.
Agsniedly,  the  akar  of  the  Goddess  trembled  as  her  priestess
brought  forth,  and  the  flame  affiighted  sunk  back  beneath
its  adies.*® When  Amulius,  the  despiser  of  justice,  learned

^  Fell  down.] — ^Ver.  30.  TbeVestalt  used  to  wetr  on  their  heads
*iiAil»',<lNaidt/  and  *vitte/  'fiUets.'  As,  on  the  degradation  of  a  Vestal
for  breaking  her  tows  of  Yirginity»  the  sacred  fillet  was  removed  from  her
head  by  the  Pontifex  Maximus,  this  dream  was  ominous  of  her  impend-
ing £ite.  The  ^beam  of  Astyages,  mentioned  by  Herodotos  and  Justin,
^k  1,  c.  4,  portending  the  birth  of  Cyrus,  was,  in  its  circumstances,  very
SHnibr.

*  B7randiahe»  the  tuce.] — ^Ver.  35-6. Gtower's  translation  is —

'  When  lo !  my  uncle  fain  would  have  them  cropt,
Smit  at  the  sight,  my  heart  for  terror  hopt/

^  A  woodpeeM:er.'\—Yet.  37.  According  to  Pliny  the  Elder,  this  bird
received  his  namie,  *  picus,'  from  the  father  c^  Faunus,  who  was  so
called,  and  was  transformed  into  that  Urd  by  Circe.  Plutarch  agrees  with
Ovid  in  representing  that  ikt  infants  were  fed  by  a  wolf  and  a  woodpecker.

'  But  two  «i^r«w.] — ^Ver.  44.  This  sentence  is  a  periphrasis  tor  *  ten
months.'

*  Tke  images  ^f  Festa,"] — ^Ver.  45.  There  were  no  images  of  this
Soddess  in  her  temples,  and  in  the  sixth  book,  1. 277,  the  poet  acknow-
ledges  Ins  error.  She  was  the  guardian  of  bouses,  and  there  were  paint*
ingi  of  her  usually  in  every  dwelling.  On  the  exterior,  however,  of  her
temple  at  Borne  there  was  a  statue  of  her,  which  form,  together  with
her  iTmbds,  is  still  to  be  seen  upon  some  Roman  coins.

^  Beneati  its  asAer.]— Ver.  48. The  extinction  of  the  sacred  fire  was


y  Google


88  THE  TAWn ;  [b.  ui.  49 — 63.

these  things,  (for  he,  Tictorions,  kept  possession  of  the  power
which  he  had  torn  from  his  brother),  he  orders  the  twins  to
be  drowned  in  the  riyer.  The  water  shrinks  back  from  the
crime  :  the  children  are  left  on  the  dry  ground.  Who  does
not  know"  how  the  infants  thriyed  on  the  milk  of  a  wild
beast,  and  how,  many  m  time  did  the  woodpecker  bear  food
to  them  thus  exposed.  I  would  not  pa^  by  thee  in  silence,
Larentia,^  nurse  of  so  mighty  a  face,  nor  would  I  be  nlent  of
thy  humble  circumstances,  0  poor  Faustulus.  Thy  praises
will  come  when  I  shall  tell  of  ^e  Larentalia ;  Be^mber,  a
month  dear  to  the  Gods  of  enjoyment, ^^  ^plds  these.  The  sons
of  Mars  had  now  grown  up  to  the  age  of  thrice  six  years,  and
the  first  beard  was  now  appearing  beneath  their  yellow  locks.
The  brothers,  the  sons  of  Ilia,  were  distributing  justice,  at  their
request,  to  aU  the  husbandmen  and  those  who  tended  the
herds. Ofttimes  do  they  come  home  exulting  in 'the  blood  of

an  event  regarded  with  the  greatest  horror,  as  being  a  presage  of  great
national  misfortunes.  The  Vestal  nnder  whose  charge  the  fire  was,  when
it  was  suffered  to  go  out,  was  stripped  and  flogged  most  severely  by  the
Pontifex  Maximus,  and  the  flame  was  rekincfied  by  the  friction  of  two
pieces  of  wood  from  the  *  felix  arbor  ;*  according  to  some  authors,  it  was
rekindled  from  the  rays  of  the  sun  by  a  hollow  conical  reflector.

"  Who  does  not  know,'] — ^Ver.  53.  This  story  was  related  in  the  works
of  Ennius.  one  of  the  olden  poets,  and  it  was  well  known  by  tradition ;
and  perhaps,  in  the  mouths  of  the  common  people,  it  occupied  much  the
same  position  as  '  the  st-ory  of  King  Arthur*  or  *  the  Seven  Champions  of
Christendom'  does  with  us.

^  Larentia.] — Ver.  55.  Larentia,  or  Laurentia,  was  the  wife  of  Fauso
tulus,  and  the  nurse  of  Romulua  and  Remus.  Being,  as  it  is  supposed,  a
woman  of  no  good  repute,  the  story  is  said  by  some  writers  to  have
arisen  from  that  circumstance,  that  the  children  were  suckled  by  a  wolf;
*  lupa'  being  the  Latin  for  both  a  *  she-wolf'  and  a  female  of  unchaste
character.  The  festival  of  Larentia,  the  Larentalia,  was  celebrated  in
December,  though  some  think  that  it  was  in  honour  of  a  different  per-
son. Faustulus  was  the  shepherd  of  Amuhus.

^*  The  gods  of  enjoymenf] — Ver.  58.  *  Genii.'  The  *  Qenii'  were
tutelary  deities,  each  having  charge  of  an  individual  up  to  the  time  of  his
death.  They  were  supposed  to  be  propitiated  with  wine  and  sacrifices,
and  hence  the  notion  arose  that  they  took  pleasure  in  revelry  and  feasting.
The  poet  alludes  here  to  the  Satumidia,  which  took  place  some  days  before
the  Larentalia,  and  which  professedly  lasted  but  three  days ;  but  the  fes-
tival, extending  its  influence  over  the  remaining  part  of  the  month,  it
naturally  imparted  a  tone  of  festivity  to  the  Larentalia.  At  this  season  all
were  engaged  in  mirth  and  revehy;  presents  were  interchanged,  and
slaves  were,  for  the  time,  elevated  to  a  level  with  their  masters.


y  Google


1.  m.  63—82.]  OB, CALEKBAB  OT  OTID.  89

the  plunderers,  and  bring  back  into  their  own  fields  ^e
oxen  that  had  been  carried  off.  When  now  they  learn  their
origin,  the  discoyery  of  tiieir  father  increases  their  courage,
and  they  feel  ashamed  to  have  renown  bat  in  a  few  cottages.
And  now  Amnlius  falls  pierced  by  tiie  sword  of  Romnlos,  and
the  sovereignty  is  restored  to  Aeir  aged  grandsire."  City
▼alls  ire  bmlt,  which,  low  as  they  were,  it  £U-betimed  Remns
to  leap  over  them.  Now,  in  the  spot  wh^re  lately  there  had
been  but  forests  and  the  retreats  of  the  cattle,  there  was  a  city
tpmng  up,  when  the  father  of  that  eternal  city  says,  "  Ruler
of  arms,  of  whose  blood  I  am  believed  to  be  bom,  (and  that  I
may  be  with  good  reckon  so  believed,  I  will  give  sure  pledges),
from  thee  do  we  derive  a  commencement  for  the  Roman  year.
Henceforth,  let  the  first  month  pass  on  its  course  called  after
the  name  of  my  sire.  His  word  is  ratified,  and  he  calls  the
month  from  his  father's  name ;  this  act  of  duty  is  said  to
have  been  pleasing  to  the  Divinity."  And  yet  the  Latum
people  of  ancient  times  worshipped  Mars  before  all  the  Goals;
the  warlike  multitude  had  made  this  worship  the  object  of  their
lealouB  attention.  The  people  of  Cecrops  venerate  Pallas;"
Crete,  the  land  of  Minos,  Diana ;  the  land  of  Hypsipyle,"  adores

"  Aged  grandsire "] — Ver.  68.  Numitor,  the  father  of  Ilii,  who  had
been  deposed  by  Amulios.

"  Pkatmg  to  the  rfmm^.]--Ver.  77-8.  Gower's  translation  of  these
two  lines  runs  thus—

*  His  word's  made  good,  this  month  he  thos  did  call,
And  pleas'd  his  father  very  well  withalL'

^  Venerate  Pallas.'] — Ver  81.  This  was  the  name  under  which  the
Athenians  or  Cecropids  worshipped  Minerva,  the  goddess  of  war  and  of
the  fine  arts.  Cecrops  was  the  first  king  of  the  Athenians,  and  founder  of
the  colony,  whence  the  epithet  here  given.  The  people  of  Crete,  now
the  Isle  of  Candia,  are  called  *  Minoian,'  from  Minos,  its  king  and  law-
gijer,  who  was  promoted  to  the  latter  distinction  in  the  Infernal  regions.
J^>M  was  worshipped  by  the  Cretans  under  the*  name  of  Dictynna,  from
Mount  Dicte,  where  her  sacrifices  were  performed  with  great  solemnity ;
wfi^m  liKTVQ^  *a  hunting-net.*

"  Land  of  HypHpyle.] — ^Ver.  82.  Lemnos,  an  island  in  the  £gean
Sea,  is  thus  called  from  Hypsipyle,  daughter  of  its  king,  Thoas.  The
women  of  Lemnos  conspiring  to  put  the  men  to  death,  she  saved  her
Jithcr,  and  had  him  conveyed  secretly  to  Chios.  Vulcan  having  been
hurled -from  heaven  by  Jupiter,  or,  as  some  say,  by  his  mother  Juno,  on
jccount  of  his  deformity,  after  a  descent  of  an  entire  day,  alighted  in
wmnos. Sparta  was  a  city  of  Laconia,  in  Peloponnesus,  founded  by


y  Google


90  THI  FASn;  [■.  m.  82—104.

Vulcan;  Sparta,  and  Mycenae  the  Pek^>ian  city,  Juno;  the  dis^
tiict  of  Msenalus,  the  pine-wreathed  head  of  Fannus.  liars  waa
a  deserving  object  of  worship  to  T<atinin,  because  he  presides
oyer  arms:  'twas  arms  that  gave  both  power  and  glory  to
that  fierce  people.  But  if  you  happen  to  have  leisure,  examine
the  Calendars  of  other  states  ofltal}^;  in  these  also  there  will
be  a  month  called  after  the  name  of  Mars.  It  was  the  third
month  among  the  Albans ;  the  fifth  with  the  Falisci ;  the
sixth  among  diy  dans,  Hemidan  land.^  There  is  an  agree-
ment in  the  AIImui  order  of  reckoning  the  months,  with  that  of
the  people  of  Aricia»  and  the  lofty  walls  built  by  the  hand  of
Telc^nus.  The  Laurentes  reckon  this  the  fifUi  month,  the
fierce  .^quicolus  the  tenth,  the  people  of  Cures  the  first  after
the  third,  and  thou,  warrior  of  Pel^inum,  coinddest  with  thy
ancestors,  the  Sabines  ;  with  each  people  this  God  is  fourth
in  the  order  of  the  months,  Romulus,  that  he  might  surpass
all  these,  in  his  arrangement  at  least,  dedicated  the  first  month
to  the  author  of  his  birth.

Nor  did  the  andents  have  as  many  Calends^'  as  there  now
are;  their  year  was  shorter  by  a  couple  of  months.  Not  yet
had  Greece,  a  people  more  eloquent  than  braye,^  imparted  to
the  conquerors  the  arts  of  the  conquered.  The  man  who
fought  well,  he  was  acquainted  with  the  arts  of  Rome  ;  who-
ever could  hurl the  javelin,  he  was  doquent. Who,  in

Spaittu,  grandson  of  Inachus.  Mycense  was  a  town  of  Argos,  in  Pelopon-
nesus. Pelops  never  lived  there,  but  it  afterwards  became  one  of  the
principal  {MMtessions  ci  his  descendants,  whenci  its  epithet  here.

1*  Hermdan  land,] — ^Ver.  90.  The  Hemid  oocnpies  a  hilly  district
between  the  Volsd  and  the  ^uL  Aricia  was  a  town  of  Latium.  Tuaca-
lum  was  situated  on  a  high  hiU,  twelve  miles  from  Rome ;  it  was  built  by
Telegonus,  the  son  of  Ulysses  and  Circe.  Laurentium  was  the  capital  ^
Latium.  The  iBqui  or  iSquicoli  were  a  people  located  between  the  Marsi
and  the  Hemid.  The  PeUgni  were  a  people  of  Italy,  beyond  the  Marsi,
and  near  the  Adriatic  Sea.  According  to  Festus  they  were  a  colony
from  IIlyria,fand  not  descended  from  the  Sabines,  as  Ovid  here  says  they
were.  They  were  a  warlike  race,  whence  the  epithet '  miles,'  a  warrior.
Niebuhr,  in  his  Roman  History,  gives  an  account  of  these  various  nations.

1*  Calends,^— \et,  99.  Consequently  months,  as  the  *  calendse'  were
the  first  day  in  every  month.

^  More  eloquetU  than  brave.] — ^Ver.  102.  He  alludes,  not  to  the  time
when  their  vidour  supplied  the  want  of  numbers,  in  their  straggles
against  the  Persian  power ;  but  to  a  much  later  period,  when,  buried
in  sloth  and  effeminacyi  they  fell  an  easy  prey  to  the  Roman  paadim  for
conquest.


y  Google


B.  111.  104 — 115.]  OB, CALEHDAB  OF  OVID.  91

tbose  days,  had  marked  the  H  jades  or  the  Pleiades,  daughters
of  AtLas,  or  had  noticed  that  there  were  two  poles  ond^  the
ciBopy  ^  of  the  heayens  ?  or  that  there  were  two  Bean,^  one  of
whidi,  the  Cynosure,  was  watehed  by  the  men  of  Sidon,
while  the  Grecian  bark  is  observing  Helice,  the  other  f And
w^  had  remarked  that  the  signs  of  the  zodiac,  which  the
brother  traverses  in  the  i^pace  of  a  year,  the  sii^r^s  steeds^
pass  through  in  a  sin^e  month  ? Left  to  themselves  and  im-
watched,  the  stars  ran  their  course  throu^  the  year;  but  yet
it  was  umivereaUy  agreed  that  the  Gods  do  exist.^ Iliey  med-
dled not  with  the  signs  that  roll  along  the  heavens,  but  their
own  etandardi:^  to  lose  whidi  was  a  great  crime.^  These  were

"  Under  the  canopy.}— Yer.  106.  '  Sub  axe.'  Literally  '  under  the
axis/  meaning  at  the  extremities  of  the  imaginary  axis  on  which  the  earth
moves,  at  which  extremities  are  the  Arctic  and  Antarctic  poles.

*»  Tufo  Bear*,'\ — ^Ver.  107.  The  *  Ursa  m^jor '  and  the  *  Ursa  miuOT.'
The  '  Ursa  major/  or  '  Greater  bear/  was  the  constellation,  whose  story
is  mentioned  at  length  in  the  second  book.  It  was  called  also  Helice.
from  the  Greek  iXiff<r«,  *  to  revolve/  because  it  revolves  round  the
Pole.  The  lesser  bear  was  also  called  *  Cynosura,'  from  cvroc  oi'/pa,  *  dog's
tail,'  the  stars,  in  their  sequence,  being  fandfdlly  thought  to  resemble
that  object.  Cynosyra  was  said  to  have  been  a  nymph,  who  nursed  Jupiter
on  Mount  Ida,  and  for  that  service  was  raised  to  the  stars.  The  Phoenix
cians,  who  inhabited  Sidon,  took  their  observations  from  this  constel-
lation, while  the  Greeks,  for  that  purpose,  used  the  former.

^  The  sister* 8  steeds."] — Yer.  110.  The  poet  means  to  say,  that  the
son,  '  the  brother,'  remains  for  a  month  in  each  sign  of  the  Zodiac,  while
the  moon  passes  through  them  all  in  the  space  of  one  month.

^  That  the  Gods  do  exist.]— Yer.  112.  He  appears  to  mean,  that,  igno-
rant  as  they  were  of  astronomical  subjects,  they  were  still  convinced  of  the
existence  (^  the  gods.  Burmann  and  Gierig  would  read  it  as  though  to
be  translated  thus,  *  but  it  was  agreed  that  they  [the  stars]  are  g^ds;'
that,  in  fact,  they  had  come  to  that  opinion  aboat  them,  but  had  never
noticed  theifi  with  the  ken  of  the  astronomer.  The  former  seems  to  be
most  probably  the  author's  meaning.

^  But  their  own  standards.} — ^Ver.  114.  The  author  here  plays  upon
the  different  meanings  of  the  word  *  signa,'  which  signifies  either '  con-
stdlations,'  or  *  standards,'  according  to  the  context.  They  did  not  trouble
themselves  about  the  *  signa'  of  the  sky,  they  only  moved  their  own
*  signa.'  To  give  effect  to  his  pun,  he  seems  to  be  guUty  of  some  harsh-
ness in  speaking  of  mortals  *  moving  the  constellations.'  The  expression
is,  however,  not  without  precedent  in  other  Latin  writers.

*•  A  great  crime.] — ^Ver.  114.  For  any  of  the  soldiers,  and  especially
the  standard  bearer,  to  lose  the  standard  was  highly  dishonourable,  and
sometimes  it  was  a  capital  offence. Among  other  punishments  were,  short


y  Google


92  THB  FASTI ;  [b.  Ui.  115 — 124.

of  hay  indeed;  bnt  there  was  as  much  respect  paid  to  that
hay  as  at  the  present  day  yon  see  your  eagles  receive.  A  long
pole  used  to  bear  the  eleyated  wisps,  firom  whidi  circumstance
the  manipular  soldier  deriyes  his  name.^

In  consequence,  those  untutored  minds,  as  yet  deficient  in
powers  of  calculation,  observed  their  five  yearly  lustra,^  too  short
by  ten  months.  When  the  moon  had  completed  her  tenth  revolu-
tion, it  was  a  year ;  this  number  was  then  in  great  esteem.  Either,
because  so  many  are  the  fingers,  by  the  help  of  which  we  are
wont  to  reckon,  or  because  in  the  tenth  month  woman  brings

commons  on  barley  bread,  decimation,  being  stripped  in  si^t  ci  the
whole  army,  being  clad  in  female  vestmre,  being  driven  into  the  enemy's
quarterSfbeing  left  among  the  baggage  with  the  prisoners,  and  being  severely
whipped.

^  Derives  Ms  wame.]— Ver.  117-18.  The  author  here  tells  us,  that
in  early  times  a  bundle  of  hay  on  the  end  of  a  pole  served  that  purpose.
The  army  of  Romulus  being  mostly  composed  of  peasants,  this  was  not  at
an  improbable.  To  every  troop  of  one  hundred  men,  a  *  manipulus,'  or
wisp  of  hay  (so  called  from  '  manum  implere,'  to  *  fill  the  hand,'  as  being
*  a  handful'),  was  assigned  as  a  standard,  and  hence  in  time  the  company
itself  obtained  the  name  of  '  manipulus,'  and  the  soldier,  a  member  of
it,  was  called,  *  manipularis.'  The  omen  derived  from  the  flight  of  the  eagle
was  deemed  the  most  auspicious.  Hence  the  figure  of  that  bird  was  after-
wards adopted  as  the  standard  in  preference  to  those  of  other  animals,
which,  before  the  time  of  Marius,  were  sometimes  used  for  that  purpose.
Gpwer's  version  is —

'  They  hung  in  bottles  on  a  pole  huge  tall.
From  whence  our  soldiers  by  that  name  we  call.'

We  may  here  observe  parenthetically,  that  the  expression  *  to  look  for  a
needle  in  a  bottle  of  hay,'  is  still*  sometimes  quoted  as  a  proverb,  though
few  perhaps  now  know  the  origin  of  the  term  *  bottle.'  It  comes  from  an
old  French  word,  *  bftstel,'  with  the  *  s'  silent.  From  this  word,  too,  is
derived  the  name  of  an  article  of  female  dress,  which  is  worn  at  the  pre-
sent day,  or,  if  not,  was  so  at  a  very  recent  period.

'^  Five  yearly  lustra.] — Ver.  120.  As  a  *  lustrum'  consisted  of  five
years,  it  would  in  those  times  contain  but  fifty  months,  and  be  ten  months
shorter  than  a  modern  *  lustrum'  of  five  years  of  twelve  months.  For  the
purposes  of  revenue,  Servlus  Tullius  instituted  the  *  census'  at  the  end  of
each  five  years.  When  it  had  been  completed,  atonement  was  made  for
the  people  by  the  sacrifice  of  a  sow,  a  sheep,  and  a  bull,  and  when  this
had  been  done,  the  people  were  said  to  be  cleansed,  *  lustrari.'  This
word  comes  from  *  luo,'  *  to  pay,'  because,  in  those  days,  the  taxes  were
paid  to  the  censors  at  these  periods  ;  this  having  been  done  every  fifth
year,  the  word  '  lustrum'  came  into  use,  as  signifying  the  intermediate
space  between  the  five  yearly  periods.


y  Google


■.  111.  124—134.] OB, CALEWDAB  OF  OTLD.  93

forth ;  or  becaose  we  arrive  so  far  as  ten,  the  number  in-
creasing ;  and  from  that  point  the  commencement  of  a  new
reckoning^  is  made.  For  that  reason  did  Romnlos  set  quirt
a  hundred  men  of  equal  standing  for  each  of  the  ten  compa-
nies,''^ and  appointed  the  ten  companies  of  Hastati,  and  so  many
men  had  the  Princeps,  and  so  many  the  Pilanus,'*  and  he  who
served  on  horse-back  as  required  by  law.^  He  also  assigned  as
many  subdivisions^  to  the  Titian  tribe,  and  to  those  whom  they
call  the  Rhamnes,  and  to  the  Luceres.  For  that  reason  he  ob-
served the  usual  numbers  in  the  formation  of  the  year ;  during
this  length  of  time  does  the  sorrowing  wife  mourn  her  husband.

^  A  new  reckoning,'} — Ver.  126.  He  alludes  to  the  system  of  decimal
notation.

*  The  ten  oompames.'] — ^Ver.  127.  That  is,  one  hundred  men  for  each
of  the  ten  companies  of  *  Hastati ;'  one  hundred  for  each  of  the  ten  com-
P&nies  of  *  Princip^ ; '  and  one  hundred  for  each  of  the  ten  companies  of
*  Pilani,'*or  *  Trimi/  which  together  formed  a  legion.  The  first  were  the
yoonger  soldiers,  and  formed  thefix>nt  rank,  as  light-armed  troops,  armed
with  *  hastse,'  or  lances.  The  second  were  men  of  the  middle  age,  and
from  that  drcumstanoe  had  their  name,  as  evincing  their  superiority  in
strength;  these  foimed  the  second  rank.  The  third  rank  was  formed
of  the  yeterans,  who  were  called  from  that  circumstance  '  Triarii,'  and
from  the  use  of  the  '  pilum,'  or  *  javelin,'  *  Pilani/  The  poet  calls  them
^uals,  because  the  three  divisions  were  made  according  to  age.

^^  The  Pilanue,'] — ^Ver.  129.  The  word  here  means  the  oflElcer  com-
manding the  ten  centuries  of  the  *  Pilani,*  or  *Triarii.'

^  JUquired  hy  law,} — Ver.  130.  In  each  legion  there  were  three
hundred  'equites,'  'knights,*  or  cavalry.  Romulus  selected  them  from  the
iBost  respectable  and  deserving  of  his  followers,  as  his  body  guard.  Those
in  each  legion  were  divided  into  ten  'turmae,'  or  'squadrons,'  of  thirty  men
each.  The  meaning  of  the  poet,  then,  seems  to  be,  that  Romulus  still
kept  in  mind  the  number  ten,  by  dividing  the  ^equites'  into  ten  companies;,
although  they  did  not  consist  of  one  hundred  men  each.  The  privileges  of
the  *equites'  were,  a  horse  supplied  at  the  public  expense,  hence  called
'legitimus,'  'required  by  law;'  a  gold  ring;  a  separate  seat  at  the  public
^ectades,  and  the  'tunica  angusticulavia,'  a  tunic  vdth  two  narrow  purple,
stripes  running  from  each  shoulder  down  the  frt>nt  to  the  bottom  of  the
dress.  The  force  of  each  legion  was  3000  foot  and  300  horse,  besides  a
itin  larger  number  of  auxiliaries.

^  Ab  many  subdiviaiona,} — ^Ver.  131.  Romulus  divided  his  subjects  into
three  tribes,  and  subdivided  each  of  them  into  ten '  Curia.'  The  Ramnenses
were  the  original  Romans,  so  called,  it  is  supposed,  from  Romulus ;  these
formed  one  tribe.  The  second  tribe  was  that  of  the  Tatienses,  or  Sabines,
so  called  from  Titus  Tatius,  their  king.  The  third  was  called  the '  Luceres,'
either  fit>m  those  vagrants  who  had  taken  refuge  in  the  'lucus.'  or  grove
of  the  asylum,  or  because  they  came  from  Etruria  to  aid  Romulus,  imder
a  'lucumo,'  or  noble  chieftain,  named  Hostus  Hostilius.


y  Google


94  TKE  TAWn;  [b.  m.  135— 151.

And  that  joa  may  have  no  doubt  bat  that  the  Calends  (^
March  were  formerly  the  first  in  the  year,  you  may  torn
Toar  attention  to  these  proofs.  The  lanrd  branch,  which
has  lasted  the  whole  year,  is  now  removed  by  the  Flamens,
and  fresh  bou^is  are  raised  to  the  dignity.  At  thia  time  the
nte  of  the  king  of  the  saerifieei  is  green  with  the  tree  of
rhoebos  fixed  there ;  before  thy  doors,  0  ancient  Court-honae,^
the  same  thing  is  done.  That  Vesta,  too,  may  appear  graee-
fdl,  wreathed  with  new  foliage,  the  faded  laurel  is  remored  frcmi
the  Ilian  hearths.  Add  to  tXis,  that  in  her  secret  shrine**  a  new
fire  is  said  to  be  now  kindled,  and  the  flame  refreshed  re-
ceives strength.  And  the  fact  is  no  small  proof  to  me  that  the
years  of  old  commenced  from  this  period,  that  it  was  in  this
numth  that  Anna  Perenna**  b^an  to  be  worshii^ped.  From
this  time,  too,  the  ancient  honours''  are  said  to  have  been  en-
tered upon,  up  to  the  period  of  the  war  with  thee,  O  perfidious
Carthaginian."  Lasuy,  the  fifth  from  this  was  the  month
Quintilis,  and  from  that  point  commences  each  month,  which  has
its  name  from  its  order. P(Hnpilius,  invited  to  Rome"  frtnn

•*  Andent  Court-hoftt^,^ — Ver.  140.  The  four  « curia! '  which  still  sur-
TiTcd,  out  of  the  thirty  originally  built  by  Romnlus  for  the  use  of  the  *curis'
of  the  dtizens,  were  distinguished  by  the  title  'veteres/  It  ia  supposed
that  in  lapse  of  time  all  the  'curiae'  were  used  for  dril  purposes.

^  Her  secret  shrineJ] — ^Ver.  143.  Because,  not  only  was  it  closed
against  the  male  sex,  but  against  dl  females  as  well,  excc^  the  Vestals,  or
perhaps  the  chief  of  the  Vestals.

••  Anna  Perenna.'} — Yef.  146.  Por  her  story  see  line  523  of  this  Book,
where  it  commences.

^  The  ancient  honours.] — ^Ver.  147.  The  author  is  guOty  of  a  slight
inaccuracy  here,  as  the  first  Consuls  took  office  on  the  23d  day  of  February;
and  the  time  fluctuated  till  a  u.c.  600,  the  end  of  the  third  Punic  war,
when  the  calends  of  January  were  fixed  for  that  purpose.

^  Ferpidious  Carihapiman.^—Yer,  148.  He  alludes  to  Hamnbal,  to
whom,  in  common  with  his  countrymen,  be  was  too  ready  to  apply  an
epithet  of  abuse.  According  to  the  Roman  accounts,  the  people  <k  Car-
thage were  noted  for  their  treachery,  whence  the  term  'Punic  faith,^  be-
came a  by-word  for  dishonourable  conduct.  We  haye  no  native  reeorda  of
the  Carthaginians  left,  and  are  consequently  ignorant  of  their  opinion  of  the
Romans.  Had  Hannibal  been  properly  supported,  Rome  would  most  pro-
bably have  fallen,  leaving  no  native  records  of  her  existence,  and  to  Car-
thage alone  and  its  writers  would  posterity  have  had  to  look  for  the  cha-
racter of  its  Italian  rival.

*  Invited  to  Rome."] — ^Ver.  151.  Nnma  was  the  fourth  son  of  Pompo-
nius,  an  eminent  Sabine. 'Deductus'  implies  the  ceremony  with  which


y  Google


B.  IIL 151—164.] OB, CAIiElTDAB  OP  OYH).  95

the  <di?e-beanng  fields,  was  the  first  to  perceive  that  two
months  were  wanting;  whether  so  taaght  by  the  Samian
ioge,^  who  considers  that  we  may  be  bom  again,  or  whe-
ther by  the  admonition  of  his  own  Egeria.  But  even  then
were  the  divisions  of  time  inaccurate,  until  amid  many  others,
this  too,  was  a  care  of  Csesar's.^^  He,  though  a  God  and
the  £ftther  of  such  a  mighty  progeny,  did  not  think  this  a
tssk  too  humble  for  his  attention  ;  he  wished  to  know  before-
hand the  heaven  that  wai  promised  him,  and  not,  when  deified,
to  enter  as  a  stranger  into  an  unknown  mansicm.  He  is  said,
by  accurate  observations,  to  have  arranged  the  periods  of  the
sun,  in  which  he  should  return  to  his  due  signs  in  rotation.
He  added  ten  times  six,  and  the  fourth  part  of  one  wh(^  day

be  was  iRTited  end  brought  to  Rome  to  reign  there.  The  Sabine  land  was
ftmoos  for  its  olive  trees.  From  his  commanion  with  the  goddess  Egeria,
he  is  laid  to  have  obtained  an  insight,  ahnost  supernatural,  into  things  both
iiaman  and  divine.

•  The  Samian  sage."] — ^Ver.  153.  Pythagoras  was  bom  in  the  isle  of
Ssmos,  opposite  to  Ephesus.  He  was  a  pupil  of  the  philosopher  Fhere-
cjdes,  of  Scyros,  and  studied  philosophy  in  Egypt  and  among  the  Babylo-
nian astndog^^.  He  then  travelled  into  Crete  and  visit^  Sparta,  to
examine  the  laws  of  Minoa  and  Lycurgus.  He  afterwards  visited  the  colony
of  Magna  Grseda,  in  the  south  of  Italy,  and  promulgated  his  doctrines  at
Crotona,  Tarentum,  and  other  towns.  Numa  is  generally  supposed  not  to
have  been  a  cotemporary  of  Pythagoras.  Livy  says  that  the  philosopher
came  into  Italy  in  the  reign  of  Servius  TuUius,  which  was  136  years  after
the  elevation  of  Numa  to  the  throne.  Dionysins  also  says  that  Numa
reigned  120  years  before  the  time  of  Pythagoras.  Plutarch  says  that
Noma  received  asaiatanoe  in  the  compilation  of  his  laws  frmn  another
Vythagoras,  a  Spartan,  who  visited  Italy.  The  chief  doctrine  of  Pythagoras
was  the  *■  metempsychosis,'  or  transmigration  of  the  soul  into  another
hody  after  death.  Some  of  his  tenets  were  similar  to  those  of  Numa.
They  would  allow  of  no  images  of  the  deity,  whom  they  considered  pos-
s3)le  to  be  comprehended  in  the  mind  only.  They  did  not  permit  blood
to  enter  into  their  sacrifices,  but  used  only  flour  and  wine  for  that  purpose.
It  did  not  require  a  Pythagoras  to  show  Numa  that  a  year  consists  of
more  than  ten  months,  as  he  might  easily  perceive  that  fact  from  the
inregnlarity  with  which  the  seasons  would  come  on,  each  season  in  every
year  being  two  months  earlier  than  on  that  preceding.

^  A  cart  qf  Casar's."] — Ver.  186.  The  year  having  fallen  into  great
confusion,  and  the  festivals  frequently  happening  at  the  wrong  seasons  of
the  year,  Julius  Cesar,  then  being  the  Pontifex  Maximus,  with  the  aid  of
SoBgines  and  Marcus  Flavius,  altered  it  so  that  it  might,  similarly  to  the
year  of  the  i£gyptian8,  correspond  with  the  course  of  the  sun.  See  the
•  Introduction.'


y  Google


96  THl  FASTI ;  [b.  in.  164—191.

to  the  three  hundred  and  five  days.  This  k  the  complement
of  the  year.  To  each  lustrum  there  ought  to  be  added  one
day,  which  is  made  up  of  these  fractions.^

If  it  be  allowed  to  poets  to  hear  the  private  intimations  of
the  Deities,  as  report,  at  least,  thinks  they  may,  tell  me  why  it
is,  0  Gradivus,  that  while  thou  art  suited  to  the  pursuit
of  men  onli/,  the  matrons  observe  thy  festival.*'  Thus  said
I,  and  thus  Mavors  rephed  to  me,  having  laid  aside  his  helmet ;
but  there  was  in  his  right  hand  a  missile  spear.  "  Now,  for
the  first  time,  am  I  a  Deity,  useful  to  the  profession  of  arms,
summoned  to  the  pursuits  of  peace,  and  I  direct  my  march
to  a  strange  camp.  Nor  do  I  repent  of  my  undertaking ;
on  this  department,  too,  I  am  delighted  to  dwell;  that  Minerva
may  not  suppose  that  she  alone  can  do  this.  Learn,  thou  poet
engaged  upon  the  Latin  days,  what  thou  askest,  and  mark
my  words  in  thy  mindful  breast.  Rome,  if  thou  wouldst  but
call  back  to  mmd  her  first  elements,  was  small ;  yet  in  her
thus  small,  was  the  promise  of  the  present  city.  And  now
stood  raised  the  walls  of  defence,  too  narrow  for  the  future
population,  but  in  those  days  supposed  to  be  too  spacious^  for
their  own  multitude.  If  Uiou  askest  what  was  die  palace  of
my  son ;  behold  his  house  of  reeds  and  straw.^  Chi  a  bed
o/ stubble  he  enjoyed  the  blessings  of  calm  slumber,  and
yet  from  that  bed  came  he  to  the  stars.  And  already  had
the  Roman  a  renown  greater  than  his  home,  and  yet  nor
wife,  nor  father-in-law  had  he.  The  rich  neighbours  had
a  contempt  for  poor  sons-in-law,  and  hardly  was  I  be-
lieved to  be  the  author  of  their  race. To  have  dwelt  under

**  Of  these  fractioTU.'] — ^Ver.  166.  The  fourth  part  which  he  mentions
made  up  a  complete  day,  which  was  added  to  every  fourth  year  as  an  ad-
ditional day.  When  he  speaks  of  a  lustrum  *here/  he  means  a  full  term
of  four  years,  and  just  the  commencement  of  a  fifth  year,  and  no  more.

«  Observe  thy  fe8tival.]—Yer.  170.  On  the  calends  of  March  the
Matronalia  were  celebrated  by  the  matrons  in  honour  of  Juno,  when  they
sent  presents  to  each  other,  and  received  them  from  their  husbands.

**  Too  spaeious.] — ^Ver.  181-2. Gower's  version  is,

*  Rome's  elements  were  at  the  first  but  small,
Tet  has  that  small  great  hopes  of  this  great  wall.'

^  0/  reeds  and  straw.'} — ^Ver.  184.  They  still  pointed  out,  in  the  time
of  Ovid,  a  straw-roofed  hut  on  the  Palatine  hill,  wMch  was  said  to  have
been  the  abode  of  Romulus.


y  Google


B.  III.  191— 212.] OB, CALEKDAB  OF  OVID.  97

the  herdsman's  roof,  and  to  have  tended  oxen,  and  now  to
be  masters  of  but  a  few  acres  of  nncultivated  soil,  was  a  re-
proach to  them.  The  fowls  of  the  air  and  the  wild  beasts
pair,  each  of  them  with  its  mate ;  the  snake  too  has  its  female,
from  which  to  propagate  its  kind.  Intermarriages  are  granted
to  the  remotest  tribes ;  but  there  was  no  woman  who  was
willing  to  marry  a  man  of  Rome.  I  was  grieved,  and  I  com-
mmiicated  to  thee,  O  Romulus,  thy  father's  mind.  "  Cease
thy  prayers,"  I  said,  "what  thou  dost  want,  arms  will  supply.
Prepare  a  festival  to  Consus.^  Consus  will  tell  thee  the  rest
that  is  to  be  done,  on  the  day  on  which  thou  shalt  be  chaunting
the  sacred  songs  to  him.*'  The  people  of  Cures*'  grew  wroth,
and  all  those  whpm  the  same  resentment  affected.  Then,  for
the  first  time,  did  the  father-in-law  bear  arms  against  his  son-
in-kw.  And  now  nearly  all  the  ravished  women  were  bearing
the  name  of  mother  as  weU,  and  the  wars  of  states  thus  neigh-
bouring were  protracted  by  lengthened  duration ;  the  wives
niet  together  in  an  appointed  temple,  that  of  Juno ;  among
whom  my  daughter-in-law^  thus  began  to  speak — "  Ye  that
together  with  myself  have  been  thus  carried  away,  since  this
character  in  common  we  hold,  no  longer  can  we  with  tardi-
ness be  dutiful.  The  lines  of  battle  are  formed,  but  for
▼hich  side  the  Gods  are  to  be  entreated,  choose  ye  ;  on  one
side,  the  husband,  on  the  other,  the  father  is  in  arms ;  we
mnst  decide  whether  we  would  be  widows  or  orphans. I  will

*  Festipol  to  ConsusJ] — ^Ver.  199.  Consus  was  the  god  of  silence  and
of  secrets.  By  some  he  has  been  confounded  with  the  Roman  god  Neptune.
It  is  said  that  the  true  name  of  this  divinity  was  not  allowed^  to  be  di-
vulged, and  that  his  name  of  *  Consus'  was  derived  from  'conso/  an  old
form  oJF  *consulo/  *to  give  counsel/  such  being  one  of  his  attributes.  He
had  a  subterranean  altar  in  the  Circus,  uncovered  only  at  the  *Con8ualia,'
and  said  to  have  been  discovered  there  by  Romulus,  having  been  closed
since  the  time  of  Evander.  The  'Consualia,'  or  festival  of  Consus,  as  ap^
pears  from  the  text,  was  being  celebrated  when  the  rape  of  the  Sabine
women  took  place.

^  People  of  Cures.'} — Ver.  201.  Namely,  the  Sabines;  but  before
they  took  up  arms,  the  Cseninenses,  Antemnates,  and  Crustumini  had
marched  against  Rome,  to  revenge  the  insulj;  which  had  been  inflicted  on
them  in  common  with  the  Sabines.  They  were,  however,  repulsed,  and
then  the  Sabines  took  the  field,  with  the  result  mentioned  in  the  text.

*•  My  daughter-in-law.']— Ver.  206.  This  was  Hersilia,  one  of  the
Sabine  women,  whom  Romulus  had  married.  After  her  death  she  was
deified  and  worshipped  under  the  name  of  Hora,  as  the  goddess  of  youth.

H


y  Google


98  THE  FASTI ;  [b.  III.  212—242.

give  you  advice,  which  is  both  energetic  and  dutiful.'^  She
had  now  given  her  advice ;  they  obey,  and  unloose  their  tresses,
and  with  funereal  garb  array  their  sorrowing  persons.  The
lines  of  battle  now  stood  prepared  for  the  sword  and  for  death,
and  the  clarion  was  on  the  point  of  giving  the  signal  for  the
combat,  when  the  women  who  had  been  ravished  rush  between
their  fathers  and  their  husbands,  and  carry  in  their  bosoms
their  babes,  those  dear  pledges.  When  they  had  reached  the
middle  of  the  plain,  with  their  dishevelled  locks  they  fell  upon
the  earth  with  bended  knee ;  and  as  though  they  had  con-
sciousness, the  grandchildren,  with  soothing  cry,  stretched
their  little  arms  towards  their  grandsires.  The  cluld  that  was
able,  called  on  his  grandfather  then  seen  for  the  first  time  ;
and  he  who  scarcely  was  able,  was  forced  by  his  mother  to
make  an  effort.^  Ilie  arms  and  the  fury  of  the  warriors  £eQ1
together,  and,  their  swords  now  laid  aside,  the  fathers-in-law
give  their  hands  to  their  sons-in-law,  and  receive  theirs  in  re-
turn. They  praise  their  daughters,  and  embrace  them ;  and
on  his  buckler  the  grandsire  carries  the  grandchild;  this
was  a  more  pleasing  use  for  their  shields.  From  that  cir-
cumstance the  (Ebalian  mothers  hold  it  no  unimportant  duty  to
celebrate  my  Calends,  the  day  which  is  first.  Is  it  7wt  either
because,  daring  to  trust  themselves  to  the  drawn  swords,  they
had  terminated  by  their  tears  the  wars  of  Mars  ?  Or  is  it
because  by  me,  with  happy  results.  Ilia  became  a  mother,
that  the  matrons  duly  observe  my  sacred  rites  and  my  holi-
day ?  And  why  besides  J  It  is  because  now,  at  length,  the
winter,  enwrapped  in  ice,  gives  way,  and  the  snows  disap-
pear, overcome  by  the  warmth  of  the  sun.  The  foliage  that
had  been  shorn  by  the  frost  returns  to  the  trees,  and  the  bud
f uU  of  life  sprouts  from  the  tender  shoot ;  the  fruitful  blade
too,  which  has  long  lain  hid,  now  finds  a  hidden  path,  whereby
to  raise  itself  to  the  breezes  of  heaven.  Now  is  the  field
teeming ;  now  is  the  season  for  breeding  the  cattle ;  now  does

^  To  make  an  f^%>rf.]— Yer.  224.  Literally,  *  was  obliged  to  be  able.'
In  all  probability  the  meaning  is,  that  the  elder  children  were  able  to  cry
out  *  ave/  *  grandfather/  and  the  younger  ones  were  obliged  to  join  in  the
general  clamour,  their  mothers  forcing  them.  Taubner  thinks  that  the
hitter  were  forced  by  the  pinches  of  their  mothers  to  scream  out '  ah!  y» ! '
(something  like  our  *  oh !  oh ! )  which  sounding  like  '  aye,  they  were
thus  compelled  perforce  to  address  their  grandsires.  The  suggestion  is
redolent  of  more  trifling  ingenuity  than  probability.


y  Google


1.UI.242— 264.] OB, CALIKDAB  OF  OVID.  99

the  bird  qq  the  bougji  prepare  a  skelter  and  a  home.  With
maou  do  the  Latiaii  moth«rs»  whoso  toils  and  dearest  longings
the  bearing  of  their  progeny  occupies,  observe  this  prolific
season.  Add,  too,  that  where,  5y  kis  soldiery^  the  Roman
Idog  was  loeeping  watch  and  ward,  the  hill  has  now  the  name
of  Bsquilise.^  There,  if  I  rightly  remember,  was  a  temple
consecrated  to  Jnno  for  the  public  use  by  the  Latian  ma-
trons on  this  day.  Why  do  I  delay  and  burden  thy  memory
▼ith  various  reasons  ?  See,  what  thou  dost  ask  is  plain  before
thine  eyes ;  Juno,  my  mother,  favours  the  married  women  :
hence  the  crowd  of  iJie  matrons  resorts  to  me ;  this  reason
BO  duteous  particularly  becomes  me.

Bring  flowers  to  the  Gknidess :  this  Goddess  takes  dehght  in
blossoming  plants  ;  with  tender  flowrets  wreathe  your  heads.
Say  ye :  " 'Diou,  Lucina,  did'st/r#^  give  us  the  hght."  Say;
"Do  thou  fjGivour  the  prayers  of  her  who  is  in  travail ;"  and  if
any  woman  is  pregnant,  let  her  pray  with  her  tresses  untied,
that  the  Goddess  may  gently  ^Bunlitate  her  labour.

Who,  now,  will  tell  me  why  the  Salii  bear  the  heavenly
wms"  of  Mars,  and  chaunt  Mamurius?  Tell  me.  Nymph,
thou  that  wast  wont  to  minister  to  the  grove  and  the  lake  of
Diana ;  Nymph,  wife  of  Numa,  come  to  thy  own  festival.
^Hiere  is  a  lake  in  the  valley  of  Arida,"  inclosed  by  a  dark

,  ^  BaquiUm.'] — ^Ver.  246.  Ovid  seems  to  hint  that  this  name  was  de-
rived  from  the  '  excubise,'  or '  watch/  mentioned  in  the  line  before ;  which
would  seem  to  be  a  very  far-fetched  derivation.  Perhaps  these  watches
were  set  there  to  keep  an  eye  upon  the  Sabines,  at  the  time  when  they
had  been  but  newly  received  into  the  number  of  the  citizens.  According  to
some  anthors,  this  hill  derived  its  name  from  the  word  *  excultae/  *  culti-
^^ated,'  and  was  added  to  the  city  and  brought  into  cultivation  by  Servius
TuUius.  Yarro  says  that  the  spot  had  its  plural  appellation  from  its  con-
'tog  of  two  ridges— the  Cis^an  and  the  Oppian  Hills.

'*  JBeavenly  an»i#.]— Ver.  259.  The  *  andle/  the  story  of  which  is
told  in  the  text ;  as  also  that  of  the  mmtorious  deeds  of  Mamurius.  The
•ndlia  were  borne  through  the  city  by  the  Salii  on  the  calends  of  March.
"Hiese  were  priests  of  Mars,  an  order  instituted  by  Numa  to  keep  the  sacred
(hielcb;  they  received  their  name  from '  salio/ '  to  leap/  or  *  dance/  because
n  the  procession  round  the  city  they  danced  with  the  shields  suspended
^om  their  necks.  Some  writers  say  that  they  received  their  name  from
'  Salhis,'  an  Arcadian,  a  companion  of  ^neas,  who  taught  the  Italian  youths
to  dance  in  armour.  After  the  procesfions  had  laked  some  days,  the
*Iuelds  were  replaced  in  the  temple  of  Mars.

*  VaUey  qf  Aricia.'\'-^et,  263.  Aricia  and  its  grove  were  situate  at
the  foot  of  the  Alban  Mount. Orestes,  pursued  by  the  Furies  for  the

h2


y  Google


100  THS  FASTI;  [b.  in.  264— 273.

wood,  sanctified  by  ancient  religious  awe.  Here  lies  concealed
Hippolytns,"  torn  asunder  by  the  madness  of  his  steeds ;  for
which  reason  that  grove  is  entered  by  no  horses.  Tltere  the
threads**  hang  down,  veiling  the  long  hedge-rows,  and  many
a  tablet  has  been  placed  to  the  Goddess  found  to  he  deserving
of  it.  Ofttimes,  the  woman  having  gained  her  wish,**  her
forehead  wreathed  with  chqplets,  bears  thither  from  the  city
the  blazing  torches.  Those  with  daring  hand  and  fleet  of
foot**  hold  there  the  sway ;  and  each  one  perishes  in  suc-
cession, after the example he has set. nith indistinct

murder  of  his  mother,  consulted  the  oracle  at  Delphi  how  he  might  escape
their  pmvuit ;  he  was  ordered  to  bring  away  the  image  <tf  DUna  from
the  Tauric  Chersonnesos.  Thoas  was  the  king,  and  by  his  order  all
strangers  that  were  caught  were  immolated.  Orestes  and  his  friend,
Pylades,  were  seized  and  condemned  to  death ;  on  which,  Iphigenia,  the
sister  of  Orestes,  who  was  then  the  priestess  of  Diana,  offered  to  spare  one
of  them  if  he  would  convey  letters  to  Greece  for  her.  A  contest  of  friend-
ship arose  as  to  which  should  save  the  other  by  his  death;  Pylades  at  length
yielded,  and  consented  to  carry  the  letter,  which,  he  found,  was  directed  to
Orestes  himself.  On  this  discovery  of  her  brother,  Iphigenia  joined  in
their  flight,  Thoas  being  first  slain ;  and,  according  to  Ovid  and  other
writers,  they  brought  the  image  of  Diana,  and  instituted  her  worship  in
the  Aridan  grove.

^  Hippoiytus,'] — ^Ver.  265.  He  was  falsely  charged  by  his  step-mother,
Phoedra,  with  a  crime,  to  commit  which,  she  had,  without  success,  solicited
him.  Theseus,  his  father,  uttering  imprecations  against  him,  Neptune  sent
a  sea  monster,  which  frightened  the  horses  of  Hippolytus ;  and  they,  run-
ning away,  dashed  him  against  the  rocks  and  killed  him.  Being  restored
to  life  by  the  art  of  iEsculapius,  he  ded  to  Italy  under  the  name  of  Yurbius,
and  was  sheltered  by  Diana  in  the  Arician  grove.

**  The  MrecKto.]— Ver.  267.  The  *licia,'  or  *  threads,*  were  used  for
suspending  the  gilts  and  votive  offerings  of  the  worshippers.  In  Catholic
countries,  and  in  some  parts  of  England,  this  practice  prevails  at  the  present

.day,  in  honour  of  the  patron  saint  of  an  adjoining  spring  or  well.

"V  6«  Gained  her  wish,] — ^Ver.  269.  Women,  whose  prayers  to  Diana  had
been  heard,  especially  in  love  matters,  used  to  carry  Ughted  torches  from
the  city  to  the  grove  of  Aricia.

«  Fleet  of/oot.']'-Ver,  271.  To  commemorate  the  flight  of  Orestes,
a  runaway  slave  was  always  appointed  to  be  her  high-priest  in  the  grove  of
Arida,  who  was  called  *  Rex  Nembrensis,'  *  the  king  of  the  woodland.'
The  term  '  with  daring  hand*  alludes  to  the  fact  that  the  priest  might,
according  to  the  usual  custom,  at  any  time  be  murdered  by  another  desirous
to  occupy  his  place,  and  hence  the  necessity  arose  of  his  always  going
armed  to  protect  himself  from  such  attacks.  This  and  the  cruelties  prac-
tised in  the  worship  of  the  Tauric  Diana,  perhaps  led  to  the  belief  that
£geriawas  identical  with  the  deity.


y  Google


i.m.  273 — 299.] OE, CALENDAB  OF  OVID.  101

murarar  glides  a  pebbly  stream:  ofttimes,  but  in  scanty
draughts,  Imve  I  drunk  thence.  It  is  Egeria  who  supplies
the  water ;  a  Goddess  pleasing  to  the  Muses ;  she  was  the
wife  and  the  counsellor  of  Numa.  In  the  first  place,  it  seemed
good  to  her  that  the  Quirites,  too  ready  for  war,  should  be
softened  by  justice  and  the  fear  of  the  Gods.  For  that  reason
laws  were  giyen,  that  the  strongest  might  not  obtain  supreme
power ;  and  the  holy  rites  dehvered  to  the  people  then  began
to  be  religiously  observed.  Their  savage  nature  is  now  laid
aside,  right  is  more  powerfU  than  arms,  and  it  is  considered
disgraceful  to  engage  in  civil  strife;  many  a  person,  but
just  now  violent,  is  now  changed  in  character  on  seeing  the
altar,  and  offers  the  wine  and  &e  salt  spelt  cake  on  the  glow-
ing hearths.  Lo !  the  father  of  the  Gtods  is  scattering  his  flash-
ing lightnings  through  the  clouds,  and  drains  the  heavens  by
deluging  showers :  on  no  other  occasion  have  the  hurled  bolts
of  fire  fallen  more  thickly.  The  king  is  alarmed,  and  terror
takes  possession  of  the  breasts  of  the  multitude.  To  him  the
Goddess  says :  ''  Be  not  unreasonably  dismayed !  the  lightning
is  to  be  averted  by  atonement,  and  the  wrath  of  the  angry
Jove  is  e€uily  appeased ;  but  Picus  and  Faunus*^  will  be  able
to  reveal  the  ceremony  of  expiation,  each  of  them  a  Divinity
of  the  Roman  soil ;  but  they  will  not  inform  thee  without  force  :
apply  chains  when  thou  hast  caught  them."  And  thus  does
she  instruct  Numa  by  what  means  they  may  be  taken.  There
was  at  the  foot  of  the  Aventine  hUl^  a  grove,  dark  with  the
shade  of  the  holm-oak,  on  seeing  which  you  might  readily
say,  **  Surely  a  Divinity  dwells  here  !  "  In  the  centre  was  a
grassy  plot,  and,  covered  over  with  green  moss,  a  constant
stream  of  water  trickled  from  the  rock. From  this  stream

'^  Pieui  and  Fatmus,'] — ^Ver.  291.  These  were  ancient  deities  of
Lttium.  They  have  been  mentioned  before,  both  in  the  text  and  in  the
notes.

»  Of  the  Aventine  At//.]— Ver.  295.  This  was  one  of  the  hills  to  which
Borne  extended  in  the  later  times.  It  is  supposed  that  its  name  was
other  derived  from  Aventinus,  son  of  Romnlus  Silyius,  king  of  Alba  Longa,
who  was  buried  there,  or  from  *ayes/  '  birds/  which  used  to  flock  there.
Varro  says  that  it  was  so  called  because  there  was  a  ferry  across  the
marshes  which  separated  it  from  the  rest  of  Rome,  by  which  the  pas-
sengers were  carried,  '  Advehebantur.'  Servius,  on  the  ^neid  (Book  7,
L  651),  mentions  a  tradition  that  it  was  so  called  by  the  Sabines,  from
'Avciii,' a  river  in  their  own  territory.  ♦


y  Google


102  THE  rA.STI;  [b.  ui.  299— 327.

FauDtui  and  PicuB  were  wont  generally  to  drink  alone.  Hidier
comes  king  Numa,  and  sacrifices  a  she^  to  the  fountain ;  lie
then  places  for  the  Gods  cups  full  of  fragrant  wine ;  and  with
his  train  lies  hid,  conceaLing  himsdf  in  a  grotto.  The
forest  Gods  come  to  their  accustomed  streams,  and  refresh
their  parched  spirits  with  copious  draughts  of  wine  :^  sle^  is
the  consequence  of  their  debauch ;  Numa  issues  forth  from
the  cool  grotto,  and  puts  tiie  hands  of  them,  thus  buried  in
slumber,  in  tight  manacles.  When  sleep  has  now  d^^arted,
tliey  strive  by  strug^ng  to  burst  the  bonds ;  «b  ^^
struggle,  the  more  tightly  do  the^  hold  them,  l^en  Kona
ioys  :  "  Gods  of  the  grores,  forgive  my  deed !  inasmuch  as
ye  know  that  impiety  is  far  from  my  nature ;  and  point  out
the  way  in  which  the  lightning  miay  be  averted."  Thus
Numa  spoke,  and  tlius  Faunus  replied,  shaking  his  horns  :^
'*  'Hiou  inquirest  ou  a  matter  of  great  difficulty,  and  which  it
is  against  the  law  of  heaven  for  t^^ee  to  learn  by  our  instruc-
tion ;  our  privileges  as  Deities  liav«  their  limits.  We  are  the
Gods  of  the  country,  and  have  our  sway  on  the  lofty  moun-
tains ;  Jove  has  fall  power  over  his  own  weapons.  Of  thyself
thou  wilt  not  be  enabled  to  bring  him  down  from  heaven ;  but
perhaps,  by  availing  thyself  of  our  aid,  thou  wUt."  Faunus
had  thus  spoken :  &e  opinion  expressed  by  Ficus  is  the  same.
^'  But  take  from  us  these  bonds,"  says  Picus ;  *'  Jove  shall
come  hither,  brought  down  from  his  topmost  height;  the
vaporous  Styx  shaU  attest  my  promise.'*  What  they  do,  when
released  from  their  bonds,  what  incantations  they  repeat,  and
by  what  art  they  bring  down  Jove  from  his  habitations  i^ove,
it  is  not  allowed  by  heaven  for  man  to  know;  let  tilings
permitted  be  the  only  subjects  of  my  song,  and  whatever  may
be  repeated  by  the  lips  of  the  poet,  without  incurring  guilt.
They  bring  thee  down,*'  0  Jupiter,  from  the  skies ;  in  ooi^e-

^  Draughts  qf  wine.] — ^Vcr.  303-4. Gower's  version  is —
*  The  wood-gods  to  their  old  wont  came,  the  bowla
They  turn'd  oflF  blithe,  and  quench'd  thdr  thirsty  souls.'

*°  Shaking  Am  honu.} — ^Ver.  312.  To  show  that  it  was  a  matter  not
to  be  settled  in  a  moment,  bnt  requiring  much  deliberation.

6^  They  bring  thee  down,] — Ver.  327.  It  is  thought  by  some  that
Numa  discovered  the  art  of  conducting  the  lightning,  and  rendering  it  in-
nocuous in  its  effects ;  and  the  death  of  TuUus  Hostilius,  the  third  king  of
Rome,  is  supposed  by  them  to  have  been  owing  to  his  ignorance  of  the
proper  mode  of  conducting  the  electric  fluid.


y  Google


B.  in.  327— 353.] OE, CAjaWTDAR  OF  OVID.  103

qnence  of  which  posterity  still  celebrates  thee,  and  names
thee  Elicius.*^  It  is  agreed  that  the  tops  of  the  Aventine
forest  then  trembled,  and  the  earth  yielded  beneath  the  pres-
sure of  the  weight  of  Jove.  The  heart  of  the  king  palpitates  ;
from  the  whole  of  his  breast  the  blood  has  fled,  and  Ms  brist-
ling hair  stands  on  end.  When  his  senses  have  returned,  he
says :  "O  diou,  both  King  and  Father  of  the  Gods  on  high  I
teach  me  the  assured  expiations  of  Mj^  lightnings ;  if,  with
guileless  hands,  I  have  touched  thy  altars ;  if  too,  my  tpngue,
with  true  piety,  asks  this  which  is  now  entreated  of  thee."  Jove
oodded  assent  to  his  prayer ;  but,  without  using  any  circumlo-
cution, he  concealed  the  truth,  and  by  his  equivocal  expres-
sions struck  the  hero  with  alarm.  "  Cut  off  a  head,"  says  he.
To  whom  the  king  says :  "  We  will  obey :  an  onion,  pulled  up
iu  my  garden,  must  be  cut  off."**  "Of  a  man,"  adds  the
God.  "  Yes,  lie  topmost  hairs,"  answers  the  other.  Tke  God
demands  "  a  life  ;"  to  whom  Numa  says  *  "  Fes,  of  a  fish."
The  God  laughed  and  said,  *'  See  to  it  then,  that  with  these
thou  dost  propitiate  my  weapons,  Q  man,  hot  to  be  re-
pulsed from  a  conference  with  the  Gods.  But  to  thee,  when
to-morrow's  sun  shall  have  raised  his  full  disk,  I  will  give  the
sure  pledge  of  empire."  He  spoke ;  with  loud  thunderings
he  is  borne  above  the  trembling  firmament,  and  leaves  Numa
in  the  attitude  of  worship.  Joyful  he  returns,  and  tells  the
Qoirites  what  had  occurred;  credence  was  given  to  his
words,  tardy,  and  extorted  with  difficulty.  "  But  surely,"
says  he,  "  I  shall  be  beUeved  if  the  result  foUow  my  words.
See  now,  hear  ye,  every  one  present,  what  will  happen  on  the
morrow. When  to-morrow's  sun  shall  have  raised  his  fall

®  Elicius,'] — ^Ver.  328.  From  •  eUdo/  to  *  entice,'  *  allure/  or  *  bring
out.'

^Mmthecutojgr.'] — ^Ver.340.  Meaning,  *It  must  have  its  "bulb"  or
**  head"  taken  off.'  The  conversation  seems  to  have  been  intended  by  Ju-
piter as  a  test  ci  Numa's  ready  wit  and  humane  disposition.  He  bids
Nnma  *  Cut  off  a  head.'  Numa  says,  *  Yes,  I  will ;  the  head  of  an  onion.'
'  Of  a  man,'  says  Jupiter.  *  Yes,  the  topmost  hair,'  says  Numa,  implying
obedience  4o  the  original  command,  as  to  the  cutting  off  of  the  head ;  but
dexterously  sabstitoting  *  capilli/  '  the  hair,*  for  *  caput/  *  the  head,'  which
were  often  used  synonymously.  The  god,  detecting  the  pun,  presses  him
closer,  and  demands  a  life ;  on  which  Numa  says,  *■  Yes,  yon  shall  have  a
life,  but  it  must  be  that  of  a  fish.'  Plutarch  says  the  fish  was  the  *  msna,'
a  kind  of  pilchard,  which  seems  to  have  been  a  favourite  ingredient  in
the '  materiel'  of  incantation. See  Bo<^  2,  L  578.


y  Google


104  THE  FASTI;  [b.  lu.  353— 381.

disk,  Jupiter  will  give  the  sure  pledge  of  empire."  They  re-
tire in  doubt ;  his  promise  aeemea  likely  to  be  of  slow  per-
formance, and  their  beUef  depends  on  the  approaching  day.

The  earth  was  still  soft,  and  bedewed  wiUi  the  hoar-frost  of
the  morning ;  the  people  are  present  before  the  threshold  of
their  king.  He  comes  forth  and  seats  himself  in  the  midst  on
a  throne  of  maple-wood;^  around  him  stand  the.  men  in
countless  numbers,  and  hold  their  peace.  Phoebus  had  now
but  risen  with  his  upper  edge ;  their  anxious  minds  are  in  a
state  of  agitation  through  hope  and  fear.  He  stands,  and  his
head  veiled^  with  a  snow-white  robe,  he  raises  his  hands  al-
ready not  nnfamiliar  in  worship  to  the  Gods ;  and  thus  he  speaks
— "  The  time  of  the  promised  favour  is  drawing  nigh ;  confer,
0  Jupiter,  upon  thy  words  the  promised  fulfilment."  While
he  was  spealang,  the  sun  had  just  raised  frotn  the  deep  his
entire  disk,  and  from  the  pole  of  heaven  th^  came  a  heavy
peal ;  thrice  did  the  God  thunder  without  a  cloud ;  thrice
did  he  dart  his  lightnings.  Believe  what  I  tell;  I  speak
of  things  wondrous,  but  realities.  The  heavens  began  to
open  in  the  midst;  the  multitude,  with  their  monarch,
cast  down  their  eyes.  Behold !  there  falls  a  shield,  gently
poised  on  the  Hghtsome  breeze ;  a  shout  from  the .  people
ascends  to  the  stars.  The  king  raises  the  gift  from  the
ground,  having  first  offered  a  heifer,  which  had  never  yielded
his  neck  to  be  pressed  by  the  yoke.  He  entitles  it  *  ancile,'
because  it  is  pared  away^  at  every  point,  and  whichever
way  you  look  at  it,  every  comer  is  off".  Then,  mindful  that
the  destiny  of  empire  depends  upon  this,  he  forms  a  plan  of
much  cunning.  He  orders  several**^  to  be  made,  engraved  of  a

**  Throne  qf  maple  wood,"] — ^Ver.  359.  The  wood  of  the  maple  was
held  by  the  ancients  in  the  highest  esteem,  next  to  that  of  the  cedar,  on
account  of  its  hardness  and  the  closeness  of  its  grain.

^^  His  tiead  veUedJ] — ^Ver.  363.  The  Romans  covered  their  heads  when
praying  or  performing  any  religious  rite,  in  order  that  nothing  of  ill  omen
should  present  itself  to  the  view  of  the  devotee.  See  iEneid,  book  iii.  1.  405.

^  Became  it  is  pared  away."] — ^Ver.  375.  In  the  old  Latin,  *ancisu8,'  or
*  amcisus,'  means  *  having  the  edges  cut  off.'  Ovid  means  tor  say,  thai
from  this  word,  the  shield  received  the  name  of  'ancile.'  Its  shape,  as  repre-
sented  on  a  gem  in  the  Florentine  cabinet,  was  oblong,  each  of  the  two  sides
receding  inwards,  with  an  even  curvature,  so  as  to  make  it  broader  at  the
ends  than  in  the  middle,  and  thus  it  presented  a  curved  edge  on  every  side.

•7  Be  orders  several.] — Ver.  381.  Ovid  says,  several.  Dionysius  says,
very  many. Other  writers  say  eleven,  and  that  Mamurius  made  them  so


y  Google


B.  III.  381^397.] OB, CALENDAB  OF  OYID.  105

similar  shape,  that  a  deception  may  meet  the  eyes  of  those
plotting  to  steal  it.  Mamurius,  whether  more  distingaished
for  his  probity  or  for  his  skill  as  a  workman,  it  is  hard
for  one  to  say,  completed  that  task.  To  him  the  munifi-
cent Noma  said,  **  Ask  thy  own  reward  for  thy  work ;  as  my
truthfolness  is  well  known,  thou  shalt  ask  for  nothing  in
vain.*'  Already  had  he  given  to  the  Salii  (from  their  dancing
do  they  deriye  their  name)  both  arms,*"  and  words  to  be  sung
to  certain  measures.  Then  thus  Mamurius  fayf,  '*  Let  fame
be  given  to  me  as  my  reward,  and  let  my  name  be  mentioned
at  the  end  of  their  strain."  From  that  circumstance  do  the
piiests  pay  the  reward  promised  for  the  ancient  workmanship,
and  call  upon  Mamurius.^

If  by  any  chance  you  should  desire  to  inarr7>  though
both  of  you  should  be  impatient,  postpone  it;^  a  short
delay  has  its  great  advantages,  .^ids  stir  up  the  fight — ^the
fight  is  unsuited  to  the  newly  wedded;  when  arms  shall
have  been  laid  by,  there  will  be  a  more  suitable  omen.  On
these  days, too, ought  the  wife of  the  mitred  ^^  Dialis,

ddlfally,  that  Numa  was  unable  to  perceiTe  the  difference. Plutarch  says
that  Numa  left  the  work  of  imitation  to  be  a  subject  of  competition  among
all  the  Roman  artists. Gower's  version  of  this  passage  is : —
'  Of  shields  like  shap'd  he  bids  to  make  a  doasen,
That  so  an  error  might  the  couzener  couzen.'

^  Both  armB,'\ — Yer.  388.  The  dress  of  the  Salii  was  an  embroidered
tanic,  with  a  brazen  belt,  the  '  trabea'  and  '  apex/  or  tufted  conical  cap ;
neh  had  a  sword  by  his  side,  and  a  spear  or  staff  in  his  hand.  They  car-
ried  tiie  '  andlia*  in  the  left  hand,  or  suspended  from  their  shoulders,
and,  while  dancing,  struck  them  with  their  rods  or  swords,  keeping  time
with  their  vtnces  and  the  movements  of  the  dance.  Their  yerses  con-
tvned,  it  is  supposed,  a  kind  of  rude  theogony  or  history  of  the  Gods,
^h  the  exception  of  Venus,  who  was  omitted  from  their  praises.

**  Mamurius.'] — ^Ver.  392.  Some  regard  this  story  as  utterly  fabulous,
and  Yarro  beUeres  their  mention  of '  Yeturius  Mamurius'  to  be  only  an  itp-
peal  to  *  vctus  memoria,'  *  ancient  tradition.'

^  PoHpone  it."] — ^Yer.  394.  As  the  *  andUa,'  which  were  emblems  of
w,  were  carried  about  on  the  Ides  of  March,  it  was  not  considered  auspi-
ooQsto  marry,  or  to  commence  a  journey,  or  indeed,  any  matter  of  import-
ance on  that  day.

^  Of  the  mi<r«;.]— Yer.  397. •  Apicati,'  literally  wearing  the  '  apex.

,This  was  a  cap  worn  by  the  Flamens  and  the  Salii. The  name  properly

l>doneed  to  a  pointed  piece  of  oliye  wood,  the  base  whereof  was  surrounded

with  wooL This  was  held  on  the  head  by  fillets,  or  by  a  cap,  which  was

^tttened  by  two  bands,  called  *  apicula,'  or  *  offendices.' The  cap  was  of


y  Google


106  THE  FASTI;  [b.  III.  397— 420.

clad  in  her  Jlame-eolaured  gown,  to  wear  her  hair  M  UB-
braided.

When  the  third  night  rising  from  the  de^  shall  Imet*  raised
its  fires,  one  of  the  two  Fishes  will  be  coMealed.  For  there  are
two — the  one  near  to  the  southern,  the  other  to  the  northern
winds  ;  each  takes  its  name  from  its  neighbouring  wind.

When  the  bride  of  Tithonm,  with  rosy  cheeks,  shall  have
begun  to  shed  her  dews,  and  shall  urge  on  the  hours  of  the
fifUi  day,  whether  that  Constellation  is  styled  ArctophylKC,  or
whether  the  lazy  Bootes,  he  shall  be  plunged  in  the  deep,  and
shall  elude  your  view.

But  not  so  the  Vintager.  It  is  but  a  trifling  delay  to  relate
whence  this  Constellation  derives  its  origin.  Bacchus  is  said,
among  the  heights  of  Ismarus,  to  have  bved  the  long-haired
Ampelos,^  offspring  of  the  Satyrs  and  of  a  Nymph.  To  him  he
gave,  pendant  from  the  foliage  of  an  elm,  a  vine,  which  still
has  its  name  from  that  of  the  youth.  While  he  is  heedlessly
gathering  the  blushiug  grapes  on  a  branch,  he  falls ;  him  thus
lost  to  earth,  Bacchus  conveys  among  the  stars.

When  the  sixth  Sun  from  the  ocean  climbs  the  steep  of
Olympus,  and  on  his  winged  steeds  traverses  the  skies,  who-
ever thou  be  that  art  present,  and  art  paying  homage  to  the
shrines  of  hoary  Vesta,  place  both  the  goblet  and  the  incense
on  the  Ilian  hearth. To  the  countless  titles  of  Caesar  was

a  conical  form,  and  was  generally  made  of  sheep-skin,  with  the  wool  on  ;
and  from  the  *  apex,'  on  its  summit,  it  at  last  acquired  that  name  also.
The  Flaminica,  or  wife  of  the  Flamen  Dialis,  wore  a  scarlet  or  flame-co-
loured robe,  called  *  venenatum,'  from  '  venenum,*  *  dye,*  and  also  the
*  rica,'  or  crimson  hood,  a  square  cloak,  with  a  border,  to  which  was  at-
tached a  slip,  cut  from  a  '  felix  arbor.'  On  certain  days  she  was  not  al-
lowed to  cut  her  nails,  or  comb  her  hair,  to  whkh  fact  the  poet  here
makes  allusion.

7^  Ampeloa,'] — Ver.  409.  The  story  of  Ampelos  is  differently  told  by
other  writers.  According  to  them,  Ampelos  was  a  youth,  the  companion
of  Bacchus.  Contrary  to  the  advice  of  that  god,  he  persisted  in  sporting
with  the  wild  beasts.  Ate,  the  goddess  of  revenge,  persuaded  him  to
torment  a  bull;  and  doing  so,  he  provoked  the  moon,  who,  in  her  anger,  sent
a  gad-fly  to  sting  the  bull,  when  Ampelos  fell  and  broke  his  neck.  Bacchus
appealed  to  the  '  Parcae,'  or  Fates,  and  Atropos  promised  to  restore  Ampelos
to  him  in  another  form.  Forthwith  a  vine,  a/it7r€Xoc»  was  produced,  laden
with  grapes ;  Bacchus  and  the  Satyrs  discovered  the  Invention  of  wine,  and, '
in  their  exultation,  became  intoxicated.  Ismarus  was  a  mountain  of
Thrace,  near  the  river  Hebrus.


y  Google


B.  III.  420—444.]  OB, ClXEin)AB  OF  OTID.  107

added  on  this  day  the  honour  which  he  most  desired  tomerit^
-—that  of  the  Pontificate.  Over  the  eternal  fires  presides  the
diyinity  of  the  immortal  Csesar;  thou  liere  heholdest  the
united  fledges  of  the  empire's  safety.  From  the  ashes  of  an-
cient Troy  came  the  most  worthy  relic,  laden  with  which,  -^neas
was  safe  from  tne  foe.  A  priest  descended  from  .£neaa
claims  an  alliance  with  thy  Deity ;  Vesta,  do  thou  preserve
his  kindred  person.^^  Well  do  ye  thrive,  ye  fires,  winch  with
sacred  hand  he  tends ;  undying,  Hve  on,  both  thou  sacred
flame,  and  thou  Prince,  I  pray.

There  is  one  distinction  for  the  Nones  of  March,  Uutt  on
tlem  they  believe  that  the  temple  of  Vejovis,  h^dre  ymt
reaxk  the  two  groves,^  was  consecrated,  when  Bomuhn  sur-
rounded the  grove  widi  a  high  stone  wall.  "  Hither  fly,  who-
ever you  are,"  says  he,  "  and  you  shall  be  in  safety."  Oh !
from  how  low  an  origin  has  the  Roman  grown !  How  little
an  object  of  envy  was  that  ancient  multitude !

Lest,  however,  the  strangeness  of  the  name  be  an  obstacle
to  you  in  your  ignorance,  learn  who  this  Deity  is,  and  why  he
is  so  called.  He  is  the  youthful  Jupiter ;  mark  his  youthful
aspect:  mark,  too,  his  hand;  it  wields  no  thunder-bolts.
The  thunder-bolt  was  assumed  by  Jupiter  after  the  attempt  of
the  giants  to  attain  to  the  skies ;  in  early  times  he  was  un-
armed. Ossa  blazed  with  new  flames,  and  Pelion  higher  than
Ossa,  and  Olympus  rooted  in  the  solid  earth.  A  she  goat
stands,"^  too,  beside  him ;  the  nymphs  of  Crete  are  said  to

**  Most  desired  to  merit,'] — ^Ver.  419.  Augustus  desired  this  dignity,
that  he  might  appear  to  stand  high  in  the  favour  of  the  gods.  He  was
appomted  Pontifex  Maximus,  a.u.c.  740,  in  the  place  of  Lepidus.  This
officer  lived  in  a  house  at  the  puhlic  expense,  called  the  *  Regia,'  or
*  palace.' Augustus  gave  this  up,  in  his  Pontificate,  to  the  Vestal  Virgins.

^*  His  kindred  person."] — ^Ver.  426.  This  passage  has  puzzled  many  of
the  commentators ;  hut  it  does  not  appear  very  cleariy  where  the  diffi-
culty  lies.  The  poet  repeatedly  calls  the  fire  of  Vesta  the  *  Uian,'  or
Trojan  fires.  He  also  addresses  Augustus,  the  adopted  son  of  Julius  Caesar,
as  descended  fh>m  ^neas ;  and  he  seems  here  only  to  allude  to  the  fact
of  both  being  able  to  trace  back  their  origin  to  the  city  of  Troy.

^*  The  two  groves.] — Ver.  430.  The  space  between  the  Arx  and  the
Capitolium,  where  the  Asylum  and  the  temple  of  Vejovis  were,  was  called,
according  to  Livy,  book  i.  c.  viii.,  and  Dionysius,  *  Inter  duos  lucos,*  *  Be-
tween the  two  groves.'

^*  Ashe  goat  stands,] — ^Ver.  443.  This  fact  goes  for  to  confirm  the
poet's  opinion  that  *  Vejovis'  means  *  the  young  Jove  ;*  as  Jupiter  in  his


y  Google


108  THE  PAST! ;  [b.  iu.  444—157.

haye  nnrtared  him;  a  Mhe-goat  fornislied  milk  for  the  in-
fant JoYe.  Now  I  am  called  upon  to  explain  the  name ;  the
country-women  call  wheat,  which  has  grown  up  but  indiffer-
ently, "  yegrandia,"  and  when  small  in  the  grain^  they  style
it  **  vesca."^  If  that  is  the  force  of  the  jrord,  "  ve''  why
should  I  not  imagine  that  the  temple  of  Vejovis  is  the
temple  of  the  little  Jupiter  ?

And  now,  when  the  stars  shall  bespangle  the  azure  sky,
look  upwards,  and  you  shall  see  the  neck  of  the  Grorgon
steed.^  He  is  believed  to  have  sprung  forth,  his  mane  be-
sprinkled with  blood,  from  the  teeming  neck  of  the  slain
Medusa.  With  him,  as  he  soared  above  the  clouds  and  be-
neath the  stars,  the  heavens  were  as  the  ground,  his  wings
were  in  place  of  feet.  And  now  had  he  taken  the  strange  curb
in  his  flatting  mouth,  when  his  lightsome  hoof  struck  forth
the  Aonian  fountains.^ Now  does  he  enjoy  that  heaven  which

infancy  was  suckled  by  the  goat  Amalthea.  He  also  attempts  to  proye  it
from  the  circumstance,  that  there  Jupiter  is  represented  at  a  time  when
he  had  not  yet  learned  to  wield  his  thunderbolts,  and  that  *  ve'  was  an
old  Latin  word,  in  all  cases  found  to  express  diminutiveness.  Some  suppose
that  ^  ve'  is  here  applied  to  the  name  of  Jupiter  in  a  bad  sense,  as  '  the
eril*  or  *  the  incensed'  Joye,  on  which  account  his  statue  was  armed
with  arrows,  for  the  purposes  of  mischief.  Mr.  Keightly;  in  his  Mytho-
logy of  Greece  and  Italy,  thinks  that  *  Vejoyis'  and  '  Yedius'  mean  the
same  deity,  their  name  meaning  the  'injurious  Jupiter/  and  that  he  was  a
god  of  the  world  below.  Vedius,  howeyer,  would  appear  to  bear  the  same
relation  to  Pluto,  'Dijs,'  that  Vejoyis  does  to  Jupiter,  whatever  that  relation
may  haye  been.

?7  *  Fesca.']— Ver.  446.  From  *  ve'  «  not,'  and  *  esca*  *  food,'  as  af-
fording but  little  nourishment.  *  Vegrandis'  is,  according  to  the  poet's
etymology,  from  *  ye,'  *  not,'  *  grandis/  *  large/  or  *  of  full  growth.'

78  The  Gorgon  steed,]— Ver.  450*  The  poet  describes  the  Heliacal
rising,  of  Pegasus  on  the  nones.  He  was  so  called  from  Trijyi),  *a
fountain/  as  haying  been  bom  near  the  springs  of  the  ocean.  Medusa,
one  of  the  Gorgon  sisters,  was  pregnant  by  Neptune,  and  when  Perseus
slew  her  and  cut  off  her  head,  Pegasus  sprung  from  the  blood ;  hence  the
poet's  expression,  *  the  teeming  neck.'  He  was  tamed  and  presented  to
Bellerophon  to  assist  him  in  the  conquest  of  the  Chimaera.  Ovid,  Metam.,
4,  785,  says  that  Perseus  was  mounted  on  Pegasus  when  he  slew  the  sea-
monster  to  which  Andromeda  was  exposed.  Minerva,  in  her  vengeance
against  Medusa,  who  had  been  previously  remarkable  for  the  beauty  of
her  hair,  changed  it  into  serpents,  and  doomed  all  who  looked  on  her  face
to  the  penalty  of  being  turned  into  stone.  Perseus,  with  the  aid  of  the
gods,  destroyed  her  wMe  sleeping.

"'^  The  Aonian  fou/Uams.] — Ver.  456. Pegasus  was  caught  and  tamed


y  Google


B.  in.  457— 475  ] OB, CALENDAE  OP  OVID.  109

formerly  he  sought  by  his  wings,  and  he  glitters,  refulgent  with
fifteen  stars.

Forthwith  on  the  succeeding  night  you  will  see  the  Onossian
crown  ;*  by  reason  of  the  crime  of  Theseus'*  was  Ariadne
made  a  Gk>ddess.  Already  had  the  damsel,  to  her  advantage,
obtained  Bacchus  in  exchange  for  her  foresworn  spouse,  she
who  had  given  to  her  ungrateful  husband  the  clue  to  be  re-
traced. Exulting  at  the  good  fortune  of  her  marriage,  she
said,  '*  What  was  I  mourning  for,  like  a  country  lass  as  I
was  ?  It  was  a  good  thing  for  me  that  he  was  faithless.''
In  the  mean  time,  Bacchus,**  with  his  well-trimmed  locks,  con-
quers the  Indians,^  and  returns  enriched  from  the  Eastern
world ;  among  the  captive  maidens  of  distinguished  beauty,
the  daughter  of  the  king  was  too  pleasing  to  Bacchus.  His
loving  wife  indulged  in  weeping,  and  as  she  paced  the  winding
shore,  with  her  hair  all  loose,  she  uttered  such  words  as
these : — "  Lo  now  a  second  time,  ye  billows,  hear  a  like  com-
plaint !  Lo !  a  second  time,  ye  sands,  receive  my  tears  ae
they  fall,  I  used  to  cry,  I  remember,  '  Foresworn  and  faith-
less Theseus!'  He  is  gone;  Bacchus  now  incurs  the  like
guilt.  *  Now,  too,'  will  I  exclaim,  '  let  woman  put  no  trust  in

by  Bellerophon,  who  iieas  thrown  off  from  him  by  Jupiter,  and,  falling  in
Cilicia,  was  struck  with  blindness.  By  striking  with  his  hoof  Mount
Helicon,  in  Aonia,  a  part  of  Bceotia,  the  fountain  called  Hippocrene,
\intov  Kprivtj,  or  *  the  horse  fountain/  was  opened.

^  Gnosaian  crown.'] — Ver.  460.  Minos,  the  father  of  Ariadne,  reigned
atGnossus,  in  the  isle  of  Crete.

"^  Theseus."] — ^Ver.  460.  He  was  the  son  of  iEthra  and  iEgeus,  and  was
sent  from  Athens  to  Crete,  as  one  of  the  seven  chosen  youths  to  be  devoured
by  the  Minotaur.  By  the  aid  of  Ariadne,  he  tracked  the  Labyrinth  where  the
monster  had  his  abode,  and  slew  hun.  He  sailed  from  Crete  with  his  com-
panions and  with  Ariadne  and  seven  other  damsels;  but  he  cruelly  aban-
doned her  to  whom  he  was  indebted  for  his  hfe,  on  the  island  of  Naxos.

*  Bacchus.] — ^Ver.  465.  Here  called  *  Liber.'  This  name  was  given
him  either  from  *  libo,'  *  to  make  a  libation,'  or  from  *Ubero,*  *to  set  free,'
because  he  hberates  the  mind  from  cares,  or  from  the  Greek  words  Xvkiv
fiapfi^  *  to  loosen  the  weights,'  i.  e.  of  care  and  despondency.  He  is  called
*  Depexus,*  *  combed  down,*  or  *  well-trimmed,'  in  allusion  either  to  his
youth  or  the  effeminacy  of  his  character.

®  The  Indians.] — ^Ver.  465.  The  conquests  of  Bacchus  in  the  east
are  said  to  have  extended  to  the  river  Ganges.  His  army  consisted  of
a  troop  of  Bacchanals,  his  conquests  were  without  blood,  and  he  taught
the  conquered  nations  the  use  of  the  vine,  the  art  of  tilling  the  earth,  and
of  preparing  honey  for  food.  He  was  accompanied  on  this  expedition  by
Silenos  and  Lusus.


y  Google


1 10  THE  FA.8TI ;  [d.  Iff.  475—500.

man  ; '  change  but  the  name,  and  my  case  has  been  repeated.
O,  wonld  that  my  destiny  had  kept  on  the  course  on  which,  it
had  before  commenced,  and  that  now,  at  this  moment,  I  had
been  no  more !  Why,  Bacchus,  didst  thou  fHreserre  me  when
about  to  die  on  the  lonely  sands  ?  I  could  then  have  ended
my  sorrows  at  once.  Ah  I  Bacchus,  thou  unstable  one !  ye*,
more  unstable  even  than  the  leaves  that  encircle  thy  temples  ;
Bacchus,  known  to  my  sorrow,  didst  thou  dare,  by  bringing
thy  paramour  before  my  very  eyes,  to  disturb  a  union  before
so  harmonious.  Alas!  where  is  tiiy  plighted  faith?**
Where  all  tiiat  thou  wast  wont  to  swear ;  Ah !  wretched
me !  How  often  do  I  repeat  these  words.  Thou  wast  wont
to  blame  Theseus,  and  thou  thyself  didst  use  to  call  him
a  deceiver ;  by  thy  own  judgment  thou  art  guilty  of  a  greater
crime.  May  no  man  know  this,  and  by  secret  anguish
may  I  be  consumed,  lest  I  may  be  supposed  to  have  deserved
to  be  thus  often  beguiled.  Above  all,  I  would  wish  it  to  be
concealed  firom  Theseus,  lest  he  should  rejoice  that  thou  art
a  partaker  of  his  guilt.  But,  I  suppose,  a  paramour  of
fair  complexion"  was  preferred  to  me,  became  of  my  swarthy
hue ;  be  then  that  colour  the  lot  of  my  enemy.  But  what
matters  th^t?  She  is  the  more  pleasing  to  thee,  ^m
this  very  defect.  What  art  thou  domg  ?  She  contaminates
thy  very  embrace.  Bacchus,  fulfil  thy  pledge,  and  prefer
no  woman  before  the  love  of  a  wife,  one  who  was
ever  accustomed  to  love  her  husband.  The  horns  of  a
handsome  bull  captivated  my  mother;  thy  horns,  me  ;^
they  commend me; the other was a disgraceful pas-

■*  I%y  pUghted  faith."] — Ver.  485-6. Gower's  version  is —
*  Ah !  whereas  thy  faith  ? Those  solemn  tows  indented.
Ah  met-  how  oft  have  I  these  dirges  vented.*

^  0/  fair  eomplesion, — Ver.  493.  This  is  meant  ironically,  as^ Bacchus
would  not  be  very  likely  to  meet  with  a  *  Candida  pellex*  in  hit  Indian
excursion^  unless,  indeed,  he  took  Georgia  or  Circassia  in  his  road.

^  Thy  horns f  me.] — Ver.  500.  Bacchus  was  frequently  represented
with  horns.  He  seems  to  have  been  worshipped  by  the  Thracians  and  the
Phrygians  under  the  name  of  Sabazius  and  in  the  form  of  an  ox. — Keight-
ley's  Mythology  of  Greece  and  Rome,  p.  168.  Neptune  gave  Minos  a
bull,  which,  on  account  of  its  beauty,  he  refused  to  sacrifice  to  the  god.  On
this,  Neptune  inspired  Pasiphae,  the  daughter  of  Minos,  with  love  for  the
animal,  and  the  Minotaur,  half  man  and  half  beast,  was  the  fruit  of  this
passion.  Perhaps  the  truth  is,  that  Pasiphae  had  an  intrigue  with  t
person  named  Taurus  (which  also  signifies  in  Latin  *  a  bull'),  and  had
twins  by  him,  whom  she  named  Minos  and  Taurus.


y  Google


8.  III.  501— 520.] OE, CALENDAB  OT  OVLD.  Ill

sion.  Let  not  my  love  prove  an  injury  to  me;  for,
Bacchus,  it  was  no  harm  to  thee  that  thou  thyself  didst  con-
fess thy  love.  And,  indeed,  thou  dost  nothing  strange  in
kindling  a  flame  ^  in  me :  in  fire  thou  art  said  to  have  been
bom,"  and  from  fire  to  have  been  snatched,  by  the  hand  of
thy  father.  I  am  she  to  whom  thou  wast  wont  to  promise
heaven ;  Ah,  me !  instead  of  heaven,  what  kind  of  gifts  am  I
now  receiving  ?"  She  had  said ;  for  a  long  time  had  Bacchus
been  listening^  to  her  words  while  thus  complaining,  as
by  chance  he  had  been  following  after  her.  He  clasps  her
in  his  embraces,  and,  with  kisses,  dries  away  her  tears,  and
he  says,  **  Together,  let  us  seek  the  heights  of  heaven;"
united  to  me  in  wedlock,  thou  shaJt  take  a  united  epithet.*®
Henceforth,  thy  name  altered  shall  be  Libera.  I  will  cause,
too,  that  with  thee  there  shall  be  a  memorial  of  thy  crown,
which  Vulcan  gave  to  Venus,  she  to  thee.  He  keeps  his
word,  and  transforms  its  nine  jewels  into  stars  ;  by  means  of
nine  stars  it  still  ghtters  in  its  golden  radiance.

When  he  who  bears  the  purple  day  upon  his  rapid  car  shall
have  completed  six  risings,  and  as  many  settings  of  his  orb,
then  shall  you  behold  the  second  Equina  on  the  grassy  plain
which  Tiber  bounds  on  its  verge  with  its  win<Ung  waters.

^  Kindling  a  Jiam€,']'^VeT.  503.  There  is  a  play  here  upon  the  word
'  oro/  *  to  bum/  which  also  means,  in  a  figurative  sense,  *  to  inflame  with
passion.'

*  To  have  been  bam.'] — Ver.  504.  Semele,  the  mother  of  Bacchus,  at
the  instigation  of  Juno,  hound  Jupiter  by  an  oath  to  grant  her  request,
and  then  desired  that  he  would  present  himself  to  her,  accompanied  by
his  lightnings  and  celestial  effulgence.  Unable  to  endure  his  presence,  she
was  consumed  in  the  flames,  and  Bacchus,  with  whom  she  was  then  eight
months  pregnant,  was  snatched  by  the  nymph  Dirce  from  the  flames,
and  placed  in  the  thigh  of  Jupiter  until  the  remaining  month  was  accom-
plished.

••  Was  Bacchus  listenmgJ] — Ver.  508-9.  Gower's  version  of  these
lines  is—

*  She  ended. Bacchus  all  the  while  did  mind  her
Lamenting,  as,  by  chance,  he  came  behind  her.
He  dips  her  waste,  and  tears  with  kisses  dries.'

^  A  united  qw/Ae/.]— Ver.  511.  Ovid  is  the  only  writer  that  identifies
Ariadne  with  the  goddess  *  Libera.'  Cicero  and  other  Latin  authors  make
her  to  be  the  same  with  Proserpine.  Perhaps  she  was  originally  a  distinct
deity ;  but,  in  consequence  of  the  similarity  of  their  offices  and  of  their
ceremonials,  in  lapse  of  time  they  became  confounded.


y  Google


112  THBFA.8TI;  [b.  ill.  521— 534.

But  if  perchance  this  shall  be  covered  by  the  flooding  wave,
then  let  the  dusty  Caelian  plain^^  receive  the  steeds.

On  the  Ides  is  the  mirthful  festival  of  Anna  Perenna,  not
far  from  thy  banks,  thou  Tiber,^  that  flowest  firom  afar.  The
common  people  assemble,  and  carouse  scattered  in  every  quar-
ter on  the  green  grass  ;^  each  with  his  sweetheart  is  there
recHning.  Some  spend  thbir  time  in  the  open  air,  some  pitch
their  tents ;  by  some  a  leafy  bower  is  formed  of  branches.
Some,  when  they  have  fixed  up  reeds  there  in  the  stead  of  solid
columns,  place  over  them  their  garments  spread  out.  Yet,**
with  the  sun  and  the  wine,  do  they  wax  warm ;  they  pray  for
years  as  many  in  number  as  the  cups  they  quafif,  and  reckon
on  as  they  drink.  There  you  will  meet  with  the  man  who
can  drink  off  the  years  of  Nestor;'* the  woman  who  be-

'^  Dusty  Cidian  plain,"] — Ver.  522.  We  have  already  observed  that
when  the  Tiber  ovCTflowed  the  Campus  Martius,  the  races  were  run  upon
a  spot  which  formed  part  of  the  Cselian  hilL*  It  was  originally  called
'  Querquetulanus/  from  its  oaks,  *  qnercus/  with  which  trees  it  abounded.
Its  later  name  was  derived  from  Caelus  Vibennius,  an  Etrurian,  who
assisted  Romulus  against  the  Sabines,  and  received  this  piece  of  ground  as
his  reward.

•2  Thou  Tiber.'] — Ver.  524.  This  spot  was  called  the  grove  of  Anna
Perenna*  and  was  between  the  Milvian  bridge  and  the  point  of  confluence
of  the  Tiber  and  the  river  Anio.  He  calls  the  Tiber,  'advena,'
'  stranger/  (here  rendered,  *  flowing  from  afor,)  because  it  took  its  rise  in
the  Apennines,  which,  at  the  time  when  Rome  was  founded,  formed  almost
the  central  part  of  Etruria.

«  On  the  green  grass.] — Ver.  525-6.  This  festival,  in  its  excess  of
revelry  and  many  other  characteristics,  seems  to  have  been  a  sort  of
Roman  Greenwich  Fair.  *  Cum  pare  sua'  is  literally  *  with  his  equal,'  or
*  his  mate/  It  is  as  likely  to  mean  *  a  sweetheart'  as  *  a  wife;'  perhaps,
from  the  nature  <^f  the  carousals,  a  little  more  so.  Gower  translates
these  two  lines  thus —  *

'  All  sorts  together  flock ;  and  on  the  ground
Displaid,  each  marrow  by  her  make  drinks  round.'

The  word  *  marrow'  is  still  used  in  the  north  of  England,  to  signify  *  an
equal,'  or  *  one  of  a  pair.* *  Make,'  is  the  old  form  of  the  word,  *  mate.'

**  Yet.] — ^Ver.  531^  That  is  to  say,  *  in  spite  of  the  exposure  of  most
of  them  to  the  open  air,'  or,  as  Mr.  Stanford  suggests,  '  notwithstanding
the  shade  they  had  formed  by  extending  their  cloaks  upon  the  upright
reeds,  and  their  reclining  beneath  them.'

^  The  years  of  Nestor.] — Ver.  533.  He  speaks  with  a  fair  allow-
ance of  poetic  license  when  he  says  that  some  are  to  be  seen  who
can  quaff  as  many  cups  (cyathi)  as  Nestor  had  years.  Nestor  was  the
son  of  Eleus, and  was  king  of  Pylos. He  assisted  Pirithous  against


y  Google


B.  111.  534— 542.]  OE, CiJiENDAB  OE  OVID.  113

comes  old  cis  the  Sibyl  by  the  number  of  her  cups.  There,
too,  they  sing  whatever  snatches  they  have  picked  up  at  the
theatres,  and  move  their  pliant  arms^  in  time  to.  their  words.
And  now,  having  laid  aside  the  bowl,  they  trip^  the  uncouth
dance,  and  many  a  gaily  dressed  wench  skips  about  with  her
locks  flowing.  When  they  return  to  their  seats,  they  stagger,
mi  are  a  gazing  sight  for  the  mob,  and  the  multitude  that
meets  them  pronounces  them  to  be  glorious  souls,  I  myself
met  them  lately ;  the  procession  seemed  to  me  one  that  was
worthy  to  be  mentioned  again,  A  drunken  old  hag  was  drag-
ging after  her  a  drunken  old  man.^  ,

the  Centaur,  and  afterwards  shared  in  the  Grecian  expedition  against
Tpoy.  The  poets  say  that  he  was  then  in  his  two  hundredth  year,  as  being
in  the  third  generation,  ykvta.  This  is  an  error,  as  that  term  signified  but
thirty  years:  consequently  we  may  allow  him  ninety  years,  which  number
must  have  pretty  well  taken  up  the  day  of  the  drinker.  It  must,  however,
be  remembered,  that  the  *cyathus'  was  a  definite  measure,  being  one-twelfth
part  of  a  sextarius,  which  was  not  quite  a  pint,  and  that  it  was  conse-
quently less  than  one-third  of  our  common  gill.  Plin^,  in  his  Natural
History,  Book  xiv.  c.  22,  s.  26,  speaks  of  Novellus  Torquatus  Mediolanensis,
who  obtained  the  cognomen  of  'Tricongius,'  from  his  drinking  three  *congii'
of  wine  at  one  sitting.  The  *congius' held  six  ^sextarii,'  or  nearly  six
pints.  It  is  a  matter  in  dispute  among  antiquarians,  whether  the  vessel
called  *cyathus'  means  the  cup  from  which  the  Romans  drank,  or  the  ladle
with  which  the  cups  were  filled  from  the  bowl,  corresponding  with  our
panch-ladle,  or  rather,  in  capacity,  with  the  toddy-ladles  of  the  Scotch.
'Bibere  ad  numenim,'  *to  drink  their  number,*  would  seem  most  probably
to  refer  to  the  number  of  ladlefuls  that  were  placed  at  one  sitting  in  the
drinking-glass,  or  cup,  of  each  person.

*•  Move  their  pliant  arms.'] — Ver.  536.  In  all  ages  it  seems  to  be  a
prevalent  notion  with  the  unrefined,  that  the  dance  cannot  be  graceful  or
complete  without  the  continual  and  independent  action  of  the  arms  and
elbows.  As  a  proof,  witness  a  Highlander  dancing  a  fling,  an  Irishman  a
jigi  or  a  Northumbrian  peasant  a  reel.

^  Thejf  trip,} — Ver.  539. Gower's  version  is  as  follows :

*  Bowls  set  aside,  each  with  his  trickt-up  lass,
IVhose  hairs  are  loosened,  trips  it  on  the  grass.'

*  A  drunken  old  man.'] — ^Ver.  542.  Heinsius,  Burmann,  and  other
conunentators,  think  that  some  lines  are  wanting  after  this,  as  the  poet
seems  by  his  words  to  promise  a  longer  story.  Burmann  supposes  that
the  monkish  transcribers  omitted  them  on  account  of  their  indelicacy.  Why
they  should  all  have  agreed  to  make  this  omission  in  the  numerous  manu-
8cr^  which  still  exist,  it  is  difficult  to  conceive,  as  no  such  fastidiousness
wems  to  have  actuated  them  in  transcribing  the  works  of  Juvenal,  Martial,
or  Ausonius,  writers  of  far  more  gross  diction  than  Ovid.  There  appears
no  occasion  for  such  a  supposition,  as  the  sense  seems  complete  vrithout

I


y  Google


114  THE  r^STI;  [b.  III.  542 — ^559.

But  as  to  the  question  who  this  Goddess  is,  since  there  is  &
wide  difference  between  the  accounts,  no  one  of  the  stories
shall  be  unnoticed  according  to  my  purpose.  The  wretched
Dido**  had  been  consumed  by  her  love  for  .^eas ;  she  had
been  consumed  also  on  the  funeral  pile  which  she  had  built
up  for  her  own  destruction :  her  ashes,  too,  had  been  col-
lected, and  on  the  marble  tablet  of  her  tomb  was  this  brief
epitaph,  which  she  herself  left  when  dying  : — "  ^neas  fur-
nished both  the  cause  of  death  and  the  weapon ;  Dido  feD  by
her  own  hand."  Forthwith  the  Numidians  invade  the  realm,
now  without  a  defender.  The  Moor  larba  possesses  himself
of  the  captured  palace ;  and  remembering  how  he  had  been
rejected,  he  cries,  "  Only  see,  how  I,  whom  she  so  often  re-
pulsed, am  i^ow  enjoying  the  chamber  of  Elissa !"  The
Tyrians  fly  in  different  directions,  wherever  each  in  his  wan-
derings is  led,  as  when  at  times  the  bees  stray  about  unsettled,
having  lost  their  king.  Thrice  had  the  threshing  floor  re-
ceived the  harvest  to  be  beaten  out,  and  thrice  had  the  must
been  poured  into  the  hoUow  vats.^ Anna  is  driven  from  her

having  recourse  to  it.  The  poet  appears  to  mean,  that  they  put  aside  their
drinkmg,  and  stand  up,  perhaps  at  some  distance,  for  a  dance ;  that,  after  the
excitement  of  the  dance,  combined  with  the  wine,  has  made  them  dizzy,  they
return  to  their  places  where  they  were  sitting  before,  and  as  they  can  hardly
stand  up,  their  companions  call  them  merry  souls.  He  then  seems  to  say
that  he  was  one  day  walking  in  this  Greenwich  Park  of  Rome,  and  he  per-
haps heard  some  shouting,  and  saw  a  crowd.  He  stopped  to  see  what  it
was.  He  found  that  it  was  a  troop  of  people  running  along  in  company  with
a  drunken  old  woman,  who  had  hold  of  a  drunken  old  man  (probably  her
husband),  and  who  from  the  dance  were  reeling  back  to  their  seats,  per-
haps within  the  Hentoria/  This  mob,  then,  was  the  *pompa,'  and  the  rich-'
ness  of  the  scene — ^this  much  ado  about  nothing — ^made  it  'digna  relatu,'
♦worthy  of  mention/  *Pompa'  means  literally  *a  troop  in  procession,
escorting  or  attending  upon  some  other  person  or  object,'  and  he  may  use
it  here  in  an  ironical  sense,

*  Z>Wo.]— Ver.  545.  The  story  of  Dido  and  -^neas  is  recounted  at
length  in  the  i£neid  of  Virgil,  fix)m  his  kind  reception  by  her  in  the  First
Book,  to  his  base  betrayal  and  desertion  of  her  in  the  Fourth  Book.  Virgil,
however,  does  not  seem  to  think  that  by  his  acts  in  this  matter  he  at  all
forfeited  his  claim  to  the  title  of  *pius  i£neas.'  Elissa  was  her  original
name:  she  was  called  'Dido'  after  her  death.  In  the  Punic  tongue  the  latter
word  signified  *the  bold  woman.'

*  The  hollow  vats,'} — Ver.  558'.  *Lacus'  means  literally  *  ponds,'  or
'lakes.'  This  was  the  name  given  to  all  tubs  or  casks  for  liquor,  especially
the  vat  into  which  the  wine  flowed  when  pressed.  The  'must,'  'mustum,*
was  the  juice  of  the  grape  when  just  pressed  out.


y  Google


B.  in.  559— 576.] OE, CALENDAE  OF  OYID.  115

home,  and  weeps  as  she  leaves  her  sister's  walls ;  yet  first  she
performs  the  funereal  offices  for  her  sister.  The  light  ashes
soak  up  the  perfumes  *  mixed  with  her  tears,  and  receive  the
locks  cut  from  her  head  as  an  offering.  Thrice,  too,  did  she
say,  "  Farewell ;"  thrice  did  she  press  the  ashes  brought
close  to  her  lips,  and  in  them  her  sister  seemed  to  be  present.
Having  found  a  bark,^  and  a  companion  of  her  flight,  she  saik
along  straight  before  the  wind,*  as  she  looks  back  upon  those
walls,  the  loved  work  of  her  sister.  Near  to  the  barren  Cosyra
is  the  fruitful  isle  of  Melite,*  which  the  billow  of  the  Libyan
sea  dashes  against.  For  this  isle  she  makes,  relying  upon  her
fonner  terms  of  friendship*  with  the  king ;  Battus,  her  friend,
abounding  in  wealth,  was  the  ruler  there.  After  he  had
learned  the  misfortunes  of  each  of  the  two  sisters,  he  says,
''  This  land,  such  as,  small  as  it  is,  thou  mayst  find  it  to  be,  is
thine."  "  And,  in  fact,  he  would,  to  the  very  last,  have  observed
the  duties  of  hospitality,  had  he  not  feared  the  great  power
of  Pygmalion.^  Twice  had  the  sun  revisited  his  Constella-
tions ;  the  third  year  was  speeding  onward,  and  a  new  land

'  Soak  up  the  perfumes. '\-~Yer.  561.  The  andents  were  accustomed
to  pour  wine  and  oils  of  great  value  on  the  ashes  of  the  dead.  They  also
cut  from  the  head  handfuls  of  hair,  which  they  threw  on  the  funeral  pile.

'  Having  found  a  bark.'] — Ver.  565.  Some  accounts  state,  that  Anna
was  ohliged  to  fly  instantly  upon  her  sister's  death  from  the  wrath  of
larbas:  and  that  Dido  put  herself  to  death  to  escape  his  vengeance,
excited  by  her  determined  refusal  of  an  alliance  with  him.

*  Straight  before  the  ufind.'] — Ver.  565.  Or,  as  the  sailors  say,  *  with  the
wind  right  aft.'  The  *pes'  here  mentioned  was  the  *halser,'  or  *rope,'  sus-
pended from  the  lower  angles  of  the  saQ,  by  wldch  it  might  be  hauled  to
the  wind,  or  hauled  in  or  veered  out  at  pleasure.  The  expression  is  lite-
rally, *with  the  halser  on  a  level,*  probably  with  the  deck,  from  which
position  the  wind  blowing  on  either  side  would  cause  it  to  swerve.

*  Melite.'] — Ver.  567.  This  is  the  island  of  Malta,  in  the  Mediterranean.
There  was  also  an  island  of  that  name  in  the  Adriatic  sea,  which  is  now
called  Mehda.  Cosyra,  now  called  Gozzo,  is  a  barren,  rocky  island,  be-
tween Sicily  and  the  coast  of  AMca,  about  seven  leagues  in  length.

^  Terms  of  friendship.] — Ver.  569.  Melita  had  been  colonized  by  the
Phoenicians.  Battus  was  the  son  of  Polymnestus  and  Phronime.  His  name
was  Aristoteles,  but  he  was  called  Battus  from  having  an  impediment  in
his  speech.

'  Pygmalion,] — ^Ver.  574.  He  was  the  son  of  Pygmalius,  and  brother
of  Dido  and  Anna.  Accordmg  to  others,  he  was  the  son  of  Belus.  He
murdered  Sichaeus,  the  husband  of  Dido,  to  obtain  his  wealth,  on  which
Dido  and  Anna  fled  from  Tyre,  where  he  reigned.

I2


y  Google


116  THE  FASTI ;  [b.  in  576—604.

must  be  sought  by  the  exiles.  "  Thy  brother  is  at  hand,  and
assails  us  in  war,"  says  the  king,  who  detested  arms  ;  "  we
are  not  prepared  for  warfare ;  fly  and  preserve  thyself."  At
his  bidding  she  flies,  and  to  wind  and  waves  she  trusts  her
bark ;  her  brother  was  more  cruel  than  any  sea.  Near  to
the  fishy  streams  of  the  craggy  Crathis,®  there  is  a  little  &pot ;
the  people  that  inhabit  it  caU  it  Camere.  Thither  was  her
course  directed ;  and  now  she  was  not  further  off  from  it  than
the  distance  which  at  nine  casts  a  sling  might  throw.  The
sails  fall  first,  and  are  flapped  to  and  fro  by  the  fltfiil  gale.
"  Cleave  the  waters  with  your  oars !"  cries  the  pilot ;  and  while
they  are  preparing  to  furl  their  canvass  with  the  twisted  tackle,
the  crooked  poop  is  struck  by  a  violent  blast  from  the  south ;
the  ship  is  borne  out  into  the  open  sea,  and  the  land  which
they  had  seen,  now  retreats  from  their  eyes.  The  billows
dash  against  them,  the  ocean  is  upturned  from  its  lowest
depths,  and  the  hold  of  the  vessel  ships  the  foaming  seas.  Skill
is  baf&ed  by  the  winds ;  the  steersman  now  foregoes*  the  use
of  the  helm ;  but  he,  as  well  as  the  others,  asks  help  in  prayeir.
The  exile  of  Phoenicia  is  tossed  over  the  swelling  billows,  and
with  her  garments  held  close  she  covers  her  tearful  eyes.
Then  for  the  first  time  was  Dido  pronounced  happy  by  her
sister,  and  whoever  in  death  has  pressed  with  his  body  any
spot  of  land.  By  a  heavy  blast,  the  vessel  is  dashed  upon  the
Laufentine  shore,  and  all  having  disembarked  in  time,  it
perishes,  engulfed  in  the  ocean.

Already  had  the  pious  -^neas  been  blessed  with  the  throne
and  the  daughter  of  Latinus,  and  had  blended  the  two  nations.®*
While  along  the  shore,  which  he  had  gained  as  a  dowry,
attended  by  Achates  alone,  with  naked  foot"^  he  treads  the

^  The  craggy  CraihisJ] — Ver.  581.  This  was  a  river  of  Magna  Grsecia,
now  Calabria.  It  waters  Consentia,  now  Cozenza,  the  capital  of  the  Brut-
tii,  and  falls  into  the  Gulf  of  Tarentum.  Its  present  name  is  *  Crate.'  It
rises  in  the  crags  of  the  Apennines,  hence  its  epithet  here.

^  The  steersman  now  JoregoesJ] — Ver.  593-4. Gower's  translation  is,

*  Up  start  the  waves,  and  upside  down  they  wallow:
The  leaking  keel  the  foaming  streams  doth  swallow ;
Winds  non-plus  art.'
®*  The  two  nations.]— \er.  602. Namely,  the  Trojans  and  the  Latins,
the  original  inhabitants. How  ^neas  gained  the  hand  of  Lavinia,  and
conquered  Turnus,  is  the  subject  of  the  latter  books  of  the  ^neid.
i<*  With  naked  foot,]^Yer.  604. This  would  seem  to  imply  that  he  was


y  Google


B.  ni.  604—634.]  OE, CALBNDAB  OE  OTHX.  117

solitary  path,  he  beholds  her  as  she  wanders  along,  nor  can  he
bring  hunself  to  believe  that  it  is  Anna.  Why  shonld  she
come  to  the  Latian  land  ?  While  ^neas  thus  debates  within
bimself,  "  It  is  Anna !"  cries  Achates.  At  the  name  she  raised
ber eyes.  Whither  is  she  to  fly?  What  is  she  to  do?  What
chasms  of  the  earth  is  she  to  seek  ?  Before  her  eyes  is  the
fete  of  her  wretched  sister.  The  heroic  son  of  Cytherea
divines  her  thoughts,  and  thus  he  addresses  her  in  her  agita-
tion; he  weeps,  however,  Elissa,  at  the  recollection  of  thy
death.  "  Anna,  by  this  land  I  swear,  which,  formerly  thou
wast  wont  to  hear,  was  bestowed  on  me  by  a  happier  destiny,
and  by  the  Gods  who  have  accompanied"  my  wanderings^
lately  settled  in  this  their  home,  that  many  a  time  did  they
chide  my  loitering.  And  yet  did  I  have  no  apprehension  of  her
death ;  that  fear  was  far  from  my  mind.  Ah,  me !  more
determined  was  she  than  could  have  been  possibly  imagined.
TcU  not  the  tale ;  I  beheld  in  that  breast  the  wounds  that  ill
beseemed  it,  when  I  dared  to  visit  the  abodes  of  Tartarus.^*
Bat  thou,  whether  thy  choice,  or  whether  fortune  has  driven
thee  to  my  shores,  do  thou  avail  thyself  of  the  resources  of
my  kingdom ;  I  am  still  mindful  that  I  owe  much  to  thee,
and  everything  to  Elissa ;  on  thy  own  account,  on  the  account
of  thy  sister,  shalt  thou  be  dear  to  me."  She  believed  him  as
he  spoke,  for  now  no  other  hope  remained ;  and  then  she  de^
tailed  her  wanderings.  And  when  she  now  enters  his  house,
arrayed  in  her  Tynan  attire,  iEneas  thus  begins,  while  the
rest  are  all  silent;  "Lavinia,  my  wife,  there  is  a  reason,
prompted  by  duty,  why  I  shoidd  introduce  to  thee  this  lady,
"hen  shipwrecked,  I  partook  of  her  bounty.  Sprung  from
Ty^j  she  possessed  a  realm  on  the  Libyan  shore ;  and  I  beg
that  as  a  dear  sister  thou  wilt  love  her."  Lavinia  makes  every
engagement,  and  hides  the  causeless  wound  of  jealousy  in  her
secret  soul, and,  though  indignant, disguises  her  feelings.

merdy  sauntering  along,  and  that  be  was  not  proceeding  on  any  bosiness
of  emergency,  which  might  require  dispatch  and  the  use  of  sandals.

"  The  Gods  who  have  accompanied.^ — ^Ver.  615.  The  Penates  that  he
brought  with  him  from  Troy.

^  The  abodes  of  rar/orw«.]--Ver.  620.  His  descent  to  Tartarus,  or
the  infernal  regions,  and  his  meeting  with  the  spirit  of  Dido,  are  narrated
itt  the  sixth  Book  of  the  iEneid.  Cytherea  was  an  appellation  of  Venus,
the  mother  of  iEneas,  from  the  ishmd  of  Cythera,  on  the  coast  of  Laconia
which  was  dedicated  to  her  worship.


y  Google


1 18  THE  TASTI ;  [b.  ni.  635—656.

And  7WW,  when  she  sees  many  presents  made  openly  before
her  eyes,  and  suspects  that  many,  too,  are  given  secretly —
and  yet  it  is  not  certain  what  she  is  to  do ;  she  hates  her  to
a  degree  of  frenzy,  and  plans  her  secret  plots,  and  longs  to
die,  having  wreaked  her  vengeance.  It  was  night ;  hefore  the
bed  of  her  sister.  Dido  seemed  to  stand,  bloodstained,  with  her
hair  dishevelled,  and  to  say,  "  Fly !  pause  not !  fly  from  this
direful  house."  Just  at  the  word,  the  breeze  shakes  the  creaking
doors,  she  leaps  from  the  bed,  and  swiftly  she  flings  her-
self from  a  low  window  upon  the  plain.  Her  very  fear  had  made
her  bold,  and  clad  with  her  robe  untied,"  she  runs,  whither
by  her  terrors  she  is  hurried,  as  the  deer  when  frightened  on
hearing  the  wolves.  The  homed  Numicius"  is  believed  to
have  snatched  her  away  in  his  amorous  streams,  and  to  have
concealed  her  in  his  pools.  In  the  meantime,  the  Sidonian**
is  sought  along  the  fields  with  loud  shouts ;  there  appear  her
traces  and  the  marks  of  her  feet.  They  had  reached  the  banks
of  the  river;  the  impress  of  her  feet  was  upon  them ;  the
conscious  river  stayed  his  noiseless  stream.  She  herself  ap-
peared to  say,  "  I  am  a  Nymph  of  the  gently  flowing  Numi-
cius ;  concealed  in  the  stream  with  constant  tide,  I  am  named
Anna  Perenna."  ^*  Forthwith,  in  their  joy  they  feast  in  the
fields  they  had  wandered  over,  and  they  do  honour  to  them-
selves^^ and  to  the  day  with  a  profusion  of  wine.

1*  With  her  robe  untied.'] — ^Ver.  645-6. Gower's  translation  is,
*  And  wing'd  with  terror  in  her  tuck'd-up  coat,
Runs  like  a  roe  that  hears  the  wolf's  hoarse  note.'

"  The  homed  iVumtciiw.]— Ver.  647.  This  river  was  between  Lauren-
tnm  and  Lavinium.  ^Comiger/  'horn  bearing,' is  an  epithet  frequently
given  to  rivers  by  the  poets,  from  the  windings  of  their  stream,  and  the
roaring  of  their  eddies.

^  The  Sidonian,] — ^Ver.  649.  Sidon  was  a  city  of  Phoenicia,  in  the
neighbourhood  of  Tyre,  and  its  rival  in  maritime  pursuits.  '  Sidonian'
here  means  simply  *  Phoenician.'

^*  Anna  PerennaJ] — Ver.  653-4. Gower's  translation  is,

'  She  seemed  to  speak:  Numicius  nymph,  I  live  here;
Perenhall  Anne  of  this  Perennall  river.'

The  poet  seems  here  to  imply,  that  she  took  her  name  from  'amnis  peren-
nis,'  'the  ever-flowing  river.*

^  Do  honour  to  themselves,'] — ^Ver.  656.  Some  commentators  would
translate  'se'  by  *Genium,'  *they  honour  the  festival  and  their  own  per-
sonal Genius  at  the  same  time.' Perhaps  it  simply  means,  'they  honour


y  Google


B.  m.  657— 674.]  OB, CAJJENDXR  OF  OTID.  119

There  are  softie  who  look  upon  this  Goddess  as  the  moon,
because  with  her  months  she  fills  up  the  measure  of  the  year ;
some  think  her  Themis;"  others  the  Inachian  cow.  Thou
wilt  find,  Anna,  some  who  say  that  thou  art  a  Nymph,  a
daughter  of  Atlas,  and  others  who  say  that  thou  didst  give  to
Jove  his  first  food.  This  story,  too,  which  I  am  going  to
relate,  has  come  to  my  ears,  and  it  is  not  at  yariance  with
probabiHty.  The  commonalty  of  olden  time,  as  yet  unpro-
tected by  their  Tribunes,  had  fled,  and  taken  refuge  on  the  top
of  the  sacred  Mount.^*  And  now,  the  provisions  which  they
bad  brought  with  them  had  failed ;  their  bread  com,  too,
suited  to  the  ntfe  of  man.  There  was  one  Anna,  bom  at
BoviUae,**  in  the  vicuiity  of  the  city,  a  poor  old  woman,  but  a
person  of  great  industry.  She,  having  her  grey  locks  bound
with  a  light  turban,  used  to  make  her  country  cakes  with
shaking  hand  ;^*  and  so,  early  in  the  morning,  she  used  to
distribute  them  smoking  hot  among  the  people;  to  them
this  supply  was  welcome.  Peace  being  now  established  at
home,  diey  erected  a  statue  to  Perenna,^  because  in  their  state

|he  day,  and  pay  a  compliment  to  themselves  for  the  pains  they  have  taken
in  seeking  her.'

^  Themis.']  — Ver.  658.  Hyginus  says,  that  she  was  the  daughter  of
^ther  or  Jupiter,  and  Terra.  She  had  a  temple  near  the  river  Cephitus,
in  Boeotia,  and  she  was  the  instructor  of  mankind  in  the  principles  of  piety
snd  justice.

*•  The  sacred  Mount,]— -Net.  664.  This  was  the  *Mon8  sacer,'  to  which
the  commonalty  at  Rome,  at  the  instigation  of  Sicinius  retired,  on  their
secession  from  the  Patricians,  a.u.c.  250.  It  was  beyond  the  Anio,  three
miles  distant  firom  the  city.  On  this  occasion  they  enforced  their  right  to
elect  magistrates  of  their  own,  whom  they  called  *Tribuni/  either  b^use
elected  hy  the  suffrages  of  the  tribes,  or  selected  from  the  military  tribunes.
It  was  on  the  occasion  of  this  secession  that  Menenius  Agrippa  related  the
now  well-knovni  fable  of  the  *BeUy  and  the  Members.'

^  BoviU€e.'] — ^Ver.  667.  This  was  a  town  of  Latium,  on  the  Appian
way.  It  was  so  called  from  'bos,'  *an  ox,'  which  in  early  times  had
escatped  from  an  altar  on  the  Alban  Mount,  and  was  caught  upon  the  site
of  the  town.  He  speaks  of  it  as  being  'suburbana,'  to  distinguish  it  from
snother  town  of  the  same  name  in  Campania,  near  Sinuessa.

*^  With  shaking  Aatid.]— Ver.  669-70.  Gower  translates  these  lines
thus:-

<  She  in  a  hood  her  gray  hairs  having  dress'd,
Made  country  cymnels  with  her  palsie  fist.'

^fibropshire  they  still  make  'simnel  cakes.'
^Staiue  to  Perenna,]—Yer,  673. This  account  gives  but  a  very  silly


y  Google


120  THE  FASTI;  [b.  ill.  674— 702.

of  destitation  she  had  brought  them  relief.  Now  it  re-
mains for  me  to  say,  why  at  this  time  the  girls  sing  inde-
cent songs ;  for  they  assemble  and  repeat  by  rote  indelicate  abuse.
She  had  been  lately  deified ;  Mars  Gradiyns  comes  to  Anna,
and  taking  her  aside,  he  utters  some  such  words  as  these : —
**  Thou  art  worshipped  in  my  month ;  I  have  shared  my  period
of  the  year  with  thee ;  on  thy  services  depends  a  great  hope
of  mine.  I,  a  warrior  myself,  am  inflamed,  consuming  with
the  love  of  Minerva,  the  warrior  Goddess;  and  long  have  I
cherished  this  passion.  Provide  that  we,  w?u)  are  Deities,
similar  in  our  pursuits,  should  come  together;  this  office
befits  thee,  thou  good-natured  old  lady."  He  had  said  ;  she
trifles  with  the  God  with  a  false  promise,  and  in  the  delays  of
doubt  spins  out  his  silly  expectations.  As  he  presses  her
more  frequently,  she  says  to  him,  "  I  have  executed  thy  in-
structions, she  yielded  to  my  solicitations ;  but  with  difficulty
has  she  given  her  hand."  The  lover  is  dehghted,  and  makes
ready  the  bridal  chamber ;  thither  is  Anna  conducted,  veiling
her  face  as  a  bride.  Mars,  just  as  he  is  about  to  snatch  a
kiss,  suddenly  catches  sight  of  Anna's  face ;  first,  shame,  then
rage  influences  the  baffled  God.  The  newly-made  Goddess  laughs
at  the  lover  of  his  dear  Minerva,  and  there  was  no  circumstance
more  pleasing  to  Venus  than  this.  It  is  by  reason  of  this
occurrence  thiat  old-fashioned  jokes  and  indelicate  sayings  are
sung,  and  delight  is  manifested  that  she  thtis  imposed  on  the
mighty  God.

I  was  on  the  point  of  omitting  to  mention  the  daggers  that
pierced  our  prince,  when  from  her  unpolluted  shnne  thus
Vesta  spoke  : — "  Hesitate  not  to  record  it — ^he  was  my  priest;^
the  sacrilegious  hands  assailed  me  with  their  weapons.  I
myself  bore  away  the  hero,  and  I  left  but  a  mere  semblance

origin  to  the  worship  of  the  Goddess,  as  he  makes  her  name  to  be  derived
from  this  old  woman,  either  because  her  name  was  *  Anna,'  or  because  she
was  an  old  woman,  'anus/  The  name  was  most  probably  derived  firom
•annus,'  *a  year,'  for  some  reason  now  unknown,  and  had  nothing  to  do
with  Dido's  sister,  whose  story,  very  probably,  the  poet  adapted  to  his
ideas  of  etymology.

*3  He  was  my  priest."] — Ver.  699.  Bemg  *Pontifex  Maximus/  it  was
incumbent  on  him  to  take  charge  of  the  sacrifices  to  Vesta.  Julius  Caesar
was  assassinated  on  the  ides  of  March,  a.u.c.  709.  The  senate  decreed
that  this  day  should  in  future  be  called  'Parricidium,'  and  that  they  should
hold  no  sittings  on  it.


y  Google


B.  in.  702— 721.]  OE,  CAUEKDAS,  OF  OVID.  121

of  him;  that  which  fell  by  the  steel  was  but  the  phantom  of
Csesar.  He,  indeed,  enthroned  in  heaven,  has  gone  to  tenant
the  haUs  of  Jove,  and  owns  a  temple  consecrated  to  him  in
the  greet  Forum.^*  But  every  one  of  those,  who,  daring  this
crime,  despite  of  the  wiU  of  the  Gods,  assailed  the  fife  of
a  Pontiff^  now  lies  still  in  the  death  so  well  merited.^  Witness
it,  Philippi,26  and  ye,  with  whose  scattered  bones  the  ground
is  whitened.  This  was  the  labour,  this  was  the  task  of  duty,
this  was  tlie  first  lesson  of  Caesar,  in  just  warfare  to  avenge
his  father."

When  the  next  morning  shall  have  refreshed  the  tender
herbage,  the  Scorpion^  will  be  visible  in  his  fore  part  onli/.

The  third  day  after  the  Ides  is  a  day  universally  observed
in  honour  of  Bacchus.  Bacchus,  while  I  sing  thy  festival,
favour  the  poet.  I  will  not  teU  of  Semele  ;  to  whom  had  not
Jove  brought  with  him  his  thunderbolts,  unarmed  he  was  reck-
oned by  her  a  paltry  object ;  nor  wilj  I  teU  now  how  the  burden
of  thy  mother  was  matured  in  thy  father's  body,  in  order  that
thou,  a  babe,  mightst  be  bom  in  due  time.  'Twere  tedious
to  recount  the  Sithonian^  and  the  Scythian  triumphs,  and  the
conquests  of  thy  nations,  thou  Indian  laden  with  frankincense.
Thou  also,  unhappy  prey  of  thy  Theban  mother,^  shalt  remain

^  The  great  Fomm,'] — ^Ver.  704.  This  was  the  chief  'Forum'  in  the
city.  It  was  called  either  *the  Roman/  *  great/  or  'old  Forum.'  Three
years  after  his  death  a  temple  was  built  here,  and  consecrated  to  Caesar.

^  Death  80  well  merited.'] — Ver.  707.  History  tells  us  that  every  per-
wn  who  took  any  part  in  the  assassination  of  JuUus  Caesar  perished
within  three  years  after  his  death.

*  Philippi.] — ^Ver.  707.  This  was  a  city  of  Macedonia,  near  the
'''^^'acian  territory,  and  close  to  the  iEgean  sea.  It  was  formerly  called
Bates,  but  king  Philip  fortifying  it,  it  received  its  new  name  from  him.
Here  Brutus  and  Cassius  were  defeated  by  Augustus  and  Antony,  on
^hich  Cassius  was,  at  his  own  request,  killed  by  one  of  his  freedmen,  and
Brutus  fell  by  his  own  hand.

^  The  Scorpion,']— Ver.  712.  On  the  17th  of  the  calends  of  April
is  the  cosmical  rising  of  the  middle  of  the  Scorpion.  Hyginus  tells  us  that
Orion,  boasting  of  his  skill  as  a  hunter,  Tellus  sent  a  scorpion  which
killed  him  by  its  sting.  Jupiter  raised  the  Scorpion  among  the  stars  as  a
reward  for  the  lesson  which  it  had  taught  to  human  vanity.  At  the  re-
<iue8t  of  Diana,  a  like  honour  was  paid  to  Orion,  on  the  condition  that
when  the  Scorpion  rose,  Orion,  as  a  mark  of  his  fear,  should  set.

^  The  SitJioniana,] — ^Ver.  719.  These  were  a  people  of  Thrace,  who,
^h  the  Scythians,  were  subdued  by  Bacchus.

*  Thy  Theban  mother.] — Ver.  721. Agave  tore  in  pieces  Pentheus,


y  Google


122  THE  FASTI ;  [b.  hi.  721—741.

unmentioned ;  thou,  too,  Lycnrgus,  impelled  by  madness  to
assail  thy  own  knee.  Behold !  'twould  please  me  much  to
tell  of  the  Fishes,^  works  of  sudden  transformationi  and  the
Etrurian  miracles ;  but  it  is  not  the  province  of  this  my  poem.
The  province  of  this  my  song  is  novo  to  relate  the  reasons  why
the  mean  old  woman  invites  the  citizens  to  her  cakes.^^  Before
thy  birth,  0  Bacchus,  the  altars  were  without  sacrifice,  and
the  grass  was  found  on  the  cold  hearths.  They .  tell  how,
having  subdued  the  Ganges  and  all  the  East,  thou  didst  set
apart  the  first  fruits  for  the  mighty  Jove.  Thou  wast  the  first
to  make  offering  of  cinnamon  and  frankincense,  produce  of
thy  capture,  and  the  roasted  entrails  of  the  ox,  emblem  of  thy
triumph.  From  the  name  of  their  institutor,  the  initial  offer-
ings take  their  name^  of  "  Libamina"  and  of  "  Liba,"  because
from  them  a  part  is  offered  up  on  the  holy  hearths.  Cakes
are  offered  to  the  God  because  he  takes  deUght  in  sweets ;
they  say  that  honey,  too,  was  discovered  by  Bacchus.  He
was  journeying  from  the  sandy  Hebrus,^  attended  by  the
Satyrs  (my  tale  contains  no  unpleasing  humour) ;  and  they  had
now  reached  Rhodope  and  the  flowery  Pangseum.  The  cymbal-
bearing  hands  of  his  attendants  join  in  united  clash.  Behold,
winged  insects,  till  then  unknown,  flock  together  at  the,  tink-

king  of  Thebes,  her  son  by  Echion,  because  he  forbade  the  celebration  of
the  orgies  of  Bacchus.  Lycurgus,  king  of  Thrace,  denied  the  divinity  of
Bacchus,  and  being  punished  with  insanity,  killed  his  wife  and  child,  and
cut  off  his  own  legs,  mistaking  them  for  vine  branches.  He  was  murdered
by  his  own  subjects,  who  were  forbidden  by  an  oracle  to  taste  want  till  he
had  been  despatched.  Another  account  is,  that  he  vras  slain  by  panthers
sacred  to  Bacchus.

»  To  tell  of  the  FisTies.'] — ^Ver.  723.  This  story  is,  that  some  sailors,
finding  Bacchus  asleep  vnth  intoxication,  carried  him  off  to  sell  him  as  a
slave.  When  sober,  he  requested  them  to  steer  towards  the  isle  of  Naxos ;
which  they  failing  to  do,  he  turned  them  into  dolphins.

51  To  her  ca*es.]— Ver.  726.  Varro  says  that  *  the  feast  of  the  Liberalia
was  so  called  because  on  that  day,  throughout  the  whole  city,  the
priestesses  of  Bacchus,  old  women  crowned  with  ivy,  sit  with  their  cakes
and  chafing-dishes,  and  perform  sacrifice  for  such  as  will  pay  them.'

'*  Take  their  name.] — ^Ver.  733.  It  is  much  more  likely,  as  we  have
before  observed,  that  Bacchus  obtained  his  name  of  *  Liber,'  from
•  libo,'  in  Greek  Xeij3a>,  *  to  pour  out,'  which  is  the  root  of  the  word  *  li-
bamen,'  signifying  'that  which  is  poured  out  in  sacrifice.'  Ovid  is
frequently  more  ingenious  than  correct  in  his  etymology.

38  Hebrua.l—Yer,  737.  This  was  a  river  of  Thrace,  falling  into  the
^gean  sea. Pangseum  and  Rhodope  were  mountains  of  that  country.-


y  Google


B.  m.  741— 767.]  OB, OAKEITDAB  OF  OTtD.  123

ling,  and  on  whiclieYer  side  the  brass  sends  forth  its  sounds
the  bees  follow.  Bacchus  collects  them  as  they  wander,  and
shuts  them  in  a  hollow  tree ;  and  he  enjoys  the  reward  of  the
discovery  of  honey.  Soon  as  the  Satyrs,  and  Silenua,  the
bald-headed  old  man,  tasted  its  flavour,  they  were  seeking
through  the  whole  grove  for  the  yellow  honeycombs.  The
old  man  hears  the  buzzing  of  a  swarm  in  a  decayed  elm ;  he
spies,  too,  the  combs,  but  declares  that  he  has  made  no  such
discovery.^  And  as  he  is  lazily  lolling  on  the  back  of  his
bending  ass,  he  guides  him  close  to  tibe  elm  and  its  hollow
bark ;  he  himself,  then,  stands  up  above  his  ass,  resting  on
the  branchy  trunk,  and  now  is  engaged  in  greedily  seeking
the  honey  hoarded  in  the  trunk.  Thousands  of  hornets  fly
together,  and  fix  deep  their  stings  in  his  bare  pate,  and  mark
the  surface^  of  his  countenance.  He  tumbles  headlong,  and
is  struck  by  the  hoof  of  the  ass ;  ^  and  then  he  calls  aloud  on
his  companions,  and  entreats  assistance.  The  Satyrs  run  to
the  spot,  and  laugh  at  the  swoUen  face  of  their  parent ;  he
limps  about  from  the  blow  on  his  knee.  The  God  himself
laughs  too,  and  teaches  him  how  to  apply  mud  to  the  stings  ;
he  follows  his  advice,  and  with  mud  bedaubs  his  face.  The
father  enjoys  the  honey,  and  with  justice  do  we  oflFer  to
its  discoverer  the  white  honey  pouried  over  the  warm  cake.
Why  a  woman  presides  over  them  is  not  a  matter  of  difficidt
discovery.  It  is  he  who  with  his  vrreathed  spear  arouses  the
choirs  of  the  women.  Why  it  is  an  old  woman  that  does
this  ?  you  ask.  It  is  this  period  of  life  which  is  more  ad-
dicted to  wine,  and  is  fond  of  the  gifts  of  the  loaded  vine.
Ton  ask  why  she  is  wreathed  with  the  ivy  ? The  ivy  is  most

**  Declares  that  he  has  made  no  such  discovery."] — ^Ver.  748.  Literally,
'  he  dissembles/  that  is  to  say,  lie  pretends,  either  by  his  words  or  hy  his
conduct,  that  he  has  not  found  any  honey.  *  Simulo'  is  '  to  pretend  that
that  is,  which  is  not ;'  *  dissimulo'  is  '  to  pretend  that  that  is  not,  which  is.*
It  was  not  the  case  that  he  had  made  no  discovery,  but  he  pretended  that
such  was  the  fact.

^  The  surface."] — ^Ver.  754. Perhaps  *  summa'  may  here  be  trans-
lated '  the  projecting  parts'  of  his  countenance,  as  his  nose  and  long  ears.
*•*  T?ie  hoof  qf  the  ass.] — Ver.  755 — 6. Gower's  translation  is —
<  Down  tumbles  he ;  his  asse  ahout  him  laid
His  heels ;  there  lies  he  yawling  out  for  aid.
The  Satyrs  flock  and  laugh,  their  sire  to  see
With  £ace  swollen  up. He  halts  on's  asse-ldck'd  knee.'


y  Google


124  THE  fAtI;  [b.  hi.  767— 787.

pleasing  to  Bacchus,  and  why  this  is  the  case,  it  will  take  no
length  of  time  to  teU.  The  Nymphs  of  Nysa,^'  when  his  step-
mother sought  the  boy,  covered  his  newly-made  cradle  with
this  leaf.  It  remains  for  me  to  discover  why  the  gown  of
freedom^  is  given  to  the  youths  upon  thy  day,  fair  Bacchus ;
whether  it  is  that  thou  thyself  alwdys  seemest  to  be  both  a  boy
and  a  young  man,  and  thy  age  is  midway  between  the  two ;  or
that  because  thou  art  a  father,  fathers  commit  their  sons,  their
pledges,  to  thy  care  and  providence ;  or  that  because  thou  art
**  Liber,"  the  "vestis  libera"  [the  dress  of  freedom]  is  assumed
under  thy  patronage,  and  the  course  of  a  life  of  more  liberty
is  commenced;  or  perhaps  it  is,  because,  when  the  ancients  cul-
tivated the  fields  with  more  attention,  and  the  senator  on  the
farm  of  his  forefathers  followed  up  the  business  of  agriculture^
and  the  consul  received  the  fasces  coming  from  the  crooked
plough,  and  it  was  no  imputation  on  one's  character  to  have
hard^skinned  hands,  then  the  rustic  population  used  to  come
to  the  games  into  the  city ;  but  that  compliment  was  paid  to
the  Gods,  and  not  to  their  own  private  inclination.  The  dis-
coverer of  the  grape  used  to  hold  the  games  on  his  own
hoUday,  which  now  he  holds  in  common  with  the  torch-
bearing  Goddess.^ That  therefore  the  multitude  might  do

37  The  nymp?i8  cf  iVysa.]— Ver.  769.  There  was  a  Nysa  in  Thrace,
Boeotia,  India,  and  Arabia.  The  poet  probably  means  the  last,  where
Bacchus  was  entrusted  to  the  nymphs,  that  he  might  be  concealed  from
the  search  of  Juno,  who  was  wishful,  by  his  death,  to  avenge  herself  for
the  infidelity  of  Jupiter. Gower  thus  translates  lines  765-6 —

*  But  why  old  wives  ? That  age  most  bouzie  proves,
And  most  of  all  the  pleasing  vine-juyce  loves.'

^  T?ie  gown  of  freedom.'] — ^Ver.  771.  The  *  toga  libera'  was  one  of
the  titles  of  the  *  toga  virilis,'  or  *  robe  of  manhood,'  which  was  assumed
on  the  *  Liberalia,'  or  feast  of  Bacchus,  by  the  young  men  who  had  then
arrived  at  the  age  of  seventeen  years,  and  who  then  laid  aside  the  *  toga
praetexta.'  The  *  toga'  was  changed  with  solemnity,  in  presence  of  the
Lares,  and  they  then  went  to  the  Capitol  or  some  other  temple  to  pray  to  the
gods.  It  was  called  *  libera,'  because  when  it  was  assumed,  they  were  free
from  the  restraint  of  masters.  The  similarity  between  *  liber,'  as  an
epithet  of  Bacchus,  and  *  liber,'  *  free,'  as  the  poet  suggests  for  his  third
reason,  was  perhaps  the  ground  on  which  this  day  was  chosen  for  the
solemnity.

®  The  torch-hearing  Goddess.] — Ver.  786.  Ceres,  who  is  thus  repre-
sented in  her  statues.  She  carried  a  torch  while  seeking  her  daughter,
Proserpine,  when  she  had  been  carried  off  by  Pluto.


y  Google


B.  III.  787—812.] OE,  CALEia)AE  OP  OTID.  125

konbuT  to  the  youth  commencing  man,  the  day  seemed  not
unsuitable  for  conferring  the  gown  of  freedom.  Hither,  O
Father,  mayst  thou  turn  thy  head  and  thy  horns  with  mild  in-
tent, and  grant  to  my  powers  a  sail  swelling  uoith  the  prosperous
gde.  On  this  day  and  the  day  before,  tf  I  remember  aright,
y&  the  procession  to  the  Argei.^  What  they  are,  their  own
liistory^^  will  tell.

The  star  of  the  Kite^  slopes  downwards  towards  the  Bear,
the  dfttighter  of  Lycaon ;  this  becomes  visible  on  this  night.
If  you  would  wish  to  know  what  it  was  that  gave  heaven  to
this  bird ;  Saturn  had  been  expelled  from  his  realm  by  Jove ;
in  his  wrath  he  excites  the  powerful  Titans  to  arms,  and
demands  that  assistance  which  was  due  to  him  from  the
Fates.  There  was  a  bull,  a  strange  monster,  bom  of  his
mother  Earth,  a  serpent  in  his  hinder  parts.  Him,  by  the
advice  of  the  three  Fates,  the  fierce  Styx  had  with  triple
wall  shut  in  the  gloomy  groves.  "Whoever  should  give  the
entraUs  of  the  bidl  to  be  consumed  by  the  flames,  it  was
fated  that  he  should  be  enabled  to  conquer  the  eternal  Gods.
With  axe  made  of  adamant,  Briareus  slays  him,  and  is  now
just  on  the  very  point  of  giving  the  entrails  to  the  flames.
Jupiter  commands  the  birds  to  snatch  them  away ;  the  kite
brings  them  to  him,  and  by  its  services  finds  its  way  to  the
stars.

One  day  intervenes,  and  the  festival  of  Minerva  takes  place,
which  has  its  name  from  the  union  of  five  days.*^  The  first
day  is  free  from  blood,  and  it  is  not  allowable  then  to  contend
with  the  steel ;  the  reason  is,  that  on  this  day  Minerva  was

^  The  Argei.'] — Ver.  791.  These  were  certain  places  in  Rome,  sup-
posed to  have  been  8o  called  from  the  burial  there  of  certain  Argives  who
had  come  over  with  Hercules.  According  to  Livy,  these  spots  were  con-
secrated by  Numa.  Some  'WTiters  think  that  the  Argei  was  the  temple  of
Castor  and  Pollux,  Spartan  divinities.

*i  Their  own  history,'] — ^Ver.  791.  Most  probably  this  alludes  to  some
topographical  history  of  the  places  then  extant,  and  well  known  to
every  one  at  that  day.

«  TheKite.^—yei,  794.  On  the  16th  of  the  calends  of  April  the  Kite  rises
achronycally.  It  is  not  known  whence  Ovid  borrowed  this  story  of  the
Kite.  This  constellation,  according  to  Krebs,  is  not  alluded  to  by  any
Greek  vmter  on  astronomy  before  the  time  of  Ovid.

*3  Union  of  Jive  days,] — ^Ver.  810.  This  was  the  Quinquatrus,  Quin-
quatres,  or  Quinquatna,  from  '  quinque,*  *  five,'  a  festival  of  Minerva,  com-
mendng  on  the  14th  of  the  calends  of  April.


y  Google


126  THE  TABTI ;  [b.  iii.  812— «31.

bom.  The  next**  and  the  three  succeeding  are  celebrated  on
the  sand  strewed  in  the  Amphitheatre;  then  the  warlike
(Goddess  is  delighted  with  the  drawn  swords.  Now,  ye  youths
and  tender  damsels,  celebrate  Pallas  ;  he  who  pays  homage  to
Pallas  will  be  learned.  Girls,  when  you  shall  have  propitiated
Pallas,  then  comb  your  wool ;  learn,  by  windingy  to  take  the
load  off  the  distaff,  when  now  it  is  full.  She  teaches  tu
also  with  shuttle  to  cross  the  standing  warps,  and  with  the
sley  she  closes  the  open  work.  Worship  her,  thou,  whose  aft  it  is
to  remove  the  stains  from  the  damaged  garments ;  worship
her,  thou,  who  preparest  the  dyeing  vessels  for  the  fleeces.
Nor  will  any  one  be  able  to  make  neatly  the  sandals  for  the
foot  if  Pallas  is  impropitious,  even  though  he  were  more
skilful  than  Tychius;**  and  even  if,  compared  with  ancient
Epeus,  he  shoidd  excel  him  in  handicraft;  yet  if  Pallas  is  dis-
pleased, he  will  be  but  a  bungler.  You,  too,  who  drive  away  dis-
ease by  Apollo's  art,  offer  from  your  fees  a  few  gifts  to  the  Grod-
dess.  And  do  not  you,  teachers,  a  set  generally  robbed  of  your
pay,**  despise  her;  she  will  bring  you  new  pupils:  and  thou  who
guidest  the  graving  tool,*^  and  thou  who  dost  enamel  the  slab

**  The  next."] — Ver.  813.  On  the  second  day  of  the  festival  commenced
the  gladiatorifd  combats  in  the  amphitheatre,  in  honomr  of  the  goddess.
The  place  where  they  fought,  was  called  the  *  arena,'  it  being  sprinkled  with
sand  or  sawdust,  to  absorb  the  blood  and  to  prevent  slipping.  By  some
the  Quinquatria  are  supposed  to  have  been  identical  with  the  Panathenaea,
a  festival  instituted  at  Athens  by  Orpheus  or  Erectheus  in  honour  of
Minerva.  Similar  license  is  said  to  have  been  allowed  to  the  slaves  on  the
Quinquatria  to  that  which  prevailed  on  the  Saturnalia,  and  friends  then
interchanged  presents.

**  Tychius.'] — Ver.  824.  He  was  a  celebrated  artificer  of  Boeotia,  and,
according  to  Homer,  the  maker  of  the  shield  of  Ajaz ;  though,  as  Mr.
Stanford  remarks.  Homer's  eulogy  of  him  is  only  in  the  character  of  a
cobbler.  Epeus  was  the  builder  of  the  wooden  horse  by  means  of  which
Troy  was  taken.

**  Bobbed  of  your  pay.] — ^Ver.  829.  This  line  has  occasioned  much
perplexity ;  but  it  seems  to  imply  pretty  clearly  that  the  schoolmaster  was
an  ill-paid  drudge,  and  that  he  was  obHged  to  look  rather  to  numbers,  for
a  living,  than  to  the  individual  honesty  of  his  employers.  Possibly,  like
the  physicians  and  barristers  of  the  present  day,  he  was  not  able  to  sue
for  his  fees  at  law:  and.having  to  trust  solely  to  the  honour  of  his  employ-
ers, he  not  imfrequently,  or  indeed,  very  frequently,  found  that  te  had
built  his  expectations  on  the  sand.  His  fee  was  called  the  '  Minerval,'  and
an  image  of  the  goddess  Minerva  stood  over  the  school  door.

^  The  ffraving-tool.^—Yer.  831.  *  Coelum.'  This  was  the  tool  used  in.
carving  or  graving — ^a  *  burin,'  or  *  chisel.*


y  Google


B.  ni.  831— 853.]  OB, CALSITDAB  OP  OVED.  12/

with  coloxurs,  thou,  too,  who  fashionest  the  soft  stones  with
sldlful  hand.  She  is  the  Gbddess  of  a  thousand  crafts ;  doubt-
less she  is  the  Goddess  of  song.  If  I  am  deserving,  may  she
be  present,  a  friend  to  my  pursuits.

Where  the  Caelian  Hill  slopes  from  its  elevation  to  the  plains,
here,  where  the  way  is  not  quite  level,  but  nearly  so,  you  may
see  a  small  temple  of  Minerva  "  Capta,"  which  the  Goddess
began  to  possess  on  her  natal  day.  The  cause  of  the  name  is
doubtful.  We  entitle  a  skilful  genius  "  Capitale,"**  [shrewd]  ;
she  is  a  Gk)ddess  full  of  genius.  Or  is  it  because  she  is  said,
without  a  mother,  to  have  leaped  forth  vdth  her  shield  from
the  crown  of  her  father's  head  1  Or  is  it  because  she  came
to  us  a  captive  when  Falisci  was  subdued  ?  And  this  very  fact
the  ancient  records  tell.  Or  is  it  because  she  has  a  law,  that
thieves  who  are  detected  in  that  place,  should  suffer  capital
punishment  ?  From  whatever  cause  thou  derivest  thy  titles,
0  Pallas,  ever  do  thou  hold  thy  ^gis**'  before  our  chiefs.  The
last  day  of  the  five,  commands  us  to  purify  the  sounding  trum-
pets,*® and  to  sacrifice  to  the  bold  Goddess.  Now,  you  can
say,  having  raised  your  eyes  to  the  sun,  "  He  yesterday  weighed
down  the  fleece  of  the  sheep  of  Phrixus,"*^*

By  the  deceit  of  the  accursed  step-mother,  the  seed-coin

*  Capitale.] — ^Ver.  838-9.  We  have  a  vulgar  expression  somewhat
similar  to  this  at  the  present  day.  If  a  person  is  clever  and  shrewd,  it  is
common  to  say  of  him  that  '  he  has  a  good  head-piece/  So  '  capitalis/
from  *  caput/  the  *  head/  will  mean  *  with  a  heaa.  or  *  relating  to  the
head.' Gower  translates  this  and  the  following  lines  thus —

*  The  reason's  douhtfuU :  She's  the  minerall
Of  wit,  which  quick  is  called  capitall.
Or  else,  hecause  her  father's  aching  head
She,  arm'd  with  shield,  sans  help  of  wife,  did  shed.'

•  JEgisJ] — Ver.  848.  This  was  the  shield  of  Minerva,  and  it  was  so
called  because  it  was  covered  with  a  goat  skin,  atytc,  that  of  the  goat
Amalthea,  that  suckled  Jupiter.  In  it  too  was  set  the  head  of  the  Gor-
gon Medusa,  which  turned  the  beholder  into  stone.

**  The  sounding  trumpets.^— Yer.  849.  This  was  the  feast  of  the
*  Tubilustrium,'  or  *  purification  of  trumpets,'  on  the  10th  of  the  calends
of  April.  Varro  and  Festus  inform  us  that  the  trumpets  used  in  the
sacr^  rites  were  purified  in  the  *  Atrium  Sutorium,'  or  *  Shoemakers'  Hall.'
Its  locality  is  not  known.

*^  Phrixus,] — ^Ver.  852.  The  story  of  Ino,  and  her  device  to  destroy
her  step-children,  has  been  in  part  related  in  a  note  to  the  second  Book.
The  story  is  here  completed. It  is  again  referred  to  by  the  Poet.


y  Google


128  THE  FAJ5TI;  [b.  in.  853— 876.

being  parched,  the  blade  had  not  raised  the  ear,  as  it  is  wont
to  do.  A  person  is  sent  to  the  oracular^  tripod,  that  he  may
bring  back,  by  an  in£aUible  arswer,  what  remedy  the  Delphic
€rod  gives  out  for  the  unproductive  soil.  He,  corrupted  too,
as  well  as  the  seed,  brings  word,  that,  by  the  oracle,  the  death
of  Helle  and  of  the  youthful  Phrixus  was  required.  The
citizens,  the  unfavourable  season,  and  Ino,  drove  the  king,
while  still  resisting,  to  submit  to  the  direful  command.  And
now,  his  sister  and  Phnxus  having  their  temples  wreathed  with
boughs,  stand  together  before  the  altar,  and  bewail  their
common  destiny.  Their  mother,  as  by  chance  she  is  float-
ing ^^  in  the  air,  sees  them,  and,  in  dismay,  strikes  her  naked
breast  with  her  hand ;  and  then,  with  clouds  in  her  train,  she
leaps  down  into  the  city  of  those  descended  from  the  dragon,*^
and  snatches  away  her  children;  and  that  they  may  take
flight,  a  ram,  most  resplendent  with  gold,  is  given  them.  He
bears  the  two  through  the  long  channel  of  the  Hellespont,
The  damsel  is  said  to  have  been  holding  his  hor^i  with  a  feeble
left  hand,  when  from  herself  she  imparts  a  name^  to  that
tract  of  water.  Her  brother  almost  perishes  together  with
her,  while  he  is  endeavouring  to  assist  her  as  she  falls,  and
extends  afar  his  outstretched  hands.  He  weeps  as  though  the
partner  of  the  twofold  danger  were  lost,  not  knowiug  that  now
she  was  the  bride  of  the  azure  Deity.  Having  arrived  at  Uie
shore,  the  ram  is  made  a  Gonstellation ;  but  his  golden  fleece
reaches  the  Colchian  palace.^

*'  The  oracular  tripod.'] — ^Ver.  855.  This  was  a  seat  or  table  with
three  legs,  on  which  the  priestess  sat,  while  delivering  the  oracles  of
Apollo  in  the  Delphian  temple.  Some  suppose  that  it  was  pierced,  and
that  through  it  the  priestess  inhaled  certain  mephitic  fumes,  which  were
productive  of  a  kind  of  madness  or  frenzy,  which  was  mistaken  for
prophetic  inspiration.

"  She  is  jUoating.l—yer.  863.  *Pependerat.'  *  Floating,*  or  *  hover-
ing,' is  an  apt  term  for  '  Nephele,'  their  mother,  who  had  been  changed
into  a  cloud,  vtipkXifi.

^  Descended  from  the  dragon."] — ^Ver.  865.  Thebes  was  founded  by
Cadmus,  who  killed  a  dragon,  which  had  slain  his  companions,  and  then
sowing  the  teeth,  a  crop  of  armed  men  was  raised ;  these  killing  each
other  till  their  number  was  reduced  to  five,  with  their  assistance  he  built
the  city,  whence  the  present  epithet.

w  Imparted  a  name.] — Ver.  870.  That  of  Hellespont,  *  the  sea  of
HeUe.'

^  The  Colchian  palace.] — ^Ver.  876. Phrixus  brinpng  the  fleece  to


y  Google


B  in.  877— 884.]  OE, CALENDA.E  OF  OVID.  129

When  the  approaching  dawn  shall  have  sent  before  it  three
light  bearing  days,  you  shall  have  the  hours  of  day  equal*^
with  those  of  night.  When  from  this  period  the  shepherd
shall  have  four  times  penned  his  well-fed  kids,  four  times  the
grass  been  white  vdth  dew  fresh  fallen,  Janus  will  require  to
be  adored,  and  with  him  mild  Concord,  and  the  Health  of
Rome,**  and  the  altar  of  Peace.

The  Moon  governs  the  months ;  the  worship  of  the  Moon
on  the  Aventine  Hill**  terminates  the  period  of  this  month.

Coldiis,  .£ete8,  the  king,  g^ve  him  his  daughter,  Chalciope,  in  marriage,
and  then,  to  secure  possession  of  the  fleece,  he  put  Phryxus  to  death.  To
recover  it,  the  Argonautic  expedition,  under  Jason,  was  formed.

^  Hours  of  day  equaW] — Ver.  878.  The  vernal  equinox  on  the  8th  of
the  calends  of  April,  or  the  25th  of  March.

»  HeaUh  of  iJome.]— Ver.  882.  « Salus,*  *  Health,*  was  the  daughter
of  Jisculapius  :  her  temple  was  built  on  the  Quirinal  hill  by  C.  Junius
Babulcus.

»  The  Aventine  MZ.]— Ver.  884.  Servius  Tullius  built  a  temple  iu
honour  of  Diana  on  the  Aventine  hill.


y  Google


130  THE  7A8TI ;  [b.  if.  1—2.


BOOK  THE  FOURTH.


CONTENTS.


Ths  inyocation  of  Ventu,  Yer.  1 — 18,  The  noble  origin  of  Germanicus,
and  his  descent  from  Venus  through  j£neas;  with  the  reason  why  April
was  formerly  the  second  month,  19 — 60.  The  different  opinions  on  the
origin  of  the  name :  the  power  of  Venus,  61 — 132.  The  festival  of
Venus  and  Fortuna  Virilis ;  Venus  Vertiourdia,  133 — 162.  The  setting
of  the  Scorpion,  163-4.  The  setting  of  the  Pleiades,  and  their  number,
165—178.  The  Megalesia :  the  m^hological  history  of  the  Mother  of
the  Gods,  and  her  arrival  at  Rome  from  Phrygia,  179—372.  The  dedi-
cation of  the  temple  to  Fortuna  Publica :  the  victory  of  Caesar  over
Juba:  the  setting  of  Libra  and  Orion:  the  rainy  season,  373 — 388.
The  games  of  Ceres,  and  her  praises :  the  rape  of  Proserpine,  389 — 620.
The  dedication  of  the  temple  to  Jupiter  Victor,  and  to  Liberty,  621 —
624.  The  hailstorms,  and  the  victory  of  Caesar  at  Mutina,  625 — 628.
The  festival  of  the  Fordiddia,  or  sacrifice  of  the  pregnant  cow :  the  insti-
tution of  that  ceremonial  by  Nuroa,  629 — 672.  Augustus  proclaimed
Imperator,  673—676.  The  settmg  of  the  Hyades,  677-8.  The  setting
fire  to  the  foxes,  in  the  Circensian  games,  679 — 712.  The  passing  of
the  Lion  from  the  constellation  of  the  Ram  to  the  Bull,  713 — 720.  The
Palilia,  or  festival  of  Pales,  721 — 806.  The  foundation  of  the  city  and
the  death  of  Remus,  807—862.  The  Vinalia :  the  aUianoe  of  Mezen-
tins  with  Tumus,  863 — 900.  The  middle  of  Spring :  the  setting  of  the
Ram ;  the  showery  season ;  and  the  rising  ot  the  Dog-star,  901 — 904.
The  Robigalia,  905—942.  The  Floralia;  and  the  reception  of  Vesta
into  the  Palatium,  943—954.

'*  Favour  the  poet,"  *  I  said,  "  thon  genial  mother  of  the
twin  loves ;"'  towards  the  poet,  she  turned  her  countenance.

^  Favour  the  poet."] — ^Ver.  1-2. Gower's  whimsical  translation  is,
* "  Alme,  queen  of  payring  love,  assist,^'  1  cried  :
To  me  she  streight  her  chearful  eye  applied.'
^  Of  the  twin  loves."] — ^Ver.  1. Cicero  mentions  three  Loves  or  Cupids,
(On  the  Nature  of  the  Gods,  Book  iii.  c.  23,)  the  first,  the  son  of  Diana
and  Mercury;  the  second,  of  Venus  and  Mercury;  and  the  third,  Anteros.
Other  writers  mention  two  only — the  celestial,  the  son  of  Jupiter  and
Venus ;  and  the  terrestrial,  the  son  of  Nox  and  Erebus. These  are  some-
times distingushed  as  the  honourable  and  the  sensual  Loves.


y  Google


B.IT.  3— 23.]  OB, CALBIIDAB  OF  OTID.  131

"  What  wilt  thou  of  me  V  she  said.  "  Surely  thou  wast  but
jut  now  in  the  habit  of  singing  of  mightier  subjects  ;*  hast
thou  still  in  thy  tender  bosom  the  old  woimd  V  By  this  timcy
Goddess,  I  replied,  thou  hast  heard  enough  of  my  wound.*'
She  smiled,  and  immediately  in  that  direction  the  sky  war
irithout  a  doud.  "  Wounded  or  whole,  have  I  ever  been  guilty
of  deserting  thy  standards  7'  Thou  wast  ever  the  object  of
my  purpose,  the  cause  of  my  toil.  Free  from  all  blame,  in
my  early  years,  I  have  sported  in  scenes  that  became  my  age ;
now  a  more  extensive  range*  is  trodden  by  my  steeds.  I  sing
of  the  festivals  with  their  reasons,  as  they  are  extracted  from
the  ancient  annals,  and  of  the  Constellations  as  they  sink  be-
neath the  earth  and  rise  again.  I  have  rwu)  arrived  at  the
fourth  month,  in  which  of  all  thou  art  the  most  extolled.
Thou  knowest,  Venus,  that  both  the  poet  and  the  month  are
devoted  to  thee."  Influenced  by  my  address,  she  liehtly
touched  my  temples  with  a  sprig  of  Cythersean  myrtle,^  and
Baid,  '*  Accomplish  the  work  wluch  thou  hast  undertaken."
I  was  sensible  of  her  power,  and  suddenly  the  peculiar
reasons  for  the  days  of  remark  became  evident ;  Let  my
hark  speed  onward  while  thus  it  may,  and  while  the  /a-
wwriiig  breezes  blow.  Yet,  if  any  part  of  my  Calendar
OQght  to  affect  thee,  it  is  in  April  thou  findest  that  by  which
thy  attention  ought  to  be  detained. This  month,  through  an

'  Mightier  nilifecis*'] — Ver.  3.  Namely,  the  preceding  books  of  the
'Fasti,'  which  treat  of  more  senous  subjects  than  love,  the  theme  of  many
of  his  former  poems.

*TheiM  woundJ] — ^Ver.  4.  Alluding  to  the  'Amores/  one  of  his  pre-
vious compositions,  in  which  he  had  complained  of  the  pains  and  disap-
pointments  attendant  on  love.

*  Deserting  thy  standards,] — ^Ver.  7*  This  figpire  is  taken  from  the  rigid
roles  of  military  discipline  among  the  Romans.  The  poets  were  fond  of
comparing  the  pains  of  the  lover  to  the  toils  of  the  soldier  in  active  service.
Gower  thus  translates  this  and  the  follovring  line —

'  Or  sound  or  sore,  I  ne'er  forsook  thy  tent ;
Thou  art  my  daily  task,  my  ornament.'

•  A  more  extensive  range.'\ — ^Ver.  10.  'Area.'  This  figure  is  derived
from  the  games  in  the  Circus^

'  Cgthereean  myrrte.]— Ver.  15.  The  myrtle  was  the  favourite  plant  of
Venus.  Servius  (on  the  Georgics  of  Virgil,  Book  ii.  1.  64)  says,  that  Venus
chose  this  plant  because  it  flourished  near  the  sea,  whence  she  sprung ;
snd  because  it  was  esteemed  for  its  medicinal  qualities  in  female  diseases.

k2


y  Google


132  THl  7A8TI ;  [b.  IV.  21—41.

illustrioas  line,  descends  to  thee,  and  becomes  peculiarly
thine  by  the  nobility,  which  is  thy  lot  by  adoption.  This  did
our  father,  offspring  of  Ilia,  perceive,  when  he  planned  out  the
lengthy  year,  and  himself  celebrated  his  ancestors.  And  as,
to  fierce  Mars  he  gave  the  first  place  in  the  succession,  because
he  had  been  the  immediate  cause  of  his  being ;  so  did  he  desire
that  Venus,"  found  in  the  line  of  his  extraction  through  many
generations,  should  have  the  place  of  the  second  mon&.  And
while  seeking  the  origin  of  his  race,  and  the  generations  as
they  were  traced  upwards,  he  went  even  as  far  back  as  to  the
Gods  themselves  in  the  line  of  his  kindred.  Could  he  be  igno-
rant, forsooth,  that  Dardanus*  was  bom  of  Electra,  the  daugh-
ter of  Atlas  ?  And  that  Electra  shared  the  bed  of  Jove  ?  His
son  was  Ericthonius ;  from  him  Tros  sprung :  he  was  the  father
of  Assaracus,  Assaracus  of  Capys.  This  last  begot  Anchises,
with  whom,  Venus  did  not  disdain  to  hold  the  name  of  parent
in  common.  Hence  was  bom  ^neas ;  his  piety  well  proved,
bore  the  sacred  reUcs  and  his  father  sitting  on  his  shoulders,
a  second  pious  charge,  through  the  flames  of  Troy.  At  length
we  have  arrived  at  the  blessed  name  of  liilus,^^  from  which
point  the  Julian  house  is  connected  with  its  Trojan  ancestors.^^
His  son  was  Postumus,^  who,  because  he  was  bom  in  the  deep

■  Fenua.l — Ver.  27 — 30. Gower  thus  renders  these  Imes —

'  So  Venus  many  ranks  before  his  mother.
He  mistress  made  of  this  next  following  other ;
And  turning  o'er  Time's  rolls  to  find  the  ground
Of  his  descent,  the  gods  his  parents  found.'

'  Dardanus.} — ^Ver.  31.  Dardanus  was  the  son  of  Jupiter  and  Electra,
the  daughter  of  Atlas.  He  was  the  founder  of  Troy,  and  by  his  wife
Astioche,  or  Batis,  he  became  the  father  of  Ericthonius.  The  poet  pro-
ceeds to  recount  the  ancestry  of  Mneas  from  Dardanus,  and  then  the  de-
scent of  the  Alban  kings  from  iEneas  down  to  Romulus.

^*>  Blessed  name  of  Hilus.] — Ver.  39.  lulus  was  one  of  the  names  of
Ascanius,  the  son  of  iEneas.  He  calls  that  name  <felix,'  or  'blessed/  as  it
was  Qn  a  more  modem  form)  the  family  name  of  the  Julii,  of  which  house
JuUus  Caesar  was  by  birth  a  member ;  and  Augustus,  Tiberius,  and  Genua-
nicus  became  so  by  adoption.

11  Trqf an  ancestors.'] — ^Ver.  40.  'Teucros.*  This  name  seems  to  have
been  applied  to  the  Trojans  almost  exclusively  by  the  Latin  poets.  Homer
and  the  older  Greek  writers  never  use  it :  the  later  ones  but  very  rarely.

^  His  son  was  Postumus.'] — Ver.  41.  Or  the  passage  will  admit  of  this
translation — 'Postumus  succeeded  him ;'  for  VirgU  says  that  Postumus  ^as
the  son  of  ^neas ;  and  Dionysius  tells  us,  that  on  the  death  of  .^Dneas,


y  Google


B.  VI.  41—50.]


OE, CALEKDAB  OP  OTID.


133


sylyan  shades,  was  called  Silyius,  among  the  Latian  nation*
And  he,  Ijatiniis,  is  thy  sire ;"  Alha  succeeds  Latinus,  Epytus
succeeds  to  thy  dignity,  0  Alha.  He  gave  to  Capys  the  re-
vived name  of  TYoy;"  he,  too,  became  thy  grandsire,  O
Calpetns.  And  while,  in  succession  to  him,  Tiherinus  was  oc-
cupying the  throne  of  his  father,  he  is  said  to  have  been
drowned  in  the  eddy  of  the  Etrurian  stream.  And  yet  he  had
lived  to  see  Agrippa,  his  son,  and  Bemulus,^  his  grandson.

LaTinia,  being  pregnant,  fled  into  the  woods  through  fear  of  liilus,  and
there  produced  Postumus,  who  derived  one  of  his  names  from  his  post-
humous birth,  and  his  other  name  (Sylvius)  from  his  birth  in  the  woods.

^  Latinus  is  thy  nre.} — Ver.  43.  According  to  Virgil  and  other
writers,  Latinus  was  the  son  of  iEneas  Sylvius,  and  grandson  of  Sylvius
Posthumut ;  hence,  some  writers  have  concluded  that  a  couplet  has  been
lost  here.  Livy,  Dionysius,  and  Eusebius  have  also  given  lists  of  the
Alban  kings,  which  differ  but  little  from  that  here  given  by  Ovid.  The
difference,  such  as  it  is,  will  be  seen  from  a  comparison  of  the  following
hsts.


LrvY.

DiONTSIUS.

Eusebius.

Ovid.

iGneas.

Mneds.

iEneas.

^neas.

Ascanius.

Ascanius.

Ascanius.

Ascanius.

Sylvius.

Sylvius.

Sylvius.

Sylvius.

i£neas.

iEneas  Sylvius.

^neas.

Latinus.

Latinus  Sylvius.

Latinus.

Latinus.

Alba.

Albas  Sylvius.

Alba.

Alba.

Atis.

Capetus  Sylvius.

Sylvius  Athis.

Epitus.

Capys.

Capys  Sylvius.

Capys.

Capys.

Capetus.

Calpetus  Sylvius.

Calpetus.

Calpetus.

Tiherinus.

Tiherinus  Sylvius.

Tiherinus.

Tiherinus.

Agrippa.

Agrippas  Sylvius.

Agrippa.

Renuilus.

Romulus.

AUades  Sylvius.

Remulus.

Agrippa.

Aventinus.

Aventinus  Sylvius.

Aventinus.

Aventinut.

Prooa.

Procas  Sylvius.

Procas.

Proca.

Amulius.

Amulius  Sylvius.

Amulius.

Numitor.

Ovid  gives  a  list  of  the  Alban  kings  in  the  fourteenth  Book  of  the  Meta-
BMnrphoses,  1.  609|  where  he  calls  Calpetus,  Capetus,  and  Agrippa  by  the
name  of  Agrota.  This  line  of  the  Alban  kings  is  universally  considered  by
histmians  as  a  fiction  of  the  later  times  of  the  Roman  republic.  See
Niebuhr's  Roman  History,  i.  202.

^  Revived  name  of  Troy,"] — Ver.  45.  That  is,  he  restored  the  use  of
a  name  or  ejothet  that  had  been  in  use  at  Troy.  Capys  was  the  name  of
the  father  of  Anchises,  and  of  one  of  the  companions  of  .Sneas.  .Sneid,
Book  i  L  183.

^  Bemulus.^^Yer.  50.  He  is  called  by  Livy  < Romulus.'  Either  name
is  a  diminutive  for  'Remus,'  or  'Romus*'  Ovid,  in  his  Metamorphoses,
Book  xiv.  L  616,  represents  him  as  incurring  the  vengeance  of  heaven  by
imitating  lightning,  and  affecting  to  be  a  divinity.


y  Google


134  THI  7ASTI ;  [b.  IV,  50—68.

They  say  that  against  BemnfaiB  the  thunderbolts  were  hurled.
After  these  came  ATentinas,  from  whom  the  place  and  the
hill,  too,  derived  its  name.  After  him  the  sovereignty
passed  to  Procas ;  him  Numitor  followed,  the  brother  of  the
cruel  Amulius ;  Dia  and  Lansos^*  were  the  children  oi  Nu-
mitor. Lausus  falls  by  his  uncle's  sword ;  Ilia  is  beloyed  by
Mars,  and  produces  thee,  Qnirinus,  with  Bemus,  thy  twin-
brother.  He  ever  boasted  that  his  lineage  was  from  Mars  and
Venus,  and  well  did  he  entitle  himself  to  gain  credit  for  the
assertion.  And,  that  generations  to  come  might  not  be  igno-
rant of  this,  to  the  QoSb  of  his  race  he  consecrated  the  months
in  succession.  But  I  conjecture  that  the  month  of  Venus  re-
ceived its  name  '  Aprilia*  from  the  Greek  language  ;^^  the
Goddess  obtained  her  name,  'Aphrodite,*  from  the  foam  of  the
sea.  But  you  must  not  wonder  that  any  thing  is  called  by  a
name  from  the  Grecian  tongue  ;  for  the  Italian  land  was  the
Greater  Grsecia."  Evander  arrived  there  with  a  fleet,  manned  by
his  fellow  countrymen ;  Alcides,  too,  came  thither;  each  of  them
of  Grecian  extraction.  The  Club-bearer,  as  a  stranger  fed  his
herd  on  the  pasturage  of  Aventine,  and  Albula*'  afforded  diink

**  XotMut.] — ^Ver.  54.  The  brother  of  Ilia  is  called  ^gestns  by  Diony-
sint,  and  by  Plutarch,  Ainitus.  He  was  treacherously  slian  by  his  nncle
while  hunting.  Plutarch  says  that  Numitor  did  reign  for  some  time  be-
fore he  was  deposed  by  Amulius.

^''  From  the  Greek  /an^Ma^e.]  — Ver.  61.  According  to  Macrobiiis,
Romulus  called  the  month  Aprilis  by  that  name  in  honour  cd  Venus,  who
was  called  by  the  Greeks  'Aphro^te/  from  d^oc,  'the  foam  of  the
sea.'  Ovid  prefers  this  derivation  (in  flattery  to  the  Julian  house)  to
that  firom  'aperio/  'to  open/  which  has  by  far  the  greater  probability  of
being  the  correct  etymology.  Scaliger  would  derive  the  name  of  this
month  from  'aper/  <a  boar,*  because  that  animal  was  a  customary  sacri-
fice at  this  season.

^*  The  Greater  Gracia.] — ^Ver.  64  Commentators  have  been  much  at
a  loss  to  tell  why  Italy  received  this  name  from  the  Gnecian  settlers,  if  it
is  intended  to  apply  to  the  whole  of  Italy,  and  not  the  southern  part,
which  in  later  times  was  known  as  Magna  Gnecia.  Mr.  Thynne  ^>pean
to  suggest  the  true  reason  for  the  name;  because,  in  f^t,  the  Greeks  found
Italy  a  much  more  spacious  country  than  the  limited  region  which  they
had  left.

"  A£bula.'\'—'Ver,  68.  This  was  the  early  name  of  the  river  Tiber.
Gower  thus  renders  this  and  the  following  line —

'  That  clubbed  pilgrime  did  his  dub  display
On  Aventine,  and  drank  of  Albula.'


y  Google


B.ir.68— 77.]  OB,  CALZKDJlR  OF  OTID.  135

to  a  God  80  mighty.  The  chief,  too,  from  Neritofl*^  came
tkUker;  ike  Lestrygoniani  attest  it,^^  and  that  shore  which  stilT
bean  the  name  of  Circe.^  And  now  were  the  walls  of
Tel^nos^  erected,  and  the  city  of  the  watery  Tibur,^  which
Giman  hands  had  built.  Halesns,^  too,  had  arrived,  driyen
awty  by  the  death  of  the  son  of  Atrens,  from  whom  the  Falis-
can  land  belieyes  that  it  receired  its  name.^  Add  Antenor^
as  wdl,  the  adriser  of  peace  at  Troy,  and,  Apnlian  Daunus,
thy  son-in-law,  the  grandson  of  (Eneus.^'*' At  a  later  pe-

*  yerifo«.]^-Ver.  69.  Servius  tells  m  that  this  was  a  mountain  of
Ithaca.  Virgil  (Mn&A,  Bock  m,  L  270)  and  Pomponius  Mda,  the
geographer,  seem  t«  consider  it  as  a  distinct  island  in  the  yidnitj  of  Ithaca.

*^  Attest  it.} — ^Yer.  69.  Attest  the  arriyal  of  Ulysses  in  Italy;  for,  being
a  race  of  cannibals,  they  caught  and  devoured  some  of  his  companions,  as
we  learn  in  the  tenth  Book  of  the  Odyssey.  They  lived  in  the  neighbour-
bood  of  Forraiae,  in  Campania.

^  Name  qf  CtreeJ] — Vtr.  70.  This  was  the  promontory  of  Circssum,
in  Latinm,  aupposed  once  to  have  formed  the  island  of '  JEksl,*  Circe  in-
babited  it.  She  was  the  daughter  of  Melius,  or  the  sun,  and  Persa,  and
by  her  magic  art  changed  all  intruders  vt-pon  her  island  into  swine.  By
tbe  aid  of  Mercury,  Ulysses  esci^d  the  exercise  of  her  terrific  power
upon  himself,  and  obtained  the  restoration  of  his  companions,  who  had
been  transformed  by  her,  to  their  original  form.

^  WaHe  qf  TelegonuaJ] — ^Ver.  71.  Telegonus  was  the  son  of  Ulysses
sad  Circe.  He  went  to  Ithaca  to  seek  his  father,  and  accidentally  killed
bim.  On  his  return  to  Italy,  he  founded  Tusculum,  in  Latinm,  north  of
AlbaLonga.

^  Watery  JtburJ] — ^Ver.  71.  This  was  a  town  of  Latinm,  on  the  river
Anio,  whence  its  epithet  here,  'udi,'  'watery.'  It  was  founded  by
Tibomus,  Catillus,  and  Coras,  three  brothers,  who  led  thither  a  colony
from  Arg^. Its  site  is  now  occupied  by  the  town  of  TivoU.

^  Halena.'] — ^Ver.  73.  He  is  supposed  to  have  been  a  son  of  Aga-
memnon, who  conspired  with  Clytemnestra  to  slay  his  father,  after  whose
murder  he  fled  to  Italy,  where  he  founded  the  town  of  Falisci,  and  intro-
duced the  worship  of  Juno.

*  Meeemed  Um  name.] — ^Ver.  74.  F  and  H  were  sounded  by  the
ancient  Digamma,  and  were  therefore  confused  in  sound.  According  to
Cicero  and  QuintUian,  S  was  changed  into  R  in  many  instances.

^  AntenorJ] — ^Ver.  75.  Antenor,  according  to  Homer,  always  advo-
cated peaceful  measures  in  the  Trojan  councils.  The  Greeks  are  said  to
Ittve  permitted  him  to  leave  Troy  with  a  colony  of  the  Heneti  from  Asia
Minor,  on  which  he  came  into  Italy,  and  founded  Patavium,  now  Padua.
By  the  Heneti,  or  Veneti,  the  city  of  Venice  is  supposed  to  have  been
foonded.

"♦  Ora$tdt(m  of  CBii«i».]— Ver.  75.  Diomedet,  the  grandson  of
(Enens,  king  of  iEtolia,  on  his  return  from  Troy,  being  driven  from


y  Google


136  THE  FASTI;  [b.  iv.  77-— 91.

riod,^  and  after  Antenor,  did  .tineas  bring  his  Gods  from  the
flames  of  Troy  to  onr  regions.  Solymus  from  Phrygian  Ida  was
one  of  his  companions,  from  whom  the  city  of  Snlmo  derives
its  name.  Cold  Sulmo,^  Germauicns,  my  native  place !  Ah !
wretched  me !  How  distant  is  it  from  the  Scythian  soil !
Shall  I  then,  so  far  ?* — ^but  suppress  thy  complaints,  my  Muse;
sacred  subjects  must  not  be  sung  to  a  desponding  lyre.  To
what  point  will  not  envy  proceed  ?  There  are  some,  0  Venus,^*
who  would  rob  thee  of  tiie  honour  of  a  month,  and  who  be-
grudge it  thee.  For,  because  the  spring  at  that  time  is  opening
every  thing,  and  the  contracted  ruggedness  of  the  frost  is
yielding,  and  the  prohfic  earth  is  teeming,  they  say  that  April
is  so  called  from  the  aperient  season ;  that  month,  which
Venus,  having  laid  her  hand  upon  it,  claims  as  her  own. She

his  own  country  by  the  infidelity  and  intrigues  of  his  wife,  came  to
Apulia,  married  the  daughter  of  Daunus,  the  king,  and  founded  Argyripa,
or  Argi,  in  that  country.

^Ata  later  period.] — ^Ver.  77.  iEneas  did  not  arrive  in  Italy  till
after  the  other  settlers  that  have  been  mentioned.  According  to  Virgil,
his  wanderings  lasted  seven  years.

^  Cold  Sulmo,] — ^Ver.  81.  Solymus  was  the  reputed  founder  of
Sulmo,  the  birth-place  of  Ovid,  which  was  a  small  town  of  the  Peligni,
between  Aquila  and  Yenafrum.  The  country  of  the  Peligni  was  remark-
able for  its  coldness,  as  is  attested  by  Horace,  Odes,  Book  iii.  Ode  19, 1. 28.
There  is  something  very  affecting  in  the  repetition  by  the  exiled  poet  of
the  name  of  his  dear  Sulmo,  his  reminding  Germanicus  that  it  was  his
native  place,  and  his  allusion  to  the  immense  distance  that  then  separated
him  from  it.

«>  Shall  I  then,  to  far  ?]— Ver.  83.  The  poet  suddenly  checks  himself
in  his  complaints.  This  is  a  very  graceful  instance  of  the  figure  Aposio-
pesis ;  he  appears  as  if  about  to  say,  *  Shall  I,  then,  be  allowed,  so  far
from  my  native  Sulmo,  to  draw  my  last  breath?''  or  to  that  effect.

31  O  Fentts.] — Ver.  86.  The  expressions  here  used  are  obviously  em-,
ployed  to  flatter  the  ambition  of  the  Julian  family  to  be  regarded  as  the
descendants  of  Venus.  Macrobius  tells  us  that  both  Aphrodite  and  Venus
were  names  unknown  to  Rome  under  the  kings ;  and  it  is  very  probable
that  the  name  of  Venus  was  introduced  at  a  much  later  period.  Some  phi-
lologists have  supposed  her  to  have  been  a  Syrian  goddess,  worshipped
under  the  name  of  Benoth  as  well  as  Astart^ ;  and  in  the  books  of  the  Old
Testament  we  more  than  once  find  mention  made  of  a  place  caUed  Succoth
Benoth,  which  is  supposed  to  mean  *  the  tents  of  Venus,'  as  being,  per-
haps, the  especial  seat  of  her  worship.  If  this  conjecture  is  well  grounded,
the  probability  is  that  the  Romans  received  the  name  of  Venus  either
through  their  intercourse  with  Carthage,  which  was  a  Phoenician  colony,  or
that  it  arrived  at  Rome  by  the  way  of  Greece  and  SicUy.


y  Google


B  IV.  91—120.]  OB, CALBNDAB  OP  OVID.  137

indeed  most  worthily  holds  sway  over  the  whole  circle  of  the
year;  she  owns  a  sovereignty  inferior  to  that  of  no  Deity.
Sbe  roles  the  heaven,  the  earth,  and  the  waves  that  gave  her
birth ;  and  by  the  power  of  her  embraces  she  holds  sway  over
every  kind.  She  it  was  who  created  all  the  Gods  ;  'twonld  be
a  tedious  task  to  enumerate  them ;  she  furnished  the  primary
causes  for  the  plants  and  the  trees.  She  it  was  that  brought
together  the  untaught  minds  of  men,  and  instructed  them  to
onite,  each  one  with  his  mate.  What  is  it  but  alluring  delights
that  creates  the  whole  race  of  the  birds  of  the  air  ?  If  gentle
k)Te  is  away,  then  do  the  flocks  refuse  to  pair.  With  another
nude  the  furious  ram  fights  with  his  horn,  but  the  forehead  of
his  beloved  ewe*^  he  is  careful  not  to  hurt.  The  buD,.  at
whom  all  the  pastures  and  all  the  wood  tremble,  follows
the  heifer,  divested  of  his  fierceness.  The  same  influence  pre-
serves whatever  it  is  that  has  life  beneath  the  wide  ocean,  and
it  fills  the  waters  with  fishes  innumerable.  It  was  she  that  first
^vested  man  of  his  savage  habits  of  life  ;  from  her  were  de-
rived the  arts  of  dress,  and  the  careful  attention  to  the  person.
The  loyer  is  said  at  first  to  have  chaunted  his  serenade  at  the
closed  doors  of  his  mistress  throughout  the  livelong  night  that
▼as  denied  to  him ;  then,  it  was  an  effort  of  oratory  to  prevail
upon  the  cruel  maid,  and  each  man  was  eloquent,  he  pleading
for  himself  \ris  own  cause.  By  means  of  her  were  a  thousand
arts  first  touched  upon,  and  through  the  desire  of  pleasing,
many  things  were  discovered,  which  before  lay  concealed.
Can  any  one  be  found  to  dare  to  deprive  this  Goddess  of  the
privilege  of  giving  her  name  to  the  second  month  T**  Far  ifrom
me  be  such  madness.  What  ?  Is  it  only  because  she  is  every
where  powerful,  and  honoured  by  many  a  temple,  that  the
Goddess  has  a  peculiar  claim  to  honour  in  our  city  ?  O,  man
of  Rome,  it  was  in  defence  of  thy  ancestral  Troy  that  Venus
was  wielding  arms,  when,  mangled  by  the  spear**  on  her

**  Behved  ewe,"] — Ver.  101-2. Gower  thus  renders  these  two  lines —
*  The  surly  ram  will  with  a  ram  knock  horns ;
But  yet  to  hurt  his  lovely  ewe  he  scorns.'

"  Second  month.'] — ^Ver.  115*  That  is  to  say,  the  second  month  in  the
original  year  of  Romulus.

**  Mangled  by  the  spear,] — ^Ver.  120.  Namely,  in  the  combat  between
Diomedes  and  iEneas,  where  she  interfered  in  favour  of  her  son. — Iliad,
Book  iii.  1.  535.


y  Google


138  THX  FASTI ;  [b.  IV.  121^138.

tender  wmty  the  lamented  aload.  By  tbe  decision,  too,  of  a
Trojan  she  overcame  two  of.  the  daughters  of  heaven.^  Ah !
would  that  the  defeated  Goddesses  had  failed  to  remember
this !  And  doubtless,  she  was  called  the  daughter-in-law  of
Assaracus,  that,  in  hd,  in  future  times  the  great  Csesar
might  have  ancestors  sprung  from  the  line  of  Itilus,  her  de-
scendant. And  no  season  was  there  more  becoming  for
Venus  than  the  spring ;  in  spring  the  earth  is  beanteous ;  in
spring  the  sc»l  is  unbound :  then  does  the  herbi^  raise  its
head,  having  burst  the  ground ;  then  from  the  swelMng  bark
does  the  shoot  push  forth  the  bud ;  and  the  lovely  Venus  is
deserring  of  the  lovely  season,  and,  as  is  her  wont,  she  is  in
close  conjunction  with  her  own  dear  Mars.  In  spring  she  bids
the  curv^  ships^  to  go  on  their  way  along  the  deep  that  gave
her  birth,  and  no  longer  to  dread  the  blustering  of  the  winter.
Properiy,  ye  Latian  matrons  and  ye  maidens,  do  ye  wor-
ship die  goddess,  and  ye  who  are  without  the  fillets^^  and
the  garment  with  lengthened  train.  Untie  the  gcdden  neck-
laces from  her  neck  of  marble ;  remove  her  jewels :  the  God-
dess must  be  laved  all  over.^  Restore  her  golden  necklaces^
to  her  neck  when  dried :  then  must  other  flowers,  then  must

^  Daughtert  of  heaven,"] — ^Ver.  121-2. Gower's  version  is —
*  She  put  two  ladies  down  (a  Trojane  judge).
Ah  1  may  those  twame  not  think  of  thieit  old  grudge.'
This  is  an  allusion  to  her  contest  with  Juno  and  Minerva  for  the  golden
apple.

*•  The  curved  ihips,'] — ^Ver.  131.  From  the  third  of  the  ides  of  Novem-
ber  to  the  sixth  of  the  ides  of  March  the  sea  was  not  deemed  navigable.
The  ships  were  then  laid  up  on  shore.  In  spring  they  were  launched  for
the  season  by  the  agency  of  rollers  placed  under  them.  To  this  Horace
makes  allusion,  Odes,  Book  i.  Ode  4,  1.  3.

^  Without  the  JiUeta.^-^Yet.  134.  The  women  of  light  character  at
Rome  were  not  allowed  to  wear  the  'vittae/  or  'fillets/  which  were
restricted  to  the  priestesses ;  or  the  'stola,!  or  long  garment  with  a  deep
*instita,'  or  *  flounce/  which  was  worn  by  women  of  character  only ;  on
the  contrary,  they  were  restricted  to  wearing  the  'toga.'

^  Laved  all  over."] — ^Ver.  136.  The  washings  of  the  statues  of  the
various  divinities  were  common  among  both  the  Greeks  and  the  Romans.
It  is  conjectured  that  ouly  the  women  of  the  lowest  rank  took  part  in  the
washing  of  the  Goddess  on  this  occasion.

"  Golden  necklaces."] — Ver.  137.  'Redimicula.'  This  word  generally
signifies  the  strings  or  ribbons  which  fell  on  the  shoulders  from  the
'mitra,'  or  head-dress,  and  were  probably  used  for  the  purpose  of  tying  it
under  the  chin. Here,  however,  it  seems  to  mean  *  neckl^es.'


y  Google


B.  IT.  138—159.]  OB, CALEITDAB  OF  OTID.  139

I  fresh  rose  be  giyen  to  her.  You  women,  too,  she  bicU  to  bathe,
▼earing  chaplets  of  the  green  myrtle  ;  and  vhy  she  does  so,
learn  nov,  /or  a  cause  exists.  AH  naked,  she  was  drying  her
dripping  tresses  on  the  sea-shore  ;  the  Satyrs,  a  wanton  set,  be-
held the  goddess.  She  perceived  it,  and  concealed  her  person
by  an  intervening  myrtle  tree  ;  she  was  saved  by  so  doing,  and
she  desires  you  to  commemorate  the-eircumstamce.

Learn  now,  why  ye  offer  the  incense  to  Fortuna  Virilis  ;***
in  Uiat  place  which  is  all  moist  with  the  application  of
warm  water.  That  place  beholds  you  all  with  your  gar-
ments laid  aside,  and  every  imperfection  of  your  naked
person  is  exposed.  To  conceal  these,  and  to  hide  them  from
your  husbands,  does  Fortuna  Yinlis  engage ;  and  this  she
does,  if  requested  so  to  do,  with  the  offering  of  a  little  frankin-
cense;  And  be  not  reluctant  to  take  the  poppy  bruised  with
the  snow-white  milk,  and  the  honey^^  trickling  from  the
squeezed  combs.  "WTien  first  Venus  was  led  home  by  her
eager  husband,  she  drank  of  this ;  from  that  time  she  was  a
wife.  With  suppliant  words  appease  her ;  under  her  protec-
tion abide  botii  beauty,  good  morals,  and  fair  fame.  Rome
had,  in  lapse  of  time,  degenerated  from  the  virtue  of  its  an-
cestors; then,  men  of  the  olden  time,  did  ye  consult  the
Comaean  Sih^l,^ She commanded  a temple  to  be  erect-

^  Fortuna  ViriU8.'\ — Ver.  145.  Plutarch,  in  one  instance,  says  that  a
tonple  was  erected  to  the  Goddess,  Male  Fortune,  (or  rather.  Fortune  of
the  Males),  by  Ancus  Martins ;  in  another  place  he  refers  the  building
of  it  to  Servhis  Tullius,  in  which  statement  he  is  supported  by  Dionysius.
The  temple  contained  a  wooden  statue  of  Servius  Tullius.  Gower  thus
renders  this  and  the  next  line —

'  Male  Fortune,  pleasM  with  but  a  little  spice.
Hides  from  your  husbands  all  deformities/
It  must  be  remembered  that  Fortuna  Virilis  was  not  a  God,  but  a  Goddess,
to  whom  were  entrusted  the  fortunes  of  the  male  sex.

*^  And  the  honey."] — Ver.  152.  A  drink  made  of  milk,  honey,  and
bruised  poppies,  was  given  to  the  bride  on  the  day  of  her  nuptials,  as  we
are  informed  by  Pliny,  Nat.  Hist.  Book  xix.  c.  8. It  was  called  'cocetum.'

^  The  Cum€ean  5%/.]— Ver.  158.  Sibylla  is  a  name  given  by  the
ancient  writers  to  several  mysterious  personages  of  antiqnity;  Pliny
mentions  three,  Plato  one,  iElian  four,  and  Varro  ten.  The  Sibyl  alluded
to  in  the  text,  and  mentioned  in  the  third  Book,  1. 534,  with  reference  to
her  great  age,  resided  at  Cumse,  in  Italy.  Erythrea  was  her  name,  though
she  is  sometimes  called  Herophile,  Daphne,  Deiphobe,  Manto,  &c.  Apollo
granted  her  a  life  to  equal  in  the  years  of  its  duration  the  grains  con-
tained in  a  handful  of  sand. Forgetting  to  add  to  her  request  the  enjoy.


y  Google


140  THE  VABTI ;  [b.  iv.  159—169

ed**  to  Venus :  this  being  duly  performed  on  that  occasion,  Venus
obtained  the  name  of  "  Verticordia,^^  jfrom  the  change  of  the
heart.  Ever  do  thou,  most  beauteous  CU)ddes8,  look  upon  the
descendants  of  iBneas  with  pleased  aspect,  and  do  thou  protect
so  many  of  thy  daughters-in-law.

Whilst  I  am  speaking,  the  Scorpion,  formidable  for  the  sting
of  his  elevated  tail,  plunges  headlong^  into  the  green  waves.

When  the  night  shall  have  passed  away,  and  the  sky  shall
first  begin  to  blush,  and  the  burds,  touched  by  the  dewdrops,
shall  complain;  and  the  traveller  shall  now  throw  aside  his  half-
consumed  torch  after  watching  out  the  night,  and  the  swain
shall  proceed  to  his  wonted  toil ;  then  do  the  Pleiades  begin^

ment  of  health  and  strength,  decrepitude  and  infirmity  hecame  her  lot  as
her  years  advanced.  When  j£neas  requested  her  aid  in  his  descent  to  the
infernal  regions,  seven  hundred  years  of  her  hfe  had  elapsed.  There
was  another  Sihyl  of  Cumsa,  in  iEolia,  who  is  represented  as  heing
a  different  personage  from  the  former.  One  of  the  Sihyk  offered  Tar-
quinius  Priscus,  or,  as  some  say,  Superhus,  nine  books  for  a  sum  of  money ;
on  being  twice  refhsei,  she  each  time  burned  three,  and  the  king  then
purchased  the  remaining  three  for  the  original  price.  Pliny  (Nat.  Hist.
Book  xiii.  c.  13)  says  there  were  but  three  books  originally,  of  which  she
burned  two.  They  were  carefully  preserved  in  the  CapitoUum,  in  a  stone
chest,  deposited  in  a  vault  underground.  They  were  supposed  to  shadow
forth  the  destinies  of  Rome,  and  were  consulted  on  great  emergencies :
two  men,  called  the  *  Duumviri  Sacrorum,'  were  appointed  for  that  especial
purpose.

**  To  he  erected,'] — ^Ver.  159.  In  the  year  a.u.c.  639,  in  the  con-
sulship of  Acilius  Balbus  and  Porcius  Cato,  Elvia,  the  maiden  daughter
of  Elvius,  a  man  of  equestrian  rank,  was  struck  vnth  lightning  while
on  horseback,  returning  with  her  father  to  Apulia  frt)m  the  plays  at
Rome.  Her  clothes  were  torn,  her  tongue  forced  out,  and  the  trappings
of  the  horse  wrenched  from  his  body.  On  this,  the  augurs  declared  that
the  occurrence  portended  infamy  to  the  knights  and  the  Vestals  of  Rome.
A  female  slave  gave  information  that  iBmilia,  Licinia,  and  Martia,  three
Vestals,  were  carrying  on  an  intrigue  with  some  of  the  Equites.  By  the
direction  of  the  Sibylline  books,  two  Greeks  and  two  Gauls  were  buried
alive  to  propitiate  some  foreign  deities,  and  a  statue  was  erected  to  Venus
Verticordia, '  the  changer  of  hearts,'  that  she  might  turn  the  hearts  of  the
females  from  iniquity.  Sulpicia,  the  vnfe  of  Fulvius  Flaccus,  was  selected,
by  reason  of  the  purity  of  her  character,  to  dedicate  the  statue.

**  Plunges  headlong,] — Ver.  164.  The  cosmical  setting  of  the  constel-
lation Scorpio  on  the  calends  of  April.

*»  The  Pleiades  begin,^—\er,  169.  The  heliacal  setting  of  the  Pleiades
on  the  fourth  day  of  the  nones  of  April.  They  were  the  daughters  of
Atlas,  who  was  said  to  support  the  world  on  his  shoulders ;  and,  as  in  their
setting,  the  weight  of  the  heavens  vras  supposed  to  be  decreased,  they  were
said  thereby  to  ease  his  shoulders  of  a  part  of  his  burden.


y  Google


B.  nr.  169— 187.]  OB, CALENDAB  OF  OVID.  141

to  relieve  the  shoulders  of  their  father  Atlas :  the  Pleiades,
▼hich  are  wont  to  be  called  seven,  but  which  really  are  but
six  in  number.  Either  it  is  because  but  six  of  them  came
into  the  embraces  of  the  Gods;  for  they  say  that  Sterope
shared  the  bed  of  Mars ;  Halcyone,  that  of  Neptune  ;  and  you,
beaatiful  Celseno,  Maia,  Electra,  and  Taygete,  that  of  Jupiter.
Merope,  the  seventh,  was  married  to  a  mortal,  to  thee,  0
Sisyphus.^  She  repents  of  this,  and  in  sohtude  hes  concealed,
through  shame  of  what  she  did.  Or  it  is,  because  Electra
could  not  endure  to  look  on  the  ruins  of  Troy,^^  and  placed
her  hand  before  her  eyes.

Three  times  let  the  heavens  roll  round  on  their  revolving
axle ;  three  times  let  Titan  yoke  and  unyoke  his  steeds.  Forth-
with the  Berecynthian  flute**  shall  blow,  together  with  the
crooked  horn,  and  the  festival  of  the  Idsean  mother  shall  take
place.  Her  eunuch  priests  shall  walk  in  procession,  and  shall
beat  the  hollow  tambourines,  and  the  cymbals,  struck  by  the
cymbals,  shall  send  forth  their  tinklings.  She  herself  shall
be  borne,  seatedon  the  effeminate  shoulders  of  her  companions,**
carried  with  loud  bowlings  through  the  middle  of  the  streets.
The  theatre  is  resounding,^  and  the  games  are  now  summoning

*•  Sisyphus,'] — ^Ver.  175.  He  was  the  son  of  ^olusy^and  the  founder
of  Corinth.  He  was  notorious  for  his  robberies  and  frauds,  and  was  con-
demned to  roll  a  stone  up  a  hill  in  the  infernal  regions,  which,  soon  as  it
reached  the  summit,  rolling  down  again,  caused  a  never-ending  toiL

*'  The  rtdns  of  TVoy.] — ^Ver.  177.  She  was  the  mother  of  Dardanus,
the  first  of  the  '^rojan  kings,  and  hence  is  supposed  to  have  felt  interest  in
the  fite  of  Troy.

*•  Berecynthian  Jlute."] — ^Ver.  181.  Berecynthia  was  a  mountain  in
Phrygia,  sacred  to  Cybele,  whence  the  present  epithet.  Midas  is  said  to
have  invented  the  flute  or  pipe  here  mentioned,  which  was  expanded  into
a  curve  all  round  at  the  end,  for  the  purpose  of  emitting  a  deeper  sound.
The  body  of  the  pipe  was  usually  of  box-wood,  or  of  Libyan  lotus  wood.
The  end  was  made  of  brass  or  horn.  The  sacred  rites  of  Cybele  were
performed  on  Mount  Ida,  in  Phrygia.

*•  Her  compamons,'] — ^Ver.  185.  *  Comitum'  is  properly  used  here,  as
the  Goddess  was  carried  by  a  Phrygian  man  and  woman  through  the
streets.  The  other  names  of  Cybele,  besides  *the  Mother,'  or  *  Parent  of
the  Gods,'  were  Ops,  Rhea,  Magna  Mater,  (or  *  the  Great  Mother,')  and
Dindymene.  It  would  appear  that  Rhea  was  originally  a  Grecian  deity.
Ops,  an  Italian  Goddess,  and  Cybele,  a  Phrygian  divinity,  which  in  time
became  amalgamated  into  one  object  of  worship.

^  The  theatre  is  resounding,] — Ver.  187.  On  the  occasion  of  the
Megalesian  games,  plays  were  performed  in  the  theatre. The  day  was


y  Google


142  THE  VABII;  [b.  it.  187—205.

OS  ;  attend  the  spectacle,  Qoiritet,  and  let  the  litigious  courts
be  rid  of  their  strife.  I  wish  to  ask  many  a  qaestion :  but
the  noise  of  the  cJaHhing  brass  quite  frightens  me,  and  the
coryed  lotos  pipe  with  its  terrific  sonnd.  Send,  Cybelean
€U>ddess,  thy  grand-daughters/^  skilled  in  learning,  of  whom  I
may  inquire  what  I  wish  to  know.  She  hears  my  prayer,  and
desires  them  to  be  present  at  my  request.  **  Disdose  to  me,
mindful  of  her  command,  ye  daughters  of  Helicon,  why  the
great  Goddess  takes  pleasure  in  a  perpetual  noise  V  Thus  I
spoke.  Thus  Erato  answered  me  (the  month  of  Cytherea  fell
to  her  lot,  because  she  bears  the  name  of  tender  Love"^),
"  This  oracular  answer  was  returned  to  Saturn,  *  Best  of
kings,  bj  thy  son  shalt  thou  be  hurled  from  thy  sovereignty.' "
He,  fearmg  his  own  offspring,  devours  each  of  them  as  each
is  bom,  and  keeps  them,  thus  swallowed,^  in  his  entrails.
Often  did  Rhea  complain,  so  often  pregnant,  and  never  yet  a
mother ;  and  she  gneved  at  her  own  fruitfulness.  Jupiter  was
bom ;  antiquity  obtains  credit  as  a  witness  of  importance ;
hesitate  berore  questioning  the  received  belief.  A  stone  con-
cealed in  a  garment  lay  swallowed  in  the  throat  of  the  God ;

*  ne£utus/  or  one  on  which  no  work  was  allowed  to  be  done,  which  will
account  for  the  reference  to  the  Forumi.  Gower'i  translation  of  this  and
the  preceding  lines  is  very  quaint —

*  Thrice  more  let  heaven  on  constant  axles  course.
Let  Sol  thrice  harness  and  knock  off  his  horse.
Then  straight  the  Phrygian  hornpipe  doth  resound;
The  Idaean  granddame's  feast  is  now  renown'd.
Her  eunuchs  marching  beat  theur  tabrets  hollow ;
From  brasse  knock'd  brasse  a  noise  a  noise  doth  follow.
She,  carry'd  on  her  servant's  neck,  in  pride
About  the  streets  is  whooted  to,  and  cri'd.
Resort,  ye  nobles ;  scenes  and  shews  do  call :
Now  in  the  court  be  there  no  suits  at  all.'

*>  Thy  grand-daughters.'] — Ver.  191.  The  Muses  were  the  daughta^
of  Jupiter;  and  Cybele,  being  identified  with  Rhea,  the  wife  of  Chronos,
or  Saturn,  and  the  mother  of  Jupiter,  they  would  be  her  grandchildren.
The  Goddess  derived  her  name  fix>m  Mount  Cybele,  in  Phrygia.

»*  Name  qf  tender  Love.'] — Ver.  196.  The  name  of  Erato  comes  from
the  Gredt  word  ?pwc,  *  love.*

^  Thus  swallowed.] — ^Ver.  199-200.  Gower's  most  comical  translation
is  to  the  following  effect —

*  He,  fearing  this,  devoureth  erery  child
As  it  came  forth,  and  in  his  g — ^ts  it  killed.*


y  Google


B.  IV.  206—229.]  OB, CALEKDAE  01  OTID.  143

tiiiis  by  the  DestinieB  was  the  father  doomed  to  be  deceived.
And  now  the  lofty  heights  of  Ida  are  resonnding  with  the  tink-
lii^,  that  the  babe  may  cry"  in  safety  with  his  infant  voice.
Some,  with  clubs  are  beating  the  shields,  some,  are  rattling
the  empty  helmets ;  in  this  work  are  engaged  the  Curetes
ind  the  Corybantes."  The  truth  was  concealed  from  the
fiither ;  and,  as  an  imitation  of  what  was  done  in  the  olden
time,  the  attendants  of  the  Goddess  still  beat  the  brass  and  the
boarse  sonnding  hides.  Cymbals  they  strike  in  place  of  the
helmets,  tambourines  for  the  shields  ;  the  pipe,  just  as  it  did
formerly,  yielded  its  Phrygian  notes.'*  She  had  ended ;  I  be-
gan, "  Why,  to  her,  does  the  fierce  race  of  the  lions  afford  for
die  bent  yoke  their  manes,  not  used  to  that  duty  V  I  had
ended ;  she  then  begto,  "  Their  savage  nature  is  supposed  to
have  been  tamed  by  her  :  this  by  her  chariot  has  she  attested."
"  But  why  is  her  head  adorned  with  a  crown  of  turrets  ?  Was
it  she  that  gave  their  towers  to  the  earliest  cities  ?"  She  nodded
assent.  "  Whence  arose,"  said  I,  "  the  madness  in  her  priests
of  mutilating  their  own  members  ?"  Soon  as  I  was  silent,  the
maid  of  Pieria  began  to  speak.  '*  Attis,  a  Phrygian  boy,  re-
markable for  his  beauty,  in  the  woods  attached  the  turret-
crowned  Goddess  to  him  by  the  ties  of  a  pure  love.  Him  she
desired  to  be  devoted  to  herself,  to  be  the  keeper  of  her  tem-
ples ;  and  she  said,  *  See  that  thou  always  keep  thyself  in
chastity.'  He  pledged  his  faith  to  her  commands,  and  said,
'  If  I  prove  false,  may  that  passion  by  which  I  commit  the
sin  be  my  last.' He  sins,  and  in  his  passion  far  the  Nymph

**  T^he  babe  may  cry.]— Ver.  207 — 212. Gower'i  trantUtion  is —

*  Long  had  a  tinkling  rung  in  Ida  tall,
That  so  the  infant  might  in  safety  hralL
The  Corybantes  and  Curetes,  some
On  ringing  hehnets,  some  on  hucklers  drum.
The  chad's  concealed. In  signe  of  this,  therefore,
Her  followers  make  their  brasse  and  parchments  rore.'

^  The  Corylantet,'] — Ver.  210.  The  Curetes  were  those  who,  accord-
ing to  the  legend,  danced  the  Pyrrhic  dance,  which  was  performed  in
armour  around  the  cradle  of  Jupiter.  They  were  also  called  *  Dactyli.'
The  Corybantes  were  the  priests  of  Cybele,  and  were  said  to  have  been
three  in  number,  Damnameneus,  Acmon,  and  Selmo.

*•  Phrygian  notes.'] — ^Ver.  214.  The  Phrygian  measure  was  that  used
in  the  musical  part  of  religious  ceremonies,  and  was  invented  by  Marsyas,
a  Phrygian. We  are  told  by  Aristotle  that  it  was  deficient  in  modulation.


y  Google


144  THE  FASTI ;  [b.  iv.  229—262.

SagaritiB  he  ceases  to  be  that  which  he  was  before ;  on  this
account  the  wrath  of  the  Groddess  exacts  vengeance.  She  de-
stroys the  Nymph  by  means  of  wounds  inflicted  upon  a  tree ;
she  dies ;  that  tree  formed  the  destiny  of  the  Naiad.  He  is
furious ;  and  belie?ing  that  the  ceiling  of  his  chamber  is
faUing,  he  takes  to  flight,  and  in  his  course  reaches  the
heights  of  Dindymus.  And  at  one  moment  he  screams  out,
'Away  with  those  torches!'  at  another,  'Away  with  the
scourges ! '  Ofttimes  he  dedares  that  the  CU)ddes8es  of  Palseste^
are  nigh  at  hand.  He  mangled  his  body,  too,  with  a  sharp
stone,  and  his  long  hair  was  dragged  in  the  foul  dust.  His
cry  was,  '  Such  are  my  deserts :  with  my  blood  I  am  paying
the  deserved  penalty ;  perish  those  which  in  me  have  been
the  sinning  parts  !  perish  they!'  again  said  he.  He  emascu-
lated himself,  and  in  a  moment  no  traces  of  manhood  were  left
to  him.  His  madness  became  a  precedent,  and  the  effeminate
priests  still  mutilate  themselves  as  they  toss  their  hair."  In
such  words,  by  the  eloquent  lips  of  the  Aonian  Muse,  was  the
cause  revealed  to  me  of  the  madness  about  which  I  had  made
this  inquiry.  "  Guide  of  my  task,  teU  me  this  also,  I  pniy;
whence  was  she  brought,  when  she  first  arrived  here  ;  or  was
she  always  in  our  City  ?"  "  The  Mother,"  said  she,  "  was  ever
attached  to  Dindymus,  and  Cybele,  aud  Ida,  pleasant  with  its
fountains,  and  the  realms  of  Ihum.  When  ^neas  was  carry-
ing Troy  to  the  fields  of  Italy,  the  Goddess  was  on  the  point
of  following  the  ships  with  dieir  sacred  freights.  But  she  had
perceived,  tibat  not  as  yet  was  her  Divinity  invited  to  Latium
by  the  Destinies,  and  she  had  stopped  in  her  native  abodes.
Afterwards,  when  Rome,  powerful  m  her  resources,  beheld  ^^^
centuries  pass  over,  and  raised  her  head  aloft  firom  the  con-
quest of  the  world,  the  priest  examined  the  words  of  destiny
in  the  Euboean  prophecies.  They  say  that  on  examination
there  were  found  these  words  :  '  Tlie  Mother  is  far  away  ;  I
command  thee,  man  of  Rome,  that  thou  fetch  hither  the
Mother  ;  when  she  comes  she  must  be  received  by  the  hand
of  chastity.'  The  senate  is  perplexed  by  the  obscure  terms
of  the  mysterious  oracle  as  to  who  the  parent  is  that  is  away,

*®  Goddesses  qf  Palaste,'] — ^Ver.  236.  From  the  mention  of  the  torches
and  "whips  it  is  clear  that  the  Furies  are  meant.  They  had  a  temple  in
Epirus,  of  which  Paheste  was  one  of  the  principal  cities.


y  Google


B.  IT.  262— 277.  OB,  OiXEHDAB  01*  OTID.  145.

or  in  what  spot  she  must  be  sought.  Psean^  is  consulted,
md  he  answers,  ''  Send  for  the  Mother  of  the  Gods ;  she  is
to  be  found  on  the  heights  of  Ida."  Men  of  noble  rank^  are
sent  on  the  mission.  Attains  was  then  swaying  the  sceptre  of
Phrygia ;  he  refuses  their  request**  to  the  men  of  Ausonia.
Of  miracles  will  I  sing ;  the  earth  shook  with  a  prolonged
mnnnunng,  and  thus  did  the  Goddess  speak  from  her  shrines:
"I  myself  desired  to  be  sent  for.  Let  there  be  no  de-
lay; send  me  away,  thua  willing  to  depart.  Rome  is  a
place  worthy  to  be  the  retreat  of  every  Divinity."  He;
strack  with  terror  at  the  sound,  said, "  Depart ;  thou  wilt
9tUl  be  ours ;  Rome  traces  her  ancestry  to  Phrygian  fore-
iathers."  Forthwith,  axes  without  number  are  felling  the
forests  of  pine,  the  same  which  ^neas,  the  pious  Phrygian,
bad  made  use  of  in  his  flight.  A  thousand  hands  unite  in
the  toil ;  and  the  hollow  bark,  ornamented  with  enamelled
colours,^  bears  the  Mother  of  the  inhabitants  of  heaven.  She
is  carried  in  perfect  safety  over  the  waters  of  her  son  Neptune,

^  Pcean.'] — Ver.  263.  This  was  an  epithet  of  Apollo,  from  the  Greek
rauof '  to  strike,'  either  in  allusion  to  his  having  slain  the  serpent  Python,
or  from  the  same  word  in  the  sense  of  '  to  cure,'  from  his  being  the  God
of  medicine.

*  Men  qf  noble  ranAf.]— Ver.  265.  They  were  five  in  number,  accord-
ing to  Livy  (Book  xxix.  c.  11)  :— M.  Valerius Laevinus,  of  consular  rank ;
M.  Caecilius  Metellus,  a  former  praetor ;  Sulpicius  Galha,  who  had  been
an  ^dile ;  and  Cneius  Tremellius  Flaccus  and  M.  Valerius  Falto.  Livy
^ys  that  Attains,  king  of  Pergamus,  readily  consented  to  the  request  of
the  Senate,  being  in  alliance  with  the  Romans  against  Philip,  their  common
^^emy.  Attains  was  so  renowned  for  his  immense  wealth,  that  his  name
pMsed  into  a  proverb.  Having  no  male  offspring  by  Berenice,  his  wife,  he
^aeathed  all  his  possessions  to  the  Roman  people.

•^  He  re/uses  their  request.'] — ^Ver.  266.  livy  says  the  contrary,  and
that  he  forthwith  *  gave  them  the  sacred  stone,  which  they  said  was  the
iBother  of  the  Gods,  and  bade  them  carry  it  to  Rome.'  Arnobius  tells  us
that  this  stone  .was  but  small,  and  could  easily  be  carried  by  one  man ;
that  it  was  black  and  tawny  in  colour,  of  irregular  form,  with  prominent
comers.  Mt.  Keightley,  on  very  good  grounds,  as  it  would  appear,  con-
siders that  it  was  an  aerolithe.  Livy  says  that  she  was  sent  for,  as  the
Sibylline  books  prophecied  the  invasion  of  a  foreign  people,  and  their
'^P^  from  Italy  by  her  assistance,  if  brought  to  Rome.

*  Enamelled  eoloure.'] — Ver.  275.  Perhaps  more  properly  "  colours
subjected  to  fire."  Pliny  (Nat.  Hist.  Book  xxxv.  c.  41)  says  that  melted
^ftt  mixed  with  colours  was  laid  on  with  a  brush,  and  that  it  was  much
"^^  ornamenting  ships,  as  being  proof  against  the  action  of  the  sun
«id  salt  water.


y  Google


146  TKM  FASTI ;  [b.  it.  278—300.

and  ihe  retcbes  the  long  ftraito  of  the  OBter  of  Fhryzas ;"
Bhe  passes  the  destroctiTe  ^uoetean  Sea,  the  shore  of  Sigsenm,
Tenedosy  and  the  ancient  realms  of  Eetion.  The  Cyclades
receive  her,  Lesbos  being  left  behind,  and  the  spot  when  the
tide  breaks  on  the  sha]h>ws  of  CarTstum.  She  passes,  too,
over  the  Icaiian  Sea,  where  Icarus  lost  his  wings  that  fell  off,
and  he  thereby  gave  a  name  to  that  extensiye  tract  of  water.
Then  she  leaves  Crete  on  her  left,  on  her  right,  the  waters  of
Pelops ;  and  she  comes  to  Cytbera,  sacred  to  Venus.  Hence
eke  enters  the  Trinacrian  Sea,^  in  which  Brontea,  Steropes,  and
Acmonides,*  are  wont  to  dip  the  steel  when  at  a  white  heat :
she  sails  over  the  sea  of  Ahusa,  and  beholds,  over  the  oars,  on
the  left  side,  the  realms  of  Sardinia ;  and  now  she  makes
Ausonia.  She  had  arrived  at  Ostia,  where  the  river  Tiber
empties  itself  by  its  two  mouths  into  the  deep,  and  flows  in  a
space  of  greater  extent.  All  those  of  the  Equestrian  order,  imd
the  dignified  Senate,  intermingled  with  those  of  Plebeian  rank,
come  to  meet  her  at  the  moudis  of  the  Etrurian  river.  Then
go  fortb  together  both  mothers  and  daughters,  and  brides
newly  became  daughters-in-law,  and  those  who  tend  the  sacred
altars  in  the  virgin  state.  The  men  weary  their  labour-
ing arms  with  the  rope  tightly  stretched ;  scarcely  does  the
stranger  bark  make  way  against  the  stream.  Long  time  had
the  land  been  parched ;  the  drought  had  burnt  up  the  grass.
The  keel,  overpowered  by  the  burden  of  the  freight ,  rests  on

"  Sitter  of  Phryiffu ']-^\er.  278.  HeUe,  who  gave  name  to  the
Hellespont.  The  places  here  mentioned  in  succession  are,  the  Hellespont,
the  Rhcetean  Sea  washing  Rhoeteum  and  Sigasom,  towns  of  Troy;  Tenedos,
an  island  within  sight  of  Troy,  fsmous  for  its  earthenware ;  Thehes,  near
Adramyttium,  the  residence  of  Eetion,  the  father  of  Andromache ;  the
Cyclades  and  Leshos,  Islands  of  the  Mgpui  Sea,  near  Delos ;  Caristus,  in
Euhoea,  opposite  the  isle  of  Andros ;  the  Icarian  Sea,  near  Samoa,  into
which  Icarus  feU,  when  soaring  on  his  wings  with  his  father  Daedalus ;
the  isle  of  Crete,  now  Candia ;  the  coast  of  the  Peloponnesus ;  the  isle  of
Cythera,  on  the  coast  of  Laconia ;  the  Sicilian  Sea;  the  coast  of  Africa ;
the  island  of  Sardinia.

«*  The  Trinacrian  jS5mi.]— Ver.  287.  Trinacriawas  the  Grecian  name  of
Sicily,  from  its  three  comers  or  promontories  Pachynus,  Pelorus,  and  Lily,
baeum.  ^tna,  its  volcano,  was  sacred  to  Vulcan,  and  ita  ^uptions  were
supposed  to  be  caused  by  the  Cyclops  working  at  the  forge.

**  Acmonidea.] — ^Ver.  288.  Vir^  calls  him  Pyracmon.  Brontes  is
from  fSpSvrtit  *  thunder;'  Steropes  from  ffrcpoirii,  '  lightning;'  and  Ac-
monides  from  dsfiiav,  *  an  anviL'


y  Google


B.  17. 300— 818.]  OB, CALBKDiJt  OF  OTO).  147

the  shoal  coyered  with  mud.  Whoever  assists  at  the  work  is
labonring  even  beyond  his  strength^  and  by  the  sound  of  his
voice**  gives  aid  in  keeping  time  to  the  power  of  his  arms.
The  vessel  settles  there  just  like  an  iidand,  immoveable  in  the
midst  of  the  ocean.  Clandia  Quinta  traced  her  descent  from
the  noble  Cknsus  ;^  and  her  beauty  was  not  inferior  to  her
noble  birth.  Chaste,  in  truth,  was  she ;  but  she  had  not  the
credit  of  being  so ;  unjust  slander  had  done  her  an  injury,  and
she  was  charged  on  a  false  accusation.  Her  style  of  dress,^
and  her  having  appeared  in  public  with  her  hair  fancifully
adorned,  together  with  the  readiness  of  her  replies  to  the
ansterity  of  old  age,**  had  done  her  this  injury.  Her  mind,
conscious  of  her  integrity,  laughed  to  scorn  the  Msehoods  of
report ;  but  we  are,  all  of  us,  &  aet  too  ready  to  beUeve  ill.
After  she  had  stepped  forward  from  the  train  of  the  chaste
matrpns,  she  took  up  with  her  hands  some  pure  water  of  the
^(tream,  and  thrice  did  she  sprinkle  her  head,  and  thrice  did
she  raise  her  hands  to  the  heavens.  Those  who  behold  her,
^^ojDk  that  she  is  deprived  of  her  senses.  And  now,  with
bending  knee,  she  fixes  her  looks  on  the  image  of  the  Gk>dde8s,
andwidi  her  hair  all  didhevelled^^  she  utters  these  words,

*^  By  the  sound  of  hit  voice,']— "Vet.  302.  This  seems  to  have  been,
ind  stOl  is,  a  habit  peculiar  to  sailors  of  all  ages  and  all  coimtries.  Mar-
tiil  calls  tlieword  given  to  the  rowers  by  the  'pansarios/  or  'horta-
^'  (the  'timekeeper^),  'cele^ma,'  'the  command,'  from  the  Greek
uXcvM,  <to  order.'  Strabo  tells  us,  that  it  was  dangerous  for  ves-
Kl<i  when  laden,  to  pass  the  bar  of  the  Tiber,  and  that  3iey  usually  dis-
charged or  hghtened  their  cargo  at  the  mouth.

"^  The  noble  Clau*u8.'i''Ytr.  305.  Atta  (or  Attus^  Claiasus  migrated
|rom  Regillum,  a  Sabine  town,  to  Rome,  where  his  umily  was  received
into  the  number  of  the  patricians,  five  years  after  the  expulsion  of  the
1'tfqnins ;  and  Attus  himself  was  called  Appius  Claudius.  The  Claudia
^ere  mentioned  was  the  graud-daughter  of  Appius  Claudius  Caecus.

"•  Her  style  qf  rfres«.]--Ver.  309-10. Dower's  translation  is,

'  Her  habits  brave,  and  music  so  delicious.
And  spmce  attire,  did  make  her  more  suspidous.'

^  The  austerity  qf  old  a^tf.]— Yer.  310.  Perhaps  she  had  been  taken
V>  talk  for  her  gaiety  by  her  seniors,  and  had  told  them  to  mind  their  own
'"uiaess,  which  did  not  improve  their  opinion  of  her.

^*  Httir  all  dishevelled,]--yer,  318.  Ornaments  were  not  permitted  to
^leworn  during  the  performance  of  refigions  ceremonies.  Our  churches
it  the  present  day  bear  no  testimony  to  the  continued  observance  of  this
'cgnUtion.

l2


y  Google


1 48  THE  FASTI  5  [b.  iv.  319—344,

*'  Gonial  Croddess,  thou  fraitM  parent  of  the  Gods,  receive
these  the  prayers  of  thy  supplicant  on  this  express  stipulation.
My  chastity  is  impugned.  If  thou  condemnest  me,  I  will
confess  that  I  have  deserved  it.  With  my  death  I  will  pay
the  penalty,  if  convicted,  a  Goddess  heing  my  judge.  But  if
guilt  is  far  from  me,  thou  wilt  give  hy  the  event  a  pledge  of
my  innocence,  and,  chaste  thyself,  thou  wilt  follow  my  chaste
huids."  She  said,  and  with  a  slight  effort  she  drew  the  rope.
That  which  I  tell  of  is  wondrous ;  hut  it  is  still  testified  by
the  representations  of  our  stage.^  The  Goddess  is  moved ;
she  follows  her  guide,  and,  hy  following,  hestows  on  her  her
testimony  of  approbation.  A  shout,  the  sign  of  exultation,
rises  to  the  sky.  They  come  to  the  bending  of  the  river ;  the
ancients  call  that  place  Ostia,^^  on  the  Tiber,  from  which  point
it  takes  its  course  to  the  left.  Night  had  come ;  they  tie  the
cable  to  the  trunk  of  an  oak,  and  after  a  repast  they  consign
their  bodies  to  gentle  slumber.  The  morning  had  now  come ;
they  loosen  the  cable  £rom  the  trunk  of  the  oak,  but  first  they
offer  frankincense  on  an  altar  which  they  had  erected ;  before
the  poop  of  the  vessel,  crowned  with  flowers,  they  sacrifice  a
heifer,  without  spot,  that  had  neither  borne  the  yoke  nor  been
coupled  with  the  bull.  There  is  a  spot  where  the  rapid  Almo
flows  into  the  Tiber,  and  the  lesser  stream  loses  its  name  in
that  of  the  greater.  There  does  the  hoary  priest,  in  his  purple
vestments,  lave  the  lady  Goddess  and  her  sacred  utensils  in  the
waters  of  the  Almo.^  His  attendants  raise  on  high  the  howl,
the  maddening  pipe  is  blown,  and  their  effeminate  hands  strike
the  tightened  hides'*  of  the  oxen.  Claudia  walks  in  jfront,  the
most  distinguished  by  the  joyousness  of  her  countenance,  with

'1  Our  stage,']— -ycr.  326.  Probably  this  was  one  of  the  stock  sub-
jects of  the  scenic  representations  in  the  theatre,  on  the  occasion  of  the
Megalesian  games.

"  0»rta.]— Ver.  330.  This  would  seem  to  be  the  name  of  the  spot
where  the  river  divided  itself,  at  some  distance  from  the  sea,  and  not  the
town  of  Ostia  at  its  mouth,  which  was  founded  by  Ancus  Martins,  and  was
celebrated  for  its  salt-pans — '  salinse  Ostienses.'

"3  The  waters  of  the  Almo.'] — ^Ver.  340.  It  was  the  yearly  custom  to
wash  both  the  image  of  the  Goddess,  and  her  chariot,  in  the  wat^  ol  the
Almo,

7*  The  tightened  hides.] — Ver.  341-2. Gower*s  translation  is,

'  Her  followers  hollow. Furious  pipes  resound ;
And  velome  thumpt  t'  her  eunuch's  hands  redound.'


y  Google


B.  IV.  344— 357.]  OB, CALEia)AE  or  OTID.  149

difficulty  now  at  last  believed  to  be  chaste  on  the  testimony  of
a  Goddess.  She  herself,  seated  in  a  car,  is  carried  through  the
Capenian  gate;'*  the  yoked  oxen  are  strewed  with  flowers
newly  plucked.  Nasica'*  receives  her ;  though  at  that  time  the
builder  of  her  temple,  he  has  not  always  continued  so.  Augus-
tus has  now  that  character ;  formerly  Metellus  was  its  builder."
Here  Erato  stopped.  She  paused,  to  see  if  I  should  make
farther  inquiries.  "  Tell  me,"  said  I,  "  why  the  Goddess  col-
lects a  contribution^  in  a  few  worthless  coins  ?"  "  Because^^
said  she,  "  the  people  contributed  the  brass,  of  which  Metellus
formed  the  shrine ;  thence  is  still  extant  the  custom  of  giving
the  trifling  coin."  I  inquired  why  people  at  that  time  in  par-
ticular frequent  tiie  banquets,  giving  them,  each  in  his  turn,''*
and  spontaneously  attend  the  feasts  which  are  duly  proclaimed  ?
**  Because,"  said  she,  "  as  with  good  omen  did  Berecynthia
change  her  abode,  so  by  change  of  place  do  they  seek  for  a
similar  omen." I  had  intended  to  ask  why  the  Megalesian

'*  The  Capenian  gate."] — Ver.  345.  The  Porta  Capena  opened  out  on
the  Appian  Way. The  Marcian  aqueduct  passed  over  it.

^  N<i8ica.'\  — Ver.  347.  The  sacred  image  was  entrusted  to  P.  Corne-
lias Sdpio  Nasica,  (the  son  of  Cndus  Scipio  who  had  heen  slain  in  Spain/;
as  being  the  most  worthy  citizen.  He  received  her  at  first  into  his  own
house,  and  afterwards  she  was  pkced  in  the  temple  of  Victory,  on  the
Palatine  hill.  Her  temple  was  contracted  for  by  Scipio,  but  was  not  dedi-
cated till  thirteen  yeiurs  afterwards,  when  stage-plays  were  first  acted  at
the  Megalesian  games,  though  both  had  been  introduced  into  the  city  be-
fcNTe  that  period.  Livy  says  that  the  temple  was  built  by  the  Censors  M.
Vrnxa  and  C.  Claudius.  The  latter  being  the  father  of  the  virgin  Claudia,
Burmann  suggests  that  the  reading  of  the  line  is,  *  Templi  pater  extitit
aactor,'  *  Her  £&ther  founded  the  temple.'  MeteUus  afterwards  repaired
it,  and  Augustus  rebuilt  it  when  destroyed  by  fire.

""  Collects  a  contribution.] — ^Ver.  351.  During  the  festival,  while  the
image  was  being  carried  through  the  dty,  a  Phrygian  man  and  woman
collected  alms  in  small  coins,  to  defray  the  expenses  of  the  worship  of  the
Deity.  These  persons,  from  this  practice,  were  called  by  the  Greeks
M^payvprat^  signifying  'collectors  for  the  mother.'  The  poet  seems
to  be  mistaken  in  his  statement  of  the  reason  for  the  collection.

^  £ach  in  hia  turn,'] — Ver.  353.  It  was  usual  at  the  Megalesia  for
the  principal  families  to  give  mutual  entertainments,  which  were  duly
produmed,  *  indicta,'  and  their  friends  attended  without  any  special  invi-
tation,  and  then  gave  banquets  in  return.  This  was  called  *  mutitare,'  *to
give  and  take.'  The  poet  very  lamely  Accounts  for  the  custom  and  the
origin  of  the  word,  by  saying  that  the  Goddess  at  that  season  '  changed,*
'mutabat,'  her  abode.


y  Google


150  THE  FASTI ;  [b.  iv.  357—376.

were  the  first  guaes^  in  our  eitj,  wbeo.  the  Ckiddess,  for  sbe
perceived  it,  raid,  *'  It  was  she  that  gave  birth  to  the  Gq^s-
The  others  gave  vinr  to  their  parent ;  and  their  Mother  has
the  first  place  in  tne  honour  that  has  been  given  to  them.''
"  Why,  then,"  said  I,  "  do  we  call  those  Galli,  who  have  muti-
lated themselves ;  inasmuch  as  the  Gallic  region  is  at  so  great
a  distance  from  Phrygia."  She  said,  "  Between  the  green
Cybele  and  the  lofty  Celsense^  there  flows  a  stream  with  mad-
dening waters,  Grallus  by  name.  The  person  who  drinks  of
it  goes  mad ;  depart  ye  afar  thence,  you  who  have  a  wish  for
a  sound  mind;  the  person  who  drinks  of  it  goes  mad/'*^
"  Does  it  not  seem  a  shame,"  said  I,  '*  to  place  the  salad  made
of  herbs^  on  the  table  of  the  lady  Goddeu  ?  Or  does  there
exist  some  peculiar  cause  for  it  f"  *'  The  ancients,"  she  re-
plied, ''  are  said  to  have  used  bat  nmple  milk,  and  such
herbs  as  the  earth  spontaneously  produced.  The  white  cheese
is  mixed  up  with  the  bruised  herbs,  that  the  ancient  GKiddess
in  them  may  recognize  the  ancient  diet."

When  the  next  Pallantias"^  shall  have  shone,  the  stars  having
retreated  from  the  sky,  and  the  moon  shall  have  unyoked  her
snow-white  steeds,  that  person  who  shall  then  say,  *'  Once,  on

"^  Thefifit  game*."] — Vet,  357-8. Gower's  version  is—

'  Why,  then,  are  her  games  Megalesia,
By  Rome  kept  first  ? To  this  my  Muse  did  say.'

M  The  Iqfty  Celana.'] — ^Ver.  362.  This  was  the  name  of  a  mountain
and  town  of  Phrygia,  near  Mount  Cybele,  and  once  the  chief  place  of  thai
country.  The  river  Meander  rose  on  its  sunmiit,  and  the  Marsyas  in  its
neighbourhood.  Phny,  in  his  Natural  History  (book  xxxi.  c.  2),  says,
that  the  waters  of  the  river  Gallus  were  g6od  for  persons  afBicted  with
stone,  but  that  taken  in  excess  they  produced  madness.

•I  Ooti  mad.] — ^Ver.  365-8. Gower  thus  transktes  these  lines : —

*  It  causes  madnesse :  fiy  it  all  in  sadnesse,
That  love  your  wits :  The  water  worketh  madnesse.
Upon  her  table  'tis,  said  I,  in  season.
To  set  herb  puddings :  Is  there  any  reason  .^

••  The  salad  made  of  herha,'] — Ver.  367.  *  Moretum.'  This  mess,  if
it  can  be  called  a  salad,  was  a  mixture  of  garlic,  parsley,  rue,  coriander,
onions,  cheese,  oil  and  vinegar.  Virgil  composed  a  poem  under  this  name,
in  praise  of  the  mixture.

^  PalianHaa.'] — Ver.  373.  Aurora  is  so  ealled  from  being  the  cousin
of  Pallas,  who  was  one  of  the  Titans.


y  Google


B.  IV.  376— 390.]  OB, OALEKBAB  OF  OTID.  151

this  day,  was  Pablic  Fortune^  inetaUed  on  the  hill  of  Qairinns/'
will  be  speaking  the  truth.

The  third  day,  I  remember,  was  appointed  for  the  games.
But  as  I  was  a  Enpectator,  an  old  man  who  sat  near  me,  said,
"This  was  the  day  on  which  Caesar,  in  the  Libyan  regions,
enished  the  tndtorons  arms  of  the  courageous  Juba.^  Ceesar
iras  my  general ;  under  him  it  is  my  boast  to  hare  served  as  a
Tribune ;  he  was  the  commander  m  my  time  of  active  ser-
vice. By  war  have  I  obtained  the  distinction  of  this  seat,  by
peace  hast  thon,**  being  invested  with  office  in  the  number  of
the  twice  five  men."  About  to  continue  the  conversation,  we
were  separated  by  a  sudden  shower."^  The  vibrating  Balance
was  urging  downwards  the  waters  of  the  sky.  But  before  the
last  day  puts  an  end  to  the  shows,  the  sword-girt  Orion  shall
be  plunged  into  the  deep.

When  the  next  dawn  shall  have  looked  upon  victorious
Rome,  and  the  stars,  put  to  flight,  shall  have  given  place  to  the

^  Public  i^orten«.]— Ver.  376.  The  temple  to  *  Public  Fortune,'  or  the
*  Fortune  of  the  State,'  was  vowed  a.u.c.  549,  hj  the  consul  Semproniui,
on  the  eve  of  a  battle  with  Hannibal.

**  The  traitormu  /«6a.]— Ver.  380.  After  the  defeat  of  Pompey  at
Phars^ia,  Cato  and  Sdino  lied  to  Juba  in  Numidia  for  assistance.  Cassir
defeated  them  with  immense  slaughter.  From  his  native  character  as  a
Numidian,  the  poet  calls  him  *  perfidus ;'  or,  perhaps,  because  he  resisted
Caesar  in  his  career  of  conquest.  Being  defeated  at  Thapsus,  he  killed
himself,  which  act,  being  one  highly  approved  of  in  the  Roman  code  of
morals,  would  entitle  him  to  the  epithet  *  magnanimus.'

M  By  pmce  host  thou.']— Yet,  383.  There  were  fourteen  rows  in  the
theatre  set  apart  for  the  Equestrian  order,  in  which  the  poet  might,  as  a
member  <tf  that  order,  have  taken  hit  seat  It  seems  doubtful  if  the  Tri-
bune  could  have  claimed  a  seat  there.  But,  as  a  public  officer,  or  rather
an  officer  of  the  Roman  army,  he  was  sitting  near  Ovid,  who  was  then
filling  the  office  of  a  Decemvir,  on  a  seat  most  probably  reserved  for  per-
sons bearing  office.  The  Decemviri  were  appointed  by  Augustus  to  assem-
Ue  the  judges,  and  genendly  to  inspect  the  numagement  oi  the  courts  of
Uw.

V  A  mdden  8hower.']-^\et.  385.  The  awning  over  the  theatres  was
only  fitted  to  modify  the  heat  of  the  rays  of  the  sun,  but  was  not  adapted
to  give  shelter  against  rain.  On  such  occasions  the  pe^e  generally  took
refuge  in  the  porticoes  till  the  rain  was  over.  The  latter  part  of  the
•pe^  of  the  old  Tribune  is  thus  translated  by  Gower  :^

*  I  served  a  Tribune  under  Cssar's  banner.
Lord  of  my  actions ;  which  I  count  my  honour.
My  warfare  me,  this  place  thy  gown  gave  thee ;
Both  raised  to  the  ''office  of  Decemviri." '


y  Google


152  THX  TASn;  [b.  lY.  390-420.

Sun,  the  Circiu  will  be  thronged  with  the  procession*  and  the
multitude  of  the  Gods ;  and  the  first  palm  shall  be  contended  for
by  steeds  that  riral  the  winds  in  speed.  These  are  the  games
of  Ceres ;  there  is  no  need  of  any  explanation  of  their  origin ;
of  themselyes,  both  the  office  and  the  merits  of  the  Goddess  are
plain  to  be  perceived.  To  the  first  mortals,  the  green  grass,
which  the  earth  yielded  without  the  urgent  demand  of  any
one,  was  in  the  place  of  the  harvest.  At  one  time  did  they
pluck  the  grass  from  the  green  sod ;  at  another  time  the  tree-
top,  with  its  tender  foliage,  was  their  repast.  Afterwards,  the
acorn  was  produced ;  well  was  it  with  them,  now  that  the
acorn  was  discoyered ;  and  the  hard  oak  furnished  a  sumptuous
supply.  Ceres  was  the  first  to  change  the  acorn  for  a  more
nutritious  food,  by  inviting  mankind  to  a  better  kind  of  diet.
She  it  was  who  compelled  the  bulls  to  bend  their  necks  to  the
yoke ;  then  for  the  first  time  did  the  upturned  earth  see  the
light  of  the  sun.  Brass  became  valuable ;  the  mass  of  iron
8^  lay  hid ;  alas !  would  that  it  had  ever  remained  con-
cealed. Ceres  takes  delight  in  peace ;  and  do  you,  ye  hus-
bandmen, pray  that  peace  may  be  everlasting,  and  that  our
Prince  may  be  immortal. Ye  may  offer  to  &e  Goddess  the

rlt  and  the  tribute  of  the  cracluing  grain  of  salty  and  the
res  of  frankincense,  upon  her  ancient  hearths ;  and  if  ye
shall  be  without  frankincense,  then  set  fire  to  the  unctuous
torches.  Little  offerings  are  pleasing  to  the  good  Ceres,  if  they
are  only  pure.  Ye  aproned  attendants  of  the  priests,  remove
the  knives  afar  from  the  ox — ^the  ox  may  plough — sacrifice
rather  the  idle  swine.  A  neck  that  is  fitted  by  nature  for  the
yoke  ought  not  to  be  smitten  by  the  axe ;  let  him  live  rather,
and  many  a  time  may  he  labour  on  the  hard  soil.  This  oppor.
tunity  now  calls  upon  me  to  tell  of  the  rape  of  the  Virgin.
The  greater  part  of  the  story  you  wiU  recal  to  your  memory  ;
on  a  few  points  you  will  requure  to  be  informed. The  Trinac.

«  Thronged  vnth  the  proce8sum.']—Ver,  391.  On  the  first  day  of  the
Ludi  Cereales,  there  was  a  'pompa'  or  procession,  from  the  Capitol,
through  the  Forum,  to  the  Circus  Masdmus.  The  officers  of  state  preceded,
followed  by  the  men  of  age  for  military  service  on  foot  and  horseback.
Then  followed  the  chariots  with  four,  and  two  horses,  and  then  those  with
but  one  horse ;  musicians  and  dancers  followed,  and  the  procession  closed
with  the  images  of  numerous  Crods  carried  either  in  chariots  or  on  men's
shoulders.  The  palm-branch  was  given  to  the  conquerors  iA  the  games  as
the  token  and  prize  of  victory.


y  Google


B.  IV.  430— 439.]  OE, CALENDAR  OP  OTID.  153

lian  land  jats  out  into  the  vast  ocean  with  three  rocks,  deriving
its  name  from  the  position  of  the  spot.  It  is  &  habitation
delightful  to  Ceres  ;  there  possesses  she  many  a  city,  among
which  is  the  firuitftll  Henna,**^  with  its  well-tilled  soil.  Cold
Aiethusa  had  invited  the  matrons  of  the  inhabitants  of  heaven ;
the  yellow-haired  Goddess,  too,  had  come  to  the  sacred  ban-
quet. Her  daughter,  attended  as  she  was  by  the  damsels,  her
constant  companions,  was  wandering  with  bare  foot  sdong
her  own  meadows.  There  was  a  spot  at  the  bottom  of  a  shady
vale,  watered  by  the  plenteous  spray  of  the  stream  that  falls
firom  a  height.  There  were  as  many  tints  there  as  nature
possesses,  and  the  ground  was  beauteous,  decked  with  flowers
of  diversid&ed  hue.  Soon  as  she  beheld  this  she  said,  '*  Come,
my  companions,  and  together  with  me  M  your  bosoms  with
the  flowers."  The  worthless  prize  delights  their  girlish  minds ;
and,  in  their  earnestness,  the  toil  is  not  felt.  One  is  filling
baskets  woven  of  the  pUant  osier,  another  one  is  loading  her
lap,  another  the  bosom  of  her  dress  loosened /or  thepui^ose.
One  is  gathering  marygolds,  to  another  the  beds  of  violets  are
an  object  of  search;  another,  with  her  nail,  is  cropping  the
blossom  of  iSie  poppy. Some  thou  engagest,  0  hyacinth,"^  some

»  Frui0a  Henna,']— Yet,  422.  This  town,  called  also  Enna,  was.
from  its  central  situation,  called  the  '  navel'  of  Sicily.  It  had  a  sacred
groYc  and  a  temple.  Sicily  was  of  proverbial  fertility,  whence  it  was  con-
sidered the  chosen  abode  of  Ceres.  She  had  a  temple  there,  founded  by
Gelon,  of  Syracuse,  containing  two  images  of  the  divinity,  one  in  marble,
the  other  in  brass.  Ovid  relates  this  story  at  some  length  in  the  fifth
Book  of  the  Metamorphoses.  Arethusa  was  the  nymph  of  a  fountain  at
Syracuse,  and  is  said  by  some  of  the  poets  to  have  been  privy  to  Pluto's
designs  against  Proserpine.  Homer  gives  Nysa,  in  Caria,  as  the  scene  of
her  abduction,  other  authors,  Attica,  Arcadia,  or  Crete.  Gower's  traosla-
lation  of  the  419th  and  420th  lines  will  oblige  us  to  give  a  rather  Hiba-
Dian  twang  to  the  end  of  the  first  line —

'  A  land  with  three  rocks  crowds  into  the  sea, -
From  its  triangle  called  Trinacria.'

^  Hyadfiih.'] — Ver.  439.  Hyadnthus,  a  beauteous  youth,  having  been
accidentally  slidn  by  Apollo,  was  changed  by  the  God  into  a  hyacinth,
'Which,  according  to  the  exuberant  fancy  of  the  poets,  bears  in  its  flowers
the  impress  of  the  letters  'Ai,  'At,  expressive,  in  the  Greek  language,  of
'  alas !  alas  ! '  uttered  by  Apollo  in  his  grief.  The  same  flower  is  said  to
have  sprung  from  the  blood  of  Ajax  when  he  killed  himself,  bearing  the
abore  letters,  expressive  either  of  grief,  or  as  denoting  the  first  two  letters
of  Ihe  name  of  Ajax,  'Acay.


y  Google


154  THE  FASTI;  [b.  IV.  439 — 469.

thou  detainest,  0  amaranth;  some  chooae  the  ihyme,  some  the
rosemary,  and  some  the  melilote ;  many  a  rose  is  gathered,
and  many  a  nameless  flower  is  t^ere.  She  herself  is  pluck-
ing the  delicate  crocuses  and  the  white  lilies.  In  her  eager-
ness to  gather  them,  the  distance  is  gradually  increased,  and
by  chamse  none  of  her  companions  follow  their  mistress.
Her  uncle  espies  her,  and  having  seen  her,  in  haste  he  bears  her
away,  and  on  his  azure-coloured  steed  carries  her  to  his  own
realms.  She  indeed  cries  aloud,  "  Alas !  my  dearest  mother !
I  am  being  carried  away ! "  and  with  her  own  hand  she  rends  her
garments  in  despair.  Meantime,  a  waiy  is  op^ied*^  to  Ruto ;
for  his  steeds,  unused  to  it,  can  scarcely  endure  the  li^t  of
day.  But  the  company  of  her  companions,  their  baskets
bemg  heaped  with  flowers,  cry  aloud,  '*  Come,  Persephone,  to
thy  presents."  When  thus  called  on,  she  returns  not  an
answer;  they  fill  the  mountains  with  their  waitings,  and
with  sorrowing  hand  beat  their  naked  bosoms.  Ceres  was
amazed  at  the  lamentation ;  she  had  just  come  to  Henna,  and
straightway  she  exclaimed,  '*  Woe  is  me !  my  daughter,  where
art  thou  V  In  distraction  she  is  hurried  along,  just  as  we
are  wont  to  hear  that  the  Thracian  Bacchanals,^  in  their
raying,  go  with  their  hair  all  dishetelled.  As  lows  the  mother
when  her  calf  has  been  torn  from  her  udder,  and  she  seeks  for
her  ofispring  throughout  the  wood,  even  so  does  the  €k>d-
dess ;  she  restrains  not  her  wailing,  and  is  swiftly  borne  on  her
course ;  and  she  begms  it  from  thy  plains,  0  Henna.  She
finds  the  marks  of  the  virgin's  foot  leading  thence,  and  sees
where  the  ground  has  been  imprinted  with  the  well-known
pressure.  Perhaps  that  would  have  been  the  last  day  of  her
wanderings,  had  not  the  swine  confused  the  traces  which  sl^
had  discovered.  And  now  in  her  course  she  passes  the  people
of  Leontium  and  the  streams  of  Amenanus,  and  thyba^s,
grassy  Acis» She  passes,  too,  Cyane,  and  the  spring  of  the

'^  A  ioay  is  opened!] — Ver.  449.  According  to  Gc^ro,  the  descent  was
through  a  lake  near  the  dty  of  Syracuse ;  but  he  says  that  the  God  had
ascended  through  a  vast  cavern  near  Henna.

«  SaccAamito.]— Ver.  458. They  are  called '  Maenades,*  firom  the
Greek  fiaivofAat,  *  to  rave  in  madness,'  as  their  frantic  gestures  formed  part
of  their  worship. Gower  thus  translates  this  and  the  preceding  line, —
*  About  she  hurries,  in  a  dead  distraction,
Like  shrews  of  Bacchus  in  their  frantic  action.'


y  Google


B.  nr.  469— 500.]  OB, CALEITDAB  OF OTH).  155

gently  flowing  Anapns,  and  thee,  0  Gela,  not  to  be  approached
by  reason  of  thy  eddies.  She  had  now  left  behind  Ortygia,
and  Megara,  and  Pantagias,  and  the  spot  where  the  ocean
receives  the  waters  oi  Symsethus,  and  the  caves  of  the  Cyclops,
burned  up  by  the  forges  which  had  been  erected  there,  and
the  place  which  has  t^e  name  of  the  carved  sickle,  and  Hi-
mera,  and  Didyme,  and  Agrigentom,  and  Tauromenus,  and
Mela,  the  joyful  pasture  of  the  sacred  oxen.''  Hence  she
goes  to  Camerina,  and  Thapsos,  and  tiie  glens  of  the  Heloms,
and  the  spot  where  Eryx,  ever  exposed,  lies  open  to  the  breeze
of  the  Zephyr.  And  now  had  she  visited  the  mountain  of
Pelorus,  and  Lilybseum,  and  Pachynus,  the  three  headlands
of  her  island.  Wherever  she  comes,  she  fills  every  place  with
her  pitiable  complaints,  just  as  when  the  bird  is  bewailing  her
lost  Itys.  In  turns,  she  exclaims  at  one  time,  *'  Persephone  V
at  another,  "  My  daughter !"  and,  in  alternate  cries,  she  calls
on  her  by  either  appellation.  But  neither  did  Persephone
hear  Ceres,  nor  the  daughter  her  mother ;  and,  in  their  turn,
each  appellation  fell  d^  on  her  ear.  And  if  Ceres  saw  a
shepherd  or  any  one  tilling  the  fields,  this  was  her  one  speech,
''Has  any  girl  passed  this  way?"  And  now  the  world  has
but  one  hue,  and  all  things  are  enwrapped  in  darkness ;  even
the  watchful  dogs  have  now  ceased  their  barking.  The  lofty
JStna  lies  on  the  £&ce  of  the  gigantic  Typhceus,  with  whose
blazes,  emitted  by  his  pantings,  the  ground  is  on  fire.  Then
she  lights  two  pines  for  a  torch  :  from  this  circumstance,  even
to  this  day,  the  torch  is  used  in  the  sacred  rites  of  Ceres.
There  is  a  cave,  rough  with  the  erected  piles  of  the  excavated
pumice-stone,  a  place  to  be  approached  neither  by  man  nor
by  wild  beast.  As  soon  as  she  arrives  thither,  she  joins  the
harnessed  dragons  to  her  car,  and,  untouched  by  the  waters,
she  traverses  the  waves  of  the  ocean.  She  escapes  the  Syrtes,
and  thee,  0  Zancleean  Charybdis,^  and  you,  dogs  of  the  daughter

*  The  aacred  oxen."] — ^Ver.  475-6. Gower  thus  renders  these  lines, —

*  Then  Himere,  Didym,  Agrigentum,  and
Tauromenus :  thence  to  Mela's  Holy-ox-land.'

The  curved  sickle  is  mentioned  a  few  lines  above,  in  allusion  to  the  old
name  of  Messina,  which  was  ZahcU,  meaning,  in  the  Sicilian  language,
*  a  sickle,'  from  a  fancied  resemblance  to  that  implement  in  the  form  of
the  spot.
**  CAarybdis.l—Yer.  499. This  was  a  violent  and  dangerous  whirlpool


y  Google


156  THE  fasti;  [b.  iv.  500— 519.

of  Nisos,  monsters  boding  shipwreck,  and  the  Adriatic,  ex-
tending far  and  wide,  and  Corinth,  situate  on  two  seas  ;^and
thus  she  arrives  at  thy  harbours,  land  of  Attica.  Here,  for  the
first  time,  immersed  in  sorrow,  she  took  rest  on  a  cold  rock,---
that  rock  even  to  the  present  day,  the  people  of  Cecrops  call  the
Rock  of  Sorrow.**  Unshaken  in  her  purpose,  she  remained
unsheltered  firom  the  weather  for  many  a  day,  exposing  her-
self to  the  rays  of  the  moon  and  the  drenching  shower.  Each
place  has  its  own  destiny ;  where  now  is  Eleusis  of  Ceres,  is
said  to  have  been  the  farm  of  the  old  man  Celeus."^  He  was
carrying  home  acorns  and  blackberries  shaken  down  from  the
bramble  thickets,  and  dry  logs  for  the  hearth,  to  be  lighted
there.  His  little  daughter  was  driying  homeward  two  goats
from  the  crag,  and  his  infant  son  was  lying  sick  in  the  cradle.
"  Mother,"  says  the  damsel,  (the  Goddess  was  moved  at  the
name  of  mother,)  '*  what  art  thou  doing,  thus  unattended,  in
these  lonely  hills  V*  The  old  man,  too,  stops,  though  heavy
is  his  burden,  and  begs  of  her  to  come  under  the  roof  of  hiiB
cottage,  humble  though  it  be.  She  declines;  she  had  as-
sumed the  form  of  an  old  woman,  and  had  confined  her  locks
with  a  turban.  When  he  has  renewed  his  invitation,  she  then
replies,  ''Unharmed  mayst  thou  be,  and  a  parent  mayst
thou  ever  remain. My  daughter  has  been  taken  away  from

in  the  straits  of  Messina.  Scylla  was  another  whirlpool  in  its  neighbour-
hood. Scylla,  the  daughter  of  Phorcus  and  Chretheis,  was  beloved  by
Glaucus ;  Circe,  in  a  fit  of  jealousy,  poisoned  the  stream  in  which  she
bathed,  on  which  she  became  transformed  into  a  monster  begirt  with  bark-
ing dogs,  and,  casting  herself  into  the  sea,  she  was  changed  into  a  rock
surrounded  with  a  howling  whirlpool.  The  poet  here  Confounds  her  with
Scylla,  the  daughter  of  Nisus,  king  of  Crete,  who  betrayed  her  father  to
Minos,  by  cutting  off  his  lock  of  purple  hair,  on  which  his  safety  depended.
The  places  prcTiously  mention^  are  all  towns,  mountains,  or  rivers  of
ancient  Sicily.

^  The  Rock  of  Sorrow."] — Ver.  504.  This  rock,  on  which  the  Goddess
fir^t  seated  herself  on  her  arrival  in  Greece,  was  called  ayiXavToe  vhrpa,
*  the  rock  of  mourning.'

*  Eleusts.l — Ver.  507.  Eleusis  was  a  maritime  town  of  Attica,  on  the
western  side  of  the  Cephisus.  It  was  so  named  from  'EXevcric,  '  an  arrival,'
because  Ceres  arrived  there  on  her  first  entrance  into  Greece.  Her  worship,
attended  with  the  secret  and  far-famed  Eleusinian  mysteries,  prevailed  there.

^7  Celeu8.'\ — Ver.  503.  Instead  of  being  a  poor  old  man,  as  here  repre-
sented. Homer  and  other  writers  represent  him  as  being  the  king  of
Eleusis,  which,  in  fact,  had  been  built  by  Ogyges  400  years  before  this
period.


y  Google


MV.  519— 551.]  OB.  CALENDAB  OP  OTID.  157

me.  Alas !  how  much  happier  is  thy  lot  than  mine !"  She
spoke,  and  a  crystal  drop,  like  a  tear  (for  the  Gods  do  not
shed  tears,*®)  fell  upon  her  hosom  made  warm  thereby.  Kind
in  disposition,  the  damsel  and  her  aged  father  Tied  in  weeping
with  her,  and  these  were  the  words  of  the  good  old  man,
"J  pray  that  thy  lost  daughter  whom  thou  art  seeking
may  return  safe  to  thee ;  hut  arise,  and  do  not  despise  the
shelter  of  my  humble  cottage.*'  To  him  the  Goddess  an-
swered, **  Lead  on,  thou  knowest  the  art  of  persuadine  me ;"
and  «o  saying,  she  arises  from  the  rock  and  follows  after  the
old  man.  Her  guide  tells  his  companion  bow  that  his  son  is
ill  and  enjoys  no  repose,  but  b  kept  awake  by  his  malady.
As  she  is  about  to  enter  the  humble  abode,  she  ^thers  the
soporiferous  poppy  from  the  soil  of  the  field.  MVhile  she  is
gathering  it,  she  is  said  to  have  tasted  it  with  forgetful  palate,
and  thoughtlessly  to  have  broken  her  Jengthened  fast.  In-
asmuch as  she  put  an  end  to  her  fasting  in  the  beginning  of
the  night,  those  who  are  initiated^  choose  the  time  of  the
stars  appearing  as  the  hour  for  breaking  their  fast.  When
she  enters  the  threshold  she  sees  all  things  pervaded  by  mourn-
ing :  there  was  now  no  hope  of  recovery  in  the  child.  Having
saluted  the  mother,  (her  name  was  Metanira,)  she  deigns  to
touch  the  mouth  of  Ihe  boy  with  her  own.  His  paleness  of
colour  departs,  and  sudden  vigour  waxes  strong  in  his  body —
such  a  degree  of  strength  was  it  that  passed  from  the  celestial
lips.  The  whole  house  is  joyful,  that  is  to  say,  the  father,
the  mother,  and  the  daughter ;  these  three  formed  the  whole
household.  Presently  they  serve  up  the  repast,  curds  dis-
solved in  milky  and  apples,  and  the  golden  honey  in  its  fresh
combs.  The  genial  Ceres  fasts,  and  gives  to  thee,  0  boy,
poppies,  the  promoters  of  sleep,  to  be  drunk  infused  in  warm
milk.  *Twas  midnight,  and  theye  was  now  the  stillness  of  tran-
quil slumber;  she  raised  Triptolemus^  in  her  lap,  and  thrice

*  J>o  not  shed  tears,'] — Ver.  521.  As  the  Gods  did  not  live  on  mortal
food,  but  on  ambrosia  and  nectar,  nor  shed  blood  when  wounded,  but  a
peculiar  fluid,  called '  Ichor,'  it  is  not  surprising  that  they  did  not  secrete
^«sn  similar  to  those  of  mortals.

,  *  Those  who  are  initiated,']— Ver,  536.  *  Mystae.'  Those  who  were
I'li^isted  in  '  the  Elensinian  mysteries'  fasted  unitil  the  evening,  in  imitation,
it^M  supposed,  of  the  conduct  of  Ceres  on  the  present  occasion.

*  Tripiokmus.] — ^Ver.  550.  In  the  Homeric  poem,  which  has  come
down  to  us  on  this  subject,  the  son  of  Celeus  is  oUled  Demophoon,  wlule


y  Google


158  tHB  FASTI ;  [».  nr.  561—570.

with  her  hand  did  she  stroke  hini^  three  rerses  did  she  utter,
Terses  not  to  be  repeated  by  mortal  Toice  ;  and  on  the  hearth
she  covered  the  body  of  the  boy  with  the  lire  embers,  that  the
fire  might  pnrge  away  that  bnrden,  mortality,  the  common  lot
of  man.  The  mother,  unwisely  a£fectionate,  is  roused  from
her  slumbers,  and  distracted,  she  cries  out,  "  What  art  thou
doing  V*  and  snatches  his  Hmbs  from  the  fire.  To  whom  the
Goddess  said,  "  While  in  intention  thou  art  not,  yet  in  fact
thou  hast  proved  a  cruel  'parent ;  by  the  fears  of  a  mother  are
my  gifts  rendered  worthless.  Mortal,  indeed,  shall  he  rww
remain,  but  yet  he  shall  be  the  first  to  plough,  and  to  sow,
and  to  bear  away  the  rewards  of  his  labour  f^om  the  ground
that  he  has  tilled."  Ceres  tha  speaks,  and  as  she  goes  forth,
she  carries  a  cloud  that  envelopes  her,  and  now  she  betakes  her-
self to  her  dragon  steeds,^  and  is  borne  on  her  winged  chariot.
She  leaves  behind  her  the  unsheltered  Sunium,  and  Piraeus'*
secure  with  its  winding  harbour,  and  the  coast  which  is  situate
on  its  right  side.  Thence  she  enters  on  the  ^gean  sea,  in
which  she  beholds  all  the  Cyclades,  and  she  passes  over  the
destructive  Ionian  and  the  Icarian  sea ;  through  the  cities
of  Asia  she  seeks  the  long  Hellespont,  and  soaring  on  high,
she  wends  her  varied  way  through  different  spots.  For  now
she  is  looking  down  upon  the  Arabs  that  collect  the  frank-
incense, and  now,  upon  the  Indians;  afterwards,  the  Libyan
lands,  then  Meroe,  and  then  the  land  of  Drought'  is  beneath

Apollodorus  represents  Triptolemus  as  the  elder  son.  Ovid  represents  the
facts  recited  as  being  the  occurrences  of  a  single  night.  Other  writers
represent  Ceres  as  nightly  huming  out  the  gross  and  mortal  parts  of  the
child,  and  hy  day  restoring  the  loss,  by  nibbing  in  ambrosia,  until  inter-
rupted by  the  mother,  wh^  she  gave  up  her  intention  of  conferring  inmunr-
taiity,  but  committed  to  him  the  guardianship  of  her  mysteries,  with  a
promise  of  immortal  £une.

*  Her  dragon  steeds,'] — ^Ver.  561-2. Gower  thus  writes  these  lines—

'  Thus  forth  she  goes,  and  with  a  cloud  attended,

Her  winged-dragon  mounted  coach  ascended.'

**  Sunium  and  Piraus.'] — Ver.  563.  The  former  was  a  promontory
of  Attica ;  the  latter  was  the  sea-port  of  Athens,  consisting  of  three  natural
inlets,  Piraeus,  properly  so  called,  Cantharon,  and  Zea.

'  The  land  qf  Drought^] — ^Ver.  570.  This  was  Ethiopia.  Meroe  was
an  island  of  that  country,  forpned  by  the  Nile.  Josephus-  says  that  its  ori-
ginal name  was  Saba,  but  that  Cambyses  called  it  Meroe,  after  his  wife  or
sister  who  died  there.  As  Mr.  Thynne  justly  remarks,  Ovid  does  not
observe  any  topographical  order,  but  characterises  the  wildness  of  the
Goddess  by  the  fact  of  her  rushing  indiscriminately  from  place  to  idace.


y  Google


B.  nr.  570— ^1.]  OB, CALEin>AS  OT  OVU).  159

her.  And  now  she  reaches  the  Hesperian  streams,  the
Rhine,  the  Rhone,  and  the  Po,  and  thee,  0  Tiber,  destined  to
be  the  parent  of  a  mighty  stream.  Whither  am  I  borne?
'twere  an  unlimited  task  to  tell  the  lands  that  she  wandered
over — ^no  spot  in  the  world  was  left  nnvisited  by  Ceres.  She
▼anders,  too,  along  the  sky,  and  she  addresses  those  Constel-
lations nearest  to  Sie  icy  Pole,  that  are  exempt  from  immersion
in  the  watery  ocean.  "  Stars  of  Parrhasia,  for  ye  are  able  to
know  all  things,  since  nerer  do  ye  set  beneath  the  billows  of
the  sea,  discover  my  daughter  Persephone  to  her  wretched
modier."  She  had  thus  said ;  and  thus  to  her  did  Helice^
reply :  ''  The  night  is  free  from  blame ;  question  the  Sun  about
the  stealing  of  the  dam^l,  who  far  and  wide  beholds  what  is
done  in  the  light  of  the  day.''  The  Sun,  being  visited,  says,
"Labour  not  in  vain;  she  whom  thou  art  seeking,  now  the
bride  of  the  brother  of  Jove,  is  the  mistress  of  the  third  em-
pire." Long  having  complained  to  herself,  she  thus  addressed
the  Thunderer,  and  deep  were  the  traces  of  grief  on  her  coun-
tenance. **  If  thou  bearest  in  mind  by  whom  Persephone
was  bom  to  me,  she  ought  to  have  an  equal  share  of  thy
regard.  Having  wandered  over  the  whole  world,  the  law-
lessness of  the  deed  alone  is  discovered  by  me ;  the  ravisher
still  holds  the  reward  of  his  crime.  But  neither  is  Persephone
deserving  of  a  ravisher  for  her  husband,  nor  should  a  son-in-
law  have  been  provided  for  thee  and  me  after  such  a  fashion
a8  this.  What  greater  misfortune  could  I  have  endured,  as  a
captive,  had  Gyges*  been  victorious,  than  I  have  now  borne,
while  thou  art  holding  the  sceptre  of  heaven.  But  let  him  have
carried  her  away  with  impunity,  and  let  me  bear  these  things
unavenged;  only  let  him  rest(»re  her,  and  let  him  make
amends  for  his  former  deeds  by  his  recent  ones."  Jupiter
mollifies  her,  and  excuses  the  act  on  the  plea  of  passion,
and  says,  ^'He  is  not  a  son-in-law  for  us  to  be  ashamed
of.  I  myself  9m  not  of  more  noble  birth ;  my  realm  is  situate
in  the  heavens ;  one  of  my  brothers  sways  the  waters ;  another
the  vacant  realms  of  Chaos* But  if  perchance  thy  resolution

^  BeUce,'] — Yer.  580.  The  Constellatioii  of  the  Greater  Bear;  see
Book  in.  ver.  106. Parrhasia  was  one  of  the  names  of  Arcadia.

*  GygeaJ] — Ver.  593.  He  was  one  of  the  hundred-handed  giants  who
^^arred  with  Jajnter  for  the  dominion  of  the  heavens,  heing  the  brother
offiriareus.


y  Google


160  THE  TASTI ;  [b.  iv.  601—618.

is  unchangeable,  and  it  is  thy  detennination  to  dissolve  the
bonds  of  wedlock  when  once  united,  this  that  thou  desirest  we
will  assay,  if  it  is  the  fact  that  she  has  continued  fasting  ;^  if
not,  the  wife  of  the  monarch  of  the  infernal  regions  she  shall
be.  The  Chd,  bearer  of  the  Caduceus,  departs  to  Tartarus,
haying  assumed  his  wings,  and,  returning  sooner  than  is
hoped  for,  reports  the  ascertained  result  of  his  visit.  "  The
damsel  th^t  has  been  carried  off,"  says  he,  '*  has  broken  her
fast  with  three  of  the  grains  which  Uie  pomegranate  conceals
beneath  its  thin  rind."  The  wretched  mother  grieved,  in  no
less  degree  than  if  her  daughter  had  that  moment  been  carried
away,  and  scarcely,  by  the  lapse  of  time,  did  she  recover.  And
thus  did  she  say :  '*  The  heavens  are  not  to  be  inhabited  by  me  :
command  that  I,  as  well,  may  receive  admittance  into  the  valley
of  Taenarus."^  And  she  would  have  done  so,  had  not  Jupiter
made  the  stipulation  that  Persephone  should  be  for  twice  three
months  in  each  year  in  heaven.  Then,  at  length,  did  Ceres
recover  het  former  looks  and  her  spirits,  and  placed  upon  her
locks  the  garlands  of  wheat.  Plenteously,  too,  did  the  harvest
spring  up  in  the  fields,  whose  produce  had  been  interrupted,
imd  hardly  did  the  threshing  floor  suffice  to  hold  the  stores

^  Con/tNtMd  fasting.'] — Ver.  603.  The  poets  in  general  represent  it  as
a  rule  that  no  one  could  return  from  Erebus  who  had  once  eaten  there.
In  the  Homeric  Hymn,  Pluto  purposely  induces  Proserpine  to  eat  the
pomegranate  grains,  that  he  may  avail  hhnself  of  this  law.  Grower  gives
a  quaint  translation  of  this  and  the  nine  succeeding  lines : —

*  Well  try  this  means ;  sh*  is  thine,  if  meat  sh'  abstein  ;
If  not,  sh'  must  th'  infemall  bride  remain.
Caduceus  sails  to  Styx  on  nimble  wings.
And  quick  as  thought  eye-witness'd  tidings  brings.
She  had  her  stomach  staid  with  kernels  three
Of  th'  apple  pluck'd  from  the  pomegranate  tree.
She  mourns  as  much  as  if  herself  had  now
Been  forced  away,  and  scarce  could  grief  outgrow :
*• And  there  she  cries.  Your  heaven  to  me  is  hateful ;
Let  me  go  to  live  in  Tartary  more  gratefulL'

The  inhabitants  of  the  Tartary  of  our  day  would  not  feel  flattered  by  this
adaptation  of  the  name  of  their  country,  if  they  heard  it.

7  The  valley  of  Tanarus,] — Ver.  612.  Taenarus  was  a  promontory  of  La-
oonia,  now  Cape  Matapan.  In  a  vale,  or  in  its  vicinity,  was  a  cave,  sacred
to  Neptune,  which  was  said  to  be  the  entrance  to  the  infernal  regions,  through
which  Hercules  dragged  Cerberus  to  the  upper  world.  *  Chaos,'  is  used,  a
few  lines  preceding,  by  poetical  license,  to  signify  'the  infernal  regions.'


y  Google


B.  IT.  618— 639.] OBy  CALEKDAB  07  OTXD.  16 1

piled  up  tJiere,  Things  which  are  white  are  befitting  Ceres  :
on  the  feast  of  Ceres  put  on  white  garments ;  at  this  season
the  wearing  of  woollen  robes  of  dark  colour  is  not  allowed.

Jupiter^  sumamed  Victor,^  takes  to  himself  the  Ides  of  Apiil ;
on  this  day  was  a  teim)le  dedicated  to  him.  On  this  day,  too,
if  I  mistake  not,  did  Liberty,  most  worthy  of  our  race,  begin
to  possess  her  own  mansions.

On  the  following  day,  do  thou,  sailor,  repair  to  safe  har-
bom« ;  a  gale,  mingled  with  hail,  will  come  from  the  west.
In  good  truth,  be  this  as  it  may,  it  is  the  fact,  that  on
this  day,  in  such  a  storm,  did  Csesar  and  his  troops  conquer
the  arms  of  the  enemy  at  Mutina.^  When  now  the  thurd
day  of  ttie  Ides  of  the  month  of  Venus  shall  have  dawned,
p^orm  the  sacnfice  with  a  cow  that  is  pregnant.  A
cow,  that  is  bearing  and  with  young,  is  called  ''forda,"^^  from
"fero,'*  [to  bear] ;  from  this  word,  too,  it  is  beheyed  that
the  foetus  derives  its  name.  Now  are  tilie  cattle  preguMit ;
the  earth  is  teeming  with  the  seed ;  to  the  pregnant  earth  a
pr^nant  victim  is  offered.  Some  are  slain  in  the  Capitol,  the
heights  of  Jove.  The  court-houses"  receivfe  thrice  ten  heifers,
and  become  wet,  besprinkled  with  the  streams  of  blood.  But
when  the  attendants  of  the  priests  have  snatched  the  calves
from  the  womb,  and  have  consigned  the  entrails,  when  cut  out,
to  the  smoking  altars,  she  who  is  by  birth  the  oldest  of  the

"  Fictor.] — ^Vcr.  621.  In  a  war  with  the  Samnites,  a.u.c.  457,  Q.
Fabius  Maximiu  vowed  to  erect  a  temple  to  Jupiter  Victor.  The  temple
erf  liberty  was  dedicated  on  Mount  Aventine,  in  the  second  Punic  war,
by  the  tetther  of  the  Gracchi.  It  was  repaired  a.u.c.  559,  by  the  Censors,
and  rebuilt  by  Asinius  Pollio,  in  the  reign  of  Augustus.  To  this  last  drcum-
stance  the  poet  seems  here  to  fefer.

*  Aftt<ina.]— Yer.  627.  The  battle  of  Mutina  was  fought  agamst
Antony  by  the  Consuls  Hirtius  and  Pansa,  and  the  propraetor  Octavianus
(afterwards  Augustus  Cesar),  A.n.c.  710,  and  ended  in  the  defeat  of
Antony.  The  two  Consuls  died  of  their  wounds,  and  Augustus  was
thereby  enabled  to  appropriate  the  glory  of  the  victory  to  himself.  'The
poet,  in  his  flattery,  would  seem  to  imply  that  the  hailstorm  was  of
Augustuses  own  special  brewing  for  the  occasion.

i«  h  caUed  *forda.*]—YeT.  630.  Varro,  on  Rustic  Matters,  Book  ii.
c5,  calls  this  word  <  horda,'  and  the  festival  *  Hordicidia,'  or  *  Hordicalia;'
originating  in  the  digamma,  the  H  and  the  F  of  the  ancients  often  be-
tokened convertible  sounds.

^'  Tke  court-houses,'] — Ver.  635.  *  Curia.'  The  singular  is  here  used
&r  the  plural.  One  cow  was  sacrificed  in  the  *  curia,'  or  *  court-house,'  of
each  of  the  thirty-'  ourin.'

M


y  Google


M2  THl  TiLBTI ;  [b.  it.  659*-^70..

VeitalYvtpnB  btumsthe  calTes  with  fire,  that»on  thefestiyalctf
Pales,  those  «riies  may  purify  the  people.  When  Noma  was
king,  the  crops  not  repaying  the  labour  expended  an  them,  the
wishes  of  the  disappointed  husbandman  remained  ungratified.
For,  at  one  time,  the  year  was  suffering  from  drought  through
the  cold  northern  blasts,  at  another  time  the  soil  became  too
luxuriant  from  constant  showers.  Often  did  the  com  disap-
point the  owner,  while  in  the  risinff  blade,  and  the  barren  wild
oat  stood  on  the  soil  choked  up  with  it.  The  cattle,  too,
before  their  time,  used  to  yield  immature  births,  and  oft  did
the  lamb,  at  its  yeaning,  prove  the  death  of  the  ewe.  There
stood  an  ancient  grove,  which  had  for  many  a  year  remained
inviolate  by  the  axe,  left  as  sacred  to  the  Msenalian  deity.  He
used  to  give  responses  in  the  stilly  night*'  to  the  soul  when  at
rest ;  here  does  the  King  Numa  offer  two  sheep  in  sacrifice.
The  first  is  offered  to  Faunus,  the  next  to  gentle  Sleep ;  the
fleece  of  each  is  spread  upon  the  hard  ground.  Twice  is  his
unshorn  head  sprinkled  with  water  of  the  fountain;  twice
does  he  wreathe  his  temples  with  the  beechen  bough.  The
joys  of  love  are  forbidden ;  it  is  not  allowed  to  place  animal
food  on  the  table,  and  no  ring  is  left  upon  the  finger.  Clad
in  a  coarse  garment,  he  places  the  fresh  fleeces  upon  Ins
person,  having  worshipped  the  Deity  in  an  address  in  the  form
prescribed.  In  the  meantime  the  night  comes,  her  gen-
tle brow  crowned  with  the  poppy,  and,  with  her,  escorts  the
shadowy  dreams.  Faunus  comes,  and  with  his  hard  foot
pressing  the  fleeces  of  the  sheep,  he  utters  such  words  as
these  from  the  right  side  of  the  couch  :^  ''  0  king,  thou  must
appease  the  earth  by  the  sacrifice  of  two  cows ;  let  the  death
of  one  yield  two  lives  to  the  sacrifice."  His  rest  ia  broken  by
terror;  Numa  ponders  over  liis  vision,  and  reflects  within
himself  o;i  these  dark  sayings  and  the  hidden  injunctions.
His  wife,  to  the  grove  most  dear,  reUeves  him  in  his  per-
plexity, and  says,  **  Thou  art  asked  for  the  entrails  of  a  preg-

i>  In  the  stiUy  nt^iU.]— Yer.  651.  The  peculiar  name  of  the  deep  of
divinatioii  or  prophecy  with  the  Romans  was  *  incubatio/  and  among  the
Greeks,  ivKoifirioiQ.  It  is  possible  that  from  this  superstition  may  be  de-
riyed  the  not  uncommon  saying  among  us, '  I  will  sleep  on  it,'  used  by  a
person  who  intends  to  give  a  matter  all  due  consideration.

1'  Right  side  qf  the  couch.} — Ver.  664.  This  boded  an  auspidoui  iriiit
of  the  Deity.


y  Google


B.  IT.  670— 687.]  OB,  CALmTDAB  OP  OTID.  163

Mat  COW."  The  entrails  of  a  pregnant  cow  are  offered,  a
year  more  happy  ensnes,  and  the  earth  and  the  cattle  brmg
forth  their  increase.  This  day,  too,  did  Venus  once  com-
mand to  press  on  its  course  with  greater  haste,  and  downwards
she  urged  the  steeds  of  the  hesTcns ;  that,  with  the  utmost
speed,  on  the  following  day,  success  in  war  might  confer  the
titk  of  empire^'*  on  the  young  Augustus.

But  now,  when  the  fourth  li^t^bearing  day  looks  back  on
the  hy-gone  Ides,  on  this  night  do  the  Hyades  yisit  Doris.*'

When  the  third  moon  shall  have  dawned,  after  the  departure
of  the  Hyades,  the  Circus  shall  receive  the  steeds  started  from
^  goal.'*  I  must  teach  the  reason  why  the  she-foxes  let  go,
htve  their  tails  burning  with  fire-brands'^  fastened  to  them.
Cold  was  the  land  at  Carseoli,'^  and  not  fit  for  the  production
of  the  oUve,  but  a  soil  naturally  fertile  in  com.  By  this  way,
TO  I  journeying  to  the  land  of  Hie  PeUgni,  the  country  of  my.
birth,  small,  but  ever  watered  by  the  constant  rains.  I  en-
tered the  well-known  abode  of  an  old  Mend  of  mine ;  Phoebus

^*  The  title  of  wnptrc.]— Vcr.  676.  On  the  16th  of  the  Calends  of
May,  A.U.C.  724,  Augostus  Cssar  was  first  saluted  by  the  senate  with  the
title  of  *  Imperator/  on  aceoant  of  his  victories.  This  honour,  according
to  Tadtos  and  Dio  Cassius,  was  conferred  on  him  twenty-one  times.  It
appears  to  haye  been  distinguished  from  the  word  *  imperator,'  signifying
'emperor/  by  being  placed  after  the  name  of  the  person,  whereas  the  title
of  the  emperor  was  placed  before  it.  The  nearest  English  translation  of
the  word  seems  to  have  been  *  successful  leader.'

**  Hffodei  frieit  i)ow.]— Ver.  679.  On  the  15th  of  the  Calends  of
^>y>  the  Hyades  set  acronyohally.  Doris  was  the  daughter  of  Ooeanus,
the  wife  of  Nereus,  and  the  mother  of  the  Nereides ;  her  name  is  here
"wdtosigmfy'thesea.'

"  The  tteeda  ttarted  from  the  ^wiil]— Ver.  680.  '  Carcere  partitos.*
The  *  career'  was  the  place  where  the  horses  stood,  with  a  cord  stretched
^^fore  them,  on  the  dropping  of  which  they  started.  *  Partitus'  means
°^^cnUy  *  divided,'  that  is  *  from  the  course,'  by  the  cord  just  mentioned.
,  *^  fuming  with  fare-brands.'} — ^Ver.  681-2.  Gower  thus  renders  these
hoes,-*

'  Here  let  one  tell,  why  foxes  on  the  rails
Ron  loose  with  fire-links  at  their  backs  and  tails.'

.  *  Corseoli.]— Ver.  683.  This  was  a  town  of  the  .£qui,  situate  near  the
river  Anio.  Ovid  seems  to  relate  a  custom  that  prevailed  at  Rome,  and  which
'^  been  borrowed  from  a  rustic  ceremony  at  Carseoli,  of  which  he  here
Bvrites  the  origin.  The  reader  cannot  fail  to  call  to  mind  how  the  idea
^  doing  miscld4sf  to  hu  enemies  by  a  similar  contrivance  came  to  the
>>^  of  the  uDfortimate  but  wrong-headed  Nazarite,  Samson.

m2


y  Google


164  THl  FASTI;  [b.  nr.  687— 712.

had  already  taken  the  yoke  from  off  his  exhausted  steeds."
He  was  wont  to  tell  me  many  other  things,  and  this  story  as
well,  by  which  my  present  work  might  be  famished  with  in*
formation,  ''  In  tins  plain,"  said  he,  pointing  to  the  plain,
''a  frn^  peasant  woman,  with  her  hardy  hnsband,  nsed  to
own  a  httle  bit  of  land.  He  nsed  to  work  it  himself,  whether
there  was  occasion  for  the  use  of  the  plough,  or  ^  curved
sickle,  or  the  spade.  She  sometimes  used  to  swe^  out  the
cottage  supported  on  the  buttress,^  and  sometimes  used  to
set  the  eggs  to  be  hatched  by  the  plumage  of  the  parent  bird;
or  now  she  vs  collecting  the  green  mallows,  or  the  white  mush-
room, or  makes  warm  their  humble  hearth  with  the  cheer-
fbl  fire.  And  yet  she  Jlnda  time  and  employs  her  arms  at  the
web  constantly  plied  by  her,  and  thereby^  she  prepares  a  defence
against  the  menaces  of  the  winter.  She  had  a  son,  sportive  in
the  dawn  of  life ;  he  had  added  two  years  to  two  •  lustia.'
He  catches  a  fox  in  a  sloping  comer  at  the  end  of  the  willow
grove :  she  had  carried  off  many  a  bird  from  their  poultry
yard."  He  wraps  the  ciqptive  in  stubble  and  hay,  and  sets  fire
to  her ;  she  escapes  from  his  hands,  as  he  is  applying  the  fire.
Wherever  she  fiies,  she  sets  in  a  blaze  the  fields,  at  that  time
clothed  with  the  harvest;  the  breeze  gave  strength  to  the
all-consuming  flames.  The  occurrence  has  long  wnee  passed
away:  the  recollection  of  it  still  remains;  for,  even  to  this  day,
does  the  law  of  Carseoli  forbid  a  she-fox  when  caught  to  be
suffered  to  live ;  and  that  this  tribe  may  atone  for  their  fault,
they  are  set  on  fire  on  the  festival  of  Ceres,  and  perish  in  the

^*  Hit  exhautted  steeds.-— \er,  687-8.  Gower's  translation  is  carious, —

'  Into  an  old  acquaintance-honse  I  turned,

Just  as  SoFs  coach-horse  had  their  day's  task  journeyed.'

Does  he  mean  to  say  that  his  old  acquaintance  and  '  Sol's  coach-horse'  had

journeyed  together,  or  that  the  house  and  the  coach-horse  had  travelled  in

company  ? It  is  not  clear  why  he  limits  the  sun  to  one  horse  on  thb  day.

»  On  the  buttress.^—Yer,  695.  *  Tibicine/  This  was  a  prop  or
buttress  placed  at  the  side  of  a  house  to  prevent  it  from  fallhig.  It
evidently  implies  here  the  decayed  and  humble  nature  of  the  building.

ai  7%eir  poultr$f.yard,]^YeT.  704.  « Cohortis.'  Cato  tells  us  that  Uie
cohors  was  round,  and,  from  what  Varro  says,  it  appears  to  have  been
covered  over.  On  Rustic  Affairs,  Book  iii.,  c.  3,  s.  6, — '  There  were  two
(*  cohortes,'  or)  receptacles  for  poultry ;  one  leveLwith  the  ground,  where
qocks  and  hens  were  fed ;  the  other  aloft,  in  which  pigeons  inhabited
turrets  or  the  tops  of  a  house.'  Perhaps  the  turrets  and  the  house  were
mimic  ones,  such  ^  as  may  be  seen  at  the  present  day  in  &ndfally  built
dovecotes.


y  Google


B.  IV.  712— 728.] OB,  CALENDAB  OF  OTID.  165

•

very  manner  in  which  the  one  that  I  hare  mentioned  destroyed
the  standing  com.

When  next  the  sajSron-colourcd  mother  of  Memnon  shall
have  come,  upon  her  rosy-coloured  steeds,  to  visit  the  broad
earth,  then  passes  away  the  light  of  the  sun  from  the  leader
of  the  wool-bearing  flock,  him  who  betrayed  Helle.  As  he  de-
parts, a  larger  animal^  oft  used  <u  a  victim,  is  at  hand.  Whe-
ther it  be  a  cow  or  a  bull  it  is  not  easy  to  know ;  the  fore
parts  appear,  the  hinder  parts  are  concealed.  But  whether
this  Constellation  is  a  bull  or  whether  a  cow,  against  the  will
of  Juno,^  it  enjoys  the  reward  of  love.

The  night  has  passed  away,  and  morning  dawns.  I  am
called  to  the  Palilia  -^  and  I  am  not  called  in  vain,  if  genial
Pales  favours  me.  Genial  Pales,  do  thou  favour  the  poet  who
celebrates  thy  shepherd  rites;  if  with  pious  attention  I  describe
thy  festival.  Many  a  time,  in  truth,  have  I  carried  in  my  fiill
hand  the  ashes  of  tiie  calf  and  the  bean  stalks,  the  holy  pur-
gatives. Often,  in  truth,  have  I  leaped  over  the  flres  placed  in
three  rows,  and  the  dripping  bough  of  laureP  has  flung  the

**  A  larger  awtwo/.] — Ver.  716.  As  Mr.  Keigbtley  justly  observes,
this  is  a  bad  periphrasis,  as  being  very  awkwardly  worded.  He  says,
that  now  the  sun  leaves  the  Constellatiou  of  the  Ram,  but  enters  that  of
a  larger  animal,  in  common  use  as  a  victim,  namely,  the  BulL

®  Against  the  wiU  of  jMno.]-i-Ver.  720.  "Whether  it  was  the  bull
^vhidi  carried  off  Europa,  or  the  cow  into  which  lo  had  been  changed,  it
was,  by  reason  of  the  infidelity  of  Jupiter,  equally  an  object  of  aversion  to
Jimo.  The  fore  part  only  of  this  Constellation  is  represented  in  the  signs
of  the  Zodiac  when  depicted.

**  The  Pofiila.]— Ver.  721.  On  the  11th  of  the  calends  of  May,  the
anniversary  of  the  foundation  of  the  dty,  the  festival  of  Pales,  the  God-
dess of  the  shepherds,  was  held.  Some  writers  considered  Pales  as  being
originally  a  male  deity^  the  servant  and  bailiff  of  Jupiter.  The  festival  is
also  by  some  authors  called  *  Parilia,'  as  being  from  *  paiio,^  *  to  bring
forth.'

*  Bough  of  laurel.'] — Ver.  728.  The  olive,  laurel,  rosemary,  or  pine,
were  usually  employed  to  disperse  the  lustral  water.  Gower  thus  trans-
late this  and  the  three  preceding  lines, —

*  I  oft  calves'  ashes  and  bean-straws  have  held,
With  bum'd  purgations  in  a  hand  well  fiU'd ;
Oft  (Hre  the  bone-fires  have  I  tane  three  hops,
And  devir'd  myself  with  holy-water-drops.'
These  rites  doubtlessly  ^originated  in  the  universally  received  notion  of  the
purifying  power  of  fire. Dionysius  says,  that  while  building  the  city,
Romolus  had  fires  kindled,  and  made  his  people  jump  through  them  for
the  purposes  of  expiation.


y  Google


IW  1!HB  VAMTl ;  [b.  it.  728->7&5w

iprinlded  watos.  Xo  /  the  OoddeM  has  bee^  moTed^  and  abe
grants  aucceaa  to  my  undertaking.  My  bark  leaves  ike  dock,
my  sails  now  bare  favoring  breezes.  Proceed^  you  multi-
tude, and  take  the  fumigation  from  tbe  Vestal  altar — ^Vesta
will  erant  it ;  by  tbe  gift  of  Vesta  you  will  be  cleansed.  Tbe
blood  of  a  borse^  will  be  tbe  fumigation,  and  tbe  asbes  of  a
calf ;  and  tbe  third  ingredient  will  be  tbe  stripped  stalk  of  the
bard  bean.  Shepherd,  purify  tbe  full  she^  at  the  beginning
of  twilight;  let  the  water  first  sprinkle  them,  and  let  tbe
broom,  made  of  t^^,  sweep  tbe  ground.  Let  tbe  sbeep-
folds,  too,  be  decorated  with  leares  and  branches  fastened  up,
and  let  tbe  long  garland  shade  tbe  ornamented  doors.  Let  a
blue  smoke  arise  from  tbe  natiye  sulphur,  and  let  tbe  ewe
bleat  aloud  while  rubbed  with  tbe  brimstone  as  it  smokes.
Bum,  too,  rosemary,  and  tbe  pitch  tree,  and  the  Sabine  herbs,
and  let  the  burnt  laurel  craclde  in  tbe  midst  of  the  hearth.
Let  the  basket  of  millet  accompany  tbe  cakes  of  millet ;  this
rustic  Gt>dde8s  takes  especial  pleasure  in  this  kind  of  food.
Bring  on,  too,  the  banquet  and  tbe  milk-pail,  peculiarly  her
own;  and  when  the  banquet  has  been  removed,  appease
Pales,  the  inhabitant  of  tbe  woods,  with  warm  milk,  and  say,
*'  Protect  thou,  alike,  tbe  cattle  and  those  who  tend  tbe  cattle,
and  let  all  harm  fly  afar,  repelled  j&om  my  stalls.  Whether
I  have  fed  them  on  holy  ground,  or  whether  I  have  seated  my-
self beneath  a  sacred  tree,  or  whether  any  ewe  of  mine,  unknown
to  me,  has  browsed  on  tbe  grass  growing  over  tbe  graves,
or  whether  I  have  trespassed  on  a  grove  forbidden  to  be  en-
tered,  or  whether  the  Nymphs  have  been  scared  away  by  my
gaze,  or  whether  the  God,  half  goat  in  form,  or  whether  my
knife  has  despoiled  a  sacred  grove  of  its  shady  bough,  from
which,  the  bundle  of  leaves  has  been  given  by  me  to  my  aihng
ewe,  do  thou  grant  pardon  to  my  error ;  nor  be  it  a  cause  of

«  The  blood  of  a  Aorw.]— Ver.  733.  The  ashes  of  the  calf  had  been
reserved  as  a  *  februa,'  or  purgative,  from  the  Fordiddia,  mentioned  be*
fore  in  line  639.  Festus  tells  us  that  the  horse,  whose  blood  was  most
probably  now  used,  was  slain  in  October.  *  A  horse,  called  the  "  equua
October,"  or  "  October  horse,"  was  slain  in  the  month  of  October  on  the
Campus  Martins,  in  honour  of  Mars,  the  tail  of  which,  streaming  with
blood,  was  carried  with  aU  possible  spieed  to  the  "  Regia." '  This  *  Regia,'
or  ^  palace,'  was  most  probably  the  temple  of  Vesta,  and  the  blood  was
preserved  there  to  be  used  with  the  ashes  of  the  calf  and  the  bean-stalks
on  the  PaHlia.


y  Google


1.  rr.  755-^7790 OB,  OiJiIirDiLB  Of  OVID.  16^7

evil  to  me,  if,  while  the  hail  was  pouring  down,  I  hare  sheltered
my  flock  within  the  rustic  fane  ;  nor  he  it  a  cause  of  harm  to
me  that  I  have  disturhed  the  waters  of  the  ponds.  Pardon
me,  ye  Nymphs,  if  at  any  time  the  motion  of  the  hoof  has
rendered  turhid  the  streams.  Do  thou,  Goddess,  for  me,  ap-
pease the  fountains  and  the  Deities  of  the  fountains ;  do  thou
propitiate  the  Gods  that 'are  dispersed  throughout  all  the
groyes.  Far  he  it  from  us  to  look  upon  the  Dryades,  or  to
behold  the  hathing  places  of  Diana,^  or  Fannus,  while  at  mid-
day he  treads  the  fields.  Drive  disease  afar;  lethoth  men
and  flocks  enjoy  the  hlessing  of  health ;  let,  too^  the  dogs
enjoy  health,  that  watchful  race.  Let  me  not  drive  home  my
sheep  fewer  than  they  were  in  the  morning ;  nor  let  me  grieve
as  I  bring  home  the  fleeces  which  alone  I  have  recovered  from
the  wolf.  Let  evil  hunger  be  afar ;  let  grass  and  leaves  be  in
abundance,  and  water,  both  to  lave  the  Umbs  and  to  serve  for
the  purpose  of  drinking.  May  it  be  my  lot  to  press  the  fuU
udders ;  may  my  cheeses  bring  me  money  home,  and  may  the
twigs,  as  they  lie  far  apart  in  the  sieve,  give  a  passage  to  the
Hqoid  whey ;  may  the  ram  prove  a  good  tup,  may  his  mate
return  the  seed  when  conceived,  and  may  there  be  many  a
lamb  in  my  sheep-folds :  may  wool,  too,  be  produced  that
will  hurt  none  of  my  damsels,  soft,  and  suited  to  even  the  ten-
derest  hands.  Let  that  happen  which  I  pray  for,  and  may  we,
at  the  close  of  the  year,  oflfer  cakes  of  goodly  size  to  Pales,  the
mistress  of  the  shepherds.  With  these  words  must  the  God-
dess be  propitiated :  turning  to  the  east  do  yon  repeat  these
words  three  times,  and  in  the  running  stream  thoroughly  wash
your  hands.  Then  you  may  drink  the  snow-white  milk  and
the  purple  must,  with  the  milk-bowP  set  on  in  the  place  of

^  BatHng  places  of  /Mana.]— Ver.  761.  It  was  a  belief  that  those
who  had  the  misfortune  to  come  where  the  Nymphs  or  Goddesses  of  the
fountains  were  bathing  were  immediately  deprived  of  their  reason.  Gower
thus  translates  this  and  the  next  line, —

'  Nor  nymphs,  nor  Cynthia,  in  her  dstem  play,
Let  us  not  see,  nor  Pan  in  fields  all  day.'

"  With  the  milk  boufL^-^Yer.  779.  Camella.  This  was  a  wooden
bowl  used  in  t)ie  country.  It  is  by  some  supposed  to  have  been  so  called
from  the  Greek  Ka/iirrw,  'to  bend,*  as  being  of  a  curved  form,  either  on
the  top  or  on  the  sides.  The  *  sapa,'  which  is  here  rendered  *  must,'  as
there  is  no  word  in  English  adapted  to  its  meaning,  really  was  the  must


y  Google


168  THB  riSTI ;  [b.  iv.  779— 8(i0.

the  goblet ;  and  afterwards  with  active  foot  fling  your  stroog
Umbs  across  the  burning  heaps  of  the  crackling  stubble*  The
ceremonial  has  now  been  told  by  me;  the  origin  of  that
custom  still  remains  for  me  to  mention.  The  great  number  of
the  cau9es  alleged  makes  me  doubtful,  and  delays  my  under-
taking. Devouring  flame  is  the  purifier  of  all  things,  and
melts  the  dross  from  out  of  the  metals,  therefore  is  it  used  fcnr
purifying  the  ewes  with  the  leader  of  the  flock.  Or  is  it,  be-
cause there  are  two  opjposing  principles  in  all  things^  fire  and
water,  the  discordant  Deities,  that  our  forefathers  united  these
elements,  and  deemed  it  to  be  fitting  to  touch  the  body  with  the
fire  and  the  sprinkled  water  ?  or  is  it,  because  in  these  is  the
origin  of  Ufe ;  the  exile  has  lost"  hU  right  to  enjoy  these  ;  by
these  the  bride  is  wedded;"  that  these  two  things  the^  think
of  primary  importance  f  For  my  part  I  hardly  belieye  it.
Some  there  are,  who  think  that  rhaeton'^  is  represented,
and  the  deluging  waters  of  Deucalion.  Some,  too,  say  that
while  the  shepherds  were  rubbing  stone  against  stone,  a  spark
suddenly  leaped  forth.  The  fint  indeed  was  lost ;  but  the
second  was  caught  on  some  straw.  The  fire  of  Pales  has  this
for  its  alleged  cause  ;  or  did  the  piety  of  JBneas  rather  give
rise  to  this  custom,  to  whom«  when  conquered,  the  fire  gave  a

or  new  wine,  boiled  down  to  one-third  of  its  original  quantity.  This  is
Pliny's  account.  Varro  says  that  it  was  boiled  down  to  one-half,  which
Pliny,  however,  calls  <  defrutum.'  The  mixture  of  milk  and  *  sapa,'  Festos
calls  *  burranica  potio,'  *  red  drink,'  probably  from  the  Greek  word  9rvppdc>
♦  red/.

^  The  esile  has  lott.] — ^Ver.  791.  Banishment,  as  a  punishment,  was
not  known  to  the  Romans,  but  the  same  effect  was  produced  by  the  inter-
diction of  fire  and  water;  by  reason  whereof,  for  the  purpose  of  supporting
life,  a  man  was  obliged  to  leave  his  country.

^  Bride  is  wedded."]  •— Yer.  792.  Fire  and  water  were  placed  at  the  door
by  which  the  newly-married  pair  entered,  and  were  toudied  by  the  bride
and  her  husband  on  entering.

^  Phaeton.'] — ^Ver.  793.  He  was  the  son  of  Apollo  and  Clymene ;
being  taunted  with  not  being  really  the  offispring  of  the  sun,  he  requested
the  loan  of  his  father's  chariot  for  one  day,  which  being  unwillingly  granted,
he  lost  his  control  over  the  horses,  and,  to  prevent  a  general  confli^ration,
Jupiter  struck  him  to  earth  with  his  lightnings.  Deucalion  was  the  son  of
Prometheus ;  when  Jupiter  sent  a  deluge  to  destroy  mankind,  he  and  his
wife  Pyrrha  took  refuge  on  Mount  Parnassus,  or,  according  to  Hyginus,
on  Mount  JStna,  and  escaping,  re-peopled  the  earth  by  throwing  stones
behind  them,  of  which,  those  thrown  by  Deucalion  became  men,  Uiose  by
his  wife,  women.


y  Google


B.  nr.  800— ^32.] OBy  OAIiEirDAB  OF  OTID.  169

harmless  passage  7  This,  however,  is  nearer  to  probabiHty,
that  when  Rome  was  built,  the  Lares  were  ordered  to  be  trans-
feired  to  new  abodes,  and  that  when  changing  their  home
they  set  fire  to  their  rustic  habitations  and  the  cottage  now  no
longer  to  be  used ;  and  that  through  the  flames  leaped  the
catde  and  the  swains,  as  is  still  done  upon  thy  natal  day,  0
Bome.  The  very  occasion  itself  calls  for  an  account  of  its
orig^  from  the  poet.  The  beginning  of  the  City  we  have  now
arriyed  at ;  be  diou  present,  great  Quirinus,  at  the  recital  of
thy  deeds.  Now  had  the  brother  of  Numitor  paid  the  penalty,
and  all  the  shepherd  people  were  under  the  government  of  the
two  chieftains.  They  agreed  to  call  together  the  shepherds,
and  to  build  a  city ;  ar  question  of  doubt  arises,  which  of  the
two  should  lay  the  foundations.  "  There  is  no  need,"  said
Komulus,  '^  of  any  dispute.  Great  is  the  truthfulness  of
birds ;  let  us  make  trial  of  the  omen  q/'the  birds.''  The  thing
proposed  pleases ;  the  one  goes  among  the  crags  of  the  woody
Palatine,  the  other  in  the  morning  ascends  the  heights  of  the
Ayentine.  Bemus  sees  six  birds  in  succession,  his  brother
twehe ;  they  abide  by  their  agreement ;  and  Romulus  has
the  direction  of  the  city.  A  suitable  day  is  chosen,  on  which
he  may  trace  out  the  plan  for  the  walls  with  th^  plough.  The
festival  of  Pales  was  at  hand ;  from  that  time  the  work  is
commenced  upon.  A  trench  is  dug"  down  to  the  firm  clay ;
fruits  are  thrown  into  the  bottom  of  it,  and  some  earth  fetched
from  the  neighbouring  soil.  The  trench  is  filled  again  with
the  earth,  and,  when  filled,  an  altar  is  built  over  it ;  and  the
hearth,  but  newly  erected,  is  graced  with  the  kindled  fire.
After  that,  pressing  the  tail  of  the  plough,  he  traces  out  the
walla  with  a  furrow ;  a  white  cow  wiSi  a  snow-white  bull
hears  the  yoke.  These  were  the  words  of  the  king :  **  Do
thou,  Jupiter,  aid  me  as  I  found  this  city;  and  Mayors
niy  father  and  mother  Veste,  and  all  other,  ye  Deities,  whom
it  is  a  rehgious  duty  to  invoke,  attend;  let  this  work  of
mine  rise  under  your  auspices.  Long  may  be  its  duration^
may  its  sway  be  that  of  an  all-ruling  land ;  and  under  it  may

"  A  trench  is  dug,"] — ^Ver.  821.  The  ceremony  here  mentioned  was
performed  according  to  the  ritual  prescribed  by  the  superstitions  of  Etro-
Tia.  This  trench  or  pit  was  filled  up  again,  and  it  must  not  be  confounded
^th  the  fmrow  made  by  the  plough.  It  was  called  *  mundus/  and  was
supposed  to  form  a  passage  to  the  infernal  regions.


y  Google


1 70  THI  TAWn ;  [b.  it.  832—860.


I


foe  footh  the  rising  and  the  setting  of  the  day/'  Tlius  he
prayed ;  Jupiter  gave  an  omen  by  a  peal  of  thunder  on  the
left  hand,  and  horn  the  heavens  on  the  left  the  lightnings
were  horled.  Rejoicing  in  the  omen,  the  citizens  laid  the
foundations,  and  in  a  short  space  of  time  there  stood  the  new
wall.  Celer  urged  on  the  work,  whom  Romulus  himself  had
called,  and  had  said  to  him,  ''  Celer,  be  this  the  task  of  thy
care,  that  no  one  pass  over  the  walls  or  the  furrow  that  has
been  made  with  the  plough :  him  who  dares  to  do  so,  put  to
death."  Remus,  in  ignorance  of  this,  begins  to  scofif  at  walls
so  lowly,  and  to  say,  "  Shall  the  people  receive  any  protection
from  these  ?"  And  without  pausing,  he  leaps  over  them.
Celer  strikes  him  down"  with  a  pick-axe  for  his  daring;
streaming  with  blood  he  presses  tne  hard  ground.  When
the  King  is  informed  of  this,  he  swallows  down  the  tears
that  inwardly  arise,  and  keeps  his  sorrow  shut  up  with-
in his  breast.  He  is  unwilling  openly  to  weep,  and  is  care-
ful to  set  an  example  of  fortitude,  and  "With  like  results,"
says  he,  "may  the  foe  pass  over  my  walls."  Yet  he  performs
his  obsequies;  he  then  is  no  longer  able  to  restrain  his
tears,  and  the  afiOiiction  which  he  had  concealed  becomes  mani-
'fest.  He  imprints  the  last  kisses  on  him  laid  out  on  the  bier,
and  he  cries,  "  Farewell^  my  brother !  snatched  firom  me  by
no  will  of  mine."  And  then  he  anointed  the  corpse  about  to
be  committed  to  the  flames;  what  he  did,  the  same  did
Faustulus  and  Acca  with  her  sad  locks  dishevelled.  Then  did
the  Quirites  (though  not  yet  become  entitled  to  that  name)
bewail  the  youth ;  and  the  last  fire  was  applied  amid  laments
to  the  funeral  pile.**  A  city  arises,  (who  then  could  have
believed  this  tale  from  any  one  ?)  destined  one  day  to  place
her  conquering  foot  upon  all  lands.  Mayst  thou  hold  sway
over  the  universe,  and  mayst  thou  ever  be  under  the  rule  of
mighty  Csesar ;  still  contmue  to  have  more  and  more  chiefs

^  Strikes  him  down."} — Yer.  843.  Eusebius  says  that  Remus  was  killed
by  Fabius,  an  officer  under  Romulus.  Other  writers  represent  that  he
was  killed  by  Romulus  himself,  while  some  say  that  he  was  slain  in  a  po-
pular tumult.

**  The  funeral  pife.]— Ver.  856.  Remus  was  buried  in  a  spot  caQed
Remuria,  on  the  Palatine  Hill,  where  he  had  taken  his  augury.  It  is  said
that  there  was  a  dispute  among  the  citizens  whether  the  city  should  be
called  Roma,  Rema,  or  Remura.  The  Romans  were  not  called  by  the
name  of  Quirites  till  after  they  had  been  united  with  the  Sabines.


y  Google


S.1T.  MO— 873:] OB,  CXLESDXSL  CfF  OTW.  171

i^that  name,  and  oft  as,  in  the  subdued  world,  thou  shalt  stand
erect,  may  all  realms  be  lower  than  thy  shoulders.

Pales  hMB  been  sung  by  me.  I,  too,  shall  now  sing  of  the
Yinalia :"  but  between  the  two  festivaU  one  day  intervenes.
Bo,  ye  damsels  of  the  town,  worship  the  deity  of  Venus;  yery
£iTourable  is  Venus  to  the  gains  of  the  prostitntes.**  Pray,
with  an  offering  of  firankincense,  for  beauty  and  the  pubhc
&your :  pray  for  the  arts  of  aUurement,  and  for  words  well
smted  to  merriment :  offer  to  your  mistress  the  pleasing  spear-
mint, with  her  own  myrtle,  and  the  chaplets  of  bulrushes
woven  with  the  enwreathed  roses.  Now  it  is  proper  that  the
teII^>le  adjoining  to  the  CoUinian  gate  should  be  resorted  to.
from  the  hill  of  Sicily*^  does  it  derive  its  name. And  when

*•  The  Finafia.] — ^Ver.  863.  There  has  been  oonsiderahle  discassioii
tmong  the  critics  whether  this  festiyal  was  celebrated  in  honour  of  Jupiter
or  Venus  alone.  The  truth  seems  to  be  that  it  was  in  honour  of  both
Deities,  as  Plutarch  says  (Rom.  Quest.  45),  that  wine  was  on  this  day
poured  fortli  in  honour  of  Venus,  whence  the  festival  received  the  name  o^
Veneralia,  and  among  the  Greeks  of  i^poSiffta.  Ovid,  too,  says  (in  lines
898-9)  that  Jupiter  claims  it  as  his  festival.  Varro  says  that  the  Vinalia
was  celebrated  in  honour  of  Jupiter,  and  not  Venus.  But  there  was  a
festival  called  the  *  Vinalia  rustica/  or  •  rural  Vinalia,'  celebrated  on  the
19th  of  August,  and  it  is  of  that  that  Varro,  in  all  probability,  speaks.
Oyid  may  have  possibly  confused  the  characteristics  of  the  two  festivals.
The  Vinalia  were  so  called  from  *  vinum,'  *  wine.'

'  *  Gains  qf  pro8tUutet.']—YeT.  866.  *  Professarum.'  When  a  woman
at  Home  intended  to  adopt  the  calling  of  a  prostitute,  she  professed,  or
dechffed,  her  intention  of  so  doing  before  the  ediles.  She  was  then  en.
tered  among  the  *  Togatie,'  or  wearers  of  the  *  toga,'  and  was  no  longer
allowed  to  wear  the  *  stola,'  or  long  robe  of  the  matrons,  and  became  ex-
empt from  the  laws  against  adultery.  Females  of  patrician  and  equestrian
nok  were  not  allowed  to  enter  in  the  ranks  of  the  *  Professae/  even  if  they
had  the  inclination  to  attain  a  distinction  of  so  unenviable  a  nature.  This
method  of  enrolment  and  supervision,  as  business-like  as  it  is  unbecoming,
prevails  in  France,  Belgium,  and  other  countries  on  the  continent  even  to
the  present  day.

^  ThehiUqf  Sicily.l-^Ver,  872.  That  is,  Mount  Eryx,  from  which
Venus  derived  her  epithet  of '  Erycina.'  The  temple  at  the  Collinian  gate
iras  dedicated  a.u.c.  571.  Syracuse  was  not  taken  by  M.  Claudius  Mar-
cus till  thirty-one  years  afterwards ;  so  that  the  poet  is  guilty  of  an
anachronism  in  attributing  the  dedication  to  that  event.  But  there  was
another  tensile  to  Venus  Erydna,  built  on  the  Capitoline  Hill  by  tiie
direction  of  the  Sibylline  books,  three  years  after  the  taking  of  Syracuse ;
and  it  is  most  probably  to  that,  that  the  poet  intended  to  make  allusion^
^kvmi  Eryx  was  near  Drepanum,  on  the  west  coast  of  Sicily.  On  it,  thtoe
^aa  a  splendid  temple  of  Venus,  the  foundation  of  which  was  attributed
to  ^eas  and  his  followers.


y  Google


1 72  THX  riwn ;  [b.  tv.  873— 9M.

ClaudioB'*  gained  possession  of  the  Syracose  of  Arethnsa,  thee
too,  0  Eryz,  he  conquered  in  war.  Venus  was  transferred
thence,  according  to  the  verse  of  the  long-liyed  Sibyl,  and  pre-
ferred to  be  worshipped  in  the  city  of  her  descendants.  Why,
then,  they  call  the  feast  of  Venus  by  the  name  of  Vinalia,  you
now  ask ;  and  why  that  day  is  sacred  to  Joye  ?  There  was  a
war  to  decide  the  question  whetker  Tumus  or  iBneas  should  be
the  son-in-law  of  tlie  Latian  Amata.^  Tumus  solicited  the  aid
of  Etruria.  Mezentius  was  famed,  and  fierce  when  once  he  had
taken  up  arms:  mighty  as  he  was  on  horseback,^  eyen
mightier  was  he  on  foot.  Him,  the  Rutulians  and  Tumus  en-
deavoured to  unite  to  their  side.  On  the  other  hand,  thus  the
Etrurian  chieftain  replied :  ''  My  bravery  costs  me  no  small
price,  I  call  these  scars  of  mine  to  witness ;  this  armour,  too,
which  oft  have  I  had  sprinkled  with  my  own  blood.  Do
thou  who  seekest  my  aid  divide  with  me  the  next  new
wine  from  thy  vats — no  vety  great  reward. I  delay  not  to

§'ve  my  aid.  For  you  it  is  to  pay;  to  conquer  is  my  part,
ow  would  iGneas  wish  that  this  price  had  been  refused
to  me  ?''  The  Rutulians  assented :  Mezentius  puts  on  his
armour;  ^neas  arms  too,  and  addresses  Jove  in  prayer:
"The  vintage  of  my  foe  has  been  promised  to  the  Etru-
rian king,  0  Jove !  Thou  shalt  qui^  the  new  \nne  firom
the  branch  of  the  Latian  vine !"  The  better  vow  prevails;  the
huge  Mezentius  faUs,  and  beats  the  ground  with  his  scornful
breast;  autumn  arrives,  stained  with  the  trodden  grapes;
the  wine  owed  to  him  is  given  to  Jupiter,  well  deserving  of  it.
Hence  the  day  is  called  Vmalia. Jupiter  claims  it  as  his  own»

"  C/aiM^iiM.]— Ver.  874.  M.  Claudius  Marcellns  was  the  first  Roman
general  that  defeated  Hannibal.  He  besieged  Syracuse,  in  Sicily,  and  took
it  while  the  inhabitants  were  celebrating  the  festival  of  Diana,  in  the  night
time.  Again  engaging  with  Hannibal,  he  was  killed  in  an  ambuscade  in
his  sixtieth  year,  and  his  fifth  consulship.  He  was  the  third  person
who  gOTcmed  the  *  Spolia  Opima,'  having,  after  the  first  Punic  war,  de-
feated the  Gauls,  and  slain,  with  his  own  hand,  their  king  Yiridomarus,
A.u.c.  530.

»  The  Latian  Amata."] — ^Ver.  879.-  She  was  the  wife  of  Latinus,  king
of  Latium,  and  the  mother  of  Lavinia,  whom  JSneas  married  after  his  con-
quest of  Tumus.  This  war,  including  the  alliance  of  Tumus  and  Mezen-
tius, the  King  of  Etruria,  and  the  death  of  them  both,  forms  the  subject
of  the  last  six  books  of  the  i£neid  of  Virgil.

**  On  horseback,'] — ^Ver.  882.  The  passage,  *  Et  vel  equo  magnus,  Tel
pede  major  erat,'  will  either  admit  of  the  translation  above  given,  or  it
may  mean  *  powerful  was  he  in  horse,  and  still  more  so  in  foot.'


y  Google


B,  rr.  900—916.] OE, CALSITDAB  OP  OTID.  173

and  takes  pleasure  in  its  being  in  the  number  of  his  festi-
Tals.«

When  April  shall  have  but  six  days  to  remain,  the  season  of
die  spring  will  be  in  the  midst  of  its  course ;  and  in  yain  will
you  look  for  the  Ram  of  Helle,  daughter  of  Athamas ;  the
rains  now  show  themselves ;  the  Dog,  too,  rises/^  On  this
day,  as  I  was  returning  to  Rome  from  Nomentum,^  a  proces-
sion, all  arrayed  in  white,  met  me  in  the  middle  of  the  way.
The  Flamen  was  going  to  the  sacred  grove  of  the  ancient  God-
dess Rubigo,^  about  to  offer  in  the  flames  the  entrails  of  a
dog  and  those  of  a  sheep.  Forthwith  I  approached  him,  that  I
inight  not  be  unacquainted  with  this  ceremonial:  and  thy
Flamen,  O  Q\iirinus,  gave  utterance  to  these  words :  "  Corrod-
ing^ Robigo,  do  thou  spare  the  blade  of  the  com,  and  let  the
smooth  top  quiver  on  tiie  surface  of  the  ground.  Do  thou
permit  the  crops,  nourished  by  the  favoring  seasons  of  the
heavens,  to  grow  apace  until  they  are  ready  for  the  sickle.
Thy  power  is  not  harmless  in  its  exercise.  The  grain  which
thou  hast  marked  as  thine  own,  the  sorrowing  husbandman

f  The  Dog,  toOf  rises.']— Yer.  904.  This  is  not  the  fact,  as  theConstel-
Istion  Cimis  sets  on  the  7th  of  the  Calends  of  May.  One  Manuscript
reads,  *  Occidit  atque  Canis/  *  And  the  Dog  sets/  which  would  be  coirect.
On  this  day  was  the  acronychal  setting  of  the  Ram.

*  NomerUum.'] — ^Ver.  905.  This  was  a  town  of  the  Sabine  country,
to  the  east  of  Rome ;  the  road  to  it  lay  through  the  Viminal  gate.

*  Afwient  Goddess  JRubigo.'] — ^Ver.  907.  Rubigo,  or  Robigo,  was  t^
Goddess,  whose  name  signifies  '  rust/  or  *  mildew.  Her  festival  was  the
*  Robigalia,'  here  mentioned.  It  was  celebrated  by  Numa,  to  propitiate
her  at  this  season  in  favour  of  the  growing  crops,  to  ensure  their  protec-
tion against  blight,  smut,  and  mildew.  Some  writers  call  the  Divinity,.
Bobigus,  making  him  a  God.  The  temple  was  in  the  Via  Nomentana,
fiear  the  Porta  Catularia.  Gower  thus  renders  this  and  the  following  line : — ■

*  A  flamen  into  Rust's  old  grove  did  hie,
The  entrails  of  a  dog  and  sheep  to  Me.'

Fcstus  says,  that  at  the  *  Porta  Catularia,'  or  *  Dog's  Gate,'  (through
^luch  the  Nomentan  road  ran),  *  they  used  to  propitiate  the  Dog-star,
which  is  injurious  to  com,  with  the  sacrifice  of  rusty-coloured  or  tawny
<^gSi  in  order  that  the  com  might  ripen  free  from  disease/  He,  perhaps
m^itt  to  gay  that  at  the  setting  of  the  Dog-star  this  sacrifice  took  place,
ss  in  another  passage  he  himseft  tells  us  that  the  sacrifice  was  made  to  the
GodRobigus.

^  **  Corrodinff.'] — ^Vcr.  911.  *  Robigo/  mildew,  or  property  meal-dew,
infects  com  in  the  shape  of  a  red  powder,  of  a  glutinous  nature,  which,
^ting  into  it,  gives  it  a  rough,  leprous  appearance


y  Google


174  THE  FASTI;  [b.  IV.  916— 944.

reckons  in  the  number  of  the  lost.  Not  so  injurions  to  the
com  are  the  winds  or  the  showers ;  nor  is  it  so  pallid  when
consumed  by  the  frost,  rigid  as  marble,  as,  when  with  his
warmth,  the  sun  makes  hot  the  moistened  stalks ;  in  such
case,  dread  Goddess,  is  thy  wrath  exercised.  Spare,  I  pray
thee,  and  keep  thy  rough  hands  ham  the  crops  ;  injure  not
our  fields :  to  possess  .the  power  of  inflicting  injury  is  enough :
seize  not  in  thy  embrace  the  tender  crops,  but  rather  the  luurd
iron,  and  do  thou  first  destroy  that  wluch  has  the  power  of
destroying  others.  More  to  our  benefit  wilt  thou  corrode  the
swords  and  the  hurtful  weapons ;  them  we  want  not :  the
world  is  at  peace.  Let  the  rakes  and  the  hardy  mattocks,  and
the  crooked  ploughshare,  the  implements  of  the  country,  be
furbished :  let  rust  stain  arms ;  and  let  some  one  as  he  strives
to  draw  his  sword  from  the  scabbard,  find  that  it  has  become
fSast  by  the  lapse  of  time.  But  hurt  not  the  com,  and  let  the
husbandman  be  ever  enabled  to  pay  his  vows  to  thee,  keep-
ing thyself  afar."  He  had  spoken ;  in  his  right  hand  hung  a
towel,  with  a  loose  nap,  and  there  was  a  censer  of  frankincense,
with  a  bowl  of  wine.  The  frankincense  and  wine  he  placed
on  the  altars,  and  the  vitals  of  a  sheep ;  the  filty  entrails,  too
(of  this  I  was  a  witness),  of  an  unclean  dog .  Then  the
Flamen  says  to  me,  "  You  ask,"  /or,  in  fact,  I  had  asked,
"  why  so  strange  a  victim  is  offered  in  sacrifice  ?  understand
the  reason ;  there  is  a  Dog  ;**  they  call  him  the  Icarian,  and
as  his  Constellation  rises,  the  parched  earth  is  athirst,  and  the
corn  is  burnt  up.  Instead  of  the  dog  of  the  Constellation,  this
dog  is  placed  on  the  altar,  and  it  has  no  other  reason  than  its
name  why  it  should  thus  be  put  to  death  V

When  the  sister  of  Titan,  having  left  the  brother  of  the
Phrygian  Assaracus,"  has  thrice  raised*^  her  beams  over  the

«  There  it  a  do^.]— Ver.  939.  Icarus,  the  father  of  Erigone,  being
slain  by  some  intoxicated  shepherds,  his  dog  Maera,  returning  home,  drew
his  daughter  by  her  robe  to  where  her  father  lay.  She  died  of  grief,  and
the  dog  perished  of  hunger.  In  compassion,  Bacchus  raised  him  to  the
tikies,  calling  Icarius  by  the  name  of  Bootes,  Erigone  the  Virgin,  and
Maera,  Canicula,  *  the  Dog-star,'  or  Procyon.  '

*  Brother  of  the  Phrygian  Aaaaraeus.'} — Ver.  943.  The  poet  alludes
to  Tithonus,  the  husband  of  Aurora,  but  by  mistake  he  has  put  Assaracus
in  the  fdace  of  Priam,  as  Priam  was  the  brother  of  Tithonus,  and  Assa-
racus was  their  great  uncle.

*7  Has  thrice  rai«cd.]— V«r.  944.  The  Floralia  began  on  the  fourth  of
the  Calends  of  May.


y  Google


8.1V.  944—954.] OE, OiXIKDAB  OF  OTID.  175

boundless  world,  the  GK>dde88  comes,  wreathed  with  the  Tarie-
gated  chaplets  of  a  thousand  flowers  :  the  stage,  thetiy  admits
8ie  practice  of  a  looser  merriment.  The  festivaL  of  Flora  ends
on  the  Calends  of  May ;  then  will  I  return  to  it :  at  this  time  a
greater  work  engages  me.

Vesta  claims  a  day ;  on  this  day  Vesta  was  received  within
a  kindred  threshold.**  Thus  did  the  just  Senators  appoint.
Phcebus**  has  a  part ;  to  Vesta  was  yielded  a  second  part.
What  remains  from  them,  AugrtBtus  hunself  possesses.  Last
for  ever,  ye  laurels  of  the  Palatium,^  and  long  may  the
house  stand,  its  front  garlanded  with  oak.  Three  everlast-
ing Gods  does  this  one  house  contain.

f  A  kindred  thre8hold,^—Ver.  949.  The  Pontifex  Maximus  being  re-
qiuied  to  live  in  a  public  buttding,  and  Augustus  filling  tiiat  office,  he  gave
a  part  of  the  Palatium,  where  he  resided,  to  the  service  of  the  Goddess,
and  on  this  day,  by  a  decree  of  the  Senate,  her  sacred  fire  was  remoyed
thither.  The  threshold  is  called  kindred,  in  the  same  sense  in  which
we  have  bef<»e  seen  the  poet,  in  his  flattery,  finding  some  afilnity  between
Vesta,  a  Trojan  deity,  and  the  Julii  (among  whom  Augustus  was  adopted)
descended  from  ^neas.

*■  Phabus.'i — ^^^'  ^^1-  "^  temple  was  dedicated  to  Apollo  by  Au-
gnstus,  probably  on  this  day,  on  the  Palatine  Hill.  It  contained  a  public
hbnay,  where  the  poets  used  to  recite  their  compositions,  and  where  the
wwks  oi  the  Roman  authors  were  preserved.

"  The  PalaiiumJ]—Yer.  953.  The  poet  aUudes  to  the  civic  crown  of
oak-leaves,  which,  as  has  been  before  stated,  the  Senate  ordered  to  be
suspended  before  the  palace  of  Augustus  between  two  branches  of  laurel,
symbolical  oi  the  preservation  of  the  Uvea  of  the  people  by  Augustas,  and
of  his  tnnmphs  over  bis  enemies.


y  Google


176  THE  FASTI ;  [b.  v.  1—5.


BOOK  THE  FIFTH.


CONTENTS.


Thk  tbree  conflicting  opinions  on  the  origin  of  tbe  name  of  the  month  of
May,  Yer.  1 — 110.  The  rising  of  the  Constellation  of  the  Goat,  and
its  history,  111— '128.  The  Lares  Pnestites,  and  the  erection  of  their
altar,  429—146. The  temple  of  Bona  Dea,  147—158. The  wind

-  Argestes,  and  the  rising  of  the  Hyades,  with  their  history,  159 — 182.
The  Floial  games,  their  origin,  and  the  worship  of  the  Goddess  Flora,  at
Bome,  with  the  story  of  the  birth  of  Mars,  183 — ^371.  The  rising  of
the  Constellation  of  the  Centaur,  and  the  story  of  Charon,  379—414.
The  rising  of  the  Lyre  and  the  Scorpion,  415 — 418.  The  nocturnal
celebration  of  the  Lemuria,  and  the  burial  of  Remus,  419 — 492.  The
setting  of  Orion,  his  birth  and  translation  to  heaven,  493—544.  The
temple  of  Mars  Ultor ;  the  slaughter  of  Crassns ;  and  the  recoyery
from  the  Parthians  of  the  Roman  standards,  545 — 598.  The  rising
of  the  Pleiades,  and  the  beginning  of  summer,  599 — 602.  The  rismg
of  the  Constellation  of  the  Bull,  with  its  origin,  603 — 620.  Figures
made  of  rushes  are  thrown  in  the  river  Tiber ;  the  arrival  of  Hercules
in  Latium,  621 — 662.  The  hymn  to  Mercury ;  his  festival ;  the  trades-
man's prayer  to  him,  663 — 692.  The  Sun  enters  the  Constellation
Gemini ;  its  origin ;  the  combat  of  Castor  and  Pollux  with  Lynceus,  >
693 — 720.  The  Agonalia  repeated ;  the  setting  of  the  Dog  Star,  721—
724.  The  TubQustria,  or  purification  of  the  trumpets,  725,  726.  The
four  initials  in  the  Calendar,  727, 728.  The  temple  of  Fortuna  Publica,
729—732.  The  setting  of  Bootes,  and  the  rising  of  the  Hyades,
733—734.

YoTT  inquire  for  what  reason  I  suppose  that  its  name  was
giyen  to  the  month  of  May.  My  answer  is,  the  cause  has
not  been  quite  clearly  ascertained  by  me.^  Just  as  the  tra-
yeller  comes  to  a  stand,  and,  in  his  uncertainty,  knows  not
which  way  to  go  when  he  sees  a  road  in  every  direction ;  so,

1  Ascertained  by  me,'] — Yer.  1, 2.  Gower  thus  translates  these  lines,—

'  Ton  ask  me  whence  this  month  is  called  May.
I  know  not  well  what  reason  down  to  lay.'


y  Google


B.  V.  5— -23.] "  OE, OALBNDAB  OF  OVID.  177

because  it  is  in  my  power  to  assign  different  reasons,  I  know
not  in  which  direction  to  turn,  and  the  very  abundance  of
them  is  a  difficulty  to  me.  Tell  me,  ye  who  hold  possession
of  the  springs  of  Aganippian  Hippocrene,'  the  pleasing  track
of  the  steed  of  Medusa.'  The  Goddesses  differed  on  the  point.
Polyhymnia*  begins,  the  first  of  them  to  speak ;  the  others
keep  ffllence,  and  mark  her  sayings  in  their  minds.  After  the
state  of  Chaos,  when  first  the  three  elements*  were  given  to
the  world,  and  the  whole  universe  receded  into  new  forms,
the  earth,  by  its  own  weight,  tended  downwards,  and  drew
after  it  the  seas  ;  whereas  its  Ughtness  buoyed  up  the  sether
to  the  highest  position.  Thou  too,  0  Sun,  together  with  the
stars,  weighed  down  by  no  gravity,  and  you,  ye  steeds  of  the
Moon,  sprung  forth  in  a  direction  upward.  But  neither  did
the  earth  for  any  length  of  time  yield  to  the  heaven,  nor  the
rest  of  the  stars  to  the  sun ;  there  was  an  equahty  of  honour
among  them.  Ofttimes  did  any  one  of  the  lower  class  of  the
Deities  dare  to  sit  on  the  throne,  which  thou,  0  Saturn,  was
wont  to  occupy :  then  any  stranger  God  reclined  side  by  side
^th  Ocean,  and  Tethys  was  received  many  a  time  in  the
lowest  place  ;®  until,  at  length,  Honour  and  Reverence,  with

*  Aganippian  HippocreneJ] — Ver.  7.  The  author  seems  here  to  confuse
tke  streams  of  Aganippe  and  Hippocrene,  which  were  distinct  fountains  near
Mount  Helicon,  in  Boeotia.  Pausanias  tells  us  that  Aganippe  was  on  the
left  of  the  ascent  to  the  grove  of  the  Muses,  on  Mount  Hdicon,  and  that
Hippocrene  was  situate  twenty  stadia  beyond  the  grove.  As  the  poet  dis-
tinguishes them  in  the  fifth  Book  of  his  Metamorphoses,  1.  132,  we  may
presume  that  he  here  gives  the  epithet  to  the  one  from  the  other,  on  ac-
count of  their  contiguity.

*  Steed  of  Medusa.] — Ver.  8.  Pegasus ;  who  was  fabled  to  have  sprung
fipom  the  blood  of  Medusa,  when  slain  by  Perseus.  These  fountains
were  sakl  to  have  sprung  from  the  ground  when  struck  by  the  hoof  of


Poh/kymnia.'] — Ver.  9.  She  was  the  muse  of  lyric  poetry.  All  the
Greek  poets  call  her  IloXvftvia,  or  *  Polumnia,'  meaning  *  she  of  the  many
songs/ Ovid  and  Horace  introduce  the  additional  letters  into  her  name.

^  Tke  three  e^emento.]— Ver.  11.  In  the  first  Book,  1.  lOa,  and  in  the
Metamorphoses,  he  mentions  four  elements.  Here  he  looks  upon  aether
and  air  as  together  constituting  but  one  element.

•  I'he  lowest  place. Ver.  21,  22. Gower  thus  renders  these  lines, —

*  Each  noteless  deity  would  by  Ocean  old
Sit  cheek  by  jouL Oft  Tethys  was  conteoU'd.'

Allusion  is  here  made  to  the  seats,  or  rather  the  couches,  on  which  the


y  Google


1 7B  THE  FASTI ;  [b.  v.  23 — 48.

mild  aspect,  placed  their  bodies  on  the  nuptial  couch,  sanc-
tioned by  the  laws.  Hence  did  Majesty  spring,  she  who  rules
the  nniverse,  and  of  full  growth  was  she  on  the  very  day  on
which  she  was  produced.  She  delayed  not;  she  took  her  seat
on  high  in  the  midst  of  Olympus,  resplendent  with  gold,  and
conspicuous  with  purple  plaited  robe.  Together  with  her  sit
Modesty  and  Awe  ;  you  might  behold  every  Deity  assuming
an  aspect  in  conformity  with  hers.  Forthwith  respect  for
high  rank  take  possession  of  their  minds;  dignity  is  now
valued,  and  each  is  no  longer  occupied  by  self-complaisance.
This  state  of  things  remained  in  heaven  for  many  years,  until,
by  the  decree  of  the  Fates,  the  oldest  of  the  Gods  was  removed
from  the  topmost  place  of  heaven.  The  Earth  brought  forth
her  savage  offspring,  huge  monsters,  giants,  who  would  dare
to  attempt  an  entrance  into  the  palace  of  Jove.  A  thousand
hands  she  gave  to  them,  and  serpents  in  place  of  legs ;  and
she  said,  "  Take  up  your  arms  against  the  great  Grods.'*
These  were  preparing  to  pile  up  the  mountains  to  the  highest
stars,  and  to  provoke  the  mighty  Jupiter  to  battle.  Jove,
hurling  his  thunderbolts  from  the  heights  of  heaven,  over-
turned the  vast  piles  on  those  who  had  formed  them.^  De-
fended by  these  arms  the  Majesty  of  the  Gods  still  remains,
and /rojw  that  time  abides  in  security.  Next  to  Jove  she  sits  ;
she  is  his  most  trusty  guardian,  and  without  violence  she  se-
cures the  sceptre  to  his  sway.  She  came  on  earth,  too;
Romulus  and  Numa^  worshipped  her ;  afterwards  the  others,

ancients  reclined,  when  taking  their  meals.  The  lowest  was  esteemed  the
least  honourahle  place*

'  Those  who  had  formed  them,"] — ^Ver.  41, 42.  The  poet  here  refers  to
the  war  of  the  giants  against  the  Gods  of  heaven.  This  story  has  been
thought  by  some  to  have  been  the  corruption  of  a  tradition  of  the  fall  of
the  angels  from  their  blessed  state ;  by  others,  it  is  supposed  to  bear  refe-
rence to  the  heaping  pile  upon  pile  in  the  construction  of  the  tower  of
Babel. Gower  thiis  translates  these  lines, —

*  He  from  his  tower  discharged  his  thunder  straight.
And  on  th*  invaders'  pates  whclm'd  that  vast  weight.'

'  Romulus  and  NumaJ] — Ver.  48.  The  poet  means  merely  to  assign
as  the  first  reason  for  the  name  of  May,  *  Maius,*  that  it  was  derived  from
this  goddess,  *  Majestas,'  whose  name  in  the  early  days  of  the  Latin  tongue
would  be  spelt  and  written  *  Maiestas.'  The  beauty  of  the  story  is  worthy
of  far  more  commendation  than  the  ingenuity  of  the  suggestion  founded
on  it.


y  Google


B.T.  48— 76.]  OB, CAULISDAB,  OE  OTID.  179

cKk  in  his  oivn  day.  She  invests  fathers  and  mothers  with
dutiful  respect ;  she  is  the  companion  of  hoys  and  maidens.
She  adds  <Hgnity  to  the  fasces  when  granted,  and  to  tilie  curole
chair  of  ivory;  she  triumphs,  standing  aloft,'  the  horses
wreathed  with  garlands.''  Polyhymnia  had  ended  her  words  ;
Clio  and  Thal^  skilled  at  the  sounding  lyre,  approved  of
what  she  said.  Urania^**  took  up  the  discourse;  all  kept
silence,  and  no  voice,  save  hers,  covld.  he  heard.  In  days  of
yore,  great  was  the  respect  of  the  hoary  head,  and  the  wrinkles
of  old  age  were  honoured.  The  youths  undertook  the  toils  of
Mars  and  the  undaunted  warfare ;  and  in  defence  of  their
Gods,  they  remained  at  their  posts.  That  age,  which  was
feebler  in  strength  and  useless  in  bearing  arms,  often  by  its
counsel  assisted  its  country.  Nor  then  was  the  Senate-house
open  to  a  citizen  but  in  ms  latter  years,  and  the  Senate  was
the  placid  synonyme  of  old  age.  The  old  man  gave  ordinances
to  the  people,  and  by  definite  laws  the  age  was  fixed  at  which
this  honour  should  be  obtained.  In  those  days  the  old  man
walked  between  the  youths,"  they  not  denying  mm  the  honour;
and  if  he  had  but  one  companion,  he  took  the  inner  place.
Who  in  those  days,  in  the  presence  of  an  old  man,  would  dare
to  utter  words  worthy  of  a  blush  ?  Old  age  conferred  the
right  to  reprimand.  Romulus  saw  this,  and  he  called  the
selected  persons,  *  Fathers.'  To  these  was  referred  the  govern-
ment of  the  new-built  city.  From  this  circumstance  I  am  in-
clined to  think  that  the  elders  gave  their  name  to  May,  and
consulted  the  honour  of  their  old  age.  It  is  possible,  too,  that
Numitor  may  have  said,  "  Grant,  Romulus,  this  month  to  the
aged,"  and  that  the  grandson  did  not  refuse  his  grandsire.

'  Standing  alofi."] — ^Ver.  52.  The  meaning  is,  that  she  attends  the  ge-
neral in  his  triuinph,  when  he  stands  aloft  in  his  chariot  drawn  by  horses
crowned  with  garlands.

^®  Urania,] — ^Ver.  55.  Clio  presided  over  history;  Thalia  was  the
pttroness  of  comedy ;  and  Urania  was  the  muse  of  astronomy.  She  gi^es
it  as  her  opinion  that  as  June  was  so  called  from  the  'jmiiores,*  the
younger  men,  so  May  received  its  name  from  the  '  majores/  or  *  maiores/
the  aged.

**  Between  the  youths.']— Yer,  67.  The  middle  was  deemed  the  most
honourable  place  in  walking,  the  persons  on  either  side  being  said  *  claudere
latera,'  *  to  shut  in  the  sides.'  Maturity  of  years  was  at  an  early  period
conudered  as  an  indispensable  qualification  for  office.  By  the  law  of
Viliius,  the  age  for  the  Quaestorship  was  31 ;  for  the  .£dUeship,  37 ;  the
Pnetonhip,  40  ;  and  the  Consulship,  43  years.

k2


y  Google


180  THE  FASTI;  [B.V.  77— 101.

June,  too,  is  at  hand,  so  called  from  the  name  of  the  Juniors,
the  successor  of  this  month,  and  no  small  guarantee  for  the
honours  of  the  month  before  it/'  Then  did  Calliope,  first  of
her  party,**  thus  begm,  her  careless  tresses  wreathed  in  ivy,
"  In  former  times.  Ocean  had  wedded  Tethys,'*  daughter  of
Titan,  who  encircles  the  earth  whichever  way  it  extends,  witii
her  flowing  waters.  Pleione,  bom  of  this  marriage,  is  united
to  Atlas,  supporter  of  the  skies,  and  beccmies  the  mother  of
the  Pleiades.  Of  these,  Maia  is  said  to  have  surpassed  her
sisters  in  beauty,  and  to  have  been  embraced  by  tiie  mighty
Jove.  She  brought  forth  on  the  brow  of  Cyllene,  dad  with
the  cypress,  him  who  with  his  winged  feet  cleaves  through
the  sethereal  path.  Him  the  Arcadians,  and  the  rapidly
flowing  Ladon,  and  the  mighty  Msenalus  duly  worship,  a  land
believed  to  be  more  ancient*^  than  the  moon.  Evander,  an
exile  from  Arcadia,  had  come  to  the  fields  of  Latium,  and  had
brought  the  Grods  which  he  had  placed  on  board  his  ships.
Here,  where  now  is  Rome,  the  capital  of  the  world,  there
were  then  but  trees  and  grass,  and  a  few  sheep,  and  a  cottage
here  and  there.  When  tiiey  had  come  hither,  "  Stop,"  cried
his  prophetic  mother,  **  for  this  spot  of  country  shall  one  day
be  the  site  of  an  empire.""  The  Nonacrian  hero  obeys  his
mother  and  prophetess,  and,  a  stranger,  he  paused  on  a
foreign  soil.  Many  sacred  rites  indeed  did  she  teach  these
nations,  but  first  the  ceremonial  of  the  homed  Faunus  and  of
the  God  of  the  winged  foot.*^  Faunus,  half-goat  in  form,  thou

^  Calliope fjirat  of  her  party  J] — ^Ver.  80.  Calliope,  or  Callioi)ea,  was
the  muse  that  presided  over  epic  poetry.  The  mention  here  made,  of  her
beginning,  as  the  first  of  her  party,  may  either  mean  that  she  began  to
speak,  the  first  of  those  that  were  of  the  opinion  expressed  by  her,  or  that
she  was  the  first  of  those  who  had  not  yet  spoken,  to  break  silence.

"  Had  wedded  Te^Ay*.]— Ver.  81.  Ocean  was  the  brother  of  Tethys,
and  they  were  of  the  Titan  race.  Pleione  was  their  daughter,  who  married
Atlas,  son  of  her  uncle  lapetus,  and  brought  forth  the  Pleiades,  on  Mount
Cylene. Maia  was  one  of  them,  and  she  bore  Mercury  to  Jupiter.

^*  To  be  more  ancient.'} — Ver.  90.  See  note  to  Book  L  line  469,  on
the  antiquity  of  the  Arca&ans.

^^  Site  efan  empire,"] — ^Ver.  95,  96. Gower  thus  renders  these  lines;
*  Here  sailing.  Hold,  Ms  learned  mother  cried ;
For  on  those  fields  a  kingdom's  plat  I've  spied.'
1*  God  of  the  winged  foot.] — Ver.  99,  100. Gow^  gives  this  trans-
lation of  these  lines ; —

*  He  taught  these  nations  jnany  services.
Both  horn-hoofed. Pans,  and  winged  M^curies.'


y  Google


B.  Y.  101— 120.] OB,  CALEl!n)AB  01"  OYU>.  181

art  wonbipped  by  tlie  aproned  Lnperci,  at  the  tune  when  the
hides  cut  in  thmga  purify  the  thronged  ways.  But  to  iki6
month  hast  thon  giyen  the  name  of  thy  mother,  thou  mventor
of  the  curred  lyre,  patron  of  the  thieyes."  And  this  Was  not
thy  first  act  of  duty ;  thou  art  belieyed  to  have  given  'to  the
lyre  the  seven  strings,  as  being  the  number  of  the  Pleiades."
She,  too,  had  ended,  and  was  applauded  by  the  voice  of  her
sisters.  What  am  I  to  do  ?  Each  part  of  the  choir  has  the
same  weight  toith  me.  Let  the  favours  of  the  Pierian  train  be
equally  bestowed  on  me,  and  let  no  one  of  them  be  praised
by  me  more  or  less  than  her  sisters.

From  Jove  let  my  work  commence.  On  the  first  night
is  to  be  seen  the  star*'  that  tended  the  cradle  of  Jove.  The
nuny  Constellation  of  the  Olenian  she-goat^  rises;  she
enjoys  heaven  as  the  reward  of  the  milk  which  she  afforded.
The  Naiad  Amalthea,  noble  on  the  Cretan  Ida,  is  said  to  have
concealed  Jupiter  in  the  woods.  To  her  belonged  a  beautiful
goat,  the  dam  of  two  kids,  with  horns  towering,  and  bending
over  her  back,  and  with  an  udder,  such  as  bg  right  the  nurse

^\Patron  qf  the  ^icue*.]— Ver.  103, 104.  The  poet  gives,  as  the  third
origin  of  the  title  of  the  month,  the  name  of  Maia,  the  mother  of  Mercury,
vho  (through  the  medium  of  Ms  son  Evander)  called  it  *  Mains,'  in  honour
of  her. Gower  thus  renders  these  and  the  two  following  lines —

'  But  witty  shirking  Mercury  who  framed
The  harp,  this  month  from  his  fair  mother  named.
Nor  was  't  his  first  good  deed,  for  he  made  even
His  harp-strings  number  with  the  Pleiads  seven/

^Tobe  teen  ihe  ator.]— Yer.  112.  On  the  Calends  of  May  is  the
hditcal  rising  of  the  star  *  Capclla.'  *  the  Shcwgoat.'  It  is  on  the  right
shonlder  of  Heniochus,  *  the  Charioteer,'  a  Constellation  on  the  north  side
<rf  the  Milky  Way.

"  The  Olenian  ehe-goaW] — ^Ver.  113.  Olenus  was  a  town  of  Achaia,
ia  the  Peloponnesus,  situated  on  the  river  Melas.  There  was  also  a  tomi
ia  Bceotia  of  that  name.  Lactantius  tells  us  that  Jupiter  was  nursed  by
Amalthea  and  Melissa,  daughters  of  Melisseus,  king  of  Crete,  upon  goats'
iiulk  and  honey.  Amalthea,  the  daughter  <xf  Olenus,  is  said  by  some
^^riters,  among  others  by  Mussus,  as  quoted  by  Eratosthenes,  to  have
owned  the  goat  that  is  mentioned  in  the  text,  and  to  have  given  Jupiter
^  be  suckled  by  it  when  he  was  delivered  to  her  from  Rhea  by  the  hands
of  Themis.  According  to  other  accounts,  the  names  of  the  daughters  of
Melisseus  were  Adrastea  and  Ida,  who  committed  the  infemt  to  be  suckled
by  the  goat  Amalthea.  Who  can  look  for  uniformity  in  a  story  whose
^^  ezittenee  d^ended  on  the  fertility  of  the  imagination  ?  Ovid  does
not  say,  or  even  aeem  to  imply,  that  the  name  of  the  goat  was  Amalthea.


y  Google


182  THE  TASTI ;  [b.  V.  120—140.

of  Jove  ought  to  haye.  She  gaye  milk  to  the  Ctod ;  but
against  a  tree  she  broke  her  horn,  and  thus  was  mutilated  c£
ludf  of  her  beauty.  This  the  Nymph  took  up,  and  wreathed
it  with  fresh  gathered  herbs,  and  then  raised  it,  filled  with
fruits,  to  the  mouth  of  Jupiter.  He,  when  he  held  the
sovereignty  of  heayen,  and  sat  on  the  throne  of  his  father,
and  when  there  was  no  one  greater  than  the  uncon-
quered  Joye,  changed  his  nurse,  and  her  fruit-bearing  horn
into  Constellations,  which  last  still  retains  the  name  of  its
owner.

The  Calends  of  May  beheld  the  altar  erected  to  the  guardian
Lares,**  and  the  Uttle  statues  of  the  Qods.  These  Curius^^
vowed;  but  the  great  length  of  time  iB/ast  destroying  them,  and
extreme  age  is  wearing  away^  the  stone.  However,  the  cause
of  the  tide  which  is  applied  to  them  is,  that  they  stand  in
guard  over  all  things  kept  in  safety  under  their  eyes.  They
stand  in  guard  over  us,  too,  and  they  guard  the  fortifications
of  the  city ;  they  are  ever  at  hand,  and  are  giving  us  their  as-
sistance. But  before  their  feet  there  used  to  stand  a  dog,  hewn
out  of  the  same  stone.  What  was  the  reason  of  its  so  standing
with  the  Lar  ?  It  is,  hecattse  each  of  them  guards  the  house  ;
each,  too,  is  faithful  to  his  owner. The  cross  roads^  are

^  Guardian  Lares.'] — ^Ver.  130.  On  the  Calends  of  May,  public  sacri-
fioe  was  offered  to  the  Lares.  Augustus  directed  them  to  be  publicly
worshipped  twice  in  the  year.

^  Curius.'] — Yer.  131.  Manius  Curius  Dentatus  held  the  consulship
with  P.  Cornelius  Rufinus.  He  enabled  the  Romans  to  withstand  Pyrrhus,
and  triumphed  over  the  Samnites.  When  their  ambassadors  came  with
the  intention  of  bribing  him,  they  found  him  at  work  in  his  field,  and  in
answer  to  their  solicitations,  he  told  them  that  he  would  rather  be  the
ruler  of  the  rich  than  be  rich  himself,  and  that  invincible  in  the  field,  he
could  not  be  conquered  by  money.  He  was  not,  however,  the  first  to
introduce  the  worship  of  the  Lares  into  Rome,  as  Yarro  tells  us  that  Titus
Tatius,  the  Sabine,  raised  a  shnne  to  the  Lares ;  and  Dionysius  says,  thai
Servius  TuUius  first  instituted  the  Compitalia.

^  Is  wearing  away,] — Yer.  131.  The  poet  says  that  Curius  erected  a
statue  to  the  *  Lares  Praestites,'  or  *  Protectors,'  and  that  it  represented
them  (probably  in  their  usual  loose  Gabinian  garb)  with  a  dog,  the  emblem
of  watchfulness,  at  their  feet ;  but  he  says  that  from  length  of  time  (the
lapse  of  about  400  years)  the  statues  had  gone  to  decay.

»  The  cross  roads.] — Yer.  140.  The  Lares  were,  perhaps,  originally
only  represented  by  the  statues  mentioned  in  the  text,  and  the  shrine  o€
tatius.  But  at  the  time  when  the  poet  wrote,  we  learn  from  the  Scho-
liast on  Horace,  Sat.  book  iL  Sat.  3.  L  281, that  Augustus  had  set  up


y  Google


B.  V.  140—148.]  OB, CALEITDAB  OF  OVID.  183

|)lea8ing  to  the  God ;  pleasing,  too,  to  the  dog.^  Both  the
Lar  and  the  tribe  of  Diana  scare  away  the  thieves  ;  both  the
Lares  and  the  dogs  keep  their  watch  throughout  the  night,
I  was  inquiring  after  the  statues  of  the  twin-brother  Gods  that
had  fallen  down  under  the  power  of  lengthened  years.  A
thousand  .La^s  does  our  city  contain,  and  the  Grenius  of  the
chief,^  who  confided  them  to  our  care;  and  to  the  three  Deities
do  the  streets  pay  homage.  Whither  am  I  hurried  away  ?
The  month  of  August  will  give  me  a  right  opportunity  for
this  strain,  meanwMle  the  good  Goddess^  must  be  sung  by  me.

Lares,  or  Penates,  at  the  *Compita,'  which  were  places  where  two  or  more
roads  met,  and  that  he  instituted  an  order  of  priests  to  attend  to  their
worship,  taken  from  the  Libertini,  and  called  Augustales.  This  accounts
for  the  *mille,*  or  thousand  Lares  mentioned  in  the  text  helow.  Varro
says  that  there  were  265  stations  for  the  Lares  at  the  comers  of  the  streets
tt  Rome.  Probably,  this  custom  first  suggested  the  idea  of  setting  up  the
images  of  the  Virgin  and  Saints  at  the  comers  of  the  streets,  which  are
still  to  be  seen  in  Catholic  countries  at  the  present  day.

^  Pleating,  toOj  to  the  dog.] — Ver.  140.  Probably,  because  the  oflRals  of
the  neighhouring  houses  were  thrown  there.  As,  in  towns,  the  idlers  of
the  human  race  generally  select  the  comer  of  a  street  for  the  purposes  of
gossip  and  warming  their  hands  in  their  pockets,  surely  the  canine  race
may  be  allowed  at  a  humble  distance  to  follow  their  example  in  choosing
such  a  locality,  especially  when  for  a  much  more  legitimate  and  practical
purpose — that  of  satisfying  their  hunger.  Dogs  were  sacred  to  Diana,  as
the  Goddess  of  the  chase.  This  and  the  previous  line  are  thus  translated
by  Gower —

*  Both  loVd  of  masters,  both  the  house  defend ;
Both  god  and  dog  the  three  leet  ways  do  tend/

^  Genius  of  the  chief  .] — Ver.  145.  This  is  an  allusion  to  the  image  of
Augustus,  which,  by  his  order,  was  erected  at  the  comers  of  the  streets,
in  company  with  the  Lares  or  Penates.  Some  have  supposed  that  Mercury,
the  father  of  the  Lares,  is  here  signified,  but  the  expression  *  qui  tradicUt
illos,' '  who  confided  them,'  seems  especially  to  point  to  Augustus.

*  The  good  Goddeee.'] — Ver.  148.  According  to  Macrobius,  *  Bona
Bea,'  '  the  good  Goddess,'  was  Fauna,  or  Fatua,  the  daughter  of  Faunus,
who  was  so  modest  that  she  never  left  the  woman's  apartment,  and  never
>et  eyes  on  a  man,  or  was  seen  by  one,  and  her  name  was  never  mentioned
in  public.  Other  accounts  make  her  the  wife  of  Faunus,  who  flogged  her
to  death  for  drunkenness,  while  others  make  her  a  Phrygian,  the  mother
of  Midas.  Others  take  her  for  either  Ops,  Juno,  Maia,  Cybele,  or
Tellus.  Men  were  forbidden  to  enter  her  temple,  or  to  be  present  at  her
Bicrifices,  which  were  performed  by  the  women  in  secret.  It  was  her  rites
that  Clodius  profaned  by  his  presence  in  disguise,  when  enamoured  of
Pompeia,  the  second  wife  of  Julius  Cesar,  who  was  one  of  the  priestesses
of  the  Goddess.


y  Google


1 84  THE  PA8TI ;  [b.  v.  149—165.

There  ia  a  natural  rock ;  the  reali^  of  the  fiict  gave  its  name
to  the  pkce.  They  call  it  *'  The  Crags ;"  it  is  a  large  part
of  the  hill.  On  this  spot^  had  Bemns  stood,  to  no  pur-
pose, at  the  time  when  you,  ye  birds  of  the  Palatine,  ga?e
the  commencing  soyerdgnty  to  his  brother.  There  did  the
Senators  erect,  on  the  gently  sloping  hill,  the  temple  that  utterly
abhors  the  gaze  of  nudes.  The  heiress  of  the  ancient  name  of
the  Clausi^  dedicated  this  ;  one  who  nerer  submitted  her  Tirr
gin  person  to  the  embrace  of  man.  Id^ia  restored  it,  tliat  she
might  not  fail  to  imitate  her  husband,  and  that  in  CTcry  point
she  might  follow  in  his  footsteps.

When  the  next  daum,  the  daughter  of  Hyperion,  raises  on
the  steeds  of  the  morning  her  rosy  light,  the  stars  being  driyen
away,  the  cold  north-western  wind**  will  gently  bend  the
tops  of  the  ears  of  com,  and  the  white  canvass  will  be  set
from  the  Calabrian  waves;  and  soon  as  the  darkening
twilight  ushers  in  the  night,  no  one  of  all  th§  train  of  the
Hyades^  lies  concealed.  The  face  of  the  Bull  glitters,  radiant

V  On  this  «po/.]— Ver.  150.  That  is,  the  Aventine  Hill,  or  Mount;
on  which  was  located  the  temple  of  *  Bona  Dea.'  which  the  poet  proceeds
to  mention.

*  Name  of  the  Clausi,] — Ver.  155.  This  was  prohably  Clandia  Quinta,
mentioned  in  the  fourth  hook,  L  305  ;  and  the  more  so,  as  the  poet  does
not  think  it  necessary  here  to  mention  her  name,  which,  if  he  had  not  al-
ready given  it,  he  would  most  probably  now  have  done.  The  temple  of
Bona  Dea  was  built  by  this  lady,  and  was  restored  by  Livia,  the  vnfe  of
Augustus.

*»  North-western  trind.'] — ^Ver.  161.  Argestes.  This  wind  was  fabled
to  be  the  son  of  Aurora,  and  was  called  by  the  Greeks  *  lapyx.'  It  was
a  favourable  wind  for  persons  sailing  from  Calabria,  in  the  south  of  Italy,
for  Greece ;  the  passage  to  which  country  was  usually  taken  firom  Brundi-
slum,  a  city  on  the  Calabrian  coast.

^  The  Hyades."] — ^Ver.  164.  The  poet  says  that  the  Hyades  rise  acro-
nychally  on  the  sixth  of  the  Nones  of  May ;  whereas  Pliny  (Nat.  Hist.
Book  xviii.  c.  66)  says  that  they  rise  cosmically  on  that  day.  Some  au-
thorities, differing  from  Ovid,  say  that  these  stars  were  originally  Nymphs
of  Dodona  in  Epirus,  and  the  nurses  of  Bacchus ;  and  that,  dreading  the
resentment  of  Juno,  they  were  transslated  by  Jupiter  to  the  skies.  Three
derivations  of  this  name  are  mentioned  by  ancient  writers;  the  first  from  i;ctv,
pronounced  by  the  Latins,  -hyein,  *  to  rain ;'  the  second,  from  the  Greek
letter  "*",  *  upsilon,'  which  the  Constellation  was  thought  to  resemble  in
figure ;  and  the  third,  from  ^Qy  *■  a  pig,'  for  some  fanciful  reason  unknown  to
us.  Cicero  says  that  his  own  countrymen,  supposing  this  to  have  been  the
origin  of  the  name,  thence  called  the  Constellation  by  the  name  of  *  Sucul«,'
*  the  little  pigs,*  derived  from  the  Latin  word  *  sus,*  *  a  pig :'  he  adopts
the  first  derivation. On  the  Nature  of  the  Grods,  Book  ii.  c.  43.


y  Google


B.V.  165—195.] OB, OALEKBAB  01"  OVID.  185,

with  seyen  flaming  stars,  which  the  Grecian  mariner  calls
Hyades,  from  rain.  Some  think  that  they  nursed  Bacchus  ;
some  have  supposed  that  they  were  the  granddaughters  of
Tethys  and  of  old  Ocean.  Not  as  yet  was  Atlas  standmg,  bear-
ing on  his  shoulders  the  burden  of  Olympus,  when  Hyas
was  bom,  distinguished  for  his  beauty.  Him  and  the  Nymphs,
did  ^thra,  daughter  of  Ocean,  bring  forth  with  timely
throes ;  but  Hyas  was  the  elder  bom.  While  the  down  of
his  cheek  is  stUl  young,  with  the  net  beset  with  yariegated
feathers,  ^^  he  scares  the  timid  deer ;  and  the  hare  proyes  to
him  an  abundant  prey.  But  when  his  manliness  ripened  with
his  years,  he  dared  to  attack  eyen  the  wild  boars  and  the
shaggy  beasts  of  prey ;  and  now  while  he  was  seeking  the
lair  and  the  cubs  of  a  lioness  that  had  just  brought  forth,  he
himself  became  the  bloodstained  prey  of  the  Libyan  wild  beast.
His  mother  and  his  sorrowing  sisters  bewailed  Hyas ;  Atlas
too,  destined  to  support  with  his  neck  the  burden  of  the  skies,
bewailed  him.  Yet  were  both  of  the  parents  surpassed  by  the
affection  of  the  sisters ;  that  affectixm  raised  them  to  the  sky ;
Hyas  gaye  them  their  name.

"  Come  hither,  thou  mother  of  the  flowers,  to  be  honoured  by
mirthful  sports ;  in  a  former  month  I  had  deferred  the  recital  of
what  related  to  thee.  In  April  thou  dost  begin  ;  thou  passest  on
to  the  days  of  May.  The  one  month  at  its  departure  receiyes  thee ;
the  other  as  it  comes.  Since  the  limits  of  the  two  months  are
thine,  and  make  place  for  thee,  either  this  one  or  that  is  suitable
for  thy  praises.  In  this  month,  end  the  games  of  the  Circus,**
and  the  award  of  the  prizes  with  the  applause  of  the  theatres :
with  this  performance  of  the  Circus  let  my  strain  proceed.
Teach  me  thyself  who  thcu  art.  The  opinions  of  men  are
fallible;  thou  wilt  be  the  best  instructor  as  to  thine  own
name."  Thus  I  spoke  ;  thus  replied  the  Goddess  to  my  re-
quest ;  while  she  was  speaking,  she  breathed  forth  the  yemal
roses  from  her  mouth. '*  I,  who  now  am  called  Flora,  was

^  Variegated  f€aiher8.']-'\eT,  173.  *  Formidine.'  The  *  formido'  was
a  toil,  or  net,  coTered  with  feathers  of  different  colours,  for  the  purpose  of
scaring  birds  and  wild  beasts.  According  to  some  authors,  Hyas  met  his
death  by  the  sting  of  an  adder.

"  The  CiVcM*.]— -Ver.  189.  This  was  the  Circus  of  Flora,  in  the  sixth
region  of  the  dty.  The  Floralia  commenced  on  the  28th  of  April,  and
fimshed  on  the  3rd  of  May.


y  Google


186  THE  FASTI ;  [b.  V.  195—217.

once  called  Chloris."  The  Greek  spelling  of  my  name  became
comi{>ted  by  the  Latin  pronunciation.  I  was  Chlons,  a
Nymph  of  the  blessed  plains,  where,  as  thou  hast  heard,  was
formerly  the  abode  of  the  blessed  men.  How  great  was  my
beauty  it  is  irksome  to  one  of  my  modesty  to  tell ;  but  it  pro-
cured a  God  as  a  son-in-law  for  my  mother.  *Twas  spring  ;  I
was  roaming  about :  Zephyrus  beheld  me.  I  walked  on  ;  he
foUowed  me :  1  fled ;  he  proved  the  stronger.  Boreas**  too  had
given  to  his  brother  a  f uU  precedent  for  violence,  when  he
dared  to  bear  off  his  prize  firom  the  house  of  Erectheus.  Yet
he  made  amends  for  his  violence  by  giving  me  the  name  of
wife,  and  in  my  married  state  I  have  no  ground  for  complaint.
I  enjoy  perpetual  spring ;  to  me  the  year  is  always  most
beauteous;  the  tree  always  bears  its  foliage;  the  earth  its
herbage.  A  firuitfiil  garden  in  the  fields  of  my  dowry  is
mine ;  the  breeze  cherishes  it ;  it  is  irrigated  by  a  spring  of
trickling  water.  This  my  husband  has  filled  with  flowers  of
the  choicest  kinds,  and  he  says,  '  Do  thou,  Goddess,  rule  the
empire  of  the  flowers.'  Ofbtimes  have  I  desired  to  reckon  the
tints  as  they  were  arranged,  and  I  could  not :  their  multitude
exceeded  all  number.  When  first  the  dewy  rime  has  been
dashed  ^m  the  leaves,  and  the  variegated  flowers  warm  in  the
beams  of  the  sun,  the  Seasons^  arrayed  in  painted  robes  as-

^  ChhrU.'] — ^Ver.  194.  This  name  is  derived  from  the  Greek  adjective
xXa>p6c»  *  green,*  and  similarly,  the  word  Flora,  is  from  *  flores,'  *  flowers/
Though  they  are  kindred  terms,  it  could  only  arise  from  the  exuberance
of  the  poet's  fancy  to  imagine  that  one  word  was  a  corruption  of  the  other.
There  is  little  doubt  that  the  story  of  Chlons,  now  lost  to  us,  was  a  fiction
of  purely  Greek  origin ;  and  that  Flora  was  essentially  an  Italian  deity.  She
was  worshipped  by  the  Sabines,  and  Titus  Tatius  erected  a  temple  to  her
in  Rome.  Lactantius  and  Plutarch  tell  a  very  business-like  and  matter-of-
fact  story  that  she  was  a  courtezan,  who  left  her  wealth  to  the  Roman
people,  on  the  condition  that  her  birth-day  should  be  always  celebrated  by
a  festival,  to  be  called  the  *  Floralia,'  and  that  the  Senate,  out  of  shame,
took  upon  themselves  to  feign  that  she  was  the  Goddess  of  Flowers.

^  Boreas,"] — Ver.  203.  This  was  the  name  of  the  north  wind.  He
was  fabled  to  have  carried  off  Orithyia,  the  daughter  of  Erectheus,  as  she
was  dancing  on  the  banks  of  the  Ilissus.  Mr.  Keightley  justly  observes,
that  the  name  of  Orithyia,  signifying  in  Greek  *  mountain  rusher/  was  a
very  good  name  for  the  spouse  of  the  norlti  wind.

*»  The  Seasona.^—Vtr.  21 7.  They  were  -the  daughters  of  Jupiter  and
Themis,  and  were  represented  in  embroidered  robes.  The ,  Charites,  or
Graces,  were  also  the  children  of  Jupiter,  and  three  in  number,  Aglaia,
Thalia,  and  Euphrosyne. Some  say  that  they  were  the  daughters  of  fiac-


y  Google


B.  V.  217— 235.]  OB, CALElfTDAB  01"  OTU).  187

semble,  and  gather  my  presents  into  their-  light  baskets.
Forthwith,  to  them  are  added  the  Graces,  and  they  plait  the
chiclets,  and  the  garlands,  destined  to  bind  their  heavenly
locks.  I  was  the  first  to  spread  the  new  seed  throughout  the
unlimited  nations ;  before  then  the  earth  was  of  but  one  tint.
I  was  the  first  to  create  the  flower  of  the  Therapnsean'*  blood,
and  the  complaint  still  remains  that  is  written  on  its  leaf.
Thou  too.  Narcissus,"  hast  a  name  throughout  the  cultivated
gardens — ^unhappy  in  thy  fate,  that  thou  <£dst  not  in  thy  own
person  form  two  individuals !  Why  should  I  tell  of  Crocus''®
or  Attis,  or  the  son  of  Cinyras,^  from  whose  blood  by  my  art
their  fame  arises  in  the  shape  of  a  flower  ?  Mars,^  too,  if  thou
art  ignorant  of  the  fact,  was  bom  by  my  art :  that  Jove  may
still  remain  in  ignorance  of  it  is  my  constant  prayer.  The
sacred  Juno,  when,  without  a  mother,  Minerva  was  bom,  was
grieved  that  Jupiter  had  not  needed  her  aid.  She  was  on  her
way,  that  she  might  complain  to  Ocean  of  the  deeds  of  her
husband ;  wearied  with  her  toil,  she  stopped  at  my  doors.**
Soon  as  I  saw  her,  I  said,  '  Daughter  of  Saturn,  what  has

chns  and  Venus ;  very  unlikely  parties,  one  would  think,  to  be  the  full
sisters  of  Priapus.  In  early  days  they  were  represented  clothed,  in  later
times  naked. The  Spartans  reckoned  but  two,  Clita  and  Phcena.

*  T^cropmcaw.] — ^Ver.  223.  Therapnae  was  a  town  of  Laconia.
Hyacinthus  was  bom  at  Amyclae,  in  its  vicinity.  Reference  has  been
made  to  him  in  a  former  page.

^  Narcisaus.2 — ^Ver.  225.  He  was  the  son  of  the  river  Cephisus,  and
the  nymph  Liriope.  While  he  was  at  a  fountain  he  became  enamoured
of  his  own  person,  and  pined  away  into  the  flower  that  still  bears  his
name.

*  Crocus.] — Ver.  227.  He  was  enamoured  of  the  nymph  Smilax,  and
pined  away  into  the  flower  that  bears  his  name,  while  the  Nymph  was
converted  into  a  yew  tree.  Attis  has  been  already  mentioned  (see  book
ii.  1.  223.) Arhobius  says  that  the  violet  sprang  from  his  blood.

®  The  son  of  Cinyro*.] — ^Ver.  227.  Adonis  was  the  son  of  Cinyras,
king  of  Cyprus,  by  his  daughter  Myrrha,  or,  according  to  others,  he  was
the  son  of  Thoas  and  Myrrha.  Hesiod  makes  him  the  son  of  Phoenix
and  Alphesibasa.  Being  killed  by  a  wild  boar,  he  was  changed  by
Vei\us  into  an  anemone.  He  was  worshipped  in  Syria  under  the  name
of  Thammuz,  to  which  worship  allusion  is  several  times  made  in  the  writings
of  the  prophets  in  the  Old  Testament.

*  ilfar*.] — Ver.  229.  Ovid  is  the  only  ancient  writer  that  narrates  this
rtory  of  the  birth  of  Mars  by  the  aid  of  Flora.

^  Stopped  at  my  doors.l — Ver.  233-4.  Gower  thus  renders  these  lines —

Comes  to  old  Ocean  for  to  make  her  mone.
And  at  our  gate  quite  tired  sits  her  down.'


y  Google


188  THE  TASn ;  [b.  v.  235-~2&7.

broHght  thee  here  V  She  tells  me  the  place  to  which  she  is
going :  she  adds,  too,  the  reason.  I  consoled  her  with  words
of  Mendship.  '  My  care/  said  she,  '  cannot  be  alleTiated
by  words.  If  Jotc  has  become  a  father,  having  neglected
the  instrumentality  of  his  wife,  and  if  he  in  his  own  person
possesses  the  title  of  both  huhand  and  wife,  why  should  I
despair  of  becoming  a  mother  without  the  aid  of  my  husband,
and,  keeping  myself  chaste,  of  bringing  forth,  untouched  by
any  man  ?  All  the  drugs  in  the  wide  world  I  will  try.  I  will
search  both  the  seas  and  the  abysses  of  Tartarus .'  ^^  She  was  in
the  middle  of  her  speech  :^  I  appeared  to  have  the  look  of
one  in  consideration.  *  Thou  seemest,  Nymph,'  she  said,
'  to  haye  some  influence  m  such  matters,^  Thrice  did  I  in-
tend to  promise  her  my  assistance — ^thrice  was  my  tongue
stayed.  The  wrath  of  Supreme  Joyc  was  the  cause  of  my
alarm.  *  Give  me,  I  pray,  thy  aid,'  she  said ;  *  my  adviser
shall  not  be  disclosed:'  ajid  she  then  calls  to  witness  the
Deity  of  the  Stygian  stream.  '  What  thou  seekest,'  said  I,
'  a  flower  sent  to  me  from  the  Olenian  fields  will  give  to  thee  ;
the  one  in  my  garden  is  the  only  plant.  He  who  made  me
a  present  of  it  said,  *  Touch,  with  this,  a  sterile  Cow ;  she
shall  become  a  dam.'  I  touched  one ;  forthwith  she  did  become
a  dam.  Straightway,  with  my  thumb,  I  plucked  the  flower  as
it  adhered  to  the  stem;  she  was  touched  hy  me;  and  when
touched,  she  conceived  in  her  womb.  And  now,  pregnant,  she
enters  Thrace  and  the  regions  on  the  left  of  the  Propontis.^

^  Abysses  of  Tartarus,'] — ^Ver.  243-4.  Gower  renden  these  lines  in
the  following  quaint  manner ; —

'  All  charms  and  mixtures,  both  in  land  and  seas,
111  search  and  trie,  and  grope  the  Stygian  lees.'

^  She  was  in  the  middle  qf  her  speech,"] — Ver.  245.  *  Vox  erat  in
cursu.-*  Literally, '  her  voice  was  in  the  course.'  It  is  absolutely  the  fact,
that  one  critic  takes  the  meaning  of  this  to  be,  *  Juno  spoke  as  she  ran/
Well  may  Mr.  Keightley  express  his  astonishment.  In  such  case  we  must
suppose  Flora  to  be  *  keeping  pace'  with  her,  to  listen  to  her  story ;  which
Juno  could  not,  in  civility,  have  permitted,  especially  as  she  was  a  very
punctilious  deity.

**  ProponHs,] — ^Ver.  257.  This  sea,  which  is  now  called  the  Sea  of
Marmora,  was  so  called  from  being  npbt  'before,'  the  Euxine,  or  Black
Sea.  It  was  a  part  of  the  eastern  boundary  of  Thrace,  where  Mars  was
especially  venerated,  on  account  of  the  hardy  and  warlike  character  of  the
people.


y  Google


B.  V.  258— 282.]  OE, CALEin)AE  OF  OVID.  189

She  gains  her  wish,  and  Mars  is  born.  He,  mindfal  that  by
means  of  me  he  had  received  his  birth,  said,  '  Do  thou  occupy
a  place,  too,  in  the  city  of  Romulus.'  Perhaps  thou  mayst
imagine  that  my  sway  is  only  over  the  deUcate  chaplets ;  but
my  divine  power  extends  to  the  fields  as  well.  If  the  corn-
fields have  blossomed  well,  then  will  the  threshing  floor  be
rich;  if  the  vineyards  have  blossomed  weU,  there  will  be
plenteous  wine ;  if  the  oUves  have  blossomed  well,  most  shining
with  oil  will  the  year  prove  ;  the  pomes  as  weU  enjoy  the  in-
crease of  this  season.  When  the  blossom  has  once  been
injured,  the  vetches  and  the  beans  perish,  and  thy  lentiles,  0
N&e,  river  that  flowcst  from  afar.  The  wine,  too,  carefully
stowed  away  in  the  spacious  cellars,  flowers,**  and  the  scum
covers  the  surface  of  the  casks.  Honey,  too,  is  my  province.
I  invite  the  winged  insects  that  wiU  yield  the  honey,  to  the
violet,  the  cytisus,  and  the  hoary  thyme.  The  same  thing  do
I  when  the  spirits  abound  in  the  years  of  youth,  and  the
body  is  now  in  strength.''  As  she  said  these  things  I  re-
garded her  with  silent  astonishment.  But  she  said,  "  Thou
hast  the  privilege  of  learning,  if  there  be  any  thing  that  thou
seekest  to  know."  "  Tell  me,  0  Goddess,"  I  answered,  "  what
was  the  origin  of  the  games."  Scarcely  had  I  fuUy  con-
cluded, when  she  answered  me.  The  other  appliances  of
luxury  were  not  yet  in  fiill  operation :  the  man  who  was  rich
possessed  either  cattle  or  a  wide  tract  of  land.  From  this
circumstance,  too,  it  was  that  the  rich  man  was  called
"  locuples,"**  and  that  money  had  the  name  of  "  pecunia."
But  now  at  length  each  was  acquiring  wealth  by  forbidden

^  In  the  cellars  /towers.']  —Ver.  270.  The  poet  is  considered  to  be  going
rather  too  far  here,  when  he  places  the  scum  of  wine  under  the  care  of
Vesta,  hecause,  when  it  rises,  the  wine  is  said  *florere,'  'to  flower,*  by  virtue
of  a  figurative  adaptation  of  the  word.  The  term  is  generally  supposed  to
apply  merely  to  the  scum  or  effervescence  of  new  vnne.  Might  it  not  possibly
apply  to  the  mouldiness  that  would  supervene  upon  that  scum  if  left  long
standing,  and  which  we  know  to  be  a  vegetable  subtance,  or  'lichen?*

*^  Was  called  *  locuples.*] — ^Ver.  281.  That  is  to  say,  the  man  who
had  much  land  was  'loci  plenus,*  'full  of  land/  'Pecunia,*  'money,*  ac-
cording to  the  poet,  derives  its  name  from  'pecus,  'cattle,*  because  origi-
nally ti^e  greatest  part  <^  a  person's  wealth  consisted  of  cattle  and  flocks ;
as  in  those  times  cattle  formed  the  most  convenient  medium  of  exchange,
money,  as  its  substitute, received  its  appellation  from  it.  The firstmoney
that  was  used  had  figures  of  cattle  stamped  upon  it ;  and,  according  to
lome,  it  was  made  out  of  the  hides  of  cattle  in  a  tanned  state.


y  Google


190  THE  FUSTI ;  [b.  t.  282—300.

means.  It  had  become  a  custom  to  depasture  the  lands  of
the  people  ;*•''  and  long  was  that  permitted,  and  there  was  no
penalty /or  so  doing.  The  people  kept  their  public  places  in
the  guardianship  of  no  one  :  and  to  pasture  on  his  own  priyate
property  was  deemed  the  act  of  a  simpleton.  Such  irregulari-
ties as  these  were  reported  to  the  .^idiles,  the  PubUcii:^
spirit  before  was  wanting  in  these  men.  The  people  took
cognizance  of  the  matter :  the  offenders  suffered  the  penalty
of  a  fine ;  to  its  guardians  the  care  of  the  pubhc  was  a  theme
of  praise.  In  part,  the  price  was  granted  to  me ;  and  with
great  applause  did  the  ^diles,  victorious  in  the  contest,  insti-
tute new  games.  With  the  other  part  they  made,  by  contract,
the  carriage-road,"  which  then  was  a  steep  precipice ;  now
it  is  a  useful  way,  and  they  style  it  the  Publician.  I  had
be/ore  supposed  that  annual  spectacles  were  instituted ;  she
told  me,  not  so,  and  added  to  her  expressions  these  words  :
*'  Honour  influences  us  too :  in  festivals  and  altars  do  we  take
pleasure,  and  we  that  inhabit  the  heavens  are  an  ambitious
set.  Often,  by  his  sin,  has  some  mortal  made  the  Grods  en-
raged, and  the  victim  has  been  a  soothing  sacrifice  for  his

<7  The  lands  of  the  people,"} — Ver.  283.  These  lands  were  called
'pascua/  and  a  rent  was  paid  for  the  liberty  of  grazing  thereon,  which
went  into  the  public  funds,  and  was  called  'scriptura,'  as  Mr.  Thynne
suggests,  probably  as  being  paid  for  the  permission  to  enter  one's  name
in  the  roll  of  those  admitted  to  the  advantage.  The  poet  tells  us  that
this  payment  was  evaded  td  a  great  extent,  till  the  iEdiles  put  a  stop  to
the  practice,  who,  then,  no  longer  allowed  interest  or  favour  to  screen
those  guilty  of  these  malpractices.

**  2%e  PublicH.'] — Ver.  288.  These  were  Lucius  and  Mardus  Publicius
Malleolus,  who  were  iCdiles  of  the  people,  a.u.c.  513.  By  the  Lidnian
law  no  one  person  was  allowed  to  stint  more  than  100  head  of  cattle  or
500  sheep  on  the  public  pastures.  Besides  instituting  the  Floral  games,
a  temple,  which  is  not  mentioned  by  the  poet,  was  built  in  honour  of
Flora,  out  of  the  fines ;  this  was  afterwards  repaired  by  Tiberius,  as  we
learn  from  Tacitus,  Annals,  Book  ii.  c.  49.

*  The  carriage  roadJ] — Ver.  293.  *  Locant,'  *  they  let  out  to  contract.'
Varro  and  Festus  confirm  this  account.  Festus  says,  *  they  made  a  road  so
that  carriages  could  come  up  the  Aventine  hill  to  Velia :'  Velia  being  one
part,  perhaps  the  highest,  of  the  hill.  Gower  thus  renders  the  four  lines
beginning  from  line  283, —

*  The  custom  was  to  feed  the  people's  conmions
Without  controlment  ^  they  long  time  were  no  man's.
Some  law  the  people  did  their  commons  keep,
He  was  a  churl  that  by  himself  fed  sheep.'


y  Google


B.  V.  300— 324.]  OB, CALENDAB  OF  OTID.  191

crimes.  Ofttiines  have  I  seen  Jove,*®  when  he  was  just
about  to  hurl  his  thunderbolts,  withhold  his  hand  on  the
offering  of  some  i^ankincense.  But  if  we  are  slighted,  the
wrong  is  atoned  for  with  weighty  penalties,  and  our  wrath
proceeds  beyond  moderate  bounds.  Look  at  the  grandson  of
ThestiuB  ;^*  with  flames,  at  a  far  distance,  did  he  bum  :  the
reason  was,  because  the  altar  of  Diana  was  without  its  fire.
Look  at  the  descendant  of  Tantalus  ;*^  the  same  Groddess  with-
held from  him  the  power  of  setting  sail.  A  Virgin  indeed  she
is,  and  yet  twice  ha!s  she  avenged  her  altars  when  subjected  to
a  slight.  Hapless  Hippolytus,  thou  couldst  wish  that  thou
hadst  paid  homage  to  Dione,  when  thou  wast  torn  in  pieces  by
thy  fr^htened  steeds.  'Twere  a  tedious  task  to  recount  the
slights  that  have  been  chastised  by  calamity.  Me,  too,  the
Roman  fathers  neglected.  What  could  I  do?  By  what
means  could  I  give  symptoms  of  my  displeasure?  What
penalty  could  I  inflict  for  this  my  diggrace?  My  wonted
duties  were  forgotten  by  me  in  my  sorrow.  No  longer  I
guarded  the  fields  :  no  longer  was  the  fruitful  garden  valued
by  me.  The  lilies  faded ;  you  might  see  the  violets  parched  ;.
and  the  filaments  of  the  ruddy  crocus  become  flaccid.  Many
a  time  did  Zephyrus  say  to  me,  *  Do  not,  thyself,  destroy  thy
own  dowry.'  Worthless  to  me  was  my  dowry.  The  olive
trees  were  in  bloom  ;  the  wanton  blasts  nipped  them.  The
corn-fields  were  in  blossom ;  the  com  was  injured  by  hail-
storms. The  vine  as  yet  gives  a  ground  for  hope ;  the  heaven
blackens  in  the  quarter  of  the  south  wind,  and  the  leaves  are

^  Have  I  seen  Jove."} — Ver.  300-1.  Gower's  version  of.  these  lines
runs  thuSi —

*  Oft  have  I  seen  Jove  hurling  his  fire  storm,
At  sight  of  incense  hold  his  threot'ning  arm/

"  Grandson  of  ThesUus.'\ — Ver.  305.  Meleager,  son  of  ^neus  and
Althea,  daughter  of  Thestius.  His  mother,  on  his  birth,  was  informed
by  the  Fates  that  he  would  live  till  a  log  of  wood,  then  huming  on  the
fire,  was  consumed.  On  this,  she  removed  it,  and  carefully  preserved  it.
Meleager  killed  the  Calydonianboar  sent  hy  Diana  in  revenge  for  the
neglect  of  her  worship ;  and  he  gave  its  skin  to  Atalanta,  who  had  first
wounded  it.  His  mother's  brothers  attempting  to  deprive  her  of  it,  Meleager
slew  them ;  on  which,  in  revenge,  his  mother  threw  the  log  on  the  fire,
and  he  expired,  when  the  flames,  thus  at  a  distance  from  him,  had  burnt
out. Althea  killed  herself  through  grief.

«  Descendant  of  TantalusJ] — Ver.  307.  Agamemnon ;  descended  from
Tantalus,  through  his  son,  Pelops. See  Book  i.  1.  387.


y  Google


192  THE  FASTI ;  [b.  v.  324—343.

stripped  off  by  the  sudden  shower.  I  did  not  wish  all  this  to
happen,  for  I  am  not  cruel  in  my  wrath ;  but  I  took  no  care
to  repel  the  evil.  The  Senators  assembled ;"  and  if  the  year
should  blossom  weU,  they  Yowed  to  my  Godhead  an  annual
festiyaL  I  assented  to  the  tow.  Lsenas,  the  Consul,  with  his
colleague  Posthumius,  in  discharge  of  their  promise,  insti-
tuted in  my  honour  these  games."  I  was  preparing  to  in-
quire why  there  was  in  these  games  a  greater  hcense,^  and
more  freedom  in  merriment.  But  it  occurred  to  me  that  she
was  no  austere  Deity,  and  that  she  had  functions  suited  for
the  enjoyment  of  pleasure.  Her  temples  are  entirely  surrounded
with  the  wreaths  of  flowers**  sewed  together,  and  the  gorgeous
board  is  concealed  by  the  roses  showered  down  upon  it.  The
drunken  reveUer  dances  with  his  hair  wreathed  with  the  bark
of  the  linden-tree,  and  scarcely  knowing  what  he  does,  is
whirled  along  by  the  influence  of  the  wine.  In  his  drunken
fit,  the  lover  sings  at  the  cruel  threshold  of  his  beauteous  mis-
tress ;  his  perfumed  locks  support  the  delicate  garlands.  No
grave  matters  are  transacted  with  a  brow  enriched  with  the
garland:  and  limpid  water  is  not  the  beverage  of  those
wreathed  with  flowers. As  long  as  thou  wast  mixed,  Ach-

**  The  Senators  a88embled.']'-Vet,  327.  In  the  consulship  of  L.  Post-
humius  Albinus  and  M.  Popilins  Lsenas,  a.x7.c.  580,  directions  were  given
that  the  Floral  games  should  be  celebrated  annually.

**  A  greater  licerue.'] — ^Ver.  331.  The  greatest  license  was  permitted
at  these  games ;  and  to  the  sound  of  music,  lewd  women  danced  in  a  state
of  nudity.  The  story  is  told,  that  when  Cato  of  Utica  once  appeared  at
the  games,  the  spectators  would  not  call  on  the  dancers  to  strip,  being
overawed  by  his  presence,  on  which  he  retired,  that  he  might  not  interfere
with  their  amusement,  and  was  loudly  applauded  for  so  doing.  This  would
appear  very  like  an  encouragement  of  the  practice  on  his  part ;  and  he,
probably,  did  not  think  of  the  maxim,  as  good  in  ethics  as  it  is  in  law,*-
*  Qui  facit  per  alium,  facit  per  se/

^  Wreaths  of  Jkwers.'j—Ver.  335.  The  poet  here  describes,  not  the
Floral  games,  but  the  gaiety  of  life  that  the  Goddess  was  wont  to  promote.
This  and  the  next  seven  lines  are  thus  translated  by  Gower —

*  Brows  are  embroidered  with  spruce  garlands  sew'd,
And  tables  cover'd  with  fresh  roses  strewed.
The  bouzy  guest,  deck'd  with  a  film  flower  crown,
In  dninken  garb  there  dances  up  and  down :
And's  head  vnth  oyl  and  floVrs  and  wine  well-lin'd,
He  catches  sings  at's  sweet-heart's  door  unkind.
Crown'd  temples  meddle  with  no  serious  matter ;
Nor  are  flow'rs  us'd  in  drinking  of  fair  water.'


y  Google


B.  V.  343—363.] OB, CALEIO)AE  OP  OVID.  193

lous,"  with  the  juice  of  no  clusters,  there  was  no  pleasure  in
assuming  the  rose.  Bacchus  loves  the  flowers;  you  may
know  that  the  garland  is  pleasing  to  Bacchus,  from  the  Con-
stellation of  Ariadne.  A  merry  stage  becomes  this  Goddess ;
she  is  not,  believe  me,  she  is  not  to  be  reckoned  in  the  num-
ber of  the  tragic  Goddesses^"  And  why  the  multitude  of  the
courtezans  throng  to  these  games,  the  reason,  when  sought  for,
is  not  difficult  to  be  ascertained.  She  is  none  of  the  morose
ones,  nor  is  she  one  of  the  great  boasters :  she  wishes  that
her  festival  should  be  open  to  the  Plebeian  multitude.  She
teaches  us,  too,  to  make  use  of  the  beauty  of  our  youth,  while
it  is  still  in  bloom  ^  and  that  the  thorn  is  slighted  when  the
roses  have  faded.  '  But  why,  whereas  white  garments  are  worn
on  the  festival  of  Ceres,  is  this  Goddess  gay  with  habits  of
various  colours  ?  Is  it  because  the  harvest  grows  white  with
its  ripened  ears,  but  every  hue  and  tint  is  to  be  found  in
flowers  ?**  She  nodded  her  assent,  and,  as  she  shook  her  hair,
the  flowers  fell,  just  as  the  rose,  when  dropped,  is  wont  to  faU"**
on  the  festive  board.  There  stiU  remained  the  torches,*^  the
origin  of  which  was  concealed  from  me ;  when  thus  she  re-
moved my  uncertainty. "  It  is  either  because  the  fields  are

**  Thou  wast  midftf  Achehus.'] — Ver.  343.  It  seems  to  have  been  a
general  notion  with  the  Latin  poets  that  the  waters  of  the  Achelous  were
the  first  that  were  used  for  the  purpose  of  tempering  wine.  Virgil  (Georgics,
Bo<^  i.  1.  9)  speaks  of  mixing  the  waters  of  the  Acheloiis  with  the  juice
of  the  newly-discovered  grape.  Hyginus,  Fable  274,  tells  us  that  Cerasus,
the  iEtolian,  was  one  of  the  first  who  taught  men  to  mix  water  with  their
wine,  and  recommended  them  to  ilse  the  waters  of  the  riTer  Achelous  for
that  purpose.

*7  Tragic  <?aWe«5«».]— Ver.  348.  *  Cothurnatas.'  Literally,  *  buskined
Goddesses.'  The  '  cothurnus'  was  a  high  shoe  or  buskin,  worn  by  actors
in  tragedy,  with  the  view  of  thereby  rendering  the  figure  more  stately  and
elevated.  Its  introduction  on  the  stage  is  sometimes  ascribed  to  Sophocles,
but  more  generally  to  ^chylus.  This  appellation  was  often  given  to  .
Diana  and  Minerva.

"^  la  wont  to  fall.'] — Ver.  360.  Allusion  is  here  made  to  the  custom  at
the  feasts  of  the  ancients  of  showering  down  flowers,  and  especially  roses,
from  the  ceiling.  At  their  potations,  garlands  of  roses  were  often  hung
from  the  ceiling ;  from  this  circumstance,  whatever  secrets  were  imparted
in  the  freedom  of  postprandial  conversation,  were  said  to  be  *  sub  rosa,'
'  under  the  rose/  and  it  was  considered  a  breach  of  good  faith  and  of  po-
fiteness  to  divulge  anything  that  might  transpire  upon  such  occasions.

**  The  torcheM,] — ^Ver.  361.  Torches  were  used  at  the  Fioralia,  as  the
rites  were  protracted  to  a  very  late  hour  of  the  might.

o


y  Google


194  THE  FASTI ;  [b.  v.  363—388.

resplendent  with  purple  flowers,  that  lights  appear  to  be
becoming  to  my  festival,  or  because  neither  the  flower  nor
flame  is  of  a  didl  colour,  and  the  brightness  of  each  attracts
our  attention,  or  because  the  licence  of  the  night  is  suited  to
my  pleasures.  The  third  reason  is  deriyed  from  fact.  "  There
is  sdll  a  little  matter, '^  I  said,  "  about  which  it  remains  for
me  to  inquire,  if  I  may  be  allowed."  She  said,  "  I  permit
thee."  "  Why,  in  honour  of  thee,  are  the  feeble  roes  and
the  timid  hares^  enclosed  in  the  net  in  place  of  the  libyaa
lionesses  ?"  She  replied  that  the  woods  were  not  her  domain,
but  the  gardens  and  the  fields  not  to  be  approached  by  the
savage  beast  of  prey.  She  had  concluded  her  speech ;  and  she
vanished  into  empty  air.  A  sweet  perfume  remained ;  you
might  know  that  she  was  a  Goddess.  That  the  song  of  Naso
Tiiay  flourish  thiroughout  all  times,  diffuse,  I  pray,  0  Goddess,
thy  gifts  in  my  breast.

On  the  night  before  the  fourth  from  the  Calends,  shall
Chiron®^  raise  his  star,  half-man,  and  half-formed  of  the
body  of  a  yellow  steed.  Pelion  is  a  mountain  of  Hsemonia,
facing  the  south ;  its  summit  is  green  with  pine ;  the  oak
covers  the  other  part.  The  son  of  Phillyra  inhabited  it.  The
cave  is  still  extant  in  the  ancient  rock  which  they  say  was  the
abode  of  the  worthy  old  man.  He  is  beheved  to  have  occu-
pied with  the  strains  of  the  lyre  those  hands  that  were  destined
in  future  times  to  effect  the  death  of  Hector.  Alddes  had
come,  a  part  of  his  task  performed,  and  now  almost  the  last^

®*  The  timid  hares,"] — Ver.  372.  '^e  animals  that  were  generally
hunted  in  the  Circus  were  of  the  fiercer  kind ;  but  at  the  Floralia,  deer
and  hares  were  brought  in  nets,  and  let  loose  then  for  the  purpose  of
chasing  them.  Very  probably,  one  reason  for  then  hunting  the  hare  was,
the  fact  that  these  animals  are  very  destructive  to  flowers,  and  have  an  es-
pecial liking  for  pinks  and  carnations.

«  CAircm.]— Ver.  379.  On  the  5th  of  the  Nones  of  May,  the  Centaur
rises.  Chiron  was  the  son  of  Saturn  and  Phillyra,  and  was  celebrated  for
his  skill  in  medicines.  He  was  a  Centaur,  half-man  and  half-horse,  and
was  the  great  grandfather  of  Achilles,  whom  he  educated.  He  was  also
said  to  have  nursed  iflsculapius.  Hercules  conquered  Troy  in  the  reign
of  King  Laomedon ;  Achilles  slew  Hector,  its  bulwark,  in  the  Trojan
war.  Ovid  seems  to  have  derived  this  story  from  Homer's  Iliad,  the  Ar-
gonautic  poem  of  Orpheus  and  Callimachus.

^  Almost  the  last.'] — Ver.  388.  ApoUodorus  says,  that  so  fax  from  its
being  at  the  time  of  almost  the  last  of  the  labours  of  Hercules,  this  acci-
dent happened  to  Chiron  when  he  was  engaged  on  his  fourth  task. Pliny


y  Google


B.  V.  388—421.] OB, CALEin)AB  OP  OVID.  195

of  the  labours  enjoined  on  him,  remained  for  the  hero.  You
might  see  the  two  destined  for  the  destruction  of  Troy,  by
chance,  standing  together.  On  the  one  side  was  the  boy,  the
son  of  iBacus  ;  on  the  other  side  was  the  son  of  Jove.  The
hero,  the  son  of  Phillyra,  receives  the  youth  with  hospitality,
and  asks  him  the  cause  of  his  coming ;  the  other  one  informs
him.  Meanwhile  he  examines  his  club  and  the  spoil  of  the
lion,  and  he  says,  ''  Hero  worthy  of  these  arms,  and  arms
worthy  of  the  hero ! "  Nor  could  the  hands  of  Achilles  refi*ain
from  daring  to  touch  the  hide  bristling  with  its  shaggy  hair.
While  the  old  man  is  handling  the  arrows,  tipped  with  poison,
one  falls,  and  the  barb  is  fixed  in  his  left  foot.  Chiron  groans
aloud,  and  draws  the  steel  from  the  wound ;  Alcides  weeps,
and  so  does  the  Hsembnian  boy.  Yet  he  himself  prepares  the
hCTbs  collected  on  the  hills  of  Pagasse,  and  soothes  the  wounds
with  various  remedies.  The  eating  venom  was  too  powerful
for  a  remedy,  and  the  pestilence  was  entirely  absorbed  in  his
bones  and  throughout  his  whole  body.  The  blood  of  the
Hydra  of  Lema  mingling  with  the  blood  of  the  Centaur  gave  no
time  for  aid.  AcMlles  stood  bedewed  with  tears,  as  though
before  his  father;  thus  was  Pelias  to  be  mourned  had  he
then  died.  Often  did  he  chafe  the  hands  of  the  patient
with  his  affectionate  hands  :  the  teacher  then  received  the  ad-
vantages of  that  disposition  of  which  he  had  had  the  train-
ing. Often  did  he  kiss  him ;  often,  too,  did  he  say  to  him  as  he
lay,  "Live  on,  I  pray ;  leave  me  not,  my  dear  father!"  The
ninth  day  had  come,  when  thou,  most  righteous  Chiron,  hadst
thy  body  girt  with  twice  seven  stars.

Him  the  curving  Lyre  ®  would  desire  to  follow  ;  but  not  yet
is  the  path  in  readiness ;  the  third  night  will  be  a  suitable
time.  At  the  hour,  when  on  the  morrow,  we  say,  that  now  the
Nones  are  dawning,  the  Scorpion  shall  be  marked  in  the  sky
from  its  middle.

When  thrice  from  this  time  the  Star  of  the  Evening  shall
have  raised  his  beauteous  disk,  and  thrice  the  conquered  stars
shall  have  made  way  for  the  Sun,  then  will  be  the  rites  of  your

<^Nat.  Hist,  book  xxv.  c.  6)  says  that  Chiron  recovered  by  the  application
of  the  herb  centaury,  which  received  its  appellation  from  the  Centaur.

®  The  curving  iyrc.]— Ver.  415.  On  the  3d  of  the  Nones  of  May,  the
Lyre  rises  acronychiUly.  On  the  day  b^ore  the  Nones,  half  of  the  Scorpion
•ets  cosmically.

o  2

Digitized  by  LjOOQ IC


196  THE  YA8TI;  [b.  v.  421—437.

ancient  ceremonial,  feast  of  the  Lemnres ;  tiiis  feast  will  pie-
sent  the  offerings  to  the  silent  shades.  ^  Their  year  was
shorter,  and  not  as  yet  had  they  heen  taog^t  to  employ,  for
porification,  the  affectionate  Fehroa,  and  not  yet  wast  thou  the
leader  of  the  months,  O  Janus !  thou  of  the  douhle  form.  Yet
already  did  they  offer  their  peculiar  gifts  to  the  ashes  of  the
dead,  and  the  grandson  performed  the  rites  at  the  tomb  of  his
boried  grand^^.  The  month  was  caUed  Mains,  firom  the
.  name  of  the  ''  majores,"  [their  ancestors,]  which  even  now  re-
tains a  part  of  the  ancient  custom.  When  midnight  now  is
come,  and  affords  silence  for  sleep,  and  ye  dogs,  and  birds
with  your  various  tints,  are  still ;  at  that  hour  rises  the  person
who  bears  in  mind  the  ancient  ceremonial,  and  stands  in  awe
of  the  (jU>ds  ;  hii  two  feet  have  no  sandals  ^  on  them,  and  he
makes  a  noise  with  his  fingers  clasped  in  each  other  with  his
thumb  in  the  middle,^  for  fear  lest  the  aerial  spectre  should
meet  him  if  silent.  After  he  has  washed  his  hands  dean  in
the  water  of  the  spring,  he  turns  round,  and  first  he  takes  up
the  black  beans  ;^^  with  his  face  turned  away,  he  flings  them ;

«*  The  silent  8hade8,']--Ver.  422.  'Tacitis  Manibus/  Literally,  'the
silent  Manes.'  As  Mr.  Kdghtley  observes,  the  Manes  were,  according  to
this  description  of  them,  what  we  term,  disturbed  spirits.

^  Have  no  tandaU.'] — Ver.  432.  On  performing  magical  incantations,
it  was  always  deemed  necessary  to  have  the  feet  bare  for  that  purpose.

•*  His  thumb  in  the  middle.'] — ^Ver.  433.  There  is  some  difficulty  in
understanding  from  the  context  how  the  sound  here  described  was  to  be
produced.  Neapohs  thinks  it  means  merely  a  snapping  of  the  thumb  and
finger.  Mr.  Thynne  and  Mr.  Stanford  seem  to  be  of  the  same  opinion.
Mr.  Keightley  thinks  that  it  may  have  been  done  by  locking  the  fingers
in  one  another,  whereby  the  thumbs  were  joined  in  the  middle,  and  then
making  a  noise  by  bringing  the  hands  smartly  together.  If  'medius  poU
lex'  here  means  the  middle  finger,  a  signification  which  Ovid  gives  else-
where to  'poUex,'  then  it  may  mean  that  he  closes  the  fingers  in  the  fist
of  the  left  hand,  and  makes  a  snapping  noise  on  them  thus  joined,  with  the
middle  finger  of  the  right,  which  is  very  easily  done,  by  smartly  striking
the  space  between  two  adjoining  fingers.

•7  The  black  beans,'] — ^Ver.  431 — 6.  Gower  gives  the  following  trans-
lation of  these  lines —

'  The  rite-rememVring,  ghost-abhorring  sunne,
Arises  gently,  and  no  shoes  puts  on ;

Then  points  with  his  closed  fingers,  and  his  thumb  - . )

Put  in  the  midst,  lest  ghosts  should  near  him  come ;
Then  in  spring-water  he  his  hands  doth  cleanse,
But  first  doth  roll  about  his  mouth  blue  beans.'
We  are  told  by  Festus^  that  the  bean  was  particularly  used  in  the  rites


y  Google


B.  V.  437 — 461.] OB, CAXBITDAB  OF  OVU).  197

bat  while  lie  flings  them/ he  says  *'  I  offer  these ;  with  these
beans  do  I  ransom  myself  and  mine."  Nine  times  does  he  say
this,  and  looks  not  behind  him.*®  The  ghost  is  believed  to
gather  them,  and  to  foUow  behind  if  no  one  is  looking  on.  A
second  time  he  touches  the  water  and  tinkles  the  copper  of
Temesa,^  and  begs  the  ghost  to  leave  his  house.  When  nine
times  he  has  repeated,  ^*  Shades  of  my  father !  depart,"  he
looks  back,  and  believes  that  his  rites  are  duly  performed.
Whence  the  day  was  called,  or  what  is  the  origin  of  the  name,
is  unknown  to  me  ;  from  some  God  it  must  be  learned.  Thou
son  of  the  Pleiad,  worthy  of  veneration  from  thy  potent  wand,
do  thou  instruct  me  ;  ofttimes  has  the  palace  of  the  Stygian
Jove  been  visited  by  thee.  The  wand-bearing  God  comes  at
my  prayer.  Hear  now  the  reason  of  the  name ;  the  reason
was  learned  from  the  God  himself.  When  Romulus  consigned
to  the  tomb  the  remains  of  his  brother,  and  the  obsequies  of
Remus,  unhappily  too  active,  were  duly  performed,  woe-
stricken  Eftustidus,  and  Acca  with  her  dishevelled  locks,  were
sprinkling  his  burnt  bones  with  their  tears.  Afterwards,  in
their  sorrow,  they  returned  home,  about  the  beginning  of
twilight,  and  threw  themselves  down  to  rest  on  their  couch,
hard  as  it  was.  The  blood-stained  ghost  of  Remus  seemed  to
be  standing  by  the  bed,  and,  with  a  subdued  gibbering,  to
utter  these  words,  "  Behold  me,  the  half,  the  equal  part,  of  all
your  prayers!  Behold  of  what  nature  I  now  am!  and  of
what  nature  but  a  little  while  ago  I  was ! I,  who  so  short  a

performed  to  the  ghosts  or  Lemures,  and  at  the  Parentalia ;  and  that  the
Flamen  Dialis  was  forbidden,  not  only  to  eat  that  pulse,  but  even
to  name  it,  because  it  was  dedicated  to  the  dead.  Pythagoras  forbade  his
disciples  to  eat  this  pulse,  as  it  was  supposed  that  the  souls  of  men  in
the  first  stage  of  the  metempsychosis  were  transferred  into  the  interior
'^f  the  bean.  This  fiction,  which  perhaps  was  the  key  to  some  more
mysterious  doctrine,  was  probably  borrowed  by  him  from  the  priests  of
Egypt.

*  Looks  not  behind  him,] — ^Ver.  439.  Mr.  Keightley  justly  remarks,
^luit  this  superstition  reminds  one  of  that  of  sowing  the  hemp-seed  on
All-hallows  Eve,  and  refers  to  Bums*s  Hallowe'en,  st.  16-20.  The  nine
tunes,  as  mentioned,  was  x>erhaps  of  magic  efficacy,  for  Virgil,  Ed.  viii.
1 75,  tells  us  that  the  Gods  take  pleasure  in  uneven  nmnbers.  So  with
w,  the  vulgar  notion  is,  that  there  is  *  luck  in  odd  numbers.'

*  Copper  of  Temesa.] — Ver.  441.  Temesa,  called  also  Tempsa  by  the
I^atins,  was  a  town  of  Bruttium,  in  Calabria.  There  was  alio  a  place  in
the  isle  of  Cyprus  called  Temesa,  or  Temsa,  famous  for  its  copper  mines.


y  Google


198  THE  FASTI;  [b.  V.  461—488.

time  8iuce>  if  I  had  obtained  the  omens  conferring  on  me  the
sovereign  sway,  might  have  been  the  chief  among  my  peopk.
Eyen  now  have  I  ^ded  firom  the  flames  oi  the  fdnenil  pile,
and  am  a  phantom  of  air.^  This  shape  is  all  that  is  left  of
that  which  was  Bemus.  Alas !  where  is  Mars,  my  father  ?  If
ye  did  but  speak  the  truth,  and  if  it  was  he  that  gave  to  ns,
when  outcasts,  the  udder  of  the  wild  beasts.  Me  has  the
rash  hand  of  a  feUow  citizen  destroyed — me,  the  yery  man
whom  a  she-wolf  preseryed-^of  the  two,  how  much  the  more
humane  was  she.  Ah,  cruel  Celer,  mayst  thou  yield  up  thy
remorseless  soul  through  wounds,  and  mayst  thou  pass  under
the  earth  all  stained  with  gore,  as  I  haye  done.  My  brother
willed  not  this ;  his  brotherly  affection  is  equal  to  my  own.
'Twas  all  he  could  do  ;  he  expended  his  tears  on  my  doom.
Entreat  him  by  those  tears,  by  the  nourishment  you  afforded
him,  to  appoint  a  day  to  be  celebrated  in  my  honour.'*  As  he
giyes  them  these  commands,  they  long  to  embrace  him,  and
extend  their  arms  :  the  gliding  phantom  escapes  their  hands  as
they  grasp  at  him.  As  the  ghost  in  its  flight  deprived  them
of  their  slumber,  they  both  of  them  reported  to  tiie  king  the
words  of  his  brother.  Romulus  obeyed,  and  he  called  that
day  on  which  the  prescribed  rites  are  performed  in  feyour  of
the  buried  dead,  "  Remuria.**  The  harsh  letter^^  which  was
the  flrst  in  the  entire  name,  in  lapse  of  time  was  changed
into  one  of  softer  articulation.  Afterwards,  they  called  the
ghosts  of  the  silent  shades  the  "  Lemures :"  this  was  the
meaning  of  the  word ;  this  the  import  of  the  expression.
Yet,  on  those  days,  the  ancients  shut  uieir  temples  as  you  now
see  them  shut  at  the  festival  of  the  Feralia.  That  time,  too,
was  not  auspicious  for  the  marriage  torches  of  the  widow  or  of
the  virgin. She  who  married  then  did  not  long  remain'^  a

^  A  phantom  qf  air,'] — ^Ver.  463-4. Gower  thos  renders  these  lines —
'  Now  is  your  Remus  but  a  dream  of  air,
A  fitting  relique  of  the  piles  impair.'

71  The  harth  te//«r.]— Ver.  481.  He  says  that  the  feast  in  honour  of
the  shade  of  Remus  was  originally  called,  Remuria,  but  that  in  lapse  of
time  the  first  letter  was  changed  into  the  letter  L,  and  that  eventually  all
spirits  of  the  dead  obtained  the  appellation  of  *  Lemures/ — a  very  impro-
bable  story.

"  Did  not  long  remain.] — ^Ver.  488.  He  means  to  say  that  such  wivM,
either  by  their  shrewishness,  or  for  worse  reasons,  soon  create  a  necessi^
for  a  divOTce  on  the  part  of  their  husbands.


y  Google


B.  V.  488—515.] OB, OALENDAB  OF  OYID.  199

mfe.  For  this  reason,  too,  if  proverbs  have  any  weight  with
you,  the  common  people  say  that  "  bad  prove  ^e  wives  that
are  married  in  May."

Bat  these  three  festivals,  I  should  observe,  are  at  the  same
season,  but  continued  on  no  one  of  the  days  intervening''^
between  them.  On  the  middle  one  of  these  days  if  you  seek
for  the  Boeotian  Orion,^'*  you  will  be  disappointed.  The  origin
of  this  Constellation  must  now  be  sung  by  me.  Jupiter  and
his  brother,  who  rules  over  the  wide  ocean,  together  with
Mercury,  were  on  their  travels.  It  was  the  hour  when
ploughs  turned  over  on  the  yoke  are  carried  homeward,  and
the  lamb  drinks  the  milk  of  the  ewe  as  it  downward  presses
the  udder.  By  chance,  the  old  man,  Hyrieus,  the  cultivator
of  a  scanty  farm,  catches  sight  of  them  while  he  is  standing
before  his  hiunble  cottage,  and  thus  he  accosts  them,— "Long
is  the  road,  and  but  little  of  the  day  now  remains ;  my  door,
too,  is  ever  open  to  the  stranger."  He  adds  looks  to  his
words  which  fully  confirm  them :  they  comply  with  his  invita-
tion, and  conceal  their  divine  nature.  They  come  beneath  the
roof  of  the  old  man,  soiled  with  the  blackening  smoke;  there
is  a  httle  fire  remaining^^  in  the  log  that  had  been  laid  on
the  day  before.  He,  hunself,  on  his  knees,  kindles  the  blaze
with  his  breath,  and  then  brings  out  and  breaks  up  the  split
firewood.  The  pipkins  stand  on  the  table;  the  smaller  of
them  contains  beans ;  the  other  herbs ;  and  each  of  them,
covered  with  its  lid,  sends  forth  its  steam.  While  there  is  a
a  pause,  he  presents  with  his  shaking  right  hand  the  blushing
wine.  The  God  of  the  Ocean  receives  the  first  cup.  When
he  has  drunk  off  the  contents,  he  says,  "  Pour  out  some  more,
that  Jupiter,  in  his  turn,  may  drink."  At  hearing  the  name
of  Jupiter,  the  man  turns  pale. As  soon  as  his  self-posses-

^  Days  intervening.'] — Yer.  492.  The  Lemuria  were  held  on  three
alternate  days,  the  7th»  5th,  and  3rd  of  the  Ides  of  May,  answering  to
May  9th,  11th,  and  13th.

^*  Orion,']— -\&[,  493.  The  Constellation  of  Orion  sets  on  the  5th  of
the  Ides  of  May.  Hesiod  says  that  he  was  the  son  of  Neptune  by  Euryale,
daughter  of  Minos.  Pindar  makes  the  Isle  of  Chios  to  have  heen  his
birth-place,  and  not  Boeotia.

"^  A  little  fire  remaimng] — ^Ver.  506.  Allusion  is  here  made  to  the  block
whieh  was  kept  on  the  hearth  smouldering  from  day  to  day,  to  be  in  rea-
diness for  cooking  the, principal  meal  of  the  day,  for  which  service  only,
fire  would  probably  be  required  by  poor  people,  in  a  warm  climate.


y  Google


200  THE  FASTI ;  [b.  v.  515—542.

sion  returns,  be  Bacnfices  the  ox,  the  tiller  of  his  humble  fSBim,
roasting  him  on  a  large  fire,  and  he  draws  the  wine  which  he
had  racked  in  his  early  years,^*  when  stored  in  a  smoky  cask.
He  admits  of  no  dela^ ;  now  they  reclined  on  couches  that
concealed  under  the  Imen  coyer  the  sedge  of  the  river,  and
eyen  with  that  addition,  by  no  means  lofty  ones.  Now  was
the  board  graced  with  viands,^  and  with  the  wine  placed  upon
it.  The  bowl  was  of  red  clay ;  the  cups  of  beech  wood.
These  were  the  words  of  Joye, — "If  thy  inclination  leads
thee  to  desire  anything,  wish  for  it:  thou  shalt  receive  any-
thing." These  were  the  words  of  the  mild  old  man, — "  I
once  had  a  dear  wife,  known  ad  the  choice  of  my  early  youth.  ^
You  ask  where  she  is  now :  the  urn  covers  her.  To  her  did
I  swear  this,  having  called  yourselves  as  witnesses  of  my  vow,
thou  alone  shalt  enjoy  wedlock  with  me.  I  swore  it,  and
keep  my  oath  ;  but  now  I  have  desires  that  are  not  compatible
with  each  other ;  I  do  not  wish  to  be  a  husband ;  but  I  desire
to  be  a  father."  They  assented  to  his  desire;  they  all
stood  round  the  hide  of  the  bull.  Modesty  forbids  me  to  tell
the  rest.  Then  did  they  cover  the  soaking  hide  with  earth
heaped  upon  it.  And  now  ten  months  had  passed,  and  a  boy
was  bom;  him  Hirieus  calls  Urion,  because  he  was  thus
begotten ;  the  first  letter  has  now  lost  the  ancient  sound.
He  had  grown  to  a  huge  size  ;  the  Gt)ddess  of  Delos  took  him
as  her  companion ;  he  was  the  protector  and  the  attendant
of  the  Goddess.  His  unguarded  words  excited  the  anger  of
tlie  Gods.  "  There  is  no  wild  beast,"  said  he,  "  that  I  am
unable  to  conquer." The  earth  sent  a  scorpion ;  ^®  it  attempted

"^^  Jn  hit  early  pears,] — ^Ver.  517-18. Gower  thus  renders  these  lines —

*  Then  broached  a  hogshead  of  his  special  sack,
Which  in  his  young  days  he  himsdf  did  make/

The  *  amphorae/  or  *  cadi/  *  casks/  were  exposed  purposely  to  the  action
of  smoke,  as  it  was  supposed  to  mellow  the  wine.
^  Graced  with  viands.'] — ^Ver.  521-2.  Gower  thus  renders  these  lines —

*  Now  braves  his  board  with  dainty  cakes  and  liquors,
In  earthen  dishes,  and  in  beech-tree  beakers.'

^  A  scorpion,] — Ver.  541.  Horace  does  not  represent  him  as  being
killed  by  the  sting  of  a  scorpion,  but  as  being  slain  by  the  shafts  of  Diana,
when  he  had  made  an  attempt  on  her  chastity.  Other  writers,  however,
with  Ovid,  represent  him  as  the  faTourite  and  protector  of  that  Goddess,
and  like  her,  excelling  in  the  chase.


y  Google


B.  V.  542—567.] OB, CiLLEinUB  OP  OTCD.  201

to  fasten  its  crooked  claws  in  the  Goddess,  the  mother  of  the
twins ;  Orion  opposed  it.  Latona  added  him  to  the  number
of  the  radiant  stars,  and  said,  *^  Enjoy  the  reward  of  thy
deserts/*

But  why  do  both  Orion  and  the  other  stars  hasten  to  leave
the  sky  ?  and  why  does  Night  contract  her  path  ?  Why,  more
swiftly  than  usual,  does  the  fair  day  raise  its  beams  from  the
watery  deep,  the  morning  star  preceding  ?  Am  I  mistaken  ?
or  do  arms  now  clash  ?  I  am  not  deceived :  it  was  the  clash
of  arms.  Mars  is  approaching,^^  and,  as  he  comes,  he  gives  the
mdications  of  war.  The  Avenger  himself  comes  down  from
heaven  to  his  or^iyi  honours,  and  to  the  temple  conspicuous  in
the  Forum  of  Augustus.  Mighty  is  the  God,  and  so  is  the  work ;
in  no  other  fashion  ought  Mars  to  have  his  habitation  in  the
city  of  his  offspring.  These  shrines  are  worthy  of  the  trophies
won  from  the  giants  ;  it  becomes  Gradivus  from  this  spot  to
^ve  an  impulse  to  the  cruel  warfare ;  whether  it  be  that  any
one  shall  assail  us  from  the  eastern  world,  or  whether,  under
the  western  Sun,  the  enemy  will  have  to  be  subdued.  He,  all-
powerfol  in  arms,  surveys  the  pinnacles  of  the  highest  part  of
the  building,  and  considers  it  right  that  the  unconquered  Grods
should  possess  its  summit.  He  surveys,  on  the  portals,  the
weapons  of  various  forms,^  and  the  arms  of  the  world  con-
quered by  his  own  soldiers.  On  one  side,  he  beholds  ^neas
kden  with  the  burden  of  affection,  and  so  many  progenitors
of  the  noble  house  of  lulus :  on  another  side  he  beholds  the
son  of  Hia^^  bearing  on  his  shoulders  the  armour  of  the  chief-
tain, and  their  illustrious  deeds  toritten  on  the  base  beneath
the  heroes  ranged  in  order. He  sees,  too,  the  temple  adorned

"  Mars  is  approaching.'] — Ver.  550.  On  the  4th  of  the  Ides  there
were  sports  in  the  Circus  in  honour  of  Mars  Ultor,  or  *  the  Avenger.'  At
the  battle  of  Philippi,  Augustus  had  vowed  a  temple  to  Mars.  When
peace  was  restored,  he  huilt  the  Augustan  Forum,  at  an  immense  expense,
and  there  erected  a  temple  to  Mars,  of  surpassing  magnificence.  On  the
4th  of  the  Ides  of  May  he  consecrated  it.

^  The  weapons  of  various  forms.'] — ^Ver.  561.  Suetonius  tells  us,  that
on  the  building  of  this  temple  the  successful  generals  of  the  time  were
ordered  to  erect  their  trophies  therein ;  and  Pliny  (Nat.  Hist.  Book  xxxv.
c  10)  says  that  Augustus  erected  in  his  own  Forum  (probably  in  the
temple  of  Mars)  two  pictures,  representing  a  battle  and  a  triumph.

•^  The  son  qf  Ilia.] — ^Ver.  565.  Romulus ;  bearing  the  *  spolia  opima,'
the  armour  of  Acron,  king  of  the  Caeninenses,  whom  he  had  slain  with  his
own  hand.


y  Google


202  THE  FASTI ;  [b.  v. 567^-593

with  the  name  of  Angostas ;  and  as  be  reads  the  name  of
Caesar,  the  work  appears  still  greater.  This,  when  a  young
man,  he  had  yowed,  at  the  time  when  he  took  np  the  arms  of
duty ;  from  such  acts  as  these  ought  a  Prmce  to  commence
his  career  o/eomnumd.  He,  stretdbmg  forth  his  hands,  as,  on
one  side,  stood  his  ayenging  army,  on  the  other,  the  conspira-
tors, thus  spake : — ''  If  the  father  of  warfare,  and  the  priestess
of  Vesta,  are  the  founders  of  my  race,  and  I  am  preparing  to
ayenge  either  of  these  [Diyinities,  do  thou.  Mars,  come  hither
and  satiate  thy  sword  in  the  accursed  blood,  and  let  thy  fayour
abide  by  the  better  cause.  Thou  shalt  receiye  a  temple,  and
when  I  am  yictorious  *  The  Ayenger*  shall  be  thy  title."  He
had  uttered  his  yow,  and  returned,  exulting,  from  the  routed
foe.  Nor  is  it  enough  for  Mars  once  to  haye  merited  this  epi-
thet :  he  pursues  the  standards  detained  in  the  hands  of  the
Parthian.  This  was  a  nation  protected  both  by  their  plains,
their  horses,  and  their  arrows,  and  inaccessible  from  the  riyers
that  surrounded  them.  The  slaughter  of  the  Crassi^  had
giyen  daring  to  the  nation,  when  soldier,  general,  and  stand-
ards were  lost  together.  The  Parthian  was  in  possession  of
the  Roman  standt^ds,  the  token  of  honour  in  warfare ;  and  an
enemy  was  the  bearer  of  the  Roman  eagle.  And  still  would
that  disgrace  haye  been  remaining,  had  not  the  empire  of  Au-
sonia  been  protected  by  the  yaliant  armies  of  Csesar.''  'Twas
he,  that  remoyed  the  ancient  stains,  and  the  disgrace  of  so  long
duration;  the  standards,  when  recoyered,  recognized  their
friends.  What,  then,  thou  Parthian,  ayailed  thee  the  arrows
wont  to  be  discharged  behind  My  back^  What,  thy  inaccessible
places  ?  What,  the  management  of  thy  fleet  steed  ?  Parthian !
thou  restorest  the  eagles !  thy  conquered  bows,^  too,  thou  ex-

**  The  Cra»«<.]— Ver.  583.  Both  M.  Licinius  Crassus,  the  father,  and
his  son,  P.  L.  Crassus,  with  eleven  Roman  legions,  were  cut  to  pieces  hy
the  Parthians  on  this  occasion.  Flaccus  f  Book  iii.  c.  2.)  says,  that  at  the
time  of  his  surprise  *  he  was  gaping  after,^  *  inhiabat,'  the  Parthian  gold.
It  is  said  that  the  Parthians,  in  ridicule  of  his  known  weakness,  cut  off  his
head,  and  poured  melted  gold  down  his  throat.

**  Arms  of  Casar,] — ^Ver.  588.  Phraates,  the  Parthian  leader,  had
agreed  to  restore  to  Caesar  the  standards  which  his  countrymen  had  taken
from  Crassus,  and  afterwards  from  Antony ;  but  he  hesitated  to  fulfil  his
engagement  until  he  heard  that  Augustus  was  preparing  an  expedition  to
enforce  compliance  with  his  demand.

^  Thy  conquered  howe.'] — ^Ver.  593. Some  of  the  Roman  coins  of  this


y  Google


B.  Y.  593->62e.]  OB, OALSITDAB  OF  OYID.  203

tendest !  Now,  not  any  pledges  of  our  disgrace  hast  thou.
Well  was  the  temple  and  the  name  given  to  the  Deity  who
twice  avenged  us,  and  the  deserved  honour  acquits  us  of  the
obligation  undertaken  by  our  vows.  Celebrate,  ye  Quirites,
these  solemn  games  in  the  Circus ;  the  theatre  does  not  seem
to  be  befitting  the  God  of  valour.

When  one  night  shall  be  remaining  before  the  Ides,  you  shall
see  all  the  Plei^es,^  and  the  whole  company  of  the  sisters.  At
that  time,  according  to  no  mean  authority,  as  I  think,  the  summer
commences,  and  the  season  of  the  mild  spring  comes  to  a  close.

The  day  before  the  Ides  shows  the  Bull^  raising  his  hce
bespangled  with  stars  ;  a  well-known  story  is  attached  to  this
Constellation.  Jupiter,  in  the  form  of  a  bull,  offered  his  back
to  the  Tyrian  maid,"  and  bore  horns  on  an  assumed  forehead.
She,  with  her  right  hand,  held  by  his  mane,  and  with  her  left
she  held  her  dress ;  and  her  very  alarm  was  a  source  of  addi-
tional grace.  The  breeze  swells  her  flowing  robes ;  her  auburn
hair  floats  along  the  wind.  In  sudi  guise,  Sidonian  maid,
it  was  befitting  that  Jove  should  behold  thee.  Full  oft  did
she  raise  her  maiden  feet  from  the  water  of  the  ocean,  and
dread  the  splash  of  the  dashing  wave;  often  did  the  God
purposely  sink  deeper  in  the  waves,  that  she  might  the  more
tightly  cling  to  his  neck.  The  shore  now  reachecJC  Jove  stood
without  horns,  and  from  a  bull  was  changed  into  a  God.  The
bull  enters  the  heavens;  thee,  maid  of  Sidon,  Jupiter  em-
braces, and  a  third  part  of  the  earth  bears  thy  name.  Others
have  said  that  this  Constellation  is  the  cow  of  Pharos,^  which,
from  a  human  being,  was  made  a  cow,  from  a  cow,  a  Goddess.

period  are  still  in  existence,  which  represent  a  Parthian  on  his  bended
knee,  extending  towards  Augustus  the  standards,  and  a  bow  and  arrows.

^  AU  the  Pleidde8.]-^\er,  599.  On  the  3rd  of  the  Ides  of  May,  the
Pleiades  rise  acronychally,  and  the  summer  begins.  The  ancients  generally
regulated  their  agricultural  operations  by  the  rising  and  setting  of  the
Pleiades.

^  Shows  the  BuU.'\-~V&c,  603.  On  the  day  before  the  Ides,  the  14th
of  May,  the  head  of  the  Bull  rises  cosmically.

^  The  Tyrian  maid,] — ^Ver.  605-6.  Europa,  the  daughter  of  Agenor,
long  of  Phoenicia.  The  following  is  Gower's  comical  translation  of  these
lines, —

'  Once  Jove,  well  hom'd  and  turned  to  a  bull,
Packed  up  the  Tyrian  virgin  by  the  gulL'

*  The  cow  of  PAaro*.]— Ver.  619.  lo,  or  Isis ;  thus  called  from
Phaioi,  an  island  of  Egypt,  at  the  month  of  the  river  Nile.


y  Google


204  THE  PAST! ;  [b.  V.  621—634.

On  this  day,  too,  the  Vestal  yirgin  is  wont  to  throw  from
the  oak-built  bridge  the  images  of  the  ancient  men,  platted  in
rashes.^  He  who  has  formed  a  belief  that  aged  men,  after  their
sixtieth  year,  were  put  to  death  by  them,  chained  onr  ancestors
with  wanton  cmelty.*^  The  tradition  is  an  old  one:  at  the  time
when  this  was  called  the  Satomian  land,  these  were  the  words
of  the  prophetic  God: — "Ye  nations,  throw  two  bodies  in
sacrifice  to  die  sickle-bearing  aged  Chd,  to  be  caught  by  the  Etru-
rian stream."  Until  the  IHrynthian  came  to  these  fields,  each
year  was  the  cruel  sacrifice  performed  with  theLeucadian  rites.*^
They  say  that  he  was  the  first  to  throw  into  the  stream  citi-
zens made  of  bundles  of  straw ;  and  that,  after  the  example
of  Hercules,  fictitious  bodies  are  still  so  thrown.  Some  thmk
that,  with  the  Tiew  that  they  alone  might  enjoy  the  right  of
suffrage,  the  youths  did  fiing^  from  the  bridges  the  infirm  old

«»  PUitUA  in  rwto.]— Vcr.  622.  On  the  ^des  of  Mayj  or,  as  Ovid
seejns  to  say,  on  the  day  before,  the  Vestals,  attended  by  the  Pontifices  and
Pnetors,  used  to  throw  from  the  Sublidan  bridge  thirty  images  of  old  men,
stuffed  with  buhrushes.  These  were  called  Argei ;  and  the  poet  proceeds  to
inquire  into  the  origin  of  a  custom  so  remarkable.  The  Sublician  bridge,
from  which  they  were  thrown,  was  so  called  from  the  '  sublicse/  or  piles
on  which  it  was  built :  it  was  the  original  bridge  of  Rome,  and,  fri>m  its
having  been  the  duty  of  the  priests  to  keep  it  in  repair,  they  received  the
name  of  '  pontifex,*  or  *  bridge-maker,'  which  is  the  literal  signification  of
the  word. It  was  rebuilt  of  stone  by  -ffimilius  Lepidus.

^  With  toanton  cruelty.] — Ver.  624.  The  poet  rejects  the  first  opinion,
that  it  was  done  to  commemorate  a  time  when  the  ancient  Romans  used
to  throw  the  aged  men  into  the  Tiber  and  drown  them.

*^  With  the  Leucadian  ri^.]— Ver.  630.  The  poet  says  that  the  second
opinion  on  its  origin  was,  that  it  commemorated  a  time  when  human  sacri-
fices were  offered  at  Rome.  Leucas,  now  Santa  Maura,  was  anciently  a
peninsula  of  Acamania ;  now  it  is  an  island.  The  custom  alluded  to  was
that  of  throwing  a  criminal,  on  the  festival  of  Apollo,  fri>m  the  heights  into
the  sea,  wings  and  a  multitude  of  birds  being  first  attached  to  him  to  break
his  fall.  Persons  in  small  boats  waited  below  to  catch  him  in  his  descent,
and  to  carry  him  beyond  the  bounds  of  the  country.  This  comparatively
merciful  dealing  with  a  criminal  would  hardly  justify  the  poet  in  applying
the  epithet '  Leucadian/  to  the  horrid  custom  of  human  saoifice.  Perhaps
it  ought  to  be  translated  rigidly  '  after  the  Leucadian  manner,'  in  allusion
merely  to  the  'mode'  of  treatment  in  both  cases ;  throwing  fr^m  a  height
being  the  method  adopted,  though  with  intentions,  and  probably,  results,  of
so  different  a  nature.  Disappointed  lovers  and  persons  in  distress  used  to
'  throw  themselves  from  the  Leucadian  rock,  whence  it  obtained  the  name
of  *  the  Lover's  Leap.'

^  The  youths  did  >7<fi^.]— Ver.  634. The  poet  here  states  the  third


y  Google


B.  V.  634—659.] OB, CALSITDAB  OP  OVID.  205

men.  Tiber,  teach  me  the  tnith ;  thy  bank  is  of  higher  an-
tiquity than  the  City;  thou  hast  the  opportunity  of  well
knowing  the  origin  of  the  ceremony.  Tiber  raises  his  head
crowned  with  reeds  from  the  midst  of  his  channel,  and  in  such
accents  opens  his  hoarse  mouth : — "  I  have  beheld  this  place,
a  lonely  piece  of  pasture  land,  without  walls ;  each  of  my  banks
used  to  feed  the  straggling  cattle ;  and  I,  that  Tiber  which  all
nations  now  know  and  hold  in  dread,  then  was  an  object,  even
to  the  flocks,  unworthy  of  notice.  The  name  of  Arcadian
Evander  is  ofttimes  mentioned  to  thee;  he,  as  a  stranger,
dashed  my  waters  with  his  oars.  There  came,  too,  Alcides,
attended  by  a  Grecian  multitude.  Then,  if  I  remember  aright,
Albula  was  my  name.  The  hero  of  Pallantium^  receives  the
youth  with  hospitaUty,  and  the  punishment  which  was  his  due
falls  at  length  upon  Cacus.  The  conqueror  departs,  and  with
him  carries  away  the  kine,  the  booty  of  Erythea ;  but  his  fol-
lowers refuse  to  proceed  any  further ;  a  great  part  of  them
bad  come  having  left  Argos  behind ;  in  these  mountains  they
establish  their  hopes  and  their  home.  Yet  many  a  time  are
they  influenced  by  sweet  love  of  their  father-land,  and  as  he
dies,  oft  does  some  one  of  them  enjoin  this  slight  task — "Throw
my  body  into  the  Tiber,  that,  carried  by  the  waves  of  the  river,
I,  become  lifeless  dust,  may  go  to  the  Inachian  shore.'"*  The
care  of  providing  such  a  tomb  as  he  enjoined  displeases  his
heir ;  the  corpse  of  the  stranger  is  buried  in  Ausonian  ground ;
a  rush-made  image  is  thrown  into  the  Tiber  instead  of  the

opmion.  Festas  explains  this  story  on  the  groond  of  a  8ing:ular  misconcep-
tion ;  that  the  aged  men  heing  free  from  the  hurden  of  public  duties,  but
still  retaming  their  right  of  voting,  the  younger  ones  became  jealous  of
their  retention  of  this  right,  and  that,  on  their  going  over  the  *  pons,'  or
*  plank,'  to  record  their  votes,  the  young  men  used  to  cry  out,  *  that  they
ought  to  be  thrown  from  the  '  pons,'  (which  word  also  means  *■  a  bridge'),
or,  in  other  words,  that  they  ought  to  lose  the  right  of  voting.  The  poet
seems  to  say  that  the  young  men  actually  had  the  ill  manners  to  push
the  older  ones  off  the  *  pontes.'  If  so,  it  is  a  very  early  specimen  of  an
election  row.

*  The  hero  of  PaUantium, — Ver.  647.  Pallantium,  a  town  of  Arcadia,
was  the  native  place  of  Evander.  The  arrival  of  Evander  and  Hercules  in
Italy  are  referred  to  in  the  first  Book.

••  The  Inachian  shore.l — ^Ver.  656.  The  Inachus  was  a  river  of  Argos.
The  only  ground  on  which  the  story  is  based  seems  to  be  the  similarity  of
the  name, '  Argei,'  by  which  these  images  were  called,  and  the  name  of
the  Argives  in  their  own  language,  'Apytioi.


y  Google


206  THE  PASTI ;  [b.  v.  659—676.

master  of  the  family ^  that  oyer  the  wide  seas  it  may  return  to
a  Grecian  home."  Thus  much  he  mid;  when  he  descended
into  his  grottoes,  dripping  from  the  natural  rock,  you,  ye
lightly  flowing  streams,  withheld  your  current.

Illustrious  grandson  of  Atlas !  come  hither.  Thou  whom
once,  on  the  Arcadian  mountains,  one  of  the  PleiUdes  brought
forth  to  Jove :  thou  minister  of  peace  and  war  to  the  Gods
above,  and  the  Gods  below :  thou  who  wendest  thy  way  with
winged  foot  ;**  thou  exulting  in  the  touch  of  the  Lyre ;  ex-
ulting, too,  in  the  Palaestra  shining  with  oil,^  under  the
patronage  of  whom  the  tongue  learned  to  speak  with  ele-
gance I  On  the  Ides  did  their  fathers  erect  for  thee  a  temple
looking  towards  the  Circus.  From  that  time  is  this  a  day  de-
voted to  thee.  Whoever  make  a  business  of  selling  their
wares,  having  first  offered  thee  the  frankincense,  beg  of  thee
that  thou  wilt  grant  them  profit.  The  fountain  of  Mercury*^
is  near  the  Capenian  gate :  if  we  may  beheve  those  who  have
experienced  it,  it  has  a  divine  efficacy.  Hither  comes  the
traidesman,  having  a  girdle^  round  his  robes,  and,  in  a  state  of

**  With  winged  foot.} — ^Ver.  663 — 6.  Gower  thus  renders  these  hnes, —

*  Brave  lad  of  Atlas,  whom  of  Joviall  seed
Fair  Maia  on  th'  Arcadian  hOl  did  breed :
Thou  wing-foot  arbiter  between  the  gods
Of  heaven  and  hell,  in  friendship  and  at  ods.'

On  the  Ides  of  May,  a.u.c.  497,  a  temple  was  dedicated  to  Mercury,  as
the  patron  of  traders,  near  the  Circus  Maximus.  His  name,  no  doubt,  came
from  the  Latin  word  *  merx,'  *  merchandize ;'  and  when,  in  later  times,  he
was  identified  with  the  Grecian  deity,  Hermes,  he  received  the  office  of
that  deity  as  herald  or  messenger  of  the  Gods,  and  the  giver  of  eloquence.

9*  The  PaUestra  ehimng  with  oi/.]— Ver.  667.  *  Palaestra'  was  a  general
term  for  all  athletic  exercises,  such  as  wrestling,  running,  and  ^xing ;
before  commencing  which,  the  persons  contending  used  to  anoint  them-
selves with  oil.  Mercury  was  the  patron  of  these  exercises ;  probably,
because  they  required  both  a^ty  and  cunning  for  the  purpose  of  excelling
in  the  art  of  self-defence,  which  qualifications  were  eminently  two  of  the
characteristics  of  Mercury.

97  The  fountain  of  Jlf«ercttry.]— Ver.  673.  This  fountain  or  well  is  not
mentioned  in  any  other  passage  now  existing  of  the  ancient  authors.

*  Having  a  g%rdleJ\ — ^Ver.  675.  It  was  customary  with  the  tradesmen
in  those  times  to  have  a  girdle  round  the  waist,  from  which  they  sus-
pended  their  purse ;  sometimes,  too,  they  used  the  folds  of  the  gurdle  for
the  purpose  of  depositing  their  money  therein.  This  custom  must  have
considerably  promoted  the  interesti  of  the  pickpockets  at  Rome.


y  Google


Bi  V.  676—700.] OB, CALEITDAE  OF  OVID.  207

purity,  he  draws  some  of  the  water,  to  carry  it  away  in  a  per-
fumed urn ;  in  this  a  laurel  branch  is  dipped,  and  with  the
wet  laurel  are  sprinkled  all  the  things  which  are  intended  to
change  owners.  He  sprinkles  his  own  hair,  too,  with  the
dripping  bough,  and  runs  through  his  prayers  in  a  voice  ac-
customed to  deceive.*^  "  Wash  away  the  perjuries  of  past
time,"  says  he  :  "  wash  away  my  lying  words  of  the  past  day,
whether  I  have  made  thee  to  attest  for  me,  or  whether  I  have
invoked  the  great  Godhead  of  Jove,  whom  I  did  not  intend  to
listen  to  me.  Or  if  I  have  knowingly  deceived  any  other  of
the  Gods,  or  any  Goddess,  let  the  swift  breezes  bear  away  my
wicked  speeches.  Let  there  be  no  trace  left  of  my  perjuries
on  the  morrow,  and  let  not  the  Gods  care  whatever  I  may
choose  to  say.  Do  but  give  me  profits ;  give  me  the  dehght
that  rises  from  gain,  and  grant  that  it  may  be  lucrative  to  me  to
impose  on  my  customers."  From  on  high.  Mercury  laughs  at
his  worshipper  wMLe  making  such  requests  as  these,  remem-
bering that  once  on  a  time  he  himself  stole  the  Ortygian  kine.^
But  explain  to  me,  I  pray,  who  am  making  far  more  be-
coming requests,  i^om  what  time  the  Sun  passes  into  the  Con-
stellation of  ike  Twins  ?  His  answer  was,  "When  thou  shalt  see
days  remain  of  the  month  as  many  as  were  the  exploits  of  the
labours  of  Hercules."  "Tell  me,"  I  said,  "the  origin  of  this  Con-
stellation?" The  God,  with  eloquent  hps,  explained  the  cause :
— "  The  brothers,  the  sons  of  Tyndarus,  had  borne  off  Phcebe,

*  Accustomed  to  deceive,"] — Ver.  681.  The  character  of  the  trader
was  held  in  bad  repute  at  Rome,  and  no  citizen  who  prided  himself  upon
his  own  respectability  would  be  employed  in  commerce.  From  this  ban
being  put  upon  trade,  it  is  not,  surprising  that  it  fell  into  the  hands  of
such  characters  as  the  one  mentioned  in  the  text.  Gower  thus  translates
lines  685-690  :—

*  What  power  soever  broker  to  my  lie
I've  made,  now  let  them  vanish  all  and  die.
Wink  thou  at  all  my  slie  deceits  to-day,
Let  not  the  Gods  tsike  notice  what  I  say.
Afford  me  gains,  and  joy  that  my  desire
Of  gain  is  fed,  and  that  I've  gull'd  the  buyer.'

*  TJie  Ortygian  kine,'] — ^Ver.  692.  Ortygia  was  the  ancient  name  of
the  Isle  of  Delos.  The  allusion  in  the  text  is  to  the  theft  by  Mercury  of
the  cattle  of  Admetus,  king  of  Thessaly,  which  were  tended  by  Apollo,
who  was  bom  in  Delos.  Ortygia  was  also  the  name  also  of  a  small  island
near  Sicily,  and  was  one  of  the  epithets  of  Ephesus,  in  Ionia.


y  Google


208  THE  FASTI;  [b.  v.  700—722.

and  the  sister  of  Phoebe  ;^  the  one  of  them  was  a  horseman,
the  other  skilled  as  a  pugilist.  Idas  and  his  brother  prepare
for  war,  and  seek  to  recover  those  betrothed  to  theih,  being
both  of  them  affianced  to  be  sons-in-law  of  Leucippos.  Loye
persuades  these  to  recover  the  damsels,  the  others,  to  refuse  to
give  them  up ;  and  from  the  same  motive  each  one  of  them
fights.  The  (Ebalian  brothers'  were  fully  able  to  escape  their
pursuers  by  flight ;  but  it  seemed  a  disgrace  to  conquer  only  by
speed  in  flight.  There  is  a  spot,  destitute  of  trees,  suited  as  a
fitting  ground  for  a  combat.  There  had  they  taken  their
stand  ;  Aphidna^  was  the  name  of  the  place.  Castor  having
his  breast  pierced  by  the  sword  of  Lyncseus,  lay  stretched  on
the  earth  by  an  unexpected  wound.  The  avenging  Pollux  is
at  hand,  and  pierces  Lyncseus  with  his  spear,  in  the  spot,  where
the  neck  at  its  termination  joins  the  shoulders.  Idas  was
rushing  on  him,  and  hardly  by  the  hghtning  of  Jove  was  he
repelled,  and  they  say  that  his  weapon  was  liot  even  wrenched
from  his  right  hwid  by  the  bolt.  And  now,  Pollux,  the  lofty
heaven  was  open  to  thee,  when  thou  saidst,  '  Hear  my  words,
my  father !  That  heaven  which  as  of  right  thou  grantest  to
me  alone,  divide  between  us  two ;  half  will  then  be  more  va-
luable to  me  than  the  whole  of  the  gift.'  He  spoke,  and  ran-
somed his  brother  by  an  alternate  change  of  place  ;*  the  pair
form  a  Constellation  serviceable  to  the  tossed  bark."  Let  him
return  to  the  month  of  Janus,*  who  asks  what  are  the  Agonia?
which,  however,  occupy  this  period  as  well  in  the  Calendar.

2  The  sister  of  i>Aa6c.]— Ver.  699.  Her  name  was  Elaira,  Ilaira,
or  Hilayra.  She  and  her  sister  Phoebe,  the  daughter  of  Leucippus,  were
betrothed  to  their  cousins  Idas  and  Lynceus,  the  sons  of  Aphareus.  The
Tyndaridae,  who  were  also  their  cousins,  carried  the  damsels  oflf  in  the
manner  stated  in  the  text.

^  The  (Ebalian  brothers.'] — ^Ver.  705.  Castor  and  Pollux  are  thus
styled,  either  because  they  were  Laconians,  who  were  also  called  (Ebalians,
or  because  (Ebalus  was  their  grandfather.

^  Aphidna.l — ^Ver.  708.  This  was  a  Demus,  or  small  district  of  Laco-
nia.  Theocritus  (Idyll.  25)  and  Pindar  (Nem.  ode  10)  represent  this  combat
as  taking  place  at  the  tomb  of  Aphareus,  in  Messenia.

*  Change  qf  place."] — ^Ver.  719-20.  The  following  is  Gower's  rather
incomprehensible  translation  of  these  lines : —

*  Then  to  his  brother  he  divides  his  charge,
A  welcome  couple  to  a  vexed  barge.'

«  The  month  of  Janus.]— \tr.  721.  See  book  i.  line  317.  On  the
12th  of  the  Calends  of  June  the  Agonia  were  rei>eated.  On  the  11th
the  Dog-star  sets  ;  for  as  such  is  the  fact,  and  as  '  exit '  can  be  so  trans-


y  Google


B.  V.  723—734.]  OE, CALEin)AB  OF  OVID.  209

On  the  nigbt  succeeding  this  day,  the  Dog  of  Erigone  de-
parts. In  another  place,  the  origin  of  this  sign  is  explained.

The  next  day  is  that  of  Vulcan :  they  call  it  Tubilustria.
The  trumpets'  which  he  makes  are  purified  as  sacred.

Then  comes  the  place  for  the  four  initials/  which  being  read
in  order,  either  the  custom  of  the  sacrifices,  or  the  flight  of  the
king  of  the  sacrificea,  is  meant  thereby.

Nor  do  I  pass  by  thee.  Public  Fortune,'  of  the  a/^powerful
nation ;  to  whom  on  the  following  day  a  temple  was  given.

When  Amphitrite,  abounding  in  waves,  shall  have  received
this  day,  thou  shalt  behold  the  beak  of  the  russet  bird^°  so
pleasing  to  Jove.  The  coming  dawn  removes  Bootes ^oi«  our
sight,  and,  on  the  succeeding  day,  the  Constellation  of  Hyas"
Mill  be  risen,

lated  with  propriety,  it  does  not  seem  to  be  just  to  the  poet  to  force  him  to
misrepresent  an  astronomieal  fact,  when,  in  all  probability,  he  had  not
even  inadvertently  been  guilty  of  an  error.  As  to  the  Dog-star,  see  book
iv.  1.  936.

7  The  ^rump^to.]— -Ver.  726.  On  the  11th  of  the  Calends  of  June  the
Tubilustria  were  repeated. See  book  iii.  L  849.

'  T/ie  place  for  the  four  initiate.]-— Ver.  727.  It  appears  that  the  ninth
day  of  the  Calends  of  June,  in  the  Roman  Calendar,  was  marked  with  the
four  initials,  Q.  R.  C.  F.  Yairo  tells  us  that  they  stood  for  '  quando  rex
comitiavit  fas,*  the  time  *  when  the  king  (of  the  sacrifices)  informs  the
people,  in  full  assembly,  of  the  days  that  are  auspicious  (fasti)  and  inaus-
picious (nefasti).'  Others  think  that  they  may  signify  *  quando  rex  comitio
fugit,'  '  when  the  king  (of  the  sacrifices)  flies  from  the  people  assembled'
Plutarch  tells  us  that  the  priest,  or  *rex  sacrificulus,*  attended  some
religious  ceremonies  at  the  '  comitium  *  or  assembly,  at  the  termination  of
which  he  formally  ran  out  of  the  building,  probably  to  signify  the  fact
that  he  was  debarred  by  his  sacred  duties  from  taking  part  in  any  civil
matters.  To  the  latter  solution,  the  *  flight  of  the  Wng*  mentioned  by
the  poet  most  probably  bears  reference ;  whatever  the  ceremonial  may  have
been,  on  this  day  it  seems  to  have  taken  place.

*  Public  Fortune.^^\eT,  730.  On  the  eighth  of  the  Calends  of  June,
the  temple  of  Fortuna  Publica  was  dedicated.  Some  commentators  think
that  this  was  the  temple  dedicated  to  Fortuna  Primigenia  by  Servius  Tul-
lius.  Mr.  Thynne  thinks  that  they  were  different  temples,  and  that  the
temple  of  Fortuna  Publica  was  on  the  Capitolium,  while  that  of  Fortuna
Primigenia  was  on  the  Quiiinal.

**  The  russet  5tr<l.]— -Ver.  732.  On  the  evenmg  of  the  8th  of  the  Ca-
lends of  June,  the  eagle  (Aquila)  rises.  The  eagle  was  the  attendant
bird  of  Jupiter. Hor.  B.  iv.  Od.  iv.  1. Ministrum  fulminis  alitem.

"  The  Constellation  o/ f/yot .]— Ver.  734.  On  the  7th  of  the  Calends
of  June,  Bootes  sets  heliacally,  and  on  the  6th  of  the  Calends,  the  Hyades
rise  in  the  same  manner.


y  Google


210  THS  TASTI;  [b. VI.


BOOK  THE  SIXTH.


CONTENTS.


The  three  opinions  on  the  origin  of  the  name  of  the  month  of  June,  Ver.
1 — 100.  The  Goddess  Carna,  her  attributes,  and  her  sacred  rites,  101 —
182.  The  temple  of  Juno  Moneta ;  and  the  punishment  of  Manliiis,
183 — 190.  The  temple  of  Mars  before  the  Capenian  Gate ;  the  temple
of  Tempest ;  the  rising  of  the  Constellation  /of  the  Eagle,  19 1-196.  The
rising  of  the  Hyades,  197»  198.  The  tewple  of  Bellona,  (on  mentioning
which,  allusion  is  made  to  Appius),  199 — 208.  The  temple  of  Hercules
Custos,  in  the  Circus  Flaminius,  209 — 212.  Mention  is  made  of  San-
cus,  Fidius,  or  Semo,  a  Sabine  Deity,  213—218.  The  early  part  of
Jime  inauspicious  for  marriage,  219 — 234.  The  setting  of  Arctophylax  ;
the  games  of  the  Fishermen  on  the  Campus  Martius,  235 — 240.  The
temple  of  the  Mind,  241 — 248.  The  Vestalia,  with  some  account  of
Vesta  and  heV  worship,  (in  which  the  poet  introduces  the  story  of  the
attempt  of  Priapus  on  the  chastity  of  the  Goddess ;  a  description  of
the  sphere  of  Archimedes ;  and  the  origin  of  the  altar  to  Jupiter  Pistor,
with  the  history  of  the  Palladium),  249 — 460.  The  surname  of  Callaicus
g^ven  to  Brutus ;  Crassus  conquered  by  the  Parthians,  461 — 468.  The
rising  of  the  Dolphin,  469 — 472.  The  temple  of  Matuta,  and  the  Ma-
tralia  celebrated  in  her  honour,  473—562.  The  death  of  Rutilius  and
Didius  in  battle,  563 — 568.  The  temple  of  Fortune  erected  by  Servios
Tullius ;  the  murder  of  Tullius  by  the  agency  of  his  daughter ;  liis
miraculous  birth,  569—636.  The  temple  dedicated  to  Concord  by  livia,
637 — 648.  The  temple  of  Jupiter  and  the  lesser  Quinquatrus ;  the  depar-
ture of  the  pipers  from  Rome,  and  their  return ;  the  invention  of  the
flute,  and  the  punishment  of  Marsyas,  649—710.  The  rising  of  the  Hy-
ades ;  the  cleansing  of  the  temple  of  Vesta,  711 — 714.  The  rising  of
Favonius,  715,  716.  The  rising  of  Orion ;  the  triumph  of  Posthumus
Tubertus  over  the  Volsci  and  the  iEqui,  717 — 724.  The  Lion  enters  the
Constellation  of  the  Crab ;  the  worship  of  PaUas  on  Mount  Aventine,
725—728.  The  temple  of  Summanus,  729—732.  The  rising  of  Ophi-
uchus ;  the  death  of  Hippolytus,  733 — 762.  The  defeat  and  death  of
Caius  Flaminius  at  Lake  Thrasymenus,  763 — 768.  The  conquest  of
Syphax  and  the  death  of  Hasdrubal,  769,  7 70.  The  rites  of  Fors  Fortuna,
the  Goddess  of  chance,  with  a  reference  to  Servius  Tullius,  771 — 784.


y  Google


B.  VI.  1—26.]  OB, OALBHTDAB  OF  OYID. '  211

The  rifling  of  Orion,  786 — 790.  The  temple  of  the  Lares  and  of  Jupiter
Stator,  791—794.  The  temple  of  Qmrinus,  795, 796.  The  temple  of  Her-
coles  and  the  Moses ;  the  praises  of  Marda,  797 — 812.

This  month,  too,  has  varying  causes  assigned  for  its  name  ;  all
of  these  heing  stated,  you  shill  choose  for  yourself  those  which
you  approve  of.  Of  realities  will  I  sing ;  but  some  there  will
be  to  say  that  I  have  invented  fictions,  and  to  beHeve  that
divine  beings  never  were  seen  by  mortals.  There  is  a  Deity
within  us ;  under  his  iofluence  we  glow  with  inspiration ;  this
poetic  fervour  contains  the  impregnating  particles  of  the  mind
of  the  Divinity.  To  me,  especially,  it  is  allowed  to  see  the
countenances  of  the  Gods,  both  because  I  am  a  poet,  and
because  of  sacred  matters  do  I  sing.  There  is  a  grove  densely
shaded  with  trees,  a  spot  sequestered  horn  every  sound,  did  it
not  re-echo  with  the  murmurs  of  a  stream.^  Here  was  I
engaged  in  inquiring  what  could  be  the  origin  of  this  month
winch  I  had  commenced  upon,  and  I  was  in  deep  thought
upon  this  name.  Lo !  I  beheld  Goddesses ;  not  those  whom
the  instructor  on  agriculture  had  seen  while  he  was  tending
the  sheep  of  Ascra ;'  nor  yet  those  whom  the  son  of  Priam
compared  in  the  vales  of  Ida  abounding  in  rills ;  yet  there
was  one  of  them ;  yes,  there  was  one  of  them,  she  who  is  the
sister  of  her  husband  ;  'twas  she,  I  recognized  her,  who  stands
on  the  heights^  which  belong  to  Jove.  I  was  struck  with  awe,
and  by  my  speechless  pallor,  I  was  betraying  my  feelings,  when
the  Goddess  herself  removed  those  alarms  which  she  had
caused,  for  she  said,  *'  0  poet,  compiler  of  the  Roman  year,
thou  who  hast  attempted  to  treat  of  mighty  subjects  in  humble
strains,  thou  hast  earned  for  thyself  the  privilege  of  beholding
a  Divinity  of  heaven  when  it  pleased  thee  to  compile  their
festivals  in  poetic  numbers.  But  that  thou  mayst  not  remain
ignorant,  and  be  iufluenced  by  a  vulgar  error,  June,  /  teU  thee^

*  Murmurs  qf  a  stream.'] — ^Ver.  9,  10. Gower  thus  transktes  these


.  «  There  is  a  tree-thronged  grave,  reserved  from  all
Shape  of  a  sound,  unlesse  some  water-fall/

*  Sheep  of  Ascra.] — Ver.  14.  Ascra  was  a  town  near  Mount  Helicon,
in  Bceotia,  of  which  pkce  the  poet  Hesiod  is  said  to  have  been  a  native.
In  his  iM>em,  entitled  *  the  Works  and  Days/  Hesiod  treats  of  rustic
matters,  and  invokes  the  nine  Muses  as  his  guides.

*  On  the  heights,] — ^Ver.  18.  Tlie  temple  of  Juno  was  on  the  right  of
that  of  Jupiter,  on  the  Capitoline  Hill.

P  2


y  Google


212.  THE  FASTI;  [b.  vi.  26—69.

derives  its  name  from  mine.  "Tis  something  to  be  the  bride
of  Jove,  to  be  the  sister  of  Jove  ;  I  hesitate  to  decide  whe-
ther I  should  take  the  more  pride  in  him  as  a  brother  or
as  a  husband.  If  birth  is  regarded,  'twas  I  that  first  made
Saturn  a  parent;  I  was  the  earliest  offspring  of  Saturn.
From  my  &ther,  was  Rome  once  called  the  land  of  Saturn ;
for  him,  this  land  was  the  next  abode  after  heaven.  If  marriage
is  held  in  respect,  then  I  am  caUed  the  spouse  of  the  Thunderer,
and  my  temple  is  adjoining  to  Tarpeian  Jove.  Was  a  concu-
bine able^  to  give  her  name  to  the  month  of  May,  and  shaJl
this  honour  be  grudged  to  me  ?  Why,  then,  am  I  styled  the
queen,  the  mistress  of  the  Gk)ddesses,  or  why  in  my  right  hand
have  thfey  placed  the  sceptre  of  gold  ?  Shall  the  days  united
constitute  the  month,  and  shall  I  from  them  be  called  Lucina,*
and  yet  shall  I  receive  no  renown  from  a  month  named  after
me  ?  In  such  case,  may  I  repent  that,  in  good  faith,  I  laid  aside
my  wrath  against  the  descendants  of  Electra  and  the  house  of
Dardanus.  Twofold  was  the  cause  of  my  wrath ;  I  grieved  when
Gkmymede  was  borne  away;  my  beauty,  too,  was  surpassed  in  the
judgment  of  him  of  Ida.  May  I  rejpent  that  I  do  not  still
encourage  the  towers  of  Carthage,  since  there  are  my  arms,
and  there  is  my  chariot.  Then  may  I  repent  that  I  subjected
Sparta  and  Argos,  and  my  own  Mycenae,  and  the  ancient
Samos  to  the  swa^  of  Latium.  Add,  too,  the  ancient  Tatfus,
and  Falisci,  worshippers  of  Juno,  whom  I  brooked  to  see  suc-
cumb to  the  men  of  Rome.  But  may  I  have  no  cause  for  re-
pentance, for  no  nation  is  dearer  to  me.  Here  may  I  still  be
worshipped ;  here  may  I  share  the  temples  with  my  Jove.  Mars
himself  said  to  me,  *  To  thee  do  I  entrust  these  walls ;  in  the
city  of  thy  grandson,  Romulus^  shalt  thou  hold  sway.'  His
words  are  verified;  at  a  hundred  altars  am  I  worshipped,
and  the  honour  of  giving  name  to  this  month  is  not  of  less
value  to  me  than  any  other  mark  of  respect.  Nor  is  it  Rome
only  that  pays  me  this  honour ;  tiie  neighbours  of  the  City
show  me  the  same  mark  of  respect. Examine  the  Calendar,

*  A  concubine  ahle^l — ^Ver.  35.  The  Pleiad  Maia,  the  mother  of  Mer-
cury. See  Book  v.  1.  85.  Gower  thus  renders  this  line  and  the  follow-
ing one —

*  Could  May,  that  strumpet,  have  a  month's  renown  ?
What  ?  And  shall  any  dare  deny  me  one  ?'

*  XmciVia.]— Ver.  39. For  the  origin  of  this  name,  see  Book  ii.  L  449.


y  Google


B.  VI.  59—86.]  OB, OALEISTDAE  OF  OTID.  .213

wMch  Aricia,  the  city  of  the  grove,  and  the  people  of  Lauren-
tam,  and  my  own  Lanuyium^  have;  there  is  the  month
Junonius  to  be  found.  Look  at  Tiber  and  the  walls  sacred
to  the  Goddess  of  Prseneste ;  there  wilt  thou  read  of  a  portion
of  time  called  after  the  name  of  Juno.  And  yet  it  was  not
Romulus  that  founded  these  ;  whereas  Rome  was  the  city  of
my  own  grandson.^'  Juno  had  ceased.  I  looked  behind  me ;
there  stqod  the  wife  of  Hercules,  and  on  her  features  were
the  indications  of  grief.  "  I  will  not,'*  said  she,  **  if  my  mother
bids''  me  quit  heaven  entirely,  stay  there  against  the  will  of
my  parent.  And  now  I  enter  into  no  contest  on  the  name  of
this  month.  In  soothing  accents  I  address  thee,  and  I  ahnost
act  the  part  of  a  supi>liant ;  and  though  the  matter  is  my  right,
I  would  prefer  obtaining  it  by  entreaty ;  and  perhaps  thou
thyself  mayst  favour  my  cause.  My  mother  has  gained  pos-
session of  the  Capitol  glittering  with  gold,  in  her  temple  there
erected;  and,  as  is  her  due,  she  shares, the  high  places  with
Jupiter.  But  aU  the  glory  belongs  to  me  that  is  derived  from
the  origin  of  ^Ae  nam^  q/'this  month;  this  is  the  only  point
of  honour  about  which  I  feel  any  anxiety.  What  matter  so
weighty  is  it,  if  thou,  man  of  Rome,  didst  give  the  honour  of
this  month  to  the  wife  of  Hercules,  and  if  posterity  conforms
to  it?  This  land,  too,  owes  me  something  on  account  of  my
illustrious  husband.  Hither  did  he  drive  his  captured  kine ;
here  Cacus,  making  but  a  poor  defence  with  his  flames  and
the  gifts  of  his  father,  stained  with  his  blood  the  ground  of
the  Aventine.  To  more  recent  transactions  I  am  now  called ;
according  to  their  years,  did  Romulus  arrange  the  people  and
divide  them  into  two-  classes ;  the  one  is  more  ready  to  de-
liberate, the  other  to  fight ;  those  of  the  one  age  recommend

*  Lamuvium.'] — ^Ver.  60.  At  Lanuvium  there  was  a  temple  and  grove
dedicated  to  Juno  Sospita.  At  Prseneste,  also,  there  was  a  temple  of  that
Goddjess. On  ancient  coins,  she  is  sometimes  called  Juno  Sispita.

'  ^  my  mother  bids.} — Ver.  67,  68.  Gower  thus  quaintly  renders
these  lines —

'  Should  my  dear  mother  bid  me  pack  away
From  heaven,  saith  she,  in  heaven  I  would  not  stay/

Hebe  was  the  daughter  of  Jupiter  and  Juno,  and  the  wife  of  Hercules ;
she  was  the  cup-bearer  of  the  Gods,  and  was  the  Goddess  of  Youth.  Juno
ba?mg  asserted  that  the  month  of  June  was  so  named  after  her,  Hebe,
who,  u  the  Goddess  of  Youth,  was  called  '  Juventas '  by  the  Romans,  now
asserts  that  the  name  is  derived  from  « juvenis,'  *  young.'


y  Google


214  THE  FASTI ;  [b.  vi.  86—109.

the  war£ure,  those  of  the  other,  wage  the  fight.  Thus  did  he
appoint,  and  with  the  same  mark  did  he  distinguish  the
months-— June  is  the  month  of  the  juniors  ;  the  month  that
precedes  it,  that  of  the  aged."  She  said,  and  with  the  keen-
ness of  contention  they  would  have  entered  on  the  discussion,
and  in  their  anger  would  the  ties  of  affection  have  heen  lost
sight  of,  when  Concord  came,  her  long  tresses  wreathed  with
the  laurel  of  Apollo,  the  Deity  and  the  object  of  our  peaceful
chief.  When  she  told  how  that  Tatius  and  the  brave  Qnirinus,
and  the  two  kingdoms,  together  with  their  subjects,  had  united,
and  that  fathers-in-law.  and  sons-in-law  were  received  under
one  common  roof,  *'  from  the  junction  "  of  these  nations,'*  says
she,  *'  does  the  month  of  June  derive  its  name."  The  causes
of  the  three  have  been  stated ;  but  pardon  me,  ye  Goddesses,
it  is  a  matter  not  to  be  decided  by  my  arbitration.  Depart,
equal  in  your  claims,  as  far  as  I  am  concerned.  Through  one
who  gave  a  judgment  on  beauty,  did  Pergamus  fall ;  two
Gknldesses  are  more  potent  to  injure  than  one  is  to  aid.'

The  first  day  is  dedicated  to  thee,  0  Cama."^  She  is  the
Gk)ddess  of  the  hinge  ;  byher  power  she  opens  what  is  e^ut,
and  shuts  what  is  open.  Whence  she  derives  the  power  that
has  been  given  to  her,  is  a  tale  rendered  obscure  by  lapse  of
time ;  but  by  my  verse  you  shall  be  informed  thereon.  The
ancient  grove  of  Helemus  is  near  the  stream  of  the  Tiber ;
even  now  do  the  Pontiffs  bear  thither  the  sacrifice.  From  him
was  bom  a  Nymph  (the  men  of  the  olden  time  called  her

^  From  the  juncfum.]— Yer.  96.  The  Goddess  Concord  suggests  that
the  month  of  June  recdved  its  name  from  *  jungo/  *  to  join ; '  in  comme*
morttion  of  the  union  of  the  Romans  with  the  Sahine  people ;  this  was  a
reason  verj  appropriately  urged  by  that  Goddess.

*  One  ie  to  atd]—- Ver.  09, 100. Gower  thus  renders  these  lines —

*  I  leaye  you  eyen. Troy  ru'd  th*  award  of  Paris,
One  cannot  make  so  much  as  two  will  marre  us.'

10  O  Cama.]— -Ver.  101.  On  the  Calends  of  June,  the  festival  of  this
Deity  was  celebrated.  Cyprian,  Augustine,  and  TertuUian  caD  her
*  Carda,'  or  Cardea :  they  unite  with  her  Forculus  and  Liminius,  the  Gods
of  the  door  and  the  hreshold,  and  derive  her  name  from  '  cardo,'  a
hinge.'  Macrobius  (Sat.  Book  i.  ch.  12)  seems  to  imply  that  her  name
was  derived  from  *  camis/  '  flesh,'  and  says  that  she  was  the  guardian  of
the  heart  and  the  vital  parts  of  the  human  body.  They  were  very  jva-
Vably  different  Deities.  Junius  Brutus,  on  the  expulsion  of  the  Tarquinii,
established  the  worship  of  Cama  on  the  Cselian  hill.


y  Google


B.  VI.  109—131.]  OB,  OALBHTAB  OP  OVID.  215

Cran^) ;  ofttimes  was  she  wooed  by  many  a  suitor,  but  in
vain.  It  was  her  wont  to  haunt  the  fields,  and  to  chase  the
beasts  of  prey  with  her  javehn,  and  to  spread  her  knotty  toils
along  the  hollow  deU.  A  quiver  she  md  not  wear ;  yet  did
people  believe  that  she  was  the  sister  of  Phoebus ;  and  me  was
not  one,  O  Phoebus,  that  might  cause  thee  shame.  If  any  of
the  young  men  addressed  to  her  words  of  love,  forthvrith  she
uttered  this  reply,  "  This  place  has  too  much  of  light,  and  of
the  blushes  that  attend  on  the  light :  if  you  lead  to  the  caves
that  are  more  sequestered,  I  follow."  The  credulous  lover
goes  before  her ;  she,  having  arrived  at  the  bushes,  stops  short,
and  Hes  concealed,  and  is  nowhere  to  be  found.  Janus  had
beheld  her,  and  captivated  with  desire  for  her  thus  seen,  he
employed  tender  words  in  addressing  the  cruel  Nymph.  The
Nymph,  in  her  usual  manner,  desires  a  more  retired  grot  to  be
sought,  and  foUows  as  though  accompanying  him,  and  then
deserts  him  as  he  leads  the  way.  Foolish  one  I  Janus  sees
what  is  done  behind  his  back ;  nothing  dost  thou  avail ;  lo !
he  is  now  looking  behind  him  upon  thy  hiding  place.  *'  Lo !
nothing  dost  thou  avail,"  I  said,  and  truly;  for  now,  as  thou
art  concealing  thyself  under  the  crag,  he  clasps  thee  in  his
embrace ;"  and,  having  realized  his  hopes,  he  says,  "  In  return
for  this  embrace  of  mine,  take  unto  thyself  the  government  of
the  hinge ;  take  this  as  the  price  of  thy  lost  virginity."  Thus
saying,  he  gave  her  a  wand  ('twas  a  white  one),  by  which  she
might  be  enabled  to  drive  afar  from  doors  all  evU  mischiefs.
There  are  ravenous  fowls ;  not  those  which  used  to  rob  the

^*  In  his  embrace.l-^Ver.  125.  Neapolis,  one  of  ibe  commentators  of
the  seventeenth  century,  thus  expresses  himself  on  this  story  of  Janus.
*0ho!  can  this  he  the  Janus  that  Aug^ustine  speaks  of,  when  he  says,
**  nothing  occurs  to  me  disparaging  to  the  character  of  Janus ;  perhaps  he
was  one  that  lived  a  life  of  innocence  far  removed  from  crime  and  wicked-
ness V  "  Mr.  Kdghtley  justly  remarks  that  this  tale  must  have  escaped  the
knowledge  or  the  memory  oi  the  zealous  father.  Gower  thus  renders  this
and  the  following  lines —

*  She,  as  she  us'd,  bids  him  walk  to  a  cave ;
And  as  she  followed,  him  the  slip  she  gave.
Fool !  'tis  in  vain :  for  Janus  sees  thy  scout ;
He  sees  behind  him ;  and  wHl  find  thee  out.
He  sayes  the  same ;  and  as  thou  close  wert  laid.
He  chp'd  thee  close.'


y  Google


216  THB  VAJTI;  [b.  ti.  131—145.

moaih  of  Phineos^  at  tiie  board,  but  tbenoe  do  tbey  derive  their
origin.  Large  are  their  heads,  fixed  is  their  gaze,  for  plunder
are  their  bei^s  adapted ;  on  their  wings  is  a  greyish  coloor,
crooked  talons  are  on  their  cUirs.^  By  ni^t  they  fly,  and
they  seek  the  diildren  unprotected  by  die  nurse,  and  pollute
their  bodies,  dragged  from  their  cradles.  With  their  beaks
Ibey  are  said  to  tear  the  entrails  of  the  sucklings,  and  they
have  their  maws  distended  with  the  blood  which  they  have  swal-
lowed. **  Striges,"  are  they  called ;  and  the  origin  of  this  name
is,  the  hd,  that  they  are  wont  to  screech  in  the  dismal  nigbt.
Whether  it  is  that  these  birds  are  produced  by  nature,  or  that
they  are  created  by  the  agency  of  charms,  and  the  magic  song
of  the  Marsi^^  transfbrms  hi^  into  birds ;  they  came  to  the
chamber  of  Procas  ;^^  Procas,  bom  there  but  five  days  before,
becomes  the  new-bom  prey  of  the  birds ;  and  with  greedy

^  Phmeua.'] — Ver.  131.  The  Harpies  were  winged  monstors,  which
were  sent  by  Juno  to  poUute  the  food  of  Phineus,  and  thereby  to  avenge
his  cruelty  towards  his  sons  Plexippus  and  Pandion,  in  putting  out  their
eyes  on  a  false  accusation.  Calais  and  Zethes  afterwards  deliyered  him
from  their  persecution.  Hesiod  says  they  were  two  in  number,  Aello  and
Ocypete,  and  ApoUodorus  says  they  were  the  offspring  of  Thaumas  and
Electra,  and  represents  them  as  snatching  away  the  food  of  the  Argonauts.
Virgil  says  that  they  had  the  face  of  women,  wings,  and  hooked  talons,  and
were  foul  and  disgusting  objects.

"  On  their  clawsj] — ^Ver.  133, 134. Gower  thus  renders  these  lines —

*  Great  heads ;  glore  eyes ;  hook  beaks  upon  their  jaws ;
Their  feathers  gray ;  huge  tallons  on  their  claws.'

Mr.  Stanford  informs  us  that  the  description  here  given  agrees  closely  with
that  of  the  '  vespertilio  yampyrus'  of  Linnaeus ;  a  species  of  bat,  with
large  canine  teeth,  sharp  Uack  beak,  the  claws  very  strong,  and  hooked.
They  inhabit  Guinea,  Madagascar,  and  all  the  islands  thence  to  the  re-
motest in  the  Indian  Ocean.  Buffon  supposes  that  they  were  not  un-
known to  the  ancients,  and  that  they  gave  rise  to  the  fiction  oi  the  Harpies.
Linnaeus  calls  this  species  of  bat,  the  vampyre,  conjecturing  it  to  be  the
kind  which  draws  blood  from  any  creature  it  may  find  asleep. The  name

*  strix'  is  derived  from  the  Greek  crrpt^«i>,  *  to  screech.' .

"  The  Afarw.]— Ver.  142.  *  Striges,*  the  plural  of  *  strix,'  also  signified

*  hags,'  or  *  witches,*  from  a  belief  that  they  had  the  power  of  assuming
this  form  at  night :  reference  is  made  in  the  text  to  this  belief.  *  The
Marsi  were  a  people  of  Italy,  celebrated  for  their  skill  in  sorcery ;  and
were  supposed  to  be  descended  from  Marsus,  the  son  of  Circe,  the  en-
chantress.

^  Procflw.] — Ver.  143.  He  was  one  of  the  kings  of  Alba  Longa,  and
is  found  in  the  list  given  in  the  note  to  Book  iv.  1.  52.


y  Google


B.  VI.  145—174.] OB,  OALSKDAB  O!  OTID.  217

tongues  they  suck  the  hreast  of  the  infant ;  the  hapless  child
screams,  and  thereby  summons  aid.  Frightened  hy  the  cries
of  her  young  chai^,  the  norse  runs  to  him  and  finds  his
cheeks  man^d  hy  their  hard  claws.  What  was  she  to  do  ?
The  hue  of  his  £eu^  was  that  which  is  wont  to  he  on  the  latest
leaves,  which  the  winter,  just  arrived,  has  seared.  She  came
to  Cran^,  and  told  her  of  the  matter.  She  said,  **  Lay  aude
thf  fear ;  safe  and  sound  shall  he  thy  charge !  '^  She  had  now
come  to  the  cradle :  the  father  and  mother  were  weeping.
"  Stay  your  tears,"  said  she ;  "  I  myself  will  find  a  remedy ! "
Forthwith,  thrice  in  due  order,  she  touches  the  lintels  with  a
branch  of  the  arbutus ;  thrice,  with  the  same  branch,  does  she
mark  the  threshold.  The  entrance  she  sprinkles  with  water,
but  which  water  contains  a  drug,  and  she  holds  the  raw  entrails
of  a  two«  year-old  sow ;  and  thus  she  says, — "  Ye  birds  of  the
night,  spare  the  vitals  of  the  child !  for  a  httle  babe  a  little
victim  falls  ;  take  ye  heart  for  heart,  I  pray — ^vitals  for  vitals !
this  life  we  give  to  you  in  the  stead  of  a  better  one."  When
thus  she  presented  the  offering,  cut  in  pieces,  she  lays  it  in
the  open  air,  and  forbids  those  who  are  present  at  the  rites  to
look  back  upon  it.  The  wand,  too,  of  Janus,  made  of  the
white  thorn,  ^  was  placed  in  the  spot  where  the  narrow  window
gave  light  to  the  chamber :  after  that,  it  is  said  that  the  birds
no  more  polluted  the  cradle,  and  the  complexion  which  he  for-
merly had,  returned  to  the  child.

You  ask  why  fat  bacon  is  tasted  on  these  Calends,  and
beans ^^  are  mixed  with  the  boiled  spelt?  She  is  a  Goddess
of  ancient  days,  and  she  still  diets  on  the  food  that  in  olden
time  she  used  to  receive,  and  she  does  not  in  a  spirit  of  luxury
ask  for  the  dainties  of  foreign  lands.  In  that  day,  uncaught
by  that  people,  swam  the  fish ;  and  the  oysters  ^^  were  safe  in

^  Made  of  the  white  Mom.]— Ver.  165.  The  wood  of  this  tree  was
•apposed  to  avert  the  evil  effects  of  drugs  and  enchantments,  to  repel
ghosts,  and  to  heal  woonds  mflictedhy  the  stmg  or  hite  of  serpents.

*7  And  beans,'] — Ver.  170.  Those  who  are  fond  of  the  dish  of
beans  and  bacon  little  imagine  that  they  are  indulging  in  a  purely
classical  taste,  and  that,  unwittingly,  they  are,  to  some  extent,  votaries  of
the  Goddess  Cama.

^»  And  the  oysters.'l'^Yer.  173.  The  man  who  was  to  be  the  first  to
eat  an  oyster  had  not  then  appeared ;  a  feat  which,  in  the  opinion  of
some,  required  a  very  considerable  amount  of  courage.  So  fond  did  the
Romans  become  of  this  fish,  that  their  emperors  were  supplied  from  the


y  Google


218  THE  FASTI;  [b.  vi.  174 — 192.

their  shells.  Latium  had  not  become  acquainted  with  the
fowl,  which  rich  lonia^*  produces,  i^or  that  which  delights
in  the  blood  of  the  Pygmies.  Then,  beyond  its  plumage,  there
was  nothing  to  please  in  the  peacock ;  nor  had  any  hud  sent
its  animals  encaged,  which  before  were  beasts  of  chase.  Swine
then  were  valuable ;  by  killing  a  sow  they  honoured  their
festiyals.  The  land  then  produced  but  beans  and  the  hard-
grained  spelt.  .Whoever  eats  these  two  things  mingled,  on  the
Calends  of  the  sixth  month,  they  say  that  his  stomach  can  re-
ceive no  harm.

On  the  loftiest  height  of  the  Capitol,  tradition  says  that  a
temple  was  built  to  Juno  Moneta,  according  to  thy  vow,  O
Camillus !  Before,  it  had  been  the  house  of  Manlius,**  who
formerly  repulsed  the  arms  of  Graul  fi*om  Capitoline  Jove.
How  gracefully — great  Gods!  had  he  fallen  in  that  fight,
the  defender  of  thy  throne,  O  Jove,  toho  sittest  on  high !  He
lived,  that  he  might  die,  condemned  for  aspiring  to  regal  power.
The  credit  of  doing  this,  did  protracted  old  age  give  to  him.

The  same  day  is  a  festival  of  Mars  ;**  whom  the  Capenian
gate  beholds,  outside  the  walls,  situated  close  to  the  covered
way.

beds  at  Rutapiuniy  in  Kent,  near  the  modem  Sandwich,  which  were
celebrated  for  the  delicate  flavour  of  the  oysters  found  there.

>•  /oma.]— Ver.  175.  The  bird  here  mentioned  was  the  *  Attagen/
similar  to  our  woodcock,  the  best  flavoured  of  which  came  from  Ionia.
The  Pigmies  were  a  fabulous  people  of  Thrace,  who  were  but  a  foot  and  a
half  in  height,  and  against  whom  the  cranes  are  fabled  to  have  waged  con-
tinual war&re.

^  Manliu8.'] — ^Ver.  185.  Marcus  Manlius  was  ttic  first  to  drive  the
Gauls  from  the  battlements  of  Rome  when  they  were  entering  the  Capitol
in  the  night,  and,  by  raising  the  alarm,  to  save  that  last  hope  of  the  City.
In  remembrance  of  this,  he  received  the  surname  of  CapitoUnus.  Being
of  a  turbulent  disposition,  he  became  an  object  of  dislike  to  the  Patricians,
and  vras  finally  thrown  from  the  Tarpeian  rock,  on  the  charge  of  aspiring
to  the  sovereign  power  at  Rome.  Grower  thus  renders  this  and  the  following
line,  little  suspecting,  perhaps,  the  anachronism  that  he  was  committing, —
'  There  Manlius'  house  once  stood ;  who  did  remove
The  Frenchmen's  troops  from  Capitolian  Jove.'

*i  Festival  of  Mars.'] — ^Ver.  191.  On  the  Calends  of  June  a  sacrifice
was  offered  to  Mars,  outside  of  the  Capenian  gate.  It  is  not  clear  whether
the  temple  of  Mars  here  taientioned  was  on  the  Appian  road,  or  had  a  way
leading  to  it  from  the  Appian  road,  which  began  at  the  Capenian  gate.
Perhaps  the  *  Tecta  via*  was  a  covered  way  or  arcade  leading  up  to  it.
Commentators  are  at  a  loss  for  the  signification  here  of  the  word  '  tecta.'


y  Google


B.  VI.  193—205.] OB, CALEia)AB  OF  OTID.  219

Thee  too,  O  Tempest,**  we  acknowledge  to  have  deserved
a  shiine,  at  the  time  when  onr  fleet  was  almost  overwhelmed
by  the  waves  of  Corsica.  These  memorials  raised  by  men
wee  exposed  to  our  view.  If  you  inquire  as  to  the  stars ;  at
that  time  rises  the  bird  of  Jove^  with  its  crooked  beak.

The  next  day  summons  the  Hyades,  the  horns  on  the
forehead^  of  the  bull :  and  the  earUi  is  soaked  with  copious
showers.

When  twice  the  Moon  has  come,  and  Phoebus  has  twice  re-
peated his  rising,  and  twice  the  standing  com  has  been  ren-
dered moist  by  the  descent  of  the  dew  upon  it ;  on  this  day
Bellona^  is  said  to  have  been  enshrined  in  the  Etrurian  war ;
she,  auspicious,  ever  favours  Latium.  Appius  was  the  builder :
he,  who,  when  peace  was  refused  to  Pyrrhus,**  saw  clearly
in  his  mind :  though,  as  to  his  eyes,  he  was  blind.  A  small
open  space*'  before  the  temple  looks  forth  on  the  highest

Mr.  Stanford  suggests  *  paved'  as  the  meaning,  a  term  especially  applicable
to  the  Appian  way,  which  was  so  firmly  paved  with  flint  and  cement  that
portions  of  it  are  still  entire  after  a  lapse  of  above  two  thousand  years.

^  Tempest.'] — ^Ver.  193.  L.  Sdpio,  the  Consul,  having  conquered  the
island  of  Corsica,  built  a  temple  to  the  deity  *  Tempestas,'  a.u.c.  495,  in
gratitude  for  his  escape  frpm  a  violent  tempest  while  engaged  in  his  descent
upon  that  island.

"  The  bird  qf  Jow.]— Ver.  196.  On  the  evening  of  the  Calends  of
June,  the  Constellation  AquOa  rises.

**  The  home  on  the  forehead.']— Yer.  197.  The  Hyades  are  so  called,
as  they  are  situated  in  the  forehead  of  the  Constellation  Taurus.  On  the
fourth  of  the  Nones  of  June,  the  Hyades  rise  heliacally,  accompanied  with
rain.  «

^  5e«ona.]— Ver.  201.  A  temple  to  Bellona,  the  Goddess  of  War,
was  raised  by  Appius  Claudius,  during  a  battle  in  the  Etrurian  war,  A.n.c.
458,  and  in  this  temple,  which  was  near  the  Carmental  gate,  he  erected
the  statues  of  his  ancestors.  Here  the  Senate  gave  audience  to  such
foreign  ambassadors  as,  from  political  motives,  were  not  admitted  into  the
dty.

*•  Rffusedto  Pyrrkus,] — ^Ver.  203.  When  the  Senate  were  inclining  to
make  peace  with  Pyrrhus,  the  king  of  Epuus,  and  to  allow  him  to  retain
possession  of  his  Italian  conquests,  Appius,  who  was  then  blind,  had  him-
self conyeyed  to  the  Senate-house  in  a  litter,  to  dissuade  them  from
adopting  that  step.

^  A  email  open  space.] — ^Ver.  205.  Before  the  temple  of  Bellona  was
a  smaU  open  space,  which  reached  to  the  upper  part  of  the  Flaminian
Circus.  Here  was  a  small  column,  and  on  proclfJming  war  against  the
enemy,  the  Fedalia  (who  combined  in  his  p€a*8on  the  character  of  priest


y  Google


220  THE  FASTI ;  [b.  vi.— 205— 223.

part  of  the  Circm.  There  stands  a  column,  small  indeed,  hat
of  no  small  fame.  From  this  spot,  is  wont  to  he  hnried  hj
the  hand,  the  spear,  the  herald  of  war,  when  it  seems  good
that  arms  should  be  taken  up  against  the  monarch  and  against
the  nations.

The  other  part  of  the  Circns  is  secure  under  the  guardian-
ship of  Herctdes,"  which  honour,  through  the  prophecy  of  the
Euboean  Sibyl,  Uiat  God  possesses. The  season  of  the  dedica-
tion IB  the  Ught-bearing  day,  which  Ib  before  the  Nones. If
you  ask  what  Ib  the  inscription,  U  is,  "  Sylla^  sanctioned  the
^building."
^^ I  was  inquiring  whether  I  should  attribute  the  Nones  to
' Sancus,  or  to  Fidius,  or  to  thee,  O  Father  Semo?^  when
/ Sancus  said  to  me,  '*  To  whichever  of  them  thou  shalt  assign

tit,  I  shall  still  hold  the  honour.  I  bear  these  three  names  ;
'twas  thus  that  Cures  willed."  Him  then,  the  ancient  Sabines
I  presented  with  a  temple,  and  enshrined  him  on  the  Quirinal
/ hill.

I  have  a  daughter'*  (and  long,  I  pray,  may  she  survive  my
years),  as  long  as  she  is  in  comfort  I  shall  ever  be  happy.
When  I  was  wishful  to  bestow  her  on  a  son-in-law,  I  inquired
what  period  was  proper  for  the  nuptial  torch,  and  what  time
should  be  shunned. Then  June  was  pointed  out  to  me  as

and  herald)  threw  a  spear  over  the  column  into  a  field  adjoining,  called  the
*  Ager  Hostilis,'  to  signifying  the  commencement  ci  hostilities.  In  the
early  days  of  Rome,  when  the  hostile  states  were  dose  at  hand,  the
Fedalis  used  to  throw  the  spear  into  the  enemy's  territories.

^  Hercules,] — ^Ver.  209.  It  i^  doubtful  whether  there  was  one  temple
to  Hercules,  or  two,  in  the  Flaminian  Circus.  NeapoUs  thinks  there  were
two ;  the  one  mentioned  in  the  text,  and  another  erected  by  FuWius  Nobi-
lior,  and  repaired  by  Philippus,  as  stated  in  line  802  of  this  Book.

*»  SyUa.l — Ver.  212. Sylla,  in  his  Censorship,  approved,  *probavit,'
this  temple  of  Hercules. The  Censors  had  the  charge  <^  the  public  build-
ings and  temples,  superintended  their  erection,  and  inspected  and  sanc-
tioned them  when  built.  Sylla  regarded  Hercules  with  especial  veneration,
as,  to  that  Deity  he  imputed  his  political  success  and  the  immensity  of
the  wealth  that  he  had  acquired.
t »  Q  Father  5'«no.]— Ver.  214. This  deity  was  'named  Sancus  or
t  Sangus,  Sanctus,  Fidius  or  Dius  Fidius,  and  Semo,  and  is  generally  sup-
1  posed  to  have  been  the  Sabine  Hercules. St.  Aug^tine  says  that  Sancus
'>  was  one  of  the  kings  of  the  Sabines,  whom  they  had  deified.

'1  A  dauphter.^—Yer.  220.  The  very  little  that  has  come  down  to  us
concerning  the  daughter  of  the  poet  will  be  found  .mentioned  in  the  life  of
Ovid,  sketched  in  the  Introduction.


y  Google


B.  VI.  223—244.] OB,  CAJj^JSTDJlR  Or  OTID.  221

being,  after  the  sacred  Ides,^  lucky  for  brides,  and  lucky  for
their  husbands.  The  first  part  of  this  month  was  found  to
be  ill-suited  for  nuptials  ;  for  thus  did  the  holy  wife  of  the
Flamen  Dialis  say  to  me,  "  Until  the  gendy  flowing  Tiber**
shall  have  borne  on  his  yellow  waters,  to  the  deep,  the  cleansings
from  the  shrine  of  Ilian  Vesta,  it  is  not  lawful  for  me  to  comb,
with  the  box-wood,  my  shorn  locks,  nor  to  pare  my  nails  with
the  knife,  nor  to  approach  my  husband's  bed ;  although  he  is
the  priest  of  Jove,  and  although  to  me  he  has  been  given  by
an  eternal  compact.  Be  not  tkon  in  any  haste ;  thy  daughter
will  marry  more  auspiciously  when  the  shrine  of  Vesta,  God-
dess of  the  Holy  Fire,  shall  be  graced  with  a  cleansed  floor.

The  third  Moon**  after  the  Nones  is  said  to  remove  Lycaon,
and  the  Bear  has  no  more  cause  of  alarm  behind  her.  I  re-
member that  it  is  at  that  time,  O  rolling  Tiber,  that  I  beheld
thy  games  upon  the  sward  of  the  Campus  Martins.  This  is  a
hohday  to  those  who  drag  the  dripping  nets,  and  who  bait
with  tiny  morsels  the  hooked  brass.**

The  Mind*^  too  is  deified.  We  see  shrines  to  the  Mind,  that
were  voted  through  fear  of  thy  war,  treacherous  Carthaginian,
Carthaginian,  thou  hadst  renewed  the  war,  and  aU,  in  dismay  at

*  After  the  sacred  Ides.'] — Ver.  223.  It  was  not  lucky  to  marry  before
the  Ides  of  June ;  all  the  rest  of  the  month  was  auspicious  for  that  purpose.

»  The  gently  Mowing  Tiber.]— Yer.  227.  Festus  and  Varro  tell  us
that  the  garbage  and  cleansings  of  this  temple  were  deposited  in  a  place
near  the  Capitoline  hill ;  and,  most  probably,  (notwithstanding  what  the
poet  here  says),  they  are  correct  in  the  assertion.  It  is  hard  to  believe
that  the  Romans  treated  their  Tiber  as  badly  as  we  do  our  Thames.  Gower
thus  renders  this  and  the  preceding  line, —

'  Till  gilded  Tiber  all  the  soil  and  trash
Of  Vesta's  temple  into  sea  doth  wash/

^  The  third  Moon.] — On  the  7th  of  the  Ides  of  June,  Arctophylax  or
Bootes  sets  in  the  morning.  Lycaon  is  here  put  for  Areas,  who  was  the
grandson  of  Lycaon. See  Book  ii.  L  153.

^  The  hooked  6raM.]--Ver.  239,  240.  Gower  thus  renders  these  hues,—

'  This  is  the  fisherman's  feast  day,  who  tangle
Fish  in  their  nets,  with  those  who  use  the  angle.'

*  The  Mind.] — Ver.  241.  This  temple  is  supposed  to  have  been  dedi-
cated shortly  after  the  defeat  of  the  Roman  army  at  Lake  Thrasymenus,
and  the  death  of  the  Consul  C.  Flaminius,  by  the  direction  of  the  Sibylline
books.


y  Google


222  THI  TASTI;  [b.  iri.  244— 269.

the  death  of  the  Consul,  stood  in  dread  of  the  Moorish  arms.'^
Terror  had  banished  hope ;  when  the  Senate  made  a  tow  to
the  Mind,  and  forthwith,  more  auspicious^  did  she  become.
That  day,  on  which  the  tow  was  performed  for  the  GMdess,
sees  the  approach  of  the  Ides  in  six  days /rom  it.

Vesta,**  bestow  on  us  thy  favour !  Now  do  we  open  our
lips  in  honour  of  thee,  if  it  is  lawful  to  do  honour  to  thy  sacri-
fices. I  was  totally  wrapt  in  my  prayer ;  I  became  sensible
of  the  presence  of  the  celestial  Divinity,  and  the  joyous  ground
reflected  back  the  purple  light.  As  for  me,  I  saw  thee  not,
O  €k)ddess — ^fiurewell  to  the  fictions  of  the  poets — by  the  eyes
of  man  thou  wast  not  possible  to  be  seen.  But  those  things
which  I  had  not  known,  and  as  to  which  I  was  hitherto  kept
in  entire  ignorance,  were  known  to  me  without  the  instruc-
tion of  any  one.  They  say  that  Rome  had  kept  the  festivals
of  Pales,  four  times  ten  in  number,  when  the  guardian  of  the
sacred  flame  was  received  into  her  temple.  ITiis  was  the  act
of  that  peaceful  king,  than  whom,  no  one  more  piously  dis-
posed, md  the  land  of  the  Sabines  ever  bear.  The  shrines
which  you  now  see  roofed  with  brass,  then  you  might  see
covered  with  straw,  and  their  walls  were  woven  of  the  pliant
osier.  This  Uttle  spot,  which  now  supports  the  hall  of  Vesta,
was  in  those  days  the  vast  palace  of  the  unshaven  Numa.
Yet  the  shape  of  the  temple  which  now  remains  is  said  to
have  been  anciently  the  same :  and  there  exists  a  reason  for
its  figure  worthy  of  our  approval.  Vesta  is  the  same  Divinity
as  the  Earth  ;  the  never-sleeping  fire  belongs  to  each.  The
Earth  and  the  Festal  fire  represent  their  respective  positions."*®

^  The  Moorish  ar»i».]— Ver.  244.  Livy  tells  us  that  there  were  Moors
in  the  army  of  Hannibal ;  but  the  poet  most  probably  here  employs  the
term  to  signify  Africans  generally.

38  More  auspiciouss.'] — ^Ver.  246.  This  is  said  in  reference  to  the  able
conduct  of  Q.  Fabius  Maximust  sumamed  *  Cunctator/  *  the  delayer,'  who,
by  his  masterly  conduct,  rescued  Rome  and  Italy  from  the-  subjugation  so
latelv  threatened  by  HannibaL

»9>cffto.]— Ver.  249.  JOn  the  5th  of  the  Ides  the  Vestalia  were  cele-
brated.

^  Respective  posiHoru.  ] — Ver.  268 .  He  seems  to  mean,  that  the  temple
of  Vesta  being  round,  and  the  Vestal  fire  being  in  the  midst  of  it,  the  fire
was  symbolical  of  the  position  which  the  earth  was  then  supposed  to  oc-
cupy in  the  middle  of  the  system.  In  the  267th  line  he  says  that  Vesta  and
the  Earth  are  the  same ;  but  in  line  290  he  says  that  Vesta  is  the  same  as
fire ;  and  in  other  instances  he  seems  to  be  guilty  of  a  similar  confusion
of  ideas. Perhaps  Vesta  may  have  been  originally  considered  as  the


y  Google


B.  VI.  269— 289.] OB, OALEin>AB  OF  OVID.  223

Tbe  Earth,  like  a  ball^^  in  shape^  upheld  by  no  support,  haogs,
a  mass,  weighty  as  it  is,  in  the  surrounding  air.  Its
very  roundness  keeps  this  orb  well  poised,  and  there  are  no
angles  in  it  to  press  upon  the  parts  external  to  it ;  and  since
it  has  been  placed  in  die  yery  middle  of  the  universe,  and  is
touching  no  one  side  more  or  less  than  the  other,  were  it  not
round,  Qien  it  would  come  nearer  to  one  part  than  the  other,
and  the  universe  would  no  longer  have  the  earth  as  a  weight  in
the  middle  of  it.  And,  by  way  of  illustration,  there  stands  a
globe  in  the  citadel  of  Syracuse,  suspended  in  the  air,^  con-
fined toithin  a  limited  space,  a  little  model  of  the  boundless
system  ;  and  as  far  as  the  earth  is  distant  from  the  top,  so  far
is  it  from  the  bottom ;  the  roundness  of  its  form  produces
this  result.  Similar  is  the  form  of  the  temple :  in  it,  there  is
no  projecting  angle — a  dome  protects  it  from  the  showers  of
rain.

You  ask  why  the  Groddess  is  worshipped  by  virgin  attend-
ants ?  On  this  subject,  too,  I  shall  discover  suitable  reasons.
They  say  that  Juno  and  Ceres  were  bom  of  the  seed  of  Saturn,
from  Ops  ;  Vesta  was  the  third.  The  two  former  were  wedded ;
both  are  stated  to  have  become  mothers ;  one  of  the  three  re-
mained without  knowing  man :  what  wonder  is  there  if  a

phlogiston,  or  natural  heat  which  pervades  the  earth,  and  by  degrees  she
may  thus  have  become  confounded  with  the  earth  itself.  This  is  the  more
probable,  as  Vesta  is  sometimes  styled  the  soul  of  the  earth.  However  the
point  may  be  settled,  this  and  the  previous  line  are  full  of  difficulties,  and
are  not  very  easily  rendered  intelligible.

**  Like  a  halL] — Ver.  269.  This  and  the  next  five  lines  are  wanting
in  all  the  MSS.  but  seven,  and  are  considered  by  Gierig  to  be  spurious,
though  it  is  difficult  to  conceive  for  what  reason,  as  they  are  intelligible,
and  bear  no  marks  of  corrupt  Latinity.  Mr.  Keightley,  however,  agrees
with  Gierig's  opinion.

**  In  the  fltV.] — Ver.  277.  Mr.  Keightley  suggests,  that  *  in  aere  clauso  *
may  mean,  '  shut  up  in  a  glass-case.'  The  words  may  probably  have  that
meaning,  and  the  suggestion  is  ingenious.  They  would  not  appear,  how-
ever, of  necessity,  to  mean  anything  more  than  that  the  model  stood
under  cover,  and  not  in  the  open  air ;  the  air  being  not  *  apertum,'  or
'  open,'  but  *■  dausum,'  *  shut  up,' — ^perhaps  by  four  waUs,  and  certainly  by
the  '  tholus,'  or  dome,  for  a  roof.  '  Polus  '  seems  to  mean  '  the  system,'
which  was  probably  represented  on  an  exterior  surface,  vrithin  which  the
earth  hung  (perhaps  by  a  thread,  or  fine  cord,  in  its  centre)  in  the  middle,
and  consequently,  as  the  poet  says,  on  all  sides  equi-distant  from  the  sur-
rounding system.  The  citadel  of  Syracuse  was  called  Achradina ;  and
there,  accordmg  to  Athenaeus,  this  model  was  kept


y  Google


224  THE  TASn;  [b.  VI.  289—311.

virgin,  pleased  with  a  virgin  attendant,  admits  chaste  hands
alwe  to  her  sacrifices.  And  consider  Vesta  nothing  else  than
the  Hying  flame ;  you  see  that  no  bodies  are  produced  by
flame.  In  tmth,  then,  she  is  a  virgin,  who  neither  yields  nor
receives  the  principles  of  conception,  and  who  has  like  com-
panions of  her  virgin  state.  Long  did  I,  in  my  simplicity,
imagine  that  there  were  statues  of  Vesta,  but  I  afterwards
ascertained  tiiat  there  were  none  under  her  concave  dome.
The  fire  that  has  never  been  extinguished  Hes  hidden  in  that
temple.  Neither  Vesta  nor  fire  has  any  likeness.  By  its  own
strength  does  the  earth  rest :  from  standing  by  her  own  strength
is  she  named  Vesta  ;^  and  similar  may  be  the  origin  of  her
Grsecian  appellation;  but  the  hearth  derives  its  name  ["focus"]
from  the  flames,  and  because  it  cherishes^  all  things:  it
formerly  stood  in  the  porch  of  the  houses.  From  this  I
think  that  spot  is  called  the  "  Vestibule."  It  is  from  that  cir-
cumstance that  we  say  in  prayer,  "  0  Vesta,  thou  who  dost
inhabit  the  foremost  place."  Before  the  hearths,  it  was  the
custom  formerly  to  sit  together  on  long  benches,^  and  to  be-
lieve that  the  Gods  were  there  at  the  board.  Now,  too,  when
sacred  rites  are  performed  to  the  ancient  Vacuna,^  they  stand
and  sit  before  the  hearths  of  Vacuna.  To  our  years  has  come
down  a  relic  of  the  ancient  custom  ;  a  dean  platter  bears  the
food  sent  as  a  present  offered  to  Vesta. Behold !  the  loaves  of

^  l8  she  named  Fetta,]'~Yer.  299.  The  poet  here  says,  that  the  name
of  Vesta  is  derived  from  the  two  words  *  Ti  stare/  *  to  stand  by  (her  own)
strength/  In  this  he  is  wrong,  as  the  word  is  derived  from  the  Greek
name  of  the  Goddess,  'Earca,  which  also  signifies  *  a  hearth,'  and  comes
from  the  Greek  verb  Verrij/ic,  *  to  stand.'

^  //  cherithes.'l — Ver.  301.  He  says  that  'focus '  is  derived  fit>m  the
verb  *  foveo/  *  to  cherish,*  or  *  warm  ;*  because  the  hearth,  by  the  aid  of
flame  sends  forth  heat.

^  Long  benches.'] — Ver.  305.  The  poet  refers  to  early  times,  when
people  sat  on  benches  to  take  their  meals,  before  the  custom  of  reclining
on  couches,  on  those  occasions,  had  been  introduced  from  the  East.  He
means  to  say,  that  as  they  sat  near  the  fire,  they  considered  Vesta  (who
was  represented  by  it)  and  the  Lares,  or  Penates  (whose  shrine  was  dose
by),  were  joining  in  the  meaL

^  Ancient  FacunaJ] — Ver.  307-  She  was  the  Goddess  of  Leisure  and
Indolence,  and  is  supposed  to  have  been  a  Sabine  deity.  By  some,  she  is
identified  with  Diana,  Ceres,  or  Venus ;  and  by  others  with  Minerva,  or
Victory.  The  husbandmen  worshipped  her,  after  the  gathering  in  of  the
harvest,  that  they  might,  through  her  £svour,  obtain  a  winter  of  repose.


y  Google


B.  VI.  311—339.]  OB, CALENDAE  OF  OVID.  225

bread  hang  down  from  the  asses  bedecked  with  garlands,  and
the  wreaths  of  flowers  cover  the  rough  mill-stones.  In  former
tunes  the  peasants  were  wont  to  parch  their  spelt  only  in
ovens ;  and  hence  the  Goddess  of  the  kiln^  has  her  own  rites.
The  hearth  itself  used  to  bake  the  bread  placed  beneath  the
ashes,  and  hroken  tiles  were  strewed  along  the  vfarm  floor.
From  that  circumstance,  does  the  baker  reverence  the  hearth,
and  Vesta,  the  mistress  of  the  hearths,  and  the  same  does  the
ass,  which  turns  round  the  mill-stones  rough  as  the  pumice.
Shall  I  pass  it  by,  or  fehall  I  tell  thy  disgrace,  ruddy  Priapus  ?^
It  is  a  short  story,  but  fall  of  fun.  Cybele,  with  her  brow
crowned  with  turrets,  invites  to  her  feast  the  eternal  Gods.
She  invites,  too,  the  Satyrs  and  the  Nymphs,  Deities  of  the
country.  Silenus  comes,  too,  though  no  one  had  invited  him.
It  is  not  lawful,  'twere  tedious,  too,  to  relate  the  banquet  of
the  Grods  ;  a  sleepless  night  is  spent  over  copious  draughts  of
wine.  Some  are  carelessly  wandering  in  the  vales  of  the  shady
Ida ;  some  are  lying  down,  and  resting  Hheir  limbs  on  the
soft  herbage.  Some  are  disporting  :*'  upon  some.  Sleep  lays  her
hand :  some  join  hands,  and  then  with  active  foot  they  beat
the  ground.  Vesta  is  lying  down,  and,  free  from  fear,  she  enjoys
quiet  repose,  supporting  her  head,  reclining  just  as  it  was,  on
a  tuft  of  grass.  But  the  ruddy  keeper  of  the  gardens  is  now
chasing  both  Nymphs  and  Goddesses,  and  turns  his  wan-
dering steps,  first  in  this  direction,  then  in  that.  He  spies
Vesta,  too  ;  whether  he  took  her  for  a  Nymph,  or  whether  he
knew  that  she  was  Vesta,  is  a  matter  of  doubt ;  he  himself
declares  that  he  did  not  know  her.  He  conceives  impure
hopes,  and  stealthily  attempts  to  approach  her,  and  with  a
palpitating  heart  he  advances  on  tiptoe. By  chance  the  old

*T  The  Goddess  qf  the  Ai7n.]— Ver.  314.  For  an  account  of  the  rites  of
the  Goddess  Fornax,  see  Book  ii.  L  525.

*^  Priapus.] — Ver.  319.  This  story  is  so  like  that  of  the  nymph  Lotis,
Book  i.  L  391 » that  it  is  difficult  to  imagine  why  the  poet  should  repeat
it ;  except  that  it  is  here  introduced  in  connexion  with  Vesta.

*»  Are  disporting.']— '\er.  329,  330. GoWer  thus  renders  these  lines —

'  Some  sport,  some  snort ;  some  arm-in-arm  a  round
Do  make,  and  nimbly  trip  it  on  the  ground.'

Lines  233,  234  he  renders  thus —

<  But  tawny  Priap  up  and  down  there  traces.
And  peers  on  all  the  Goddesses  and  lasses.'


y  Google


226  THE  FAan ;  [b.  vi.  339—364

man  Silenus  had  left  the  ass  on  which  he  had  rode,  near  the
bank  of  a  gently  murmuring  stream.  The  God  of  the  ext^ided
Hellespont  is  about  to  commence  his  prefect,  when,  with  an
unseasonable  noise,  the  ass  brays  aloud. Alarmed  at  this
harsh  sound,  the  Goddess  arises. All  the  company  run  to
the  same  spot:  he  escapes  through  their  indignant  hands.
Lampsacus^ is  wont  to sacrifice this  animal  to Priapus:
aptly,  too^  do  we  consign  to  the  flames  the  entrails  of  the  tell-
tale ass. Him dost  thou,  0  grateful  Groddess,  adorn  with
necklaces  made  of  loaves  :^^  at  that  titneiy  too,  the  mill-stones,
in  idleness,  cease  their  grating  noise. I  will  tell  what  meaim
the  altar  of  Jupiter  Pistor,^^  on  the  height  of  the  Thunderer,
more  glorious  in  its  renown  than  in  its  actual  value. The
Capitol^  beleaguered,  was  pressed  hard  by  the  savage  Gauls  :
the  extreme  length  of  the  siege  had  caused  a  famine. Jupiter
having  called  the  Gods  to  his  royal  throne,  says  to  Mars,  *'  Do
thou  begin." Forthwith  he  answers,  "  Is  it  unknown  to  thee,
forsooth,  what  is  the  present  fortune  of  my  people ;  and  does
this  pang  of  my  soul  need  the  voice  of  complaint  ? If,  how-
ever, thou  requirest  that  I  should,  in  a  word,  relate  their  woes
in  conjunction  with  their  disgrace ;  Rome  now  lies  at  the  foot
of  an  Alpine  foe. Is  this  the  city,  0  Jupiter,  to  which  had
been  promised  the  sovereignty  of  the  world  ? Is  it  this  that
thou  wast  to  impose  as  a  ruler  upon  the  earth  ? Already  has
she  crushed  the  people  in  her  vicinity,  and  the  arms  of  Etruria.
In  their /m// career  were  our  hopes ;  now,  from  her  very  home,
has  she  been  expelled. We  have  seen  the  veterans  graced  by
many  a  triumph,  adorned  with  their  embroidered  garments,

*  Lampsacus.^ — Ver.  345,346.  These  lines  are  considered  to  be  spurious
by  Heinsius  and  other  commentators.  The  following  is  Gower's  quaint
translation  of  them : —

*  The  Lampsacenes  to  him  the  asse  do  kill ;
This  tell-tale's  g— ts  are  fitly  broiled  still.'

*i  Necklaces  made  of  loaves,"] — Ver.  347.  He  says,  that  in  gratitude
for  the  service  done  by  the  ass  to  Vesta  on  this  occasion,  it  was  the  cus-
tom, at  her  festival,  to  give  that  animal  a  day  of  rest,  and  a  necklace  made
of  loaves.  It  is  not  clear  whether  the  necklace  was  formed  of  one  entire
loaf,  baked  in  the  form  of  a  ring,  or  whether  it  was  made  of  a  number  of
smdl  cakes  or  loaves  strung  together.

»=*  Jupiter  Pts/or.]— Ver.  350.  Literally,  *  Jupiter  the  Baker.'  This
God  is  mentioned  only  by  this  author  and  Lactantius.


y  Google


B.  n.  364—383.] OE,  CALEOTXiH  OF  OVID.  '  227

fall  ufuler  the  slaughtering  hand,  in  the  halls^  bedecked  with
brass^  We  have  seen  the  pledges  of  the  Dian  Vesta*^  trans-
ferred from  their  abode  to  another  retreat ;  clearly,  they  be-
lieve that  some  Grods**  do  exist.  But  if  they  only  took  notice
that  the  spot  where  ye  Gods  inhabit  on  the  Capitoline  heights,
and  so  many  of  your  mansions  are  invested  in  blockade ;  if  so,
I  say,  they  would  surely  know  that  there  no  longer  exists  any
benefit  in  their  worship  of  the  Gods,  and  that  the  frankincense
offered  with  the  anxious  hand  is  lost.  Oh !  would  that  an
opportunity  for  the  fight  were  given  to  them  !  Let  them  take
arms ;  and  if  they  cannot  conquer,  why  let  them  perish.  Now
destitute  of  food,  and  dreading  an  inglorious  death,  a  rabble
of  barbarians  is  beleaguering  them,  cooped  up  on  their  own
hill.  Then  Venus,  and  Quurinus  graced  with  his  staffs  and
his  kingly  robe,  and  Vesta,  pleaded  many  things  in  behalf  of
their  Latium.  Jupiter  said,  in  reply,  **  All  o/"  tw  are  concerned
in  common  for  these  walls,  and  conquered  Graul  shall  sufier
retribution.  Do  thou,  Vesta,  but  effect,  that  of  those  pro-
visions which  are  scarce,  there  ^ould  be  thought  to  be  a
superabundance,  and  desert  not  thy  own  abode.  Whatever
unground  grain  there  is,  let  the  hollow  machine  ^^  bruise  it,
ancC  kneaded  with  the  hand,  let  the  hearth  harden  it  upon  the
fire."  He  had  given  his  commands,  and  the  Virgin,  the
da^hter  of  Saturn,  assents  to  the  orders  of  her brother.

^  In^  AaWf.]— Ver.  363.  Floras  tells  us,  that  on  the  irraption  of
the  Gauls,  the  Senators  devoted  themselves  to  the  Manes,  in  the  Forum,
and  then  retired  to  their  houses,  there  to  await  their  fate.  Plutarch  and
Livy  inform  us  that  they  were  slain  in  the  Forum.

**  The  Ilian  F«to.]— Ver.  365.  The  sacred  fire,  and  other  holy  things
in  the  temple  of  Vesta,  were  conveyed  from  Rome  to  Csre,  a  town  of
Etruria,  where  those  who  fled  with  them  were  hospitably  entertained.
The  people  of  Caere  received  the  freedom  of  the  city  of  Rome  by  way  of
recompense  for  their  pious  hospitality.

**  That  some  Gods,']—VeT.  366.  The  meaning  o^  this  somewhat  ob-
scure passage  seems  to  be — ^Although  the  Romans  \fiad  themselves  de-
serted by  us,  yet  from  the  care  which  they  still  take  of  the  sacred  tilings
of  Vesta,  it  is  dear  that  they  believe  in  her  existence  at  least.

^  With  his  stqff'.'] — Ver.  375.  *  Lituus '  properly  means  a  staff  with  a
curved  top,  used  by  the  augurs  in  pointing  to  the  heavens,  the  form  of
which  is  still  retained  in  the  crosier  of  the  bishops.

*^  The  hollow  machine,']— yti,  381.  The  mill  is  so  called  here,  proba-
bly from  the  circumstance  that  the  lower  stone  was  somewhat  hollowed,
whence  it  was  called  *  catillus,*  which  properly  signifies  *  a  dish.'

«2


y  Google


228  THE  FASTI ;  [b.  vi.  384—405-

'Twas  now  the  hour  of  midnight :  toil  had  hrought  sleep  to  the
chiefs.  Jupiter  chides  them,  and,  with  his  holy  lips,  he  sig-
nifies  to  them  his  wishes  :  "  Rise  ye,  and,  from  the  top-
most towers,  hurl  down  into  the  midst  of  the  enemy  that  suc-
cour which  least  of  all  ye  prefer  to  resign/'  Sleep  departs,
and,  in  agitation,  hy  reason  of  these  strange  dark  sayings,  they
make  inquiries  what  succour  it  is  that  they  would  be  un-
willing, and  yet  that  they  are  ordered  to  resign  ?  Lo !  it
seems  to  them  that  it  is  bread.  They  hurl  down  the  gifts
of  Ceres ;  thrown  down,  they  rattle  over  helmets  and  long
bucklers.  AU  hope  that  they  could  be  overcome  through
famine,  deserts  the  enemy.  The  foe  being  repulsed,  a  marble
altar  is  erected  to  Jupiter  Pistor.

It  chanced  that  I  was  returning  from  the  festival  of  Vesta,
by  that  way  by  which  the  new  street  is  now  joined  to  the
Roman  Forum.  I  saw  a  matron  coming  along  down  it  with
bare  feet ;  I  was  surprised,  and,  in  silence,  I  made  a  pause.
An  old  woman  who  Hved  near  the  place  perceived  my  asto-
nishment, and,  requesting  me  to  be  seated,  she  addressed  me,
shaking  her  palsiedhosAy  in  a  tremulous  voice : — '*  This  place,
where  now  are  the  markets, /ormer/y  fenny  marshes  covered ;  a
ditch  was  here  swimming  with  water,  from  the  overflowing  of
the  river.  That  spot  formed  the  Curtian  lake^  which  now
supports  the  altars  on  dry  ground ;  'tis  now  dry  ground,  but
once  it  was  a  lake. In  the  spot  where  the  Veiabra**  are  now

**  The  Curtian  lake.']—\er,  403.  In  early  times,  the  valleys  between
the  hills  of  Rome  were  often  rendered  swampy,  and  almost  impassable,
through  the  frequent  inundations  of  the  Tiber.  The  spot  called  the  *Car-
tius  Lacus '  received  its  name  from  some  heroic  act  there  performed  by  a
soldier  named  Curtius ;  but  there  are  doubts  as  to  the  period  when  that
name  was  first  given.  Some  suppose  that  it  was  so  called  from  Marcus
Curtius,  who  there  exhibited  his  heroism  by  leaping  into  the*  yawning
gulf,  a  self-devoted  sacrifice  for  the  benefit  of  his  country ;  while  others
understand  it  to  refer  to  Mettus  Curtius,  a  Sabine  soldier,  who  withstood
the  Romans  on  this  spot,  and  lost  his  horse  in  the  marsh.  It  retained
the  name  '  Lacus,'  for  centuries  after  it  had  been  drained,  and  had  '  sup-
ported the  altars  on  dry  ground.'

59  The  Feteftra.]— Ver.  405.  The  *  Via  Nova,*  or  *  New  way,*  led
from  the  streets  called  *  Velabra '  into  the  interior  part  of  Rome.  The
greater,  and  the  less  *  felabrum,*  lay  between  the  Palktine  and  Capitoline
hills :  oil,  fruits,  and  other  commodities  were  there  sold  in  booths,  or  under
awnings.  Varro  says  that  these  streets  received  their  name  from  the  verb
•  veho,*  *  to  carry,*  because  in  early  times  that  part  was  traversed  in  boats ;
which  mode  of  carriage  also  was  adled  '  Yelatura.'


y  Google


B.  VI.  405 — 423.] OB, CAL£ia>AB  OP  OTID.  229

wont  to  lead  the  processions  into  the  Circus,  nought  vas  there
then  but  willows  and  dense  reeds.  Ofttimes  does  the  reveller
sing,  as  he  is  returning  homeward  through  the  waters  of  the
suburbs,  and  passes  his  drunken  jokes  upon  the  sailors.  Not
yet  had  the  God,  he  who  adapts  himself  to  various  forms,  re-
ceived a  name  from  the  turning  aside  of  the  river.^  Here,  too,
there  was  a  sacred  grove,  dense  with  bulrushes  and  reeds,  and
a  marsh  not  to  be  approached  with  covered  feet.  The  stand-
ing waters  have  been  drained  off;  its  own  bank  confines  the
stream^  and  now  the  ground  is  dry ;  yet  still  is  the  customi  kept
up."  She  had  told  me  the  cause.  "  Farewell,  most  worthy
dame,"  said  I;  "tranquil  be  the  remainder  of  thy  days."''^
The  rest  that  I  shall  tell,  I  learned  long  since  in  the  days  of
my  childhood ;  but  it  must  not  on  that  account  be  passed  over
by  me.  Ilus,^^  the  descendant  of  Dardanus,.  had  just  built  his
new  walls :  the  wealthy  Ilus  still  held  the  sovereignty  of  Asia.
The  heavenly  statue  of  the  armed  Minerva^  is  beheved  to  ha\e
fallen  on  the  heights  of  the  city  of  Ilus : to  see  it  was  my

^  Turning  aside  of  the  rwer,"] — ^Ver.  410.  On  this  spot,  in  a  street
called  the  Etrurian  Street,  there  was  a  statue  of  Vortumnus,  or  Vertum-
nos,  a  God  of  Etruria.  He  received  this  name  from  having,  on  an  inun-
dation, changed  the  course  of  the  river;  *Verto'  signifying  *to  turn.'
The  poet  makes  allusion  to  the  variety  of  forms  which  were  assumed  by
Vertumnus  while  wooing  the  nymph  Pomona,  which  story  he  relates  in
the  14th  book  of  the  Metamorphoses,  1.  637.  According  to  some,  he  was
the  God  of  the  autumnal  fruits ;  and,  according  to  others,  of  merchan-
dize ;  while  others  suppose  him  to  have  been  the  God  who  presided  over  the
thoughts  of  mankind,  and  thus  account  for  the  fickleness  and  versatility
which  were  his  characteristics.

^  R&nainder  of  thy  daysj] — Ver.  415,416.  Gower  gives  the  foUow-
mg  quaint  translation  of  these  lines : —

*  l^he  ended. Farewell,  good  old  soul,  said  I ;
Maist  thou  spend  all  thy  old  dayes  merrily.'

•'  //i».] — ^Ver.  420.  He  was  the  great  grandson  of  Dardanus,  and  built
a  considerable  part  of  the  city  of  Troy.

®  The  armed  Minerva,']— Yer.  421.  This  statue  was  called  the  *  Pal-
ladium.' It  was  supposed  to  have  fallen  from  Heaven,  and  being  de-
posited in  Troy,  was  brought  thence  to  Italy,  as  the  poet  here  says,  either
by  Maeoif  Diomedes,-or  Ulysses ;  though  the  credit  of  having  so  done  is
distinctly  given  by  most  writers  to  iEneas.  By  some  it  is  described  as  a
wooden  statue  of.  the  Goddess,  about  three  cubits  high,  holding  in  her
right  hand  a  pike,  and  in  her  left  a  distaff ;  by  others  it  is  said  to  have
heen  made  of  the  bones  of  Pelops.  It  was  deposited  near  the  sacred  fire,
in  the  temple  of  Vesta,  at  Borne.


y  Google


230  THE  FASTI;  [b.  vi.  423—453.

care.  I  saw  the  temple  and  the  spot :  they  are  still  left  to
Troy ;  but  Rome  has  the  iimage  of  Pallas.  SmiHthens'*  w
consulted,  and  in  the  gloom  of  a  shady  grove  he  utters  these
words,  with  a  voice  that  never  deceives : — "  Preserve  the  Gpod-
dess  that  comes  from  the  skies,  and  ye  will  preserve  yoar
city :  with  herself,  she  will  transfer  the  empire  of  the  place/*
Ilus  preserves  her,  and  keeps  her  shut  up  in  the  heights  of  his
citadel,  and  the  care  of  her  descends  to  his  son  Laomedon.
Badly  guarded  was  she  under  Priam  ;  thus  wished  she  that  it
should  be,  from  the  time  when  her  heauty  was  impugned  by
the  judgment  of  his  son.  Either  the  descendant  of  Adrastus,^
or  Ulysses,  skilled  in  theft,  or  else  the  pious  -^neas,  is
said  to  have  carried  her  away :  the  perpetrator  of  the  deed  is
unknown ;  the  image  itself  is  Roman ;  Yeeta  protects  her,
because  she  watches  all  things  with  her  unceasing  hght.  Oh !
how  great  was  the  dread  of  the  Senators,  at  the  time  when  the
temple  of  Vesta  was  burned,  and  she  herself  was  almost  over-
whelmed by  her  own  ruins !  The  sacred  fires  were  burning
with  the  accursed  ones  ;  and  the  sacrilegious  flames  were  min-
gling with  the  pious.  Her  priestesses,  astounded,  were  weep-
ing with  dishevelled  locks :  their  very  fear  had  deprived  their
bodies  of  strength.  Metellus  flies  forward  into  the  midst,  and,
with  a  loud  voice,  he  cries,  "  Haste  to  the  rescue !  tears  afford
no  help.  Remove  the  pledges  of  destiny  with  your  virgin
hands !  By  the  hand,  and  not  by  vows,  must  they  be  rescued.
Woe  is  me!  Do  ye  hesitate ?*'••  sajs  he.  He  saw  that  they
were  hesitating,  and  that  in  their  dismay  they  had  fallen  down
on  their  knees.  He  takes  up  some  water,  and,  raising  his
hands,  he  says,  '^  Forgive  me,  ye  holy  things !  Though  a  man,
I  will  enter  the  shrines  which  ought  not  by  man  to  be  entered.
If  this  be  a  crime,  then  full  upon  me  fall  the  penalty  of  my
sin,  and  at  the  cost  of  my  life  let  Rome  be  redeemed." He

^  SmirUheus,'] — Ver.  425.  This  was  an  epithet  of  Apollo,  derived
either  from  '  Sminthus/  a  village  near  Troy,  or  from  '  Sminthus/  or
'  Sminthea,'  the  Phrygian  name  for  a  mouse  or  rat ;  which,  at  the  inter,
cession  of  his  priest  Qiryses,  when  his  gardens  and  orchards  were  much
infested  by  them,  lie  had  driven  away  and  extirpated.

«  Descendant  of  Adrasius,'] — Ver.  433.  Diomedes,  the  son  of  Tydeus
by  Deiphyle.  the  daughter  of  Adrastus,  Kmg  of  Argos.

^  Do  ye  hesitate  ?] — ^Ver.  447, 448.  Gower  thus  renders  these  lines : —
*  0  heavens ! D'ye  stand  f Them  in  a  stam  he  sees,
And  in  amazement  fall'n  upon  their  knees.'


y  Google


B.  VI.  453—477.] OB, CALENDAE  OF  OVID.  231

said,  and  he  burst  in.  The  Goddess,  carried  oflF,  approved  of
the  deed;  and  by  the  devotedness  of  her  Priest*^  was  she  sa^ed.
Now,  happily  do  ye  glow,  ye  sacred  fires,  under  Caesar.  Now
the  fire  both  is,  and  will  be,  upon  Ilian  shrines ;  and  while  he
is  our  chief,  no  priestess  wUl  be  told  of  as  having  defiled  her
fiUets,  or  will  be  buried  ahve  in  the  earth.  Thus  perishes  the  un-
chaste one,^  inasmuch  as  she  against  whom  she  has  sinned  is
heaped  upon  her;  for  the  Earth  and  Vesta  are  the  same  deity.

On  this  day  did  Brutus  gain  a  surname  from  the  CaUaican
foe,^  and  stain  with  blood  the  Spanish  soil.  Sometimes,  for-
sooth, is  sorrow  mixed  with  rejoicings ;  lest  the  festal  day
should  delight  the  people  to  their  very  hearts'  content,  and
leave  nothing  for  them  to  desire.  Crassus,  near  the  Euphrates,
lost  his  eagles,  his  son,  and  his  soldiers ;  and,  last  of  all,  was
lumself  consigned  to  death.  "  Parthian!  why  dost  thou  exult? "
said  the  Groddess.  "  Those  standards  thou  shalt  restore,  and
there  shall  be  aa  avenger  to  take  satisfaction  for  the  death  of
Crassus."  But  as  soon  as  the  violets  are  taken  off  ^m  the
long-eared  asses,  and  the  rough  millstones  grind  the  grain  of
Ceres,  the  mariner,  sitting  in  his  bark,  says,  "We  shall  see
the  Dolphin,'*  when  the  damp  night,  having  chased  away  the
day,  shall  have  set  in."

Now,  Phrygian  'Rthonus,  thou  complainest  that  thou  art  de-
serted by  thy  bride,  and  the  watchful  Ught-bearing  star  of  the
morn  comes  forth  from  the  eastern  waves.  Go  in  procession,
good  matrons, — the  Matralia  is  your  festival,— and  offer  the
yellow  cakes  to  the Theban  Goddess."  There  is  an  open  space  ad-

^  Devotedness  of  her  Priest  ] — ^Ver.  454.  Metellus  lost  his  sight  in
the  flames :  in  consequence  of  which  he  was  allowed  to  come  to  the
Senate-house  in  a  chariot  (an  honour  never  before  bestowed  on  any  one),
tnd  a  statue  was  erected  to  him  in  the  Capitol.

^  The  unchaste  one.'] — ^Ver.  459.  AUuuon  is  here  made  to  the  punish-
ment of  being  buried  alive,  which  was  awarded  to  the  Vestal  who  was
found  guilty  of  a  violation  of  her  vows  of  chastity.

*  CaUaican /oe.]^Yer.  461.  On  the  day  of  the  Vestalia,  D.  Junius
Brutus  overcame  the  Callaici,  a  people  of  the  north-west  of  Spain,  whose
chief  city  was  Calle,  now  Oporto,  on  the  river  Durius,  now  Douro.

^  The  Dolphin.]— Wer.  471.  On  the  4th  of  the  Ides  of  June,  the
day  after  the  VestaUa,  the  Dolphin  rises  in  the  evening.  The  termination
of  the  Isstival  is  signified  by  the  garlands  being  taken  off  the  asses,  and
their  being  set  to  work  again  at  turning  the  mill-stones.

^  Theban  Goddess,]-^ et.  476.  The  Goddess  Mater  Matuta  is  here
identified  by  the  poet  with  Ino,  daughter  of  Cadmus,  the  founder  of


y  Google


232  THE  FASTI ;  [b.  vi.  477—500.

joining  to  the  bridges  and  the  great  Circus,  which  deriyes  its
name  from  an  ox  placed  there.  Here,  on  this  mom,  they  say
that  the  sceptred  hands  of  Servius  gave  a  temple^  to  Mother
Matuta.  As  to  what  Goddess  she  is,  why  she  keeps  hand-
maidens afar  from  the  thresholds  of  her  temple  (for  she  does
keep  them  away),  and  why  she  requires  the  toasted  cakes,
Bacchus,  with  thy  hair  crowned  with  clusters  and  wreathed
with  ivy,  if  this  family  be  thine,  do  thou  guide  the  course  of
my  bark.  Through  Jove's  compliance  with  her  request,  Semele
had  been  consumed ;  Ino  received  thee,  O  child,  and  carefully
reared  thee  with  her  best  attention.  Juno  was  enraged,  be-
cause she  was  bringing  up  the  child  that  was  snatched  from
the  womb  of  a  concubine  of  Jove.  But,  in  good  truth,  he  was  the
offspring  of  her  sister  .^^  On  this  account,  Athamas  is  haunted
by  the  Furies  and  by  false  imaginings,  and  thou  diest,  infant
Learchus,  by  the  hand  of  thy  father.  The  sorrowing  mother
had  now  buried  the  corpse  of  Learchus,  and  had  performed  all
the  rites  due  to  the  dismal  pile.  She,  too,  bounds  forward  just
as  she  is,  with  her  locks  torn  in  funereal  woe,  and  snatches  thee,
Melicerta,  from  thy  cradle.  There  is  a  spot^*  contracted  within
a  narrow  compass, — ^two  seas  it  dashes  back,  and  one  tract
of  land  is  beaten  by  two  tides.  Thither  she  comes,  embracing
her  son  in  her  maniac  arms,  and  plunges  him,  along  with  her-
self, from  the  high  summit  of  the  cliff  into  the  deep.  Un-
harmed, Panope"  and  her  hundred  sisters  receive  them,  and

Thebes,  who  was  deified  under  the  name  of  Leucothea.  Reference  has
been  already  made  to  the  story  of  Ino  and  Melicerta,  and  HeUe  and
Phryxus,  in  Book  ii.  1.  628,  and  Book  iii.  1.  859.

7^  Gave  a  temple.']— -Yer.  480.  The  poet  says  that  Servius  Tullius
built  the  temple  of  Mater  Matuta,  in  the  Forum  Boarium,  or  Ox  Market,
which  was  near  the  Palatine  bridge  and  the  Circus  Maximus.  There  was
a  brazen  statue  of  a  bull  in  this  market-place.

7^  Offspring  qf  her  sister,] — ^Ver.  487, 488.  Gower  thus  renders  these
lines: —

*  Vex'd  Juno  swell'd,  that  she,  the  strumpet  gone,
Should  nurse  her  brat ;  yet  'twas  her  sister's  sonne.'

7<  There  is  a  spot] — ^Ver.  495.  The  poet  here  describes  the  Isthmus
of  Corinth,  whence  Ino  plunged  into  the  sea.  It  was  very  narrow,  the
space  between  the  ^Egean  and  Ionian  seas  not  being  more  than  about  six
miles  in  width.

'*  Fanope.] — Ver.  499.  She  was  the  daughter  of  Nereus  and  Doris,
and  sister  of  the  Nereids.


y  Google


B.  VI.  500—622.] OB, CAIiENDAB  OF  OVID.  233

with  a  gently  gliding  pace  they  hear  them  through  their
realms.  Not  yet  does  Leucothoe — ^not  yet  does  3iat  boy
Palsemon'*  possess  the  mouth  of  Tiber,  abounding  with  its
eddies.  There  was  a  sacred  grove :  whether  it  is  called  the
Grove  of  Semele,  ,or  of  Stimula,"  is  a  matter  of  doubt ;  'they
say  that  the  Bacchanals'®  of  Ausonia  inhabited  it.  Of  these,
Ino  enquires  what  nation  that  is  ?  She  hears  that  they  are
Arcadians,  and  that  Evander  wields  the  sceptre  of  the  place.
Concealing  her  divinity,  Juno,  the  daughter  of  Saturn,  insi-
diously urges  on  the  Latian  Bacchanals  by  deceiving  words: —
"  0,  people — ^too  credulous,^  and  utterly  mad !  TMs  stranger
comes,  no  friend  to  our  choirs.  By  ^ud  she  seeks  and  en-
deavours to  become  acquainted  with  the  ceremonial  of  our
rites ;  she  has  with  her  a  pledge  by  which  she  can  pay  the
penalty."  Hardly  has  she  ceased ;  the  Bacchanals  fill  the  air
with  their  bowlings,  their  locks  streaming  down  their  shoul-
ders ;  they  lay  hands  upon  her,  and  strive  to  tear  away  the
babe ;  she  invokes  those  (rods  whom,  as  yet,  a  stranger,  she
knows  not.  "  Ye  Ctods,  and  ye  men  of  this  place,  assist  a
mother  in  her  distress  V  Her  cries  re-echo  among  the  neigh-
bouring crags  of  the  Aventine.  The  hero  of  (Eta^  had  just
driven  to  the  bank  of  the  river  his  Iberian  cows ;  he  hears
her,  and  in  haste  pursues  his  way  towards  the  sounds.  At
the  approach  of  Hercules,  those  who,  but  a  moment  before,
were  preparing  to  oflfer  violence,  turn their  cowardly  backs

"  PalamonJ]—yeri  501.  As  Ino,  when  deified,  received  the  names  of
Leucothoe  and  Matuta,  so  wiu  Melicerta  called  by  the  Greeks,  Pahemon,
l)y  the  Latins,  Portunus.

^  SHmula,'] — ^Ver.  503.  There  was  a  Goddess  of  this  name,  in  whose
grove  the  orgies  of  Bacchus  were  celebrated,  until  they  were  discontinued
by  order  of  the  Senate,  on  account  of  the  gross  irregularities  discovered
to  have  been  committed  there.

'*  The  Bacchanals,']— Vtt,  504.  Literally,  the  '  Maenades,'  or  'frantic'
votaries  of  Bacchus.

^  Too  credulous,'] — Ver.  509, 510.  Gower  gives  the  following  trans-
lation of  these  lines : —

'  *  O  simple  souls ! O  senselesse  folk  and  blind !
D'ye  take  this  vagrant  huzzie  for  your  friend  ?'

*  The  hero  of  (Eta.] — Ver.  519.  Hercules  is  so  called  here  prolep-
tcrally,  or  by  anticipation,  because  he  ordered  his  body  to  be  burned,  after
his  decease,  on  Mount  (Eta,  in  Thessaly.  At  the  period  mentioned  in  the
text,  he  was  driving  the  oxen  which  he  had  taken  from  Geryon,  King  of
Iberia,  or  Spain.


y  Google


•234  THE  FABTI ;  [b.  ti.  522—548.

in  womanish  flight.  He  says,  *'  What  seekest  thou  in  this
spot,  aunt  of  Baucchos?"  for  he  had  recognized  her:  "Does
the  same  Deity  that  harasses  me,  harass  thee  idso  V*  Partly
she  informs  him ;  ^^  as  to  some  part  o/*  her  story,  the  presence
of  her  son  is  a  check  upon  her,  and  she  is  ashamed  that  in  her
froQzy  she  has  rescnrted  to  crime.  Fame,  swift  as  she  is,  flies
about  with  fli4>ping  wings ;  and  ofttimes,  Ino,  is  thy  name  on
her  Hps.  As  the  guest  of  CarmentiB,  thou  art  said  to  have  en-
tered a  ^Edthful  abode,  and  to  have  broken  thy  protracted  fast.
The  priestess  of  T^esea^  is  said  to  have  given  to  thee  cakes
hastily  made  with  her  own  hand,  and  baked  upon  a  hurried
hearth.  And  so  at  the  present  day,  on  the  festival  of  the
Matralia,  are  cakes  pleanng  to  her ;  this  rustic  courtesy  was
more  pleasing  than  idl  the  tfpHances  of  art.  ''  Now,"  she  says,
"do  thou,  a  prophetess,  unseal  the  decrees  of  destiny  as  thou
mayst  be  pleased ;  add  this/atHmr,  I  pray,  to  thy  hospitable
reception  of  me."  But  Utile  delay  is  there :  the  prophetess
receives  the  mspiratum  of  the  Deities  of  the  heavens,  and  be-
comes filled  with  the  Qod  throughout  her  entire  soul.  On  a
sudden,  scarcely  could  you  recognize  her,  so  much  more  holy,
and  so  much  more  stately  did  she  seem  than  the  moment  be-
fore. "  Tidings  of  joy  will  I  sing;  rejoice,  Ino,  that  thou
hast  ended  thy  t€»l8,"  she  said,  "  and  ever  be  present,  propi-
tious to  this  nation !  A  Deity  of  the  ocean  shak  thou  be  :  the
deep,  too,  shall  receive  thy  son ;  amid  our  seas  take  ye  both
another  name.  Leucothoe  shalt  thou  be  called  by  the  Greeks;
Matuta  by  our  nation ;  thy  son  shall  have  universi^  sway  over
the  harbours.®  Him  whom  we  shall  call  Portunus,  his  own
tongue  shall  call  Palsemon. Go  ye  both,  I  pray,  propitious

^*  Ske  informs  him.'] — Ver.  525,  526.  Gowct  thns  renders  these
lines —

*  Part  tells  she ;  part  the  presence  of  her  sonne
Withheld. She's  shamed  for  those  mad  tricks  were  done.*

*«  Priestess  of  Tegeaa,'\—yec,  531—534.  The  following  is  Gower's
translation —

*  The  holy  woman  made  a  fire  in  hast,
And  hak'd  a  hisket  for  her  quick  repast.
Hence  in  her  matrals  bake  they  biskets  dry ;
No  art  pleas'd  her  like  that  tight  houswifry.'

53  0%i€T  ike  harbours.'] — Ver.  546.  The  poet  here  implies  that  Mdi-
certa  received  his  name  '  Portunus'  from  the  harbours,  *  portus/  which  he
was  to  take  under  his  protection.


y  Google


B.  VI.  548—569.]  OE/  CALEKDAB  OF  OTID.  235

tor  these  our  lands."  They  nodded  their  assent.  Truth  at-
tended her  promise  :  they  ended  their  labours :  they  changed
their  names  :  the  one  is  a  God,  the  other  a  €U)ddes8.  You  en-
quire why  she  forbids  the  handmaids  to  approach ;  she  hates
them,  and  if  she  p^nnits  me,  I  will  sing  the  origin  of  her  hate.
Daughter  of  Cadmus,®*  one  of  thy  female  servants  was  wont
ofttimes  to  submit  to  the  embraces  of  thy  husband.  The  faith-
less Athamas  wooed  her  by  stealth.  From  her  he  learned  that
grain  subjected  to  ihe  fire  was  given  out  to  the  husbandmen.
The  queen  herself  denied  that  she  did  this,  but  rumour  has  given
reception  to  the  story  y  diis  is  the  reason  why  this  cIms  of
servants  are  objects  of  her  hatred;  But  let  not  the  fond
mother  offer  up  to  h&t,  prayers  for  her  own  family ;  she  her-
self seems  to  have  been  but  an  unhappy  parent.  With  more
fortunate  results,  ye  will  entrust  to  her  the  offspring  of  another;
she  was  more  beneficial  to  Bacchus  than  she  was  to  her  own
children.  It  is  reported  that  this  Goddess  said  to  thee,  O  Bu-
tilius,®  "Whither  dost  thou  hasten  on  my  festival?  A  Consul,
thou  shalt  fall,  by  the  hand  of  the  Marsian  foe."  The  event
accorded  with  her  words ;  and  tlie  empurpled  sti^am  of  Tole-
nus  ran  witli  his  waters  mingled  witii  gore.  The  next  year
came :  on  the  same  m<Hni^  the  slaughter  of  Didius®'  redoubled
the  success  of  the  foe. The  same  cUiy^  is  thine,  0  Fortune;*

^  Daughter  of  Cadmus.] — ^Ver.  553.  This  appears  to  be  a  very  absurd
story.  Plutarch  tells  us  that  a  female  servant  used  to  be  admitted  into
her  temple,  but  only  for  the  purpose  of  beii^  soundly  flogged  by  the  ma-
trons. He  adds,  ^t  no  iStoUan  was  admitted  into  the  temple  of  Leu-
cothea  at  Chronea,  as  the  favorite  of  Athamas  was  an  iEtolian  by  birth.

®*  JRutUiiu.'] — ^Ver.  563.  On  the  day  of  the  Matralia,  in  the  Marsian
or  Social  war,  the  Consul  P.  Rutilius  Lupus  was  slain  near  the  Tolenus,
a  river  flowing  from  the  Marsian  into  the  Sabine  territory.

*  On  the  same  worn.]— Ver.  567.  *  PaUantide/  Literally,  « the  kins-
woman of  Pallas  \*  an  epithet  of  Aurora,  the  Goddess  of  the  Morning,
who  was  the  cousin  of  Pallas,  one  of  the  Titans.

^  Didius.J — Ver.  568,  Appian  informs  us  that  Didius  was  Praetor
during  the  Marsian  or  Social  war ;  but  we  have  no  record  of  hia  defeat  and
death,  which  are  probably  here  referred  to.

^  The  same  day.] — Ver.  569,  570.  Gower  thus  quaintly  tnmslates
these  lines —

*  Thine,  Fortune,  is  this  day,  this  place,  this  founder.
But  who's  that  statue  wrapt  up  in  a  gown  there  ?'
In  good  truth,  Uie  transltttor  was  not  a  re^)ecter  ev^  of  rhyme  on  all  oc-
casions!

**  O  Forftme.]— Ver.  569» On  the  same  day  virith  the  temple  of


y  Google


236  THE  PAST! ;  [b.  VI.  569—598.

the  $ame  the  builder ;  the  same  the  site.  But  who  is  this  that
lies  hid  beneath  the  garments^  coyering  him  ?  It  is  Servius  :
for  this  much  is  agreed  upon ;  but  various  reasons  are  assigned
for  his  concealment,  and  they  leave  me  uncertain  in  my  own
mind.  While  the  Goddess  timidly  confesses  her  stolen  loves,
and  blushes  that  she,  a  daughter  of  heaven,  had  submitted  to
the  embrace  of  a  mortal,  for  she  was  inflamed  with  love,  being
seized  with  a  violent  passion  for  the  king,  and  in  the  case  of
this  man  alone  she  proved  herself  not  bUnd. — By  mght  she  was
wont  to  enter  his  abode  through  a  little  window,  from  which
circumstance  the  gate  bears  the  name  of  Fenestella.*^  Now  is  she
ashamed,  and  she  covers  with  a  veil  those  beloved  features,
and  the  face  of  the  king  is  hidden  by  many  a  gown.  Or  is  it
rather  the  truth,  that  after  the  death  of  TuUius  the  people
were  shocked  by  the  death  of  their  peaceful  chief?  No
bounds  were  then  set  to  their  grief;  at  sight  of  his  statue
their  sorrow  increased,  until  they  concealed  it  by  putting
gowns  over  it.  The  third  reason  must  be  sung  by  me  in  a
wider  space ;  yet  shall  I  keep  my  steeds  within  the  narrowest
Hmits  as  I  dnve.  TuUia  having  effected  her  marriage,  the
wages  of  iniquity,  was  wont  to  urge  her  lord  with  these  words  :
"  What  boots  it  that  we  are  equally  matched  in  guilty  thou,
with  the  murder  of  my  sister,  and  I,  with  the  blood  of  thy
brother,  if  now  a  life  of  piety  contents  us  ?  My  husband  and
thy  wife  should  both  have  Hved,  if  we  were  to  dare  no  greater
crime  than  this  ?  The  life  and  the  kingdom  of  my  father  I
present  to  thee  as  my  dowry ;  if  thou  art  a  man,  go  and  exact
the  benefits  of  my  dower,  that  I  tell  thee  of.  Crime  is  worthy
of  a  king ;  islay  thy  father-in-law,  and  seize  the  throne,  and
do  thou  stain  both  our  hands  with  my  father's  blood."  Goaded
on  by  such  words,  he,  a  private  person,  had  rum  taken  his  seat
on  the  lofty  throne:  in  amazement,  the  multitude  takes  to  arms.

Matuta,  by  the  same  person,  Servius  Tollius,  and  in  the  same  place,  the
Forum  Boarium,  or  ox-market,  the  temple  of  FortunaViriliswas  dedicated.

^  Beneath  the  ffarments.'] — Ver.  570.  We  are  told  by  Dionysius  that
this  statue  was  of  wood  gilt,  and  that  two  togas  were  thrown  oyer  it.
Varro  speaks  of  the  statue  thus  covered,  as  though  it  had  been  that  of  the
Goddess  herself.

»»  Fenestella.^—yer.  578.  He  tells  us  that  the  Goddess  Fortuna  used  to
pay  her  nightly  visits  to  Servius  through  a  window,  and  that^  in  comme-
moration  thereof,  one  of  the  gates  of  the  city  was  called  *  Porta  Fenea*
tdla,'  from  the  word  *  fenestra,'  *  a  window.*


y  Google


B.  VI.  599—629.] OB, CALBNDAB  OF  OTtD.  237

Bloodshed  and  slaughter  are  the  consequence,  and  feeble
age  is  overpowered.  The  son-in-law,  Tarquinius  Superbus,
wields  the  sceptre  that  he  has  won  from  his  father-in-law.
The  ktTig  himself,  slain  at  the  foot  of  the  Esquilise,  where  his
palace  was,  fell,  weltering  in  his  blood,  on  the  hard  ground.
His  daughter,  about  to  enter  the  home  of  her  father,  was
passing  in  her  chariot,  lofty  and  impudent,  through  the
middle  of  the  street.  The  charioteer,  soon  as  he  beheld  the
body,  bursting  into  tears,  stopped  short ;  with  such  words  as
these  did  she  reproach  him :  "Are  you  going  on?'^  or  are  you
awaiting  the  *  bitter  reward  of  your  affection  ?  Drive,  I  tell
you,  the  wheels  over  his  very  face,  whether  they  will  go  or
not."  A  sure  evidence  of  this  deed,  from  her  the  street  was
called  "The  Accursed,"**  and  that  transaction  is  thereby  im-
pressed with  a  lasting  mark.  Yet,  after  this,  she  dared  to
touch  the  temple  that  was  the  memorial  of  her  father :  won-
ders, truly,  but  still  facts,  do  I  relate.  There  was  a  statue,
the  resemblance  of  TuUius,  sitting  on  a  throne ;  this  is  said,
with  its  hands,  to  have  covered  its  eyes ;  and  a  voice  was  heard,
"  Cover  ye  my  countenance,  that  it  behold  not  the  impious
face  of  my  daughter."  He  was  covered  with  the  garment  pre-
sented to  him ;  Fortune  forbade  it  to  be  removed,  and  fiius
from  her  temple  did  she  speak :  "  That  day,  on  which,  with
unveiled  features,  Servius  shall  first  be  uncovered,  shall  be  the
first  of  the  departure  from  shame."  Forbear,  ye  matrons,  to
touch  the  forbidden  garments ;  it  is  enough  to  utter  praters
with  the  voice  of  worship ;  and  may  he  who  was  the  seventh
king**  in  our  city,  ever  keep  his  head  concealed  in  the  Roman
garb.  This  temple  was  burned  by  fire ;  yet  did  the  flames
spare  that  statue ;  Mulciber  himself  gave  his  aid  to  his  son.
For  Vulcan  was  the  Father  of  Tullius ;  Ocrisia  was  his  mother,
a  woman  of  Comiculum,^  remarkable  for  her  beauty. Her,

^  Going  on,'\ — Ver.  607,  608. Gower  thus  translates  these  lines —
*  Drive  on,  or  Fll  pay  you  for  your  foolish  zeal ;
Run  o'er,  I  say,  his  carkasse  with  the  wheel/

*  Accursed,'] — Ver.  609.  Dionysius  says,  that  before  this  tragic  oc-
currence, that  street  or  road  was  called  *the  Happy;'  Livy  calls  it  the
•  Virbian,'  and  Festus  *  the  Orbian  way.'

**  T/ie  MeverUh  king,'] — Ver.  624.  That  is  to  say,  by  reckoning,  as  one
of  the  kings,  Titus  Tatius  the  Sabine,  mrho  reigned  jointly  with  Romulus.

^  Cormculum.'] — Yer.  628.  This  was  a  to^n  in  the  Latian  territory,
which  was  taken  by  the  Romans,  on  which  occasion  Ocrisia,  the  mother  of
Servius  Tullius,  became  a  captive.


y  Google


238  THE  rAffPI;  [b.  VI.  629—652.

Taaaquil,  kaving  duly  performed  tbe  sacred  rites,  ordered,  in
company  with  herself,  to  pour  the  wine  on  the  decorated  altar.
Here  among  the  ashes  either  was,  or  seemed  to  be,  a  form  of
obscene  shape  ;  but  snch  it  really  was.  Being  ordered  so  to  do,
the  captive  submits  to  its  embraces ;  conceived  by  her,  Servius  has
the  origin  of  his  birth  from  heaven.  His  father  afforded  l^e
proof,  at  the  time  when  he  touched  his  head  with  the  gleaming
tire,  and  a  flame,  rising  to  a  point,  blazed  upon  his  locks.

Thee,  too,  0  Concord,**  does  Livia  enshnne  in  a  gorgeous
temple,  thee,  whom  she  bestowed  upon  her  beloved  hus-
band. But  know,  generations  to  come,  that  where  the
portico  of  Livia  now  is,  once  stood  the  building  of  an  immense
house.  One  house  was  the  work  of  a  whole  city;  and  it
occupied  a  space,  a  smaller  than  which  many  towns  contain
withm  their  walls.  This  was  levelled  with  the  ground,  under
no  accusation  <^  one  aiming  at  sovereign  power,  but  because,
by  its  gorgeousness,  it  was  deemed  injurious  to  public  virtue,
Caesar  had  the  moral  courage  to  level  so  vast  a  pile  of  build-
ings ;  and  himself,  die  heir  to  it,  to  lose  so  much  property  of
his  own.  Thus  is  his  Censorship  dischai^ed,  and  thus  is  an
example  given ;  when  the  assertor  of  morality  himself  practises
that  which  he  enjoins  on  others.

There  is  no  mark  of  distinction  on  the  succeeding  day  which
I  am  able  to  mention.

On  the  Ides  a  temple  was  given  to  unconquered  Jove.
And  now  I  am  commanded  to  tell  you  of  the  lesser  Quin-
quatrus  ;*^  Minerva,  thowmXh  thy  auburn  locks,  assist  my  un-

^  O  Con€ord.'\—YeT.  637.  On  the  3rd  of  the  Ides  of  June,  Livia
dedicated  a  temple  to  Concord,  in  token  of  the  harmony  which  had
always  subsisted  between  her  and  her  husband  Augustus.  It  was  near
the  *  Liviae  Porticus/  which  was  built  on  the  site  of  the  former  palace  of
Vedius  Pollio.  This  he  had  bequeathed  to  Augustus ;  but  it  was  of  such
immense  extent,  and  its  splendour  was  supposed  to  furnish  so  bad  a  prece-
dent, that  Augustus  ordered  it  to  be  razed  to  the  ground.

^  Quinquatrus,'] — ^Ver.  651.  On  the  Ides  of  June  a  temple  had  been
dedicated  to  Jupiter^  and  on  that  day  the  Lesser  Quinquatrus  or  Quinqua-
tria  were  celebrated.  It  is  doubtful  whether  *  Invictus,'  '  unconquered,'
is  here  a  mere  supplementary  epithet  of  Jupiter,  or  whether  the  temple
had  been  dedicated  to  him  with  that  '  cognomen'  or  '  surname.'  No
other  writer  mentions  any  such  *  cognomen.'  The  greater  '  quinqua^a'
were  on  the  14th  of  the  Calends  of  April.  They  are  described  in  Book  iiL
1.  809. Gower  thus  renders  the  two  preceding  lines —

*  Two  following  days  are  blank. To  Jove  invioted
Upon  the  Ides  a  chapell  was  addicted.'


y  Google


B.  VI.  652—675.]  OB, CJlLBNDAB  OF  OVID.  239

dertaking. Why  does  the  strolling  piper*^  rove  about  all  the
city? What  mean  the  masks,  wlutt  the  long  flowing  hair?
Thus  I  spoke. Thus  said  Tritonia,  having  laid  aside  her  lance
(would  that  I  could  repeat  exactly  the  words  of  the  learned
Goddess)  :  "  In  the  times  of  your  forefathers  of  old,  the  piper
was  much  employed,  and  was  always  hdd  in  high  estimation.
The  piper  used  to  sound  his  notes  in  the  temples,  and  at  the
games ;  at  the  sorrowful  funerals  the  piper  used  to  sound.
His  toil  was  then  sweetened  by  reward ;  but  a  time  followed,*^
which  suddenly  put  an  end  to  the  employment  of  the  Grecian
art.* Add,  too,  the  fact ^  that  the  ^dile  had  ordered  that  there
should  be  but  ten  musicians  who  should  attend  the  fiineral
procession. They  quit  the  city  in  self-imposed  exile,  and  they
retire  to  Tibur. The  hollow  pipe  is  missed  on  the  stage,  it  is
missed  at  the  altars ;  no  dirge  now  escorts  the  last  obsequies.
A  certain  man,  Atf7w«{f  worthy  of  any  rank,  had  been  a  slave  at
Tibur,*^  but  after  a  length  of  time  he  had  become  free.  He  pre-
pares a  repast  at  his  form,  and  invites  the  musical  band ;  they  as-
semble at  the  festive  banquet.  'Twas  now  night,  and  their  sight
and  their  eyes  and  their  souls  were  drenched  with  wine,  when  a
messenger  came  with  a  speech  previously  arranged,  and  thus  he

*  The  stroUmg  joipcr.]— Ver.  653,  654.  Gowcr  gives  the  following
translation —

*  Why  do  the  waits  walk  all  abont  the  town  ?
Why  do  they  mask  disguised  ?  What  means  the  gown  V

*  A  time  followed.] — ^Ver.  661.  The  time  which  the  poet  here  refers
to  was  when  Appius  Claudius  was  Censor,  a.u.c.  443,  by  whom  the  pipers,
or  flute-players,  were  prohibited  from  eating  in  the  temple  of  Jupitet.
He  had  previously  restricted  the  number  of  them  which  should  accom-
pany funerals  to  ten.

*  Grecian  art,'] — Ver.  662.  Ovid  is  here  mistajcen  in  ascribing  the  in-
vention of  the  flute  or  fife  to  Greece.  The  Romans  received  the  use  of
the  flute  from  Asia;  whereas  the  *Cithara,'  or  lyre,  was  the  national
music  of  Greece.  Most  of  the  MSS.  read  'grata,'  which  would,  if
adopted,  alter  the  passage  to  the  *  pleasing  art,'  which,  most  probably,  is
the  correct  reading.  It  must,  however,  be  remembered,  that  the  poet  is
here  consistent  with  the  sequel,  in  which  he  ascribes  the  invention  of  the
'  Tibia'  to  Minerva  or  Pallas,  who  was  originally  a  Grecian  deity.

2  At  rifcur.]— Ver.  669, 670.  Livy  says  that  the  stratagem  here  re-
lated was  practised  by  the  Government  of  Tibur,  at  the  request  of  envoys
sent  thither  from  Rome. Gower  thus  renders  these  lines : —

*  At  Tybur  liv'd  a  libertine,  in's  'art
A  long  time  free,  and  one  of  great  desert.'  ^


y  Google


240  THE  TASTI;  [b.  vi.  675—691.

said:  'Why  debiyest  thou  to  pat  an  end  to  the  banqnet?
the  giyer  of  thy  fi!«edom'  is  at  hand.  There  is  no  delay  ;'*  the
guests  more  their  limbs  staggering  nnder  the  strong  wine ;
their  stumbling  feet  now  stand,  now  give  way.  But  the  master
of  the  house  said,  *  Depart  ye,'  and  lifted  them  into  a  cart
as  they  yet  lingered ;  with  broad  hurdles  was  the  cart  fenced
round.*  The  late  hour,  the  jolting,  and  the  wine,  all  bring  on
sleep,  and  the  drunken  crew  think  that  they  are  going  back  to
Tibur.  And  now,  the  cart  had  entered  the  Roman  city  through
the  Esquiliae,  and  in  the  morning  it  was  standing  in  the  middle
of  the  Forum.  Plautius,  that  he  may  deceive  the  Senate
both  as  to  their  iqppearance  and  numbers,  orders  their  faces  to
be  covered  with  masks.  He  also  puts  among  them  others,
and,  that  the  band  of  female  musicians  may  increase  this
multitude,  he  orders  them  to  go  in  long  garments,  that  so
those  who  had  returned .  might  be  thoroughly  concealed,
lest,  by  chance,  they  should  be  remarked  to  have  come  back
contrary  to  the  commands*  of  his  colleague. The  thing  was

•  Thy  freedom,'] — ^Ver.  676.  •Vindicta'  is,  literally,  the  rod  which
the  Victor  laid  on  the  head  of  the  skve  about  to  receive  his  freedom.

*  There  is  no  delay^j^Ver,  677--682.  The  following  is  Gower's
comical  translation  of  these  lines : —

'  Away  all  staggering  hastily  do  pack :
Their  legs  miroly  large  indentures  make.
Away,  the  master  cry'd :  and  as  they  slacked,
Into  a  matted  waggon  all  he  packed.
'  Time,  wine,  and  motion  sleep  provok'd. They  thought.

All  fox'd,  the  cart  had  them  to  Tybur  brought.'
Of  course  the  indentures  made  by  their  legs  were  bipartite.

^  Fenced  round.'] — Ver.  680.  Varro  says  that  a  '  plaustrum '  was  an
open  cart ;  and  it  seems  to  be  the  opinion  of  Neapolis,  a  very  intelligent
commentator,  that  the  *  sirpea'  was  a  hurdle  fence  round  the  cart,  and
not  an  awning  over  it.  At  the  present  day,  carts  are  sometimes  to  be
seen  in  the  country,  fitted  up  in  this  way  for  the  safe  conveyance  of  pigs
and  sheep.  The  object  of  putting  up  the  hurdles  in  the  cart  was  clearly
to  prevent  the  pipers  from  recognizing  the  face  of  the  country,  if  any  of
them  should  chance  to  wake,  and  thus  prematurely  discover  the  trick
that  was  being  placed  on  them.

Contrary  1o  the  commands. ]-~VtT,  690.  Though  the  pipers  had
voluntarily  withdrawn  from  Rome,  it  is  not  unlikely  that  Claudius  and
the  senators  had  determined  that  they  should  not  return,  after  having
once  abandoned  their  home  and  their  duties  as  citizens.  On  the  other
hand,  it  seems  that  C.  Plautius,  the  other  censor  and  the  colleague  of
Appius,  adopted  the  views  of  those  who  vnshed  for  their  return,  and
having  succeeded  in  his  stratagem,  used  his  best  endeavours  to  conceal  it
from  his  colleague  and  the  Senate.


y  Google


B.  VI.  690—717.]  OB,  CALEITDAB  OF  OTID.  241

approved  of;  and  ever  since  it  has  been  allowed  bj/  usage  to
wear  strange  dresses  on  the  Ides,  and  to  chant  merrj  sayings
to  the  old-fashioned  airs/  When  she  had  given  me  this  in-
formation, I  said,  *  It  still  remains  for  me  to  learn  why  that
day  is  called  Quinquatrus?'  'March,'  says  she,  'keeps  a
fesdyal  of  mine  by  that  name,  and  this  kind  of  people  are  in
the  number  of  my  inventions.  I  was  the  first  to  cause  the
long  pipe  to  give  forth  its  sounds,  the  box-wood  having  been
first  bored  in  a  few  holes.  The  melody  pleased  me ;  but  in
the  clear  waters  that  reflected  my  face,  I  saw  the  swelling  out
of  my  vurgin  cheeks.'  *  The  art  is  not  worth  the  penalty  to
me,' I  cried;  'farewell!  my  pipe.'  The  nrw'*  bank  received
it  as  I  threw  it  away.  A  Satyr^  having  found  it,  is  at  first
struck  with  wonder,  and  knows  not  its  use ;  but  he  perceives
that  when  blown  into  it  emits  a  sound ;  and  at  one  moment,  he-
ists forth  the  air  with  his  fingers,  at  another,  he  stops  it.  And
now  among  the  Nymphs  he  is  vain  of  his  new-found  art.
He  challenged  even  Phoebus ;  Phoebus  being  victor,  he  was
hong  up  ;  and  his  mangled  limbs  were  stripped  of  their
skin.  Yet  I  am  the  inventress  and  the  originator  of  this
melody ;  this  is  the  reason  why  that  branch  of  art  observes
mj  festive  days."

The  third  day*  shall  come,  on  which  thou,  Thyene  of  Do-
dona,  shalt  stand  conspicuous  on  the  forehead  of  the  Bull  of
Agenor's  daughter.  This  is  the  day  on  which  thou,  0  Tiber,
dost  roll  to  the  deep,  along  thy  Etrurian  streams,  the  cleans**
ings  of  the  shrine  of  Vesta.

If  there  is  any  dependence  at  all  on  the  winds,  ye  mariners,
spread  your  canvass  to  Zephyrus :  to-morrow  he  shall  come
propitious,  over  your  waves.

But  when  the  parent  of  the  Heliades'  shall  have  plunged  his

'  A  Saiyr,'\ — ^Ver.  703.  This  was  Marsyas,  who,  in  his  exultation,,
challenged  Apollo  to  a  musical  contest.  The  God  being  successful,  flayed
lus  antagonist  alive  ;  and  the  tears  which  were  shed  by  the  rural  Deities
on  his  death,  formed  the  river  d  Phrygia,  known  by  his  name.

'  The  third  day.j^Yer.  711.  On  the  17th  of  the  Calends  of  July
tbe  Hyades  rise  acronychally.  Thyene  was  the  name  of  one  of  them.
At  to  the  cleaniing  of  the  temple  of  Vesta,  see  line  287  of  this  Book.

•  Heliad€M.]^Yer,  717.  Literally,  *the  daughters  of  the  sun.'  They
were  the  niters  of  Phaeton.  Hyrieus  is  mentioned  in  the  5th  Book,  1.
499.  He  was  the  fither  of  Orion,  which  ConsteUation  rises  aoronychaUy
OB^  15^  of  the  Calends  of  Ju^.

B


y  Google


242  THE  FUJTI;  [■.▼!.  717— 740.

beams  in  the  wayes,  and  the  bright  atan  shall  gird  the  two
extremities  of  the  sloes,  die  son  of  H jnens  shall  liaise  from  the
groond  his  strong  shoulders ;  on  the  succeeding  night»  the
Dolphin  will  be  yisible.  In  truth,  he  once  had  seen  the  Yolsci
and  the  ^qui  routed  on  thy  plains,  OJand  of  Algidus ;  from
which  circumstance,  Tubertus  Poathumus,^  thou  wast  carried,
renowned  by  a  triumph  oyer  thy  n^hbonring  foes,  by  snow-
white  steeds.

Now  six  days  and  as  many  more  of  the  month  are  remaining ;
and  to  this  number  add  one  day.  The  sun  leayes  Gremini,"
and  the  sign  of  the  Crab  grows  ruddy  with  his  light:  an
this  day  Pallas  began  to  be  worshipped  on  the  heights  of  the
Ayentine.

Now,  Laomedon,  thy  daughter-in-law*'  rises,  and  rising,  dis-
pels the  night,  and  the  damp  rime  departs  from  the  meadows :
then  a  temple  is  said  to  haye  been  giyen  to  Summanus,  ^  who-
eyer  he  may  chance  to  be,  at  that  season  when  thou,  0  Pyrrhus,
wast  an  object  of  dread  to  the  Romans.

When  Galatea*^  shall  haye  receiyed  her,  too,  in  the  wayes  of
her  sire,  and  the  earth  shall  be  full  of  rest,  undisturbed  with
care;  then  rises  from  the  earth  the  youth  who  was  smitten  by
the  weapons  of  hisgrandsire,  and  extends  his  hands,  wreathed
with  two  uiakes.  Well  known  is  the  passion  of  Pheedra— ^^ell
known  the  injustice  of  Theseus  :  he,  in  his  credulity,  deyoted
to  destruction  his  own  son.  The  youth  who,  not  with  impu-
nity, adhered  to  yirtue,  is  on  his  way  to  Trsezene ;  a  bull

^  ISibertus  Post^mtia.]— Ver.  724-5.  In  his  Dictatorship,  he  tri-
umphed  after  defeating  the  Yolsci  and  iEqui  at  Algidus,  a  town  of  Latixnn.
€k>wer  giyei  the  following  version  of  these  lines : —

*  Whose  staires  the  Yolsci  and  the  Equi  saw
Terwhile  expelled  the  plains  of  Algida.'

"  Leavet  Gemini.'] — Yer.  727.  On  the  13th  of  the  Caloids  of  July,
the  sun  enters  Cancer,  the  Crab ;  on  which  day  a  temple  was  dedicated
to  Minerva  on  the  Aventine  Hill.

^  Thy  dauffhter-inUaw.l-^Yer,  729,  Aurora  was  fabled  to  be  married
to  Tithonus,  the  son  of  Laomedon.

^'  Summanus.'] — Yer.  731.  The  poet  does  not  seem  to  know  what
Deity  is  meant  by  this  name.  He  is  generally  supposed  to  have  been
the  same  with  Pluto,  and  to  have  received  this  name  as  being  *  summus
manium,'  'the  chi^  of  the  spirits.'  Yarro  aays  that  the  worship  of
this  Deity  was  instituted  by  Tatius,  the  Sabine.

>«  Oalai€a.]^\eT.  733.  On  the  night  of  the  13th  <d  the  Calends  of
July  the  Constellation  Ophiuchus  rises.  Galatea  was  a  sea-nymph,  one  c€
the  daughters  of  Nereus  and  Doris.


y  Google


B.  VI.  740—767.]  OB, CiXENDAS  OF  OVED.  243

deayes  with  his  breast  the  opposing  waters;  the  startled
horses  are  frightened ;  and,  in  yain  held  in,  they  drag  their
master  oyer  the  crags  and  hard  rocks.  Hippolytns  fell  from
his  diariot,  and  was  hurried  along  by  the  draggling  reins,
with  his  body  all  torn ;  and  he  yielded  up  his  life,  to  the
great  indignation  of  Diana.  ''  There  is  no  cause  for  thy  sorrow,"
says  the  son  of  Coronis,"  "  for  I  will  restore  life  to  the  yirtuons
youth,  without  a  wound  being  left  on  him,  and  his  sad  destiny
shall  giye  way  to  my  art."  Forthwith  he  brings  out  the  herbs
from  his  iyory  cabinet ;  they  had  formerly  benefited  the  manes
of  Glaucus  :^^  'twas  at  that  time  when  the  augur  stooped  to
the  examination  of  herbs,  and  the  snake  experienced  the  bene-
fit.of  the  remedy  that  was  giyen  by  a  snake.  Thrice  did  he
touch  his  breast ;  thrice  did  he  repeat  the  healing  charms ;  the
other  raised  from  the  ground  his  head,  as  it  lay  there,  A
sacred  groye>  and  Dictymna,  in  the  recesses  of  her  retreat,
shdters  him :  he  is  Virbius,  in  the  lake  of  Aricia.^^  But  Cly-
menus  and  Clotho  take  it  amiss ;  the  one,  that  her  threads  are
unspun,  the  other,  that  the  priyileges  of  his  kingdom  are  yio-
lated.  Jupiter,  taking  alarm  at  the  precedent,  aimed  his  bolt
against  him,  who  applied  the  aid  of  an  art  too  profound.  PhiBbus,
thou  didst  complain.  He  is  a  God ;  be  appeased  with  thy  sire :
for  thy  sake,  he  himself  does  that  yery  thing  which  he  forbids
to  be  done !

I  would  not  wish  thee,  Csesar,  to  moye  thy  standards,
though  to  yictory  thou  shouldst  hasten,  if  the  auspices  forbid.
Flanunius,  and  the  shores  of  Thrasymenus,^^  can  attest  to  thee
that  the  just  Grods  giye  many  intimations  by  birds.  If  thou  en-

^  Son  qf  Coronis.'] — ^Ver.  746.  JEsculapius  was  the  son  of  Apollo  and
CoTonis,  and  was  raised  to  the  Constellations  under  the  name  of  Ophidclms,
the  Serpent  Bearer,  in  allusion  to  his  strangling  the  serpent  which  Juno
had  placed  in  his  cradle.

"  GtoucM*.]— Ver.  750.  He  was  the  son  of  Minos,  and  was  restored
to  life  by  iEsculapius.  It  is  said  that  while  ^sculapins  was  considering
how  he  might  effect  that  object,  a  serpent  came  in  his  way,  which  he
killed,  on  which  another  serpent  brought  a  herb  in  his  mouth,  and  having
touched  the  head  of  the  dead  one,  restored  him  to  life.  With  this  herb
^fisculapius  effected  his  most  wonderful  cures.

^  Lake  qf  Aricia.']—\er.  756.  Sec  Book  iii.  L  263.  Clymenus,  in  the
next  Une,  is  an  epithet  of  Pluto.

»*  7%ra*ym«wM*.]-— Ver.  765.  On  the  9th  of  the  Calends  of  July,  the
Consul  Q.  Flaminius  was  defeated  and  slain  at  Lake  Thrasymenus,  haying
fought  contrary  to  the  warnings  of  the  auspices.

b2


y  Google


244  THE  7A8TI;  [b.  vi.  767— 784,

quirest  the  season  of  rashness,  on  which  occurred  the  ancient
defeat,  it  was  the  eighth  day  from  the  end  of  the  month.

More  fortonate  is  the  next  day.  Masinissa"  then  con-
quers Syphaz,  and  hy  his  own  weapons  does  Hasdnibal^
himself  fall.  Time  rolls  on,  andf  with  noiseless  years  do  we
reach  old  age:  the  days  flee  away  with  no  rein  to  check  them.
How  qnickly  have  arrived  th^  honours  of  the  Goddess  of
Chance  ;**  after  some  days,  June  will  be  no  more.  Go,  ye
Quirites,  and  joyfcdly  throng  to  the  bold  Goddess;  on  the
banks  of  the  Tiber  she  possesses  an  abode,  the  gift  of  a  king.
Some  of  you,  go  on  foot;  some  run  down  ^  the  stream,  too,  in
the  rapid  skiff;  and  be  not  ashamed  to  return  home  intoxi-
cated. Ye  boats,  crowned  ivith  garlands,  bring  the  jovial  troops
of  youths,  and  let  plenty  of  wine  be  drunk  in  the  midst  of
your  voyage !  The  commonalty  worship  her,  because  he  who
built  thu  temple  is  said  to  have  been  one  of  the  commonalty,
and,  £rom  an  humble  rank,  to  have  wielded  the  sceptre.  She  is
also  suited  for  slaves ;  because  Tullius,  bom  of  a  bond-woman,
erected  the  neighbouring  temple  to  the  fickle  Goddess.

»  Jl/fl»imwa.]— Ver.  769.  On  the  8th  of  the  Calends  of  July,  Syphax.
king  of  Numi^,  was  defeated  by  Caius  liaelius  and  Masinissa,  king  of
the  MassylL  Cyrta,  his  capital,  was  captured,  and  his  wife  and  family
were  made  prisoners.

»  HasdrubaL] — ^Ver.  770.  The  brother  of  Hannibal  is  probably  here
meant.  He  was  defeated  hy  the  Roman  Consuls,  M.  Livius  Salinator  and
C.  Claudius  Nero,  in  a  battle  on  the  banks  of  the  Metauros.  There  was
also  another  Hasdrubal,  who  was  an  ally  of  Syphax.  By  *  his  owh  wea-«
pons  *  an  ambuscade  is  most  probahly  meant.

21  The  Goddess  of  CAance.]— Ver.  773. It  is  not  improbable that

*  Fortuna  Fortis  *  here  means  the  same  Goddess  that  is  mentioned  in  Book
iv.  1.  145,  {^  *  Fortuna  Virilis,'  or  •  manly  Fortune.*  Mr.  Keightley  sug-
gests that  this  appellation  was  prohably  given  from  a  misapprehension  of
the  meaning  of  *  Fortis.*  That  word  appears  to  be  the  genitive  singular
of  the  suhstantiye  *fors,'  'chance/  and  not  of  the  adjective 'fortis/

*  brave/  or  *  manly;*  as  a  substitute  for  which  latter  word,  very  possibly
by  mistake,  the  epithet '  virilis '  may  hjive  originated.

'2  Run  doum.'] — Ver.  777.  It  is  a  matter  of  dispute  on  which  side  of
the  river  stood  the  temple  of  Fors  Fortuna.  The  meaning  of  *  decurrit€ '
throws  no  light  upon  it,  for  we  may  with  equal  propriety  speak  of  running
down  with  the  tide,  or  running  down  the  river,  whether  we  intend  to  land
on  the  opposite  side,  or  on  the  same  side  as  that  on  which  we  eqibarked.
By  the  mention  of  the  wine  we  may  conclude  that  the  Komans  had  thdr
pic-nics  as  well  as  ourselves,  and  that  this  is  one  more  illustratioii  ^  the
truth  of  the  adage,  that '  there  is  nothing  new  under  the  sun/


y  Google


B.  VI.  785—799  ] OB, CALENDAB  OF  OVID.  245

Lo !  some  one  returning  from  the  temple  in  the  suhnrhs,
far  from  soher,^  utters  to  the  stars  some  such  words  as  these :
"Now  is  thy  helt  concealed;  and  perhaps  to-morrow  it  will  he
concealed ;  afterwards,  Orion,^*  it  will  be  yisible  to  me."  Were
he  not  intoxicated,  he  would  say,  as  well,  that  the  summer  sol-
stice would  come  on  the  same  day.

The  next  day  arriying,  the  Lares  Received  their  temple;
here,  where  many  a  chaplet"  is  wrought  by  a  skilful  hsuid  ;
Jupiter  Stator  has  the  same  time  as  the  anniversary  of  his
temple,  which  Romulus  formerly  built  on  the  front  of  the  Pa-
latine Hill,

As  many  days  remain  of  the  month  as  the  Fates  have  names,
m  the  dayy  when  there  was  a  temple,  0  Quirinus,^  erected  in
honour  of  thee  in  thy  kingly  robe.  To-morrow^  is  the  natal
day  for  the  Calends  of  JuHus :  Pierian  maidens!^  put  the  con-
clusion to  my  undertaking. **Tell  me,  ye  Pierian  maids!  who

^  Far  from  sober. "l — ^Ver.  785-90. Gower  thus  renders  these  lines—
*  Lo!  now  in  troops  scarce  sober  tome  they  walk,
When  some  starre-peeper  with  the  starres  doth  talk.
Your  belt,  Sir  Orion,  now  you  will  not  shew  it ;
Nor  yet  to-morrow ;  but  e'er  long  we'll  view  it.
But,  were  his  brain  not  pickled,  he  would  say,
The  Summer  solstice  is  upon  that  day.'
«*  Omn.]--Ver.  788. On  the  6th  of  the  Calends  of  July  the  Belt  of
Orion  rises  heliacally. On  the  same  day  (the  26th  of  June),  the  poet  tells
us,  is  the  Summer  solstice.

^  Many  a  ehaplet/j—Ver.  792.  It  appears  from  this,  that  in  the  neigh-
bourhood «f  the  temple  of  Jupiter  Stator  was  the  shop  of  some  famous
seller  of  garhinds.  On  the  5th  of  the  Calends  of  July  the  temple  of  the
Lares  in  the  Forum,  and  that  of  Jupiter  Stator  vowed  by  Romulus,  were
dedicated.

^  QMirimi*.]— Ver.  796.  On  the  4th  of  the  Calends  of  July  was  the  dedi-
cation of  the  temple  built  to  Romulus,  or  Quirinus,  on  the  Quirinal  hill.

^  To-morrow,]— Yer,  797.  This  line  is  merely  a  circumlocution  for
'this  is  the  last  day  of  June,'  as  the  Calends  of  July  were  the  first  day  of
that  month.  Julius  Caesar  was  bom  in  the  month  of  July,  whence  it  re-
ceived its  name.

»  Pierian  matdctw.]— Ver.  798.  These  were  the  Muses :  their  sta-
tues were  placed  in  a  temple  of  Hercules,  built  by  M.  Fulvius  Nobilior,
in  the  Circus  Flaminius.  It  was  repaired  by  Marcius  Philippus,  who  mar-
ried the  maternal  aunt  of  Augustus,  and,  by  her,  was  the  father  of  Marda,
who  is  mentioned  in  the  802nd  line.  She  clandestinely  married  Fabius
Maximus ;  on  his  discovery  of  the  marriage,  Augustus  expressed  great
displeasure,  on  which  the  imhappy  husband,  after  censuring  his  wife,  put
in  end  to  his  own  existence.


y  Google


246  THS  FASTI.  [B.VI.  799--816.

placed  you  next  to  him,  to  whom,  Juno^  Ids  conquered  step-
mother, offered  her  reluctant  hands?"  Thus  I  said;  thus
CUo  answered  —  ^'Thou  beholdest  a  memorial  of  the  illus-
trious Philippus,  from  whom  the  chaste  Marcia  derives  her
birth.  Marcia,  a  name  derived  from  the  religious  Marcus,  in
whom  her  beauty  is  equal  with  her  noble  birth ;  in  her,  too,
her,  beauty  is  equal  to,  and  in  accordance  with  her  spirit.  In
her,  are  birth,  beauty,  and  genius,  united ;  nor  should' st  thou
think  it  so  mean  a  thing  that  I  praise  her  beauty ;  in  this
respect,  too,  am  I  wont  to  praise  the  great  Gk>ddes8eB.  The
aunt  of  Cesar  was  once  the  bride  of  this  noble,  0  thou  glory ;
thou  woman  worthy  of  that  sacred  house !"  Thus  Clio  sang ;
her  learned  sisters  gave  their  assent ;  Alcides,  too,  nodded  his
assent,  and  struck  lus  lyre.^


If  the  new  year*  shall  commence  to  be  reckoned  from  the
sacred  rites  of  Janus,  the  month  Quintihs  wiU  be  so  caUed  by
a  wrong  appellation.  If  you  begin  your  Calends  from  the
month  of  March,  as  they  formerly  were,  then  the  months,
taken  in  their  order,  will  be  consistent  with  their  appellations,

^  Struck  Ms  lyre.'\—\et,  811-12. Gower  tmislates  these  liima ■

The  learned  nine  applaud  what  Clio  sang ;

Alcides  nodded,  and  the  harp  cried  twang.'

Thus  Gower  concludes  his  work  with  a  translation  fidly  as  comical,  and

as  nearly  allied  to  the  burlesque,  as  any  of  those  most  amusing  versioiis

which  have  been  from  time  to  time  presented  to  the  reader.

^  If  the  new  year,"]  — Ver.  813.  The  translation  of  these  lines  is  added,
because  they  are  foimd  in  some  of  the  MSS.  of  this  poem.  They  are,
however,  generally  considered  to  be  spurious ;  but  if  genuine,  they  must
have  formed  the  commencement  of  a  seventh  Book  of  the  Fasti ;  see  the
remarks  in  the  Life  of  the  poet,  in  the  Introduction.


END  or  THE  PASTI.


y  Google


THE  TRISTIA;

OB,

LAMENT OF OVID.


BOOK  THE  FIRST.


ELEGY  I.


Thb  poet,  in  exile  at  Tomi,  addresses  his  book,  and  recommends  it,  as  it
is  about  to  ^isit  the  dty  of  Rome,  to  appear  there  in  the  garb  of  an  exile,
telling  it  what  answer  to  give  to  those  who  shall  make  inquiries  after
him.  He  also  says  what  it  is  to  plead  by  way  of  excuse,  if  his  verses
should  appeal:  inferior  to  his  former  productions.  He  tells  it  to  avoid
the  royal  abode,  whence  the  lightnings  had  proceeded  by  which  he
had  been  prostrated.

Without  me,  little  book,  you  will  visit  the  Roman  City,
whither  it  is  not  allowed  your  master  to  go;  hut  I  do  not  envy
yaur/ortune.  Go  on  your  way,  hut  unadorned,  just  as  becomes
the  book  of  an  exile ;  put  on  the  fitting  garh,  unhappy  one,
of  this  season.  Let  not  the  hyacinth^  array  you  in  its  purple
tints ;  that  is  not  a  colour  suitable  for  mourning.  Let  not
your  title  be  inscribed  in  vermilion,'  nor  let  your  leaves  be  pre-
pared with  the  oil  of  the  cedar ;  and  do  not  wear  whitened

*  Th$  Ayadnth,'] — Ver.  5.  *  Yacdninm'  is  by  some  writers  considered
to  mean  the  hyacinth ;  but  it  is  really  a  matter  of  doubt  to  what  pUnt
this  name  was  given ;  some  suppose  it  to  have  been  the  garden  *  larkspur.'

'  In  venmA'on.]— Ver.  7.  It  has  been  before  remarked  that  the  andentc
adorned  their  mannscripts  with  various  colours,  among  which  vermilion
was  conspicuous.  Pliny  tells  us  that  they  steeped  their  books  in  the  oil
or  juice  of  cedar,  to  preserve  them  from  decay,  and  to  impart  to  them  a
pleasant  smeU.  This  oil  was  especially  useful  in  averting  the  attacks  of
insects,  and  gave  the  paper  a  ydlow  colour


y  Google


248  THE  TBISTIA  ;  [b.  I.

extremities'  with  a  bll^^kened  page.  Let  these  appliances  be
the  ornaments  of  more  fortunate  books :  it  befits  yon  to  keep
yonr  fate  in  remembrance.  And  let  not  the  two  sides  ofyow
leaves  be  polished  with  the  brittle  pumice,^  so  that  you  may
appear,  as  you  ought,  all  rough  with  your  dishevelled  hair.
And  be  not  ashamed  of  your  blots:  he  who  beholds  them
will  be  sensible  that  they  were  caused  by  my  tears.  Go,  my
book,  and  in  my  words  salute  those  pleasing  spots ;  for,  in  the
only  method  that  is  allowed  me,  I  will  assuredly  reach  them.
If  &ere  shall  be  any  one  there  not  forgetful  of  me,  as  in  «o
great  a  multitude  is  not  unlikely ;  if  there  shall  be  any  one
who,  by  chance,  may  inquire  what  has  become  of  me ;  you  will
say  that  I  am  still  Hving :  you  will  say,  too,  that  my  state  is
but  an  unhappy  one  ;  and  that  the  very  life  that  I  have  I  re-
ceive as  a  favour  from  the  God.*  And  you  will  present  your-
self, in  silence,  to  be  read  by  any  one  making  further  enqui-
ries, lest  perchance  you  may  utter  what  may  not  be  to  my
advantage.

The  reader,  put  in  mind,  will  at  once  recall  to  memory  the
charges  against  me ;  and  by  the  mouth  of  the  public  shall  I
be  condemned.  But  beware  that  you  say  nought  in  my  de-
fence, although  you  will  be  carped  at  with  reproachful  speeches.
The  cause  that  is  not  a  good  one  will  be  made  worse
by  your  support.  You  wiU  find  the  person,  who  will  sigh  in
regret  that  I  was  snatched  away,  and  who  will  not  read  these

3  Whitened  ea!trermHe8,']—Vet.  8.  *Con»ia.'  This  word  literally
means  <  horns.'  The  paper  or  parchment  which  formed  a  book  was  joined
together  so  as  to  form  one  sheet ;  when  finished,  it  was  rolled  on  a  staff,
and  was  called  *  volumen,'  from  *  volvo/  '  to  roll.'  The  staff  on  which  it  was
rolled  was  fastened  to  it  at  the  top,  and  the  two  projecting  ends  of  it  were
often  capp^  with  halls  or  bosses,  which  were  of  various  colours  and
patterns,  and  had  the  name  of  *  comua.'  Orid  bids  the  <  comna'  of  this
work  not  to  be  white,  but  rather  to  assume  an  aspect  of  sorrow.

*  Brittle  pumice.'] — ^Ver.  11.  Only  one  side  of  the  paper  or  parchment
was  written  on,  and  that  was  first  rubbed  smooth  with  pumice-stone,  that
the  pen  of  the  writer  might  run  freely,  and  not  be  impeded  by  bidrs  or
other  foreign  substances.  The  pumice  of  the  isles  of  Melos  and  Scyros
and  of  Idpara  was  the  most  esteemed.  lightness  and  whiteness  were  the
two  most  desirable  qualities  in  pumice.

»  A  favour  from  the  6odJ]--yer.  20.  We  find  the  poet  throughout
addressing  Augustus  as  a  Divinity ;  this,  when  suffering  in  exile  the  dfects
of  his  anger,  he  could  hardly  have  omitted  to  do,  as  extreme  adulation  of
Augustus  and  his  family  was  one  of  the  fashionable  £ulings  of  the  day.  ,


y  Google


E.  I.]  OB, LAMENT OT  OTLD.  249

verses  of  mine  with  unmoistened  cheeks;  who  also,  in  silence,
that  no  mischieyous  person  may  overhear  him,  wiU  hreathe  a
wish  that,  Csesar  (mce  appeased,  my  punishment  may  he  hghter.
IHioever  he  may  he,  tiiat  wishes  the  Gods  to  he  softened
against  wretched  me, — ^that  he  may  never  he  unfortunate  is  my
prayer.  And  what  he  wishes,  may  the  same  he  accompUshed;
may  the  wrath  of  the  Prince,  once  assuaged^  grant  me  leave
to  die  in  the  home  of  my  fathers.

Perhaps,  my  hook,  you  will  he  hlamed  for  having  obeyed  my
commands^  and  you  mil  be  said  to  be  inferior  to  my  usual  repu-
tation for  genius.  As  it  is  the  duty  of  a  j udge  to  consider  facts,
so  ouffht  he  to  take  into  consideration  the  circumstances.  In  your
case,  when  the  circumstances  are  inquired  into,  you  will  be  safe.
When  composed  by  a  spirit  at  rest,  verses  flow  easily;  but  my
days  are  overclouded  by  sudden  misfortunes.  Verses  require
both  retirement  and  ease  for  their  writer :  ^e  sea,  the  wmds,
and  the  cruel  storm,  are  tossing  me ^  to  and  firo.  All  alarm  ought
to  be  afar  from  him  who  is  composing  verses ;  I,  wretched  man
that  I  am,  each  moment,  think  that  a  sword  is  about  to  be
plunged  into  my  throat.  A  considerate  judge  will  even  wonder
at  this  performance  of  mine ;  and  such  as  they  are,  he  will
read  my  compositions  with  indulgence.  Give  me  Homer'
himself  in  my  place,  and  then  look  round  upon  my  calamities :
all  his  genius  would  vanish  amid  misfortunes  so  great.

Lastly,  my  book,  remember  to  go  regardless  of  your  repu-
tation ;  and  let  it  be  no  cause  of  shame  to  you,  when  read,  to
have  displeased  your  reader.  Fortune  doed  not  show  herself
so  favouring  to  me,  that  any  care  needs  be  taken  by  you  of
your  fame.  So  long  as  I  was  in  prosperity,  I  was  influenced
by  the  love  of  glory,  and  ardent  was  my  desire  of  acquiring
reputation.  If  I  do  not  now  abhor  all  versed,  and  that  pursuit
which  proved  my  ruin,  let  that  be  enough ;  for  thus  was  my
exile  caused  by  my  genius.^ But  go :  go  instead  of  me ;  and

•  Are  tossing  me.'] — ^Ver.  42.  This  Elegy  either  was  written  by  (hid
while  going  to  his  place  oi  banishment,  and  when  out  at  sea;  or,  by  a
poetical  license,  he  supposes  such  to  have  been  the  case.

7  Homer.] — ^Ver.  47.  Literally, '  Maeonides.'  He  was  so  caUed  either
from  'Maeonia,'  or  Lydia,  in  Asia  Minor,  which  was  the  place  of  his  birth ;
or,  according  to  some  writers,  from  Mseon,  which  was  the  name  of  hia
father.

»  Bff  my  gemus.] — Ver.  56.  He  alludes  to  his  having  been  banished
from  Rome,  ostensibly  for  having  written  the  'Art  of  Love;'  though  h^


y  Google


250  THE  TBISTIA ;  [b.  i.

do  yon,  to  whom  it  is  allowed,  behold  the  city  o/^Rome.  Oh !  that
the  Grods  would  grant,  that,  this  moment  I  could  be  my  book!
And  do  not,  because  you  come  from  afar  into  the  great  City,
suppose  that  yon  come  unknown  to  it9  peqple.  Although  you
want  a  superscription,  you  will  be  recognized  by  your  very
colour  ;  should  you  wish  to  conceal  thej'acty  it  is  clear  that
you  belong  to  me.  But  enter  by  stealth,  lest  yerses  of  mine
should  prove  an  injury  to  you ;  mey  are  not  now  loaded  with
public  &vour,  as  once  they  were.  If  there  be  any  one  who
thinks  that  because  you  are  mine  you  ought  not  to  be  read,
and  throws  you  from  his  bosom,  say  to  Mm,  "  Look  at  my
title :  I  am  not  the  instruct<Nr  in  love  ;  that  work  has  already
paid  the  penalty  that  it  deserved."

Perhaps  you  may  expect  that  I  should  order  you,  thus  sent,  to
aseend  to  the  lofty  palace,  and  the  home  of  Csesar.  May  tliat
august  spot  and  its  Gods'  pardon  me ;  from  those  heights,  de-
scended the  bolt  on  this  my  devoted  head.  I  remember,  indeed,
that  there  are  in  those  abodes  Deities,  full  of  mercy;  but  still  do
I  fear  those  Gods  who  have  wrought  my  ruin.  The  dove  is  star-
tled at  the  slightest  flutter  of  its  wing,  when  once  she  has  been
wounded,  ^Aom  hawk,  by  thy  talons.  The  lamb,  too,  dares  not
stray  afar  from  the  sheep-folds,  if  by  chance  it  has  once  been
seized  by  the  teeth  of  the  ravening  wolf.  Were  Phaeton  now
living,  he  would  shun  the  skies ;  and  he  would  be  unwilling  to
touch  the  very  horses  which,  in  his  folly,  he  wished  for.  And
so  do  I,  who  have  experienced  them,  confess  that  I  dread  the
weapons  of  Jove.  When  it  thunders, I  imagine  that  it  is  I  who  am
sought  by  the  fires  of  heaven.  Each  person  in  the  Grecian  fleet
that  has  escaped  Caphareus,^^  always  makes  all  sail  away  from

frequently  reveals  the  fact  that  his  offence  really  was  the  possession  of
some  secret  relative  to  the  family  of  Augustus,  which  had  accidentally
come  to  his  knowledge.  He  nowhere  reveals  what  that  secret  was,  and
only  persists  in  declaring,  throughout  his  'Lament,'  that  criminality  of
intention  was  no  part  of  his  fault.

*  And  it8  G^oeb.]— Ver.  71.  Under  this  title  he  intends  to  include  not
only  Augustus,  but  Hberius,  Germanicus,  and  Drusus.

^^  Caphareua.'] — Ver.  83.  This  was  a  promontory  of  the  island  of
Euboea.  Nauplius,  the  king  of  the  island,  to  avenge  the  death  of  his  son,
Palamedes,  who  had  been  put  to  death  by  the  Greeks,  when  they  were
returning  from  Troy,  caused  lighted  torches  to  be  exhibited  on  this  pro-
montory ;  supposing  that  a  harbour  was  at  hand,  many  of  the  ships  made
for  land,  and  suffered  shipwreck  in  consequence,  amid  the  rocks  with
which  Caphareus  is  girt.


y  Google


E.  I.]  OE, LAHSNT  OF  OVID.  251

the  Euboean  wavet.  My  little  bark,  too,  once  straok  by  the
o'erwhelming  storm,  dreacU  to  approach  the  spot  on  which  it  has
be^i  shattered!  Therefore,  beloved  book  of  mine,  look  aronnd
you  with  timorons  feelings,  and  let  it  satisfy  you  to  be  perused
by  the  middle  classes.  While  Icarus  was  soaring  on  high,  with
wmgs  too  weak,  he  gave  a  name  to  the  Icarian  waves.  And
yet  is  a  niatter  of  difficulty  to  say  whether  you  should  make
use  of  your  oars  or  of  the  breezes  :^^  circumstances  and  op-
portunity will  give  yon  fitting  advice.  If  you  can  be  pre-
sented when  he  is  at  leisure ;  if  you  shall  see  any  thing
fiivourable  ;  if  Ids  wrath  shall  have  spent  its  strength ;  if  there
shall  be  any  one  to  present  you  hesitating  and  fearing  to  ap-
proach him,  and  to  say  first  a  few  words  in  your  favour ;  then
do  you  approach  his  presence.  May  you  arrive  there  at  a  for-
tunate hour,  more  fortunate  yourself  than  me,  your  master,  and
may  you  diminish  my  calamities.  For  either  no  one,  or  he
only,  who  has  inflicted  on  me  the  wound,  is  able  to  remove  it,
after  the  example  of  Achilles.^'  Only  take  care  that  you  do
not  injure  me,  while  you  are  intending  to  serve  me :  for  my
hope  is  less  strong  than  the  apprehensions  of  my  mind.  Be-
ware, too,  that  the  wrath  which  was  lulled  be  not  excited,
and  that  it  do  not  again  burst  forth ;  and  that  you  become
not  a  second  cause  of  disgrace  to  me.

And  when  now  you  shaU  have  been  received  back  again  into
my  closet,  and  shjdl  have  reached  the  hollow  book-case,  ^^  your
destined  home,  there  will  you  see  your  brothers  arranged  in
order,  whom  die  same  amdety  has  composed  in  its  hours  of
watching.  The  remaining  portion  will  openly  show  their  titles
exposed  to  view;  and  will  bear  their  own  names  on  their  undis«

"  Oars  or  of  the  breezes,']—'^ et,  91.  This  it  a  metaphorical  expres-
sion, signifying  that  he  was  doubtful  whether  his  recall  might  be  hastened
by  his  own  efforts  as  a  rower,  or  rather  by  watching  for  the  breezes,  the
blowing  of  which  would  be  indicated  by  the  returning  favour  of  Augustus.

"  Example  qf  AchiUes,}—Yer.  100.  Achilles  wounded  Tdephus,  the
son  of  Hercules,  with  his  lance ;  and  afterwards,  being  reconciled  to  him,
he  healed  him  by  an  application  of  the  rust  of  the  same  weapon.

"  Hollow  bookcase,^ — ^Ver.  106.  *  Scrinium'  was  the  name  of  a  box,
or  case  for  books,  among  the  Romans.  The  smaller  sort  of  these  boxes
were  called  '  capste,'  and  the  larger  ones  *  scriuia.'  They  were  made  of
beech  wood,  and  were  of  cylindrical  form,  almost  exactly  resembling  the
common  band-box  of  the  present  day.  The  books  when  rolled  up  were
placed  perpendicularly  in  the  *  scnnium'  or  *  capsa. '


y  Google


2^2  THE  TBISTIi. ;  [b.  I.

goised  front.  You  will  see  three  hiding  apart,'*  in  a  dark
comer.  'Tu  these,  too,  that  teach,  what  no  one  is  ignorant  of^
how  to  love.  Do  you  at  least  shun  these,  or  even,  if  you  shall
have  boldness  enough,  call  them  so  many  parricides,  Uke  (Edi-
pus  and  Telegonus."  And  of  the  three,  I  warn  you,  if  you  have
any  regard  for  your  parent,  bestow  not  your  love  on  any  one,
even  if  he  himself  shall  instruct  you  in  so  dcing.  There  are,
too,  thrice  ^^^  volumes  on  the  change  of  the  human  shape,
verses  that  were  lately  rescued  from  my  funereal  obsequies  :^
to  these  I  bid  you  say,  that  the  aspect  of  my  altered  fortune
may  be  reckoned  in  the  number  of  the  forms  that  have  been
chuiged.  For,  on  a  sudden,  it  has  been  rendered  unlike  to
what  it  was  before ;  and,  now  a  source  of  sorrow,  'twas  once
fall  of  joy.  If  you  ask  me ;  I  had  some  further  commands
to  give  you ;  but  I  fear  to  be  the  cause  of  delay  that  may  retard
you.  And  if,  my  book,  you  were  to  convey  every  thing  that  r
occurs  to  me,  a  heavy  burden  would  you  become  to  him  who
is  to  carry  you.  Long  is  the  way ;  niake  speed.  MeanwkUe^
the  extremity  of  the  earth  will  be  my  habitation — a  region  far
removed  from  my  native  land.


ELEGY  11.

The  poet,  setting  out  on  his  exile  by  the  order  of  Augustus,  is  overtaken
by  a  storm  at  sea :  he  prays  the  Gods  to  show  him  mercy,  and  not  to  com-
bine with  Caesar  in  his  destruction.  He  dtes  many  reasons  for  the  ex-
tension of  their  beneficence  to  him.  He  then  describes  the  tempest,
and  prays  the  Deities  for  his  safe  arriyal  at  TomL

€k)DS  of  the  sea  and  skies  (for  what  resource  have  I  but
prayers  ?)  abstain  from  rending  asunder  the  joints  of  our  shat-
tered bark  ;  and  second  not,  I  pray,  the  wrath  of  the  mighty
GfiRsar. Ofttimes,  as  one  God  harasses  us,  does  another  Deity

**  Three  hiding  apart.'] — Ver.  111.  These  were  the  three  'volumina,'
or  books  of  his  '  Art  of  Love  ;*  the  ostensible  causes  of  his  banishment.

^  Telegonus,] — Ver.  113.  (Edipus  unknowingly  killed  his  father
Laius,  and  Telegonus,  the  son  of  Ulysses  and  Circe,  slew  his  father  by
mistake.

^<  Funereal  ohseqtUee.'] — ^Ver.  118.  He  refers  to  the  fact  that  before
leaving  Rome  for  Ms  place  of  exile,  he  placed  on  the  fire  his  fifteen  books
of  the  Metamorphoses ;  and  this  fiire,  lighted  at  the  period  of  his  down-
fall, he  poetically  alludes  to  as  his  funeral  pOe,  or  rather  that  of  his  for-
tunes. The  Metamorphoses  were,  however,  saved  to  posterity,  through
the  medium  of  duplicates  which  were  in  the  hands  of  his  friends.


y  Google


V.  II.]  OB, LAMEl^T  OF  OTID.  253

bring  ns  assistance.  Mulciber  was  arrayed  against  Troy;
Apollo  was  for  Troy ;  Venus  was  friendly  to  Qie  Trojans  ;
Pallas  hostile.  The  daughter  of  Saturn,  more  favourable  to
Tumus,  hated  JBneas ;  yet  was  he  safe  under  the  tutelage  of
Venus.  Ofttimes  did  tide  fierce  Neptune  attack  Ulysses  ;  as
oft  did  Minerra  rescue  him  from  her  uncle.  And  what  forbids,
far  inferior  though  I  be  to  these,  that  a  Deity  should  aid  me,
when  a  Deity  is  enraged  ?  Wretched  man  that  I  am ;  in  vain  I
waste  my  unavailing  words :  the  heavy  billows  dash  against  my
very  lips  as  I  speak.  The  raging  South  wind,  too,  sweeps  away
my  words,  and  does  not  allow  my  prayers  to  reach  the  Gods
to  whom  they  are  addressed.  The  same  winds,  for  the  reason
that  I  may  not  be  afflicted  on  one  point  only,  bear  away  the
sails  and  my  prayers,  whither  I  know  not.

Ah,  wretched  me !  What  mountains  of  water  are  heaped
aloft!  You  would  think  that  this  very  instant  they  would
reach  the  highest  stars.  What  abysses  yawn  as  the  sea  re-
cedes !  You  would  suppose  that  this  very  instant  they  would
extend  to  black  Tartarus.  On  whichever  side  you  look,  there
is  nothing  but  sea  and  sky ;  the  one  swelling  with  billows,
the  other  lowering  with  clouds.  Between  the  two,  the  winds
rage  in  fearful  hurricane.  The  waves  of  the  ocean  know  not
which  master  to  obey.  For  at  one  moment,  Eums  gathers
strength  from  the  glowing  East,  at  another  instant  comes
Zephyrus,  sent  from  the  evening  West.  At  one  time,  the  icy
Boreas  comes  raging  from  the  dry  North ;  at  another,  the
South  wind  wages  battle  with  adverse  front.  The  steersman
is  at  fault :  and  he  knows  not  what  to  avoid,  or  what  course
to  take. Skill  itself  is  at  a  loss  amid  these  multiplied  evils.

In  truth,  we  are  on  the  verge  of  destruction,  and  there  is
no  hope  of  safety,  but  a  fallacious  one ;  as  I  speak,  the
sea  dashes  o'er  my  face.  The  waves  will  overwhelm  this  breath
of  mine,  and  in  my  throat,  as  it  utters  vain  entreaties,  shall  I
receive  the  waters  that  are  to  bring  my  doom.

But  meantime,  my  affectionate  wife  is  bewailing  nothing  else
but  that  I  am  an  exile :  this  one  portion  alone  of  my  misery
does  she  know  and  lament.  She  is  not  aware  how  my  body
is  tossed  on  the  boundless  ocean ;  she  knows  not  that  I  am
driven  to  and  fro  by  the  winds  ;  she  knows  not  that  death  is
impending  o'er  me.  'Tis  well,  ye  Gods,  that  I  suffered  her
not  to  embark  with  me  :  so  that  death  might  not  have  to  b^
twice  endured  by  wretched  me ! But  now,  although  I  perish,


y  Google


254  THS  tbutia; '  [b.  i.

since  she  is  safe  from  danger,  doubtless  I  shall  still  soniye  in
heTi  one  half  of  myself.

Ah,  wretched  me !  how  the  cbods  glisten  with  the  instants-
neons  flash.  How  dreadful  the  peal  that  re-echoes  from  the  sky
of  hesren.  The  timbers  of  onr  sides  are  strnck  by  the  waves,
with  blows  no  lighter  than  when  the  tremendous  chai^  oi  the
balista^  beats  against  the  walls.  The  wave  that  now  is  coming
on,  o'ertops  all  the  others ;  'tis  the  one  that  comes  aft^  the
ninth  and  before  the  eleyenth."

I  fear  not  death ;  'tis  the  dreadful  kind  of  death ;  take
away  the  shipwreck ;  then  death  will  be  a  gain  to  me.  'Tis
something  for  one,  either  dying  a  natural  dei^h,^®  (»r  by  the
sword,  to  lay  his  breathless  corpse  in  the  firm  ground,  and  to
impart  his  wishes  to  his  kindred,  and  to  hope  for  a  sepulchre,
and  not  to  be  food  for  the  fishes  of  the  sea.

Suppose  that  I  am  worthy  of  such  a  death  as  this ;  I  am
not  the  only  person  that  is  carried  here.  Why  does  my  punish-
ment involve  the  innocent?

Oh,  ye  Gods  above,  and  ye  azure  Deities,  in  whose  tute^
lage  is  the  ocean !  Do  you,  each  of  your  number,  desist
from  your  threatenings.  Suffer,  that,  in  my  wretchedness,
I  may  take  to  the  appointed  destination  that  life  which  the
most  lenient  wrath  of  Ceesar  has  granted  me.  If  you  wish
me  to  endure  a  punishment  which  I  have  merited,  stilly  in  my
own  thinking,  my  fault  is  not  deserving  of  death.  If  Csesar
had  wished  now  to  send  me  to  the  Stygian  waves,  in  that,  he
had  not  needed  your  aid.  He  has  a  power  over  my  life, ,
amenable  to  the  envy  of  none  ;^  and  that  which  he  has  given,
when  he  shall  please,  he  will  take  away.  Only  do  you,  ye
Gods,  whom  I  assuredly  think  that  I  have  injured  by  no
misdeeds,  be  content  with  my  present  misfortunes.

"  Charge  of  the  haUsta.']^\tt,  48.  The  '  balista'  was  an  engine  of
war,  used  by  the  ancients  for  the  purpose  of  discharging  stones  against
the  higher  part  of  the  walls  of  besieged  places,  whife  the  catapulta  was
directed  against  the  lower.  The  charge  of  the  '  balista'  varied  from  two
pounds  in  weight  to  three  hundred  weight.

!•  B^ore  the  eleventh.] — Ver.  50.  It  was  a  common  belief  among
the  ancients  that  every  tenth  wave  exceeded  the  others  in  violence.

"  A  natural  death.] — Ver.  53.  *Fato  suo.'  Literally,  '  according  to
one's  fate,*  or  '  destiny.*

»  The  envy  of  none,] — Ver.  67.  *  Invidiosa'  means  either  *  envious,
or  '  causing  enyy,*  according  to  the  conte3ct.


y  Google


E.  II.]  OB, LAMENT  01*  OYID.  255

And  yet.  even  if  you  all  wished  to  preserve  unliappy  me,  it
is  not  possible  that  one  who  is  utterly  undone  can  be  in  safety.
Although  the  sea  be  calmed,  and  I  avail  myself  of  favouring
winds ;  although  you  should  spare  me :  sludl  I,  any  the  less»
be  an  exile  ?  I  am  not  ploughing  the  wide  ocean  for  the  ex-
change of  my  merchandize,  greedy  of  acquiring  wealth  with-
out lunit.  I  seek  not  Athens,  which  once,  when  studious,  I
sought :  I  seek  not  the  cities  of  Asia,  nor  spots  which  once  I
visited.  Nor  yet  do  I  vnsk,  that  carried  to  the  famed  city  of
Alexander,'^  I  should  behold  thy  luxuries,  thou  revelling  Nilus.
The  object,  for  which  I  desire  favouring  winds  (who  could
credit  it  ?)  is  the  Sarmatian  land,  to  which  my  prayers  now
tend.  I  am  bound  to  reach  the  barbarous  shores  of  Pontus,
situate  on  the  left  hand ;  and  what  I  lament  is,  that  my  flight
from  my  country  is  so  tardy.  In  my  prayers  do  I  make  my
travel  of  short  duration,  that  I  may  see  the  people  of  Tomi
situate  in  some  obscure  comer  of  the  globe.  If  so  it  is,  that
you  favour  me,  restrain  the  waves  thus  overwhehning,  and  let
your  powers  be  propitious  to  my  bark :  if  rather  you  hate  me,
bring  me  to  the  appointed  land.  A  part  of  my  punishment
is  in  the  situation  of  the  spot.  What  do  I  here  ?  Speed  on
my  canvass,  ye  rajring  winds.  Why  do  my  sails  ^en  look  on
the  Italian  shores  f  Csesar  willed  this  not  to  be :  why  do  ye
detain  him,  whom  Csesar  drives  afar?  Let  the  Pontic  land  behold
my  £eu^.  He  both  orders  this,  and  I  am  deserving  of  it ;  and  I
deem  it  neither  just  nor  righteous  for  those  accusations  to  be
defended,  on  which  he  has  condemned  me.  But  if  the  deeds  of
mortals  never  escape  the  Gods,  you  are  aware  that  wilful  crime
is  no  part  of  my  fault.  So  it  was  :  and  ye  know  it.  If  my  igno*
ranee  has  carried  me  away,  and  if  my  mind  was  foolish,  but  not
imbued  with  crime ;  H,  though  but  one  of  the  least,  I  have  been
devoted  to  that  house ;  if  the  public  edicts  of  Augustus  have  been
sufficient  for  me  for  my  own  guidance :  if,  in  this  Prince,  I  have
pronounced  the  age  to  be  blessed  :  and  if,  in  my  reverence,  I
have  offered  franlancense  for  Csesar  and  the  Caesars  :^  if  such

**  City  of  Alexander^] — ^Ver.  79.  This  was  the  city  of  Alexandria,
in  Bgypt,  which  was  fouSided  by  Alexander  the  Great.  For  luxury  and
dissolute  manners,  it  occupied  much  the  same  rank,  in  the  time  of  Ovid,
that  Paris  does  at  the  present  day.

^  The  C<»«ar».]— Ver.  104.  These  would  be,  perhaps,  Caius  and
Julius,  the  grandsons  of  Augustus ;  and  Tiberius,  who  was  adopted  by
Augustus  after  their  death,  together  wil^  his  son  Drusus,  and  Gennanicus,
his  nephew  and  adopted  son.


y  Google


256  tHB  TSISTUl;  [b.  l

haye  been  my  feelings :  then  pardon  me,  ye  Ctods ;  but  if  nol^
then  let  the  waye,  falling  from  on  high,  oyerwhelm  my  head.

Am  I  deceiyed  ?  Or  are  the  clouds,  pregnant  with  stamu,
b^inning  to  disappear,  and  does  the  wra^  of  the  sea  now
changed  in  aspect,  diminish  ?  This  is  no  chance ;  but  when
inyoked  on  these  terms,  you,  whom  it  is  not  possible  to  de«
ceiye,  bring  me  this  assistance.


ELEGY  III.

Thb  poet  detcribei  his  constemation  when  first  he  was  exiled  by  the
order  of  C«tar;  and  how  he  spent  his  List  night  at  Rome.  He  depicts
the  affliction  of  his  wife,  and  of  his  household,  on  that  occasion.

Week  the  most  sad  remembrance  recurs  to  me  of  that  night,
which  was  my  last  in  the  City — ^when  I  recal  that  night,  in
which  I  left  so  much  that  was  dear  to  me — eyen  now  does
the  tear  start  from  my  eyes.

Now  was  the  day  near  at  hand,  on  which  Csesar  had  ordered
me  to  depart  frx>m  the  limits  of  even  the  extremity  of  Ausonia :
neither  my  feelings  nor  the  time  allotoedy  were  well  adapted
for  me,  to  make  my  preparations ;  my  senses  had  become
by  protracted  delay.  I  paid  no  regard  to  procuring  attendants,^
nor  to  making  choice  of  a  companion,  nor  to  providing  clothes
or  means  suitable  for  an  exile.  I  was  astounded,  just  as  when
a  man,  struck  by  the  bolts  of  Joye,  Uyes  on,  and  himself  is
unconscious  that  he  liyes.

But  when  grief  itself  remoyed  this  cloud  from  my  mind,
and  my  senses  at  last  regained  their  strength,  about  to  depart,
for  the  last  time  I  addressed  my  sorrowing  friends,  who,
out  of  so  many,  were  only  one  or  two  in  number.  My  affec-
tionate wife,  bitterly  weeping,  herself  clung  to  me  weeping ;
as  the  shower  of  tears  flowed  down  her  cheeks,  undeserving
of  sorrow.  My  daughter  was  far  distant  from  me,  in  the
Libyan  regions ;  nor  could  she  be  informed  of  my  fate.  On
whicheyer  side  you  might  look,  grief  and  tears  re-echoed  witJi-
in  the  house:  there  was  the  semblance  of  a  funeral,  not  cele-

M  AUendanU.'] — ^Ver.  9.  For  the  purpose  of  accompanying  him  to
his  plaoe  of  banishment.  He  wtrni  not  to  haye  been  fortunate  in  his
choice  when  it  was  made ;  as  he  was  in  constant  peril,  he  tells  us  else-
wfaoe,  from  the  treach^  of  those  who  accopipanied  him.


y  Google


l.ni.]  OB,  XAMBXT  OP  OTLD.  257

brated  in  silence.  Both  wife  and  husband,  and  my  servants,
too,  were  lamenting  at  my  obsequies ;  and  in  the  house,  every
comer  had  its  share  of  tears.  If,  in  a  small  matter,  I  may  make
use  of  great  examples,  such  vjras  the  appearance  of  Troy  when
it  was  taken.

And  now  the  voices  of  men  and  the  baying  of  dogs  were
lolled,  and  the  Moon  on  high  was  guiding  the  steeds  of  the
night.  Looking  up  to  her,  and  from  her,  turning  my  eyes  to
the  Capitol,  which,  in  vain,  was  adjacent^  to  my  house,  I  said,
— "Ye  Deities  that  inhabit  these  neighbouring  abodes,  and
ye  temples,  never  again  to  be  beheld  by  these  eyes ;  and  ye
Gods,  whom  the  lofty  city  of  Quirinus  contains,  that  must  be
left  by  me,  be  ye  bade  adieu  by  me  for  ever!  and  although  'tis
but  late  after  my  wounds  that  I  assume  my  shield,  yet  do  ye
divest  this  my  exiled  state  of  hatred  against  me ;  and  teU  that
heaven-bom  person  what  error  it  was  that  deceived  me :  lest,
instead  of  a  fault,  he  may  think  it  was  a  crime  on  my  part;  so
that,  what  you  are  aware  of,  of  that  same  the  author  of  my  pun-
ishment may  be  sensible.  I  can  still  be  not  unhappy,  that
Divinity  once  being  appeased."

With  these  prayers  did  I  address  the  Gods  above;  with
more  entreaties  did  my  wife,  as  the  sobs  broke  her  sentences
in  the  midst ;  she  even,  prostrated  before  the  household  Gods
with  her  hair  disheveUed,  touched  the  extinguished  hearths
with  trembling  lips,  and  many  words  did  she  pour  forth  to  the
Penates,  now  alienated,  to  be  of  no  avail  for  her  lamented  hus-
band.

And  now,  the  advanced  night  refused  any  time  for  delay,
and  the  ParrhaSian  Bear^  was  turning  from  the  North  Pole.
What  could  I  do  ?  I  was  detained  by  affectionate  love  for  my
country;  but  that  was  the  last  night  before  my  prescribed
banishment.  Ah !  how  often  did  I  say,  as  any  one  put  me  in
mind, — "  Why  dost  thou  hurry  me  ?  Consider  both  whither
thou  art  hastening  me,  and  whence !"  Ah !  how  often  did  1
falsely  say,  that  I  hsA  fixed  on  a  certain  hour,  which  was  suited

**  In  vain  was  adjacent.'] — Ver.  30.  He  implies  that  his  house  yfu
near  the  Capitol  to  no  purpose,  as  the  Deities  ^ho  were  there  residing,  did
not  extend  their  benign  influence  to  one  who  was  so  very  contiguous  to
them.

*•  The  Parrhatian  Bear,']~'Yer,  48.  This  was  Callisto,  whose  story
hu  been  related  in  the  second  Book  of  the  Fasti.  Parrhasia  was  in
Arcadia,  of  which  country  she  was  a  native ;  hence  her  present  epithet

s


y  Google


258  THE  TBISTIiL;  [b.1.

for  commencing  my  destined  journey.  Thrice  did  I  touch  thd
threshold ;  thrice  .was  I  called  hack,  and  my  lingering  foot
itself  proved  indulgent  to  my  feelings :  often,  having  bade
farewell,  did  I  again  give  utterance  to  many  a  word,  and,  as  if
now  departing,  I  gave  the  last  kiss.  Oft  did  I  give  the  same
injunctions,  and  I  became  my  own  deceiver,  looldiig  back  with
my  eyes  upon  my  dear  pledges.  *•  At  last  I  said, — "  Why  do
I  hasten  ?  It  is  Scythia  to  which  I  am  banished — Rome  must
be  left  by  me:  either  way  my  delay  is  justified;  my  wife,
while  living,  is  for  ever  denied  to  me  still  in  life ;  my  home,
too,  and  the  dear  members  of  my  faidiful  household;  the  com-
panions^  too,  whom  I  loved  with  the  attachment  of  a  brothers-
hearts  that,  alas!  were  linked  to  me  in  an  affection  worthy  of
Theseus."  While  yet  I  may,  I  will  embrace  them ;  perhaps,
never  again  shall  I  be  allow^  to  do  so.  The  moment  that  is
conceded  to  me,  is  so  much  gained."  I  delay  no  longer  ;  I  leave
the  words  of  my  discourse  but  half  finished,  while  embracing
each  that  is  dearest  to  my  heart.

While  thus  I  was  speaking,  and  we  were  in  tears,  the  Light-
bearing  star  had  nsen  in  its  efiulgence  in  the  lofty  heavens
— a  star  full  of  woe  for  us.  I  was  then  torn  away,  jnst  as
though  I  was  leaving  my  limbs ;  and  one  part  of  me  seemed
to  be  dissevered  from  its  trunk.  So  did  Priam  grieve  at  the
time,  when  the  horse,  changing  to  the  eontrary  of  its  supposed
purpose,  held  within  it  those  who  were  to  avenge  the  treason.^
Then,  indeed,  arose  the  sobs  and  the  lamentations  of  my  funily,
and  their  sorrowing  hands  beat  their  bared  bosoms  ;  and  then
my  wife,  clinging  to  my  shoulders  as  I  departed,  mingled

*  Dear  pledges.^—Ver,  60.  iVis  pretty  clear  firom  his  writings,  that
Ovid  had  no  children  at  the  time  of  Ms  banishment,  except  one  daughter,
Tvho  was  then  absent  in  Africa.  Reference  is  most  probably  here  made  to
her  children,  who  perhaps  had  been  left  in  their  grandfather's  house
during  the  absence  of  their  mother.

^^  Theseus.] — Yer.  66.  He  refers  to  the  friendship  of  Theseus  and
Pirithoiis,  which  was  celebrated  in  ancient  story.

28  Avenge  the  treason,'] — ^Ver.  75,  76.  This  perhaps  refers  to  the
treason  of  which  Paris  had  been  guilty  in  seducing  the  wife  of  Menelaus,
his  entertainer,  and  thus  violating  the  laws  of  honour  and  hospitality.
The  wooden  horse  *  changed  to  the  contrary,'  when,  instead  of  producing
advantage  to  the  city  of  Troy  as  had  been  anticipated  on  its  admission,  it
introduced  the  enemy,  who  was  to  destroy  it.  Heinsius  suspects  that
these  two  lines  are  not  genuine,  which,  from  their  very  vague  and  am>
biguous  meaning,  seems  Ukely  to  be  the  case.


y  Google


1.  ni.]  OX, ULMDITT  01*  OTIB.  259

these  sad  words  wkh.  her  teorsi — '^  Thon  can'st  not  be  tens
from  me :  together,  aks ! — ^together  with  thee  will  I  also  go.**
She  said, — '*  Thee  will  I  follow ;  and  I,  an  exile,  will  be  the  wife
of  an  exile.  For  me,  too,  has  this  journey  been  destined ;  and
me  do  the  remotest  lands  receive  :  I  shaU  prove  but  a  slight
burden,  to  add  to  the  flying  bark.  The  wrath  of  Caesar  bids
thee  depart  from  thy  eountry — affection  bicta  me  do  the  same  /
This  duty  shall  be  in  place  of  Caesar  to  me."  Such  attempts  a&
these  did  «lie  make ;  thus,  too,  had  she  pressed  me  before ;
and  scarcely  did  she  yield,  overcome  by  asenee  of  my  advantage.

I  go  fordi  (that,  indeed,  was  to  be  borne  to  the  ff rave,  with  no
fimareal  rites !)  all  neglected,  with  my  hair  hanging  about  my
unshaven  face.  Sl»— -overwhelmed  with  sorrow — is  said,  a
fainti[ies8  coming  over  her,  to  have  fallen  down  lifeless  in  the
midst  of  the  house  ;  and  when  she  rose  again,  with  her  hair
soiled  with  the  foul  dust,  and  lifted  her  limbs  from  the  cold
ground,  they  say  that  she  bewailed  her  household  Gods, that  mo-
m^tleft  destitute,  and  many  a  time  called  on  the  name  of  her
huftbimjd,  just  torn  away  from  her ;  and  they  say  that  she
gtieved  no  less  than  if  she  had  seen  the  erected  pile  receive
9ie  body  of  our  daughter,  or  my  own ;  and  that  she  wished
to  die,  and  in  death  to  put  an  end  to  her  sufferings ;  but  that,
from  regard  for  me,  she  did  not  terminate  Aer  life.

May  she  live  on ;  and,  since  the  Fates  have  thus  decreed,
may  she  live  ever  to  relieve  me,  far,  far  away,  by  her  aid.


ELEGY  IV.

Hb  dcBcribei  a  tempest  which  arose  in  the  Ionian  sea  during  Ids  voyage ;
and  he  depicts  the  despair  of  the  crew.

The  guardian  of  the  Erymantbian  Bear^  is  immersed  in  the
ocean,  and,  by  the  influence  of  her  Constellation,  arouses  the
waves,  while  I  am  ploughing  the  Ionian  sea  by  no  inclination
of  my  own ;  but  apprehension  itself  forces  me  to  be  bold.
Ah,  wretched  me !  by  how  tremendous  a  gale  is  the  sea
aroused,  and  how  the  sand  seethes  again  as  it  is  ploughed  up

*  Erymanthian  5eor.]— Ver.  1. Callisto  is  here  called  Erymanthian,
from  Erymanthus,  a  mountain  of  Arcadia.

s  2


y  Google


260  THX  TBIBTIA.;  [b.  I.

from  the  lowest  depths.  The  wayes,  no  lower  than  a  mountain,
are  hm'led  over  the  prow  and  the  conring  poop^  and  dash  against
the  resemblances  of  the  Deities.*^  'the  pinewood  texture
creaks ;  the  rigging,  with  load  noise,  is  beaten  to  and  fro ;  and
the  very  ship  groans  responsiYcly  to  my  woes.  The  nilor,
betraying  his  fear  by  the  paleness  of  an  ice-cold  chiU,  now
passively  follows  his  bark  o'ercome  by  the  stormy  and  guides
it  not  by  his  skill.  Just  as  the  driyer,  failing  in  his  strength,
loosens  the  useless  reins  on  a  horse  of  unbending  neck,  so
do  I  behold  our  charioteer  set  the  sails  of  the  ship,  not  in  the
direction  that  he  desires,  but  whither  the  raging  current  of  the
sea  is  driving  us;  and,  unless  .^lus  sends  breezes  from
another  quarter,  I  shall  be  carried  to  lands  now  forbidden  to  be
approached  by  me.  For  lUyria,  being  descried  afar  to  the
left,  the  forbidden  shares  of  Italy  are  beheld  by  me.  May
the  wind,  I  pray,  cease  to  blow  towards  the  forbidden  regions,
and,  together  with  me,  may  it  obey  the  great  Deity.  While  I
am  speaking,  and  am,  at  the  same  moment,  both  longing  and
fearing  to  be  hurried  back  again,  with  what  tremendous  force
does  the  wave  lash  upon  our  sides !  Spare  me,  ye  Deities  of
the  azure  ocean,  spare  me ;  let  it  be  enough  that  Jove  is  in-
censed^* with  me :  save  my  wearied  life  from  a  cruel  death,  if,
indeed,  one  who  is  already  undone  can  possibly  be  saved  from
perishing.


ELEGY  V.

Thb  poet  extols  the  -constancy  of  his  friend,  who  in  sdversitj  had  not
abandoned  him.  He  says  that  but  few  out  of  so  many  of  his  acquaint-
ances had  thus  deseired  his  esteem.  He  also  exhorts  his  friend  to
remain  firm  in  his  attachment,  and  not  to  stand  in  fear  of  the  resent-
ment of  Augustas.

Oh  thou!  that  must  be  recorded  as  second  to  none  of  my  com-
panions ;  oh  thou !  to  whom  especially  my  lot  seemed  to  be

^  Resemblances  <tf  the  Deitiee,'] — Ver.  8.  On  the  *  puppis,'  or  *  poop/
there  was  usually  a  statue  of  one  or  more  Deities,  the  g;uardians  of  de
ship.  From  these,  or  from  the  *  insigne,'  or  *  figure  head,'  which  was
placed  at  the  bow,  the  vessel  had  its  name.

^  Jove  ii  incerued,'] — Ver.  26.  In  an  excess  of  the  all-prevailing  adu-
lation of  the  time,  he  does  not  content  himself  with  calling  Augustus  a
God,  but  he  very  frequently  calls  him  either  Jupiter,  or  the  equal  of
Jupiter.


y  Google


E.  v.]  OE,  LAMENT  OF  OTD).  261

his  own ;  thou,  most  beloved  friend,  who  first  of  all  didst  dare
to  cheer  me,  when  overwhelmed,  by  thy  words ;  thou  who
didst  give  me  the  kind  advice  to  live,  when  desire  of  death  was
eziBtLQg  in  my  wretched  heart !  Thou  knowest  weU  whom  I  axii
addressing  by  allusions  and  not  byname ;  and  thy  kind  attention
is  not  forgotten  by  thee,®  my  friend.  These  things  will  ever
remain  impressed  upon  my  very  innermost  marrow ;  and  I
shall  ever  be  indebted  to  thee  for  this  life  of  mine.  My  breath
shall  go  forth  to  vanish  in  the  vacant  air,  and  shidl  leave
my  bones  upon  the  heated  pile,  before  forgetfulness  of  thy
deserts  comes  o'er  my  mind ;  oidy  by  dint  of  length  of  time
may  that  affection  fa.de  from  my  memory.  May  the  Gods  be
propitious  to  thee ;  may  they  also  grant  thee  a  fate  that  needs
the  assistance  of  no  one,  and  quite  unlike  to  mine.  But  if
this  ship  were  not  now  being  borne  on  by  favouring  breezes,
perhaps  the  extent  of  that  friendship  would  have  remained
unknown  to  me.  Pirithous  would  not  have  experienced  The-
seus as  being  so  much  his  friend,  had  he  not  descended,  while
yet  living,  to  the  infernal  streams.  Thy  persecuting  Furies,
sad  Orestes,  caused  PyladeSy  the  Phocian,  to  be  an  example  of
true  friendship.  Had  not  Euryalus  fallen,  when  fighting
against  Rutulmn  foes,  no  praise  would  there  have  been  for
Nisus,  sprung  from  Hyrtacus.

Just  as  the  yellow  gold  is  beheld  in  the  fiames,  so  is  fidelity  to
be  tested  in  the  season  of  distress.  While  Fortune  aids  us,  and
smiles  with  serene  countenance,  all  good  attends  undiminished
wealth.  But  soon  as  peals  the  thunder,  all  fly  afar,  and  by
none  is  he  recognized,  who,  the  moment  before,  was  surrounded
with  troops  of  acquaintances.  And  this  fact,  long  since
gathered  by  me  from  the  instances  of  those  of  olden  times,
is  now  known  to  be  true,  from  my  own  misfortunes.  Out  of
BO  many  friends^  scarcely  are  two  or  three  of  you  now  remain-
ing to  me.  The  rest  of  the  crowd  belonged  to  Fortune,  not  to
me.  Do  you,  then,  the  more,  0  ye  few,  aid  my  broken  fortunes,
sad  afford  a  saviog  shore  for  my  shipwreck.  And  be  not  too
much  alarmed  with  an  ill-grounded  dread,  fearing  lest  the
Divinity  should  be  offended  at  this  your  affection. Ofttimes,

"  Noiforgoiten  by  thee.'] — ^Ver.  8.  lie  means  to  iay  that,  without
mentLoniiig  )^  Mend's  name^  he  will,  when  he  mentions  the  drcom-
*tttoes  attending  his  acts  of  kindness,  easily  recall  them  to  his  mind,
and  know  to  whom  Ovid  alludes.


y  Google


262  THE  TMStIA;  [b.1.

eren  in  adrerse  warfare,  has  he  praised  fidelity ;  Csesar  loves
it  in  his  friends^  and  in  his  foe  he  i^pproves  of  it.  My  case  u
a  still  better  one,  as  I  have  not  fayonied  adverse  arms  ;  but  by
my  sincerity"  have  I  earned  my  exile.  Therefore,  I  entreat
you,  watch  over  my  misfortunes,  if  by  any  means  the  wrath
of  the  Divinity  can  be  assuaged.

Should  any  one  wish  to  know  of  all  my  woes,  he  would  be
asking  more  than  possibility  allows  of.  Evils  have  I  endured,
as  many  as  there  are  shining  stars  in  the  heavens,  and  as  many
as  the  Httle  partides  which  the  dry  dust  contains.  Muay  woes,
too,  have  I  endured,  great  beyond  credibility ;  such  as,  though
they  really  have  befallen  me,  would  not  reoeive  implicit  cre-
dence. A  certain  portion,'^  too,  it  is  fitting  should  perish
together  with  me ;  and  would  that  it  may  be  concealed,  while
I  strive  to  hide  it.  Had  I  a  voice  that  could  never  grow  weak ;
had  I  a  breast  stronger  than  brass ;  had  I  many  mouths,  to-
gether with  many  tongues ;  not  even  on  that  account  would
I  include  every  subject  in  my  words ;  the  very  extent  of  the
topic  exhausting  my  strength.

Ye  learned  poets,  write  of  my  woes,  instead  of  the  chief  firom
Neritos  ;^  far  more  evils  have  I  endured  than  he  of  Neritos.
He,  for  many  a  year,  wandered  in  a  limited  space  between
the  settlements  of  Dulichium  and  those  of  Troy.  Me,  Fortune
has  borne  to  the  Getic  and  Sarmatian  shores,  having  traversed
distant  seas  through  all  the  raises  of  the  seasons.^  He  had  a
faithful  band,  and  faithful  firieno»  had  he  ;  me  banished,  have
my  companions  deserted.  He,  exulting  and  a  oonqueror,
sought  his  country ;  I,  overpowered  and  an  exile,  fly  from  my
country. Neither  DuHchium,  nor  Ithaca  nor  Sam^^^  is  my

^  My  sincerity,'] — ^Ver.  42.  He  seems  here  to  allude  to  the  real  ground
of  his  banishment,  and  to  imply  that  exeesftof  unoerity  or  finnkneis  had
been  the  cause  of  his  ruin.  Peihaps  he  had  spoken  his  mind  too  freely
on  some  of  the  family  matters  of  the  empeior,  which  had  acddentally
come  to  his  knowledge.

^  A  certain  portion,"] — ^Ver.  51.  That  is,  the  secret  connected  with  the
family  of  Aug;ustus,  which  he  was  in  possession  of,  and  which  he  nowhere
discloses.

^  Nerito8.]'--Y€sr,  57.  *'  He  of  Neritos''  hert  metni  Ulysses.  Dull*
chium  was  an  island  in  the  vicinity  of  Ithaca.

^  The  ranges  qf  the  seasons,] — ^Vet:. .  61.  This  seeroi  here  to  be  the
only  assignable  meaning  to  '  distantia  sideribus  notis,'  whkh  meant  lite*
rally, '  d£tant  under  the  knpwn  Constellations.'

>^  ^am^.].— Yer.  67. This  was  an  island  of  the  Ionian  sea,  and  it


y  Google


E.  v.]  OB,  ULMEirr  OE  OTED.  263

home  (places  from  which  it  vas  no  great  punishment  to  he  far
away) ;  but  Rome,  the  seat  of  empire  and  of  the  Gods,  which  from
her  seven  Mils  looks  round  on  the  whole  earth,  is  my  home.
Hardy  was  his  body,  and  able  to  endure  toil ;  my  powers  are
but  weakly  and  enfeebled."  He  was  continually  engaged  in
savage  warfare ;  I  have  been  accustomed  to  the  pursuits  of
refinement.  A  (rod  has  crushed  me,  there  being  none  to
alleviate  my  woes ;  to  him,  the  warrior  Goddess  brought
assistance.  And  whereas  he  who  holds  sway  over  the  billowy
waves  is  inferior  to  Jove ;  'twas  the  wrath  of  Neptune  that
pursued  him ;  Jove's  anger  presses  upon  me.  Besides,  the
greater  part  of  his  labours  is  fictitious ;  in  my  misfortunes,
no  fabulous  story  is  told.  In  fine,  still^'  did  he  arrive
at  his  desired  home ;  and  still  did  he  reach  the  fields  which
long  he  sought.  But  by  me  must  the  land  of  my  fathers
be  left  for  ever,  unless  the  wrath  of  the  incensed  Deity  become
appeased.


ELEGY  VI.

The  poet  praises  the  fidelity  and  attention  of  his  wife,  because,  when  some
were  endeavouring  to  obtain  liis  property,  she  preserved  it,  by  her  own
finnness  and  the  assistance  of  his  friends.  In  return  for  her  virtues,  he
promises  her  immortality  in  his  poems.

Not  so  much  was  Lyd^^  beloved  by  the  poet  of  Claros ;  not
so  much  was  Battis  adored  by  him  of  Cos,*^  as  you,  my  wife,
are  endeared  to  my  heart,  worthy  of  a  husband,  less  unhappy,

formed  part  of  the  realms  subject  to  Ulysses.  Its  present  name  is  Cepha-
lonia.

^  Ei^ebled.'] — Vcr.  72.  *  Ingenuae,'  properly  means  *  free-born;'
hence  the  word  came  to  signify  *weak,'  or  *  feeble/  because,  in  general,  the
free-bom  could  not  endure  fatigue  so  well  as  the  slave,  who  was  bom  to
labour.

^  SliU  did  ^.]— Ver.  81.  That  is  to  say,  '*  In  spite  of  all  his  misfor-
tnnes,  he  returned  home,  which  at  present  is  not  my  happy  lot.*

*®  Lyd^."] — Ver.  1.  Lyde  was  the  mistress  of  Callimachus,  a  Greek
poet,  who  wrote  in  praise  of  her  beauty.

*"  Him  of  Ciw.]— Ver.  2.  Philetas.  a  native  of  Cos,  who  lived  in  the
^e  of  Alexander  the  Great,  in  his  verse  celebrated  his  mistress,  Battis.
He  is  said  to  have  been  of  so  slight  a  figure,  that  he  was  obliged  to  attach
heights  of  lead  to  his  person,  to  avoid  being  blown  away  by  the  wind.


y  Google


364  XU  TBI0TL1 ;  [b.  I.

though  not  a  kinder  one.  By  yon,  as  though  a  beam  for  my
support,  was  my  £b11  upheld ;  if  still  I  am  anything,  'tis  aU
of  your  giving.  "Tii  yon  that  are  the  cause  that  I  am  not
become  a  prey,  and  am  not  despoiled  by  those  who  have  sought
the  remnants  of  my  shipwreck.  As,  when  hunger  stimu-
lates him,  the  wolf,  rayenous  and  greedy  of  blood,  surprises
the  unguarded  sheepfold;  or,  as  the  hungry  Tulture  looks
around  if  he  can  see  any  carcase  uncovered  by  the  earth — so  a
certain  perfidious  wretch,  treacherous  in  my  sore  adversity,
would  have  £iJlen  on  my  property,  if  you  had  suffered  him.
Him  did  your  firmness  displace,  aided  by  strenuous  friends,  to
whom  no  sufficient  thanks  can  be  returned  by  me.  There-
fore are  you  approved  of  by  the  testimony  oi  one  as  wretched
as  he  is  honest ;  if  only  that  witness  has  any  weight.  In
fidelity  neither  is  the  wife  of  Hector  your  superior,  nor  Lao-
damia,^  who  followed  as  a  companion  in  death  to  her  husband.
Had  it  been  your  lot  to  gain  the  Mseonian  Homer  as  your
poet,  the  glory  of  Penelope  had  been  inferior  to  yours.  Whe-
ther is  it  to  yourself  you  owe  it,  that  you  became  virtu-
ous by  the  tuition  of  no  instructress,  and  that  virtue  was
granted  you  at  the  moment  of  your  birth  ?  or  is  it  that  the
princely  woman,*  venerated  by  you-  all  your  life,  has  in-
structed you  by  the  example  of  a  good  nofe,  and,  by  long
practice,  has  made  you  like  herself? — ^if  it  may  be  dlowed
me  to  compare  mighty  subjects  with  those  of  humble  nature.
Ah  me !  that  my  verses  have  no  great  weight,  and  that  my
pndses  are  inferior  to  your  deserts !  If  even  there  was  for-
merly some  native  vigour  in  me,  it  has  all  departed,  extin-
tinguished  by  my  prolonged  miseries;  you  ought  to  have  place
the  first  of  all  among  the  pious  women  of  story ;  you  ought  to
be  conspicuous,  the  first  of  all,  for  the  goodness  of  your  dis-
position. Yet,  so  ^  as  any  praises  of  mine  shall  avails  to  all
future  time  shall  you  live  in  my  verse.

43  Laodamia^l — ^Ver.  20.  She  was  the  wife  of  Protesilaiis,  wbo  wu
the  first  person  slain  in  the  Trojan  war.  Her  grief  at  his  death  was  so
extreme,  that  she  refosed  to  survive  him.

^  The  princely  fooman,"] — Yer.  25.  Livia.  the  wife  of  Augustus,  to
whose  family  the  wife  of  Ovid  seems  to  have  been  probably  attached  in
some  capacity.


y  Google


«.  VII.]  OB,  lAKEKT  OP  OVTD.  265

ELEGY  VIL

The  poet  requests  his  friend,  when  he  looks  on  his  likeness  engraved  on
a  nagf  to  think  of  him  in  his  exile,  and  to  remove  the  wreath  of  iyy
idiich  he  wears,  as  that  only  belongs  to  a  fortunate  poet.  Instead  of
looking  at  his  likeness,  he  requests  his  friends  to  read  the  fifteen  hooks
of  his  Metamorphoses,  of  which  he  hears  that  several  copies  are  still  in
existence,  though  when  about  to  leave  Rome  he  had  committed  the
original  to  the  flames.  He  requests  that  six  verses,  which  he  inserts,
should  be  written  at  the  beginning  of  that  work,  in  which  the  reader  is
informed  that  it  was  published  in  an  unfinished  state,  by  reason  of  the
suddenness  of  his  mirfortune.

Ii"  there  is  any  one  of  you  who  has  a  likeness  of  me  in  a  por-
trait, take  off  from  my  locks  the  ivy,  the  garland  of  Bacchus..
Those  happy  tokens  befit  only  the  joyfrd  poet ;  the  garland
is  not  befitting  my  circumstances.  Thou  dost  not  confess  it,
but  thou  knowest  that  this  is  addressed  to  thee,  thou  who
dost  carry  me  to  and  fro  on  thy  finger,  and  who  having  set  my
likeness  in  the  yellow  gold,  beholdest  the  beloved  features  of
the  exile,  so  far  as  it  is  now  possible  to  do.  Oft  as  thou  dost
look  upon  them,  perhaps  it  may  occur  to  thee  to  say,  "  How
far  away  from  us  is  our  friend  Naso  !'*  Pleasing  is  thy  affec*'
tion  ;  but  a  more  faithful  likeness  are  my  verses,  which,  such
as  they  are,  I  bid  thee  read ;  verses  that  celebrate  the  changed
forms  of  men ;  a  work  that  the  wretched  exile  of  its  master
cut  short.  These,  at  my  departure,  like  a  good  many  more  of
my  works,  did  I  myseft  in  my  sorrow,  throw  into  the  flames
with  my  own  hand.  As  the  daughter  of  Thestius**  is  said
to  have  burnt  her  son  by  means  of  the  brand,  and  to  have
proved  a  better  sister  than  mother,  so  did  I  place  the  in-
nocent books,  my  offspring,  on  the  blazing  pile,  to  perish
with  myself.  'Twas  eidier  because  I  held  in  abhorrence  the
Muses,  as  being  the  causes  of  my  condemnation ;  or  because
my  poem  was  still  imperfect,  and  in  an  unpolished  state.  But
since  these  have  not  been  utterly  destroyed,  but  are  in  exist-
ence (I  believe  that  they  were  written  out  in  several  copies),  I
now  pray  that  they  may  still  exist,  and  delight  the  leisure  of
^e  reader,  not  idly  spent,  and  may  put  him  in  remembrance
of  me.

^  The  daughter  qf  I^esfttit.]— Ver.  18.  Althea,  the  mother  of  Me-
leager,  who  caused  his  death,  in  revenge  for  that  of  her  bi  others,  who  were
slain  by  him.


y  Google


256  TUB  TUSTIA;  [it.  l

Bat  it  is  not  possible  that  they  can  be  read  with  patience
by  any  one,  if  he  shall  be  ignorant  that  the  finishing  hand
was  not  put  to  them.  That  work  of  mine  was  snatched  from
the  anvil  in  the  midst,  and  the  concluding  polish^  was
wanting  to  my  lines.  Pardon,  too,  in  place  of  praise,  do  I
craye ;  abundantly  shall  I  be  praised,  leader,  if  I  shall  not
cause  you  disgust.  Insert,  too,  these  six  lines  at  the  begin-
ning of  the  Uttle  book,  if  thou  shalt  deem  them  worthy  to
be  prefixed.  '' Whoever  thou  art,  that  art  touching  these
volumes,  deprived  g£  their  parent,  let  at  least  some  spot  be
granted  to  them  in  thy  City.  And,  the  more  to  ensure  thy
favour,  'tis  not  by  himself  that  they  have  been  made  public,
but  they  have  been  snatched,  as  it  were,  from  the  fimeral  pile
of  their  master.  Whatever  faults,  therefore,  the  rugged  verse
in  them  shall  chance  to  have,  these  should  I  have  corrected,
had  it  been  allowed  me  so  to  do."


ELEGY  VIIL

The  poet  complaina  of  the  fiuthlessness  and  desertion  of  his  familiar
firiend  at  tke  moment  of  his  niin  and  banishment.  He  entreats  him  to
resume  his  friendship,  that  he  may  be  enabled  to  snbstitute  praise  for

. censure.

The  deep  rivers  shall  flow  back  again  to  their  sorprces  fi:t)m
the  sea,  and  the  sun  shall  repass  his  course,  having  turned  his
steeds.  The  earth  shall  bear  stars,  the  heavens  dball  be  cleft
by  the  plough ;  the  waves  shall  send  forth  flames,  and  the  fire
shall  produce  water.  All  things  shall  proceed  contrary  to  the
laws  of  nature,  and  no  part  of  the  system  shall  hold  on  its
usual  course.  All  things  shall  now  come  to  pass  which  I
was  wont  to  call  impossible ;  and  there  is  nothing  which  is  not
worthy  of  belief.  This  is  my  prophecy;  because  by  him
have  I  been  deceived,  whom  I  expected  to  aid  me  in  my  wretch-
edness.

Has  so  great  forgetfulness  of  me,  deceiver,  taken  possession
of  thee? Was  it  so  great  a disgrace  to  approach  one  in

^  The  concluding poli8h,]^yeT,  30.  *  Ultima  lima '  is  literally  the  'last
file.'  He  alludes  to  the  foct,  that  the  Metamorphoses  Tvcre  in  an  incom-
plete state  when  he  committed  them  to'  the  flames;  and  that,  thoiigh
rescued  from  destruction,  he  had  not  made  any  alteration  in  the  work,  or
had  in  any  way  amended  it.


y  Google


I.  VIII.]  OE,  hAMSST  or  OTH).  267

distress?  Wotddst  ihou  neither  look  npdn  nor  c<Hisole
me,  lying  prostn^,  oh  eruel  manf  Wouldst  thon  not
attend  my  funeral  rites  ?  Is  the  holy  and  venerated  mme
of  friendship  trodden  hy  thee  under  foot  as  a  worthless
thing  ?  What  so  great  matter  was  it  for  thee  to  visit  thy  com-
panion, prostrated  h^  an  affliction  so  heavy,  and  to  alleviate  it
hy  a  share  of  thy  discourse  ?  and  if  not  to  shed  a  tear  at  my
misfortunes,  yet,  at  least ^  to  utter  a  few  words  of  complaint  in
fbigned  sorrow  ?  at  least,  too,  to  hid  me  farewdl,  which  even
strangers  do  ?  and  to  imitate  the  language  of  the  many,  and  the
expression  of  puhhc  sorrow  ?  Was  it  not  thy  duty  on  the
hurt;  day,  and  while  it  was  allowed  thee,  to  hehold,  for  the  last
time,  my  tearful  face,  never  to  he  heheld  again  ?  and  to  give
and  receive,  with  Uke  voice,  the  farewell,  never  again  to  be  re-
peated during  all  my  life  ?  This  even  those  did  that  were
united  to  me  in  no  intimacy,  and  they  shed  tears,  the  evidence
of  their  feelings.  Why  was  it  ?  even  had  I  not  been  bound  by
intimacy  and  the  most  stringent  reasons,  and  the  uttachment
that  grows  in  length  of  time ;  Why  ?  even  if  thou  hadst  not
known  so  much  of  my  moments  of  relaxation  and  of  my
serious  hours,  and  if  I  had  not  known  so  much  of  thy  mo-
ments of  rehoatibn  and  of  thy  serious  hours  ;  Why  ?  even
if  thou  hadst  been  only  known  to  me  at  Rome,  thou  who
wast  so  often  invited  by  me  to  every  kind  of  place ;  have  all
these  things  fled  as  unavailing,  amid  the  blasts  of  the  ocean  f
Are  all  these  things  borne  away,  sunk  amid  the  streams  of
Lethe?

'  I  do  not  believe  that  thou  wast  bom  in  the  gentle
dime  of  the  City  of  Quirinus,  a  City  never  to  be  paced  again
by  my  foot ;  but  rather  amid  rocks,  which  this  coast  of  Pon-
ius,  lying  to  the  left,^  claims  as  its  own,  and  amid  the  savage
steeps  of  Scythia  and  of  Sarmatia.  Round  thy  heart,  too,  are
veins  made  of  flint,  and  the  ore  of  iron  possesses  thy  hardened
breast.  The  nurse,  also,  which  once  gate  thee  her  full  breast,
to  be  drawn  by  thy  tender  mou^,  was  a  tigress,  otherwise  thou
wouldst  have  thought  my  lossless  a  matter  of  indifference  to
thee  than  thou  now  dost,  and  thou  wouldst  not  now  be  con-
victed by  me  of  hardness  of  heart. But  since  this,  too,  is

^  *•  Lying  to  the  &/{.]— Ver.  39.  This  epithet  is  given  to  the  r^«m  o|
Pontus,  as  lying  to  the  left  hand  of  a  person  proceeding  thither  by  s^
from  Rome,  or  the  countries  lying  to  the  south  of  it.


y  Google


268  THl  TBISTIA. :  [b.  i.

added  to  my  destined  eyils,  that  my  recent  life  should  miss  its
wonted  harmony  of  /riendahip,  do  thou  cause  me  not  to  bear
in  remembrance  this  lapse  of  thine,  but  rather  that,  with  the
same  Ups  with  which  I  complain,  I  should  also  proclaim  thy
affection.


ELEGY  IX.

Thk  poet  complains  that  the  vulgar  wait  on  fortune,  and  that  a  man  has
friends  in  prosperity,  but  is  deserted  in  adversity;  and  he  says  that  the
truth  of  this  had  been  bitterly  experienced  by  \dm ;  that  before  he  was
banished  by  Augustus,  he  had  many  acquaintances ;  but  after  his  sudden
down&n,  he  found  no  one  to  come  to  his  succour,  although  the  good
feeling  of  Caesar  would  not  have  forbidden  it,  inasmuch  as,  even  in  the
case  of  an  enemy,  he  would  approve  of  fidelity  in  friendship.  He  con-
gratulates his  friend  on  the  renown  that  his  genius  and  attainments  have
acquired  for  him,  and  he  contrasts  his  graver  pursuits,  and  their  reward,
with  the  evil  consequences  of  his  own  indiscreet  compositions.

Hat  it  be  granted  thee  to  arriye  at  the  limit  of  life  free
from  misfortune,  thou  who  readest  this  work  with  no  unfriendly
feeling  towards  me. And  would  that  these  prayers  of  mine
may  be  of  ayail  for  thee,  which  have  not  moved  the  crud
Deities  in  my  behalf. So  long  as  thou  shalt  be  fortunate,
thou  wilt  number  many  friends; if  the  weather  becomes
o'ercast,  thou  wilt  be  alone. Thou  seeest  how  the  pigeons
resort  to  the  whitened  roofs,  and  how  the  begrimed  turret
receives  no  bird. The  ants  never  proceed  to  empty  granaries ;
no  friend  will  attend  the  ruin  of  the  wealthy. And  just  as
the  shadow  accompanies  those  who  walk  in  the  rays  of  the
sun,  but  flies  when  he  lies  hid  o'erwhelmed  with  clouds,  e'en
so  does  the  crowd  follow  the  brightness of  Fortune, and
departs,  soon  as  it  is  obscured  by  night  coming  on. It  is  my
prayer  that  this  may  always  appear  a  fiction  to  thee,  but  that
it  is  the  truth  must  be  comessed  by  my  experience. While  I
stood  erect,  a  house,  well  known,  but,  of  no  pretensions,  enters
tained  a  circle  sufficiently  large. But,  soon  as  that  house  wai
shaken,^  all  dreaded  the  crash,  and,  in  their  caution,  joined  the
common  flight.  And  I  am  not  surprised  if  they  do  fear  the  rath«
less  thunderbolts^  by  whose  fires  they  see  each  nearest  object
blasted. But  yet  in  an  enemy  hatea  ever  so  much,  Ceesar
approves  of  him  that  adheres  as  a  friend  in  adversity ;  and  he
is  not  wont  to  be  angered  (indeed,  no  one  is  more  lenient  than


y  Google


B.  nc.]  OB,  LAMElfrr  OP  OVID.  ^9

he)  if  a  person  loyes  him  still  in  his  affliction,  whom  he  has  loved*
before.  Thoas  himself  is  said  to  have  approved  of  PykdeSy
when  he  learned  the  story  of  the  Mend  of  Argive  Orestes.
The  fedthful  ties  that  existed  between  the  son  of  Actor^  and
the  great  Achilles  used  to  be  praised  by  the  lips  oi  Hector.
They  say  that  the  God  of  Tartarus  grieved  that  ^e  affectionate
Theseus  had  attended  his  Mend  to  the  shades  below.  'Tii
worthy,  Tnmus,  of  behef,  that  thou  didst  bedew  thy  cheeks
with  tears  when  the  attachment  of  Nisus  and  Euryalus  was  re-
lated to  thee.  Towards  the  wretched,  there  is  a  dnty,  whieh^
even  by  an  enemy  is  praised.  Ah,  me !  how  few  are  moved
by  these  words  of  mine !  Such  are  my  circumstances,  such  is
the  downfall  of  my  fortunes,  that  no  limit  ought  to  be  set  to
anguish.

But  my  heart,  though  filled  with  sadness  at  my  own  lot,
is  made  joyful  at  thy  advancement.  I  foresaw,  dearest /rt^nif,
that  this  would  come  to  pass,  while  a  gender  breeze  was
still  speeding  on  thy  bark.  If  there  is  any  value  in  good
morals,  or  in  a  life  free  from  stain,  no  one  will  be  more  de-
serving of  esteem  than  thee ;  or  if  any  one  has  raised  himself
through  the  liberal  arts ;  through  thy  eloquence,  every  cause  be-
comes a  good  one.  Influenced  by  these  considerations,  I  forth-
with said  to  thee,  "  a  wide  fidd,  my  Mend,  awaits  thy  endow-
ments." Not  the  entrails  of  sheep,  not  the  thunders  on  my
left,  or  the  voice  or  the  wing**  of  some  bird  observed  by  me
told  me  this.  Reason  is  my  augury,  and  my  estimate  of  the
future  ;  from  this  did  I  precUct,  tmd  from  facte  did  I  derive  this
knowledge.  And  since  now  it  is  verified,  with  all  my  heart  do  I
congratulate  myself  and  thee  that  thy  genius  did  not  escape
me.  But  would  that  mine  had  lain  concealed  in  the  deepest
shades !  It  were  my  interest  that  fame  had  not  attended  my
productions.  And  as,  eloquent  man,  serious  studies  promote
thy  welfare,  so  have  those  of  no  like  character  been  my  ruin.
And  yet  my  life  is  well  known  to  thee ;  thou  knowest  that  the
morals  of  the  author  reMuned  from  the  pursuits  therein  de-

^7  The  son  of  ^c/or.]— Ver.  29.  This  was  Patrodus,  the  bosom  friend
of  Achilles.  He  was  slain  by  Hector,  and  his  death  was  avenged  by
Achilles,

^  Voice  or  the  tD%ng.'\ — ^Ver.  50.  He  says  that  he  did  not  learn  this  by
the  aid  of  augury,  either  by  observing  the  flight  of  the  'prcpetes,'  or  liiten-
ing  to  the  voice  of  the  ^osdnes.'


y  Google


270  THE  TBI8TIA;  [b.  i.

ditiei.  Thou  knowest  that  the  poem  was  sportiVely  composed
by  me  long  ago,  when  a  youth ;  and  that  those  lines,  although
worthy  of  no  encouragement,  are  yet  but  so  many  sportive
trifles.  Therefore,  as  f  think  that  my  sins  can  by  no  plea  be
defended,  so  do  I  bdieye  that  they  may  yet  be  palliated.  So
hr  as  thou  canst,  excuse  me ;  and  forsake  not  the  cause  of
thy  friend.  Mayst  thou  always  proceed  well  in  the  steps  in
which  thou  hast  commenced  to  go.


ELEGY  X.

Ottd  here  eulogises  the  ship  on  board  of  which  he  embarked  in  the  Gulf
of  Corinth.  He  then  describes  his  voyage,  and  the  (daces  which  he
touched  at.  He  prays  that  he  may  arrive  in  safety  at  Tomi,  and  on  his-
safe  arrival  he  promises  to  sacrifice  a  lamb  to  Minerva.  He  also  prays
to  Castor  and  Pollux  to  look  upon  his  bark  vnth  favour.

The  yellow-haired  Minerva  has  the  guardianships  of  my
bark,  and  long  may  she  hold  it,  I  pray ;  from  the  helmet,  too,
painted  therein,  does  it  take  its  name.  Is  there  need  for
spreading  smI  ?  She  runs  well  at  the  very  lightest  breeze ;
are  the  oars  to  be  pUed  ?  with  them  she  hastens  on  her  way.
Nor  is  she  contented  to  surpass  her  companions  in  the  swift-
ness of  her  course ;  she  overtakes  the  vess^  that  have  gone
out  cf  harbour  ever  so  long  before.  She  makes  head  against
the  seas ;  she  bears  up  against  the  waves  that  assail  her,  rolling
from  afar ;  and«  when  struck  by  the  raging  billows,  she  springs
no  leak.  She,  first  known  to  me  at  Cenchrese,  of  Corinth,**
abides  as  the  fakhfiil  leader  and  companion  of  my  flight.  And,
throughout  so  many  casualties,  and  through  so  many  seas
lashed  by  the  hostile  gales,  under  the  tutelage  of  Pallas,  is
she  safe  and  sound.  Now,  too,  I  pray,  may  she  cleave
her  way  in  safety  along  the  straits  of  the  extended  Pon-
tus ;  aiul  may.sbe  enter  the  waves  of  the  G^tic  shore,  whither
she  is  steering.

♦»  The  guartHttn8kip,']—'Y&[i  1.  He  means  to  say,  that  Minerva  was
the  tutelar  deity  of  the  ship,  whose  statue  was  placed  on  the  poop ;  but
that  it  took  its  name  from  the  helmet  which  was  paintM  on  the  'insigne/
or  '  figure-head,'  on  the  prow.

^  Cenchrea  af  Corinth.'] — Ver.  9.  Corinth,  being  situated  on  an  isthmus
between  the  ^Egean  and  Ionian  seas,  had  two  harbours,  Lecheae  on  the  one
side,  and  Cenchreae  on  the  other.  From  the  latter,  the  poet  set  sail  for
^e  Hellespont.


y  Google


s.  X.]  OB,  LAMEST  or  OTH).  271

After  she  bad  brought  me  to  tbe  sea  of  tbe  iElolian  Helle,
and  proceeded  on  ber  long  voyage  between  the  narrow
limits,  we  bent  our  course  to  tbe  left,  and  from  the  city  of
Hector  we  came  to  thy  harbours,  land  of  Imbros.  Tben,
after  having  made  the  shores  of  Zerynthus  with  a  gentle
breeze,  the  weary  bark  touched  at  the  Thracian  Samos.  From
this  spot  to  Tempyra  is  but  a  short  passage  for  the  traveller ;
up  to  this  point  did  she  accompany  her  master ;  but  I  pre-
ferred to  travel  by  land  over  the  Bistonian  plains.  Again
she  sailed  over  the  waters  pf  the  Hellespont ;  and  steered  for
Dardania,  ^at  bears  the  name  of  its  founder,  and  thee,  Lamp-
sacus,  safe  under  the  care  of  thy  rustic  God,  and  where  the
sea  divides  Sestos  firom  the  city  of  Abydos,  by  means  of  the
straits  named  after  ^e  virgin  that  was  so  badly  carried  ;'^  and
thence,  Cyzicus,  situated  on  the  shores  of  Propontis,  ^e  re-
nowned work  of  the  Hsemonian  nation ;  and  where  the  coasts
of  Byzantium  skirt  the  entrance  of  Pontus;  (this  spot  is  a  vast
inlet  to  two  seas).  May  she  pass  these  spots,  I  pray ;  and,
impelled  by  the  fresh  south  winds,  may  she  bravely  pass
the  movii^  ides  of  Cyanea ;  ^  and  may  she  steer  her  way
along  the  Thynnian  bays;  and  thence  impelled  past  the
city  of  Apollo,^  may  she  pass  on  her  course  the  walls  of
Anchialus.  Thence  may  she  pasa  the  harbours  of  Mesembria
and  Odessus,  and  the  towers,  Bacchus,  that  are  called  after  thy
name,  and  where  they  say  that  those  sprung  from  the  city  of
Alcathous^  re-established  their  exiled  homes  in  these  parts.
Thence  may  shearrive  insafety  at  the  city  sprung  frt)m  Miletus,"
whither  the  wrath  of  the  offended  CU)d  has  driven  me.

^  So  hodiy  corriA^.] — ^Ver.  27.  Because  she  fell  off  as  the  ram  was
carrying  her,  and,  from  her  accident,  gave  the  name  of  Hellespont  to  that
tract  of  water.

^  liles  of  CyceneaC^ — ^Ver.  34.  These  were  also  called  the  Symplegades,
or  'floating  islands/  They  were  two  rocks  at  the  mouth  of  the  Euxine
sea,  and  were  £^>led  to  shift  their  position.  One  yery  simple  explanation
of  the  story  is,  that,  standing  opposite  to  them,  they  appeared  to  he  two  in
numher,  but  looking  at  them  obliquely  they  seemed  to  be  hut  one.

"  City  of  ApoOo.] — Ver.  35.  This  was  Apollonia,  a  dty  pn  the  shores
of  Pontus.

**  Alcathoua,'] — ^Ver.  39.  He  was  a  son  of  Pelops,  and  reigned  over
Megara,  in  Greece.  His  subjects  were  said  to  have  founded  the  dty  of
Callatia,  on  the  Getic  coast.

•*  aiy  sfyrungfrom  Miletus,'] — ^Vcr.  41.  Namely,  Tomi,  his  destined
place  of  banisiunent,  which  he  tells  as,  elsewhere,  was  founded  by  a  colony
from  Miletus,  in  Asia  Minor.


y  Google


272  9SI  TBI0TIA.;  [B.L

If  she  arriyes  thither,  a  lamh  shall  be  slain  to  Minenra,
meriting  it ;  a  larger  sacrifice  does  not  suit  my  circumstances.

Do  jon  also,  ye  brothers,  sons  of  Tyndarus,  whom  this
island  holds  in  yeneration,  be  present  with  your  £ayouiiiig
protection,  on  my  two-fold  journey.  For  the  one  ship  is  pre-
paring to  steer  her  course  ti^ugh  the  straits  of  the  Symple-
gades,  while  the  other^  is  about  to  cleaye  the  Bistonian  waters.
Grant  ye,  that  when  we  are  going  on  our  way  to  different
points,  the  one  may  haye  fayouring  breezes,  and  ttie  other
may  hkye  them  not  less  fayourable.


ELEGY  XI.

OyiD  excuses  himself,  if  there  should  appear  in  his  yerses  any  marks  of
liaste  or  inelegance ;  and  he  attributes  them  to  the  tempests  and  the
ocean,  amid  whose  conflicts  he  says  that  they  were  composed.

Etibt  letter  that  has  been  read  by  thee  in  the  whole  of  this
book  was  composed  by  me  at  the  time  of  an  anxious  voyage.
Either  the  Adriatic  sea  beheld  me  writing  it  in  the  midst  of
its  wayes,  while  I  was  shiyering  in  the  month  of  December ;  or,
after  I  had  passed  on  my  route  the  Isthmus  of  the  two  Seas,"
and  ano^er  ship  was  taken  for  my  yoyage.  I  verily  belieye
that  the  .^ean  Cyclades  were  astounded  tiiat  I  could  compose
yerses  amid  the  jarring  tumults  of  the  ocean.  I  myself  am
now  surprised,  that,  amid  such  billowy  conflicts  botik  of  my
spirit  and  of  the  sea,  my  genius  did  not  yanish.  Whelher  insen-
sibility or  madness  is  tiie  proper  name  for  this  aniious  feeling,
my  intellect  was  entirely  upheld  by  this  pursuit.  Ofttimes
was  I  tossed,  full  of  apprehension,  imder  the  influence  of  the
stormy  Constellation  of  the  Kids  ;  often  was  the  sea  threaten-
ing under  the  Constellation  of  Sterope,"  the  keeper,  too,  of

M  While  the  other.]^Yer.  48.  He  speiOu  metaphorically  of  himself
and  his  intended  passage  by  land  oyer  the  Bistonian  plains,  having  disem-
barked, while  the  ship  pursued  her  Qourse  (probably  carrying  his  baggage)
to  Tomi.

"  0/  the  two  5ifiM.]— Ver.  5.  The  isthmus  of  Corinth,  between  the
^gean  and  the  Ionian  seas.

«•  Constellation  qf  Sterope] — ^Ver.  14.  She  was  one  of  the  Pleiades,
the  name  of  one  being  here  substituted  for  all,  which  is  also  frequently
done  by  the  poet,  when  speaking  of  the  Muses  or  the  Furies.


y  Google


m.  n.]  OB,  LAMENT  OF  OTID.  273

tlie  Eiymanthian  bear  made  the  day  o*ercast ;  or  the  South
-wind  had  heaped  the  raging  torrents  on  the  Hyades.  Often
did  she  ship  a  sea ;  yet  still,  with  trembling  hand,  did  I
compose  my  verses,  such  aa  they  are.  Now,  the  rigging
rattles,  blown  out  by  the  North  mnd,  and  the  curving  wave
rises  like  a  hill  aloft.  The  helmsman  himself,  raising  his
liands  to  the  stars,  forgetful  of  his  art,  implores  aid  in  his
prayers.  Whichever  way  I  look,  there  is  nothing  but  the  form
of  death,  which,  with  anxious  mind,  I  fear,  and;  as  I  fear,  I
pray.  If  I  gain  my  port,  by  that  very  port  I  shall  be
frightened ;  the  shore  has  more  horrors  for  me  than  the  hostile
-waves.  For  by  the  deceit  both  of  men  and  of  the  ocean  am
I  buffeted,  and  the  sword  and  the  wave  give  ine  double  grounds
for  fear.  I  fear  lest  the  one,  through  shedding  my  blood,
should  hope  for  my  spoil,  and  lest  the  other  should  wish  to
have  the  credit  of  my  death.  The  part  on  my  left  hand  is  a
barbarous  region,  surrounded  by  greedy  rapine ;  a  region
which  bloodshed,  slaughter,  and  wars  are  always  in  possession
of.  And,  although  the  sea  be  agitated  by  the  wintry  storms,
yet  is  my  breast  more  agitated  than  the  sea  itself.

Therefore  thou  oughtst,  candid  reader,  the  more  to  pardon
these  lines,  if  they  are,  as  really  they  are,  inferior  to  thy  ex-
pectation. These  I  write  not,  as  once  I  did,  amid  my  gardens ,
nor  dost  thou,  my  wonted  little  couch,  now  receive  my  body.
I  am  tossed  on  the  unruly  deep  on  a  wintry  day,  and  my
very  paper  is  dashed  o'er  by  the  azure  wavea.  The  boisterous
storm  battles  and  rages  because  I  dare  to  write,  while  it  hurls  its
cruel  threats.  Let  Uie  storm  prove  stronger  than  man.  Yet,
at  the  same  instant,  I  pray  that  I  may  put  an  end  to  my  lines^
it,  to  its  threats.


y  Google


274  THB  TBIBTU.;  [b.  u


BOOK  THE  SECOND.


Ovid  entreats  Augustus,  if  he  will  not  pennit  his  return,  at  least  to  grant
him  a  safer  and  more  civilized  place  for  his  exile.  He  declares  that  he
will  try  whether  verses,  which  have  caused  his  disgrace,  will  not  now
obtain  a  mitigation  of  his  punishment,  just  as  the  spear  of  Achilles
both  wounded  Telephus  and  healed  him.  In  a  lengthened  arg^umenta-
tive  poem,  he  endeavours  to  appease  Caesar,  showing  that  he  had  written
many  things  in  his  praise.  He  enumerates  a  vast  number  of  poets
who  never  received  any  punishment  whatever,  although  they  had  pub-
lished works  of  either  a  loose  or  a  slanderous  character.

What  have  I  to  do  with  you,  ye  little  books  ? — an  unliappy
pursuit  of  mine,  who,  in  my  misery,  am  undone  by  my  own
genius.  Why  do  I  turn  again  to  the  Muses  but  just  con-
demned— ^the  grounds  of  my  accusation  1  Is  it  too  little,  but
once  to  have  been  found  deserving  of  punishment  t  My  verses
have  been  the  cause  that  both  men  and  women  desired  to
know  me,  by  reason  of  my  ill-omened  fate.  My  verses  have
been  the  cause  that  Csesar  formed  his  estimation  of  me  and  my
morals,  from  my  Art  of  Love,  seen  by  him  after  a  lengthened
lapse  of  time.  Take  from  me  my  productions — ^you  will  then
remove,  too,  the  disgrace  of  my  life ;  I  owe  to  my  verses,  as  the
result  of  them,  that  I  am  a  cnminal.  This  is  the  reward  that
I  have  received  for  my  pains  and  my  labours,  the  result  of
my  watchings :  my  punishment  was  the  discovery  of  my  inge-
nuity.

Had  I  been  wise,  I  ought,  by  rights,  to  have  hated  the
learned  sisters — ^Deities,  the  destruction  of  their  devotee  !  But
now,  so  great  is  the  madness  that  accompanies  my  disease,
that  again  (sad  fote !)  I  turn  my  steps  to  the  rocks  on  which  I
have  struck:  the  conquered  gladiator,  forsooth,  is  seeking  once
more  the  arena,  and  the  wrecked  ship  is  returning  to  the  bois-
terous waves.

Perhaps,  as  once,  in  the  cose  of  him  who  held  sway  o'er


y  Google


B.  II.]  OB, LAMEliT  OF  OTID.  275

the  realms  of  TenthnntoB,*  so  to  me^  die  tanie  object  shall
giye  the  wound  and  the  remedy ;  and  the  Muse,  who  has  ex-
cited it,  shall  assuage  the  anger  that  has  been  proToked:
yerses  often  propitiate  the  great  Gods.  Caesar,  too,  himself
ordered  the  matrons  and  the  brides  <^  Ansonia  to  repeat
yerses  in  honour  of  Ope,  crowned  with  torrets;'  he  had
ordered  them  also  to  be  repeated  in  honour  oi  Phoebus,  at  the
time  when  he  appointed  die  games,  which  one  age  beholds
but  once.'  After  these  precedents,  O  most  merdM  Csesar,  I
praj  that  thj  anger  may  be  wpeased  by  my  productions.  It
is  justified,  indeed,  and  I  will  not  deny  that  I  hare  been  de-
scrying of  it :  all  shame  has  not,  to  that  d^;ree,  fled  from  my
face ;  but,  had  I  not  sinned,  what  had  there  been  for  thee
to  pardon?  My  £»te  has  giyen  thee  the  opportunity  for
mercy.  If,  ofttimes  as  mortals  sin,  Joye  were  to  hurl  his  light-
nings, in  a  litde  time  he  would  be  disarmed:  when  he  has
thundered,  and  has  alarmed  the  earth  with  his  peal,  he  makes
the  air  clear  by  dispersing  the  showers ;  justly,  therefore,  is
he  called  both  the  Father  and  the  Ruler  of  the  Gods ;  justly
has  the  capacious  uniyerse  nothing  superior  to  Joye.  Do  thou
as  well,  since  thou  art  styled  the  Ruler  of  thy  country,  and  its
Father,  follow  the  example  of  the  God  that  has  the  same  title.
And  tiius  thou  dost;  and,  than  thee,  no  one  could,  with»
greater  moderation,  hold  the  reins  of  goyemment.  Pardon
hast  thou  often  granted  to  the  conquered  party,  which,  if
yictorious,  it  would  not  haye  granted  to  thee ;  I  haye  seen  many
eyen  exalted  with  riches  and  honours,  who  had  taken  up
urms  against  thy  person.  The  same  day  which  ended  the  war-
fere,  ended  with  thee  the  angry  feelings  of  warfare;  and  either

'  The  realms  qf  r«rfAran<ii».]— Ver.  19.  The  kingdom  of  Mysia,  a
cooniry  of  AbU  Minor,  is  thus  called  from  Teuthrantus,  its  king,  who,
hiving  no  male  issne,  mairied  his  daughter  Argiope  toTdephus,  the  son
of  Hotmles,  and  made  him  heir  to  his  kingdom.

'  Ops  eroumed  trith  turrets.^ — Ver.  24.  This  was  one  of  the  names
of  Cyhele,  Rhea,  or  Bona  Dea,  "who  was  generally  thus  represented.

'  Beholds  but  once.'] — ^Ver.  26.  He  alludes  to  the  Sectdar  games,  which
were  celebrated  every  110  years,  and  which  were  held  in  the  reign  of
Augustus,  A.U.C.  736.  They  were  first  instituted  by  Valerius  Publicola,
the  Consul,  after  the  expulsion  of  the  kings,  according  to  Festus  and  Cen^
■orinus ;  though  the  occasion  of  their  first  institution  is  generally  con-
sidered very  doubtfuL  Before  they  commenced,  heralds  were  sent  to  in-
^te  the  people  to  a  spectacle  which  no  one  of  them  had  ever  beheld,  and
^tich  no  one  "would  ever  behold  again.

T  2


y  Google


276  THB  TSISTLl;  [b.  U.

side,  at  ih^  same  moment,  bore  offerings  to  the  temples ;  and,
as  Uiy  soldiers  rejoice  that  they  have  snbdued  the  enemy,  so
has  the  enemy  reason  to  rejoice  ihst  he  is  subdued.

My  cause  is  a  better  one ;  who  am  neither  said  to  have  taken
up  arms  against  thee,  nor  to  have  followed  the  fortunes  of  thy
enemies.  By  the  sea,  by  the  land,  by  the  third  Deities,^  do  I
swear,  by  thee  too,  a  Diyinity  present  and  yisible  to  us ;  that  this
spirit  q/mtfitf  prayed  for  thy  welfare,  and  'that  I,  in  mind,  the
only  way  I  could  be  so,  was  devoted  to  thee.  I  wished  that,
late  in  Itfe,  thou  mightst  attain  the  stars  of  the  heayens ;  and  I
was  an  humble  fraction  of  a  multitude  that  prayed  the  same.
For  thee,  with  pious  feelings,  have  I  offered  the  frankincense ;
and  with  all  the  rest^  I  myself,  as  one,  have  seconded  the
prayers  of  the  public  with  my  own.  Why  shall  I  make  men-
tion of  those  books  as  well,  my  causes  of  offence,  which,  in
a  thousand  places,  are  filled  with  thy  name?  Examine  my
larger  work,  which  aa  yet  I  have  left  incomplete,  about  bodies
changed  into  incredible  forms.  There  wilt  ihon  find  the  com-
men£itions  of  thy  name ;  there  wilt  thou  find  many  a  pledge
of  my  affection.  Thy  glory  is  not  enhanced  by  Terse,  nor  has
it  any  means  of  increasing,  so  as  to  become  greater.  The  glory
of  Joye  is  transcendent;  yet  he  is  pleased  that  his  deeds
should  be  recounted,  and  that  he  himself  should  be  the  subject
of  poetry ;  and  when  the  battles  of  the  Giant  warfare  are  re-
lated, it  IS  worthy  of  belief  that  he  takes  a  pleasure  in  his  own
praises.  Others  celebrate  thee  with  as  loud  a  yoice  as  is  be-
fitting, and  sing  thy  praises  with  a  more  fertile  genius ;  but
yet,  as  a  Grod  is  moved  by  the  streaming  blood  of  a  hundred
bulls,  so  is  he  influenced  by  the  least  offering  of  frankincense.

Ah !  cruel  was  he,  and  too  inhuman  a  foe  to  me,  whoever  it
was  that  read  to  thee  my  loye  tales !  for  fear  lest  yerses  in  my
books,  so  full  of  respect  to  thee,  might  possibly  be  read  under
the  influence  of  a  judgment  more  fayourable.  But  who,  when
thou  art  offended,  could  prove  a  friend  to  me  ?  Hardly,  under
such  circumstances,  was  I  other  than  an  enemy  to  myself?  When
the  shaken  house  began  to  sink,  all  the  weight  rested  upon
the  part  that  subsided ;  all  sides  open  wide  when  Fortune  has
made  the  breach;  buildings  themselves  fall  down  through  their
own  weight. And  thus  the  hatred  of  mankind  has  l^n  the

*  By  the  third  Z>e»<ies.]— Ver.  53.  Those  of  the  heavens ;  or,  possibly
of  the  infernal  regions ;  a  Enphemism  being  employed,  to  avoid  the  mention
of  their  names.


y  Google


B.  II.]  OB, LAMBITT  OP  OTID.  277

resmt  of  my  yerses :  and,  where  it  ought,  the  muldtiide  has
followed  thy  looks.

But,  as  1  remember,  thou  didst  approve  of  my  life  and
manners,  as  I  passed  by  thee  tit  review,  on  the  horse'  whiich
thou  hadst  given  me.  And  if  this  is  of  no  avail,  and  no
favour  is  shown  to  my  probity,  still,  tit  thai  position,  I  gave
no  ground  for  crimination.  The  fortunes  of  the  accused^
were  not  ill  entrusted  to  me,  and  the  litigation  that  was  to  be
taken  cognizance  of  by  the  hundred  men ;  on  private  matters,
too,  did  I  arbitrate  as  a  judge,  without  any  cause  of  accusation,
and  even  the  party  that  was  defeated  bore  witness  to  my  up-
rightness. Wretched  me!  I  had  been  able,  had  not  late
events  redounded  to  my  injury,  to  be  safe  on  thy  judgment,
not  once  only  expressed  in  my  favour.  "lis  recent  matters  that
have  proved  my  ruin ;  and  one  tempest  engulfs  in  the  ocean
the  bark  that  has  been  so  oft  unscathed.  Nor  was  it  any  little
portion  of  the  sea  that  injured  me ;  but  all  the  waves,  and
Ocean  himself,  o'erwhelmed  my  head.

Why  was  I  the  witness  of  anything  V  Why  did  I  render
my  very  eyes  criminal?  Why  was  I  unadvisedly  made
acquainted  with  the  error?  Acteeon  beheld  Diana  without
her  garments,  unconsciously :  not  the  less  was  he  a  prey  to
her  hounds.  In  dealing  with  the  Gods  above,  even  accident,
forsooth,  must  be  atoned  for;  and  chance  receives  no
pardon  when  a  Deity  is  affironted :  for,  on  that  same  day  on
which  my  unfortunate  mistake  removed  me  from  my  home,  a
fiunily,  humble  indeed,  but  without  a  stain,  was ruined.

s  In  review  on  the  Aorae,'] — ^Ver.  90.  The  inspection  (tf  the  Equestrian
order  originally  belonged  to  the  Censors;  but  that  office  having  been
abolished,  Augustus  substituted  in  its  place  the  *  pnefecturamorum/  "which
office  he  took  on  himself.  Suetonius  tells  us  that  he  firequently  reviewed
the  troops  of  Equites,  and  restored  the  disused  '  transvectio  Equitum/
which  was  a  solemn  procession  of  the  body  on  horseback,  and  in  martial
array,  on  the  Ides  of  July^  It  appears  from  the  present  passage,  and  the
information  given  us  by  Suetonius,  that  the  *  recognitio,'  or  review,  which
was  formerly  held  by  the  Censor,  was  connected  by  Augustus  vnth  the
'  transvectio,'  or  procession,  and  held  at  the  same  time.

*  Fortunes  of  the  accuaed,']^~Ye!t.9Z,  He  alludes  to  the  fact  (tf  his  having
held  office  as  one  of  the  '  centumviri,'  or  <  hundred  men.'  Their  number
was  really  105,  being  elected,  three  from  each  of  the  35  tribes ;  their  duty
was  to  assist  the  praetor  in  questions  of  property  between  individuals.
\  7  Witness  qf  any  thmg,'\ — ^Ver.  103.  He  here  alludes  to  his  having
accidentally  been  witness  to  that  fact,  connected  with  the  family  of  Augustus,
the  seeing,  or  speaking  of  which,  was  the  real  cause  of  his  eiile.


y  Google


278  THB  TBISTIA;  [b.  ii.

Hiimble>  howeyer^  though  it  be,  in  the  days  of  mj  fiither  it
may  be  said  to  have  been  illustrious,  and  in  point  of  nobility
inferior  to  none ;  it  was  remarkable  for  neither  its  wealth  nor
its  poverty;  whence,  rendered  conspicuous  by  neither  ex-
treme^ it  holds  its  Equestrian  rank.  Be  it,  however,  that  my
£imily  is  humble,  either  in  the  point  of  riches  or  of
origin,  assuredly  it  is  not  rendered  obscure  by  my  talents.
Al&ough  I  may  seem  to  have  used  them  too  frivolously,
still  I  have  derived  thence  great  fame  through  the  whole
earth.  The  class  of  the  learned  knows  of  Naso,  and  ventures
to  reckon  him  among  those  men  that  it  is  not  ashamed  of.

This  house,  ^en,  beloved  by  the  Muses,  falls  ruined  through
but  one  error,  though  that  was  no  slight  one ;  and  it  has  so
fallen,  that  it  can  rise  again,  if  only  the  wrath  of  the  offended
Ceesar  should  be  mitigated,  whose  clemency,  in  the  case  of  my
punishment,  has  been  so  extreme,  that  it  is  less  severe  than  I
had  apprehended.  My  life  was  granted  me,  and  thy  anger
stopped  short  of  death.  Prince,  that  hast  thus  used  thy  power
wim  moderation.  There  still  remains  to  me,  as  thou  didst  not
take  it  away,  my  paternal  property,  as  though  the  gift  of  my
life  was  too  small.  Thou  didst  not  condemn  my  deeds  by  the
decree  of  the  Senate,  nor  was  my  banishment  pronounced  by
a  commissioned  jud^e."  Censuring  me  in  words  of  sadness
(as  becomes  a  Prince),  thou  thyself  hast  avenged,  as  is  proper,
my  offence  against  thee.  Add,  too,  that  the  edict,  although
terrible  and  tibreatening,  was  stiU  fiill  of  mercy  in  the  designa-
tion of  the  punishment;  for  in  it  I  am  called  not  an  ''exile,''  but
merely  one  "removed,"*  and  but  few  words  are  employed  mpro-
nouncing  my  destiny.  There  is,  in  truth,  no  punishment  more
weighty  to  a  man  of  principle,  and  who  retains  his  senses,  than

'  Commiationed  judge,'] — Vcr.  132.  The  *  judices  select!'  were  se-
lected by  the  city  Pnetor,  according  to  the  Lex  Aurelia,  from  the  three
classes  of  the  Senators,  the  Equites,  and  the  Tribuni  ^rarii.  From  these
dasses  a  body  of  350,  (ht,  according  to  some  yrriters,  450  men  was  selected,
and  from  these,  the  numbers  of  *  judices'  requisite  for  the  trial  of  each  par-
ticular case  was  chosen  by  lot.

*  One  removed.'] — ^Ver.  137.  This  is  the  only  translation  that  can  be
given  for  the  word  *  relegatus,'  which,  while  it  implied  removal  from  one's
country,  did  not  necessarily  imply  any  thing  more,  such  as  loss  of  dric
rights  and  of  property,  which  were  the  consequences  of  <  exilium.'  '  Re-
legatio'  was  of  two  kinds ;  the  less  severe  only  forbade-  residence  in  some
particular  place,  while  the  other  kind  confined  the  person  condemned  to
it  to  one  spot,  and  no  other. The  latter  was  the  fate  of  the  poet.


y  Google


B*  II.]  OE, LAMSin?  or  OTQ).  279

to  haye  displeased  so  great  a  personage.  But  even  a  Divinity
is  wont  sometimes  to  be  pacified ;  the  day  is  wont  to  proceed
in  its  brightness  when  the  clouds  are  dispersed.  I  have  beheld
the  elm,  laden  with  the  leafy  vines,  which  had  been  struck  by  the
dreadful  lightnings  of  Jove.  Though  thou  thyself  forbid  me
to  hope,  yet  hope  I  will ;  and  this  alone  t;an  I  do,  even  against
thy  commands.

Great  is  the  hope  that  I  entertain,  when  I  consider  thee,
0  most  merciful  Prince!  When  I  reflect  upon  my  lot,  my
hope  vanishes.  But  as,  when  the  winds  ruffle  the  sea,  their
rage  is  not  equal,  nor  their  blasts  always  the  same,  but  some-
times they  are  lulled,  and  with  intermissions  they  are  at  rest,
and  you  would  suppose  that  they  had  rid  themselves  of  their
violence ;  so  do  my  apprehensions  depart,  return,  and  fluctuate,
and  both  give  and  deny  me  the  hope  of  appeasing  thee.

By  the  Gods  above,  then,  who  both  can  and  will  give  thee
length  of  days,  if  only  they  are  attached  to  the  Roman  name ;
by  thy  country,  which  is  safe  and  free  from  cares,  with  thee
for  its  Parent,  of  which  but  lately  I  formed  a  part,  as  one
of  its  people ;  so  may  the  love  of  the  grateful  City,  thy  due,
of  which,  both  for  thy  deeds  and  for  thy  disposition,  thou  art  so
deserving,  attend  thee.  May  Livia,  who  was  deserving  of  none
but  thee  for  her  husband,  with  thee,  complete  the  number  of
her  years  as  thy  companion.  Were  she  not  in  existence,  a  single
life  would  then  befit  thee  ;  for  no  one  would  there  be,  worthy
for  thee  to  be  h^  husband.  And  while  thus  thou  dost  flourish,
may  thy  son  fleurish  too ;  and  may  he,  one  day,  full  of  years,
rale  this  empire,  in  company  with  thee,  more  aged  than  kim^
self,  *  And  may  thy  grandsons,^®  that  youthful  Constellation,
foUow  in  the  steps  of  thee,  and  of  their  father,  as  already/  they
do.  May  Victory  also,  always  attached  to  ihj  camp,  show
herself  ever  nigh  at  hand,  and  may  she  attend  the  well-known
standards:  may  she,  too,  o'ershadow  with  her  wings  the
Aosonian  chieftain,  and  may  she  place  the  laurel  wreaths  on
his  beauteous  locks.  By  him  thou  wagest  the  war,  in  his  per-
son dost  thou  now  fight ;  to  him  dost  thou  entrust  thy  mighty
destinies,  and  thy  Gods.  In  one  half  of  thyself  dost  thou
here  present  look  upon  this  City ;  in  the  other  half,  thou  art  far

^  Thy  ^ondwwM.]— Ver.  167.  This  is  in  allusion  to  Drusus,  the  son
of  Tiberius,  himself  the  adopted  son  of  Augustus ;  and  Germanicus,  the
nephew  of  Tiberius,  who  had  adopted  him,  in  accordance  with  the  com-
mands of  Augustus.


y  Google


280  THE  TBISTIi.;  [b-u.

away,  and  art  can^g  on  the  dreadfnl  warfare.  E'en  so  mij
he  return  to  thee  a  conqueror  from  a  subdued  enemy,  and  Tm
he  be  resplendent  aloft,  with  his  steeds  decked  with  trntmpkd
garlands.

Spare  me,  I  pray,  and  lay  aside  thy  bolts,  those  cruel
weapons — ^weapons,  alas !  but  too  well  known  to  me  !  Spare
me.  Father  of  thy  country !  and  do  not,  in  forgetfnlness  of
this  title,  deprive  me  of  the  hope  of  appeasing  thee  one  day.
But  I  pray  not  to  return ;  although  *tis  Vorthy  of  belief  that
the  great  Gods  have  often  granted  favours  greater  than  those
that  have  been  asked  for.  If  thou  wouldst  grant  a  more  tole-
rable place  for  my  exile,  and  at  a  less  distance,  then  in  a  great
degree  would  my  punishment  be  alleviated.  I  am  enduring
the  greatest  agony,  thrust  forth  in  the  midst  of  our  enemies ;
and  no  one  is  there  in  banishment  at  a  greater  distance  firom
his  country.

Sent,  in  soHtude,  aa  far  aa  the  mouth  of  the  sevenfold
Danube^  I  am  oppressed  with  cold  under  the  icy  sky  of  the
Parrhasian  virgin.  The  lazyges  and  the  Colchians,  and  the
Meterean  race"  and  the  Getce  are  scarcely  divided ^cwt  me  by
the  waters  of  the  Danube  between  us;  and  where  others
have  been  banished  by  thee  for  a  cause  more  weighty,  a  more
distant  land  has  been  assigned  to  no  one  of  them  t£an  hcu  been
to  myself.  Nothing  is  there  beyond  this  region^  but  cold  and
the  foe,  and  the  wave  of  the  sea  which  unites  in  firm  ice.  Thus
fax  is  the  Roman  portion  of  the  left  side  of  the  Euzine  ;  the
Bastemee^'  and  the  Sauromatse  occupy  our  neighbourhood.
This  land  is  the  remotest  under  Ausonian  sway,  and  is  hardly
situate  within  the  limits  of  thy.  empire.  A  suppliant,  I  entreat
thee  to  send  me  hence  to  a  place  of  safety,  that  quiet  may  not  be
withheld  from  me  as  well  as  my  country;  that  I  may  not  have
to  dread  the  nations  from  which  the  Ister  is  no  good  defence,

"  The  Meterean  rac«.]— Ver.  191.  The  lazyges  were  a  people  of  Sar-
matia.  The  Colchians  here  referred  to  were  probably  a  colony  founded  by
the  people  of  Colchis  who  pursued  Medea,  but  being  unable  to  overtake
her,  settled  in  the  vicinity  of  Tomi.  The  Metereans,  or,  more  probably,  the
Neureans,  which  is  supposed  to  be  the  correct  reading,  were  a  nation  liying
near  the  vicinity  of  the  river  Borysthenes,  now  the  Dnieper.  The  Getas
lived  in  the  country  lying  to  the  east  of  Pontus.

^  The  Basterna.^'^Veu  198.  This  nation  lived  near  the  Danube.  Ta-
citus calls  them  the  Peucini,  and  is  in  doubt  whether  to  number  them
among  the  tribes  of  Germany  or  of  Sarmatia.  The  name  *  Sarmatian,'
was  applied  in  general  to  all  the  tribes  living  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the
Borysthenes.


y  Google


B.  II.]  OB,  LAMiKT  or  onv,  281

and  that,  a  citizen  of  thine,  I  may  not  be  captured  by  the  enemy.
Justice  forbids  that  any  one  bom  of  Latian  blood  should  endure
the  fetters  of  the  barbarian,  while  the  Ceesars  are  in  safety.

Although  two  charges,  my  verses  and  my  mistake,  wrought
my  ruin,  yet  the  guilt  of  this  latter  action  must  be  suppressed
in  silence  by  me.  For  I  am  unworthy,  even  by  the  allusion,
to  renew  thy  wound,  0  Caesar,  whom  it  is  far  too  much  to  have
offended  even  once.

The  other  part  remains  to  be  spoken  of,  in  which,  impeached
on  a  base  accusation,  I  am  convicted  as  the  teacher  of  foul
adultery. It  is  possible,  then,  that  the  minds  of  the  Gods  can
sometimes  be  deceived;  and  are  not  many  things  too  humble  for
thy  observation  ? Just  as  there  is  not  time  for  Jove  to  attend
to  trifling  matters  while  he  looks  at  the  same  moment  upon
the Deities and  the  heavens  on  high, so, while  thou  art
looking  around  upon  the  earth,  that  depends  upon  thee,  things
of  less  consequence  escape  thy  consideration. Wouldst  thou
deign  forsooth,  0  Prince,  abandoning  thy  high  position,  to  read
verses  composed  in  the  unequal  measure  ?  *^ It  is  no  weight  so
trifling  of  the  Roman  name,  that  presses  upon  thee,  and  no
burden  so  Hght  is  supported  by  thy  shoulders  that  thou  couldst
occupy  thy  godlike  majesty  with  my  silly  trifles,  and  exa-
mine with  tlnne  own  eyes  my  idle  productions. At  one  mo-
ment, Pannonia,  at  another,  the  Illyrian  region,  is  to  be  sub-
daed  by  thee ;  and  now  the  Rheetian  and  the  Thracian  arms
give  grounds  for  apprehension.  At  another  time,  the  Armenian
sues  for  peace  ;  and  now  the  Parthian  horseman,  with  trem-
bling hand,  holds  out  to  thee  the  bow  and  the  captured  stand-
ards. At  another  time,  Grermany  feels  that  thou  hast  grown
youug  again  in  thy  offspring,  and  in  the  place  of  the  great
Ceesar,  another  Csesar  conducts  the  war. In  fine,  what  never
happened  before,  in  the  case  of  so  great  a  whole,  there  is  no
port  of  thy  empire  that  is  insecure ;  the  City  also,  the  care
of  thy  laws,  and  attention  to  the  public  morals,  which  thou
wishest  to  resemble  thy  own,  fatigue  thee. That  leisure,  which
thou  affordest  to  nations,  faUs  not  to  thy  lot,  and  with  many,
thou  art  waging  war  destructive  of  repose.
Ought  I,  then,  to  be  surprised  if,  oppressed  by  the  weight  of

"  The  unequal  measure.'] — Ver.  220.  Namely,  Elejpac  verse,  which
consists  of  an  Hexameieri  or  six  feet  line,  alternately  with  a  Pentameter,  or
line  of  five  feet.


y  Google


282  THE TBISTLl;  |  B.  Ii.

matten  so  important,  thou  liast  neyer  perused  these  pastiines  of
mine  ?  But  ^  (and  would  it  had  been  so !)  thou  hadst  perchance
had  leisure,  thou  wouldst  in  reading  it  have  found  nothing
criminal  in  my  Art  of  Love.  I  confess  that  these  are  not
writings  mited  to  a  graye  brow,  and  are  not  worthy  to  be
read  by  a  Prince  so  great ;  but  they  are  not,  on  that  account,
contrary  to  the  precepts  of  the  laws ;  and  they  are  for  the
edifying  of  the  Roman  women.  That  thou  mayst  not  doubt
to  whom  I  address  my  writings,  one  little  book  of  the  three
has  these  four  lines  : —

'*  Be  ye  afar,  ye  with  the  Httle  fillets  on  your  hair,  the  mark
of  chastity;  and  thou  long  flounce, ^^  which  concealest  the  mid-
dle of  the  foot ;  we  will  sing  nought  but  what  is  lawful,  and
thefts  allowable  ;  and  in  my  song  there  shall  be  nothing  that
is  criminal."  And  have  I  not  scrupulously  removed  from  this
Art  of  Love  those  whom  the  lengthened  gown,  and  the  assump-
tion of  the  fillet,  forbid  to  be  brought  in  contact  with  it  ?

But  still, "  the  matron  may  make  use  of  ^e  arts  that  belong
to  others;  and  eyen  though  she  be  not  taught,  she  has  the  means
of  gaining  information.  Let  the  matron,  then,  read  nothing
at  all,  because,  from  eyery  poem  she  can  receive  instruction
how  to  misbehaye.  Whatever  she  glances  upon,  if  she  is  at  all
inclined  to  sin,*'  thence  will  she  adapt  her  morals  to  crime.  Let
her  take  up  the  Annals  ;*^  nothing  is  more  uninviting  than  them :
yet,  in  truth,  there  wiU  she  read  how  Ilia  became  a  mother.
Let  her  take  up  the  book  in  which  the  "ancestress  of  the  line  of
^neas  "  comes  first;"  she  will  find  how  the  genial  Venus  be-

**  Long  Jlounee.'] — ^Ver.  248.  The  Roman  matrons  wore  abroad  flounce
with  wide  folds,  sewed  to  the  bottom  of  the  dress,  and  reaching  to  the
instep.  The  use  of  it  was  indicative  of  regard  to  modesty  and  propriety  of
manners.

^  But  atiU.'} — Yer.  253^  He  implies  that  Aug^ostus  is  making  this  ob-
jection, which  he  endeavours  to  answer,  though,  we  must  confess,  not  very
successfully^

»«  Inclined  to  sin.'] — ^Ver.  257.  Or,  in  Pope's  words,  more  famed  than
gallant,  *  is  at  heart  a  rake.'

V  The  Annals.'] — Ver.  259.  These,  containing  nothing  beyond  a  mere
table  of  events  connected  with  the  Roman  people,  written  in  ancient  and
uncouth  language,  would  not  be  very  likely  to  attract  the  attention  of  one
in  search  of  love  stories.  Yet  even  these,  he  says,  to  the  impure  in  mind,
would  be  not  quite  unproductive  of  niu'ture  for  the  prurience  of  their
thoughts.

"  ^neoM  eomee  firat.]'^y&t.  261.  Some  suppose  that  he  here  alludes
to  the  ^neid  of  Virgil. That  does  not  appear  to  be  the  fact. He  rather


y  Google


B.  II.]  OB,  LAMINT  OF  OTID.  283

came  tihe  anoestress  of  those  descaidants.  I  will  descend
low^  (if  only  I  may  be  allowed  to  proceed  in  order),  to  show
that  eyery  kmd  of  poetry  can  injure  the  mind.  Yet^  for  that
reason,  eyery  book  should  not  be  condemned.  That  thing  is
of  no  use  which  is  not  able  to  hurt  as  wdl.  What  is  there  more
us^ul  than  fire  ?  Yet,  if  any  one  endeayours  to  bum  a  house,
itis  with  fire  that  he  proyides  his  nvsh  hands.  The  healing  art
sometimes  takes  away  health,  at  other  times,  bestows  it;  and  it
shows  what  herb  is  wholesome,  and  what  is  injurious.  Both  the
cut-throat  and  the  wary  trayell^  is  ready girtwith  the  sword;  but
the  one  plans  treachery,  the  other  carries  a  protection  for  him-
self. Eloquence  is  taught  to  plead  the  cause  of  the  innocent;
yet  it  protects  the  guilty,  and  presses  hard  on  the  guiltless.

So,  then,  it  will  be  clear,  that  my  yerses,  if  they  are
read  in  a  proper  spirit,  can  injure  no  one.  But  whoeyer  it
is  that  deriyes  any  idea  of  yiciousness  from  them,  he  is  in
the  wrong,  and  aetracts  too  much  from  the  credit  of  my
writmgs.  Suppose,  howeyer,  that  I  confess  it :  the  games''
as  well  afford  incentiyes  to  yice.  Order,  then,  the  whole  of  the
theatres  to  be  swept  away,  which  haye  giyen  to  many  a  one  an
opportunity  for  wickedness,  when  the  sand  of  Malrs  is  be-
sprinkled on  the  hard  ground.  Let  the  Circus  be  abolished:
the  Hcence  of  the  Circus  is  unsafe ;  here  sits  the  girl  by  the
side  of  some  strange  man.  Why  are  any  porticos  left  open,
when  some  women  walk  in  them,  that  their  loyers  may  meet
them  there?  What  spot  is  there  more  yenerable  than  the
temples  ?  If  any  woman  has  a  turn  for  criminal  pursuits,  let
her  ayoid  these  as  well.  When  she  shall  be  standing  in  the
temple  of  Joye,  there,  in  his  temple,  will  it  occur  to  her  how
noany  were  made  moUiers  by  that  God.  It  will  occmr  to  her,
who  pays  respect  to  the  neighbouring  temple  of  Juno,  how  that
Goddess  was  yexed  by  many  a  concubine.  On  beholding
Pallas,  she  will  enquire  why  the  Virgin  brought  up  Encthonius,
who  deriyed  his  being  from  a  criminal  attempt.  Suppose  she
enters  the  temple  of  mighty  Mars,  thy  own  gift,  there,  before  his

alliides  to  the  poem  of  Lucretius,  which  commences  "with  the  very  "words
here  used  hy  him, '  ^neadum  genitrix/  and  in  which  the  poet  expatiates
largely  upon  the  attributes  of  Venus,  or  the  creative  power,  a  subject
wluch  the  £neid  does  not  profess  to  treat  of.

^*  The  games.'] — Ver.  280. He  alludes  to  the  extreme  licentiousness
of  the  theatricad  representations,  which  were  sanctioned  by  law.


y  Google


284  THB  TBI8TIA.;  [m.n.

doors,  BtandBVenns,  in  Gonjanctionwithlfar«,  the  Avenger.  Sit-
ting in  the  temple  of  Ins,  she  will  ask  why  the  daughter  of  Satom
drove  her  over  die  Ionian  and  the  Bosphorean  seas.  In  the  case
of  Venus,  Anchises;  in  that  of  Diana,  the  Latmian  hero;^  and  in
the  case  of  Ceres,  Jasius,^  will  have  to  be  made  mention  of.  All
these  are  able  to  lead  perverted  minds  astray,  and  yet  they  are  all
standing  safe  on  dieir  sites.  But  the  first  page  warns  the  vir-
tuous matrons  away  from  the  Art  of  Love,  written  for  the
wanton  onlv.  Whoever  breaks  in  by  force,  where  the  priest
does  not  allow  her  to  eo,  forthwith,  on  that  account  is  she
accused  of  a  crime  that  is  forbidden.  But  it  is  not  a  crime  to
peruse  wanton  poems,  although  females  of  virtue  may  there
read  many  things  not  to  be  put  in  practice.  Ofttimes  doea
the  matron  of  severe  aspect^  look  upon  the  females  naked,
and  practising  each  kind  of  indelicate  posture.  The  eyes  of
the  Vestals  behold  the  persons  of  the  wanton,  nor  has  that
been  any  ground  for  punishment  by  their  master.

But  why  is  there  in  my  poetry  an  excess  of  wantonness  ?  or
why  does  my  book  persiude  any  one  to  love  ?  That  it  is  no-
thing less  than  a  sin,  and  a  manifest  fault,  ipust  be  confessed.
I  gneve  for  thus  perverting  my  talents  and  my  judgment.
Why  was  not  rather  that  Troy,  which  feU  by  the  weapons  of
Argos,  harassed  once  again  in  my  verses  ?  Why  was  1  silent
about  Thebes,  and  the  mutual  slaughter  of  the  brothers?^
and  the  seven  gates,  each  of  them  under  its  chief?  War-
like Rome,  too,  was  not  sparing  of  material  for  me ;  it  is  a
labour  of  affection  to  recite  tbe  exploits  of  one's  country.
Lastly,  Caesar,  inasmuch  as  thou  hast  filled  all  places  with  thy
glorious  deeds,  one  portion  selected  from  many  might  have
been  sung  by  me ;  as  the  brilliant  rays  of  the  sun  attract
the  eyes,  so  might  thy  deeds  have  attracted  my  feelings.

^  The  Latmian  hero.'] — Ver.  299.  Endymion,  vho  was  beloved  by
Diana,  is  tbus  called,  from  Latmtu,  a  mountain  of  Caiia.

2^  JaeiusJ] — ^Ver.  300.  He  was  the  son  of  Jupiter  and  Electra,  and  the
brother  of  Dardanus  and  Armonia,  the  wife  of  Cadmus.  By  his  wife
Cybele  he  was  the  futher  of  Ck>rybantu8.  The  story  was,  that  Plutus  was
the  fruit  of  an  adulterous  intrigue  between  Ceres  and  Jasius,  who  was
struck  by  the  thunderbolts  of  Jove  for  his  audacity.

^Severe  ojpeo^.]  —  Ver.  311.  It  is  hardly  credible  that  matrons  of
character  can  have  been  the  willing  spectators  of  the  obscene  representa-
tions of  the  Floralia,  to  which  allusion  is  here  made.

^  The  brothere.l^'VeT,  319.  He  alludes  to  Eteocles  and  Polynices,  the
sons  of  (Edipus,  who  slew  each  other  in  single  combat.


y  Google


B.  n.]  OB,  LAMBKX  OP  OTID.  285

Unjustly  am  I  accused. A  humble  field  is  tended  by  me ;
the  other  were  a  work  requiring  great  fertility  of  invention,
K,  perchance,  one  ventures  to  sport  on  a  little  pond  in  a  small
boat,  that  is  no  reason  for  trusting  one's-self  on  the  ocean.
Perhaps  (and  of  that  I  am  doubtful)  I  am  well  enough  suited
for  trifling  compositions,  and  am  adapted  for  slight  produc-
tions ;  but  if  ^ou  shouldst  order  me  to  sing  of  the  Giants  sub-
dued by  the  bolts  of  Jove,  the  weight  would  exceed  my  strength
for  the  attempt. It  belongs  to  a  mind  richly  endowed  to  treat
of  the  migh^  deeds  of  Ceesar,  lest  the  work  be  overpowered
by  its  subject. And  yet  I  made  the  attempt ;  but  I  seemed  to
be  detracting  from  thy  feune,  and  unrighteously  to  be  a  detri-
ment to  thy  virtues. Again  I  resorted  to  my  hghter  labours,
my  youthful  compositions :  and  with  a  fictitious  passion  was
my  breast  smitten. I  wish,  indeed,  that  I  had  not ;  but  my
destiny  drew  me  on,  and  I  exercised  my  ingenuity  to  my  own
destruction.  Oh !  wretched  being  that  I  am,  that  ever  I  received
instruction !  that  my  parents  taught  me,  and  that  any  letter
ever  arrested  my  eyes  f This  wantonness  rendered  me  hateful
to  thee,  by  reason  of  my  hooks  on  the  Art  of  Love,  which  thou
didst  suppose  had  been  aimed  against  ties  forbidden  to  their
influence.  But,  under  my  instruction,  the  matrons  did  not  leam
furtive  loves ;  for  no  one  is  able  to  teach  that  of  which  he
knows  but  little. I  have  so  composed  my  love  tales  and  my
light  poems,  that  no  evil  story  ever  wounded  my  reputation,
l^ere  is  no  husband  of  the  middle  class  that  is  in  doubt
whether  he  himself  is  really  a  father  through  any  fault  of  mine.
Believe  me,  my  morals  are  far  different  from  those  of  my
poem ;  my  life  is  one  of  decency :  my  Muse  is  a  sportive  one.
A  great  part,  also,  of  my  labours,  that  is  untrue  and  fictitious,
has  allowed  itself  more  hcense  than  ever  its  author  did. My
book,  too,  is  no  index  of  my  mind,  but  is  an  honourable  amuse-
ment, that  presents  many  things  in  apt  expression  for  tickling
the  ear.  If  thus  judged,  Accius**  would  be  a  savage ;  Terence
would  be  a  ^utton  ;^  those  who  sing  of  fierce  wars  must
needs  be  ever  embroiled.

**  ^ect««.]— Ver.  359.  He  was  one  of  the  older  Roman  poets,  who
wrote  seyeral  tragedies,  besides  translating  some  of  those  of  Sophocles  into
the  Latin  language.  His  tragedies  were  written  in  rugged  and  uncouth
language,  and  this,  together  with  the  humble  subjects  they  treated  of,
would  form  a  ground  for  the  epithet  suggested  by  the  poet.

>  A  gluttonJl—Yer.  359. Terence,  the  Roman  comic  writer,  was  par-


y  Google


2SG  THS  TSIBTIA.;  [b.  u.

In  fine,  I  am  not  the  only  one  who  has  snng  of  yoluptaous
amoun  ;  yet  I  am  the  only  one  that  has  received  punishmeot
for  his  love  compositions.  What  precepts  did  the  Teian  muse^
of  Jnmcreen,  the  Lyric  old  bard,  give,  except  how  to  unite  loTe
with  abundance  of  wine?  What  did  Leisbian  Sappho^  do,
but  teach  the  girls  how  to  love  ?  And  yet  Sappho  was  safe,
and  he  was  unharmed.  And  to  thee,  descendant  of  Bottoa,^
it  was  no  injury  that  thou  thyself  didst  often  confess  thy  gaieties
to  the  reader.  There  is  no  play  of  the  pleasing  Menander^
without  an  amour,  and  yet  he  is  accustomed  to  be  read  by
youths  and  yirgins.  The  Iliad  itself,  what  is  it  but  the  ease
ofK  base  adulteress,  about  whom  there  was  a  strife  between
the  lover  and  the  husband  ?  What  happens  in  it  before  the
flame  conceived  for  Chryseis?  and  how  did  the  ravished
damsel  cause  anger  between  the  chieftains?  Or  what  is
the  Odyssey,  but  the  ease  of  one  woman,  sought,  while  her
husband  is  away,  by  a  host  of  suitors,  to  gratify  their  pas-
sion ?  Who  but  the  Mseonian  hard  tells  the  story  of  Venus
and  Mars  fastened  together,  and  their  two  persons  caught  in
a  polluted  bed?  Whence  should  we  learn,  but  from  the  show-
ing of  great  Homer,  how  two  Goddesses^  fell  in  love  with  their
guest?  Tragedy  surpasses  every  style  of  composition  in
seriousness  ;  this  as  well,  always  has  love  for  its  subject.  For
what  was  there  in  the  azse  o^  Hippolytus,  but  the  flame  of  his
blinded  step-mother?  By  the  love  of  her  own  brother  is
Canace celebrated. What besides? Did  not the  son  of

ticularly  successful  in  depicting  parasites,  gluttons,  and  selfish  young  men
devoted  solely  to  their  own  pleasures.

"^  The  Tdan  MuseS] — ^Ver.  364.  Anacreon,  a  Grecian  lyric  poet,  was
a  native  of  Teos,  a  city  of  Ionia,  in  Asia.  Some  of  his  poems  have  sur-
vived to  our  times.

*^  Lesbian  Sappho.'] — ^Ver.  366.  Sappho  was  a  writer  of  love  songs
of  a  Ucentious  character.  She  was  a  native  of  Lesbos,  an  island  in  the
i£^an  sea.

*  Descendant  of  -BaWtw.]— Ver.  367.  He  alludes  to  the  poet  Calli-
machus,  who  was  descended  from  Battus,  the  founder  of  Cyrene.  He
sung  the  praises  of  his  mistress,  Lyde.

2^  Menander."] — Ver.  369.  He  was  an  Athenian  comic  poet  of  eminence.
His  works  are  lost,  with  the  exception  of  some  fragments ;  but  Terence  is
supposed  to  have  borrowed  largely  from  them.

^  Two  Goddesses,]— \eT,  380.  Calypso  and  Circe,  who,  as  Homer
tells,  successively  fell  in  love  with  Ulysses.


y  Google


B.  H.]  OB, lAMETXT  OF  OTID. '  287

Tantalus,  with  bis  ivory  limb,  carry  ber  of  Pisa"  witb  Phrygian
steeds,  while  Love  gave  speed  to  bis  chariot.  Grief,  caused
by  blighted  love,  made  the  mother  stain  the  steel  with  her
children's  blood.  Love  suddenly  changed  the  king  and  his
concubine  into  birds,  and  her  who,  even  now,  a  mother,  laments
her  Itys.  If  a  wicked  brother  had  not  loved  Aerope,^  we
should  not  read  of  the  horses  of  the  Sun  turning  back.  The
impious  ScyUa,  too,  would  not  have  obtained  the  buskin  of
tragedy,^  had  not  love  cut  off  the  locks  of  her  father.  You
who  read  of  Electra  and  of  Orestes,  deprived  of  reason,
read,  too,  of  the  crime  of  ^gisthus,  and  of  the  daughter  of
Tyndarus.  And  what  shall  I  say  of  the  grim  subduer  of
the  Chimsera,  whose  death  a  deceitful  hostess^  was  nearly
causing  ?  Why  should  I  mention  Hermione  ?  Why  the  virgin
daughter  of  Schceneus  ?^  And  why  thee,  priestess  of  Phoebus,
loved  by  the  Prince  of  Mycenae  ?  Why  mention  Danae  and
her  daughter-in-law,**  and  the  mother  of  Lyseus  ?"  And  why,
Hsemon,  and  her,  for  whom**  two  nights  were  united? Why

^  Her  of  Pitch] — ^Ver.  386.  Pelops,  the  son  of  Tantalus,  having  con-
quered (Enomaus,  carried  off  his  daughter,  Hippodamia,  from  Pisa,  a  city
of  Arcadia,  and  made  her  his  wife.  His  steeds  were  Psilla  and  Harpina,
which  he  brought  from  Phrygia.

*  Aerope,"] — Ver.  .391.  She  was  the  wife  of  Atreus,  and  was  guilty  of
incest  with  her  brother  Thyestes.

^  The  buskin  of  traffedp.^—Ver  393.  The  *  cothurnus,'  or  buskin,
was  worn  by  the  performers  of  tragedy,  to  render  the  person  taller,  and
more  august  in  appearance.  Hence,  the  expression  is  often  used  to
denote  a  lofty  and  florid  style  of  composition.

^  A  deceitful  Acwtow.]— Ver.  398.  Sthenobcea,  the  wife  of  PrcEtus,
being  unable  to  captivate  Bellerophon,  brought  a  false  accusation  against
him,  and  he  only  escaped  through  the  known  purity  of  his  character.

^  Daughter  qf  Sohceneus.'] — Ver.  399.  Atalanta  was  the  daughter  of
Schoeneus,  King  of  the  Isle  of  Scyros.  Hermione  was  the  daughter  of
Menelaus  and  Helen,  and  was  betrothed  to  Orestes,  the  son  of  Agamemnon.

^  Daughter-in-law.'] — Ver.  401.  Andromeda,  who  was  the  wife  of
Perseus,  the  son  of  Danae.

"  Mother  of  Lyaua.] — Ver.  401.  This  was  Semele,  the  mother  of
Lyaeus,  or  Bacchus.  Haemon  was  the  lover  of  Antigone,  and  when  she
was  put  to  death  by  the  order  of  Creon,  he  stabbed  himself  at  her  tomb.

**  Her  for  whom,] — Ver.  402.  He  here  alludes  to  Alcmena,  the  wife  of
Amphitryon,  who  was  the  mother  of  Hercules  by  Jupiter.  Wiitu  the  God
was  enjoying  her  society,  he  is  said  to  have  united  two  successive  nights.
Admctus  was  the  son-in-kw  of  Pelias,  having  married  his  daughter
Alcestis.


y  Google


288  THE  TBISTU.;  [B.U.

the  son-in-law  of  Pelias?  Why  Theseus  ?  And  why  Prote-
nlausy  hhn  who  was  the  first  of  the  Greeks  to  touch  the
Trojan  ground  ?  To  these  he  added  lole,'  and  the  mother  of
Pyrrhus  ;  the  wife  of  Hercules  as  well,  Hylas,*^  and  the  Trojaa
hoy.  Time  would  fail  me,  should  I  recount  the  loves  of
Tragedy,  and  scarcely  would  the  whole  of  my  hook  contain
the  bare  names.

Tragedy,  too,  is  distorted  by  obscene  jokes,  and  contains
many  expressions  which  violate  decency.  It  is  no  reproach,  too,
to  the  author,  who,  in  his  verses,  has  represented  Achilles  as
in  love,  and  stopping  short  in  his  warlike  deeds.  Aiistides
connected  with  his  name  the  crimes  of  Miletus;  and  yet
Aristides  was  not  banished  from  his  city.  Nor  yet  was  Eubius,
the  compiler  of  impure  stories,  who  described  how  abortions
are  produced.  Nor  was  he  exiled  who  lately  composed  the
Sybaritic  poem ;  nor  yet  those  who  have  not  kept  silence  on
their  own  intrigues.  These  are  even  mingled  with  the  memo-
rials of  the  learned,  and  by  the  munificence  of  our  Princes  are
they  made  public.

And  not  only  by  foreign  armour  shall  I  be  defended ;  the
Roman  writings  as  well  have  many  a  wanton  passage.  Ajs  the
grave  Ennius  sang  of  Mars  with  his  own  mouth,  Ennius  excel-
ling in  talent,  yet  rude  in  his  management  ofit\  as  Lucretius,
toOf  explains  the  principles  of  blazing  fire,  and  prophesies'  that
the  threefold  work  will  one  day  perish,^^  so,  too,  many  a  time,
was  his  sweetheart,  whose  fictitious  name  was  Lesbia,  sung  of  by
the  wanton  Catullus.^  And,  not  content  with  that,  he  published
many  of  his  amours,  in  which  he  himself  confessed  his  own  adul-
tery. Equal,  too,  in  degree^  and  like  in  character^  was  the  licen-

30  /o/tf.]— -Ver.  405.  She  was  the  daughter  of  Eurytus,  King  of  (Echalia,
and  eloped  with  Hercules  after  he  had  slain  her  father.  Deidamia,  the
daughter  of  Lycomedes,  King  of  Scyros,  was  the  mother  of  Pyrrhus  hy
Achilles.

^  HyUu^ — Ver  406.  He  was  a  hoy  beloved  by  Hercules;  being
lost  by  him  in  Ionia,  he  was  supposed  to  have  been  changed  into  a  foun-
tain.

«i  WiJIX  we  day  j>«mA.]  — Ver.  426.  The  object  of  the  writings  of
Lncretius  is  to  prove  that  the  world  is  not  eternal,  but  that  matter  must
perish.  By  the  *  threefold  work,'  he  means  the  earth,  the  sea,  and  the
heavens.

^  Co/uOiis.]— Ver.  427.  Catullus  was  a  Roman  poet,  some  of  whose
writings  have  come  down  to  our  time.  He  celebrates  his  mistress,  whose
rod  name  was  Clodia,  under  the  epithet  of  Lesbia.


y  Google


B.  II.}  OB,  LAHEKT  OF  OTID.  289

tioasness  of  the  little  Calvns,^  who  revealed  his  stolen  caresses
in  yarious  songs.  Why  shall  I  mention  the  poems  of  Ticida^
and  of  Memmius,  with  whom  names  cannot  he  found  for  their
suhjects,  or  decency  for  their  names,  when  found.  Cinna,
too,  is  the  companion  of  these,  and  Anser,  more  lascivious  even
than  Cinna,  and  the  sportiye  work  of  Comificius,  and  the
similar  one  of  Cato.  Those,  too,  of  whose  hooks,  she  who
before  was  concealed  under  the  name  of  Perilla,  is  the  sub-
ject, called  by  her  own  name  of  Metella.  He  as  well,  who
brought  the  skip  Argo^  into  the  Phasian  waters,  was  not  able  to
be  silent  upon  the  stealthy  joys  of  his  intrigues.  No  less  im-
pure are  the  verses  of  Hortensius,  nor  less  impure  are  those  of
Servius.  Who  could  hesitate  to  follow  the  example  of  names
so  great  ?  Sisenna  translated  Aristides ;  and  yet  it  did  him  no
ham  to  insert  wanton  jests  in  his  history.  It  was  no  disgrace,
too,  to  Oallus  to  sing  of  Lycoris,  but  it  woe,  for  him  not  to
have  held  his  tongue,  when  he  had  taken  too  much  wine.^

TibulluB^^  thinks  it  is  a  difficult  thing  to  beUeve  a  woman
on  her  oath,  and  similarly  with  regard  to  the  denials  she  makes
about  herself  to  her  husband.  He  confesses,  too,  that  he
has  taught  her  how  to  deceive  her  protector:  and  he  says  that
he,  to  lus  sorrow,  has  been  injured  through  his  own  precepts.
He  says  that  he  has  many  a  tune  squeez^  a  hand,  on  the  pre-

^  The  Utile  Calvu8.']'^Y€ir.  431.  Calvus  was  a  Roman  poet  and
orator,  who  contested  the  palm  of  eloquence  with  Cioero.  He  was
the  friend  of  Catullus,  and  was  very  short  in  stature,  whence  his  present
epithet.

**  Tidcfa.]— Ver.  433.  He  was  a  Roman  poet,  who  wrote  Elegiac
verses  in  praise  of  his  mistress  Metella,  under  the  assumed  name  of  Perilla,
Memmius,  Cinna,  Anser,  Comifidus,  and  Cato  were,  all  of  them,  writers
of  a  similar  character.

*  The  $hip  Arffo,] — ^Ver.  439.  Varro  Attacinus,  a  Roman  poet,  wrote
in  praise  of  Leucadia,  his  mistress.  He  wrote  a  poem  on  the  Argonautic
expedition,  in  imitation  of  that  of  Apollonius  Rhoidius.

*  Too  much  wme.'] — ^Ver.  446.  Gallus,  a  Roman  poet,  having  heen
entrusted  with  certain  secrets  of  the  Emperor  Augustus,  hetrayed  them  in
his  moments  of  inebriety,  and  was,  in  consequence,  punished  with  exile
and  confiscation  of  his  property.  He  composed  five  books  in  praise  of  a
damsel,  named  Lycoris.  Sisenna,  above  mentioned,  was  a  learned  orator
and  historian  of  Rome.

^  TibulluM.'] — Ver.  447.  TibuUus  was  a  Roman  poet  of  considerable
merit.  Ovid  idludes  to  the  fact  of  his  having  written  of  his  mistress,  Delia,
to  the  following  effect : — *  She  denies  many  a  thing ;  but  *tis  difficult  to
believe  her ;  for  even  about  me  does  she  make  deniab  to  her  husband.'

V


y  Google


290  THB  TSIBTIi.;  [B.IL

text  as  though  he  wis  praising  the  jewel  or  the  signet  of  Ui
owner.  And,  as  he  teUs,  many  a  time  has  he  conyersed  with
his  fingers  and  with  signs,  and  drawn  the  silent  hints  on
the  surface  of  the  tahle.  He  teaches,  too,  by  means  of  what
extracts  the  paleness  maybe  removed  from  the  features,  which
is  usually  caused  by  the  pressure  of  a  kiss.  Besides,  he  asks
the  too  careless  husband  even  to  watch  him,  that  the  toife  may
have  the  less  chance  of  sinning.  He  knows  at  whom  the  dog
is  barking,  while  he  is  walking  up  and  down  alone  ;  and  why
he  spits  so  many  times,  as  a  signal^  before  the  closed  doors.
And  many  a  precept  does  he  give  for  such  guilty  thefts  ;  he
teaches,  too,  by  what  means  wives  may  systematically  deceive
their  husbands.  And  yet  this  was  no  injury  to  him ;  TibuUiu
is  read,  and  amuses,  and  was  already  weU  known  when  tlioa
wast  made  Prince.  Thou  wilt  find,  too,  the  same  precepts  in
the  pleasing  Propertius  ;^  and  yet  he  was  not  punished  with
the  slightest  dis^^u^.

Of  &ese  I  was  the  successor,  since  honour  bids  me  not  men-
tion many  excellent  i^unes  of  persons  now  Hving.  I  was  not
a£raid,  I  confess,  that  in  the  track  where  so  many  ships  had
gone,  one  would  be  wrecked,  when  the  rest  were  all  saved.

The  skill  has  been  described  by  some,  which  is  requisite  for
playing  at  games  of  hazard,^  and  this  sin  against  our  ancestors
IS  na  small  crime.  They  teach  what  is  the  value  of  the  throws
on  the  dice ;  how  you  may  make  the  most  at  a  throw,  or  how

^  ProperUiu.']  — Yer.  465.  He  was  the  most  graceful  of  all  the  Roman
writers  of  Elegiac  measure ;  but,  like  those  before  mentioned,  amatory  sub-
jects were  his  principal  theme.

*•  Games  of  hajgartU^-^Yer,  471.  *  Alea*  seems  to  have  been  a  term
Implied  to  all  games  involying  hazard,  and  depending  on  chance.  The
'  talus'  was  originally  the  knuckle-bone  of  a  sheep  or  goat.  These  were
imitated,  for  the  purposes  of  gaming,  in  ivory,  gold,  silver,  bronze,  glass,
and  agate.  They  were  played  with  by  women,  boys,  and  old  men.  They
were  originally  used  without  marks,  and,  being  thrown  in  the  air,  were
caught  on  the  back  of  the  hand.  In  later  times  they  were  used  in  games
of  chance,  and  for  that  purpose  bore  numbers.  They  had  four  flat  facet
and  two  curved  ones.  On  the  flat  faces  were  fourteen  points ;  the  numbers
on  the  opposite  sides  being  ace  and  six,  and  three  and  four.  Four  *  talf
were  generally  used,  and  they  were  thrown  from  a  dice-box,  which  was
called  *  fritillus,'  *  turricula,'  *  pyrgus,'  or  *  phimus.'  The  ace,  which  was
called  *  unio,'  was  the  most  unlud^  numbor ;  and,  while  *  Venus'  was  the
highest  cast  of  a  set  of  four  *  tali,'  *  canis'  was  the  name  of  the  worst
throw.  Games  of  chance  were  forbidden  in  the  early  times  of  the  Roman
Rc|»ublic ;  and  the  character  of  a  gamester  was  held  in  extreme  contempt.


y  Google


B.  Til.]  OB, LAMENT  OF  OTID.  291

yon  may  escape  the  losing  numbers ;  how  many  numbers  the
gamester^  8  cube  **  has ;  in  what  manner  it  is  proper  to  throw
when  the  wantmg  number'^  is  called,  and  in  what  manner  to
move  the  throws  ;  how,  too,  the  man  of  the  opposite  colour
proceeds  onward  in  a  straight  line,  when  the  piece  is  lost  that
lies  in  the  middle  between  two  enemies;  how  the  player  may  un-
derstand when  rather  to  follow,  and  how  to  recall  hit  piece  when
advanced ;  that,  as  it  retreats  in  safety,  it  may  not  again  advance
miprotected.  There  is  a  little  board,  provided  with  three
pebbles,  on  which,  to  bring  one's  own  men  in  a  straight  line
gives  the  victory.  And  other  games  there  are  (T  will  not  now
recount  them  all),  which  are  wont  to  waste  a  valuable  thing,
namely ^  our  time.  And  see  how  another  sings  of  the  shape  and
the  throw  of  the  ball;**  another  teaches  the  art  of  swimming ;
another  of  howling  the  hoop.**  The  art  of  dyeing  in  colours  has
been  taught  by  others  ;  and  another  writer  has  laid  down  the
law  for  feasting  and  good  fellowship.  Another  one  points  out
the  clay  from  which  cups  are  made,  and  he  informs  us  what
kind  of  vessel  is  fit  for  the  flowing  wine.  •  Such  sportive  tribes

^  The  gamester's  cwfee.]— Ver.  475.  *  Tessera'  received  its  name  pro-
bably from  the  Greek  word  HaaaptQ^  *  four.'  They  resembled  the  cubes  or
dice  of  the  present  day,  and  were  used  in  sets  of  four.

"  The  wantmg  number.'] — Ver.  475.  This  seems  to  be  the  meaning  of
the  word  '  distanti/  which  has  caused  considerable  doubt  among  the  com-
mutators. The  player,  in  his  anxiety,  seems  in  those  days,  as  now,  to
have  called  for  the  desired  number.  The  poet  appears  to  allude  to  som6
cheating  directions  given  by  the  writer,  used  to  obtain  favourable  casts  by
due  management  of  the  dice,  in  throwing  them.  The  game  of  *  duodecim
scripta,'  or  *  twelve  points,'  was  played  with  *  calculi,'  or  ♦  lapiUi,'  *  coun-
ters,' of  different  colours,  which  were  moved,  according  to  the  throws  of
the  dice,  perhaps  in  a  manner  not  unlike  our  game  of  backgammon ;  the
meaning  of  the  passage  is,  however,  involved  in  considerable  obscurity.

«  The  6atf.]— -Ver.  485.  Games  with  the  *  pila,'  or  •  ball,'  were  those
played  with  the  *  pila  trigonalis ;'  so  called,  probably,  from  the  players
standing  in  a  triangle ;  the  *  foUis'  was  a  lai^  ball  inflated,  and  used  for
football ;  '  paganica'  was  a  similar  one,  but  harder,  being  stuffed  vrith
feathers,  and  was  used  by  the  rustics.  *  Harpastum'  was  a  small  ball
used  by  the  Greeks,  and  was  scrambled  for  as  soon  as  it  came  to  the
ground.

«  The  koop.']—'\ex.  486.  The  hoop  of  the  Roman  boys  was  a  bronze
ring,  which  sometimes  had  bells  attached  to  it.  It  was  impelled  by  meana
of  a  metal  hook  attached  to  a  wooden  handle,  similar  to  that  in  use  at  the
present  day.  The  game  was  borrowed  by  the  Romans  from  the  GreekSf
and  was  one  of  the  exercises  of  the  Gymnasium.

v2


y  Google


292  THE  TBI8TIA.;  Ib.II.

as  these  are  composed  in  the  month  of  smoky  December,  aad
no  one  has  received  injury  from  haying  composed  them.

Deceived  by  these  eannderations^  I  have  made  my  T^rtes
the  reverse  of  sad ;  but  a  sad  retribution  has  been  the  result
of  my  jests.  In  fact,  I  see  not  one  out  of  so  many  writen,
of  wnom  his  Muse  has  been  the  ruin;  I  am  the  only  oae
to  be  found.  But»  suppose  I  had  written  Mimes,^  iri&
their  obscene  jokes,  which  are  always  amenable  to  the  chai^
of  containing  a  love  story?  In  these,  constantly  does  &
spruce  adulterer  strut  about;  and  the  cunning  wife  plays
tricks  upon  her  booby  husband.  The  marriageable  virgin,
the  matron,  the  husband,  the  boy,  are  all  spectators  of  these :
and  a  great  part  of  the  Senate  is  there.  And  it  is  not  enough
for  the  ears  to  be  polluted  with  filthy  language:  the  eye
is  accustomed  to  put  up  with  many  indecent  sights.  When
the  lover  has  outwitted  the  husband  by  any  new  device,
they  clap  aloud,  and  the  victory  is  granted  bun  with  great
applause.  The  less  its  utility,  the  more  lucrative  is  the  stage
to  the  poet,  and  the  Prsetpr  buys'^  abuses  of  such  enormity  at
no  small  cost.  Examine,  Augustus,  the  expenses  of  thy
games ;  many  such  as  these  wit  thou  find  that  have  been
bought  for  thee  at  a  heavy  price.  At  these  thou  hast  been  a
spectator,  and  hast  many  a  time  given  them  for  a  spectacle,  so
kindly  disposed  in  every  way  is  thy  Majesty.  With  thy  own
eyes,  too,  which  all  the  world  follows,  sitting  at  thy  ease,  thou
hast  looked  upon  the  adulteries  of  the  stage.  If  it  is  allowable
to  write  Mimes,  that  imitate  vicious  actions,  a  less  punish-
ment is  surely  due  to  my  case.  Do  their  boards^  ensure  safety
for  this  kind  of  composition,  and  is  the  stage  privileged  to  allow

^  Mimes.'] — Ver.  497.  The  Roman  Mimes  were  either  parodies
and  burlesques  of  serious  circumstances,  or  imitations  of  indecent  and
obscene  occurrences.  They  differed  from  Comedy,  in  consisting  more  of
gestures  and  mimicry  than  of  spoken  dialogue,  which  was  interspersed  in
various  parts  of  the  representation,  while  the  action  continued  uninter-
ruptedly from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  the  piece.  They  ware  originally
exhibited  at  funerals,  when  one  or  more  persons  in  burlesque  represented
the  life  of  the  deceased  person.  They  were  afterwards  pcnf orm^  in  tiie
public  theatres,  at  well  as  in  private  houses.  Decius  Laberius,  and  Publins
Syrus,  were  the  most  distinguished  writers  of  them.

~  The  Prator  6tty».]— Ver.  508. It  was  the  duty  of  the  Pnetor,  at
the  .£dile8,  to  provide  mimes  and  plays  at  the  public  expense,  for  repre-
sentation at  the  games  and  festivals. The  Andria  of  Terence  was  acted  i^
the  Megaleaian  games.
^  "  Their  ioarrft.]— Ver.  517. *  Sua  pulpita.' The  '  pulpitum'


y  Google


•*.  IX.]  OE, LAMENT  OP  OTLD.  293

in  its  Mimes  whatever  it  pleases  ?  My  songs,  as  well,  have
many  a  time  been  represented  in  the  dance  ;^^  many  a  time
have  they  arrested  thy  attention.

As  in  tmth,  in  thy  abode  the  ancient  figures  of  heroes  are
resplendent,  painted  by  the  artist's  hand ;  so,  in  a  certain  spot
there^  there  is  a  little  picture,  which  shows  the  variety  of  pos-
tures and  figures  which  belong  to  Venus.  And  as  the  son  of
Telamon  sits,  expressing  his  anger  in  his  countenance,  and  the
barbarous  mother  ^  is  conceiving  crime  in  her  very  eyes ;  so
dripping  Venus  is  wringing  her  wet  hair  with  her  fingers,  and
seems  but  now  covered  witiii  the  waters  that  gave  her  birth.

Others  recite  warfare,  armed  with  its  blood-stained  weapons ;
some,  too,  sing  the  exploits  of  thy  family,  some  thy  own.
Penurious  nature  confined  me  within  narrow  limits,  and  gave
but  little  strength  to  my  genius.  And  yet  he  wfut  was  the  for*
tonate  author  of  thy  ^neid  introduced  his  arms  and  his  hero^'
to  a  Tynan  intrigue :  and  no  subject  is  more  read  of,  through-
out the  whole  work,  than  love  united  by  unlawfcd  ties.  The
same  poet  had  before,  when  a  youth,  sportively  related  in  his
Terse  the  soft  flames  of  Phillis  and  of  Amaryllis.  I,  long  since,
erred  by  one  composition ;  a  fault  that  is  not  recent  endures  a
pumshment  inflicted  thus  late.  I  had  already  published  my
poems,  when  of  Equestrian  rank,  so  many  times,  according  to
my  privilege,  in  review,  I  passed  thee  unmolested,  who,  at  the
very  time,  was  the  inquirer  into  criminal  charges.  Is  it,  then,
passible  that  the  writings  which,  in  my  want  of  prudence,  I
supposed  would  not  injure  me  when  yoimg,  have  now  been
my  ruin  in  my  old  age?  This  late  vengeance  for  a  work
written  so  long  since,  b  superfluous,  and  the  punishment  is  far
removed  from  the  time  when  it  was  merited.

That  thou  mayst  not,  however,  suppose  that  all  my  works

that  part  of  the  ftage  which  was  nearest  to  the  orchestra,  and  where  the
actors  stood  when  they  were  addressing  the  audience.

^  In  the  donee,"] — Ver.  519.  Love  scenes,  taken  fix>m  the  mythology,
were  acted  in  pantomimic  dance,  to  the  recitation  of  words  written  hy  the
.poets  of  the  day.  This  text  was  called  the  '  canticum,'  and  was  frequently
written  in  the  Greek  tongue.  Ovid  here  shows  that  he  had  heen  the  com
..poser  of  *  cantica  *  for  the  public  amusement.

»  J%e  barbarous  motherJ] — ^Ver.  526.  Medea,  who  slew  her  childreii
in  revenge  against  Jason.  Her  story  has  been  already  referred  to  in  the
Notes.

M  Arms  and  hie  Aero.]— Ver.  534.  He  here  alludes  to  the  commendng
lines  of  the  ^neid  of  Virgil,  'Anna  virumque  cano/


y  Google


294  THE  TmsTiA;  [b.ii«

are  thus  loose>  I  haye  often  fitted  ample  sails^  to  my  bark ;
I  have  written  the  books  of  six  months"  Fasti,  and  themselves
as  many  in  number  :'^  and  each  book  comes  to  an  end  with  its
month.  My  fate  interrupted  that  work  ;  that  work,  too>  de-
dicated under  thy  name,  Caesar,  and  consecrated  to  thee.  I  have
produced  also  a  poem  of  kings^  for  the  tragic  buskin ;  and
that  buskin  employs  such  expressions  as,  in  its  gravity,  it  ought
to  use.  The  transformation,  too,  of  bodies  into  new  shapes
has  been  sung  of  by  me,  although  a  finishing  hand  has  been
wanting  to  the  work.  And  I  wish  that  thou  wouldst  relieve  thy
mind  but  a  little  of  its  anger,  and  order,  at  thy  leisure,  a  few
lines  of  this  work  to  be  read  to  thee.  A  few  lines,  in  which,
conmiencing  from  the  earliest  origin  of  the  world,  I  have
brought  the  work  down,  Csesar,  to  thy  times :  thou  wouldst  then
behold  how  much  spirit  thou  diyself  hast  given  me,  and  with
what  devotion  of  mind  I  sing  of  thee  and  thine.

No  one  have  I  pulled  to  pieces  in  spiteful  verses,  nor  does
my  poetry  contain  a  charge  against  any  one.  In  my  inno-
cence, I  hiave  abstained  from  witticisms  steeped  in  gall ;  not  a
letter  is  there  tainted  with  a  v^oomous  sarcasm.  Among  so
manj  thousands  of  our  people,  so  many  thousands  of  our
writings,  I  am  the  only  one  whose  own  Muse^  has  been  his  ruin.
I  do  not  suppose,  then,  that  any  Roman  will  rejoice  at  my  mis^
fortunes,  but  rather,  that  many  have  taken  them  to  heart.  It
transcends  my  belief,  that  any  one  could  trample  on  me,
when  prostrate,  if  any  regard  has  been  had  to  my  innocence.

On  these  and  other  considerations,  I  entreat  that  thy  divine
Majesty  may  be  moved,  0  Father,  0  thou  care  and  salvation
of  thy  country.  I  pray  not  to  return  to  Ausonia,  except,  per*
haps,  at  a  future  day,  when  thou  shalt  be  prevailed  on,  by  the
lengthened  duration  of  my  punishment.  I  pray  for  a  safer
place  of  exOe,  and  one  a  little  less  disturbed,  that  my  punish-
ment may  be  commensurate  with  my  transgression.

<®  Fitted  ample  sails.'] — ^Ver.  548.  He  alludes  to  his  Metamorphoses,
which  he  composed  in  the  Hexameter,  or  Heroic  measure ;  and  to  his
Fasti,  which  treat  of  more  serious  subjects.

•1  Many  in  nwrnftcr.]— Ver.  549.  This  possibly  is  the  proper  transla-
tion of  a  Une  which  has  caused  much  trouble  to  commentators.  In  the  life
of  the  poet  prefixed  to  the  work,  will  be  found  some  remarks  on  this  line,
and  its  possible  meaning.

®  A  poem  qf  Hng:] — Ver.  .553.  He  here  speaks  of  the  tragedy  of
Medea,  which  he  composed,  but  which  has  not  come  down  to  us.

®  Whose  own  Muse^ — Ver.  568.  Literally,  *  my  own  Calliope,'  the
name  of  one  Muse  being  used  instead  of  them  all.


y  Google


B.  T.]  OE, LAMENT  OF  OTID.  295


BOOK  THE  THIRD.


ELEGY  I.


The  Poet  sends  his  book  to  Rome,  in  neglected  and  sordid  attire,  and
represents  it  as  wandering  through  various  parts  of  the  city,  and  praying
Augustus  to  pardon  the  Poet,  pining  in  eidle.  When  it  finds  that  it  is
rejected  by  all,  it  requests  the  hands  of  the  Plebeians  to  receive  it,
and  afford  it  a  place  of  shelter.

I,  the  book  of  a  trembling  exile,  sent  hither,  am  come  to  tbig
City ;  giye  me  a  soothing  hand  in  my  weariness,  friendly  reader;
fear  not  that  by  chance  I  should  prove  a  disgrace  to  thee ;
there  is  no  Hne  in  this  sheet  that  gives  precepts  for  love.
The  fortune  of  my  master  is  not  of  that  kind  that  he  ought,
in  his  wretchedness,  to  gloss  it  over  with  any  jesting.  That
work,  too,  which  once,  to  his  cost,  he  sportively  composed  in
his  youthful  years,  he  now,  too  late,  alas!  condemns  and
abhors.  Look  at  my  cdhtents :  thou  wilt  see  nothing  here
but  what  is  sorrowful,  in  verses  befitted  to  their  circum-
stances. That  my  limping  verses^  halt  in  each  alternate  Hne,
either  the  nature  of  the  measure,  or  the  length  of  my  journey,
is  the  cause.  I  am  neither  yellow  wiUi  cedar  oil,  nor
smoothed  with  the  pumice  stone ;  'tis  because  I  was  ashamed
to  be  more  gay  than  my  master.  The  reason  why  my
smeared  letters  have  blots  scattered  over  them  is,  that  the  poet
himself  has  disfigured  the  work  with  his  tears.  If,  perchance,
anything  shall  appear  not  to  be  expressed  in  the  Latin  idiom,
the  land  in  which  he  wrote  me  was  a  barbarous  one.  Tell
me,  my  readers,  if  it  is  not  a  trouble  to  you,  whither  I  must
go>  mid  what  abodes  in  this  City  I,  a  stranger  book,  must  seek.

'  1  My  Umpmg  verses,'] — ^Ver.  11.  Alluding  to  the  alternating  measure
of  the  Hexameter  and  Pentameter  lines.  The  remark  is  but  a  poor  attempt
at  wit.


y  Google


296  THE  TBISTIA;  [b.  m.

When  I  had  stealthily  said  thus  much  with  a  stammeiiiig
Umgae,  there  was  hardly  even  one  person  who  would  show  me
the  way.  *'  May  the  Grods'  grant  thee  what  they  hsnre  not  given
my  parent,  to  he  able  to  Hre  at  thy  ease  in  thy  own  country.
L^  on,  I  pray,  for  I  follow ;  although,  weary,  I  am  come  by
land  and  sea  firom  a  distant  region."  He  obeyed  my  request^
and  conducting  me,  he  said,  "  This  is  the  Forum  of  Csesar ;
this  is  the  way  which  derives  its  name  firom  the  Sacred  rites.'
This  is  the  shrine  of  Vesta,  which  contains  the  Palladium
and  the  eternal  fire ;  this  was  the  Httle  palace  of  the  ancient
Numa."  Then,  bearing  to  the  right,  he  said,  "  Hiat  is  the  gate
of  the  Palatium ;  this  is  Jupiter  Stiutor's  temple :  on  this  spot
was  Rome  first  founded."  While  I  was  admiring  each  ohjec^
I  beheld  a  portal  gorgeous  with  shining  arms,  and  a  habita-
tion worthy  of  a  Deity,  **  Is  this  the  house  of  Jove  f  said  I,
for  a  wreath  of  oak-leaves  caused  a  presentiment  in  my  mind
for  taking  it  to  be  such.  When  I  learned  who  was  its  owner,
I  said,  **  I  am  not  deceived,  and  it  is  true  that  this  is  the  house
of  the  great  Jove.  But  why  is  the  gate  wreathed  with  the  laurd
fastened  to  it,  and  why  does  the  overshadowing  tree  surround
the  doors  of  majesty  ?  Is  it  because  this  one  house  has  deserved
everlasting  triumphs  ?  or  is  it  because  it  has  been  ever  beloved
by  the  Leucadian  Qod  ?^  Is  it  that  it  is  festive  itself,  or  be-
cause it  makes  everything  joyful?  or  is  that  an  emblem
of  the  peace  which  it  has  bestowe^d  on  all  lands  ?  As  thd
laurel  is  always  green,  and  is  not  plucked  with  withering
leaves ;  has  that  housey  in  like  manner,  perpetual  glory  ?  The
cause  of  the  wreath  thtu  placed  above,  testified  by  an  in-
scription, declares  that  the  citizens  were  saved  by  his  aid.
Add,  most  excellent  Father,  one  citizen  to  the  number  of  the
saved ;  one  who,  banished  afar,  lies  prostrate  in  the  remotest
regions.  In  him,  not  criminality,  but  bis  own  inadvertence,  gave
occasion  for  that  punishment,  which  he  confesses  himself

^  May  the  God».'\ — ^Ver.  23.  Tkese  are  supposed  to  be  thewonb  of
the  Book  to  the  person  who  has  pointed  out  to  it  the  way.

'  The  Sacred  ritet.l — Ver.  25.  The  '  via  Sacra'  received  that  name
from  the  treaty  being  there  concluded  between  Romulus  and  Tatras,  ithax^
was  attended  by  the  performance  of  sacrifice.

*  The  Leucadian  God,'] — ^Ver.  42.  Apollo  is  so  called,  from  a  promon-
tory in  the  isle  of  Leucadiiay  where  Augustus  consecrated  a  temple  to  ]m%
after  the  battle  of  Actium.


y  Google


».  III.]  OB,  XiiMSKT  or  OVID.  297

to  haye  deserved.  Wretched  me ;  I  both  dread  the  place,  and
I  venerate  its  master,  and  the  writing  on  me  shakes  with  tre-
mulous fear.  Dost  thou  perceive  how  my  paper  becomes  white
with  a  pallid  colour  ?  Dost  thou  behold  how  my  alternating
feet  tremble  ?  That  thou,  house  of  Caesar,  one  day  appeased
by  my  parent,  mayst  always  be  seen  under  the  same  masters,
is  my  prayer."

Thence,  in  sunilar  manner,  I  was  led  by  lofty  steps  to  the  white
temple,  situate  on  high,  of  Apollo  the  unshorn  God ;  where  the
descendants  of  Belus^  and  their  barbarous  i^ther,  with  his  drawn
sword,  stand  as  statues,  alternately  with  the  columns  of  foreign
marble  ;  and  where,  those  things  which  the  ancients  and  the
modems  have  conceived  in  their  learned  breasts,  are  made
public  for  the  inspection  of  readers.*  I  sought  my  brothers,
those,  forsooth,  excepted,  whom  my  parent  would  fain  wish  he
had  never  begotten.  As  I  was  seeking  them  in  vain,  the
keeper  appointed  over  that  place  ordered  me  to  leave  the
holy  spot.

I  turned  my  steps  to  another  temple,  adjoining  to  the
neighbouring  dieatre;  this,  too,  was  not  allowed  to  be  ap-
proached by  my  feet.  Liberty  did  not  permit  me  to  touch  her
halls,  which,  first  of  all,  were  thrown  open '  for  the  reception
of  learned  works.  The  destinies  of  my  wretched  author  ex-
tend to  his  progeny,  and  we,  his  children,  suffer  the  exile  which
he  himself  has  endured*  Perhaps  Caesar,  prevailed  upon  in
length  of  time,  will  one  day  be  less  severe  with  us  and  with
him.  Te  Gbds,  I  pray,  and  thou  Caesar  too,  ( indeed,  to  the
rest  I  direct  not  my  entreaties),  listen,  most  powerful  God,  to
my  prayers.  Meanwhile,  since  a  public  place  has  been  denied
me,  let  it  be  allowed  me  to  lurk  m  some  private  spot.  And
do  you,  hands  of  the  Plebeians,  if  it  is  permitted,  receive  my
verses,  ashamed  through  the  disgrace  of  their  rejection.

*  Descendants  of  B^ua,'] — ^Ver.  62.  Hie  Danaides  tre  lo  called,  at
Belus  was  the  father  of  Danaus,  of  whom  they  were  the  daughters.

*  Inspection  of  readers,] — Ver.  64.  He  allades  to  the  Ubrary  which
Augostus  had  founded  on  the  Palatine  hill,  in  a  wing  of  his  palace,  and
from  which  the  works  of  Ovid  were  excluded.

^  Throum  openJ] — Ver.  71.  Asinius  Pollio  founded  the  Temple  of
Liberty,  and  in  it  established  the  first  public  library  at  Rome.


y  Google


THI  TKBTIi. ;  {m.  in.


ELEGY  11.


The  Poet  laments  his  destiny,  which  has  compelled  him  in  exile  to  -visit
the  Scythian  regions,  and  he  complains  that  neither  Apollo  nor  the
Mnses  aided  him,  who  was  their  priest.  He  says,  that  his  life  is  spent
in  tears  and  lamentation,  and  entreats  the  Gods  to  permit  him  to  die.

Was  it  then  ordained^  by  m^  destmy,  that  I  should  visit
Scythia  and  the  land  which  hes  under  the  Lycaonian  pole?
And  did  not  you,  Pierian  maids,  nor  thou,  son  of  Latona,
a  learned  body,  give  aid  to  your  priest  ?  Is  it  of  no  avail  to
me,  that  I  sportively  composed  without  any  real  ground  of
offence,  and  mat  my  Muse  was  more  wanton  than  my  mode  of
life  ?  But  Pontus,  pinched  with  perpetual  frost,  confines  me,
after  I  have  undergone  many  a  danger,  by  sea  and  by  land.
I,  who  avoided  business,  and  was  bom  to  careless  ease,  who
formerly  was  delicate,  and  unable  to  endure  fatigue,  am  now
suffering  in  the  extreme :  and  yet  neither  could  seas  without
harbours,  nor  varied  modes  of  travel,  put  an  end  to  me.
My  mind  bore  up,  too,  under  my  misfortunes ;  for,  from  it,  my
body  derived  strength,  and  endured  things  almost  beyond
endurance.

But  while  I  was  tossed  to  and  fro  by  wind  and  waves,
occupation  beguiled  my  cares  and  the  sadness  of  my  heart.
When  my  wanderings  were  concluded,  and  the  fatigue  oi
travelling  had  ceased,  and  the  land  of  my  exile  was  reached
by  me,  then  my  only  pleasure  was  in  weeping,  and  a
shower  flowed  from  my  eyes,  not  less  than  the  stream  from  th^
wintry  snows.  The  Roman  City  and  my  home  recur  to  me,
and  longing  for  my  former  haunts,  and  whatever  remains
connected  with  me  in  that  City,  now  lost  to  me.  Ah,  wretched
me!  that  so  oft  the  gate  of  my  tomb  should  have  been
knocked  at,  and  yet  at  no  time  opened !  Why  did  I  escape
so  many  weapons,  and  why  did  no  storm,  when  so  often
threatening,  overwhelm  my  wretched  head  ?

Ye  Gods,  whom  I  experience  as  too  constant  in  your  hostility,
whom  one  Divinity  has  as  partners  in  his  wrath,  urge  on, .  I
pray,  my  lingering  destiny,  and  forbid  the  gates  of  death
to  be  longer  closed  to  me.


y  Google


«.  III.]  OB, LAMEST  OP  OTTO.  299


ELEGY  HI.

Ovid,  "writing  to  his  wife,  from  his  place  of  exile,  excuses  himself,  because
the  letter  is  written  in  handwriting  not  his  own.  He  says  that  it  is  a
matter  of  necessity,  on  account  of  the  ill  health  with  which  he  is
afflicted ;  and  he  then  enlarges  upon  his  miseries.  Of  all  these,  he  says
that  the  greatest  is,  to  be  debarred  from  her  society.  He  gives  direc-
tions for  his  bones  to  be  carried  to  Rome  in  a  little  urn,  and  composes
an  Epitaph  to  be  inscribed  thereon.

Iv,  parcbance,  you  are  wondering  why  this  letter  of  mine  ia
written  by  the  hand  of  another,  'tis  because  I  was  ill.  Ill,
too,  at  the  very  extremity  of  an  unknown  region,  and  almost
in  doubt  of  my  life.  What,  do  you  suppose,  are  my  feelings,
now  placed  here  in  this  dreadful  country,  between  the  Sauro-
matse  and  the  Getae  ?  I  can  neither  endure  the  open  air,  nor
can  I  accustom  myself  to  the  water  here ;  and  the  country
itself  is  repulsive  to  I  know  not  what  degree.  My  habitation
is  not  sufficiently  convenient ;  the  food  here  is  unsuited  for
an  invalid,  and  there  is  no  one  to  reUeve  disease  by  the  art  of
Apollo.  There  is  no  friend  nigh  to  console  me,  no  one  to  be-
guile my  moments  with  his  conversation,  as  they  slowly  creep
along.  I  am  lying  here  worn  out,  among  the  remotest  tribes
and  regions  ;  and  whateyer  is  at  a  distance,  now  recurs  to  me,
thus  indisposed.  And  though  all  things  so  recur;  yet  you,
my  wife,  are  chief  of  all,  and  occupy  more  than  your  equal
shiure  in  my  heart.  I  address  you  fax  away ;  my  voice  names
you  only ;  no  night,  no  day  comes  to  me  without  you.  They
even  say,  that  I  speak  so  wildly,  that  your  name  is  ever
on  my  wandering  lips.  If  at  any  time,  my  mouth  being  closed,
my  voice  fails  me,  scarcely  to  be  restored  by  pouring  wine
down  my  throaty  any  one  should  tell  me  that  Ins  mistress  is
come,  I  should  arise  at  once,  and  the  hope  of  seeing  you  would
be  a  source  of  strength  to  me,

I  am  then  in  doubts  as  to  my  life  ;  are  you,  perchance,  for-
getful of  me,  there,  at  a  distance,  passing  a  happy  life  ?  You
are  not  doing  so,  I  affirm  it ;  I  am  sure,  0  dearest  one !  that
without  me  life  is  only  passed  in  sadness  by  you.

If,  however,  my  fate  has  completed  the  number  of  years
which  it  was  destined  to  complete,  and  the  end  of  my  life  is  so
very  near  at  hand,  how  grand  a  thing  was  it,  ye  great  Gods,  to
spare  a  man  on  the  point  of  death  !  at  least,  I  might  have  re-
reived  sepulture  in  my  native  land. Either  my  punishment


y  Google


300  THX  TSIiTU.;  [b.  ui.

might  hare  been  delayed  to  the  moment  of  my  death,  or  an
accelerated  end  might  have  forestalled  my  exile.  Unscathed,
I  might  but  lately  have  well  left  tiiis  world  in  happiness  ;  but
now,  my  life  has  been  granted  me,  that  I  might  die  an  exile.

Shall  I  then  depart,  so  (ax  away  in  unknown  regions?  and  will
death  be  embittered  by  the  very  spot  ?  WiU  my  body  not  waste
away  on  my  wonted  couch  ?  will  tiiere  be  no  one  to  lament  me  at
my  sepulture  ?  and  will  not  a  few  moments  be  added  to  my
life,  as  the  tears  of  my  wife  fidl  upon  my  face  ?  And  shall  I
gire  no  Uut  injunctions  ?  And  shall  no  Mendly  hand  close
my  failing  eyes,  amid  the  sobs  attending  my  last  moments  ?
But  shall  barbarian  earth  cover  this  head,  unlamented,  without
f^ereal  rites,  and  without  the  honour  of  a  tomb  ?

And  wiU  you  not,  when  you  hear  of  it,  be  afflicted  to  the
greatest  d^ree ;  and  will  you  not  beat  your  fedthfiil  bosom  with  a
trembling  hand  ?  And  wJl  you  not,  as  you  yainly  stretch  your
arms  in  this  direction,  caU  upon  the  departed  name  of  your
wretched  husband  ?  Yet  desist  from  tearing  your  cheeks,  and
rend  not  your  hair.  I  shall  not  then,  my  life,^  have  been  torn
from  you  for  the  first  time.  When  I  left  my  country,  fimcy
that  then  I  died ;  that  was  the  first  and  the  more  grievous  deat&
to  me.  Now,  if  you  but  could,  (but  you  cannot),  rejoice,  best
of  wives,  that  my  many  troubles  are  ended  in  death.  As  far  as
you  can,  diminish  your  griefs,  by  enduring  them  with  a  coura-
geous heart,  evils  against  which  you  have  already  had  your
mind  too  well  prepared.  And  oh !  that  my  soul  would  perish
with  my  body,  and  that  no  part  of  me  would  escape  the  con-
suming pile !  For  if  my  immortal  spirit  soars  aloft  into  the
vacant  air,  and  the  words  of  the  Samian  sage'  are  true,  a
Roman  shade  will  be  wandering  amid  Sarmatian  ghosts,  and
will  ever  be  a  stranger  amid  uncivilized  spirits.

Yet  do  you  cause  my  bones  to  be  brought  back  in  a  Httle  nm,
and  thus  I  shall  not  be  an  exile,  even  when  dead.  No  one  for-
bids thee.  The  Theban  sister  placed  her  slain  brother  in  the
tomb,  even  when  the  king  forbade  it.^^ And  do  you  mingle

•\a/y  /i/'tf.]— Ver.  52.  *  Lux  mca,'  is  literally,  *  my  light;'  it  may  be
translated  *  my  life/  or  *  my  angeL'

*  The  Samian  «a^e.] — ^Ver.  62.  Namely,  Pythagoras,  who  was  a  natire
of  Samoa,  and  taught  the  doctrine  of  the  immortaUty  of  the  soul,  and  oi
its  inhabiting  yarious  bodies  in  succession.

^  When  the  king  forbade  it.] — ^Ver.  68.  Antigone,  in  spite  of  the
orders  of  Creon,  buried  the  body  of  her  brother,  Eteocles,  and  was  put  to
death  lor  this  act  of  affection.


y  Google


B.  iv.]  OE, LAMBBTT  0!  lOOD.  301

them  with  leaves  and  powdered  amomuniy^^  and  place  them,
when  inumed,  in  the  ground  near  the  City*  And  cut  an  inscrip^
tion  in  large  characters  on  the  marble  of  my  tomfo,  which  the
traveller  may  read  with  glancing  eye : — "  I  who  lie  here,  the
poet  Naso,  ^e  sportive  composer  of  tender  loves,  was  undone
through  my  own  genius.  And  let  it  not  be  a  hardship  for
thee,  the  passer-by,  who  has  felt  what  is  love,  to  say,  'May  the
bones  of  Naso  repose  herein  peace.'  "

This  is  enough  for  my  inscription ;  for,  indeed,  my  books
are  greater  and  more  lasting  memorials  of  me.  And  these,  I
trust,  although  they  have  mjured  him,  wOl  give  fame  uid
lasting  years  to  the  author.  But  do  you  perform  the  funereal
rites  for  me  when  dead,  and  offer  chaplets  wet  with  your  tears.
Although  the  fire  shall  have  changed  my  body  into  ashes,  yet
the  sad  dust  wiQ  be  sensible  of  your  pious  affection.

Fain  would  I  write  more  ;  but  my  voice,  weary  with  speaking,
and  my  parched  tongue,  deny  me  strength  to  dictate.  Receive
the  farewell  uttered  by  me,  perhaps  for  the  last  time,  and  which
applies  not  to  the  lot  of  him  who  sends  it  you.


ELEGY  IV.

Ths  Poet  adrises  his  dearest  friend,  ^hom  he  is  afraid  to  name,  to  avoid
the  abodes  of  the  great,  and  the  society  of  the  powerful ;  and  says,  that
though  they  have  it  in  their  power  to  help  others,  they  give  no  assist-
ance, but  rather  cause  injury.  He  then  extols  the  constancy  of  his
friend,  which  has  never  flagged  in  the  time  of  adversity ;  and  recounting
the  miseries  of  his  exile,  he  entreats  his  friends  to  give  him  all  the  as-
sistance in  their  power.

Oh  thou  I  always  beloved  by  me,  but  especiallytned  in  adversity,
after  my  fortunes  were  ruined ;  if  thou  puttest  any  faith  in  a
man  taught  by  experience,  live  for  thyself,  and  keep  at  a
distance  ^m  ike  names  of  the  great.  Live  for  thyself,  and,
so  far  as  thou  canst,  avoid  splendour.  It  is  from  a  resplendent
heaven  that  the  ruthless  lightning  descends.  For  although
the  powerfa]  alone  are  able  to  aid,  if  one  of  them  can  do  thee
iiarm,  he  would  not  choose  rather  to  do  thee  a  service. The  sail-

**  ^momum.] —Yer.  69.  This  was  a  small  shrub  found  in  Armenia,
with  fruit  like  a  cluster  of  grapes,  and  leaves  like  the  white  vine,  of  which
the  Romans  made  a  fragrant  ointment.  It  was  used  in  the  process  of  em-
Ulming ;  the  word  *  mummy  *  is  a  coxruption  of '  amomum.'


y  Google


302  rai  tbistia;  [b.ui.

yird,  ban^ng  low^  escapes  the  wintry  storms^  and  wide  sails
cause  more  fear  than small  ones. Thou  beholdest how
light  cork  floats  on  the  surface  of  the  water,  whereas  the
heayy  weight  sinks,  together  with  iUelf,  the  net  attached  thereto.
If  I,  now  the  adviser,  had  only  been  formerly  advised  of  these
things,  I,  perhaps,  should  now  have  been  in  the  City  in  which
I  ought  to  be. While  I  lived  in  intimacy  with  thee,  while  a
gentle  breeze  was  bearing  me  on,  this  bark  of  mine  ran  through
still  waters. The  man  that  falls  on  smooth  ground  (scarcely,
however,  does  such  a  thing  happen),  falls  so,  that  when  he  has
touched  the  ^ound,  he  can  rise  again;  but  the  wretched
Elpenor,^  fallmg  from  the  top  of  the  house,  met  his  king  asa
miserable  phantom. Why  did  it  happen  that  Daedalus  waved
his  wings  in  safety,  whereas  Icarus  impressed  the  boundless
waters  with  his  name  ? It  is  because  the  latter  soared  aloft,
and  the  former ^eK7  at  a  more  humble  distance. And  yet  did
not  they  each  of  them  have  wings  for  himself?

Believe  me,  he  who  has  the  good  fortune  to  escape  notice  lives
the  happiest  life,  and  every  one  ought  to  Uve  within  his  means.
Eumedes^  would  not  have  been  deprived  of  his  son  if,  in  his
folly,  he  had  not  hankered  after  the  horses  of  Achilles.  And
Merops^^  wouldnot  haveseen  hisson  in  flames, and  his  daughters
chanffedinto  trees,  had  he,  as  being  his  father,  owned  Phaeton.
Do  thou,  too,  always  shun  what  is  too  lofhr,  and,  remembering
my  determination,  gather  in  thy  sails,  ror  thou  deservest  to
pass  along  the  course  of  life  without  a  stumbling  foot,  and  to
enjoy  a  happier  lot.  That  I  should  entertain  these  wishes  for
thee,  thou  deservest  for  thy  kind  affection,  and  thy  fidelity
that  will  adhere  to  me  at  all  times.  I  beheld  thee,  bewailing
my  destiny,  with  such  a  countenance  as  may  be  supposed  to
have  been  presented  by  my  own  visage. I  beheld  thy  tears

"  ElpenorJl—yet,  19.  When  Ulysses  and  his  companions  were  fleeing
from  the  realms  of  Circe,  Elpenor,  who  was  intoxicated,  fell  from  a  height
and  hroke  his  neck.

^  Eumedes.]--YeT.  27.  Dolon,  the  son  of  Eumedes,  having  stipulated
that  he  should  receive  the  horses  of  Achilles  as  his  reward,  went  as  a  spy
into  the  Grecian  camp,  where  he  was  slain  by  Diomedes  and  Ulysses.

"  And  Meropt.^—Yer.  30.  He  was  the  husband  of  Ciymene,  who,  by
Apollo,  became  the  mother  of  Phaeton.  The  meaning  is,  that  if  Phaeton
had  been  contented  to  be  owned  by  Merops  as  his  son,  he  would  not  have
been  tempted  to  guide  the  chariot  of  Apollo,  and  so  might  have  avoided  his
unhappy  fate.


y  Google


K.1V.]  OB, LAMENT  OP  OTLD.  303

as  they  fell  over  my  face ;  at  the  tune  that  I  drank  in  thy
words  breathing  constancy.  And  now  thou  defendest  thy
distant  friend  with  energy,  and  dost  alleviate  evils  that  can
hardly  be  alleviated  in  any  degree.  Live  on,  without  envy ;
pass  in  obscurity  thy  tranquil  years,  and  attach  thy  equals
to  thyself  in  friendship.  Love,  too,  the  name  of  thy  own
Naso,  the  only  part  of  him  which  is  not  yet  exiled.  The
Scythian  Pontus  confines  the  rest  of  him.  The  land  nearest
to  the  Constellation  of  the  Erymanthian  She-bear,  pinched
with  hard  frosts,  confines  me.  Bosphorus  and  Tanais,  and  the
swamps  of  Scythia,  and  a  few  other  names  of  a  region  almost
unknovm,  are  beyond.  Further  than  these,  there  is  nothing
but  uninhabitable  cold.  Alas  !  how  near  to  me  is  the  end  of
the  earth !  But  my  country  is  afar ;  afar  my  dearest  wife ;
and  whatever,  besides  these  two,  was  delightful  to  me.  Yet  so
are  they  afar  from  me,  that,  in  my  mind,  those  can  all  be  seen
whom,  bodily,  it  is  not  possible  to  touch.  Before  my  eyes,
flit  my  home,  the  City,  and  the  aspect  of  ihe  various  spots  ;
and  then  follows,  in  order,  everythmg  as  it  happens  in  its
appropriate  place.  The  form  of  my  wife,  as  Uiough  she
were  present,  is  before  my  eyes.  She  both  increases  my
misfortunes  and  she  alleviates  them.  She  increases  them,  be-
cause she  is  absent;  she  alleviates  them,  by  shewing  her
affection ;  and  she  bears  vdth  firmness  the  burden  that  is
imj>osed  on  her.

You, too,  my  Mends,  remain  attached  to  my  heart;  you,  whom
I  long  to  mention^  each  by  name.  But  cautious  fear  restrains
this  act  of  duty,  and  I  beheve  that  you  would  prefer  not  to  be
inserted  in  my  lines.  Once  you  were  anxious  for  it ;  and  it
was  as  good  as  a  pleasing  mark  of  distinction,  for  your  names
to  be  read  in  my  compositions.  But,  as  now  it  is  a  matter  of
doubt,  I  will  address  each  one  in  my  own  thoughts,  and  to  none
of  you  will  I  be  a  cause  of  apprehension.  My  verses,  shall
betray  my  concealed  friends  by  no  hint ;  if  any  one  has  been
attached  to  me  in  secret,  let  him  still  be  attached.  But  know
that  although  I  am  removed  to  a  distant  land,  you  are  always
present  to  my  thoughts.  So  four  as  each  of  you  can,  do  alle-
viate my  misfortunes  in  some  degree:  and  refuse  not  a  faithful
hand  to  me,  thtis  prostrate.  May  Fortune  be  ever  propitious
to  you ;  and  may  you  never,  experiencing  a  similar  lot,  have
to  implore  the  aid  of  others


y  Google


304  THl  TBTSTIi.;  [b.  iii.


ELBGY  V.

Otid  praises  the  constancy  of  his  friend,  which  he  had  experienced  in
adYcrrity,  and  declares  that  the  remembrance  of  it  will  never  be  efiaced
from  his  memory.  He  confesses  that  he  entertains  s<mie  slight  hopes,
that  Angnstus  will  one  day  be  pacified,  and  make  his  exile  man
endurable.

The  extent  of  my  acqnaintancesMp  with  thee  was  not  great,  so
that  thou  mightst  have  concealed  it  without  any  difficulty^  hadst
thou  not  united  me  to  thyself  in  closer  ties,  while  my  bark,
perchance^  sped  on  with  favouring  gales.  When  I  fell,  and
all  fled  through  fear  of  my  wreck,  and  turned  their  backs  upon
my  acquaintanceship,  thou  didst  dare  to  touch  a  body  struck
by  the  bolts  of  Jove,  and  to  enter  the  threshold  of  a  woe-
stricken  house.  And  that,  thou,  a  recent  ticqtiaintaneey  and
known  by  no  prolonged  intimacy,  didst  do,  which  scarcely  two
or  three  of  my  old /riends  did  for  wretched  me.  I  beheld  thy
alarmed  countenance,  and  I  marked  what  I  saw.  I  beheld
thy  face  bedewed  with  tears,  and  more  pale  than  my  own ;  and,
seeing  thy  tears  as  they  fell  at  each  word,  I  dnmk  in  those
tears  with  my  face,  those  words  with  my  ears.  I  felt,  too,  thy
arms,  as  they  hung  around  my  sorrowing  neck,  and  thy  kisses,
mingled  with  the  sound  of  thy  sobs.  By  thy  efforts,  too.  Cams,
in  my  absence,  am  I  defended.  Thou  knowest  that  Cams  is  put
in  the  stead  of  thy  real  name.  I  receiye,  besides,  many  tokens
of  thy  evident  kindness,  that  will  never  be  effaced  from  my  heart
May  the  Gods  grant  thee  power  ever  to  defend  thy  friends,
and  mayst  thou  assist  them  on  a  more  fortunate  occasion.

But  if,  in  the  mean  time,  thou  makest  inquiry  what  I,  a
ruined  man,  am  doing  in  thesci  parts,  (and  1  may  suppose
that  thqu  dost  make  &e  inquiry),  I  am  influenced  by  a  shght
hope  (and  do  not  thou  deprive  me  of  it)  that  the  offended
Majesty  of  the  God  can  be  appeased.  Whether  I  am  rash  in
my  expectations,  or  whether  it  is  possible  to  attain  that  object,
do  thou  prove  to  me,  I  pray,  that  what  I  desire  is  possible^
And,  whatever  eloquence  of  language  thou  possessest,  employ
it  for  the  purpose  of  showing  that  my  wishes  may  possibly
attain  success.  For  the  greater  any  one  is,  the  more  placable
is  he  in  his  anger,  and  a  noble  disposition  easily  receives  an
impression.  It  is  sufficient  for  the  noblerhearted  lion  to  have
brought  the  body  to  the  ground ;  the  contest  is  ended  when  the


y  Google


B.  v.]  OE,  LAJifEirr  01"  OTTD*  305

enemy  lies  prostrate.  But  the  wolf  ^nd  the  disgusting  bears
attack  even  the  dying,  and  so  does  eiu;h  wild  beast  that  is  in-
ferior in  nobleness  cf  blood.  What  have  we  greater  at  Troy
than  the  brave  Achilles  ?  He  was  not  proof  against  the  tears
of  the  Dardanian  old  man."  Porus,"  and  the  ceremonial  of
the  celebrated  funeral^  show  how  great  was  the  clemency  of  the
£mathian  general.  And  not  to  mention  cases  where  the  wrath
of  mortals  has  been  tamed  into  milder  feelings  ;  he  who  once
was  her  enemy,  is  now  the  son-in-law  of  Juno.  Besides,  it  is
impossible  that  I  can  despair  of  some  favour,  as  the  cause  of
my  punishment  is  not  one  deserving  of  death.  The  life  of
Cfiesar,  which  is  a  life  belonging  to  9ie  whole  world,  has  not
been  attempted  by  me,  endeavouring  to  spread  universal  ruin.
I  have  said  nothing,  nor  has  my  tongue  uttered  threats ;  and
no  profane  words  have  been  let  slip,  in  excess  of  wine.  I  am
pumshed,  because  my  unguarded  eyes  were  witnesses  of  a  sin ;
and  my  crime  is,  that  I  had  eyes.  For  my  part,  I  canuot
entirely  defend  my  fault ;  but  mistake  embraces  a  part  of  my
accusation.  A  hope  therefore  remains,  that  that  will  cause
him  to  moderate  my  punishment,  on  the  terms  of  a  change
of  the  place  of  my  eanle.  I  pray  that  the  brilliant  Light-
bearing  star,  the  forerunner  of  the  beauteous  Sun,  may  bring
on  that  day,  pressing  onward  his  steeds


ELEGY  VL

Thb  Poet  praises  the  constancy  of  his  friend,  and  says,  that  even  if  he
wished,  he  is  not  able  to  conceal  it ;  and  that  if  he  had  applied  to  him
for  advice,  he  migfft  still  have  been  in  safety.  He  entreats  him  to  pa-
dfy  Augustus,  tluit  he  may  obtain  a  change  of  his  place  of  exile,  and  he
asserts  that  he  has  been  guilty  of  no  criminality.

Thott  neither  desirest,  my  dearest  friend,  nor  canst  thou,
shouldst  thou  perchance  desire  it,  conceal  the  ties  of  our
friendship. For  so  long  as  it  was  permitted  me,  no  one  was

^*  Dardanian  old  man,"] — ^Ver.  38.  This  was  Priam,  on  the  occasion  of
his  begging  the  body  of  Hector  from  Achilles.

"  Porui,'] — ^Ver.  39.  Porus  was  a  prince  of  India,  who  was  conquered
by  Alexander  the  Great.  The  latter,  in  admiration  of  his  courage,  be-
stowed on  him  a  larger  kingdom  than  that  of  which  he  had  previously
dq)rived  him.  The  same  conqueror  honoured  the  body  of  Darius,  his
adversary,  with  a  gorgeous  funeral.  Smathia  was  the  ancient  name  of
Macedonia,  of  which  country  Alexander  was  the  king.

X


y  Google


306  THX  TBI8TIA;  [b.  ni.

dearer  to  me  than  thee,  nor  was  any  one  in  all  the  City  more
intimate  with  thee  tiian  myadf ;  and  diat  was  so  wdl  preyed  to
die  public,  that  oar  Menoship  was  almost  better  known,  than
thou  and  I  were,  onrsdyes.  l^e  kindness  that  exists  in  thy
mind  towards  thy  friends,  is  known  to  the  man  whom  thoa
makest  thy  friend.  Thou  wast  wont  to  conceal  nothing,  so  that
I  was  not  conscious  of  it ;  and  thou  didst  in^part  many  things
to  be  concealed  in  my  breast.  Thou,  too,  wast  the  only  one
to  whom  I  used  to  tell  whateyer  secrets  I  had,  except  that  (me
which  has  proyed  my  ruin.  Hadst  thou  known  that,  as  wdl,
thou  wouldst  haye  been  blessed  with  thy  friend  in  safety,  and
I  should  haye  been  sayed,  my  friend,  by  thy  adyice.  But,
doubtless,  my  destinies  draggea  me  onwsjrdi  to  destructimi,
and  closed  eyery  ayenue  to  my  own  benefit.

Howeyer,  whether  by  caution  I  could  haye  ayoided  this
misfortune,  or  whether  no  reasoning  is  able  to  control  destiny,
still  do  thou,  most  closely  united  to  me  by  lengthened  intimacy,
and  thyself  almost  the  greatest  object  of  my  regrets,  keep  me
in  remembnuice  ;  and,  if  fayour  has  giyen  thee  any  influence,
make  use  of  it,  I  pray,  in  my  behalf;  so  that  the  anger  of  the
offended  Deity  may  be  less  yiolent,  and  my  punishment  may  be
lessened  by  a  change  of  locahty.  And  this  /  ask  thee,  since
there  is  no  criminahty  in  my  heart,  and  mistake  holds  the  chief
place  in  my  offence.  It  is  no  Hght  matter,  nor  is  it  safe  to  say,
by  what  accident  my  eyes  became  acquainted  with  so  shocking
a  disaster.  My  mind,  too,  shudders  at  that  time,  as  though  at
its  own  wounds,  and  by  the  recollection,  my  grief  itself  is
renewed.  Whateyer  can  be  productive  of  such  disgrace,  is
proper  to  be  concealed  in  the  obscurity  of  the  night.  I  will,
then,  mention  nothing,  except  that  I  offended ;  but  that  from
that  fault  no  advantage  was  sought  to  be  gained  by  me ;  and
that  my  offence  ought  rather  to  be  styled  foolishness,  if  yon
would  give  a  thing  its  proper  name.  And  if  this  is  not  the
truth,  seek  some  oti^er  place,  where  I  may  be  still  more  dis-
tant, and  let  this  region  be  but  a  city  suburb  in  comparison
to  it*


y  Google


B.  VII.]  OB, LAMENT  OF  OTID.  307


ELEGY  VII.

The  Poet,  writing  to  a  young  lady  named  Perilla,  says  that,  badly  as  he
has  been  treated  by  them,  he  is  still  devoting  himself  to  the  Muses ;
and  he  exhorts  her  by  similar  pursuits  to  aspire  to  immortality.  He
tells  her  that  her  native  grace  and  beauty  \7ill  depart  in  old  age,  but
that  the  endowments  of  the  intellect  are  immortal.

Mt  letter,  now  you  are  finished,  go  forthwith,  the  faithful
n^iessenger  of  my  words,  to  salute  Perilla."  You  will  either  find
her  sitting  with  her  charming  mother,  or  among  her  hooks
and  her  Muses.  Whatever  she  shall  be  doing,  she  will  leave
it,  when  she  knows  that  you  have  come ;  there  will  be  no
delay;  she  will  ask  why  you  have  come,  and  what  I  am  doing  T
You  wiU  say  that  I  am  fiving ;  but  in  such  a  way  that  I  would
prefer  not  to  be  living;  and  you  will  say,  that  my  woes
have  not  been  alleviated  in  such  a  length  of  time ;  that  I
have  returned  to  the  Muses,  though  they  have  proved  my
ruin,  and  that  I  am  fitting  my  words  to  alternate  measures.
Do  you  say,  too,  "  Why  dost  thou  apply  thyself  to  ordinary  pur-
suits, and  why  dost  thou  compose  learned  poems  in  Greeks  and
affcer  a  manner  not  that  of  thy  country?  For  nature,  with  the
Destinies,  has  granted  thee  chaste  manners,  and  rare  endow-
ments and  genius."  I  was  the  first  that  led  thy  genius  to  the
Pegasian  streams,  lest  the  spring  of  gushing  water  should  un-
fortunately be  wasted.  I  was  the  first  to  perceive  it  in  thy  tender
years,  when  yet  a  girl ;  and,  as  is  seen,  I  was  the  guide  and  the
companion  of  this  tendency.  Therefore,  if  the  same  fires  stiU
dwell  in  thy  breast,  the  Lesbian  Sappho  will  be  the  only  poetess
to  excel  thy  works.  But  I  fear  that  my  fortune  may  now
retard  thee,  and  that  thy  spirit  may  flag  after  my  downfall.
While  there  was  the  opportunity,  often  dMst  thou  read  thy  own
works  to  me ;  often  did  I  read  mine  to  thee.  I  either  gave  my  at-
tention to  the  verses  thou  hadst  just  composed,  or  when  thou

*■'  PerUlaJ] — Ver.  1.  Some  commentators  have  supposed  that  Pe-
rilla  was  the  daughter  of  Ovid.  There  does  not  appear  any  indication  of
such  a  £act  in  this  Elegy ;  and  he  seems  rather  to  speak  of  her  in  terms  of
admiration  than  of  the  affection  of  a  parent  for  his  daughter.  He  would
hardly  be  content  vdth  a  mere  allusion  to  his  wife,  as  being  her  *  dulcis
mater,*  and  then  saying  no  more  about  her.  The  name  of  his  daughter  is
nowhere  to  be  found.

x2


y  Google


308  THE  TEISTLl;  [b.  in.

hadst  neglected  to  do  so,  I  was  the  cause  of  a  blnsh.^"  Perhaps,
after  my  example,  because  my  books  injured  me,  thou,  too,  hairt
traced  retribution  in  my  punishment.  Lay  aside  thy  fears,
Perilla ;  only  let  no  woman  be  led  astray,  or  leam  from  thy
writings  how  to  love.

Lay  aside,  then,  most  learned  girl,  all  grounds  for  sloth-
fulness,  and  return  to  the  liberal  arts  and  to  thy  pursuits.
That  beautiful  form  will  be  spoiled  by  length  of  years,  and
the  wrinkle  of  age  will  be  on  thy  antiquated  brow.  Wither-
ing old  age,  too,  which  comes  with  noiseless  step,  wiU  lay
his  hand  on  thy  good  looks.  And  when  any  one  shaU  say,
"  She  once  was  a  beauty,"  thou  wilt  grieve  and  wilt  compkon
that  thy  mirror  is  deceitful.  Thy  means  are  hut  moderate,
although  thou  art  most  deserving  of  great  wealth  ;  but  fancy
that  thy  means  are  equal  in  amount  to  immense  riches.  For,
in  good  truth,  Fortune  both  gives  to  whom  she  pleases,  and
takes  away  again ;  and  he  is  Irus^'  on  a  sudden,  who  was
Croesus  the  moment  before.  Why  should  I  enter  into  details  1
We  have  nothing  that  is  not  penshable  except  the  blessings  of
the  heart  and  of  the  intellect.  Behold  how  I  am  deprived  of
my  country,  yourselves,  and  my  home,  and  how  everyUiing  has
been  torn  from  me  that  could  be  taken  away;  and  yet  I
have  my  genius  as  my  companion  and  source  of  enjoy-
ment ;  over  this,  Csesar  could  hold  no  sway.  Let  who  pleases
put  an  end  to  my  hfe  with  the  cruel  sword,  yet  when  I  am
dead,  my  fame  wiU  survive  me,  and,  so  long  as  victorious  Rome,
sprung  from  Mars,  shall  look  down  from  &e  hills  on  the  whole
earth  subdued,  mv  writings  will  be  read.  And  do  thou  too,
whom  may  a  happier  result  of  thy  studies  await,  so  far  as  thou
canst,  avoid  extinction  in  time  to  come.


ELEGY  VIIL

Hk  says  that  his  longing  to  revisit  his  country  and  his  friends  is  so  great,
that  he  wishes  he  coidd  find  some  instantaneous  means  of  transporting
himself  thither.  He  speaks  of  the  wretchedness  of  his  exile,  and  prays
that  Csesar  may  one  day  modify  his  anger,  and  assign  him  a  more  en-
durahle  place  of  banishment.

At  this  instant  could  I  wish  to  ascend  the  chariot  of  Tripto-
lemus,  who  planted  the  unknown  seed  in  the  ground  then

"  Caute  of  a  hluah,^ — ^Ver.  26.  Probably,  by  reason  of  his  blaming  her
for  her  idleness,  and  her  neglect  of  the  Muses.

19  /rw«.]— Ver.  42.  He  was  a  beggar  of  Ithaca,  and  a  dependant  of  the
suitors  of  Penelope. Ulysses  slew  him  with  a  blow  of  his  fist. His  name

Digitized  by  LjOOQ IC


E.  viTi.]  OE, JjAMENT  or  OTID.  309

unused  to  it.  At  this  moment  could  I  wish  to  harness  the
dragon-steeds  of  Medea,  which  she  had,  Corinth,  at  her  flight
from  thy  citadel.  At  this  moment  could  I  wish  to  assume  the
waving  wings,  either  thine,  0  Perseus,  or  thine,  0  Daedalus ;  that,
the  thin  air  yielding  to  my  flight,  I  might  on  a  sudden  hehold
the  delightful  soil  of  my  native  land,  and  the  face  of  my  de-
serted home,  and  my  companions  that  still  rememher  me,  and,
chief  of  all,  the  dear  features  of  my  wife.

Fool !  why,  with  thy  childish  desires,  dost  thou  vainly  hanker
after  that  which  no  day  brings  thee,  or  will  bring  thee  ?  If  this
must  ever  be  thy  ardent  desire,  pray  to  the  divine  power  of
Augustus,  and  address  in  prayer  that  God,  whose  wrath  thou
hast  experienced:  he  is  able  to  give  thee  both  the  wings
and  the  swift  chariot.  Should  he  grant  thy  return,  at  once
thou  wilt  be  fitted  with  wings.

Should  I  pray  for  these  things,  (and  more  I  cannot  pray
for,)  I  fear  that  my  prayers  would  be  too  exorbitant.  Perhaps,
at  a  future  day,  when  his  anger  shall  have  expended  itself,
this  favour  will  have  to  be  asked  by  me  with  anxious  mind ;
meantime,  what  is  less  than  that,  but  equal  to  an  ample  boon
to  me,  would  that  he  would  order  me  to  depart  from  ttus  region
to  any  other  place :  neither  the  climate,  nor  the  water,  nor  the
soil,  nor  the  air  agrees  with  me,  and  a  perpetual  weakness  per-
vades my  body.  Whether  it  is  that  the  contagion  of  a  dis-
eased mind  affects  my  limbs,  or  whether  the  cause  of  my  illness
lies  in  the  situation  of  the  place :  soon  as  I  arrived  in  Pontus,
sleeplessness  distressed  me;  my  leanness  scarcely  kept  my
bones  covered,  and  food  became  repulsive  to  my  palate.  That
hue  which  exists  in  leaves  smitten  with  the  first  cold  in  autumn,
end  which  the  fresh-come  winter  has  nipped,  the  same  do  my
limbs  present.  I  obtain  relief  by  no  medicines,  and  some
occasion  for  complaining  misery  is  never  wanting.

I  am  not  more  healthy  in  my  mind  than  in  my  body  ;  both
of  them  are  equally  affected  wiUi  infirmity,  and  twofold  ills  do
I  endure,  the  hideous  aspect  of  my  fate  haunts  me,  and
stands  before  my  eyes  to  be  scanned,  just  as  if  it  were  a  body
that  could  be  seen. When  I  look  on  the  spot,  the  manners  of

afterwards  became  a  proverbial  expression  for  a  beggar.  Crcesus  was  the
rich  king  of  Lydia,  who  was  conquered  by  Cyrus  the  Great.  His  wealth
was  so  enormous  that  his  name  passed  into  a  proverb,  meaning  the  very
converse  of  that  of  Irus.


y  Google


310  THS  TfiUni.;  [B.ni.

the  people,  their  dress,  and  their  language,  and  it  occnrs  to  me
what  I  am,  and  what  I  have  been,  so  great  is  my  desirB  ISm*
death  that  I  complain  of  the  wrath  of  Csesar,  becaose  he  did
not  avenge  his  grievances  with  the  swcnrd ;  but  sinee  he  has
once  satisfied  his  hatred  by  legal  means,^  ma^  my  exile,  I  frw^y
'  become  more  tolerable  by  a  change  of  ntuauon.


EliEGY  IX.

He  shows  that  the  Grecians  founded  cities  on  the  Getic  shores,  and  in-
forms us  that  they  gave  its  name  to  the  city  of  Tomi.

Hebe  too,  then,  do  Grecian  cities  exist :  who  conld  Inve
beheved  it!  here^  among  the  names  of  savage  barbarism.
Hither,  too,  have  come  the  colonists  sent  from  Miletus,  and
among  the  Getee  have  they  founded  Grecian  homes.  But  the
ancient  name  of  this  spot,  and  ow«,  older  than  the  eiiy  b^
here^  was  clearly  derived  from  the  murder  of  Absyrtea.^

For  the  impious  Medea,  flying  from  her  deserted  fatlier  in  a
ship  which,  made  by  the  care  of  the  warlike  Minerva,  was  the
first  to  speed  through  waves  vBUch  before  yoere  untried,  is  sud  to
have  pHed  her  oars  in  these  fords.  Soon  as  the  sentinel  beheld
Aer  father  from  the  lofty  hill, — "  A  stranger  comes  from  Cd-
chis,'*  he  cries ;  "  I  recognize  the  sails."  While  the  Minyana  are
hastening,  while  the  rope  is  being  loosened  from  the  quay,
while  the  anchor,  drawn  up,  follows  their  swift  handa,  the
Colchian  dame,  conscious  (^  her  crimes,  baUa  her  boaosn  ;  she
who  had  dared,  and  who  was  to  dare,  many  impious  deeds
with  her  own  hand.  Although  abundance  of  audacity  re-
mains in  her  spirit,  paleness  is  impressed  on  the  astomdied
features  of  the  virgin.  When,  ther^ore,  she  beholds  afar  the
approaching  sails,  she  says,  **  We  are  overtaken ;  and  my
father  must  be  delayed  by  some  stratagem."  While  she  is
considering  what  to  do,  while  she  turns  her  eyes  on  every
side,  by  chance  she  fixes  them,  as  they  turn  towards  her

^  By  legal  means,'] — Ver.  41.  That  is,  by  punishing  him  according  to
the  hiws,  and  not  by  taking  vengeance  with  the  sword,  after  the  fashion  of
tyrants.

3*  Absyrius.] — Ver.  6.  He  was  the  son  of  iSetes,  and  the  brother  of
Medea.  His  death  by  the  hand  of  his  sister  is  here  related  by  the  poet
He  says  that  Tomi  was  so  called,  because  there  he  was  cut  into  pieces  by
Medea ;  thus  deriving  the  name  of  the  place  from  the  Greek  Hfiwht,  <to  cut.'


y  Google


K.  IX,]  OE, LAMEKT  OP  OVID.  311

brolik^.  When  his  presence  occurs  to  her,  "we  are  the
eonqoerors/'  says  she ;  "he,  by  his  death,  shall  be  productive
of  my  safety."  On  the  instant,  with  the  cruel  sword,  she
pierces  his  innocent  side,  he  not  suspecting  it,  and  fearing
no  such  fate ;  and  she  tears  him  in  pieces,  and  scatters  his
Jimbs,  torn  asunder,  about  the  fields,  so  as  to  be  found  in
many  places ;  and  that  her  father  may  not  be  ignorant  of  it,
she  exposes  on  a  lofty  rock  both  the  pallid  hands  and  the  head
dripping  with  blood,  in  order  that  her  parent  may  be  arrested
in  his  course  by  a  new  sorrow,  and  that  he  may  be  delayed  on
his  sad  road,  while  he  is  gathering  up  the  lifeless  limbs.

Thence  was  this  place  called  Tomi ;  because  in  it  the  sister
is  said  to  have  cut  to  pieces  the  limbs  of  her  brother.


ELEGY  X,

Thb  Poet  describes  the  miseries  of  his  exile,  and,  among  other  things,  he
says,  that  the  frost  is  so  intense,  that  the  rirer  and  the  sea,  and  even
the  fish,  are  frozen ;  and  that  when  that  is  the  case,  the  Scythian  foe,
which  excels  in  cavalry  and  archers,  is  able  to  pass  the  river  Danube,
and  lay  waste  the  country,  and  lead  the  inhabitants  into  captivity.

It  any  one,  yonder,  remembers  the  banii^ed  Naso,  and  if,  with-
out me,  my  name  still  surriyes  in  the  City,  \et  him  know  that  I
4an  living  in  the  midst  of  barbarism,  exposed  under  stars  that
neyer  set  in  the  ocean.  The  Sauromatae,  a  savage  race,  the
Bead  and  the  Getee  surround  me,  names  how  unworthy  of
my  genius  to  mention  !  yet,  while  the  air  is  mild,  we  are  de-
fended by  the  intervening  Danube  ;  while  it  fiows,  it  repels  in-
vasion by  its  waves.  But  when  dire  winter  has  put  forth  his
ragged  face,  and  the  earth  has  become  white  with  ice,  hard  as
marble ;  when  Boreas  is  at  Hberty,  and  snow  has  been  sent  upmi
the  regions  under  the  Bear ;  then  it  is  true  that  these  nations
are  cdstressed  by  a  shivering  climate.  The  snow  lies  deep;
and  as  it  hes,  neither  sun  nor  rains  melt  it ;  Boreas  hardens  it,
and  makes  it  endure  for  ever :  hence,  when  the  former  ice
has  not  yet  melted,  fresh  succeeds,  and  in  many  a  place  it  is
wont  to  last  for  two  years.

So  great  is  the  strength  of  the  North  wind,  when  aroused,
that  it  levels  high  towers  with  the  ground,  and  carries  off  roofs
borne  away :  the  inhabitants  ipooTlY  defend  themselves  from  the
cold  by  slons  and  sewn  trowsers ;  and  of  the  whole  body,  the


y  Google


312  THE  TBISTIA;  [b.  ui.

face  is  the  only  ptrt  exposed.  Often,  the  hair,  as  it  is  mored,
rattles  with  the  pendant  icide,  and  ^e  white  beard  shines  widi
theice  that  has  formed  upon  it.  Liquid  wine  becomes  sdid*  ]^«*
serving  the  fo/m  of  the  vessel :  they  do  not  quaff  draughts  ^
liquor,  but  pieces  which  are  presented.

Why  shidl  I  mention  how  the  frozen  rivers  become  hard,
and  how  brittle  water  is  dug  out  of  the  streams.  The  Danube
itself,  which,  no  narrower  than  the  river  that  bears  the
papyrus,  mingles,  through  many  mouths  witli  the  vast
ocean,  freezes  as  the  windis  harden  its  azure  streams,  and  it
rolls  to  the  sea  with  covered  waters ;  where  ships  had  gime,
they  now  walk  on  foot ;  and  the  hoof  of  the  horse  strikes  the
waters  hardened  by  freezing.  Sarmatian  oxen  drag  the  un-
couth waggons  along  unwonted  bridges,  as  the  waters  roll
beneath;  indeed,  I  shall  scarcely  be  beheved ;  but  inasmuch  as
there  is  no  profit  in  untruths,  an  eye-witness  ought  to  receiye
full  confidence.  I  have  seen  the  vast  sea  frozen  with  ice,  and
a  shppery  crust  covered  over  the  unmoved  waters.  To  have
seen  it  is  not  enough  :  I  have  trod  upon  the  hardened  ocean,
and  the  surface  of  the  water  was  under  my  foot,  not  wetted  by  it.
If,  Leander,  in  days  of  old  thou  hadst  had  sucVa  sea,  thy  deaUi
would  not  have  been  a  charge  laid  against  the  narrow  stream.**
At  that  time,  too,  the  curved  dolphms  cannot  raise  themselves
to  the  air ;  the  severity  of  the  wmter  hinders  them  striving  to
do  80 ;  and,  although  Boreas  resounds  with  agitated  wings,
there  ia  not  a  wave  on  the  sea  then  blocked  up.  The  ships
stand,  hemmed  in  by  the  frost,  as  though  by  marble,  and  no
oar  can  cleave  the  stiffened  water.

I  have  seen  fish  remain  bound  fast  in  ice,  and  even  then
some  part  of  them  retained  life ;  whether,  therefore,  the  severe
power  of  the  mighty  Boreas  congeals  the  waters  of  the  sea,  or
those  flowing  in  the  river,  immediately,  the  Danube  being  made
level  by  the  drying  Northern  blasts,  the  barbarous  enemy  is
carried  over  on  his  swift  steed:  an  enemy,  strong  in  horses,
and  in  the  arrow  that  flies  from  afar,  depopulates  the  neighbour-
ing region  far  and  wide.  Some  take  to  flight,  and  no  one
being  left  to  protect  the  fields,  the  unguarded  property  becomes
a  prey;  such  as  cattle,  and  the  creaking  waggons,  the  litde  trea-

*^  The  narrow  stream.'] — Ver.  41.  He  alludes  to  the  Hellespont,
'Which  was  not  more  than  a  mile  in  Mddth,  from  Sestos  to  Ahydos,  between
which  towns  Leander  was  in  the  habit  of  swimming  to  visit  his  mistress,
Hero.


y  Google


B.  X.]  OB, LAMENT  OP  OTID.  313

sores  of  the  country,  and  the  riches  besides  that  the  poor  in-
halHtant  possesses ;  some  are  driven  along  as  captiyes,  with
their  arms  fastened  behind  their  backs,  looking  back  in  Tain
upon  their  fields  and  their  homes;  some  die  in  torments,
pierced  by  barbed  arrows,  for  on  the  winged  steel  there  is  a
poison,  in  which  it  has  been  dipped.  What  they  cannot  carry
with  themselves,  or  lead  away,  they  destroy,  and  the  flames  of
the  enemy  consume  the  unoffending  cottages ;  even  when  there
is  peace,  they  cause  alarm  from  the  apprehension  of  war,  and
no  one  ploughs  the  ground  with  (he  pressed  ploughshare.

This  spot  either  beholds  the  enemy,  or  is  (dtoays  in  dread  of
a  foe  wluch  it  does  not  behold ;  the  earth  deserted,  becomes
worthless,  left  tmtUled  in  ruinous  neglect.  Here  the  luscious
grape  does  not  lie  concealed  under  the  shade  of  the  foliage,
and  the  fermenting  new  wine  does  not  fill  the  deep  vats ;
the  country  does  not  bear  fruit,  and  Acontius  would  have
nothing  here  on  which  to  write  a  line  to  his  mistress.  You
may  behold  naked  plains  without  trees — ^without  leaves;
places,  alas !  not  to  be  visited  by  a  fortunate  man !  Since,
then,  the  extensive  globe  is  so  wide,  has  this  land  been  dis-
covered for  the  purpose  of  my  punishment?


ELEGY  XL

Thb  Poet,  without  mentiomng  the  name,  charges  some  erael  person,  that
he  insults  his  misfortunes  while  thus  confined  in  Scythia,  and  deprived  of
home  and  every  comfort  >  and  he  tells  him  that  it  is  the  greatest  disgrace
to  press  hard  on  a  man  who  is  already  prostrate.  He  reminds  hun  of
the  story  of  Phalaris,  and  the  punishment  of  him  who  contrived  the  de-
struction of  others ;  and  then  recommends  him  to  keep  in  mind  the
fluctuating  fate  of  man,  and  no  longer  to  hear  his  faults  in  rememhrance,
hut  rather  to  let  his  wounds  heal  with  time ;  and  he  ends  by  telling
him  that  his  wretchedness  cannot  possibly  be  exceeded.

If  thou  art  one,  unfeeling  man,  to  insult  my  misfortunes,  and
endlessly,  in  thy  cruelty,  to  persecute  me  with  accusations,  furefy
thou  wast  bom  of  a  rock,  and  nourished  with  the  milk  of
savage  beasts ;  I  should  say,  too,  that  flint  Alls  thy  breast.
What  further  lengths  remain,  to  which  thy  anger  can  pro-
ceed ?  or  what  dost  thou  see  to  be  wanting  to  my  misery  ?
A  barbarous  region,  the  inhospitable  shores  of  Pontus,  and
the  MienaHan  she-bear,  with  her  attendant  Boreas,  behold


y  Google


314  THB  TBI8TLA.,  [b.  m.

me.  I  have  no  intereoime  in  language  with  this  savage
mM&m ;  all  places  for  me  are  filled  widi  anxioiis  appiek^-
sbna.  As  the  fleeing  stag^  when  caught  by  the  greecly
bean,  or  as  the  lamb^  when  surrounded  by  the  mouataifi
wolyes,  trembles,  so  am  I  filled  with  dread ;  hemmed  ia  on
erery  nde  by  wariike  tribes,  while  the  enemy  almost  pievees
my  aide.  Suppose  it  were  a  trifling  punishment  to  be  depmed
of  my  dear  wife,  my  country,  and  my  pledges  of  t^tctimi;
suppeaa  I  anffined  no  mii^rtuBe,  but  hardy  the  wnA  ef
Cseaar — ^la  the  bare  wrath  of  Caesar  too  hght  a  misf<Mrtm9e  to
me  f  And  yet  there  is  one  who  can  handle  again  my  bkeding
wounda;  and  who  can  open  his  eloquent  Ups  against  my
morals  ?  On  an  easy  subject  every  one  can  be  eloquent ;  and
but  little  strength  is  required  to  break  what  is  o/rt o^  brmaed.
It  k  true  courage  to  overthrow  towns  and  standkig  walls :  'tii
only  cowards  that  destroy  what  is  already  |»ro8trate.  I  am  m^
irbBi  onee  I  was.  Why  cbst  thou  trample  on  an  empty  shadow  ?
Why  with  atones  dost  ih&a  press  upon  my  a£^es  and  my
tomb  ?  'Twas  Hector  kmaelf,  at  the  time  when  he  fou^t  in
battle ;  but  he  who  was  fastened  to  the  H»monian  hones
was  not  Hector :  remember,  too,  that  I  am  not  the  person
whom  thou  didst  formerly  know — the  phantom  only  of  that
penon  is  left.  Why,  insulter,  dost  thou  persecute  a  phantom
with  reproachful  words  ?  Cease,  I  pray,  to  harass  the  mere
ghost  of  myself.

Suppose  aH  my  crimes  to  exist ;  let  there  be  nothing  in
them  which  thou  mayst  suppose  to  be  rather  the  result  of  error
than  of  criminality.  Lo !  as  an  exildj  I  pay  the  penalty — a
penalty  both  dreadful  in  the  banishment  itsel/,  and  in  the
place  of  banishment ;  glut  thy  anger,  then  !

Mj  lot  might  appear  worthy  of  tean,  even  to  an  executicmer ;
yet,  in  thy  sole  judgment,  'tis  not  sufficiently  dreadful :  thou
art  more  cruel  than  the  savage  Busiris,^ — ^more  cruel  than  he
who  heated  the  fictitious  biiU  by  the  slow  fire,  than  he,  too,
who  is  said  to  have  given  the  buU  to  the  Sicilian  tyrant,^  and

^  BtMtm.]— Yer.  39. He  was  a  cruel  king  of  Egypt,  who  sacrifieed
strangers  to  Jupiter,  and,  at  length,  was  slain  by  Herciiles.
3*  The  Sicilian  tffranL} — ^Ver.  41. Phalaris,  the  king  of  Agrigentum,


who,  being  of  a  cruel  disposition,  received  as  a  present  ^m  Perillus,  a
brazen  buU,  with  the  suggestion  mentioned  by  the  Poet ;  and  who  tried,

y  Google


Drazen  dou,  waa  me  suggestion  menuonea  oy  ine  roen ;  ana  wno  inea,
with  retributive  justice,  the  first  experiment  with  it  on  the  inventor,  as
related  in  the  text.


B.XI.]  OK, LAMENT  OF  OVID.  315

by  his  words  to  have  recommended  his  invention.  "  0  king !"
9ay8  hcy  '*  there  is  utility  in  this  gift,  and  that  greater  than
would  aj^ar :  not  only  is  the  appearance  of  my  work  worthy
of  approval.  Dost  thou  see,  on  the  right  hand,  this  side  of  the
bull  that  can  be  opened  ?  Here  the  person  must  be  inclosed,
whom  thou  wouldst  put  to  death.  Forthwith,  when  he  is
indosed,  bum  him  with  a  slow  fire :  he  will  roar  out,  audit  will
be  exactly  the  voice  of  a  real  bull.  To  recompense  one  present
with  anodier,  give  me,  I  pray,  in  return  for  this  invention,  a
reward  worthy  of  my  in^nuity!"  He  had  spoken;  but
Phalaris  said,  "Wonderful  mventor  of  punishment!  be  thou
at  once  the  first  to  make  trial  of  thy  work !"  There  was  no  de-
lay ;  dreadfully  roasted  on  the  fires,  his  own  invention,  he  gave
a  ^ecimeu  of  the  cries  of  suffering  with  shrieking  voice.

What  have  I  to  do  with  the  Sicilies,  among  the  Scythians  and
the  Gretse  ?  Whoever  thou  art,  my  complaint  reverts  to  thee.
That  thou  mayst  be  able,  too,  to  satiate  thy  thirst  with  my  blood,
and  that  thou  mayst  experience  as  much  pleasure  with  greedy
heart  as  thou  mayst  wish  ;  so  many  evils  have  I  suffered  by
land  and  by  sea,  in  my  journey,  that  I  could  think  that  even
thou,  on  hearing  them,  wouldst  grieve.  Beheve  me,  were
Ulysses  compared  with  me,  the  wrath  of  Neptune  is  less  than
that  oi  Augustus.  Therefore,  whoever  thou  art,  refrain  from
opening  my  wounds  afresh,  and  take  off  thy  hajids  from  my
painful  sores  ;  and,  that  oblivion  may  take  possession  of  the
story  of  my  fault,  permit  my  destiny  to  heal  my  scars.  Keep-
ing, too,  the  lot  of  man  in  thy  recollection,  which  raises  and
crushes  the  same  persons,  do  thou  stand  in  awe  of  the  chances
of  uncertainty;  and  since,  what  I  never  supposed  could
happen,  thou  hast  so  much  anxiety  about  my  affairs,  thou
hast  no  reason  to  be  alarmed.  My  fate  is  a  most  wretched  one.
The  wrath  of  Cssar  brings  with  it  every  woe.  That  this  might
be  the  better  proved,  and  I  might  not  be  thought  to  deceive
thee  in  this,  I  could  wish  that  thou  thyself  wouldst  make  trial
of  my  punishment.


y  Google


316  THE  TBISTIA;  [b.  in.


ELEGY  XII.

He  says  that  the  winter  is  past,  and  that  spring  has  arrived.  He  fhen
compares  its  delights  in  Pontus  with  those  of  other  countiies.  He
says  that  the  seas  have  become  navigable,  .and  that,  should  any  nilor
arrive  from  civilized  lands,  he  will  go  to  meet  him,  and  learn  the  recent
triumphs  of  Caesar.  Should  any  one  be  enabled  to  give  him  the  desired
information,  he  says  that  he  will  entertain  him  as  his  guest ;  and  he
concludes  by  praying  that  his  abode  in  the  Scythian  regions  may  not  be
lasting,  but  that  his  stay  there  may  be  only  temporary,  and  that,  at  a
future  day,  he  may  return  to  his  country.

Now  the  Zephyrs  moderate  the  cold  ;  and,  the  year  now  fin-
ished, this  Maeotian  winter  has  seemed  to  me  more  protracted
than  any  former  ones;  and  now,  the  Ram,  which  did  not  safeiy
carry  nelle  when  placed  on  him,  makes  the  length  of  the  days
equal  with  that  of  the  nights.  Now  the  boys  and  the  sportiye
lasses  are  gathering  the  yiolet,  which  the  ground  in  the  country
bears,  no  one  planting  them.  The  meadows,  too,  become  clad
with  flowers  of  yarious  tints,  and  the  prattling  birds  reyel
with  their  untaught  throats  ;  the  swallow,  that  she  may  ayoid
the  crime  of  her  cruel  ancestress,  makes  her  nest  and  her
Httle  home  under  the  rafters  ;  the  blade,  which  has  lain  hid,
covered  in  the  ridges  devoted  to  Ceres,  puts  forth  its  tender
top  from  the  warmed  earth ;  and  in  whatever  region  the  yine
exists,  the  bud  is  pushed  forth  from  the  shoot :  but  from  the
Getic  shores  the  vine  is  far  distant.  In  whatever  region  any
tree  exists,  the  branch  begins  to  swell  on  the  tree ;  but  trees
are  far  removed  from  the  Getic  land.  At  Rome  there,  it  is  now
a  time  of  enjoyment,  and  the  garrulous  warfare  of  the  wordy
Forum  gives  place**  to  the  games,  as  they  succeed  in  order.
Now  the  horse  is  employed,  now  they  sport  with  light  arms  ;
now  the  ball  is  tossed,  and  now  the  hoop  is  rolled  with  its
whirling  circle ;  now,  when  the  youths  have  been  besprinkled
with  the  flowing  oil,  they  bathe  their  wearied  limbs  in  the
Virgin's  aqueduct.  The  stage  is  frequented,  and  the  applause
waxes  loud  with  divided  opinions  ;  and  the  three  theatres  now
resound,  in  place  of  the  three  Forums.

Oh  four  times,  aye,  immeasurably  blest  is  he  who  is  allowed
to  enjoy  the  delights  q/"  the* City,  not  forbidden  to  him  !  but  by

*  Forum  gives  phceJ] — Yer.  18. The  days  on  which  the  public  games
were  celebrated  were  *  nefasti,'  and,  on  them,  the  courts  of  law  were  closed.


y  Google


E.  xil]  OB, LAlCElfT  OP  OVID.  317

me  is  beheld  snow  melted  by  the  venial  smi,  and  water  which
can  hardly  be  dug  out  of  the  hardened  strcfam.  The  sea  is  not
now  congealed  with  ice,  and  no  longer,  as  before,  does  the  Sau-
romatian  herdsman  drive  the  creaking  waggon  over  the  Danube ;
a  few  ships,  too,  will  be  beginning  to  sail  this  way,  and  the
stranger  bark  will  be  on  the  Pontic  shore.  I  will  be  careful  to
meet  the  sailor,  and  having  saluted  him,  I  will  enquire  why  he
comes?  who  he  wP-and  from  what  country  ?  Wonderful,  indeed,
will  it  he,  if  he  has  not  merely  ploughed  in  safety  the  neigh-
bouring waters  from  some  adjacent  place.  Few  are  the  sailors
that  cross  so  large  a  tract  of  sea  horn  Italy ;  few  are  they  that
come  to  these  shores,  destitute  of  harbours ;  yet,  whether  he
knows  how  to  speak  in  the  Oreek,  or  whether  in  the  Latin
language,  assitredly  on  the  latter  account  will  he  be  more
pleasing.  It  is  possible,  also,  that  one  may  have  directed  his
course  hither,  with  a  steady  South  wind  from  the  mouth  of  the
straits  of  the  Hellespont y  and  from  the  waves  of  the  prolonged
Propontis  :  whoever  he  is,  he  can  teU  the  news  with  in  faithful
narrative,  and  it  may  be  a  portion  of,  and  a  substitute  for,
the  topics  of  the  day.  I  pray  that  he  may  be  able  to  telP  me
the  triumphs  of  Csesar  that  he  has  heard  of,  and  of  the  vows
that  have  been  fulfilled  for  Latian  Jove ;  and  that  thou  at
length,  rebellious  Germany !  hast  laid  thy  weeping  head  be-
neath the  feet  of  the  great  General.  He  who  brings  me  this
news,  of  things  which  I  shall  grieve  not  to  have  seen — ^the
same  shall  forthwith  be  a  guest  at  my  home.

Ah,  me !  and  is  the  home  of  Naso  in  the  Scythian  land  ?  and
does  punishment  give  me  a  place  of  its  own  for  my  home  ?
May  tiie  Gods  grant  that  Caesar  make  this  but  a  temporary
shelter  in  my  disgrace,  and  not  my  lasting  abode  and  my
home!


ELEGY  XIII.

His  birthday  baying  arrived,  be  pronoances  it  to  be  needless,  as  it  comes
in  a  place  wbere  it  is  not  possible  for  bim  to  perform  tbe  customary  so-
lemnities ;  be  tells  it  to  return  no  more,  so  long  as  be  sball  remain  in
tbe  Scytblan  regions.

Behold,  my  birth-day  comes  round  at  its  usual  time;  needless,
indeed,  for  of  what  use  to  me  was  it  to  be  bom  ?  "Why,  in  thy
cruelty,  didst  thou  come,  an  addition  to  the  wretched  years  of
the  exile  ? Thou  oughtst  rather  to  have  put  an  end  to  them.

Digitized  by  LjOOQ IC


318  THC  TBI8TIA ;  [b.  m.

If  thou  hadst  had  any  care  of  me,  or  had  there  heen  any  duune
in  thee,  thou  wooldtt  not  have  accompanied  me  beyond  my
Gonntry.  In  the  place  where  first  I  was  onfortonateiy  known
to  thee  as  an  infant,  in  that  same  thou  wonldst  have  tried  to
be  my  last.  Thou,  too,  in  thy  sorrow,  wonldst  have  said  hre-
well  (as  said  my  friends)  in  the  City,  when  now  about  to  be
left  by  me.

What  hast  thou  in  common  with  Pontus  ?  Has  the  wrath  of
Cflesar  sent  thee  as  well,  to  the  extreme  region  of  the  freezing
climates?  Dost  thou  expect,  forsooth,  the  honour  of  thy
wonted  tribute,  and  that  the  white  robe^  should  hang  from  my
shoulders  ?  that  the  smoking  altar  should  be  girt  with  flowery
chi^plets?  that  the  morsel  of  frankincense  should  crackle
in  the  flames?  that  I  should  offer  the  sacrificial  cakes  to
mark  the  day  of  my  birth  ?  and  that  I  should  give  utterance
to  auspicious  prayers,  my  lips  uttering  words  of  good  omen  ?
I  am  not  so  situated ;  and  my  circumstances  are  not  such  tiiat
I  can  be  joyful  at  thy  arrival.  A  funereal  altar,  wreathed  with
the  moumM  cypress,  and  flames  prepared  on  the  erected
pileT,  befit  me.  I  choose  not  to  offer  the  frankincense
that  fails  to  conciliate  the  Gods ;  and  words  of  good  omen
occur  not  to  me,  amid  evils  so  great.  If,  however,  any  thing
can  be  gained  by  me  on  this  day,  I  pray  thee  never  to  return
in  these  r^ons,  so  long  as  Pontus,  almost  the  remotest  spot
in  the  earth,  and  wrongly  called  by  the  name  of  Euxinus,"
retains  me.


ELEGY  XIV.

He  praises  the  constancy  imd  fidelity  of  a  friend  who  is  coUeding  his
works,  and  entreats  him,  to  the  best  of  his  abihty,  ta  keep  alive  his
name  in  the  City.  He  tells  him  that  his  Metamorphoses  have  been
published  in  an  uncorrected  state ;  and  he  concludes  by  alleging,  that
allowance  ougnt  to  be  made  for  whatever  he  composed  in  Scythia  during
the  time  of  luB  exile.

Thou  worshipper,  and  holy  guardian  of  learned  men,  my
2«  The  white  ro6c.]— Ver.  14. On  the  celebration  of  birth  days  the

white  robe  was  assumed  as  being  an  emblem  of  purity  and  happiness,  and

of  good  omen  in  its  hue.
2'  EuxitmaJ] — Ver.  28,  This  name  is  derived  from  the  Gre^  Ev^ecvoc,

*  hospitable,'  or  '  friendly  to  strangers.' The  Poet  implies,  that,  from  its

stormy  character,  and- the  barrenness  of  the  neighbouring  regions,  it  ought

to  have  been  called  a^fvo^t  or  *  Axenus,'  '  inhospitable,'  which,  indeed,

was  its  ancient  name.


y  Google


B.  XIV.]  OB, LAMEKT  OP  OVID.  31  ^

Mend,  who  art  ever  liie  fayourer  of  my  talents ;  and  dost  thou
not,  as  once  thon  wast  wont  to  honour  me  in  my  pro-
sperity, now  too,  have  a  care  that  I  seem  not  wh(^y  lost?  Art
^on  compiling  my  poems,  those  Arts  alone  heing  excepted^
which  have  brought  ruin  on  their  composer  ?  Do  so,  I  pray,
thou  admirer  of  the  modem  poets,  and  to  the  best  of  thy  power
retain  my  body  in  the  City.  Exile  has  been  awarded  to  me ;
exile  has  not  been  awarded  to  my  books,  whidi  have  done
nothing  to  deserve  the  punishment  of  their  master.  Often  is
the  banished  father  an  exile  in  most  distant  lands  ;  yet  it  is
allowed  the  children  of  the  exile  to  remain  in  the  City.  After
the  example  of  Pallas,  verses  have  been  bOTn  of  me  without  a
mother.  These  are  my  own  ofiispring,  and  my  own  progeny.
These  I  commend  to  thy  care :  the  more  they  are  deprived  of
their  parent,  the  greater  will  be  the  burden  to  thee,  their  pro-
tector. Three  have  been  bom  to  me  that  have  followed  my
unhappy  example ;  remember  to  make  the  rest  of  them  thy
care  in  the  eyes  of  men.  There  are  also  thrice  five  volumes
on  the  changes  of  figure,  poems  that  were  snatched  from  the
funeral  pile  of  their  master.  That  work  might  have  gained  a
surer  reputation  from  my  correcting  hand,  had  not  my  min
happened  first.  Now,  uncorrected,  it  has  come  into  the  pre-
sence of  the  public — if,  indeed,  anything  of  mine  is  still  be-
fore the  public.

Add  to  my  works,  this  composition,  such  as  it  is,  which
comes  sent  to  thee  from  a  distant  re^on;  and  when  any
one  reads  it  (should  any  one  do  so),  let  him  first  consider
under  what  circumstances,  and  in  what  place  it  was  written.
He  will  be  considerate  to  writings  whose  time  of  composition
he  will  know  was  a  time  of  exile,  and  which  were  toritten  in  a
barbarous  clime.  And,  amid  so  many  misfortunes,  he  will  be
surprised  that  I  was  capable  of  fnuning  any  poem  with  my
trembling  hand.  Misery  has  ruined  my  powers,  the  fountain
of  which  even  before  was  not  prolific,  and  the  vein  hut  unpro-
ductive. But,  such  as  it  was,  it  has  disappeared,  for  want  of
exercise,  and,  dried  up,  it  has  perished  by  lengthened  stag-
nation. Here  is  no  abundance  of  books,  oy  which  I  might
be  both  invited  and  instmcted  :  instead  of  books,  there  is  the
sound  of  the  bow  and  of  armour.  There  is  no  one  in  this
region,  should  I  recite  my  verses,  whose  ear  I  could  engage  so

2s  Those  Arts  alune  heing  excepted,"] — Ver.  6.  He  means  his  three
books  on  the  Art  of  Love  the  ostensible  cause  of  his  misfortunes.


y  Google


320  THX  TBI8TIA;  [b.  lu.

as  to  ondentand  me.  There  is  no  spot  for  me  to  retire  to :
the  guard  of  the  city  walls,  and  the  closed  gate>  keep  off  the
Getic  foe.  Many  a  time  do  I  enquire  about  some  word,  name,  or
place,  and  there  is  no  one  to  inform  me.  Often  (I  am  ashamed
to  own  it)  words  fail  me,  when  endeavouring  to  say  some-
thing ;  and  I  have  forgotten  how  to  speak.

I  am  almost  stunned  with  the  Thradan  and  the  Scythum
jargon  on  every  side ;  and  I  seem  as  though  I  could  write  in
Getic  measures.  Believe  me,  I  am  afraid  lest  Pontic  words
should  be  mixed  with  Latin  ones,  and  thou  shouldst  read
them  in  my  writings.  Deign,  then,  to  grant  pardon  to  my
book,  such  as  it  is,  and  excuse  it,  on  the  ground  of  my
wretched  lot.


y  Google


OB, LAMENT  or OVID.  321


BOOK  THE  FOURTH.


ELEGY  I.


He  says  that  his  works  must  be  excused,  if  they  are  found  to  be  of  infe-
rior character ;  since  he  writes  them  in  exile,  not  for  the  sake  of  glory,
but  only  that  he  may  solace  his  griefs,  and  lull  the  recollection  of  them.
He  then  enumerates  the  afflictions  which  he  endures  in  the  Scythian
region.

If  there  are  any  blemishes  in  my  books,  as  there  will  be,
excuse  them,  reader,  on  account  of  the  time  of  their  com-
position. I  am  an  exile;  and  repose,  not  fame,  is  my  object :
that  my  mind  may  not  dwell  too  intently  on  my  misfortunes,
This,  too,  is  the  reason  why  the  miner  sings  chained  with  the
fetter,*  when  he  lightens  Ins  heavy  labour  with  his  untaught
numbers ;  and  why  the  man  sings,  who  strives,  as  he  bends
forward  on  the  oozy  sand^  while  he  drags  the  slow  barge
against  the  tide;  and  why  he,  too,  who  brings  together  his
pliant  oars  to  his  breast,  moves  his  arms  to  time,  as  he  strikes
the  water.  When  the  weary  shepherd  leans  on  his  staff,
or  sits  on  the  rock,  he  soothes  his  sheep  with  the  song  of  his
reed  pipe.  The  labour  of  the  handmaid  is  cheered  and  be-
guiled as  she  sings,  and  while,  as  she  sings,  she  draws  out  her
allotted  task  in  spinning.  Even  Achilles,  in  his  sadness,  is
said  to  have  lessened  his  sorrows  with  the  Heemonian  lyre,
when  the  Lymessian'  damsel  had  been  taken  from  him. Or-

*  Chained  with  the  fetter.'] — Ver.  5.  The  word  ^fossor*  literally  means
'  a  digger ;'  but,  by  the  mention  of  the  fetter,  it  would  seem  that  the
ponislmient  of  malefactors  is  here  referred  to ;  very  probably  they  were
employed  in  the  mines  and  public  works  of  the  state.  It  is  certain  that
slaves  were  employed  in  the  mines  belonging  to  the  Repubhc.

*  Ttie  Lymessian  damsel.'] — Ver.  15.  Briseis  is  so  called,  from  Lyr-
nessus,  a  town  near  Troy.  She  was  taken  from  Achilles  by  Agamemnon,
when  he  had  lost  Chryseis,  whom  the  Gods  ordered  to  be  restored  to  her

T


y  Google


322  THB  TBISTIA;  [b.  iv.

pheos  was  in  sorrow,  haying  twice  lost  his  wife,  when  he  at-
tracted the  woods  and  the  hiard  rocks  with  his  song.

Me  also,  did  the  Muse  comfort,  as  I  sought  the  appointed  spot
in  Pontus ;  she  was  the  only  companion  of  my  exile.  She  alone
fears  neither  the  treachery  of  man,  nor  the  sword  of  the  enemy,
nor  the  sea»  nor  the  winds,  nor  a  state  of  harharism.  She
knows,  too,  when  I  was  undone,  what  error  it  was  that  deceived
me,  and  she  knows  that  there  was  mistake,  and  not  criminality,
in  whati  did.  In  good  truth,  for  the  very  reason  that  she  be-
fore proved  my  injury,  she  is  now  propitious  to  me.  She  has
been  condemned  for  a  common  crime,  in  conjunction  with  me.
Would  that,  for  my  part,  I  had  never  employed  my  hand  in  the
rites  of  the  Pierian  maids,  since  that  sacrifice  was  to  prove  my
ruin.

But  what  shall  I  do  now  ?  The  very  potency  of  the  Sisters
retains  me,  and,  in  my  madness,  I,  ruined  by  poesy,  am
still  in  love  with  poesy.  Thus  was  the  newly-found  lotus,
when  tasted  by  the  palate  of  him  of  Dulichium,  grateful  in
flavour  to  him  whom  it  injured.'  The  lover  is  generally  sen-
sible of  his  losses  ;  yet  he  persists  in  them,  and  he  follows
after  the  very  cause  of  his  error.

Me  too,  my  books  delight,  although  they  have  injured  me,
and  the  very  weapon  that  has  caused  my  wounds,  I  love.
Perhaps  this  attachment  may  appear  to  be  a  madness,  but
this  madness  has  some  advantages.  It  precludes  my  mind
from  always  brooding  over  my  woes,  and  makes  me  forgetful
of  my  present  misfortunes.  And  just  as  the  Bacchanal,  when
wounded,  feels  not  the  wound  while,  in  her  delirium,  she  howls
along  the  steeps  of  Edonis;*  so,  when  my  breast  waxes
warm,  aroused  by  the  verdant  Thyrsus,  its  spirits  are  superior
to  mortal  woe.  They  are  sensible  neither  of  exile,  nor  of
the  shores  of  the  Scythian  ocean,  nor  do  they  feel  that  the
Deities  are  incensed.  Just  as  though  I  had  qua£fed  the  cup
from  the  soporific  Lethe,  does  my  sense  of  adversity  become
blunted. With  justice,  then,  do  I  venerate  the  Deities  that

father.  Haemonia  was  the  ancient  name  of  Thessaly,  of  which  countiy
A.chilles  was  a  native.

'  Ii  injured.] — Ver.  32.  Homer  tells  us  that  the  companions  of
Ulysses  found  the  flavour  of  the  lotus  so  delightful  that  they  forgot  their
country,  and  it  was  with  the  greatest  difficulty  that  Ulysses  could  persuade
them  to  embark,  and  leave  the  shores  of  the  Lotophagi

^  Edoms.'] — Ver.  42.  This  was  amountain  in  th^  part  of  Macedonia
Khioh  bordered  upon  Thrace.


y  Google


«.!.]  OH,  LAMEITT  OF  OTID.  323

alleviate  my  woes,  companions  from  Helicon  of  my  anxious
flight ;  and  who  have  deigned  to  attend  my  steps,  partly  by
sea  and  partly  by  land,  both  on  board  and  on  shore.  May
these,  at  least,  1  pray,  be  propitious  to  me ;  for  the  rest  of
the  Gods  make  common  cause  with  Caesar,  and  they  load
me  with  as  many  troubles  as  the  shore  has  sands,  as  the  sea
has  fishes,  and  as  the  fishes  have  spawn.  You  will  sooner
be  able  to  number  the  flowers  in  spring,  the  ears  of  com  in
summer,  the  fruit  in  autumn,  and  the  snow  in  winter,  than
the  evils  which  I  endured,  while,  driven  over  the  face  of
the  world,  I  sought,  in  my  wretchedness,  the  shores  on  the
left  side  of  the  Euxine  sea.  Nor  yet,  when  I  had  arrived,  was
the  allotted  number  of  my  woes  more  endurable  ;  hither,  too,
did  my  destinies  track  my  steps.  Here,  too,  do  I  recognize
the  threads  of  fate  allotted  me  at  my  birth,  threads  made
for  me  with  blackened  wool.  And,  not  to  speak  of  treachery,
and  my  life  being  in  danger,  things  true,  indeed,  but  too  ex-
traordmary  for  implicit  behef ;  how  sad  a  thing  is  it  for
one,  who  was  always  in  favour  with  his  fellow-citizens,  to  be
limng  among  the  Bessi  and  the  Getse !  How  sad  a  thing
is  it  for  one's  life  to  be  protected  by  gate  and  walls,  and  to  be
hardly  in  safety  through  the  resources  of  one's  place  of  abode !
When  young,  I  avoided  the  fierce  conflicts  of  warfare,  and  I
touched  not  arms  but  with  sportive  hand.  Now,  in  my  old
age,  Igird  my  side  with  the  sword,  my  left  arm  with  the  shield,
and  I  place  my  white  locks  under  the  helmet.  For  when  the
watchman  from  his  tower  gives  the  signal  of  some  rising,  forth-
with I  take  up  arms  with  nervous  hand.  A  savage  enemy,
that  has  bows  and  arrows  tipped  with  venom,  surveys  the  for-
tifications on  his  panting  steed.  And,  just  as  the  ravening
wolf  drags  and  carries  along  some  sheep,  which  has  nbt  hidden
itself  in  the  fold,  over  corn-fields  and  through  woods,  so,  if
the  barbarian  foe  finds  any  one  in  the  fields  that  has  not  yet
betaken  himself  within  the  protection  of  the  gates,  he  carries
him  off.  The  person  so  taken,  either  follows  them,  and  has
chains  thrown  over  his  neck,  or  is  killed  with  a  weapon  dipped
in  poison.

Here  am  I  placed,  a  newly-come  denizen  of  an  anxious  abode.
Alas !  too  long  is  the  duration  of  my  existence !  And  yet,
even  amid  so  many  woes,  the  Muse,  a  sojourner,  endures  to
return  to  her  numbers  and  to  her  former  devotions. But  there

t2


y  Google


324  THE  TKISTDL;  [b.  iv.

is  no  one  to  whom  to  recite  my  verses,  and  none  to  listen  with
their  ears  to  Latin  words.  I  myself  (what  else  can  I  do  ?)
both  write  and  read  for  myself ;  and  my  writings  are  reviewed
by  my  own  judgment  cdone.  Yet  many  a  time  have  I  said,
on  whose  account  do  I  labour  at  these  pursuits  ?  Will  the
Sauromatae  and  the  Gretae  read  my  writings  ?  Many  a  time,
as  I  was  writing,  the  tears  have  trickled  down,  and  the  writing
has  been  moistened  with  my  weeping.  My  mind,  too,  is  as
sensitive  to  its  old  wounds  as  though  they  were  ^esh ;  and
showers  of  sorrowM  tears  fall  upon  my  bosom.  When  I  call
to  mind  what  I  am  and  what  I  was,  my  fortune  thus  changed,
and  reflect  whither  and  from  what  quarter  my  destiny  hurries
me  ;  many  a  time,  in  my  desperation,  angered  at  my  ruinous
studies,  has  my  hand  thrown  my  lines  upon  the  hearth,  there
to  be  consumed.  And  since,  out  of  so  many,  only  a  few  are
remaining,  do,  whoever  thou  art,  read  them  with  indulgence ;
and  do,  as  Rome  is  forbidden  to  me,  take  it  in  good  part  that
my  poetry  is  not  any  better  than  my  present  circumstances.


ELEGY  IL

The  news  has  reached  the  poet  that  Tiberius  has  commenced  his  expedi-
tion against  Gennany.  He  says  that,  perhaps,  at  the  moment  of  his
writing,  victory  has  been  obtained,  and  that  though  corporeally  he  can-
not be  present  at  the  triumph,  yet  mentally  he  can  behold  the  pageant.
He  concludes  by  saying,  that,  should  any  one  bring  him  an  account  of
the  triumph,  he  will  receive  the  news  with  extreme  delight,  and  will  lay
'  aside  his  own  private  sorrows  in  his  love  for  the  public  welfare.

By  this,  fierce  Germany,  like  the  rest  of  the  earth  being  over-
come, thou  mayst  have  .bent  the  knee  to  the  Caesars.  Per-
haps, too,  the  lofty  Palatiura  is  being  decorated  with  wreaths,
and  the  frankincense  is  crackhng  in  the  blaze,  and  by  its  smoke
is  obscuring  the  day ;  the  white  victim,  struck  on  its  neck
with  the  planted  axe,  is  dyeing  the  ground  with  its  crimson
blood ;  and  each  of  the  Caesars  is  preparing,  as  conqueror,  to
offer  the  promised  gifts  in  the  temples  of  the  favouring  Gods ;
the  young  men,  too,  who  are  growing  up  under  the  name  of
Caesar,  that  that  house  may  ever  rule  over  the  earth ;  and
1/ivia,  with  her  good  daughters-in-law,  destined  often  to  pre-
sent them,  is  presenting  gifts  for  her  son  returned  in  safety,*

*  Son  returned  in  safety.'] — Ver.  12. Tiberius ;  who  is  here  supposed  in
luive  returned  victorious  from  his  German  expedition.  The  daughters-in-law


y  Google


B.  II.]  OB,  LAMENT  OF OTID.  325

and  the  matrons  as  well,  and  those  who,  free  from  imputation,
preserve  in  perpetual  virginity  the  chaste  altars.  The  com-
mon people,  too,  in  its  veneration,  and  with  the  people  so
revering,  the  Senate,  is  rejoicing ;  and  the  Knights,  of  whom
but  lately  I  formed  a  small  fraction.

Driven  far  away,  I  share  not  in  the  pubUc  joy,  and  but
little  of  the  news  travels  thus  far.  The  whole  of  the  people,
then,  of  the  City,  will  be  able  to  be  spectators  of  the  triumphs,
and  will  read  of*  captured  cities  with  the  titles  of  their  kings  ;
and  will  behold  monarchs,  bearing  the  fetters  of  the  capdve,
going  before  the  horses  vnreathed  with  garlands;  and  will
see  the  countenances  of  some  changed  with  their  fortunes,
those  of  others  stiU  firm,  and  forgetful  of  their  condition.
Some  of  them  will  be  enquiring  the  reasons,  and  the  circum-
stances, and  their  names ;  some  will  be  telling,  although
they  themselves  know  Uttle  about  it.  He  who  is  resplendent
on  high  in  Sidonian  purple,  was  the  leader  in  the  war;
he  is  next  to  our  general.  He,  who  is  now  fixing  his
sorrowful  looks  on  the  ground,  bore  not  that  countenance
while  he  was  in  arms.  That  one  in  his  pride,  and  who  still
sends  burning  glances  from  his  indignant  eyes,  was  the  insti-
gator and  the  adviser  of  the  war.  The  one  who  covers  his
squalid  face  with  his  dishevelled  locks,  in  his  perfidy,  hemmed
our  troops  in  an  ambuscade.  They  say  that  by  the  priest  that
follows,  the  bodies  of  the  captives  were  many  a  time  oflfered
up  to  the  unpropitious  Deity.  This  lake,  these  mountains,  this
number  of  fortresses,  these  many  rivers,  were  all  filled  with
slaughter,  and  were  streaming  vdth  blood.  Drusus,  who  was
the  excellent  son  of  a  worthy  sire,  once  earned  a  title  in  these
lands.  Rhine,  having  broken  his  horns,  and  vainly  conceal-
ing himself  in  his  sedge,  will  be  discoloured  by  his  own
blood.  See  too,  Germany  is  borne  along  with  dishevelled
hair,  and  sits  in  sadness  at  the  feet  of  the  invincible  chief ;
extending  her  courageous  neck  to  the  Roman  axe,  she  is  now
bearing  fetters  on  the  hand  with  which  she  wielded  arms.

Duly,  Caesar,  art  thou  borne  towering  above  these  in  thy

here  mentioned  were  probably  Agrippina,  the  daughter  of  Julia  and
Agrippa,  and  who  was  the  wife  of  Germanicus ;  and  Livia,  the  sister  of
Germanicus,  who  was  the  wife  of  Drusus,  the  son  of  Tiberius.

«  Will  read  o/.]— Ver.  20.  Not  only  were  the  captives  led  in  the
triumphal  procession,  but  models  and  paintings  of  the  captured  places
were  also  ^chibited,  with  their  titles  written  over  them.

Digitized  by  LjOOQ IC


326  TAB  TBISTLL ;  [b,  iv.

vict(Nnoii8  chanoty  anray^  ia  purple,  in  the  ^esence  of  Uiy
people ;  whicheyer  way  thou  shalt  turn,  thou  shalt  reeeive
i^pplauae  from  the  hands  of  thy  subjects,  as  the  strewed  flowers
on  every  side  cover  the  way.  The  soldier  will  have  his  brow
girt  with  the  laurel  of  Phoebus,  and  will  ung,  "  lo  Triumphe," '
with  loud  voice.  Thou  wilt  see  the  horses  of  the  chariot  often
stop,  through  the  sound  and  the  applause,  and  the  noise  of  the
musicians.  Thence  thou  wilt  go  4o  the  heights  of  the  Capitol,
and  to  the  temples  that  listened  to  thy  vows  ;  and  the  promised
laurel  branch  will  be  given  to  Jove,  who  ^serves  it.

I,  removed  afar,  so  far  as  I  cui,  shall  mentally  behold  tl^se
things,  for  my  mind  has  the  privilege  of  resorting  to  a  qpot  f cht-
b^dden  to  me.  In  freedom  it  ranges  at  large  over  unbounded
r^ons  ;  with  swift  flight  it  attains  to  the  Heavens.  It  directs
my  eyes  to  the  very  midst  of  the  City,  and  allows  them  not  to
be  deprived  of  a  blessing  so  great.  It  will  And  out  the  way,
too,  to  behold  the  ivory  chariot ;"  and  thus,  doubtless,  for  a
moment,  shall  I  be  in  my  father-land.

But  the  people,  supremely  blest,  will  see  the  pageant  in  its
reality,  and  the  joyous  crowd  will  be  there  widi  its  Prince.
By  hearsay  only  will  this  enjoyment  be  experienced  by  me,  thus
giving  range  to  fancy,  and  removed  afiu*.  There  will^  too,  be
scarcely  one,  sent  afar  from  Latium  to  a  distant  dime,  to  tell
me,  anxious  to  hear  it,  this  news.  Even  then,  he  will  tell  me  of
the  triumph  when  it  is  long  since  past  and  grown  old ;  but  at
whatever  time  I  shall  hear  of  it,  I  shall  rejoice.  When  that
day  shall  come,  I  will  lay  aside  my  griefe,  and  the  cause  of  tibe
pubhc  will  rise  superior  to  my  private  sorrows,

7  lo  TVutfnpAe.]— -Yer.  51.  *  lo/  or  '  lo  Trinmphe,'  was  espedaDytbe
cry  of  exultation  used  by  the  troops,  following  their  general,  on  the  occa-
sion of  his  triumph.  It  was  used  in  much  the  same  spirit  as  our  *  Huzza,*
and  the  German  *  Hoch/  at  the  present  day.

*  T/te  ivory  cHariotl^-Yer.  63.  The  'quadriga,'  or  four-horsed  cha-
riot, was  us^  by  the  Roman  generals  in  then:  triumphs.  The  bodywts
cylindrical,  and  enriched  with  gM  and  ivory,  and  the  utmost  skiJl  and
elegance  were  lavished  upon  the  wwkmanship.  The  car  was  elevated,  so
that  the  person  triumphing  was  the  most  conspicuous  object  in  the  pro-
cession. The  triumphal  chariot  had  no  pole,  the  horses  being  led  by  men
stationed  at  their  heads.


y  Google


B.  111.]  OB, LAMENT OF OVID.  327


ELEGY  III.

Ths  Poet  entreats  the  Constellations  of  the  Greater  and  the  Less  Bear  to
look  upon  the  Roman  City,  and  tell  him  whether  or  not  his  wife  keeps
him  in  rememhrance.  He  then  blames  himself  for  doubting  his  wife's
constancy ;  and  he  launches  forth  in  her  praises,  and  grieves  that,  through
him,  she  passes  a  life  of  sorrow.  He  exhorts  her  to  remain  fiim  in  her
constancy.

Yb  Bears,  both  the  Greater  and  the  Less,  of  which  the  one  guides
the  Grecian,  the  other  the  Sidonian  ship,  and  both  are  un-
touched by  the  waves ;  since,  situate  in  the  lofty  sky,  ye
survey  all  things,  and  set  not  in  the  Western  wave  ;  and  your
circuit,  in  its  circumference,  embracing  the  topmost  height  of
heayen,  is  free  from  contact  with  the  horizon  of  the  earth.
Cast  a  look,  I  beseech  you,  on  those  walls  which  Remus,  son
of  Hia,  is  said  once  lucklessly  to  have  overleapt ;  turn  your
shining  eyes  on  my  wife,  and  tell  me  whether  she  keeps  me
in  her  memory  or  not.  Alas !  why  do  I  inquire  what  is  too
well  known  ?  Why  fluctuate  my  hopes,  mingled  with  doubt-
ing apprehensions  ?  Believe  that  that  which  thou  wishest  to
he  true,  is  true  ;  cease  to  fear  for  what  is  secure ;  and  have
a  certain  assurance  of  undoubted  constancy.  And  that  which
the  stars  set  in  the  sky  are  unable  to  tell  thee,  do  thou  repeat
to  thyself,  with  voice  that  will  not  deceive ;  say  that  she  who
is  thy  greatest  care  keeps  thee  in  her  memory,  and,  so  far  as
she  is  able,  retains  thy  name  in  her  mind.  She  clings  to  tlte
recollection  of  thy  features  as  though  thou  were  present ;  and,
far  away,  she  loves  thee,  if  only  she  lives.

And  does  not,  at  ^iW*,  when  her  afQicted  mind  has  been  over-
come with  virtuous  grief,  soft  slumber  depart  from  her  anxious
breast  ?  Then  do  your  woes  recur  to  you,  my  wife,  when  my
conch  and  my  wonted  place  affect  you,  and  allow  you  not  to  be
forgetful  of  me.  Anxieties  arise,  and  the  night  appears  without
an  end ;  and  the  wearied  bones  of  your  resUess  body  are  sore.

For  my  part,  I  doubt  not,  that  these  and  other  like  things
happen;  tlmtyour  love  of  me  gives  proof  of  its  pure  sorrow,  and
that  you  are  not  less  distressed  than  when  Andromache,  the
Theban  matron,  beheld  the  blood-stained  Hector  dragged
along  by  the  Thessalian  chariot.  Yet  what  to  pray  I  know
not ;  and  I  am  unable  to  say  what  are  the  feelings  I  would
wish  you  to  have. Are  you  sad  ? I  am  grieved  to  be  the


y  Google


328  THE  TIOSTIA;  [a.  iv.

cause  of  your  sorrow.  Are  you  not  sad  ?  Would  that  you
were  worthy  of  the  husband  lost  to  you.

But  grieve  at  your  loss,  my  dearest  wife,  and  pass  a  life  em-
bittered by  my  woes.  Weep  for  my  afflictions;  there  is  &
certain  pleasure  in  weeping.  Tears  both  satisfy  sorrow  and  give
vent  to  it.  And,  oh!  that  not  my  hfe,  but  my  death  were
mourned  by  you  ;  and  that  by  my  death  vou  had  been  left  in
solitude  !  That  this  spirit,  by  your  aid,  nad  mingled  with  the
air  of  my  father-land !  That  the  tears  of  affection  had  bedewed
my  breast !  That  your  hands  had  closed  my  eyes,  looking  on
my  native  sky  at  the  last  moment !  That  my  ashes  had  rested,
laid  in  the  tomb  of  my  forefathers !  That  the  same  earth  had
held  me  that  was  touched  by  my  body  at  my  birth !  And,  lastly,
that  as  I  had  lived,  so  I  had  died  without  stain !  Now,  tbrough
my  disgrace,  my  very  life  is  a  source  of  shame;

Ah!  wretched  am  I,  if  you  think  it  a  disgrace  to  be  known  as
my  wife  I  Wretched  am  I,  if  you  are  now  ashamed  of  being  mine !
Wliere  are  those  times  goncy  when  you  were  wont  to  take  a  pride
in  your  husband,  and  not  to  conceal  his  name  ?  Where  are  those
times  gone  (unless,  perchance,  you  desire  to  forget  them),
when  it  pleased  you,  as  I  remember,  both  to  be  called  mine
and  to  be  mine  ?  As  became  a  virtuous  woman,  I  then  was
pleasing  to  you  in  all  of  my  qualities ;  and  the  esteem  of  your-
self, who  loved  me,  added  much  in  my  favour  to  what  was
true.  No  other  man  was  there  whom  you  would  prefer  (so
great  a  prize  did  I  seem  to  you),  or  whom  you  would  rather  have
made  your  husband.  And  now  be  not  ashamed  that  you  arc  my
wife  ;  your  shame,  and  not  your  grief,  ought  to  be  laid  aside.

When  the  rash  Capaneus  fell  by  a  sudden  stroke,  do  you
read  that  Evadne  blushed  for  her  husband  ?  Not  because  the
King  of  heaven  subdued  the  flames  of  the  world  with  his
bolts,  wa^t  thou,  Phaeton,  thyself  to  be  disavowed  by  thy
relations  ?  Semele  was  not  disowned  by  her  father  Cadmus,
because,  through  her  ambition,  she  met  her  death  by  her  en-
treaties. And  do  not,  because  I  have  been  struck  by  the
cruel  bolts  of  Jove,  let  the  crimson  blush  arise  on  your  placid
face ;  but  rather  arouse  yourself  to  the  care  of  defending  me,
and  prove  yourself  the  very  pattern  of  a  good  wife  for  me :
and  adorn  with  your  virtues  your  state  of  sorrow.  Let  glory,
so  difficult  of  attainment,  mo.unt  the  steep  path.  Who  would
have  known  of  Hector,  had  Troy  been  flourishing  ?  A  path
has  been  laid  open for  fortitude, through the  midst  of


y  Google


E.  iv.J  OB, LAMENT  OF  OTID.  329

sorrows.  Thy  art,  Tiphys,  is  thrown  away,  if  there  are  no
storms  on  the  ocean  ;  if  men  are  always  in  health,  thy  skill,
Phoebus,  is  worthless.  The  virtue  which,  in  prosperity,  is
concealed  and  hes  unknown,  makes  its  appearance  and  is
proved  in  adversity.  My  fate  gives  you  an  opportunity  for
fame,  and  your  piety  has  a  height  to  which  to  raise  its  head
aloft.  Use,  then,  this  opportunity,  and  trust  in  reliance
on  its  advantages.  Behold !  a  wide  field  Ues  open  for  your
fame.


ELEGY  IV.

The  Poet  extols  the  virtues  of  his  friend,  and  recounts  his  own  hardships
in  exile  at  Tomi ;  he  heseeches  him,  while  he  conceals  his  name,  to  ask
Augustus  to  grant  him  a  more  desirable  place  of  exile ;  and  he  says,
that  SQ  great  is  the  clemency  of  the  Emperor,  that  he  is  sure  that  he
will  readily  grant  his  request.  He  relates  how  Orestes  fled  with  his
sister  fix)m  the  cruelties  of  the  neighbouring  region ;  and  how  the  statue
of  Diana  was  taken  by  them  to  a  more  happy  clime.

Oh  thou!  who,  whilst  ennobled  by  the  names  of  thy  an-
cestors, exceUest  thy  high  birth  in  the  nobleness  of  thy
manners :  in  whose  mind  exists  the  reflection  of  thy  father's
integrity,  but  in  such  degree  that  that  integrity  is  not  with-
out its  proper  strength ;  whose  gift  is  eloquence  in  thy  native
language,  so  great,  that  there  was  none  superior  to  it  at  the
Latian  bar.  Far  from  my  wishes,  thou  art  described  by  signs,
employed  in  place  of  thy  name.  Pardon  for  this  the  extent
of  fiiy  fame.  In  nothing  have  I  erred ;  it  is  thy  good  deeds
that  betray  thee ;  if  thou  art  seen  to  be  what  thou  really
art,  then  is  my  fault  absolved.  And  do  not  suppose  that  es-
teem shown  for  thee  in  my  verses  could  hurt  lliee,  under  a
Prince  so  just.  The  Father  of  his  country  himself  (who  more
observant  of  the  laws  than  he  ?)  endures  often  to  be  mentioned
in  my  poetry.  And  Caesar  cannot  prevent  it,  because  he  be-
longs to  the  pubhc ;  and  a  part  is  he,  that  belongs  to  us,  of  the
conunon  welfare.  Jupiter  proffers  his  own  majesty  to  the  scope
of  the  poet's  genius,  and  allows  himself  to  be  sung  by  the  hps
of  all.  Thy  case  is  safe  in  the  prticedents  of  two  of  the  Gods
above ;  of  these,  the  one  is  seen,  and  the  other  is  believed  to
be  a  God.

Though  I  ought  not,  yet  will  I  cling  to  this  eiror  of  mine:
my  writings  are  not  subject  to thy  control. The  injury


y  Google


330  THE  TSI8TIA  ;  [b.  it.

arising  from  my  addressing  thee  is  nothing  new ;  for  oft,  while
I  was  yet  safe,  had  I  conversed  with  thee.

Therefore  thou  mayst  have  the  less  apprehension  thi^  I
should  canse  thy  disgrace  hy  being  a  friend  of  thine :  I,  the
origin  ofity  can  beiur  the  blame,  if  there  is  any.  For  thy
father  was  always  respected  by  me  from  my  earliest  years
(at  least  conceal  not  that  fact)  :  he  used  to  praise  my  talents
(this,  perhap9y  you  can  remember)  ;  yes,  even  more  than  I  de-
servec^  in  my  opinion  ;  and  he  used  to  tell  about  my  verses
in  that  voice  m  which  some  part  of  his  high  nobility  of  descent
was  conspicuous.  It  was  not  thee,  then,  but  thy  father,  that
was  imposed  upon,  for  it  was  his  house  that  gave  me  a  recep-
tion. And  yet,  believe  me,  there  was  no  deceit ;  but  in  all  my
actions,  if  the  last  is  excepted,  my  hfe  cannot  be  impugned.
Thou  wouldst  deny,  too,  that  this  fault,  through  which  I  was
undone,  was  a  crime,  if  the  lengthened  detail  of  so  great  a
misfortune  were  known  to  thee.  Either  timidity  or  mistake,
say  rather  mistake,  proved  my  downfall.  Ah,  suffer  me  to
lose  the  recollection  of  my  fate,  and  let  me  not,  by  handling
them,  burst  open  my  wounds  not  yet  closed ;  scarcely  will  rest
itself  be  of  any  avail  to  them.  Although,  therefore,  I  am  justly
punished,  yet  all  criminality  and  all  bad  intention  were  no  part
of  my  error.  And  of  that  the  Qod  is  sensible ;  for  which
reason,  I  have  neither  been  deprived  of  life,  nor  does  any
other  person  possess  my  property  taken  from  me.  Perhaps
(should  he  live)  he  wiU  one  day  put  an  end  to  this  banish-
ment, when  Ms  wrath  shall  have  become  moderated.  Now,
my  entreaty  is,  that  he  will  order  me  to  go  hence :  if
my  desire  is  not  wanting  in  becoming  moderation.  I  pray  for
a  more  civilized  place  of  exile,  and  one  a  little  nearer  to  Borne,
and  a  spot  which  is  at  a  greater  distance  from  a  savage
enemy.  And  so  great  is  the  clemency  of  Augustus,  that  if  any
one  asked  him  this  for  me,  perhaps  he  would  grant  it.

The  cold  shores  of  the  Euxine  Pontus  confine  me  ;  by  the
ancients  it  was  called  Axenus.  For  its  seas  are  ruffled  by
no  moderate  breezes;  and  there  no  stranger  ship  enters  a
quiet  harbour.  Around  are  tribes  which  seek  their  prey
through  bloodshed,  and  the  land  has  no  fewer  sources  of
alarm  than  the  faithless  waves.  Those  whom  thou  hearest
of  as  revelling  in  the  blood  of  human  beings,  are  situate  almost
under  the  sky  of  the  same  star.  And  not  far  from  me  is
the  place  where  the  Tauric  altar  of  the  quivered  Goddess  is


y  Google


K.  v.]  OE, LAMENT  OF  OTID.  331

fed  with  dreadful  slaughter.  These  regions  formed  once,  as
they  tell,  the  realms  of  Thoas — realms  not  hateful  to  the
-wicked,  nor  desirable  for  the  good.  Here  the  virgin  descendant
of  Pelops,  the  hind  having  been  substituted  for  her,  presided
over  the  rites  of  the  (xoddess,  such  as  they  were.  After
Orestes,  (whether  more  pious  or  wicked,  is  a  matter  of  doubt,)
driven  by  his  avenging  Furies,  had  come  here,  and  his  com-
panion ;  from  Phocis,  a  pattern  of  true  friendship,  they
who  were  two  in  body  and  one  in  mind :  forthwith  they  were
led  in  bonds  to  the  altar  of  Trivia,  which  stood,  aU  blood-
stained, before  the  twofold  doors.  Neither  did  his  own  fate
affect  the  one  or  the  other  of  them ;  each  was  in  affliction,
on  account  of  the  other's  death.  And  now,  with  drawn  sword,
the  priestess  had  taken  her  station,  and  a  barbarian  Met
had  girded  the  Grecian  locks ;  when  Iphigenia,  in  the  course
of  conversation,  recognised  her  brother,  and  gave  him  embraces
in  place  of  death.  She  joyfully  transported  the  statue  of  the
Groddess,who  holds  cruel  rites  in  abhorrence,  from  those  regions
into  more  happy  climes.

This  region,  then,  the  most  remote  part  of  the  vast  world,
from  which  both  Gods  and  men  have  taken  their  flight,  is
neighbouring  to  me.  Close  to  my  country  are  these  deadly  rites,
if,  indeed,  a  land  of  barbarians  can  be  the  country  of  Naso.
Would  that  those  winds,  by  which  Orestes  was  borne  away,
would  bear  back  my  sails,  as  well,  the  Divinity  being  appeased.


ELEGY  V.

The  Poet  ptaises  the  constancy  of  his  firiend,  and  requests  him  never  to
fail  in  his  friendly  offices,  and  to  speak  in  his  favour  to  Augustus.  He
shows  that,  by  length  of  time,  all  things,  except  his  own  woes,  become
more  endurable ;  and  concludes,  hj  wishing  that  every  worldly  happi-
ness may  be  the  lot  of  his  friend.

O  THOU,  especially  allotted  to  me  by  destiny  among  my  beloved
companions,  the  only  altar*  that  I  have  found  in  my  calamities ;

•  The  only  altar.] — Ver.  2.  With  the  ancients,  aU  altars  to  the  Deities
were  places  of  refuge ;  hence  the  present  complimentary  allusion.  The
supplicant  was  considered  to  place  himself  under  the  protection  of  the
Deity  to  whom  the  altar  was  consecrated,  and,  under  such  circumstances,
violence  offered  to  the  person  so  flying  for  refuge,  even  if  a  criminal,  or  a
runaway  slave,  was  looked  upon  as  an  act  of  saoilege.


y  Google


332  THE  TSISTIA;  [b.  IT.

through  whose  discourse,  this  spirit  of  mine,  abont  to  perish,
resumed  life,  just  as  the  watchfol  flame  waxes  strong  by  the
infusion  of  oil,  the  invention  of  Pallas  ;^^  thou,  who  didst  not
fear  to  open  thy  friendly  doors,  a  refuge  to  my  bark  when
struck  by  the  lightnings  ;  through  the  aid  of  whose  fortune  I
should  not  have  found  myself  in  want,  had  Csesar  even  de-
prived me  of  my  patrimonial  property.  While  my  feelings  are
carrying  me  away,  forgetful  of  present  circumstances,  how
very  nearly  did  thy  name  escape  me.  Yet  thou  dost  recognize
thyself;  and,  moved  by  the  desire  of  applause,  thou  wouldst
wish  to  say  openly,  *'  ft  is  I."  Truly  would  I,  if  thou  wouldst
aUow  me,  be  ready  to  give  thee  glory,  and  to  commend  thy
remarkable  constancy  to  Fame.  But  I  fear  lest  I  should  injure
thee  by  my  grateful  strains,  and  lest  an  honour  paid  to  thee
at  a  not  fitting  season,  should  be  to  thy  prejudice.  What
thou  mayst  do  in  safety,  rejoice  in  thy  heart  that  I  remember
thee,  and  that  thou  keepestme  in  thy  memory.  And,  as  thou
art  doing,  strive  with  all  thy  oars  to  bear  me  aid,  until  a  more
gentle  breeze  arise,  the  God  being  propitiated.  Do  thou
defend  that  person  who  can  be  saved  by  the  aid  of  none,  if
he  who  has  overwhelmed  him  on  the  Stygian  wave  should
not  give  him  his  assistance.  Do  thou,  also,  what  seldom
happens,  show  thyself  with  constancy  ready  for  every  duty  of
a  Mendship  not  to  be  shaken.

Then  may  thy  good  fortune  have  everlasting  increase ;  then
mayst  thou  never  stand  in  need  of  aid  thyself,  and  mayst  thou
always  help  thy  firiends.  May  thy  wife  share  with  her
husband  in  lasting  felicity,  and  may  but  few  complaints  occur
in  your  married  Ufe.  And  may  thy  brother,  thy  companion  in
blood,  always  love  thee  with  that  affection  with  which  his
attached  brother  loved  Castor.  May  the  youth,  thy  son,  be
like  to  thee,  and,  by  his  manners,  may  every  one  recognize  that
he  is  thy  son.  May  thy  daughter  make  tiiee  a  father-in-law,
by  lighting  her  marriage  torch,  and  may  she  speedily  confer
the  name  of  grandsire  on  thee  while  yet  a  young  man.

10  Invention  qf  Pa^/a#.]— Ver.  4.  *  Pallade/  literally  the  name  of  the
GoddesSt  is  here  used  to  signify  *  oil/  as  Minerva,  or  Pallas,  was  the  dis-
coverer of  the  olive,  firom  which  it  was  extracted.


y  Google


OB, LUfEXT  OT  OTW.  333


ELEGY  VI.

Ovid  here  enlarges  upon  the  effect  of  length  of  time,  and  says,  that
though  by  its  efficacy  all  difficulties  are  surmounted,  yet  that  his  mise-
ries experience  no  mitigation,  but  rather  an  increase.  He  complains  of
his  protracted  wretchedness,  and  describes  its  effects  upon  his  health ;
and  concludes,  by  hoping  that  death  will  bring  a  speedy  termination  to
his  woes.

In  time,  the  buU  becomes  accustomed  to  the  plough  that  tills
the  fields,  and  yields  his  neck  to  be  pressed  by  the  curving
yoke.  In  time,  the  spirited  horse  obeys  the  flowing  reins,  and,
with  quiet  mouth,  receives  the  hard  bit.  In  time,  the  anger  of
the  Punic  lions  is  assuaged,  and  the  fierceness  which  once  was,
exists  in  their  nature  no  longer.  The  Indian  beast,"  too,  which
obeys  the  commands  of  its  master,  overcome  in  time,  submits
to  servitude.  Length  of  time,  too-  causes  that  the  grape
swells  out  on  the  spreading  clusters,  and  that  the  berries  can
scarcely  contain  the  juice  that  they  hold  within.  Time,  too,
pushes  forth  the  seed  into  the  whitening  ears  of  com ;  and
makes  the  apple  to  be  not  of  a  sour  flavour.  'Tis  this  that
blunts  the  edge  of  the  plough  that  renews  the  land;  'tis  this  that
wears  the  hard  flint  and  the  adamant.  This,  too,  by  degrees,
mitigates  raging  anger;  this  lessens  sadness  and  elevates
the  sorrowing  heart.  Length  of  time,  then,  as  it  glides  on
with  silent  foot,  is  able  to  lessen  everything  except  my  cares.

Since  I  have  been  deprived  of  my  country,  twice  has  the
threshing  floor  been  beaten  with  the  com ;  twice  has  the
grape,  pressed  with  the  bare  foot,*-  been  burst  asunder.
And  yet,  in  so  long  a  space  of  time,  patience  has  not  been  ac-
quired ;  and  my  mind  retains  its  sensitiveness  to  its  recent  woes.
In  fact,  the  oxen,  even  when  old,  fly  from  the  curving  yoke  ;
and  the  horse  that  has  been  broken  in,  often  struggles  against
the  bit.  My  present  sorrow  is  even  more  bitter  than  it  once
was ;  for  though  it  be  similar  to  its  former  self,  it  has  waxed
stronger,  and  increases  as  time  wears  on. My  woes,  too,  were

"  The  Indian  beast] — Ver.  7,  8.  He  alludes  to  the  elephant,  which
in  time  is  taught  even  to  kneel,  in  obedience  to  the  command  of  his
master.

"  With  the  barefeef] — Ver.  20.  The  practice  of  crushing  the  grape
by  the  pressure  of  the  bare  foot,  prevails  in  the  wine-growing  countries  of
the  south  of  Kuroite  at  the  present  day.


y  Google


334  TBX  TSISTUL;  [B.1V.

not  80  weU  known  to  me  once  as  they  now  are ;  bnt  the  better  I
become  acquainted  with  them,  the  more  heavily  do  they  press
upon  me.  This,  too,  is  not  the  least  evil,  for  one  to  bring  fresh
strength  to  their  endurance,  and  not  to  become  utterly  spent
beforehand  by  the  passing  sorrows.  A  firesh  wrestler  on
the  yellow  sand  is  stronger  than  he  whose  arms  are  wearied
tot/^erem^e  for  a  length  of  time.  The  gladiator  that  comes
fresh,  is  better  in  shining  arms  than  he  whose  arms  are  red,
stained  with  his  own  blood.  The  ship,  but  lately  built,
bears  well  the  impetuous  storm ;  the  old  one  is  battered  to
pieces  by  ever  so  slight  a  gale.  I,  too,  at  first  endured  my
sufferings  with  patience,  and,  by  length  of  time,  my  evils  have
become  multipHed.

Beheve  me,  I  despair,  and,  judging  from  my  body,  so  f»i
as  I  can  form  an  opinion,  but  few  days  will  be  added  to  my
sorrows.  For  I  have  neither  the  strengUi  nor  the  colour  that  I
used  to  have,  and  scarcely  have  I  a  thin  covering  of  skin  for  my
bones.  But  my  mind  it  more  diseased  than  my  sickening  body,
and  it  stands  eternally  gazing  upon  its  afflictions.  No  sight  is
there  here  of  the  City ;  my  companions,  my  dehght,  are  afer,
and  my  wife,  than  whom  nothing  is  dearer  to  me,  is  far  distant.
There  is  here  a  Scythian  multitude,  and  crowds  of  the  Getse
wearing  trowsers ;  and  so,  both  what  I  see,  and  what  I  cannot
see,  are  a  cause  of  misery  to  me.  Yet  one  hope  there  is,  which
consoles  me  amid  these  things ;  that^  through  my  death,  these
woes  will  not  last  long.


ELEGY  VII.

Thb  Poet  expresses  his  surprise,  that,  now  two  years  have  eli^[>8ed,  he  has
received  no  letter  from  his  Mend,  especially  after  he  has  heaxd  from
some  with  whom  he  was  not  so  intimately  acquainted.  He  adds,  that
he  would  rather  helieve  any  thing  than  that  his  friend  had  not  written
to  him ;  and  he  concludes  that  his  letter  must  have  miscarried.  He
tells  him  to  write  again  and  agaiir,  that  he  may  not  always  have  to  sug-
gest these  excuses  for  him.

Twice  has  the  Sun  visited  me  after  the  frosts  of  icy  winter,
and  twice,  passing  through  the  Constellation  of  the  Fish,  has
he  run  his  course.  In  so  long  a  time,  why  did  not  thy  right
hand  employ  itself  on  some  lines  to  me,  however  few  ?  Why
has  thy  affection  grown  tardy,  while  those  have  written  to  me
with  vrhom  I  had  but  httle  acquaintanceship  ? Why,  often  as


y  Google


B.  VIIL]  OB, LAMENT  OP  OVU).  335

I  untied  the  fiastenings  of  any  packet,  have  I  been  hoping
that  it  enclosed  thy  name  ?  Oh,  that  the  Gk)ds  may  grant
that  a  letter  ha3  often  been  written  by  thy  right  hand,  but
that  out  of  so  many  not  one  has  reached  me !  What  I  pray
I  am  sure  is  the  case.  I  will  sooner  beheve  that  the  face  of
Medusa,  the  Grorgon,  is  surrounded  by  locks  formed  of  serpents;
that  there  are  dogs  beneath  the  stomach  of  the  virgin  Scylla  ;
that  there  is  a  Chimaera,  which  amid  her  flames  divides  the
form  of  the  Honess  from  that  of  the  dreadful  dragon ;  that
there  are  quadrupeds  that  have  their  breasts  joined  to  the
breasts  of  human  beings ;  that  a  man  exists  with  three  bodies,
and  a  dog  with  three  bodies;  that  the  Sphinx  exists,  the
Harpies,  and  the  Giants  with  serpents  for  their  feet ;  that
Gyges,  with  his  hundred  hands,  and  the  man  half  a  bull
exist.^^  I  will  beHeve  all  these  things  sooner,  my  dearest  friend,
than  I  will  believe  that  thou,  changed,  hast  ceased  to  care  for
me.  Innumerable  mountains  and  roads,  and  rivers  and  plains,
and  no  httle  of  the  ocean,  he  between  diee  and  me.  The  letter
which  has  been  often  sent  by  thee,  may,  for  a  thousand  reasons,
never  have  reached  my  hands.  Yet  overcome  these  thousaiid
reasons  by  writing  repeatedly :  that  I  may  not,  my  Mend,
always  have  to  be  excusing  thee  to  myself.


ELEGY  VIIL

Hb  complains  that  now,  in  his  fiftieth  year,  he  is  becoming  hoary  with
age,  in  a  wretched  spot,  at  a  time  when  he  ought  to  have  been  enjoying
the  pleasures  of  homeland  the  society  of  his  wife  and  friends.  He  says,
that  if  his  destiny  had  been  foretold  by  the  Delphic  oracle,  or  by  Do-
dona,  he  could  not  have  credited  them,  and  shoidd  have  accused  them
of  falsehood.  He  shows  that  there  is  nothing  strong  enough  to  be
able  to  resist  the  divine  will  and  power,  and  he  concludes  by  advising
others  to  take  a  lesson  from  his  misfortunes,  and  to  deserve  the  esteem
of  Augustus,  whose  power  is  equal  to  that  of  the  immortal  Gods.

Now  do  my  years  assume  the  hue  of  the  feathers  of  the  swan,
and  hoary  age  tints  my  black  locks.  Now  hours  of  weak-
ness are  coming  on,  and  old  age  more  desirous  of  repose ;

^  Hal/abuU  ean8t.]--YeT.  18.  He  alludes  to  the  Minotaur,  half  a
man  and  half  a  bull,  the  fruit  of  the  intrigue  of  Pasiphae  with  the  Bull.
The  quadrupeds  mentioned  by  the  poet  are  the  Centaurs.  The  man  with
three  bodies  was  Geryon,  or  Hmlus,  mentioned  by  Virgil.  The  dog  with
three  bodies  was  Cerbems. All  of  these  are  mentioned  in  fabulous  story.


y  Google


336  THE  TBlSTIii;  [b.  iv.

and  now  it  is  a  matter  of  difficulty  to  support  •  myself  in  my
weakness.  Now  was  the  time  that  I  ought  to  live,  having
pat  an  end  to  my  toils,  while  no  cares  were  harassing  me ;
to  enjoy,  too,  that  repose  which  was  ever  pleasing  to  my  mind,
and  to  be  at  ease  amid  my  own  pursuits ;  to  live  in  my  humble
home,  and  in  my  dwelling-place  of  old,  and  amid  my  patri-
monial fields,  which  now  are  deprived  of  their  master.  Now  I
ought  to  be  growing  aged,  free  from  care,  in  the  bosom  of  my
wife,  among  my  dear  grandchildren,  and  in  my  native  land.

My  you£  once  hoped  that  this  would  come  tb  pass  ;  and
then  I  was  worthy  thus  to  spend  these  latter  years.  Other-
wise did  it  seem  to  the  Gods,  who  have  exposed  me  in
the  Sarmatian  regions,  tossed  to  and  fro  by  sea  and  by  land.
The  shattered  ships  are  taken  into  the  excavated  docks,  that
they  may  not  go  to  pieces  at  hazard  in  the  midst  of  the  waves.
The  steed,  worn  out,  crops  the  grass  in  the  meadows,  that  he
may  not  stumble,  and  thereby  disgrace  the  many  victories  that
he  has  won.  The  soldier,  when,  Uirough  length  of  years,  he  is
no  longer  useful  enough  for  war,  puts  away  the  arms  which  he
has  borne,  at  the  home  of  his  youth.  So,  too,  as  old  age
slowly  creeping  on,  diminished  my  strength,  it  was  time  for
me,  as  well,  to  be  presented  with  my  discharge."  It  was  time
for  me  neither  to  be  breathing  a  foreign  atmosphere,  nor  to
be  quenching  my  parching  thirst  at  a  Gretic  spring,  but  rather y
to  be  at  one  time  retiring  at  my  leisure  to  the  gardens  which
I  possessed, ^^  at  another,  enjoymg  the  intercourse  of  men  and
the  pleasures  of  the  City.

Thus,  in  my  former  days,  with  a  mind  having  no  presage
of  the  future,  used  I  to  desire  tx)  spend  my  old  age  in  calm
repose.  The  Fates  refused  it;  who,  though  they  granted
me  an  early  life  full  of  delights,  are  now  rendering  my  latter
days  wretched.  And  now,  having  passed  fifty  years  with-
out any  stain,  I  am  afflicted  in  the  decline  of  my  life.
Not far from  the goal,** at which I seemed almost

^*  Presented  toith  my  discharge,']' — Ver.  24.  Literally,  *  rude  donari '
means,  *  to  be  presented  with  a  rod.'  The  *  rudis '  was  a  *  rod,'  or  *  foil/
with  which  soldiers  or  gladiators  fought  for  exercise  and  sport.  Such  a
rod  was  given  to  gladiators  when,  for  their  merit,  they  were  discharged
from  fighting  in  the  arena.  Hence,  figuratively,  the  term  came  to  sigmfy
'  to  receive  an  honourable  discharge,'  or,  *  to  be  released  from  one's  duties/

^*  Gardens  which  I  possessed."] — Ver.  27.  He  alludes  to  his  patrimo-
nial possessions  at  Sulmo,  in  the  Apennines,  the  place  of  his  birth.

"  The  goal.] — Ver.  35. The  *  Meta '  was  a  pyramidal  ct^umn  at  each


y  Google


B.  VIII.]  OB, LAMENT  OF  OVID.  337

to  have  arrived,  a  dreadful  crash  befel  my  chariot.  Did  I,  in
.  my  madness,  compel  him  to  be  angered  against  me,  than  whom
the  unbounded  earth  contains  no  one  more  fuU  of  mercy  ?
And  was  that  very  clemency  overpowered  by  the  magnitude  of
my  foults  ?  And  still  was  life  not  denied  to  my  errors  ?  A
life  to  be  spent  afar  from  my  coxmtry,  under  the  Northern
pole,  where  the  land  extends  on  the  left  of  the  Euxine  sea.
Had  Delphi  and  Dodona  itself  foretold  me  this,  either  place
would  have  appeared  untruthful  to  me.  There  is  nothing
strong  enough,  even  though  it  be  riveted  with  adamant,  to
be  able  to  endure  the  impetuous  bolt  of  Jove.  Nothing  is
there  so  lofty,  and  that  soars  so  high  above  dangers,  that  it  is
not  lower  than  the  Deity,  and  submissive  to  his  wilL  For  al-
though a  part  of  my  sorrows  was  earned  by  my  own  fault,  yet
the  wrath  of  the  God  awarded  the  greater  shsore  of  my  down-
fiall,  for  the  better  manifestation  of  his  power.

But  be  ye  instrt^cted,  too,  by  my  misfortunes,  to  deserve
favour  at  the  hands  of  one  who  is  equal  to  the  Gods  above.


ELEGY  IX.

The  Poet  threatens  his  enemy  that  he  will  attack  him  in  his  writings,  if
he  does  not  desist  from  his  hostility.

If  it  is  allowed  me,  and  if  thou  sufferest  me  to  do  so,  I  will
he  silent  on  thy  name  and*  thy  misdeeds ;  thy  actions  shall
he  given  to  the  waters  of  Lethe,  and  my  forgiveness  will  be
obtained  by  thy  entreaties,  even  thits  late.  Only  ta^e  care
that  it  is  clear  that  thou  hast  repented.  Only  remember  to
condemn  thy  ow^  conduct,  and  to  show  a  desire  to  cleanse
thy  life  of  these  moments  devoted  to  the  Furies,*'^  But  if  not,
and  if  thy  breast  is  still  burning  with  hatred  against  me,
my  sad  state  of  misery  will  assume  the  arms  that  have  been
forced  upon  it.  Although,  as  I  have  been,  I  am  sent  to  the
extremi^  of  the  earth ;  still  even,  thus  far,  shall  my  anger

end  of  the  Roman  Circus,  round  whiph  the  horses  and  chariots  turned
seven  times.  Hence  it  came,  figuratively,  to  mean,  any  fixed  term  or  limit,
to  which  to  look  forward.  The  goal  here  alluded  to  by  the  poet  was  the
ease  and  quiet  retirement  of  old  age.

*7  The  Furies.'] — Ver.  6. Literally,  *  to  Tisiphorie,'  the  name  of  one
Fury  being  used  for  all.

z

Digitized  by  LjOOQ IC


338  THE  TBI8TIA;  [b.  iv.

Stretch  forth  its  hands.  Csesar,  if  thou  knowest  it  not,  has
left  to  me  all  my  rights  (u  a  citizen,  and  my  sole  punishment
is  to  he  deprived  of  my  country.  From  hun,  too,  if  he  only
hves,  do  I  hope  for  a  return  to  my  country.  Often  does  the
oak  thriye  againy  that  has  heen  struck  hy  the  holts  of  Jove.
In  fact,  if  I  have  no  means  of  vengeance,  the  Pierian  maids
will  give  me  strength,  and  weapons  of  their  making.  Although
I  am  Hving  removed  afar,  amid  the  Scythian  regions,  and  al-
though the  Constellations  that  avoid  contact  with  the  waves
are  close  to  my  eyes,  yet  my  commendations  will  travel  through
nations  innumerahle,  and  my  complaints  will  hecome  known  as
far  as  the  earth  extends.  Whatever  I  shall  give  utterance  to,
will  travel  from  the  East  to  the  West,  and  the  climes  of  the
morn  wiU  he  conscious  of  the  voice  from  Hespena.  Beyond
the  land,  heyond  the  wide  waves,  shall  I  be  heard,  and  great
will  he  the  echo  of  my  laments.  Nor  will  thy  own  age  only
be  acquainted  with  thy  guilt ;  thou  wilt  be  a  disgrace  to
late  posterity.

I  am  now  summoned  to  the  combat,  but  not  yet  have
I  assumed  my  horns,*®  my  weapons  of  defeTice ;  and  I  would
rather  that  there  was  no  cause  for  assuming  them.  The  Circus
is  as  yet  in  quietude ;  but  the  fierce  bull  is  already  spuming
the  sand,  and  is  beating  the  ground  with  hostile  hoof.  Even
this  is  more  than  I  wished  to  say,  Sound  the  retreat,  my
Muse,  while  yet  it  is  allowed  this  man  to  conceal  his  name.


^  ELEGY  X.

He  gives  an  account  of  his* life  and  his  family,  after  saying  when  and
where  he  was  bom.  He  describes  the  miseries  of  his  exile,  and  says
that  the  Muses  are  his  only  consolation  and  delight.

That  thou  mayst  know.  Posterity,  the  man  whose  works  thou
art  reading,  understand  that  I  am  he  who  sportively  sang  of
voluptuous  love.

Sulmo  is  my  native  place,  which,  abounding  in  its
cold  streams,  is  distant  ninety  miles  from  the  Roman  City,
Here  was  I  bom,  and  (that  you  may  know  the  date)  at  the

^8  My  horns.'] — Ver.  18.  He  is  here  comparing  himself  to  a  bull  about
to  be  baited  in  the  Circus,  which  was  one  of  the  favorite  sports  of  the
Romans.  As  in  Spain,  at  the  present  day,  the  bull  was  irritated  by  objects
of  a  red  colour  being  placed  before  his  eyes,  especially  straw  figures  of
men,  clothed  in  that  colour.


y  Google


E.  X.]  OE, LAMBKT  OE  OTCD.  339

time  when  two  Consuls  fell  with  a  similar  death.  If  that  is  any-
thing, I  am  heir  to  an  hereditary  Equestrian  rank,  descended
itoxa  my  ancestors ;  and  I  was  not  created  a  Knight  merely
through  the  chance  of  riches.  I  was  not  the  eldest  son;  I
was  horn  after  my  hrother,  whose  hirth  was  thrice  four  months
before  mine.  The  same  light-bearing  day  was  the  birthday
of  us  both ;  one  day  was  honoured  by  two  sacrificial  cakes.
This  day  is  one  of  the  five  festival  days  of  the  armed  Mi-
nerva,  the  one  that  is  wont  to  be  the  first  stained**  with  gla-
diatorial blood.  When  young,  we  were  attentively  educated,
and,  through  the  care  of  our  father,  we  resorted  to  men  in  the
Roman  City  distinguished  in  the  arts.  My  brother  had  a  turn
for  eloquence  from  his  earhest  years,  bom,  as  it  were^  to  the
vigorous  warfare  of  the  wordy  Forum.  But,  while  yet  a  boy,
the  rites  of  the  heaven-bom  maids  dehghted  me,  and  imper-
ceptibly the  Muse  attracted  me  to  her  vocation.  Many  a  time
did  my  father  say,  "  Why  are  you  striving  at  a  worthless  pur-
suit ?  Even  the  Maeonian  bard  himself  left  no  wealth."  I
was  influenced  by  his  words ;  and  having  entirely  deserted
HeUcon,  I  endeavoured  to  write  words  disengaged  from  poetic
measures.  Spontaneously,  my  lines  ran  according  to  befitting
numbers,  and  whatever  I  tried  to  express,  the  same  was  poetry.

In  the  mean  time,  as  years  rolled  on  with  silent  pace,  the
gown  of  freedom^  was  assumed  by  my  brother  and  myself.  The
purple  with  the  broad  hem**  was  put  on  our  shoulders,  and  the
attachment  which  before  existed  still  remained.  And  now  my
brother  had  lived  twice  ten  years,  when  he  died ;  and  then  was
I  first  deprived  of  one  half  of  myself. I  enjoyed,  too,  the  first

1*  The  first  stained.'j^Yer.  14.  This  was  the  second  day  of  the  Quin-
quatrus,  or  Quinquatria,  the  five  day  festival  of  Minerva,  and  the  first  of
the  gladiatorial  shows  on  that  occasion.  The  birth-day  of  Ovid  was,
therdbre,  on  the  13th  of  the  Calends  of  April,  or  the  20th  of  March.  For
a  full  account  of  the  Quinqaatria,  see  the  third  book  of  the  'Fasti.'

^  The  gown  of  freedom.']— 'Vex.  28.  This  was  the  'toga  viriUs/  or
'  manly  robe,*  which  was  generally  assumed  by  the  young  men  in  their
seventeenth  year.  Full  reference  has  already  been  made  to  the  mode  of  its
assumption,  in  the  notes.

21  The  broad  Aem.]— Ver.  29.  From  Dr.  Smith's  Dictionary  of
Greek  and  Roman  Antiquities,  we  learn,  that  Augustus  formed  a  select
class  of  *  equites,'  or  *  knights,'  who  possessed  the  property  of  a  senator,
and  the  former  requirement  of  free  birth  up  to  the  grandfather.  He  per-
mitted this  class  to  wear  the  *  latus  clavus,'  or  '  broad  hem,'  and  distin-
guished them  by  the  title  *  illustres,* '  insignes,'  and  '  splendidi.'

z2


y  Google


340  THE  TBISTIA;  [b.  iv.

honours  that  helong  to  a  tender  age,  and  once  I  formed  one
of  the  Triumviri.  The  Senate-house  still  remained ;  the
hreadth  of  my  distinctive  hem  was  still  restricted:^'  that
was  a  hurden  too  onerous  for  my  shoulders.  My  body  was
not  fitted  for  labour,  my  mind  could  not  endure  fatigue,  and
I  was  one  who  shunned  the  anxieties  of  ambition.  The
Aonian  sisters,  too,  persuaded  me  to  seek  a  repose  free  from
care,  that  had  been  always  courted  by  my  inclination.

I  loved  and  I  honoured  the  poets  of  those  days ;  and  as  mitoy
bards  as  there  were,  I  thought  them  to  be  so  many  Grods.
Macer,**  when  stricken  in  years,  many  a  time  repeated  to  me
his  poem  on  birds,  and  each  serpent  that  is  deadly,  each  ^herb
that  is  curative.  Many  a  time  was  Propertius  wont  to  repeat
to  me  his  love  songs ;  he  was  united  to  me  by  the  ties  of
friendship.  Ponticus,**  famous  in  heroic  measure  ;  Bassus,
too,  famed  in  Iambics,  were  dehghtful  members  of  my  circle.
Horace,  too,  with  his  varied  numbers,  used  to  captivate  my
ears,  while  he  sang  his  beauteous  strains  to  his  Ausonian  lyre.
I  only  saw  Virgil ;  and  bitter  destiny'*  did  not  grant  time  for
my  friendship  to  Tibullus.  He  was  thy  successor,  Grallus ;
Propertius  was  his.  In  order  of  time,  I  was  the  fourth  of
them ;  as  I  honoured  my  seniors,  so  did  those  who  were
younger,  honour  me ;  and  my  poetic  talents  were  not  long  in
becoming  known.  When  first  I  recited  my  juvenile  poems
before  the  people,  my  beard  had  been  shaved  but  once  or
twice. Corinna'®  (so  called  by  a  fictitious  name),  the  subject

22  Was  still  restricted,'] — Ver.  35.  This  expression  seems  contradictory
to  the  words  found  in  line  29,  if  we  give  them  the  meaning  which  Dr.
Smith  has,  as  quoted  in  the  last  note,  given  to  them.  It  would  not,  how-
ever,  be  at  all  discrepant  with  the  suggestion  which  is  made  in  the  Intro-
ductory Life  of  the  poet,  that  the  children  of  the  knights  were,  up  to  a
certain  age,  graced  with  the  laticlave,  as  being  candidates  for  senatorial
rank.

J  ^  Macer.l — Ver.  44.  ^milius  Macer,  a  Roman  poet,  was  a  native  of
Verona ;  he  wrote  a  poem  on  plants,  serpents,  and  birds ;  and,  according
to  Eusebius,  he  died  in  Asia.  He  was  a  friend  of  Virgil  and  Ovid;  of
whom  he  was  the  senior.

**  Ponticus.'] — ^Ver.  47.  He  wrote  a  poem  on  the  Theban  war,  which
Ovid  compares  with  the  writings  of  Homer.  Of  the  poet  Bassus,  no  par-
ticulars have  come  down  to  us.  Propertius  merely  mentions  him  as  being
a  poet.

25  Bitter  destiny,'] — Ver.  52.  Because  the  poet,  Tibullus,  died  prema-
turely, at  a  youthful  age.

'^^  Corinna,] — Ver.  60. It  is  most  likely  that  this  character  is  quite


y  Google


E.  X.]  OB, LAMENT  OF  OVID.  341

of  song  throughout  the  whole  City,  had  imparted  a  stimulus
to  my  genius.

Much  did  I  write,  but  what  I  considered  faulty,  I  myself
committed  to  the  all-correcting  flames.  At  the  time,  too,  when
I  was  banished,  I  burnt  some  things  that  would  have  afforded
amusement,  being  enraged  both  with  my  pursuits  and  with
my  verses.

My  heart  was  tender,  and  not  proof  against  the  darts
of  Cupid,  and  a  slight  cause  could  easily  affect  it.  And^
yet,  though  this  was  my  nature,  and  I  caught  fire  with
the  slightest  flame,  there  never  was  any  scandalous  story  at-
tached to  my  name.  While  yet  but  almost  a  boy,  a  wife
was  given  me,  neither  worthy  of  me,  nor  good  for  anything ;
she  was  married  to  me  but  a  very  short  time.*''  A  wfie  suc-
ceeded her,  who,  though  without  any  fault,  was  not  destined
long  to  be  united  to  me.  My  last,  who  remained  with  me
up  to  my'  later  years,  has  endured  to  be  the  wife  of  a  banished
man.  My  daughter,  who  twice  bore  children  in  her  early
youth,  but  not  by  the  same  husband,  made  me  a  grandfather.

And  now  my  father  had  completed  his  allotted  time,  and  to
nine  "  lustra"  had  added  nine  other  "  lustra."^  I  bewailed  him
in  no  other  degree  than  he  would  have  bewailed  me,  if  carried
off.  I  performed  the  prescribed  funereal  rites  for  my  mother,
immediately  after  him.  Happy  were  they  both,  and  timely  in
their  burial,  that  they  died  before  the  day  of  my  punishment !
Fortunate,  too,  am  I,  that  1  am  wretched  when  they  no  longer
live,  and  that  they  had  no  misery  on  my  account !  But  yet,
if  anything  remains  to  the  dead  besides  their  name,  and  if  the
unsubstantial  ghost  survives  the  erected  pile,  if  the  news
about  me  reaches  you,  shades  of  my  parents,  and  if  my
offences  are  taken  cognizance  of  in  the  Stygian  haU.  of  judg-
ment ;  understand,  I  pray  (and  you  I  may  not  deceive),  that
error  was  the  cause  of  my  prescribed  exile,  and  hot  criminality.

This  is  enough  for  the  shades  below.  I  turn  to  you,
studious  minds,  who  enquire  into  the  events  of  my  life.

ideal,  originating  solely  in  the  imagination  of  the  poet.  Some  have  sug-
gested that  she  represented  the  daughter ;  others,  the  granddaughter  of
Augpistus ;  but  without  the  slightest  ground  of  probability.

^  A  very  short  time.'\ — Ver.  70.  She  may  have  soon  died ;  but  the
probability  is  that  he  speedily  divorced  her ;  and  perhaps  the  same  was  the
case  with  his  «econd  wife.

«•  *  Irtitf^ra.*]— Ver.  78.  *  A  lustrum/  consisting  of  five4year8;  the  poet's
^her  would  consequently  be  ninety  years  old  at  the  time  of  his  decease.


y  Google


342  THl  TKISTIA;  [b.  TV.

Hoary  age  had  now  come  upon  me,  the  yearg  of  my  prime
having  fled,  and  had  tinted  ivith  its  hue  my  hair,  now  ffraum
ancient.  And  now,  since  the  honr  of  my  hirth  the  yictorions
steed,  crowned  with  the  olive  of  Pisa,**  had  ten  times  carried
away  the  prize  ;  when  the  anger  of  the  offended  Prince  com-
manded me  to  seek  the  people  of  Tomi,  situate  on  the  left  side
of  the  Eoxine  sea.  The  cause  of  my  ruin,  which  is  too  vrell
known  to  all,  needs  not  to  he  pointed  out  by  my  testimony.
Why  should  J  make  mention  of  the  wickedness  of  my  attend-
ants, and  how  my  servants  injured  me  ?**  Many  things  did  I
endure,  not  less  afflicting  than  my  exile.  My  spirit  disdained
to  succumb  to  misfortune,  and  showed  itself  unconquered,
using  its  native  energy.  Forgetting,  too,  the  arts  of  peace,  and
how  my  life  was  passed  in  tranquillity,  I  took  up  arms  for  the
occasion  ^^  with  hand  unused  to  them.  I  endured  as  many
dangers,  both  by  land  and  sea,  as  there  are  stars  between  the
pole  that  is  concealed,  and  the  one  that  is  seen.  At  last,  the
Sarmatian  shore,  that  is  adjoining  to  the  quivered  Getse,  was
touched  by  me,  tossed  about  in  wanderings  so  protracted.
Here  do  I,  though  on  every  side  I  am  stunned  by  the  neigh-
bouring warfare,  alleviate  my  sad  lot,  so  far  as  I  am  able,  by  my
poesy.  And,  though  there  is  no  one  to  whose  ear  I  can  re-
peat it,  yet  in  this  way  do  I  consume  and  beguile  my  time.

Thanks  then  to  thee,  my  Muse,  that  I  still  live,  and  bear  up
against  my  heavy  calunities,  and  that  the  irksomeness  of  a
\Se  of  anxiety  does  not  take  possession  of  me.  For  it  is  thou
that  affordest  me  a  solace,  thou  art  a  rest  for  my  cares,  a  cure
for  my  woes ;  thou  art  my  leader,  thou  art  my  companion ;  'tis

*•  Olhe  qf  Pisa."] — ^Ver.  95.  The  victors  at  the  Olympic  games,  which
were  celebrated  near  Pisa,  in  Elis  of  the  Peloponnesus,  were  crowned  with
olive.

^  Servants  injured  m6.] — Ver.  101.  The  attendants  of  his  joniney,
here  mentioned,  were,  prohably,  those  deputed  by  Augustus  to  escort  him
to  the  place  of  his  destination.  According  to  his  account,  they  seem  to
have  conspired  with  his  servants  to  increase  his  miseries  on  his  journey  to
his  place  of  exile.

<^  Amu  for  the  oocanon.'] — ^Ver.  106.  He  seems  here  to  allude  to
patience  and  resignation,  as  these  were  the  only  arms  which  could  a^ail
him  during  his  voyage  to  his  destination.  If  we  are  to  translate  the  words
literally,  they  would  appear  to  imply  that  he  considered  himself  in  danger
of  his  life  during  the  voyage,  and  that  he  was  forced  to  use  weapons  in
self-defence,  which  fact,  however,  we  dQ  not  find  mentioned  elsewhere  in
his  writings. ^


y  Google


B.  X  ]  OB, LAMEirr  OP  OTED.  34^

thou,  that  sendest  me  afar  from  the  Danube,  and  that  givest
me  a  place  in  the  midst  of  HeHcon.  Thou  hast  given  to  me
(what  rarely  happens)  that  distinguished  name  while  yet  living,
which  Fame  is  wont  to  give  after  death.  Envy,  who  dispa-
rages what  is  present,  has  never  fastened  on  any  work  of  mme
with  her  unjust  tooth.  For,  although  my  age  has  produced  great
poets.  Fame  has  not  been  unkind  to  my  talents.  And  though
I  prefer  many  to  myself,  I  am  said  to  be  not  inferior  to  them ;
and  my  works  are  much  read  throughout  the  whole  world.  If,
then,  the  prophecies  of  poets  contain  any  truth,  though  I*should
die  at  once,  I  shall  not  be  thine,  0  Earth.  Whether  through
kindly  feeling,  or  whether,  through  my  verses,  I  have  gained
this  celebrity  of  my  own  right,  candid  reader,  I  return  thee
thanks.


y  Google


344  THE TBI6TIA;  [b.  y^.


BOOK  THE  FIFTH.


ELEGY  I.

Ovid,  sending  this  last  book  of  his  Lament  to  Rome,  requests  his  friends
to  receive  it  in  addition  to  the  four  that  he  has  sent  before.  He  says,
that  under  the  sad  circumstanees  in  which  he  is  placed,  he  cannot  pos-
sibly write  on  any  other  than  mehincholy  ioj^cB ;  but  that  if  he  is  re-
stored to  his  native  land,  he  will  write  on  pleasing  aud  lively  subjects.
He  concludes  by  craving  pardon,  should  his  lines  prove  not  to  the  taste
of  the  reader.

Add  this  litde  book  too,  my  firiend,  to  those  that  have  before
been  sent  by  me  from  the  Getic  shore :  this,  too,  will  be  just
such  as  the  fortunes  of  the  poet  are.  You  will  find  notlmig
cheerful  throughout  my  whole  song.  As  my  state  is  a  mournful
one,  so  are  my  verses  mournful,  the  writing  befitting  its
master.  Unbanned  and  joyful,  I  have  composed  playful  and
juvenile  strains;  but  now  I  repent  that  I  composed  them.
When  I  fell,  I  assumed  the  heralding  of  my  sudden  fall ;  and
I  myself  am  the  originator  of  my  own  subject.  Just  as  the
bird  of  Cayster^  is  said,  as  he  lies  on  its  banks,  to  lament  his
death  with  his  dying  voice,  so  do  I,  expelled  afar  into  the
Sarmatian  re^ons,  cause  my  funereal  rites  not  to  pass  by  in
silence.  If  any  one  seeks  for  love  tales  and  wanton  lines,  I
warn  him  beforehand  never  to  read  these  compositions.
Gallus  will  be  better  suited  to. him,  and  Propertius  with  his
pleasing  language ;  Tibullus,  too,  a  mind  full  of  elegance,  wiU
be  more  adapted  to  him.  Would  that  1  was  not  one  of  that
number ! Ah,  wretched  me  !  why  did  my  Muse  ever  become

*  The  bird  of  Cayster,'] — Ver.  11.  Caysterwas  a  river  of  Asia,  not
far  from  Ephesus.  Swans  were  very  numerous  on  its  banks,  and  they  were
supposed  to  sing  melodiously  just  before  their  death.


y  Google


E.  I.]  OB, LAMEITP  or  OTID.  345

thus  sportive  ?  But  I  have  paid  the  penalty,  and  the  trifler
with  quivered  Cupid  is  now  far  away  in  the  regions  of  the
Scythian  Danube.  For  the  future,  I  turn  my  attention  to
verses  for  the  public  perusal,  and  I  have  commanded  them
to  he  careful  of  their  reputation ;  ,but  yet,  if  any  one  of  you
should  ask  the  reason  why  I  sing  so  many  mournful  lines :
many  a  mournful  woe  have  I  endured.  I  compose  not  these,
lines  through  my  inventive  powers,  or  my  skiU ;  my  matter  is
ingeniously  furnished  by  my  own  sorrows.  How  small  a  part
of  my  fortunes  is  described  in  my  lines !  Happy  the  man,  who
suffers  evils  that  he  can  number !  As  many  as  the  shrubs
which  the  woods  contain,  as  many  as  the  grains  of  sand
which  the  yellow  Tiber  holds,  as  many  as  the  tender  blades
of  grass  which  the  field  of  Mars  bears,  so  many  evils  have  I
endured,  for  which  there  is  no  cure,  no  repose,  but  in  t»-
dulging  my  poetic  vein,  and  in  the  solace  of  the  Muses.

*'  yfhsX  limit,  Naso,"  you  will  say,  "  is  there,  to  be  to  your
tearful  ditties  ?  "  The  same,  I  say^  that  will  terminate  this  fate
of  mine ;  this  suppHes  me  with  complaints  from  an  abundant
source;  and  these  words  are  not  mine, but  those  of  my  destiny.
But  if  you  were  to  restore  to  me  my  country,  with  my  dear  wife,
then  my  features  would  be  joyous,  and  I  should  be  what  once  I
was.  Were  the  wrath  of  the  invincible  Caesar,  against  me,
mitigated,  then  should  I  give  thee  Unes  full  of  gladness;
but  no  more  should  my  writings  be  sportive,  as  once  they
were  ;  let  them  indulge  but  once  in  that  mischief.  I  would
sing  that  which  Aitffitstus  himself  would  approve ;  if,  only  a
part  of  my  punishment  being  alleviated,  I  could  escape  from
barbarism  and  the  savage  Getae.  In  the  meanwhile,  what  em-
ployment but  a  mournful  one  can  my  writings  have  ?  That  is
the  pipe  that  befits  my  funereal  obsequies.

"  But,"  you  will  say,  "  you  could  have  better  borne  your  evils
in  silence,  and  have  quietly  concealed  your  woes !"  In  this  you
are  requiring  that  no  groans  should  be  consequent  upon  my  tor-
ture, and  are  forbidding  me  to  weep,  after  receiving  a  severe
wound.  Phalaris  himself  allowed  him  who  was  inclosed  in  the
brass  of  Perillus  to  utter  his  shrieks,  and  to  lament,  through  the
mouth  of  the  bull.  Achilles  was  not  offended  by  the  tears  of
Priam ;  whereas  you,  more  cruel  than  any  enemy,  forbid  my
tears.  When  the  progeny  of  Latona  made  Niobe  childless,  they
still  did  not  command  her  to  keep  hercheeks  untouched  by  tears.


y  Google


346  THE  TEISTIA  ;  [b.  v.

*Ti8  something  to  alleviate  a  deadly  evil,  by  giving  utterance
to  sorrow  ;  'tis  this  that  makes  Progne  and  Halcyone*  always
complaining ;  this  was  the  reason  why  Philoctetes,  the  son  of
Peas,  in  the  cold  cavern,  wearied  the  Lemnian  rocks  with  his
voice.  Grief  repressed  chokes  one  ;  it  agitates  internally,  and
is  compelled  to  redouble  its  intensity.  Grant  me  pardon  rather,
or  lay  aside  all  my  works ;  if,  reader,  that  hurts  you  which  is
my  delight.  But  they  cannot  hurt  you:  my  writings  were  never
injurious  to  any  one  but  their  author.

They  are  but  poor,  I  confess.  Who  compels  you  to  take  them
up ;  or  who  forbids  you,  when  disappointed,  to  put  them  down  ?
I  do  not  correct  them,  hnt  I  wish  them  to  be  read  as  being  com-
posed here :  they  are  not  more  uncouth  than  the  place  of  their
origin;  and  Rome  ought  not  to  form  comparisons  of  me  with
her  own  poets.  Among  the  Sauromatae  I  shall  pass  for  talented.
Lastly,  no  glory  is  sought  by  me,  nor  that  Fame  which  is  wont
to  stimulate  the  genius.  I  desire  my  mind  not  to  be  consumed
by  everlasting  cares,  which  still  break  in,  and  go  where  they  are
forbidden  to  go,  I  have  said  why  I  write :  you  ask  why  I  send
these  works  ;  it  is,  that  I  wish  to  be  among  you,  in  some  mea-
sure at  least.


ELEGY  IL

Writing  to  his  wife,  he  says  that  he  is  well  in  health,  but  that  his  grief
is  still  as  intense  as  when  he  was  first  banished  by  Augustus.  He  expa-
tiates upon  the  innumerable  misfortunes  which  surround  him  on  every
side.  He  entreats  her  to  apply  to  the  Emperor  in  his  bdialf,  as  the
cause  for  his  punishment  was  not  of  a  serious  nature,  and  the  clemency
of  Caesar  is  known  to  be  extreme ;  and  he  says,  that  in  this  spirit  of
mercy  is  centred  his  only  hope  of  a  mitigation  of  his  punishment.

AiTD  do  you  grow  pale  whenm  fresh  letter  arrives  from  Pontusj
and  is  it  unjfolded  by  you  with  a  tremulous  hand  ?  Lay  aside
your  apprehensions  :1  am  well,  and  my  body,  which  formerly
was  weakly,  and  unable  to  endure  fatigue,  is  recruited,  and,
tossed  about,  has  become  hardy  by  length  of  habit. Oris  it

2  Hatq/one,] — Ver.  60.  She  was  the  daughter  of  JSolus  and  ^giale,
and  the  wife  of  Ceyx,  on  hearing  of  whose  death,  she  threw  herself  into
the  sea.  The  Gods,  in  their  compassion,  changed  them  both  into  king-
fishers.


y  Google


E.  II.]  OE, I^UCENT  or  OTID. '  347

rather  that  I  have  no  leisure  to  be  ill  ?  Yet  my  spirit  is  pros-
trated by  weakness^  and  has  acquired  no  strengtii  by  lapse  of
time ;  and  the  corndition  of  my  mind  remsdns  the  same  as  it
was  before.  The  wounds,  which  I  supposed  would  close  in
length  of  time,  and  at  their  proper  season,  pain  me  as  though
this  moment  inflicted ;  in  truth,  length  of  years  is  good  for
little  mishaps,  but  in  lapse  of  time,  eyils  are  added  to  heayy  ca-
lamities. For  almost  ten  whole  years  did  the  son  of  Paeas
endure  the  pestilential  venom  yielded  by  the  puffing  serpent.
Telephus  would  have  died,  consumed  with  lasting  disease,  if
the  hand  that  did  the  injury  had  not  brought  &e  remedy.
I  hope,  since  I  have  committed  no  crime,  that  he  who  has
caused  my  wounds  will  be  ready  to  assuage  them  thus  made  ;
and  now  at  length,  satisfied  with  a  part  of  my  penalty,  may  he
take  a  Httle  drop  of  water  from  the  full  ocean.  However  much
he  may  take  off,  much  of  what  is  bitter  "will  remain ;  and  a
part  of  my  banishment  will,  in  its  intensity,  be  equal  to  the
whole.  As  many  as  the  shells  which  the  sea  shore  contains,
as  many  as  the  flowers  which  the  pleasant  rose-beds  bear,  as
many  as  the  grains  which  the  drowsy  poppy  holds,  as  many
as  the  wild  beasts  which  the  wood  nourishes,  as  many  as  the
fishes  that  swim  in  the  waves,  as  many  as  the  birds  that
beat  the  thin  atmosphere  with  their  wings,  by  so  many  adver-
sities am  I  overwhelmed.  Should  I  endeavour  to  enumerate
them,  I  might  as  well  attempt  to  teU  the  number  of  the  waves
of  the  Icarian  Sea-  To  pass  over  in  silence  the  casualties  of
my  journey,  the  bitter  dangers  of  the  ocean,  and  the  hands
that  were  arrayed  against  my  life:  a  barbarous  country,  one  the
most  distant  in  the  great  earth,  itotc  confines  me,  a  place  beset
with  savage  enemies  on  every  side.

Hence  I  should  be  transferred  (for  my  crime  is  not  a  capital
one),  if  you  had  the  care  for  me  which  you  ought  to  have.
That  God,  on  whom  the  Roman  empire  justly  rehes,  when  a
conqueror,  was  often  merciful  towards  his  enemy.  Why
do  you  hesitate  ?  Why  fear,  when  there  is  no  danger  ?  go
and  ask  him.  The  vast  earth  contains  nothing  more  full  of
clemency  than  Caesar.

Ah,  wretched  me!  What  shall  I  do  if  those  dearest  to  me
forsake  me?  Do  you,  too,  withdraw  your  neck  from  the  yoke  now
broken  ?  No  anchor  now  holds  my  bark.  He  may  look  to  it :  I
myself,  hated  as  I  am,  will  fly  for  refuge  to  the  sacred  altar :  the
altarremoves  the  hands  of  none.  Behold !  at  a  distance  I  address


y  Google


348  THE  tbistia;  [b.  v.

the  Deity  that  ib  present ;  if  it  is  allowed  man  to  be  able  to
commune  with  Jove.

Thou  ruler  of  the  empire,  in  whose  safety  it  is  eyi-
dent  that  all  the  Gk>ds  have  a  care  for  Ausonia.  Thoa
Glory,  thou  resemblance  of  the  country  that  flourishes
through  thee,  0  thou  that  art  not  lees  in  value  than  the  world
that  mou  dost  govern ;  mayst  thou  live  on  earth,  may  the
heavens  long  spare  thy  presence  there !  fiir  distant  be  the  time
for  thee  to  go  to  the  stars,  which  have  been  promised  thee !
Pardon  me,  I  pray,  and  remove  but  the  least  portion  of  thy
lightnings :  what  shall  then  remain  will  be  a  sufficient  punish-
ment. Thy  anger,  indeed,  has  been  moderated,  aad  thou  hast
granted  me  my  life  :  I  am  neither  deprived  of  the  rights  nor
the  name  of  a  citizen.  My  property  has  not  been  granted  to
others ;  nor  am  I  styled  an  exile  in  the  words  of  thy  edict.
All  these  things  I  dreaded,  because  I  seemed  to  deserve  them ;
but  thy  anger  was  more  moderate  than  my  offence.  Thou  hast
ordered  me  to  go  in  banishment  to  the  fields  of  Pontus,  and  to
cleave  the  Scythian  seas  in  the  fleeing  ship.  By  thy  command,
I  came  to  the  unsightly  shores  of  the  Euxine  Sea.  This  land  is
situated  under  the  icy  pole.  Not  so  much  does  the  climate
annoy  me,  never  free  from  cold,  and  the  ground  ever  parched
up  with  hoar  firost ;  and  the  barbarous  tongue  that  is  ignorant
of  the  Latin  language,  and  the  fact  that  the  Greek  dialect
has  been  overpowered  by  the  Getic  pronunciation ;  as,  that  I
am  hemmed  in,  beset  on  every  side  by  the  neighbouring  hosts;
and  a  narrow  wall  scarcely  renders  me  safe  from  the  enemy.
Yet  there  is  peace  sometimes,  but  never  any  confidence  in  that
peace  ;  and  so  the  place  is  at  one  time  experiencing  war,  at
another,  it  is  standing  in  dread  of  it.

So  that  I  be  only  removed  hence,  let  either  Zanclseon  Charyb-
dis  devour  me,  and  by  its  waters  send  me  to  Styx,  or  let  me
patiently  be  consumed  in  the  flames  of  glowing  ^tna;  or  let  me
be  thrown  in  the  deep  waters  of  the  Leucadian  God.  What  is
required,  is  punishment,  and  I  refuse  not  to  be  wretched ;
but  I  entreat  that  I  may  be  wretched  with  a  Httle  more  safety
to  myself.


y  Google


K.  III.]  OE, LAMEITT  OP OTID.  349


ELEGY  III.

He  laments  that  he  cannot  be  at  Rome  to  assist  at  the  celebration  of  the
festival  of  Bacchus  by  the  poets,  as  had  been  his  former  custom.  He
expresses  surprise  that  Bacchus  should  have  thus  neglected  one  of  his
devotees,  and  concludes  by  praying  him,  and  his  companidbs  the  poets,
to  entreat  Gaesar  to  permit  his  return.

This  is  the  day,  Bacchus,  on  which  the  poets  are  wont  to  cele-
brate thee,  if  1  am  not  deceived  in  the  time ;  and  now  they
bind  their  temples  with  the  fragrant  wreaths,  and  sing  thy
praises  over  thy  wine. Among  them,  as  I  remember,  while
my  destiny  permitted  it,  I  was  one  by  no  means  hated  by  thee.
The  Sarmatian  region,  neighbouring  to  the  ferocious  Getse,
now  confines  me,  placed  beneath  the  stars  of  the  Cynosurian
Bear. I,  who  in  former  days  passed  a  life  of  ease,  and  freedom
from  labour,  amid  my  poetic  studies,  and  in  the  company  of  the
Muses,  am  now,  far  from  my  country,  surrounded  on  every
side  by  the  Getic  arms,  having  first  endured  many  fatigues  on
the  sea,  many  by  land :  whether  'twas  chance,  or  wheSier  the
anger  of  the  Gods,  that  caused  me  this,  or  whether  my  destiny
was  lowering  at  my  birth ;  still  thou  oughtst,  by  thv  divine
power,  to  have  defended  one  of  the  sacred  cultivators  of  the  ivy.
Is  it,  that  everything  which  the  Sisters,  the  mistresses  of  Fate,
have  pronounced,  ceases  to  be  under  the  influence  of  a  Deity?
Thou  thyself,  too,  for  thy  deserts,  hast  been  carried  to  the
heights  of  heaven,  a  way  to  which  was  made  by  no  small
exertion. Thy  native  lan4  was  not  inhabited  by  thee  ;  but
thou  didst  come  even  as  far  as  the  snowy  Strymon,^  and  the
Cretan  devoted  to  Mars ;  to  Persia,  too,  and  the  Ganges  spread-
ing vrith  its  broad  stream,  and  the  waters  which  the  swarthy
Indian  drinks.  In  truth,  the  Destinies,  spinning  the  threads  of
Fate,  twice  pronounced  this  doom  for  thee,  twice  born.* If  I
am  allowed  to  follow  the  example  of  the  Gods,  a  rigid  and  a
hard  lot  in  life  haraisses  me  too. Not  less  heavily  did  I  fall,
than  he  whom  Jupiter  drove  with  his  bolt  from  Thebes,  while

>  The  snowy  Strymon.'] — ^Ver.  22.  The  Strymon  was  a  river  which,
taking  its  rise  in  Mount  Hsmus,  separated  Thrace  from  Macedonia.

*  Thee  twice  horn.'] — Ver.  26.  Because  he  was  first  taken  from  the
womb  of  Semele,  and,  being  enclosed  in  the  thigh  of  Jupiter,  was  pro-
duced from  it,  when  he  had  arrived  at  the  completion  of  the  usual
period  of  gestation.


y  Google


350  THE  teistia;  [b.  v.

boasting  aloud.  But  thou^  when  thou  hast  heard  of  the  poet
struck  by  the  lightnings,  mayst  condole  with  him  from  the
recollection  of  thy  mother.  And  thou  mayst,  when  looking
upon  the  poets  assembled  around  thy  sacrifice,  say,  ^'  I  know
not  which  worshipper  of  mine  it  is  that  is  absent."

Give  me  thy  aid,  good  Bacchus ;  let  the  vine  weigh  down  the
lofty  elm,  and  let  the  grape  be  fdll  of  the  wine  inclosed  in  it.
Let  the  active  youthful  troop  of  the  Satyrs,  with  the  Bacchanals,
accompany  thee,  and  be  not  thou  silent  amid  the  stunning  noise.
And  may  the  bones  of  Lycurgus  wielding  the  axe  be  but  lightly
covered,  and  may  the  impious  shade  of  Pentheus  not  escape  pun-
ishment. May  the  Cretan  crown  of  thy  spouse  shine  for  ever
in  the  heavens,  and  surpass  in  radiance  the  neighbouring  Con-
stellations.

Come  hither,  most  beauteous  God,  and  alleviate  my  woes,
remembering  that  I  am  one  of  thy  number.  There  exists  an
intercourse  among  the  Gods  :  do  try,  Bacchus,  to  soften  the
divine  power  of  Caesar  by  thy  divine  mfluence.

You  too,  ye  poets,  a  holy  band,  sharers  in  my  pursuits ;
do  ye,  each  of  you,  after  making  a  Ubation  of  wine,  prefer  a
like  petition.  And  may  some  one  of  you,  when  the  name  of
Naso  is  mentioned,  set  down  the  cup  that  has  been  mingled
with  his  tears :  and  remembering  me,  when  he  looks  round
upon  the  rest,  may  he  say,  "Where  is  Naso,  who  was  but
lately  a  member  of  our  society  ?'*  And  thus  be  it ;  if  by  my
uprightness  I  have  deserved  your  esteem ;  and  if  not  a  line  of
y(mr  works  was  ever  injured  by  my  criticism.  If,  too,  at  the
same  time  that  I  pay  due  veneration  to  the  writings  of  the  men
of  old,  I  am  of  opinion  that  the  recent  compositions  are  not  in-
ferior to  them.  Then,  may  you  continue  to  compose  your  verses
under  the  auspices  of  Apollo  ;  and,  so  far  as  you  can,  keep  up
my  name  among  you.

ELEGY  IV.

He  represents  his  letter  as  announcing  its  arrival  at  Rome,  and  extolling
the  constancy  of  his  Mend,  to  whom  it  was  sent.  He  entreats  him  al-
ways to  continue  his  friendship  and  support.

I,  A  LETTER  from  Naso,  have  come  from  the  Euxine  Sea,
wearied  with  the  ocean,  wearied  too  with  my  joutney.  He,
with  tears,  said  to  me,  "  Do  you,  to  whom  it  is  permitted,
visit  Rome  ;  how  much  preferable,  alas !  is  your  fate  to  my


y  Google


E.  IV.]  OB, LAMENT  OF  OVID.  351

own  ! "  In  tears^  too^  did  he  write  me  ;  and  the  signet  with
which  I  was  sealed  was  not  first  put  to  his  mouth,^  hut  to  his
moistened  cheeks.  If  any  one  desires  to  know  the  cause  of
his  sorrow,  he  is  requiring  the  Sun  to  be  pointed  out  to  him.
He  neither  sees  leaves  in  the  woods,  nor  the  tender  grass  on
the  wide  meadow,  nor  water  in  the  flowing  stream.  He  will
wonder  why  Priam  grieved,  when  Hector  was  snatched  from
him  ;  or  why  Philoctetes  wept,  when  stung  by  the  serpent.
Oh  I  that  the  Gods  would  grant  that  my  master's  state  were
such  that  no  cause  for  grief  were  to  be  lamented.  Yet,  as  he
ought  to  do,  he  bears  his  bitter  sorrows  with  patience,  and  re-
fuses not  the  bridle  hke  an  unbroken  horse.  Nor  yet  does
he  expect  that  the  wrath  of  the  Deity  wiU  be  lasting,  as  he  is
conscious  that  criminality  was  no  part  of  his  fault.  He
often  mentions  how  great  is  the  clemency  of  the  God  ;  and  is
wont  to  reckon  himself  as  an  illustration  of  it.  For  he  says  that
it  is  through  the  favour  of  that  God  that  he  still  possesses  his
patrimonial  property,  and  the  name  of  a  citizen,  and,  in  fine,
that  he  still  lives.

But  thee,  0  friend  beloved  more  than  all,  if  thou  be-
lievest  me,  he  always  retains  in  his  entire  heart.  •  He  calls
thee  his  son  of  Mensetius,  thee  his  companion  of  Orestes,
thee  his  son  of  -^geus,  thee  his  own  Euryalus.  He  longs
not  more  for  his  own  country,  and  the  many  other  things  of
which,  with  his  country,  he  finds  himself  deprived,  than /or  a
sight  of  thy  features,  and  thy  eyes,  thou,  that  art  sweeter  to
him  than  the  honey  which  the  Attic  bee  lays  up  in  the  combs !

Many  a  time  with  tears,  does  he  remember  that  day,  which  he
grieves  was  not  anticipated  by  his  death.  And  while  others
fled  the  contact  of  his  sudden  downfall,  and  were  unwilling  to
approach  the  threshold  of  a  stricken  house ;  he  bears  in  mind
that  thoi^  with  a  few  more  (if  any  one  calls  two  or  three  a
few),  remained  faithful  to  him.  Although  struck  with  amaze-
ment, he  was  sensible  of  every  thing,  and  saw  that  thou  didst
grieve  at  his  sorrows  not  less  than  himself.  He  is  wont  to
recall  to  memory  thy  words,  thy  features,  thy  lamentations,
and  how  that  with  thy  tears  thou  didst  bedew  his  bosom  ;  he
remembers  the  aid  that  thou  didst  give  him,  the  comfort  with
which  thou  didst  console  thy  friend;  when  thou  thyself  shouldst

*  To  his  mouth.'} — Ver.  5.  By  this  remark  we  see  that  in  those  days,
as  with  us  now,  they  were  in  the  habit  of  moistening  the  seal  before  they
applied  it  to  the  wax.


y  Google


352  THB  TSI8TIA;  [b.  v.

have  been  consoled.  For  these  things  he  declares  that  he
will  profe  gratefnl  and  affectionate,  whether  he  beholds  the
light  o/dBLj,  or  is  buried  in  the  ground.  By  his  own  head,
and  by  thine,  was  he  wont  to  swear  :  thine  which,  I  know,  is
not  less  dear  to  him  than  his  own.  May  abundance  of  thanks
be  given  in  return  for  services  so  many  and  so  great ;  he
will  not  allow  thy  oxen  to  plough  the  barren  sea-shore.^  Only,
do  constantly  defend  the  exile.  What  he,  who  knows  thee
well,  asks  not,  that  do  I  myself  entreat  thee.


ELEGY  V.

Hb  preptrei  to  celebrate  the  birthday  of  his  wife,  on  whose  behalf
he  prays  for  every  blessing,  and  extols  the  day  that  brought  into  the
world  one  so  deserving  of  admiration  for  every  virtue.  And,  though  she
deserves  a  better  fate,  he  entreats  her  to  endure  her  sufferings  ^th
equanimity,  as  virtue  becomes  the  most  conspicuous  when  suffering  ad-
versity. He  entreats  the  Gods,  that,  if  they  refuse  to  pardon  him,  they
will  spare  his  wife,  who  has  been  guilty  of  no  crime.

The  yearly  birthday  demands  the  wonted  honour  for  its  mis-
tress :  turn,  my  hands,  to  the  rites  of  affection.  Thus,  per-
haps, in  former  days,  the  hero,  son  of  Laertes,  celebrated  the
festive  day  of  his  wife  at  the  extremity  of  the  earth.  Let  an
auspicious  tongue  be  used,  forgetting  my  protracted  woes :  it,
I  doubt,  has  quite  forgotten  by  this,  how  to  utter  words  of  happi-
ness. Let,  too,  the  white  dress  be  assumed,  (not  according
in  its  hue  with  my  lot,)  which  is  put  on  by  me  but  once  a  year.
Let  the  altar,  too,  be  erected,  green  with  the  grassy  turf ;  and
let  the  wreath,  bound  to  it,  veil  the  warm  hearth.  Boy,  give
me  the  frankincense,  that  makes  the  strong  flame,  and  wine
to  hiss  when  poured  on  the  flame  lighted  by  affection.
Dearest  natal  da^ !  Although  we  are  far  distan<^  I  wish  thee
to  come  hither  m  white  array,  and  unlike  to  mine.  And  if
any  direful  calamity  impended  on  thy  mistress,  let  her  have
suffered  it  for  eUl  future  time  in  my  misfortunes.  And  let  the
bark,  which  has  lately  been  more  than  shattered  by  a  dreadful
storm,  for  the  future,  speed  onward  through  the  sea  in  safety.

*  Barren  aea-shoreJ] — ^Ver.  48.  By  this  remark  he  means  that  he
vnll  not  show  himself  devoid  of  gratitude,  and  of  a  desire  to  make  a  doe
return  for  his  kindness.


y  Google


K.  v.]  OB,  LAMEOT  OF  OTID.  353

May  she  enjoy  her  home,  the  society  of  her  daughter,  and  her
country ;  let  it  suffice  for  her  to  be  torn  from  me  only.  And
since  she  is  not  blessed  in  her  beloved  husband,  let  the  other
portion  of  her  life  be  without  a  cloud  of  sorrow.  May  she
Hve,  and  may  she  love  her  husband  far  away,  since  this  she
is  obliged  to  do  ;  and  may  she  fiU  her  destined  years,  but  after
a  prolonged  life.  I  would  add  mine  as  well ;  but  I  am  afraid^
lest  the  contact  of  my  destiny  should  taint  the  years  that  she
is  passing.

There  is  nothing  sure  to  mortals.  Who  could  have  sup-
posed that  it  would  come  to  pass,  that  I  should  be  cele-
brating these  rites  in  the  midst  of  the  G^tae?  But  see
how  the  breeze  wafts  the  smoke,  arising  from  the  frankincense,
towards  the  regions  of  Italy,  and  the  lands  on  my  right  hand.
There  is  sense,  then,  in  the  clouds  which  the  fire  raises;
almost  every  thing  else  refuses  to  second  my  purpose.  De-
signedly, when  the  common  rites  were  being  performed  on  the
altar,  for  the  brothers  who  perished  by  each  other's  hand,  did
the  bkck  ashes,  at  variance,  divide  themselves  into  two  parts,
as  though  at  their  command.  This  I  remember,  I  was
wont  formerly  to  say,  could  not  happen ;  and,  in  my
opinion,  the  son  of  Battus  spoke  not  the  truth.  Now,  I  be-
lieve it  all :  when  thou,  conscious  smoke,  ffiest  from  the
North,  and  takest  the  direction  of  Ausonia.  This,  then,  is  the
day ;  and  had  this  not  risen,  no  festival  would  there  have  been
to  be  seen  by  me.  This  day  gave  birth  to  virtues  equal  to
those  of  the  heroines,  of  whom  Eedon  and  Icarius'  were  the
fathers.  Then  was  chastity,  morality,  honesty,  and  fideUty
brought  forth  :  but  on  this  day  joyousness  was  not  produced  :
but  toil,  and  care,  and  a  destiny  unsuited  to  her  virtues,  and
just  complaints  of  a  union  almost  widowed.

In  truth,  probity,  harassed  by  adversity,  furnishes  a  subject
for  praise  in  its  day  of  sorrow.  Had  the  hardy  Ulysses
seen  nothing  of  adversity,  Penelope  would  have  been  happy,
but  unknown  to  fame.  If  the  hero  Capaneus  had  vic-
toriously penetrated  to  the  citadel  of  Eehion,^  perhaps  her
'  7  nation  and  Icarius.l — Ver.  44.  Eetion  was  the  Neither  of  Andro-
mache, the  urife  of  I}ector;  and  learius  was  the  father  of  Penelope,  the
wife  of  Ulysses ;  hoth  of  them,  women  celebrated  for  their  virtues. .  i

^  Citadel  of  ^cAton.]— Ver.  53.  This  was  Thebes,  in  Boeotia.  Echion
assisted  Cadmus  in  building  it.  Capaneus  was  struck  with  lightning,  when
uttering  threats  against  the  city;

A  A


y  Google


354  THl  TEISTIiL;  '  ' [b.  T.

own  land  wonld  scarcely  have  known  of  Efadne.  Wbca  ao
many  daughters  of  Pelias  were  bom,  why  is  hut  one  famous  ?
It  is  because  she  only  was  married  to  an  unfortunate  hus-
band. Make  it  so  that  another  should  be  the  first  to  touch
the  Trojan  sands;  there  would  then  be  nothing  for  Lao-
damia  to  be  mentioned  for.  And  your  affection  would  haye
remained  unknown,  as  I  should  have  {Nreferred,  if  favouring
breezes  had  filled  my  sails.

And  yet,  0  ye  Gods,  and  thou,  Csesar,  to  be  added  to  the
number  of  the  Gods,  but  at  a  far  distant  period,  when  thy  life
nas  eaualled  in  number  the  Pylian  days  of  Nestor  ;  spare,  not
me,  wno  confess  that  I  have  deserved  punishment,  but  her>  who
sorrows  when  she  is  deserving  of  no  sadness.


ELEGY  VI.

Ha  oomplains  thai  he  is  deserted  by  his  friend ;  and  entreats  him  to  main-
tain that  friendly  feeling  which  had  fonnerly  existed  between  them.

Akd  dost  thou,  too,  once  the  safeguard  of  my  fortunes,  who  wast
my  refuge  and  my  haven,  dost  thou  even  throw  aside  the  cause
of  thy  acknowledged  Mend ;  dost  thou  so  soon  dismiss  thealfec-
tionate  obUgations  of  duty  t  I  am  a  burden,  I  confess  ;  but
if  thou  wast  about  to  lay  that  5i«rc^down  in  adversity,  it  should
not  have  been  taken  up  by  thee.  Dost  thou  desert  the  ship,
Fahnurus,  in  the  midst  of  the  waves?  Fly  not,  and  let
not  thy  confidence  be  less  than  thy  skill.  Did  the  incon-
stancy of  the  faithful  Automedon  desert  the  steeds  of  Achilles
during  the  fierce  battle?  Did  not  Fodalirius*  afr<nrd  the
promised  aid  of  the  medical  art  to  the  invahd  whom  he  had
once  received  ?  The  stranger  is  turned  out  with  more  dis-
grace to  the  host,  than  is  the  case  if  he  is  not  first  received.
Let  the  altar  which  has  been  afforded  me,  stand  firm  for  my
right  hand.

i  At  first,  thou  didst  defend  nothing  but  myself  alone;
do  thou  now  defend  both  me  and  the  opinion  thou  hadst
formed  of  me ;  if  only  there  is  no  new  fault  in  me,  and
if  my  alleged  crimes  have  not  suddenly  wrought  a  change
in  thy  confidence.  May  this  breath,  wluch  I  draw  with  diffi-
culty in  the  Scythian  air,  first  leave  my  Umbs  (as  I  wish  it

•  PodaUrius.l — Ver.  11.  He  was  a  son  of  ^sculapios,  and  with  his
whether  Machaon,  accompanied  the  Grecian  army  to  the  Trojan  war,
hrore  they  acquired  great  celebrity  by  their  skill  in  the  heliling  art.


y  Google


S.  ▼!.]  OB,  LAMEI7T  OF  OYID.  ' 355

may)  before  thy  heart  be  wounded  by  any  fault  of  mine,  and
l>efore  I  deservedly  appear  worthless  to  thee.  I  am  not  so
entirely  crashed  by  my  adverse  destiny,  that  my  mind,  as  well,  is
affected  by  my  prolonged  misfortunes.  Imagine  it  affected,
however :  how  often,  dost  thou  suppose,  that  the  son  of  Aga-
memnon uttered  harsh  words  against  Pylades  ?  and  it  is
not  very  unlikely  that  he  may  have  even  struck  his  fiiend ;
yet  not  a  whit  the  less  did  he  remain  firm  in  his  dutiful  atten-
tions. This  is  the  only  thing  in  common  with  the  wretched
and  the  happy,  that  devotedness  is  wont  to  be  shown  towards
them  both.  Boom  is  made  both  for  the  bUnd,  and  for  those
whom  the  prsetextal  robe^^  and  the  rod  of  command,  together
with  their  orders,  causes  to  be  dreaded.  If  thou  dost  not
oonsidw  me,  yet  thou  oughtst  to  be  considerate  to  my  lot ;  anger
has  no  grounds  for  its  existence,  in  my  case.  Choose  the  least,
yes,  the  very  least,  of  my  afflictions ;  it  will  be  far  greater
Hnan  what  thou  dost  imagine  it  to  be.  As  many  as  the  reeds
with  which  the  wet  ditches  are  filled,  as  many  as  the  bees
which  the  flowery  Hybla  holds,  as  many  as  the  ants  which
are  wont  to  carry  the  grains  which  they  have  found,  by  the
narrow  path  to  their  subterranean  granaries,  so  numerous  do
the  multitudes  of  my  countless  evils  throng  around  me.  Be-
lieve me,  my  complaints  come  short  of  the  truth.  He  who  is
not  contented  with  these,  would  pour  sand  on  the  sea  shore,
ears  of  com  amid  the  standing  crop,  and  water  in  the  waves.
Restrain,  then,  thy  unreasonable  fears,  and  do  not  forsake  my
sails,  in  the  midst  of  the  ocean.


ELEGY  VII.

Ovid  tells  his  friend,  who  inquires  what  he  is  doing  in  Scythia,  that  he
lives  a  life  of  misery.  He  describes  the  manners  of  the  inhabitants  of
Tomi,  and  says  that  he  beguiles  his  griefs  by  writing  poetry,  and  that,
amid  his  compositions  alone,  he  is  able  to  forget  his  misfortunes.

The  letter  which  thou  readest,  comes  to  thee  from  that  land,
where  the  wide  Danube  is  added  to  the  waters  of  the  ocean.

^0  Thepnetextal  ro6e.]— Vcr.  31.  The  *toga  praetexta'  had  a  broad
pnrple  border.  It  was  worn  by  the  Consuls  and  other  magistrates,  not
only  of  Rome,  but  of  the  colonies,  and  the  *  municipia,'  and  by  the  priests
and  other  persons  when  engaged  in  celebrating  sacred  rites. The  *  rod  of


y  Google


356  THB  TBISTIi.;  [b.  v.

If  life,  wiih  pleasing  health,  ia  thy  lot,  one  part  of  my  d^linj
is  still  propitious.

Doubtless,  my  dearest  friend,  as  thou  alwayst  dost,  thou
inquirest  what  I  am  doing?  although  thou  mightst  know  that,
even  if  I  were  silent  upon  it.  I  am  wretched ;  this  is  the  limited
substance  of  my  woes ;  and  whoerer  shall  live,  haying  offended
Csesar,  will  be  so.

Hast  thou  a  wish  to  learn  what  is  the  race  in  the  r^on
of  Tomi,  and  among  what  manners  I  am  hying  ?

Although  this  spot  is  divided  among  the  Greeks  and  the  Gets^
it  follows  rather  the  customs  of  the  Getae,  who  have  been
but  half  subdued.  A  greater  multitude  of  the  Sarmatiaik
and  of  the  Getic  nations  comes  and  goes  along  its  roads  on
horseback.  Among  them  there  is  no  one  who  does  not  carry
a  bow-case,  ^^  a  bow,  and  arrows  Hvid  with  the  venom  of  ser-
pents. Their  voice  is  wild,  their  countenance  savage,  the
very  resemblance  of  Mars ;  neither  their  hair  nor  their
beiurd  is  shorn  by  any  hand.  Their  right  hand  is  not  slow
to  give  a  wound  with  the  implanted  knife,  which  every  one  of
these  barbarians  wears,  fastened  to  his  side.  Thy  poet,  alas !
my  Mend,  lives  in  the  midst  of  these,  forgetful.of  his  gentle
loves  ;  these  he  beholds,  to  these  he  listens.  And  may  he  live,
but  not.  die  among  them!  And  still  may  his  ghost  be  far
away  from  these  bideful  regions !

Thou  write8t,my  friend,  that  my  verses  are  danced  to  in  the
crowded  theatre,  and  that  applause  is  given  to  my  lines.  I,
indeed,  have  done  nothing  for  the  theatres,  and  thou  thyself
knowest  it,  and  my  Muse  never  was  ambitious  of  applause
on  the  stage.  But  whatever  precludes  forgetfulness  of  me,  and
brings  the  name  of  me,  in  banishment,  into  the  mouths  of  the
people,  is  far  from  displeasing.  And  yet  sometimes  I  curse
my  verses  and  my  Pierian  mistresses,  when  I  recollect  the
injury  they  have  done  me ;  and,  after  I  have  cursed  them  to
the  utmost,  still  I  cannot  exist  without  them,  and  I  attach  my-
self to  the  arms  that  are  stained  with  the  blood  of  my  wounds,
command/  *  virga  imperiosa,'  here  mention^,  was  probably  the  rod  with
which  the  Lictor  was  wont  to  summon  people  to  move  aside,  as  the  Con-
sul or  other  magistrate  was  passing.

^i  A  bow  case.] — Ver.  15.  This  is  the  usual  meaning  of  the  word
'  corytos/  though,  perhaps,  it  may  here  mean  a  case  in  which  both  the  bow
and  arrows  were  kept,  which  was  frequently  used  by  the  Eastern  nations,
and  sometimes  by  the  Greeks  and  Romans.


y  Google


K,  VII.]  OB,  LAMBITT  OF  OVID.  357

The  Grecian  bark,  which  has  just  been  shattered  by  the  Eu-
boean  waves,  dares  to  cleave  the  waters  of  Caphareus. But
yet  I  have  no  anxiety  to  be  praised,  and  I  have  no  care  for
future  glory,  which  had,  more  to  my  comfort,  better  been  ob-
scured. I  occupy  my  mind  with  my  pursuits,  and  I  beguile
my  sorrows ;  I  try,  too,  thereby  to  aeceive  my  cares. What
should  I  do,  in  preference,  alone  on  these  solitary  shores  ?  or
what  occupation  wouldst  thou  rather  that  I  should  endeavour
to  seek  ? If  I  look  at  the  place,  it  is  odious ;  and  there  can-
not, in  all  the  world, be one  more  wretched  than  it. If
I  look  at  the men : the  men  are  hardly  worthy^  of  that
name, and  they  have more savage  ferocity  than  wolves.
They  regard  not  laws,  but  right  yields  to  might,  and  jus-
tice, overcome,  lies  prostrate  under  the  warlike  sword. Tfliey
poorly  repel  the  cold,  with  skins  and  flowing  trowsers  ;  and
their  faces  are  rough,  covered  with  long  hair. Vestiges  of
the  Greek  language  are  remaining,  in  a  few  words:  this,
too,  has  become  barbarous,  through  the  Getic  pronunciation.
There  is  no  one  among  this  people  who  can  by  chance  trans-
late into  Latin,  words  in  general  use. I,  who  am  a  poet  of
Home  (pardon  me,  ye  Muses),  am  compelled  to  say  many
things  in  the  Sarmatian  language. I  am  ashamed,  I  confess
it ;  for  now,  from  long  disuse,  scarcely  do  the  Latin  expres-
sions occur  to  me ;  and  I  have  no  doubt  but  that  there  are  no
few  barbarisms  in  this  little  work. That  is  not  the  fault  of
the  man,  but  of  the  place. But,  that  I  may  not  lose  all  ac-
quaintance with  the  Ausonian  tongue,  and  my  voice  become
dumb  in  its  native  language,  I  talk  to  myself,  and  I  run  over
the  unaccustomed  words,  and  repeat  the  unfortunate  expo-
nents^' of  my  pursuits. Thus  I  occupy  my  mind  and  my
hours ;  and  thus  I  take  myself  away,  and  remove  myself  from
the  contemplation  of  my  woes. I  seek  in  my  verse  forgetful-
ness  of  my  miseries ;  if  by  my  pursuits  I  obtain  that  reward,
it  is  enough.  ,

w  Unfortunate  exponents.'] — ^Ver.  64.  He  either  means  words  or  lines ;
because,  either  through  speaking  without  due  precaution,  or,  at  least,  osten-
siblj  through  his  poetical  effusions,  he  was  sentenced  to  bamshment.


y  Google


358  THE  TBISTIA ;  f [b.  T.


ELEGY  VIII.

Hb  recommends  an  enemy,  who  insults  him,  to  rememher  the  fiddeness  of
fortvne,  and  to  cease  to  exult  at  his  downfall ;  and  he  tella  him,  that  it
may  possibly  be  his  foitnne  to  be  permitted  to  retnrn,  and  see  his  an-
tagonist ezfled,  for  some  offence  ci  greater  magnitude.

Althofoh  prostrate,  not  so  low  have  I  fallen,  that  I  am  be-
neath even  thee,  than  whom  nothing  can  be  lower.  What
is  it  that  excites  thy  anger  against  me,  thou  wretch  ?  Or  why
dost  thou  insult  my  misfortunes,  which  thou  thyself  mayst
have  to  endure  ?  Do  not  my  miseries,  at  which  even  wild
beasts  might  weep,  render  thee  gentle  and  lenient  towards
me,  thus  lying  prostrate?  And  dost  thou  stand  in  no
fear  of  the  dirine  power  of  Fortune,  standing  on  the  un-
steady wheel,  ^'"^^  and  of  the  Goddess  that  abhors  boast-
ful words?  Ah!  the  Rhamnusian  avenger^  will  exact  a  be-
fitting punishment !  Why  dost  thou  crush  my  destiny  with
thy  foot  placed  upon  it  ?  I  myself  have  beheld  a  shipwreck,
and  men  drowned  in  the  sea ;  and  I  said,  never  were  the
waves  more  justly  avenging.  He  who  once  denied  a  worthless
morsel  of  food  to  the  destitute,  is  now  fed  upon  the  bread  of
charity.  Fleeting  Fortune  wanders  with  doubting  steps,  and
remains  in  no  one  place  for  certain,  and  to  be  relied  upon.  At
one  moment,  she  abides  in  a  place  full  of  joy;  at  anotiier,  she
assumes  an  austere  countenance ;  and  only  in  her  very  fickle-
ness is  she  constant.  My  fortunes,  too,  have  had  their  bloom,
but  that  bloom  was  but  fleeting,  and  my  brilltant  flame  arose
but  from  stubble,  and  was  of  short  duration.

But  that  thou  mayst  not  relish  thy  savage  joy  with  all
thy  soul,  I  tell  thee,  my  hope  of  appeasing  the  Divinity  is  not
quite  extinguished.  Both  because  I  committed  a  fault  which
fell  short  of  criminahty ;  and  though  my  error  is  not  unaccom-
panied with  shame,  it  is  not  attended  witb  hatred :  and  because
the  vast  earth,  ^m  the  rising  of  the  sun  to  his  setting,  contains
nothing  more  fiill  of  clemency,  than  he,  to  whom  it  pays  obe-

^'*  On  the  unsteady  wAecZ.]— Ver.  7.  The  Goddess  Fortuna  was  r^re-
sented  as  standing  on  a  wheel,  the  attitude  being  indicative  of  herunst^idi-
ness  and  inconstancy.

^  The  Jihamnusian  avenffer,'] — ^Ver.  9.  Nemesis,  the  Goddess  of  jus-
tice and  retribution,  was  thus  called,  from  Bhamnus,  one  of  the  boroughs
of  Attica,  where  she  had  a  temple.


y  Google


K.  vni.]  ^ OB,  LAMENT  O*  X)YTD.  359

dience.  Troly,  as  he  is  not  to  be  subdued  by  force  by  any
one,  in  the  same  degree  he  has  a  heart  that  is  tender  to  hum-
ble entreaties.  Andfrcm  him,  after  the  example  of  the  Gods,
to  whom  he  is  one  day  to  be  added,  I  shall  obtain  many  other
requests,  with  a  remission  of  my  punishment.

If  thou  wast  to  count  the  fine  days  and  the  cloudy  ones,
throughout  the  year,  thou  wouldst  find  that  the  day  has  oftener
been  bright.  Therefore,  that  thou  mayst  not  exult  too  much  in
my  downfall,  consider  that  even  I  may  one  day  be  restored  to
my  country.  Consider  that  it  may  happen,  that,  the  Prince
b^ng  appeased,  thou  in  thy  sadness  mayst  behold  my  features
in  the  midst  of  the  City,  and  I  may  behold  thee  euled  for  a
more  weighty  reason.  This  is  my  next  prayer  after  my
former  one.^*


ELEGY  IX.

He  praises  the  constancy  of  his  friend,  and  says,  that  it  is  through  his'bene-
ficence  that  he  exists,  and  he  expresses  his  gratitude  for  it.  He  says  that
he  would  willingly  make  public  his  extreme  kindness,  if  he  would  allow
his  name  to  be  mentioned  in  his  writings.

Oh  !  if  thou  wouldst  but  permit  thy  name  to  be  placed  in  my
verse,  how  often  wouldst  thou  be  inserted  there  !  Remembering
thy  deserts,  I  would  sing  of  thee  alone ;  and  in  my  books  not
a  page  should  sweU  without  thee.  It  should  be  known
throughout  all  the  City,  how  much  I  am  indebted  to  thee :  if
indeed,  an  exile,  my  works  are  read  in  the  City  now  lost  to  me.
The  present  age  should  know  of  this  kindness,  a  future  age
should  know  it ;  if  only  my  writings  shall  reach  an  age  of
antiquity.  The  learned  reader  should  not  fail  to  extol  thee :
this  honour  should  await  thee,  for  being  the  preserver  of  tiie
poet.  The  chief  gift  is  that  of  Caesar,  that  I  breathe  the  air ;
next'after  the  great  God,  thanks  must  be  given  to  thee.  'Twas
he  that  granted  me  life ;  of  that  which  he  granted,  thou  art  the
protector ;  and  thou  causest  me  to  be  able  to  enjoy  the  gif
which  I  have  received  from  him.

While  the  greater  part  of  my  acquaintances  were  dismayed

1*  Afier  my  former  one,] — ^Ver.  38.  His  first  prayer  is,  that  he  may
return  to  his  country :  his  mext  wish  is,  that  exile  for  a  grayer  offence  may
be  the  lot  of  his  enemy.


y  Google


360  ras  Kts^ciA. ;  [b.  t.

mt  mycalaiiiitaeSy  and  some,  too,  wiahedto  belboag^t  to  behm-
rified,  ^nd  from  a  lo^  hill  looked  down  upon  my  shipwred[,
and  yet  extended  no  hand  to  me,  sal  swam  through  die  smgii^
waters ;  thou  wast  the  only  one  to  recall  me,  half  dead,  firma
the  Stygian  wares.  This,  too,  is  thine,  that  I  have  the  power
to  be  gratefbl.  May  the  Gods,  t<^ether  with  Csesar,  ever  shew
themselves  Mendly  to  thee :  my  prayers  cannot  extend  farther.
*  My  care,  if  thou  wonldst  permit,  would  insert  these  things  in
my  ingenious  books,  to  be  seen  in  the  broad  light  of  day.
Even  now,  my  Muse,  although  she  has  been  bid  to  ke^
silence,  scarcely  restrains  herself  from  naming  thee,  thus  un-
willing. And  as  the  strong  leash  with  difficulty  withholds  the
strug^ing  hound,  when  he  has  found  the  traces  of  the  de»;
and  just  as  the  h^h-mettled  steed,  now  with  his  foot,  now  with
his  forehead,  beats  at  the  doors  of  the  starting-place,  not  yet
opened,  ^^  so  does  my  Muse,  bound  and  restrained  by  the  in-
junction imposed  on  her,  desire  to  recount  the  praises  of  this
name,  forbidden  to  be  uttered.  But  that  thou  mayst  not  receive
injury  from  the  affection  of  a  grateful  friend,  cease  to  fear,
I  will  obey  thy  commands.  But  yet  I  would  not  obey,  didst
thou  not  believe  that  I  keep  in  memory  thf/  kindness.  I  will
be  gratefdl^  a  thing  which  thy  words  do  not  ^rbid.  And
while  I  shall  look  on  the  light  of  the  sun,  (a  short  time  may
it  be !)  this  spirit  will  be  devoted  to  thy  service.


ELEGY  X.

The  Poet  says,  that  the  three  years  which  he  has  passed  in  Pontns,  have
appeared  to  him  to  be  ten,  from  the  wretched  nature  of  the  place,  iN^ch
he  then  proceeds  to  describe.

Since  I  have  been  in  Pontus,  thrice  has  the  Ister  frozen
and  thrice  has  the  wave  of  the  Euxine  sea  become  hardened.
But,  to  myself,  I  seem  now  to  have  been  absent  from  my  coun-
try as  many  years  as  Dardanian  Troy  was  exposed  to  the
Grecian  foe.  The  time  passes  so  slowly,  you  would  think  it  to  be

^  Ni>t  yet  qpcwerf.]— Ver.  29.  The  '  carceres '  were  vaults  at  the  end
of  the  race-course,  closed  by  gates  of  open  wood-work,  which,  on  the
signal  being  given,  were  simultaneously  opened  by  the  aid  of  men  and
ropes,  and  the  chariots  came  forth,  ready  for  starting.  The  number  of
*  carceres '  on  a  course  are  supposed  to  have  varied  from  eight  to  twelve.


y  Google


».  X.]  OB,  LAMEfT  OP  OVID.  361

standing  still ;  and  with  but  slow  steps  the  year  performs  its
course.  The  summer  solstice  diminishes  not  my  nights,  and
midwinter  does  not  make  my  days  shorter.  In  good  truth,  the
nature  of  things,  in  my  case,  has  hecome  quite  altered,  and
renders  every  thing  protracted  along  with  my  woes.  Do  the
usual  periods  reaUy  perform  their  wonted  courses,  and  is  it
rather  that  this  period  of  my  life  is  unendurahle  ?  Me,  whom
the  shores  confine,  false  in  their  name  of  Euxine,  and  die  land
of  the  Scythian,  near  the  Scythian  seas,  truly  sinister  in  name
and  in  character.

Innumerahle  trihes  around  are  threatening  cruel  warfare  ;
tribes  which  deem  it  a  disgrace  not  to  live  hy  rapine.  Out-
side, nothing  is  safe;  the  hill  is  but  poorly  defended  by
small  fortifications,  afid  the  resources  of  the  place.  When
you  would  least  expect  it,  the  enemy,  in  a  dense  mass,  like
birds,  is  flying  down  upon  you,  and,  before  he  is  well
seen,  is  driving  off  his  prey.  Often  do  we  pick  up  in  the
midst  of  the  streets  their  dangerous  arrows,  that  have  come
within  the  fortifications,  when  the  sates  have  been  shut.
There  are  few,  therefore,  that  dare  to  live  out  in  the  country ;
and  they,  wretched  people,  plough  with  one  hand,  and  hold
their  arms  wjththe  other.  Covered  with  a  helmet,  the  shepherd
plays  on  his  oaten  pipe,  joined  with  pitch  ;  and,  instead  of  the
wolf,  the  timid  sheep  are  in  dread  of  war.  By  the  aid  of  the
citadel,  we  are  hardfy  defended ;  and  even  within,  a  multitude
of  the  barbarians,  mixed  with  the  Greeks,  causes  apprehension.
It  is,  because  the  barbarians  live  together  with  us,  no  distinction
bein^  made  ;  and  they  occupy  the  greater  portion  of  the  houses.
Even  if  you  did  not  fear  them,  you  would  be  disgusted,  on
seeing  their  foreheads  covered  with  skins  and  long  hair.
Even  those,  who  are  supposed  to  derive  their  origin  from  the
Grecian  city,  the  Persian  trowsers  cover,  instead  of  the  dress
of  their  country.  They  enjoy  the  intercourse  of  a  common
language ;  by  gestures,  anything  must  be  signified  to  me.
Here  it  is  I  who  am  the  barbarian,  because  by  no  one  am  I
understood;  the  stupid  Getae  laugh  at  Latin  words.  Many
a  time,  before  my  face,  do  they  speak  ill  of  me  in  safety,
and  perhaps  are  reproaching  me  with  my  banishment ;  and  as
often  as  by  signs  1  assent  or  dissent  when  they  are  speak-
ing, just  as  it  happens,  they  always  suppose  something  to  my
disadvantage.^* Besides,  iniquitous  rettdiation  is  dealt  with

^  To  my  duadvantage.l^yet.  42. He  seems  to  imply,  that  whether


y  Google


362  THX  TSnWTLL  i  [b.  r.

the  cmel  sword,  and  wounds  are  often  inflicted  in  the  middle  of
the  court  of  justice.  Oh,  crael  Lachesis,  who  hast  not  giren
a  shorter  thread  of  life  to  one  who  has  a  star  so  disastrons.

I  lament,  my  Mends,  hoththat  I  am  deprived  of  theli^t  of
my  country  and  of  yonrselTcs,  and  that  I  am  here,  in  the
Scythian  land.  Either  is  a  heayy  punishment :  yet  I  de-
served to  he  expelled  from  the  City ;  though,  perhiaps,  I  did
not  deserve  to  he  in  such  a  place.  Ah !  what,  in  my  madness,
am  I  sajing  ?  I  deserved  to  lose  even  my  life,  when  I  offisnded
the  majesty  of  Caesar.

ELEGY  XI.

Hb  laments  that  his  wife  has  been  reproached  and  insulted,  as  being
the  wife  of  an  exHe. He  exhorts  her  to  endure  her  misfortunes  with
patience ;  and  says,  that  Augustus  did  not  pronounce  him  an  exile,  hut
only  ordered  his  withdrawal  firom  his  native  country.
YovB  letter  made  the  complaint  that  some  fellow  reproach-
fully called  you  the  wife  of  an  exile. I  was  grieved  at  it ;  not
so  much  because  my  fate  received  blame,  as  I  have  now  accus-
tomed myself  to  bear  my  misery  with  fortitude ; as  because  I
am  a  source  of  disgrace  to  one  to  whom  I  would  £iir  from  wish
to  he  so,  and  hecause  I  think  that  you  have  felt  ashamed  at
my  misfortunes.  Bear  up  and  endure  it ;  you  endured  a  much
greater  misfortune,  when  the  anger  of  the  Prince  snatched  me
away  from  you.

Yet  he  is  deceived,  in  whose  allegations  I  am  called
an  exile.  A  milder  punishment  was  the  consequence  of  my
fault.  My  greatest  punishment  is,  that  I  gave  offence  to  the
Pritice  himself:  and  I  would  prefer  that  the  hour  of  my  death
had  come  hefore  that.  Yet  my  ship  was  shattered,  not  wrecked
or  sunk ;  and  although  she  is  not  in  harbour,  yet  she  still
keeps  above  water.  He  has  not  deprived  me  of  life  or  pro-
perty, or  the  rights  of  a  citizen ;  all  which  I  deserved  to  lose,
through  my  fa^t.  But,  because  crime  was  not  added  to  that
error  of  mine,  he  gave  no  order,  but  that  I  should  leave  the
home  of  my  fathers.  And  as  it  is  to  others,  whose  numhers
cannot  he  counted,  so  was  the  might  of  Csesar  lenient  towards
me.  He  himself,  in  my  case,  uses  the  title  of  ''one  removed,"
not  of  '*  an  exile ;"  my  case  is  established  by  the  words  of  its
own  judge.

he  assents  or  dissents,  they  are  always  suspicious  of  his  motives,  and  are
determined  never  to  put  a  just  and  fair  construction  on  his  words.


y  Google


«.  XI.]  OB,  -LAMEST  OP  OTED.  363

Widi  justice,  then,  do  my  vewes,  Csesar,  such  as  they  are,
celebrate  thy  praises,  with  all  my  energies.  Justly  do  I  entreat
the  Gods  still  to  keep  the  threshold  of  heaven  closed  against
thee,  and  to  desire  thee  to  be  a  God,  but  not  in  their  com-
pany.^^  The  public  desires  the  same  thing ;  but  just  as  the
riyers,  so  the  stream  of  the  little  brook  is  wont  to  run  into  the
vast  ocean.

And  do  thou,  by  whose  lips  I  am  styled  an  exile,  cease  to
aggravate  my  lot,  by  the  imposition  of  a  false  name.


ELEGY  XII.

The  Poet  answers  a  friend,  that  had  exhorted  him  to  compose  afresh
work,  and  he  gives  his  reasons  for  not  doing  so.  He  confesses  that  he
cannot  restrain  himself  from  composing  something  at  times,  but  he  says
that  he  makes  it  a  practice  to  bum  his  compositions.

Thotj  writest,  that  I  ought  to  while  away  my  wretched  hours
in  study,  that  my  talents  may  not  decay  in  disgraceful
sloth.  What  thou  advisest,  my  Mend,  is  a  difficult  matter,
because  versifying  is  a  cheerful  occupation,  and  requires  to
have  the  mind  at  ease.  My  fortunes  are  buffeted  by  adverse
storms ;  and  no  lot  can  be  more  sad  than  my  own.  Thou  art
requiring  that  Priam  should  be  merry  on  the  death  of  his  chil-
dren, and  that  the  bereft  Niobe  should  lead  the  festive  dance.
Whether  does  it  appear  that  I  ought  to  be  engaged  in  weeping
or  in  study,  thus  ord^ered  to  go  in  solitude  among  the  most  dis-
tant Getse  ?  Even  if  thou  shouldst  give  me  a  breast  supported
by  stout  courage,  such  as  Fame  says  there  was  in  him  accused
by  Anytus  ;"  even  then,  would  wisdom  lie  prostrate,  crushed
under  the  weight  of  so  great  a  downfaQ.  The  anger  of  a  God
is  too  strong  for  human  endurance.  The  old  man  that  was  called
wise  by  Apollo,  would  have  been  able  to  write  no  works  under
such  a  calamity.  Although  forgetfulness  of  my  country  should
come  on  me,  forgetfulness  of  yourselves  should  come,  although
every  recollection  of  my  offence  should  be  able  to  depart ;  still

"  Not  in  their  company.'] — Ver.  26.  That  is  to  say,  may  they  leave
you  on  earth,  to  enjoy  your  honours  as  a  God,  and  not  receive  you  in  the
skies  till  a  period  far  distant  hence.

1^  AnyittaJ] — ^Ver.  12.  Anytus,  Melitus,  and  Lycon,  were  the  aocusen
(tf  Socra^,  the  greatest  of  the  ancient  philosophers.  By  the  orada  of
ApoUo,  he  was  pronounced  to  be  the  wisest  of  men.


y  Google


364  THE  TEIBTIi^  [b.  r.

does  yery  fear  forbid  me  to  perform  a  daty  that  needs  tran-
quillity. A  place  confines  me,  g^  aronnd  by  foes  iImmne^
able.  Besides,  my  inyenlion  is  grown  doll,  injured  by
iong-continned  rust ;  and  it  is  far  smaller  than  it  once  was.
The  fertile  field,  if  it  is  not^b  renewed  by  the  constant  plough,
will  contain  nothing  but  grass  and  thorns.  The  steedy  which
has  been  long  stanmng  in  the  stable^  will  run  badly,  and  will
be  the  last  among  the  horses  issuing  from  the  starting-place.  If
any  bark  has  been  for  a  long  time  out  of  the  accustomed
water,  it  becomes  changed  to  crumbling  rottenness,  and  gapes
wide  with  leaks.  I  despair  that  I,  too,  humble  though  I  was
even  before,  can  become  equal  to  what  I  formerly  was.  The
lengthened  endurance  of  fatigues  has  crushed  my  powers,  and
a  large  portion  of  my  former  vigour  is  lost.  Yet  many  a  time,
as  now,  has  the  writing-tablet  been  taken  up  by  me  ;  and  I
have  essayed  to  arrange  the  words  in  their  proper  feet :  either
no  verses  have  been  composed  by  me,  or  such  as  thou  seeest ;  wot-
thy  of  the  circumstances  of  their  master,  worthy  of  the  locality.

Lastly,  fame  gives  no  little  eneigy  to  the  mind,  and  the  love
of  praise  renders  the  genius  prolific.  Formerly,  I  was  attracted
by  the  splendour  of  praise  and  celebrity,  while  yet  a  favouring
breeze  bore  on  my  sail  yards.  Things  go  not  now  so  well  with
me,  for  glory  to  be  a  care  to  me ;  if  it  be  allowed  me,  I  wish  to
be  known  to  no  one.

Dost  thou  persuade  me  to  write,  that  because  my  verses
have  before  turned  out  so  well,^*  I  should  follow  up  my  suc-
cesses ?  With  your  leave,  may  I  be  allowed  to  say  it,  ye  Nine
Sisters,  you  are  the  principal  cause  of  my  banishment ;  and  as
the  designer  of  the  brazen  bull  paid  the  just  penalty,  so  do
I  myself  pay  the  penalty  of  my  own  pursuits.

Nothing  more  ought  I  to  have  to  do  with  verses  ;  but,
when  shipwrecked,  I  ought,  by  rights,  to  avoid  all  parts  of
the  ocean.  But,  no  doubt,  if,  in  my  madness,  I  should  ixj  again
my  fatal  pursuits,  this  place  will  afford^  me  opportunities  for
making  my  verses.  Here,  there  are  no  books,  no  person  to  give
me  his  attention,  or  to  know  what  is  the  meaning  of  my  words.
Every  spot  is  fiill  of  barbarism  and  of  a  savage  jargon ;  all

"  Ttimed  out  so  wellJl — ^Ver.  43.  He  says  this  ironically,  implying
that  his  poetical  pursuits  had  turned  out  anything  but  to  his  adyantage.

*>  This  place  will  afford."] — Ver.  52.  This  is  also  said  ironically,  as  in
the  next  line  he  says  that  there  is  nothing  there  tp  encourage  liiip  to  con-
tinue his  poetical  labours.


y  Google


B.  xit.]  OB,  LAMEirr  or  ottd,  '  365

Uiings  are  filled  with  the  misery  of  the  Gretic  babble.  I  seem
to  myself  by  this  to  have  forgot  my  Latin ;  I  have  now  learned
to  speak  the  Getic  and  the  Sarmatian  languages.

Nor  yet,  to  confess  the  truth  to  thee,  can  my  Muse  be  restrained
from  composing  poetry..  I  write,  and  I  bum  my  books  when
they  are  written  :  a  litde  ashes  are  the  result  of  my  labour.  I
cannot,  and  I  do  not  wish  to  compose  any  more  verses ;  for  that
reason,  are  my  labours  thrown  in  the  fire.  No  produce  of  my
invention  has  come  among  you,  unless  snatched  from  the
flames  by  chance,  or  by  stealth.  And  so  do  I  wish  that  my
Art  of  Love  had  been  turned  to  ashes,  which  ruined  its  master,
when  he  apprehended  no  such  a  calamity.


ELEGY  XIIL

Hb  exhorts  his  friend,  as  he  has  giyen  him  many  proofs  of  his  a£fectioii,
not  to  deny  him  the  pleasure  of  his  letters.  He  says,  that  if  he  will
only  comply  ^th  this  request,  he  will  leave  nothing  that  can  possihly
be  demanded  of  his  Mendship.

Health  does  thy  Naso  send  thee  from  the  Getic  ahore^  if  any
one  can  send  the  thing  which  he  himself  is  in  want  of.  For
I,  in  ill  health,  have  contracted  an  infection  from  my  mind  in
my  body,  that  no  part  of  me  may  be  free  and  undisturbed  by
pain.  For  many  days  I  have  been  tormented  with  pains  in  my
side,  which,  fi»  well,  tiie  winter  injured  with  its  immoderate  cold.
But  yet,  if  thou  art  well,  then,  in  some  degree,  I  am  well :
because  it  was  by  thy  shoulders  that  my  doimfaQ  was  upheld*
Since  thou  hast  afforded  me  these  large  pledges  of  affection,
and  since,  through  all  vicissitudes,  thou  defendest  this  person
of  mine  ;  thou  dost  wrong,  in  that  thy  letters  console  me  but
so  seldom :  and  thou  performest  the  duties  of  affection,  I  own,
unless  thou  refusest  me  thy  correspondence.  Correct  this,
I  pray;  shouldst  thou  correct  this  only,  there  will  be  no
blemish  in  thy  faultless  person.  I  would  accuse  thee  more  at
length ;  might  it  not  happen,  perchance,  that  the  letter  did
not  reach  me,  and  yet  that  it  might  have  been  sent.  May
the  Gods  grant,  that  my  complaint  is  groundless,  and  that  I
wrongly  supposed  that  thou  didst  not  remember  me.  It  is
clear  that  that  is  the  fact,  which  I  pray :  for  it  is  not  possible


y  Google


366  THI  TIUSTIA. ; '  [b.  v.

for  me  to  beliere  that  the  strength  of  thy  mind  is  liable  to
change.  Let  the  white  wormwood  first  be  wanting  in  tiie
freezing  Pontns,  and  let  Trinacrian  Hybk*^  be  without  its
sweet  uyme,  before  any  one  can  prove  that  thou  art  forgetful
of  thy  Mend.  The  threads  of  my  destiny  are  not  so  black  as  that.

Bat  do  thou,  that  thou  mayst  also  be  enabled  to  rq)el
die  charge  of  a  fiudt  wrongfully  alleged,  take  care  lest  thou
appear  to  be  what  thou  art  not.  And  as  we  were  wont  to  spend
much  of  our  time  in  conversation,  the  day  not  sufficing  for  our
discourse  ;  so  let  our  letters  carry  to  and  fro  our  silent  words ;
and  let  the  paper  perform  the  duty  of  our  tongues.

And  that  I  may  not  appear  too  distrustful  that  thia  shall
come  to  pass,  and  that  it  may  suffice  to  have  put  thee  in
mind  in  a  few  lines,  receive  that  word  with  which  a  letter
ever  closes,  and  a  wish  that  thy  lot  may  be  different  from  mine.
FarewelL


ELEGY  XIV.

Hb  promiies  his  wife  immortality  in  his  writings,  and  tells  her  that
there  are  many  who,  though  they  may  deem  her  wretched,  will  stiD

^  consider  her  fortunate,  and  envy  her  lot.  He  exhorts  her  to  remam
constant  to  him,  and  to  give  no  room  for  aspersions  on  her  fidelity.  He
shows,  by  citing  examples,  that  constancy  of  wives  to  their  husbands
has  been  considered  a  marked  theme  for  praise  in  all  ages,  and  among
all  nations.

0  WIFE,  dearer  to  me  than  myself,  you  yourself  behold  what
lasting  fame  my  books  have  conferred  on  you.  Fortune  will
be  at  liberty  to  detract  much  from  the  author,  but  by  my
talents  you  will  become  illustrious.  So  long  as  my  works
shall  be  read,  together  will  your  praises  be  read :  and  you
cannot  entirely  cease  to  exist  at  the  mournful  pile.  And  though
you  may  appear  deserving  of  compassion,  on  account  of  the
downfaQ  of  your  husband,  some  you  will  find,  to  wish  to  be
what  you  are ;  to  call  you  happy,  and  to  envy  you,  although
you  share  my  miseries.  In  giving  you  riches,  I  could  not  have
given  you  more  ;  the  ghost  of  the  rich  man  will  take  nothing

*>  Trinacrian  Hybla."] — ^Ver.  22.  Hybla  was  a  mountain  of  Trinacria,
or  Sicily.  It  was  famous  for  its  bees,  whose  honey  was  rendered  of  the
finest  quality  by  the  wild  thyme  with  which  its  sides  were  covered.


y  Google


B.  xnr.]  OB,  IiAMENT  OIT  OTLD.  367

to  the  shades  below.  I  have  presented  you  with  the  gift  of  a
lafiting  name,  and  you  have  that,  than  which  I  could  have  pre-
sented you  with  nothing  greater.

Besides,  as  you  are  the  sole  guardian  of  my  property,  to  you
falls  no  slight  amount  of  honour.  Inasmuch  as  my  voice  is
never  silent  about  you,  you  ought  to  be  proud,  too,  of  the
good  opinion  of  your  husband.

Be  it  your  care,  that  no  one  may  say  that  it  is  rashly  pro-
nounced :  and  regard  both  me  and  your  own  constant  fideUty.
For  your  merit,  while  I  was  fortunate,  remained  without  any
evil  charge,  and,  unblamed,  received  the  praises  of  all ;  it  has
not  been  unequal  to  itself  in  this  my  term  of  calamity.  Here
may  your  virtues  erect  a  glorious  fabric.

"Tis  easy  to  be  virtuous,  when  that  which  may  forbid  virtue,
is  afar  o£f;  and  when  a  wife  has  nothing  to  obstruct  her  in  the
path  q^duty.  When  the  God  has  sent  his  thunders,  not  to  hide
one's  self  from  the  storm,  that  is  affection,  that  is  conjugal  love.
Bare,  indexed,  is  that  virtue,  which  Fortune  does  not  influence ;
which  stands  with  a  firm  foot,  when  she  flies.  But  if  any  virtue
was  ever  the  reward  of  its  own  deserts^  sought  by  it,  and
showed  itself  erect  in  disastrous  circumstances;  though
you  should  reckon  the  occasions,  yet  it  is  forgotten  in  no  lapse
of  ages,  and  all  places  admire  it,  wherever  the  surface  of  the
earth  extends.

Do  you  observe  how  the  fidehty  of  Penelope  has  re-
mained, a  subject  of  praise,  an  immortal  name  for  length-
ened ages  ?  Do  you  see  how  the  wives  of  Admetus,  and  of
Hector,  are  celebrated  in  song,  and  how  the  daughter  of  Iphis**
dared  to  ascend  the  Ughted  pile  ?  How,  too,  3ie  wife,  she  of
Phylaz,^  Uves  in  fame,  whose  husband  with  active  foot  trod  on

^  Reward  qf  its  ovm  merits.'] — Ver.  31,32.  This  seems  to  approxi-
mate, probably,  to  the  sense  intended  to  be  conveyed  by  these  lines ;  but
the  reading  is  so  corrupt  and  confused,  that  it  can  hardly  be  said  for  cer-
tain, whether  he  is  speaking  of  a  virtue,  or  of  a  woman,  or  what  he  really
intends  to  say.

^  Daughter  of  Jphi8,'\—y&[.  38.  This  was  Evadne,  the  wife  of  Capa-
neus,  who,  in  her  excess  of  grief,  threw  herself  on  the  funeral  pile  of  her
husband.

2*  She  of  PAytoar.]— Ver.  39.  Laodamia,  the  wife  of  Protesilaus,  is  here
alluded  to.  Phylax  was  a  town  of  Phthiotis,  in  Thessaly,  of  which  Prote-
silaus was  the  king.  Phylax  was  also  the  name  of  the  father  of  Iphiclus,
who  was  the  father  of  Protesilaus.  Laodamia  refused  to  live  any  longer,
on  hearing  of  the  death  of  her  husband,  who  was  killed  immediately  on  his
landing  on  the  Trojan  shore.


y  Google


368  THE  TBISTIi. ;  OB,  UlMXST  OF  OYH).  [b.  t.

the  Trojan  soil.  I  require  not  Death,  but  love  and  constancy.
Fame  is  not  to  be  sought  by  you  by  an  arduous  path.  Bat
do  not  suppose  that  I  recommend  these  things  to  your  notice,
because  you  do  them  not ;  I  hoist  my  sails,  although  the  ship
speeds  on  with  its  oars.  He  who  exhorts  you  to  do,  what
you  are  already  doing,  praises  you  by  his  exhortations,  and  by
ms  adyice  shows  his  approTal  of  your  actions.


EKD  OF  THE  TBIBTIA.


y  Google


THE


PONTIC  EPISTLES  OF  OVID.


BOOK  THE  FIRST.


EPISTLE  I.— TO  BRUTUS.

Hb  entreats  his  friend  Brutus  to  give  his  books  a  kind  reception,  especially
as  his  works  share  his  disgrace ;  and  he  then  states  what  forms  the
subject  of  his  Pontic  Epistles.

Naso,  now  become  an  old  inhabitant  of  the  region  of  Tomi,
sends  thee  this  work  from  the  Getic  shores.  If  thou  hast
leisure^  Brutus^  receive  with  hospitahty  these  little  books,
coming  from  afar,  and  put  them  in  any  place  thou  mayst
please,  so  that  it  be  some  place.  They  dare  not  approach  the
public  buildings,  lest  their  author  should  have  already  closed
the  path  against  them  in  that  direction.  Ah !  how  often  have  I
said,  "assuredly  ye  teach  no  bad  precepts;  go  on  your  way;  that
spot  is  open  for  verses  that  are  pure."  And  yet  they  go  not ;  but,
as  thou  seeest,  they  think  it  sf^er  to  He  concealed,  in  a  private
abode.  Dost  thou  enquire  where  thou  mayst  place  them,  no
one  being  offended  ?  That  spot  is  vacant  for  thee,  where  the
Arts  of  Love  used  to  stand.  Perhaps  thou  mayst  ask,  on  this
their  sudden  arrival,  why  they  have  come  ?  Receive  them,
whatever  the  reason  is,  so  that  it  is  not  Love.  Thou  wilt  find,
although  its  title  is  not  redolent  of  woe,  that  this  work  is  not
less  sorrowful  than  the  one  I  produced  before.  They  are
similar  in  subject,  hut  there  is  a  difference  in  the  title,  and  each
letter  shows  to  whom  it  is  sent,  the  name  no  longer  being
concealed.  You,  my  friends,  do  not  desire  this,  but  you  are  not
able  to  prevent  it ;  and  the  dutiful  Muse  approaches  those  who

B  B


y  Google


370  THE  PONTIC  BPISTLES  [b.1.

are  unwilling  to  receive  her,  Howeyer  that  is,  add  these  iinet
to  my  works.  There  is  nothing  to  hinder  the  progeny  of  an
exile  from  enjoying  a  life  in  the  City,  if  they  observe  the  laws.
There  is  no  reason  for  fear.  The  writings  of  even  Antonios  are
read,  and  the  learned  Brutus '  pubhcly  occupies  the  book-case.
I  am  not  so  insane  as  to  compare  myself  with  names  bo  great ;
but  yet  I  never  bore  blood-stained  arms  against  the  Deities.
In  fine,  not  one  of  my  books  fails  to  do  honour  to  Caesar,
although  he  wishes  it  not.  Shouldst  thou  hesitate  as  to  me;  ad-
mit the  panegyrics  of  the  Divinities,  and  receive  my  poem,  omit-
ting my  name.  The  branch  of  the  peaceful  oUve  has  its  influence
in  warfare ;  will  it  avail  m^  books  nothing,  to  mention  the  very
Founder  of  Peace  ?  When  the  neck  of  JSneas  was  placed
beneath  his  parent,  the  flame  itself  is  said  to  have  made  a  way
for  the  hero.  This  book  bears  the  name  of  the  descendant  of
^neas;  and  shall  not  every  path  be  open  to  it  ?  The  latter,  too,
is  the  Father  of  his  country ;  the  former  was  the  father  of
Mneas  himself  only.  Who  is  there  so  rash,  that  he  would
compel  him  that  shakes  the  tinkling  sistrum  of  Pharos^  to
depart  from  his  threshold  ?  When  the  piper  is  playing  on  the
crooked  horn,  before  the  Mother  of  the  Gods,  who  can  refuse
the  brass  pieces  of  trifling  coin  ?  We  know  that  no  such
thing  as  this  is  done  by  the  order  of  Diana ;  yet  the  soothsayer
has  thence  the  means  of  making  a  UveUhood.  The  heavenly  in-
fluence of  the  Gods  above  acts  upon  our  feelings ;  and  it  is  no
disgrace  to  be  beguiled  into  such  a  beUef. Behold !  instead

^  The  learned  Bruhis.] — Ver.  24.  Brutiu,  who  was  one  of  the  mor-
darers  of  Julias  Caesar,  was  a  man  of  great  genius  and  learning.  He  wroU
a  work  *  On  Virtue/  which  has  heen  praised  hy  Cicero,  Seneca,  and
Plutarch.  He  was  sJso  the  author  of  some  poems,  some  of  which,  how-
ever,  according  to  Pliny  the  Younger,  were  of  a  very  loose  character.

*  Sistrum  of  Pharos.] — Ver.  38.  The  *  sistrum'  was  a  mystical
musical  instrument,  used  hy  the  ancient  Egyptians  (whence  the  presrait
epithet  *  Pharia')  in  their  ceremonies,  and  especially  in  the  worship  of  Isis.
It  was  shaken  with  the  hand,  and  emitted  a  tinkling  sound.  Plutarch  tells
us  that  the  shaking  of  its  four  cross  hars  was  supposed  to  represent  the
agitation  of  the  four  elements,  earth,  air,  fire,  and  water ;  and  that  the  cat,
which  was  usually  sculptured  at  the  end  of  it,  represented  the  moon.
Apuleius  says  that  these  instruments  were  sometimes  made  of  silver,  and
even  of  gold.  The  '  sistrum'  was  introduced  into  Italy,  with  the  worship
of  Isis,  shortly  before  the  Christian  era.  It  is  used  in  Nubia  and  Abys-
sinia at  the  present  day.  The  word  is  sometimes  used  by  Latin  authors,  to
denote  simply  *  a  child's  rattle.'


y  Google


B.  1.]  OF  OTtD.  371

of  the  sistmm,  and  the  pierced  holes  of  the  Phrygian  box-
wood, I  bear  the  sacred  names  of  the  family  of  liilus.  I  both
prophecy,  and  I  instruct ;  make  way  for  him  that  bears  the
sacred  things ;  not  for  myself,  but  for  the  great  God,  it  is
asked.  But  do  not  suppose  that,  either  because  I  have  de-
served, or  have  experienced  the  anger  of  the  Prince,  he  is  un-
willing that  he  should  be  worshipped  by  me.  I  have  beheld
one  who  confessed  that  he  had  o£fendea  the  Divinity  of  Isis,
clothed  in  linen,'  sitting  before  the  altars  of  Isis ;  another,  de-
prived of  his  sight  for  a  fault  like  his,  was  crying,  in  the
middle  of  the  road,  that  he  had  deserved  it.  The  inhabitants
of  heaven  rejoice  that  such  public  declarations  are  made,  that
they  may  prove  by  testimony  how  great  is  the  extent  of  their
power.  Often  do  they  mitigate  the  punishment,  and  restore  the
sight  that  has  been  taken  away,  when  they  see  that  a  man  has
truly  repented  of  his  error.  Great,  oh!  great  is  my  penitence  (if
credence  can  be  given  to  any  of  the  wretched) ;  and  I  am  agonized
by  my  fault !  Though  my  exile  afflicts  me,  my  error  afflicts
me  still  more ;  and  to  endure  punishment  is  less  grievous  than
to  have  been  deserving  of  it.  Even  should  the  Gods,  among
whom  Augustus  himself  is  most  conspicuous,  show  favour  to  me,
the  punishment,  indeed,  may  be  removed,  but  the  fault  will
last  for  ever.  Death,  assuredly,  will  cause  me  to  be  no  longer
an  exile,  when  it  shall  have  come ;  but  death  will  not,  as
well,  make  me  not  to  have  committed  a  sin.  It  is  not,
then,  to  be  wondered  at,  if  my  mind,  wasting  away,  melts  lilte
the  water  that  trickles  from  the  snow.  It  is  consumed,  like
a  ship  infected  with  the  hidden  wood-worm ;  and  as  the  wave
of  the  salt  sea  hollows  out  the  rocks;  as  the  iron,  when  thrown
by,  is  corroded  by  the  scaly  rust ;  as  the  book  that  has  been
shut  up  is  gnawed  by  the  bite  of  the  moth ;  so  does  my  heart
feel  the  eternal  remorse  of  its  cares,  to  be  everlastingly  affected
thereby.  These  stings  will  not  leave  my  mind  sooner  than  my
life  ;  and  he  that  grieves,  will  cease  to  exist,  before  his  grief
will  cease.

If  the  (rods  above,  in  whose  power  all  things  are,  beUeve  me
in  this,  perhaps  I  shall  be  deemed  worthy  of  a  Httle  favour ;  and
I  shall  be  transferred  to  a  spot,  free  from  the  Scythian  bow.
Of  shameless  face  should  I  be,  if  I  prayed  for  more  than  that.

*  Clothed  in  linen.l^ — ^Ver.  51.  Isis  is  thus  called,  as  it  was  requisite  that,
in  her  worship,  her  priests  and  devotees  should  he  arrayed  in  linen  garments.

BB2

Digitized  by  LjOOQ IC


372  THB  POiraiC  BPISTLES  [».  L


EPISTLE  IL—TO  MAXIMUS.

He  commences  by  extolling  the  funily  of  Fabius ;  and  he  beseeches  Ik
attention,  while  he  is  making  his  request.  He  then  laments  his  end
fate,  and  sets  forth  his  numerous  woes,  his  dangers  from  the  enemjf  the
natives  of  the  country,  and  the  effect  which  his  misfortunes  hare  pro-
duced on  his  mind  and  body.  He  says  that  he  trusts  in  the  demencj
of  Caesar  for  a  change  in  the  place  of  his  exile ;  and  he  entreats  Maximns
to  make  this  request  alone  of  Augustus  in  his  faTour.

Maximtjs,  thou  who  fillest  the  measure  of  a  name  so  great,^
and  dost  amplify  thy  descent  by  the  nobleness  of  thy  mind ;
that  thou,  especially  mightst  be  bom,  although  three  hun-
dred feD,  yet  one  d&iy  did  not  carry  off  all  the  Fabii.  Per-
haps thou  mayst  ask,  by  whom  this  letter  is  sent;  and  thou  mayst
wish  to  be  informed,  who  it  is  that  is  addressing  thee.  Ah
me  !  what  shall  I  do  ?  I  fear,  lest,  when  thou  shalt  read  my
name,  thou  mayst  read  the  rest,  unfavourably  disposed  and
with  alienated  feelings.  If  any  one  shall  see  this ;  I  will  dare
to  confess  that  I  have  written  to  thee,  and  that  I  have  la-
mented over  my  own  woes.*  Let  him  see  it,  I  will  dare  to
confess  that  I  have  written  to  thee,  and  to  pubUsh  the  extent
of  my  transgression.  And,  though  I  acknowledge  that  I  de-
serve a  greater  punishment,  I  can  scarcely  have  to  endure  a
penalty  more  weighty.

I  Uve  in  the  midst  of  foes,  and  among  dangers ;  as  though,
together  with  my  country,  peace  had  been  torn  away  from  me :
These  ^c«,  that  they  may  effect  a  twofold  cause  for  death  in
the  cruel  woimd,  dip  aU  their  darts  in  the  venom  of  the  viper.
Provided  with  these,  the  horseman  surveys  the  fortiffeations,
just  Hke  a  wolf  prowHng  round  the  sheep  in  their  fold.  Their
light  bow,  when  once  stretched  with  the  horse-hair  cord,
always  remains  with  its  string  unrelaxed.  The  houses  bristle
as  though  palhsaded  with  the  arrows  fixed  there,  and  the  gate,
with  its  strong  lock,  is  hardly  able  to  keep  out  the  warfare.
Add  too,  the  appearance  of  the  place,  gladdened  with  neither

♦  A  name  80  great.'] — Ver.  1.  This  may  allude  either  to  the  other
name  of  Maximus,  which  was  Fabius,  the  cognomen  of  one  of  the  most
illustrious  of  the  Roman  families,  and  of  which  he  was  a  member ;  or  it
may  bear  reference  to  the  literal  meaning  of  the  name  *  Maximus,'  which
signifies  *  the  greatest  ;*  whereby  the  poet  intends  to  compliment  him  on  the
possession  of  each  virtue  in  th^  highest  degree.


y  Google


B.  11]  ' or  OVID.  3/3

leaves  nor  trees;  and  the  fact ,  that  one  sluggish  winter  is  ever
joined  to  another.  Here  is  a  fourth  winter,  wearing  me  out,  as
I  straggle  against  the  cold,  and  the  arrows,  and  my  destiny.
My  tears  are  without  an  end,  except  when  senselessness  has
checked  them;  and  a  torpor  like  death  takes  possession  of  my
heart.  Happy  was  Niohe,  though  she  beheld  the  deaths  of  so
many,  when,  changed  into  stone,  she  lost  all  sense  of  her  mis-
fortunes !  Happy  too,  were  ye,  whose  mouths,  when  calling  on
your  brother,  Uie  poplar  covered*  with  its  new-made  bark !  I
am  one,  who  can  be  turned  into  no  wood ;  I  am  one,  who  in
vain  desire  to  become  a  stone.  Even  if  Medusa  herself  were
to  come  before  my  eyes,  yet  would  even  Medusa  lose  her
power.

I  live,  so  as  never  to  be  free  from  a  feeling  of  sadness :  and
by  length  of  time  my  punishment  becomes  more  severe.  So,
the  Hver  of  Tityus,  unconsumed  and  ever  growing  again,
wastes  not,  that  it  may  be  devoured  many  times  over.

But,  I  suppose,^  when  rest  comes,  and  sleep,  the  universal
remedy  for  care,  the  night  passes,  free  from  the  usual  woes.
Visions  then  alarm  me,  that  pourtray  my  real  misfortunes,  and
my  senses  are  ever  awake  to  my  sorrows.  Either,  I  seem  to  be
flying  from  the  Sarmatian  arrows,  or  to  be  placing  my  cap-
tive hands  in  the  cruel  fetters ;  or,  when  I  am  beguiled  by  the
outline  of  a  happier  dream,  I  behold  the  lost  home  of  my
native  land  :  and  at  one  time,  I  am  conversing  at  length  with
you,  my  friends,  whom  I  esteemed,  at  another,  with  my  dear
wife.  And  thus,  when  a  short-Uved  and  imaginary  pleasure  has
been  experienced,  this  state  of  mine  becomes  worse,  from  the
very  recollection  of  happiness.  Whether,  therefore,  the  day
looks  upon  wretched  me,  or  whether  the  horses  of  the  frosty
night  are  urged  on ;  my  heart  melts  away  with  everlasting
cares,  just  as  new  wax  is  wont  to  doy  on  the  application  of  fire.
Often  do  I  pray  for  death,  often  too,  do  I  avert  it  by  prayer,
in  order  that  the  Sarmatian  soil  may  not  cover  my  bones.
When  it  occurs  to  me  how  great  is  the  clemency  of  Augustus,
I  trust  that  a  share  of  repose  may  be  granted  to  my  shipwreck.

*  The  poplar  covered,"] — Ver.  34.  The  sisters  of  Phaeton  are  fabled,
after  his  death,  to  have  pined  away  with  grief,  and  to  have  been  changed
into  poplars,  or,  according  to  Virgil,  into  alders.

^  But,  I  suppose,'] — ^Ver.  43.  This  is  said  ironicaUy,  and  is  supposed
to  be  uttered  by  some  one  who  is  expostulating  with  him.


y  Google


374  THE PCWTTIC  EFISTLES  [l.  I,

When  I  see  how  obdnnte  ib  my  destiny,  I  despdbr ;  and  fiert-
ing  hope  fails,  OTcreome  by  great  alarm.  As^  yet  I  n^dicr
hope  Dor  pray  for  any  thing  mere,  than  that  I  may  leave  tlii
country,  even  if  changed  for  a  worse.  Either  it  is  this,  or
nothing,  that  diy  credit  at  Court  may  with  propiety  ende^
Yoor  to  obtain  for  me,  without  compromising  thy  moderatioB.
Maximns,  thou  embodied  eloquence  of  the  Roman  langmge,
undertake  the  kind  defence  of  a  difficult  case.  "Hs  a  bi^  one,
I  confess ;  but,  thou  being  my  defender,  it  shall  become  a
good  one.  Only  do  utter  soothing  words,  on  account  of  mj
wretched  exile ;  for  Caesar  does  not  know,  although  a  God
knows  every  thing,  in  what  state  is  tins  remote  region.  The
weighty  avocations  of  business  occupy  that  Divinity:  tiiis
care  is  too  trifling  for  a  heaven-bom  mind.  He  has  no  leisure
to  inquire  in  what  region  the  people  of  Tomi  are  situate,  t
spot  scarce  known  to  the  neighbouring  Gretse ;  or  what  the
Sauromatse  are  doing,  or  what  the  savage  lazyges,  and  theTauric
land,  beloved  by  the  Goddess  carried  off  by  Orestes  :  or  what
other  nations,  when  the  Danube  has  frozen,  pass  on  thor
swift  horses  over  the  hardened  surface  of  tiie  river.  The
greatest  part  of  tJtese  men  care  not  for  thee,  most  beauteous
Rome,  and  fear  not  the  arms  of  the  Ausonian  soldiers.  Their
bows,  their  full  quivers,  and  their  horses,  equal  to  the  longest
distances,  give  them  courage ;  the  fact  too,  that  they  have
long  learned  to  endure  thirst  and  hunger ;  and  that  the  enemy
that  follows  wiU  be  deprived  of  water.  The  anger  of  the
merciful  Deity  would  not  have  sent  me  to  that  spot,  if  these
things  had  been  sufficiently  known  to  him.  It  delights  hkn
not  that  I,  or  that  any  Roman,  should  be  destroyed  by  the
enemy ;  and  me,  to  whom  he  himself  has  granted  life,  the
least  of  all.  He  was  unwilling,  though  he  had  the  power,  to
injure  me  with  the  slightest  nod ;  there  is  no  need  of  any
Getse  for  the  purpose  of  my  death.

Besides,  he  has  found  that  I  have  done  nothing  why  I  should
suffer  death;  and  he  may  be  less  hostile  against  me ihan  he  has
been .  He  has  done  nothing,  too,  but  what  I  myself  have  forced
him  to  do ;  his  anger  has  even  been  almost  more  moderate  than
my  offence.  May  the  Gk)ds  therefore,  of  whom  he  is  the  most
merciful,  grant  that  the  genial  earth  may  produce  nothing
greater  than  Csesar;  that  long  in  his  charge  may  be  the
public  burden  of  the  State;  and  that,  descending,  it  may


y  Google


1.  II.]  or  ovnK  375

pass  into  the  hands  of  that  family. But,  do  thou,  open  thy
lips  in  behalf  of  my  tears  hefore  a  judge  so  lenient,  as  even  I
haye  experienced  him  to  be. Make  no  request  that  it  may  go
well  witii  me,  but  that  my  woes  may  continue  in  a  place  of
safety  ;  that  my  exile  may  be  spent  at  a  distance  from  a  cruel
enemy ;  and  that  the  life  which  the  favouring  Deities  have
granted  me,  the  disgusting  Getan  may  not  deprive  me  of,  with
his  drawn  sword. Lastly,  that  if  I  die,  my  bones  may  be
laid  in  a  more  peaceful  spot,  and  may  not  be  covered  with
Scythian  soil; that  the  hoof  of  the  Bistonian  horse may
not  crush  my  ashes  half  unburied  (as,  forsooth,  befits  an
exile)  ;  and  that  if,  after  death,  there  is  any  perception,  no
Sarmatian  ghost  may  alarm  my  shade. These  things,  Maxi-
mus,  when  heard,  could  affect  the  feelings  of  Csesar ;  if  first
they  could  influence  thine. Let  thy  voice,  I  entreat  thee,
which  is  wont  to  aid  the  trembling  accused,  soothe  the  ears  of
Augustus  in  my  behalf :  and  do  thou,  with  the  wonted  bland-
ness  of  thy  learned  tongue,  soften  the  heart  of  him  who  is  to
be  reckoned  equal  with  the  Gods. Neither  Theromedon,'  nor
cruel  Atreus,®  will  have  to  be  entreated  by  thee,  nor  he  that
made  human  beings  food  for  his  mares  r  but  a  Prince,  slow
to  punish,  quick  to  reward,  and  who  grieves,  as  often  as  he  is
forced  to  be  severe  :  one  who  ever  conquers,  that  he  may  spare
the  conquered^  and  who  has  shut  up  civil  warfare  witili  ever-
lasting locks. One  who  prevents  many  a  crime  by  the  dread  of
punishment,  but  few  by  punishment  itself;  and  who  hurls  but
few  bolts,  and  those  witb  a  repugnant  hand. Therefore,  sent
as  my  pleader  before  ears  so  lenient,  do  thou  entreat  that  the
place  of  my  banishment  may  be  nearer  to  my  country. I  am
one,  who  held  thee  in  esteem,  and  whom  the  festive  table  used
to  see  among  thy  guests. I  am  he  who  led  Hymenseus  before
thy  marriage  torches,  and  repeated  verses^"  worthy  of  a  happy

7  !Z%erom«ton.]— Ver.  121.  He  was  a  cruel  king  of  Scythia,  who  fed
his  lions  upon  human  bodies.

8  Cruel  Atreus.'\—\ex,  121.  He  killed  the  children  of  Thycstes,  and
served  them  up  to  him  at  a  banquet.  Reference  has  been  previously  made
to  this  Cable.

•  Food  for  JUa  marea,'] — Ver.  122.  He  alludes  to  Diomedes,  the
barbarous  king  of  Thrace,  who  fed  his  mares  upon  the  bodies  of  strangers
found  within  his  kingdom^  He  was  slain  by  Hercules,  who  caused  him  to
be  eaten  by  his  mares.

^  And  repeated  vertes.'l—Yer,  134.  He  means  by  this,  that  he  wrote  the


y  Google


376  THE  POHTIC EPISTLES ^  [kl

nnion  ;  whose  works,  as  I  remember,  thou  wast  wont  to  pruse,
with  the  exception  of  those  that  brought  rain  oa  ihm  master ;
and  to  whom,  admiring  tkemy  thou  wast  wont  sometimes  to
read  thy  writings.  I  am  he,  to  whom  a  bride  was  given,  from
out  of  thy  family.  Martia  esteems  her,  and  from  her  earliest
youth  has  always  reckoned  her,  mttch  beloyed,  in  the  nmnber  of
her  companions.  Formerly,  the  maternal  aunt  of  Csesar  had  her
among  her  own  companions ;  if  a  person  is  to  be  esteemed
according  to  their  opinion,  she  is  yirtuons.  Clatidia,"  her-
self superior  to  her  own  character,  would  not  have  stood  in
need  of^the  Divine  aid,  had  they  praised  her.  I,  too,  spent
my  former  years  without  a  stain  :  the  last  portion  of  my  life
must  be  omitted.  But,  to  keep  silence  about  myself,  my  wife
is  thy  charge ;  without  impeachment  of  thy  honour,  tlion  canst
not  treat  her  with  neglect.  To  thy  family  she  flies  for  aid :
your  altars  does  she  embrace.  Every  one,  properly,  resorts  to
the  Gods  that  have  been  worshipped  by  bun :  and,  weeping,
she  entreats  that,  Caesar  once  appeased  by  thy  supplications,
the  tomb  of  her  husband  may  be  nearer  to  his  country.


EPISTLE  III.— TO  RUFINUS.

Ovid  declares  that  he  has  received  much  pleasure  firom  his  friend's
letters ;  and  that  he  has  conceived  fresh  hopes  since  he  has  read  them ;
hut  he  says,  that,  consoling  as  they  are,  they  cannot  dispel  his  grief;  and
he  gives  his  reasons  for  saying  so.  He  recounts  the  instances  of  those
who  have  endured  exile  with  fortitude ;  hut  he  says  they  did  so,  because
they  were  not  removed  far  frt)m  their  native  land.  He  confesses,  how-
ever, that  if  the  wounds  of  his  spirit  were  capable  of  being  healed,  it
would  be  by  his  friend's  kind  advice  and  eloquent  language ;  and  de-
clares that  he  considers  his  kind  attentions  as  a  great  boon.

Tky  friend  Naso,  Rufinus,  sends  thee  this  salutation  ;  if  he,
who  is  in  misery,  can  be  owned  as  the  friend  of  any  one.  The
consolation  that  has  been  lately  given  by  thee  to  my  disturbed
spirit,  has  afforded  both  aid  and  hope,  amid  my  woes. As

Epithalamium,  or  nuptial  song,  on  the  occasion  of  the  marriage  of  Maximum
The  name  of  Hymenaeus,  the  God  of  Marriage,  is  here  used  to  signify  the
Epithalamium.

11  Claudia.] — ^Ver.  144.  This  is  the  Vestal  vii^,  whose  miraculous
deliverance  from  the  imputation  of  unchastity  is  recounted  at  length  in
the  fourth  Book  of  the  '  Fasti.'


y  Google


«.  111.]  OF  OVTD.  377

the  hero,  the  son  of  Pseas,  through  the  skill  of  Maehaon  expe-
rienced the  aid  of  medicine  in  the  cure  of  his  wound ;  so  I,
prostrate  in  mind,  and  wounded  with  a  cruel  blow,  began,  at
thy  exhortation,  to  take  courage.  And  when  now  failing,  I
revived  at  thy  words,  as  the  pulse  is  wont  to  return  on  winie
being  administered.^  But  yet  thy  eloquence  did  not  put  forth
powers  so  great,  that  my  heart  was  entirely  healed  by  thy
words.  However  much  thou  mayst  subtract  from  the  floods
of  my  cares ;  that  which  will  remain,  will  be  no  less  than  that
which  is  removed.  In  length  of  time,  perhaps,  the  scar  will
be  covered  over ;  wounds,  while  yet  raw,  shudder  at  the  ap-
plication of  the  hand.  It  is  not  always  within  the  physician's
power,  that  the  invalid  should  recover :  sometimes  disease  is
more  powerful  than  the  experience  of  art.  Thou  seeest,  how
blood  discharged  from  the  tender  lungs  leads  by  a  sure  path
to  the  Stygian  streams.  Should  even  he  of  Epidaurus  himself
apply  the  sacred  herbs,  by  no  skill  of  his  will  he  heal  the
wounds  of  the  heart.  The  medical  art  is  at  a  loss  how  to  re-
move the  swelling  gout,  and  gives  no  aid  in  cases  of  hydropho-
bia. Grief,  too,  is  sometimes  curable  by  no  skill ;  or,  even  if
it  is,  by  length  of  time  must  it  be  alleviated.  After  thy  advice
had  strengthened  my  prostrate  spirit,  and  the  armour  of  thy
mind  had  been  assumed  by  me,  again  did  longing  for  my
country,  more  powerful  than  all  reasoning,  destroy  the  work
which  thy  writings  had  formed.  Whether  thou  wouldst  have  it
called  affectionate  or  womanish :  I  confess  that  the  heart  of
wretched  me  is  but  tender.  The  wisdom  of  him  of  Ithaca
is  undoubted ;  and  yet  he  longed  to  be  able  to  behold  the
smoke  of  his  paternal  hearths.  The  land  of  our  birth  im-
pels us,  influenced  by  an  extraordinary  attraction,  and  allows
us  not  to  be  forgetful  of  it.  What  is  there  better  than  Rome?
What  is  there  more  intolerable  than  the  Scythian  frosts  ?  Yet,
hither  does  the  barbarian  flee  from  that  City.  Although  the
daughter  of  Pandion^  is  safe,  when  shut  in  a  cage ;  yet  she
struggles  to  regain  her  woods.  The  oxen  seek  their  wonted
pastures, the  hons  their  wonted  caves,  and  their  fierceness

^  Being  administered^'] — ^Ver.  10.  *Infli8o;'  literally,  *  poured  in;'
meaning, '  on  wioe  being  poured  down  the  throat.*

^  Daughter  of  Pandion.] — ^Ver.  39.  He  alludes  to  Philomela,  who
was  changed  into  a  nightingale ;  a  hird  which  never  becomes  reconciled  to
the  cruel  confinement  of  a  cage.


y  Google


378  THE POHTIC  EPISTLES  [3.%

hinders  them  not  from  doing  so.  And  yet  thoa  helievest  thtt
the  torments  of  exile  can  be  removed  from  my  heart  by  thy
consoktions.  Make  yonrselves  to  be  not  so  worthy  to  be
loyed  by  me,  that  it  may  be  a  hghter  mi^ortime  to  be  de-
jwived  of  such.

But,  I  suppose,  now  that  I  am  driven  firom  the  bind  of  my
birth,  it  has  still  fallen  to  my  lot  to  be  in  a  place  fit  for  man.
I  lie  here,  deserted,  amid  the  sands  of  a  far  distant  region,  wha%
the  hidden  earth  supports  eternal  snows.  Here  the  land  pro*
duces  neither  the  pome,  nor  the  sweet  grape ;  willows  fiouxish
not  on  the  bank,  nor  oaks  on  the  mountain.  And  praise  not
the  sea  any  more  than  the  land :  the  ocean,  deprived  of  the  heat
of  the  sun  is  ever  unsettled  through  the  raging  of  the  winds.
Whichever  way  you  look,  plains  extend  without  a  cultivator ;
and  vast  fields,  to  which  there  is  no  one  to  lay  claim.  A  foe
is  at  hand,  to  be  dreaded,  both  on  the  right  side  and  the  left ;
and  either  direction  brings  its  alarms  through  fear  of  our
neighbours.  One  side  is  to  be  made  to  feel  the  Bistonian
lances ;  the  other,  the  javelins  hurled  by  the  Sarmatian  hand.
Come  now,  and  recount  to  me  the  exam{\^es  of  men  of  ancient
times,  who  have  endured  misfortunes  with  fwtitude.  Admire,
too,  the  firmness  of  the  magnanimous  Rutilius,^*  who  accepted
not  the  Uberty  of  returning,  that  was  granted  him.  Smyrna
received  that  heroic  man,  not  Pontus,  and  the  land  of  an
enemy ;  Smyrna,  not  less  desirable  than  hardly  any  other
place.  The  Cynic  of  Sinope**  did  not  grieve  that  he  was  &r
from  his  country ;  for  he  chose,  land  of  Attica,  thy  abodes.
The  son  of  Neocles,^'  who  crushed  the  Persian  arms  in  warfare,

'*  Rviiliu8,'] — Ver.  63.  Publius  RutiUus  was  a  man  of  great  integrity
and  learning,  who  having,  during  his  Qusestorship,  rectified  considerable
abuses,  drew  upon  himself  the  enmity  of  the  Equestrian  order.  Being
wrongfully  accused  of  malpractices,  he  was  exiled.  When  Sylla's  cause
was  victorious,  he  had  permission  to  return ;  but  he  declined  to  live  at
Rome,  even  under  a  former  imputation  of  dishonesty ;  and  he  spent  his
latter  years  at  Smyrna,  in  Asia  Minor,  where  he  died.

"  The  Cynic  of  Sinope.'] — Ver.  67.  Diogenes,  the  Cynic  philosc^her,
was  the  son  of  Icesius,  and  was  a  native  of  Sinope,  a  town  of  Paphlagonia,
in  Asia  Minor.  Coming  to  Athens,  he  became  a  disciple  of  Antisthenes,
the  philosopher,  who  founded  the  sect  of  the  Cynics.  These  philosophers
professed  to  reject  the  amenities  of  life,  and  to  Uve  conformably  to  nature ;
a  doctrine  which  Diogenes,  in  some  instances,  carried  to  the  extent  of
neglecting  common  decency.

*•  The  son  of  Neocks.'] — ^Ver.  69. Themistocles,  tlie  Athenian  general,


y  Google


B.  m.]  OP  OTTD.  379

experienced  his  first  banisliment  in  the  city  of  Argos.  Aris-
tides,"  when  driyen  from  his  country,  fled  to  Lacedaemon ;
between  the  two,  it  is  a  matter  of  doubt  which  was  preferable.
Patroclus,  when  a  youth,  being  guilty  of  homicide,  left  Opus,
and  arrived  in  the  land  of  Thessaly,  as  the  guest  of  Achilles.
Jason,  imder  whose  guidance  the  sacred  bark  sped  onwards  to
the  Colchian  waves,  went  as  an  exile,  from  Hsemonia,  to  the
spring  of  Pirene.  Cadmus,  the  son  of  Agenor,  left  the  walls
of  Sidon,  that  he  might  found  his  city  on  a  preferable  site.
Tydeus  came  to  Adrastus,  expelled  from  Calydon;  and  the  land
pleasing  to  Venus*®  received  Teucer.  Why  shall  I  make
mention  of  the  forefathers  of  the  Roman  race,  among  whom
Tybur*'  was  the  remotest  spot  for  the  exile  ?  Should  I  detail
all  of  them,  to  no  one,  in  all  ages,  has  a  place  been  assigned
so  far  from  his  country  as  this,  or  more  dreadful  than  it.
Therefore,  the  more  readily  should  thy  wisdom  find  a  pardon  for
me  in  my  sorrow,  who  profit  but  so  Httle  by  thy  exhortations.
And  yet  I  do  not  deny,  that  if  my  wounds  were  capable  of
closing,  they  could  close  under  thy  advice.  But  I  fear  lest
thou  shoulost  strive  in  vain  to  save  me,  and  lest,  weak
and  past  all  recovery,  I  can  derive  no  benefit  from  the  apph-
cation  of  thy  aid.  And  I  say  this,  not  because  I  have  any
greater  foresight,  but  because  I  am  better  known  to  myself
than  to  my  physician.  But,  though  so  it  is,  thy  good  wishes
have  come  as  a  great  boon  to  me,  and  are  gratefully  accepted.

was  the  son  of  Neocles.  The  Athenians,  with  their  usual  ingratitude,  un-
mindful of  his  great  services  in  withstanding  the  Persian  power,  banished
him  several  times.  On  the  first  occasion  of  his  banishment,  he  retired  to
Argos.

^■^  ArisHdesJi — Vcr.  71.  He  was  an  Athenian,  the  son  of  Lysimachus.
He  was  the  rival  of  Themistocles,  and,  for  his  virtues,  received  the  epithet
of  *  the  Just.'  Being  banished,  he  fled  to  Sparta,  which  being,  at  that
time,  the  rival  of  Athens,  as  the  poet  says,  it  is  doubtful  whether  he  made
a  change  for  the  worse.

^  Land  pleasing  to  Venus,]— Yer.  80.  The  island  of  Cyprus,  where
that  Goddess  was  especially  worshipped.  Teucer,  being  expelled  after  the
Trojan  war,  by  his  father  Telamon  from  his  own  country,  retired  to  Cyprus,
and  there  founded  a  city,  which  he  called  Salamis  after  his  native  place.

w  ryittr.]— Ver.  82.  Tybur  veas  eighteen  miles  from  Rome.  Of
course,  in  the  earUest  days  of  Rome,  exiles  could  not  be  driven  away  any
further  than  its  very  limited  boundaries  would  admit  of.


y  Google


380  THE PONTIC EPISTLES  [b.  I.


EPISTLE  IV.—TO  HIS  WIFE.

Hb  lays  that  his  hair  has  become  grey,  and  his  body  weak,  and  that  the
cause  is  twofold,  old  age,  and  incessant  grief.  He  then  compares  the
voyage  of  Jason,  who  came  to  that  region,  with  his  own  exile,  and
shows  that  his  troubles  are  far  greater  than  those  of  Jason.  He  prays
for  a  return  to  his  country,  to  enjoy  the  society  of  his  wife,  and  to
evince  his  gratitude  to  the  family  of  Caesar. .

My  declining  years  are  now  besprinkled  with  grey  hairs ;  and
the  wrinkle  of  old  age  now  seams  my  countenance ;  now
vigour  and  strength  are  growing  languid  in  my  exhausted
frame;  and  those  amusements  which  delighted  me  when  a
a  youth,  delight  me  no  longer.  If  you  were  to  behold  me  on
a  sudden,  you  would  not  recognize  me,  so  great  has  been^the
decline  of  my  age.  I  confess  that  length  of  years  causes  this ;
but  there  is,  too,  another  cause  ;  anxiety  of  mind,  and  eternal
care.  For,  were  any  one  to  distribute  my  woes  through  a
length  of  years,  (believe  me,)  I  should  be  older  than  Nestor
of  Pylos.  You  see  how,  in  the  rugged  fields,  hard  work
weakens  the  strong  bodies  of  the  oxen ;  and  what  is  stronger
than  an  ox  ?  The  soil  which  has  never  been  accustomed  to
rest  in  the  repose  of  the  fallow,  wearied  with  continually  pro-
ducing, grows  old.  If  a  horse  shall  be  always  engagmg  in
the  contests  of  the  Circus,  without  the  intermission  of  any  of
the  races,  he  will  die.  Although  a  ship  be  strong,  she  will  go
to  pieces  at  sea,  if  she  is  never  dry,  and  free  from  the  action  of
the  flowing  water.  An  endless  series  of  troubles  wears  me  away,
too,  and,  before  my  time,  forces  me  to  be  an  old  man.  Repose
gives  nourishment  to  the  body  ;  the  mind,  too,  is  refreshed  by
it :  on  the  other  hand,  immoderate  care  consumes  them  both.
See,  what  fame  the  son  of  ^son  wiU  gain  from  latest  pos-
terity, because  he  came  to  these  regions.  But  his  labours  were
both  lighter,  and  less  than  mine  ;  if  only,  illustrious  names  do
not  smother  the  truth.  He  set  out  for  Pontus,  being  sent  by
Pelias,  who  was  hardly  to  be  dreaded  within  the  limits  of
Thessaly.  The  wrath  of  Csesar  has  caused  my  afflictions;
him,  at  whom  both  sides  of  the  earth  tremble,  from  the  rising
of  the  sun  to  its  setting.  Hsemonia  is  nearer  to  the  baleful
Pontus  than  Rome  is,  and  he  travelled  a  less  distance  than  I  did.
He  had  for  his  companions,  the  chief  men  of  the  Grecian  land ;
whereas,  all  deserted  me  on  my  banishment. I  ploughed  the


y  Google


».  nr.]  or  OTID.  381

▼ast  ocean  on  a  firail  bit  of  timber ;  the  ship  that  bore  the
son  of  Moon  was  strong.  Tiphys,^  too,  was  not  my  pilot,
and  the  son  of  Agenor  did  not  instruct  me  what  course  to  fol-
low, and  what  to  avoid.  Royal  Juno,  with  Pallas,  protected
him ;  no  Divinities  have  defended  my  person.  The  furtive
arts  of  Cupid  aided  him ;  arts,  which  I  wish  that  Love  had
not  learned  from  me.  He  returned  home ;  I  shall  die  in  these
lands,  if  the  heavy  wrath  of  the  offended  God  shall  be  lasting.
My  burden,  most  faithful  wife,  is  a  harder  one  than  that
which  the  son  of  -^son  bore.  You,  too,  whom  I  left  still
young  at  my  departure  from  the  City,  I  can  beUeve  to  have
grown  old  under  my  calamities.  Oh,  grant  it,  ye  Gt)ds,  that
I  may  be  enabled  to  see  you,  even  if  such,  and  to  give  the
joyous  kiss  on  each  cheek  in  its  turn ;  and  to  embrace  your
emaciated  body  in  my  arms,  and  to  say,  ''  'twas  anxiety,  on  my
account,  that  caused  this  thinness;"  and,  weeping,  to  recount
in  person  my  sorrows  to  you  in  tears,  and  thus  enjoy  a  con-
versation that  I  had  never  hoped  for ;  and  to  offer  the  due
frankincense,  with  grateful  hand,  to  the  Caesars,  and  to  the  wife
that  is  worthy  of  a  Caesar,  Deities  in  real  truth !

Oh,  that  the  mother  of  Memnon,^^  that  Prince  being  softened,
would  with  her  rosy  lips,  speedily  call  forth  that  day.


EPISTLE  v.— TO  MAXIMUS.

He  requests  Maximus  not  to  be  surprised,  if  his  verses  are  neglected  and
repiAsive  from  their  want  of  polish ;  but  he  says,  that  his  mind  is  so
overwhelmed  by  his  misfortunes,  that  his  abilities  have  suffered  decay
in  length  of  time.  He  then  explains  why  he  continues  to  write,  in  spite
of  the  injury  which  his  verses  have  done  him ;  and  he  tells  the  reason
why  he  is  not  anxious  to  make  them  remarkable  for  their  elegance.

Naso,  once  not  the  last  among  thy  friends,  entreats  thee,  Max-
imus, to  read  his  words.  In  these,  cease  to  look  for  my
/ormer  abiUty,  that  thou  mayst  not  seem  to  be  ignorant  of  my

20  TipAy*.]— Ver.  37.  He  was  the  pilot  of  the  Argo,  which  conveyed
Jason  and  his  companions,  on  their  expedition  to  recover  the  golden  fleece.
Phineus,  the  son  of  Agenor,  instructed  Jason  how  to  steer  clear  of  the
Cyanean  rocks.

21  Mother  qf  Memnon.'i—XeT.  57.  Aurora  was  the  mother,  andTitho-
nus  the  fiither,  of  Memnon,  who,  being  bom  in  ^Ethiopia,  was  of  a
swarthy  or  bUck  colour.  He  assisted  the  Trojans  in  the  Trojan  war,  and
was  killed  by  Achilles.


y  Google


383  THE  PONTIC  EPISTLES  [b.  T.

exile.  Thou  seeest  how  ease  enervates  the  slothfdl  body  ;  iKrr
water  contracts  a  tiunt,  if  it  is  not  stirred.  If  ever  I  had  any
facility  in  composing  yerses,  it  now  hils  me,  and  has  been  d^
minished  by  listless  sloth.  These  words  too,  which  ye  read»
(if  you  will  beheve  me,  Maximus),  I  write,  put  together  with
difficulty,  and  with  a  reluctant  hand.  It  delights  me  not  to
giye  the  bent  of  my  mind  to  such  pursuits,  and  the  Muse,
though  invited,  comes  not  among  the  savage  Getse.  Yet,  as
thou  seeest,  I  struggle  to  compose  a  line ;  but  it  is  not  less
harsh  than  is  my  destiny.  When  I  read  it  over  again,  I  am
ashamed  that  I  wrote  it :  because  I  see  many  things  that  are
deserving  to  be  erased,  even  in  the  opinion  of  myself  who
have  composed  them.  And  yet  I  correct  them  not :  this  were
a  gi^ater  labour  than  to^  write  them,  and  the  mind  that  is  sick,
is  able  to  endure  no  hardship.  Should  I,  forsooth,  begin  to
use  polished  language  with  more  attention,  and  should  I  re-
peat every  word  accorcUng  to  rule  ?  Does  Fortune  torment
me  too  Httle,  unless  the  Nile  is  in  confluence  with  the  Hebrus,
and  unless  Athos  adds  his  leaves  to  the  Alps  ?  We  must  make
allowance  for  the  mind  that  bears  the  wound  of  sorrow ;  let
the  oxen  withdraw  their  galled  necks  from  the  burden.

But  I  suppose,  forsooth,  profit  is  the  result,  the  justest
stimulant  of  labour ;  and  the  earth  returns  the  seed  sown  with
bounteous  interest.  "^  Up  to  this  moment  (even  should  you
review  my  whole  career),  no  work  of  mine  has  been  of  any
advantage  to  me,  and  I  only  wish  no  one  of  them  had  done  me
an  injury.  Dost  thou,  then,  wonder  why  I  write  ?  I  wonder
as  well ;  and  I  often  ask  myself,  what  I  shall  get  by  it.  Does
the  multitude  say  truly,  that  poets  are  insane  ;  and  am  I  the
greatest  illustration  of  this  saying  ?  I,  who,  when  I  have  been
so  often  deceived  in  a  barren  soil,  persist  in  sowing  my  seed
in  unproductive  ^ound.  In  truth,  each  one  is  attached  to
bis  own  pursuit ;  and  it  is  pleasant  to  spend  our  time  in  one*s
usual  occupations.  The  wounded  gladiator  curses  the  combat,
and  yet  the  same  man,  forgetful  of  his  former  wound,  resumes
arms.  The  shipwrecked  person  says  that  he  wiU  have  nothing
to  do  with  the  waves  of  the  sea ;  soon  he  is  plying  the  oars,  in
the  water,  in  which  but  just  now,  he  was  swimming.  So  am  I
constandy  following  a  useless  pursuit ;  and  I  seek  again  those
Groddesses,  to  whom  I  vrish  I  had  not  devoted  myself.  What
am  I  to  do  in  preference  ? I  am  not  one  to  indulge  in  listless


y  Google


»,  v.]  OF  ovn).  383

sloth :  lime  unemployed  is  considered  death  hy  me.  1  take
no  pleasure  in  wearing  myself  out  till  dawn,  with  excess  of
wine  ;  and  alluring  games  of  hazard  do  not  occupy  my  shaking
hands.  "When  I  haye  deyoted  the  hours  to  sleep  which  the
body  demands,  after  1  am  awake,  how  shall  I  dispose  of  the
long  hours  ?  Forgetting  the  manners  of  my  country,  shall  I
learn  to  stretch  the  Sannatian  how ;  and  shall  I  he  allured
by  the  peculiar  art  of  this  place  ?  My  strength  too  forbids
me  to  follow  this  pursuit;  and  my  mind  is  stronger  than
my  thin  body.  When  you  have  well  considered  what  I  am  to  do ;
there  is  nothing  more  useful  than  these  pursuits,  which  haye
no  utility.  From  them  I  gain  forgetfulness  of  my  calamity ;
if  my  field  yields  this  for  its  haryest,  it  is  enough.  61c»y
stimulates  you,  ye  poets;  keep  your  attention  fixed  on  the
Pierian  choirs,  that  your  poems,  when  recited,  may  meet  wkh
approyal.  It  is  enough  for  me  to  compose  anything  that  oc-
curs without  an  eflFort :  and  no  necessity  exists  for  extreme
labour.  Why  should  I  polish  my  lines  with  anxious  care  ?
Ought  I  to  fear,  lest  the  Getan  should  not  approve  of  them  ?
Perhaps  I  may  be  acting  rashly,  in  so  doing,  but  I  boast  that
the  Danube  possesses  no  genius  superior  to  my  own.  It  is
enough,  if  in  this  land,  where  I  must  liye,  I  attain  to  being  a
poet  among  the  savage  Getse.  Of  what  use  is  it  to  reach  dis-
tant regions  by  my  fame  ?  Let  that  place,  which  Fortune  has
given,  be  Rome /or  me.  With  this  for  her  theatre,  is  my  Muse
content.  This  have  I  deserved;  this  have  the  great  Gods
willed.  Besides,  I  do  not  think  that  there  is  any  way  hence  to
that  spot  for  my  works,  a  spot,  at  which  Boreas  arrives  with
flagging  wing.  We  are  in  quite  a  different  climate ;  and  the
Bear,  which  is  afar  from  the  City  of  Quirinus,  looks  down  on
the  hairy  Getae  close  at  hand.  Through  so  great  a  tract  of
land,  so  many  seas,  1  could  hardly  believe  that  any  exponent
of  my  pursuits  could  make  its  way.  Suppose  my  works  to  be
read,  and,  what  is  surprising,  suppose  they  give  pleasure :
assuredly  that  thing  will  avail  the  author  nothing.  Of  what
use  is  it  to  thee,  if  thou  art  praised  when  situate  in  the  hot
Syene,^  or  where  the  Indian  waves  surround  Taprobane  ?^  Do

*2  Syene.l — ^Ver.  79.  Syene  was  a  city  of  Egypt,  on  the  confines  of
ifithiopia,  where  the  heat  would  naturally  be  intense.

**  Tc^robane.l — Ver.  80.  This  was  the  Roman  name  of  the  island,
which  at  the  preient  day  is  called  Ceylon. It  was  but  very  little  known


y  Google


384  THE  POITTIC  EPISTLES  [b.  i.

you  wish  to  go  farther?  If  the  hi  distant  Constellatioiis
of  the  Pleiades  please  thee^  what  henefit  dost  thou  derive
from  that?  But  I  do  not  reach  there^  with  my  homely
writings :  with  their  master,  his  glory  has  fled  from  the  City.
And  ye,  to  whom  I  have  been  dead,  from  the  time  when  my  feme
was  entombed,  I  suppose  you  have  kept  a  rigid  silence  upon
my  death  up  to  the  present  moment.


EPISTLE  VI.— TO  GKffiCINUS.

The  Poet  laments  that  Grseciniis  was  not  near  at  the  time  when  he  was
banished  by  Augustus ;  and  he  expresses  a  belief  that,  on  hearing  of  it,
his  friend  was  much  affected  by  his  misfortunes.  He  entreats  him  to
afford  him  the  pleasure  of  his  conversation  at  least  by  letter;  and  re-
quests him  not  to  inquire  the  cause  of  his  exile,  that  his  wounds  may
not  bleed  afresh.  He  says  that  he  has  not  lost  all  hope  of  returning ;
and  that  he  still  confides  in  the  clemency  of  Caesar,  and  trusts  thereby
to  regain  his  favour.  He  ends  by  expecting  every  impossible  thing  to
happen,  before  he  finds  himself  deserted  by  his  old  and  attached  friend,
Grsecinus.

A»p  was  not  thy  heart  sad,  when  first  thou  heardst  of  my  ca-
lamities? (for  then  a  distant  land  withheld  thee).  Although,
Grsecinus,  thou  shouldst  hide  it,  and  hesitate  to  confess  it,  if
I  know  thee  well,  I  am  sure  thou  wast  sad.  Unamiable  in-
sensibility does  not  beflt  those  manners  of  thine,  nor  is  it  less
at  variance  with  thy  pursuits.  By  the  liberal  arts,  to  which
thou  payest  the  greatest  attention,  the  heart  is  made  tender,
and  harshness  is  dispelled ;  and  there  is  no  one  who  embraces
them  vrith  more  sincerity  than  thyself,  so  far  as  duty  and  the
avocations  of  war  permit.

Assuredly,  at  the  first  moment  that  1  could  be  sensible  of
what  I  was  (for,  in  my  stupor,  for  a  long  time  I  had  no  under-
standing), I  felt  that  this,  too,  was  a  part  of  my  destiny,  that
thou,  my  friend,  who  couldst  have  been  a  great  protection  to
me,  shouldst  be  at  a  distance.  With  thee,  the  solace  of  a
dejected  spirit  was  wanting ;  and  a  great  part,  as  well,  of  my  mind
and  of  my  faculties.  But  now,  grant  me  this  aid  from  afer,
which  alone  remains,  and  cheer  my  heart  by  thy  converse :  a  heart
(if  thou  wouldst  put  any  trust  in  a  friend  that  speaks  no  un-
to the  Romans  in  the  days  of  Ovid ;  but  in  the  time  of  the  later  emperor^
it  became  somewhat  better  known*


y  Google


B.  VI.]  or  OTID.  385

truth),  that  ought  rather  to  be  called  unwise,  than  wicked.  It
is  neither  a  sHght  matter,  nor  a  safe  one,  to  write  what  was
the  cause  of  my  offence:  my  wounds  will  not  endure  handling.
Do  not  inquire,  how  they  have  come  to  be  inflicted  on  me  ;  if
thou  wishest  the  wounds  to  close,  disturb  them  not.

Whatever  it  is,  though  not  a  crime,  yet  it  must  be  called  a
fault ;  or  is  it  that  every  fault,  committed  against  the  great
Gods,  is  a  crime  ?  Some  hope  then,  Graecinus,  is  still  left  to
my  spirit,  of  a  mitigation  of  my  punishment.  Hope  was  the
only  Goddess,  that,  when  the  Deities  fled  from  the  wicked
earth,  alone  remained  on  the  soil  ^o  hateful  to  the  Gods.  She
causes  even  the  miner,  bound  with  the  fetter,  to  live  on,
and  to  expect  that  his  legs  will  be  Hberated  from  the  iron.
She  causes  the  shipwrecked  sailor  to  extend  his  arms  in  the
midst  of  the  waves,  when  he  beholds  no  land  on  any  side.
Many  a  time  has  the  skilful  care  of  the  physicians  given  a
person  up ;  and  yet,  as  his  pulse  has  failed,  hope  has  not  deserted
him.  Those  shut  up  in  prison  are  said  to  hope  for  safety ;  and
the  criminal,  as  he  hangs  on  the  cross,'^*  breathes  his  prayers.
Ho'w  many,  when  they  have  fastened  their  necks  with  the  noose,
has  that  Goddess  forbidden  to  die  by  the  fate  they  had  pur-
posed !  Me  too,  endeavouring  to  end  my  griefs  by  the  sword,
she  prevented,  and  restrained  me  by  laying  her  hand  upcm  me.
**  What  art  thou  doing  ?"  said  she.  "  Tears  are  needed,  not
hlood;  by  means  of  them,  often  is  the  wrath  of  the  Prince  wont
to  be  assuaged."  Although  then  it  is  not  the  due  of  my
deserts,  yet  there  is  great  room  for  hope,  in  the  clemency  of
the  God.  Do  thou  entreat  him,  Grsecinus,  not  to  be  inexor-
able against  me  ;  and  contribute  thy  words  towards  the  attain-
ment of  my  wishes.  May  I  lie  entombed  amid  the  sands  of
Tomi,  if  I  do  not  believe  that  thou  wishest  the  same  in  my

34  On  the  crosaJ] — ^Ver.  38.  This  instrument  of  capital  punishment  was
used  by  the  Romans  and  Carthaginians.  It  was  usually  in  shape  like  the
letter  T  or  X,  but  there  were  other  forms  of  it  also.  The  first  was  the
most  common  sort :  the  stem  being  a  little  elongated  above  the  point  of
intersection  by  the  transverse  beam ;  and  on  a  cross  of  this  kind,  according
to  the  unanimous  testimony  of  the  Fathers  of  the  Church,  Our  Saviour
suffered.  The  punishment  was  usually  inflicted  on  slaves^^and  the  com-
monest malefactors.  The  condemned,  as  we  are  informed  by  Plutarch,
carried  his  own  cross,  and,  being  first  stripped  of  his  clothes,  was  either
nailed  or  bound  to  it,  and,  in  the  latter  case,  was  left  to  die  of  hunger.  The
body  was  usually  left  on  the  cross  after  death

C  c

Digitized  by  LjOOQ IC


386  THE  POKTIC  SPISTLES  [b.  i.

behalf;  for  first  would  the  pigeons  begin  to  ayoid  the  turrets,
the  wild  beasts  their  dens,  the  sheep  their  pastures,  the  di-
dapper  the  waves,  before  Grsecinus  would  show  himself  un-
kind to  his  old  fidend.  Everything  has  not  been  so  far
reversed  as  that,  by  my  destiny.


EPISTLE  VII.— TO  MESSALINUS.

In  this  Epistle,  he  reminds  Messalinus  of  his  former  acquaintanceship  with
him,  and  of  his  intimacy  with  his  father  and  brother.  He  then  en-
larges on  the  pnnishment  which  has  been  inflicted  on  him  by  the
hand  of  Augustus,  and  gives  his  reasons  why  he  ought  not  to  be
disowned  on  that  account.  He  concludes,  by  declaring  the  affection  he
has  ever  felt  towards  the  house  of  Messalinus.

The  letter,  Messalinus,  which  thou  art  reading,  has,  in  the
place  of  words,  brought  thee  my  salutation,  even  from  among  the
savage  Getse.  Does  the  region  reveal  who  the  writer  is?  or  is
it  unknown  to  thee,  unless  thou  readest  my  name,  that  it  is  I,
Naso,  who  write  these  words  ?  Who  of  thy  friends  lies  pros-
trate, far  removed  in  a  distant  region,  except  myself,  who
pray  ever  to  be  thy  friend?  Oh!  that  the  Gods  would  wish
that  all  who  esteem  and  love  thee,  should  gain  no  knowledge
of  this  race.  It  is  enough  for  me,  to  be  living  among  ice  and
the  Scythian  arrows ;  if  a  kind  of  death  is  to  be  considered
life.  Let  the  earth  with  its  wars,  or  the  climate  with  its  cold,
be  distressing  me,  and  let  the  fierce  Getan  be  striking  me  with
his  arms,  and  the  storm  with  its  haU.  Let  a  region  confine
me  that  is  proUfic  neither  in  pomes  nor  in  grapes ;  and  of
which  no  side  is  free  from  the  enemy.  Let  the  rest  of  the
multitude  of  thy  friends  be  in  safety,  among  whom  I  was  a
small  fraction,  like  one  out  of  a  great  number.  Ah,  wretched
me !  if  thou  art  ofiended  by  these  words  ;  and  if  thou  denyest
that  I  was  ever,  in  any  degree,  thy  friend.  Suppose  that  to
be  the  truth,  thou  oughtst  to  forgive  me  thus  gmlty  of  a  false-
hood :  my  praise  subtracts  nothing  from  thy  fame.  Who  is
there,  if  the  Caesars  are  known  to  him,  that  does  not  pretend
that  he  is  a  friend  of  theirs  ?  Pardon  me,  if  I  confess  it;  thou
shalt  be  my  Caesar.  But  I  rush  not  inVhere  I  may  not  tread ;
and  it  is  enough,  if  thou  dost  not  deny  that  thy  haU  was  once
open  to  me. And  although  I  had  no  fiirther  intimacy  with  thee


y  Google


«.  vji.]  OP  OTn>.  387

than  this ;  thou  art  now  saluted  by  one  mouth  less  than  formerly
thou  wast ;  but  thy  father  did  not  deny  that  I  was  his  friend,
the  encourager,  the  cause,  and  the  very  Ught  of  my  pursuits.
To  him  I  gave  both  my  tears,  as  my  last  gift  at  his  death,  and
my  verses  for  recitation  in  the  middle  of  the  Forum.  Besides,
thou  hast  a  brother,  united  to  thee  in  an  affection  as  strong  as
that  between  the  sons  of  Atreus  and  the  offspring  of  Tyndarus.
He  rejected  me,  neither  as  a  companion,  nor  as  a  friend ;  if
thou  art  of  opinion  that  these  avowals  wiU  not  do  him  any  in-
jury ;  but,  if  thou  dost  not  think  so,  I  will  confess  that  in  this
respect,  also,  I  have  been  |untruthful.  Sooner  than  that,  may
the  whole  of  thy  house  be  shut  against  me.  But  there  is  no
necessity  for  it  to  be  shut,  for  there  is  no  power  that  has
the  means  of  preventing  a  friend  from  doing  wrong.  And
although,  much  as  I  could  wish  that  my  fault  could  be  denied,
no  one  is  ignorant  that  I  was  not  guilty  of  a  sin.  And,  unless
some  part  of  my  offence  had  been  excusable,  'twould  have
been  but  a  light  penalty  to  be  removed  from  my  country.
But  Caesar  himself,  who  perceives  everything,  saw  that  my
offence  might  be  construed  to  be  thoughtlessness ;  and,  so
far  as  I  permitted  him,  and  so  far  as  the  matter  allowed  of,  he
showed  himself  merciful ;  and  he  used  the  flames  of  his  Ught- '
nings  with  moderation.  He  took  not  away  my  life,  nor  my
property,  nor  even  the  possibihty  of  my  return ;  if  only  his
wrath  can  be  moderated  by  your  entreaties,  my  friends.

But  heavy  was  my  fall ;  and  what  is  there  surprising,  if  one
who  has  been  struck  by  Jupiter,  has  no  slight  wound  ?  Even
when  Achilles  spared  to  exert  his  strength,  the  spear  of  the  son
of  Pelias,  when  hurled,  gave  heavy  blows.  Since,  therefore,  the
sentence  of  the  avenger  was  favourable  to  me,  there  is  no  reason
why  thy  gate  should  deny  acquaintance  with  me.  It  was
attended,  I  confess,  less  often  than  it  ought  to  have  been ;  but
this^  too,  I  beHeve,  was  the  effect  of  my  destiny.  And  yet  no
other  one  was  more  sensible  of  my  respect ;  and  whether  in  this
place,  or  in  that,  I  was  ever  under  the  protection  of  thy  family.
Such  is  thy  affection,  that,  even  if  he  did  not  cultivate  thy
friendship,  the  friend  of  thy  brother  has  some  claim  upon  thee  ;
and  is  it  not  thy  own  good  fortune,  as  gratitude  is  ever  the  re-
sult of  kindness,  now  to  have  made  thyself  deserving  of  it  ?  And
if  thou  allowest  me  to  persuade  thee  what  to  desire,  pray  the
Gods  that  thou  mayst  give,  rather  than  exchange  for  a  requital.

c  c  2


y  Google


388  THE  PONTIC EPISTLES  [b.  I-

And  80  thou  art  wont  to  do,  and,  so  far  as  I  can  remember,
thou  wast  wont  to  be  the  originator  of  kindnesses  shown  to
many.^  Give  me,  Messalinus,  whatever  place  thou  mayst  please,
80  that  I  be  a  portion  not  ahenated  i&om  thy  house  ;  and,  if
thou  dost  not  grieve  that  Naso  has  endured  misfortunes,  since
he  appears  to  have  deserved  them,  still  grieve  that  he  has  been
deserving  of  them.


EPISTLE  VIIL— TO  SEVERUS.

He  shows  his  friend  how  he  is  surrounded  with  enemies,  and  amid  eter-
nal warfare,  at  a  time  when  he  feels  the  pangs  of  regret  for  his  friends,
his  wife,  his  daughter,  and  his  country.  He  expresses  his  sorrow  at
not  having  the  opportunity  of  giving  his  time  to  agricultural  pursuits,
such  as  ploughing  and  sowing ;  but  he  says  that  such  a  thing  is  im-
possible, as  the  city  of  Tomi  is  ever  surrounded  with  multitudes  of  the
enemy.  He  congratulates  Severus  on  his  prosperity ;  and  entreats  him
to  request  Augustus  to  grant  him  some  other  place  of  banishment.

Receite,  Severus,  thou  great  portion  of  my  life,  the  salutation
sent  from  Naso,  beloved  by  thee.  But  ask  not  what  I  am
doing :  if  I  should  recount  everything,  thou  wouldst  weep.
Let  it  be  enough,  if  the  sum  of  my  misfortunes  is  known  to
thee.

Destitute  of  peace,  I  am  living  in  eternal  warfare,  the  qui-
vered Cretan  provoking  the  cruel  strife.  Out  of  so  many  ba-
nished, I  am  the  only  one  that  is  a  soldier,  as  weU  as  an  exile;
aU  the  rest  of  the  eociles  are  in  safety,  but  I  do  not  envy  their
lot.  And  that  thou  mayst  the  more  readily  accord  pardon  to
my  writings,  thou  wilt  read  these  lines  composed  by  mcy  in
readiness  for  military  duty.

There  stands  an  ancient  city,  near  the  bank  of  the  Danube,
that  bears  two  names,^  scarcely  accessible,  from  its  fortifica-
tions and  the  position  of  the  place.  The  Caspian  ^gypsus  (if
we  believe  them,  when  speaking  of  themselves)  founded  it,  and

^  Kindneases  shown  to  many,'] — Ver,  66.  This  is  clearly  the  meaning
of  the  passage ;  but  there  must  either  be  a  corrupt  reading  here,  or  Ovid
must  have  forgotten  his  Latinity  amop^  the  Getag.  *  Causa,'  instead  of
*  causam,'  would  be  correct  Latin,  though  it  would  not  suit  the  measure.

^  That  bears  two  names.] — Ver.  11.  The  Danube  was  called  by  that
name,  from  its  source  to  the  city  of  A^um ;  apd  thence,  to  the  sea,  it  was
known  by  the  name  of  Ister.


y  Google


E.  VIII.]  OF OTED.  389

called  it  after  liis  own  name.  The  savage  Getan  took  it,  the
Odrysii  being  massacred  in  a  sadden  incursion,  and  then  he
"waged  -war  against  its  king.  He,  mindful  of  his  high  birth,
which  he  enhances  by  his  courage,  immediately  presents  him-
self, surrounded  with  soldiers  innumerable ;  and  he  does  not
withdraw,  before,  through  the  well-deserved  slaughter  of  the
aggressors,  he,  in  his  excess  of  vengeauce,  himself  becomes  the
aggressor.  O  king,  the  most  valiant  in  this  our  age,  may  it
be  granted  thee,  ever  to  wield  the  sceptre  with  an  honoured
hand.  May  Rome,  too,  the  offspring  of  Mars,  and  the  great
Csesar,  grant  thee  their  approval,  a  thing  still  more  desirable  ;
what  greater  boon  than  this  could  I  pray  for  thee  ?

But,  not  forgetful  whence  I  have  digressed,  my  dear  com-
panion, I  complain  that  cruel  warfare  is  added  to  my  calami-
ties. The  rising  Pleiad  has  brought  on  four  autumns,  since,
driven  into  these  Stygian  regions,  I  have  been  deprived
of  thee.  But  do  not  suppose  that  Naso  regrets  the  conveni-
ences of  a  city  life ;  and  yet  he  does  regret  them.  For  at  one
moment  I  recall  to  mind  you,  my  much-loved  friends ;  at
another  time,  my  daughter,  with  my  dear  wife,  recurs  to  me  :
and  theriy  from  my  house  I  turn  to  the  spots  of  the  beauteous
City :  and  my  mind,  with  its  eye,  surveys  them  all.  Now  the
markets,  now  the  temples,  now  the  theatres  paved  with  mar-
ble, and  now  all  the  porticos  recur  to  me,  with  their  level
ground.^  Now  the  grass  of  the  plain  that  looks  on  the  beau-
teous gardens,  and  the  standing  waters  of  the  Euripus,^^  and
the  aqueduct  of  the  Virgin,  recur  to  me.

But,  I  suppose,  the  delights  of  the  City  have  been  thus  torn
from  wretched  me,  that,  at  least,  I  may  be  allowed,  in  some  de-

27  WUh  their  level  ground,"] — Ver.  36.  The  porticos  which  were  attached
to  the  temples  and  puhlic  edifices,  as  well  as  to  the  houses  of  the  great,
served  both  for  the  purposes  of  ornament  and  utility,  as  they  aflforded  to
persons,  wishful  to  take  exercise,  a  retreat  from  the  rain  and  the  rays  of  the
sun.  For  this  reason,  care  was  taken  that  the  ground  should  be  made  level,
by  being  paved.

**  Waters  of  the  Euripu8.}—\er.  38.  The  Euripus  was  properly  the
sound  or  strait  between  Euboea  and  Boeotia,  now  called  the  straits  of
Negropont.  From  the  resemblance,  aqueducts,  canals,  pitches,  and  water-
passages  were  called  by  that  name.  There  were  several  canals  or  pieces
of  standing  water  in  the  Circus  Maxlmus.  The  aqueduct  of  the  Virgin  is
said  to  have  been  so  called,  because  when  water  was  being  sought,  a  little
girl  was  the  first  to  point  out  the  spring.


y  Google


390  THE  poiirric  epistles  [b.i.

gree,  to  enjoy  the  pleasures  of  the  country.  My  spirit  loi^
not  for  the  fields  that  it  has  lost,  and  the  rural  retreats  to  be
beheld  on  the  Pelignian  soil ;  nor  yet'  for  the  gardens,  situate
on  the  pine- bearing  hills,  which  the  Clodian  way,  at  its  junc-
tion with  the  Flaminian,  looks  upon.  For  another,  whom,  I
know  not,  have  I  cultivated  them ;  in  them  I  was  wont  to
conduct  the  fountain  streams  to  my  plantations,  and  I  repent
it  not.  There  too,  if  they  are  still  alive,  are  apples,
once  planted  with  my  hand,  but  not  destined  to  be  ga&ered
by  it  as  well.  In  exchange  for  the  loss  of  these  things,
would  that  some  piece  of  land,  at  least,  had  fallen  to  my  lot
to  cultivate  in  my  exile.  I  myself  could  wish,  were  it  only
allowed  me,  to  feed  my  she-goats  balancing  on  the  edge
of  the  crag,  and,  leaning  on  my  stafip,  to  feed  my  sheep.  I
myself,  did  not  my  heart  continually  dwell  on  my  wonted
cares,  could  lead  the  oxen  that  till  the  land  under  the  curni^
yoke.  I  could  learn  the  words  that  the  Getan  bullocks  under*
stand,  and  I  could  apply  to  them  the  wonted  threats  of  the
ploughman,  I  myself,  guiding  the  handle  of  the  pressed
plough,  with  my  hand  could  try  to  scatter  the  seed  in  the
ground  that  has  been  turned  up.  I  would  not  hesitate  to
cleanse  the  field  with  the  long  hoe,  and  to  supply  the  water,
for  the  thirsting  garden  to  drink  up.  But  in  what  quarter  am
I  to  find  this,  between  whom  and  the  foe,  the  fortifications
and  the  closed  gate  form  but  a  scanty  interral  ?  But  for  thee,
(and  with  all  my  heart  do  I  rejoice  at  it)  the  Goddesses  of
Destiny  have  spun  strong  threads.  At  one  moment,  the  Field
of  Mars  receives  thee ;  at  another,  the  portico,  with  its  dark
shade  ;  at  another,  the  Forum,  to  which  thou  givest  but  little
of  thy  time.  And  now  Umbria^  recalls  thee  ;  and  the  Appian
way  takes  thee,  going  towards  the  fiejds  of  Alba  with  swift
wheel.  Perhaps  here  thou  mayst  wish  that  Csesar  would
check  his  deserved  anger ;  and  that  thy  country  residence
might  be  my  ho^itable  retreat.  Oh !  my  friend,  'tis  too  much,
what  thou  dost  wish  for ;  request  something  more  moderate,
and  take  in  the  sails  of  thy  desires.  Would  that  a  land  were
granted  me  nearer  to  my  country,  and  subject  to  no  warfare ;
then  would  a  great  part  be  subtracted  from  my  woes.

^  CTm&rta.]— Ver.  67. This  was  a  district  between  the  Sabines  and
the  country  of  Etruria,  where  the  country  residence  of  Severos  was  sitnite.


y  Google


IT.]  or  OVID.  391


EPISTLE  IX.~TO  MAXIMUS.

Ths  poet  having  been  informed  by  Maximus  of  the  death  of  his  friend
Celsus  (through  whose  intercession  he  had  hoped  that  Maximus  would  in-
terest himself  in  soliciting  a  reversal  of  his  sentence),  declares  that  he
has  moistened  the  letter  of  Maximus  with  his  tears ;  and  that  nothing
more  grievous  has  befallen  him,  since  he  arrived  in  Pontus.  He  en-
larges upon  his  friendship  both  with  Maximus  and  Celsus.  He  declares
hisvrish,  in  some  manner,  to  celebrate  his  funereal  rites,  which,  however,  he
can  only  do  vrith  his  verses  :  and  he  concludes,  by  entreating  Maximus  to
look  upon  him  as  dead,  and  to  show  him  a  similar  degree  of  attention.

Tht  letter,  which  came  to  me,  speaking  of  the  loss  of  Cel-
sus,^ was  immediately  moistened  with  my  tears ;  and,  what
I  ought  not  to  say,  and  I  did  not  think  possihle  to  happen,
thy  letter  was  read  hy  unwilling  eyes.  Nothing  has  come  to
my  ears  more  distressing,  since  I  have  heen  in  Pontus ;  and
may  it  long  he  so,  I  pray.  His  countenance  ever  remains
before  my  eyes,  as  though  he  were  present ;  and  affection
makes  the  dead  still  to  live.  My  mind  often  recalls  his
playful  remarks,  when  stripped  of  gravity ;  and  often  recalls
his  performance  of  the  serious  duties  of  life  with  sincere
fidelity.

But  no  occasion  recurs  to  me  more  frequently  than  that,
which  I  wish  had  heen  the  last  moment  of  my  life ;  when  my
house  coming  down  suddenly,  fell  in  ruins  with  a  tremendous
crash  upon  the  head  of  its  master.  He  was  present  with  me,
Maximus,  when  a  great  part  deserted  me  ;  and  he  proved  him-
self no  hanger-on  upon  Fortune.  I  heheld  him,  weeping  a*:
my  downfall,  in  no  other  manner,  than  if  his  brother  was  about
to  be  placed  on  the  burning  pile.  He  remained/cw^ewerf  in  my
embrace,  and  consoled  me,  as  I  lay  prostrate,  and  even  mingled
his  own  tears  with  mine.  Oh !  how  often  did  he,  at  that  moment y
the  repulsive  defender  of  my  hated  hfe,  restrain  my  hands
prepared  for  my  own  destruction !  Oh !  how|  often  did  he
say,  "  The  anger  of  the  CJods  is  capable  of  being  appeased  ;
hve  on,  and  do  not  deny  that  possibly  thou  mayst  receive
pardon.**  Yet  these  were  his  most  remarkable  words,  "  Con-
sider how  much  assistance  Maximus  o\ight  to  afford  thee !
Maximus  wiU  apply  himself  to  the  task,  and,  such  is  his  affec-

^  Celsus. "^ — Ver.  1.  Aulus  Cornelius  Celsus  was  a  Roman  physician  of
great  learning  and  ability.  His  works  on  medicine  have  come  down  to  us.
He  wrote  also  on  Rhetoric  and  the  Military  Art.


y  Google


392  THE PONTIC  EPISTLES  [b.  I.

tion,  he  will  ask  that  the  anger  of  Csesar  he  not  lasting  for
ever.  Together  with  his  brothers,  he  will  use  his  energies
and  try  every  resource,  that  thy  griefs  may  be  alleviated."
These  words  diminished  in  me  tibe  hatred  'of  my  wretched
existence ;  and  be  it  thy  care,  Maximus,  that  they  prove  not
to  have  been  unfounded.  Hither,  too,  he  used  to  swear  to
me  that  he  would  come,  if  only  thou  didst  grant  him  permis-
sion to  undertake  so  long  a  voyage.  For  he  esteemed  thy
family  with  no  less  veneration,  than  that  with  which  thou  thy-
self dost  worship  the  Gods  that  rule  the  earth.  BeUeve  me,
although  thou  deservedly  hast  many  friends ;  out  of  so  many
he  was  inferior  to  none  :  if  only,  it  is  not  riches,  nor  the  illus-
trious names  of  ancestors,  but  probity  and  talent  that  make
men  great.  Justly  then  do  I  shed  tifie  tear  for  Celsus  re-
moved from  us,  which  he  gave  for  me  still  living,  at  the  time
when  I  was  banished.  Deservedly  do  I  afford  these  lines,
that  attest  thy  rare  virtues ;  in  order y  Celsus,  that  posterity
may  read  of  thy  name.  This  is  what  I  am  able  to  send  thee
from  the  Getic  regions  ;  in  this  place,  this  is  the  only  thing  that
'tis  certain  is  my  own.

I  could  not  attend  thy  funeral,  nor  anoint  thy  body ;  and
from  thy  pile  I  am  separated  by  the  distance  of  the  whole
earth.  Maximus,  who  was  able,  and  whom,  when  ahve,  thou
didst  esteem  as  a  Divinity,  performed  every  duty  for  thee.  He
performed  thy  sepulchral  rites,  and  gave  thee  a  funeral  of
great  pomp ;  he,  too,  poured  the  amomum  on  thy  cold  breast.
He,  weeping,  mingled  the  oiQtment  with  his  gushing  tears,  and
buried  thy  bones,  laid  at  rest  in  the  neighbouring  ground.  And
since  he  gives  their  due  to  his  friends  when  dead,  he  is  at
hberty  to  reckon  me  in  the  number  of  them.


EPISTLE  X.— TO  FLACCUS.

Ovid  details  the  languid  state  of  his  body,  and  thecauses  of  his  illness ;
and  he  entreats  Flaccus  and  his  brother  to  give  him  their  assistance,  and
to  endeavour  to  moderate  the  wrath  of  Augustus  against  him.

Flaccits,  the  exile  Naso  sends  thee  health ;  if  any  one  can
send  the  thing  which  he  himself  is  in  want  of.  For  lasting
grief  does  not  allow  a  body  diseased  by  grievous  cares  to  re-
tain its  strength.  And  yet  no  pain  is  there ;  I  am  not  parched
by  panting  fever,  and  my  pulse  beats  with  its  usual  tenor.  My


y  Google


E.  X.]  OF  OVID.  393

appetite  is  blunted ;  food  set  before  me  creates  loathing ;
and  I  complain  wfien  the  hour  comes  for  my  hated  repast.
Set  before  me  whatever  the  sea,  whatever  the  land,  whatever
the  air  produces ;  there  will  be  nothing  there,  to  create  an  appe-
tite in  me.  Were  Hebe,  the  active  damsel,  with  her  beauteous
hand  to  present  to  me  nectar  and  ambrosia,,  the  drink  and  the
food  of  the  Gods,  yet  the  taste  of  them  would  not  sharpen
my  dulled  palate ;  and  the  weight  would  rest  long  on  my  in-
active stomach.  This,  though  it  is  most  true,  I  dare  not  write
to  any  one  ;  lest  they  should  style  my  malady  mere  affectation.
Such  is  my  state,  forsooth,  such  is  the  aspect  of  my  fortunes,
that  there  can  be  room  even  for  affectation !  I  wish  such
affectation  as  this,  to  be  the  lot  of  the  man,  if  such  there  is,
who  fears  lest  the  wrath  of  Csesar  against  me  should  be
mitigated.  That  sleep,  too,  which,  to  a  weakly  body,  is  aliment,
affords  no  nourishment  by  its  virtues  to  my  emaciated  frame.
But  I  keep  awake,  and  for  ever  do  my  griefs  abstain  from
sleep ;  matter  for  which  the  very  place  itself  affords  me.
Scarcely,  then,  couldst  thou  recognize  my  features,  if  seen ;
and  thou  wouldst  ask  whither  the  colour  has  gone,  that  for-
merly existed.  But  little  nourishment  comes  into  my  wasted
limbs ;  and  my  members  are  paler  than  new  ^ax.  These  ma-
ladies I  have  not  contracted  through  excess  of  wine;  thou
knowest  how  almost  water  alone  is  drunk  by  me.  I  am  not
stuffed  with  food :  and  were  I  affected  with  a  desire  for  it,
there  is  no  abundance  in  the  Getic  regions.

The  injurious  pleasures  of  Venus  take  not  away  my  strength :
she  is  not  wont  to  approach  my  bed  of  sorrow.  The  water
and  the  climate  are  injurious  to  me ;  and,  a  cause  still  more
powerful  than  these,  the  anxiety  of  mind  that  is  ever
present  with  me.  And  hadst  thou  not,  together  with  thy
brother,  like  te  thee,  alleviated  this,  scarcely  could  my  sorrow-
ing mind  have  borne  its  weight  of  sadness.  You  two  are  as
a  hospitable  shore  for  my  fnul  skiff,  and  you  give  me  that  aid
which  many  refuse.  Give  it  me  always,!  pray,  because  I  shall
always  stand  in  need  of  it :  as  long  as  the  divine  Majesty  of
Csesar  shall  be  offended  with  me.  And  do  you,  both,  humbly
entreat  your  Gods,  that  he  may  moderate,  not  that  he  may  put
an  end  to,  the  anger  that  I  have  mierited.


y  Google


394  THE  pownc  epistles  [b.  u.


BOOK  THE  SECOND.


EPISTLE  I.—TO  GERMANICUS  C^SAR.

Ths  Poet  says,  that  the  fame  of  the  triumph  of  Tiherius  Caesar  has  reached
even  Scythia,  and  that  it  has  afforded  him  much  delight ;  he  then  de-
scribes the  procession;  and  praising  the  clemency  which  Caesar  has
shown,  in  sparing  the  lives  of  the  enemies  whom  he  had  taken  in  battle,
he  concludes  that  he  himself  has  a  greater  right  to  expect  it.  He  prays
that  the  Gods  will  grant  length  of  days  to  Tiberius.

Even  thus  far  has  the  fame  of  the  triumph  of  Caesar  arrived,
whither  the  languid  hreeze  of  the  wearied  South  wind  comes
with  .difficulty.  I  thought  that  there  could  he  nothing  pleas-
ing to  me  in  the  regions  of  Scythia ;  the  place  is  less  hateful
to  me  now,  than  it  was  before.  The  cloud  of  my  cares  heing
dispelled,  I  have,  at  length,  seen  a  Httle  clear  sky :  and  thus
I  have  deceived  my  destiny.  Even  if  Caesar  should  wish  that
no  joys  should  fall  to  my  lot,  he  may  still  he  dedrous  that  this
one  pleasure  should  he  granted  to  every  man.  The  Gods  also
command  sorrow  to  he  laid  aside  on  their  festivals,  that  they
may  he  worshipped  hy  all  with  cheerful  veneration.  In  fine,
what  it  is  undouhted  madness  to  dare  to  confess ;  even  should
he  forhid  it,  I  shall  experience  pleasure  on  this  occasion.  Often
as  Jupiter  refreshes  the  fields  with  nourishing  showers,  the
clinging  burr  is  wont  to  spring  up,  mixed  with  the  com.  I
too,  a  useless  weed,  feel  the  effects  of  the  bounteous  Divinity ;
and  often  am  I  refreshed  with  unintentional  benefits.  The
joys  that  pervade  the  mind  of  Caesar  are  made  my  own,  to  the
best  of  my  ability :  that  house  has  nothing  that  belongs  to
itself  alone.  Fame,  I  return  thee  thanks  ;  by  means  of  whom
the  procession  of  triumph^  has  been  beheld  by  me,  though  shut

^  Procession  of  triumph.'] — ^Ver.  19. It  has  been  supposed  by  some
commentators  that  he  here  rdiers  to  the  ovation  of  Tiberius  after  his  defeat


y  Google


E.  I.]  OP  OYID.  S195

up  in  the  midst  of  the  G^etae.  Under  thy  instruction  I  learned
that  nations  innumerable  had  lately  assembled,  to  behold  the
features  of  their  Prince ;  and  that  Rome,  which  embraces  the
immense  world  within  her  extensive  walls,  scarcely  found
room  for  their  entertainment.  'Twas  thou  that  didst  teU  me,
how,  after  the  lowering  South  wind  for  many  a  day  before  had
poured  down  its  constant  showers,  the  Sun  shone  forth  bril-
liantly with  his  heavenly  refulgence,  the  day  being  in  accord-
ance with  the  countenances  of  the  people  ;  and  how  that  the
Conqueror,  with  the  great  honour  of  his  eulogies,  had  distri-
buted the  prizes  of  war  among  the  heroes  bepraised  hy  him  ;
and  how  that,  when  about  to  assume  liie  embroidered  gar-
ments, the  insignia  of  glory,  he  first  placed  the  frankincense
on  the  hallowed  altars ;  and  hmio  that  he  piously  propitiated
Justice,  the  'peculiar  Betty  of  his  parent ;  she  who  ever  holds
a  temple  in  his  breast :  and  how  that  wherever  he  proceeded,
a  happy  omen  was  given  in  shouts  of  applause,  and  the  stones
turned  red  with  the  dew-besprinkled  roses.  How  that,  next  in
order,  along  with  the  conquered  men,  the  cities  of  the  bar-
barians were  carried,  imitating  in  silver  the  real  walls :  and
how  that  rivers  and  mountains,  and  meadows  among  lofty
woods,  and  variotis  arms  were  mingled  with  their  weapons  in
trophy  piles.  And  how  that  the  roof  of  the  Roman  Forum
was  gilded  by  the  triumphal  gold,  which  the  Sun  shone  upon.
And  how  that  as  many  chiefs  bore  chains  fastened  to  their
captive  necks,  as  were  almost  sufficient  to  compose  an  army
of  the  enemy.  Of  these,  the  greatest  part  received  life  and  par-
don ;  among  whom  was  Bato,  the  head  and  the  very  existence
of  the  war.  Why  should  I  deny  that  the  wrath  of  the  Divi-
nity may  possibly  be  mitigated  against  me,  when  I  behold
how  the  Gods  are  merciful  to  their  enemies  ?  The  same  report,
Germanicus,  bfought  the  news  to  me,  how  that  cities  had  passed
in  the  procession  under  the  title  of  thy  name  :^  and  how  that

of  the  Pannonians ;  but  it  is  much  more  likely  that  the  victory  of  Tibe-
rias over  the  Illyrians,  which  happened  in  the  year  preceding  the  death  of
Augustus,  is  here  celebrated ;  as  this  seems  to  be  the  period  at  which
this  book  was  composed.  Messalinus,  to  whom  the  next  letter  is  addressed,
was  one  of  the  lieutenants  of  Tiberias  on  this  occasion,  and,  with  him,
partook  of  the  honour  of  the  triumph.

'  Under  the  title  of  thy  name.'] — Ver.  50.  Models  of  the  captured
cities  were  carried  in  the  procession  ;  over  them  was  a  label  or  superscrip-
tion, bearing  the  name  of  the  general  by  whom  each  place  had  been  taken.


y  Google


396  THE  POKTIC  EPISTLES  [b.  u.

they  were  not  secnre  against  thee,  either  in  the  thickness  of
the  walls,  or  in  the  arms  with  which  they  were  defendedy  or
n  the  natural  advantages  of  their  situation.

May  the  €^s  grant  thee  length  of  years !  ^// other  blessingt
from  thy  own  self  thou  wilt  derive,  let  only  length  of  time  be
granted  for  thy  virtue.  That  which  I  pray,  will  come  to  pass ;
the  prophecies  of  the  Poets  have  some  value;  for  the  Grod  gave
an  auspicious  sign  as  I  breathed  the  wish.  Thee  too,  wiU  ^me
behold,  in  her  joy,  ascending  as  a  conqueror  to  the  Tarpeian
heights,  thy  horses  wreathed  with  garlands :  the  Father  will
behold  the  ripening  honours  of  his  son,  experiencing  that  joy,
which  he  himself  hieus  afforded  by  his  own  glories.  Thon  thai
art  the  first  of  our  youths,  both  in  war  and  in  peace,  mark  the
words  that  have  just  been  spoken  by  me,  as  I  uttered  my  pro-
phecy to  thee.  Perhaps  I  shall  recount  this  triumph  as  well
in  my  verses,  if  my  life  shall  only  bear  up  against  my  woes :
if  I  myself  shall  not  have  first  dyed  the  Scythian  arrows  with
my  bloody  and  the  savage  G^tan  shall  not  have  first  struck  off
tlus  head  of  mine  with  his  sword.  And  if,  while  I  am  still
living,  the  laurel  shall  be  granted  thee  in  the  temples,  thou  wilt
pronounce  that  my  presage  was  doubly  true.'


EPISTLE  II,— TO  MESSALINUS.

He  entreats  him  to  receive  this  letter,  ooming  from  the  shores  of  the
Euxine,  with  the  same  countenance  that  he  was  wont  formerly  to  show
to  himself.  He  also  requests  him,  when  he  has  read  the  writer*s  name,
not  to  refuse  to  read  the  whole  Epistle ;  as  he  has  not  been  guilty
of  such  crimes  as  to  forbid  his  lines  to  be  read  by  him.  He  entreats
him,  on  many  considerations,  at  a  fitting  time,  to  entreat  Augustus  in
his  behalf;  but  he  requests  him  only  to  do  so,  if  he  shall  fed  con-
vinced that  no  injurious  results  wiU  be  the  consequence.

Naso,  the  admirer  of  thy  family  firom  his  earliest  years,  nofw
banished  to  the  shores  on  the  left  of  the  Euxine  sea^  sends
thee,  Messalinus,  this  salutation,  from  among  the  savage  Gretae,
which  he  was  accustomed  to  give  thee  personally.  Wretched
am  I,  if,  when  thou  readest  my  name,  thy  countenance  is  not
the  same  as  once  it  was,  and  if  thou  hesitatest  to  read  the  rest
to  the end. Read  them  through,  and  do  not  banish  my

*  Doubly  true.'] — Ver.  68. True,  both  as  to  his  having  gained  a  triumph,
and  as  to  (Jie  poet  being  alive  to  witness  it.


y  Google


B.  II.]  OP  OVID.  397

words,  as  ^ell  as  myself :  it  is  allowed  my  verses  to  be  in  your
City. I  never  conceived  the  thought  that  the  brilliant  stars
could  be  touched  by  my  hand,  if  Ossa  could  only  bear  Pelion.
I have not, following  the mad expedition  of  Enceladus,
wielded  arms  against  the  Gods,  the  nilers  of  the  earth. No
Deities  have  been  struck  by  any  weapon  of  mine,  as  was  done
by  the  rash  right  hand  of  the  son  of  Tydeus. My  fault  was
a heavy one,  but  such  as  could  ruin  myself  only ;  and  no
greater  heinousness  has  it  attained. I  can  be  called  nothing
else than  imprudent  and  timid ;  these  are  the  two  real  cha-
racteristics of  my  mind. I  acknowledge,  indeed,  that,  with
justice,  thou  dost  not  lend  an  easy  ear  to  my  entreaties,  after
the  merited  wrath  of  Caesar. And  such  is  thy  affection  to  all
who  bear  thq.  name  of  lulus,  that  thou  considerest  thyself  to
be  offended^  vhen  any  one  of  them  is  offended. Bnt  even
sbouldst  thou  bear  arms,  and  shouldst  thou  threaten cniel
wounds,  still  thou  wilt  not  cause  me  to  be  in  dread  of  thee.
The  Trojan  ship  received  the  Grecian  Achsemenides;*  and  the
spear  of  the son  of  Pelias  bore  aid  to  the  Mysian chief.
Sometimes  the  violator  of  the  temple  flies  for  refuge  to  the
altar,  and  dreads  not  to  implore  the  aid  of  the  offended  Deity.
Some  one,  perhaps,  may  say  that  this  is  not  safe  ;  I  confess  it ;
but  my  bark  is  not  sailing  in  smooth  water. Let  others  seek
safety. The  most  wretched  Fate  affords  its  security;  for
there  is  no  fear  of  worse  mishaps.  The  man  that  is  hurried  on
by  his  destinies,  what  but  his  destinies  should  he  entreat?
Often  does  the  prickly  thorn  produce  the  sweet  rose ;  he  that
is  carried  along  by  the  foaming  tide,  extends  his  arms  towards
the  crag,  and  catches  at  the  brambles  and  the  hard  rock;  the
bird  that  is  in  dread  of  the  hawk,  with  trembling  wings  dares
to  come,  in  its  weariness,  to  the  breast  of  man  ;  the  bind  that
in  its  terror,  is  flying  from  the  savage  dogs,  hesitates  not  to
trust  itself  to  the  neighbouring  house. Grant,  I  pray  thee,
most  kind  friend,  access  to  my  tears ;  and  shut  not  the  obdu-
rate door  to  my  kind  words. And,  do  thou  kindly  carry
these  words  of  mine  to  the  Deities  of  Rome,  venerated  by
thee  not  less  than  the  Thunderer  of  the  Tarpeian. As  my

*  Jchamenide8.']--YeT.  25.  He  was  one  of  the  companions  of  Ulysses,
who  was  left  on  shore,  m  Sicilv,  when  Ulysses  fled  thence.  Virgil  and
Ovid  [Metamorphoses,  Book  xiv,]  relate  how  iEneas  discovered  him  there,
and  rescued  him  from  the  danger  of  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  Cyclop,
Polyphemus.


y  Google


398  THE  PONTIC  EPISTLES  [b.  il

ambassador,  undertake  to  plead  the  cause  of  this  my  re-
quest :  although,  under  my  name,  no  cause  is  really  good.
Now,  nearly  entombed,  now  assuredly  cold  as  death,  with
difficulty  shall  I  be  saved  by  thee,  if  I  am  saved  at  all.  On
this  occasion,  the  favour  which  the  esteem  of  the  immortal
Prince  bestows  upon  thee,  may  make  an  effort  in  behalf  of
my  ruined  fortunes.  On  this  occasion,  that  brilliancy  of
speech,  which  is  peculiar  to  the  members  of  thy  family,  with
which  thou  wast  wont  to  aid  the  trembling  accused,  may  be
employed  by  thee.  For  in  thee  still  hves  the  tongue  of  thy
eloquent  parent ;  and  that  point  of  excellence  has  found  its
own  heir.

I  intreat  not  that  tongue  to  attempt  to  defend  me ;  the
cause  of  a  criminal  that  has  made  a  confession  cannot  be  de-
fended. Yet  consider  whether  thou  canst  palliate  my  mis-
deed under  the  name  of  error,  or  whether  it  is  better  not  to
enter  upon  that  point.  The  kind  of  wound  is  such,  that  as  it
admits  of  no  cure,  I  consider  it  safer  for  it  not  to  be  handled.
Be  silent,  thou  tongue  of  mine  ;  not  another  word  must  be  said.
I  could  wish  myself  to  cover  these  ashes  of  mine.  Take  care,
then,  to  speak  in  such  a  manner  as  if  no  mistake  beguiled
me,  that  I  may  enjoy  that  life  which  he  has  granted  me.
And  when  he  shall  be  calm,  and  shall  have  laid  aside  that
countenance,  which  agitates  by  its  influence*  both  the  earth  and
the  empire,  entreat  him  not  to  allow  me  to  become  an  humble
prey  to  the  Getse,  and  to  grant  me  a  quiet  spot  for  my  wretched
exile.

The  time  is  propitious  for  thy  entreaties ;  he  himself  is
prosperous,  and  sees,  0  Rome,  thy  resources  prospering,  which
he  has  created.  His  wife,  in  happiness,  preserves  her  nuptial
couch ^  with  chastity  :  his  son  is  extending  the  sway  of  Auso-
nia.  Germanicus  himself  is  exceeding  his  years  in  his  spirit,
and  the  natural  vigour  of  Drusus  is  not  less  than  his  great-

*  By  its  injluence.'] — ^Ver.  66.  *  Secum  ;*  literally,  *  with  itself;'  mean-
ing that  the  earth  enjoys  repose,  or  is  distracted  with  trouble,  according  as
the  countenance  of  Augustus  is  indicatiye  of  a  corresponding  state  of
things.

^  Her  nuptial  couch.'] — ^Ver.  71.  *  Pulvinaria.*  These  were  stuffed
cushions,  which  were  used  on  the  couches  on  which  the  statues  of  the
Deities  reposed  at  the  *  Lectistemia,'  which  were  celebrated  in  their  re-
spective temples.  By  the  use  of  this  term,  a  compliment  is  intended  to  be
conveyed  to  the  elevated  position  enjoyed  by  Livia.


y  Google


B.  II.]  or  OVID.  399

ness  of  soul.  In  addition  to  this,  his  daughters-in-law,  and  his
affectionate  granddaughters,  and  the  children  of  his  grand-
sons, and  the  other  memhers  of  the  house  of  Augustus,  are
flourishing.  Add,  too,  that  the  Pceonians''  have  just  now  af-
forded a  triumph,  and  that  the  arms  of  the  mountainous
Dalmatia  have  heen  reduced  to  tranquiUity.  lUyria,  too,
throwing  away  her  arms,  has  not  disdained  to  bear  the  foot  of
Caesar,  impressed onher  servile  head.  He  himself,  conspicuous
in  his  chariot,  with  a  mild  countenance,  has  had  his  temples
wreathed  vrith  laurel^  the  produce  of  the  virgin  beloved  by
Phoebus.  Him,  as  he  went  along,  together  with  yourselves,
his  affectionate  offspring  attended — an  offspring  worthy  of
their  parent,  and  of  the  titles  that  have  been  given  to  them :
an  offspring  Uke  to  the  brothers,  whom,  as  they  occcupy  the
neighbouring  temple,  the  God  Julius  beholds^  from  his  lofty
shrine.  Messalinus  does  not  deny,  that  to  thee,  to  whom  all
things  ought  to  give  place,  the  first  rank  in  happiness  be-
longs. Whoever  comes  next  after  these,  he  enters  into  the
contest  of  love  for  the  Ccesars  ;  thou,  Messalinus,  in  this
respect,  shalt  be  the  inferior  of  no  mortal.  Him  dost  thou
venerate,  by  whose  means,  before  the  fitting  age,  the  laurel,
deserveciy  decreed  to  thee  who  merited  it,  descended  upon  thy
honoured  locks.  Happy  were  they,  to  whom  it  was  allowed
to  behold  these  triumphs,  and  to  enjoy  a  sight  of  the  face
of  a  Prince  that  is  the  equal  of  the  Gods.  But  by  me,  in-
stead of  the  face  of  Csesar,  the  country  of  the  Sauromatse
must  be  beheld,  a  land  devoid  of  peace,  and  water  bound  up  in
ice.  But  if  thou  hearest  this,  and  if  my  voice  reaches  even
so  far  ;  let  thy  favour  be  kindly  employed,  for  a  change  of  the
place  of  my  exile.  This  does  thy  father  ask,  who  was  venerated  by
me  from  my  earhest  years,  if  indeed  that  eloquent  shade  stiU  en-
joys any  perception.  This,  too,  does  thy  brother  ask ;  although,
perchance,  he  apprehends  that  thy  care  of  saving  me  may  be

'  T?ie  Paoniana.] — ^Ver.  139.  These  were  a  people  of  Mysia,  neigh-
bouring to  the  Illyrians  and  Pannonians.  In  mentioning  these,  and  Dal-
matia and  Illyria,  he  alludes  to  the  successes  that  Tiberius  had  lately
gained  in  Illyria.

8  The  God  Julius  beholds.] — Ver,  86.  This  either  means  that  the
statue  of  Julius  Caesar  was  placed  in  a  temple  (perhaps  that  of  Venus,
which  he  had  founded),  looking  down  upon  the  temple  of  Castor  and
Pollux ;  or  it  refers  to  his  Equestrian  statue,  which  was  near  the  threshold
of  that  temple.


y  Google


400  THB  POiniC  EPISTLES  [b.  n.

to  thy  injury.  All  thy  family  asks  this ;  and  thou  thyself
canst  not  deny  it,  that  I  was  in  the  number  of  thy  friends.
With  the  exception  of  my  Art  of  Love ^  often  wast  thou  the  ap-
prover of  my  tolents,  which  I  have  since  found  that  I  employed
to  bad  purpose.  And  to  thy  family,  no  cause  for  shame  can
my  life  afford,  if  only  my  last  fault  is  excepted.  May,  then,
the  fortunes  of  thy  family  ever  flourish,  and  may  the  Gods
above,  and  the  Caesars,  have  a  care  for  thee ;  supplicate  the
Divinity  that  is  merciful,  but  that  is  deservedly  offended  with
me,  to  remove  me  from  the  barbarism  of  this  Scythian  spot.
'Tis  difficult,  I  confess ;  but  courage  seeks  obstacles ;  and  so
much  the  greater  will  be  my  gratitude  for  thy  deserts.  And
yet  neither  any  iEtnsean  Polyphemus  in  his  vast  cavern,  nor
any  Antiphates,*  will  be  hearing  thy  words :  but  a  parent,
gentle  and  lenient,  and  ever  ready  to  pardon ;  one  who  often
Sunders,  without  hurling  his  fiery  bolts  :  one  who,  when  he
has  come  to  a  sad  decision,  himself  too  becomes  sad  ;  and  to
whom  it  is  almost  a  punishment  to  inflict  punishment.  Yet
his  clemency  has  been  overcome  by  my  fault,  and  his  anger
has  been  forced  to  have  recourse  to  his  power.

And,  since  I  am  removed  from  my  native  land  by  the  distance
of  the  whole  earth,  and  I  have  not  the  hberty  to  throw  myself  at
the  feet  of  the  Deities  themselves  ;  do  thou,  as  the  priest,  bear
these  requests  of  mine  to  the  Gods  above,  whom  thou  dost
adore;  and  to  my  words,  add  thy  own  entreaties  as  xoell.
However,  try  these  means  only,  if  thou  shalt  be  of  opinion  that
they  will  not  prove  injurious.  Pardon  my  timidity  ;  once  ship-
wrecked, I  am  in  dread  of  the  whole  ocean.


EPISTLE  III.— TO  MAXIMUS.

The  Poet  extols  the  fidelity  and  constancy  shown  by  Maximus  towards
him  in  his  adversity ;  and  he  says,  that  he  was  not,  like  the  multitude,
led  by  motives  of  interest,  but  by  those  of  honour  and  virtue.  He  en-
treats him  to  persist  in  his  attachment,  and  to  give  him  all  the  aid  in
his  power.

Maxtmus,  thou,  who  by  thy  illustrious  virtues,  dost  equal  thy
name,  and  dost  not  suffer  the  gifts  of  thy  intellect  to  be

®  Antiphates.'] — ^Ver.  116,  He  was  the  king  of  the  Laestrygons,  who
were  cannibals ;  they  are  mentioned  in  the  Odyssey,  and  by  Ovid  in  the
14th  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses.


y  Google


E.  III.]  OF  OTH).  401

eclipsed  by  thy  nobleness  of  birth  ;  honoured  by  me,  even  to
the  latest  moment  of  my  life,  (for  in  what  does  this  state  differ
from  death  ?) Thou  dost  a  thing,  in  not  turning  thy  back
upon  thy  friend  in  his  affliction,  than  which  there  is  nothing
more  uncommon  in  this  thy  age. It  is  a  shocking  thing,
indeed^  to  be  owned,  but,  if  we  must  only  confess  the  truth,
the  multitude  esteems  Mendship  according  to  interest. It  is
first,  a  care  what  is  expedient,  before  what  is  honourable  ;  and
attachment  both  stands and  falls  with a  man* a  fortunes.
Among  many  thousands,  thou  wouldst  not  easily  find  one,  to
believe  that  virtue  is  its  own  reward. Its  own  comeliness,  if
there  is  no  reward  for  a  virtuous  action,  does  not  influence  them,
and  they  are  sorry  to  be  honest  for  no  recompense. There  is
nothing  dear  to  theniy  but  that  which  is  for  their  advantage.
Go,  noiVy  and  deprive  the  greedy  mind  of  the  hope  of  profit,
and  not  one  will  be  found, to  practise  virtue  for  nothing.
But  now-a-days  every  one  loves  his  own  interest,  and  he  reckons,
on his  anxious  fingers,  what  may  turn  out  useful  to  himself.
The  once  venerated  name  of  Friendship  is  prostituted,  and
she  sits  like  a  harlot,  to  be  bought  at  a  price. The  more,  then,
do  I  admire  thee,  that  thou,  as  well,  art  not  contaminated  by  the
blemish  of  the  universal  vice,  as  though  by  a  rushing  torrent.
No  one  now,  is  beloved,  but  the  man,  to  whom  Fortune  is  favour-
able :  soon  as  she  thunders,  she  chases  away  all  that  are  near.
See  my  own  case ; I  was  once  surrounded  with  no  few
friends,  while  the  favouring  breeze  swelled  my  sails; soon
as  the  raging  billows  were  aroused  by  the  boisterous  wind,
I  was  left,  in  the  midst  of  the  waves,  in  a  shattered  bark  :
and  while  the  rest  were  unwilling  to  appear  even  to  have
known  me,  barely  two  or  three  of  you  gave  aid  to  me,  thus
prostrate. Of  them,  thou  wast  the  chief ;  and  thou  wast  de-
serving not  to  be  the  follower  of  others,  but  the  originator;
not  to  seek  an  example,  but  to  give  one.  Virtue  and  attachment^
lend  their  aid  to  thee,  deriving  no  profit  from  thy  actions,  ex-
cept the  fact,  that  thou  hast  not  acted  amiss.  In  thy  judgment,
virtue  requires  no  reward,  and  is  to  be  sought  for  her  own
sake,  unaccompanied  by  external  benefits. Thou  thinkest  it
a  disgrace  for  a  Mend  to  be  repulsed,  because  he  is  in  misery;
and  for  him  to  cease  to  belong  to  thee,  because  he  is  unfortu-
nate. It  is  more  merciful  to  place  the  hands  under  the  wea-
ried chin  of  the  swimmer,  than  to  overwhelm  his  head  in  the

n  D


y  Google


402  THE  POimC  EPISTLES  [a.  il

flowing  waters.  See,  what  the  grandson  of  .^laeus^^  did  fer
his  friend,  after  his  death ;  and  consider,  that  this  life  of  mm
is  as  had  as  death.

Theseus  accompanied  Pirithoiis  to  the  Stygian  waves,  b
what  degree  does  my  fate  differ  from  the  Stygian  streams !
The  youth  from  Phocis  attended  Orestes  in  his  madness;
my  error,  also,  has  no  httle  amount  of  insanity.  Do  thou,  too,
accept  these  praises  of  the  illustrious  heroes ;  and,  as  tfaou
art  wont  to  do,  give  thy  aid,  so  far  as  ^ou  canst,  to  me  thu
ruined.  If  I  know  thee  aright ;  if  thou  art  now  also  what
formerly  thou  wast  wont  to  he,  and  if  thy  spirit  has  not  failed
thee  ;  the  more  fiercely  Fortune  rages,  the  more  strongly  dost
thou  resist ;  and,  as  hefits  thee,  thou  takest  care,  that  she  shall
not  overcome  thee.  An  enemy  that  fights  well,  causes  thee,
too,  to  fight  weU ;  so  that  the  same  cause  works  both  for  my
advantage  and  my  disadvantage.  In  truth,  inestimable  youtl^
thou  thmkest  it  not  worthy  of  thee,  to  becoine  the  attendant
on  Fortune,  the  Goddess  that  stands  upon  the  wheel.  Thou
art  steadfast,  and  inasmuch  as  they  are  not  such  as  thou
couldst  wish,  thou  guidest  the  sails,  such  as  they  are,  of  my
shattered  bark.  And  so  greatly  have  its  ruins  been  shaken,  as
to  have  been  deemed  on  the  point  of  falling ;  but  they  still  stand,
supported  by  thy  shoulders.  At  first  indeed,  thy  wrath  was
just,  and  not  any  lighter  than  his,  who  was  deservedly  offended
with  me :  and  thou  wast  wont  to  swear  that  the  same  grief
which  affected  the  heart  of  the  great  Csesar,  was  forthwith
thine  own.  But,  when  the  cause  of  my  downfall  was  heard
of  by  thee,  thou  art  reported  to  have  grieved  much  at  my
faults.  Then,  for  the  &«t  time,  did  thy  letters  begin  to  con-
sole me ;  and  to  afford  a  hope  that  the  offended  God  could  be
propitiated.  Then,  the  constancy  of  thy  continued  friendship,
which  commenced  with  me  before  thy  birth,"  moved  thee  in
my  favour ;  both  because,  whereas  thou  didst  become  so  to
oliiers,  to  me  thou  wast  bom  a  Mend ;  and  because,  in  the
cradle,  I  gave  thee  the  first  kisses.  And,  whereas,  thy  family
was  ever  revered  by  me,  from  my  tenderest  years,  now  in  my

*^  The  grandson  qf  Maeus.'] — Ver.  41.  Achilles ;  who  avenged  the
death  of  his  friend  Patroclus,  by  resuming  the  anns  which  he  bad  kid
aside,  and  slaying  Hector.

^*  Before  thy  birth,"] — Ver.  70.  He  alludes  to  his  former  intimacy  wiUi
the  father  of  Maximus.


y  Google


E.  III.]  OP  OTTD.  403

old  age,  I  am  compelled  to  become  a  burden  to  thee.  'Twas
tliy  &ther,  the  embodiment  of  an  eloquence  in  the  Latian  lan-
guage, that  was  not  less,  in  degree,  than  the  nobleness  of  his
birth,  that  first  urged  me  to  dare  to  trust  my  verses  to  Fame  ;
he  was  the  guide  of  my  genius.  I  assert,  too,  that  thy  brother
cannot  recollect  at  what  time  he  first  enjoyed  my  friendship.
But,  thee,  before  all,  did  I  so  embrace,  that  thou,  alone,
mightst  be  my  comfort  in  any  calamity.  The  extreme  shores
of  Italy  ^*  saw  me  together  with  thee,  and  received  the  tears
that  feU  down  my  sorrowing  cheeks  ;  at  the  time,  when,  as
thou  didst  enquire  whether  the  news  was  true,  which  an  evil
report  of  my  error  had  circulated,  I  was  hesitating,  in  doubt
whether  to  confess,  in  doubt  whether  to  deny,  while  alarm
showed  the  marks  of  fear ;  and,  just  like  the  snow,  which  the
watery  South  wind  melts,  the  starting  tear  was  trickling  down
my  affiighted  cheeks.  Calling  these  things,  then,  to  memory ;
and  because  thou  seeest  that  the  charges  against  me  can  be
veiled  under  the  forgiveness  of  a  first  error ;  thou  regardest
thy  former  friend  amid  the  wreck  of  his  fortunes ;  and  thou
soothest  my  wounds  with  thy  consolations.  In  return  for
this,  if  I  might  be  allowed  to  form  a  wish,  I  would  pray  a
thousand  blessings  for  thee,  so  well  deserving  of  them.

But,  if  wishes  entertained  by  thee,  are  alone  granted  me,  then
I  will  pray  that  Csesar  and  thy  mother  too,  may  live  long  in
health.  This  is  the  request,  that  I  remember  thou  wast  wont  first
to  make  of  the  Gods,  when  thou  didst  sacrifice  upon  the  altars,
rich  with  frankincense.


EPISTLE  IV.—TO  ATTICUS.

He  calls  to  recoUection  his  ancient  Mendship  with  Atticus,  and  the  plea-
sant hours  they  had  spent  together ;  he  tells  him  that  he  is  persuaded
of  the  continuance  of  his  attachment,  although  he  is  far  distant,  and
entreats  him  to  continue  his  friendship  towards  him.

Receive  the  converse  of  Naso  from  the  freezing  Danube,
Atticus,  in  my  estimation  one  not  to  be  doubted.  And  dost
thou  still  bear  in  memory  thy  unhappy  friend  ?  or  is  weak-
ened affection  deserting  its  post? The  Gods  are  not  so  far

12  Extreme  shores  of  Italy.'} — ^Ver.  84.  He  alludes  very  probably  to
Brundisium,  to  which  place  Maximus  had  perhaps  accompanied  him  when
embarking  for  his  place  of  banishment.

DD  2


y  Google


404  THE  VOWnC  EPISTLES  [b.  li,

hostile  to  me  that  I  could  believe  it,  or  suppose  it  possible
that  thou  dost  not  now  remember  me.  Before  my  eyes  Ay
form  stands,  and  is  ever  there ;  and  mentally,  I  seem  to  be*
hold  ^y  features.  I  call  to  recollection  many  an  hour  of
seriousness  that  has  been  spent  by  me  together  with  thee;
and  no  few  occasions  that  have  been  devoted  to  pleasiog
sportiveness.  Often  did  the  hours  seem  too  short-lived  for
our  prolonged  conversation ;  often  was  the  day  shorter  thtn
was  my  discourse.  Often  did  my  verses,  but  just  composed,
come  to  thy  ears,  and  my  new-bom  Muse  was  submitted  to
thy  judgment.  What  thou  wast  wont  to  praise,  I  used  to
thmk  would  please  the  public ;  that  was  the  delightful  reward
of  my  recent  labours.  And  as  my  book  was  corrected  by  the
criticism  of  my  friend,  many  a  time  was  an  erasure  made  at
thy  suggestion.

TogeUier  did  the  market-places  behold  us,  and  every  por-
tico, the  streets,  and  the  curving  theatres,  our  seats  beiag
next  to  each  other.  In  fact,  dearest  ^'^n^?,  as  great  was  the
affection  between  us,  as  between  the  grandson  of  ^Slaeus  and
the  grandson  of  Actor.  I  could  not  believe,  even  shouldst
thou  drink  the  cup  of  Lethe,  that  banishes  care,  that  these
things  could  fade  from  thy  memory.  Sooner  shall  the  long
days  arrive  under  the  Constellation  of  midwinter,  and  the
nights  of  the  summer  solstice  shall  be  more  tardy  than  those
of  winter  ;  Babylon  shall  experience  no  heat,  Pontus  no  cold,
and  the  marigold  shall  surpass  the  roses  of  Psestum  in  fra-
grance ;  than  forgetfulness  of  my  fortunes  shall  overtake  thee.
Not  to  that  extent  is  no  part  of  my  destiny  happy.  But  be
it  thy  care  that  this  confidence  be  not  pronounced  unfounded,
and  called  a  silly  credulity  :  defend,  too,  thy  old  friend  with
firm  constancy,  so  far  as  thou  canst,  and  so  far  as  I  shall  be
no  burden  to  thee.


EPISTLE  v.— TO  SALANUS.

He  acknowledges  his  gratitude  to  Salanus,  in  return  for  the  sorow  he
manifested  on  his  banishment,  although  they  were  not  intimately  ac-
quainted ;  and  returns  him  thanks  for  the  praises  he  had  bestowed  on
his  verses.  He  requests  him,  if  his  book  on  the  Triumph  of  Tibeziot
should  come  under  his  notice,  to  favour  it  with  his  protection ;  and
concludes,  by  enlarj^ing  upon  the  natural  ties  that  exist  between  persons
devoted  to  the  different  branches  of  Uterature.

1  Naso,  have  here  sent  to  my  friend  Salanus  my  words  formed


y  Google


B.  v.]  OP  OTTD.  405

into  unequal  numbers,  prefacing  them  wkh  my  salutation.  I
desire  it  may  obtain  its  fuMment ;  and  that  it  may  realize  its
good  omen  by  facts,  I  pray  that  this  may  be  read  by  thee,  my
firiend,  in  good  health.  Thy  sincerity,  a  thing  almost  extinct
in  these  days,  requires  me  to  form  such  wishes.  For,  although
I  was  known  to  thee  by  but  a  shght  acquaintanceship,  thou
art  said  to  have  lamented  over  my  banishment ;  and  when
thou  didst  read  my  verses,  sent  from  the  far  distant  Pontus,
thy  kindness  defended  them,  such  as  they  were.  Thou,  too,
didst  wish  that  the  wrath  of  the  favoured  Caesar  against  me,
would  be  but  short-hved ;  and,  did  he  know  it,  he  himself
would  allow  of  such  a  wish.  Of  thy  own  natural  excellence,
liast  thou  conceived  wishes  so  kind ;  and  not  the  less  pleasing
are  they  to  me,  on  that  account.

And  'tis  worthy  of  behef,  most  learned  one,  that  thou  art
the  more  moved  by  my  misfortunes,  through  the  nature  of
this  place.  In  the  whole  world  (beheve  me)  thou  couldst
scarcely  find  a  spot  which,  less  than -this,  enjoys  Peace,  the
gift  of  Augustus.  But  here  thou  readest  verses  composed
amid  direful  battles,  and,  as  thou  readest,  thou  approvest  of
them  with  favouring  Hps.  Thou  praisest,  too,  my  genius,
which  flows  with  but  an  humble  stream,  and  of  a  brook  thou
makest  great  rivers.  This  approval  is,  indeed,  pleasing  to  my
spirit ;  fdthough  thou  canst  hardly  suppose  that  the  wretched
can  be  productive  of  pleasure  for  themselves.  But  as  long  as
I  attempt  verses  upon  humble  subjects,  my  abiHty  is  equal  to
my  scanty  matter.  Lately,  when  the  fame  of  the  great  tri-
umph reached  here,  I  dared  to  commence  upon  a  work  of  so
great  importance.  The  magnitude  and  the  splendour  of  the
subject  overwhelmed  me,  w£ale  thus  daring  ;  and  I  was  unable
to  endure  the  burden  of  my  enterprize.  There,  will  be  found
duteous  attention  on  my  part,  for  thee  to  praise ;  all  the  rest
is  deficient,  being  weakened  by  the  subject-matter.  And  if,
perchance,  my  book  has  come  to  thy  ears,  I  request  that  it
may  experience  thy  protection.  Let  regard  for  me  be  added  as
some  small  obhgation  by  thee,  who  would  have  done  this,
even  if  I  myself  had  not  entreated  thee.  It  is  not  I  that  de-
serve the  praise,  but  'tis  thy  heart,  more  unspotted  than  milk,
and  than  the  untrodden  snow.  Thou  admirest  others,  when
thou  thyself  art  the  object  of  admiration ;  neither  thy  learn-
ing nor  thy  eloquence  can  be  concealed. The  Prince  of  the


y  Google


406  THE  PONTIC  EPISTLES  [b.  n.

youths,^^  to  whom  Germany  gives  a  name,  is  wont  to  hare  tliee,
as  a  companion  in  his  studies.  Thou,  his  companion  of  dd,
thou,  united  to  him  from  his  earliest  years,  delightest  him  by
thy  genius,  that  equals  thy  virtues.  As  thou  declaimest,  the
inspiration  immediately  rises  in  him :  and  he  has  thee  to  eUcit
his  words  by  thy  own.  "When  thou  hast  ceased,  and  the
lips  of  men  are  at  rest,  and  when  tkus  shut  they  have  no
long  time  been  silent ;  the  youth  arises  that  is  worthy  of  the
surname  of  lulus,  just  as  the  light-bearing  star  arises  from
out  of  the  Eastern  wave.  And  while  he  silently  stands,  his
carriage  and  his  aspect  are  those  of  a  man  of  eloquence,  and
his  becoming  dress  creates  the  expectation  of  a  graceful  de-
Uvery.  Then,  when  delay  is  put  an  end  to,  and  his  heavenly
mouth  is  opened,  you  could  swear  that  in  this  manner  the
Gods  above  are  wont  to  speak  ;  and  you  would  say,  ^'  This  is
eloquence  befitting  a  Prince,  so  much  nobleness  is  there  in
his  language."  Although  thou  art  thus  pleasing  to  him,  and
touchest  the  stars  with  thy  head,  thou  still  thinkest  that  the
writings  of  the  exiled  Poet  are  worthy  to  be  had.  In  truth,
there  is  a  certain  alliance  between  kindred  spirits,  and  eadi
one  cherishes  the  ties  of  his  own  pursuit,  llie  rustic  loves
the  husbandman ;  the  soldier  him  that  wages  the  cruel  war ;  the
helmsman  the  pHot  of  the  veering  ship.  Thou  too,  lover  of
study,  art  influenced  with  a  love  for  the  Pierian  maids,  and,
thou  dost,  0  man  of  genius,  feel  sympathy  for  my  genius.  Got
occupations  are  different ;  but  they  arise  from  the  same  source,
and  each  of  us  is  the  cultivator  of  a  Hberal  art.  For  the
thyrsus^*  has  been  wielded  by  thee,  the  laurel  by  me  ;  but  en-
thusiasm ought  to  belong  to  us  both.  And  as  thy  eloquence
gives  vigour  to  my  numbers;  so  from  us  poets  comes  the
requisite  polish  for  thy  language.

With  reason,  then,  dost  thou  think  that  verses  are  on  the
confines  of  thy  pursuits,  and  that  the  ties  of  communion  in
study  ought  to  be  defended.  In  return  for  this,  I  pray  that  he,
with  whose  acquaintanceship  thou  art  honoured,  may  remain

^  Prince  of  the  youths  J] — ^Ver.  41. Germanicus.

1*  The  thyrsus.'] — Ver.  67.  This  was  a  staff  suirounded  -with  leaves
of  the  vine  and  the  ivy,  which  the  Bacchanals  waved  when  performing  the
rites  of  Bacchus.  It  was  deemed  the  emblem  of  eloquence ;  the  laurel  was
the  characteristic  of  poetic  excellence.


y  Google


K.  v.]  or  OTiD.  407

thy  Mend  to  the  last  moments  of  thy  life ;  and  that  he  may
succeed  to  guide  the  reins  of  the  world,  that  belong  to  thee,
Augusttis:  a  thing  which  the  prayers  of  the  pubHc  also  entreat.


EPISTLE  VI.— TO  GRiECINUS.

He  entreats  Graecinus  not  to  censure  his  fault,  which  he  has  akeady  ad-
mitted, since  what  has  heen  done  cannot  he  undone.  He  entreats  him,
rather  to  aid  him  in  his  misfortunes,  than  to  persist  in  condemnation
of  him ;  at  the  same  time,  he  acknowledges,  with  gratitude,  the  kind
sympathy  that  he  has  manifested  towards  hun.

The  sorrowing  Naso,  who  formerly  was  wont,  personally  with
his  voice,  to  do  so,  salutes  Graecinus  from  the  Euxine  waves.
This  is  the  voice  of  the  exile.  This  letter  finds  me  a  tongue,
and  were  I  not  allowed  to  write,  I  should  be  dumb.  Thou
blamest,  as  thou  oughtst,  the  offence  of  thy  fooHsh  companion ;
and  thou  teachest  me  to  endure  woes  inferior  to  my  deserts.
Thou  utterest  a  rebuke  against  my  fault,  true  indeed,  but  tardy.
Cease  harsh  expressions,  to  a  criminal  who  has  made  his  con-
fession. So  long  as  I  was  able  to  pass  by  Ceraunia^^  with  a
steady  sail,  I  was  to  be  advised  how  to  avoid  the  dangerous
rocks.  Of  what  use  is  it  to  me  now,  when  my  shipwreck  has
happened,  to  learn  what  course  my  bark  ought  to  steer?
Rather  extend  thy  arms,  to  be  grasped  by  the  weary  swimmer,
and  think  it  no  trouble  to  place  thy  hands  under  my  chin.
And  so  thon  dost,  and  so,  I  pray,  continue  to  do.  May
thy  mother  and  thy  wife,  may  thy  brother  and  all  thy  family
be  pro»pering.  And — what  thou  art  wont  to  pray  in  thy  spirit,
and  ever  with  thy  voice— mayst  thou,  in  all  thy  actions,  meet
with  the  approval  of  the  Csesars.  'Twould  be  a  disgrace  for
thee  to  have  given  no  aid,  in  any  degree,  to  thy  old  friend,  in
his  afflicted  circumstances.  'Tis  a  disgrace  to  turn  back
again,  and  not  to  stand  with  a  firm  attitude  ;^^  'tis  a  disgrace
to  desert  the  ship  in  distress ;  'tis  a  disgrace  to  follow  chance,
and  to  yield  to  fortune,  and  to  deny  that  a  person  is  one's

^*  Cerauma.'] — ^Ver.  9.  These,  which  are  also  sometimes  called  Acro-
ceraunia,  were  high  rocks,  which  formed  a  very  dangerous  promontory  of
Epirus.

16  With  a  firm  attitude,']— ytr,  21.  *  Passu,'  literally,  '  step ;'  hut,  '  to
stand  with  firm  step,'  in  our  language,  would  he  amenable  to  the  charge
of  being  paradoxical.


y  Google


408  THE  poirnc  ewstlbb  [b.ii.

friend,  unlefis  he  is  prosperous.  Not  so  lived  the  sons  of
Strophius  and  of  Agamemnon ;  such  were  not  the  ties  of  tke
son  of  .£geas  and  Firithoiis.  These  a  past  age  has  admired,
and  a  succeeding  age  will  admire ;  in  their  applause,  whok
theatres  re-echo.

Thou  too,  art  worthy,  having  served  thy  friend  in  his  ad-
versity, to  reckon  th^  name  among  heroes  so  great  Thou  art
worthy  of  it :  and  smce  thou  deservest  praise  for  thy  attach-
ment, my  gratitude  for  thy  affection  shall  not  prove  dumb.  Be-
lieve me  (if  my  verses  shdl  not  perish),  thou  shalt  be  often  on
the  lips  of  posterity.  Only  do,  Grsecinus,  remain  constant  to  me,
Mt£«  ruined;  and  let  that  warmth  qfyi^eZtn^  endure  for  many  a
day.  Although  thou  dost  grant  tins,  still  do  I  use  my  oars^in
the  breeze.  There  is  no  harm  in  giving  spur  to  a  horse  even  at
fidl  speed.


EPISTLE  VII.— TO  ATTICUS.

After  saluting  his  friend,  he  inquires  what  he  is  doing,  and  whether  he
retains  his  former  affection  for  him  ;  he  complains  of  his  sad  fortune^
and  laments  his  innumerable  woes.  He  says,  that  amid  so  many  evils,
hope  is  his  only  consolation ;  and  entreats  him  to  adhere  to  his  deter-
mination, not  to  abandon  his  friend.

This  letter  of  mine,  Atticus,  sent  from  amid  the  half-subdued
Getse,  first  bids  thee  to  be  saluted ;  next  follows  the  pleasure
of  hearing  what  thou  art  doing ;  and  if,  whatever  thou  art
doing,  thou  still  hast  regard  for  me.  I  doubt  not  but  thou
hast ;  but  the  very  dread  of  evils  often  compels  me  to  enter-
tain unnecessary  fears.  Pardon  me,  I  pray,  and  forgive  my
excess  of  apprehension:  the  shipwrecked  man  dreads  the
waves,  even  when  calm.  The  fish  that  has  once  been  hurt  by
the  lurking  hook,  thinks  that  the  barbed  brass  is  concealed  in
every  morsel ;  oft  does  the  lamb  fly  from  the  dog,  seen  afar,
and  believes  it  to  be  the  wolf,  and  unknowingly,  shuns  its
own  protector  ;  the  wounded  limb  shudders  at  even  a  gentle
touch  ;  and  the  unsubstantial  shadow  strikes  alarm  in  the  ap-
prehensive. So  I,  pierced  with  the  cruel  darts  of  Fortune,  con-

^^  Use  my  oan.'] — ^Ver.  37.  His  meaning  is,  that  although  his  friend
Graecinus  entertains  the  kindest  feelings,  and  proffers  his  assisftince  to  the
best  of  his  ability,  his  request  that  he  will  continue  to  do  so  ought  to  do
him  no  more  injury  than  if  he  were  to  use  his  oars  when  a  favourable
breeze  was  blowing.


y  Google


B.  VII.]  OF  OVID.  409

eeiye  in  my  breast  nothing  but  sadness.  Now  I  feel  assured
that  my  destiny,  preserving  the  course  it  had  commenced,  will
always  pursue  the  paths  to  which  it  has  accustomed  itself.  I
think  that  the  Gods  keep  watch,  that  nothing  may  turn  out  to
my  advantage ;  and  I  hardly  think  that  Fortune  can  be  de-
ceived ;  she  has  a  determination  to  ruin  me,  and  she  who  was
once  wont  to  be  fickle,  is  now  constant  and  well-assured  in  her
hostility.  Beheve  me,  if  I  am  known  to  thee  to  be  of  truth-
ful speech,  no  deceit  can  there  be  in  my  misfortunes.  Sooner
wilt  thou  reckon  the  ears  of  the  Cinyphian^^  standing  corn,
and  with  how  mjuiy  sprigs  of  thyme  the  lofty  Hybla  is  bloom-
ing ;  sooner  wilt  thou  ascertain  for  certain,  how  many  birds  are
soaring  in  the  air  on  the  wing,  and  how  many  fishes  are  swim-
ming in  the  sea,  than  the  amount  of  my  troubles  can  be  reck-
oned, which  I  have  endured  by  land  and  by  sea.  There  is  no
nation,  in  all  the  world,  more  savage  than  the  Getse,  and  yet
even  these  have  lamented  over  my  calamities.  Did  I  attempt
to  enumerate  them  to  thee,  in  exact  lines,  'twould  be  a  long
Iliad  on  my  destinies.  I  fear  not,  then,  because  I  suppose  thee
to  give  grounds  for  fear,  whose  love  has  afforded  me  a  thou-
sand pledges ;  but,  because  every  one  in  misery  is  hut  a  timid
creature,  and  because  for  a  long  time  the  door  has  been  shut
against  my  happiness.  Sorrow  has  now  become  a  habit  with
me  ;  as  rocks  are  hollowed  out  by  the  constant  contact  of
the  falling  water,  so  am  I  wounded  by  the  lasting  blows  of
Fortune;  and  scarcely  can  a  fresh  wound  find  on  me  any
spot  unharmed.  Not  more  is  the  plough  consumed  by  con-
tinual use ;  not  more  has  the  Appian  way  been  worn  by  the
curving  wheels,  than  my  heart  has  been  overpowered  by  its
series  of  ills  ;  and  nothing  have  I  found  to  give  me  relief.

Glory  has  been  attained  by  many  through  the  liberal  arts;  I
myself  have  been  undone  by  my  own  endowments.  My  former
life  is  without  fault,  and  has  been  spent  without  a  blemish  ;  yet
that  gave  me  no  aid  in  my  distress.  Many  a  time  is  a  serious  fault
pardoned  at  the  entreaties  of  one's  friends :  in  my  behalf  all
influence  was  dumb.  In  adverse  circumstances,  to  be  present
is  of  use  to  others ; this  tremendous  storm  has  overwhelmed

•  ^  Cinyphian.'] — ^Ver.  25.  This  epithet  signifies  *  Libyan;'  astheCinyps
was  a  river  of  that  region,  running  through  a  tract  of  country  which  was
extremely  prolific  in  com.  Libya  was  frequently  styled  *  the  granary  of
Rome.


y  Google


410  THE  PONTIC  EPISTLES  [b.  IL

this  head  of  mine  in  my  absence.  Who  has  not  dreaded  even
the  silent  wrath  of  Ceesar  ?  Harsh  expressions  have  formed
an  addition  to  my  punishment.  Banishment  is  sometimes  made
more  tolerable  by  its  season;  I,  cast  upon  the  ocean,  have  been
exposed  to  Arcturus,  and  the  threats  of  the  Pleiades.  Ships  aie
wont  often  to  experience  a  calm  winter ;  to  the  bark  of  the
Ithacan  the  waves  were  not  more  boisterous.  The  faithful  at-
tachment of  one's  companions  would  have  been  able  to  alleyiate
evils  of  such  magnitude ;  a  perfidious  set  were  enriched  by  my
spoils.  The  place  makes  exile  more  endurable  ;  no  land,  more
repulsive  than  this,  lies  extended  beneath  the  two  poles.  "Ks
something  to  be  near  the  confines  of  one's  country;  a  most
remote  region,  the  end  of  the  earth,  confines  me.  Thy  laurels,
too,  Caesar,  ensure  peace  to  the  exiled ;  the  Pontic  land  hes
exposed  to  the  neighbouring  foe.  'Tis  pleasant  to  pass  one's
time  in  the  cultivation  of  the  land ;  the  barbarian  enemy  allows
not  the  ground  to  be  turned  up.  Both  the  body  and  the  spirit
are  refreshed  by  a  temperate  climate ;  the  Sarmatian  shores
are  frozen  with  everlasting  cold.  In  pure  water  there  is  a
comfort  that  is  begrudged  to  none ;  here,  the  water  of  the
marsh  is  drunk,  mixed  with  the  brine  of  the  sea.

I  am  deficient  in  all  comforts;  and  yet  my  spirit  subdues
everything ;  for  'tis  that  which  makes  even  my  body  to  exert
its  strength.  To  sustain  one's  burden,  you  must  strive  with
the  head  fully  erect ;  but,  should  you  suffer  the  muscles  to  bend,
it  will  fall.  Hope  too,  that  the  wrath  of  the  Prince  may  be
moderated  in  length  of  time,  prevents  me  from  desiring  not  to
live,  and  from  utterly  perishing.  And  no  little*  consolation  do
you  afford  me,  ye  £ew  friends,  whose  attachment  has  been  proved
throughout  my  misfortunes.  Persist  in  thy  resolves,  I  pray,
and  abandon  not  my  bark  on  the  ocean ;  and  preserve  both.
thy  regard  for  me,  and  for  the  opinion  that  thou  hast  formed.


EPISTLE  VIII,— TO  MAXIMUS  COTTA.

He  thanks  Cotta  for  having  sent  him  the  likenesses  of  Augustus,  Caesar,
Livia,  and  Tiberius ;  and  says,  that  as  he  is  forbidden  to  behold  the
originals,  he  will  pay  his  adoration  to  their  resemblances.  He  then  ex-
presses his  hope  that  they  will  grant  him  a  more  endurable  place  for
his  banishment ;  and  that  they  will  not  suffer  their  likenesses  to  remain
in  a  place  which  must  be  displeasing  to  them.

The  one  Csesar  with  the  other,  Gods  whose  likenesses  thou
didst  lately  send  me,  have  arrived  safe,  Maximus  Cotta ;  and,


y  Google


B.  VIII.]  OF  OVID.  4 1 1

that  thy  present  may  embrace  the  number  that  it  ought,  Livia
is  there,  added  to  her  Caesars.  Happy  is  the  silver,  and  more
blest  than  any  gold,  which,  when  in  its  rough  state  it  had  its
value,  will  now  be  as  a  Divinity  to  me.  By  presenting  me  with
riclies,  thou  couldst  not  have  given  me  greater  wealth,  than
these  three  Divinities,  that  have  been  set  before  my  face.  "lis
something  to  behold  the  Gods,  and  to  think  that  they  are  pre-
senty  and  to  be  able  to  converse  as  though  with  the  real  Divi-
nity. How  great  a  gift,  ye  Gods !  The  remotest  region  does
not  confine  me  now;  and  once  again,  as  formerly,  I  Uve  in
safety  in  the  midst  of  the  City.  I  see  the  features  of  Csesar,  as
I  formerly  used  to  see  them ;  scarcely  did  I  hope  for  the  ful-
filment of  that  prayer ;  and,  as  once  I  did,  so  now  I  salute  the
heavenly  Divinity.  Thou  hast  nothing  preferable,  I  think,  that
thou  couldst  offer  me  on  my  return.  What  is  wanting  to  my  eyes,
but  the  Palace  alone  ?  a  place  which,  if  Csesar  is  away,  becomes
worthless.  When  I  look  upon  him,  I  seem  to  be  beholding
Rome ;  for  in  himself  he  bears  the  majestic  features  of  hit  country.
Am  I  deceived ;  or  are  the  features  frowning  upon  me  in
the  likeness,  and  has  the  stem  figure  a  certain  threatening
aspect?  Pardon  me,  thou  hero,  by  thy  virtues  elevated
above  the  immense  world,  and  draw  in  the  avenging  reins  of
thy  retribution.  Pardon  me,  I  pray,  thou  eveiiasting  glory  of
our  age;  whom  his  own  watchfulness  makes  to  be  the  ruler  of
the  world.  By  the  name  of  thy  country,  which  is  dearer  to
thee  than  thyself;  by  the  Gods,  who  are  never  deaf  to  thy
prayers  ;  by  the  partner  of  thy  bed,  who  alone  has  been  found
Vorthy  of  thee,  and  to  whom  thy  majesty  of  character  has  not
proved  a  source  of  anxiousness  ;^'  by  thy  son,  like  to  thee  in
the  resemblance  of  his  virtues,  and  who,  by  his  morals,  can  be
recognized  as  belongmg  to  thee;  and  by  thy  grandsons,
worthy  both  of  their  grandsire,  and  of  their  father,  awe?  who,  by
rapid  strides,  are  realizing  thy  wishes ;  do,  but  in  a  very  smaU
degree,  alleviate  my  punishment  and  moderate  it ;  and  grant
me  a  place  afar  from  the  Scythian  foe.  And,  (if  so  it  may  be),
thou,  Caesar,  that  art  next  after  Csesar  Augustus  !  be  thy  Divi-

^  A  source  of  anxiouaneaaJ] — ^Ver.  30.  The  meaning  of  this  phrase  is
somewhat  obscure ;  but  he  seems  to  imply  that  Livia  was  naturally  so
graceful,  and  so  well  prepared  to  adapt  herself  to  circumstances,  that  she
did  not  feel  herself  overpowered  by  the  elevated  position  to  which  she  had
been  raised.


y  Google


412  THE  pomnc  epistles  [B.n.

nity  not  hostile  to  these  my  entreaties.  May,  ere  long,  savage
Germany  be  borne,  with  timorous  features,  before  thy  trium-
phant horses.  May  thy  father  live  to  the  years  of  the  Pylian
Nestor,  thy  mother  to  those  of  the  Cumsean  Sibyl,  and  long
mayst  thou  remain  a  son.  And  thou,  fitting  wife  for  a  husband
so  mighty,  listen  with  no  obdurate  ears  to  the  entreaties  of  me,
a  suppliant.  Then  may  thy  husband  be  ever  prosperous ;  then,
with  thy  children,  may  thy  grandsons,  and  together  with  thy
daughters-in-law,  the  children  which  those  daughters-in-lawhave
borne,  be  prosperous.  Then  may  Drusus,  whom  cruel  Grermany
snatched  from  thee,  be  the  only  portion  of  thy  progeny  to  perish;
then,  may  thy  son,  clad  in  purple,  press  on  his  snow-white  steeds,
in  his  warfare  the  avenger  of  his  brother's  death.  Accede,  ye
most  merciful  Divinities,  to  these  my  timorous  prayers ;  may  it  be
of  some  advantage  to  me,  to  have  the  Grods  in  my  presence.  On
the  approach  of  Caesar,  the  gladiator  quits  the  entire  arena,  and
his  countenance  affords  no  slight  aid.  Let  it  be  of  some  benefit
to  me  as  well,  that,  so  far  as  I  can,  I  behold  your  features ;  since
one  house  has  been  visited  by  three  Divinities.  Blessed  are  they
who  behold,  not  the  resemblance,  but  the  originals  ;  and  who,
face  to  face,  see  the  real  persons  of  the  Grods.  And  since  un-
kind fate  has  denied  me  this,  I  worship  with  my  prayers  what
art  has  granted  me,  the  resemblance  of  them.  "Tis  thus  that
men  are  acquainted  with  the  Gods  whom  the  lofty  skies  con-
ceal ;  and  in  place  of  Jove,  the  form  of  Jove  is  venerated.
Lastly,  have  ye  a  care  that  your  likenesses,  which  are,  and
which  ever  shall  be,  in  my  possession,  be  not  in  a  place  displeas-
ing to  you.  For  my  head  shall  sooner  part  from  my  neck,  and
sooner  will  I  allow  my  eyes  to  leave  my  gouged  cheeks,  than
I  will  part  with  you  torn  from  me,  ye  Gods  of  the  common-
wealth. You  shall  be  my  harbour,  and  the  altar  of  my  exile.
You  will  I  embrace,  if  I  am  surrounded  with  the  Getic  arms ;
you  will  I  follow  as  my  eagles,  you  as  my  standards.

Either  I  deceive  myself,  and  am  deluded  by  my  excessive
longing,  or  a  hope  does  suggest  itself,  of  a  more  desirable  place
of  banishment ;  for  less  and  less  stern  are  the  features  in  the
likeness,  and  the  countenance  appears  to  assent  to  my  requests.
May  the  presages  of  my  anxious  mind  be  truthful,  I  pray ;
and,  just  though  it  be,  may  the  wrath  of  the  Divinity  become
moderated.


y  Google


B.  IX.]  or  OVID.  413


EPISTLE  IX.— TO  KING  COTYS.

He  writes  to  Cotys,  the  King  of  Thrace ;  and,  after  extolling  the  nohility
of  his  descent,  he  tells  him  that  it  is  the  duty  of  Gods  and  of  Monarchs
to  succour  the  distressed  ;  and  that,  as  Cotys  himself  is  a  poet,  he  has
a  douhle  claim  on  him.  He  entreats  him  to  show  him  kindness  and  hos-
pitality in  the  misery  attendant  upon  his  exile.

CoTTS,  offspring  of  kings,  the  origin  of  whose  noble  race  ex-
tends even  to  the  name  of  Eumolpus  ;^  if  garrulous  report  has
now  reached  thy  ears,  that  I  am  lying  prostrate  in  a  part  of
the  earth  that  is  neighbouring  to  thee ;  Hsten,  most  merciful
of  youths,  to  the  voice  of  a  suppliant ;  and  give  that  aid  which
thou  canst  to  me,  an  exile  (for  such  thou  canst  do).  Fortune  has
dehvered  me  to  thee ;  this  is  a  thing  on  which  I  shall  make
no  complaint ;  in  this  thing  alone,  she  has  proved  not  hostile
to  me.  Receive  my  wrecked  ship  on  no  inhospitable  shore,
that  the  waves  may  not  prove  safer  to  me  than  the  land.

'Tis  a  regal  thing  (believe  me)  to  assist  the  distressed ;  and  it
befits  so  great  a  man  as  thou  thyself  art.  This  becomes  thy
fortune,  which,  glorious  though  it  be,  can  hardly  prove  itself
equal  to  thy  greatness  of  soul.  Power  is  never  beheld  under
circumstances  more  favourable,  than  as  oft  as  it  does  not  allow
entreaties  to  be  in  vain.  This  the  splendour  of  thy  family  re-
quires ;  this  is  the  task  of  a  nobleness  derived  from  the  Gods
above.  This  course,  Eumolpus,  the  most  illustrious  founder  of
thy  family,  and  Ericthonius,^^  who  was  before  Eumolpus,  recom-
mend to  thee.  This  thou  hast  in  common  with  the  Deity  ;  that
both  of  you,  when  entreated,  are  wont  to  give  aid  to  those
who  supplicate  you.  For  what  reason  would  there  be  for  us
to  worship  the  Deities  with  the  usual  rites,  if  you  deny  that
the  Oods  are  inclined  to  assist  us  ? If  Jupiter  will  turn  a

20  Eumolpus,'] — Ver.  2.  He  was  a  son  of  Neptune  and  Chione,  and
reigned  over  the  kingdom  of  Thrace.  Aiding  the  Eleusinians  against  the
Athenians,  he  was  slain  by  Erectheus,  as  we  learn  from  Apollodorus.  The
king  Cotys,  to  whom  this  epistle  is  addressed,  is,  hy  some,  supposed  to
have  been  the  same  person  that  is  mentioned  hy  Suetonius,  under  the  name
of  Cotiso.

2*  EricthoniusJ] — Ver.  20.  He  was  one  of  the  early  kings  of  Athens,
and  succeeded  Aiaphictyon,  whom  he  expelled.  He  was  fahled  to  have
had  the  tail  of  a  dragon  for  his  lower  extremities,  and  to  have  enjoyed  the
&your  and  patronage  of  Minerva.  He  was  the  ancestor  of  Chione,  the
mother  of  Eumolpus.


y  Google


414  THE  POimC  SFISTLX8  [b.  n.

deaf  ear  to  hhn  that  entreats,  why  ahould  the  stricken  Yictiffl
fall  before  the  temple  of  Jupiter  ?  If  the  sea  will  give  me  do
rest  on  my  voyage,  why  should  I  c^er  the  useless  £rankiii-
cense  to  Neptune  ?  Why  should  Ceres  receive  the  entrails  of
a  pregnant  sow,  if  she  denies  the  unavailing  prayer  of  die
toiling  husbandman  ?  No  he-goat  will,  as  a  victim,  present
his  throat  to  the  long-haired  mcchus,  if  no  new  wine  flows
under  the  pressure  of  the  foot.  I  pray  that  Caesar  will  guide
the  reins  of  empire,  because  so  well  does  he  consult  the  ad-
vantage of  his  country.  'Tis  interest,  then,  that  renders  both
men  and  Gods  illustrious ;  each  of  us  esteeming  his  own
especial  benefactor.  And  do  thou,  0  Cotys,  offspring  worthy
of  thy  parent,  give  some  assistance  to  one  who  lies  prostrate
within  thy  camp.  *Tis  a  becoming  pleasure  for  one  man  to
save  anodier ;  and  by  no  act  is  favour  more  readily  sought.
Who  does  not  execrate  Antiphates  the  Laestrygon  ?  Or  who
disapproves  of  the  manners  of  the  munificent  Alcinoiis  ?^  He
of  Cassandria^  is  not  thy  father,  or  one  of  the  race  of  Pherae  ;**
or  he  who  roasted  the  mventor  in  his  own  contrivance  ;  but
one,  as  valiant  in  battle,  and  as  unused  to  be  subdued  in  arms,
as  he  is  averse  to  bloodshed,  when  peace  is  concluded.

Besides,  to  have  thoroughly  studied  the  hberal  arts,  softens
the  manners,  and  suffers  Ihem  not  to  be  brutal.  And  no  king
has  been  better  prepared  by  then!  than  thou,  or  has  given  more
time  to  the  pursuits  of  peace.  Thy  verses  testify  t^  ;  if  thou
wast  to  conceal  thy  name,  I  should  not  say  that  a  young  man
of  Thrace  had  composed  them.  That  Orpheus  might  not  be
the  only  poet  of  this  region,  the  Bistonian  land  is  rendered
proud  by  thy  genius.  And,  as  thou  hast  the  courage,  when
circumstances  demand  it,  to  take  up  arms,  and  to  stain  thy
hands  with  the  blood  of  the  enemy ;  and  as  thou  art  skilled
at  hurling  the  javelin  with  thy  extended  arm,  and  at  guiding

^  Aldnout.'] — Ver.  42.  He  was  a  king  of  the  Phoeacians,  who  most
hospitably  entertained  Ulysses  when  he  was  shipwrecked  on  his  coasts.

^  Heof  CassandHa.^-^Yer.  43.  This  is  supposed  to  refer  to  Apdlo-
dorus,  a  bloodthirsty  tyrant  of  Cassandria,  in  Macedonia,  who,  in  revenge
for  his  cruelties,  was  first  flayed  alive,  then  thrown  into  a  boiling  caul-
dron, and  while  still  living,  entombed.  His  character,  as  remarkable  for
cruelty,  is  often  referred  to  by  the  classical  writers.

^  Race  qf  Pher<B.'\^\tr,  43.  Alexander,  the  tyrant  of  Pherae,  m  Thes-
saly,  was  also  noted  for  his  cruelties,  and  was  slain  by  his  wife  Thebe,  with
the  assistance  of  her  brothers.


y  Google


E.  IX.]  OP  OTID.  415

the  neck  of  the  swift  steed ;  so,  when  due  time  has  been  de-
voted to  the  pursuits  of  thy  country,  and  when  the  task  of
valour  is  at  rest  from  off  thy  shoulders,  peculiarly  its  own ;
in  order  that  thy  hours  of  retirement  may  not  waste  away
in  sluggish  sleep,  thou  seekest  the  bright  stars  by  the
path  of  the  Pierian  maids.  '  This  thing,  too,  creates  some  tie
between  thee  and  me  :  we  are  both  of  us  worshippers  at  the
same  rites.  To  a  poet,  do  I,  a  poet,  extend  my  arms  in  sup-
plication, that  thy  land  may  prove  hospitable  to  my  exile.
I  have  not  come  to  the  Pontic  shores  as  one  guilty  of  murder,
nor  have  any  fell  poisons  been  mixed  by  my  hand  ;  and  no
seal  of  mine  has  been  convicted  of  impressing  a  forged  mark
on  strings  within  which  any  documents  are  enclosed.^  Nor
have  I  done  any  thing,  which  I  am  forbidden  by  the  laws  to
do  ;  and  yet,  a  graver  fault  than  all  these  must  be  confessed
by  me.

But,  lest  thou  shouldst  ask  what  it  is,  I  have  written  a  silly
work  on  the  Art  of  Love,  'Tis  that,  which  forbids  my  hands
to  be  guiltless.  But  ask  not  on  what  other  subject  I  have
erred ;  and  let  my  fault  be  concealed  under  my  Art  of  Love
alone.  Whatever  it  is,  I  have  been  sensible  of  the  modera-
tion of  the  anger  of  the  avenger,  who  has  deprived  me  of
nothing  but  the  land  of  my  birth.  Since  I  am  deprived  of
that,  let  thy  vicinity  now  cause  me  to  be  in  safety  in  this
hated  place.

26  Documents  are  enclosed.] — Ver.  69.  *  Subjecta  tabella ;'  literally,  *  a
tablet  being  placed  underneath/  The  *  tabulae/  or  *  tabellae/  were  thin
pieces  of  wood,  often  of  an  oblong  shape,  covered  over  vnth  wax,  on  which
an  impression  was  traced  with  the  iron  *  stilus  *  These  tablets  were  also
made  of  ivory,  but  more  frequently  of  citron-wood,  beech,  or  fir.  The  in-
side only  of  the  tablet  was  covered  with  wax,  the  outer  part  consisting
solely  of  wood.  The  leaves  were  fastened  vidth  wires  at  the  back,  and
opened  and  shut,  like  in  the  books  of  the  present  day.  There  was  a  raised
margin  to  each  leaf  of  the  tablet  (similar  to  our  school  slates),  to  prevent  the
wax  of  the  one  from  rubbing  against  the  other.  From  two  to  five,  six,  or
even  more  of  these  leaves,  were  joined  together.  Two  being  so  joined,
were  called  *  diptucha,'  three,  *  triptycha,'  and  so  on;  Those  tablets  which
contained  legal  documents,  such  as  wills,  had  the  outer  edges  pierced
vnth  holes,  through  which  a  triple  ^thread,  or  string,  *  linum,'  was  passed,
on  which  a  seal  was  then  placed,  to  guard  against  forgery,  and,  virithout
which,  the  document  was  not  considered  to  be  legally  executed.  To  this
custom  the  poet  here  refers,  in  saying  that  the  crime  of  forgery  cannot  be
imputed  to  him,  as  the  cause  of  Ms  banishment.


y  Google


416  THE  POimO  EPISTLES  [b.  n.


EPISTLE  X.— TO  MACER.

Writing  to  the  poet  Macer,  he  sets  forth  many  reasons  why  he  should
rememher  him  and  their  former  terms  of  intimacy ;  and  he  says,  that  if
he  recals  the  many  happy  hours  they  once  spent  together,  he  wifl
seem  to  he  ever  present  before  his  eyes.  He  concludes  by  entreating
him  never  to  forget  him  at  any  future  time.

Dost  thou  know,  Macer,  from  the  impression  of  the  seal
affixed,  that  it  is  Naso  who  writes  to  thee  these  words  ?  And  if
the  seal  ring  is  not  the  discoverer  of  the  writer,  are  these  letters,
written  with  my  own  hand,  recognized  by  thee  ?  or  does  length
of  time  deprive  thee  of  the  recollection  of  them,  and  do  3iy
eyes  fail  to  recall  to  memory  the  ancient  characters  ?  Although
thou  mayst  have  forgotten  both  my  seal  and  my  handwriting,
/  only  hope  that  love  of  me  has  not  forsaken  thee.  This  thou
owest  both  to  the  intimacy  of  a  length  of  years,  and  to  the
fact,  that  my  wife  is  no  stranger  to  thee,  and  to  thy  pursuits
which  thou  hast  followed  with  more  prudence  than  I  have,  and
hast  not  been  guilty  of  any  Art  of  Love,  as  became  thee.  Thou
singest  whatever  was  left  undone  by  the  immortal  Homer;  that
the  Trojan  wars  may  not  be  without  a  finishing  hand.^

Naso,  a  proficient  of  little  prudence,  wlule  he  is  pro-
ducing the  Art  of  Love,  receives  a  sad  reward  for  his  learning.
Yet  with  poets  there  are  common  ties  among  themselves,  al-
though we  each  of  us  pursue  our  separate  path.  Of  these,
though  I  am  far  away,  I  suspect  that  thou  art  not  forgetful,
and  that  thou  hast  a  desire  to  alleviate  my  calamities.  Under
thy  guidance,  I  beheld  the  magnificent  cities  of  Asia  ;  under
thy  guidance,  Trinacria  was  viewed  by  my  eyes.  We  beheld
the  heavens  glowing  with  the  flames  of  iEtna,  which  the  Giant,
placed  beneath  thejmountain,  belches  from  his  mouth ;  and  the
lakes  of  Henna,  and  the  fetid  pools  of  Palicus,^  and  the  spot
where  Anapus  joins  Cyane  with  its  waters  ;  and,  not  far  thence,
the  Nymph,  who,  as  she  flies  from  the  river  of  Elis,  runs,

^  A  finishing  hand."] — ^Ver.  14.  Homer  concludes  the  Iliad,  after  the
death  of  Hector.  Macer  had  commenced  his  poem  at  that  period,  bringing
it  down  to  the  taking  of  Troy.

27  Fetid  pools  of  Palicus.'] — ^Ver.  25.  There  were  two  brothers,  named
the  Palici,  said  by  some  writers  to  have  been  the  sons  of  Jupitcur ;  but,
according  to  Hesychius,  the  name  of  their  father  was  Adranus.  From
them,  two  sulphureous  lakes  of  Sicily  received  the  name  of  Palicus.


y  Google


E.  X.]  OF  oyij>,.  417

under  cover,  even  beneath  the  waves  of  the  sea.  Here,  a  large
portion  of  the  passing  year  was  spent  by  me.  Alas !  how
unlike  is  that  region  to  the  Getic  land !  And,  how  small  a
part  is  this,  of  the  things  which  we  saw  together,  as  thou  didst
render  the  journey  dehghtful  to  me;  whether  we  were  plough-
ing the  azure  waves,  in  the  painted  ship,  or  whether  the  two-
wheeled  chaise^  bore  us,  with  its  active  wheels.  Often  did  our
journey  appear  short,  by  our  interchange  of  conversation;  and,
shouldst  thou  number  them,  our  words  were  more  numerous
than  our  steps.  Often  was  the  daytime  too  short  for  our  dis-
course; and,  while  talking,  the  long  hours  of  the  summer  day
proved  too  short.  "lis  something,  together,  to  have  dreaded
the  dangers  of  the  sea,  and  to  have  offered  our  united  prayers
to  the  Gods  of  the  ocean ;  to  have,  at  one  time,  transacted
business  together,  and  to  be  able  to  recall  to  memory,  at
another  time,  the  saUies  of  wit  that  followed  it,  and  of  which
we  need  not  be  ashamed.  If  these  things  recur  to  thee,
though  I  am  far  away,  at  aU  hours  shall  I  be  before  thy  eyes,
as  though  that  moment  seen.

I  myself,  indeed,  though  I  am  under  the  sky  of  the  ex-
tremity of  the  world,  which  always  stands  aloof  from  the
flowing  waters,  still  regard  thee  with  the  only  feelings  that
I  can,  and  often  do  I  converse  with  thee,  under  that  freez-
ing firmament.  Thou  art  here,  and  thou  knowest  it  not ;  thou
art,  while  absent,  repeatedly  present :  and  thou  comest,  be-
held by  me,  from  the  midst  of  the  City  among  the  Getae.
Make  me  some  return ;  and  since  that  place  is  a  more  happy
one,  ever  retain  me  there,  in  thy  constant  breast.

^  The  two-wheeled  chaise.'] — Ver.  34.  'Esseda.'  'Essedum/  or  *esseda/
was  originally  the  name  of  the  chariots  which  were  used  hy  the  natives  of
Britain  and  Gaul  in  warfare.  The  Romans  copied  their  form  for  the
purposes  of  luxury  and  conyenience ;  and  the  use  of  them,  in  the  time
of  Seneca,  was  very  general  in  Rome.  The  '  esseda '  were  always  drawn
by  two  horses,  and  they  are  supposed  to  have  heen  kept  in  readiness  for
bire,  at  the  post-houses  or  stations,  and  to  have  been  similar  to  the  *  covi-
nus,'  except  that  the  latter  had  a  cover.


E  S


y  Google


418  THE  POimO  SKSTLSS  {b.  n.


EPISTLE  XL— TO  RUPUS.

Tbb  Poet  it  here  writing  to  Rufiis  Fnndaniu,  the  uncle  of  his  wife ;  he
tells  him,  that,  distant  as  he  is,  he  is  fully  sensible  of  his  kindness ;
and  he  prays  the  Gods  to  grant  him  a  commensurate  return  for  his
affection.

Naso,  the  author  of  the  Art  of  Love^  an  unfortunate  work,
sends  thee  this  book,  hurried  off  in  a  short  space  of  time ;
that,  although  we  are  separated  by  the  wide  distance  of  flie
whole  world,  thou  mightst  be  enabled  to  perceive  that  I  keep
thee  in  remembrance.

Sooner  shall  forgetfulness  of  my  own  name  come  upon  me,
than  thy  affection  be  banished  from  my  breast.  And  sooner
will  I  give  up  this  breath  to  the  vacant  air,  than  the  grateful
recollection  of  thy  kindness  shall  fade.  I  esteem  the  tears  with
which  thou  didst  moisten  thy  face,  when  my  own  was  dry  in
tearless  grief,  a  great  mark  of  kindness.  I  call  thy  consola-
tion to  a  distressed  mind,  a  great  mark  of  kindness  ;  when
thou  didst  afford  it,  both  to  me  and  to  thyself.  Of  her  own
accord,  indeed,  and  of  herself,  my  wife  is  deserving  of  all
praise ;  still  by  thy  admonition  is  she  improved.  For,  what
Castor  was  to  Hermione,**  Hector  to  liUus,  the  same  do  I
congratulate  myself  that  thou  art  to  my  wife.  Not  to  be  un-
like thee  in  virtue,  is  her  aim ;  and  by  her  life  does  she  prove
that  she  is  of  thy  family.  Therefore,  what  she  would  have
done  without  any  persuasion,  the  same  does  she  do  more
abundantly,  having  found  thee  as  an  encourager.  The  steed
that  is  thorough-bred,  and  that  of  itself  would  gain  the
honours  of  victory  in  the  race,  if  you  encourage  it,  will  nm
even  more  swiftly.  Besides,  thou  dost  perform  my  requests,
thus  absent,  with  faithful  diligence,  and  thou  deemest  it
no  trouble  to  bear  any  burden.  Oh !  may  the  Gods  give  thee
a  recompense,  since  I  myself  cannot :  the  Gods,  who  will  re-
ward, if  they  witness  acts  of  affection.  May  thy  body,  too,
last  long,  for  the  practice  of  those  virtues,  Rufus,  thou  greatest
glory  of  the  Fundanian  soil.'*^

^  To  Hermione.'i — ^Ver.  15.  Hermione  was  the  daughter  of  Udeo,
consequently  Castor  and  Pollux  were  her  uncles.

^  Fundanian  soil.} — Ver.  30.  Fundi  was  a  town  o{  Campania,  and  wis
the  native  place  of  Rufus.


y  Google


or  OYiD.  419


BOOK  THE  THIRD.


EPISTLE  I.— TO  HIS  WIFE.

He  enlarges  upon  the  misery  he  endures  in  the  region  of  Pontus;  and  he  tells
his  wife,  that  it  is  not  to  he  wondered  at,  if  he  desires  a  more  tranquil
place  for  his  hanishment ;  and  that,  as  a  good  wife,  it  is  her  duty  to
exert  all  her  energies  in  his  hehalf.  He  requests  her  to  make  appUea-
tion  to  Livia,  the  wife  of  Augustus,  upon  whose  kindness  of  disposition
he  expatiates.  He  begs  his  wife  to  choose  a  fitting  opportunity,  and  in-
structs her  how  she  must  act,  and  what  request  she  is  to  make.

Thott  sea,  for  the  first  time  set  in  motion  by  the  oars  of  Jason,
and  thou  land,  which  art  devoid  of  neither  the  savage  foe,  nor  of
perpetual  snow,  when  will  the  time  come,  when  I,  Naso,  shall
leave  yon,  being  commanded  to  go  to  a  region  less  exposed  to
the  enemy  ?  Or  am  I  ever  to  Uve  amid  tins  barbarism  ?  And
must  I  be  -entombed  in  the  soil  of  Tomi  ?  With  no  desire  to
disturb  thy  peace  ^  (if,  land  of  Pontus,  there  is  any  peace  for
thee,  whom  the  neighbouring  foe  is  for  ever  trampUng  under
his  swift  steed),  wiSi  thy  leave,  I  would  say,  thou  art  the  most
intolerable  part  of  my  wretched  banishment :  thou  dost  aggra-
vate my  woes.  Thou  dost  neither  feel  the  Spring  bedecked
with  the  flowery  wreaths,  neither  dost  thou  behold  the  naked
bodies  of  the  reapers.  For  thee  no  Autumn  holds  forth  the
clustering  grapes;  but  all  seasons  retain  an  intense  cold.
Thou  keepest  the  sea  bound  up  with  ice,  and  often,  in  the  ocean,
does  the  fish  swim  inclosed  in  the  covered  water.  Thou
hast  no  springs,  except  of  running  water,  almost  as  salt  as  the

»  With  no  desire  to  disturb  thy  peac^.]— Ver.  7.  *  Pace  tua ;'  literaDy
*^with  thy  peace,'  corresponds  with  our  expression,  *  by,'  or  '  with  your
leave.'  It  is,  however,  necessary  here  to  render  it  as  above,  to  give  full
effect  to  the  reference  which  the  Poet  immediately  makes  to  the  mention  of
*  peace.'  His  grief  did  not  entirely  preclude  his  indulgence  in  the  pleasures
of  panning.

BE  2

Digitized  by  LjOOQ IC


420  THE  POimC  EPISTLES  [b.  in.

sea,  and  it  is  a  matter  of  doubt  whether  that  quenches  thiist,
or  increases  it.  But  few  trees,  and  those  of  no  strong  growth,
appear  in  the  open  country,  and  on  the  dry  land  is  beheld  an
exact  resemblance  of  the  sea.  No  bird  warbles  forth  its  notes,
unless,  perchance,  in  the  distant  forest,  a  few  drink  the  water
of  the  ocean,  with  croaking  throat.  The  bitter  wormwood
grows  prickly  along  the  unproductive  plains,  a  harvest,  in
its  bitterness,  fittmg  to  the  place  of  its  growth.  Add,  too,
continual  alarms,  and  the  attacks  of  the  fortifications  by  the
enemy,  and  how  the  arrow,  dipped  in  the  deadly  venom,  reeks
tcith  it ;  that  this  region  is  afar,  and  distant  from  every  route,
and  is  a  place  where  one  can  travel  in  safety  neither  on  foot,
nor  on  board  ship.  'Tis  not,  then,  to  be  wondered  at,  if  a
different  spot  is  repeatedly  requested  by  me,  as  I  seek  to  put
an  end  to  these  evils.  It  is  still  more  strange,  my  wife,  that
you  cannot  obtain  this  favour,  and  that  you  can  witlihold  your
tears  at  my  woes.  Do  you  enquire  what  you  are  to  do  ?  You
may  ask  that,  forsooth  ;  you  will  find  out,  if  you  really  wish
to  know.  To  be  willing  is  a  sHght  matter :  to  obtain  a  thing,
you  must  set  your  heart  upon  it,  and  this  anxiety  must  curtail
your  moments  of  sleep.  I  beheve  that  many  have  the  will ;
for  who  can  be  so  cruel  to  me,  as  to  desire  my  exile  to  be  spent
without  tranquiUity  ?  It  is  your  duty  to  strive  with  all  your
heart,  and  all  your  strength,  and  to  exert  yourself  night  and
day  in  my  behalf.  And,  that  others  may  render  me  aid,
you  ought,  my  wife,  to  surpass  my  friends,  and  to  be  the  very
first  to  fulfil  your  duties.

A  conspicuous  name  has  been  conferred  on  you,  in  my
writiags :  you  are  there  said  to  be  the  model  of  a  good  wife ;
take  care  that  you  fall  not  short  of  it.  Be  careful  that  my
praises  are  well-founded ;  that  you  may  show  respect  for  a
work  of  Fame.  Though  I  myself  should  make  no  complaint,
yet  Fame  wiU  complain,  in  my  silence,  if  you  have  not  that
care  for  me  which  you  ought  to  have.  My  destiny  has  ex-
posed me,  in  the  sight  of  the  pubhc,  and  has  drawn  upon  me
more  attention  than  I  formerly  received.  Capaneus  has  become
better  known  from  being  struck  by  Hghtning :  Amphiaraua*

2  AmpJdaraut.'] — Ver.  52.  He  was  the  son  of  O'lcles,  and  was  a
prophet  and  soothsayer  of  Greece.  Being  forced  by  Polynices  to  accom-
pany him  to  the  Theban  war,  he  fled  from  Periclymenus,  who  pursued
him. Jupiter,  on  this,  hurled  a  thunderbolt,  which  opening  the  ground,


y  Google


E.  I.]  OF  OTID.  421

is  known,  from  his  horses  having  been  sunk  in  the  e^h.  Had
he  wandered  less,  Ulysses  would  have  been  less  kuown ; the
fame  of  Philoctetes  became  great,  through  his  wound.  If  there
is  any  room  for  humble  names  among  great  ones,  my  fall  makes
me  too  illustrious ;  and  my  pages  allow  not  that  you  should  be
unknown,  in  which  you  have  a  celebrity  not  inferior  to  that  of
the  Coan  Battis. Whatever,  then,  you  shall  do,  you  will  be
beheld  on  an  extensive  stage,  and  you  will  prove  an  affectionate
wife,  with  no  few  persons  for  your  witnesses. Believe  me,  as
often  as  you  are  praised  in  my  verses,  she  who  reads  those
praises,  enquires  whether  you  are  deserving  of  them. And,  as
I  believe  that  there  will  be  many  to  approve  of  those  virtues,
so  there  will  be  no  few  ready  to  criticise  your  actions. There-
fore, do  you  take  care,  that  Envy  may  not  be  able  to  say,  "This
woman  is  slow  in  helping  her  afflicted  husband."  And,  since  I
have  lost  my  strength,  and  cannot  guide  my  chariot,  be  it  your
care  alone  to  keep  up  the  flagging  yoke. As  my  veins  become
exhausted,  in  my  illness  I  look  to  the  physician :  come  to  my
aid,  while  the  last  moments  of  my  life  still  remain;  and,  as  you
are  in  stronger  health,  do  you  give  me  that  assistance,  which,
if  I  were  better  than  you,  I  would  then  give  you. Conjugal
affection,  and  the  marriage  tie,  demand  this;  you  yourself,  my
wife,  demand  this  of  your  virtues. This  you  owe  to  the  family
in  whose  number  you  are  reckoned,  that  you  may  honour  it,
not  more  by  your  attachment  than  by  your  goodness.  Though
you  should  ao  everything  besides,  unless  you  prove  yourself
praiseworthy  as  a  wife,  it  will  not  be  believed  that  ^Iarcia  is
esteemed  by  you. And  I  am  not  unworthy  of  it ;  nor  (if  you
are  only  wilhng  to  speak  the  truth)  are  there  no  thanks  due
from  you  for  my  kindnesses :  they  are  repaid  me  with  heavy
interest ;  and  Envy  has  not  the  power,  though  she  should  de-
sire  it,  to  injure  you. But  still,  add  this  one  action  to  your
former  ones,  and  be  regardful  of  your  duty  in  the  alleviation  of
my  misfortunes. Exert  your  energies,  that  I  may  be  placed
in  a  less  hateful  spot ;  and  theriy  no  part  of  your  duty  will  be
defective. I  ask  great  favours,  but  nothing  to  produce  dislike,
when  you  entreat  in  my  behalf;  and  though  you  should  not
gain  your  request,  your  denial  will  be  productive  of  no  danger.
And  do  not  blame  me,  if  I  request  you  so  often,  in  my  lines,

he  and  his  chariot,  with  Bato,  his  charioteer,  were  swallowed  up. After
his  death,  divine  honours  were  paid  to  him.


y  Google


422  THE  FOimC  EPISTLES  [b.  IIL

to  do  as  yon  are  doing,  and  to  imitate  yourself.  The  trum-
peter is  wont  to  be  of  use  to  the  valiant;  and  the  general,  with
his  Toice,  cheers  on  the  men  that  are  bravely  fighting.  Yoor
goodness  is  well  known,  and  is  attested  to  all  faturity :  1^
your  courage,  too,  be  no  less  than  your  goodness.  The  battb-
axe  of  the  Amazons  is  not  to  be  assumed  in  my  behalf,  nor  is
the  small  target  to  be  borne  by  your  active  hand.  A  Deity  w
to  be  prayed  to,  not  to  become  friendly  to  me,  but  to  be  less
angered  against  me,  than  he  was  before.  If  there  is  no  favcrar
for  youy  yet  tears  will  plead  in  your  favour.  By  this  means,
or  by  none  at  all,  can  you  influence  the  Crods.  It  is  well  pro-
vided by  my  misfortunes,  that  these  shall  not  be  wanting  to
you ;  and  as  I  am  your  husband,  you  have  abundant  cause  for
weeping.  And  as  my  fortunes  stand  at  presenty  I  think  yoi
will  have  to  weep  throughout  all  time.  My  fate  supplies  yoa
with  such  resources  as  these.

If  my  death  could  be  redeemed  at  the  price  of  yovrs
(which  Heaven  forfend),  'tis  the  wife  of  Admetus'  whom  you
would  imitate.  You  would  become  the  rival  of  Penelope,  it
as  a  wife,  you  had  occasion  to  deceive  importunate  suitors  by
a  virtuous  stratagem.  If  you  had  to  follow,  as  an  attendant
the  funeral  of  a  dead  husband,  Laodamia  would  be  a  prece-
dent for  your  actions.  The  daughter  of  Iphis*  must  be  placed
before  your  eyes,  if  you  wish  to  place  your  body  full  of  life  on
the  lighted  pile.  There  is  no  necessity  for  deatii,  none  for  the
web  oi  the  daughter  of  Icarius ;  but  the  wife  of  Csesar  must
be  implored  with  your  own  lips.  She,  by  her  own  virtues,  ensures
that  hoar  antiquity  shall  not  surpass  our  time  in  the  credit  of
chastity.  Wlule  she  has  both  the  beauty  of  Venus  and  the
manners  of  Juno,  she  alone  has  been  found  worthy  of  Ae
bed  of  a  Divinity.  Why  are  you  trembling  ?  Why  do  you
hesitate  to  approach  her  ?  Neither  unnatural  Progne,  nor  the
daughter  of  Jfietes,  is  to  be  entreated  by  your  words;  no
daughter-in-law  of  iEgyptus,  nor  the  «ruel  wife  of  Agamem-
non, nor  yet  ScyUa,  she  who,  by  her  lower  parts,  keeps  the
Sicilian  seas  in  dread ; nor  yet  the  mother  of  Telegonns^

'  The  w\fe  of  Admetus.'] — Ver.  106.  Alcestis  was  the  daughter  of
Pelias,  and  the  wife  of  Admetus,  king  of  Pherae,  in  Thessaly.  In  her
affection  for  her  husband,  she  consented  to  die  in  his  stead.

*  The  daughter  of  Jpkis.'] — ^Vcr.  111.  Evadne,  the  daughter  <rf Iphis,
in  her  grief,  threw  herself  on  the  funeral  pile  of  Ciqpaneus,  her  husbuid.


y  Google


B.  I.]  OP  OVID.  423

born  for  the  transformation  of  sliapes  ;  nor  Medusa,  having
her  matted  hair  wreathed  with  serpents.  But  'tis  a  princely
woman ;  in  whose  instance  Fortune  proves  that  she  can  see,
and  has  removed  the  false  imputation  of  blindness.  This
universe  contains  nothing  in  the  world  more  illustrious  than
her,  with  the  exception  of  Csesar ;  even  from  the  rising  of  the
sun  to  its  setting.  Choose  the  time  for  entreating  her,  which
you  have  often  watched  for,  that  your  bark  may  not  leave  Aar-
bour  with  an  unfavourable  t^de.  The  oracles  do  not  always
give  out  the  hallowed  responses  ;  and  the  temples  themselves
are  not  thrown  open  at  all  times.  When  the  state  of  the  City
shall  be  such,  as  I  now  suppose  it  to  be,  and  when  no  misfor-
tune shall  be  contracting  the  brow  of  the  public ;  when  the
home  of  Augustus,  honoured  with  rites,  after  the  example  of
the  Capitol,  shall  be  joyous  (as  now  it  is,  and  lonff  may  it  be
so),  and  shall  be  replete  with  tranquillity;  then  may  the
Gods  grant  you  liberty  to  approach  her ;  then  believe  that
your  words  will  have  some  effect.  If  she  shall  be  engaged
with  something  of  more  importance,  postpone  your  under-
taking, and  take  care,  not,  by  too  much  precipitation,  to  ruin
my  hopes.  Again,  I  do  not  order  you  not  to  seek  access  to
her  until  she  is  entirely  at  liberty ;  for  she  hardly  has  leisure
to  decorate  her  person.  Should  the  Court  be  crowded  with
the  venerable  Senators,  still  must  you  go  amid  the  turmoil  of
business.  When  it  has  been  thy  lot  to  come  into  the  presence
of  Juno,^  take  care  and  remember  the  character  that  you  are
sustaining.

And  do  not  defend  my  acts;  silence  must  be  preserved
when  a  cause  is  bad :  let  your  words  be  no  other  than  anxious
entreaties.  Then  there  must  be  no  cessation  of  your  tears ;
and,  on  the  ground,  extend  your  suppliant  arms  to  the  heavenly
feet.  Then  ask  for  nothing  else,  but  that  I  may  depart  from
amid  savage  foes  ;  let  it  be  enough  for  me  for  Fortune  to  be
my  foe.  More  things,  indeed,  occur  to  me ;  but,  struck  with
awe,  you  will  hardly  be  able  to  utter  thus  much  with  your
trembling  lips.  I  am  of  opinion  that  this  will  not  cause  you  in-
jury ;  let  her  understand  that  you  stood  in  awe  of  her  Majesty.
And,  if  your  words  are  interrupted  by  your  sobs,  it  will  do
no  harm ;  tears  sometimes  have  the  weight  of  words. Take

*  Presence  of  Juno,] — Ver.  145.  Under  this  august  name,  he  intends
to  convey  a  compliment  to  Livia.


yG.oogle


424  THS  POKTIC  EFI8TLE8  [b.  m.

care,  too,  that  a  lucky  day*  is  found  for  yonr  undertaking,  aad
a  fitting  hoar,  and  a  favourable  omen.  But  first,  after  fire
has  been  placed  on  the  hallowed  altars,  offer  firankincense  and
unmixed  wine  to  the  great  (jods ;  among  whom,  before  all,
adore  the  Divinity  of  Augustus,  and  his  affectionate  offspring,
and  the  partner  of  his  bed.  May  they,  after  their  usual
manner,  be  kind  to  you ;  and  may  they  behold  your  tears
with  no  aeyere  countenance.


EPISTLE  II.— TO  COTTA.

He  prtitct  the  constancy  of  Cotta ;  and  he  says,  that,  whereas  others  de-
serted then:  friend  in  his  adversity,  he  always  remained  firm  in  his  attaeb-
ment.  He  tells  him  that  his  kindness  will  always  be  remembered  by  him ;
and  that  it  will  not  be  forgotten  after  his  death,  should  his  writings  sm^
Tive  to  posterity.

I  PBA.T,  Cotta,  that  the  salutation  which  thou  here  readest,
sent  by  me,  may  come  to  thee  bringing  its  own  fulfilment.^
For,  while  prospering,  thou  gready  diminishest  my  tor-
ments, and  thou  causest  a  good  part  of  me  to  be  still  un-
scathed. And  when  others  fiag,  and  desert  my  split  sails,
thou  remainest,  as  the  only  anchor  of  my  shattered  bark.  Thy
affection,  then,  is  delightful  to  me  ;  and  I  pardon  those,  who,
together  with  Fortune,  have  turned  their  backs  in  flight.
Although  the  thunderbolts  strike  but  one,  not  one  onltf  do  Siej
alarm;  the  multitude  that  is  near  him  who  is  smitten,  is  wont  to
tremble.  And  when  a  wall  has  given  symptoms  of  an  ap-
proaching fall,  that  spot  becomes  deserted  in  anxious  appre-
hension. Who,  of  the  fearful  ones,  does  not  avoid  intercourse
with  the  sick  man,  in  dread  lest  he  should  thereby  contract
the  malady  of  his  neighbour  ?  Me  too,  in  the  extreme  dread
and  alarm  of  my  friends,  and  not  through  dislike,  did  some
of  my  acquaintances  desert — neither  attachment,  nor  affection-
ate attention  was  wanting  in  them ;  they  stood  in  awe  of  the
hostile  Deities. And,  although  they  may  appear  too  cautious

•  A  lucky  <tey.]— -Ver.  159.  Not,  in  fact,  one  of  those  days  that  were
called  *  atri,'  *  black/  as  being  remarkable  for  some  public  calamity.

^  Bringing  itg  own  fulJUmenW] — Ver.  2.  *  Missa  vere ;'  literally,  *  sent
truly;'  alluduig  to  the  word  'salus,'  'health,'  or,  as  it  is  rendered  above,
'  salutation.'


y  Google


B.  n]  OF  OTID.  425

and  timid,  yet  they  do  not  deserve  to  be  called  bad.  But
my  sincerity  thus  excuses  my  friends,  and  is  in  their  favour,
that  they  may  have  no  grounds  of  reproach  on  my  account.
Let  them  be  content  with  this  indulgence ;  and,  if  they  like,
they  may  put  it  upon  record,  that,  even  by  my  testimony,  their
conduct  was  unimpeached.  Ye  few  are  the  more  desirable
portion,  who,  in  my  adversity,  deemed  it  a  disgrace  to  give  me
no  aid.  For  that  reason,  will  gratitude  for  your  kindness  die
at  the  time,  when,  my  body  being  consumed,  I  shall  have
become  ashes.  In  that  I  shall  be  deceived,  and  it  shall  extend
beyond  the  period  of  my  life,  if  indeed  my  works  shall  be
read  by  attentive  posterity.  The  lifeless  body  is  the  due  of
the  sorrowing  pile  ;  fame  and  glory  escape  the  erected  pyre.
Theseus  is  dead,  and  he  who  was  the  companion  of  Orestes  ;
but  still  each  of  them  lives  in  his  own  praises.  And  you  too,
shall  our  remote  descendants  often  praise,  and  in  my  writings
your  fame  will  be  distinguished.  Even  here,  the  Sauromatse
and  the  Getse  have  now  heard  of  you;  and  the  barbarian
multitude  approves  of  such  feelings.  And  when,  lately,  I  was
making  mention  of  your  goodness  (for,  I  have  learned  to  speak
the  Getan  and  the  Sarmatian  languages),  by  chance  a  certain
old  man,  as  he  was  standing  in  that  company,  answered  my
words  to  the  following  effect : —

"We  too,  stranger,  whom  the  freezing  Danube  confines,
far  from  you  at  Rome,  are  well  acquainted  with  the  name  of
friendship.  There  is  a  place  in  Scythia,  (the  ancients  call  it
Tauri,)  which  is  not  so  very  far  distant  from  the  Getic  land.
Of  this  limd  I  am  a  native,  and  of  my  country  I  am  not
ashamed:  this  nation  worships  the  Goddess,  the  sister  of
Phoebus.  4  Her  temple  remains  to  this  day,  supported  on  vast
columns ;  and  you  ascend  to  it  by  ten  times  four  steps.  The
story  is,  that  in  this  place  there  was  a  statue,  that  had  come
from  heaven ;  and  that  you  may  have  the  less  hesitation  in  believ-
ing it,  the  pedestal  stiU  stands  there,  deprived  of  the  Goddess.
The  altar,  too,  which  had  been  white  from  the  nature  of  the
stone,  is  dyed  red,  being  discoloured  by  the  blood  which  was
shed  upon  it.  A  woman,  who  is  a  stranger  to  the  torch  of
marriage,  performs  the  rites ;  (me,  who  is  pre-eminent  among
the  Scythian  matrons  in  noble  station.  The  nature  of  the
sacrifice  is,  (for  thus  did  our  forefathers  ordain)  that  the
stranger  must  die,  struck  by  the  sword  of  the  virgin. Thoas


y  Google


426  THB  POHnC  EPISTLES  [b.  m.

ruled  the  Idngdom,  a  num  iUustrious  in  the  land  of  Mseotis;
and  no  one  was  more  famed  throughout  the  waters  of  the
Euxine.  While  he  held  the  Sceptre,  they  say,  that  a  cortiin
Iphigenia,  a  stranger,  made  her  way  thither,  through  the  liquid
air.  Her,  carried  under  a  cloud  by  the  light  breezes  throu^
the  air,  Phoebe  is  supposed  to  have  deposited  in  these  regions.
She  had  now  presided,  in  due  form,  oyer  the  temple  for  many
a  year,  performing  the  woeful  rites  with  unwilling  hand ;  wbi&i
two  young  men  came  in  a  sail-bearing  ship,  and  trod  onr  shores
with  their  feet.  Their  ages  were  alike,  and  so  was  their  affec-
tion ;  of  these,  the  one  was  Orestes,  the  other,  Pylades.  Fan^
preserves  their  names.  They  are  immediately  led  to  the  re-
morseless altar  of  Trivia,  having  their  two  hands  bound  be-
hind their  backs.  The  Grecian  priestess  sprinkles  the  captives
with  the  water  of  purification,  that  the  long  sacred  band  may
encircle  their  yellow  hair.  And  while  she  is  preparing  tl^
rites,  while  she  is  binding  their  temples  with  the  fillets,  and
while  she  is  ever  discovering  some  ground  for  tardy  delay  :  she
says,  'Pardon  me,  young  men,  I  am  not  cruel;  I  perform
rites  that  are  more  barbiurous  than  their  own  country.  Tet,
such  is  the  custom  of  this  nation.  But,  from  what  city  do
ye  come  ?  and  whither  were  ye  directing  your  course,  in  your
unfortunate  bark  V  She  spoke,  and  tl^  pious  virgin,  on  hear-
ing the  name  of  her  country,  found  out  that  they  were  inha-
bitants of  her  own  city.  *  Let  one  of  you,'  she  says,  *  fall  as  a
victim ;  let  the  other  go,  as  the  messenger  of  these^rites,  to
your  paternal  abodes.'  Pylades,  on  the  point  of  death,  bids
his  dear  Orestes  go :  the  other  refuses  ;  and  each,  in  his
turn,  strives  to  die.  This  is  the  sole  thing,  on  which  they
are  not  agreed :  in  all  other  respects,  the  pair  are  of  one
mind,  and  without  disagreement.  While  these  beauteous
youths  are  waging  this  contest  of  love;  she  pens  written
characters  to  her  brother.  She  there  gives  a  message  for  her
brother,  and  he  to  whom  it  was  given  (see  the  accidents  of
mortals)  was  her  brother.  There  is  no  hesitating  ;  from  the
temple  they  carry  off  the  image  of  Diana  :  and  by  ship,  they
are  stealthily  borne  over  the  boundless  waters.  This  wondrous
friendship  of  the  youths,  although  so  many  years  have  elapsed,
even  yet  enjoys  great  celebrity  in  Scythia."

After  this  hackneyed  story  was  related  by  him ;  all  praised
their  actions  and  their  faithful  attachment. In  truth,  even  in


y  Google


B.  II.]  as  OTiD.  427

this  land  (than  which  there  is  none  more  uncivilized)  the  nione
of  friendship  moyes  the  hearts  of  barbarians.  What  ought
ye  to  do,  who  are  bom  in  the  Ausonian  City,  when  such  actions
affect  the  ruthless  Getae  ?  Besides,  thou  hast  always  a  kind  dis-
position, which  has  thy  firtues  for  a  proof  of  thy  high  no-
bility ;  virtues,  which  Volesus,®  the  founder  of  thy  paternal
name,  would  approve,  and  which  Numa,  thy  maternal  ancestor,
would  not  diuivow  as  his  own.  The  Cottae  too,  who  are
added  to  thy  family  name,  a  house  that  would  have  perished,'
hadst  thou  not  exi^d,  would  praise  them.  Oh  thou,  thus
worthy  of  that  hne,  believe  that  it  is  befitting  such  virtues  to
'  ;  a  ruined  friend.


EPISTLE  TIL— TO  FABIUS  MAXIMUS.

Hb  says,  that  wbUe  reclining  on  his  couch,  Cupid  presented  himself,  and
that  he  requested  the  God,  that,  inasmuch  as  through  him  he  had  heen
exiled,  he  would  prevail  upon  Augustus  to  grant  him  a  less  disagreeable
spot  for  his  banishment.  He  then  states  the  answer  that  he  receiYed
from  Cupid.

If  thou  hast  leisure  to  give  a  little  time  to  thy  exiled  friend,
do  thou  be  present,  Maximus,  thou  star  of  the  Fabian  house,
while  I  tell  thee  what  I  have  seen  ;  whether  it  was  the  phan-
tom of  a  body,  or  an  appearance  of  reality,  or  a  dream.

'Twas  night ;  and  the  Moon  was  entering  the  windows  with
their  two  shutters,  ^^  as  strong  as  she  is  generally  wont  to  shine

•  VolesuB.'] — Ver.  105.  He  was  the  paternal  ancestor  of  Cotta ;  being
a  Sabine,  who  migrated  to  Rome  with  Titus  Tatius.  Silius  Italicus  telU
us  that  Volesus  was  of  Spartan  origin.

•  That  would  have  perished.'] — Ver.  108.  From  this,  it  appears  that  he
had  been  adopted  into  the  Aurelian  branch  of  the  house  of  Cotta,  which
had,  at  the  time  of  the  Poet's  writing  this  Epistle,  become  extinct.

^  Their  two  shutters.'] — Ver.  5.  This  alludes  to  the  fact  that  many  of
the  windows  were  openings  in  the  wall,  closed  by  means  of  shutters,  which
sometimes  had  two  leaves,  or  compartments.  They  were  frequently  with-
out any  other  protection  or  covering  than  the  shutters ;  but  were  some-
times covered  with  lattice  or  trellis  work,  and  sometimes  with  net-work.
Laminse  of  '  lapis  specularis,'  or  'mica,'  were  used  in  later  times,  to  admit
the  light,  while  excluding  the  cold.  Glass  was  also  used  under  the  early
emperors,  as  frames  of  glass  windows  have  been  found  in  some  of  the
houses  at  Pompeii.  It  is  most  probable  that  the  window  of  the  room  in
which  the  Poet  lay  at  this  period  was  glazed  either  with  *  mica'  or  glass  ;
as  it  is  not  likely  that  in  a  chmate,  the  cold  of  which,  as  he  often  says,  he
felt  80  bitterly,  he  would  lie  in  bed  exposed  to  the  chill  of  the  night ;  as,


y  Google


428  THE  POKTIC  EPISTLES  [b.  m

in  the  middle  of  tlie  month.  >  Sleep,  the  common  respite  inm.
care,  possessed  me,  and  my  languid  limbs  were  stretched  oyer
the  whole  couch ;  when,  suddenly,  the  air  shook  tremulously,
beaten  by  wings,  and  the  moved  window  creaked  with  a  gentle
noise.  Startled,  I  supported  my  body  on  my  left  arm  ;  and
sleep,  dispelled,  departed  from  my  trembling  breast.  Cupd
was  standing,  with  a  countenance  not  such  as  he  was  formerly
wont,  in  his  sadness  holding  a  maple  staff  in  his  left  hand.
On  his  neck  he  had  no  collar,  ^^  no  hair-pin  in  his  hair ;  ^  nor
was  he  neat,  with  his  locks  well  arranged,  as  formerly.  His
soft  hair  was  hanging  over  his  rough  countenance,  and  his
wings  appeared  all  ragged  to  my  eyes  :  just  as  it  is  wont  to  be
on  Uie  back  of  the  aenal  pigeon,  which  many  fingers  of  hand-
lers have  touched.  Soon  as  I  recognized  him,  (and  none  was
better  known  to  me)  my  tongue,  set  at  liberty,  addressed  him
in  such  words  as  these :  "  Oh  boy,  the  cause  of  exile  to  thy
beguiled  master,  whom  it  had  been  more  to  my  interest  not  to
have  had  for  my  instructor  ;  hast  thou  come  hither,  too,  where
there  is  peace  at  no  time,  and  the  barbarian  Danube  freezes
with  his  icy  waves  ?  What  is  the  cause  of  thy  journey  ?  un-
less that  thou  mightst  be  th^  witness  of  my  sorrows,  which  are,
if  thou  knowest  it  not,  a  cause  for  hatred  against  thee.  Thou
wast  the  first  to  dictate  the  poems  of  my  youth  ;  under  thy
guidance,  I  have  alternated  the  five  feet  with  the  six  feet.^'
Thou  didst  not  allow  me  to  soar  aloft  with  the  Mseonian  verse,
nor  to  celebrate  the  actions  of  great  generals.  Perhaps  thy
bow  and  thy  fiame  diminished  the  powers  of  my  genius,  which,
small  though  perhaps  they  were,  were  still  something. For

by  his  mention  of  the  rays  of  the  moon  entering  the  room,  it  is  clear  that
the  shutters  were  not  closed,  as  he  lay.

**  Had  no  collar.'] — Ver.  15.  *Torquem.'  The  *torquis,'  or  *  torques,'
was  an  ornament  of  gold,  twisted  spirally  and  bent  into  a  circular  form,
which  was  worn  round  the  neck  by  the  men  of  the  upper  classes  among
the  Persians,  Gauls,  Britons,  and  other  northern  and  eastern  nations.
Cupid  is  here  represented  as  wearing  no  *  torques,'  as  a  sign  of  grief.

^  No  hair-pin  in  his  /tair.]— -Ver.  15.  *Crinale.'  This  alludes  to  the
Cfustom  of  the  women,  and  probably  the  children  among  the  ancients,  of
platting  the  hiur,  and  then  fastening  it  behind  with  a  hair  pin.  This  was
called  either 'acus  crinalis,'  or  'crinale,'  absolutely,  as  in  this  instance.
They  were  made  of  metal,  wood,  bone,  or  ivory,  and  resembled  a  needle
or  bodkin  with  a  sharp  point.  This  fashion  still  prevails  in  Italy  and
Germany,  and  has  been  adopted  in  some  degree  in  England.

^*  With  the  six  feet.] — ^Ver.  30.  That  is,  when  he  composed  his
*  Amores,'  in  the  Elegiac  measure,  in  his  younger  days.


y  Google


K.  III.]  OP  OTID.  429

while  I  was  singing  of  thy  sway,  and  that  of  thy  mother,  my
mind  never  had  leisure  for  any  work  of  magnitude.  And  that
was  not  enough ;  in  my  folly,  too,  I  wrote  verses,  that  thou
mightst,  through  my  books  on  the  Art  of  Love,  become  not
inexperienced.  In  return  for  these,  exile  was  given  as  a  recom-
pense to  wretched  me  ;  that,  too,  in  regions  the  most  distant,
and  without  the  enjoyment  of  any  peace.  But  Eumolpus,  the
son  of  Chione,  did  not  prove  such  towards  Orpheus,  nor  was
Olympus  such  towards  Marsyas,  the  Phrygian  Satyr.  Chiron
received  no  such  reward  from  Achilles,  and  they  do  not  say
that  Numa  did  any  injury  to  Pythagoras.  And,  not  to  repeat
names  collected  over  a  long  space  of  time,  I  am  the  only  one
who  have  been  ruined  by  my  own  scholar.  While  I  am  pro-
viding thee  with  weapons,  while,  wanton  one,  I  am  instructing
thee ;  the  master  receives  such  a  gift  as  this  firom  his  scholar.
J.nd  yet  thou  knowest,  and  thou  mightst  say  it,  sworn  to  the
truth,  that  I  plotted  not  agaipst  lawful  wedlock.  These  things
did  I  write  for  those  whose  chaste  hair  the  fillet  does  not  touch,
nor  the  long  gown  their  feet.  Tell  me,  I  pray,  when  didst
thou  learn  to  beguile  the  matrons,  and,  through  my  pre-
cepts, to  cast  a  doubt  on  the  legitimacy  of  their  offspring  ?
Is  not  every  woman  strictly  repulsed  from  these  books,
whom  the  law  forbids  to  entertain  men  by  stealth  ?  But  of
what  avail  is  that,  if  I  am  considered  to  have  composed
precepts  for  adultery,  forbidden  by  severe  laws  ?  But  thou,
mayst  thou  have  arrows  that  strike  all  things,  and  may  thy
torches  never  be  without  the  burning  flame ;  may  Caesar,  who
is  the  descendant  of  thy  brother  ^neas,  rule  the  empire,  and
hold  sway  over  the  whole  earth  ;  but  do  thou  cause  that  his
wrath  against  me  be  not  implacable,  and  that  he  allow  me  to
be  punished  in  a  place  more  agreeable."

These  things  did  I  seem  to  say  to  the  winged  boy ;  these
words  did  he  seem  to  utter  to  me.  "  By  the  torches,  that  are  my
weapons,  and  by  the  arrows  that  are  my  weapons,  and  by  my
mother,  and  by  the  head  of  Csesar,  do  I  swear,  that,  under  thy
instruction,  I  learned  nothing  but  what  was  lawful,  and  that
there  is  no  ground  for  accusation  in  thy  books  on  the  Art  of
Love,  And  would  that,  like  this,  I  could  defend  thee  in  other
respects  !  Thou  knowest  that  it  is  rather  another  thing  that
caused  thy  ruin.  Whatever  it  is  (and  that  grief  ought  not  to  be
disclosed)  thou  canst  not  say  that  it  was  unattended  with  fault


y  Google


430  THS  POKnC  XFI8TLSS  [b.  m.

on  thy  put.  Althoagh  thou  mayst  Bcreen  the  change  under  the
iqppearance  of  error,  still  the  anger  of  the  Avenger  was  not
greater  than  was  deserved.  But  yet,  that  I  might  hehokL  thee,
and  that  I  might  console  thee  thus  prostrate,  my  wings  hxn
glided  through  immeasurahle  tracts.  These  regions  did  I
first  behold,  at  the  time  when,  at  the  request  of  my  moth^,
the  Phasian  damsel  Medea  was  pierced  by  my  weapons.
Thou,  soldier  that  art  a  friend  to  my  camp,  art  the  cause  (d
my  revisiting  this  land,  after  a  length  of  ages.  Lay  aside,  then,
thy  fears  ;  Uie  wrath  of  Caesar  wi^  be  assuaged,  and  a  more
joyous  time  will  come,  at  thy  entreaties.  And  fear  not  delay ;
the  time  that  we  look  for,  is  at  hand ;  and  triumph  makes
every  place  to  be  filled  with  joy.  While  thy  house,  and  thy
sons,  and  their  mother  Livia  are  happy ;  while  thou  art  happy,
great  Father  of  thy  country,  and  of  the  triumphant  Greneral ;
while  the  people  is  feeling  an  inward  joy,  and,  throughout
the  City,  every  altar  is  glowing  with  the  perfumed  flames ;
while  the  venerable  temple  is  afibrding  an  easy  access  ;  'tis  to  be
hoped  that  our  prayers  may  at  length  be  enabled  to  prevail.'*
He  spoke ;  and  either  he  disappeared  in  thin  air,  or  my
senses  began  to  awake.  If  I  doubted,  0  Maximus,  of  thy
approval  of  these  words,  I  could  beUeve  that  there  are  swans
of  the  colour  of  Memnon.^*  But  neither  is  the  milky  stream
changed  into  black  pitch ;  nor  does  the  ivory,  which  was  white,
become  the  turpentine  tree.  Thy  birth  is  befitting  thy
spirit ;  for  thou  hast  a  heart  that  is  noble  and  endowed  with
the  honesty  of  Hercules.  Envy,  that  spiritless  vice,  attacks
not  stich  high  feelings ;  like  a  viper,  it  crawls  lurking  on  the
ground  beneath.  Thy  lofty  spirit  rises  superior  to  thy  vary
descent ;  and  thou  hast  not  a  name  that  is  more  illustrious
than  thy  character.  Let  others,  then,  injure  the  distressed,  and
desire  to  be  dreaded  ;  and  let  them  wield  their  arrows,  tipped
with  the  corrosive  venom  ;  thy  house  has  ever  been  accus^
tomed  to  aid  the  prostrate :  in  the  number  of  these,  I  pray
thee  to  allow  me  to  be.

"  Colour  of  Memnon.} — Ver.  96.  That  is,  black.  The  ancients  con-
sidered that  a  black  swan  was  the  very  ideal  of  an  impossibility :  modern
enterprise  has  corrected  this  mistake,  and  has  shown  us,  by  ocular  demon-
stration, that  such  a  bird  exists  in  the  Australasian  continent.


y  Google


B.  IV.]  OF  OYID.  431


EPISTLE  IV.— TO  RUFINUS.

Ovid,  having  sent  to  Rome  his  Poem  on  the  Triumph  of  Tiberius,  after
the  conquest  of  Illyria,  requests  his  friend,  Rufinus,  to  take  it  under  his
protection.  He  excuses  himself  on  many  grounds,  because  he  feels  that
he  has  not  done  justice  to  his  subject.  He  then  addresses  Liyia,  the
mother  of  Tiberius,  and  foretells  that  he  will  shortly  have  another
triumph,  and  that  over  Germany.

Thy  friend  Naso  sends  thee,  from  the  city  of  Tomi,  these
words  that  bear  no  insincere  salutation ;  and  he  bids  thee,
Eufinus,  to  show  favour  to  his  Triumph ;  if  indeed,  it  comes
into  thy  hands.  'Tis  but  a  Uttle  work,  and  unequal  to  its
vast  subject ;  but,  such  as  it  is,  I  entreat  thee,  take  it  under
thy  protection.  Bodies  that  are  healthy  are  strong  of  them-
selves, and  seek  the  aid  of  no  Machaon :  the  sick  man,  in  his
uncertainty,  has  recourse  to  medical  aid.  Great  poets  have
no  need  of  an  indulgent  reader,  they  captivate  one,  however
unwilling  and  difficult  to  please.  I,  whose  talent*  protracted
toils  have  impaired,  (or  may  be,  I  had  none  even  before),  infirm
in  strength,  recover  health  by  thy  kindness ;  shouldst  thou
withhold  that,  I  should  think  myself  deprived  of  every  thing.
And,  whereas  all  my  productions  rely  upon  partial  support,
this  book  has  an  especial  claim  to  indulgence.

Other  poets  have  written  of  a  temple  which  they  beheld ;
*tis  something  to  set  down  what  we  have  seen  with  a  recording
hand.  I  write  of  these  things,  with  difficulty  caught  by  me  in
public  with  greedy  ear;  and  rumour  has  been  in  place  ofejes
for  me.  Does,  forsooth,  the  like  enthusiasm,  or  the  same  inspi-
ration arise  from  things  when  only  heard  of,  as  from  them  when
seen  ?  I  complain  not  that  the  splendour  of  the  silver  and  of
the  gold,  and  the  purple  which  ye  beheld,  was  wanting  to  me ;
but  still  the  various  places,  the  nations  modelled  in  a  thousand
forms,  and  the  battles  themselves,  would  have  invigorated  my
lines.  The  countenances,  too,  of  the  kings,  the  surest  indexes
of  their  feelings,  would  perhaps,  in  some  measure,  have  aided
that  work.  Every  genius  is  able  to  grow  warm  at  the  applause
of  the  public,  and  at  its  transports  of  joy.  As  much  vigour
should  I  have  acquired,  amid  such  acclamations,  as  the  raw
soldier  does,  when  he  hears  the  trumpet  sound  to  arms.  Al-
though my  heart  were  made  of  snow  and  ice,  and  were  colder
than  this  region  that  I  am  now  enduring ;  yet  the  features  of


y  Google


432  THE  POITTIC  EPISTLES  [r  in.

that  Chief,  as  he  stands  in  his  ivory  chariot,  would  dispel  every
chill  from  my  senses.  Defective  in  these  respects,  and  fiir-
nished  with  uncertain  authorities,  with  good  reason  I  have
recourse  to  the  aid  of  thy  favour.  Neither  the  names  of  the
leaders  nor  those  of  the  places  are  known  to  me  ;  my  hands
with  difficulty  met  with  subject  matter.  Of  events  so  great,
how  large  a  part  was  there  that  Fame  could  repeat,  or  that
any  one  could  write  to  me  ?  With  greater  reason,  then,  0
reader,  thou  oughtst  to  pardon  me,  if  there  is  anything  there
omitted  by  me,  or  in  wluch  I  am  mistaken.  Besides,  my  lyre,
that  has  dwelt  upon  the  everlasting  complaints  of  its  master,
was  with  difficulty  brought  round  to  a  song  of  joy.  Words
of  gladness  hardly  recurred  to  me  seeking  them  after  so  long
a  time  :  to  be  at  all  joyful,  seemed  to  me  a  novelty.  And  as
the  eyes  dread  the  sun,  to  which  they  are  unused,  so  was  my
mind  averse  to  joyousness.  Novelty  is  the  most  endearing  of
all  things,  and  thanks  for  a  kindness,  which  delay  retards,  are
lost.  I  suppose  that  other  works,  written  in  a  spirit  of  emu-
lation about  the  great  triumph,  have  already  been  read  by  the
lips  of  the  ^public.  The  reader  drinks  of  those  cups  when
thirsty,  when  now  satisfied,  of  mine  ;  that  stream  is  drunk  of
when  fresh,  mine  becomes  nauseous.'*  I  have  not  been  idle,
nor  has  slothfulness  made  me  tardy :  the  remotest  shore  of
the  wide  ocean  confines  me.  While  report  is  arriving  hither,
while  my  hurried  verses  are  being  composed,  and,  when  com-
posed, while  they  are  travelling  to  you  at  Rome,  a  whole  year  may
have  passed  away.  And  it  makes  no  slight  difference,  wheth^
you  first  pluck  the  roses  before  untouched,  or  whether,  with
a  late  hand,  when  there  are  scarcely  any  left.  What  wonder
is  there,  when  the  garden  is  exhausted,  the  flowers  having  been
picked,  if  a  chaplet  has  been  formed,  not  worthy  of  its  chief?
I  entreat  no  poet  to  think  that  this  is  said  against  his  verses :.
in  her  own  behalf  has  my  Muse  spoken.  I  have  kindred  ti«
with  you,  ye  poets ;  if  it  is  allowed  to  the  wretched  to  be  of  your
number.  Ye,  my  friends,  have  lived  with  me,  as  being  a  large
portion  of  my  very  life ;  even  in  this  re^on,  I,  still  ever  present,"
hold  you  in  esteem.  May  my  verses  then  be  commended  to  your

15  Becomes  nauseous,'] — Ver.  56.  *  Tepescit  ;*  literally,  *  grows  warm.'
Warm  water,  when  drunk  alone,  is  generally  productive  of  a  tendency  to
nausea.

*«  /  stiU  ever  present  ]— Ver.  70. *  Non  absens : '  literaDy,  *  not  absent.'


y  Google


K.  IV  ]  or  OTiD.  433

favour,  in  behalf  of  which  I  cannot  address  you  personally.
Writings  generally  please  after  death ;  because  envy  is  wont
to  attack  the  living,  and  to  tear  them  with  unfair  tooth.
If  it  is  a  kind  of  death  to  live  in  wretchedness;  the  earth  only
awaits  me,  and  the  sepulchre  alone  is  wanting  to  my  end.
Lastly,  although  this  result  of  my  labours  shoidd  be  blamed
on  every  side,  there  will  be  no  one  to  blame  my  zeal.  Although
strength  is  wanting,  yet  the  inclination  is  to  be  commended;
with  this,  I  trust,  the  Gods  are  content.  This  is  the  reason,
why,  even  the  poor  approach  the  altars  acceptably;  and
why  a  lamb  pleases  not  less  than  a  slaughtered  ox.  The
subject,  too,  was  so  great,  that  it  would  have  proved  a  burden
even  for  the  great  poet  of  the  -^neid  to  support  it.  The
weak  Elegiac  measure,  too,  was  not  able  to  bear  on  its  unequal
wheels  the  excessive  weight  of  a  triumph.

I  am  doubtful  in  opinion,  what  kind  of  measure  I  shall  now
use ;  for  another  triumph  is  approaching ;  one  over  thee,  0
lUiine.  The  presages  of  the  truth-telling  poets  are  not  deceptive.
A  laurel  must  be  offered  to  Jove,  while  the  former  one  is  still
green.  Thou  art  not  now  reading  my  words,  who  am  far  re-
moved to  the  Danube,  to  streams  that  are  drunk  of  by  the  un-
subdued Getae.  'Tis  ^e  voice  of  a  Divinity ;  a  Divinity  resides
within  my  breast :  I  foretell  and  I  prophecy  this  under  the
influence  of  a  God.  Why,  Livia,  art  thou  delaying  to  prepare
the  chariot  and  the  procession  for  the  triumph  ?  Wars  do  not
now  cause  thee  any  delay.  Germany  throws  aside  her  spear,
which  she  curses  ;  now  wilt  thou  say  that  my  prophecy  has  its
weight.  Have  faith,  and  soon  will  tiiy  confidence  be  realized  ;
thy  son  will  reiterate  his  honours,  and  will,  as  before,  go  in
procession  with  the  yoked  steeds.  Prepare  the  purple,  which
thou  mayst  place  on  the  victorious  shoulders  :  the  very  laurel
is  able  to  recognize  the  head  to  which  it  is  accustomed.  Let
the  shields  and  the  helmets  sparkle  with  gems  and  .with  gold  ;
let  the  trophies  on  the  lopped  trunks  stand  above  the  men  in
fetters.  Let  the  towns  in  ivory  be  surrounded  with  the  turreted
fortifications  ;  and  let  an- imitation  of  a  thing  be  supposed  to  be
p^ormed  after  the  manner  of  the  original.  Let  the  squaUd
Rhine  have  his  hair  gathered  under  his  broken  reeds,  and  his
waters  tinged  with  blood.  Now,  captive  kings  are  demanding  the
omamentsof  barbarism,  and  woven  vestments  of  more  worth  than
their  own  lot. Prepare^  too,  the  things  which  the  invincible

rr


y  Google


434  THE PONTIC EPISTLES  [b.  ill.

valour  of  thy  £&mily>  both  has  caused,  and  will  cause,  to  be
prepared  by  thee.

Ye  Gods,  by  whose  command  I  have  given  utterance  to  tkc
future,  verify  my  words,  I  pray,  by  a  speedy  fulfilment.


EPISTLE  v.— TO  MAXIMUS  COTTA.

He  launches  forth  in  praise  of  the  speech  of  Maximus  Cotta,  which  he
had  delivered  before  the  judicial  court  at  Rome,  a  copy  of  which  he  hsd
sent  the  Poet  to  read ;  and  he  begs  him  often  to  send  him  his  prodne-
tions.  He  says  that,  in  his  absence,  he  ever  seems  present  to  him ;  and
that  he  fancies  himself  at  Rome,  in  his  company,  as  though  in  the  enjoy-
ment of  heaven.  When  he  remembers  that  he  is  in  Scythia,  he  says
that  he  seems  to  return  to  the  infernal  regions.

Dost  thou  inquire,  whence  the  letter  was  sent  to  thee,  that
thou  art  now  reading  ?  '  Tis  from  here,  where  the  Danube  joins
the  azure  waves.  When  the  place  has  been  mentioned,  the
author,  too,  ought  to  recur  to  thee,  Naso  the  poet,  who  was
ruined  by  his  own  talents.  ^Tia  he  who  sends  thee,  Maximus
Cotta,  from  among  the  shaggy  Getse,  the  salutation  which  he
would  rather  give  thee  in  person.

I  read,  0  youth  that  hast .  not  degenerated  from  the  elo-
quence of  thy  father,  the  fluent  language  that  has  been  spoken
by  thee  in  the  crowded  court.  Although  this  has  been  read
by  me  with  a  hastening  tongue,  throughout  several  hours,  my
complaint  is,  that  there  was  too  httle.  But  this  I  have  made
more  by  often  reading  it  again  ;  and  never  was  it  less  pleasing
to  me,  than  it  was  at  first.  And  since,  when  so  often  read,  it
loses  nothing  of  its  interest,  it  pleases  by  its  own  merit,  and
not  by  its  novelty.  Happy  were  they,  whose  lot  it  was  to  hear
it  in  reality,  and  to  enjoy  the  pleasure  q/*  language  so  eloquent!
For  although  there  is  a  pleasant  taste  in  water  that  is  fetched,
water  is  drunk  with  greater  pleasure  at  the  spring  itself.  It
is  more  gratifying,  too,  to  pluck  the  apple  from  the  bough  pulled
downward,  than  to  take  one  from  a  sculptured  dish.  And,  unless
I  am  mistaken,  had  not  my  Muse  caused  my  exile,  thy  voice
should  have  given  utterance  in  my  presence  to  the  work  which
I  have  read.  As  was  my  wont,  perhaps  as  one  of  the  hun-
dred men,  I  should  have  been  sitting  as  a  judge  over  thy  words  ;
and  a  greater  pleasure  would  have  filled  my  heart,  when  V
was  influenced  by  thy  language,  and  yielded  my  assent  to  it.


y  Google


E.  v.]  OF  OTID.  435

Since  fate,  yourselves  and  my  country  being  left  behind,  has
preferred  that  I  should  be  among  the  barbarian  Getse,  often
send  me,  I  beg,  as  it  is  permitted  thee  to  do,  the  pledges  of
thy  pursuits,  to  be  read  hy  me,  that  I  may  seem  still  more  to
be  with  thee :  follow,  too,  my  example,  unless  thou  despisest
it — a  thing  which,  more  properly,  thou  thyself  shouldst  show
me.  For  I,  Maximus,  who  for  some  time  have  been  dead  to
you,  my  fnend%y  endeavour,  through  the  medium  of  my  genius,
not  to  perish  utterly.  Give  a  commensurate  return  ;  and  let
my  hands  receive  no  few  memorials  of  thy  labours,  that  will  be
«o  pleasing  to  me.  But  tell  me,  0  youth,  so  devoted  to  my
pursuits,  art  thou  not,  by  those  very  pursuits^  reminded  of  me  ?
When  either  thou  art  reciting  the  poem  which  thou  hast  just
composed,  to  thy  friends,  or  when,  as  thou  art  often  wont,  thou
art  requesting  them  to  recite,  does  not  thy  heart  grieve,  for-
getting what  it  is  that  is  absent?  Assuredly  it  does  feel
that  an  indefinite  portion  of  itself  is  wanting.  And  as  thou
wast  wont  to  speak  much  of  me  when  among  you,  is  now
too  the  name  of  Naso  often  on  thy  lips  ?  May  I,  indeed,  perish,
wounded  by  the  Getic  bow  (and  may  that  be  the  punishment
of  my  perjury  which  thou  seeest  thus  near  me),  if  I  do  not
in  thy  absence  behold  thee  almost  every  moment.

Thanks  to  the  Gods,  the  spirit  may  range  wherever  it  pleases.
In  my  imagination,  when,  beheld  by  none,  I  have  arrived  in  the
City,  I  often  hold  discourse  with  thee ;  I  often  enjoy  thy  con-
versation. At  that  moment,  it  is  hard  to  say,  how  dehghtfol  it  is
to  me ;  and  how  happy  is  that  hour,  in  my  thinking.  At
that  moment  (if  I  may  be  at  all  trusted),  I  believe  myself  re-
ceived into  the  abodes  of  heaven,  along  with  the  blessed  Gods.
Again,  when  I  have  returned  hither,  I  leave  the  heavens  and
the  Grods  above  ;  and  the  Pontic  soil  is  not  far  removed  from
the  Styx.  If,  against  resisting  fate,  I  am  struggUng  to  return
thence,  do  thou,  Maximus,  divest  me  of  an  unavailing  hope.


F F


y  Google


436  THE  POKTIC  BPI8TLES  [b.  HL


EPISTLE  VI.— TO  A  FRIEND.

He  writes  to  one  of  his  friends,  who,  throagh  fear  of  Aagustus,  did  not
wish  his  name  to  he  mentioned  in  his  writings ;  he  bids  him  consider
the  merciful  disposition  of  the  Emperor,  and  tells  him  that  he  has  no  jut
grounds  for  apprehension ;  but  he  promises  that,  without  his  leave,
he  wiU  not  insert  his  name  in  his  letters.  He  asks  him,  if  he  cannot
venture  to  do  so  openly,  at  least  to  maintain  his  former  affection  towards
him  in  secret.

Naso  sends  these  few  lines,  from  the  Euxine  wayes,  to  bis  o^
companion,  to  which  he  was  nearly  adding  the  name.  And
why,  when  others  deem  it  safe,  art  thou  the  only  one  to  re-
quest that  my  lines  should  not  name  thee  ?  By  me,  if  thoa
knowest  it  not,  thou  mayst  be  informed,  how  great  is  the  mercy
of  Caesar,  in  the  midst  of  bis  wrath.  Were  I  compelled  to  be
the  judge  of  my  own  deserts,  I  should  be  able  to  subtract
nothing  from  this  punishment  which  I  am  suffering.  He
does  not  forbid  imy  one  to  remember  his  companion  ;  he  does
not  prevent  me  from  writing  to  thee,  nor  thee  to  me.  Thoa
canst  commit  no  crime,  if  thou  consolest  thy  friend,  and  dost
alleyiate  his  cruel  fate  by  soothing  words.  Why,  while  thoa
art  fearing  in  safety,  dost  thou  cause  such  dread  to  become  a
ground  of  hatred  against  the  august  Deities  ?  We  have  some-
times seen  those  that  have  been  blasted  by  the  bolts  of  the
Ughtning,  live  and  recover,  Jove  not  forbidding  it.  Because
Neptune  had  shattered  the  ship  of  Ulysses,  Leucothoe  did  not
re^e  to  aid  him  as  he  swam.  BeHeve  me,  the  Deities  of
Heaven  spare  the  wretched,  and  they  do  not  for  ever  and  un-
ceasingly persecute  the  afflicted.  And  no  Grod  is  more  lenient
than  our  Prince ;  he  moderates  his  might  by  justice.  Caesar
has  lately  placed  her  in  a  temple  bmlt  of  marble  ;^^  he  did  so,
long  since,  in  the  temple  of  his  mind.  Jupiter  hurls  his  light-
nings at  random  against  many,  who  have  not  deserved  punish-
ment for  a  commensurate  faidt.  When  the  God  of  the  ocean
has  overwhelmed  so  many  in  his  relentless  waves,  how  large  a
number  of  them  was  deserving  to  be  drowned  ? Were  all  the

17  Temple  hmU  qf  fnarbleJ] — ^Ver.  25.  This  temple  is  not  anywhere
mentioned  hy  the  classical  authors.  Some  commentators  think  that
reference  is  made  to  the  temple  which  was  dedicated  to  Mars  Ultor,  or
the  Avenger,  after  the  defeat  and  death  of  Brutus  and  Cassius.  They  justify
this  supposition,  on  the  ground  that  vengeance,  or  rather  retrihution,  is
a  part  of  justice.


y  Google


«.  VI.]  OF  OVID.  437

bravest  to  perish  in  battle,  the  choice  of  Mars,  even  in  his  own
judgment,  would  be  unjust.  But  if,  perchance,  thou  shouldst
desire  to  inquire  of  us  Romans,  there  is  no  one  who  would
deny  that  he  is  deserving  of  what  he  endures.  Besides,  no
day  can  again  bring  to  iSe  those  that  have  perished  either  by
the  sea,  or  by  warfare,  or  by  fire.  Csesar  has  pardoned  many,
or  has  modified  apart  of  their  punishment :  and  I  pray  that
he  may  will  me  to  be  one  of  that  multitude.  And  dost  thou,
■when  we  are  a  people  under  such  a  Prince,  believe  that  there
is  ground  for  apprehension  in  the  correspondence  of  an  exile  ?
Perhaps,  with  Busiris  for  thy  master,  thou  mightst  with  reason
have  dreaded  this,  or  with  him,  who  was  wont  to  roast  men
shut  up  in  the  brass.  Cease  to  asperse  a  merciful  spirit  with
thy  vain  fears.  Why,  in  the  tranquil  waves,  art  thou  in  dread
of  the  rocks  ?  I  seem  hardly  able  to  find  an  excuse  for  my-
self, because  I  first  wrote  to  thee  without  a  name.  But  fear
had  taken  away  the  use  of  reason  from  me,  thtis  stupified,  and
all  judgment  had  forsaken  me  in  my  misfortunes.  Dreading  my
destiny,  not  the  wrath  of  the  Avenger,  I  myself  was  alarmed
by  the  superscription  of  my  own  name.

Thus  far  exhorted,  indulge  the  grateful  Poet,  that  he  may  in-
sert thy  dear  name  in  his  sheets.  It  will  be  a  disgrace  to  us  both,
if  thy  name,  connected  with  me  by  long  acquaintanceship,  is  to
be  read  in  no  part  of  my  book.  But,  that  this  apprehension
may  not  disturb  thy  slumbers,  I  will  not  be  affectionate  beyond
thy  wishes;  and  I  will  conceal  who  thou  art,  unless  thou  thyself
shalt  have  Jirst  given  me  permission.  No  man  shall  be  com-
pelled to  receive  my  gifts.  Only  do  thou,  if  it  is  a  cause  of
anxious  fear  to  thee,  love  him  in  secret,  whom  thou  couldst
even  love  openly  without  danger.


EPISTLE  VII.— TO  HIS  FRIENDS.

Thb  Poet  writes  to  his  friends,  and  complains  that  his  letters  are  eternally
on  the  same  suhject,  and  that  after  he  has  so  often  entreated  them  to
obtain  of  Augustus  either  liberty  for  him  to  return,  or  to  go  to  a  more
tranquil  place  of  exile,  he  knows  not  what  language  to  use.  He  says
that  in  future  he  must  change  his  subject,  lest  he  should  appear  bur-
densome to  them  and  to  his  wife,  who,  through  fear,  does  not  dare  to
second  his  wishes.  He  also  says  that  he  wiU  bear  his  evils  with  equa-
nimity, as  he  has  endured  sorrows  even  greater ;  and  expresses  himself
ready  to  die  an  exile.

WoBDS  fail  me,  asking  the  same  thing  so  often,  and  I  am  at

Digitized  by  LjOOQ IC


438  THE  pojrric  epistles  [b.  m.

last  ashamed  that  my  useless  entreaties  have  no  end.  I  sup-
pose that  weariness  is  the  result  of  Hues  all  of  the  same  tenor,
and  that  you  have  all  learned  by  heart  what  I  desire.  Already
do  ye  know  what  my  letter  brings,  although  the  paper  is  not
yet  loosened  from  its  strings ;  therefore,  let  the  purport  of  my
writings  be  changed,  that  I  may  not  so  often  go  against  the
stream  that  carries  me  away.  Pardon  me,  my  friends,  if  I
have  confidently  reckoned  upon  you ;  henceforth  there  shall
be  an  end  of  such  mistakes.  I  will  not  be  called  a  burden  to
my  wife,  who,  forsooth,  is  as  timid  and  as  inexperienced  in  my
case,  as  she  is  virtuous.  This  too,  Naso,  shalt  thou  endure  ;  for
worse  hast  thou  already  suffered.  By  this  time  tlie  weight  of
no  burden  can  be  felt  by  thee.  The  bull  that  is  taken  from
the  herd  refuses  the  plough,  and  withdraws  his  youthful  neck
from  the  galling  yoke.  I,  whom  Destiny  has  been  wont  to
treat  with  cruelty,  have  long  ceased  to  be  unprepared  for  any
evils.  I  have  come  to  the  Getic  land ;  in  it  let  me  die,  and  let
my  destiny  go  on  to  the  end,  by  the  path  on  which  it  has
begun.  Let  it  delight  to  adhere  to  a  hope,  which  does  not  ever
delight  to  elude  us  by  its  frustration ;  and  if  you  desire  any-
thing to  happen,  think  it  will  come  to  pass.  The  next  step
after  this,  is,  entirely  to  despair  of  safety ;  and  to  feel  con-
vinced, once  for  all,  with  a  certain  assurance  that  we  are
ruined.  In  the  healing,  we  see  certain  wounds  become  larger,
which  it  had  been  better  not  to  have  touched.  He  dies  a  more
easy  death,  who  is  overwhelmed  by  a  sudden  torrent,  than  he
who  wearies  his  arms  in  the  swelling  waves.

Why  have  I  imagined  that  I  could  depart  from  the  Scythian
regions,  and  be  blessed  with  a  happier  land  ?  Why  did  I  ever
hope  for  any  more  leniency  in  my  behalf  ?  Was  my  fortune
thus  experienced  by  me  ?  Behold  !  I  am  tormented  still  more
bitterly,  and  the  beauty  of  places,  called  to  my  memory,  renews
the  sadness  of  exile,  and  begins  it  afresh.  Still,  it  is  better  for
the  zeal  of  my  friends  to  have  slumbered,  than  for  the  entreaties
which  they  have  used,  to  have  been  of  no  avail.  Great,  indeed,
is  the  thing,  my  friends,  which  ye  dare  not  do ;  but,  had  any  one
asked  it,  there  was  one  who  would  have  granted  it.  If  only
the  wrath  of  Csesar  has  not  denied  you  that,  I  will  die  coura-
geously amid  the  Euxine  waves.


y  Google


E.  VIII.]  OF OTTD.  439

EPISTLE  VIII.— TO  MAXIMUS.

He  sends  a  quiver  and  arrows  to  Maximus,  from  Tomi,  and  says  that,  as
he  has  not  the  means  of  sending  him  any  better  present,  he  hopes  that
he  will  take  in  good  part  a  gift  of  such  a  trifling  nature.

I  WAS  considering  what  presents  the  country  of  Tomi  is  able  to
send  thee,  testifying  my  attentive  affection.  Thou  art  worthy
of  silver,  more  worthy  still  of  yellow  gold  :  but  they  are  wont
to  delight  thee  only  when  thou  thyself  gLvest  them.  Besides,
this  soil  is  not  enriched  by  any  metals :  the  foe  scarcely
permits  it  to  be  turned  up  by  the  husbandman.  Often  has  the
glistening  purple  covered  thy  under  garments  ;  but  that  is
not  dyed  by  the  Sarmatian  hand.  The  sheep  bear  coarse
fleeces,  and  the  matrons  of  Tomi  have  not  learned  to  employ
the  arts  of  Pallas.  The  woman  bruises  the  gifts  of  Ceres,  instead
of  spinning  wool,  and  she  carries  the  heavy  weight  of  water,
her  head  placed  beneath.  The  elm  here  is  not  clothed  with
the  clustering  vines ;  no  apples  bend  the  branches  with  their
weight.  The  unsightly  plains  produce  the  bitter  wormwood,
and  the  soil  shows,  by  its  productions,  how  bitter  it  is.

There  was  nothing,  then,  in  all  the  region  of  Pontus,  that  lies
on  the  left  hand,  which  my  attention  could  send  thee.  Still
I  have  sent  thee  some  arrows,  enclosed  in  a  Scythian  quiver ;
may  they  be  stained,  I  pray,  with  the  blood  of  thy  foe.  Such
pens  as  these,  such  books  Jis  these,  does  this  land  possess  :  this
is  the  Muse  that  flourishes,  Maximus,  in  the  place  of  my
abode.  Although  I  am  ashamed  of  sending  them,  because
they  seem  so  trifling  ;  still  I  beg  thee  to  take  it  in  good  part,
that  I  have  sent  them.


EPISTLE  IX.— TO  BRUTUS.

Brutus  had  written  to  tell  Ovid  that  a  person  had  hlamed  his  writings
for  containing  nothing  hut  complaints  ahout  the  place  of  his  exile,  and
entreaties  to  be  removed  to  another  country ;  on  which  the  Poet,  in
answer,  admits  that  there  are  many  faults  in  his  verses,  and  that  it  would
have  been  well  had  there  been  that  one  only.  He  then  states  the
reasons  why  he  has  not  corrected  them,  and  tells  Brutus  why  he  has  so
frequently  repeated  the  same  thing,  as  his  letters  were  written  to  different
persons,  and  were  not  originally  intended  to  be  collected  in  one  work.

Thou  tellest,  me,  Brutus,  that  some  one,  who,  I  know  not,
finds  fault  with  my  poems,  because  in  these  books  the  subject


y  Google


440  THE  POKTIO EPISTLES  [b.  ut.

is  always  the  same  ;  that  I  pray  for  nothing  but  to  enjoy  the
favour  of  a  spot  not  so  remote,  and  that  I  complain  that  I  am
surrounded  by  a  numerous  foe.  Oh !  how  is  it,  that  out  of  so
many  faults,  but  one  alone  is  censured  ?  'Tib  weU,  if  my  Muse
is  wrong  in  this  only.  I  myself  am  sensible  of  the  faults  of
my  works  ;  whereas,  usually,  every  one  approves  of  his  own
verse  more  than  it  deserves.  The  author  naturally  praises
his  own  works.  Thus,  perhaps,  in  days  of  yore,  Agrius"  said
that  Thersites  had  good  features.  But  that  error  does  not  lead
my  judgment  astray  ;  nor  do  I  forthwith  fall  in  love  with  any-
thing to  which  I  have  given  birth.  Dost  thou  ask  then,  why,
if  I  see  my  error,  I  continue  to  commit  faults,  and  suffer  grounds
for  censure  to  exist  in  my  writings  ?  The  art  of  perceiving  and
removing  diseases,  is  not  the  same.  The  sense  of  feeling  exists
in  all ;  by  skiU  alone,  disease  is  removed.  Often,  when  I  wish
to  change  a  word,  I  leave  it ;  and  my  ability  faUs  short  of  my
judgment.  I  often  (for  why  should  I  hesitate  to  confess  the
truth  to  thee  ?)  feel  it  a  trouble  to  make  a  correction,  and  to
endure  the  tedium  of  protracted  exertion.  Enthusiasm  itself
aids  the  writer,  and  diminishes  his  toil ;  and,  as  the  work
grows,  it  waxes  warm  along  with  his  feelings.  But,  to  correct,
is  a  thing  as  much  more  difficult,  as  the  illustrious  Homer
was  greater  than  Aristarchus.^'  It  galls  the  mind,  by  the
languid  chiU  of  anxiety,  just  as  the  charioteer  pulls  in  the
reins  of  the  anxious  steed.  And  so  may  the  benignant  Deities
mitigate  the  wrath  of  Caesar  against  me,  and  may  my  bones
be  covered  by  a  soil  that  enjoys  tranquillity ;  as  sometimes,
when  I  endeavour  to  exert  pams,  the  cruel  form  of  my  destiny
presents  an  obstacle.  And  I  hardly  appear  to  myself  of  sound
mind,  for  writing  verses,  and  for  taking  care  to  correct  them,
amid  the  savage  Getse.

But  there  is  nothing  more  pardonable  in  my  writings,

18  Agriua.'] — Ver.  9.  He  was  the  father  of  Thersites,  who,  as  well  as
being  deformed,  was  the  most  cowardly  and  contemptible  chanicter  in  the
Grecian  army  before  Troy.

1^  Aristarchus.'] — ^Ver.  24.  He  was  a  grammarian  of  Alexandria,  and  a
commentator  upon  the  writings  of  Homer.  uElian  tells  us  that  he  was
considered  to  be  a  person  of  such  refined  and  exquisite  taste,  that  those
lines  were  rejected  by  universal  assent,  which  he  had  pronounced  not  to
have  been  written  by  Homer.  His  name  was  applied  proverbially,  perhaps
with  some  degree  of  injustice,  to  those  who  were  inclined  to  be  hyper-
critical or  censorious  in  their  judgments.


y  Google


».  IX.]  OP  OTED.  441

than  that  but  one  idea  ahnost  pervades  them  all.  When  joy-
ous, I  have  usually  sung  joyous  songs ;  when  sad,  I  compose
what  is  sad.  Either  seaaon  is  suitable  to  its  own  produc-
tions. On  what  should  I  write,  but  on  the  miseries  of  this
dreadful  spot,  imd  entreat  that  I  may  die  on  a  more  agree-
able soil  ?  Oft  as  I  say  the  same  things,  I  am  heard  by  hardly
any  one  ;  and  my  words^  unnoticed,  fail  of  e£fect.  And  yet,
although  they  are  the  same  things,  I  do  not  write  them  to
the  same  persons ;  and  my  single  voice  seeks  aid  through
many  intercessors.  Ought  one  only  of  my  friends  to  have
been  intreated,  Brutus,  lest  the  reader  might  twice  meet  with
the  same  subject  ?  It  was  not  of  so  much  consequence  to  me  :
pardon  the  confession,  ye  learned:  the  reputation  of  my  works
is  of  less  value  than  my  own  safety.

Lastly,  whatever  subject-matter  any  poet  has  planned  out
for  himself,  he  varies  many  things,  according  to  his  own  judg-
ment. My  Muse,  also,  is  a  too  faithful  indicator  of  my  mis-
fortunes; and  she  carries  the  weight  of  an  uncorrupted
testimony.  And  it  was  not  either  my  purpose  or  my  intention
that  a  book  should  be  composed,  but  that  to  each  person
should  be  delivered  his  own  letter.  Afterwards,  I  united  them
when  collected,  without  any  order,  however  ;  that  thou  mayst
not  suppose  by  chance  that  it  was  a  work  of  selections  by  me.
Pardon  my  writings,  of  which  fame  was  not  the  cause  with
me,  but  self-interest  and  affection  united.


y  Google


442  THE  PONTIC  EPISTLES  [b.  iv.


BOOK  THE  FOURTH.


EPISTLE  I.— TO  SEXTUS  POMPEIUS.

He  tells  Pompeius  that  it  shows  a  want  of  affection,  not  to  have  men-
tioned him  in  his  lines ;  as  he  has  received  services  at  his  hands  which
deserve  never  to  he  forgotten.  He  confesses  that  through  his  assistance
he  was  saved,  and  that  hy  his  kindness  he  still  exists.

Receive,  Sextus  Pompeius,  a  poem  composed  by  him,  who  is
indebted  to  thee  for  his  hfe.  If  thou  dost  not  forbid  thy  name
to  be  placed  there  by  me,  that  will  be  added  as  the  crowning
point  to  thy  deserts.  But  if  thou  contractest  thy  brow,  in
truth,  I  shall  confess  that  I  have  done  wrong.  Still  the  cause
of  my  fault  is  a  praiseworthy  one ;  my  feelmgs  could  not  be
withheld  from  being  grateful.  Let  not  thy  anger,  I  pray,  be
heavy  against  this  f^ectionate  mark  of  attachment.  Oh!  how
often  did  I  appear  to  myself  ungrateful  in  these  my  books,  be-
cause thou  wast  to  be  read  of  in  no  part  of  them  !  0  !  how
often,  when  I  was  intending  to  write  another  name,  has  my
right  hand  unconsciously  traced  thy  name  on  the  wax !  My
very  mistake  pleased  me,  in  a  slip  like  this;  and  with  difficulty
was  the  blotting  out  of  thy  name  made  with  unwilling  hand.
He  must  see  it  at  last,  said  I ;  though  he  should  complain,  I
am  ashamed  that  I  have  not  deserved  this  censure  sooner."
Give  me  the  stream  of  Lethe,  that  takes  away  the  memory,  and
yet  I  cannot  be  forgetful  of  thee.  I  entreat  thee  to  permit  it
to  be  so,  and  not  to  repel  my  words,  as  though  disdained  by
thee ;  and  do  not  consider  there  to  be  any  ground  for  censure  in
my  attachment. Let  this  sHght  mark  of  affection  repay  thy

^  Deserved  this  censure  sooner,'] — Ver.  16.  His  meaning  seems  to  be,
that  he  felt  convinced,  that  whenever  he  should  write,  his  friend  would
certainly  answer  him,  upbraiding  him  with  his  neglect ;  and  that  he  is
ashamed  that  he  has  so  long  deferred  writing,  and  thereby  bringing  upon
himself  the  censure  that  he  merits.


y  Google


E.  I.]  OF  OVID.  443

great  deserts ;  but  if  not,  I  will  be  grateful,  even  against  thv
•will.  Thy  kindness  was  never  idle  about  my  welfare ;  thy  chest
never  denied  me  its  bounteous  riches.  Now  too,  thy  benevo-
lence, not  at  all  alarmed  by  the  suddenness  of  my  downfall,
gives  aid  to  my  existence,  and  will  do  so.

For  what  reason,  perhaps  thou  mayst  enquire,  have  I  so
great  confidence  in  the  future  ?  Every  one  has  regard  for  the
work  which  he  has  completed.  As  the  Venus,  who  is  wringing
her  hair  dripping  with  the  ocean  wave,  is  the  production  and
the  glory  of  the  artist  of  Cos  ;^  as  the  warlike  Goddess  stands,
formed  by  the  hand  of  Phidias,^  the  guardian,  either  in  ivory
or  in  bronze,  of  the  Athenian  citadel ;  as  Calamis'*  asserts  the
glory  of  the  horses  which  he  has  made ;  as  the  heifer  of
Myron*  resembles  life ; '  so  I,  Sextus,  not  the  slightest  portion
of  thy  works,  am  esteemed  to  be  the  gift  and  the  produce  of
thy  protection.


EPISTLE  II.— TO  SEVERUS.

He  writes  to  the  Poet  Severus,  and  excuses  himself,  on  several  grounds,
for  not  having  yet  mentioned  his  name  in  his  Pontic  writings ;  although
he  has  not  omitted  repeatedly  to  send  him  letters,  written  in  prose.

What  thou  art  reading,  0  Severus,  most  illustrious  poet  of  the
great  kings,®  comes  even  from  amid  the  unshorn  Getse.  I  am
ashamed  (if  only  thou  wilt  allow  me  to  speak  the  truth),  that

2  The  artist  of  Cos."] — Ver.  29.  This  was  Apelles,  the  painter,  who  was
a  native  of  Cos,  an  island  of  the  iEgean  sea.  His  most  famous  painting
was  the  one  here  mentioned,  of  Venus  Anadyomene,  or  Venus  rising  from
the  sea.

3  The  hand  of  Phidias.'] — ^Ver.  32.  He  was  an  Athenian,  and  the  most
celebrated  of  the  Grecian  sculptors.  He  made  a  statue  of  Minerva,  twenty
cubits  in  height,  and  formed  of  ivory  and  gold.  It  was  in  a  standing  posi-
tion, and  was  erected  in  the  citadel  of  Athens.  He  also  made  a  statue  in
bronze,  of  the  same  Goddess,  which  was  remarkable  for  its  extreme
beauty.

♦  Calamia.'] — Ver.  33.  Calamis  was  an  artist  of  great  celebrity.  His
statues  of  horses  were  considered  to  be  unrivalled.

*  Myron,'] — Ver.  34.  He  was  a  famous  sculptor,  whose  most  celebrated
work  was  the  figure  of  a  heifer. Pliny  the  Elder  makes  mention  of  it.

«  Poet  of  the  great  kiAga.'] — Ver.  1.  He  means,  by  this  expression,  to
address  him  as  a  tragic  poet ;  as  kings,  and  persons  of  exalted  station,  were
generally  the  subjects  of  tragedy,  while  persons  of  the  hmnbler  classes
usually  figured  in  comedy.


y  Google


444  THE POKTIC  EPISTLES  [b.  IV.

a«  yet  my  books  have  not  mendoned  thy  name.  Yet  die  aiTee*
tionate  letter,  devoid  o£  poetic  numbers,  has  never  ceased  to  be
exchanged  between  us.  'Tis  verses  alone,  signifying  my
grateful  attachment,  that  have  not  been  sent  thee.  For  -why
should  I  send  that  which  thou  makest  thyself?  Who  woold
give  honey  to  Aristeeus  ?  wine  to  Falemian  Bacchus  ?  com  to
Triptolemus  ?  apples  to  Alcinoiis  ?  Thou  hast  a  prolific  feuicy,
and  for  no  one  among  the  cultivators  of  Helicon  does  Hiat
crop  spring  up  more  abundantly.  To  send  verses  to  such  a
one  as  this,  would  be  to  heap  leaves  in  the  woods.  This,
Severus,  was  the  cause  of  my  delay.  Nor  yet  does  my  genius
favour  me,  as  formerly  ;  but  I  plough  a  dry  sea-shore  with  a
barren  plough-share.  As,  forsooth,  the  shme  chokes  up  the
springs  in  the  waters,  and  the  stream,  obstructed,  is  kept  back
in  the  fountain  stopped  up,  so  have  my  abilities  been  destroyed
by  the  shme  of  my  misfortunes ;  and  my  verses  flow  from  a
less  prolific  source.  Had  any  one  placed  Homer  himself  in  this
country,  even  he,  beheve  me,  would  have  become  a  Getan.

Pardon  the  confession :  I  have  given  a  loose  rein  to  my  pur-
suits, and  few  are  the  letters  that  are  traced  by  my  fingers.
That  holy  inspiration,  which  fosters  the  gsnius  of  poets,  which
was  once  wont  to  exist  in  me,  is  gone.  The  Muse  scarcely
attends  to  her  duty;  scarcely,  when  compelled,  does  she  give
her  tardy  hands  to  the  writing  tablets  when  taken  up.  I  have
little  pleasure  in  writing,  not  to  say  none ;  and  I  take  no  delight
in  connecting  words  in  poetic  numbers.  Either  it  is,  because
I  have  derived  no  advantage  thence,  inasmuch  as  'twas  that
thing  that  was  the  beginning  of  my  woes  ;  or,  it  is  because  it
is  the  same  thing  to  dance  to  time  in  the  dark,  as  to  write
verses  which  you  can  read  to  no  one.  A  listener  sharpens
one's  energy ;  and  excellence,  when  approved  of,  still  in-
creases. Applause,  too,  gives  an  immense  stimulus.  Here,  to
whom  can  I  recite  my  writings,  except  to  the  yellow-haired
Coralli,  and  the  other  tribes  which  the  countty  of  the  barba-
rian Danube  contains  ?  But  what  can  I  do  alone  ?  and  on
what  subject  can  I  wear  away  my  wretched  hours  of  idleness,
and  begmle  the  day  ?  For,  since  neither  wine,  nor  deceiving
games  of  chance,  have  any  charms  for  me,  by  means  of  which
time  is  wont  stealthily  to  pass  away  in  silence  ;  nor,  as  I  could
wish,  if  savage  warfare  would  allow  it,  does  the  earth,  renewed
in  its  cultivation,  amuse  me ;  what  remains  /or  me  but  a  cold


y  Google


■.II.]  or  OTiD.  445

solace,  the  Pierian  maids,  Goddesses  who  have  not  deserved
well  of  me.  But  do  thou,  hy  whom  the  Aonian  fountain  is
drunk  of  with  more  success,  cherish  a  pursuit  which  turns  out
to  thy  advantage ;  and  deservedly  venerate  the  rites  of  the
Muses,  and  send  hither  some  production  of  thy  recent  lahours,
for  me  to  read.


EPISTLE  111.— TO  A  FAITHLESS  FRIEND.

He  rebukes  the  perfidious  and  fickle  conduct  of  a  former  friend,  whose
name  he  conceals ;  since,  although  he  had  been  on  the  strictest  intimacy
with  him  frx>m  his  earliest  chUdAiood,  he  has  not  only  deserted  him  in
bis  adversity,  but  has  even  pretended  that  he  knew  him  not.  He  con-
cludes, by  recommending  him  to  keep  in  mind  the  vicissitudes  of  For-
tune,  and  her  inconstancy.

ShalTt  I  complain,  or  shall  I  hold  my  peace  ?  Shall  I  write
the  charge  without  the  name,  or  shall  I  will  it  to  be  known  to
all  who  &0U  art  ?  I  will  not  use  thy  name,  lest  thou  shouldst  be
graced  hy  my  censure ;  and,  lest  fame  should  be  obtained  by
thee,  through  my  verse.  So  long  as  my  bark  was  in  good  con-
dition, with  strong  keel,  thou  wast  the  first  to  be  willing  to
take  a  passage  by  me.  Now,  because  Fortune  has  contracted
her  brow,  thou  withdrawest ;  at  a  time  when  thou  knowest  that
I  stand  in  need  of  thy  aid.  Thou  feignest  ignorance,  too,
and  thouwishest  not  to  seem  to  have  known  me ;  onff,  when  thou
hearest  my  name,  thou  enquirest,  "  Who  is  this  Naso  ?"

I  am  he ;  although  thou  dost  not  wish  to  hear  it,  who,  when
almost  a  boy,  was  united  with  thee,  then  a  boy,  in  early  friend-
ship. I  am  he,  who  was  first  accustomed  to  know  thy  serious
thoughts,  and  the  first  to  be  present  at  thy  joyous  sports.  I  was
thy  comrade,  and  thy  friend  in  the  most  intimate  acquaintance-
ship ;  I  was  the  only  poet,  in  thy  judgment ;  I  am  the  same  one,
gei^dious  man,  of  whom  thou  now  knowest  not  whether  I  am
ving,  or  not ;  about  whom  'twas  no  care  of  thine  to  make  en-
quiry. If  I  have  never  been  dear  to  thee,  then  thou  confessest
to  have  acted  the  hypocrite ;  if  thou  didst  not  pretend  it,  thou
wilt  be  proved  to  he  inconsistent.  Tell  me  now,  come,  teU  me,
what  offence  it  is  that  has  thus  changed  thee  ;  for,  unless  thy
complaint  is  a  just  one,  mine  is  just.  What  thing  is  it  that  now
forbids  thee  to  be  like  what  thou  wast  formerly?  Dost  thou  call
it  a  crime,  because  I  began  to  be  unfortunate  ? If  thou  didst


y  Google


446  THB  PONTIC  EPISTLES  [b.  iv.

give  me  no  assistance  in  reality,  and  by  deeds,  yet  there  might
have  come  from  thee  a  paper  inscribed  with  tuH)  or  three  words.
For  my  part,  I  hardly  beheve  it;  but  report  says,  that  thou  dost
insult  me  thus  prostrate,  and  art  not  sparing  of  thy  words.

What  art  thou  doing,  madman  ?  Why  art  thou  withdraw-
ing tears  from  thy  own  wreck,  supposing  that  Fortune  should
abandon  thee  ?  That  Goddess  confesses  how  changeable  she
is  on  her  unsteady  wheel,  which  she  ever  keeps  on  its  edge,
under  her  wavering  foot ;  she  is  more  fleeting  than  a  leaf
or  than  any  breeze.  Thy  fickleness,  thou  faithless  one,
is  alone  ^  equal  to  her.  All  that  belongs  to  man  is  pendent
from  a  slender  thread,  and  that  which  was  firm  falls  head-
long with  a  sudden  descent.  By  whom  has  not  the  wealth  of
the  rich  Croesus  been  heard  of?  and  yet,  as  a  captive,  he  re-
ceived his  life  from  an  enemy.^  He  who  was  but  just  now
dreaded  in  the  city  of  Syracuse,  with  difficulty  repelled  cruel
hunger  by  a  lowly  employment.®  Who  was  greater  than  he
styled  "the  Great?"*  and  yet,  in  his  flight,  with  imploring
voice,  he  entreated  aid  of  lus  dependant ;  and  the  very  man
whom  the  whole  world  obeyed,  was  rendered  more  needy  than
all  besides.  Marius,  the  man  who  was  made  illustrious  by  the
triumphs  over  Jugurtha  and  the  Cimbri,  under  whom,  oft  as  he
was  Consul,  Rome  was  triumphant,  lay  concealed  in  the  mud*"
amid  fhe  reeds  of  the  marsh,  and  endured  many  things  dis-
graceful to  so  great  a  man. The  Divine  power  finds  sport  in

7  From  an  «icmy.]— Ver.  38.  Croesus,  the  rich  and  powerful  king  of
Lydia,  being  conquered  by  Cyrus  the  Great,  was  condemned  to  be  burnt,
and  beinir  placed  on  the  pile,  recaDed  to  mind  the  remarks  of  Solon^  on  the
instability  of  human  affairs.  Cyrus,  being  struck  with  the  circumstance,
and  the  wondrous  mutation  of  his  enemy's  fortunes,  pardoned  him.

*  By  a  lowly  employment.'] — Ver.  40.  Dionysius  the  tyrant  of  Sicily,
i^eing  expelled  from  Syracuse,  fled  to  Corinth,  where  he  earned  a  livelihood
by  pursuing  the  calling  of  a  schoolmaster.

*  He  styled  '  the  Great.*] — Ver.  41.  He  here  alludes  to  the  miserable
end  of  Pompey  the  Great.

^^  Concealed  in  the  mud.] — Ver  57.  Marius,  flying  from  the  faction  of
Sylla,  was  obliged  to  seek  safety  by  hiding  among  the  reeds  in  the  marshes
of  Mintums.  Being  discovered,  he  was  thrown  into  prison,  and  a  Cimbrian
slave  being  sent  there  to  put  him  to  death,  he  was  so  struck  by  the
majestic  dignity  of  his  countenance,  that  he  was  unable  to  perform  his
cruel  mission.  Marius  defeated  Jugurtha,  the  king  of  Numidia,  in  Africa,
and  defeated  the  Cimbri,  a  powerful  people  of  Germanv,  who  had  invaded
Italy.


y  Google


E.  111.]  OP  OVTD.  447

the  aiFairs  of  men,  and  tlie  present  moment  hardly  carries  cer-
taiuty.  Had  any  one  said  to  me,  "  Thou  wilt  go  to  the  shores
of  the  Euxine,  and  wilt  be  in  dread,  lest  thou  be  wounded  by
the  bow  of  the  (Jetan ;"  I  would  have  said,  "  Go  and  drink  those
potions  that  cure  the  mind ;  and  whatever  beside  is  produced
in  the  whole  of  Anticyra." "  Yet,  this  I  have  endured  ;  and
even  if  I  could  have  defended  myself  against  mortal  weapons,  I
could  not,  as  well,  have  provided  against  those  of  the  Gods.
Do  thou  then  feel  apprehensive,  and  beheve,  that  that  can
turn  out  sad,  which,  while  thou  art  speaking,  seems  joyful.


EPISTLE  IV.— TO  SEXTUS  POMPEIUS.

He  says  that  no  state  is  so  utterly  wretched  as  not  to  have  some  inter>
mixture  of  joy ;  and  he  shows  how  that  has  heen  his  lot.  He  says  that,
as  he  walked  along  the  sea  shore,  Fame  told  him  that  Pompeius  would
be  Consul  for  the  ensuing  year,  and  that  this  has  afforded  him  ex-
treme pleasure.  He  then  laments  that  he  cannot  be  present  to  see  his
friend  assume  the  Consulate ;  but  entreats  him  sometimes  to  bestow  a
thought  on  him  in  his  exile.

No  day  is  so  far  surcharged  with  clouds,  borne  by  the  South
winds,  that  the  showers  flow  in  torrents  without  intermission.
No  spot  is  so  barren,  that  there  is  not  generally  in  it  some
useful  plant,  mingled  with  the  rough  brambles.  Misfortune
has  made  nothing  so  wretched,  that  pleasure  does  not  diminish
the  evil  by  some  cessation.  Lo !  I,  deprived  of  my  home,  my
country,  and  the  sight  of  my  family,  am  driven  in  my  shipwreck,
to  the  waters  of  the  Getic  shores  ;  and  yet  I  have  found  a  cause
for  relaxing  my  brow  and  not  remembering  my  lot.

For  while,  in  my  sadness,  I  was  pacing  the  yellow  sands,  a
wing  behind  me  seemed  to  make  ^  faint  noise.  I  looked  back  :
there  was  no  person  that  I  could  see ;  yet,  these  words  were
caught  by  my  ear — "  Behold,  I,  Fame,  am  come  to  thee,  the
messenger  of  joyful  things,  having  ghded  along  immense  tracts
through  the  air.  The  next  year  will  be  auspicious  and  happy,
when  Pompeius  shall  be  Consul,  than  whom  no  one  is  dearer
to  thee." She  spoke  ;  and  soon  as  she  filled  Pontus  with  the

"  Anticyra.'\ — ^Ver.  54.  This  was  an  island  near  the  coast  of  Phocis.
It  was  remarkable  for  the  quantity  of  hellebore  which  grew  there,  the  juice
of  which  plant  was  supposed  by  the  ancients  to  be  curative  of  madness.


y  Google


448  THE  POimC  EPISTLES  [b.  IV.

joyous  news,  the  Goddess  hurried  her  stqps  thence  to  othor
nations.  But,  my  cares  dispersed  amid  my  recent  joy,  the  in-
tolerable ruggedness  of  this  place  vas  forgotten  by  me.  Th&r^
fore,  vhen,  Janus  with  the  two  heads !  thou  shalt  have  unlocked
the  long  year,  and  December  shall  have  been  expelled  by  the
month  sacared  to  thee,  the  purple  of  the  supreme  dignity  shall
array  Pompeius,  that  he  may  be!deficient  in  no  <meof  his  honours.
I  seem  already  to  behold  the  inmost  parts  of  the  house
bursting  with  the  multitude,  and  the  people  crushed  for  want
of  space :  and  the  temple  of  the  Tarpeian  abode,  fen*  the
first  time  entered  by  thee,  and  the  Gods  readily  acceding  to
thy  prayers;  the  snow-white  bulls,  too,  which  the  Faliscan  grass
has  fed  on  its  plains,  yielding  their  necks  to  the  unerring  axe.
And  when  thou  hast  begged  all  the  Gods  to  be  propitious  to
thee,  and  some  most  especially ;  there  will  be  Caesar  along  with
Jove.  The  Senate-house  will  receive  thee,  and  the  Senators,
convoked  according  to  custom,  will  give  ear  to  thy  words.
When,  with  its  eloquent  utterance,  thy  voice  shall  have  glad-
dened these ;  and,  as  it  is  wont,  the  day  shall  have  produced  its
words  of  congratulation;  and  thou  shalt  have  given  the  merited
thanks  to  the  Gods  above,  together  with  Csesar,  who  will  afford
reason  for  thee  often  to  do  so  :  then  thou  shalt  return  home,
the  whole  Senate  accompanying  thee  ;  thy  house  being  hardly
able  to  hold  the  respectful  multitude.  Ah !  wretched  am  I !
that  I  am  not  to  be  seen  in  that  crowd  ;  and  that  my.  eyes  will
not  be  able  to  enjoy  these  things  !  Although  far  away,  I  shall
behold  thee,  so  far  as  I  can,  in  my  mind  :  it  will  look  upon
the  features  of  its  own  Consul.  May  the  Gods  cause  my  name,
at  some  time,  to  recur  to  thee,  and  thee  to  say — ''  Alas !  what
is  that  unfortunate  man  doing  ?"  Should  any  one  bear  to  me
these  words  of  thine,  I  will  confess  that  my  exile  will  at  once
become  more  endurable.


EPISTLE  v.— TO  SEXTUS  POMPEIUS,  WHEN  CONSUL.

The  Poet  is  supposed  to  be  addressing  his  own  lines,  before  sending  tbem
to  Pompeius,  to  whom  he  wrote  the  last  Epistle ;  he  states  his  message,
and  the  extreme  obligations  he  is  under  to  Pompeius,  declaring,  that
through  his  kindness  he  has  become  his  property.  He  then  prays  him
to  continue  to  preserve  that  life  which  he  has  already  saved.

Go,  humble  Elegiacs,  to  the  learned  ear  of  the  Consul,  and

Digitized  by  LjOOQ IC


E.  v.]  OF  OTID.  449

bear  words  to  be  read  by  a  man,  honoured  by  his  office.  Long
is  the  road,  and  ye  speed  onward,  with  uneven  feet ;  and  the
earth  lies  hid,  concealed  under  the  wintry  snow.  After  you  shall
have  passed  over  cold  Thrace,  and  Hsemon  capt  with  clouds,
and  the  waters  of  the  Ionian  Sea :  in  less  than  ten  days  you
will  arrive  at  the  City,  the  mistress  of  the  world,  although  you
should  not  make  a  hurried  progress.  Then,  straightway,  let
the  house  of  Pompeius  be  sought  by  you;  none  is  nearer
to  the  Forum  of  Augustus.  If  any  one  of  the  multitude
should  inquire  who  ye  are,  and  whence :  let  him,  with  de-
ceived ear,  hear  any  names  you  please.  For,  although  it  may
be  safe  to  confess,  as  indeed  I  think  it  is,  undoubtedly  a  false
account  causes  less  fear.  You  will  have  no  opportunity,  too,
of  seeing  the  Consul,  some  one  preventing  you  when  you
have  arrived  at  the  threshold.  Either  he  wiR  be  ruling  his
own  Quirites,  by  pronouncing  judgment,  when,  on  high,  he
shall  be  seated  on  the  ivory  chair,  conspicuous  with  its  carvings  ;
or  he  will  be  adjusting  the  revenues  of  the  people  by  the
erected  spear,  ^  and  he  wiU  not  allow  the  resources  of  the  great
City  to  be  diminished.  Or,  when  the  Senators  shall  have  been
summoned  to  the  temple  built  by  JuHus  Caesar,  he  will  be
transacting  business  worthy  of  so  great  a  Consul.  Or,  he
will  be  giving  the  wonted  salutation  to  Augustus  and  his  son,
and  will  be  asking  advice  on  the  duties  not  yet  well-known  to
him.  After  these,  Caesar  Germanicus  will  occupy  all  his  spare
time ;  to  him  he  pays  respect,  next  after  the  great  Gods.

But,  when  he  shall  have  rested,  after  the  anxieties  of  these
matters,  to  you  will  he  extend  his  beneficent  hands  :  and,  per-
haps, he  vrill  enquire  what  I,  your  parent,  am  doing.  I  wish
you  to  answer  him  in  words  l^e  these ;  "  He  is  stiU  living,  and
to  thee,  he  confesses  that  he  owes  the  Ufe,  which,  in  the  first
place,  he  holds  as  a  gift  from  the  benignant  Caesar.  With
grateful  Hps,  he  is  wont  to  repeat,  that  thou,  when  he  went
into  exile,  didst  point  out  a  sjie  road  through  the  lands  of
barbarism ;  that  through  the  anxiety  of  thy  mind  it  was  ef-

**  By  the  erected  spearJ] — Ver.  19.  The  public  revenues  were  farmed
out,  or  sold,  under  the  superintendence  of  the  Consul,  to  the  highest  bid-
der.  In  auctions,  a  spear  was  usually  erected,  which  was  said  to  have  been
a  symbol,  derived  from  the  old  and  summary  practice  of  selling  under  a
spear  the  booty  acquired  in  war.  Hence,  the  phrase  *  Sub  hastavendere,*
means, '  to  sell  by  auction/

O  G


y  Google


450  THS  FOimC  EPISTLES  [■»!¥.

fected,  tliat  be  did  not  make  the  Bistonian  kbow  marm  wi&
his  blood.  That  there  were  many  presents  besides  added
to  the  preservation  of  his  life,  that  he  might  not  exhaost  his
own  resonrces.  That  due  thanks  may  be  returned  for  these
kindnesses,  he  swears  that  he  wiU  be  Ihy  property  for  aHlfitture
time ;  for  that,  first  shall  the  mountains  be  destitute  of  dw
shady  tree,  and  the  seas  shall  have  no  sailing  ships,  and  ^
rivers  shall  again  return  to  their  springs,  by  streams  flowmg
upward ;  before  gratitude  for  thy  kindness  can  pass  away."
When  you  have  said  these  things,  entreat  him  to  preserve
what  is  his  gift:  and  so,  the  purpose  of  y<»ir.jounieywill
have  been  fdMUed.


EPISTLE  VI.— TO  BRUTUS.

He  says  that  be  has  now  passed  five  years  in  Pontas;  and  that  Fabins  Maxi-
mus  is  dead,  in  whose  intercession  in  his  behalf  he  had  centered  hishopes.
He  admits,  however,  that  Bmtus  has  shown  equal  affection  towards
him.  He  enlarges  upon  the  virtues  and  ahilitks  of  Brotas,  and  de-
clares that  he  never  will  be  ungrateful  for  the  kindnesses  of  those  Mends,
who  have  been  faithful  in  their  attachment  during  his  adversity.

The  Epistle,  which  thou  art  reading,  Brutus,  comes  to  thee
from  those  regions  in  which  it  would  not  be  thy  wish  for  Naso
to  be.  But  Siat  which  thou  wouldst  not  wish,  my  wretdied
destiny  has  willed.  Ah  me !  it  is  more  powerful  than  are  Ay
desires !  An  Olympiad  of  fire  years  *^  has  been  spent  by  me
in  Scythia ;  time  is  now  passing  into  the  period  of  a  second
lustrum.  For  stubborn  Fortune  still  persists,  and  insidiously
opposes  her  spiteful  foot  to  my  wishes.  Thou  hadst  resdived,
Maximus,  the  light  of  the  Fabian  house,  to  ^eak  to  the  Di-
vinity of  Augustus,  with  suppliant  voice,  in  my  behalf.  Th<m
didst  die,  before  thou  hadst  pre/erred  thy  entreaties,  and  I  be-
lieve, Maximus,  that  I  was  the  cause  of  thy  death ;  not  suck
was  my  value.  I  now  dread  to  entrust  my  safety  to  any  one.
Aid  itself  perished  with  thy  death. Augustus  had  begun  to

^  An  Olympiad  of  five  yearsJ] — ^Ver.  5.  The  Olympiad  vros  a  period  of
foor  years,  which  intervened  between  each  celebration  o£  the  Olympic
games,  which  were  held  at  Olympia,  in  EUs.  The  Olympiads  began  to  be
reckoned  from  the  year  776  b.c.  Ovid  calls  an  Oljrmpiad  *  qmnquomis,'
as  consisting  of  four  complete  years,  and  terminating  just  at  the  com-
mencement of  a  fifth.


y  Google


s.  ti.]  OP  OVID.  45  f

pardon  my  fault,  committed  through  deception :  he  has  aban-
doned my  hopes,  and  the  earth  at  the  same  moment.  And
yet,  Brutus,  I,  placed  here  far  away,  have  placed  before
thee,  a  poem,  such  as  I  could,  on  the  newly-made  inhabitant
of  tiie  heavens.  May  that  act  of  piety,  be  favourable  to
me  ;  and  may  there  be  a  hmit  now  to  my  woes,  and  may
the  anger  nf  that  holy  family  be  moderated.  I  could  swear  for
certain,  that  thou  too,  Brutus,  known  to  me  by  no  uncertain
signs,  prayest  the  same  thing.  For,  whereas  thou  hast  ever
shown  me  sincere  affection,  stiU  did  that  affection  wax
stronger  in  the  hour  of  adversity.  Whoever  had  beheld  thy
tears  and  mine  together,  would  have  supposed  that  both  of  us
were  about  to  undergo  punishment.  Nature  produced  thee
kind  to  the  wretched,  and  gave  not  a  more  benignant  heart
to  any  one,  Brutus,  than  to  thee.  So  that,  if  any  one  were
ignorant  what  is  thy  power  in  the  warfare  of  the  courts,  he
could  hardly  suppose  that  the  accused  are  pursued  to  convic-
tion by  thy  lips.  In  truth,  it  belongs  to  the  same  person,
although  there  appears  to  be  a  discrepancy,  to  be  gentle  to
the  suppliant,  to  be  terrible  to  the  guilty.  When  the  vindica-
tion of  the  rigid  law  has  been  undertaken  by  thee,  each  of
thy  words  has,  as  it  were,  venom  infused.  May  it  be  the  lot
of  thy  enemies  to  find  how  impetuous  thou  art  in  warfare,  and
to  feel  the  weapons  of  thy  tongue.  These  are  sharpened  by
thee  with  a  care  so  imperceptible,  that  all  deny  that  ^y  genius
belongs  to  that  body  of  thine.  But  if  thou  seeest  any  one
crushed  by  cruel  Fortune,  no  woman  is  more  pitying  than  are
thy  feelings.  This  I  especially  was  sensible  of ;  when  a  great
part  of  my  acquaintances  denied  all  knowledge  of  me.  I  shall
be  forgetful  of  them,  but  never  forgetful  of  you,  my  friends,  who
have  anxiously  alleviated  my  misfortunes.  And  first  shall
the  Danube  (too  close  to  me,  alas !)  turn  its  course  from  the
Euxine  sea  to  its  source ;  and,  as  though  the  days  of  the  feast
of  Thyestes^*  had  returned,  the  chariot  of  the  sun  be  driven
towards  the  Eastern  waves  ;  before  any^one  of  you,  who  have
mourned  me  thjia  torn  away,  can  prove  that  I,  in  my  ingrati-
tude, have  not  remembered  him.

^  Feast  of  ThyesteiJ] — ^Ver.  47.  When  Atreus  served  up  the  children
of  Thyestes,  to  be  eaten  by  their  father,  according  to  the  fable,  the  sun
ran  back  in  his  course,  heing  struck  with  horror  at  the  atrocity  of  the
deed. The  story  has  heen  more  fully  referred  to  in  a  previous  Note.

Digitized  by  LjOOQ IC


452  THE  POKTIO  SFISTLES  [b.  iv.


EPISTLE  VII.— TO  VESTALIS,

Yestalis  haying  been  sent  to  assume  the  command  in  the  regions  of
Pontns,  Ovid  calls  upon  him  to  untness  the  truth  of  his  assertions,  as  to
the  wretched  nature  of  that  country ;  he  then  enlarges  upon  the  yaloor
of  VestaUs,  and  promises  that  his  exploits  shall  be  commemorated  by
his  Terse  to  all  futurity.

Since,  Vestalis,  thou  hast  been  sent  to  the  waves  of  the
Eoxine,  that  thou  mayst  dispense  justice  in  regions  situate
under  the  Pole,  thou  beholdest,  thyself  being  present,  in
what  kind  of  a  land  I  am  placed  ;  and  thou  wilt  be  a  witness
that  I  am  not  accustomed  to  make  idle  complaints.  Toung
man,  sprung  from  the  Alpine  kings,  by  thy  aid  undoubted
confidence  will  be  given  to  my  words.  Thou  thyself  seeest>
no  doubt,  that  Pontus  is  hardened  with  frosts ;  thou  thyself
beholdest  the  wine  frozen  with  hard  ice ;  thou  thyself  be-
holdest how  the  lazygian  herdsman  leads  his  laden  waggons
over  the  midst  of  the  waters.  Thou  seeest,  too,  the  poison
hurled  beneath  the  barbed  steel,  and  the  arrow  bearing  a  double
cause  of  death.  And  would  that  this  portion  had  been  only  be-
held by  thee,  and  that  it  had  not,  too,  been  known  by  thee
in  personal  combat !  Thou  didst  aspire  to  the  office  of  a  Chief
Centurion,  through  many  a  danger ;  an  honour  which  of  late
deservedly  fell  to  thy  lot.  Although  this  dignity  be  abounding
for  thee  in  plenteous  advantages,**  yet  valour  itself  wiU  be  the
first  in  rank.  This  the  Danube  cannot  deny,  whose  waters  thy
right  hand  once  made  red  with  Getic  blood.  This  -^gypsus^^
cannot  deny,  which,  retaken,  when  thou  didst  enter  it,  was
sensible  that  there  was  no  advantage  in  the  natural  resources
of  the  place  ;  for  that  city  was  even  with  the  clouds,  on  the  top
of  a  mountain  ridge,  and  it  is  doubtful  whether  it  was  better
defended  by  position  or  art.  The  savage  enemy  had  taken
it  from  the  Sithonian  king,  and,  victorious,  possessed  the
intercepted  wealth ;  until  Vitellius'^  bore  his  standards,  car-

"  In  plenteous  advantages.] — ^Ver.  17.  The  office  of  Chief  Centurion,
or  *  Primipilus/  was  extremely  lucrative,  in  the  advantages  and  emolu-
ments  that  accompanied  it.

16  JEgypsus.^-^YeT,  21.  This  was  a  well  fortified  town,  situate  in  the
Scythian  territory,  on  an  eminence  near  the  banks  of  the  Danube.

i'  ViteUius.] — ^Ver.  27.  History  is  silent  as  to  any  further  particulars
lelative  to  this  officer.


y  Google


B.  vii.]  OP  OVID.  453

ried  along  the  waves  of  the  stream,  among  the Getse,  his
soldiers  having  landed. But,  most  valiant  descendant  of  the
ancient  Daunus,^^  an  impulse  came  on  thee  to  go  agamst  the
opposing  enemy. There  was  no  delay. Conspicuous  afar,  in
^tiering  arms,  thou  takest  care  that  deeds  of  hravery  shall  not
be  concealed ;  and,  with  rapid  strides,  thou  advancest  against
both  steel  and  iiht  fortified  place  and  the  stones,  more  numerous
than  the  hail  of  midwinter. Neither  the  multitude  of  javelins,
hurled  upon  thee,  nor  yet  the  darts  which  are  reeking  with  the
blood  of  the  viper,  stop  thee ;  the  arrows  with  their  coloured
feathers  bristle  on  thy  helmet,  and  hardly  is  any  part  of  thy  shield
without  a  wound ;  nor  does  thy  body  fortunately  escape  all
blows,  but  pain  is  inferior  to  the  love  of  glory. In  such
manner,  at  Troy,  Ajax  is  said  in  defence  of  the  Grecian  ships  to
have  warded  ofF  the  torches  hurled  by  Hector.  When  thou  hadst
now  approached  nearer,  and  the  combat  was  hand  to  hand,
and  the  fight  cou]d  be  waged  with  the  fierce  sword  at  close
quarters;  'tis  difficult  to  say  what  thy  courage  there  per-
formed, and  how  many  thou  didst  put  to  death,  and  whom,
and  in  what  manner. Thou,  victorious,  didst  tread  upon  heaps
made  by  thy  sword  ;  and  many  a  Getan  was  under  thy  foot
placed  upon  him. The  next  in  rank  fights  after  the  example
of  the  Chief  Centurion  ;*'  and  the  soldiers  both  give  and  receive
many  a  wound  ;  but  thy  valour  as  much  outshmes  the  others,
as  Pegasus  did  in  speed  the  swift  horses,  ^gypsus  is  taken,
and,  Yestalis,  thy  exploits  have  been  attested  in  my  verse  to
2HI  future  time.

EPISTLE  VIIL— TO  SUILLIUS.

Apter  the  death  of  Augustus,  Ovid  writes  to  Suillius,  the  sou-in-law  of
his  wife,  and  thanks  him  for  his  letter,  late  as  it  is,  which  he  has  just
received.  He  asks  him  to  entreat  Germanicus  in  his  behalf,  and  he
promises,  not  to  erect  in  his  honour  marble  temples,  hut  to  sing  his
praises  in  his  poems.  He  then  shows  that  it  is  most  becoming  to  ex-
press gratitude  to  princes  in  poetical  effusions.  He  extols  the  merits  of
poesy,  and  prays  that  his  verses  may  conduce  to  his  own  advantage;  and
condudes  by  saying,  that  if  he  is  denied  permission  to  return  to  his
country,  still,  a  place  of  exile,  nearer  to  Rome,  will  give  him  a  hetter
opportunity  of  celebrating  the  exploits  of  Caesar.

SuHiLnrs,  graced  by  studious  pursuits,  thy  letter  arrived  here

IB  Daunu8,'\ — ^Ver.  29. He  was  king  of  the  Rutulians,  who  settled  in
Apulia,  and  was  the  father  of  Tumus  and  Jutuma.
J»  The  Chu(f  C«i/firi(Wi.]— Ver.  49. '  Primi  pilL' This  was  the  First,


y  Google


454  THB PONTIC  EPISTLES  [b.  I¥.

safe,  late,  but  still  pleasing  to  me. In  it,  &oa  sayert  thai  d
affectionate  esteem  can  soften  die  (rods  above  bj  &aian9tia,
thou  wilt  gife  me  assistance. Thon^  hitherto  thou  hast
availed  nothing,  I  am  indebted  for  tlij  friendly  diqpositiiNi;
andl  callit  a  kbidness  to  have  the  wish  to  aid. May  only  dus
anxiety  of  thine  last  to  a  late  period ;  and  may  thy  affeed<»
be  not  worn  out  by  my  misfortunes. The  links^of  con^sdon
make  a  certain  tie  between  us ;  and  that  diey  may  ever  remam
unbroken,  ii  my  prayer. For  she  who  is  thy  wife,  the  same  is
almost  my  daughter :  and  she  who  calls  thee  son-inrlaw,  calk
me  husband. Wretched  am  I,  if  thou  contractest  thy  brow
when  thou  readest  these  lines,  and  art  ashamed  to  be  my  eon-
nexion ! But  thou  wilt  be  able  to  find  here  nothing  deserniif
of  shame,  except  Fortune,  who  proved  blind  for  me. Should
thou  trace  my  pedigree ;  we  shall  be  found  to  be  Kni^ts,
from  the  earliest  stock, even  through  unnumbered  ances-
tors. Shouldst  thou  wish  to  enquire  what  is  my  ehariM^ter ;
take  away  my  mistake from wretched me, and  it  is  tret
from  blemish. Only  do  thou,  if  thou  shalt  have  a  hope  that
anything  can  be  done  by  entreaty,  implore  the  Deities,  with
suppliant  voice,  whom  thou  dost  venerate. Thy  €rods  are  the
youthful  Caesar;  appease  thy  own  Divinities ;  assuredly  no  altar
is  better  known  to  thee  than  this. It  never  suffers  the  entrea-
ties of  its  worshippers  to  be  in  vam ;  hence  seek  relief  for  my
fortunes. Shoald  it  aid  me  with  a  breeze  ever  so  small,  my
sunk  bark  will  rise  again  from  the  midst  of  the  waves. Then
will  I  offer  the  solemn  frankincense  in  the  burning  flantes,  and
I  will  testify  how  great  is  the  power  of  the  Gods. But  I  will
not  erect  to  thee,  (xermanicus,  a  temple  oi  Parian  marble.
This downfall  has diminished  my  property;  let  thy  own
family  and  rich  cities  erect  temples  to  thee ;  Naso  will  show
his  gratitude  with  his  verses,  which  are  his  wealth. I  con-
fess, indeed,  that  but  small  gifts  are  returned  for  large  ones,
when  I  give  but  words  in  return  for  my  deliverance  granted
to  me. But  he  is  abundantly  grateful,  who  gives  the  most
he  can ;  affection  thereby  reaches  its  limits. Tlie  franldn-

or  Chief  Centurion,  of  the  first  maniple  of  the  TriariL  He  was  originally
called  '  Centurio  Primus/  and  afterwards  *■  Centurio  Primipili/  or,  as  ia
the  present  instance,  '  Primipilus.'  He  was  next  in  rank  to  the  mflitary
Tribunes,  and  sat  on  the  military  covmciL  In  his  charge,  too,  was  the
eagle  of  the  legion,  whence  he  obtained  the  title  of  *  Aqmlifer.'


y  Google


E.  VIII.]  OF  OVID.  455

cense  which  the  poor  man  offers  to  the  Gods  out  of  the  Httle
censer^  is  not  less  availing  than  that  which  is  offered  out  of  a
broad  charger.  The  sucking  lamh,  too,  just  as  much  as  the
victim,  fed  on  the  Faliscan  pasturage,  when  shun,  stains  toith
its  blood  the  Tarpeian  altars.  And  indeed,  nothing  is  more
pleasing  to  men  of  regal  dignity  than  gratitude  expressed
through  the  verse  of  poets.  Verses  perform  the  heralding  of
your  praises,  and  they  provide  that  the  fame  of  your  actions
be  not  fleeting.  By  verse  is  valour  made  immortal;  and,
free  from  death,  it  ohtains  the  notice  of  late  posterity.

Decaying  age  consumes  hoth  iron  and  stone ;  and  no  one
thing  has  greater  power  than  time.  Writings  survive  the
length  of  years ;  through  writings  hast  thou  known  of
Agamemnon,  and  who  bore  arms  against  him,  or  who,  with
him.  Who,  without  verse,  could  have  known  of  Thebes  and
the  seven  chiefs,  and  of  what  took  place  after  these  things,
and  what  before  ?  The  Gods,  too,  (if  I  may  be  allowed  to  say
so,)  exist  through  poetry  ;  and  majesty  so  great  has  need  of
the  voice  of  one  to  celebrate  it.

'Tis  thus  we  know  that  Chaos,  when  divided,  derived  its
parts  from  that  original  mass  of  early  nature ;  thus,  that  the
Giants  aspiring  to  the  realms  of  heaven  were  hurled  to  Styx
by  the  storm-bearing  fires  of  the  Avenger.  "Twas  thus  that
the  victorious  Bacchus  received  glory  from  the  conquest  of
the  Indians ;  Alcides,  from  the  taking  of  (Echalia  ;^  and
lately,  in  some  degree,  verse  hallowed  thy  grandsire,  whom  his
virtues  added  to  Ihe  number  of  the  stars.  If  then,  there  is
any  life  at  all  still  remaining  in  my  genius,  it  shall  all  be  at
thy  service.  Thyself  a  poet,  thou  canst  not  despise  the
homage  of  a  poet ;  according  to  thy  own  judgment,  that
pursuit  has  its  worth  ;  and  had  not  so  great  an  mfluence  in-
vited thee  to  loftier  objects,  thou  wouldst  have  been  the
especial  glory  of  the  Pierian  maids.  But  it  was  more  glorious
to  afford  us  a  subject-matter,  than  verses ;  and  yet  thou  canst
not  entirely  abandon  them.  For  at  one  time  thou  art  waging
war ;  at  another,  thou  art  fitting  thy  words  into  measure,  and
what  is  a  business  to  others,  the  same  is  a  sport  to  thee.

30  (Echalia.'] — Ver.  62.  Hercules  made  war  on  Eurytus,  the  king  of
(Echalia,  whom  he  killed,  together  with  his  sons.  He  took  and  plundered
the  town,  and  led  lole  away  captive,  to  gain  whom  he  had  undertaken  the
expedition.


y  Google


456  TH£  POimO  BPI8TLES  [b.  IT.

And  as  Apollo  is  slow  at  ndther  the  lyre^  iior  the  bow,  but
either  string  comes  m  contact  with  his  sacred  hands ;  so  art
thou  defectife  in  neither  the  arts  of  the  scholar  nor  those  of
the  Prince ;  but  the  Muse  is  united  with  Joyc  in  thy  intellect
And  inasmuch  as  she  has  not  removed  me  from  tluit  stream,
which  the  hollowed  hoof  of  the  Gorgon  steed  has  formed,
may  she  aid  me,  and  may  she  give  me  assistance  in  perform-
ing the  rites  that  are  common  to  u$,  and  in  applying  my  hand
to  the  same  pursuits ;  in  order  that  I  may,  at  length,  escape
from  the  shores  too  much  exposed  to  the  Coralli  clad  in  hides,
and  from  the  cruel  Oetse  ;  and,  if  my  country  is  shut  against
wretched  me,  that  I  may  be  located  in  any  place,  that  is  less
distant  firom  the  Ausonian  City ;  from  which  I  may  be  able  to
sing  thy  new-bom  praises,  and  to  relate  thy  great  exploits,  with
the  least  possible  delay.

Implore  for  one  who  is  almost  thy  step-father,  dear  SuiUius,
that  this  prayer  may  influence  the  Divinities  of  the  heavens.


EPISTLE  IX.— TO  GRiECINUS.

The  Poet,  having  been  informed  that  Gnednns  is  Consid  elect,  laments
that  he  is  away  from  Rome,  and  cannot  share  in  the  geno^  joy,  or  take
part  in  the  ceremonial ;  and  such  being  the  case,  he  Inds  his  letter  per-
form his  part.  He  requests  Gnecinus  to  entreat  in  his  behalf  that  he
may  return ;  and  he  says  that  his  joy  is  increased  by  the  fact  that
Flaccus,  the  brother  ci  Grsednns,  wUl  succeed  him  in  the  Considship,
whose  good  offices  he  also  entreats.  He  condudes  by  enlarging  upon
the  miseries  of  his  exile.

Naso  sends  thee  this  salutation,  Greecinus,  from  the  Euzine  waves,
from  a  spot  whence  it  is  permitted  him,  not  whence  he  delights,
to  do  80.  And  may  the  Gods  grant  that,  tktis  sent,  it  may
arrive  on  that  mom,  which  shall  be  the  first  to  present  thee
with  the  twice  six  fasces.'^  And  since  without  me,  thon,  as
Consul,  wilt  approach  the  Capitol,  and  I  shall  not  be  a  portion
of  thy  retinue ;  let  my  letter  act  the  part  of  its  master,  and
perform  the  duty  of  thy  friend  on  the  day  appointed. Had  I

«i  Twice  six  fasces,']'— Yer,  4.  The  Consuls  were  attended  by  twehe
lictors,  without  whom  they  never  appeared  in  public.  These  preceded  the
Consul  in  a  hne,  one  behind  another.  The  one  that  went  last,  or  nearest
to  the  magistrate,  was  he  to  whom  the  requisite  commands  were  givoir
and  he  was  called  *  Proximus  Lictor.'


y  Google


K.  IX,]  OE  OVID. ':  457

been  bom  under  better  destinies,  and  had  my  chariot  sped  on-
ward with  unbroken  wheel,  my  tongue  would  have  performed
the  duty  of  saluting  thee,  which  now  my  hand  discharges,
by  means  of  my  writing.  Congratulating  thee,  I  would  have
given  thee  kisses  with  complimentary  words ;  and  that  honour
would  not  have  less  been  mine  than  thy  own.  On  that  day
(I  confess  it)  I  should  have  been  so  proud,  that  hardly  any
house  could  have  contained  my  pride.  And  while  the  body
of  the  venerable  Senate  attended  at  thy  side,  I,  of  Equestrian
rank,  should  have  been  seen  going  before**  the  feet  of  the
Consul.  And  although  I  could  wish  ever  to  be  close  to
thee,  I  should  have  rejoiced  not  to  have  had  my  place  at  thy
side.  And  I  should  not  have  been  complaining,  even  if  I  had
been  squeezed  by  the  crowd ;  but  it  would  then  have  been  a
pleasure  to  me  to  be  pressed  by  the  populace.  I  should  have
beheld,  in  my  joy,  how  lengthened  was  the  train  of  the  proces-
sion, and  how  dense  a  crowd  occupied  the  long  road.  And  that
thou  mayst  the  better  know  how  trifling  matters  influence  me,
I  should  have  looked  to  see  what  kind  of  purple  clothed  thee.
I  should  also  have  observed  the  wrought  statues  on  the  curule
chair,  and  aU  the  sculptured  work  of  the  Numidian  tusk.'*
And  when  thou  shouldst  have  been  escorted  to  the  Tarpeian
heights,  until  the  devoted  victim  should  fall  by  thy  order,  the
great  Grod,  who  dwells  ia  the  midst  of  the  temple,  should  have
heard  me  in  secret  giving  him  thanks.  I  would  also  have
offered  frankincense,  with  a  miad  three  or  four  times  more
bounteous  than  the  charger  containing  it,  overjoyed  by  the
honours  of  thy  dignity.  Here  should  I  have  been  numbered
among  thy  Mends  then  present :  if  only  my  destinies  had
auspiciously  given  me  permission  to  be  in  the  City :  and  that
pleasure  which  now  is  conceived  by  my  mind,  could  then  have
been  enjoyed  by  my  eyes.  It  seemed  not  thus  to  the  inhabit-
ants of  heaven,  and  perhaps,  with  justice ;  for  what  can  it

^  Seen  going  before,} — ^Ver.  18.  In  the  Consular  procession,  it  was
customary  for  the  Equestrian  order  to  precede  the  Senators.  It  appears
that  it  is  from  the  enjo3rment  of  this  right  of  precedence,  that  the  Poet
says  that  he  should  he  required,  during  the  time  of  the  procession,  to  leave
his  place  hy  the  side  of  the  Ck>nsul.

^  Of  the  Numidian  /ti**.]— Ver.  28:  It  has  before  been  observed,
that  the  curule  chair  was  made  of,  or  decorated  with,  ivory.  The  greater
part  of  the  ivory  used  by  the  Romans,  was  most  likely  to  be  the  produce
of  Numidia,  and  other  provinces  of  the  north  of  Africa.


y  Google


458  THE  POHTIC  EPISTLES  [b.  IV.

avail  me  to  deny  the  cause  of  my  punkfameiit  ?  Aad  yet  I
will  use  my  mental  poiren,  which  alone  aze  not  iMmished  from
the  spot>  and  so  will  I  behold  thy  Coosnkur  robe  ^  and  thy
Fasces.  'Hiey  only  shall  behold  thee>  dispensing  jnstice  to  the
peof^,  and  shallfeign  to  be  present  in  thy  plaees  of  priTacj.
At  one  moment,  they  shall  bdudd  Uiee  setting  up  to  auctioii,
under  the  sjpear,  the  revenues  of  a  long  lustrum,  and  letting
out  eadi  thmg  with  a  scrupulous  fidelity  ;  at  anoth^  tisM,
doqnently  speaking  in  the  midst  of  the  Senate,  discussing
what  the  public  welfare  requires  ;  at  another  time,  decreeii^
dianks  to  the  Qods  abore,  on  account  of  the  Csesars,  and
striking  the  white  necks  of  the  choice  bulls.

And  would  that,  when  thou  shalt  have  already  prayed  fur
things  of  more  consequence,  thou  wouldst  entreat  that  tiie
wram  of  the  Deity  against  me  be  appeased !  May,  at  these
words,  the  sacred  fire  shoot  upwards  from  the  laden  altar,  and
may  the  pointed  flame,  in  its  brilliancy,  give  a  good  (Huen  to
thy  prayers.  Meanwhile,  in  so  £ur  as  I  may,  that  I  may  not
ever  be  in  querulous  mood,  I  will  celebrate  here,  too,  the  fes-
tiye  day  on  thy  Consulship.  Another  cause  of  joy,  and  one
that  yields  not  to  the  first — ^thy  brother  shall  be  thy  successor
in  an  honour  so  great.  For,  as  thy  rule,  Grsecinus,  is  finished
on  the  last  day  of  December,  he  commences  it  on  the  day  of
Janus ;  and,  such  is  the  affection  between  you,  you  will  share
your  joys  alternately,  thou  in  the  Consular  dignity  of  thy
brother,  he  in  thine.  Thus  thou  wilt  have  become  twice
Consul,  and  twice  Consul,  he :  and  in  thy  family  will  be  be-
held a  twofold  honour :  which,  great  though  it  is,  and  though
Rome  sprung  from  Mars,  beholds  no  sway  more  lofty  than
that  of  the  supreme  Consul ;  yet  the  dignity  of  the  givn
amplifies  this  honour,  and  a  thing  that  is  given  partakes  of
the  majesty  of  him  who  confers  it.  May  it,  then,  be  granted
thy  brother  Flaccua,  and  thyself,  to  enjoy  such  marks  of  the

food  opinion  of  Augustus  at  all  times. But  when  you  shall
ave  leisure,  from  the  care  of  affairs  more  connected  with  your-
selves, I  entreat  you,  add  your  prayers  to  mine. And  if  the

^  Thy  Consfdar  ro6e.]— Ver.  42.  Literally,  *pnetexta.'  The  *togt
praetexta  *  had  a  hroad  purple  border.  It  was  worn  by  the  children  of
both  sexes,  and  by  the  magistrates  of  Rome,  the  Mmiici^a,  and  the
colonies,  and  by  the  priests,  and  those  engaged  in  the  sacrtd  rites.  It  is
said  to  have  been  first  derived  from  the  Etrurians.


y  Google


E.  IX.]  OF  OTTD.  459

breeze  shall  at  all  eirell  the  sail^  loosen  the  ropes^^  that  my
bark  may  take  its  departure  firom  the  Stygian  waters.  Flaccus
was  lately  the  governor  of  these  regions,  Grsecinus;  and,
under  his  role,  the  savage  hanks  of  the  Danube  were  in  safety.
He  kept  the  Mysian  nations  in  constant  peace ;  he,  hy  his
sword,  alarmed  the  Getse  that  trust  in  the  bow.  By  prompt
Talour  he  recovered  Trosmis,^  that  had  been  taken,  and  tinted
the  Danube  with  barbarian  blood.  Inquire  of  him,  what  is  the
aspect  of  this  spot  ?  and  what  are  the  miseries  of  a  Scythian
clunate?  and  by  how  near  an  enemy  I  am  kept  in  alarm?
whether  or  not  the  slender  arrows  are  dipt  in  the  venom
of  the  serpent  ?  or  whether  human  Uves  are  not  the  sad  vic-
tims ?  whether  I  tell  an  untruth,  or  the  hardened  ocean  freezes
with  the  cold,  and  the  ice  extends  many  hundred  yards^  out
to  sea  ?  When  he  has  told  thee  these  things,  inquire  of  him
what  is  said  of  me,  and  ask  in  what  manner  I  mpend  my
tedious  time.  I  am  not  hated  h^re,  nor,  in  truth,'do  1  deserve
to  be  ;  and  my  disposition  has  not  changed  together  with  my
fortune.  That  peace  of  mind  remains,  which  Siou  wast  wont
to  praise,  that  former  modest  demeanour,  as  usual,  on  my
countenance.  Thus  am  I  far  aw<iy,  thus  am  I  here,  where  a
barbarian  enemy  causes  cruel  arms  to  have  more  power  than
laws ;  whereas  no  woman,  man  or  boy,  Grsecinus,  for  now  so
many  years,  can  have  any  ground  of  complaint  against  me.
This  is  the  cause,  why  the  people  of  Tomi  wish  me  well,  and
assist  me,  since  this  land  can  testify  in  my  favour.  They
prefer  that  I  should  depart,  because  they  see  that  I  wish  it ;
yet,  in  regard  to  themselves,  they  wish  me  to  be  here.  And
shouldst  thou  not  beUeve  me ;  there  are  decrees  in  existence
in  which  the  public  records  praise  me,  and  make  me  exempt
from  impost. Although  this  boasting  is  not  befitting  the  un-

25  Loosen  the  ropes,^ — ^Ver.  73.  The  *  rudentes  *  were  the  ropes  used
to  move  or  fix  the  masts,  sails,  or  yards  of  a  vessel.

2«  Troamis.l — ^Ver.  79.  This  was  a  city  of  Mysia,  which  the  Scythians
had  taken  from  the  Romans.

27  Many  hundred  yards.'] — ^Ver.  86.  *  Jugera  mnlta ;'  literally,  *  many
jugera.'  The  '  jugerum  *  of  the  Romans  was,  as  a  measure  of  superficies,
240  feet  in  length,  and  120  in  breadth.  It  was  the  common  measure  of
road  among  the  Romans.  Pliny  renders  the  Greek  word  irXc^eov,  by
'  jugerum,'  in  which  case  it  would  be  a  measure  of  length  of  100  Grecian,
or  104  Roman,  feet.  In  the  present  instance,  the  word  seems  to  imply  a
measure  of  length.


y  Google


460  THB  pomnc  epistles  [b.iv.

fortunate,  the  neighbouring  towns  grant  me  the  same  privi-
leges.

My  piety,  too,  is  not  unknown ;  this  stranger  land  sees  a
shrine  of  Ceesar  existing  in  my  house.  Together  with  him,  stand
his  affectionate  son,  and  his  wife  m  his  priestess  ;^  Deities  not
less  than  him  who  has  lately  been  consecrated  a  €k>d.  And  that
no  part  of  the  family  may  be  wanting,  each  of  his  grandsons
stands  there,  the  one,  next  to  the  side  of  his  grandmother,  the
other,  to  that  of  his  father.  As  oft  as  the  day  arises  from  the
Eastern  quarter,  so  often  do  I  offer  suppliant  words  to  these,
together  with  fiankincense.  The  whole  of  the  Pontic  land,
attesting  my  dutifulness,  shouldst  thou  enquire,  will  say  that  I
do  not  inyent  this.  The  Pontic  land  knows  that  I  celebrate  the
birth-day  of  the  Dirinity  with  sports  as  worthy  as  I  can,  in
this  country.  And  not  less  is  my  duty,  in  this  respect,  known
to  strangers,  if  at  any  time  the  extensive  Propontis  has  sent  any
persons  to  these  seas.  Thy  brother  also,  under  whose  govern-
ment were  the  districts  of  Pontus  on  the  left,  may,  perhaps,
have  heard  of  these  things.  My  fortune  is  not  equid  to  my
heart,  and  in  such  duties,  though  poor,  I  willingly  expend  my
little  property.  Nor  do  I,  far  removed  from  the  City,  present
these  things  to  your  eyes ;  but  I  am  content  with  nlent  acts
of  piety.  And  yet  these  things  will  some  day  reach  the  ears
of  Caesar;  there  is  nothing  which  passes  throughout  the
whole  world  concealed  from  him.  Doubtless  thou  knowest  of
this,  and  beholdest  it,  Csesar,  summoned  to  the  Gods  above  1
since  now  the  earth  is  exposed  to  thy  eyes.  Placed  among
the  stars  fixed  in  the  arch  of  the  sky,  thou  hearest  my  prayers,
which  I  utter  with  anxious  lips.  Perhaps,  too,  those  verses
may  arrive  thither,  which  I  have  sent,  about  thee,  newly-
made  an  inhabitant  of  heaven.  I  divine  that,  by  means  of
these,  thy  Divinity  will  be  appeased  ;  and,  not  undeservedly,
dost  thou  bear  the  benign  name  of  Father.

38  His  vfife  as  his  priestess,] — Ver.  107.  His  meaning  is,  that  lAm
venerates  the  memory  of  her  husband  Augustus  in  no  less  degree  than  the
priest  venerates  the  Deity  of  whom  he  is  the  minister.


y  Google


B.  X.]  OF  OTID.  461


ELEGY  X.— TO  PEDO  ALBINOVANUS.^

Hs  'Writes  to  his  friend  Pedo  Albinovanus,  the  poet,  and  refers  'to  the
length  of  time  he  has  lived  among  the  savage  Getse ;  comparing  his
troubles  with  those  of  Ulysses,  he  says  that  his  own  are  the  greater.
He  entreats  him  to  preserve  his  attachment  to  him  in  his  adversity ;
and  to  imitate  the  example  of  Theseus,  whose  exploits  he  had  made  the
theme  of  his  verse.

Thb  sixth  summer  is  being  passed  by  me,  here,  on  the  Cimme-
rian shore,  to  be  spent  among  the  Getse,  wrapped  in  skins.
And  dost  thou,  my  dearest  Albinovanus,  compare  flint  stones,
or  iron,  to  my  hardships  ?  The  drop  hollows  out  the  stone  ;
the  ring  is  worn  by  use,  and  the  curving  ploughshare  is  rubbed
away  by  the  pressure  of  the  earth.  Will,  then,  devouring
Time  consume  everything  except  me  ?  Eyen  deatih,  overcome
by  my  hardships,  is  tardy  in  its  approach.  Ulysses  is  an  in-
stance of  a  mind  extremely  patient ;  he  who  was  tost  on  the
fitful  ocean  during  ten  years  ;  but  yet  he  did  not  endure  the
whole  of  that  term,  full  of  the  anxieties  of  his  destiny  ;  there
were  jBrequently  pauses  of  quietude.  Was  it  a  hard  thing  for
him,  during  six  years,  to  embrace  the  beauteous  Calypao,  and
to  share  the  bed  of  a  Goddess  of  the  Sea  ?  The  son  of  Hip-
potas^  entertained  him ;  ^  who  gave  him  the  winds  as  his  gift,
that  a  serviceable  breeze  might  bend  his  impelled  sails.  It  was
no  hardship  to  listen  to  the  Sirens,  damsels  that  sang  so  well,  and
the  lotus  was  not  bitter  to  him  that  tasted  it.  I  would  buy  the
potions  that  cause  forgetfiilness  of  one's  country,  at  the  price
of  half  my  life,  were  they  but  saleable ;  nor  couldst  thou  ever
compare  the  city  of  the  Lsestrygon,  to  the  nations  which  the
Danube  passes  with  its  winding  stream.  The  Cyclop,  too,  will
not  surpass  Phyaces^^  in  cruelty ;  how  large  a  part  of  my  dread
is  he  wont  to  form !  Although  Scylla  is  lurking,  with  fierce
monsters,  downward  from  her  amputated  groin ;  the  ships  of

^  Pedo  Albinovamis.'] — He  was  an  heroic  poet  of  Rome,  and  is  now
generally  supposed  to  have  heen  the  author  of  the  Consolation  to  Livia
Augusta,  on  the  death  of  her  son  Drusus ;  a  poem  which  was  long  attrihuted
to  Ovid.

30  The  son  of  Hippotas,}—YtT,  15.  .^lus  was  the  son  of  Hippotas.
He  hospitably  entertained  Ulysses,  and  gave  him  favourable  winds  for  his
return  to  his  own  country.

'»  PAyaccff.]— Ver.  23.  This  person  appears  to  have  been  a  savage  chief
of  some  of  the  neighbouring  Scythian  tribes.


y  Google


462  THX  poarnc  spistlib  [b-iv.

the  Heniochi*'  do  more  injury  to  mariners ;  and  thou  canst  not
compare  Charybdis  with  the  hostile  Achsei,  altirangh  she
thrice  vomits  fordi  the  brine  that  she  has  thjice  sacked  19.
Although  these  roam  more  at  large,  on  the  coasts  on  the  rig^t-
hand  side  of  the  Euxine  Sea,  still  they  do  not  allow  this  side  to
be  free  from  anxiety.  Here  are  fields  without  trees^  here  are
arrows  dipped  in  venom,  here  the  winter  makes  the  sea  pass-
able even  on  foot ;  so  that  the  traveller,  despising  the  ship,
may  go  with  dry  feet,  where  the  oar  had  lately  made  a  path  by
impelling  the  waves.  Those  who  come  frx)m  your  parts,  say
that  you  hardly  bdieve  these  things.  How  wretdied  is  he,  who
endures  things  more  dreadful  than  can  be  believed !  Yet,  do
believe  me,  and  I  will  notidlow  thee  to  remain  ignorant  of  the
reasons  why  the  cold  winter  hardens  the  Sarmatian  Sea.  The
Constellation  that  bears  the  form  of  a  wain,  and  that  brings
extreme  cc^d,  is  near  to  us.  In  these  parts  Boreas  arises ;
he  is  familiar  with  these  coasts,  and  he  derives  his  strength
from  a  neighbouring  region ;  but  the  South  Wind,  whK^h
breathes  wiu-mly  from  the  opposite  pole,  is  far  away,  and
comes  but  seldom  and  faint.  Besides,  here  min^e  the  riven
with  the  inclosed  Euxine  Sea,  and  the  ocean  loses  its  power,
from  the  multitude  of  streams.  Hither  do  the  Lycus,^  the
Sagaris,  the  Penius,  the  Hypanis,  and  the  Crates  flow  onwards
to  die  sea,  and  the  Halys,  whirling  with  many  a  po<^ ;  and
the  rapid  Parthenius,  and  the  Cynics,  carrying  along  rocks,
rolls  on,  and  the  Tyras,  that  is  more  sluggish  than  no  other
river.  And  thou,  Thermodon,  well  known  to  the  female
squadrons,'^  and  thou  too,  Phasis,  once  sought  by  the  men  of
Greece.  The  most  pellucid  Dryaspes,  too,  with  the  stream  of
the  Borysthenes,  and  the  Melanthus  silently  pacing  on  his
quiet  way  ;  the  river,  too,  which  separates  the  two  la^ls,  Asia

^  The  Hemochi.']—'Yer,  26.  These  were,  a  race  of  pirates,  who  liycd
in  the  neighbourhood  of  Ck>lchis,  and  caused  great  terror  by  their  devasta-
tions. The  Achaeans  were  a  peopk  of  Scythia,  of  a  similar  rapacious  and
lawless  character.

*»  The  Xyctts.] — Ver.  47.  This,  and  the  other  rivers  here  mentioned,
are  streams  which,  situate  in  the  north  of  Turkey,  the  south  of  Russia,
or  in  Asia  Minor,  flow  into  the  sea  of  Marmora,  or  the  Black  Sea.

*»  The  female  tgucidrons,} — ^Ver.  51.  The  Amazons  are  here  alluded
to.  They  were  a  warlike  race  of  females,  who  first  dwelt  in  Sarmatia,
near  the  river  Tanais,  but  afterwards  in  Cappadocia,  near  the  river  Ther-
modon.


y  Google


B,  X.]  OP  OVID.  463

and  the  sister  of  Cadmus,^  and  makes  his  path  between  them
both ;  and  innumerable  others,  the  greatest  among  all
which,  the  Danube,  denies  that  he  yields  the  palm  to  thee,  O
Nilus.  Such  an  abundance  of  streams,  taints  the  waters
-which  they  increase ;  and  permit  not  the  sea  to  retain  its
strength  of  current.  Moreover,  just  like  a  standing  pool,  and
a  sluggish  swamp,  it  is  of  colour  hardly  azure,  and  its  native
hue  is  modified.  Fresh  water  swims  on  the  surface  of  the
deep,  and  is  lighter  than  the  sea  water;  which  derives  its
peculiar  weight  from  the  admixture  of  salt,.

Should  any  one  inquire  why  these  things  are  told  to  Pedo,
and  what  is  the  use  of  mentioning  them  in  measured  numbers ;
I  will  tell  them,  I  have'  worn  awaTy  the  time  and  I  have  be-
guiled my  cares ;  this  advantage  has  the  present  hour  brought
to  irie.  While  I  have  been  writing  these  things,  I  was  far  re-
moved from  my  usual  sorrows ;  and  I  was  not  sensible  that  I
was  in  the  midst  of  the  Getse.  But  thou,  I  doubt  not,  when  in
thy  verse  thou  art  praising  Theseus,'*  dost  defend  the  reputa-
tion of  thy  subject,  and  thou  dost  imitate  the  hero  of  whom
thou  art  singing.  He  certainly  forbids  friendship  to  be  the
waiter  upon  times  of  prosperity.  Although  he  is  an  hero,
mighty  in  his  exploits,  and  is  celebrated  by  thee,  in  language
in  which  he  ought  to  be  sung,  yet  in  him  there  is  something
worthy  to  be  imitated  by  us,  and  any  one  can  be  a  Theseus
in  attachment.  Foes  have  not  to  be  subdued  by  thee,  with
the  sword  and  with  the  club,  by  reason  of  whom  the  Isthmus
of  Corinth^  was  hardly  passable  by  any  one ;  but  affection
must  be  shewn,  not  a  difficult  matter  to  him  who  is  willing.
What  labour  is  it  not  to  have  violated  sincere  attachment.
Thou  must  not  suppose  that  these  things  have  been  said  with
complaining  tongue  to  thee,  who  remainest  throughout  con-
stant to  thy  friend.

^  T?ie  sister  of  Cadmus.'] — Ver.  55.  Europa,  who  gave  name  to  Europe,
which  is  here  signified.

^  Art  praising  Theseus,'] — Ver.  71.  Pedo  Albinovanus  wrote  a  poem,
of  which  Theseus  was  the  hero.

"  The  Isthmus  of  Corinth.] — Ver.  80.  This  spot  was  rendered  almost
impassable  by  the  atrocities  perpetrated  by  Sinnis,  or  Scyron,  a  robber  of
that  vicinity. Theseus  slew  him,  and  hung  him  on  a  pine  tree.


y  Google


464  THE  PONTIC  EPISTLES  [b.  it.


EPISTLE  XI.— TO  GALLIC.

Having  been  informed  by  Gallio  of  the  death  of  his  wife,  he  apologizei
for  not  having  before  named  her  in  his  writings,  in  return  for  the  grief
which  he  manifested  on  his  banishment  from  Rome.  He  states  his  own
sorrow  on  hearing  of  the  death  of  the  wife  of  Gallio,  bat  he  says  thtt
he  will  not  presume  to  offer  him  consolation,  as  he  is  already  acquainted
with  all  the  precepts  of  the  learned  on  the  subject  of  resignation,  and
he  trusts,  that  by  this  time,  his  grief  has  subsided.  He  also  thinks  it
possible  that,  by  the  time  his  letter  arrives,  Gallio  may  have  married  again.

Gallio  !  the  fault  will  be  hardly  excusable  by  me,  that  then
hast  not  received  praise  in  my  verse  ;  for  thou,  too,  (as  I  re-
member), with  thy  tears  didst  foment  my  wounds,  that  were
made  by  the  celestial  spear ;  and,  would  that,  afflicted  by  the
loss  of  thy  Mend  thus  snatched  away,  thou  hadst  felt  no
reason  besides,  why  thou  shouldst  grieve !  It  pleased  not  thus
the  Gods,  who,  in  their  cruelty  did  not  thmk  it  wrong  to
deprive  thee  of  thy  chaste  wife.  For  a  letter  lately  came  to  me,
the  messenger  of  woe,  and  thy  loss  was  read  of  by  me  with
tears.  But  I  would  not  dare,  in  my  folly,  to  console  so  wise  a
man,  and  repeat  to  thee  the  well-known  sayings  of  the  learned ;
I  suppose,  too,  that  thy  grief  has  terminated  by  this,  through
the  very  length  of  time,  if  not  on  principle.  While  thy  letter
was  arriving,  while  mine,  returning,  is  passing  over  so  many
seas  and  lands,  a  whole  year  passes  away.  To  offer  consola-
tion, is  the  duty  of  a  certain  space  of  time  ;  so  long  as  grief  is
in  full  career,  and  while  the  afflicted  seeks  relief ;  but,  when
length  of  time  has  lulled  the  wounds  of  the  mind,  he  who  un-
seasonably foments  them,  renews  them.

Besides,  (and  may  this  omen  be  a  true  one  for  thee !)  thou
mayst  by  this  time  be  happy  in  a  new  marriage.


EPISTLE  XIL— TO  TUTICANUS.

Hb  first  tells  Tuticanus  the  reason  why  he  has  not  hitherto  mentioned  his
name  in  his  writings.  He  then  refers  to  the  intimate  friendship  that
has  existed  between  them  from  their  childhood :  and  he  condudeSt  by
entreating  him  to  use  his  influence  with  Tiberius  Caesar  in  his  fsvonr.

It  is  caused  by  the  nature  of  thy  name,^  that  thou  art  not

5*  The  nature  of  thy  name.  ] — ^Ver.  2.  He  says  that  the  quantities  of  the
feet  in  the  name  of  TutKcanus  had  rendered  it  impossible  for  him,  with  due
retrard  to  poetical  rules,  to  name  him  either  in  Hexameter  or  Pentameter
lines.


y  Google


i


B.  XII.]  or  OYTD.  465

named,  my  friend,  in  my  books.  But  I  would  deem  no
one  worthy  of  honour  sooner  than  that ;  if  only  my  verses
are  any  honour.  The  law  of  poetical  measure,  and  the
nature  of  the  name,  impede  this  act  of  duty  ;  and  there  is  no
way  for  thee  to  take  a  place  in  my  numbers.  For  I  am
aahamed  so  to  distribute  thy  name  into  two  lines,^  that  the
first  one  may  end,  and  the  second,  begin  with  it.  1  should
be  ashamed,  too,  if,  in  the  part  of  the  wordy  where  a  stress
is  laid  on  the  syllable,  I  should  pronounce  My  name  short,
and  call  thee  Tuticanus?  and  thou  canst  not  be  introduced
in  a  line  under  the  form  of  Tuticanus;  so  that  the  first
syllable  be  made  short  out  of  a  long  one.  Or,  suppose  the
syllable  is  made  long,  which  is  now  pronounced  short ;  and
the  second  syllable  is  long  with  an  extended  pause.  If,  by
these  blemishes  I  should  dare  to  spoil  thy  name,  I  should
be  laughed  at,  and  I  should  deservedly  be  denied  to  be  the
possessor  of  judgment.  This  was  the  cause  of  my  deferring
this  tribute,  which  my  resources  shall  now  pay  with  the  ad-
dition of  interest.  And  under  an  indication  of  some  sort,
I  will  celebrate  thee ;  I  will  sen4  thee  my  verses,  oh  thou
that  wast  known  when  almost  a  boy  to  me  when  almost
a  boy  as  well;  and  that  hast  been  beloved  by  me  not  less
than  as  a  brother  by  a  brother  through  a  series  of  years,
as  long  as  we  both  of  us  have  lived.  Thou  wast  my  kind
adviser,  thou  wast  my  guardian  and  my  companion,  while
I  guided  the  reins  but  newly  assumed  with  inexperienced
hand.  Often,  under  thy  criticism,  have  I  corrected  my
works ;  often,  by  my  recommendation,  was  an  alteration
made  by  thee  ;  when  ^e  Pierian  maid  instructed  thee  to  write
the  Phseacian  poem,'*®  worthy  of  even  Mseonian  paper.  This
even  course,  this  unison,  commenced  in  early  youth,  continued

^*  To  distribute  thy  name  into  two  lines.'] — Ver,  7.  He  mevis  to  say
that  the  only  way  in  which  his  name  can  possihly  he  introduced  is  hy  using
the  first  two  syllahles  for  the  final  spondee  of  the  Hexameter,  and  com-
mencing the  Pentameter  with  the  two  remaining  syllahles ;  hut  that  he
would  he  ashamed  to  adept  that  expedient ;  therehy  implying  the  hmp-
ing  and  mutilated  nature  of  the  lines,  which  would  infalhhly  result  from
such  a  step.

^  Phaadan  poem.'] — Ver.  27.  This  appears  to  haveheen  apoem  which
Tuticanus  had  composed  either  in  praise  of  Alcinoiis,  the  king  of  the
Phieadans,  or  descriptiYe  of  the  wanderings  of  Ulysses,  as  recounted  hy  him
to  Alcinoiis,  hy  whom  he  was  hospitably  entertained.  He  compliments
Tuticanus  on  his  work,  in  saying  that  it  was  worthy  of  the  paper  of  Homer.

H  H

Digitized  by  LjOOQ IC


4^  THE  POKTIC  KnSTLES  [b.  it.

tmimpaired  until  our  hair  was  grey.  And  if  theae  Hm^
move  thee  not,  I  could  bdiere  that  thy  breast  is  of  hard  iron,
or  enclosed  in  infrangible  adamant.

Bet,  first,  may  war  and  frosts,  which  two  evils  Pontos  as
hatefdl  to  me  possesses,  cease  from  off  this  land,  and  mxf
Boreas  become  warm,  and  the  South  wind  intens^y  cold,  tad
may  my  lot  become  more  endurable ;  before  thy  feelings  afe
hardened  against  thy  ruined  companion.  May  this  burdmi  not
be  added  to  my  woes ;  and  it  is  not  added.  Only  do  tbcra,  by
the  Gods  of  heaTen,  of  whom  he  is  the  most  unwaTering,  und^
whose  rule  thy  honours  have  continually  increased,  effect  by
defending  me,  an  exile,  with  constant  attachment,  that  the  de-
sired breeze  desert  not  my  bark.  Dost  thou  ask,  what  I  would
recommend  ?  May  I  die,  if  I  am  not  almost  unable  to  say ;  ii
only,  the  person  who  is  dead  can  die  again,  I  neither  know
what  to  do,  nor  what  to  wish,  or  not  to  wish ;  and  my  own  in-
terests are  not  well  ascertained  by  me.  BeHere  me,  prudence
is  the  first  thing  to  forsake  the  distressed,  and  common  sense
and  judgment  take  flight  together  with  prosperity.  Do  thou
thyself,  I  pray,  consider  in  what  respect  1  can  foe  assisted,  aud
through  what  channel  thou  canst  make  a  passage  to  ike  uttam-
ment  o/mj  desires.


EPISTLE  XIII.— TO  CARUS.

Hb  tells  Caros,  the  Pneceptor  of  the  Caesars,  that  he  ^sill  at  once  peroeifei
fi^m  the  colonr  of  the  paper  and  the  structure  of  the  verse,  from  whom
this  letter  comes.  He  informs  him  that  he  has  composed,  in  the  Getie
tongue,  a  letter  in  praise  of  Augustus,  Livia,  and  her  dbildren.  He
entreats  him,  by  their  ancient  friendship,  as  he  is  now  in  tiie  sixth  /esr
M  bis  exile,  to  procure  his  removal  to  some  other  place.

0  THOU,  not  to  be  numbered  among  my  wavering  acquaint-
ances, hail  thou  who  art  called  Carus,  a  thing  which  thoa
really  art.*^  The  colour  which  this  letter  bears,^  and  the  com-
position of  my  Terse,  can  be  at  once  a  sign  to  thee  from  what
quarter  thou  receivest  this  salutation  ;  not  that  my  compomtim

^  A  thing  which  thou  realty  ar/. ]—Vcr.  2.  *  Cams'  sign^es  'dear.'
It  being  the  name  of  his  correspondent,  he  tells  him  that  h^  is  not  only
Cams  in  name,  but  in  reality.

«  The  colour  which  this  letter  ft«ir».]— Ver.  3.  The  fact  of  it  being
wofn  and  thumbed,  showing  that  it  has  come  fkom  a  distance.


y  Google


B.  XIII.]  OF  OTID.  467

18  wonderful,  but  neitlier  is  it,  assuredly,  common-plftce ;  but,
of  wkaterer  nature  it  is,  it  is  evident  that  it  is  mine.  Thou,
too,  thyself,  though  thou  shouldst  tear  oflF  the  superscription
from  the  top  of  the  paper,^  I  still  seem  able  to  pronounce
what  is  thy  composition.  Placed  among  ever  so  many  works,
thou  art  recognized,  and  thou  wilt  be  found,  through  indica-
tions which  have  been  remarked.

The  strength  which  we  know  to  be  worthy  of  Hercules,  and
equal  to  tke  might  of  Yaim.  of  whom^  thou  art  singing,. betrays
its  author ;  my  Muse,  too,  betrayed  by  her  pecuUar  qualities,
may  perhaps  be  remarkable  through  her  own  blemishes.  As
much  did  his  ugly  shape  hinder  Thersites  from  lying  concealed,
as  Nireus^  was  conspicuous  for  his  beauteous  one ;  and  it  will
not  be  right  for  thee  to  be  surprised,  if  the  verses  are  faulty,
which  I,  now  become  almost  a  Gretic  poet,  compose.

Ah!  I  am  ashamed  to  own  it;  I  have  composed  a  work  in
the  Getic  language,  and  barbarian  words  have  been  arranged
into  my  measures.  I  have  given  satisfaction,  too ;  congratulate
me !  I  have  begun  to  have  the  reputation  of  a  poet  among  the
savage  Getse.  Dost  thou  enquire  what  was  my  subject  ?  I  have
'  sung  the  praises  of  Caesar.  My  new  attempt  was  aided  by  the
inspiration  of  the  Divinity ;  for  I  have  shewn  that  the  body  of
our  father  Augustus  was  mortal ;  that  his  spirit  has  departed  to
the  sethereal  abodes ;  that  he  who,  by  compulsion,^  has  assumed
the  reins  of  empire,  often  refused  hy  hiniy  is  equal  to  his  father ;
that  thou,  Livia,  art  the  Vesta  of  chaste  matrons  ;  and  that  it
is  a  matter  of  doubt  whether  thou  art  more  worthy  of  thy  son,
or  of  thy  husband ;  that  there  are  two  youths,  the  firm  sup-
ports of  their  father,  who  have  given  sure  indications  of  their

■*  The  top  of  the  paper,"] — ^Ver.  7.  *  Frons  chartae'  will,  perhaps,  either
mean  the  top  of  the  paper  in  a  book  composed  of  a  scroll,  or  the  first  page
in  one  composed  of  different  leaves,  like  our  books ;  the  '  titulus'  would  be
tlie  superscription  and  address,  stating  by  whom  written,  and  to  whom  sent.

■•*  Him  of  whom.'] — ^Ver.  12. Hercules,  who  was  the  hero  of  his  poem.

^  Nireus.] — ^Ver.  16.  He  was  the  son  of  Charops  and  Aglaia,  and  a
native  of  the  island  of  Syme.  Homer  si^s  that  he  was  the  most  beauteous
of  men.

*»  By  compulsion.'] — Ver.  27.  This  refers  to  the  pretended  difficulty
which  Tiberius  made,  on  bdng  requested  by  the  Senate  to  assume  the  reini
of  government ;  an  offer  which,  for  some  time,  to  suit  his  purposes,  he
pretended  to  refuse  to  accept.

H  H  2


y  Google


468  THE  PONTIC  EPISTLES  [b.  nr.

dispositioii.  When  I  read  througli  these  verses,  written  mt
in  the  song  of  my  conntry,  and  the  last  page  came  to  mj
hands,  all  moved  hoth  their  heads  and  their  fall  quivers,  and
there  was  a  prolonged  applause  in  the  mouths  of  the  G«t>e ;
and  one  said,  *'  Since  thou  writest  these  things  about  Caesar,
thou  oughtst  to  be  restored  by  the  command  of  Caesar/'

He,  indeed,  said  so ;  but  now,  Carus,  the  sixth  winter  behol4p
me  removed  xmder  the  snowy  pole.

My  verses  avail  me  not;  once  did  my  verses  injure  me,  and
they  were  the  first  cause  of  so  wretched  a  banishment ;  but  do
thou,  by  the  common  ties  of  our  sacred  pursuits,  by  the  name
of  friendship  not  despised  by  thee,  aid  me;  then  may  G&t-
manicus  afford  a  subject-matter  for  the  scope  of  thy  genius,  the
foe  being  captive  in  Latian  chains.  May  the  youths  prosp^,
the  common  anxiety  of  the  Gods,  whom,  it  is  thy  great  honour
to  have  had  entrusted  to  thee  to  educate  ;  do  thou  give  all  the
influence  that  thou  canst  to  my  preservation,  which  will  not  be
achieved,  except  by  a  change  of  my  place  of  exile.


EPISTLE  XIV.— TO  TUTICANUS.

He  writes  to  Tnticanus,  whom  he  had  before  addressed,  and  says  thai  he
would  prefer  any  place  of  exile  to  TomL  He  says,  that  the  people  of
that  place  ought  not  to  be  angry  at  his  censures,  as  they  are  not  directed
against  them,  but  the  place  only.  On  the  contrary,  he  admits  that  he  has
inyariably  received  the  greatest  kindness  from  them.

These  lines  are  sent  to  thee,  whom  I  lately  complained  of  as
not  having  a  name  suited  to  my  measure.

In  them,  thou  wilt  find  nothing  to  give  thee  pleasure,  ex-
cept that  I  am  still  pretty  weU ;  even  health  is  hateful  to  me,
and  my  most  earnest  wish  is,  forsooth,  to  depart  some  way  or
other  from  these  regions.  I  have  no  anxiety  but  to  leave
this  land ;  for  any  one  will  be  more  pleasing  than  this  which  I
behold.  Send  my  sails  into  the  midst  of  the  Syrtes,  into  the
midst  of  Charybdis,  so  that  I  may  depart  from  my  present  lo-
cality. Styx,  even,  if  there  is  such  a  thing,  will  be  a  good
exchange  for  the  Danube ;  and  if  there  is  anything  hmdet
that  the  world  contains  lower  than  Styx.

The  tilled  field  less  dreads  weeds,  the  swallow  less  [dreads
the  winter,. than  Naso  does  the  places  adjacent  to  the  Gretse,


y  Google


B.  XIV.]  OF  OTID.  469

the  worshippers  of  Mars.  The  people  of  Tomi  are  angry  with
me,  on  account  of  such  expressions,  and  the  puhUc  displeasure
has  been  excited  by  my  Imes.  Shall  I,  then,  never  cease  to
receive  injury  through  my  verses,  and  shall  I  be  everlastingly
punished  by  an  imprudent  disposition?  Why  do  I  delay
catting  off  my  fingers,  that  I  may  not  write  ?  and  why,  in  my
madness,  do  I  still  adhere  to  the  weapons  which  have  been  my
i^uin  ?  Again  I  turn  to  the  wonted  rocks,  and  to  those  waves,
in  which  my  shipwrecked  bark  was  dashed.  But,  I  have  don6
nothing ;  it  is  no  fault  of  mine,  ye  people  of  Tomi,  whom  I
esteem,  although  I  utterly  hate  your  place.

Let  any  one  examine  the  records  of  my  labours ;  my  letters
have  made  no  complaints  about  you.  I  complain  of  the  cold,
and  of  incursions  to  be  dreaded  on  every  side,  and  that  the
fortifications  are  shaken  by  the  enemy.  I  have  uttered  charges,
most  truthful,  against  the  locality,  not  against  the  people :
even  you  yourselves  often  condemn  your  own  soil.

The  Muse  of  Hesiod,  the  old  man  that  was  devoted  to  agri-
culture, dared  to  show  us  why  his  own  Ascra  should  always  be
shunned. But  he  who  wrote  was  bom  in  that  land ;  and  yet
Ascra  was  not  exasperated  against  her  own  poet. Who  loved
his  coimtry  better  than  the  sagacious  Ulysses  ? And  yet,  by
his  showing,  the  ruggedness  of  the  place  has  become  known.
Scepsius  ^^  did  not  attack  places,  but  manners,  in  his  bitter
remarks,  and  Rome  herself  was  accused. And  yet  she  bore
these  false  charges  with  equanimity,  and  an  abusive  tongue
was  no  injury  to  its  owner. But  an  unskilful  interpreter  excites
the  wrath  of  the  people  against  me,  and]  calls  on  my  lines  to
answer  a  fresh  charge. Would  that  I  were  as  fortunate,  as  I  am
pure  in  my  heart. No  man  is  yet  in  existence  that  has  been
wounded  by  my  tongue. Besides,  had  I  been  blacker  even  than
lUyrian  pitch,  the  friendly  multitude  should  not  have  been
slandered  by  me. My  exile,  kindly  entertained  by  you,  people
bf  Tomi,  shows  that  men  of  such  gentle  manners  are  Greeks.
The  Peligni,  my  people,  and  Sulmo,  my  native  place,  could
not  have  been  more  affectionate  to  me,  in  my  misfortune.  That
honour  was  lately  conferred  by  you  on  me,  which  you  would
scarcely  grant  to  any  one  flourishing  and  prosperous. As  yet,

^  ScepHus,} — ^Ver.  38.  It  is  not  known  whether  this  person  was  a
poet  or  a  philosopher,  who  was  thus  allowed  with  impunity  to  attack  the
manners  of  the  Roman  people.


y  Google


470  THE  POHTIC  EPISTLES  [b.  iv.

I  am  the  odI j  one  that  is  exempt  from  impost  inyonrcoimtry ;
except  those  who  haye  these  privileges  by  law.  My  temples  have
been  wreathed  with  a  sacred  garland,  which  the  public  U^om
bestowed  on  me,  reluctant  to  accept  it.  As  pleasing,  theref(»e,
as  the  land  of  Delos  was  to  Latona,  which  alone  afforded  her
a  place  of  safety,  in  her  wanderings  ;  so  dear  to  me  is  Tomi;
which,  in  its  hospitability,  remains  faithful  up  to  the  present
moment  to  me  banished  from  my  country.  Oh!  that  Ihe
Gods  would  only  grant,  that  it  might  but  afford  a  hope  of  tran-
quil peace,  and  &a.t  it  could  be  further  off  from  the  freezii^
pole.


EPISTLE  XV.— TO  SEXTUS  POMPEIUS.

Hb  tellfl  him  that  he  is  indebted  to  him  for  erery  thing  bat  his  Mfe,  which
he  owes  to  Caesar.  He  begs  him  to  ask  of  the  Emperor,  whom  he  so
much  respects,  another  place  of  exile  exposed  to  fewer  hardships.  He
excuses  himself  for  so  often  making  the  same  request ;  but  he  says,  that
his  longing  knows  no  bounds.

If  there  is  still  any  one  in  existence  not  unforgetfdl  of  me,  or
who  enquires  what  I,  Naso,  sent  a^u*,  am  doing ;  let  him  know
that  I  owe  my  life  to  the  Caesars,  my  safety  to  Sextus  Powt-
peius.  After  the  Gtodn  aboye,  he  shall  be  the  first  in  my
esteem.  For,  though  I  should  embrace  aU  the  season  of  my
wretched  life,  no  one  part  of  it  is  without  his  kindnesses.
These  are  as  many  in  number  as  the  crimson  grains  under  the
thin  rind  of  the  pomegranate,  that  blush  in  the  beds  of  a  fertile
garden ;  as  the  ears  of  standing  com  that  Africa,  the  grapes
that  the  land  of  Tmolus,^  the  olives  that  Sicyon,  the  honey-
comb that  Hybla  produces.  I  confess  it ;  you  may  attest  it ;
s^  it,  ye  Quirites.  There  is  no  need  for  the  authority  of  die
laws;  I  myself  say  so.  Put  me  too,  but  a  trifling  matter,
among  thy  patrimonial  possessions ;  let  me  be  a  part,  how-
ever small,,  of  thy  property. As  much  as  Tiinacria  is  thine,^

^  Dnolus.'] — Ver.  9.  This  was  a  mountain  of  Lydia,  £smed  among
the  ancients  for  the  excellence  of  its  wine  and  8af[h>n.

*•  Tnnacria  is  tAine."} — Ver.  15.  It  is  supposed  that  Sicily  was  under
the  especial  protection  and  guardianship  of  Sextus,  and  that  he  was  en-
trusted by  Augustus  or  Tiberius  with  the  command  in  Macedonia,  or  in
one  of  its  principal  towns.


y  Google


B.  XV.]  or  OTiD.  471

and  Macedonia,  the  land  that  was  rnled  over  by  Philip ;  as
much  as  thy  hoase,  that  adjoins  the  Forum  of  Augustus  ;  as
much  as  thy  Campania,  thy  country  domain,  is  pleasing  to  the
eyes  of  its  owner,  and  the  rest  which  thou  possessest,  Sextus,
either  as  left  to  thee  or  bought ;  so  much  am  I  thy  property  ;
by  reason  of  which  melancholy  gift  thou  canst  not  say  that
thou  possessest  nothing  in  Pontus.  And,  oh  !  that  thou  didst
not,  and  that  a  more  genial  soil  were  granted  me ;  and,  that
thou  wouldst  hold  thy  property  on  a  preferable  spot !  And
since  it  rests  with  the  Gods,  attempt  to  soothe  the  Divinities,
whom  thou  worshippest  with  unceasing  yeneration :  for,  it  is
hard  to  discover,  whether  thou  art  more  a  proof  of  my  mistake,
or  its  consolation.  And  I  do  not  entreat  thee  in  uncertainty :
but  often,  the  speed  of  the  flowing  water,  as  we  go  along  with
the  stream,  is  increased  by  rowing.  I  am  ashamed,  and  I  dread
to  be  always  making  the  same  entreaties,  lest  a  justified  tedium
should  take  possession  of  thy  feelings.  But  what  shall  I  do  ?
Desire  is  a  thing  that  knows  no  bounds.  Pardon,  kind  friend,
my  failing.  Often,  when  I  wish  to  write  something  else,  I
ghde  into  that  subject :  my  very  letters  of  themselves  ask  for
another  place  of  exile.

But  whether  thy  favour  is  to  have  effect,  or  whether  cruel
Destiny  bids  me  die  under  the  freezing  pole  ;  I  shall  ever  recall
to  mind  thy  unforgotten  services  ;  and  my  country  shall  hear
that  I  am  thine.  Each  other  country  besides,  that  is  situate
under  this  sky,  shall  hear  of  it,  if  only  my  song  travels  beyond
the  savage  Gretse ;  and  shall  know  that  thou  wast  the  cause  and
the  guardian  of  my  safety,  and  that  I  am  thine,  less  only  the
coin  and  the  balance.*'*

EPISTLE  XVI.— TO  HIS  ENEMY.

He  tells  his  calumniator,  that  he  ought  not  to  revile  him,  as  he  ought  now
to  be  looked  upon  as  dead ;  and  that  envy  attacks  only  the  living,  but
does  not  molest  the  dead :  he  then  enumerates  a  multitude  of  poets,
whom  he  may  assail  with  as  much  justice  as  himself.

Thoit  envious  man,  why  dost  thou  pull  to  pieces  the  verses  of
Naso,  who  is  no  more  ?  Death  is  not  wont  to  injure  genius.
Greater  fame,  too,  arises  when  we  are  no  more ;  and  I  had
reputation  even  when  I  was  numbered  with  the  Uving.  When
^^  And  the  balance,^ — Ver.  42.  These  were  formally  used  on  the  sale
of  slaves.


y  Google


472  THE  POKTIC  EPISTLES  [b.  nr.

MawuB**'  was  existiDg,  and  Rabirius/*  with  his  nervous  lan-
guage, and  Macer,  the  bard  of  lUum,  and  Pedo  the  poet'of  Ae
stars,  and  Cams,  who,  by  his  Hercules,  would  have  offended
Jano,  had  he  not  now  been  the  son-in-law  of  Juno;  and
Severus,**  who  gave  a  regal  poem  to  Latium,  and  either
Priscus,**  with  their  elegant  poems  on  Numa.  And  thou,  Mon-
tanus,^  who  excellest  either  in  unequal  or  equal  measures,
and  who  hast  a  celebrity  in  two  kinds  of  verse.  Sabinus,  too,
who  bade^  Ulysses,  ^the  wanderer  for  ten  years  over  the  ragii^
seas,  write  an  answer  to  Penelope  ;  and  who  left  his  Trsezene
and  his  work  upon  the  Days  unfinished,  by  reason  of  his  pre-
mature death.  Lai^s,**  too,  who  is  called  by  the  epithet  be-
longing to  his  genius,  he  who  brought  the  Phrygian  sage  to
the  Gdlic  plains.  Camberinus  as  weU,  who  sings  of  Troy  sub-
dued by  Hercules ;  the  Etrurian"  also,  who  derives  his  reputa-

^  AfarsKs.] — ^Ver.  5.  Domitins  Marsns  was  a  Roman  poet,  the  oon-
temporary  of  Ovid  and  Horace.  Only  five  lines  of  his  works  are  extant;
four  of  these  form  part  of  an  elegy  on  the  death  of  Tibullus.

5^  Rabirius.] — Ver.  5.  Caius  Rabirius  was  a  Roman  Epic  poet,  whose
writings  were  fidl  of  spirit  and  energy,  on  which  account  Ovid  calls  him
*  magni  oris.' His  works  have  perished.

*2  Severus,'] — Ver.  9.  Cassius  Severus  was  a  Roman  poet  of  consider-
able merit,  who  wrote  several  tragedies,  to  which  reference  is  here  made.
He  also  wrote  some  epigrams  and  elegies.  His  works  have  not  come  down
to  our  time.

"  Either  PriscusA — Ver.  10.  These  were  two  Roman  poets  of  the
name  of  Priscus ;  each  of  whom  wrote  a  poem,  of  which  Numa  Pompilius
was  the  hero.  »

**  Montanus.] — ^Ver.  11.  Julius  Montanus  was  a  Roman  poet,  who
was  patronized  by  the  Emperor  Tiberius.  He  composed  both  in  Heroic
and  in  Elegiac  measure,  to  which  Ovid  here  refers,  as  the  unequal  and
equal  measures.

w  Who  bade."] — Ver.  13.  Aulus  Sabinus,  the  Roman  poet,  composed  an
Epistle,  supposed  to  be  vmtten  by  Ulysses,  in  answer  to  that  of  Penelope,
which  is  the  first  Epistle  in  Ovid's  Heroides ;  to  this  fact  reference  is  here
made.  It  is  not  known  whether  the  work  mentioned  here,  under  the  name
of  Traezene,  refers  to  a  poem  composed  by  him  in  praise  of  some  female  of
that  name, '  or  to  some  tragedy  or  didactic  work  relative  to  Traezene,  in
Argolis,  of  which  place  Pittheus,  the  grandfather  of  Theseus,  was  king.

w  Largus."] — Ver.  17.  This  poet,  who  is  here  said  to  have  been  so
called  from  his  fruitfid  genius,  composed  a  poem  descriptive  of  the  settle-
ment of  Antenor  the  Trojan  at  Patavium,  now  Padua,  in  the  north  of
Italy;  which  was  formerly  Cisalpine  Gaul.

57  The  Etrurian,'] — Ver.  20.  It  is  not  knovm  to  whom  reference  is
here  made ;  or  whether  the  poet  gained  his  fame  hy  singing  the  praises  of
his  mistress  Phillis,  or  those  of  Phillis  the  daughter  of  Lycurgus,  king  of


y  Google


B.  XVI.]  or  OVID.  473

tion  from  his  Phyllis.  The  poet,  too,®  of  the  sail-covered  sea,
for  whom  you  might  suppose  that  the  azure  Deities  had  com-
posed his  verses.  He,  too,  who  sang  the  Lihyan  armies  and
the  Eoman  hattles  ;  and  Marcus,  skilled  in  every  kind  of  com-
position ;  and  the  Trinacrian,  author  of  his  song  on  Perseus,
and  Lupus,^  the  author  of  the  return  home  of  the  descendant
of  Tantalus,  and  of  the  daughter  of  Tyndarus.  Tuticanus,  too,
who  translated  the  Meeonian  song  ofAlcinoUs  the  Phoenician,  and
together  with  him,  thou  too,  Rufus,  the  performer  on  the  Pin-
daric lyre.  The  Muse,  too,  that  is  supported  on  the  tragic  bus-
kins of  Turranius ;  and  thy  Muse,  Melissus,'*  sportive  with  the
sock  of  comedy.  While  Varus*^  and  Gracchus^  were  describing
the  fierce  boastings  of  their  Tyrants,  Proculus  was  foUovsdng
the  wanton  path  of  Cijlimachus.  There  was  Titjrrus,*'  too,
who  was  feeding  his  sheep  on  his  paternal  pastures,  and  6ra-
tius"  was  giving  proper  weapons  to  the  hunter.  Fontanus
sang  of  the  Naiads,  beloved  by  the  Satyrs,  and  Capella  in-
cluded his  words  in  unequal  measures.  And  though  there  were
others,  the  names  of  all  of  whom  'twould  take  a  long  time  to

Thrace,  who  succeeded  her  father  in  that  kingdom.  Some  would  read
'  Fuscus/  instead  of  '  Tuscus.' Of  Camerinus,  nothing  whatever  is  known.

^  The  poety  too.] — Ver.  21.  He  alludes  to  Publius  Terentius  Varro
Attacinus,  a  Roman  satirical  poet.  He  translated  the  Argonautics  of  Apol-
lonius  Rhodius  into  Latin  verse,  to  which  reference  is  here  made.

*•  Lupus."] — ^Ver.  26.  Nothing  is  known  of  this  poet,  or  of  either  of
the  three  that  are  referred  to  immediately  before  him.

^  Meliasua.] — Ver.  30.  Caius  Cilnius  Melissus  was  the  freedman  of
Maecenas,  and  was  the  author  of  several  comedies  and  mimes,  and  of  a
book  of  jests. Of  Rufus  and  Turranius,  no  particulars  are  known.

61  Varus.] — Ver.  31.  Quintilius  Varius,  or  Varus,  was  a  native  of
Cremona,  and  was  of  Equestrian  rank.  He  is  mentioned  by  Horace  and
Virgil,  and  was  one  of  the  persons  to  whom  the  Emperor  Augustus  en-
trusted the  revisal  of  the  iEneid,  prior  to  its  publication.

*2  GrQcchus.] — Ver.  31.  He  was  a  Roman  poet,  who  wrote  a  tragedy
on  the  subject  of  Thyestes,  the  same  which  Varus  had  chosen.  Ovid
alludes  to  the  taunts  which  the  poets  put  into  the  mouth  of  Thyestes
against  Atreus.

®  Txtyrus.] — Ver.  33.  Under  this  name  he  alludes  to  Virgil;  who
introduces  Tityrus  as  one  of  the  characters  in  his  first  Eclogue.  It  is  gene-
rally supposed  that  the  poet  intended,  under  that  character,  to  depict  his
own  fortunes,  and  the  favour  he  had  experienced  at  the  hands  of  Augustus.
Of  Proculus,  nothing  is  known.

w  GraftW.]— Ver.  34.  Gratius  was  a  Roman  poet,  whose  poem  on
hunting,  called  '  Cynaegeticon,'  has  come  down  to  our  time.


y  Google


474  THE  POimO  EPISTLSS  OF  OTTD.  [b.  nr.

recount,  whose  yeraes  the  public  possesses  ;  and  there  were
other  ^oung  men,  whom  I  have  no  right  to  mention  by  name,
as  theur  labours  are  as  yet  unpublished ;  still  I  could  not  Ten-
ture,  Cotta,**  to  pass  thee  in  silence  in  the  throng.

Thou  light  of  the  Rerian  maids,  thou  guardian  of  the  bar ;
to  whom  Sie  highest  nobility  of  the  blood  on  both  sides  has
giyen  the  Cottse  as  the  maternal,  the  Messalse  as  the  paternal
ancestors.  If  I  may  be  allowed  to  say  so,  my  Muse  was  one
of  illustrious  name,  and  was  one  that  was  read  even  amid
authors  so  great.  Therefore,  Envy,  cease  to  defame  one  re-
moved from  his  country,  and  do  not,  inhuman  man,  scatter  my
ashes.  I  have  lost  every  thing.  Life  alone  is  left,  that  it  may
afford  matter  for  my  woes  and  the  power  of  feeling  them.
Of  what  use  is  it  to  plunge  the  sword  into  the  lifeless  limbs  ?
By  this  time,  a  firesh  wound  can  find  no  place  unhurt  in  m&for
its  in/lietion.

^  Cotta.'i—YeT.  41.  To  this  poet,  the  second  Epistle  in  the  third
Book  of  the  Pontic  Epistles  is  addressed.  Of  Fontanus,  and  Capellah^
referred  to,  no  further  information  has  come  down  to  us.


EUTD  OF  THE FOKTIC  EFISTLES.


y  Google


THE

INVECTIVE  AGAINST  THE  IBIS.


It  18  not  known  against  whom  this  shocking  poem,  which  combines  a
chapter  of  horrors  with  a  Tocabulary  of  abuse,  was  written.  It  is,  how-
ever, generally  supposed  that  Caius  Julius  Hyginus,  a  grammarian  of
Alexandria,  and  the  freedman  of  Augustus,  an  author  who  has  left  a
work  on  the  ancient  Mythology,  is  the  person  alluded  to.  Whoever  it
may  have  been,  it  appears  that  he  had  been  a  friend  of  Ovid,  and  that,
in  his  banishment,  he  had  calumniated  both  the  Poet  and  his  wife,  and
had  tried  to  enrich  himself  by  the  confiscation  of  the  property  of  the  exile.
The  Poet  makes  allusion  to  these  several  facts ;  and  says,  that  he  will
follow  the  example  of  CaUimachus,  the  Greek  poet,  who  attacked  Apol-
lonius  Rhodius,  another  poet,  under  the  fictitious  title  of  Ibis :  whibh
was  the  name  of  a  bird  of  Egypt,  of  filthy  habits,  supposed  to  live
upon  scorpions  and  venomous  serpents.  The  country  of  the  person  at-
tacked, or,  at  least,  its  vicinity,  seems  to  be  denoted  by  his  allusion  to
Lybia,  as  being  the  country  of  his  enemy,  and  the  adaptation  of  the
Ibis,  as  the  object  of  censure ;  although  Suetonius  says,  that  Hyginus
was  really  a  Spaniard,  though  thought  by  some  to  have  been  a  native  of
Alexandria.  Some  say,  that  Corvinus,  others  that  Comificius,  was
the  name  of  the  unfortunate  object  of  Ovid's  vituperation.  The  former,
however,  is  the  more  general  belief  among  the  learned.*

Up  to  this  time,  twice  five  lastra  having  now  been  passed  by
me,  every  verse  of  my  Muse  has  been  inoffensive,  and  not  a
single  letter  of  Naso's  exists,  out  of  so  manv  thousands  that
have  been  written,  that  can  be  read  as  injurious.  My  books,
too,  have  hurt  no  one  but  myself ;  when  the  life  of  the  author
was  lost  through  his  Art  of  Love,  One  man  (and  that  very
circumstance  is  a  great  reproach)  does  not  permit  my  credit
for  inoffensiyeness  to  be  lasting.  Whoever  he  is  (for  I  will
still,  in  some  measure,  be  silent  on  his  name)  he  forces  my

*  As  a  full  reference  to  each  of  the  allusions  to  be  found  in  this  poem
would  suffice  to  fill  a  small  volume,  and  as  a  considerable  proportion  of
them  have  been  already  explained  in  the  Notes  to  the  former  pturt  of  this
work,  some  of  the  more  obscure  passages  only  will  be  selected  for  elucida-
tion in  the  notes.


y  Google


476  THE rSTEOTITB

unused  bands  to  take  up  weapons. He  does  not  allow  me,
removed  afer  to  the  cold  rising  of  the  North  wind,  to  lie  co»-
cealed  in  my  place  of  exile. In  his  craelty,  he  torments  the
wounds  that  seek  for  rest,  and  he  bandies  my  name  about  the
whole  of  the  Forum. Nor  does  he  allow  her,  who  is  bound  to
me  by  the  lasting  tie  of  marriage,  to  lament  the  death  oi  hex
wretched  husband. While I  am  clinging  to the  shattered
remains  of  my  vessel,  he  strives  to  seize  the  planks  of  my
shipwreck. He,  too,  who  ought  to  extinguish  the  sudden
conflagration,  like  a  plunderer,  snatches  his  booty  from  the
midst  of  the  fire. He  strives  that  subsistence  may  be  want-
ing to  my  exiled  old  age ; alas ! how  much  more  worthy
was  he  hunself  of  my  misfortunes ! The  Grods  deemed  other-
wise ;  of  whom  he  is  by  far  the  greatest  to  me,  who  willed
not  my  wanderings  to  be  destitute. To  him,  then,  whenever
I  shall  be  allowed,  I  shall  always  return  deserved  thanks  f(»r  a
disposition  so  merciful. Pontus  shall  hear  of  these  things ;
perhaps  the  same  Divinity  may  cause  a  nearer  country  to
testify  them  for  me. But  I  will  be  deservedly  an  enemy  to
thee,  however  wretched,  who  hast,  cruel  man,  trod  upon  me
when  lying  prostrate. Water  shall]  sooner  cease  to  be  the  an-
tagonist of  fire,  and  the  light  of  the  Sun  shall  be  joined  with
the  Moon ;  the  same  portion  of  the  heavens  shall  send  forth
the  West  winds  and  those  of  the  East ;  and  the  warm  South
wind  shall  blow  from  the  cold  North  pole  ;  a  fresh-bom  con-
cord, too,  shall  arise  between  the  smoke  of  the  ashes  of  JSieo-
cles  and  Polynices,  the  brothers,  which  the  old  enmity  sepa-
rated even  on  the  lighted  funeral  pile  ;  Spring,  too,  shall  min^e
with  Autumn,  and  Summer  with  Midwinter ;  and  the  West
and  the  East  shall  be  the  same  spot,  before,  having  laid  aside
the  arms  which  I  have  assumed,  there  shall  be  the  friendship,
thou  wretch,  between  me  and  thee  which  thou  hast  broken
by  thy  crimes  :  before  this  resentment  can  ever  cease  in  length
of  time,  or  time  and  season  can  moderate  my  hatred. There
will  be  that  peace  between  us,  so  long  as  my  life  shall  last,
which  there  is  wont  to  be  between  the  wolves  and  the  weak
sheep. I,  indeed,  will  commence  the  first  warfare  in  the  verse
with  which  I  have  begun,  although  wars  are  not  wont  to  be
waged  in  this  measure. And,  as  the  lance  of  the  light-armed
soldier,  not  yet  heated  for  the  combat^  is  first  aimed  at  the
ground  strewed  with  the  yeUow  sand ;  so  will  I  not  at  first


y  Google


AGAINST  THE  EBIfl.  47?

aim  at  thee  i^th  the  sharp  steel ;  nor  shall  my  spear  at  once
strike  at  thy  hated  head,  neither  will  I  mention  ^y  name,  or
tliy  actions  in  this  book ;  and  I  wiU  safifer  thee,  for  a  little
time,  to  conceal  who  thou  art.  Afterwards,  shouldst  thou  per-
sist, the  bold  Iambic  measure  shall  provide  me  with  weapons
against  thee,  steeped  in  the  blood  of  Lycambes.^

At  present,  I  curse  thee  and  thine,  in  the  same  manner  in
which  CallimachuSy  the  son  of  Battus,  curses  his  enemy,  the
Ibis.  And  as  he  does^  I  will  inyolve  my  lines  in  dark  fables,
although  I  am  not  accustomed  to  practise  this  kind  of  com-
position.  Emulating  his  obscurities  in  his  Ibis,  I  shall  be
pronounced  forgetful  of  my  taste  and  of  my  skiU.  And  as  I
do  not  disclose  to  inquirers,  for  the  present  who  thou  art,  do
thou  as  well,  in  the  meantime  take  the  name  of  Ibis.  As  my
lines  will  contain  some  obscurity,  so  be  the  whole  tenor  of
thy  life  overcast.  I  will  cause  some  one  to  read  these  lines
to  thee  on  thy  birth-day,  and  on  the  Calends  of  Janus,  with  no
deceiving  lips.

Ye  Grods  of  the  sea  and  of  the  land,  and  ye  who,  together
with  Jove,  possess  realms  still  better  than  these  between  the
opposite  poles,  I  pray  all  of  you  to  turn  hither  your  attention,
and  to  allow  due  weight  to  attend  my  wishes.  And  do  thou.
Earth,  and  thou  Ocean  with  thy  waves,  and  thou  ^ther  on
high,  receive  my  prayers ;  ye  stars  too,  and  thou  form  of  the
Sun,  surrounded  with  rays ;  thou  Moon  too,  who  never  shinest
with  the  same  aspect  with  which  thou  didst  the  day  before ;
thou  Night  too,  awful  in  the  appearance  of  thy  shades :  and
ye  Destinies  as  well,  who  spin  your  appointed  task  with
three-fold  fingers ;  and  thou,  Lethe,  river  of  the  water  that
sanctions  no  false  oath,  that  rollest  through  the  vallies  of  hell
with  terrific  roar ;  and  you  Furies,  who  they  say,  are  seated  be-
fore the  dark  doors  of  the  dungeon,  with  your  locks  wreathed
with  twisted  vipers  ;  and  you,  too,  the  commonalty  of  the  Di-
vinities, ye  Fauns,  and  Satyrs,  and  Lares,  and  Streams,  and
Nymphs,  and  thou  race  of  Demigods.  And  lastly,  all  ye  Gods
both  old  and  young,  from  ancient  Chaos  down  to  our  time,  assist,
while  imprecatory  verses  are  being  repeated  against  this  per-

1  The  blood  of  Lycambe8,']-^Yer.  54,  Lycambes  having  promised
his  daughter,  Neobule,  to  the  poet  Archilochus,  broke  his  word ;  on  which
the  poet  inveighed  so  bitterly  in  his  verse  against  the  father  and  the
daughter  that  they  both  hanged  themselves.


y  Google


478  THE UiVKCTiVJC

fidiouB  bead,  and  anger  and  reaentm^t  are  performing  the^
part ;  favour  my  demres  all  of  you,  eadi  in  his  order,  and  kt
no  fraction  of  my  wishes  be  unrealized.  Let  Ibe  tbii^  Ibal  I
pray  for  come  to  pass,  that  be  may  suppose  that  tbey  weie
not  my  sayings,  but  the  words  of  the  son-in4aw  <^  Panpbae.^
May  be  suffer,  too,  those  punidbments,  which  I  shall  onot ;
may  he  be  wretched  to  an  extent  beyond  my  imagination.
And  let  not  my  prayers  that  execrate  a  fictitious  name,  prevafl
the  less /or  that  reason^  <nr  influence  in  a  less  degree  the  great
Gods.

I  accurse  him,  whom  my  mind  understands  as  the  Ibis ;
who  knows  that  by  his  crimes  he  has  deserved  this  execration.
I  am  guilty  of  no  delay ;  as  the  priest,  I  will  go  through  the
prayers  reserved  on  by  me.  Whoever  ye  be,  that  are  present
at  my  rites,  aid  me,  all  of  you.,  with  your  words.  Whoev^
ye  be,  that  are  present  at  my  rites,  utter  words  of  sadness ;
and  i^proach  the  Ibis  with  tearful  cheeks ;  meet  him  wi^
inauspicious  words,  and  with  the  left  foot  advanced ;  and  let
bluck  vestments  clothe  your  bodies.  And  thou  too,  Ibis,  why
dost  thou  hesitate  to  assume  the  mournful  fillets  ?  the  altar,  as
thou  seeest,  is  now  standing  ready  for  thy  doom.  'Hie  pro-
cession is  prepared  for  thee ;  be  there  no  delay  in  the  fulfil-
ment of  my -vows  of  iU  omen /or  thee.  Victim  accursed,  ex-
tend thy  throat  for  my  knives.  May  the  earth  deny  thee  its
produce,  the  stream  its  waters  ;  may  the  wind,  and  may  the
air  deny  thee  their  breezes.  May  the  sun  be  no  longer  bright
for  thee,  nor  the  moon  shining :  may  all  the  stars  fade  ^m
before  thy  eyes.  Let  neither  Vulcan,  God  of  fire,  nor  air
afford  thee  their  use  :  let  neither  the  land  nor  the  sea  afford
thee  a  passage.  An  exile  and  in  need,  mayst  thou  wander ;
mayst  thou  visit  the  thresholds  of  otbers ;  and  mayst  thou
beg  a  little  morsel  vdth  tremulous  lips.  Let  neitha*  thy
body  nor  thy  weakened  mind  be  free  from  comfdaining  pain ;
and  may  the  night  prove  more  tormenting  to  thee  than  the
day,  the  day  than  the  night.  Mayst  thou  ever  be  wretched ;
and  mayst  thou  be  pitied  by  none. Let  both  man  and  woman

2  SonUn-law  of  Pasiphae.'] — ^Ver.  90.  Theseus  married  Ariadne,  the
daughter  of  Pasiphae  ;  and  afterwards,  crediting  the  false  accusation  of
Hippolytus,  by  his  mother-in-law,  Phsedra,  he  cursed  him,  and  prayed
Neptune  to  destroy  him ;  on  which  Hippolytus  was  dragged  by  his  hones
and  killed.


y  Google


AGAINST  THE IBIS.  479

Tejoice  in  thy  misfortimes.  Let  hatred  be  added  to  thy  tears,
and  when  thou  art  enduring  a  multitude  of  woes,  mayst  thou
be  deemed  worthy  of  still  more/  May  too,  which  seldom
happens,  the^hateful  appearance  of  thy  sorrow  be  deprived  <^
the  usual  interest.  May  the  occasion  of  death  not  be  wanting
to  thee,  but  may  its  opportunity  be  denied  thee  :  may  hfe,
forced  upon  thee,  never  meet  with  the  death  that  is  longed
for.  May  thy  breath,  only  after  a  prolonged  struggle,  forsake
thy  agonized  limbs :  and  may  it  torment  thee  first  by  a
lengthened  procrastination.

These  things  will  come  to  pass. Phoebus  himself,  this  mo-
ment, gave  me  signs  of  the  future,  and  a  bird  of  bad  omen
flew  on  my  left  hand. Assuredly,  I  will  always  believe  that
what  I  wish  will  influence  the  Gods  above ;  and,  pei^dious
wretch  /  I  shall  ever  be  nourished  by  the  hope  of  thy  destruc-
tion. That  day  will  come  to  pass,  which  wiU  hereafter  take  thee
away  from  me ;  that  day  will  come  to  pass,  which  comes  but
slowly  for  me. And  may  that  day,  which  approaches  but
tardily  for  me,  first  take  away  this  life,  often  the  object  of  thy
attacks,  before  this  resentment  ever  fade  in  length  of  years,  or
time  or  season  modify  my  hatred. So  long  as  the  Thracian
shall  fight  with  the  javelins,  the  lazyges  with  the  bow,  so
long  as  the  Ganges  shall  be  warm,  the  Danube  be  cold ;  so
long-  as  the  mountains  shall  have  their  oaks,  the  plains  their
soft  pasturage,  so  long  as  the  Etrurian  Tiber  shall  have  yellow
waters,  so  long  with  thee  will  I  wage  war ;  even  death  shall
not  put  an  end  to  my  wrath,  but  to  one  ghost  shall  it  give
ruthless  arms  against  another  spirit. Then,  too,  when  I  shall
have  flitted  into  vacant  air,  my  lifeless  phantom  shall  still  hate
thy  shade  ;  even  then,  as  a  ghost,  I  w&l  approach,  not  unfor-
getful  of  thy  crimes,  and,  a  skeleton  form,  I  will  attack  thy
face. Whether  I  shall  be  worn  out  by  length  of  years,  a  thing
I  would  not  desire,  or  whether  I  shall  depart  by  a  death  caused
by  my  own  hand ;  whether  I  shall  be  tost  in  shipwreck  along
the  boundless  waves,  and  the  fish  from  afar  shall  prey  on
my  entrails ; whether  foreign  birds  shall  tear  my  hmbs,  or
whether  wolves  shall  stain  their  jaws  with  my  blood; or
whether  any  one  shall  deign  to  deposit  me  in  the  earth,  or  to
give  my  lifeless  body  to  an  humble  pile ;  whatever  I  shall  be,
I  shall  struggle  to  escape  from  the  Stygian  regions,  and,  as  my
own  avenger,  I  will  extend  my  cold  hands  to  thy  features. In


y  Google


480  THE  IKTECTrrB •

thy  watcbings  thou  shalt  behold  me ;  seeming  to  be  piesentin
the  silent  diu'kness  of  night,  I  will  disturb  thy  sleep.  In  fine,
whatever  thou  shalt  be  doing,  I  will  hover  before  tiiy  fiice  and
thy  eyes,  and  I  will  wail ;  in  no  spot  shalt  thou  be  at  rest.
The  twisted  thongs  shall  send  forth  their  sounds,  and  the
torches,  wreathed  with  snakes,  shall  ever  be  smokhig  before
thy  conscience-stricken  face ;  by  these  Furies,  while  yet  living,
Ihou  shalt  be  tormented,  and  by  the  same  when  dead.  Thy
life  will  prove  shorter  than  thy  punishment.  Obsequies  and
the  tears  of  thy  Mends,  shall  not  be  thy  lot ;  undeplored  shalt
thou  be  thrown  out.  Thou  shalt  be  draped  by  the  hand
of  the  executioner,  amid  the  shouts  of  the  people,  and  the
hook  shall  be  fixed  amid  thy  bones.  The  very  flames,  which
devour  everything,  shall  fly  from  thee ;  the  retributive  earth
shall  reject  thy  hated  carcase  with  disgust.  With  talons  and
bill  shall  the  sluggish  vulture  drag  thy  entrails,  and  the  greedy
dogs  shall  tear  asunder  thy  perfi^ous  heart.  Over  thy  body,
too,  (although  thou  mayst  be  elated  at  such  a  compliment),
there  shall  be  strife  among  the  insatiate  wolves.  Thou  wilt  be
banished  to  a  spot  far  away  from  the  Elysian  Plains,  and  thou
wilt  inhabit  the  abodes  which  the  guilty  crowd  occupies.
Sisyphus  is  there,  both  rolling  his  stone  and  catching  it  a»  it
falls ;  and  Ixion,  who  is  whirled,  fastened  to  the  circumference
of  the  revolving  wheel ;  the  Danaides,  too,  grand-daughters  of
Belus,  who  bear  on  their  shoulders  the  water  that  ever  flows
away,  the  daughters-in-law  of  jEgyptus,  a  blood-stained  crowd ;
Tantalus,  the  father  of  Pelops,  catches  at  the  apples,  ^wcr  at
hand,  and  the  same  person  is  ever  thirsting  for,  yet  ever
abounding  with  the  flowing  water;  Tityus,  too,  who  at  has  crown
many  hundred  yards^  distant  from  his  feet,  there  affords  his
entrails,  as  the  due  of  the  ever-present  bird.  There  one  of  the
Furies  win  lacerate  thy  sides  wiUi  a  whip,  that  thou  mayst  con-
fess the  number  of  thy  crimes ;  another  one  will  give  thy  torn
limbs  to  the  dragons  of  Tartarus ;  the  third  will  roast  thy
smoking  cheeks  with  fire.  Thy  guilty  shade  shall  be  tormented
in  a  thousand  ways,  and  ^acus  shall  be  quite  refined  in  thy
tortures.  To  thee  shall  he  transfer  the  torments  of  those  men  of
olden  time  ;  thou  shi^t  be  a  cause  of  rest  to  the  shades  of  thie
ancients. Sisyphus,  thou  shalt  have  one,  to  whom  thou  mayit

'  Many  hundred  yards.'] — ^Ver.  183.  *  Jugeribus  novem/  *  nine  jugenu'
See  Note  to  Pontic  SpisUes,  Book  iv.,  Epistle  ix.,  line  ^^


y  Google


AGATBTST THE IBIS.  481

hand  over  thy  burden  that  ever  rolls  back  again ;  the  rapid
wheels  shall  now  whirl  the  Umbs  of  a  new  yietim.  He  it  shall
be,  who  shall  in  yain  catch  at  the  boughs  and  the  water ;  he
shall  feed  the  bird  with  his  undiminished  entrails.

No  other  end  shall  terminate  the  punishment  of  this  death,
and  no  hour  shall  be  the  last  for  miseries  so  great.  I  will
mention  a  few  of  the  number ;  just  as  though  any  one  were
to  pick  leaves  from  Ida,  or  skim  water  from  the  surface  of  the
Libyan  sea.  For,  I  can  neither  recount  how  many  flowers
spring  up  in  the  SiciUan  Hybla,  nor  how  many  ears  of  safiron
the  Sicilian  land  produces  ;  nor  yet  with  how  many  hailstones
Athos  is  made  white,  when  the  ruthless  storm  rages  on  the
wings  of  the  North  wind.  Nor  yet  could  all  thy  woes  be  enu-
merated by  my  voice,  even  though  thou  shouldst  give  me
multiphed  mouths.  Sorrows  will  come  upon  thee,  0  wretched
man,  so  many  and  so  great,  that  I  could  fancy  that  even  I
could  be  forced  to  weep.  Those  tears  wiU  make  me  happy
unceasingly ;  then  will  those  tears  be  far  sweeter  to  me  than
laughter.  Of  ill  omen  wast  thou  bom ;  thus  did  the  Gods
will ;  and  there  was  no  star  favouring  or  propitious  at  thy
birth.  No  Venus  shone,  no  Jupiter,  at  that  hour ;  neither  Sun
nor  Moon  was  in  a  favourable  position.  Mercury^  whom  the
beauteous  Maia  bore  to  the  great  Jove,  did  not  afford  thee
his  hght  situate  with  any  kind  influence  for  thee.  The  stars
of  Mars,  and  of  the  old  man  with  the  scythe,  ruthless  and
foreboding  no  tranquilHty,  overwhelmed  thee.  The  day,  too,
of  thy  birth,  that  thou  mightst  see  nothing  but  what  was
sinister,  was  foul  and  lowering  with  clouds  o'ercast.  This
was  the  day  to  which  Calamitous  Allia*  gives  a  name  in  the
Calendar ;  a  day  which  produced  the  Ibis  as  well,  a  pubHc  dis-
grace. Soon  as  he,  faUing  from  the  womb  of  his  impure
mother,  came  in  contact  wim  the  Cinyphian  ground  with  his
filthy  body,  the  owl  of  the  night  sat  on  an  opposite  house-top,
and  uttered  his  ill-boding  notes  with  funereid  voice.  Forth-
with the  Furies  washed  him  in  the  sedge  of  the  swamp,  where
the  deep  waters  had  overflowed  from  the  Stygian  pools.  They
besmeared  his  breast  with  the  venom  of  the  serpent  of  Erebus,

*  Calamitous  AlUa.'j^YeT,  221.  Allia  was  a  river  about  fifteen  miles
distant  from  Rome,  near  which  the  Roman  army  was  cut  to  pieces  by  the
Gauls  under  Brennus.  The  16th  4ay  of  July,  on  which  it  happened,
was  ever  after  considered  as  *  ater,'  or  *  unlucky.'

I  I


y  Google


482  THE  nnnECTiTB

and  thrice  did  they  chp  their  blood-stained  handB  ;  they  filled,
too,  hig  infant  throat  with  the  milk  of  a  bitch  ;  this  was  the
first  nourishment  that  entered  the  mouth  of  the  child.  Thence
does  the  fosterling  imbibe  the  sayage  nature  of  his  nurse  ;  and,
throughout  all  the  Forum,  does  he  bark  out  his  canine  words.
They  swathed  his  limbs,  too,  with  clouts  dipped  in  rust,  which
they  snatched  from  a  funereal  pile  that  had  been  shamelessly
deserted.  And,  that  it  might  not  he  down,  supported  by  the
bar«  earth,  they  placed  his  youthful  head  upon  the  flint  stones.
And,  when  now  they  were  about  to  depart,  they  waved  near
his  eyes,  and  before  his  face,  torches  made  of  green  branches.
The  mfant  cried,  soon  as  he  came  in  contact  with  the  pungent
smoke ;  when  thus  spoke  one  Sister  of  the  three :  "  Those
tears  haye  we  destined  for  thee  to  endless  time,  which  shall
eyer  flow  with  a  cause  to  excite  them."  She  spoke.  Clotho
ordered  her  promises  to  take  effect,  and,  with  enyenomed
hand,  she  spun  the  black  warp.  And  that  she  might  not
haye  to  pronoimce  the  lengthened  foreboding  of  his  days,
she  said,  "  There  will  be  a  Poet  who  shall  foreteU  thy  destiny."
I  am  that  Poet ;  from  me  shalt  thou  learn  thy  sorrows ;  if  only
the  Gods  giye  their  own  energy  to  my  words ;  and  if  the  con-
firmation of  eyents,  which  thou  shalt  find  to  be  true  throughout
thy  griefs,  is  consequent  upon  my  lines.  And  that  thou  mayst
not  be  tortured  without  the  precedents  of  former  ages,  may
thy  woes  be  no  lighter  than  those  of  the  Trojans.  Mayst  thou,
too,  on  thy  gangrened  foot  bear  wounds  as  numerous  as  Phi-
loctetes,  the  Paeantian  hero,  the  heir  of  the  dub-bearing  Her-
cules. Mayst  thou  feel  no  less  pain  than  Telephus,  he  who
sucked  the  udder  of  the  hind,  and  who  received  the  wound  of
Achilles  in  arms,  his  cure  as  a  Mend ;  or  than  Belleropkon,
who  fell  headlong  from  his  horse  upon  the  Ale'ian  plains,  whose
beauty  was  nearly  his  own  destruction.  Mayst  thou  see  that
which  Phoenix^  the  son  of  Amyntor  did;  and,  deprived  of
thy  eyes,  mayst  thou  tremblingly  grope  thy  way  with  the  assist-
ing stick.  And  mayst  thou  see  no  better,  than  CEdipus,  whom
AntigonCy  his  own  daughter  guided ;  whose  criminality  either
parent  experienced.  Mayst  thou  he  just  as  Tiresias,  the  old
man  celebrated  in  the  prophetic  art  of  Apollo,  after  he  was
chosen  umpire  in  the  sportive  dispute  :  just,  too,  as  Phineus
was,  by  whose  directions  the  dove  was  given  as  the  forerunner
and  guide  of  the  bark,  the  work of  Pallas ;  a7id  like  Polym-


y  Google


AGAINST  THE  IBIS.  483

Tiestor,  who  lost  his  eyes,  by  which,  to  his  sorrow,  he  had  be-
hrfd  the  gold ;  etfes  which  the  bereft  mother*  oflfered  as  an
atoning  sacrifice  to  the  shades  of  her  son. Like  the  shepherd
of  -^tna,  whose  future  calamities  Telemus,  the  son  of  Eury-
mus,  had  previously  prophecied. Like  the  two  sons  of  Phi-
neus,  whom  the  same  person  deprived  of  sight  that  gave  it  to
them  ;  hke  Thamyras  and  the  person  of  Demodocus. May  one
mutilate  thy  members,  just  as  Saturn  cut  off  those  parts,  whence
he  had  derived  his  origin. And  may  Neptune  be  no  more  fa-
vourable to  thee  on  the  boisterous  waves,  than  he  was  to  Ceyxy
whose  brother  and  wife  suddenly  became  birds  ;  and  to  Ulysses,
the  sagacious  man,  upon  whom/^io,  the  sister  of  Semele,  took  com-
passion, as  he  clung  to  the  shattered  remnants  of  his  ship. Or,
that  one  only^  may  not  have  been  acquainted  with  that  kind  of
punishment,  let  thy  divided  entrails  be  torn  asunder  by  horses
going  different  ways. Or,  mayst  thou  endure  thyself  what
Regulus,  who  thought  it  shameful  to  be  redeemed,  bore  from
the  Punic  general. And  may  no  Divinity  be  present  to  aid  thee ;
as  it  was  with  Priam,  to  whom  the  altar  of  Hercean  Jove,  as
a  place  of  refuge,  was  of  no  avail.  And  just  as  Thessalus  was
precipitated  firom  the  heights  of  Ossa,  mayst  thou  be  hurled  as
well  from  the  rocky  steep ;  or  may  thy  Umbs  be  a  prey  to
greedy  snakes,  just  hke  those  of  Euryalus,  who  received  the
sceptre  after  him. Or  may  the  boihng  stream  of  water  poured
over  thee  hasten  thy  death,  hke  that  of  Minos ;'  and  just  as
Prometheus,  mayst  thou  feed  the  fowls  of  the  air  with  thy
blood  far  from  guiltless,  but  not  so  with  impunity. Or,  Hke
the  son  of  Etracus,  the  fifth  from  the  thrice  great  Hercules,
mayst  thou  be  hurled,  when  slain,  into  the  boundless  ocean.
Or  may  some  boy,  loved  with  a  disgraceful  affection,  hate  thee

*  The  bereft  mother.'] — Ver.  270.  Polymnestor,  king  of  Thrace,  re-
ceived under  his  protection  Polydorus,  the  son  of  Priam,  together  with  a
large  sum  of  money  which  was  entrusted  to  his  care.  To  gain  the  money,
he  murdered  the  child,  on  which  Hecuba,  the  mother  of  Polydorus,  tore
out  his  eyes.

«  That  one  only.'] — ^Ver.  281.  Metius  Fuffetius,  the  king  of  Alba,
having  engaged  to  aid  the  Romans  against  the  Fidenates,  behaved  with
treachery;  on  which  Tullus  Hostilius  took  a  most  cruel  revenge,  by
causing  him  to  be  dragged  to^pieces  between  horses.

'  That  of  Minos.] — Ver.  291.  Minos  was  stifled  in  the  vapours  of  a
hot  bath  by  Cocalus,  the  king  of  Sicily,  to  whose  court  Daedalus  had  fled,
and  whither  Minos  had ursued  him.

Il2


y  Google


484  THE  TSTECfnTE

and  wound  thee  with  the  ruthless  sword,  like  Philip,  the  son
of  Amyntas.

May,  too,  no  draughts  be  mingled  for  thee,  less  treacherous,
than  were /or  kirn,  who  was  bom  of  Jove  wearing  the  horns.*
Or  mayst  thou  perish,  suspended  in  the  manner  of  the  cap-
tive AchflBUs,'  who  was  miserably  hanged,  the  gold-bearing
stream  attesting  it.  Or  may  a  tile,  hurled  by  the  hand  of  the
foe,  crush  thee,  as  it  did  him,  who  was  famous  with  the  kindred
surname  *°  of  the  son  of  Achilles.  And  may  thy  bones  repose
no  more  quietly  than  those  of  Pyrrhus,  which,  scattered  about,
were  strewed  in  the  roads  of  Ambracia.^^  And  mayst  thou
die,  just  like  the  daughter  of  the  descendant "  of  ^acus,  by
the  impelled  darts ;  from  Ceres  it  is  not  possible  to  conceal
this  wickedness.  And,  like  the  grandson  of  the  King,^*  just
now  mentioned  in  my  verse,  mayst  thou  drink  extract  of  can-
tharides,  a  parent  administering  it.  Or  may  some  adulterous
woman  be  called  virtuous  for  thy  murder  •  just .  as  she  was
called  virtuous,  by  whose  avenging  hand  Leucon**  fell. And,

®  Jove  wearing  the  horns.'] — ^Ver.  300.  This  was  the  form  under  which
Jupiter  Ammon  was  represented.  Alexander  the  Great  asserted  that  he
was  the  son  of  Jupiter  Ammon,  and  not  of  Philip.  By  some  writers  he
was  supposed  to  have  been  poisoned  by  the  agency  of  Antipater.

^  The  captive  Achctus.'] — Ver.  301.  Achaeus,  king  of  Lydia,  for  his
oppressions  and  exactions,  was  hanged  by  his  subjects,  with  his  head  down-
wards in  the  river  Pactolus,  whose  sands  were  said  to  be  golden.  Another
account  is,  that  he  was  delivered  over  to  king  Antiochus  by  Bolus  and
Cambylus,  and  then  treated  in  the  manner  before  mentioned,  near  the
river  Pactolus.

^^  The  kindred  surname,]  —Ver.  303.  Pyrrhus,  the  king  of  Epurus,  who
had  the  same  name  as  the  son  of  Achilles,  was  killed  by  a  tile  thrown  by
a  woman  from  the  wall,  as  he  was  besieging  the  city  of  Argos.

1*  The  roads  qf  Amhracia.] — ^Ver.  306.  Pyrrhus,  the  son  of  Achilles,
was  slain  by  Orestes ;  and,  as  we  are  told  by  Hyginus,  his  bones  were
scattered  throughout  Ambracia,  on  the  coast  of  Epirus.

I'*  Daughter  of  the  descendant] — Ver.  307.  Laodamia,  the  youngest
daughter  of  Pyrrhus,  son  of  Achilles,  fled  in  a  popular  tumult,  to  the
altar  of  Ceres,  where  she  was  slain  by  a  man  named  Milo ;  on  which  the
Goddess  sent  plagues  against  the  country,  and  the  murderer  beconung
mad,  mutilated  himself  and  died.

13  Grandson  of  the  King.] — Ver.  309.  This  passage  is  supposed  to
refer  to  Pyrrhus,  the  grandson  pf  Pyrrhus  the  Great,  the  antagonist  of
Rome.  Olympius,  who  was  either  his  mother  or  grandmother,  destroyed
his  mistress,  Tigris,  with  poison,  and  is  supposed  to  have  despatched  hira
in  a  similar  manner.

1^  Leticon.] — Ver.  312. Leucon  is  supposed  to  have  been  guilty  of


y  Google


AGAINST THE IBIS.  485

mayst  thou,  together  with  thyself,  throw  on  the  pile  the  dear-
est pledges  of  affection;  an  end  which  Sardanapalus  ex-
perienced for  his  life.  And  may  the  sands,  driven  by  the
South  wind,  cover  thy  face,  as  they  did  that  of  CambyseSy  who
attempted  to  profane  the  temple  of  Libyan  Jove.  May  the
crumbling  ashes  consume  thy  bones,  as  they  did  of  those  who
were  slain  by  the  treachery  of  the  second  Darius.^*  Or,  may
cold  and  hunger  be  the  cause  of  thy  death,  as  with  Neocles,
that  once  was  banished  from  olive-bearing  Sicyon.  Or,  as  he,
of  Atama,^'  mayst  thou  be  disgracefully  carried  to  thy  superior,
sewed  up  in  the  hide  of  a  boll.  Mayst  thou  also  be  stabbed
in  thy  chamber,  after  the  manner  of  Alexander  of  Pherse,
who  was  put  to  death  by  the  sword  of  his  wife.  And,  mayst
thou,  like  Aleuas*'^  of  Larissa,  find,  by  thy  wounds,  those  to
be  unfaithful,  whom  thou  deemest  trustworthy.  And,  just
like  Milo,*®  under  whose  tyranny  Pisa  was  tormented,  mayst
thou  be  precipitated  alive  in  the  subterranean  waters.  May
those  bolts,  too,  strike  thee,  which  were  sent  by  Jupiter  against
Adimantus,  who  ruled  the  realms  of  PhUus.  Or,  like,  in  days
of  old,  Lenseus,^^  from  the  regions  of  Amastris,  mayst  thou
be  deserted,  naked  on  the  ground,  that  is  called  by  the  name

adultery  with  the  wife  of  Oxilochus,  the  king  of  Pontus,  who  was  his  own
brother,  and  then,  in  hopes  of  gaining  the  kingdom,  to  have  slain  the
king,  on  which  his  paramour,  the  wife,  in  revenge  slew  him.

^  The  second  Darius.'] — Ver.  317.  Darius  Ochus,  having  taken  an
oath  never  to  slay  his  confederates  by  poison,  famine,  the  sword,  or
violence,  invited  those  of  his  faction  to  a  feast.  In  the  room  was  a  trap-
door, under  which  hot  ashes  were  placed ;  when  he  had  made  his  guests
intoxicated,  the  trap  was  opened,  and  they  fell  into  the  ashes  and  were
smothered.

^^  He  of  Atama.'] — ^Ver.  321.  Hermias,  the  king  of  Atama,  a  city  of
Mysia,  having  revolted  from  the  king  of  the  Persians,  was  conquered  by
Hector,  the  king's  general ;  and,  from  what  is  here  stated,  he  is  supposed
to  have  been  brought  before  his  master  sowed  up  in  the  hide  of  an  ox.

^"^  Aleuas."] — Yer.  325.  Aleuas,  king  of  Larissa,  the  son  of  Thiodamas,
was  slain  by  his  guards,  whom  he  had  appointed  with  the  view  of  pro-
tecting him  against  the  vengeance  of  his  own  subjects.

!•  Milo.'] — Ver,  327.  Milo  was  king  of  Pisa,  in  Elis ;  who,  in  return
for  his  cruelty,  was  drowned  by  his  subjects,  in  the  river  Alpheus,  a  stone
being  first  tied  round  his  neck.

w  Lerueus.'] — Ver.  331.  Lenseus,  or  Dionysius,  king  of  Heracha,  being
expelled  by  Mithridates,  from  Amastris,  in  Paphlagonia,  fled  to  a  place
caUed  the  course  of  Achilles ;  and,  being  abandoned  by  Ms  friends,  he  was
there  slain. Achilles  had  formerly  pursued  Iphigenia  to  the  same  spot.


y  Google


486  THE DTTECnVB

of  Achilles.  And  jost  as  either  Eurydamas  was  thrice  dragged
around  the  pile  of  Thrasyllus,  hy  Larisssean  wheels,  or,  as
Hector,  who,  with  his  body,  made  the  circuit  of  the  walls  not
destined  to  last,  which  he  had  frequently  defended  ;  and  as,
when  the  daughter  of  Hippomenes  sufifered  a  new  kind  of
punishment,  her  adulterer  is  said  to  haye  been  dragged  on  the
Actsean  soil :  so,  when  thy  odious  life  shall  have  left  thy  limbs,
may  ayenging  horses  drag  thy  filthy  carcase.  May  some  pro-
jecting  rock  transfix  thy  entrails ;  as  were  once  those  of  the
Greeks,  returning  from  Troy,  transfixed  in  the  Eubsean  strait.
And  as  the  bold  rayisher,  Ajax,  the  son  of  Oileus,  perished  by
lightning  and  the  wayes ;  so  may  fire  aid  the  wayes  that  are
to  oyerwhelm  thee.  May  thy  infatuated  mind,  too,  be  fren-
zied by  the  Furies,  as  with  Marsyas,  who,  when  flayed,  had
but  one  wound  in  the  whole  of  his  body.  And,  as  with
LycurguSy  the  son  of  Dryas,  who  held  the  realms  of  Rhodope,
who  had  not  the  same  regard  for  both  his  feet.  As  it  happened,
too,  in  former  times,  to  Hercules,  at  (Eta,  and  to  the  son-in-law
of  the  Dragons,^  and  to  Orestes,  the  father  of  Tisamenus,  and
to  AlcnuBon,  the  husband  of  Callirhoe.  And  may  thy  wife  be
no  more  chaste  than  JEgile,  that  matron,  at  whom  Tydeus  might
blush  for  a  daughter-in-law ;  and,  than  Hypermnestra,  the
Locrian,  who  had  intercourae  with  the  brother  of  her  husband,
concealing  it  by  the  death  of  her  handmaid.  May  the  Gods
also  make  thee  able  to  rejoice  in  a  wife,  as  faithful  as  Amfphi-
araiis,  the  son-in-law  of  Talaus,  and  Agamemnon,  the  son-in-
law  of  Tyndarus,  did;  and,  a«  true  as  the  Bandides,  the
grand-daughters  of  Belus,  who,  daring  to  contriye  the  death
of  their  cousins,  are  oyerwhelmed  eyerlastingly  with  water  up
to  their  necks.  May  she  bum,  too,  with  the  flame  of  Byblis,
and  of  Canace,  as  though  with  that  of  a  torch ;  and  be  not
thy  sister  known  to  thee,  but  in  a  criminal  manner.  Shouldst
thou  haye  a  daughter  ;  may  she  be  as  Pelopea  was  to  Thyestes,
Myrrha  to  her  own  father,  and  Nyctimene  to  hers ;  and  may
she  be  no  more  affectionate,  or  attached  to  the  person  of  her
father,  than  thy  daughter  was  to  thee,  Pterelas,^  or  thine  to

*>  Son-in-law  qf  the  Droffons.] — ^Ver.  349.  This  was  Athamas,  who
married  Ino,  the  daughter  of  Cadmus  and  Hermione,  who  were  fabled  to
have  been  transformed  into  dragons.

*»  Pterelas.l-^Ver,  364.  He  was  a  king  of  Thebes,  who  was  betrayed
by  his  daughter,  Cymetho,  or  Comaetho,  in  her  extreme  admiration  of
Amphitryon,  his  enemy.


y  Google


AGAINST THE IBIS.  48/

thee,  Nisas  ;  and,  than  Tullia,  who  made  the  place  acenrsed  by
the  feme  of  her  wickedness,  and  crushed  the  limbs  of  her  father
with  the  wheels  driyen  over  them.  Mayst  thou  die  as  the
youths  did,  whose  heads  the  summits  of  the  gates  of  Fisa^^
once  supported ;  arid,  as  (Enomaiia,  who  stained  the  ground
that  had  been  often  bathed  in  that  of  the  wretched  Suitors,
more  deservedly  with  his  own  blood.  And^  as  Myrtilus,
the  charioteer,  did,  the  betrayer  of  the  remorseless  tyrant,
who  gave  its  new  name  to  the  Myrtoan  sea.  And,  as  those  who,
in  yain,  sought  Atalanta,  the  damsel  swift  of  foot ;  imtil  she
was  caught,  overtaken  through  the  three  apples.  And  as  those
who  entered  the  irremeable  retreats  of  the  darkened  habitation,
that  concealed  the  form  of  the  wondrous  monster,  the  Mi-
nottmr.  Like  those  Trojans,  whose  six  bodies,  along  with
other  six,  Achilles,  the  son  of  iBacus,  in  his  rage,  placed  upon
the  lofty  pile.  Like  those,  whom  we  read  that  the  Sphynx
devoted  to  a  horrid  death,  when  deceived  by  the  obscurities  of
her  ambiguous  language.  Like  those  who  were  slain  in  the
temple  of  the  Bistonian  Minerva;  on  which  account  even
now  the  face  of  the  Goddess  is  covered.  Like  those,  who  once,
as  food,  made  the  mangers  of  the  Thracian  king  red  with
blood.  Like  those  who  were  exposed  to  the  Uons  of  Thero-
damas,  and  like  those  who  were  sacrificed  at  the  Tauric  rites
of  the  Goddess  worshipped  by  Thoas.  Like  those  whom  vora-
cious Scylla,  and  Charybdis,  opposite  to  Scylla,  snatched  trem-
bling from  the  DuUchian  ship :  like  those  whom  Polyphemus
despatched  into  his  vast  paunch :  like  those  who  entered  into
the  houses  of  the  Lsestrygons.  Like  those  whom  the  Punic
general^  drowned  in  the  waters  of  the  well,  and  made  the

^  Oatea  qf  PiaaJ] — ^Ver.  368.  GSnomaus,  king  of  Pisa,  in  Elis,  pro-
claimed that  any  one  who  should  conquer  him  in  a  chariot-race  should
marry  his  daughter,  Hippodamia ;  but  that  the  person  who  was  conquered
should  die.  Thirteen  were  overcome  and  put  to  death,  and  their  heads
were  fixed  to  the  gates  of  Pisa.  Pelops  won  the  race  by  the  help  of
Myrtilus,  the  charioteer  of  (Enomaiis,  who,  for  a  bribe,  withcfrew  the  lynch-
pin  firom  the  axletree,  so  that  the  king  fell  to  the  ground ;  whereon  Pelops
gaining  the  race,  won  Hippodamia,  and,  for  his  treachery,  threw  Myrtilus
in  the  sea  that  lay  between  the  Ionian  and  iEgean  seas,  which  thence  was
called  the  Myrtoan  Sea.

»  The  Punio  general^^Yer,  391.  This  is  supposed  to  have  been
Hamilcar,  who  having  deceitfolly  allured  the  Senate  of  the  town  of
Acerra  into  his  power,  drowned  them  in  wells  and  ditches,  and  covered
their  bodies  with  stones.


y  Google


488  THE IKVECnVE

stream  white  with  the  dast  thrown  in.  Just  as  the  twice  six
maid  servants  of  Penelope^  the  daughter  of  Icarus,  and  her
suitors  perished,  and  like  Melanthiui,  too,  who  furnished  those
suitors  with  arms  against  the  hfe  of  his  master.  Just  as  Jn-
taus^  the  wrestler,  who  lies  prostrate,  thrown  hy  the  Aonian
stranger,  one  who  (wondrous  to  relate)  was  conqueror  after  he
had  f^n.  Like  those  whom  the  strong  arms  of  Antseus
crushed ;  and  those  whom  the  Lemnian  multitude**  put  to  a
cruel  death :  like  him,  who,  the  discoverer  of  cruel  rites,**
slain  as  a  victim,  brought  down  the  showers  of  rain  after  a
length  of  time.  As  Busiris,  the  brother  of  Antseus,  strewed
the  altars  with  that  blood  which,  injustice,  he  ought,  and  was
slain  himself,  after  the  example  he  had  set :  and  as  Diomedes,
who,  in  his  impiety,  fed  his  terrible  steeds  with  human  entrails,
in  place  of  the  blade  containing  the  grain :  like  the  two  that
were  slain,  on  different  occasions,  by  the  same  avenger,  Nessus,
and  Eurytion,  the  son-in-law  of  Dexamenus.  like  thy  great
grandson,  Saturn,  Periphetas,  whom  jEsculapius,  the  son  of
Coronis,  from  his  own  City  saw  yield  up  his  life.  Like  Sinnis
and  Scyron,  the  robbers,  and  Procrustes,  the  son  of  Poly-
pemon,  and  the  Minotaur,  ^ho  was  a  man  in  one  part,  a  bull
in  another.  Like  him,  too,^  who,  surveying  the  waters  of
this  sea  and  of  that,  used  to  let  the  pine  trees  pressed  down
spring  up  from  the  ground  into  the  air ;  and  like  the  body  of
Cercyon,  which  Ceres  beheld,  with  joyful  countenance,  dying
by  the  hand  of  Theseus.  May  these  curses,  which  my  anger
calls  down  with  merited  prayers,  be  thy  lot,  or  others  not  more
tolerable  than  these  woes.  Just  as  Achsemenides,  deserted  on
Sicilian  JStna,  was,  when  he  beheld  the  Trojan  sails  approach.

**  TJie  Lemnian  multitude.'] — ^Ver.  398.  The  women  of  Lemnos,
despising  the  sacrifice  of  Venus,  were  made  by  her  so  loathsome  to  their
husbands,  that  they  left  them,  and  sought  new  wives  from  other  regions.
On  their  return  home,  the  former  wives  slew  their  husbands,  together  with
their  new-fpund  spouses.

28  The  discoverer  of  cruel  rites,'] — ^Ver.  399.  Thrasius,  or  Thrasyllus,
a  soothsayer,  when  a  drought  prevailed,  told  Busiris,  the  tyrant  of  Egypt,
that  if  he  sacrificed  strangers  to  Jupiter,  rain  would  fail.  Busiris,  finding
him  to  he  a  foreigner,  ordered  him  to  be  sacrificed  first.

*  Like  him  too.] — Ver.  411.  This  alludes  to  Pityocamptes,  a  notorious
robber,  who  infested  the  isthmus  of  Corinth,  and  is  generally  considered
the  same  as  Sinnis,  the  robber  that  was  slain  by  Theseus ;  though  Ovid
here  makes  them  to  be  distinct  individuals.


y  Google


AGAINST  THE  IBIS.  489

Such,  too,  as  was  the  fortune  of  the  two-named  Irus,'^  and
of  those  who  post  themselyes  as  beggars  on  the  bridge,  a  for-
tune which  shall  be  more  intolerable  to  thee.  In  vain  may
PlutuSy  the  son  of  Ceres,  ever  be  loved  by  thee  ;  and  may  he,
ever  souj^ht,  desert  thy  fortunes.  And  as  the  soft  sand  gives
way  under  the  pressure  of  the  foot,  as  the  water  ebbs  and
flows,  so  may  thy  possessions  always  melt  in  some  indescribable
manner ;  and,  slipping  through  the  midst  of  thy  hands,  may
they  ever  flow  away.  Mayst  thou,  when  filled,  be  wasted  by
insatiate  hunger,  like  the  father  of  the  damseP  who  was  wont
to  assume  various  forms.  And  may  no  loathing  of  human
flesh  come  on  thee ;  and  in  the  only  respect  that  thou  canst,
thou  shalt  be  the  Tydeus  of  the  present  day.  And  mayst
thou  perpetrate  some  crime,  by  reason  of  which  the  steeds  of
the  horror-stricken  Sun  may  again  be  turned  from  the  West
towards  the  East.  Thou  shalt  repeat  the  foul  banquet  of  the
table  of  Lycaon,  and  thou  shalt  attempt  to  deceive  Jupiter  by
the  false  appearance  of  thy  viands.  I  wish,  too,  that  some
one  would  try  the  power  of  the  Divinity,  by  serving  thee  up  ;
that  thou  mayst  be  the  son  of  Tantalus,  and  the  boy  of  Tereus.
And  may  thy  limbs  be  scattered  over  the  wide  fields,  as  those
were  which  arrested  the  progress  of  the  father  of  Medea,
Mayst  thou  imitate  the  real  bulls  in  the  brass  of  Penllus,  with
a  voice  adapted  to  the  figure  of  the  bull.  And,  like  the  cruel
Phalaris,  thy  tongue  first  cut  out  with  the  sword,  mayst  thou
lament  in  imitation  of  the  bull,  enclosed  in  Paphian  brass.
And  whilst  thou  shalt  desire  to  return  to  the  years  of  a  more
youthful  age,  mayst  thou  be  outwitted  like  Pelias,  the  aged
father-in-law  of  Admetus.  On  horseback  mayst  thou  be  swal-
lowed, like  Curtius,  in  the  gulf  of  the  pervading  swamp,  only
so  that  there  be  no  glory  in  thy  deed.  And  mayst  thou  perish,
like  those  sprung  from  the  teeth  sown  in  the  Grecian  fields
by  the  Sidonian  hand  of  Cadmus. May  the  direful  impreca-

«T  The  two-named  Irus.'] — ^Ver.  419.  He  was  a  notorious  beggar  of
Ithaca,  who  is  mentioned  in  the  Odyssey.  His  original  name  wfls  ixnaeus,
which  was  afterwards  changed  to  Irus.  He  was  slain  by  Ulysses  with  a
blow  of  his  fist,  for  aiding  the  suitors  of  Penelope.

28  Father  of  the  damsel,] — ^Ver.  427.  Erisicthon,  a  Thessalian,  having
cut  down  a  grove  of  Ceres,  was  punished  with  insatiable  hunger.  His
daughter  Mestra,  or  Dryops,  having  the  power  of  transforming  herself,  con-
sented to  be  sold  in  various  forms  to  procure  the  means  of  satisfying  her
father's  hunger,  which  often  compelled  him  to  devour  bis  ovm  flesh.


y  Google


-190  THE INVJBCTITB

tions  fall  upon  thy  head  which  the  grandson  of  Penthens
uttered, -and  the  brother  of  Medusa;  and  those  with  which,
in  the  little  book,  the  bird  was  accursed,  which  purges  its  own
body  with  water  injected.*  And  mayst  thou  endure  as  many
wounds  as  Osiris  is  said  to  have  borne,  irom  whose  rites  the
knife  is  said  to  be  absent.  And  mayst  thou  insal^ely  hack
thy  worthless  members  to  the  Phrygian  tune,  like  Uiose  whom
Mother  Cybele  influences.

From  a  man  mayst  thou  be  made  neither  man  nor  woman,
like  Atys ;  and  mayst  thou  shake  the  jarring  tambourine  with
effeminate  hand.  Mayst  thou,  too,  suddenly  be  changed  into  a
lion,  the  beast  of  the  great  Mother  Cybele,  just  as  the  con-
queror, and  she  that  was  conquered^  in  the  foot-race,  were
transformed.  And,  that  Limone  alone  may  not  have  expe-
rienced that  punishment,  may  the  horse  tear  thy  entraUs,  too,
with  savage  tooth.  Or,  as  he  of  Cassandna,'^  not  less  cruel  than
that  tyrant,  mayst  thou,  wounded,  be  entombed  in  the  earth
heaped  on  thee.  Or,  as  Perseus,  the  descendant  of  Abas,  or
the  Cycneian  hero,  mayst  thou,  shut  up,  be  precipitated  into
the  waves  of  the  deep ;  or  mayst  thou  be  slain,  a  victim  at  the
sacred  altars  of  Phoebus;  a  death  which  Theudotus^  received
at  the  hands  of  a  cruel  enemy.  Or  may  Abdera  devote  thee  on
the  appointed  days,^  and  may  multitudes  of  stones,  in  a  shower,
be  hurled  upon  thee  so  devoted.

Or  mayst  thou  be  slaruck  by  the  three-forked  bolt  of  Jove,
like  Capaneus,  the  son  of  Hipponous,  and  like  Atrax,  the
father  of  Dosithoe ;  like  Semele,  the  sister  of  Autonoe  ;  like
Jasius,  whose  aunt  was  Maia ;  like  him,  who  badly  guided  the
horses  that  in  his  rashness  he  had  desired.  Like  Salmonetis,  the

»  Wiih  water  injected.'] — ^Ver.  452.  The  Ibis  was  said  by  the  ancients
to  pnrge  its  own  body  with  injections  of  sea-water,  by  the  idd  of  its  bill ;
and  thereby,  to  have  first  led  to  the  use  of  the  clyster  pipe.

^  She  that  was  conquered.'] — ^Ver.  460.  Hippomanes  and  Atalanta  were
changed  into  lions  by  Cybele,  whose  temple  they  had  defiled.

^  He  of  Cowonrfna.]— Ver.  463.  See  the  note  to  Pontic  Epistles,  Book
ii.  Epistle  9, 1.  43.

^  Theudotus.] — Ver.  468.  Asserting  himself  to  be  king  of  Bactria,  he
was  conquered  by  Arsaces,  the  king  of  Persia,  and  was  sacrificed  by  him
to  Apollo.

35  On  the  appointed  days.]  — Ver.  469.  The  people  of  Abdera,  in  Thrace,
were  accustomed,  at  the  beginning  of  each  year,  to  vote  the  death  of  one
individual  in  behalf  of  the  state ;  on  which,  the  person  so  named,  was
stoned  to  death.


y  Google


AGAINST THE IBIS.  491

cruel  son  of  Molns ;  like  him  bom  of  the  same  parent  as  she
was  sprang  from,  who,  as  the  Bear,  ever  avoids  the*  flowing
waters.  As  Macedo,  with  her  husband,  was  struck  by  the  swift
lightnings,  so,  I  pray,  mayst  thou  fall  by  the  fires  of  the  hea-
venly avenger.  Mayst  thou  also  be  a  prey  to  the  dogs,  by
which  Latonian  Delos  may  not  be  approached,  Thasus,  the
priest  of  ApolLoy  having  been  torn  by  them  before  his  time;  and
who  pulled  in  pieces  him  who  beheld  the  bath  of  the  modest
Diana,  and  Linus,  the  grandson  of  Crotopus.  And  mayst  thou
Dot  be  more  hghtly  stung  by  the  venomous  serpents  than
Eurydice,  the  daughter-in-law  of  the  old  man  (Eagrus,  and
of  Calliope ;  than  Opheltes,  the  son  of  Hypsipyle ;  than
Laocoon,  who  was  the  first  to  pierce  with  his  sharp  spear
the  wood  of  the  suspected  horse.  And  mayst  thou  not
approach  the  lofty  stairs  more  cautiously  than  Elpenor,  and
mayst  thou  feel  the  effects  of  wine  in  the  same  manner
as  he  did.  And  mayst  thou  fall,  as  much  vanquished
as  each  Dryopian^  that  aided  the  inhuman  Thiodamas,  who
called  them  to  arms ;  as  much  as  Cacus,  who  fell  slaughtered
in  his  own  cave,  betrayed  by  the  voice  of  the  heifer  shut  up
there ;  as  much  as  Lichas,  who  bore  the  gifts  dipped  in  the
Lemsean  venom,  and  who  dyed  the  Euboean  waves  with  his
own  blood.  Or  mayst  thou  come  to  Tartarus  from  the  steep
rock,  like  him  who  read  the  Socratic  book^  upon  death ;
like  him  who  beheld  the  deceiving  sails'*  of  the  ship  of
Theseus ;  Hke  the  boy  Astyanax,  who  was  hurled  from  the
towers  of  Troy ;  like  Ino,  the  nurse  of  the  infant  Bacchus,
who  was  his  aunt ;  like  him,  the  cause  of  whose  death  was

^  Each  Dryopian.'] — Ver.  490.  Thiodamas,  having  refused  food  to
Ilylas,  the  son  of  Hercules,  Hercules  slew  some  of  his  oxen.  Thiodamas
thereupon  raised  an  army  against  him  ;  on  which  he  was  defeated,  toge-
ther with  the  Dryopians,  his  allies.

**  The  Socratic  hookJ] — Ver.  496.  Cleombrotus,  an  academic  philoso-
pher, having  read  *  Phaedo,*  the  book  written  by  Plato,  the  scholar  of  So-
crates, on  the  Immortality  of  the  Soul,  in  his  extreme  desire  to  enjoy  the
happy  state  there  described,  threw  himself  ofif  a  rock  into  the  sea,  where
he  was  drowned.

38  the  deceiving  sails.'] — ^Ver.  497.  iEgeus,'  seeing  black  sails  on  the
ship  of  his  son  Theseus,  on  his  return  from  the  conquest  of  the  Minotaur,
supposing  that  it  was  a  token  of  his  son's  death,  threw  himself  into  the
sea,  which  thence  assumed  the  epithet  of  'JSgean.'


y  Google


492  THE  nrvECTiVB

the  inyention  of  the  saw.''  Like  the  Lydian  virgin,"  who
threw  herself  from  the  lofty  rocks,  and  who  had  uttered
opprohrious  expressions  to  the  reluctant  Deity.  May  a  preg-
nant lioness,  a  native  of  thy  country,  meet  thee  on  thy  pater-
nal soil,  and  may  she  he  the  cause  of  thy  death,  resemhling
that  of  Phayllus,  king  of  Ambracia.  May,  too,  the  hoar  which
slew  the  son  of  Lycurgus,  and  Adonis,  who  was  horn  of  a  tree,
and  the  hold  Idmon,  tear  thee  as  well;  and  may  he,  even
when  dead,  give  thee  a  wound,  as  with  him,  upon  whose  face
the  head  of  the  transfixed  hoar  fell.^  Or  mayst  thou  he  like
him  whom  a  pine-nut  slew  with  a  similar  fate,  and  mapt  thoa
he  as  the  Phrygian,  and  the  hunter  of  Berecynthus.'^  Should
thy  ship  touch  upon  the  Minoian  sands,  may  the  Cretan  mul-
titude take  thee  to  he  a  Corcyrsean.**  Mayst  thou  enter  a
house  about  to  fall,  like  the  offspring  of  Aleuas,^  when  the
Constellation  was  propitious  to  the  man  who  was  the  son  of
Leoprepis.  And,  like  either  Evenus  or  Tiberinus,  drowned  in
the  rapid  stream,  mayst  thou  give  a  name  to  the  flowing  river.
And  may  thy  head,  a  fit  prey  for  wild  beasts,  be  a  prey  for
man,  cut  off  like  that  of  the  son  of  Astacus,^  from  thy  muti-

^  Invention  of  the  «aw.]— Ver.  500.  Perdix,  the  nephew  of  Daedalus,
invented  the  saw.  His  uncle,  stung  with  jealousy  at  his  skiU,  threw  him
headlong  from  the  tower  of  the  temple  of  Minerva,  at  Athens.  The  God-
dess,  however,  supported  him,  and  he  was  changed  into  a  partridge,  which
was  caUed  hy  his  name.

^^  The  Lydian  virgin."] — ^Ver.  501.  Ilex,  the  daughter  of  Ihycus,  a
Lydian,  heing  loved  hy  Mars,  was  protected  hy  Diana  against  him.  Be-
viling  the  God,  Mars  became  incensed,  and  killed  her  father,  on  which
Ilex  became  mad  with  grief,  and  threw  herself  from  a  rock  into  the  sea.^.

'*  The  transfixed  hoar.'] — Ver.  508.  Thoas,  a  hunter  of  Andragathia,
having  captured  a  boar,  instead  of  sacrificing  both  the  head  and  feet  to
Diana,  kept  the  feet,  and  hung  up  the  head  only  by  a  string  tied  to  a  tree.
Falling  asleep  beneath  it,  it  fell  upon  him,  and  smothered  him.

^  Hunter  of  Berecynthus.']'—Yer.  510.  Atys  and  Nauclus,  two  hunters,
sleeping  under  pine-trees,  were  killed  by  the  pine-nuts  falling  upon  them.

*^  A  Corcyrcean  ] — Ver.  512.  The  people  of  the  isle  of  Corcyra  had
been  guilty  of  an  insult  to  the  bones  of  Minos,  king  of  Crete.  The  inha-
bitants of  the  latter  island  were  consequently  in  the  habit  of  sacrificing  any
native,  of  Corcyra  who  might  fall  into  their  hands,  to  the  shades  of  Minos.

*^  Offspring  of  Aleuas!] — ^Ver.  513.  Scopas,  the  Thessallan,  the  son
of  Aleuas,  was  slain  for  his  impiety,  by  the  fall  of  his  house,  from  which
calamity  Simonides,  the  poet,  who  was  his  guest,  was  saved  by  the  inter-
vention of  Castor  and  Pollux.

^  The  son  qf  Astacus.] — Ver;  517. Mcnalippus,  the  youngest  son  of


y  Google


AGAINST  THE TBIS.  493

lated  carcase. And,  as  they  say  that  Broteas  did,  in  his  desire
for death,  mayst  thou  place  thy  Hmbs  to  be  burnt  on  the
lighted  pile; Shut  up  in  a  cage,  mayst  thou  suffer  death,  like
the  compiler  of  the  history,'"  that  availed  him  nothing. May,
too,  thy  insolent  tongue  prove  thy  destruction,  as  it  was  the
ruin  of  the  inventor  of  the  abusive  Iambics.** Like  him,  too,
who slandered  Athens  in  his  Hmping  verse,*^  mayst  thou
perish,  despised,  for  want  of  food. And,  as  the  poet  of  the
satirical  lyre'*'  is  said  to  have  perished,  may  thy  breach  of
faith  be  the  cause  of  thy  ruin. And,  as  the  serpent  gave  the
wound  to  Orestes,  the  son  of  Agamemnon,  mayst  thou,  too,
perish  from  a  sting  containing  venom. May  the  first  night  of
thy  marriage  be  the  last  of  thy  Hfe :  EupoHs  and  his  new-
made  bride  died  in  this  manner. As  they  say  that  Lycophron'*®
the  Tragedian  perished,  so  may  an  arrow  stand  fixed  in  thy
vitals.  Or,  torn  in  pieces,  mayst  thou  be  scattered  in  the  woods,
by  the  hands  of  thy  relations ;  just  as  Penthetis  was  scattered
about,  at  Thebes,  who  was  descended  from  Cadmus  changed
into  a  dragon  for  his  grandsire. And  mayst  thou  be  drawn  over
the  wild  mountains,  a  bull  dragging  thee ;  just  as  Dircey  the  ty-
rannical wife  of  Lycus,  was  dragged. And,  that  which  Fhilo-
mela  the  unwilling  supplanter  of  her  sister  suffered,  may  thy
tongue,  cut  out,  fall  before  thy  feet.  Like  him  that  was  named

Astacus,  having  been  slain  in  the  Thehan  war,  his  head,  when  cut  off,  was
mangled  and  gnawed  by  Tydeus,  to  the  great  disgust  of  Minerva.

**  Compiler  of  the  history.']— Vex,  522.  Callisthenes,  of  Olynthus,
wrote  a  history  of  the  exploits  of  Alexander  the  Great,  in  which  he  launched
out  into  extreme  praise  of  that  monarch.  Being  accused  of  conspiring
against  his  master,  his  nose,  ears,  and  lips,  were  cut  off,  and  his  limbs
were  mutilated,  and,  after  being  carried  about  in  a  cage,  he  was  put  to
death.

^  Inventor  of  the  aJmsive  Iambics.'] — Ver.  523.  This  was  Archilochus
the  poet,  who  employed  the  Iambics  against  Lycambes,  as  before  men-
tioned. He  was  afterwards  banished,  by  reason  of  the  numerous  enemies
that  his  satirical  turn  had  created  against  him.

^  Limping  verse.] — Ver.  525.  This  is  generally  supposed  to  refer  to
Hipponax,  who,  in  verses  called  Scazons,  a  limping  measure,  inveighed
against  Bupalus  and  Athenis,  inhabitants  of  Athens.

^  The  satirical  lyre.] — Ver.  527.  This  is  supposed  to  refer  to  Alcseus
the  Lyric  poet,  who  broke  his  promised  allegiance  to  Pittacus,  by  whom
he  was  put  to  death.  By  some,  Stesichorus  is  supposed  to  be  here  re-
ferred to.

*3  Lycophron.] — Ver.  533.  Contending  with  an  antagonist  as  to  the
.  .^lative  merits  of  their  poetry,  he  was  slain  by  him  with  an  arrow.


y  Google


494  ' THE DTTECTITB


1


Biaesos,  the  founder  of  Cyrrha,  late  in  its  erectioD,  nutyit
thou  he  found  in  innumerable  parts  of  the  world.  And  nuy
the  industrious  bee,  as  it  did  to  the  poet  Achaeus,^  ^  its  hurt-
ful sting  in  thy  eyes.  Bound,  too,  on  the  hard  rocks,*  majit
thou  have  thy  entrails  torn,  like  Prometheus,  whose  brother's
daughter  was  Pyrrha.  Like  the  son  of  Harpagns,^  majst
thou  recall  the  example  of  Thyestes,  and,  slaughtered,  mayst
thou  enter  the  bowels  of  thy  parent.  Mayst  Siou  have  diy
members  mutilated,  thy  parts  being  lopped  off  by  the  cmel
sword,  just  as  they  say  that  the  limbs  of  Mimnermus  were.
And  as  it  was  with  the  Syracusan  poet,**  may  the  passage  of  thy
breath  be  closed,  thy  throat  being  stopped  up.  May  thy  en-
trails, too,  lie  exposed,  the  skin  being  stripped  off;  like  him
whose  name  the  Phrygian  river  bears.  Mayst  thou^  to  thy
misery,  look  upon  the  face  of  Medusa,  that  changes  into  stone,
she  who,  though  but  one,  put  to  death  many  of  the  subjects
of  Cepheus.  Mayst  thou  feel  the  bite  of  the  mares  of  Potnite
like  Glaucus,  and  mayst  thou  leap  into  the  water  of  the  sea,
like  another  Glaucus.*^  And  as,  with  him  who  had  the  same
names  as  the  two  just  now  mentioned,  may  Gnossian  honey"
stop  up  the  passage  of  thy  breath.  Mayst  thou  too  driidc,
witli  trembling  lips,  the  same  w\lu^  Socrates,  the  most  learned
of  men,  accused  by  Anytus,  once  drank  with  serene  counte-
nance. May  nothing,  shouldst  thou  love  anything,  happen  to
thee  more  fortunately  than  it  did  to  Hsemon ;  and  mayst  thou
enjoy  thy  own  sister,  as  Macareus  did  his.  Or  nMiyst  tJiou  be-
hold what  the  son  of  Hector  saw  from  his  native  towers,  when
now  the  flames  prevailed  on  every  side. Mayst  thou  expiate

^  AchteusJ] — ^Ver.  543.  "When  composing  a  poem  in  his  garden,  a
swarm  of  bees  settled  on  his  head.  Trying  to  drive  them  away,  they
fixed  their  stings  in  his  eyes,  and  blinded  him.

*"  The  son  of  Harpagua.] — Ver.  547.  Harpagus,  not  having  killed
Cyras,  as  his  grandfather,  Astyages,  had  ordered  lum,  was  invited  by  the
king  to  a  feast,  when  his  own  son  was  served  up  to  him  as  the  chief  dish.

*»  The  Syracusan  poet."] — Ver.  551.  Theocritus  Is  supposed  to  be  here
alluded  to,  who,  by  some  writers,  is  said  to  have  been  hanged  for  railing
against  Hiero,  king  of  Sicily.

**  Another  Glaucus."] — Ver.  558.  Glaucus,  a  fisherman,  seeing  the  fish
when  caught,  revive  on  eating  a  certain  herb,  ventured  to  taste  of  it,  on
which  he  leaped  into  the  sea,  and  became  a  God  of  the  ocean.

^  Gnossian  honey.] — Ver.  561.  Glaucus,  a  Cretan,  playing  at  tennis,
or,  as  some  say,  following  a  mouse  which  he  was  trying  to  cateh,  fell  into
a  vessel  filled  with  honey,  and  was  smothered.


y  Google


AGAIKBT  THE  IBIS.  495

thy  cnmes  with  thy  blood,  like  Adonis,  who  was  begotten  by
his  father,  who  was  his  grandfather,  anid  whose  own  sister,  by
criminaUty,  became  his  mother. May  such  a  kind  of  weapon
stick  in  thy  bones  as  that  with  which  Ulj/sses,  the  son-in-law  of
Icarius,  is  said  to  have  been  slain. And  as  the  loquacious
throat^  was  stopped  up  in  the  horse  that  was  made  of  maple
wood,  so  may  the  passage  of  thy  voice  be  closed  by  the  thumb.
Or,  like  Anaxarchus,  mayst  thou  be  brayed  in  a  deep  mortar,*^
and  may  thy  bones,  when  struck,  rattle  instead  of  the  real
com. And  may  Phoebus  enclose  thee  in  the  lowest  depths  of
Tartarus,  as^he  did  Crotopus,  the  father  of  Psamathe;  the  same
as  he  had  done  to  his  own  daughter. May  that  plague,  too,
attack  thy  fEunily  which  the  right  hand  of  Chorsebus  con-
quered, and  so  aided  the  wretched  Argives. Like  Hippolytus,
the  grandson  of  j^thra,  doomed  to  perish  through  die  wrath
oi  Venus,  mayst  thou,  in  exile,  be  dragged  by  thy  frightened
horses. As  the  host,  Polymnestor,  slew  his  foster-child,  on
account  of  his  great  riches,  may  thy  host  slay  thee,  on  account
of  thy  want 'of  riches. As  they  say,  too,  that  his  six  brothers
were  slain,  together  with  Damasicthon,  son  of  Niobe,  so  may
all  thy  race perish,  together  with thee. As the  harper,
Amphion,  added  his  own  death to that of  his  wretched
children,  so  mayst  thou  have  a  deserved  loathing  of  thy  own
life. Or,  like  Niobe,  the  sister  of  Pelops,  mayst  thou  become
hard  with  rock  growing  over  thee,  and,  like  Battus,  who  was
ruined  by  his  own  tongue. If  thou  shalt  cleave  the  vacant  air
with  the  hurled  quoit,  mayst  thou  fall,  struck  by  the  same
circle  as  the  boy,  Hi/acinthus,  the  son  of  (Ebalus. If  any
water  shall  be  cleaved  by  thy  alternating  arms,  may  every
stream  provie  more  injurious  to  thee  than  that  of  Abydos,  over
which  Leander  swam. As  the  Comedian  perished  in  the  midst
of  the  waves,  while  he  was  swimming,  so  may  the  Stygian

"  The  loquacious  throat.] — Ver.  571.  This  is  supposed  to  refer  to  a
man  named  Anticlusi  who,  when  shut  up  In  the  wooden  horse  which  was
carried  within  the  walls  of  Troy,  was  seifed  with  a  desire  io  answer  Helen,
who,  standing  outside,  imitated  the  voice  of  his  wife.  Ulysses  stopped
his  throat,  by  the  pressure  of  his  thumb,  and  so  effectually  precluded  his
utterance  that  he  never  spoke  again,  being  suffocated.

^  Ina  deep  mortar,']  —Ver.  573.  Anaxarchus,  a  philosopher  of  Abdera,
was  condemned  by  Nicocreon,  the  tyrant  of  Cyprus,  to  be  pounded  with  iron
pestles  in  a  mortar,  which  torment  he  suffered  with  the  greatest  fortitude,
and  biting  off  his  own  tongue,  he  spat  it  in  the  face  of  the  tyrant.


y  Google


496  THE  nnnBCTivE

water  suffocate  thee.  Or  else,  when,  shipwrecked,  thoa  sbalt
have  escaped  the  hoisteroos  sea,  mayst  thou  perish  on  touching
the  shore,  as  Pahnurus  did.  And  may  the  pack  of  watchful
hounds,  the  care  of  Diana,  tear  thee  too  in  pieces,  Uke  the
Poet  of  Tragedy.**  Or  like  Empedocles,  of  Trinacria,  mayst
thou  leap  upon  the  face  of  the  giant  Enceladus,  where  the
Sicilian  j^tna  vomits  forth  flames  in  abundance.  May  the
Strymonian  matrons  tear  asunder  thy  limbs  with  insane  nails,
thinking  they  are  those  of  Orpheus,  As  Meleager,  the  son  of
Althaea,  burned  with  distant  flames,  so  may  thy  funereal  pile
be  consumed  by  the  flame  of  a  branch.  As  the  new-made
bride,  Creusa,  was  deceiyed  by  the  Phasian  chaplet,  and  as
the  father  of  the  bride,  and,  with  the  father,  the  household.  As
the  venom,  diffused,  pervaded  the  limbs  of  Hercules,  so  may
the  pestilential  poison  consume  thy  body.  May  those  wounds,
from  a  new-fashioned  weapon,  await  thee  too,  by  means  of
which  his  offspring  avenged  Lycurgus,  the  son  of  Pentheus.
And,  like  Milo,*^  mayst  thou  endeavour  to  cleave  the  fissile
oak ;  and  mayst  thou  be  unable  to  remove  thence  thy  hands
caught  there.  Mayst  thou  perish,  too,  through  thy  own  gifts,
like  Icarus ;  against  whom  the  drunken  crowd  raised  thdr
hands  in  arms.  And  as  Erigone,  his  affectionate  daughter,
did,  through  grief  for  her  father's  death,  do  thou  cause  the
noose  of  the  rope  to  go  round  thy  throat.  Mayst  thou  too
endure  famine,  the  threshold  of  the  house  being  blocked  up,
like  him  to  whom  his  own  mother*®  herself  gave  sentence  of
punishment.  Mayst  thou  outrage  the  statues  of  Diana,  after
the  example  of  Agamemnon,  who  sped  on  his  ri^id  path  from
the  port  of  Aulis. After  the  example  of  Palamedes,  the  son

^  The  poet  of  tragedy.] — Ver.  597.  Euripides,  the  Greek  Tragic  poet,
having  supped  with  king  Archelaus,  on  returning  home,  was  attacked  by
the  dogs  that  kept  the  temple  of  Diana,  and  was  torn  to  pieces  by  them,
his  enemy  Lysimachus  having  set  them  on  him  for  that  purpose.

^7  Milo.'] — Ver.  612.  Milo  of  Crotona,  a  man  of  enormous  strength,
endeavouring  to  withdraw  the  wedges  that  had  been  inserted  in  a  cldi
oak,  the  wood  suddenly  closed  and  caught  his  hands,  which  were  held  so
fast  that  he  could  not  withdraw  them,  and  he  became  a  prey  to  wild
beasts.

^  His  own  mother.'}— Yet.  618.  Pausanias,  a  general  of  the  Laced«-
monians,  being  condemned  for  treason,  was  shut  up  by  the  Ephori  in  the
temple  of  Minerva,  and  the  door  was  blocked  up  with  stones,  his  mother
throwing  the  first  stone  against  it.


y  Google


AGAINST  THE  IBIS.  497

of  Nauplios,  mayst  thou  be  punished  with  death  on  a  false
accusation :  and  may  it  be  of  no  advantage  to  thee  that  thou
didst  not  deserve  it.  As  the  host,  the  priest  of  Isis,  deprived
^thalius  of  his  life,  whom,  lo  remembering  it  even  to  this
day,  drives  afar  from  her  rites.  And  as  the  bereft  mother,  by
the  aid  of  her  lamp,  betrayed  Melantheus  as  he  lurked  in
darkness  after  the  murder ;  so  may  thy  breast  be  pierced  with
the  hurled  darts ;  so,  I  pray,  mayst  thou  be  injured  by  thy
own  allies.  May  such  a  night  be  passed  by  thee,  as  was  by
Dolon,  the  Phrygian  coward,  who  bargained  for  the  horses
which  the  brave  Achilles  used  to  drive.  Mayst  thou,  too,  enjoy
no  better  sleep  than  Rhesus  did,  and  those  who  were  the  com-
panions of  Rhesus,  both  in  his  death  and  before,  in  his
journey ;  and,  than  thej/  did,  whom  the  active  son  of  Hyrta-
cus,  and  his  companion,  put  to  death,  together  with  the  Rutu-
lian  Rhamnes.  Surrounded,  too,  like  the  son  of  Clinias,^^  with
smoky  flames,  mayst  thou  carry  thy  half-burnt  limbs  to  Sty-
gian doom.  May  rustic  arms  fdso  prove  the  destruction  of  thy
Hfe,  as  they  were  for  Remus,  who  dared  to  pass  over  the  new-
built  walls.  Lastly,  I  pray,  that  amid  Sarmatian  and  Getic
arrows,  thou  mayst  live  and  die  in  these  regions.  These
things  have  been  only  sent  thee  in  a  hurried  work,  that  thou
mayst  not  complain  that  I  am  forgetful  of  thee.  Thet/  are
few  indeed,  I  confess,  but  may  the  Gods  grant  more  than
is  asked  for,  and,  in  their  kindness,  may  they  multiply  my
wishes.

Hereafter,  thou  shalt  read  still  more,  and  that  which  shall
contain  thy  true  name,  written  in  Iambics,  the  measure  in
which  ruthless  warfare  ought  to  be  waged.

*  The  son  of  CUnias.'\—Yer.  635.  Alcibiades,  the  son  of  Clinias,  being,
through  the  agency  of  Lysander,  banished  from  Athens,  fled  into  Phrygia.
Phamabazus,  sending  persons  to  slay  him,  they  set  the  house  on  fire,  on
which  he  made  his  way  through  the  flames,  but  at  length  fell  dead,  pierced
with  darts.


Bin) 01" THE nrVECTITE AGAINST THE IBIS.


K£


y  Google


THE

HALIEUTICON;
TREATISE  ON  FISHES.

A  FRAGMENT.


This  fragment  is  fuU  of  lacims  and  corrapt  readings.  Ovid  seems  to
have  intended  to  depict  in  this  poem  the  points  of  resemblance  in  ter-
restrial and  aquatic  animals.  From  its  treating  on  the  nature  of  fishei,
he  caUs  the  work  Halieuticon,  from  the  Greek  word  &\ui)£,  *  a  fisher-
man.' Some  writers  have  attributed  this  fragment  to  Gratius  Faliscot,
a  Roman  poet,  the  author  of  the  Cyniegeticon,  a  treatise,  in  Tcne,
on  hunting ;  but  Pliny  the  Elder  (Book  xxxii.  c.  2)  distandly  says,
that  Orid  is  the  author ;  his  words  are — 'The  disposition  of  fishes,  whidi
Ovid  has  mentioned  in  his  work  called  Halieuticon,  appears  to  me  resUy
wonderfuL'  Commentators  generally  believe  this  poem  to  have  been
written  by  him  during  his  exfle  at  TomL*

*  *  *  *  T^he  world  received  the  law;  and  he  gave  arms
to  aU  beings,  and  reminded  them  of  their  self-preservatim ;
for  thus  it  is  that  the  calf  threatens,  which^  not  yet  bears
horns  on  its  tender  forehead ;  for  this  reason  the  hinds  flee,
the  lions  fight  yaloroosly,  the  dog  defends  himself  by  his  bite,
the  scorpion  by  the  sting  of  its  tail,  and  the  light  bird  flies  away
with  agitated  wings.

All  have  a  vague  fear  of  a  death  that  is  unknown  to  them ;
to  all  it  hcts  been  granted  to  be  sensible  of  the  enemy,  and  the
means  of  defence  that  have  been  given  them,  and  to  know
the  power  and  the  manner  of  using  their  weapons :  and  thus

*  The  different  versions  of  this  Fragment  vary  so  much,  that  it  has
been  thought  proper  to  adopt  those  readings,  which  seem  most  likc^  to
imply  the  writer's  meaning,  without  reference  to  the  text  of  any  individual
commentator.  A  few  passages  are  of  very  obscure  signification,  and  are
open  to  considerable  doubt.


y  Google


TBEATISE  OK  ushes.  '  499

too,  the  Bcarus^  is  cauglit  by  stratagem,  beneatli  the  waves,  and
at  length  dreads  the  bait  ^nght  with  treacherousness.  It
dares  not  strike  the  sticks'  wiUi  an  effort  of  its  head ;  but,
taming  away,  as  it  loosens  the  twigs  with  frequent  blows  of
its  tail,  it  makes  its  passage,  and  escapes  safely  mto  the  deep.
Moreover,  if  perchance  any  kind  scams,  swimming  behind,
sees  it  struggling  within  the  osiers,  he  takes  hold  of  its  tail
in  his  mouth,  as  it  is  thus  turned  away,  and  so  [it  escapes.]

The  cuttle-fish,  slow  in  flight,  when  perchance,  it  has  been
caught  under  the  buoyant  wave,  and  every  moment  is  in  dread
of  the  hands  of  the  spoiler,  vomits  from  its  mouth  a  black
blood,  that  tints  the  sea  and  hides  its  path,  deceiving  the  eyes
of  those  that  follow.

The  pike,  taken  in  the  net,  though  huge  and  bold,  sinks
down,  crouching  in  the  sand  which  it  has  stirred  up  with
its  tail.  *  *  *  *5  It  leaps  into  the  air,  and  uninjured,
with  a  bound  it  escapes  the  stratagem.  The  fierce  lamprey,
too,  conscious  of  the  smoothness  of  its  round  back,  turning
its  head,  in  preference,*  towards  the  loosened  meshes  of  the
net,  with  its  sHppery  body  at  last  escapes  clear  through  the
multiplied  windmgs,  and,  injurious  in  the  example  it  has  set,
it  alone  sHps  through  them  all.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  the
sluggish  polypus  sticks  to  the  rocks  with  its  body  provided
with  feelers,  and  by  this  stratagem  it  escapes  the  nets,  and,
according  to  the  nature  of  the  spot,  it  assumes  and  changes

1  The  seana,'] — ^Ver.  9.  This  fish  is,  by  some,  supposed  to  mean  the
*  parrot-fish;'  by  others, '  the  char/  The  scams  was  esteemed  a  great
delicacy  at  the  Roman  tables.  It  is  not  now  known  to  naturalists  what
were  the  various  fishes  to  which,  in  the  translation,  the  Latin  name  only
is  giyen ;  this  circumstance,  of  course,  renders  it  impossible  to  give  their
present  names  in  English.

2  The  8Hek8.'\ — Ver.  11.  Radiis.  This  alludes  to  the  sticks,  or  twigs,
which  formed  the  sides  of  the  *nassa,'  which  was  a  contrivance  for  catch-
ing fish  by  the  junction  of  willow  rods.  This,  being  somewhat  in  the  shape
of  a  large  bottle  with  a  narrow  mouth,  was  placed  with  the  mouth  facing
the  current.

s  *  *  *  *.]— Ver.  17.  The  words  here  are,  *  Ubcr  Servato,  quem
texit,  in  -  •  -  resulset.' They  are  not  capable  of  any  translation.

*  Turning  its  head  in  pr^erence,] — Ver.  27.  *  Magis  conversa.*
These  words  seem  to  be  used  in  contradistinction  to  the  word  *  aversus,'
as  applied  before  to  the  '  scams,'  when  endeavouring  to  make  its  escape.

KK2


y  Google


500  THE HALIETJTICOSr  ;

its  colour,  always  resembling  that  ]»lace  which  it  has  lighted
upon ;  and  when  it  has  greedily  seized  the  prey  hanging  firom
the  fishing-line,  it  likewise  deceives  the  angler,  on  his  raising
the  rod,  when,  now  emerging  into  the  air,  it  loosens  its  feelers,
and  spits  forth  the  hook  that  it  has  despoiled  of  the  bait.

But  the  mullet,  with  its  tail,  beats  off  the  pend^mt  bait,  and
snatches  it  up  when  thus  struck  off.  The  pike,  lashed  into
furious  rage,  is  carried  along  with  its  fioundenngs  on  erery
side,  and  follows  the  current  that  carries  it  on,  and  wriggles
about  its  head,  until  the  cruel  hook  falls  from  the  loosened
wound,  and  leaves  its  opened  mouth.  The  lamprey,  too,  is
not  ignorant  of  its  own  powers  of  attack,  and  is  not  without
its  sharp  bite  on  the  instant  as  its  means  of  defence ;  nor,
when  caught,  does  it  lay  aside  its  -fierce  spirit.  The  anthias
uses  those  arms,  which,  being  behind  it,  it  does  not  behold ;
it  knows,  too,  the  power  of  its  back-bone,  and  turning  its
body  with  its  back  downwards,  it  cuts  the  line  and  intercepts
the  hook  fixed  in  the  bait.

As  to  the  rest  of  the  animals  which  inhabit  the  dense  woods,
either  vain  fears  are  ever  alarming  them,  maddened  with  terror,
or  the  blind  ferocity  of  their  nature  is  ever  throwing  them
headlong  into  dangers,  'Tis  nature  itself  that  prompts  them
either  to  take  to  flight,  or  to  rush  into  close  conflict.  See
how  the  intrepid  lion  rushes  on,  to  scatter  the  ranks  of  the
hunters,  and  how  he  presents  his  breast  to  the  hostile  darts.
Wherever  he  approaches,  he  bums  with  rage,  more  and  more
confident,  and  more  spirited ;  he  shakes  his  mane,  and  he
adds  anger  to  his  native  strength.  He  rushes  on,  and,  by  his
own  courage,  he  hastens  his  death.

The  hideous  bear,  as  it  rolls  along  from  its  Lucanian^  dens,
what  is  it  but  a  sluggish  mass,  ferocious,  and  of  a  stoHd  dis-
position ?  The  wild  boar,  hard  pressed,  signifies  his  anger  by
his  erected  bristles,  and,  with  a  bound,  rushes  amid  the  wounds
of  the  opposing  steel,  and,  followed  up,  dies  with  the  weapon
transfixing  his  vitals.

Another  portion  of  the  animals,  trusting  in  their  fleetness,
turn  their  backs  on  the  pursuer ;  such  as  the  timid  hares,  and
the  deer  with  tawny  hide,  and  the  stag,  flying  with  unlimited

^  Lucanian.^ — Ver.  57.  Lucania  was  a  district  situate  in  the  south  of
Italy.


y  Google


OE, TEEATISE  ON  FISHES.  501

terror. 'Tis  nature  itself  that  prompts  them,  either  to  take  to
flight,  or  to  rush  into  close  conflict.

The  honour  of  high  spirit  and  the  greatest  glory  belong
to  the  horse ;  for,  in  his  instinct,  he  covets  the  victory,  and
exults  in  his  conquest.  Whether  it  is  that  he  has  gained  the
-wreath,  in  the  seven  courses^  round  the  Circus ;  do  you  not  see,
ho^w  much  more  erect  the  victor  raises  aloft  his  head,  and  dis-
plays himself  to  the  applause  of  the  crowd  ?  or,  whether  it  is
when  his  lofty  back  is  adorned  with  the  slaughtered  hon ;
how  proudly,  how  remarkable  for  his  stately  air,  does  he  walk,
and  how  his  hoof,  as  he  returns  heavily  laden  with  the  spoils  of
victory,^  actuated  by  the  generous  impulse,  strikes  the  ground  ?

Which  is  the  especial  point  of  merit  in  the  dog  ?  What  in-
trepid boldness  there  is  in  them !  What  sagacious  aptness  for
the  chase  :  what  powers  of  endurance  in  foUowing.  Now  they
are  snufllng^the  air  with  elevated  nostrils ;  now  they  are  ex-
amining the  track  with  nose  close  to  the  ground ;  and  now,
with  their  cry,  they  proclaim  that  they  have  found,  and  urge
on  their  master  with  their  voice.  Should  the  prey  escape  lus
attack,  then,  over  hiUs  and  over  plains  does  the  dog  pursue.
All  our  toils  are  centered  in  their  skill ;  on  that  do  all  our
hopes  rely.

But  I  would  not  recommend  you  to  go  out  into  the  midst  of
the  ocean,  nor  to  try  the  depths  of  the  open  sea.  You  will  do
hetter  to  regulate  your  cable '^  according  to  each  kind  of  loca-
lity. At  one  time,  the  spot  may  be  rugged  with  rocks  ;  such
demands  the  pliant  fishing-rod ;  whereas  the  smooth  shore  re-
quires the  net.  Does  some  lofty  mountain  send  its  deepening
shadows  over  the  sea ;  according  to  their  different  natores,  some
fish  avoid,  and  some  seek  such  a  spot.  If  the  sea  is  green  from
the  weeds  that  grow  at  the  bottom *  *  *

*  *  *  *

let  him  apply  patience,  and  let  him  watch  by  the  soft  seaweed.
Nature  has  designed,  in  a  varied  manner,  the  bottom  of  the

•  Seven  ooursesJ] — Ver.  68.  The  extent  of  the  race  in  the  Circus
Maximus,  was  always  seven  times  round  the  '  meta,'  or  goal.

■^  Spoils  of  victory.'] — ^Ver.  74.  '  Spoliis  opimis.'  This  literally  means
the  spoil  taken  from  a  prince  or  general  of  the  enemy.  It  is  here  appUed
to  the  lion,  as  heing  the  king  of  the  wild  heasts.

8  Your  cable.] — ^Ver.  87.  *Fimem/  This  seems  to  apply  to  the  rope,
by  which  the  hoat  or  punt  of  the  fisherman  is  moored.


y  Google


502  THI  HALTETTTICOlfr ;

ocean^  and  she  has  not  willed  that  all  fish  should  frequent  the
same  haunts ;  for  there  are  some  that  love  the  open  sea,  such
as  the  mackarel,'  and  the  sea  ox,  and  the  darting  hippurus,
and  the  gurnet  with  its  swarthy  hack^  and  the  yaluable  helops,
unknown  in  our  waters,  and  the  hardy  sword-fish,  not  less
dangerous  than  a  sword  with  its  blow,  and  the  timid  tunnies,
that  fly  in  large  shoals ;  there  is,  too,  the  little  sucking-fish,
wondrous  to  tell !  a  yast  obstruction  *°  to  ships ;  you,  too,  the
pilot-fish,  the  companion  of  the  vessels,  who  always  follow
the  white  foam  of  the  track  that  they  make  along  the  ocean,
and  the  fierce  cercyros,  that  haunts  the  bases  of  the  rocks ;  the
cantharus,  too,  impleasant  in  its  flavour,  the  orphas,  like  it  in
colour,  and  the  erythinus,  reddening  in  the  azure  waves ;  the
sargus,  remarkable  with  its  spots  and  distinguished  by  its  fins,
the  sparulus,  refulgent  with  its  gilded  neck,  tibie  ghttenng  pagur,
the  tawny  shark,  and  the  rufF  that  re-produces  itself,  deprived
of  two-fold  parents;  besides ;  the  rock-fish,"  with  its  green
scales  and  its  little  mouth,  the  scarce  dory,  the  tinted  mormyr,
and  the  gilt-head,  rivalling  the  brilliancy  of  gold ;  the  grayling,
too,  with  its  hvid  body,  the  darting  pike,  the  perch,  and  the
tragus.  Besides ;  the  melanurus,  remarkable  for  the  beauty
of  its  tail,  the  lamprey  burning  with  its  spots  of  gold,  the
green  merling,  the  conger-eel,  cruel  with  tibe  wounds  wMck
it  inflicts  on  those  of  its  own  kind,  the  sea-scorpion,  in-
jurious horn  the  sharp  sting  in  its  head,  and  the  glaucus
that  is  never  beheld  under  the  Constellation  of  summer.  But
on  the  other  hand,  some  fishes  extend  themselves  on  the
sands  covered  with  weeds,  as  the  scarus,  which  fish  alone  ru-
minates the  food  it  has  eaten,  and  the  prolific  species  of  the
pilchard,  the  lamyros,  the  smaris,  the  filthy  chromis,  and  the
salpa,"  deservedly  in  little  esteem;  the  fish,  too,  that  imitates,

r  •  The  maekarel.^ — Ver.  94.  'Scombri.'  This  name  is  supposed  by
naturalists  to  have  belonged  to  the  mackarel ;  but  it  is  by  no  means  cer-
tain to  what  fish  it  was  given.

^0  A  vast  obstruction.] — Ver.  99.  The  *  Echeneis  remora,'  or  suddng
fish,  was  supposed,  by  sticking  to  the  rudder  or  keel  of  a  vessel,  to  be  able
to  stop  its  s^ng.

"  The  rocAf-^A.]— Ver.  110.  ♦  Saxatilis.'  This  probably  is  not  the
name  of  any  fish ;  but,  as  the  poet  had  forgotten  the  name,  he  uses  it  as
denoting  its  habits.

^^  The  8alpa.]^\et>  122. Plmy  the  Elder  tells  us  that  this  was  a  sea


y  Google


OB, TBEATISE  ON  FISHES.  503

beneath  the  waves,  the  pretty  nests  of  the  birds ;  and  the
squalus,  and  the  red  mullet,  tinted  with  e  faint  blood  colour  ;
the  sole,  too,  shining  in  its  whiteness ;  the  turbot,  like  it  in
colour;  the  pearl-fish,^^  admired  on  the  coasts  of  the  Adriatic;
the  broad  epodis,  and  the  frog-fish,  with  its  soft  back.
The  last  appear  *  *  ♦  *

4:  *  *  *  *

The  slippery  gudgeon,  too,  that  hurts  with  none  of  its
prickles ;  the  ink-fish,  that  carries  a  black  liquid  in  its  snow-
white  body;  the  tough  sea-pigs,  and  the  twisting  caris ;  the
cod-fish  too,^*  little  deserving  of  a  name  so  ugly ;  and  you,
too,  the  acipenser,  famed  in  distant  waters  *  *  *

fish,  which,  like  a  stock  fish,  required  to  he  beaten  with  rods  in  order  to
make  it  tender.

«  The  pearljish.l'-yet.  126.  *  Rhombus.'  This  fish  is  generally
supposed  to  have  been  the  turbot,  or  pearl ;  though  '  passer,'  which  has
been  just  mentioned,  is  supposed  also  to  have  been  one  of  the  names  of
the  turbot.

"  The  coct-^A.]— Ver.  131.  *  Asellus.'  This  fish  was  highly  esteemed
by  the  Romans,  and  is  generally  thought  to  have  been  the  cod-fish.  Its
name  '  asellus '  is,  literally, '  Uttle  ass,'  for  which  reason,  with  his  usual
punning  propensity,  Ovid  says  that  it  does  not  deserve  a  name  so  ugly.


THE  EITD.


J. BILLING, PRINTER,  WOUNO,  8URRXT.


y  Google


y  Google


y  Google


y  Google


y  Google


y  Google


PAB622.F2  1851


3  2106


00154  6271


y  Google
