================================================================================
The Heroides; or, Epistles of the Heroines; The Amours; Art of Love; Remedy of Love
Ovid | Literally translated into English prose by Henry T. Riley (Bohn's Classical Library, 1852)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Internet Archive: Bohn's Classical Library, Ovid vol. 2 (1852)
Source URL: https://archive.org/details/herodesorepistle00ovid
Rights: Public Domain (U.S.)
Staged: 2026-10-09 | Tower of Babel Library, Batch 09a (classical-literature lane)
================================================================================

THE HEROIDES,


OE


EPISTLES1  OF THE  HEROINES,


EPISTLE  I.

PENELOPE  TO  ULYSSES.

The  Trojan  war  having  been  caused  by  the  perfidy  of  Paris,  who  carried
off  Helen,  the  wife  of  his  host,  Menelaus,  king  of  Sparta,  the  Greeks,
having  in  vain  applied  for  redress,  determined  to  revenge  themselves  by
force  of  arms.  Unwilling  to  embark  in  the  expedition,  Ulysses  counter-
feited madness  ;  but  on  his  stratagem  being  discovered  by  Palamedes,
he  accompanied  the  Grecian  forces  to  Troy,  where  his  valour  and
wisdom  greatly  contributed  to  the  overthrow  of  that  city.  On  return-
ing, the  Grecian  ships,  through  the  vengeance  of  Minerva,  were  over-
taken by  storms,  whereby  many  were  driven  upon  remote  coasts,  and
the  fugitives  were  involved  in  great  distress.  Among  others,  Ulysses
wandered  through  various  regions  for  above  ten  years,  exposed  to
numerous  dangers,  and  unable  to  regain  his  own  country.  Penelope,  his
wife,  ignorant  of  the  cause  of  his  absence,  but  solicitous  for  his  return,
is  supposed  to  address  the  present  Epistle  to  her  husband,  in  which
she  chides  him  for  his  long  absence,  and  entreats  him  to  return  home  to
his  wife  and  family,  as,  Troy  being  now  overthrown,  he  can  have  no
reason  for  his  absence.

Ulysses,  thy  Penelope2  sends  this  to  thee,  thus  delaying  ;

1  Epistles.'] — It  may  be  here  observed,  that  Scaliger  attributes  only
fifteen  of  these  Epistles  to  Ovid,  and  thinks  that  the  following  six — Paris
to  Helen,  Helen  to  Paris,  Leander  to  Hero,  Hero  to  Leander,  Acontius
to  Cydippe,  andCydippe  to  Acontius — were  written  by  Sabinus  ;  while  the
three  which  are  usually  ascribed  to  Sabinus,  he  attributes  to  some  poet  of
the  middle  ages.  In  this  opinion,  however,  he  is  not  generally  supported
by  the  learned.

2  Penelope.'] — Ver.  1.  She  was  the  wife  of  Ulysses.  Her  original
name  is  said  by  some  writers  to  have  been  Amyre,  or  Arnsea.  According
to  them,  she  was  afterwards  called  Penelope,  either  from  '  Penelops,'  the
name  of  a  bird  supposed  to  be  the  widgeon,  she  having  been  fed  by  those
birds  when  exposed  by  her  parents,  or,  as  some  would  have  it,  from  a
Greek  word,  signifying  '  a  web,'  on  account  of  the  great  skill  she  displayed
in  the  art  of  spinning.

B /


2  THE  EPISTLES  OP  THE  HEROINES.  [EP.  I.

but  write  me  nothing  in  answer  ;  do  thou  come  thyself.
Troy,3  so  hateful  to  the  Grecian  fair,  doubtless  lies  prostrate  :
hardly  was  Priam4  and  the  whole  of  Troy  of  such  great  impor-
tance. Oh  !  how  I  wish  that  at  the  time  when  he  was  making
for  Lacedsemon5  with  his  fleet,  the  adulterer6  had  been  over-
whelmed in  the  raging  waves  !  Then  I  had  not  lain  cold
in  a  deserted  bed,  nor  forlorn7  should  I  have  complained  that
the  days  pass  slowly  on  :  the  hanging  webs  would  not  then

3  7Voy.] — Ver.  3.  Troy  was  called  '  Troja,'  from  its  king  Tros,  the
son  of  Ericthonius  and  Calirrhoe.  It  was  before  called  Teucria,  from
Teucer,  and  Dardania,  from  Dardanus.

4  Hardly  was  Priam.'] — Ver.  4.  '  Vix  Priamus  tanti,  totaque  Troja
fiirt.'  These  words  are  thus  rendered  in  Davison's  translation — '  Scarcely
were  Priam  and  all  his  kingdom  worth  such  a  mighty  stir.'

5  Lacedcemon.] — Ver.  5.  Lacedaemon  was  a  city  of  Peloponnesus,  the
capital  of  the  dominions  of  Menelaiis,  the  husband  of  Helen.  It  received
its  name  from  Lacedsemon,  the  son  of  Jupiter  and  Taygete,  the  daughter
of  Atlas  and  Pleione. Another  name  of  the  same  city  was  Sparta.

6  The  adulterer.'] — Ver.  6.  She  alludes  to  Paris,  the  son  of  Priam,
who  carried  off  Helen,  the  wife  of  Menelaiis,  and  thereby  caused  the  Tro-
jan war.  Her  resentment  will  not  allow  her  to  call  him  by  his  proper
name  of  Alexander  or  Paris,  but  suggests  one  which  sufficiently  distin-
guishes him,  and  at  the  same  time  reproaches  him  with  his  crimes.

7  Nor  forlorn.] — Ver.  8.  She  had  now  been  left  twenty  years  by  him  :
he  having  been  engaged  ten  years  in  the  Trojan  war,  and  another  ten  in
his  wanderings  on  his  return  homeward.

8  The  hanging!  web.] — Ver.  10.  The  term  '  pendula '  is  used  because
the  warp  (which  was  called  '  stamen,'  from  '  sto,'  'to  stand,')  stood  erect
in  the  loom,  and  did  not  lie  horizontally,  like  those  of  the  present  day.
Though  weaving  was  a  trade  among  the  Greeks  and  Romans,  every  house
of  distinction,  especially  in  the  country,  contained  a  loom,  with  the  requi-
site apparatus  for  working  wool.  This  occupation  was  supposed  to  be
especially  pleasing  to  Minerva,  who  was  regarded  in  this  character  as  the
guardian  of  female  industry  and  decorum.  The  work  was  mostly  carried
on  by  the  female  slaves,  under  the  supervision  of  the  mistress  of  the  house,
who,  with  her  daughters,  occasionally  took  a  part  in  the  more  tasteful
portion  of  their  labours.  The  Greeks  and  Romans  supplied  themselves
from  their  own  looms  with  the  ordinary  articles  of  clothing ;  but  the
finer  textile  works  of  scarfs,  shawls,  carpets,  and  tapestry  were  mostly
supplied  them  from  the  East.  In  the  earlier  ages  of  Greece  and  Rome,  it
was  the  duty  of  the  matron,  assisted  by  her  daughters,  to  weave  clothing
for  her  husband  and  sons.  Thus,  Lucretia  is  depicted  by  Ovid,  in  the
Second  Book  of  the  Fasti,  as  weaving  a  cloak  for  her  husband.  In  the
■'  Ion'  of  Euripides,  Creusa  proves  herself  to  be  the  mother  of  Ion,  by  des-
cribing the  pattern  of  a  shawl  which  she  had  made,  and  in  which  she  had
wrapped  her  infant  son.  In  the  '  Iphigenia  in  Tauris'  of  Euripides,  Iphigenia


2P.  I.]  PENELOPE TO ULTSSES.  3

have  wearied  my  widowed  hands,  as  I  seek  to  beguile9  the
lingering  night.10

When  have  I  not  been  dreading  dangers  more  grievous
than  the  reality  1  Love  is  a  thing  replete  with  anxious  fears.
Against  thee  did  I  fancy  that  the  furious  Trojans  were  rush-
ing on ;  at  the  name  of  Hector  I  was  always  pale.  If  any
one  made  mention  of  Antilochus,11  conquered  by  Hector,  Antilo  -
chus  was  the  cause  of  my  apprehensions  ;  or  if,  how  the  son  of
Mencetius12  had  fallen  in  assumed  armour,  I  lamented  that
his  stratagem13  should  fail  of  success. Tlepolemus  had  stained

recognizes  Orestes,  and  in  the  •  Choephorse'  of  vEschylus,  Electra  also  recog-
nizes him,  by  the  figured  clothing  which  he  wears,  and  which  they  had
respectively  long  before  woven  for  him.  Shawls  and  fine  garments  were
frequently  woven  as  offerings  to  the  temples  of  the  Divinities.

9  SeeJc  to  beguile.] — Ver.  9.  In  the  Epistle  of  Hero  to  Leander  there
is  a  similar  expression — '  deceptse  pars  noctis,'  '  a  portion  of  the  beguiled
night.'

10  The  lingering  night.'] — Ver.  10.  Being  much  importuned  by  her
suitors,  some  of  whom  threatened  to  carry  her  off  by  force,  Penelope
begged  a  respite,  until  she  should  have  finished  a  web  which  she  was
then  weaving.  To  prolong  the  time,  she  was  in  the  habit  of  undoing  at
night  what  she  had  completed  in  the  day.  Hence  the  proverb,  'Pene-
lopes telum  texere,'  '  to  do  and  undo.'

11  Antilochus.] — Ver.  15.  Politian  suggests  that  '  Amphimachus  '
should  be  read  here  instead  of  '  Antilochus/  inasmuch  as  not  only  Homer
relates  that  Antilochus  was  slain  by  Memnon,  but  Quintus  Calaber,  Dictys
the  Cretan,  and  Pindar  say  the  same.  Some  writers,  however,  think  that
the  version  given  by  Ovid  is  favoured  by  what  Hyginus  says  in  his  113th
Fable  ;  though  in  the  112th  he  follows  the  common  account,  that  Anti-
lochus was  killed  by  Memnon.  There  was  another  Antilochus,  son  of
Hercules,  who  was  killed  by  Paris.  As  Amphimachus  was  killed  by
iEneas,  it  has  been  suggested  that  the  reading  should  be  '  Archilochus  ;'
inasmuch  as  Dares  the  Phrygian  says  that  a  person  of  that  name  was
slain  by  Hector.  The  Poet  may,  however,  have  designedly  made  the  mis-
take; inasmuch  it  was  not  unlikely  that  Penelope,  a  female  living  at  a  great
distance,  might  be  ignorant  of  the  minute  circumstances  of  the  war,  and,
gathering  her  information  from  report,  might  mistake  one  person  for
another.  Besides,  Ovid  uses  the  word  '  victus,'  '  conquered :'  and,  as
Heinsius  justly  observes,  it  is  one  thing  to  be  conquered,  but  another  to
be  killed.

12  Son  of  Mencetius.]— V er.  17.  Patroclus  was  the  son  of  Mencetius,
and  was  the  companion  of  Achilles.  When  this  hero  retired  from  the
contest,  on  being  deprived  by  Agamemnon  of  Briseis,  Patroclus  appeared  in
his  armour  on  the  field  of  battle,  and  was  slain  by  Hector.

13  That  his  stratagem.] — Ver.  18.  Knowing  that  Ulysses  was  famed
for  his  skill  in  stratagem,  she  expresses  sorrow  and  apprehension  that  even
stratagem  mav  fail  of  success.

E 2


4  THE  EPISTLES  OE  THE  HEBOIKES.  [EP.  I.

the  Lycian  spear  with  his  blood  ;  by  the  death  of  Tlepole-
mus14  were  my  cares  renewed.  In  fine,  whoever  in  the  Gre-
cian camp  was  slain,  my  affectionate  breast  was  more  cold
than  ice.

But  the  righteous  God15  had  a  regard  for  my  chaste  pas-
sion ;  and  Troy,  my  husband  surviving,16  has  been  reduced  to
ashes.  The  Argive  chieftains17  have  returned;  the  altars
are  smoking  ;  the  spoils  of  the  barbarians18  are  offered  to  the
Gods  of  our  country.  The  damsels  newly  married19  are  pre-
senting the  gifts  of  gratitude  for  the  safe  return  of  their  hus-
bands ;  they  themselves  are  celebrating  the  destinies  of  Troy
overcome  by  their  own.20 Both  virtuous  old  men  and  timid

14  Death  of  Tlepolemus.'] — Ver.  19.  Astyoche  was  the  daughter  of
Phyleus,  king  of  Thesprotia.  By  Hercules  she  had  Tlepolemus.  Having
killed  his  uncle,  Lycimnius,  in  his  father's  house,  he  fled  to  Rhodes :
whence  he  afterwards  sailed  with  nine  ships  to  aid  the  Grecian  cause  in
the  Trojan  war.  He  was  slain  by  Sarpedon,  king  of  Lycia,  who  was  in
his  turn  slain  by  Patroclus.

15  The  righteous  God.] — Ver.  23.  By  the  Divinity  here  mentioned  pro-
bably Hymenseus,  the  God  of  marriage,  is  meant.

16  My  husband  surviving. .] — Ver.  24.  This  she  would  learn  from  her
son  Telemachus,  who  was  so  informed  by  Menelaiis  and  Nestor.

17  The  Argive  chieftains.'] — Ver.  25.  Such  as  Agamemnon,  Menelaiis,
and  Nestor.  The  Trojan  war,  however,  was  fatal  to  most  of  the  Grecian
chiefs.

1S  Of  the  barbarians.] — Ver.  26.  Francius  suggests  '  Dardana  '  in  this
line,  in  place  of  '  barbara.'  But  in  the  earlier  ages  of  Greece  the  Phry-
gians were  especially  considered  to  be  (3apj3apoi.

19  Damsels  newly  married.] — Ver.  27.  The  Poet  here  adopts  the  Greek
word  vvfjupr/,  signifying  '  a  newly,'  or  '  recently  married  woman.'  Hein-
sius  suggests,  that  the  reading  should  be  '  nuptse  ;'  the  use  of  '  nymphse '
in  this  sense  being  so  uncommon.

20  By  their  own.] — Ver.  28.  As  each  event  that  happened  was  sup-
posed by  the  ancients  to  take  place  by  the  decree  of  fate,  the  poets,  as  in
the  present  passage,  sometimes  use  the  word  '  fate,'  to  signify  the  things
accomplished  by  fate.  By  fate,  was  understood  a  succession  of  events,
which  must  unavoidably  take  place,  and  which  were  to  give  rise  the  one
to  the  other.  There  were  several  circumstances  upon  which  the  fate  of
Troy  was  said  to  depend.  First,  the  life  of  Troilus,  the  son  of  Priam,  who
was  slain  by  Achilles.  Secondly,  the  preservation  of  the  Palladium,  or
the  image  of  Pallas,  which  was  kept  in  the  city  ;  this  was  carried  off  by
Ulysses  and  Diomedes,  who  entered  the  city  by  night,  and  slew  the  guards
of  the  place  where  it  was  deposited.  Thirdly,  the  horses  of  Rhesus  ;  if
they  should  not  be  captured  before  they  '  had  tasted  of  the  pastures  of
Troy,  and  the  waters  of  Xanthus,'  as  Virgil  says :  they  were  also  carried


EP.  I.]  PENELOPE TO ULYSSES.  5

maidens  are  astonished  ;  the  wife  hangs  intently  on  the  lips  of
her  husband  as  he  tells  the  tale.  Some,  a  table  being  placed,
describe  there  the  dreadful  battles ;  and  they  trace  out  the
whole  of  Pergamus  with  a  little  wine.21  This  way  flowed  the
Simois;22  there  is  the  Sigeean  territory;23  here  stood  the
lofty  palace  of  aged  Priam ;  here  was  the  grandson  of  iEacus
encamped,  here  Ulysses ;  here  mangled  Hector  frightened
the  steeds24  in  full  career.

For  aged  Nestor  related  it  all  to  thy  son,  who  was  sent25  to  seek
thee,  and  he  again  to  me.  He  related,  too,  how  that  Rhesus26
and  Dolon27  were  slain,  and  how  the  one  was  surprised  in

off  by  Ulysses  and  Dioraedes.  And  lastly,  the  sepulchre  of  Laomedon,
in  the  Scsean  gate,  which  was  to  remain  untouched ;  this  was  partly  de-
stroyed, when  that  gate  was  taken  down  by  the  Trojans,  for  the  purpose  of
admitting  the  wooden  horse.

21  With  a  little  wine.'} — Ver.  32.  It  was  a  common  custom  with  the
Greeks  and  Romans,  after  the  'ccena,'  or  chief  meal, to  set  wine  on  the  table,
and  to  prolong  the  conversation  to  a  late  hour  of  the  night.  To  describe
positions  and  localities,  they  were  in  the  habit  of  pouring  a  little  wine  on
the  table,  and  making  the  requisite  delineation  with  the  finger.  Ovid
mentions  the  same  custom  on  other  occasions  ;  and  in  the  Epistle  from
Helen  to  Paris,  1.  88,  he  describes  the  lover  as  signifying  his  passion  to  his
mistress  by  tracing  the  word  '  amo,'  '  I  love,'  on  the  table.

22  The  Simois.] — Ver.  33. — The  Simois  was  a  small  river,  near  Troy,
that  flowed  into  the  Scamander,  and  by  its  shallow  course  covered  the
neighbourhood  with  swamps  and  marshes.

23  The  Siffcean  territory.} — Ver.  33.  Sigagum  was  a  promontory,  near
Troy.  The  ships  of  the  Greeks  were  laid  up  in  its  vicinity.  There,  were
also  the  tombs  of  Achilles,  Patroclus,  and  Antilochus.

24  Frightened  the  steeds.} — Ver.  36.  This  refers  to  the  behaviour  of
Achilles  to  Hector,  after  he  had  slain  him.  He  fastened  his  body  to  his
chariot,  and  dragged  it  round  the  walls  of  Troy.

25  Who  was  sent.] — Ver.  37.  Penelope  did  not  send  Telemachus  to
seek  his  father  Ulysses  ;  but  being  incited  to  do  so  by  the  advice  of  Minerva,
under  the  form  of  Mentes,  the  son  of  Anchialus,  the  king  of  the  Taphians,
unknown  to  any  person  but  his  nurse,  Telemachus  left  Ithaca  with  that  ob-
ject. He  visited  Nestor  in  Pylos,  and  Menelaiis  at  Sparta,  and  there  having
learned  the  fortunes  of  the  Greeks,  at  the  taking  of  Troy,  he  returned
to  his  mother.

26  Rhesus.] — Ver.  39.  Rhesus  was  the  son  of  Eioneus,  and  the  king  of
Thrace.  Coming  to  the  assistance  of  Priam  in  the  night,  he  was  obliged
to  pitch  his  camp  outside  of  the  city.  On  hearing  of  this,  Ulysses  and  Dio-
medes  surprised  his  guards,  who,  through  the  fatigue  of  their  march,  had
fallen  asleep,  and  slaying  Rhesus,  carried  off  his  white  steeds,  and  his
chariot  that  was  adorned  with  gold  and  silver.

27  And  Dolon.] — Ver.  39. Dolon  was  a  Trojan  by  birth,  the  son  of


6  THE  EPISTLES  OF  THE  HEROINES.  [EP.  T.

his  sleep,  the  other  by  stratagem.  Thou  didst  venture,  0
thou,  far,  far  too  forgetful  of  thy  fame,  to  enter  the  Thra-
cian  camp  by  a  stratagem  in  the  night ;  and  to  slay  so
many23  men  together,  when  aided  by  but  one.  But  no  doubt2*
thou  wast  extremely  careful,  and  didst  first  bethink  thy-
self of  me.  My  bosom  continually  throbbed  with  fear,  until
thou  wast  reported  to  have  proceeded  as  a  conqueror  through
the  allied  ranks  with  the  Ismarian  steeds.30  But  what  avails
me  Ilion  hurled  down  by  thy  arms  ?  and  that  level  ground,
which  once  was  walls  ;31  if  I  remain  just  as  I  remained  while
Troy  was  flourishing,  and  if  thou,  my  husband,  art  afar
from  me,  to  be  lamented  by  me  eternally  ?  To  others  Per-
gamus  is  demolished,  to  me  alone  it  survives  ;  Pergamus,
which  the  victorious  inhabitant  is  ploughing  with  the  cap-
tured steer  ?

Now  'tis  a  field  of  corn82  where  once  Troy  stood  ;  and  the
ground,  destined  to  be  plied  with  the  sickle,  is  rich,  fattened
with  Phrygian  blood.  The  half  buried  bones  of  men  are
struck  by  the  curving  ploughs  ;  grass  covers  over  the  ruinous
houses.  Victorious,  thou  art  absent,  and  it  is  not  granted  to
me  to  know  what  is  the  cause  of  thy  delaying,  or  in  what

Eumedes.  He  was  sent  by  Hector  as  a  spy  into  the  Grecian  camp ;  and
the  horses  of  Achilles  were  promised  to  him,  as  the  reward  of  his  services.
Diomedes  and  Ulysses  being  engaged  in  a  similar  pursuit,  and  meeting
him,  offered  to  spare  his  life  if  he  would  reveal  the  counsels  and  plans  of
the  Trojans.  To  this  he  consented  ;  and,  among  other  things,  disclosed  the
recent  arrival  of  Rhesus  ;  after  which  he  was  treacherously  put  to  death.
It  does  not  seem  very  probable  that  Penelope  would  remind  her  husband
of  a  transaction  which  was  so  much  to  the  discredit  of  himself  and  his
friend  Diomedes.

28  Slay  so  many.'] — Ver.  43.  Penelope  is  here  flattering  her  husband.
Diomedes  slew  Rhesus  and  his  twelve  attendants. He  also  slew  Dolon.

29  But  no  doubt.] — Ver.  44. This  is  said  ironically.

30  Ismarian  steeds."] — Ver.  46. Ismarus  was  a  mountain  of  Thrace.

31  Once  was  walls.] — Ver.  48.  Scaliger  is  severe  upon  this  line :  as  he
says  that  a  wall  cannot  become  the  ground.  This  is  rather  hypercritical,
as  the  place  where  the  walls  stood  is  evidently  meant  by  the  Poet.

32  A' field  of  corn.'] — Ver.  53.  Lucan,  in  the  Ninth  Book  of  his  Phar-
salia,  introduces  Cato  as  visiting  the  site  of  Troy :  '  and  he  seeks  the
famous  vestiges  of  the  Phcebean  walls  —  the  memorable  name  of  burned
Troy — now  become  barren  woods,  and  the  rotten  trunks  of  trees.' — •  The
whole  of  Troy  is  covered  with  shrubs  :  even  its  ruins  are  gone.'


EP.  I.]  PEKELOPE TO ULYSSES.  7

corner  of  the  world,  in  thy  cruelty,  thou  art  concealed.33
Whoever  steers  his  stranger  bark  to  these  shores,  departs
after  having  been  asked  by  me  many  a  question  about  thee  ;
and  to  him  is  entrusted  the  paper  inscribed  with  my  fingers  for
him  to  deliver  to  thee,  if  he  should  only  see  thee  anywhere.

To  Pylos,  the  Neleian  lands  of  the  aged  Nestor,  have  I
sent ;  from  Pylos  an  uncertain  report  was  sent  back.  To
Sparta,  too,34  have  I  sent :  Sparta,  also,  was  ignorant  of  the
truth/  what  regions  thou  dost  inhabit,  or  where,  thus  lingering,
thou  art  absent.  More  to  my  advantage  would  the  walls  of
Phoebus35  be  standing  even  now.  (Alas !  in  my  fickleness  I
am  vexed  at  my  own  wishes.)  I  should  then  know  where  thou
art  fighting,  and  warfare  alone  should  I  dread ;  and  with
those  of  many  others™  would  my  complaints  be  joined.  What
to  fear  I  know  not ;  still,  bewildered,  I  dread  every  thing  ;
and  a  wide  field  lies  open  for  my  cares.  Whatever  dangers
the  sea  presents,  whatever  the  land,  these  I  suspect  to  be  the
causes  of  a  delay  so  prolonged.

While  in  my  folly  I  am  imagining  these  things  (such  is  the
inconstancy  of  you  men31),  thou  mayst  be  captivated33  by  some
foreign  beauty.  Perhaps,  too,  thou  mayst  be  telling  how
homely  thy  wife  is,  who  only  will  not  allow  the  wool  to  be

33  Thou  art  concealed.'] — Ver.  58.  She  implies  a  suspicion  that  her
husband  is  detained  hy  a  passion  for  some  rival,  which  causes  him  to  be
concealed.

3i  To  Sparta  too.] — Ver.  65.  On  enquiring  of  Menelalis,  Telemachus
could  gain  no  information  relative  to  Ulysses.  At  his  departure  he  was
presented  by  Menelaiis  with  a  goblet  which  Vulcan  had  made,  and  a  robe
which  Helen  had  woven.

35  Walls  of  Phoebus.] — 'Ver.  67.  Phcebus  and  Neptune  had  aided
Laomedon  in  building  the  walls  of  Troy.

36  Of  many  others.] — Ver.  70.  It  is  not  an  uncommon  notion  that
companionship  in  grief  is  a  solace.

37  Of  you  men.] — Ver.  75.  The  word  '  vestra '  is  here  appropriately
used,  as  applying  to  husbands  in  general.  Judging  from  what  they  do,
she  thinks  that  it  is  not  improbable  that  Ulysses  may  be  doing  the  same.

33  Mayst  be  captivated.] — Ver.  76.  Penelope  here  only  intimates  the
suspicions  that  occasionally  cross  her  mind.  As  she  is  entirely  ignorant  of
what  has  happened  to  Ulysses  since  his  departure  from  Troy,  it  is  not  to
be  supposed  that  she  here  alludes  to  Calypso  and  Circe ;  though  such  an
idea  has  been  suggested  by  some  Commentators.  By  Circe,  Ulysses  was
the  father  of  Telegonus,  and  by  Calypso,  of  Auso,  from  whom  Italy  re-
ceived the  name  of  Ausonia.


8  THE  EPISTLES  OE  THE  HEEOIFES.  [EP.  I.

unspun.39  May  I  prove  mistaken,  and  may  this  charge  vanish
into  unsubstantial  air  ;  and  mayst  thou  not,  free  to  return,  be
desiring  to  be  absent.  My  father,  Icarius,40  urges  me  to
leave  a  widowed  bed,  and  is  always  chiding  thy  protracted
delay.  Let  him  chide  on  ;  thine  I  am,  thy  Penelope  must  I
be  called ;  the  wife  of  Ulysses  will  I  ever  be.  Still,  by  my
affection  and  my  chaste  entreaties  is  he  softened,  and  himself
restrains  his  own  authority.  Suitors  from  "Dulichium,41  and
Same,42  and  those  whom  the  lofty  Zacynthus43  has  given  birth
to,  a  wanton  crew,44  are  besetting  me  ;  and  in  thy  palace  do
they  rule,  with  no  one  to  hinder  them ;  thy  wealth,  our  very
entrails,  is  being  dissipated  by  them.

Why  should  I  mention45  to  thee  Pisander  and  Polybus,
and  ugly  Medon,46  and  the  greedy  hands  of  Eurymachus,  and
of  Antinoiis,47  and  others,  all  of  whom  in  thy  absence,  to  thy
disgrace,  thou  art  supporting  with  the  substance  acquired  by

s9  Wool  to  be  unspun.~}—Yev.  78.  '  Quse  tantum  lanas  non  sinat  esse
rudes.'  The  following  is  the  vague  translation  of  this  line  given  by  Davison
— '  who  minds  only  the  spindle  and  the  distaff.'

40  My  father  Icarius.'] — Ver.  81.  Penelope  was  the  daughter  of  Ica-
rius and  Polycaste.  Leucadius  and  Alyzes  were  her  brothers.  Her  father,
concluding  from  the  long  absence  of  Ulysses  that  he  would  not  return,
importuned  her  to  resign  all  thoughts  of  him,  and  to  marry  Eurymachus,
whom  he  favoured  before  the  other  suitors.

41  Dulichium.'] — Ver.  87.  Dulichium  was  one  of  the  cluster  of  islands
called  the  Echinades,  on  the  western  side  of  the  Peloponnesus.  It  formed
part  of  the  realms  of  Ulysses.

42  Same.] — Ver.  87.  Samos  was  the  name  of  several  islands.  The
one  here  mentioned  was  also  called  Samos,  and  had  a  city  of  that
name.  It  formed  part  of  the  dominions  of  Ulysses  ;  its  present  name  is
Cephalenia.

43  Zacynthus.] — Ver.  87.  This  island  lay  to  the  south  of  Same,  and
was  part  of  the  realms  of  Ulysses.

44  A  wanton  crew,] — Ver.  88;  The  word  'turba,'  'multitude,'  or
'  rout,'  is  by  some  thought  to  apply  rather  to  the  riotous  demeanour  of
the  suitors  of  Penelope,  than  their  number.  But  surely  no  word  but
'  turba '  could  apply  to  a  body,  of  whom  fifty -two  were  from  Duhchium,
twenty-four  from  Same.

43  Why  should  I  mention.] — Ver.  91.  She  here  names  a  few  of  her
suitors,  to  move  his  indignation  and  prompt  his  return.  Pisander  was
the  son  of  Polyctor. Medon  followed  the  occupation  of  a  herald.

46  Ugly  Medon.] — Ver.  91.  It  is  hard  to  say  why  the  epithet  '  dirum'
is  here  given  especially  to  Medon,  whom  Ulysses  spared  for  his  compara-
tive inoffensiveness.  It  is  most  probable  that  in  this  place  it  means  no-
thing more  than  '  ugly,'  or  '  disagreable.'

47  And  of  Antinous.] — Ver.  92.  Eurymachus  and  Antinoiis  were  the
chief  in  rank  of  the  suitors.


EP.  I.]  PENELOPE TO ULYSSES.  9

thy  blood.  Needy  Irus,48  and  Melanthius,49who  drives  thy  flocks
to  pasture,  are  added  to  thy  evils,  as  the  crowning  disgrace.
We  are,  in  number,  three  unprotected  persons ;  thy  wife
without  strength,  Laertes 50  an  aged  man,  and  Telemachus  a
boy.  By  treachery51  has  he  been  nearly  torn  from  me  of  late  ;
while,  against  the  will  of  all,  he  was  preparing  to  go  to  Pylos.
May  the  Gods  ordain,  I  pray,  that,  while  the  destinies  proceed
in  the  usual  order,52  he  may  close  my  eyes, — he  may  close
thine.  Both  the  keeper  of  thy  oxen53  and  thy  aged  nurse  do  the
same  ;  and  as  a  third,  the  guardian  of  the  unclean  stye.  But
neither  is54  Laertes,  as  being  one  incapable  of  bearing  arms,
able  to  hold  his  sway  in  the  midst  of  enemies. To  Telema-

43  Needy  Irus.'] — Ver.  95.  Irus  was  an  indigent  wretch  of  Ithaca,  of
vast  size,  but  of  no  strength  or  courage.  Ulysses  slew  him  with  a  blow  of
his  fist.

49  Melanthius.] — Ver.  95.  Melanthius  was  the  goat-herd  of  Ulysses,
who  joined  the  suitors  of  Penelope  in  consuming  the  flocks  of  his  master.

50  And  Laertes.'] — Ver.  98.  Laertes  is  generally  called  the  father  of
Ulysses.  Sometimes,  indeed, he  is  reproachfully  styled  the  son  of  Sisyphus ;
for  his  mother,  Anticlea,  after  being  betrothed  to  Laertes,  was  carried  off
by  the  robber  Sisyphus,  and  by  him  she  was  said  to  have  become  the
mother  of  Ulysses.  Ajax,  in  the  contention  for  the  armour  of  Achilles,
reproaches  him  with  this. See  the  13th  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses.

51  By  treachery.] — Ver.  99.  The  suitors,  as  we  learn  from  Homer,  tried
to  intercept  Telemachus  on  his  road  to  the  court  of  Nestor  ;  but  by  the
interposition  of  Minerva,  he  was  saved.

52  In  the  usual  order.] — Ver.  101.  That  is,  the  more  aged  being  the
first  to  die.  Tt  was  the  office  of  the  nearest  relatives  to  close  the  eyes  of
the  dying.  Varro,  however,  tells  us  that  by  the  Maevian  law  it  was  for-
bidden that  sons  should  close  the  eyes  of  their  parents  when  dying.

53  Of  thy  oxen.] — Ver.  103.  She  alludes  to  Philetius  the  neat-herd,
Eumseus  the  swine-herd,  and  Euryclea,  the  daughter  of  Pisenor,  the  nurse
of  Ulysses.

54  But  neither  is.] — Ver.  104.  The  following  are  the  remarks  of
Daniel  Heinsius  on  the  present  passage  : — "  Some  critics  have  supposed
that  many  passages  of  this  Epistle  have  been  carelessly  transposed ;  and
of  this  I  myself  am  convinced.  About  the  present  passage  I  have  no
doubt ;  for  what  relation  do  the  present  lines  bear  to  the  former  ones  ?
Penelope,  unless  I  am  mistaken,  does  not  mean  to  say  that  she  wishes
the  neatherd,  or  the  nurse  of  Ulysses,  to  close  her  own  eyes  and  those  of
her  husband.  I  am  of  opinion  then  that  the  whole  passage  ought  to  be
readjusted,  and  that  it  should  stand  thus  : —

"  Tres  sumus  imbelles  numero  :  sine  viribus  uxor
Laertesque  senex,  Telemachusque  puer.
Sed  neque  Laertes,  ut  qui  sit  inutilis  armis
Hostibus  in  medhs  regna  tenere  potest.


10  THE  EPISTLES  OE  THE  HEBOIKES.  [EP.  II.

chus  (if  he  only  lives)  a  more  vigorous  age  will  be  given ;
now  ought  it  to  be  defended  by  the  aid  of  his  father.  I  have
no  strength  to  drive  the  enemy  from  thy  abode ;  come,
speedily,  then,  the  refuge  and  sanctuary  of  thy  family.

Thou  hast,  and  long  mayst  thou  have,  a  son,  who,  in  his
tender  years,  ought  to  have  been  trained  to  the  virtues  of  his
father.  Think  of  Laertes ;  that  thou  mayst  still  close  his
eyes,  he  still  drags  on  the  closing  hours  of  his  existence.  I,  no
doubt,55  who  was  but  a  girl  when  thou  didst  depart,  shall
seem  to  have  become  an  old  woman,  though  thou  shouldst
return  at  once.

EPISTLE  II.
PHYLLIS  TO  DEMOPHOON.

Demophoont,  the  son  of  Phaedra  and  Theseus,  king  of  Athens,  on  his
return  from  the  Trojan  war,  being  overtaken  by  a  tempest,  was
obliged  to  make  for  the  coast  of  Thrace,  which  was  at  that  time  go-
verned by  Phyllis,  the  daughter  of  Lycurgus  and  Crustumena.  From
her  he  met  with  a  most  hospitable  reception,  and  at  length  was  admitted
to  share  her  bed.  Hearing  of  the  death  of  Mnestheus,  who,  after  the
expulsion  of  Theseus,  had  taken  possession  of  the  government  of
Athens,  and  urged  by  a  desire  of  recovering  his  kingdom,  he  resolved

Nee  mihi  sunt  vires  inimicos  pellere  tectis,

Tu  potius  venias,  portus  et  ara  tuis.
Telemacho  veniet  (vivat  modo)  fortior  setas,

Nunc  erat  auxihis  ilia  tueuda  patris.
Hoc  faciunt,  custosque  boum,  longaevaque  nutrix  :
Tertius  immundae  cura  fidelis  harae.
"  We  are  in number  three unprotected persons,  thy  wife without
strength,  Laertes  an  aged  man, and  Telemachus,  a  boy. But  neither
is  Laertes,  as  being  one  incapable  of  bearing  amis,  able  to  hold  his  sway
in  the  midst  of  enemies. I  have  no  strength  to  drive  the  enemy  from
thy  abode  ;  come  speedily  then,  the  refuge  and  sanctuaiy  of  thy  family.
To  Telemachus  (if  he  only  lives)  a  more  vigorous  age  will  be  given ;  now
ought  it  to  be  defended  by  the  aid  of  his  father. Both  the  keeper  of
thy  oxen  and  thy  aged  nurse  do  the  same,  and  as  a  third,  the  guardian  of
the  unclean  stye."

55  /,  no  doubt.'] — Ver.  115.  She  closes  by  endeavouring  to  move  his
compassion  in  her  own  behalf.  He  had  married  her  in  her  youth,  and  had
left  her  soon  after  her  marriage — she  has  languished  through  the  flower  of
her  life  in  his  absence  ;  now  age  is  growing  upon  her,  and  her  beauty  is
beginning  to  fade,  so  that  she  must  naturally  appear  at  the  time  of  his
return,  different  from  what  she  was  at  his  departure.  She  entreats  him
to  hasten,  before  all  the  remains  of  what  had  formerly  recommended  her,
are  lost.


EP.  II.]  PHYLLIS TO DEMOPHOOX.  11

to  sail  for  Athens,  promising  Phyllis  that  he  would  return  in  a  month.
Having  reached  that  city  he  entirely  forgot  his  promise.  Phyllis,
therefore,  after  four  months  had  expired,  wrote  to  him  the  above  Epis-
tle, entreating  him  to  remember  her  kindness,  and  not  to  break  his
promise,  and  threatening  that  she  would  inflict  on  herself  a  violent
death,  if  he  should  fail  to  return.

Demophoo^,  56  I  thy  Rhodopeian57  entertainer,  Phyllis,  am
complaining  that  thou  art  absent  beyond  the  prescribed  time.
Thy  anchor  was  promised  to  our  shores  when  the  horns  of
the  moon  should  once  have  closed53  in  her  full  orb.  Four
times  has  the  moon  waned  ;  four  times  by  her  full  orb  has
she  been  renewed,  and  yet  the  Sithonian  waves59  bear  not  the
Actasan  ships.60  If  thou  dost  reckon  the  time,  which  we  who
are  in  love  so  carefully  reckon,  not  before  its  day  does  my  com-
plaint come  ;  my  hopes,  too,61  have  been  slow  to  depart;  with

56  Demopho6n.~] — Ver.  1.  The  story  of  Demophoon  and  Phyllis  is
thus  related  by  Hyginus,  ch.  59.  "  Demophoon,  the  son  of  Theseus,  is
said  to  have  been  entertained  by  Phyllis  in  Thrace,  and  to  have  been  be-
loved by  her.  Wishing  to  revisit  his  native  country,  he  promised  to
return  to  her  on  a  certain  day.  Not  arriving  on  the  day  named,  Phyllis
is  said  on  that  day  to  have  run  down  to  the  shore  nine  times,  which
thence  received  the  name  of  the  Enneados,  or  '  nine  journies.'  Phyllis
died  of  sorrow  on  losing  Demophoon.  Her  parents  having  erected  a  tomb
in  her  honour,  trees  sprang  up  around  it ;  which  at  a  certain  time  of  the
year  lament  Phyllis,  their  leaves  withering  and  falling  off.  From  her  name
the  leaves  of  trees  came  to  be  called  by  the Greeks (pv\\a (phylla)."

67  Rhodopeian.] — Ver.  1.  Phyllis  is  called  '  Rhodopeia,'  from  Rho-
dope,  a  mountain  of  Thrace,  her  native  country.  Some  authors  state  that
Rhodope,  a  queen  of  Thrace,  for  her  contempt  of  the  Gods,  was  changed
into  that  mountain,  and  that  thence  it  had  its  name.  Others  say  that
she  was  only  buried  upon  it.

5>  Once  have  closed. — Ver.  3.  Semel,  'once,'  and  not  '  quater,'  'four
times,'  seems  to  be  the  proper  reading ;  as  the  story  is  that  Demophoon
had  promised  to  return  in  a  month.

59  Sithonian  waves."] — Ver.  6.  Namely,  the  waves  that  beat  the
Thracian  coast.  We  learn  from  Aulus  Gellius  that  Sithon  was  an  ancient
name  of  Thrace.

w  Actcean  ships.] — Ver.  6.  '  Actseas,'  '  Attic,'  or  '  Athenian,'  from  the
Greek  word  clkt >),  '  the  shore  ;'  because  Attica  was  a  region  on  the  sea-
shore.

61  My  hopes,  too.] — Ver.  9-  The  sentiment  in  this  passage  is  ex-
tremely natural :  Ovid  well  understood  many  of  the  phases  of  human  na-
ture. How  unwilling  are  we  to  believe  the  contrary  of  what  we  wish  ;
so  much  so,  that  the  wish  is  the  father  to  the  thought.  How  ready  are
we  to  find  a  thousand  excuses,  or  even  to  be  guilty  of  possible  untruths,
in  favour  of  those  whom  we  are  desirous  to  find  innocent.


12  THE  EPISTLES  OF  THE  HEROINES.  [EP.  IT.

hesitation  do  we  believe  that,  which  believed,  distresses  us  ;
now  both  reluctant  and  in  love,  it  does  distress  me.

Oft  have  I  deceived62  myself  for  thee  ;  often  have  I  thought
that  the  stormy  South  winds  would  bring  back  thy  white
sails.  Theseus  have  I  cursed,  because  he  was  unwilling  to
let  thee  go  ;  and  yet,  perhaps,  he  did  not  withhold  thy  re-
turn. Sometimes  have  I  dreaded  lest,  while  thou  wast  making
towards  the  shallows  of  Hebrus,63  thy  wrecked  bark  might  be
swallowed  up  by  the  foaming  waves  :  oft  as  a  suppliant,  per-
fidious man,  have  I  entreated  the  Gods  in  thy  behalf,
worshipping  them  with  my  prayers,  at  the  altars  that  barn
the  frankincense.  Often,  as  I  saw  the  winds  favouring  both
the  seas  and  skies,  have  I  said  to  myself,  "  If  he  is  alive,
he  will  come."  In  fine,  my  trusting  affection  has  imagined
whatever  causes  delay  to  those  in  haste ;  and  in  making
excuses  I  have  been  ingenious.

But,  lingering  on,  thou  art  absent ;  neither  do  the  Deities
by  which  thou  didst  swear,  bring  thee  back ;  and  moved  by
love  for  me,  thou  dost  not  return.  Demophoon,  both  thy
words64  and  thy  sails  hast  thou  given  to  the  winds  ;  I  com-
plain that  thy  sails  fail  in  thy  return,  thy  word  fails  in
truthfulness.  Tell  me  what  I  have  done,  except  that  I  loved
thee  not  with  prudence.  By  my  fault  I  should  have  en-
deared myself  to  thee.  My  only  fault,  perfidious  man,  is,
that  I  received  thee  ;  but  that  fault  has  the  force  of,  and  is
equal  to,  merit.  Where  now  are  thy  vows,  where  thy  honour,
and  thy  right  hand  joined  to  my  right  hand  ?  and  where  the
God65  that  so  oft  was  on  thy  perjured  lips  1  Where,  noiv,  is
Hymenseus,  who  was  promised  for  our  united  years,  who  was
the  pledge  and  the  security  of  my  future  marriage?

62  Oft  have  I  deceived.] — Ver.  11.  She  has  even  persuaded  herself  of
the  reality  of  the  excuses  which  she  herself  has  invented  to  account  for
his  not  having  returned.

63  Hebrus. .] — Ver.  15.  The  Hebrus  was  a  river  of  Thrace,  which
separated  the  territories  of  the  Peantes  and  the  Dolonci.  It  also  touched
upon  the  Ciconian  territory.

64  Both  thy  words.'] — Ver.  25  Some  think  that  this  expresses  resent-
ment and  indignation  on  the  part  of  Phyllis  :  but  if  we  examine  the
passage,  we  shall  find  that  it  implies  the  greatest  love  and  tenderness.  It
begins  a  mournful  expostulation  with  him  for  having  disappointed  her,
and  for  having  caused  so  much  trouble  to  one  so  constant  to  himself,  and
whose  only  error  was  an  unbounded  affection.

65  Wiere  the  God.] — Ver.  32„ Cupid  is  the  Divinity  here  alluded  to.


EP.  II. J  PHYLLIS TO DEMOPHOON.  13

By  the  sea  didst  thou  swear,  which  is  agitated  throughout  by
winds  and  by  waves,  over  which  so  oft  thou  hadst  gone,  so  oft
thou  wast  destined  to  go  ;  by  thy  grandsire66  also  didst  thou
swear  to  me  (if  he,  too,  is  not  falsely  called  so),  who  soothes  the
sea  when  aroused  by  the  winds  ;  by  Venus,  and  the  weapons,
too  successf  ul,  alas  !  against  myself,  the  bow  the  one  weapon,67
the  torch  the  other  ;  and  by  Juno,68  who,  genial  Deity,  pre-
sides over  the  nuptial  couch ;  and  by  the  mystic  rites  of  the
Goddess  that  bears  the  torch.69  If  each  of  the  Divinities  out  of
so  many  thus  wronged  should  take  vengeance  for  their  injured
Godheads,  thou,  but  one,  wouldst  not  be  sufficient  for  the
retribution.

But  in  my  madness  I  even  refitted  thy  damaged  ships,
that  more  safely  might  speed  the  bark  in  which  I  was  de-
serted. Oars,  too,  have  I  supplied,  in  order  that,  about  to
abandon  me,  thou  mightst  fly.  Wounds,  alas  !  am  I  enduring,
inflicted  by  my  own  weapons  !  I  confided  in  the  soothing
words,70  of  which  thou  hast  such  a  command  ;  in  thy  kindred
and  in  thy  titles did  I  confide  ;  I  confided  in  thy  tears  ;  are

65  Thy  grandsire.'] — Ver.  38.  Some  Commentators  think  that  iEgeus
is  here  referred  to,  who  was  changed  into  a  Divinity  of  the  sea  on  pre-
cipitating himself  into  it.  He  was  the  father  of  Theseus,  and  the  grand-
father of  Demophoon.  Others  would  take  '  avus'  to  mean  '  great'  grand-
father, and  to  allude  to  Neptune,  the  father  of  iEgeus.  But,  according
to  some  accounts,  Neptune  was  the  father  of  Theseus,  and  the  grand-
father of  Demophoon.  Isocrates,  in  his  Encomium  of  Helen,  makes
mention  of  this  belief.  Euripides,  too,  in  his  '  Hippolytus,'  speaks  of
Neptune  as  the  father  of  Theseus.

67  The  one  weapon.'] — Ver.  40.  The  bow  and  arrows  and  the  lighted
torch  were  represented  by  the  poets  and  painters  as  the  especial  weapons
of  Cupid. They  are  occasionally  ascribed  to  Venus  herself.

6S  By  Juno.] — Ver.  41.  This  Goddess,  in  the  character  of  Juno  Pro-
nuba,  presided  over  the  marriage  bed.

69  That  bears  the  torch.] — Ver.  42.  This  was  the  Eleusinian  Ceres,
whose  sacred  rites  were  performed  in  the  night  with  torches,  in  remem-
brance of  her  having  gone  in  search  of  her  daughter  Proserpine,  when
ravished  by  Pluto,  in  the  night  time,  having  first  lighted  her  pine  torch
at  Mount  TEtna.  Her  priests  thence  obtained  the  name  of  '  Daduchi,'  or
'  torch-bearers.'

70  The  soothing  words.  ] — Ver.  49.  It  being  a  solace  to  think  that  our
misfortunes  are  not  brought  upon  us  by  any  fault  of  our  own,  Phyllis
here  endeavours  to  justify  herself,  and  to  throw  the  whole  blame  on  the
perfidious  conduct  of  Demophoon.  Her  own  innocence  and  simplicity
plead  for  her.  She  gave  entire  credit  to  his  oaths  and  protestations,  his
fine  speeches  and  pretended  tears.  Being  herself  a  stranger  to  deceit,
she  apprehended  no  such  conduct  in  him.


14  THE  EPISTLES  OF  THE  HEROINES.  [EP.  II.

these,  too,  taught  to  dissemble  ?  Have  these,  too,  their  arti-
fices, and  do  they  flow  just  as  they  are  bid  1  In  the  Gods,
too,  did  I  put  ray  trust ;  where  now  are  these  many  pledges
given  to  me  ?  By  means  of  them  in  any  way  could  I  have
been  deceived.  Yet  I  am  not  vexed  that  in  my  harbour  and
kingdom  I  received  thee  ;  but  that  ought  to  have  been  the
limit  of  my  kindness.

I  am  ashamed  that  I  disgracefully  added  the  social  couch
to  hospitality,  and  that  I  laid  my  side  by  thine.  I  could  wish
that  the  night  that  was  before  that  one  had  been  my  last,  while
yet  I  could  have  died  the  chaste  Phyllis.  I  hoped  the  best,
because  I  thought  that  I  deserved  the  best ;  whatever  hopes
arise  from  deserts,  justly  arise.  It  is  no  mighty  glory  to  de-
ceive a  trusting  mind  ;  my  innocence  was  deserving  of  kind-
ness. Both  a  woman  and  in  love,  by  thy  words  have  I  been
deceived.  May  the  Gods  grant  that  to  be  the  amount  of  thy
glories  ;  among  the  descendants,  too,  of  iEgeus,  mayst  thou  be
erected71  in  the  midst  of  the  city ;  may  thy  father,  graced
with  inscriptions,  stand  before  thee.  When  Scyron7;i  shall
be  read  of,  and  the  fierce  Procrustes,73  and  Sinis,74  and  the
mingled  shape75  of  the  bull  and  of  the  man ;  Thebes,  too,76

71  Mayst  thou  be  erected.] — Ver.  67.  That  is, '  may  a  statue  of  you  be
erected,  together  with  those  of  your  father  Theseus  and  your  brothers,  the
descendants  of  iEgeus,  in  the  midst  of  Athens,  your  native  city.'

72  Scyron.] — Ver.  69.  He  was  the  son  of  Canethus  and  Henioche,  the
daughter  of  Pittheus.  He  haunted  a  spot  in  the  territory  of  Megara,
where  he  was  famous  for  his  robberies  and  cruelty.  He  was  in  the  habit
of  plundering  travellers,  and  then  throwing  them  headlong  from  the  rocks
into  the  sea. Theseus,  on  his  way  to  Athens,  attacked  and  slew  him.

73  Procrustes.'] — Ver.  69.  He  inhabited  a  spot  in  Attica,  called  Cory-
dalus,  and  it  was  his  custom  to  measure  such  travellers  as  fell  into  his
hands  by  his  bed.  If  too  long,  he  cut  them  shorter  ;  but  if  too  short,  he
stretched  them  till  they  were  of  an  equal  length  with  it.  We  learn  from
Diodorus  Siculus,  that  he  was  slain  by  Theseus.

74  Sinis.] — Ver.  70.  Sinis  was  a  cruel  robber,  who  lived  on  the  Isthmus
of  Corinth.  With  his  mighty  strength  he  bent  together  the  branches  of
trees,  and  having  fastened  travellers  to  them,  unfastened  the  boughs;  which,
on  regaining  their  former  positions,  tore  the  unhappy  victims  to  pieces.

75  Mingled  shape.] — Ver.  70.  She  alludes  to  the  Minotaur,  a  mon-
ster whose  form  was  partly  that  of  a  man,  and  partly  of  a  bull ;  it  was
begotten  upon  Pasiphae  by  a  bull.  It  was  kept  in  the  Cretan  labyrinth,
and  was  slain  by  Theseus.

76  Thebes  too.] — Ver.  71.  Thebes  in  Boeotia  was  founded  by  Cadmus.
Theseus  took  the  city,  and  slew  its  king  Creon,  because  he  had  denied  the
rites  of  sepulture  to  the  Argives.


EP.  II.]  PHYLLIS TO DEMOPHOO^.  15

subdued  in  war,  and  the  double-limbed  Centaurs11  dispersed  ;
and  the  dusky  palace78  of  the  black  God  stormed  ;  next  to
him,  may  thy  statue  be  marked  with  this  inscription  :'9  '  This
is  he  whose  loving  entertainer  was  betrayed  by  guile.'

Out  of  so  great  a  multitude  of  exploits,  and  the  deeds  of
thy  parent,  the  Cretan  dame  deserted  was  pleasing80  to  thy
feelings.  That  which  alone  calls  for  an  excuse,81  in  him  alone
dost  thou  admire  ;  perfidious  man,  thou  dost  make  thyself  the
heir  to  thy  father's  deceit.  She  enjoys  (I  envy  her  not)  a
better  husband  :8'2  and  she  is  seated  aloft  with  the  harnessed
tigers.83  But  the  Thracian  youths  whom  I  scorned  avoid  an
alliance  with  me,  because  I  am  said  to  have  preferred  a
foreigner  to  my  own  countrymen.  And  some  say,  "  Now  let
her  repair  to  learned  Athens  :  there  shall  be  another  person
to  reign  over  warlike  Thrace. The  result  proves84  all  actions."

71  Double-limbed  Centaurs.] — Ver.  71.  The  Centaurs  were  the  sons  of
Ixion  and  a  cloud,  which  was  substituted  to  meet  Ixion's  violence  in
place  of  Juno.  At  the  marriage  of  Pirithoiis,  the  friend  of  Theseus,  they
offered  violence  to  Hippodamia,  the  bride,  on  which  they  were  attacked  by
Theseus,  Peleus,  Nestor,  and  the  Lapithae,  who  slew  some  and  put  the
rest  of  them  to  flight.  They  were  fabled  to  resemble  a  human  being  in
the  upper  part  of  the  body,  and  a  horse  in  the  lower.

78  The  dusky  palace.'] — Ver.  72.  Theseus  broke  into  the  realms  of
Pluto,  the  king  of  the  Infernal  regions,  that  he  might  carry  off  Proserpine,
whom  his  friend  Pirithoiis  desired  for  a  wife.  Pirithoiis  was  slain  by
Cerberus,  while  Theseus  was  taken  prisoner  and  detained  until  he  was  set
at  liberty  by  Hercules.

79  With  this  inscription.] — Ver.  73.  That  the  contrast  between  your
exploits  and  those  of  your  father  may  be  put  in  the  strongest  light.

80  Was  pleasing.] — Ver.  76.  She  says  that  of  all  the  deeds  of  his
father,  his  desertion  of  the  Cretan  princess  Ariadne,  was  the  only  one
that  had  made  an  impression  on  his  mind.

81  Calls  for  an  excuse.'] — Ver.  77.  The  meaning  is,  'You  admire  that
only  in  your  father  which  he  seeks  to  excuse  ;  and  in  which  he  acknow-
ledges himself  to  have  been  culpable.'

82  A  letter  husband.] — Ver.  79.  Having  been  deserted  by  Theseus,
in  the  island  of  Naxos,  Ariadne  became  the  favourite  of  Bacchus,  who
married  her,  and  gave  her  a  diadem,  which  was  afterwards  placed  by
him  among  the  Constellations.  According  to  some  accounts,  Ariadne  her-
self was  placed  there. See  the  Third  Book  of  the  Fasti.

33  Harnessed  tigers.] — Ver.  80.  Bacchus,  on  his  return  from  India,  was
represented  as  drawn  by  harnessed  tigers.  Meeting  with  Ariadne  at  that
period,  he  placed  her  in  his  chariot.

84  The  residt proves.] — Ver.  85.  These  words  are  by  some  attributed
to  the  Thracians,  who are  censuring Phyllis, while others attribute


16  THE  EPISTLES  OF  THE  HEKOItfES.  [EP.  II.

I  trust  that  he  may  fail  of  success,  whoever  thinks  that  actions
are  to  be  judged  of  by  the  result ;  for  if  the  seas  were  now
foaming  with  thy  oars,  I  should  be  now  said  to  have  studied
my  own  interest,  and  that  of  my  people.  But  neither  have  I
consulted  them ;  nor  will  my  palace  receive  thee  ;  nor  wilt
thou  bathe  thy  wearied  limbs  in  the  Bistonian  waters.85

That  form  of  thine,  as  thou  didst  depart,  is  impressed  upon
my  eyes,  at  the  time  when  thy  fleet,  about  to  sail,  occupied
my  harbour.  Thou  didst  venture  to  embrace  me,  and,  throw-
ing thyself  on  my  loving  neck,  to  imprint  the  lengthened
kisses,86  and  with  thy  tears  to  mingle  my  own  tears,  and  to
complain  that  the  breeze  was  favourable  for  thy  sails,  and  at
thy  departure  to  say,  with  thy  last  words,  "  Phyllis,  take  care
and  expect  thy  Demophoon."  Should  I  expect  thee,  who  didst
depart,  never  again  to  see  me  ?  Should  I  expect  the  sails  that
are  denied  to  my  seas  ?  And  yet  I  do  expect  thee  ;  though
late,  return  to  her  who  loves  thee  :  that  thy  promise  may  have
failed  in  the  time  only  for  thy  return.

What,  in  my  wretchedness,  am  I  praying  for  ?87  Already
perhaps  some  other  wife  detains  thee,  and  a  love  that  is  in-
auspicious for  me.  And  soon  as  I  was  lost  to  thy  sight,  of
no  Phyllis,  I  suppose, thou  didst  know ! Ah  me  !  shouldst

them  to  Phyllis  herself.  The  former  seems  to  be  the  most  probable
supposition  ;  on  which  the  rejoinder  of  Phyllis  commences,  who  wishes
bad  luck  to  all  who  judge  of  actions  only  according  to  the  result.

85  Bistonian  waters.'] — Ver.  90.  According  to  Antoninus  Liberalis,
Bistonis  was  the  name  of  a  lake  in  Thrace.

85  The  lengthened  kisses.] — Ver.  94.  The  literal  translation  of  this  line
is — '  To  join  the  impressed  kisses  with  long  delays/  She  here  puts  him
in  mind  of  his  insinuating  manner  when  he  parted  with  her,  and  the
hopes  he  had  raised  of  speedily  revisiting  her.  She  tells  him  that  he
hung  upon  her  neck  and  nearly  smothered  her  with  embraces,  and  blamed
the  winds  for  being  so  favourable  for  his  voyage,  and  charged  her  to  ex-
pect his  immediate  return.

87  Am  I  praying  for.] — Ver.  103.  Penelope,  in  the  preceding  letter,
thinking  that  inconstancy  is  the  common  failing  of  husbands,  suspects
a  similar  reason  for  her  husband's  absence.  Plutarch  relates  that  Demo-
phoon had  an  intrigue  with  a  damsel  named  Laodice,  by  whom  he
had  a  son  whose  name  was  Munychus  :  others  say  that  the  name  of  his
mistress  was  Calliope.  This  intrigue,  however,  took  place  before  Demo-
phoon arrived  in  Thrace,  and  had  become  known  to  Phyllis.  The  same
story  is  told  at  length  by  Parthenius  in  his  Erotica,  except  that  for
Demophoon  he  substitutes  Acamas,  who  was  the  brother  of  Demophoon.


EP.  II.]  PHYLLIS TO DEMOPHOOE".  17

thou  enquire  who  I,  Phyllis,  am,  and  whence  I  come.  I,  who,
Demophoon,  gave  thee,  when  driven  after  prolonged  wander-
ings, the  Thracian  harbours  and  hospitality ;  whose  wealth
my  own  riches  increased ;  to  whom  in  want,  in  my  opu-
lence, I  gave  many  a  present,  and  was  likely  to  give  many
more.  I,  who  subjected  to  thee  the  extended  realms  of
Lycurgus,88  hardly  well  enough  adapted  to  be  ruled  in  the
name  of  a  female  :  where  the  ice-clad  Rhodope  extends  to  the
shady  Hsemus,89  and  the  sacred  Hebrus90  rolls  forth  his  waters
onward  speeding  :  whose  virginity  was  violated  by  thee  with
unhappy  omens,  and  whose  girdle  was  unfastened  by  thy
treacherous  hand.91

Over  that  match  did  presiding  Tisiphone92  howl,  and  the  soli-
tary bird  uttered  its  mournful  notes.  Alecto  was  there,  her
hair  wreathed  with  short  serpents  ;  and  the  light  was  waved
with  the  sepulchral  torch.98  Still,  in  my  sorrow,  do  I  pace  the
rocks  and  the  shores  overgrown  with  shrubs,  and  the  spots,
where  the  wide  seas  extend  before  my  view. Whether  by  day

83  Realms  of  Lycurgus. .] — Ver.  111.  He  was  the  son  of  Boreas  or
of  Dyas,  and  was  king  of  Thrace.  Despising  the  rites  of  Bacchus,  he
was  afflicted  with  madness,  and  hewed  off  his  own  legs  with  a  hatchet.
The  mention  of  him  here  is  thought  to  be  very  appropriate,  as,  while  he
ruled  in  Thrace,  he  not  only  denied  hospitality  to  strangers,  hut  was  in
the  habit  of  putting  them  to  death.

89  Shady  Hcemus.] — Ver.  113.  She  describes  the  vast  extent  of  her
kingdom.  '  It  includes,'  she  says,  '  Mount  Rhodope,  and  reaches  as  far  as
Haemus  and  the  river  Hebrus.'

90  Sacred  Hebrus.] — Ver.  114.  The  Hebrus  is  called  '  sacer,'  either
because  all  rivers  were  frequented  by  river  Gods  and  water  Nymphs,  or
because  the  inspired  Orpheus  lived  on  its  banks,  and,  when  he  was  torn
to  pieces,  his  head  was  thrown  into  its  waves  ;  or  else,  because  the  orgies
of  Bacchus  were  celebrated  in  its  vicinity.

91  Thy  treacherous  hand.'] — Ver.  116.  Burmann  suggests  that  there
should  be  a  note  of  interrogation  at  the  end  of  this  line,  to  show  the  in-
dignation of  Phyllis  at  the  conduct  of  the  man  for  whom  she  has  made
such  sacrifices.

92  Tisiphone.] — Ver.  117.  Tisiphone,  being  '  Pronuba,'  would  be  in-
auspiciously  supplying  the  place  of  Juno  •  Pronuba.'  The  '  pronubae'
were  also  the  women  who  directed  the  marriage  ceremony  on  the  part  of
the  bride,  '  the  bridewomen.'

93  The  sepulchral  torch.] — Ver.  120.  According  to  Plutarch,  the  nuptial
torches  were  lighted  in  honour  of  the  Gods  above,  while  the  funereal
torches  were  lighted  in  honour  of  the  infernal  Deities.  The  funereal  torches
were  also  used  for  the  purpose  of  setting  fire  to  the  funeral  pile.

C


18  THE EPISTLES OF THE HEROINES.  [EP.  II.

the  earth  is  refreshed,  or  whether  the  chilly  stars  are  shining,
I  am  looking  forth  what  winds  impel  the  waves.  And  what-
ever sails  I  see  coming  afar,  at  once  I  conclude  that  the  Deities
are  propitious 94  to  me.  Towards  the  shore  I  run,  the  waves
hardly  restraining  me,  where  the  inconstant  billows  extend
the  margin  of  their  waters.  The  nearer  they  approach,  less  and
less  firmly  do  I  stand  :  I  faint  away  and  I  fall,  to  be  supported
by  my  maids.

There  is  a  bay,95  bending  slightly  like  a  drawn  bow ;  the
promontories  at  its  extremities  are  rugged  with  lofty  rocks  ;
hence  have  I  intended  to  hurl  my  body  into  the  waves  below  :
and  since  thou  dost  persist  in  deceiving  me,  so  it  will  be.  The
friendly  billows  may  bear  me,  thus  thrown  down,  to  thy  shores,
and  unburied  I  may  meet  thy  eyes.  Though  thou  shouldst  sur-
pass iron  and  adamant,  and  thy  own  self  in  hardness,  thou  wilt
say,  "  Phyllis,  not  thus  ought  I  to  have  been  followed  by  thee."
Often  have  I  a  thirst  for  poisons  ;  often  does  it  please  me,
pierced  by  the  sword  to  die  by  a  bloody  death.  My  neck,
too,  because  it  has  allowed  itself  to  be  embraced  by  perfidious
arms,  do  I  wish  to  be  encircled  in  a  halter.  It  is  my  determi-
nation to  atone  for  my  injured  honour  by  a  premature  death  :
but  little  delay  shall  there  be  for  the  choice  of  that  death.96

On  my  tomb97  thou  wilt  be  described  as  the  hated  cause  of

94  Deities  are  propitious. .] — Ver.  126.  She  may  possibly  allude  to  the
figures  of  the  Divinities  which  were  painted  on  the  sterns  of  vessels.

95  There  is  a  bay.~\ — Ver.  131.  Phyllis  is  at  length  reduced  to  despair,
and  declares  her  resolution  of  putting  an  end  to  her  life,  if  he  shall  con-
tinue to  slight  her  passion.  This  passage  is  remarkable  for  its  beauty.
She  revolves  in  her  mind  several  modes  of  death,  and  at  last  deter-
mines to  throw  herself  into  the  sea.  Her  love  extends  beyond  the  termi-
nation of  her  existence,  and  she  soothes  her  mind  with  the  reflection,  that
when  dead,  some  favourable  wind  may  carry  her  body  to  the  Athenian
shore,  and  that  if  there  her  body  shall  chance  to  meet  his  eyes,  it  will,
even  in  despite  of  himself,  excite  his  compassion.

96  Choice  of  that  death.] — Ver.  144.  "According  to  some  writers,  she
hung  herself  to  an  almond  tree,  which  at  once  withered  away,  but  after-
wards became  green  on  the  approach  of  Demophoon;  others  say  she
died  of  grief,  and  was  then  changed  into  an  almond  tree.

97  On  my  tomb.] — Ver.  145.  According  to  Coluthus,  in  his  Poem  on
the  Rape  of  Helen,  when  Paris  was  going  to  Greece  to  carry  off  Helen,
the  sepulchre  of  Phyllis  was  visible  on  Pangseum,  a  promontory  of  Thrace.
This,  however,  could  not  be  the  case  if,  as  other  writers  say,  Demophoon
was  entertained  by  Phyllis  on  his  return  from  the  Trojan  war.


EP.  III.]  BEISElS TO ACHILLES.  19

my  destruction  ;  either  by  this  or  a  like  inscription  wilt  thou
be  known  :  '  Demophoon,  the  guest,98  caused  the  destruction
of  his  loving  Phyllis :  he  supplied  the  cause  for  her  death,
she  the  hand.'


EPISTLE  III.
BRISEIS  TO  ACHILLES.

After  the  Greeks  had  arrived  in  Phrygia,  they  attacked  all  the  cities
in  the  vicinity  of  Troy,  particularly  those  opposite  to  the  isle  of  Lesbos.
Among  the  rest,  Achilles,  the  son  of  Peleus,  king  of  Thrace,  and  of
Thetis,  assaulted  the  territories  of  Thebes  and  Lyrnesus,  and  having
taken  Chyrnesium,  he  carried  off  two  beautiful  damsels,  one  of  whom
was  Astynome,  the  daughter  of  Chryses,  the  priest  of  Apollo  Smin-
theus,  the  other,  Hippodamia,  the  daughter  of  Brises,  who  received
the  respective  surnames  of  Chryseis  and  Briseis  from  their  parents.
Chryseis  was  given  by  Achilles  to  Agamemnon,  while  Briseis  was  re-
served for  himself.  Agamemnon  being  obliged,  in  compliance  with  the
will  of  the  Gods,  to  restore  Chryseis  to  her  father,  wrongfully  deprived
Achilles  of  the  possession  of  Briseis.  Enraged  at  this  insult,  Achilles
withdrew  his  forces,  and  refused  to  assist  the  allies  against  the
Trojans.  The  Greeks  being  several  times  worsted  by  the  Trojans,
Agamemnon  sent  deputies  to  Achilles  to  appease  him,  with  offers  to  re-
turn Briseis,  and  to  give  him  considerable  presents  besides  ;  all  which  he
obstinately  refused.  On  this,  Briseis  is  supposed  to  write  to  him  the  fol-
lowing Epistle,  in  which  she  censures  the  violence  of  his  resentment,
and  entreats  him  to  accept  the  offer  of  Agamemnon  and  to  take  up
arms  against  the  Trojans.

The  letter  which  thou  readest,  not  correctly  written  in  Greek
by  a  barbarian  hand,"  comes  from  the  captive  Briseis.  What-
ever blots  thou  shalt  observe,  my  tears  have  made  them  :  but
still  even  those  tears  have  the  meaning  of  words.  If  I  am
allowed  to  complain  a  little  of  thee,  my  master  and  my  hus-
band :  of  my  master  and  my  husband  a  little  will  I  complain.
No  fault  is  it  of thine  that  so  readily  was  I delivered  to

96  Demophoon,  the  guest.] — Ver.  147. She  seems  to  think  the  conduct
of  Demophoon  more  particularly  base,  from  the  circumstance  that  h«
in  so  daring  a  manner  violated  the  laws  of  hospitality,  and  by  his  trea-
chery occasioned  the  death  of  her  who  was  at  once  his  entertainer  and  his
mistress. She  imagines  thereupon  that  this  will  adhere  to  his  memo-
an  eternal  reproach,  which  no  behaviour  on  his  part  will  be  able  to  efface.

99  A  barbarian  hand.'] — Ver.  2. As  Hippodamia  was  a  native of  Ci-
licia,  and  probably  knew  nothing  of  the  Greek  language  before  her  cap-
tivity,  her  knowledge  of  it  may  naturally  be  supposed. to  have  bee;;
imperfect,  q  2


20  THE EPISTLES OF THE HEKOIKES.  [EP.  III.

the  king  when  he  demanded  me  ;  although  even  that  was  thy
fault1  in  some  degree.  For,  soon  as  Eurybates  and  Talthy-
bius2  summoned  me,  to  Eurybates  and  Taithybius  was  I  sur-
rendered as  a  companion.  Each,  as  he  cast  his  eyes  upon
the  features  of  the  other,  inquired  in  silence,3  where  was  our
affection.  I  might  have  been  detained  :  delay  would  have
been  acceptable  for  my  grief.  Ah  me  !  when  departing,  no
kisses  did  I  give  thee.

But,  without  ceasing  did  I  shed  tears  and  tear  my  locks  ;
in  my  misery  I  seemed  a  second  time  to  become  a  captive.
Often  did  I  wish,  my  guards  deceived,  to  return  ;  but  there
was  the  enemy,  who  might  take  me  in  my  trepidation.  If
I  had  departed,  I  feared  lest  perchance  I  might  be  taken,
destined  to  go  as  a  present  to  some  daughter-in-law  of  Priam.
But  I  was  given  up,  because  I  was  to  be  delivered  up  ;  so
many  nights  have  I  been  away,  and  yet  I  am  not  demanded
back  ;  thou  dost  linger,  and  thy  wrath  is  of  long  endurance.
At  the  time  when  I  was  being  delivered  up,  the  son  of  Menoe-
tius  whispered  in  my  ear,  "  Why  dost  thou  weep  ?  Thou  wilt
be  here  in  a  little  time."  Not  to  have  demanded  me  back  is
too  little  ;  thou  dost  endeavour,  Achilles,  that  I  may  not  be
returned.4  Go  to,  then,  and  still  retain  the  name  of  an  anxious
lover.

The  sons  of  Telamon5  and  of  Amyntor  came  to  thee  ;  the  one

1  That  was  thy  fault .] — Ver.  8.  She  seems  here  to  he  contradicting
herself.  Her  meaning  is,  that  Achilles  was  not  to  he  hlamed  for  deli-
vering her  into  the  hands  of  Agamemnon,  since  that  could  not  have  been
avoided  ;  but  that  he  might  be  justly  charged  with  delivering  her  up  too
quietly,  as  it  would  have  been  a  very  easy  matter  to  create  delay,  and
that  delay  would  have  been  pleasing  to  her.

2  And  Taithybius.'] — Ver.  9.  Eurybates  and  Taithybius  were  the
heralds  deputed  by  Agamemnon  to  fetch  away  Brise'is ;  to  whom  she
was  delivered  by  Patroclus,  the  friend  of  Achilles.

3  Inquired  in  silence.'] — Ver.  12.  She  says  that  even  the  heralds  were
surprised  at  the  alacrity  with  which  he  delivered  her  to  Agamemnon.

4  Not  be  returned.] — Ver.  25.  In  this  she  reproaches  Patroclus  with
perfidy,  and  Achilles  with  cowardice.

5  Of  Telamon.] — Ver.  27.  Ajax,  the  son  of  Telamon,  and  Phcenix,
the  son  of  Amyntor,  together  with  Ulysses,  were  sent  as  ambassadors  by
Agamemnon  to  Achilles,  with  the  view  of  procuring  a  reconciliation.  They
were  empowered  to  promise  that  Brise'is  should  be  restored,  and  to  offer
him  many  rich  presents ;  but  all  their  solicitations  were  fruitless,  and
Achilles  remained  inactive  in  his  tent  till  the  death  of  Patroclus  aroused
him  to  vengeance.


EP.  Ill,]  BBISElS TO ACHILLES.  21

related6  to  thee  by  affinity  of  blood,  the  other  thy  friend  ;7  the
son  of  Laertes  as  well ;  attended  by  them  I  might  have  re-
turned. Persuasive  entreaties  were  added  to  large  presents  ;
twenty  yellow  cauldrons  of  brass  curiously  wrought,  and  seven
tripods,8  equal  in  weight  and  in  skill ;  to  these  were  added
twice  five  talents9  of  gold ;  twice  six10  horses  too,  ever  accus-


6  The  one  related.'] — Ver.  28.  Ajax  was  the  son  of  Telamon,  who  was
the  brother  of  Peleus  and  the  uncle  of  Achilles.

7  The  other  thy  friend.] — Ver.  28.  Phoenix  was  appointed  by  Peleus
to  be  the  instructor  and  companion  of  Achilles,  after  he  had  been  ex-
pelled by  his  father,  Amyntor,  from  his  kingdom.

8  Seven  tripods.] — Ver.  32.  The  word  '  tripos,'  which  is  generally
translated  '  tripod,'  signifies  any  utensil  or  article  of  furniture  supported
on  three  feet.  It  more  especially  means,  1.  A  three-legged  table.  These
were  made  of  different  materials,  such  as  marble,  wood,  porphyry,  or
other  valuable  materials.  The  tripod  which  was  used  at  entertainments
had  short  feet,  and  was  not  much  elevated.  2.  A  pot  or  cauldron  used
for  boiling  meat,  and  either  raised  upon  a  three-legged  stand  of  bronze,
or  made  with  its  three  feet  in  the  same  piece.  These  utensils  were  of
great  value,  and  were  sometimes  given  as  prizes  in  the  public  games.
3.  A  bronze  altar,  probably  not  very  dissimilar  to  the  tripod  cauldron
already  mentioned.  The  most  ancient  representations  of  the  sacrificial
tripod  exhibit  it  in  general  of  the  same  shape,  with  three  rings  at  the  top,  to
serve  as  handles.  The  oracular  tripod  at  Delphi,  from  which  the  Pythian
priestess  gave  responses,  is  supposed  to  have  been  of  this  kind.  Besides
the  three  legs  and  three  handles  which  were  fitted  to  the  tripod,  on  it
was  placed  a  flat  round  plate,  which  the  Greeks  called  oA//oc,  on  which
the  Pythian  seated  herself  to  give  responses,  and  on  which,  at  other  times,
a  laurel  wreath  was  placed.  The  fame  of  this  tripod  produced  many  imi-
tations of  it,  which  were  known  under  the  name  of  '  Delphic  tripods,'
and  were  made  for  the  purpose  of  sacrifice,  and  also  to  be  presented  as
offerings  to  the  treasury  both  of  the  temple  at  Delphi  and  of  other  tem-
ples of  Greece.  Tripods  were  especially  sacred  to  Apollo  and  Bacchus  ;
and  a  tripod  was  given  as  a  prize  to  the  victors  at  the  Pythian  and  other
games  which  were  celebrated  in  honour  of  Apollo.  The  theatre  at
Athens  being  considered  sacred  to  Bacchus,  the  successful  Choragus  re-
ceived a  bronze  tripod  as  an  appropriate  prize.  Tripods  were  also  some-
times made  of  stone,  probably  for  no  purpose  but  as  beautiful  works  of
art.

9  Five  talents.] — Ver.  33.  It  must  be  remembered  that  the  talent  of
the  Homeric  period,  which  is  here  referred  to,  was  a  denomination  of
value  much  smaller  than  the  later  Grecian  talent,  which  consisted  of
sixty  mime,  or  six  thousand  drachmae  of  about  nine  pence  three  farthings
each.

10  Twice  sir.] — Ver.  34.  Some  MSS.  have  here  '  bis  septem,'  '  twice
seven :'  but  the  other  reading  agrees  with  the  narrative  of  Homer.


22  THE EPISTLES OE THE HEROINES.  [EP.  III.

tomed  to  victory ;  and  (what  might  have  well  been  spared11)
Lesbian  girls  of  exquisite  beauty,  their  persons12  captured  in
their  pillaged  home  ;  and  together  with  so  many  of  these,
one  of  the  three  maiden  daughters13  of  Agamemnon  as  a  wife
(but  of  a  wife  thou  hast  no  need14).

Wilt  thou  refuse  that,  which  thou  oughtst  to  have  given,
if  I  could  have  been  redeemed  from  the  son  of  Atreus16  at  a
price.  By  what  fault,  Achilles,  have  I  deserved  to  become
of  no  value  to  thee  ?  Whither  has  thy  fickle  affection  so
soon  fled  from  me  ?  Does  ill-fortune16  tenaciously  pursue  the
wretched?  And  does  no  propitious  breeze  favour  my  de-
signs? By  thy  attacks  have  I  seen  the  walls  of  Lyrnesus17
levelled  ;  and  of  my  native  country  I  was  no  inconsiderable
part.  I  have  seen  fall  three  brothers,  partners  both  in  blood  and
in  death  ;18  the  mother  of  these  three  was  my  own  parent.  My
husband  too,19  great  as  he  was,  I  have  beheld  stretched  upon

11  Have  well  been  spared.'] — Ver.  35.  The  naive  manner  in  which  her
jealousy  here  peeps  out  is  admirable.

12  Their  persons'] — Ver.  36.  The  use  of  the  word  'corpora,'  'bodies,'
seems  very  appropriate  here :  as  slaves  were  often  hardly  looked  upon  as
anything  but  mere  '  bodies,'  and  were  considered  as  unworthy  of  the  rank
of  intelligent  beings.

13  Maiden  daughters."] — Ver.  38.  These  were  Chrysothemis,  Laodice,
and  Iphianassa,  or  Iphigenia.

14  Hast  no  need.] — Ver.  37.  Either  her  jealousy  prompts  her  to  this
remark,  or  she  means  to  say  that  he  is  already  affianced  to  Deidamia,  the
daughter  of  Lycomedes,  king  of  Scyros.

15  Son  of  Atreus.] — Ver.  39.  According  to  some  writers,  Agamemnon
was  the  son  of  Atreus,  while  others  say  that  he  was  the  son  of  Plis-
thenes,  the  brother  of  Atreus  ;  and  that  being  adopted  by  Atreus,  he  came
in  time  to  be  considered  as  really  his  son.

1G  Does  ill-fortune.] — Ver.  43.  Here  she  endeavours  to  raise  his  pity  by
a  detail  of  her  various  calamities,  while  she  laments  her  hard  fate,  and  the
perpetual  succession  of  misfortunes  to  which  she  has  been  doomed.  She
has  seen  the  ruin  of  her  native  country,  and  the  destruction  of  her  nearest
relations  ;  she  has  seen  herself  the  captive  of  a  foreign  prince,  and  at  the
mercy  of  a  conqueror ;  and  when  she  has  flattered  herself  at  last  with  the
hope  of  some  respite,  new  calamities  arise,  so  that  she  can  foresee  no  end
to  her  miseries.

17  Walls  of  Lyrnesus.] — Ver.  45.  Commentators  are  divided  as  to  the
situation  of  Lyrnesus.  According  to  some,  it  was  in  Cilicia,  in  Asia  Minor  ;
while  others  say,  perhaps  with  more  probability,  that  it  was  in  the  greater
Mysia,  and  opposite  to  the  isle  of  Lesbos.

1S  And  in  death.] — Ver.  47.  Achilles  slew  the  three  brothers  of  Briseis,
and  her  father,  Brises,  committed  self-destruction  by  hanging  himself.

19  My  husband  too.] — Ver.  50. Minetes,  king  of  part  of  Cilicia,  was


EP.  in.]  EBISE1S TO ACHILLES.  23

the  bloodstained  earth,  heaving  his  breast  drenched  with  gore.
Yet,  for  so  many  lost,  thee  as  the  only  recompense20  I  had ;
thou  wast  my  lord,  my  husband,  my  brother.

Thou,  thyself,  swearing  by  the  Godhead  of  thy  ocean
mother,21  used  to  say  that  it  was  my  advantage22  to  be  made
a  captive.  For  instance, — to  repulse  me,  though  I  come
with  a  dowry  :  and  together  with  myself,  to  decline  those
riches  which  are  oifered  to  thee.  Besides,  there  is  a  re-
port that  when  to-morrow's  morn23  shall  have  shone,  thou
wilt  open  the  flaxen  sails24  to  the  cloud  bearing  South  winds25.

the  husband  of  Brisei's.  He  was  slain  at  the  taking  of  the  city  of
Lyrnesus.

20  The  only  recompense.'] — Ver.  51.  It  must  be  confessed  that  it  does
not  say  much  for  the  feelings  of  Brisei's,  when  she  says  that  the  person
who  had  slain  her  husband  and  her  brothers,  was  her  only  recompense
for  her  loss.

21  Thy  ocean  mother.'] — Ver.  53. Thetis,  who  was  a  Goddess  of  the  sea.
32  Was  my  advantage.] — Ver.  54. Her  expostulation  is  strong  and  full

of  pathos.  She  had  hoped  (though  rather  unnaturally,  we  should  think)  to
find  in  Achilles  a  recompense  for  all  her  misfortunes.  He  himself  had
told  her  that  her  captivity  should  ultimately  be  for  her  advantage  :  and
yet  so  little  now  does  he  regard  her,  that  he  prefers  gratifying  his  resent-
ment to  promoting  her  happiness  :  and  rather  than  yield  to  the  wishes  of
Agamemnon,  he  has  refused  to  take  her  back,  and  even  expresses  his  in-
tention of  returning  home  without  her.

23  To-morroiv's  morn.] — Ver.  57-  '  Eos'  is  a  name  often  given  by  the
Latin  poets  to  Aurora.  It  also  signifies  '  the  East.'  or  '  the  land  of  the
morning/

24  The  flaxen  sails.] — Ver.  58.  Pliny  the  Elder  uses  the  word  '  linteus.'
to  signify  cloth  of  various  materials,  cotton  for  instance.  But,  with  the
ancients,  the  sails  of  ships  were  usually  made  of  linen,  which  was  manu-
factured in  great  quantities  in  Egypt,  a  country  famous  for  its  flax.  Sails
were  woven  also  at  Tarquinii,  in  Etruria.  Cotton  sail-cloth  was  sometimes
used,  as  it  is  at  the  present  day  in  the  Mediterranean  :  and  it  is  thought  by
many  to  be  superior  to  that  made  of  linen.  The  separate  pieces  of  linen
(lintea)  were  taken  as  they  came  from  the  loom,  and  were  sewed  to-
gether. In  the  ancient  paintings  of  ships,  the  seams  are  represented  as
distinct  and  regular.  Most  of  the  ships  had  but  one  sail,  which  was  at-
tached with  the  yard  to  the  great  mast.  Sometimes,  however,  when  greater
speed  was  required,  two  sails  were  attached  to  one  mast.  The  sails  of
the  Athenian  ships  of  war,  and  of  most  of  the  ancient  ships  in  general ,
were  of  a  square  form :  and  it  is  doubtful  whether  the  Greeks  ever  used
triangular  sails.  The  Romans  used  triangular  sails,  which  they  called
1  suppara,'  and  which  had  the  shape  of  an  inverted  A,  or  Delta,  the  upper
side  of  which  was  attached  to  the  yard.

25  South  winds.] — Ver.  58. The word '  Notis,' which generally


24  THE EPISTLES OE THE HEEOINES.  [EP.  III.

Soon  as,  in  my  misery,  this  criminal  resolve  reached  my  alarmed
ears,  my  breast  was  bereft  of  blood  and  of  breath.  Thou
wilt  depart ;  and,  ah  wretched  me  !  to  whom,  barbarous  man,
wilt  thou  be  leaving  me  ?  what  comforting  solace  will  there
be  for  me  forlorn  1  Sooner,  I  pray,  might  1  be  swallowed27  by
the  earth  suddenly  yawning,  or  might  I  be  burnt  by  the  flash-
ing fires  of  the  hurled  lightnings,  than  that  without  me  the  seas
should  grow  white  with  the  oars  of  Phthia,"  and  than  I,  left
behind,  should  see  thy  ships  departing.  If  now  a  return
pleases  thee,  the  Penates  too  of  thy  country,  I  am  no  great
burden  to  thy  fleet.

As  a  captive  will  I  follow  the  conqueror  ;  not  as  a  wife  the
husband  ;  I  have  hands  skilled  at  teasing  the  wool.  By  far
the  most  beauteous  among  the  Achsean  dames  shall,  as  thy
wife,  repair  to  thy  couch  (and  let  her  so  repair).  A  daughter-
in-law  let  her  be  worthy  of  her  father-in-law,  the  grandson  of
Jupiter  and  of  iEgina  :29  to  whom  the  aged  Nereus  may  wish
to  be  a  connexion  by  marriage.30  In  humble  station,31  and  as
thy  handmaid,  the  given  task  will  I  ply,  and  the  threads  shall
diminish  my  loaded  distaff. Only, I  entreat  that  thy  wife

means  the  South  winds,  is  perhaps  used  here  to  signify  any  wind  favour-
able to  the  return  of  Achilles  ;  inasmuch  as  the  South  wind  would  be  ex-
tremely unfavourable  for  his  return.  Virgil,  in  the  first  book  of  the
yEneid,  uses  the  word  '  Eurus,'  which  is  properly  the  East  wind,  to  signify
any  wind : — '  Vix  septem  (naves)  convulsse  undis  Euroque  supersunt.'

27  Be  swallowed.] — Ver.  63.  She  perhaps  had  in  view  here,  the  fate
of  Amphiaraiis,  who  was  swallowed  up,  together  with  his  chariot,  by  a
chasm  in  the  earth,  during  the  Theban  war.

23  Of  Phthia.]—Yer.  65.  The  Phthians  were  the  people  of  Phthia,  a
city  of  Thessaly,  the  kingdom  of  Achilles.

29  Jupiter  and  of  JEgina.] — Ver.  73.  iEacus  was  the  son  of  Jupiter
and  iEgina,  and  the  father  of  Peleus.

a0  Connexion  by  marriage.'] — Ver.  74.  We  have  no  word  in  the
English  language  to  express  the  meaning  of  'prosocer.'  It  here  means
*  husband's  grandfather,'  or  '  mother-in-law's  father  ;'  as  Nereus  was  the
father  of  Thetis,  the  mother  of  Achilles.  Some  writers,  however,  call  the
name  of  the  father  of  Thetis,  Chiron.

31  In  humble  station.] — Ver.  75.  The  language  of  Briseis  is  very
affecting.  She  says  that  no  condition  of  life  appears  to  her  more
wretched  than  that  of  being  separated  from  the  man  she  loves.  She
would  consent  to  see  him  in  the  arms  of  another,  and  submit  to  do  the
meanest  service  in  his  house,  if  she  could  only  enjoy  the  pleasure  of  being
near  his  person.  She  would  even  submit  to  ill-treatment  from  her,  whom
he  should  make  the  partner  of  Ms  bed,  rather  than  be  absent  from  him.


EP.  III.]  BEISE1S TO ACHILLES.  25

may  not  persecute  me  as  a  rival,  who,  to  what  extent  1  know
not,  will  prove  hostile  to  me.  And  do  not  permit  her,
before  thee,  to  tear  my  hair,32  and  do  thou  gently  say,  "  This
damsel  was  once  my  own."  Even  let  me  bear  this,  so  as  I
am  not  abandoned  in  contempt.  That  dread,  alas  !  thrills
through  my  bones  in  my  wretchedness.

But  what  dost  thou  wish  for  ?  Agamemnon  repents  of  his
anger,  and  all  Greece  is  lying  disconsolate  before  thy  feet.
Thou  who  dost  conquer  every  thing  else,  conquer  thy  own  feel-
ings and  thy  temper.  Why  is  the  restless  Hector  destroying  the
resources  of  Greece  ?  To  arms,33  grandson  of  iEacus  !  but  still,
having  first  recovered  me  ;  and  hi  prosperous  warfare,  do  thou
harass  their  vanquished  troops.  On  my  account  was  anger  ex-
cited, on  my  account  let  it  end  :  and  let  me  be  both  the  cause
and  the  termination  of  thy  sorrow.  And  deem  it  no  disgrace
for  thee  to  listen  to  my  prayers  :  by  the  entreaties  of  his  wife
was  the  son  of  (Eneus34  persuaded  to  arm. A  thing  heard

33  To  tear  my  Mir.'] — Ver.  79.  It  was  the  custom  to  cut  close  the  hair
of  slaves.  This  practice  may  be  here  referred  to,  though  it  is  more  proba-
ble that  she  appeals  to  him  for  protection  from  the  passion  of  his  future
wife,  when  she  should  feel  inclined  to  tear  the  hair  of  her  slave,  which
seems  to  have  been  a  not  unusual  habit  among  the  ladies  of  ancient
times.

a3  To  arms.'] — Ver.  86.  Having  already  endeavoured  to  move  Achilles
by  arguments  drawn  from  her  own  love  and  affection  for  him,  she
now  attempts  to  arouse  his  courage,  and  to  awaken  him  to  a  sense  of
glory.  He  alone  is  able  to  resist  the  impetuosity  of  Hector.  '  Is  it  possi-
ble that  he  can  stand  still,  and  tamely  behold  the  victories  of  his  enemy,
see  him  triumph  over  his  country,  and  unimpeded  carry  off  the  prize  of
valour  ?'  At  the  same  time,  it  seems  somewhat  singular  that  she  should
make  these  appeals  to  the  disadvantage  of  the  Trojans,  who  had  so  recently
been  the  allies  of  her  country  and  her  kindred.

u  The  son  of  CEneus.] — Ver.  92.  Meleager  was  the  son  of  (Eneus,
king  of  Calydon,  and  Althea.  Diana,  incensed  against  his  father,  who,  in
a  general  sacrifice  to  the  Gods,  had  been  guilty  of  neglecting  her,  sent  a
huge  boar  to  ravage  his  territory.  Meleager  hunted  the  boar,  and,  after
it  was  killed  by  himself  and  his  companions,  presented  its  head  to
Atalanta,  the  daughter  of  Iasius,  king  of  Argos,who  had  been  the  first  to
wound  the  monster.  This  exciting  the  jealousy  and  indignation  of  Toxeus
and  Plexippus,  his  mother's  brothers,  they  attempted  to  wrest  her  prize
from  Atalanta,  on  which  Meleager  slew  them  both.  On  this,  a  war  arising
between  the  Curetes  and  the  Calydonians,  Meleager,  terrified  at  the  im-
precations of  his  mother,  would  not  assist  in  protecting  his  country,  or
in  driving  away  the  enemy,  though the  danger  was  most  imminent. At


26  THE  EPISTLES  OF  THE  HEROINES.  [EP.  Ill

by  me,  'tis  known  to  thee.  Bereft  of  her  brothers,35  the  mother
doomed36  both  the  hopes  and  the  existence  of  her  son.  There
was  a  war  ;  he,  in  disgust,  laid  down  his  arms  and  withdrew,
and  with  a  firm  determination  refused  aid  to  his  native
country.  His  wife  alone37  moved  her  husband.  More  happy
she  !  whereas  my  words  are  wasted,  as  having  no  weight.

Still,  I  do  not  repine ;  neither  have  I  conducted  myself  as
thy  wife,38  though  oft  as  a  slave  summoned  to  my  master's
bed.  A  certain  captive,  as  I  remember,  was  calling  me  '  mis-
tress:'39 "To  my  servitude,"  I  said,  "thou  dost  add  a  burden
by  the  name."  Yet,  by  the  bones  of  my  husband,  but  half
covered  in  a  hurried  tomb,  bones,  in  my  estimation,  ever  to
be  respected ;  and  by  the  brave  spirits  of  my  three  brothers,
my  own  Divinities,  who  bravely  fell  both,  for  their  country,
and  with  their  country  :  and  by  thy  head  and  my  own,  which
we  have  placed  on  the  pillow  close  together,40  and  by  thy  sword,

length,  by  the  prayers  and  entreaties  of  Cleopatra,  his  wife,  he  was  pre-
vailed upon  to  take  arms.

35  Of  her  brothers.] — Ver.  93.  These  were  the  sons  of  Thestius,  who
are  usually  called  Toxeus  and  Plexippus,  but  sometimes  Protus  and
Cometes.

36  The  mother  doomed.] — Ver.  94.  This  was  when  Althea  placed  on
the  fire  the  fatal  billet  upon  which  the  life  of  Meleager  depended.

37  His  wife  alone.] — Ver.  97.  Hyginus,  Fable  174,  calls  the  wife
of  Meleager  by  the  name  of  Halcyone.  By  Antoninus  Liberalis  and
Homer  she  is  called  Cleopatra ;  and  the  scholiasts  on  Homer  say  that
she  was  the  daughter  of  Aphareus  and  Marpusa,  wThich  is  also  confirmed
by  Apollodorus,  who  adds,  that  after  the  death  of  Meleager  she  com-
mitted suicide.

38  As  thy  wife.] — Ver.  99.  She  tells  him  that  his  kindness  did  not
create  any  pride  or  presumption  on  her  part ;  she  did  not  boast  of  being
his  wife,  but  submitted  cheerfully  to  the  rigours  of  servitude.

39  Calling  me  'mistress.'] — Ver.  101.  'Dominus'  means  'master'  or
'  owner,'  and  '  domina'  '  a  mistress  ';  in  addressing  a  person,  the  latter
word  would  be  equivalent  to  our  '  my  lady,'  or  '  mistress.'  These  words
are  used  especially  as  opposed  to  ■  servus,'  the  '  slave.'  Pliny  the  Younger,
in  his  Epistles,  addresses  Trajan  as  '  Dominus ;'  but  this  is  probably  meant
as  a  mark  of  respect,  equivalent  to  our  '  sire,'  and  not  as  the  acknow-
ledgment of  a  title.  The  emperor  Domitian  claimed  the  epithet  '  Do-
minus' as  a  title ;  and  Aurelian  is  said  to  have  been  the  first  to  adopt  it
on  his  medals.  The  Roman  ladies  took  the  title  of  '  Domina'  from  their
fourteenth  year.

40  Pillow  close  together.] — Ver.  107.  In  common  life  the  ancients
were  in  the  habit  of  swearing  by  the  Gods,  and  sometimes  by  individuals
or  things  most  dear  to  them. Thus  we  have  instances  of  a  person  swear-


EP.  III.]  BEISE1S TO ACHILLES.  2/

a  weapon  experienced  by  my  family  ;  I  swear  that  the  sovereign
of  Mycense41  has  never  shared  my  couch  with  me  :  mayst  tlioa
be  ready  to  forsake  me,  if  I  speak  false.

Were  I  now  to  say  to  thee  :  "  Most  valiant  hero,  do  thou
swear  too,  that  without  me,  no  joys  hast  thou  experienced  ;"
thou  wouldst  decline.  But  the  Greeks  think  that  thou  art
sorrowing.  By  thee  the  plectrum  is  moved4'2  to  the  lyre  :  in
her  warm  bosom  is  a  tender  mistress43  pressing  thee.  And  if
any  one  inquires  why  thou  dost  decline  to  fight ;  "  warfare
is  hateful;  the  lyre,  the  song,  and  love  have  charms."  "Tis
safer  to  be  stretched  on  a  couch,  and  to  be  fondling  a  mis-
tress, and  to  be  striking  the  Thracian  lyre44  with  the  fingers,

ing  by  his  own  welfare  or  that  of  his  children,  and  by  his  own  head  or
that  of  another,  as  in  the  present  instance.

41  Sovereign  of  Mycence.] — Ver.  109.  Agamemnon  was  the  king  of
Mycenae,  in  Peloponnesus.  Homer  represents  him  as  giving  the  same
assurance  to  Nestor  that  is  here  given  by  Briseis.

42  Plectrum  is  moved.] — Ver,  113.  In  other  words,  'you  are  passing
your  time  with  music/  as  the  plectrum  was  the  thin  stick  or  quill  with
which  the  strings  of  the  lyre  were  touched.

43  A  tender  mistress.] — Ver.  114.  She  is  probably  alluding  to  Dio-
rneda,  the  daughter  of  Phorbas,  with  whom,  as  we  are  told  by  Homer,
Achilles  was  wont  to  pass  the  time  in  the  absence  of  Briseis.

44  Thracian  lyre.] — Ver.  118.  The  lyre  was  introduced  by  Orpheus  into
Thrace,  and  became  the  favourite  instrument  of  that  country.  This  in-
strument was  probably  first  used  by  the  Eastern  nations  and  the  Egyptians,
from  whom  the  Greeks  learned  the  use  of  it.  The  Greeks,  however,  at-
tributed the  invention  of  the  lyre  to  Hermes  or  Mercury,  who  is  said  to
have  formed  the  instrument  of  a  tortoise-shell,  over  which  he  placed
strings.  Diodorus  says  that  the  lyre  of  Mercury  had  but  three  strings,
while  Macrobius  says  four,  and  that  they  symbolically  represented  the
four  seasons  of  the  year ;  Lucian,  and  Ovid  in  the  Sixth  Book  of  the
Fasti,  assume  that  from  the  first  the  lyre  had  seven  strings.  It  is  proba-
ble that  the  lyre  differed  from  the  '  cithara,'  which  resembled  the  modern
guitar,  (and probably  gave  its  name  to  it)  ;  inasmuch  as  in  the  'cithara'  the
strings  were  drawn  across  the  sounding  bottom,  whereas  in  the  lyre,  at
least  that  of  later  times,  they  were  free  on  both  sides,  like  the  harp.  In  the
Homeric  hymn  to  Hermes  or  Mercury,  the  term  Xupy  Ki9api'£fiv  is  used,
from  which  it  would  seem  that  in  the  early  ages  there  was  no  distinction
between  the  '  lyra'  and  the  '  cithara,'  or,  in  other  terms,  the  instrument
known  by  those  names  was  a  •  cithara'  in  the  later  sense  of  the  word.
Terpander,  of  Antissa,  is  said  to  have  added  to  the  original  number  of
four  strings  three  new  ones,  and  thus  to  have  changed  the  tetrachord
into  a  heptachord.  Timotheus  of  Miletus,  in  the  time  of  Alexander  the
Great,  increased  the  number  of  strings  to  eleven.  The  lyre  was  considered
a  more  manly  instrument  than  the  '  cithara.'  These  instruments  were
often  adorned  in  the  most  costly  manner  with  gold  and  ivory.


28  THE EPISTLES OF THE HEROINES.  [EP.  III.

than  to  be  bearing  a  shield  in  the  hand,  and  a  sharp-pointed
lance,  and  a  helmet  on  thy  pressed  locks.  But,  instead  of
safety,  glorious  exploits  used  to  please  thee  ;  and  sweet  was
the  fame  acquired  by  warfare.  Or  didst  thou  admire  fierce
warfare  only  until  thou  hadst  made  me  a  captive  ?  and  with
my  native  land  does  thy  glory  lie  extinguished.  May  the  Gods
grant  it  otherwise  ;  and  may  the  lance  from  Pelion,45  I  pray,
poised  by  thy  strong  arm,  pierce  the  sides  of  Hector.

Send  me  thither,*6  ye  Greeks  ;  your  envoy,  I  will  entreat
my  master,  and  many  a  kiss  will  I  give,  intermingled  with
your  injunctions.  More  will  I  effect  than  Phoenix,  more  than
eloquent  Ulysses,  more  will  I  effect  (believe  me)  than  the
brother  of  Teucer.  'Tis  something  to  encircle  his  neck  with
my  arms  as  formerly,  and  to  remind  his  eyes  of  one's  own
presence.  Though  thou  wouldst  be  cruel  and  more  obdurate
than  the  waves  of  thy  mother,  though  I  were  silent,  thou
wouldst  be  influenced  by  my  tears.  And  now,  (then  may
thy  father  Peleus  fulfil  the  measure  of  his  years,  then  under
thy  auspices  may  Pyrrhus47  assume  arms)  do,  valiant  Achilles,
regard  the  anxious  Brise'is,  and  do  not,  hard  as  iron,  torment

45  Lance  from  Pelion.'] — Ver.  126.  The  spear  of  Achilles  was  made
of  wood  from  Mount  Pelion,  in  Thessaly.  Homer  says  that  the  weight
of  it  was  such  that  it  could  be  wielded  only  by  himself ;  and  that  when
Patroclus  assumed  his  other  armour,  he  was  obliged  to  forego  the  spear.

45  Send  me  thither.] — Ver.  127.  There  is  considerable  beauty  in  this  pas-
sage. Briseis  fancies  that  she  is  likely  to  have  more  influence  over  Achilles
than  the  deputies  of  Agamemnon,  and  to  be  able  to  prevail  when  theyare  re-
pulsed. The  remembrance  of  past  endearments,  the  presence  of  the  person
whom  he  has  loved,  and  those  tender  feelings  which  the  sight  of  her  cannot
fail  to  raise  in  him,  will,  she  flatters  herself,  make  him  incapable  of  resisting
her  suit.  From  this,  she  very  naturally  falls  into  an  expostulation  with
him  as  though  present,  chides  him  for  his  obstinacy  and  neglect,  and
tells  him  that  it  will  be  less  cruel  to  deprive  her  at  once  of  life,  than  thus
to  make  her  languish  in  uncertainty  aDd  fear.  She  then  concludes  with
a  simple  and  touching  appeal,  '  It  will  be  better  to  deprive  me  of  life
than  to  keep  me  in  this  cruel  uncertainty ;  but  better  still  to  preserve  my
life  and  happiness  together,  and  to  prolong  those  days  which  are  your
own  gift.  Troy  will  afford  you  plenteous  objects  on  which  you  may
wreak  your  vengeance.  Restore  me,  then,  to  my  former  place  in  your
affections.'

47  May  Pyrrhus.] — Ver.  136.  Pyrrhus,  or  Neoptolemus,  was  the  son
of  Achilles  by  Deidamia.  After  his  father's  death  he  repaired  to  the
Grecian  camp,  and  distinguished  bimself  by  his  valour.  Virgil  represents
him  as  putting  Priam  to  death  at  the  taking  of  Troy.


EP.  IV.J  PHJEDBA. TO HIPPOLYTUS.  29

her  with  prolonged  delays.  Or  if  thy  affection  is  changed  to  a
loathing  of  me,  force  me  to  die,  whom  thou  dost  oblige  to
exist  without  thee. .  And  as  thou  art  now  doing,  thou  wilt  force
me  ;  both  my  flesh  and  my  colour  are  gone  ;  and  still  does
the  hope  alone  of  thy  love  support  this  remainder  of  life.
Should  I  be  deprived  of  this,  I  shall  seek  again  my  brothers
and  my  husband  ;  a  woman  bid  to  die,  will  be  no  mighty  exploit
of  thine.

But  why  shouldst  thou  bid  this  ?  strike  my  body  with  the
drawn  sword  :  I  have  blood  enough  to  flow  from  my  pierced
breast.  Let  that  sword  of  thine,  which,  had  the  Goddess
allowed  it,48  was  about  to  pierce  the  breast  of  the  son  of  Atreus,
be  aimed  at  me.  Ah  I  rather  preserve  my  life,  thy  own  gift ;  as
thy  mistress  do  I  ask  of  thee  that  which  thou,  when  the  con-
queror, didst  give  to  me  as  an  enemy.  Pergamus,  built  by
Neptune,  affords  that  which  more  fitly  thou  mayst  destroy;  seek
of  the  enemy  a  subject  for  destruction.  Only,  whether  thou
art  preparing  to  impel  thy  fleet  with  the  oars,  or  whether  thou
dost  remain  here,  in  the  right  of  a  master  do  thou  order  me
to  come  to  thee.


EPISTLE  IV.
PtLEDRA  TO  HIPPOLYTUS.

The  Athenians  having  murdered  Androgeus,  the  son  of  Minos,  king  of
Crete,  he  made  war  upon  them,  and  compelled  them  yearly  to  deliver
to  him  seven  sons  of  the  nobility,  to  be  devoured  by  the  Minotaur.  The
lot  falling,  among  others,  upon  Theseus  the  son  of  iEgeus,.  king  of
Athens,  he  went  to  Crete,  where  he  slew  the  monster,  and  then  escaped
from  the  Labyrinth  by  means  of  a  clue,  which  he  received  from  Ariadne,
the  daughter  of  Minos  and  Pasiphae.  In  return  for  this  service,  hs
promised  to  marry  her  ;  and,  on  leaving  Crete,  took  her  and  her  sister
Phaedra  with  him.  Having  afterwards  deserted  Ariadne,  in  the  isle
of  Naxos,  he  married  Phaedra.  Previously  to  this,  Theseus  had  a
son  named  Hippolytus,  by  Hippolyta,  or  Antiope,  the  Amazon.  Of  hira,
in  her  husband's  absence,  Phaedra  became  enamoured.  He,  being  de-
voted to  a  life  of  chastity,  and  delighting  in  hunting  and  similar  exei-
cises,  made  no  return  to  her  passion. She  is  supposed,  on  this,  to  write

48  Goddess  allowed  it."] — Ver.  147.  According  to  Homer,  Minerva
restrained  the  extreme  fury  of  Achilles,  when  he  drew  his  sword  against
Agamemnon.


30  THE  EPISTLES  OF  THE  HEROINES.  [EP.  IT.

to  him  the  following  Epistle,  in  which  she  confesses  her  passion,  and
endeavours,  by  all  the  methods  of  art  and  persuasion,  to  inspire  him
with  a  mutual  tenderness,  and  to  efface  the  horror  which  the  idea  of
the  crime  would  naturally  inspire  in  his  breast.

That  health49  of  which  she  herself  will  be  deprived,  unless
thou  shalt  grant  it  to  her,  the  Cretan  dame50  sends  to  the
hero  born  of  the  Amazon.51  Whatever  it  proves,  read  this
through  :  what  harm  will  the  reading  of  a  letter  do  ?  In  this
there  maybe  something  which  may  even  be  to  thy  advantage.
In  these  characters  are  secrets  borne  over  land  and  sea  ;  an
enemy  reads52  the  letters  sent  by  his  enemy.  Thrice  have  I
attempted  to  discourse  with  thee,  thrice  has  my  tongue  failed
through  inability,  thrice  have  the  words  forsaken  me  on  the
edge  of  my  lips.  So  far  as  is  possible  and  is  convenient,
modesty  must  be  united  with  love.  Love  has  bid53  me
write  that  which  I  was  ashamed  to  say.  Whatever  love  has
commanded,  it  is  not  safe  to  despise ;  he  rules,  and  over  the
supreme  Gods  he  holds  his  sway.

When  first  I  was  hesitating  to  write,  he  said  to  me,  "  Write  ;
hard  as  iron  though  he  be,  he  shall  extend  his  conquered
hands." May  he  be  propitious  ;  and  as  he  is  heating  my

49  That  health. .] — Ver.  1.  The  word  '  salutem'  here  may  be  rendered
'  health'  or  '  salutation,'  though  the  former  word  is  requisite  for  giving  the
full  meaning  of  the  passage.

50  The  Cretan  dame.~\ — Ver.  2.  Phosdra  was  the  daughter  of  Minos,
king  of  Crete,  while  Hippolytus  was  the  son  of  the  Amazon  Hippolyta,  or
Antiope.

51  Born  of  the  Amazon.'] — Ver.  3.  Hippolytus  had  hitherto  neglected
the  charms  of  the  fair  sex,  and  had  preferred  the  chase  to  female  society.
Phasdra  being  no  stranger  to  his  feelings,  she  not  only  doubts  of  her  ulti-
mate success,  but  has  reason  to  fear  that  he  will  not  even  peruse  her  letter.

52  An  enemy  reads.] — Ver.  6.  She  endeavours,  by  her  arguments,  to
persuade  him  to  a  step  to  which  she  knows  he  will  be  naturally  averse.
First  she  endeavours  to  excite  his  curiosity,  and  to  make  him  believe  that
he  will  find  in  the  letter  something  that  may  prove  agreable ;  then  she  tells
him  that  even  an  enemy  would  not  refuse  to  read  a  letter  ;  much  less  then
ought  he  whom  she  loves  so  tenderly,  and  who  in  common  humanity  is
bound  to  make  her  some  adequate  return.

63  Love  has  bid.] — Ver.  10.  She  now  proffers  an  excuse  for  her
forwardness.  Shame  will  not  allow  her  to  speak  her  mind  openly,  and
love,  ever  fertile  in  expedients,  has  suggested  to  her  this  method  of  making
her  feelings  known  to  him.  She  shows  how  great  is  the  power  of  that
Divinity,  who  is  so  irresistible  that  even  the  Gods  themselves  are  not  ex-
empted from  the  power  of  his  darts.  How  little  the  blame,  then,  for  a
weak  woman  to  give  way  to  him.


EP.  IY.j  PH^DKA TO HIPPOLTTUS.  31

marrow  with  his  devouring  flame,  so  may  he  change54  thy
feelings  to  my  desires.  By  no  criminality55  will  I  break  my
nuptial  vows  ;  my  fame  (I  wish  thou  wouldst  enquire)  is  free
from  all  reproach.  The  later  love  comes,  the  more  violent
does  he  come  :  inwardly  do  I  burn  ;  I  burn,  and  my  breast
receives  the  secret  wound.  Just  as  the  first  yoke  galls  the
tender  oxen,  and.  the  horse  taken  from  the  herd  hardly  sub-
mits to  the  reins  ;  so  with  difficulty  and  reluctance  does  my
inexperienced  bosom  submit  to  its  first  passion  ;  and  this
burden  sits  not  lightly  on  my  mind.  When  this  failing  is
practised  even  from  childhood,  the  resources  of  art56  avail :  she
whom  it  assaults  at  a  later  period,  loves  distractedly.

Thou  shalt  receive  the  first  offerings  of  a  cherished  fame,
and  both  of  us57  shall  be  guilty  in  an  equal  degree.  'Tis
something58  to  strip  the  orchards  with  their  loaded  branches,
and  with  the  sharp  nail  to  pluck  the  early  rose.  If,  how-
ever,59 that  former  chastity  in  which  I  lived  without  a  blemish,

5i  So  may  he  change.] — Ver.  16.  Instead  of  '  figat/  the  usual  reading
in  this  line,  Burmann  suggests  '  frangat,'  which  reading  has  been  adopted.

55  By  no  criminality.'] — Ver.  17.  She  evidently  means  to  say  that  her
approaches  are  not  prompted  by  lust,  but  by  an  affection  of  a  pure  nature.
Crispinus,  however,  explains  the  passage  in  these  words,  '  Non  libiclinosa
levitate  foedera,  quae  tu  mecum  iniveris,  rumpam  : '  '  I  will  not  break  with
lustful  wantonness  those  ties  which  you  shall  form  with  me.'  He  has  evi-
dently mistaken  the  meaning  of  the  passage.

58  Resources  of  art.] — Ver.  25.  She  continues  to  plead  her  own  cause
Math  all  the  address  of  which  she  is  the  mistress.  Love  has  taken  posses-
sion of  her  at  a  more  mature  age,  and  therefore  it  is  the  more  violent,
and  the  more  difficult  to  be  removed.  Had  she  been  accustomed  to  it
from  her  younger  years,  she  might  have  known  how  to  repress  it :  but
her  unpractised  heart,  unable  to  oppose  its  ravages,  suffers  itself  to  be
wholly  possessed  by  her  passion.

57  And  both  of  us.] — Ver.  28.  Inasmuch  as  he  has  never  hitherto  be-
stowed his  affection  on  any  female,  and  she  has  never  loved  any  other  per-
son than  her  husband.

58  '  Tis  something.] — Ver.  29.  Her  artfulness  is  very  aptly  displayed
in  this  passage.  She  chooses  a  very  defective  side  of  human  nature  for
her  attack.  Nothing  is  more  common,  and  indeed  more  successful,  than
to  set  a  chimerical  value  upon  certain  things,  and  in  that  light  to  invite  a
pursuit  of  objects  which  otherwise  we  might  despise,  or  perhaps  even
regard  with  horror.

59  If,  however.] — Ver.  31.  Phaedra  here  begins  to  reason  with  herself,
and  to  take  a  view  of  the  crime  the  commission  of  which  she  is  about  to
attempt.  But  as,  when  we  have  once  resolved  upon  a  thing,  we  are  never
at  a  loss  to  find  plausible  pretences  for  our  justification,  such  is  the  case
with  Phaedra.  As  she  has  wholly  given  herself  up  to  this  fatal  passion,  she


32  THE  EPISTLES  OF  THE  HEEOINES.  [EP.  TV.

must  be  spotted  by  some  unusual  stain,  still  it  has  happily
fallen  out  that  I  burn  with  a  worthy  flame  ;  no  worthless
paramour  is  there,  himself  more  disgraceful  than  the  adultery.
Should  Judo60  yield  to  me  her  brother  and  her  husband,  I  seem
as  though  I  should  prefer  Hippolytus  to  Jove.  Now,  too,  (thou
wouldst  hardly  believe  it),  I  am  urged  on61  to  pursuits  hitherto
unknown  to  me  ; I  have  a  desire  to  go  amid  the  savage  wild


Now  is  she  of  Delos62  my  chief  Divinity,  distinguished  by
her  crooked  bow  ;  I  consign  myself  to  thy  tastes.  Into  the
groves  am  I  desirous  to  go,  and,  the  stags  pursued  into  the
toils,  to  cheer  on  the  swift  hounds  over  the  mountain  ridges  ;
or  else  to  poise  the  quivering  javelin  with  shaken  arm,  or  to  re-
cline my  body  on  the  grassy  ground.  Often  do  I  delight  to
guide  the  light  chariot  in  the  dust,  as  I  turn  the  heads  of  the
swift  steeds  with  the  reins.  Now  am  I  borne  onward  like  the
Eieleides,63  impelled  by  the  inspiration  of  Bacchus,  and  those

can  be  satisfied  with  reasons,  which  in  no  other  circumstances  could  ap-
pear of  weight.  Though  she  is  forced  to  own  that  her  design  is  crimi-
nal, yet  she  thinks  it  some  excuse  that  she  is  about  to  offend  with  a  man
of  virtuous  character ;  and  she  disdains  to  commit,  if  we  may  be  allowed
the  paradox,  an  inglorious  crime.

60  Should  Juno.] — Ver.  35.  Juno  was  fabled  to  be  both  the  sister  and
the  wife  of  Jupiter :  probably  with  the  object  of  showing  how  utterly  the
Deities  disregarded  mere  mortal  ordinances.

61  I  am  urged  on."] — Ver.  37.  In  the  Art  of  Love,  Ovid  lays  it  down
as  one  of  his  rules,  that  a  lover  ought  to  take  pleasure  in  the  same  exer-
cises, pursuits,  and  diversions,  as  his  mistress.  Agreeably  to  this  notion,
Phaedra  here  addresses  Hippolytus ;  and  professes  herself  to  be  delighted
with  bunting,  knowing  that  to  be  his  chief  delight.

62  She  of  Delos.] — Ver.  40.  Diana,  the  sister  of  Apollo,  was  born  in
the  island  of  Delos ;  she  was  the  patron  of  the  chase  and  field  sports.

Ci  The  Eieleides.] — Ver.  47.  Tbe  votaries  of  Bacchus  are  called  Eie-
leides after  that  God,  one  of  whose  names  was  Eleleus.  He  was  so  called
either  from  Helus,  a  town  of  iEtolia,  where  he  was  especially  worshipped,
or  else  from  the  vociferations  and  cries  (of  which  '  Eleleu '  was  one)  which
attended  his  rites.  Ovid  mentions  Eleleus  as  a  nameof  Bacchus  intheFourth
Book  of  the  Metamorphoses.  Macrobius  says  that  it  was  also  one  of  the
epithets  of  Apollo,  and  that  he  was  so  called  cltto  tov  iXtrrtaOai  7repi  rr\v
yi)v,  '  from  his  revolving  round  the  earth.'  As  '  Eleleu '  was  one  of  the
shouts  of  the  Greeks  and  of  the  Eastern  nations,  denoting  joy  or  triumph,
it  is  not  unlikely  that  Apollo,  as  well  as  Bacchus,  received  this  epithet  from
that  source,  and  not  from  the  fanciful  origin  suggested  by  Macrobius.  We
retain  the  Hebrew  form  of  the  same  word  in  the  word  '  Hallelujah,'  it  bein^
the  same  interjection  with  the  addition  of  '  Jab.,'  '  God.'


EP.  IV.]  PH^EDKA TO HIPPOLTTUS.  33

who  shake64  the  tambourines  at  the  foot  of  the  hill  of  Ida ;  or
those  whom  the  Dryads,65  half  Divinities,  and  the  two-homed
Fauns66  have  maddened,  when  touched  by  the  enthusiasm 67  im-
parted by  them.  For  when  this  fury  has  abated,  they  tell  me
all ;  conscious  Love  is  consuming  me  in  my  suspense.  Per-
haps I  may  be  owing  this  passion  to  the  destinies  of  my
family,  and  Venus  may  be  demanding68  this  tribute  of  all
their  race.

64  Those  who  shake.] — Ver.  48.  Some  would  suggest  the  masculine
1  quique,'  for  '  quseque/  as  the  Galli,  or  priests  of  Cybele,  who  are  here
alluded  to,  were  males.  Ovid  seems,  however,  as  they  were  eunuchs,  pur-
posely to  refuse  to  acknowledge  them  as  of  the  male  sex.  In  the  same
way,  the  poet  Catullus  describes  Attis  as  a  female  ;  and  Claudian  in  a  simi-
lar manner  alludes  to  the  eunuch  Eutropius.  Lucian,  however,  says  not
only  that  the  Galli  were  clothed  in  female  dress,  but  that  women  were  also
mingled  with  them.  The  Galli  were  also  called  Idsei  Dactyli.  According
to  Euripides,  these  devotees,  having  sacrified  to  Cybele,  or  the  Mother  of
the  Gods,  proceeded  in  a  wild  procession  from  Ida,  the  mountain  in  Phrygia,
to  mount  Olympus.

63  The  Dryads.] — Ver.  49.  The  Dryads  were  Nymphs  who  were  the
guardians  of  the  woods  and  groves.  Their  name  is  derived  from  the
Greek  SpvQ,  *  an  oak.'

66  Two-horned  Fauns.] — Ver.  49.  Some  persons  were  said  to  be  in-
spired by  the  visits  of  Divinities  in  the  night,  such  as  those  in  Latium,  who
were  said  to  consult  the  Fauns  in  the  night-time.  We  are  told  by  Caius
Bassus  that  Faunus,  the  son  of  Picus,  first  instituted  sacred  rites  in  ho-
nour of  his  grandfather  Saturn,  and  procured  the  reception  of  his  father
Picus  and  his  sister  Fauna  among  the  Gods.  Fauna  was  consecrated  as
being  also  the  wife  of  Faunus  ;  and,  according  to  Varro,  she  was  the  same
Goddess  that  was  worshipped  under  the  name  of  Bona  Dea.  She  was
consulted  by  the  women,  while  the  men  made  application  for  responses
to  Faunus.  Pan  seems  also  to  have  been  introduced  into  Latium,  under
the  name  of  Faunus.  Ovid,  in  the  Second  Book  of  the  Fasti,  relates  an
adventure  of  Pan  with  Hercules  and  Omphale,  under  that  name.

67  By  the  enihusiasrn.] — Ver.  50.  She  here  makes  allusion  to  those  who
were  called  Lymphatics  by  the  ancients.  They  wei'e  persons  who  were
said  to  have  seen  some  kind  of  Divinity,  or  rural  Deity  or  Nymph,  which
threw  them  into  transports  that  overcame  their  reason.  Their  ecsta-
sies were  shown  in  quakings  and  tremblings,  tossing  of  the  head  and  limbs,
and,  according  to  Livy,  convulsions,  extemporary  prayers,  prophecies,
singing  and  the  like.  According  to  Pliny  the  Elder,  the  magicians  were
not  able  to  cure  these  unfortunate  persons,  and  they  never  recovered
their  senses,  unless  they  were  first  sprinkled  with  the  blood  of  moles.

66  May  be  demanding.] — Ver.  54.  She  alludes  to  the  discovery  by  the
Sun,  or  Apollo,  of  the  intrigue  between  Mars  and  Venus  ;  in  revenge  for
which,  Venus  kindled  among  the  female  descendants  of  Apollo  such  a  flame

D


34  THE  EPISTLES  OE  THE  HEKOIKES.  [EP.  IT.

Jupiter  loved  Europa,69  (such  is  the  origin  of  my  family)
the  bull  concealing  the  God.  Pasiphae,70  my  mother,  sub-
mitting to  the  deceived  bull,  produced  from  her  womb  her
conviction  and  her  burden.  The  perfidious  son  of  iEgeus,71
following  the  guiding  clue,  fled  from  the  winding  abode
by  the  aid  of  my  sister.  Lo  !  I  now,  lest  perchance  I  should
be  deemed  too  little  the  daughter  of  Minos,  conform,  the  last
of  the  family,  to  the  laws  of  our  blood.  This,  too,  is  decreed
by  fate  ;  one  house  won  the  regards  of  us  two  ;  thy  beauty
attracts  me,  by  thy  father  was  my  sister  captivated.  The  son
of  Theseus  and  Theseus  himself  have  charmed  two  sisters ;  erect
a  twofold  trophy  gained  of  our  family.  I  would  that,  at  the
time  when  Eleusis,72  sacred  to  Ceres,  was  entered  by  thee,  the
Gnossian  land73  had  still  retained  me  ;  it  was  then  especially

of  love,  that  not  one  of  them  was  able  to  preserve  her  chastity,  as  Phaedra
goes  on  to  prove. So  Seneca,  in  his  Hippolytus,  says —
"  Sirpem  perosa  Solis  invisi  genus,

Per  nos  catenas  vindicat  Martis  sui,

Suasque  ;  probris  omne  Phoebeum  genus

Onerat  nefandis. Nulla  Minois  levi

Defuncta  amore  est."
"  Abhorring  the  progeny  of  the  hated  Sun,  on  us  she  avenges  the  chains
of  her  Mars  and  of  herself ;  with  shocking  disgrace  does  she  load  all  the
race  of  Phcebus. No  female  descendant  of  Minos  has  been  visited  with  a
moderate  passion."

69  Loved  Europa.] — Ver.  55.  The  story  of  Jupiter  and  Europa  is  re-
lated at  length  in  the  Second  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses.

70  Pasiphae.'] — Ver.  57.  Pasiphae  was  the  daughter  of  the  Sun,  and
the  wife  of  Minos,  king  of  Crete ;  as  the  result  of  her  infamous  passion,
she  gave  birth  to  the  Minotaur,  which  was  afterwards  slain  by  Theseus.

71  Son  of  JEyeus.] — Ver.  59.  She  gives  another  illustration  in  the  case
of  her  sister  Ariadne,  who,  loving  Theseus  the  son  of  iEgeus,  instructed
him  how  he  might  slay  the  Minotaur,  and  at  the  same  time  gave  him  a
clue  by  which  he  was  enabled  to  extricate  himself  from  the  labyrinth.  He
afterwards  deserted  her  in  the  island  of  Naxos,  where  she  was  found  by
Bacchus.

72  Eleusis.'] — Ver.  67.  Eleusis,  or  Eleusin,  was  a  city  of  Attica,  which
lay  to  the  west  of  Athens.  Here  was  a  temple  sacred  to  the  Eleusinian
Ceres,  where  her  mysteries  were  celebrated.  The  place  is  said  to  have
derived  its  name  from  the  Greek  word  eXevatg,  '  an  arrival,'  as  that  was
the  first  place  where  Ceres  rested  on  her  arrival  in  Greece  in  her  search
for  her  daughter  Proserpine,  when  she  had  been  carried  off  by  Pluto.  It
was  at  these  sacred  rites,  Phosdra  says,  that  she  was  first  smitten  with
her  passion  for  Hippolytus.

73  The  Gnossian  land.] — Ver.  68.  Gnosus,  or  Gnossus,  or  Cnossus,
was  a  famous  city  in  the  isle  of  Crete,  where  Minos  had  his  palace.


EP.  IV.J  PH^EDEA  to  hippolytus.  35

(and  yet  before  that  as  well),  that  thou  didst  please  me ;
piercing  loves  penetrated  to  my  inmost  bones.  White  were
thy  vestments,74  thy  hair  was  wreathed  with  flowers ; 75  a
modest  blush  had  tinted  thy  rosy  face.  Thy  features  too,
which  others  call  harsh  and  stern,  instead  of  being  harsh,
were,  in  the  estimation  of  Phsedra,  manly.  Afar  from  me  be
all  youths  that  are  decked  out  like  women ;  a  manly  form
requires  to  be  adorned  within  moderate  limits.  That  stern-
ness of  thine,  and  thy  locks  arranged  without  art,  and  the
little  dust  on  thy  beauteous  face,  are  becoming.

Whether  thou  art  bending  the  reluctant  neck  of  the  fiery
steed,  I  delight  to  see  his  feet  turning  in  the  little  ring  :75
or  whether  thou  art  hurling  the  huge  lance  with  nervous  arm,
thy  stalwart  arm  has  my  eyes  turned  towards  it ;  or  whether
thou  art  brandishing  the  cornel  hunting-spears77  with  the
broad  iron  point;  in  fine,  whatever  thou  art  doing,  it  delights
my  eyes.  Only,  do  thou  leave  thy  moroseness  for  the  woods
of  the  mountain  ridge  ;  I  am  not  deserving  to  perish  by  thy
agency.  What  does  it  profit  to  follow  the  pursuits  of  the
tightly  girt  Diana,78  and  to  deprive  Venus  of  her  dues  ? That

"4  White  were  thy  vestments.'] — Ver.  71;  She  describes  him  here  pro-
bably in  the  garb  of  one  about  to  be  initiated  into  the  Eleusinian  mys-
teries. In  the  '  Hippolytus'  of  Euripides,  he  is  introduced  as  offering  a
wreath  to  Diana  on  this  occasion.

75  Wreathed  with  flowers. ,] — Ver.  71.  She  now  proceeds  to  show  the
progress  of  her  passion.  His  dress,  his  air,  his  manner,  in  a  word,  every
thing  about  him  is  full  of  charms  of  an  irresistible  nature.  If  he  is
mounted  on  horseback,  she  is  delighted  with  the  skill  and  art  of  the  rider.
If  he  hurls  the  flying  javelin>  she  is  charmed  with  his  strength  and  agility.
His  dress  is  negligent  and  graceful,  such  as  becomes  a  hero ;  his  looks,
whatever  they  may  appear  to  others,  appear  in  her  eyes  befitting  a  man,
brave  and  courageous.  All  this  is  very  natural,  and  well  worthy  of  so
skilful  a  master  as  Ovid.

76  In  the  little  ring.] — Ver.  80.  She  alludes  to  the  '  gyrus,'  which  was
a  small  ring,  round  which  horses  were  ridden,  for  the  purpose  of  exercise,
or  of  breaking  them  in.  The  same  practice,  in  breaking  horses  in,  is  adopted
at  the  present  day.

77  Cornel  hunting-spears.] — Ver.  82.  The  '  venabulum,'  or  hunting-
spear  of  the  ancients,  may  possibly,  by  being  barbed,  have  been  distin-
guished from  the  spears  and  lances  used  in  warfare  ;  it  is  so  represented
in  several  ancient  works  of  art.  It  was  seldom,  if  ever,  thrown,  but  held
so  as  to  slant  downwards,  and  thus  to  receive  the  onsets  of  the  wild  boar
and  other  beasts  of  chase.

78  Tightly  girt  Diana.] — Ver. 87. Diana  is  called  '  incincta,'  from

i>2


36  THE  EPISTLES  OE  THE  HEEOINES.  [EP.  IV.

which  admits  of  no  interval  of  rest,  is  not  lasting  ; 'tis  that
recruits  our  strength  and  refreshes  our  wearied  limbs.

The  bow  (and  surely  the  arms  of  thy  own  Diana  ought  to
be  imitated  by  thee),  shouldst  thou  never  cease  to  bend  it,  will
become  weak.  Cephalus  was  famed79  in  the  woods,  and  many
a  wild  beast  had  fallen  on  the  grass,  as  he  brought  it  down  ;
and  still  not  unbecomingly  did  he  allow  himself  to  be  loved
by  Aurora.  The  knowing  Goddess  went  from  an  aged  hus-
band80 to  him.  Full  oft  beneath  the  holm  oaks  has  any
grassy  spot  supported  Venus  and  the  son  of  Cinyras,81  as
they  reclined.  The  son,  too,  of  (Eneus  burned  for  Maenalian82
Atalanta ;  as  a  pledge  of  love,  she  possesses  the  spoils  of  the
wild  beasts.  Let  us  too,  now,  be  numbered  for  the  first  time
in  that  throng — shouldst  thou  banish  Venus,  thy  woods  are
repulsive.  As  thy  attendant  will  I  come  ;  neither  the  rugged
rocks  shall  move  me,  nor  the  wild  boar,  dreadful  with  his
sidelong  tusk.

Two  seas  beat  the  Isthmus  with  their  waves,  and  a  narrow
slip  of  land  hears  either  tide.  Here,  together  with  thee,83
will  I  inhabit  Trcezen,  the  realms  of  Pittheus  ;  already  is
it  dearer  than  my  native  country.  The  hero  of  the  race  of
Neptune  has  been  absent  for  some  time,  and  for  a  long  period

having  her  garments tucked  up  and  girt  around  her,  with  the  view  of
securing  speed,  when  engaged  in  her  favourite  pursuit  of  hunting.

79  Cephalus  was  famed,] — Ver.  93.  The  story  of  Cephalus  and  Procris
is  related  at  length  in  the  Seventh  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses.  Accord-
ing to  the  story  as  there  narrated,  he  did  not  return  the  love  of  Aurora.
Perhaps,  however,  the  meaning  here  is,  that  though  he  was  very  fond
of  hunting,  and  other  athletic  exercises,  he  was  no  enemy  to  the  delights
of  love,  and  was  not  displeased  at  the  passion  of  Aurora.

80  From  an  aged  husband.'] — Ver.  96.  The  aged  husband  of  Aurora,
here  alluded  to,  was  Tithonus,  the  son  of  Laomedon,  and  the  brother  of
Priam.

81  The  son  of  Cinyras.'] — Ver.  97-  Adonis  was  the  son  of  Cinyras,
king  of  Cyprus,  by  his  daughter,  Myrrha.  Their  shocking  story  is  related
in  the  Tenth  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses.  Venus  was  smitten  with  love
for  Adonis.

82  Mainalian.'] — Ver.  99. Maenalus  was  a  mountain  of  Arcadia.

83  Together  with  thee.]— Ver.  107.  Phsedra  tells  Hippolytus  that  she
is  willing  to  share  every  risk  with  him,  and  that  she  can  be  deterred  by  no
dangers.  She  will  be  contented  to  live  with  him,  whether  hechooses  theforests
or  the  cities.  If  he  should  prefer  the  woods,  she  will  accompany  him  in  all
his  diversions,  and  cheerfully  submit  to  the  fatigues  of  the  chase.  If  the
cities  delight  him,  she  is  willing  to  live  with  him  in  Trcezen,  the  place  of


EP.  IV.]  PHAEDRA. TO HIPPOLTTUS.  '37

will  be  absent ;  the  country  of  his  own  Pirithous 84  detains
him.  Theseus  (unless  we  deny  what  is  manifest),  has  pre-
ferred Pirithous  to  Phsedra,  Pirithous  to  thyself.  Nor  has
this  injury  only  accrued  to  us  from  him ;  in  matters  of  im-
portance have  we  both  been  wronged.  The  bones  of  my
brother,85  broken  with  a  three-knotted  club,  did  he  scatter  on
the  ground ;  to  the  wild  beasts  my  sister  was  left  a  prey.
Thy  mother  bore  thee,  the  first  among  the  females  that  wield
the  battle-axes6  in  valour,  and  worthy  the  prowess  of  her
son.  Shouldstthou  enquire87  where  she  is;  Theseus  pierced
her  side  with  the  sword ;  nor  was  a  mother  safe  in  a  pledge
of  value  so  great.

But,  in  fact,  she  was  not  married  and  received  with  the
nuptial  torch.  Why  so  1  Only  that,  being  a  bastard,  thou
mightst  not  receive  the  realms  of  thy  father.  He  has  given
thee  brothers  too  by  me  ;  yet  not  I,  but  he,  was  the  cause ss

his  own  choice.  This  was  a  city  of  Argolis,  in  Peloponnesus,  where
Pittheus  reigned,  who  was  the  father  of  iEthra,  the  mother  of  Theseus.

S4  Pirithous.] — Ver.  110.  Pirithous  was  the  son  of  Ixion  ;  the  region
where  he  dwelt  was  that  part  of  Thessaly  which  bordered  upon  the  river
Peneus,  and  where,  according  to  Diodorus  Siculus,  Ixion  reigned.  The
friendship  between  Theseus  and  Pirithous  was  almost  as  celebrated  as
that  between  Orestes  and  Pylades;

85  Bones  of  my  brother.'] — Ver.  115.  This  shows  the  dilemma  to  which
Phaedra  is  reduced  for  an  excuse  for  her  infamous  passion.  She  com-
plains that  Theseus  had,  a  long  time  before,  killed  her  monster  brother,  the
Minotaur.  This,  however,  had  not  had  much  influence  on  her  hitherto,
as  she  did  not  refuse  to  accompany  her  sister,  Ariadne,  in  her  escape
with  Theseus,  from  the  wrath  of  Minos.

86  The  battle-axe.'] — Ver.  117.  The  battle-axe  was  the  weapon  especially
used  in  war  by  the  Amazons.

87  Shouldst  thou  enquire.] — Ver.  119.  After  mentioning  the  injuries
which  she  herself  has  received  from  Theseus,  namely,  the  slaughter  of  her
brother,  the  Minotaur,  and  the  desertion  of  her  sister,  Ariadne,  she  pro-
ceeds to  say  that  the  wrongs  done  by  hhn  to  Hippolytus  deserve  equally
to  be  resented.  Theseus  had  cruelly  murdered  his  mother,  Hippolyta,
queen  of  the  Amazons.  He  had  not  avowed  her  as  his  lawful  wife,  con-
sequently her  son  was  excluded  from  the  succession  ;  and,  as  though  this
had  not  been  sufficient,  to  remove  him  still  further  from  the  throne,  and
to  cut  off  from  him  all  hopes  of  rule,  he  had  given  him  brothers  by  her-
self. Some  writers  represent  that  Hippolyta  was  killed  by  Hercules,  who
had  been  commanded  by  Eurystheus  to  bring  to  him  her  girdle.  Other
accounts  state  that  he  spared  her  life,  and  gave  her  to  Theseus,  who  after-
wards put  her  to  death.

88  Was  the  cause.] — Ver.  124.  She  tries  to  recommend  herself,  by
insinuating  that  she  had  endeavoured  to  persuade  Theseus  to  destroy  her


38  THE  EPISTLES  OF  THE  HEROINES.  [EP.  IV.

of  bringing  them  ail  up.  0,  that  in  the  midst  of  travail,  most
beauteous  of  all  things,  the  womb  had  been  rent  asunder89
that  would  prove  of  injury  to  thee.  Go  to,  then ;  respect
the  bed  of  a  parent  that  thus  deserves  it ;  the  bed,  from
which  he  flies,  and  which  by  his  deeds  he  rejects.  And  let
not  empty  names  terrify  thy  feelings,  because  I  appear  as  a
step-mother  about  to  have  intercourse  with  a  step-son.  That
old-fashioned  superstition,  doomed  to  perish  in  a  future  age,
existed,  when  Saturn  held90  his  rustic  sway.  Jupiter91  has  de-
termined that  whatever  is  pleasing,  the  same  is  pious  ;  and
the  sister  as  the  wife  to  the  brother  makes  everything  to  be
lawful.92  That  unison  of  blood  is  made  stringent  by  a  firm  tie,93
to  which  Venus  herself  has  added  her  own  bonds.  And  there  is
no  trouble  in  doing  so :  we  may  conceal  it ;  ask  this  as  a
favour  of  her ;  under  the  name  of  relative  our  faults  will  be
able  to  be  concealed.  Should  any  one  see  us  embracing, we  shall
both  be  praised ;  I  shall  be  deemed  an  affectionate  step-mother

own  children  by  him,  and  thus  to  promote  the  chance  of  Hippolytus  suc-
ceeding to  the  throne,  but  that  he  had  refused.  Among  her  children,  by
Theseus,was  Demophoon,  and,  according  to  some,  Acamantes.

89  Been  rent  asunder.] — Ver.  126.  Some  suggest  that  by  'viscera,'
Phaedra  here  means  the  child  of  which  she  was  delivered,  wishing  that  it
might  have  been  suffocated  at  its  birth ;  but  it  seems  not  improbable  that
her  prayer  is  directed  against  herself,  and  that  she  wishes  she  had  died  in
labour,  instead  of  bringing  children  in  the  world  to  his  injury.

90  When  Saturn  held.] — Ver.  132.  She  alludes  to  the  traditional  ac-
counts of  the  piety  and  virtue  which  universally  existed  in  the  Golden
Age,  when  Saturn  reigned.

91  Jupiter. ~\ — Ver.  133.  In  many  of  the  MSS.  there  are  two  lines
added  before  this  line,  which  are  generally  thought  to  be  spurious : —

*  Saturnus  periit,  perierunt  et  sua  jura.
Sub  Jove  nunc  mundus  ;  jussa  Jovis  sequere.'
Or, '  jussa  tuere  Jovis,'  or,  as  one  MS.  gives  the  last  line : —
'  Sub  Jove  mundus  adest,  jura  Jovis  sequere.'
'  Saturn  is  gone,  his  ordinances  too,  are  gone ;  the  world  is  now  under
the  sway  of  Jove  ;  obey  the  precepts  of  Jove.'

92  To  be  lawful.'] — Ver.  134.  She  cites  the  fact  of  Jupiter  having  been
united  to  his  sister  Juno,  as  a  precedent  for  universal  lawlessness  in  all
matters  connected  with  passion.

93  By  a  firm  tie.] — Ver.  1 35.  Her  meaning  is,  that  nearness  of  relation-
ship and  all  other  considerations  ought  to  prove  no  obstacle  in  matters
connected  with  love.  This  she  urges,  that  she  may  remove  all  reluctance,
on  the  part  of  Hippolytus,  to  a  daring  and  incestuous  encroachment  on
his  father's  honour.


EP.  IT.]  PH^DKA TO HIPPOLTTUS.  39

to  my  step-son.  No  husband's  door  will  have  to  be  opened
by  thee  in  the  dark,  no  keeper  to  be  deceived.94  As  one
house  has  contained  us  both,  so  one  house  will  still  contain
us  ;  caresses  openly  didst  thou  give  ;  caresses  openly  wilt
thou  give.  Safe  wilt  thou  be  with  me,  and  by  thy  cri-
minality thou  wilt  earn  approbation  ;  even  if  thou  shouldst
be  seen  in  my  bed.  Only,  banish  delay,  and  haste  to  unite  our
ties:  then  may  the  Love  which  now  rages  within  me,  prove
more  merciful  to  thee.  I  do  not  disdain  to  entreat  as  a  sup-
pliant and  with  humility.  Alas  !  where  are  my  pride  and  my
lofty  expressions  now  lying  prostrate  ?  And  long  had  I  deter-
mined to  struggle,  and  not  to  yield  to  criminality :  if  Love  could
have  admitted  of  any  resolution.  Vanquished,  I  entreat  thee,
and  to  thy  knees  do  I  extend  my  royal  arms  :  no  one  in  love
considers  what  is  becoming.  I  am  past  shame,  and  modesty,
flying,  has  deserted  its  standards.  Grant  pardon  to  me  con-
fessing it,  and  subdue  thy  obdurate  feelings.

What  avails  it  me  that  Minos,  who  owns  the  seas,95  is  my
sire  ?  And  that  the  quivering  lightnings  proceed  from  the
hand  of  my  great  grandsire?36  That  he  too  is  my  grandsire,
having  his  forehead  crowned  with  pointed  rays,  who  in  his
purple  chariot  brings  in  the  warm  day  ? Under  Love  does

94  Keeper  to  be  deceived.'] — Ver.  142.  Among  the  Greeks  and  Romans,
in  the  houses  of  opulent  persons,  a  porter  or  door-keeper  (who  was  called
'janitor,'  or  '  custos,'  by  the  Romans,  and  Ovpupbg,  by  the  Greeks),  was
always  in  attendance  to  open  the  door,  and  to  ensure  safety  against  the
inroads  of  improper  characters.  He  was  generally  a  eunuch,  or  a  slave,
aud  was  frequently  chained  to  the  spot.  To  assist  him  in  keeping  watch
at  the  entrance,  a  dog  was  generally  kept  near  it,  which  was  also  attached
by  a  chain  to  the  wall.  Sometimes  near  the  door  was  written  evXajSov
rbv  Kvva,  or  '  cave  canem,'  '  beware  of  the  dog :'  and,  as  we  find  in  the
house  of  the  tragic  Poet,  at  Pompeii,  the  figure  of  a  dog  was  wrought  in
mosaic  on  the  pavement,  or  painted  upon  the  wall.  Sometimes,  instead
of  this,  the  walls  or  pavements  were  inscribed  with  the  courteous  salutation
SALVE,  or  XAIPE,  '  hail,'  or  '  welcome.'  Immediately  adjoining  the
front  door,  there  was,  in  some  houses,  a  small  room  for  the  porter.

95  Who  owns  the  seas.~] — Ver.  157.  The  power  of  Minos,  king  of
Crete,  over  the  neighbouring  seas,  especially  when  he  had  conquered  the
Athenians,  was  almost  supreme.

96  My  great  grandsire.'] — Ver.  158.  Jupiter  was  the  grandfather  of
Phaedra  by  the  father's  side,  he  being  the  father  of  Minos.  But  by  the
mother's  side  he  was  her  great-grandfather ;  she  being  the  daughter  of
Pasiphae,  who  was  the  daughter  of  the  Sun,  and  the  grand-daughter  of
Jupiter.


40  THE EPISTLES OE THE HEEOItfES.  [EP.  IT.

noble  descent  lie  prostrate;  have  compassion  on  my  ancestors;
and  if  thou  dost  not  wish  to  spare  me,  spare  my  house.
Crete,  the  island  of  Jove,  is  my  land  in  dower  ;97  let  the
whole  of  that  court  obey  my  own  Hippolytus.  Conquer  thy
stubborn  feelings.  My  mother  could  move  even  a  bull ;
wilt  thou  thyself  be  more  cruel  than  a  savage  bull  ?98

Spare  me,  I  entreat,  by  Venus,  who  is  all-powerful  with
me  ;  then  mayst  thou  never  love  one  who  may  despise  thee.
Then  may  the  active  Goddess  attend  thee  in  the  remote
forests,  and  may  the  lofty  woods  afford  thee  the  wild  beasts  for
slaughter.  Then  may  the  Satyrs  protect  thee,  and  the  Pans,
the  mountain  Deities  ;  and  may  the  wild  boar  fall  pierced  by
the  hostile  spears.  Then  may  the  Nymphs  (although  thou
art  said  to  hate  the  fair),  grant  thee  the  stream  to  allay  thy
parching  thirst.  Tears  as  well  do  I  add  to  these  entreaties  ;
the  words  of  one  entreating  thou  dost  peruse,  but  imagine"
that  thou  dost  see  her  tears  as  vjell.

97  My  land  in  dower. ,] — Ver.  163.  If  we  take  these  words  in  their  lite-
ral sense,  we  must  suppose  that  the  Isle  of  Crete  formed  the  dowry  of
Phaedra,  which  we  do  not  learn  from  any  of  the  ancient  writers  to  have  been
the  fact ;  nor,  indeed,  could  it  have  been,  since  Deucalion  succeeded  Minos,
and  his  brother  Catreus  him,  who  was  followed  by  Idomeneus,  the  son  of
Deucalion.  We  must  then  come  to  the  conclusion,  either  that  the  Poet
in  this  instance  does  not  pay  due  attention  to  the  historical  facts  of  ancient
times,  or  else  that  he  intentionally  represents  Phaedra  as  ready,  in  her  un-
principled attempts  to  gain  Hippolytus,  to  make  any  promises,  and,  in  fact,
to  say  anything  that  may  possibly  conduce  to  the  promotion  of  her  infa-
mous design.

98  A  savage  bull.'} — Ver.  166.  Burmann  is  of  opinion  that  this  and  the
three  preceding  lines  are  not  genuine,  and  that  they  have  been  inserted  by
some  writer  of  a  later  age  than  that  of  Ovid.

99  But  imagine.] — Ver.  176.  This  last  appeal  is  ingeniously  added,  and
carries  in  it  more  strength  than  all  her  former  arguments  together  :  for
nothing  affects  the  mind  more  forcibly  than  what  is  suggested  by  the
fancy.  It  was  in  vain,  however,  that  Phaedra  used  so  many  artifices  to
corrupt  the  chastity  of  Hippolytus ;  as  he  resolutely  withstood  all  her  at-
tempts, and  continued  inflexibly  virtuous.  Her  love  was  at  length  changed
into  hatred,  and,  burning  with  a  desire  for  revenge,  she  accused  him  to
Theseus  of  having  offered  violence  to  her  person.  On  this,  finding  that
his  father  was  inclined  to  believe  her  assertions,  he  took  flight,  and  was
proceeding  to  the  court  of  his  grandfather  Pittheus,  when  the  horses  of
his  chariot  took  fright  at  the  appearance  of  certain  sea-monsters  sent  by
Neptune,  and  his  chariot  was  dashed  to  pieces,  and  himself  slain.  He  was
afterwards,  at  the  entreaty  of  Diana,  restored  to  life  by  iEsculapius,  and
was  said  to  have  been  transferred,  under  the  name  of  Virbius,  to  the


EP.  V.]  (EXONE TO PAEIS.  41


EPISTLE  V.

CENONE  TO  PARIS.

When  Hecuba,  the  daughter  of  Cisseus  and  the  wife  of  Priam,  was  preg-
nant with  Paris,  she  dreamed  that  she  was  delivered  of  a  burning  torch,
which  set  all  Troy  in  flames.  Terrified  at  the  presage,  Priam  applied
to  the  oracle ;  and  being  told  that  he  would  have  a  son  who  would
prove  the  cause  of  his  country's  ruin,  he  ordered  that  the  child,  as  soon
as  born,  should  be  put  to  death.  On  this,  Hecuba,  moved  by  maternal
affection,  delivered  him  to  the  royal  shepherds,  with  orders  to  bring
him  up  secretly.  When  he  grew  up,  he  became  enamoured  of  the
Nymph  OEnoue,  and,  according  to  some  accounts,  he  married  her.  The
Deities  having  been  invited  to  the  marriage  of  Peleus  and  Thetis,  the
Goddess  Discord  alone  was  overlooked.  Enraged  atthis  neglect,  she  waited
for  an  opportunity  of  revenge.  With  this  object,  while  Jupiter,  Juno,
Pallas,  and  Yenus  were  sitting  together,  she  threw  an  apple  among  them,
on  which  were  written  these  words,  '  Let  this  be  given  to  the  fairest/
Upon  this,  a  dispute  arose  as  to  which  of  the  three  Goddesses  was  en-
titled to  the  prize.  Jupiter,  unwilling  to  decide  in  a  matter  of  such
delicacy,  referred  them  to  the  arbitration  of  Paris.  He,  having  been
bred  up  among  Priam's  shepherds,  was  then  tending  his  flocks  upon
mount  Ida.  Thither  the  Goddesses  repaired,  and  each  endeavoured  to
influence  his  decision  by  large  offers.  Juno  promised  him  a  kingdom  ;
Pallas,  wisdom  and  prudence ;  and  Venus,  the  most  beautiful  woman
in  the  world.  On  this,  Paris  gave  his  judgment  in  favour  of  Venus.
Afterwards,  having  been  acknowledged  by  Priam,  and  having  been
sent  to  Menelaiis,  king  of  Sparta,  he  was  received  by  him  in  a  most
hospitable  manner.  Being  captivated  by  the  beauty  of  Helen,  the  wife
of  Menelaiis,  and  having  gained  her  by  his  solicitations,  he  carried  her
off,  while  Menelaiis  was  absent  in  Crete.  This  circumstance  gave  rise
to  the  Trojan  war.  In  the  present  Epistle,  CEnone  reproaches  Paris  with
his  perfidy,  and  entreats  him  to  restore  Helen  to  the  Greeks.

A  Ny^iph1  sends  to  her  Paris  (although  to  be  mine  thou
dost  refuse)  her  words,  from  the  heights  of  Ida,  to  be  read  by
him.

Dost  thou  read  this  through  ?  or  does  thy  new  wife  hinder
thee  1 Read  it  through. This  letter  is  not  written  by  the  hand

Arician  grove  near  Rome.  His  story  is  related  at  length  in  the  Fifteenth
Book  of  the  Metamorphoses.

1  A  Nymph.'] — Ver.  1. This  and  the  next  line  are  wanting  in  most
of  the  MSS. ;  and  being  inferior  to  the  general  style  of  Ovid's  writing,
they  are  perhaps  justly  considered  spurious. The  lines  are —
'  Nympha  suo  Paridi  (quamvis  meus  esse  recuses)
Mittit  ab  Iuseis  verba  legenda  jugis.'


42  THE EPISTLES OE THE HETtOINES.  [EP.  V.

of  him  of  Mycenae.2  I,  (Enone,3  a  Nymph  of  the  streams,
well  known  in  the  Phrygian  groves,  injured,  complain  of  thee,
who  art  mine,  if  thou  thyself  dost  permit  it.  What  Deity  has
opposed  his  authority  to  my  wishes  ?  What  crime  is  it  that
precludes  me  from  remaining  thine?  Whatever  you  suffer
deservedly,  should  be  borne  with  patience :  the  penalty  that
comes  upon  us  undeservedly,  comes  as  a  ground  for  complaint.
Not  yet  so  great  wast  thou,  when  I,  a  Nymph,  sprung  from  a
great  river,  was  content  with  thee  for  a  husband.  Thou,
who  art  now  a  son  of  Priam  (let  respect  be  paid  to  truth),
wast  then  but  a  slave  :4  I,  a  Nymph,  condescended  to  wed  a
slave.  Many  a  time,  shaded  by  the  trees  have  we  rested  among
the  flocks  :  and  the  grass  mixed  with  the  leaves  has  afforded  us
a  couch.  Often,  in  our  lowly  cottage,  as  we  lay  upon  the  straw
and  the  piled  hay,  has  the  white  hoar  frost  been  kept  off  from  us.
Who  pointed  out  to  thee  the  thickets  suited  for  the  chase,
and  beneath  what  rock  the  wild  beast  concealed  her  whelps  ?
Oft,  as  thy  companion,  have  I  spread  the  nets  variegated  with
the  meshes  ;5  oft  have  I  cheered  the  speeding  hounds  over  the
long  mountain  ranges.  The  beech  trees,  cut  by  thee,  still
preserve  my  name  :6  and  marked  by  thy  pruning  knife, I,

2  Him  of  My  cents.] — Ver.  2.  That  is,  'by  the  hand  of  your  injured
enemy  from  Mycenae,'  in  Peloponnesus,  which  was  the  country  of  Mene-
laiis  and  Agamemnon.

3  (Enone.] — Ver.  3.  She  was  the  daughter  of  the  river  Cebren,  or
Cebrenus,  according  to  Apollodorus,  or,  as  other  writers  say,  of  the  river
Xanthus  ;  both  of  which  were  streams  of  the  Troad.  Being  a  Naiad,  she  is
here  called  *  Pegasis :'  those  Nymphs  being  styled  by  the  Greeks  '  Pega-
sides,'  or  '  fountain  Nymphs.'  The  Muses  had  the  same  name  from  their
favourite  retreat  near  the  fountain  of  Helicon.  It  is  thought  by  some,
that  (Enone  is  especially  styled  '  Pegasis,'  to  distinguish  her  from  another
person  of  that  name,  from  whom  the  island  of  iEgina  received  the  name
of  (Enone.  Micyllus,  however,  would  read  here  instead  of  Pegasis,  '  Pe-
dasis,'  signifying  that  she  was  an  inhabitant  of  Pedasus,  a  town  which  was
situate  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Ida.

4  Wast  but  a  slave.~\ — Ver.  12.  That  is,  before  the  secret  of  his  noble
birth  was  discovered.

5  Variegated  with  the  meshes. .] — Ver.  19.  'MacuhV  is  here  said,  by
many  of  the  Commentators,  to  signify  '  knots '  in  the  formation  of  the
net :  but  it  is  much  probable  that  it  means  the  meshes  themselves.

6  Preserve  my  name.'] — Ver.  21.  Paris  and  (Enone  are  here  repre-
sented as  having  led  a  pastoral  life  together,  and  as  having  participated  to-
gether in  the  diversions  and  pleasures  of  the  country.  No  state  of  life  could
have  afforded  her  finer  or  more  affecting  images  of  the  past.  Here  we
meet  with  undisguised  nature,  and  passion  without  art. (Enone  reminds


EP.  V.]  (EUTOKE TO PARIS.  43

.XEnone,  am  read  of  as  thine  ;  and  as  the  trunks  increase,  so
does  my  name  grow  on  ;  grow  on,  then,  and  rise  upward  in  my
praise.  There  is  a  poplar7  (I  remember  it)  planted  on  the
banks  of  the  river,  on  which  there  is  an  inscription  carved,8  a
memorial  of  ourselves.  Flourish,  thou  poplar,  I  pray,  which,
planted  on  the  margin  of  the  banks,  hast  these  lines  inscribed
on  thy  rough  bark :  "  When  Paris  shall  be  able  to  exist,  his
GEnone  deserted,  the  waters  of  Xanthus  turning  back  shall
flow  towards  their  source."9  ^

Xanthus,  hasten  back  ;  ye  streams,  return  to  your  source  :
Paris  dares  to  desert  his  GEnone;  That  day  pronounced  the
doom  of  wretched  me ;  on  that  day  commenced  the  direful
storm  of  his  estranged  affection,  on  which,  Venus  and  Juno,
and  the  naked  Minerva,  (more  becoming10  in  her  armour  when
assumed)  came  for  thy  arbitration.  My  smitten  bosom  throb-
bed, and,  as  thou  didst  tell  me,  a  cold  shudder  ran  through  my
firm  bones. I  consulted  (for,  indeed,  in  no  moderate  degree

Paris  of  those  once  pleasing  scenes  when  they  were  sharers  in  the  same
delights  :  when  he  indulged  his  poetic  vein  in  her  praise,  and  was  in  the
habit  of  carving  her  name  on  the  bark  of  the  trees.  If  a  remembrance
of  these  soft  moments  cannot  recall  his  wandering  affection,  she  must  des-
pair of  success  in  any  other  way.

7  There  is  a  poplar.] — Ver.  25.  The  ancients  were  much  in  the  habit
of  planting  poplars  on  the  banks  of  rivers ;  and  Virgil,  in  his  Seventh
Eclogue,  1.  66,  remarks  that  that  tree  delights  in  a  moist  situation.
Poplars  were  very  numerous  in  the  region  round  Troy,  which  was  ren-
dered swampy  by  the  many  rills  that  ran  from  Mount  Ida.

8  An  inscription  carved.] — Ver.  26.  It  was,  and  certainly  is  still,  the
custom  of  the  youths  to  cut  the  names  of  their  sweethearts  on  the  bark
of  the  trees.  Though  trivial  in  itself,  there  is  something  affecting  in  her
thus  reminding  him  of  it,  since  it  cannot  fail  to  bring  more  vividly  to  his
recollection  the  delightful  moments  which  they  had  once  spent  together.
Indeed,  the  whole  of  this  Epistle  is  exceedingly  simple  and  pathetic ;  and
the  attentive  reader  must  of  necessity  feel  himself  deeply  interested  for  the
injured  (Enone.

9  Flow  toiyards  their  source.] — Ver,  30.  The  words  civw  TroTajiwv,  signi-
fying '  upwards  to  the  river's  source,'  were  used  by  the  Greeks  and  Romans
as  a  proverb,  signifying  an  impossibility.  They  form  the  commencement  of
an  Iambic  line  in  the  '  Medea '  of  Euripides,  "Avco  7rora/j,u>v  xw9°^ai
irayai,  '  the  streams  flow  upwards  towards  their  sources.'  Cicero  uses
this  proverb  in  one  of  his  Epistles  to  Atticus.  Of  course  it  applies  to
rivers  flowing  down  a  declivity,  and  having  no  tides.

10  More  becoming.] — Ver.  35.  This  is  apparently  a  hint  at  the  want
of  modesty  exhibited  on  this  occasion  by  the  Goddess  of  wisdom  and
of  arms.


44  THE EPISTLES OF THE HEUOIKES.  [EP.  y.

was  I  alarmed)  both  old  women  and  aged  men  ;  it  was  agreed
that  there  was  mischief  hatching.

Fir-trees  were  hewn  down,  and  beams  were  cut,  and  the
fleet  being  built,  the  azure  waves  received  the  pitched  ships.11
When  departing,  thou  didst  weep ;  at  least,  forbear  to  deny  that ;
this  present  passion  is  more  deserving  of  shame  than  thy  for-
mer one.  Thou  both  didst  weep,  and  didst  see  my  eyes  as  I
wept :  each  of  us  in  sorrow  mingled  our  tears.  Not  so  firmly
is  the  elm  clasped  by  the  embracing  vines,12  as  thy  arms  were
entwined  around  my  neck.  How  often,  alas  !  did  thy  attend-
ants smile,13  when  thou  didst  complain  of  being  detained  by
the  wind  !  for  it  was  favourable.  How  often  didst  thou  give
me  the  repeated  kiss  when  parting  !  With  what  difficulty  was
thy  tongue  able  to  utter  '  Farewell !'  A  propitious  breeze
arouses  the  canvass  as  it  hangs  from  the  erect  mast ;  and
ploughed  up  by  the  oars,  the  water  is  white.  Hapless,  with
my  eyes,  did  I  pursue  the  departing  sails,  so  long  as  I  could  ;
and  the  sand  was  moistened  with  my  tears.  I  entreated,  too,
the  azure  Nereids  that  thou  mightst  speedily  return  ;  that,  to
my  misfortune,  forsooth,  thou  mightst  speedily  return.  And
hast  thou  then,14  0  thou,  who  shouldst  have  returned  at  my  en-
treaties, returned  for  another  ?  Ah  me  !  for  a  remorseless  rival
have  I  used  my  endearments !

A  rock,  formed  by  nature,  looks  down  on  the  boundless
deep  ;  it  was  a  mountain  once  ;  it  opposes  itself  to  the  waves
of  the  ocean.  While  I  awaited  thee,  at  the  summit  of  the  prow
there  shone,  conspicuous  to  me,  a  purple  dress  :15  I  was  struck

11  The  pitched  ships.'] — Ver.  42.  It  is  supposed  that  the  ships  of  the
ancients  were  coated  with  a  composition  of  wax  and  pitch.  The  ships  of
Paris,  like  those  in  which  iEneas  afterwards  sailed,  were  made  from
trees  which  were  cut  down  on  Mount  Ida.

12  The  embracing  vines.'] — Ver.  47.  It  has  been  already  observed,  in
the  Notes  to  the  fourteenth  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses,  L  663,  that  the
elm  was  especially  used  by  the  ancients  for  the  purpose  of  forming  a  sup-
port for  the  vine.

13  Thy  attendants  smile.} — Ver.  50.  At  the  idleness  of  your  excuses  ;
as  they  know  that  you  were  detained  by  love,  and  not  by  the  winds  being
unfavourable.

14  And  hast  thou  then.] — Ver.  59.  Heinsius,  in  his  Commentary  on
the  Tristia,  Book  i.  El.  i.  1.  86,  says  that  Ovid  never  makes  short  the  last
syllable  of  '  ergo.' Here  is  an  illustration  to  the  contrary —

'  Votis  ergo  meis  alii  rediture  redisti  ?'

15  A  purple  dress] — Ver.  65. The  purple  would  show  the  distin-


EP.  Y.]  (EJ^OKE TO PAEIS.  45

with  alarm  :  that  dress  was  not  thine.  It  came  nearer  ;  and,
urged  by  a  favouring  breeze,  the  bark  reached  the  shore  ;  with
palpitating  heart  I  saw  the  features  of  a  female.  And  that
was  not  enough  ;  and  why,  in  my  madness,  did  I  hesitate  ? — thy
shameless  mistress  was  clinging  to  thy  bosom.  Then,  indeed,
did  I  rend  my  garments  and  beat  my  breast,  and  with  my
sharp  nails  I  tore  my  moistened  cheeks  ;  I  filled,  too,  the  sacred
Ida  with  my  shrieks  of  despair ;  thence  did  I  convey  those
tears16  to  my  rocky  cave.  So  may  Helen  grieve,  and  so,  de-
serted by  her  spouse,  may  she  mourn  ;  and  may  she  herself
endure  that  which  she  was  the  first  to  inflict  on  me.

Now  are  women  pleasing  to  thee,17  who  accompany  thee
over  the  open  sea,  and  desert  their  lawful  ties.  But  when
thou  wast  a  poor  man,  and,  as  a  shepherd,  wast  driving  the
flocks,  no  one  but  (Enone  was  the  wife  of  the  poor  man.  I
admire  not  thy  wealth,  nor  does  thy  palace  attract  me  ;  nor
that  I  should  be  called  one  daughter-in-law  of  Priam  out  of
so  many.  And  yet,  not  that  Priamls  should  refuse  to  be  the
father-in-law  of  a  Nymph,  or  that  I  should  be  a  daughter-in-
law  to  be  denied  by  Hecuba.  I  both  am  worthy,  and  I  wish
to  become  the  consort  of  a  powerful  man  ;  I  have  hands  which

guished  rank  of  the  person  wearing  it,  it  being  the  most  expensive  of  all
dyes.

16  Convey  those  tears."] — Ver.  74.  Ovid  is  wonderfully  skilful  in
describing  the  softer  passions  :  he  always  paints  according  to  life  and
nature.  In  the  first  transports  of  grief,  we  open  ourselves  to  all  whom
we  meet,  and  fondly  imagine  that  they  must  be  ready  to  take  part  in  our
sorrows.  Afterwards,  on  finding  little  relief,  we  retire  to  woods  and
deserts,  and  feel  a  melancholy  pleasure  in  gloom  and  solitude.

17  Pleasing  to  thee.~\ — Ver.  77.  The  meaning  of  '  nunc  tibi  conveniunt'
is  either  '  are  attending  thee,'  or  '  are  pleasing  to  thee.'  The  latter  seems
to  be  the  real  meaning  of  the  passage.  The  plural  is  used  contemptu-
ously, as  much  as  to  say  that  Helen  is  not  singular  for  either  her  beauty
or  her  affection,  and  that  a  thousand  other  women  are  ready  to  do  the
same  as  she  has  done.  She  means  also  to  reproach  Paris  for  his  levity
and  his  fondness  for  vain  titles  and  a  pretended  affection  that  assumes  to
be  ready  to  follow  him  through  all  dangers.

18  Not  that  Priam.'] — Ver.  83.  The  use  of  the  particle  '  ut '  is  very
emphatic,  and  cannot  well  be  estimated  by  the  English  reader  without  a
paraphrase.  The  meaning  is,  '  Though  I  look  with  indifference  on  your
rank  and  title,  there  is  no  reason  that  Priam  should  refuse  me  for  his
daughter-in-law ;  for  I  am  one  of  the  Nymphs.'  This  she  adds,  that  he
may  not  impute  her  contempt  of  dignities  and  splendour  to  rustic  igno-
rance.


46  THE EPISTLES OF THE HEROINES.  [EP. T«

a  sceptre  might  grace  ;  and  despise  me  not,  because,  together
with  thee,  I  used  to  lie  on  the  leaves  of  the  beech  ;  I  am
more  suited  to  a  purple  couch.19  In  fine,  my  affection  is
safe  to  thee  :  no  wars  are  in  preparation,  nor  do  the  waves
bring  the  avenging  ships.

The  fugitive  daughter  of  Tyndarus  is  demanded  back  by
hostile  arms  ;  with  this  for  a  dowry  does  she  haughtily  ascend
thy  couch.  Whether  she  ought  to  be  restored  to  the  Greeks,
ask  either  thy  brother  Hector,  or  Polydamas,20  together  with
De'iphobus.21  Ask  what  sage  Antenor,22  and  what  Priam  him-
self thinks  ;  men, whose long life has proved  an  instruc-

19  A  purple  couch.'] — Ver.  88.  The  '  tori/  or  beds  of  the  ancients,
were  in  early  times  made  of  straw,  hay,  leaves,  or  seaweed.  They  were
afterwards  stuffed  with  wool  and  feathers,  and  sometimes  with  swans'  down,
so  as  to  be  as  much  raised,  and  as  soft  as  possible.  They  were  sometimes
covered  with  hides,  but  more  commonly  with  sheets  and  blankets,  which
were  called  '  pallia,'  or  '  toralia.'  The  '  torus,'  which  answers  to  our  bed  or
mattress  in  its  position,  rested  upon  girths  or  strings,  which  connected  the
two  horizontal  side-posts  of  the  bed.  Over  the  bed  were  spread  coverlets,
which,  among  the  wealthy,  were  of  purple  colour  (as  mentioned  in  the
present  instance),  and  were  adorned  with  interwoven  and  embroidered
figures.  Martial,  B.  ii.  Ep.  16,  ridicules  the  vanity  of  Zoi'lus,  who  pre-
tended to  be  ill,  that  he  might  show  his  visitors  the  '  coccina  stragula,'  or
'  purple  coverlet,'  on  his  bed,  which  he  had  lately  received  from  Alexan-
dria. The  bedsteads  of  the  ancients,  for  sleeping  on,  were  higher  than
the  '  lecti  tricliniares,'  or  couches  which  were  used  for  reclining  on  at  meals,
and  were  ascended  by  means  of  a  '  scamnum,'  or  '■  footstool.'  They  were
made  of  various  metals  or  of  costly  wood,  and  were  inlaid  with  tortoise-
shell  and  ivory,  while  the  feet  were  sometimes  of  ivory,  and  gold  or  silver.
Besides  the  '  torus,'  '  bed '  or  '  mattress,'  there  was  the  '  culcita,'  which
answered  the  same  purpose  as  our  bolster.

20  Polydamas/] — Ver.  94.  Polydamas  was  a  Trojan  who  bore  a  con-
siderable rank  in  the  court  of  Priam.

21  With  De'iphobus.] — Ver.  94.  De'iphobus  was  one  of  the  sons  of
Priam,  and  was  remarkable  for  his  strength.  Still  he  was  unequal  to  Paris
in  a  contest  that  took  place  between  them,  while  the  latter  was  the  ser-
vant of  one  of  the  royal  shepherds,  and  was  not  known  to  be  the  son  of
Priam.  Upon  the  death  of  his  brother  Paris,  he  married  Helen,  who
betrayed  him  and  delivered  him  to  the  Greeks.

22  Sage  Antenor.] — Ver.  95.  Antenor  was  a  noble  of  the  court  of
Priam,  to  whom  he  was  related,  and  who,  together  with  Priam,  disap-
proved of  the  conduct  of  Paris,  and  advised  that  Helen  should  be  restored
to  her  injured  husband,  and  that  an  end  should  be  thereby  put  to  the  war.
After  the  fall  of  Troy  he  was  suffered  by  the  Greeks  to  depart  with  a
colony  of  his  countrymen,  whom  he  conducted  into  Italy,  and  settled
there.


EP.  Y.]  (ENOKE TO PAEIS.  47

tion  to  them.  'Tis  a  scandalous  beginning,  to  prefer  a  woman
carried  off,  to  thy  country  ;  thy  cause  is  a  disgraceful  one  ;
her  husband  is  waging  a  righteous  war.  And  do  not,  if  thou
art  wise,  promise  thyself  that  this  Laconian  woman23  will  prove
faithful,  who  has  so  readily  betaken  herself  into  thy  embraces.
As  the  younger  son  of  Atreus  is  now  exclaiming  at  the  violation
o/'the  ties  of  his  dishonoured  bed,  and,  injured  by  the  intrigues
of  a  foreigner,  is  grieving,  so  wilt  thou  too  be  exclaiming.

Chastity,  once  sullied,  can  by  no  skill  be  recovered  ;  for  ever
it  is  lost.  She  now  burns  with  love  for  thee  ;  thus,  too,  did
she  love  Menelaiis :  easy  of  belief,  he  is  now  lying  in  a  de-
serted bed.  Happy  Andromache,24  married  happily  to  a  con-
stant husband !  After  the  example  of  thy  brother,  I  should
have  been  kept  as  thy  wife.  Thou art  more  fickle  than  the
leaves,  at  the  time  when,  made  dry  by  the  inconstant  winds,
"without  the  weight  of  moisture,  they  are  flying  about ;  and
there  is  less  firmness  in  thee  than  in  the  tops  of  the  wheat,
which,  parched  by  the  constant  sunshine,  stand  stiff  in  their
lightness.

This  (for  I  recollect  it)  did  thy  sister  once  prophesy.25  Thus
did  she  foretell  to  me  with  her  dishevelled  locks.  "What
art  thou  doing,  (Enone  1  Why  art  thou  committing  the  seed  to
the  sand  ?  Thou  art  ploughing  the  sea-shore  with  oxen  to  no
purpose. The  Grecian  heifer26  is  coming,  to  ruin  thee,  and  thy

23  Laconian  woman.'] — Ver.  99.  Helen  is  called  '  Lacsena,'  because  her
husband  Menelaiis  reigned  over  Laconia ;  l  Lacaena  '  being  the  feminine
of  Lacon,  '  an  inhabitant'  or  '  a  native  of  Laconia.'

24  Andromache.'] — Ver.  107.  Andromache  was  the  daughter  of  Eetion,
and  the  wife  of  Hector.  (Enone  here  refers  to  Hector  and  Andromache,  as
an  illustration  of  true  conjugal  happiness.  She  considers  that  her  own
affection  has  merited  an  equal  return,  and  therefore  mentions  Hector  as  an
example  that  deserves  imitation.

25  Sister  once  prophesy.] — Ver.  1 13.  She  alludes  to  Cassandra,  the  sister
of  Paris  and  Hector,  whom  Apollo  loved  ;  and,  upon  whom,  when  she  had
promised  to  yield  to  his  desires,  he  conferred  the  gift  of  prophecy.  On  find-
ing himself  afterwards  deluded,  being  unable  to  recall  that  which  he  had
once  granted,  he  rendered  the  gift  ineffectual,  by  adding  this  to  it,  that  no
credit  should  ever  be  given  to  any  of  her  prophecies.  (Enone  now  reflects
upon  that  fatality,  by  means  of  which  she  was  so  far  blinded,  as  not  to
hearken  to  the  predictions  of  Cassandra,  which  now,  alas !  turn  out  to
have  been  too  well  founded.

26  The  Grecian  heifer.] — Ver.  1 18.  She  probably  calls  Helen  by  this
name  on  account  of  her  unchaste  conduct.  Some  writers,  however,  sup-
pose that  the  epithet  is  merely  used  in  the  prophecy  for,  the  purpose  of


48  THE EPISTLES OF THE HEROINES.  [EP.  V.

country,  and  thy  home ;  0,  avert  it.  The  Grecian  heifer  is
coming.  While  it  may  be  done,  ye  Gods,  overwhelm  the  foul
bark  in  the  deep :  alas  !  how  is  it  freighted  with  Phrygian
blood.''  Thus  she  said :  the  female  servants  bore  her  off27
while  still  inspired  ;  but  my  yellow  locks  stood  on  end.  Alas  !
too  true  a  prophet  hast  thou  proved  for  wretched  me  !  Lo
that  heifer  is  in  possession  of  my  pastures  !  Although  she  is
beauteous  in  person,  yet  she  is  an  adulteress  beyond  a  doubt
captivated  by  her  guest,  she  has  deserted  her  country's  Gods.
Theseus,  (unless  I  am  mistaken28  in  the  name)  one  Theseus,  I
know  not  who,  before  this,  carried  her  off  from  her  country.
Let  her,  forsooth,  be  supposed  to  have  been  restored  a  vir-
gin, by  a  youth,29  and  that  an  amorous  one.30

Do  you  ask  whence  I  learned  this  so  accurately  ? I  am  in

rendering  her  meaning  the  more  obscure,  without  reference  to  the  cha-
racter of  Helen.

27  Bore  her  off.] — Ver.  121.  Cassandra  was  carried  off  before  she  had
finished  her  prediction,  as  some  say,  by  command  of  her  father  Priam
but  more  probably  by  her  own  attendants,  lest  her  life  should  be  endan-
gered by  the  violence  of  her  agitation.  Lycophron  indeed  says,  that
Priam  gave  a  general  order  to  the  attendants  of  Cassandra  to  shut  her  up
in  her  chamber,  whenever  she  began  to  utter  her  prophecies,  as  he  sup-
posed her  to  be  deranged.

28  Unless  I  am  mistaken  ] — Ver.  127.  The  Poet  does  not  wish  to  re-
present a  damsel  whom  he  has  depicted  as  chaste  and  innocent,  as
being  too-well  skilled  in  the  history  of  past  events,  and  especially  in  that
of  so  worthless  a  character  as  Helen.  Although,  however,  she  speaks  with
such  diffidence,  she  proves  to  be  right  as  to  the  fact ;  for  we  are  told  by
Hyginus  and  Apollodorus,  that  Helen  was  carried  off,  when  very  young,
by  Theseus,who  afterwards  restored  her,  intact,  to  her  brothers  Castor  and
Pollux.

29  By  a  youth.] — Ver.  129.  Varro  tells  us  that  the  age  of  '  juventus,'  or
'  youthfulness,'  lasted  up  to  the  end  of  the  forty-fifth  year.  If  such  is  the
fact,  Ovid  may  have  some  little  excuse  for  here  calling  Theseus  '  juvenis,'
as  he  was  not  far  off  his  fiftieth  year  when  he  carried  Helen  off.

30  An  amorous  one. ] — Ver.  129.  (Enone  hopes,  by  throwing  discredit
on  her  rival  by  her  inuendos,  to  recommend  herself  in  the  eyes  of  Paris.
The  more  faithless  Helen  has  proved  throughout  her  past  life,  the  less
confidence  can  now  be  placed  in  her,  and  the  more  ought  she  herself  to
be  valued,  who  has  proved  constant.  She  insinuates  that  this  is  not
the  first  time  that  she  has  suffered  herself  to  be  seduced  ;  and  that  one
who  has  since  so  misconducted  herself,  must  have  been  a  consenting  party.
She  then  surmises,  that,  whatever  may  have  been  asserted  to  the  contrary,
it  is  very  unlikely  that  one,  of  the  disposition  of  Theseus,  would  restore
untouched  an  object  so  attractive  as  Helen.


EP.  V.]  (ETTOKE TO PAEIS.  49

love.31  Though  thou  shouldst  call  it  violence,  and  disguise
her  faultiness  by  its  name,  she,  who  has  been  so  often  car-,
ried  off,  has  allowed  herself  to  be  carried  off.  But  (Enone
continues  faithful  to  a  deceiving  spouse ;  and,  still,  thou  thy-
self mightst  have  been  deceived,  after  thy  own  precedent.
The  nimble  Satyrs,33  (I  concealed  myself  in  the  woods33)  a
wanton  crew,  sought  me  with  hasty  feet ;  Faunus,  too,  having
his  horned  head  wreathed  with  sharp  pine-leaves,  where  Ida
swells  with  its  boundless  ridges.  The  builder  of  Troy,  so
famed  for  his  lyre,  loved  me ;  he  gathered  the  spoil  of  my
virginity.  And  yet,  that  against  my  struggling  ;  still,  with  my
nails  I  tore  his  locks,  and  his  face  was  made  rough  with  my
fingers.  I  asked  for  neither  gems  nor  gold  as  the  price  of
my  ravishment :  presents  disgracefully  purchase  the  body
that  is  free.34

He  himself,  deeming  me  worthy,  entrusted  me  with  the
healing  art,  and  admitted  my  hands  to  his  own  functions.
Whatever  herb  is  powerful  for  healing,  and  whatever  root  use-
ful for  a  cure  grows  in  all  the  world,  it  is  my  own.  Unhappy
me  !  that  love  can  be  healed  by  no  herbs  !  Skilled  in  my  art,
by  my  own  skill  am  I  deserted.  The  inventor  of  the  medical  art
is  said  himself  to  have  fed  the  cows  of  Pherae,35  and  by  a  passion

31  I  am  in  love.] — Ver.  130.  Her  meaning  is,  that  Love  is  very  quick-
sighted  at  discerning  a  change  in  the  person  beloved,  and  is  ever  ready  to
cause  numerous  enquiries  relative  to  such  persons  as  may  probably  stand
in  its  way.

32  The  nimble  Satyrs."] — Ver.  135.  Directly  she  mentions  the  Satyrs,
remembering  that  the  fact  of  being  in  the  company  of  individuals  of  such
doubtful  reputation  might  possibly  not  appear  to  redound  to  her  credit,  she
is  careful  to  add,  that  she  hid  herself  in  the  woods  at  the  time  when  she
met  them.

33  In  the  woods.] — Ver.  135.  To  the  perfidy  and  inconstancy  of  Helen,
she  opposes  her  own  inviolate  cbastity.  Pan  and  the  Satyrs  have  pursued
her  in  vain.  Even  Apollo  was  unable  to  obtain  her  without  a  severe  strug-
gle ;  for  he  bore  the  marks  of  her  resentment.  He  is  called  '  munitor
Trojae,'  because,  with  Neptune,  he  was  said  to  have  raised  the  walls  of
Troy,  for  a  reward  promised  to  them  by  king  Laomedon.

34  Body  that  is  free.] — Ver.  144.  She  says  that  it  is  disgraceful  for  a
free-born  woman  to  be  unchaste,  implying,  that  she  leaves  it  to  slaves  (as
only  becoming  their  degraded  position)  to  sell  their  charms  for  lucre.  The
Latin  word  '  meretrix '  is  derived  from  '  mereo,'  '  to  earn  money  :'  i.  e.
by  prostitution.

35  Cows  of  Pherce.] — Ver.  151.  The  poets  in  general  say  that  Apollo
did  not  betake  himself  to  feeding  the  herds  of  Admetus,  the  king  of

E


50  THE EPISTLES OE  THE HEEOItfES.  [EP.  VI.

for  me  was  he  wounded.  Thou  art  able  to  give  me  an  aid,
which  neither  the  earth,  so  fruitful  in  producing  plants,  can
give,  nor  yet  the  Divinity.  This  thou  both  canst  do,  and  I  de-
serve it ;  have  pity  on  the  damsel  who  thus  merits  it.

I  am  not,  together  with  the  Greeks,  wielding  blood-stained
arms.  But  I  am  thine,  and  with  thee  have  I  been  from  my
early  years  :  and  for  the  time  that  remains,  do  I  pray  to  be
thine.


EPISTLE  VI.
HYPSIPYLE  TO  JASON.

Pelias,  the  son  of  Neptune,  was  warned  by  an  oracle  that  his  death
would  be  near  at  hand,  when  one  barefooted  should  approach  him
while  sacrificing.  "While  engaged  in  the  celebration  of  certain  annual
rites,  Jason,  the  son  of  iEson,  having  lost  his  shoe  in  the  mud  of  the
river  Anaurus,  met  him,  while  hastening  to  be  present  at  the  sacrifice.
Pelias,  remembering  the  oracle,  endeavoured  to  persuade  Jason  to  un-
dertake an  expedition  to  Colchis,  to  obtain  the  Golden  Fleece,  hoping
that  he  would  never  return,  inasmuch  as  he  had  heard  that  it  was  a
work  beyond  human  power  to  accomplish.  Jason,  being  possessed
of  great  courage,  readily  engaged  in  the  attempt ;  and  having  asso-
ciated with  himself,  a  number  of  gallant  adventurers,  he  set  sail  in  the
ship  Argo,  from  Thessaly,  and  soon  after  arrived  in  the  Isle  of  Lemnos.
Not  long  before  this  period,  the  women  of  Lemnos  had  murdered,  in
one  night,  all  the  men  on  the  island,  with  the  exception  of  Hypsipyle,
the  daughter  of  Thoas,  who  had  saved  her  father,  under  the  pretence  of
•having  slain  him,  and  who  at  this  time  was  reigning  in  Lemnos. Con-


Pheraj,  in  Thessaly,  through  love,  as  (Enone  seems  here  to  hint,  but
because  he  was  flying  from  the  wrath  of  Jupiter,  whom  he  had  offended,
by  slaying  the  Cyclops,  the  founders  of  his  thunderbolts.  Callima-
chus,  however,  assigns  a  similar  reason  for  the  retirement  of  Apollo,  and
his  entering  the  service  of  Admetus,  to  that  here  given  by  Ovid ;  in-
asmuch as  he  says  that  he  was  prompted  by  his  love  for  Alcestis,  the
daughter  of  Pallas,  to  that  step.  The  poet  Quintus  Calaber  relates,  that  when
Paris  had  been  wounded  with  an  arrow  by  Philoctetes,  he  betook  himself
to  (Enone,  and  confiding  in  her  medical  skill,  entreated  her  to  cure  his
wound.  This  she  refused  to  do,  and,  on  his  return,  he  died  on  Mount  Ida.
The  shepherds  having  placed  the  body  on  the  funeral  pile,  (Enone,  who
was  present  at  the  ceremonial,  leaped  amid  the  flames,  and  was  con-
sumed together  with  the  body.  Dictys  the  Cretan  varies  the  narrative,
by  saying  that  the  body  of  Paris  was  carried  to  (Enone,  to  receive  from
her  the  rites  of  sepulture,  and  that  she,  recollecting  her  former  passion,
fell  dead  on  beholding  the  corpse.


EP.  VI.]  3YPSIPTLE TO JASOtf.  51

ceiving  a  passion  for  Jason,  she  not  only  proffered  him  the  greatest
hospitality,  but  even  admitted  him  to  her  bed.  After  remaining  two
years  in  Lemnos,  his  companions  urged  him  to  proceed  on  the  intended
expedition ;  on  which  he  set  sail  for  Colchis,  leaving  Hypsipyle  preg-
nant. Medea,  the  daughter  of  ^Eetes,  king  of  Colchis,  having  be-
come enamoured  of  him,  by  her  magic  arts  she  lulled  asleep  the  watch-
ful dragon,  and  the  bulls  with  brazen  feet,  and  by  her  aid,  he  obtained
the  Golden  Fleece ;  then,  leaving  Colchis,  he  carried  off  Medea,  who
readily  accompanied  him.  Hypsipyle,  enraged  that  Medea  has  been  pre-
ferred to  her,  sends  this  Epistle  to  Jason,  congratulating  him  on  his  safe
return.  Then,  exposing  the  cruelty  and  enchantments  of  Medea,  she
endeavours  to  bring  her  into  contempt,  and  to  make  him  sensible  of  her
own  superior  deserts.  She  concludes  by  loading  both  Jason  and  Me-
dea with  imprecations.

Hypsipyle  of  Lemnos,36  the  descendant  of  Bacchus,  com-
munes with  the  son  of  iEson ;  but  in  her  words  how  small
a  portion  is  there  of  her  feelings.

Thou  art  reported  to  have  touched  the  shores  of  Thessaly
with  thy  returning  bark,  enriched  by  the  fleece37  of  the  golden
sheep.  I  congratulate  thee  on  thy  safety,  so  far  as38  thou  dost
permit :  still,  of  that  same  thing  ought  I  to  have  been  informed
by  thy  own  writing.  For  thou  mayst  not  have  had  propitious
winds,  so  as  not  to  return  past  my  realms,  as  thou  didst
promise,  even  hadst  thou  desired  it.  Still,  though  the  wind
is  ever  so  contrary,  a  letter  might39  be  written ;  I,  Hypsipyle,
was  worthy  of  a  salutation  being  sent.

Why  did  report  come  to  me,  before  a  letter  as  thy  mes-
senger, how  that  the  bulls,  sacred  to  Mars,40  had  come  be-

36  Hypsipyle  of  Lemnos.'] — Ver.  1. The  two  commencing  lines—

Lemnia  Hypsipyle,  Bacchi  genus  iEsone  nato
Dicit ;  at  in  verbis  pars  quota  mentis  erat.
are  generally  considered  to  be  spurious.

37  By  the  fleece.]-^  ex.  2.  The  recovery,  by  Jason,  of  the  Golden
Fleece,  is  narrated  at  length  in  the  Seventh  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses.

3*  So  far  as.]— Ver.  3.  Because  she  had  heard  how  Jason  had  pre-
ferred Medea  to"  herself :  and  therefore  she  had  reason  to  fear  that  her
congratulation  might  not  be  very  cordially  received.

39  A  letter  might.']— -V er.  7.  Some  critics,  with  too  refined  acumen,  as
it  would  seem,  remark  that  the  third  person  is  here  used  designedly,  and
that  the  Poet  makes  Hypsipyle,  from  indignation,  avoid  mentioning
the  very  name  of  Jason.  Certainly,  in  one  of  the  scenes  of  Terence,
Sostrata  chides  a  person,  though  present,  in  the  third  person  ;  but  here
the  use  of  that  person  seems  entirely  accidental.

40  Bulls  sacred  to  Mars.}— Ver.  10.  These  bulls,  which  were  sacred
to  Mars,  had  brazen  feet,  and  breathed  forth  smoke  and  flames. Jason

E  2


52  THE EPISTLES OE THE HEROINES.  [EP.  VI.

neath  the  bending  yoke  ?  How  that  the  harvest  of  men  had
sprung  up  when  the  grain  was  sown,41  and  how  that  they  did
not  need42  thy  right  hand  for  their  destruction  ?  How  that
the  wakeful  dragon43  had  watched  the  spoil  of  the  ram,  and
yet  that  the  yellow  fleece  had  been  carried  off  by  thy  vigo-
rous arm  ?  If  I  could  have  been  enabled  to  say  to  those
who  believed  these  things  with  hesitation — "  He  himself  has
written  to  me  to  this  effect  ?"  how  glad  should  I  have  been  !
Why  do  I  complain  that  the  respect  of  my  delaying  husband
towards  me  has  failed  ?  If  I  am  still  thine,  I  receive  the
height  of  devotion.

A  barbarian  sorceress44  is  said  to  have  come  with  thee,  re-
ceived to  a  share  of  that  bed  which  was  promised  to  me.  Love
is  a  credulous  thing  ;  I  wish  that  I  may  be  pronounced  rash
in  accusing  my  husband  on  a  false  charge  !  A  Thessalian
guest  lately  came  to  me  from  the  Hsemonian  shores  ;  and
scarcely  was  the  threshold  well  reached  ;  "  How  fares  my
Jason,  the  son  of  iEson  V  said  I.  With  shame  he  stood
silent,  fixing  his  looks  upon  the  ground  beneath  him  :  at  once,
I  sprang  forward  ;  and  tearing  my  garments  from  my  breast,
I  exclaimed  : — "  Does  he  still  live  ?  or  do  the  Fates  summon
me  away  as  well  ?"  "  He  does  live,"  said  he  :  and,  in  his
confusion,  I  compelled  him  to  swear  to  me.  Hardly,  when  a
God  attested,45  was  I  convinced  of  thy  existence.

was  instructed  by  Medea  how  to  tame  them  ;  without  which  step,  the
Golden  Fleece,  the  object  of  his  voyage,  could  not  be  obtained.

41  Grain  was  sown.'] — Ver.  11.  She  alludes  to  the  teeth  of  the
dragon,  which  Jason,  having  killed  that  monster,  was  next  obliged  to
sow,  and  from  which  sprang  up  armed  men.

42  They  did  not  need.] — Ver.  12.  Jason,  by  the  advice  of  Medea,
throwing  stones  among  them,  they  turned  their  arms  against,  and  slew
each  other.  Apollodorus,  however,  informs  us,  that  falling  into  dissen-
sions among  themselves,  they  were  all  slain  by  Jason.

43  The  wakeful  dragon.] — Ver.  13.  Besides  the  brazen-footed  bulls
before  mentioned,  there  was  a  dragon  of  enormous  size,  which  kept  watch
over  the  Golden  Fleece,  and  slept  neither  by  day  nor  night.

44  Barbarian  sorceress."] — Ver.  19.  She  alludes  to  Medea,  whom  she
here  calls  '  venefica,-'  a  '  sorceress,'  or  ;  enchantress.'  Her  history  is  re-
lated in  the  Seventh  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses.  Whatever  served  to
pervert  or  disturb  the  mind,  was,  by  the  ancients,  called  '  venenum.'

45  A  God  attested.] — Ver.  30.  Though  the  stranger,  by  an  oath,  called
the  Gods  to  witness  the  truth  of  his  asseverations,  she  could  hardly  be-
lieve that  Jason  was  still  living.  She  means  thereby  to  make  him  sen-
sible of  her  anxiety  and  concern,  that  could  hardly  be  satisfied  as  to  his
welfare  without  the  strongest  proofs.


feP.  YI.]  HTPSIPTLE TO JAS02f.  53

When  my  senses  had  returned,  I  began  to  enquire  about
thy  deeds.  He  told  me  how  that  the  bulls  of  Mars,  with  the
brazen  feet,  had  ploughed ;  how  that  the  teeth  of  the  dragon
were  cast  into  the  earth  for  seed,  and  how  that  men,  suddenly
produced,  had  wielded  arms  ;  how  that  these  people  sprung
from  the  earth,  cut  off  in  civil  warfare,  had  filled  their  allot-
ment of  life,  limited  to  one  day.46  The  dragon  conquered,  once
more  I  enquire  if  Jason  is  alive  ;  hope  and  fear  by  turns  act
on  my  belief.  While  he  is  relating  each  thing  ;  in  his  earn-
estness and  in  the  thread  of  his  discourse  he  reveals  the
wounds  that  have  been  made  in  thy  heart.47

Alas  !  where  is  thy  plighted  faith  ?  Where  the  marriage
tie  ?  And  where  the  torches  more  deserving  to  go  beneath  the
pile  about  to  be  lighted  ?48  By  no  stealth  was  I  known  to
thee  ;  Juno  was  present  as  the  presiding  Divinity,  and  Hymen
having  his  temples  wreathed  with  garlands.  But  neither  Juno
nor  Hymen,  but  sad  Erinnys,  besmeared  with  blood,  bore  the
inauspicious  torches  before  me.  What  had  I  to  do  with  the
Minyee  ?49  Whatwith  the  Tritonianbark?50  What,  pilot  Tiphys,51
hadst  thou  to  do  with  my  country  ?  Here  was  no  ram  beau-
teous in  his  golden  fleece ;  nor  was  Lemnos  the  court  of  the

46  Limited  to  one  day.'] — Ver.  36,  Because  they  were  cut  off  on  the
same  day  on  which  they  had  sprang  to  life.

47  In  thy  heart.] — Ver.  40.  '  Tuo  '  seems  a  preferable  reading  here  to
'  suo/  '  his  heart.'  '  Suo  '  will  be  admissible,  if  we  consider  the  stranger
as  speaking  of  Jason  in  the  third  person.

43  Pile  about  to  be  lighted.'] — Ver.  42.  She  says  that  the  marriage  torch,
which  had  been  used  at  their  nuptials,  was  more  fitted  to  be  used  at
funereal  rites,  for  the  purpose  of  lighting  the  pile.  It  was  the  custom  for
the  nearest  relative  of  the  deceased  to  set  fire  to  the  pile  with  his  face
turned  away.

49  The  Minyce.] — Ver.  47.  The  Argonauts  are  so  called  from  the
Minyse,  a  people  of  Iolcos,  in  Thessaly,  who  had  formed  part  of  the  forces
of  Jason,  in  his  expedition  to  Colchis.  They  were  originally  from  Orcho-
menus,  a  town  of  Bceotia.

50  Tritonian  bark.] — Ver.  47.  The  ship,  Argo,  is  called  '  Tritonis
pinus,'  from  Pallas,  who  assisted  in  the  building  of  it.  Pallas  is  often  men-
tioned by  the  ancients,  under  the  name  of  '  Tritonia,'  from  the  marsh  Tri-
tonis, in  Africa,  near  which  locality  she  was  said  to  have  been  born.

51  Pilot  Tiphys.] — Ver.  48.  Tiphys  was  the  pilot  of  Jason's  ship.
The  Poet,  by  making  her  exclaim  against  things  both  animate  and  inani-
mate, as  though  present,  admirably  expresses  the  disorder  of  her  mind
produced  by  the  result  of  that  expedition,  so  fatal  to  her  happiness.


54  THE EPISTLES OF THE HEROINES.  [EP.  TT.

aged  iEetes.32  At  first  I  had  determined  (but  my  unhappy-
destiny  overruled  me)  to  expel  the  stranger  band  with  a
female  hand.  The  Lemnian  women  too  know  but  too  well
how  to  conquer  men.53  By  troops,  thus  brave,  were  my  coasts54
to  be  defended.  I  beheld  a  man  in  my  city,  and  with  my
hospitality  and  my  heart  did  I  receive  him  ;  here  did  the
summer  twice,55  and  twice  the  winter  pass  on  for  thee.

It  was  now  the  third  harvest ;  when  thou,  forced  to  set  sail,56
didst  interrupt  such  words  as  these  with  thy  tears  :  "  I  am
taken  away/rom  thee,  Hypsipyle  :  but  (if  the  Fates  only  allow
of  my  return)  hence  do  I  depart  as  thy  husband  :  thy  husband
will  I  ever  be. Still,  may  that  pledge  of  ours  which  is  concealed

52  Aged  Metes. .] — Ver.  50.  iEetes,  or  iEeta,  was  the  son  of  Phoebus
or  Apollo,  and  the  father  of  Medea.  He  was  reigning  in  Colchis,  when
Jason  went  thither  in  quest  of  the  Golden  Fleece.  The  complaints  of
Hypsipyle  here  depicted,  are  extremely  natural.  When  any  disaster
happens  to  us,  we  are  apt  to  reflect  upon  the  train  of  circumstances  that
contributed  to  it,  and  to  murmur  at  the  course  of  events.

53  To  conquer  men.'] — Ver.  53.  Venus  having  been  surprised  in  adultery
with  Mars,  in  the  isle  of  Lemnos,  the  women,  in  sacrificing  to  the
Deities,  neglected  her  ;  in  consequence  of  which,  she  infected  them  with
a  malady  that  rendered  them  loathsome  to  their  husbands ;  who,  for
the  purpose  of  avoiding  them,  went  to  the  wars  in  Thrace.  The  fe-
males greatly  resenting  this,  they  formed  a  conspiracy  to  destroy  them
on  their  return ;  which  design  they  put  in  execution.  Hypsipyle,  how-
ever, secretly  spared  her  father  Thoas,  who  was  carried  by  Bacchus  to
the  island  of  Thoas.  In  the  meantime,  she  pretended  that  her  father  was
dead,  and  raised  a  funeral  pile  in  her  palace,  as  if  to  celebrate  his  obse-
quies, placing  another  person  upon  it  in  his  stead.

54  Were  my  coasts.'] — Ver.  54.  The  usual  reading  here  is  '  vita,'  but
'  ripa,'  meaning,  '  the  coast,'  or  '  shore,'  seems  to  be  the  proper  reading ;
as  it  has  been  justly  observed,  that  the  life  of  no  one  was  at  stake  in  the
contest,  but  that  the  women  of  Lemnos  at  first  opposed  the  landing  of
the  Argonauts  in  their  island.

55  The  summer  twice.] — Ver.  56.  But  Valerius  Flaccus  gives  only
four  months  as  the  duration  of  the  stay  of  Jason  in  the  island  of  Lemnos.
Ovid  may  possibly  have,  at  the  moment,  assigned  a  longer  visit  to  Jason,
inasmuch  as  Hypsipyle  had  by  him  two  sons,  Euneus  and  Deiphilus,  or,
according  to  some  writers,  Thoas.  If  so,  he  forgot  the  circumstances  that
these  sons  were  twins,  at  least,  according  to  the  testimony  of  Statius,  in
the  Thebaid,  B.  v.  1.  464,  and  as  it  would  seem,  according  to  the  true
meaning  of  the  121st  line  of  the  present  Epistle.  On  the  other  hand,
Valerius  Flaccus  represents  her  in  the  Second  Book  of  the  Argonautics,
1.  425,  as  pregnant  of  but  one  child.

56  Forced  to  set  sail.] — Ver.  57.  He  was  pressed  to  depart  by  Her-
cules and  others  of  his  companions.


EP.  VI.]  HTPSTPTLE TO JASON.  55

in  thy  pregnant  womb,  live  on,57  and  of  the  same  offspring
may  we  both  be  the  parents."  Thus  far  didst  thou  speak ;
and,  as  tears  flowed  down  thy  deceitful  face,  I  remember  that
thou  couldst  not  say  the  rest.  After  all  thy  companions58
didst  thou  embark  in  the  sacred  Argo  :59  onward  it  flew,60  and
the  wind  filled  its  swelling  sails.

The  azure  waves  recede  from  before  the  impelled  ship  ;
by  thee  the  earth,  by  me  the  waters  are  beheld.  A
tower  open61  on  every  side  looks  down  upon  the  waves  :
hither  do  I  betake  myself,  and  my  face  and  my  bosom62  are
bedewed  with  tears.  Through  my  tears  do  I  view  thee  ;  and
my  eyes,  favouring  the  eagerness  of  my  feelings,  see  farther
than  usual.  I  add  chaste  prayers,  and  vows  mingled  with  ap-
prehensions, that  even  now  should  be  performed  since  thou
art  safe.  Shall  I  then  fulfil  those  vows  ?  Shall  Medea  reap^
the  advantage  of  those  vows  1  My  heart  is  sorrowing,  and
love  is  overflowing,  mingled  with  rage. Shall  I  carry  offerings

57  Live  on.~\ — Ver.  62.  She  promises  that,  in  spite  of  the  barbarous  de-
termination of  the  females  of  her  island,  in  case  she  should  be  delivered
of  a  son,  he  shall  not  be  put  to  death.  The  destruction  of  female  children
was  not  uncommon  in  the  early  ages,  throughout  the  heathen  world.

58  After  all  thy  companions.'] — Ver.  65.  If  we  translate  '  ultimus  e
sociis '  quite  literally,  it  is,  '  The  last  of  thy  companions  thou  didst,  &c.,'
a  form  of  expression  not  unlike  the  famous  line  of  Milton,  '  And  fairest
of  all  her  daughters,  Eve."  Apollonius  Rhodius  says,  that  Jason  was  the
first  to  embark.  It  has,  however,  been  justly  remarked  that,  Apollonius
was  more  desirous  to  paint  Jason  as  a  hero  and  a  skilful  leader,  than  as
an  attentive  lover  ;  on  the  other  hand,  Valerius  Flaccus,  though  he  does
not  distinctly  say  that  Jason  was  the  last  to  go  on  board,  states  that  he,
with  Castor  and  Pollux,  lingered  behind  in  the  embraces  of  the  Lem-
nian  females.

59  The  sacred  Argo.] — Ver.  65.  The  ship  Argo  is  called  f  sacra,'  be-
cause it  was  built  under  the  auspices,  and  by  the  instructions  of  Minerva.
It  was  also  built,  in  part,  of  wood,  from  the  sacred  forest  of  Dodona,  which
had  been,  cut  down  by  the  direction  of  Minerva.

60  Onward  it  flew.]  Ver.  66.  In  saying  that  the  ship  flew,  she  alludes
to  its  name,  which  denoted  its  speed ;  it  being  derived  from  a  Greek  word
signifying  swift.

61  A  tower  open.] — Ver.  69.  See  the  Metamorphoses,  Book  ii.  1.  393,
and  the  Note  to  the  passage.

62  And  my  bosom.] — Ver.  70.  The  word  'sinus'  may  here  mean
either  the  folded  or  plaited  part  of  the  garment  that  covered  the  bosom,
or  perhaps,  figuratively,  the  bosom  itself.

63  Shall  Medea  reap.] — Ver.  75.  These  words  are  prompted  by  a  just
indignation  at  her  wrongs,  which  she  here  very  pathetically  sums  up.


56  THE EPISTLES OP THE HEROINES.  [EP.  VI.

to  the  temples,  because  I  lose  Jason,  but  living  still  ?  Must  the
smitten  victim  fall  for  my  misfortunes  1  Never,  indeed,  was  I
free  from  apprehension,  and  I  was  always  in  fear  lest  my
father  should  be  choosing  a  daughter-in-law  from  an  Argive
city.64  The  Argive  women  did  I  dread  :  a  barbarian  rival  has
done  me  the  injury  ;  from  an  unlooked-for  enemy  have  I
received  my  wound.

Neither  by  her  beauty  nor  by  her  accomplishments  is  she
pleasing  ;  but  by  her  incantations  has  she  influenced  thee ;  and
with  her  enchanted  sickle  does  she  reap  the  dreadful  plants.05
She  endeavours  to  draw  down  the  struggling  Moon  from  her
chariot,  and  to  envelope  the  horses  of  the  Sun  in  darkness.
She  bridles  the  waves,  and  stops  the  winding  rivers  :  she  moves
the  woods  and  the  firm  rocks  from  their  spot.  Amid  the  tombs66

64  An  Argive  city.] — Ver.  80.  '  Argolica  urbe  '  here  probably  means
'  from  some  Thessalian  city,'  as  there  was  a  city  there  called  the  Pelasgian
Argos,  which  was  the  capital  of  a  small  territory.  It  may,  however,
possibly  be  intended  as  a  term  to  extend  to  the  whole  of  Greece.

65  The  dreadful  plants.] — Ver.  84.  Of  the  herbs  used  in  the  magic  arts,
2ome  were  to  be  plucked  up  by  the  roots,  and  others  to  be  cut  with  a
sickle  or  scythe.  Regarding  the  latter  kind,  we  learn  from  Virgil,  that
they  were  cut  with  a  brazen  knife  by  the  light  of  the  moon.

&  Amid  the  tombs.] — Ver.  89.  The  tombs  appear  to  have  been  the
favourite  haunts  of  all  the  magicians  and  unnatural  characters  of  olden
time,  from  the  enchantresses  and  magicians  of  Ovid  and  Apuleius,  down
to  the  Ghouls  of  the  Arabian  Nights'  Entertainments.  Among  the  Greeks
the  corpses  that  were  not  burnt  were  buried  in  coffins,  which  were  made
of  various  materials,  but  usually  of  baked  clay  or  earthenware.  The  dead
were  generally  buried  outside  the  towns,  as  it  was  thought  that  their  presence
in  the  city  brought  pollution  on  the  living.  At  Athens  the  dead  were
formerly  buried  in  their  own  houses,  but  in  historical  times,  none  were
allowed  to  be  buried  within  the  city.  Lycurgus,  with  the  view  of  re-
moving all  superstitions  relative  to  the  dead,  allowed  of  burial  in  Sparta ;
and  at  Megara  they  were  also  buried  within  the  town.  Persons  who
possessed  lands  in  Attica  were  often  buried  in  them  ;  but  the  tombs  were
mostly  by  the  side  of  roads,  and  near  the  gates  of  the  city.  These  tombs
were  regarded  as  private  property,  and  belonged  exclusively  to  the  families
whose  relatives  had  been  buried  there.  Sometimes  they  were  mounds
of  earth  or  stones,  while  they  were  occasionally  built  of  stone,  and  were
frequently  ornamented  with  great  taste.  The  Romans,  in  the  most  ancient
times,  buried  their  dead,  although  they  adopted  the  custom  of  burning
them  at  an  early  period.  Those  who  were  buried  were  placed  in  a  coffin
which  was  frequently  made  of  stone,  and  sometimes  of  that  from
Assos  in  Troas,  which  consumed  all  the  body  with  the  exception  of
the  teeth,  in  forty  days,  whence  it  obtained  the  name  of  '  Sarcophagus,'


EP.  VI.]  HTPSIPYLE TO JASON.  57

does  she  wander  without  her  girdle,  her  locks  all  dishevelled,
and  certain  bones67  does  she  collect  from  the  warm  piles.
Those  afar  off  does  she  curse  ;  she  pierces,  too,  the  images  of


which  was  gradually  extended  to  other  stone  coffins.  The  urns  which
contained  the  ashes  of  the  dead  were  placed  in  sepulchres,  which  were
mostly  outside  of,  though  in  a  few  instances  we  read  of  them  being
buried  within,  the  City.  The  places  for  burial  were  either  public  or
private :  the  public  were  of  two  kinds,  one  for  illustrious  citizens,
who  were  buried  at  the  public  expense,  and  the  other  for  the  poor.
The  former  were  in  the  Campus  Martius,  which  was  ornamented  with
the  tombs  of  the  dead,  and  in  the  Campus  Esquiiinus  ;  while  the  latter
was  also  in  the  Campus  Esquiiinus,  and  consisted  of  small  pits  or  caverns.
Private  places  for  burial  were  usually  by  the  sides  of  roads  leading
into  Rome,  and  on  some  of  these  roads,  such  as  the  Appian  way,  the  tombs
formed  an  almost  uninterrupted  street  for  many  miles  from  the  gates  of
the  City.

67  And  certain  bones.} — Ver.  90.  Some  MSS.  have  'cuncta,'  'all,'  instead
of 'certa,'  'certain,'  as  applied  to  the  bones,  but  the  latter  is  considered  to  be
the  better  reading,  inasmuch  as  the  sorcerers  of  old  are  said  to  have  been
very  fanciful  in  their  selections,  preferring  the  skulls,  and  the  parts  about
the  joints,  while  they  were  content  with  scrapings  or  parings  of  some
of  the  other  portions.

68  Images  oftvax.~] — Ver.  91.  Magic  spells  and  incantations  were  very
numerous  among  the  ancients,  who  put  considerable  faith  in  their  effi-
cacy. Diana  was  frequently  resorted  to  for  assistance  in  cases  of  de-
sperate love  and  unlawful  desires,  being  invoked  under  the  name  of
'Thessalis'  and  'Lamia,'by  witches  and  enchanters.in  set  forms,  withpotent
spells :  the  influence  of  which,  it  was  thought,  could  be  dispelled  by  the
sound  of  brazen  instruments.  Her  presence  was,  by  these  incantations,
supposed  to  be  compelled,  and  she  was  said  to  appear  accompanied  by
howling  dogs.  Thessaly  was  the  original,  and,  indeed,  the  most  cele-
brated seat  of  this  superstition :  thence  was  probably  derived  the  use
of  herbs  and  their  juices,  and  other  ingredients  in  philtres  for  compel-
ling love,  appeasing  or  averting  it.  The  belief  in  ghosts  was  con-
nected with  the  magic  art,  and  was  very  prevalent,  they  being  sup-
posed to  haunt  sepulchres,  and  to  be  under  the  control  of  incantations.
The  spirits  of  the  departed  were  consequently  worshipped  with  great
reverence.  Ovid,  in  the  present  instance,  enumerates  many  articles  of
the  magic  code  ;  charms  muttered  over,  herbs  cut  with  an  enchanted
sickle,  the  Moon  brought  down,  and  the  Sun  darkened  by  her  invocations,
the  waves  and  the  tides  stopped  in  their  course,  the  woods  and  rocks
moved  from  one  locality  to  another ;  rites,  too,  performed  amid  the
tombs,  and  bones  culled  from  the  pile  yet  warm.  He  finally  speaks  of
images  being  made  of  wax,  and  then  pierced  with  needles,  in  the  part
where  the  liver  is  situate ;  which  latter  plan  was  adopted  for  the  purpose  of
torturing  the  person  intended  to  be  represented  by  the  image. This  be-


58  THE  EPISTLES  OF  THE  HEKOINES. 3  [EP.  VI.

needles.  Other  things,  too,  which  'twere  better  I  should  be
unacquainted  with.  Love  is  wrongfully  acquired  by  herbs,
which  should  be  won  by  merit  and  by  beauty.

And  canst  thou  embrace  her?69  And,  left  in  the  same
chamber,  canst  thou  enjoy  sleep,  in  the  silent  night,  without
alarm  1  In  truth,  just  as  the  bulls,70  so  has  she  forced  thee  to
bear  the  yoke,  and  by  the  arts,  by  which  she  charms  the  raging
serpents,  does  she  charm  thee  as  well.  Besides,  she  takes  plea-
sure in  being  connected  with  the  exploits  of  thy  chieftains  and
thyself;  and  the  wife  detracts  from  the  praises71  of  the  husband.
Some,  too,  of  the  party  of  Pelias72  impute  thy  deeds  to  sorcery,
and  they  have  people  to  believe  them. "'Twas  not  the  son

lief  seems  to  have  extended  down  to  comparatively  recent  periods.
English  history  presents  a  memorable  instance  in  the  penance  inflicted  on
the  unfortunate  wife  of  Humphrey,  the  good  Duke  of  Gloucester,  who
was  accused  of  having  practised  incantations  upon  a  waxen  image  of  the
Regent  in  the  minority  of  Henry  the  Sixth.  Lord  Hastings  and  Jane  Shore
were  also  accused  of  having  conspired  in  similar  practices  against  Richard
the  Third.

69  Canst  thou  embrace  her  ?] — Ver.  95.  One  coidd  almost  fancy  that
she  had  read  what  happened  to  Beder,  when,  sleeping  in  Queen  Labe's
chamber,  he  saw  her  stealthily  arise  and  prepare  the  diabolical  cake
which  was  to  play  so  important  a  part  in  his  intended  transformation.
See  the  story  of  Beder  and  Giauhare  in  the  Arabian  Nights'  Entertain-
ments.

70  Just  as  the  hulls.'] — Ver.  97.  The  artifice  and  ingenuity  of  the  Poet
in  these  passages  are  admirable ;  and  truly  wonderful  is  the  skill  which  he
shows  in  making  each  circumstance  answer  his  purpose.  Hypsipyle  is  not
here  endeavouring  to  gain  Jason's  affection,  so  much  as  to  withdraw  it  from
Medea.  For  this  purpose  she  represents  her  in  such  a  light  as  may  cre-
ate horror  and  aversion.  She  endeavours  to  excite  his  fears,  and  would
persuade  him  that  he  cannot  with  safety  trust  himself  in  her  company.
Lastly,  under  the  appearance  of  weakening  her  own  arguments,  she  adds
double  strength  to  them.  She  insinuates  that  his  case  is  desperate,  and
that  he  is  a  mere  slave,  and  unable  to  shake  off  the  yoke.  Knowing
his  disposition,  she  trusts  that,  to  clear  himself  from  such  an  imputation,
he  will  endeavour  to  subdue  this  hateful  passion.

71  From  the  praises."] — Ver.  100.  She  here  persists  in  inveighing
against  Medea.  She  now  endeavours  to  arouse  his  jealousy,  and  to  work
upon  his  passion  for  glory.  '  Medea,'  she  says,  '  boasts  to  have  had  the
chief  hand  in  your  exploits,  and  carries  away  all  the  honour.  The  par-
tisans of  Pelias  take  advantage  of  this,  and  the  world,  in  general,  is  too
ready  to  believe  them.'

79  Party  of  Pelias.] — Ver.  101 .  She  alludes  to  the  partisans  of  Pelias,
who  had  dispossessed  his  brother,  jEson,  the  father  of  Jason,  of  the
throne.


EP.  VI.]  HTPSIPYLE TO JASON".  59

of  iEson,  say  they,  but  the  Phasian73  daughter  of  iEetes  that
carried  off  the  golden  fleece  of  the  sheep  of  Phryxus."74
Thy  mother,  Alcimede,75  approves  not  of  her  ;  take  the  advice
of  a  mother ;  nor  yet  does  thy  father  approve  of  a  bride  who
comes  from  the  chilling  North.76  Let  her  seek  for  herself  a
husband  from  the  Tanais77  and  the  marshes  of  swampy
Scythia,78  and  even  from  the  regions  of  the  Phasis.

Fickle  son  of  iEson,  more  inconstant  too  than  the  breezes  of
spring,  why  are  thy  words  destitute  of  their  promised  weight  ?
Hence  didst  thou  depart  as  my  husband,  as  my  husband  thou
didst  not  thence  return  :  I  ought  to  be  the  wife  of  thee  return-
ing, as  I  was  of  thee  when  setting  out.  If  noble  descent  and
honourable  names  at  all  influence  thee,  behold !  I  am  said  to
be  the  daughter  of  Thoas,79  sprung  from  Minos.  Bacchus
was  my  grandsire  ; so the  wife  of  Bacchus,  encircled  by  her


73  The  Phasian.'] — Ver.  103.  Phasis  was  the  name  of  a  river  of
Colchis.

74  Sheep  of  Phryotras.]  — The  Golden  Ram  carried  Phryxus  and  Helle  over
the  Hellespont,  on  which  occasion  the  latter  was  drowned ;  their  story  is
told  at  length,  hoth  in  the  Fasti  and  in  the  Metamorphoses.

75  Mother  Alcimede.'] — Ver.  105.  According  to  some,  Alcimede,  was
the  daughter  of  Clymenus,  according  to  others,  of  Autolycus.  Some
call  the  mother  of  Jason  by  the  name  of  Rhea  or  Polymela.  According
to  Apollodorus,  the  mother  of  Jason  hanged  herself.

76  The  chilling  North.] — Ver.  106.  That  is  from  Colchis,  which  was  a
cold  climate,  in  comparison  with  Greece,  as  being  situate  much  farther  to  the
North.  She  makes  this  reference  in  a  spirit  of  contempt  and  disdain,  in-
timating that  he  has  made  choice  of  a  barbarian.  She,  therefore,  exag-
gerates the  reflection,  by  telling  him  that  he  has  brought  a  wife  from  the
icy  pole  ;  although  Colchis  was  far  enough  distant  from  it.  It  may  be
here  remarked,  that  Ovid  little  anticipated,  when  he  penned  these  hues,
that  the  time  would  come  when  he  himself  would  have  to  feel,  and  to
mourn  amid  the  regions  of,  the  '  gelidus  axis,'  of  the  Colcluan  climate ;
the  coast  of  Pontus  being  situate  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  Caspian  sea.

77  From  the  Tanais.] — Ver.  107.  This  river  is  now  called  the  Don,
and  empties  itself  into  the  sea  of  Azof,  formerly  the  '  Palus  Maeotis.'

78  Scythia.] — Ver.  107.  Scythia  was  the  general  name  for  the  Northern
parts  of  Europe  and  Asia.  She  speaks  with  indignation  against  Medea,
whom  she  represents  as  being  a  more  suitable  wife  for  a  barbarian  than
for  a  Greek.

79  Daughter  of  Thoas.]— Vet.  114.  Thoas,  the  father  of  Hypsipyle,
was  the  son  of  Ariadne,  the  daughter  of  Minos.

*°  My  grandsire.] — Ver.  115.  Bacchus  was  the  father  of  Thoas,  by
Ariadne.

31  By  her  croivn.] — Ver.  115. She  here  alludes  to  the  crown  of


60  THE EPISTLES OF THE HEEOIKES.  [EP.  YI.

Lemnos  shall  be  thy  marriage  gift,82  a  land  fruitful  for  the
cultivator ;  thou  couldst  take  me  as  well  among  such  pos-
sessions.

Now  too  have  I  brought  forth  ;  Jason,  congratulate  us  both.
In  my  pregnancy  the  father  had  made  the  burden  a  pleasing
one  to  me.  In  the  number  too  am  I  blessed  ;83  and  Lucina
favouring,  a  twin  offspring,  a  twofold  pledge  have  I  produced.
Shouldst  thou  enquire  whom  they  are  like  ;84  by  them  mightst
thou  be  recognized.  They  know  not  how  to  deceive  ;  the  other
features  of  their  father  do  they  possess.  To  my  envoys85  I  had
almost  given  them  to  be  borne  in  place  of  their  mother:  but  their
cruel  step-mother86  impeded  the  intended  journey.  I  dreaded
Medea  ;  more  cruel  than  any  step-mother  is  Medea  ;  the  hands
of  Medea  are  ready  for  every  crime.  She  who  could  scatter
the  mangled  limbs  of  her  brother87  over  the  fields,  would  she
be  merciful  to  these  pledges  of  mine  ?  And  yet,  0  madman,
demented  by  the  Colchian  philtres,  thou  art  reported  to  have

Ariadne,  which  was  placed  among  the  Constellations  by  Bacchus.  The
Poet  admirably  depicts  female  jealousy,  in  making  Hypsipyle  aim  at  secur-
ing glory  to  herself  from  every  possible  incident.

82  Marriage  gift.] — Ver,  117.  She  could  with  justice  say,  that  Lemnos
was  her  dowry,  inasmuch  as  it  was  the  determination  of  the  Lesbian  women
that  Thoas  should  cease  to  reign  there,  and  she  had  doubly  earned  the
kingdom  by  her  dutiful  conduct  in  saving  his  life.

83  Am  I  blessed.'] — Ver.  121.  It  would  appear  from  this  passage,  that
it  was  considered  lucky  to  become  the  mother  of  twins.

84  Whom  they  are  like."] — Ver.  123.  She  hopes  hereby  to  excite  his
compassion,  and  at  the  same  time  insinuates  her  own  chastity  and  fidelity,
while  by  her  inuendo  in  the  next  line,  she  deals  a  severe  blow  at  his  want
of  constancy.

85  To  my  envoys.] — Ver.  125.  If  we  read,  'legates,'  in  this  line,  it
will  mean  that  she  had  some  thoughts  of  sending  her  children  to  act  as
her  envoys,  by  appealing  to  his  feelings.  If  '  legatis '  is  read,  it  will  mean
that  she  had  intended  to  give  them  to  some  envoys,  who  were  to  act  in
the  place  of  their  mother  in  presenting  them.

8b  Cruel  stepmother.] — Ver.  126.  The  ancients  seem  to  have  had  a
very  bad  opinion  of  stepmothers  in  general,  in  relation  to  their  conduct
towards  their  stepchildren ;  much  worse,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  than  was  really
justified  by  fact.

87  Limbs  of  her  brother.] — Ver.  129.  She  alludes  to  the  story  which  is
related  by  Ovid,  in  the  Tristia,  how  Medea  cut  her  brother  Absyrtus  into
pieces,  and  scattered  his  limbs  in  the  way,  that  her  father  iEetes,  who  was
in  pursuit  of  her,  might  be  stopped  by  the  necessity  of  gathering  them
up,  w  \ereby  she  might  the  more  readily  effect  her  escape.  From  this  cir-
cumstance, Tomi,  the  place  to  which  Ovid  was  afterwards  banished,  received
its  name.


EP.  VI.]  HYPSIPYLE TO JASOtf.  61

preferred  this  woman  to  the  couch  of  Hypsipyle.  Basely  did
that  adulteress  associate  with  my  husband  ;  the  chaste  nuptial
torch  gave  me  to  thee,  and  thee  to  me.  She  betrayed  her
father  ;ss  I  rescued  Thoasfrom  death.  She  deserted  Colchis  ;
my  own  Lemnos  retains  me.

What  avails  it,  if  in  her  wickedness  she  triumphs  over  one
virtuous,  and  if  by  her  very  criminality  she  is  dowried,  and
has  so  earned  a  husband  ?S9  The  crimes  of  the  Lemnian
dames  do  I  censure,  Jason,  and  not  admire.  Indignation
itself90  supplies  any  arms  to  the  enraged.  Come  tell  me,  if,
(as  was  thy  duty)  driven  by  adverse  winds  thou  hadst  entered,
thou  and  thy  companion,  my  harbour ;  and  if  I  had  gone  forth
to  meet  thee,  attended  by  my  twin  offspring,  (the  ground  no
doubt  would  have  been  implored  to  yawn  for  thee,)  with  what
countenance,  perjured  man,  wouldst  thou  have  seen  thy
children,  with  what,  myself  ?  Of  what  death  wast  thou  de-
serving, as  the  reward  of  thy  perfidy  ?  Thou  thyself,  indeed,
through  me  wouldst  have  been  safe  and  unhurt ;  not  because
thou  wast  worthy,  but  because  I  was  indulgent.  I  myself
would  have  sated  my  eyes,  and  thine  too,  which  she  has  charmed
by  her  sorceries,  with  the  blood  of  my  rival.  To  Medea  I
would  have  proved  a  Medea.

And  if,  in  any  degree,  thou  Jupiter,  on  high,  art  thy-
self propitious  to  my  prayers,  may  that  supplanter  of  my
bed91 feel the  same  sorrows  for  which Hypsipyle  is  now

88  Betrayed  her  father .] — Ver.  135.  Because  she  had  assisted  Jason  in
his  project  of  carrying  off  the  Golden  Fleece.  iEetes,  according  to  one  ac-
count, was  afterwards  slain  by  Meleager  in  a  skirmish  that  took  place  be-
tween him  and  the  Argonauts  on  the  sea  shore.  In  contrasting  her  own
conduct  with  that  of  Medea,  Hypsipyle  omits  no  opportunity  of  disparag-
ing her  rival,  and  making  herself  appear  to  advantage.

m  Earned  a  husband.'] — Ver.  138.  Medea  chiefly  recommended  herself
to  Jason  by  her  infamous  and  premeditated  treachery  in  deserting  and  be-
traying her  father.  This  is  a  circumstance  too  favourable  to  the  design
of  Hypsipyle  to  be  passed  over  in  silence.

9u  Indignation  itself.] — Ver.  140.  '  Dolor,'  in  this  verse,  signifies  indig-
nation or  resentment  at  wrongs  ;  for  the  Lesbian  wives  had  been  slighted
by  their  husbands,  who,  on  going  to  the  wars  in  Thrace,  brought  home
with  them  on  their  return  women  from  that  country.  '  Quaelibet'  is
adopted  as  the  reading  in  this  line.

91  Supplanter  of  my  bed.] — Ver.  153.  The  word  '  succuba' has  been
suggested  as  the  proper  reading,  instead  of  '  subnuba,'  which  has  the  same
signification — a  '  supplanter,' '  rival,'  or  '  concubine.'  Heinsius,  however,
thinks  that  the  word  '  succuba'  is  hardly  Latin.


62  THE EPISTLES OF THE HEROINES.  [EP.  VII.

grieving,  and  may  she  herself  follow  her  own  precedent  ;92  and
as  I  am  deserted,  a  wife  and  a  mother  of  two  children,  may-
she  be  deprived  of93  as  many  children,  and  of  her  husband.
And  may  she  not  long  retain  what  she  has  so  disgracefully
acquired  ;  and  more  disgracefully  may  she  abandon  them  :
may  she  be  an  exile,  and  may  she  be  seeking  a  refuge  over  all
the  world.  As  cruel  a  sister  as  she  has  proved  to  her  brother,
as  cruel  a  daughter  to  her  wretched  father  ;  so  cruel  may  she
prove  both  to  her  children,  and  to  her  husband.

When  she  has  traversed  the  sea,  and  when,  the  earth,  let
her  attempt  the  air;  may  she  wander  destitute,  hopeless,
bloody  in  her  death.  These  things  do  I,  the  daughter  of
Thoas,  pray,  wronged  of  my  nuptial  tie  ;  live  on,  both  bride
and  husband,  with  a  bed  accursed.


EPISTLE  VII.

DIDO  TO  ^NEAS

After  the  destruction  of  Troy  by  the  Greeks,  iEneas,  the  son  of  Anchi-
ses  and  Venus,  having  saved  his  household  Gods  from  the  flames,  and
having  collected  some  of  the  vanquished  Trojans,  put  to  sea  with
twenty  ships. Being  overtaken  by  many  storms,  and  having  wan-


92  Her  own  precedent.'] — Ver.  154.  Her  meaning  is,  'As  Medea  has
thought  it  no  crime  to  disturb  the  marriage  tie,  and  to  entice  away  the
husband  of  another,  may  she  herself  meet  with  the  same  usage.'

9:3  She  be  deprived  of .~\ — Ver.  156.  This  passage  is  greatly  commended
by  Scaliger  for  its  beauty.  The  imprecations  of  Hypsipyle  against
Medea  were  afterwards  fulfilled  ;  for  Jason,  attracted  by  the  charms
of  Creiisa,  the  daughter  of  Creon,  king  of  Corinth,  deserted  Medea,
who  nmrdered  the  two  children  which  she  had  had  by  him.  She
then  sent  a  combustible  composition  in  a  cabinet,  or,  as  some  say,
in  a  dress,  to  Creiisa,  who  opening  it,  the  fire  burst  forth,  and  consumed
her  and  the  whole  palace.  According  to  Hyginus,  Jason  also  perished
in  the  flames.  Other  writers,  however,  assert  the  contrary,  and  say
that  he  was  preparing  to  punish  and  even  to  kill  Medea  for  this  out-
rage, on  which,  she,  for  farther  revenge,  then,  and  not  before,  killed  her
children  in  his  presence,  and  then  fled  to  Athens,  where  she  became  the
wife  of  the  aged  iEgeus,  and  had  by  him  a  son  called  Medus.  At  length,
being  divorced  from  iEgeus,  she  raised  a  storm  of  clouds  and  wind,  amid
which  she  was  carried  by  her  winged  dragons  through  the  ah-,  with  her
son,  into  that  part  of  Asia,  which,  from  her,  was  afterwards  called  Media.


EP.  YH.]  DIDO TO ^E>TEA3.  63

dered  from  shore  to  shore,  he  was  at  last  thrown  upon  the  coast  of
Libya,  where,  at  that  time,  according  to  the  fiction  of  Virgil,  Dido
was  reigning.  This  princess  was  the  daughter  of  Belus,  and  the  wife
of  Sichaeus,  the  priest  of  Hercules.  Her  brother,  Pygmalion,  king
of  Tyre,  being  of  an  avaricious  disposition,  and  imagining  that  Sichaeus
possessed  great  treasures,  murdered  him,  for  the  purpose  of  gaining  his
wealth.  "When  Dido  discovered  this,  she  departed  from  Tyre,  accom-
panied by  such  as  were  disgusted  with  the  tyrant,  and  landing  in  Africa,
founded  the  city  of  Carthage.  The  city  was  approaching  completion,
when  /Eneas  is  represented  by  the  poets  to  have  been  driven  upon  that
coast,  and  to  have  been  most  hospitably  entertained  by  Dido.  After  some
time,  being  admonished  by  Mercury,  he  prepared  to  set  sail  for  Italy,
the  country  promised  to  him  by  the  Fates.  Dido,  who  had  been  seized
with  a  violent  passion  for  him,  having  a  presentiment  of  this,  en-
deavours, in  the  present  Epistle,  to  divert  him  from  the  prosecution  of
his  design,  and  threatens,  in  case  of  his  refusal,  to  put  an  end  to  her
own  life.

Descend antt  of  Dardanus,94  receive  the  lines  of  Elissa95  about
to  die  ;  the  words  that  thou  dost  read,  thou  readest  as  the  last
■words  from  me.

Thus  does  the96  white  swan,  as  he  lies  on  the  wet  grass,
when  the  fates  summon  him,  sing  at  the  fords  of  Mseander.97
Nor  do  I  address  thee  because  I  hope  that  thou  canst  be  moved
by  my  entreaties  :  for  that,  against  the  wall  of  the  Deity,  have
I  wished.98  But  since  1  have  unfortunately  lost  a  merited
return,  and  my  good  name,  and  my  chastity  of  body  and  mind,

94  Descendant  of  Dardanus."] — The  Latin  text  of  these  two  lines  is,

Accipe,  Dardanide,  moriturae  carmen  Elissae  ;

Quae  legis,  a  nobis  ultima  verba  legis.
However  well  they  may  agree  with  what  follows,  they  are  to  be  found  in
but  few  of  the  MSS.,  and  are  generally  considered  to  be  spurious.

95  Lines  of  Elissa.'] — The  reading  is  sometimes  'Elisa,'  but  it  is  more  cor-
rectly written  '  Elissa.'  The  word  is  said,  in  the  Punic  language,  to  have
meant  '  a  divine  woman.'

96  Thus  does  the.] — Ver.  1.  The  abrupt  commencement  of  this  Epis-
tle, denoting  the  indignation  and  distress  of  mind  of  the  writer,  is  worthy
cf  remark.

97  Fords  of  Maander.) — Ver.  2.  The  Maeander  was  a  river  of  Asia
Minor,  not  far  from  Troy.  It  ran  into  the  /Egean  Sea,  and  was  so  full  of
windings,  that  it  often  seemed  to  be  taking  its  course  backwards.  It  was
a  common  notion  with  the  ancients,  tbat  the  swan  sang  melodiously  just
before  its  death. This  belief  is  very  frequently  referred  to  by  the  poets.

ss  Have  I  wished."] — Ver.  4.  '  Vovimus'  seems  here  to  be  a  more  ap-
propriate reading  than  'movimus,'  which,  however,  is  more  generally
adopted. Heinsius  prefers  '  vovimus.'


64  THE EPISTLES OE THE HEEOINES.  [EP.  VII.

'tis  a  trifling  thing  to  lose  a  few  words.  Still  then  art  thou  de-
termined to  go,  and  to  forsake  the  wretched  Dido  ;  and  the
same  winds  will  bear  away  thy  sails,  and  thy  promises."  Thou
art  determined,  iEneas,  with  thy  ships  to  part  with  thy  vows,
and  to  go  after  Italian  realms,  while  thou  knowst  not  where  they
are.  Neither  rising  Carthage,1  nor  its  growing  walls  influence
thee  ;  nor  the  supreme  rule  conceded  to  thy  sceptre.  Thou
dost  fly  from  a  city  built :  thou  dost  seek  one  to  be  erected  :3
the  one  region  must  be  sought  throughout  the  world,  the
other  has  been  reached  by  thee.

And  yet,  shouldst  thou  find  the  land,  who  will  give  it  thee
to  possess  ?  Who  will  deliver  up  his  own  fields  to  be  occupied
by  persons  whom  he  knows  not  ?  Another  love  awaits  thee
to  be  entertained,  and  another  Dido,  and  another  vow  must
be  plighted  for  thee  once  again  to  break.  When  will  it  be  that
thou  shalt  found  a  city  equal  to  Carthage,  and  aloft  from  thy
citadel  look  down  on  thy  multitudes  ?  Though  all  this  should
come  to  pass,  and  thy  wishes  should  meet  with  no  impedi-
ment, whence  will  come  thy  wife,  to  love  thee  as  I?  I  burn,
as  the  waxen  torches  tipped  with  sulphur ;  as  the  pious
frankincense  poured  on  the  smoking  altars.  iEneas  is  ever
placed  before  my  eyes  as  I  watch :  both  night  and  day  bring
back  iEneas  to  my  mind.  He,  indeed,  is  ungrateful  and  deaf
to  my  deserts  ;  and  one  whom  I  could  fain  be  without,  were
I  not  demented.

Still,  though  he  intends  what  is  wrong,  I  do  not  hate  iEneas :
but  I  complain  that  he  is  faithless,  and  having  complained,
the  more  distractedly  do  I  love  him.  Venus,  show  mercy  to
thy  daughter-in-law,  and  do  thou,  Love,  his  brother,  embrace

99  Thy  sails  and  thy  promises.'] — Ver.  8.  It  is  a  common  fault  with
Ovid,  for  the  sake,  either  of  alliteration,  or  of  a  fancied  curtness  of  expres-
sion, to  combine  phrases,  which  have  a  literal,  with  those  which  have  a  figur-
ative signification,  making  use  of  the  same  verb.  He  here  says,  '  the  winds
will  bear  away  thy  sails  and  thy  promises.'  In  the  next  line,  he  uses
the  words,  '  cum  fcedere  solvere  naves,'  which  literally  means,  '  to
loosen  his  ships  together  with  his  promise':  while  '  solvere  foedus'  means,
'  to  break  an  engagement,'  and  '  solvere  naves'  is,  '  to  weigh  anchor,'  or
'  to  set  sail.'

1  Rising  Carthage.'] — Ver.  11.  Dido  was  then  engaged  in  building  her
new  city  of  Carthage.  The  word  '  Carthage,'  in  the  Punic  language,  sig-
nifies '  the  new  city.'

2  One  to  he  erected.] — Ver.  13.  She  alludes  to  the  city  which  iEneas
supposed  that  he  was  destined  by  the  Fates  to  found.


EP.  VII.]  DIDO TO ^EtfEAS.  65

thy  brother  ;  let  him  fight  under  thy  banners.  Or  else  I  will,
who  have  begun3  to  love  (and,  indeed,  I  deny  it  not)  ;  only  let
him  afford  an  object  for  my  passion.  I  am  deceived ;  and  that
image  is  falsely  suggested  to  me.  He  differs  from  the  dispo-
sition of  his  mother.  Stones  and  mountains,4  and  oaks  grow-
ing on  the  lofty  rocks,  and  savage  wild  beasts  have  begotten
thee  ;  or  else  the  ocean,  just  as  thou  seest  it  now,  agitated  by  the
winds  ;  which  still  thou  dost  prepare  to  pass  with  its  hostile
billows.  Whither  dost  thou  fly?  The  storm  prevents  thee  ;
may  the  favour  of  the  storm  be  to  my  advantage.  Behold
how  Eurus  is  raising  the  foaming  waves.  Let  me  owe  that  to
the  tempests,  which  I  had  rather  owe  to  thee.  The  winds  and
the  waves  are  more  righteous  than  thy  feelings.  (Although
thou  dost  deserve  it,  deceiver,)  I  am  not  of  that  value,  that
thou  shouldst  perish,  while  thou  art  flying  from  me  over  the
extended  main.

Thou  dost  give  way  to  a  costly  hatred,  and  of  amount  too
great ;  if  that,  so  that  thou  avoid  me,  'tis  a  trifling  thing  for
thee  to  die.  Soon  will  the  winds  be  lulled ;  and  the  waves,
in  their  stillness,  being  becalmed,  Triton  will  run  amid  the
seas  with  his  azure  steeds.  Would  that  thou,  too,  couldst
be  changed,  together  with  the  winds  !  And  unless  thou  dost
exceed  the  oak  in  hardness,  thou  wilt  be.  Just  as  if  thou  wast
ignorant  of  what  the  raging  sea  can  do  !  How  rashly  dost  thou
trust  the  waves  that  thou  hast  so  oft  experienced?  Though,
the  deep  inviting,  thou  shouldst  even  weigh  thy  anchor,  still,
many  a  danger  does  the  wide  ocean  contain.  It  is  not  the  in-
terest of  those  who  tempt  the  main,  to  violate  their  oath.
That  place  exacts  retribution  for  perfidy.  Especially  when
Love  has  been  injured  ;  because  the  mother  of  Love  is  said  to
have  been  born  naked  in  the  waves  of  Cythera.5

Lost,  I  am  apprehensive  of  destroying  thee,  or  of  injuring
thee  who  hast  injured  me  ;  lest  my  enemy,  shipwrecked,  may

3  Who  have  begun.'] — Ver.  33.  t  Quae  ccepi'  seems  to  be  a  preferable
reading  to  '  quern  coepi.'

4  Stones  and  mountains.'] — Ver.  37.  She  here  addresses  jEneas  as
though  he  were  present,  and  with  great  propriety;  because,  in  the  former
verse,  she  mentions  the  deceitful  image  which  she  had  formed  to  herself  of
him.

5  Waves  of  Cythera.] — Ver.  60.  Cythera  was  an  isle  off  the  coast  of
Laconia,  whither  Venus  was  borne  when  she  arose  from  the  sea.

F


66  THE EPISTLES OF THE HEEOINES.  [EP.  VII.

swallow  the  waves  of  the  deep.  Live  on,  I  pray  ;  thus  would
I  rather  lose  thee,  than  by  thy  death.  Mayst  thou  rather  be
esteemed  the  cause  of  my  destruction.  Come,  suppose  that
thou  art  overtaken  by  a  fierce  hurricane  (let  there  be  no
meaning  in  the  omen)  ;  what  then  will  be  thy  feelings  ?  At
once  will  recur  the  perjuries  of  thy  deceiving  tongue,  and
Dido,  compelled  by  Phrygian  perfidy6  to  die.  The  form  of
thy  beguiled  wife  will  be  standing  before  thy  eyes,  disconso-
late and  bloodstained,  with  dishevelled  locks.  "  Depart,  what-
ever it  is,  I  have  deserved  it  all,"  thou  mayst  say  ;  and  the
lightnings  that  shall  fall,  thou  wilt  think  to  be  hurled  against
thee.

Give  a  short  respite  for  the  madness  of  the  sea  and  thine
own ;  a  safe  voyage  will  be  the  great  reward  of  thy  delaying.
Let  no  regard  be  had  for  me  ;  let  regard  be  had  for  the  boy
lulus ;  'tis  enough  for  thee  to  have  the  credit  of  my  death.
What  has  the  boy  Ascanius7  deserved  ?  What  have  the  Penates,
thy  household  Gods,  deserved  ? The  waves  will  overwhelm

6  Phrygian  perfidy.'] — Ver.  68.  Whatever  is  here  said  of  the  loves  of
Dido  and  JSneas,  is  altogether  founded  upon  a  fiction  of  Virgil,  who  intro-
duces this  story  into  his  poem,  for  the  purpose  of  embellishing  it.  Carthage,
according  to  the  computation  of  the  best  Chronologers,  was  founded  only
132  years  before  Rome  ;  and  Rome  was  not  built  until  432  years  after
the  destruction  of  Troy  ;  so  that  iEneas  must  have  lived  very  long  before
the  time  of  Dido.  The  poet  Ennius  was  said  to  be  the  first  who  suggested
this  fabulous  story,  for  the  purpose  of  gratifying  the  vanity  of  the  Roman
people.  Ausonius  has  an  epigram  on  this  subject,  supposed  to  be  spoken
by  a  statue  of  Dido,  which  he  has  translated  from  the  Greek.  The  fol-
lowing is  a  literal  translation  of  it :  'I  am  that  Dido,  whom,  stranger,
thou  dost  behold  in  me,  resembling  her  wondrously  in  her  beauty.  Such
was  I,  but  not  such  was  my  mind,  as  Maro  has  depicted :  nor  yet  was  my
life  pleased  with  unchaste  joys.  For  neither  did  Trojan  ^Eneas  ever  behold
me,  nor  did  he  arrive  in  Libya  with  the  Ilian  fleet ;  but  flying  from  the
rage  and  arms  of  the  lustful  Iarbas,  I  preserved,  I  confess,  my  chastity
by  my  death.  My  breast  transfixed,  'twas  not  madness,  or  grief,  excited
by  slighted  passion,  that  prompted  the  chaste  sword.  'Twas  thus  it
pleased  me  to  die.  I  lived  without  a  spot  to  my  fame ;  having  avenged
my  husband,  having  erected  my  walls,  I  went  to  meet  him.  Why,  envious
Muse,  didst  thou  excite  Maro  against  me,  that  he  might  invent  a  slur
against  my  chastity  ?  Do  you.  readers,  believe  rather  the  historians  about
me,  than  those  who  sing  of  the  stealthy  loves  and  intrigues  of  the  Gods.
Untrue  bards  are  they,  who  blemish  the  truth  by  their  lives,  and  attribute
to  the  Gods  the  frailties  of  men.'

7  Ascanius. ,] — Ver.  77.  Ascanius,  who  was  also  called  Iiilus,  was  the
son  of  jEneas.  She  asks  why  he  and  the  household  Gods  should  be  borne
over  the  seas  at  the  mere  caprice  of  iEneas  ?


EP.  VII.]  DIDO TO iENEAS.  67

the  Divinities  rescued  from  the  flames.  But  neither  dost  thou
carry  them  with  thee  ;  nor,  what  thou  dost  boast  of,  perfidious
man,  to  me,  have  the  sacred  things,  and  thy  father  burdened3
thy  shoulders.  All  this  thou  dost  invent ;  nor,  indeed,  does
thy  tongue  begin  to  deceive  with  me,  nor  am  I  the  first  to
suffer.  If  you  ask9  where  is  the  mother  of  the  beauteous
lulus,  she  has  perished,  left  alone  by  her  .cruel  husband.
This  didst  thou10  relate  to  me ;  and  yet  it  moved  me  not ;
torment  me  thus  grieving  ;  through  my  own  punishment  will
thy  culpability  be  the  less.

But  my  mind  is  not  in  doubt,  but  that  thy  own  Divinities
condemn  thee.  Over  seas,  over  lands,  the  seventh  winter  is
buffeting  thee.  Cast  ashore  by  the  waves,  I  received  thee  in
a  harbour  of  safety,  and  having  hardly  heard  thy  name,  I
offered  thee  my  realm.  Still,  with  these  kind  offices  do  I
wish  that  I  had  been  content ;  and  that  the  report  of  our  in-
tercourse had  been  buried  in  oblivion.  That  day  proved  my
ruin,11  on  which  the  lowering  storm,  by  its  sudden  rain,  drove

8  Thy  father  burdened.] — Ver.  80.  Virgil  gives  to  iEneas  the  especial
epithet  of  '  pius,'  because  he  rescued  his  father  and  the  images  of  the  Gods
from  the  flames  of  Troy,  and  bore  them  upon  his  shoulders  to  a  place  of
safety.  Painters  have  adopted  this  story,  and  frequently  represent  iEneas
as  bending  beneath  the  pious  burden.

9  If  you  ask.'] — Ver.  83.  We  are  to  consider  Dido  as  transported  by
her  resentment,  and  disposed  to  view  everything  in  the  worst  light.  She
reproaches  him  with  having  abandoned  his  wife  Creiisa,  who  was  the
daughter  of  Priam,  and  the  mother  of  Ascanius.  This  is  affirmed  by
some  writers,  while  others  go  so  far  as  to  say,  that  he  slew  her  with  his
own  hand.  Virgil  gives  a  different  account.  According  to  him,  iEneas,
on  his  escape  from  Troy,  missing  his  wife,  whom  he  had  directed  to  fol-
low him  to  an  appointed  place,  went  back  into  the  burning  city  in  quest
of  her,  and  exposed  himself  to  many  dangers  amid  the  swords  of  the
enemy,  but  in  vain  :  the  Fates  had  decreed  their  separation,  and  destined
for  .ZEneas  another  country,  and  another  wife.

10  This  didst  thou.] — Ver.  85.  The  readings  of  this  and  the  following
lines  are  very  corrupt,  and  the  meaning  of  the  whole  passage  is  extremely
obscure.  It  seems,  however,  to  be  this :  '  You  yourself  had  told  me
how  perfidiously  you  had  abandoned  your  wife;  from  which  I  ought  to
have  formed  a  more  correct  estimate  of  your  disposition  ;  but  this,  alas  !
had  no  effect  on  me,  and,  on  the  contrary,  I  pitied  you,  and  received  you
with  hospitality,  and  even  loved  you.  I  deserve,  then,  to  be  still  slighted
by  you ;  and  the  greater  my  blame  in  that  respect,  the  less  is  the  punish-
ment which  you  deserve.'

11  Proved  my  ruin.] — Ver.  93. The  Poet  here  alludes  to  what  is  re-

f2


68  THE EPISTLES OE THE HEKOI^ES.  [EP.  VII.

us  into  the  arched  cave,  I  heard  a  noise  ;  I  thought  the
mountain  Nymphs  made  the  outcry ; 12  the  Furies  gave  the
signal  for  my  doom.  Offended  Chastity,  thus  violated,  exact
satisfaction  for  Sichseus,  to  whom,  ah  wretched  me !  filled
with  shame,  I  am  hastening.

A  statue  of  Sichseus  has  been  consecrated  by  me  in  a
marble  temple,  branches,  hung  up,  and  white  wool  conceal  it.
Four  times  from  that  spot  did  I  hear  myself  called  by  a  well-
known  voice  ;  in  low  accents  it  said — "  Elissa,  come." 1S  There
is  no  delay ;  I  am  coming ;  I  am  coming,  a  wife  due  to
thee  alone  :  but  still  detained  by  shame  at  my  crime.  Grant
pardon  to  my  error ;  an  apt  contriver  of  it  beguiled  me  ;  he
diminishes  the  guiltiness  of  my  fault.  His  mother  a  God-
dess,14 and  his  aged  father,  the  affectionate  burden  of  his  son,
gave  me  hopes  of  a  husband  that  would  be  firmly  attached.
If  I  was  to  err,  my  error  has  a  fair  excuse  ;  give  him  but  con-
stancy ;  then,  in  no  respect  will  it  be  to  be  regretted.  That
course  of  fatality  which  existed  before,  continues  to  the  last,  and
attends  the  closing  moments  of  my  existence.  My  slaughtered
husband15  falls  at  the  concealed  altars  ;  and  my  brother  has
the  reward  of  criminality  so  great.

lated  by  Virgil,  in  the  Fourth  Book  of  the  iEneid,  how  that  iEneas  and
Dido  being  driven  into  a  cave  by  a  sudden  storm,  their  intercourse  first
commenced  on  that  occasion.

12  Made  the  outcry.] — Ver.  95.  '  Ululo  '  is  a  word  of  ambiguous  sig-
nification, being  sometimes  taken  in  a  good,  and  sometimes  in  a  bad
sense  :  the  latter  more  frequently,  however.  Here  it  seems  to  be  meant
in  a  favourable  sense.

13  Elissa,  come.] — Ver.  102.  Sichseus  is  thought  appropriately  to  call
her  '  Elissa ;'  as  the  name  of  '  Dido,'  which  is  supposed,  in  the  Punic  lan-
guage, to  have  signified  '  a  bold  woman,'  was  not  given  her  until  after
her  death.  Some  writers,  however,  say  that  she  herself  assumed  tbat
name  after  she  had  founded  Carthage.

14  Mother  a  Goddess.'] — Ver.  107.  She  here  takes  occasion  to  enu-
merate all  the  circumstances  which  may  serve  to  lessen  her  guilt.  She
had  every  reason  to  believe  that  he  would  prove  constant,  and  a  faithful
observer  of  his  vows.  Being  the  son  of  Venus,  he  had  a  Goddess  for  his
mother.  He  had  given  strong  proof  of  his  filial  affection,  in  the  care
which  he  had  taken  of  the  aged  Anchises ;  whom,  when  Troy  was  in
flames,  he  had  borne  upon  his  shoulders  out  of  the  reach  of  danger
These  were  strong  grounds  for  her  confidence  and  trust ;  and  she  could
never  have  supposed  it  possible  that  a  man,  who  had  given  such  evidence
of  a  humane  and  pious  disposition,  would  treacherously  abandon  her.

15  My  slaughtered  husband.] — Ver.  113. Her  husband,  Sichaeus,  was


EP.  VII.]  DIDO TO J3KEAS.  69

An  exile16  am  I  banished,  and  I  leave  both  the  ashes  of  my
husband  and  my  native  land  ;  and,  my  enemy  pursuing17  me,
I  am  driven  into  laborious  wanderings.  I  am  thrown  upon
coasts  unknown ;  and  escaping  both  my  brother  and  the
ocean,  I  purchase  that  shore, 18  which,  perfidious  man,  I  have
offered  to  thee.  I  build  a  city,  and  I  erect  walls  extending19
far  and  wide,  that  raise  the  envy  of  neighbouring  spots.20
Wars  threaten  ;  a  stranger  and  a  woman,  I  am  harassed  by
wars  ;  and  with  difficulty  do  I  prepare  the  unfinished  gates
of  my  city  and  my  arms.  A  thousand  suitors  have  I  pleased ;
who  have  combined.21  complaining  that  I  have  preferred,22  I

the  high  priest  of  Hercules,  and  was  slain  by  her  brother  Pygmalion.
The  '  internae  arse/  '  concealed '  or  'interior  altars,'  may  either  mean  those
of  the  shrine  of  Hercules,  or  the  altars  of  his  own  Penates,  or  household
Gods.  Virgil  supports  the  latter  construction.

16  An  exile.} — Ver.  115.  For  some  time  after  the  murder  of  Sichseus
by  Pygmalion,  his  ghost  was  in  the  habit  of  visiting  Dido  by  night,  and,
after  informing  her  what  had  happened,  of  exhorting  her  to  fly  from  her
country  and  the  cruelty  of  her  brother.  It  also  pointed  out  to  her
where  his  treasures  lay,  advising  her  to  carry  them  along  with  her,  as
likely  to  prove  serviceable  in  her  exile.  By  means  of  these,  she  was
enabled  to  purchase  the  ground  whereon  Carthage  was  afterwards  founded.

17  My  enemy  pursuing."] — Ver.  116.  This  was  her  brother,  who  pur-
sued her  closely.  Dido  is  careful  to  amplify  every  circumstance,  and
gives  a  long  account  of  the  difficulties  she  had  to  encounter.  Her  husband
murdered,  and  that  by  her  own  brother ;  herself  an  exile,  and  a  settler
amidst  strangers.

18  Purchase  that  shore,] — Ver.  118.  It  is  related  of  Dido  that,  upon
her  arrival  in  Africa,  she  purchased  of  Iarbas,  king  of  Gaetulia,  as  much
land  as  she  could  encompass  with  a  bull's  hide.  This  she  cut  into  small
thongs,  and  enclosed  within  them  that  piece  of  ground  whereon  she
afterwards  built  the  city  of  Carthage.

19  Walls  extending.] — Ver.  120.  She  means  walls,  which,  by  their
greatness  and  strength,  raised  the  jealousy  of  neighbouring  states.

20  Neighbouring  spots.] — Ver.  121.  Iarbas,  king  of  Gaetulia,  being
offended  that  she  refused  to  marry  him,  was  threatening  her  with  war.

21  Who  have  combined.] — Ver.  123.  Some  would  read,  'in  me,'  after
'  qui,'  in  this  line  ;  while  some  MSS.  have  'me  cupiere,'  or  'me  petiere.'
But  the  common  reading  is  to  be  preferred,  if  we  omit  the  preposition
'  in,'  upon  the  authority  of  the  best  copies.  The  construction  is,  '  que-
rentes  me  praeposuisse,'  '  complaining'  that  I  have  preferred.'  '  Coiere'
has,  in  this  passage,  the  same  meaning  with  '  convenire :'  as  in  the
Eighth  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses,  '  Lecta  manus  juvenum,  coiere  cu-
pidine  laudis.'

22  That  I  have  preferred.] — Ver.  124.  She  says  this  in  a  spirit  of  con-


70  THE EPISTLES OF THE HEEOINES.  (EP.  Til.

know  not  whom,  to  their  alliance.  Why  dost  thou  hesi-
tate23 to  deliver  me  up  in  chains  to  the  Gsetulian  Iarbas  ?  I
would  yield  my  arms  up  to  thy  criminality.  There  is  my
brother,  too,  whose  impious  hand,  stained  with  the  blood  of
my  husband,  may  be  stained  with  mine.

Put  down  thy  Gods,  and  the  sacred  things,  which,  by  touch-
ing them,  thou  dost  pollute ;  an  impious  right-hand  but  ill
worships  the  Gods  of  heaven.  If  thou  wast24  about  to  be
their  worshipper  when  they  had  escaped  from  the  fire,  the  Gods
regret  that  they  did  escape.  Perhaps,  too,  perjured  man,
thou  dost  leave  Dido  in  a  state  of  pregnancy ;  and  a  part  of  thy-
self lies  concealed  in  my  body.  To  the  destiny  of  its  mother,
a  wretched  infant  will  be  added,  and  thou  wilt  be  the  cause
of  the  death  of  one  not  yet  born  ;  with  its  mother  will  die  as
well  the  brother  of  lulus,  and  one  doom  will  carry  off  the  two
together.  But  a  God  commands25  you  to  be  gone.  I  wish
he  had  forbidden  you  to  come,  and  that  the  Punic  ground
had  not  been  trodden  by  the  Trojans.  Under  this  guide  (a
God  forsooth),  thou  art  buffeted  by  unfavourable  winds,  and
thou  dost  waste  the  slowly  passing  time  on  the  boisterous
seas  ;  Pergamus  ought  hardly  to  be  sought  again  by  thee  with

tempt  and  disdain.  A  person  to  whom  I  was  an  utter  stranger,  whose
birth  and  rank  I  learned  only  from  himself.

23  Dost  thou  hesitate.] — Ver.  125.  By  this,  she  would  insinuate  that,
iEneas  has  forfeited  his  claim  to  piety  and  humanity,  since  he  has  been
so  far  from  relieving  the  sorrows  of  one  who  deserved  well  of  him,  that,
on  the  contrary,  he  has  plunged  her  into  them,  and  has  then  cruelly  aban-
doned her.

24  If  thou  wast. .] — Ver.  131.  Her  meaning  here  is,  'The  Gods  will
repent  of  having  escaped  from  the  flames,  if  you  are  to  be  their  adorer.
They  would  rather  have  dispensed  with  your  agency,  and  have  perished
with  their  country,  than  receive  the  homage  of  a  votary  so  impious.'

25  A  God  commands.] — Ver.  139.  She  repeats  the  objection  which
Mneas  has  been  in  the  habit  of  making  to  prolonging  his  stay.  He  has
told  her,  that  a  God  commands  him  to  be  gone.  She  means,  doubtless,
either  Mercury  or  Apollo,  by  whose  command  he  sought  to  settle  in  Italy,
as  he  himself  tells  us  in  the  Fourth  Book  of  the  JSneid :

'  Sed  nunc  Italiam  magnam  Grynaeus  Apollo,
Italiam  Lyciae  jussere  capessere  sortes.'
'  But  now  Grynaean  Apollo  has  commanded  me  to  repair  to  Italy ;  the
Lycian  responses,  too,  have  commanded  me  to  go  to  Italy.'  Dido,  how-
ever, is  speaking  in  an  ironical  vein  ;  she  says,  '  Since  you  are  so  scrupu-
lous in  obeying  the  mandates  of  the  Gods,  I  only  wish  they  had  ordered
you  not  to  come  here.'


EP.  VII. 1  DIDO TO -S3KEAS.  71

labour  so  great,  if  it  were  as  great  as  it  was  when  Hector
was  alive.

Thou  art  not  seeking  thy  native  Simois,  but  the  waves  of  the
Tiber  ;  shouldst  thou  arrive,  forsooth,  where  thou  dost  wish,
thou  wilt  be  a  stranger.  And  as  this  region,  which  thou  dost
seek,  lies  concealed,  and,  hidden,  avoids  thy  ships,  it  will  hardly
be  met  with  by  thee  when  an  aged  man.  Receive  rather,  all
wanderings  laid  aside,  this  people  for  my  dower,  and  the  wealth
of  Pygmalion,26  which  I  have  brought.  More  propitiously,
transfer  IHum  to  a  Tyrian  city,  and  hold  both  this,  the  place
of  thy  sovereignty,  and  the  sacred  sceptre.  If  thy  mind  is
greedy  for  warfare,  if  lulus  is  seeking  whence  a  triumph  may
be  gained,  acquired  by  his  warlike  skill ;  that  nothing  may  be
wanting,  we  will  find  here  an  enemy  for  him  to  subdue  ;  this
spot  is  adapted  to  the  regulations  of  peace,  and  to  arms.

Do  thou  only,  by  thy  mother,  and  by  the  weapons  of  thy
brother,27  his  arrows,  and  by  the  Gods,  companions  of  thy
flight,  the  sacred  relics  of  Troy  (then,  may  they  survive,  who-
ever thou  art  bringing  with  thee  from  thy  nation,  and  may
that  cruel  war  prove  the  limit  of28  thy  woes,  and  may  Ascanius
happily  fill  up  the  measure  of  his  years,  and  in  repose  may
the  bones  of  aged  Anchises  rest),  spare,  I  pray,  that  house,
which  offers  itself  to  be  possessed  by  thee.  What  crime  dost
thou  lay  to  my  charge,  except  that  I  have  loved  1  I  am  not  a
woman  of  Phthia,29  or  one  sprung  from  great  Mycenae,  nor
have  my  husband  and  my  father  ever  been  in  arms  against
thee.

If  thou  art  ashamed  of  me  as  a  wife,  I  may  be  called  not  thy
bride,  but  thy  entertainer. So  long  as  Dido  is  thine,  she  will

2S  Wealth  of  Pygmalion.] — Ver.  150.  Dido  carried  with  her  into
Africa,  not  only  the  immense  treasures  of  Sichaeus,  but  also  a  great  part  of
the  wealth  of  Pygmalion.

27  Of  thy  brother.] — Ver.  157.  She  here  alludes  to  Cupid,  the  son  of
Venus,  as  his  brother.

28  7 "he  limit  of  ] — Ver.  160.  '  May  that  cruel  war  which  proved  so
fatal  to  your  country,  be  the  last  you  shall  ever  be  engaged  in,  and  may
no  future  wars  distress  you.'

29  Woman  of  Phthia.] — Ver.  165.  In  saying  that  she  is  not  from
Phthia,  she  means  that  she  is  no  Greek,  not  a  countrywoman  of  Achilles,
nor  yet,  she  adds,  from  Mycena;,  the  native  place  of  Agamemnon  and
Menelatis.


72  THE EPISTLES OE THE HEROINES.  [EP.  VII.

endure  to  be  anything.30  The  seas  that  beat31  against  the
African  shore  are  known  to  me  ;  at  certain  seasons  they  both
give  and  deny  a  passage.  When  the  gales  shall  allow  of  a  pas-
sage, thou  shalt  open  thy  canvass  to  the  winds. — Now,  worth-
less seaweed  surrounds32  thy  ship,  cast  up.  Entrust  it  to  me
to  watch  for  the  opportunity ;  with  greater  safety  wilt  thou
depart ;  and  shouldst  thou  thyself  desire  it,  I  will  not  allow
thee  to  stay.  Thy  companions,  too,  require  rest,  and  thy  shat-
tered fleet,  only  half  repaired,  requires  a  little  delay.  In  re-
turn for  my  kindnesses,  and  if,  even  beyond  that,  I  should
be  under  any  obligation  to  thee,  in  place  of  my  hope  of  thy
marriage  ties  do  I  implore  a  little  respite  ;  until  the  waves
and  my  passion  are  assuaged  ;  until  by  time  and  experience
I  learn  to  be  able  with  fortitude  to  endure  my  sorrows.  But
if  not,  I  have  determined  to  pour  forth  my  life  :  to  me  thou
art  not  able  for  long  to  be  cruel.

30  To  be  anything.'] — Ver.  168.  It  has  been  remarked  of  Ovid,  by
some  critics,  that  he  would  appear  to  greater  advantage,  were  his  lines,
in  many  instances,  transposed ;  because  his  sentiments  are  often  intro-
duced at  a  wrong  time,  and  would  suit  other  parts  of  the  Epistle  better
than  that  in  which  they  are  found.  Here  they  would  seem  to  have  con-
siderable reason  for  animadversion :  for  Dido,  after  having  loaded  ^Eneas
with  reproaches,  has  recourse  to  supplication.  This  would  appear,  at
least,  in  some  degree,  to  savour  of  absurdity.  And  yet,  it  may  be  the
result  of  consummate  tact  and  delicacy.  May  it  not,  very  possibly,  be
his  intention  to  describe  the  giddy  and  inconstant  nature  of,  at  least,
some  part  of  the  fair  sex.

31  Seas  that  beat.} — Ver.  169.  Dido  still  persists  in  her  endeavours
to  dissuade  iEneas  from  his  intended  voyage.  She  enumerates  all  the
dangers  which  he  will  probably  encounter  by  hazarding  a  voyage  at  this
time  of  the  year,  when  the  sea  is  unsettled  and  tempestuous  ;  and  she
then  assures  him,  that  when  it  becomes  navigable  he  shall  not  only  be  al-
lowed to  depart,  but  shall  be  even  urged  to  it ;  while  a  short  delay,  for  the
present,  is  necessary,  that  his  companions  may  recover  from  their  fatigue,
and  his  ships  may  be  refitted.  Finally,  she  will  by  that  time  have  learnt  to
bear  a  separation  with  patience  and  resolution ;  and  therefore,  out  of  regard
to  one  who  has  deserved  so  well  of  him,  he  ought  not  to  deny  a  request
so  reasonable.

32  Seaweed  surrounds.'] — Ver.  172.  Crispinus  thinks  that  by  this  she
means,  that  the  ships  being  surrounded  by  seaweed  thrown  up,  show  how
adverse  are  the  winds,  and  how  boisterous  is  the  sea ;  and  that  this  ought
to  act  as  a  warning  to  him,  not  at  present  to  trust  to  the  clemency  of  the
wayes.  This  seems  to  be  much  more  probable  than  Davison's  suggestion,
that  she  means  that  the  seaweed  is  floating  around  the  ships  in  such
quantities  that  they  cannot  get  away.


1EP.  VII.]  DIDO TO ^NEAS.  73

I  wish  that  thou  couldst  see  what  is  my  appearance  as  I
write  !  I  am  writing ;  and  in  my  lap  there  is  the  Trojan  sword  :
along  my  cheeks  the  tears  are  falling,  too,  npon  the  drawn
sword  which  soon  will  be  bathed  in  blood,  in  place  of  tears.
How  well  do  thy  gifts  agree  with  my  destiny !  At  small  ex-
pense dost  thou  prepare  my  sepulchre.33  And  not  now  for
the  first  time  is  my  breast  smitten  by  a  weapon  :  that  spot
has  a  wound  from  cruel  Love.  Anna,  my  sister,34  my  sister
Anna!  unfortunately  the  confidant  of  my  error,  soon  wilt
thou  be  presenting  thy  tears,  the  last  gifts,  to  my  ashes.  And,
consumed  on  the  pile,  I  shall  not  have  the  inscription,  "  Elissa,
the  wife  of  Sichseus  :"  but  on  the  marble  of  my  tomb  will
there  be  this  epitaph — "  iEneas  afforded35  both  the  cause  and
the  instrument  of  her  death.  Dido  fell,36  having  herself
employed  her  own  hand."

33  prepare  my  sepulchre.'] — Ver.  188.  It  was  a  frequent  practice  with
the  ancients  to  adorn  the  sepulchres  of  the  dead  at  a  great  expense,  and  to
throw  gold,  rich  vestments,  and  armour,  upon  the  funeral  pile.  Dido,
in  allusion  to  this,  tells  iEneas,  in  the  bitterness  of  her  reproach,  that
the  sword  which  he  had  presented  to  her,  shall  be  the  instrument  of  her
death,  and  the  ornament  of  her  sepulchre.

34  Anna,  my  sister.'] — Ver.  191.  She  addresses  her  absent  sister,  who
had  accompanied  her  to  Carthage.  When  Dido  intended  to  stab  herself,
she  dismissed  her  sister,  under  some  feigned  pretence,  that  she  might
not  be  interrupted  in  the  prosecution  of  her  design.

35  JEneas  afforded.] — Ver.  195.  Ovid  adopts  the  story  related  by
Virgil,  and  intends  to  represent  her  as  killing  herself.  Ausonius  has  a
witty  distich  upon  the  fate  of  Dido : —

;  Infelix  Dido,  nulli  bene  nupta  marito,
Hoc  pereunte  fugis,  hoc  fugiente  peris  !'
'  Unhappy  Dido,  married  under  no  good  auspices  to  either  husband ;  the
one  dying,  thou  didst  fly,  the  other  flying,  thou  didst  die.' The  same
has  been  very  prettily  translated  into  French : —
'  Pauvre  Didon,  ou  t'a  reduite,

De  tes  amants  le  triste  sort !

L'un  en  mourant  cause  ta  fuite,

L'autre  un  fuyant  cause  ta  inort.'
Justin  says,  that  Dido  being  threatened  with  war  by  Iarbas,  the  king  of
Gaetulia,  if  she  should  persist  in  her  refusal  to  many  him,  and  being
prompted  by  her  subjects  to  comply  with  his  desires,  named  a  day  for
propitiating  the  shade  of  her  husband.  Having  ascended  a  lighted
pile,  with  her  subjects  standing  around  her,  she  told  them  that  she  was
about  to  visit  her  husband,  and  then  leaped  into  the  flames.

36  Dido  fell.]  — Vex.  196.  Among  the  Greeks,  the  inscriptions  upon
funeral  monuments  usually  contained  the  name  of the  deceased  persons,


74  THE EPISTLES OF THE HES0IXE3.  [EP.  VIII*

EPISTLE  VIII.

HERMIONE  TO  ORESTES.

Hermione,  the  daughter  of  Menelaiis  and  Helen,  was  betrothed,  during
the  absence  of  her  father  at  the  Trojan  war,  to  Orestes,  the  son  of
Agamemnon  and  Clytemnestra,  by  Tyndarus,  her  maternal  grandfather,
to  whom  Menelaiis  had  entrusted  the  care  of  his  family.  Menelaiis,  in
the  mean  time,  ignorant  of  what  had  been  done  by  Tyndarus,  pro-
mised his  daughter  to  Pyrrhus,  the  son  of  Achilles,  who,  by  virtue
of  this  engagement,  claimed  her  on  his  return  from  Troy,  and  carried
her  away  by  force.  Hermione,  being  averse  to  an  union  with  Pyrrhus,
and  passionately  fond  of  Orestes,  sent  him  word  how  she  might  be
recovered  from  Pyrrhus ;  on  which,  Orestes  slew  Pyrrhus  in  the  temple
of  Apollo,  and  thus  recovered  her.  In  the  present  Epistle,  she  entreats
him  to  hasten  to  her  assistance.

I,  Hermioke,37  address  him  who  was  lately  my  cousin  and
my  husband,  now  my  cousin  only :  the  name  of  husband
another  possesses.

Pyrrhus,38  the  son  of  Achilles,  impetuous  after  the  fashion
of  his  father,  holds  me  in  confinement  against  both  right  and
justice.  So  far  as  I  could,  I  resisted ;  that  I  might  not39
against  my  will  be  detained  ;  more,  female  hands  could  not  do.
"What  art  thou  doing,  descendant  of  iEacus  ?"40  said  I,  "  I

and  that  of  the  demus,  or  borough,  to  which  he  belonged,  as  well  as
frequently  some  account  of  his  life.  The  epitaph  upon  the  Roman
urns  or  tombs  began  with  the  letters  D.  M.  S.,  or  only  D.  M.,  that  is,
•  Dis  Manibus  Sacrum,'  '  sacred  to  the  Manes,'  followed  by  the  name  of
the  deceased,  and  generally  the  length  of  his  life.  The  tombs  of  the  rich
were  usually  built  of  marble,  and  the  ground  was  enclosed  with  an  iron
railing  or  wall,  and  planted  round  with  trees.

37  /,  Hermione.]— \  ex.  1.  This  and  the  following  line  are  wanting  in
most  of  the  MSS.,  and  Heinsius  thinks  it  to  be  spurious,  although  it
is  inserted  in  most  of  the  editions.  Indeed,  it  does  not  seem  to  be  in-
ferior to  the  usual  style  of  Ovid,  and  is  not  an  inappropriate  commence-
ment of  the  Epistle.

36  Pyrrhus.] — Ver.  3.  Pyrrhus  is  said  to  have  been  so  called  from  his
father  Achilles,  who,  when  he  was  concealed  at  the  court  of  king
Lycomedes,  in  female  apparel,  was  known  by  the  name  of  Pyrrha ;  so,  at
least,  we  are  told  by  Hyginus.

39  That  I  might  not.\ — Ver.  5.  The  negative  '  ne '  is  put  in  this
passage  for  the  affirmative  '  ut,'  which  would  not  suit  the  measure.

40  Descendant  of  JEacus.] — Ver.  7.  Pyrrhus  was  the  great-grandson
of  JSacus,  whose  son  was  Peleus,  and  grandson,  Achilles,  the  father  of
Pyrrhus.


EP.  Till.]  HEEMKXNE TO OEESTES.  75

am  not  without  an  avenger.  This  damsel  of  thine  has  a
master  of  her  own."  More  deaf  than  the  ocean,  he  dragged
me  with  my  dishevelled  locks  into  his  abode,  as  I  called  upon
the  name  of  Orestes.41  What  worse  could  I  have  endured
as  a  captive,  if,  Lacedeemon  taken,  a  barbarian  multitude
had  carried  off  the  Grecian  dames  ?  Less  did  victorious  Achaia
afflict  Andromache, a  at  the  time  when  the  Grecian  flames  con-
sumed the  Phrygian  wealth.

But,  Orestes,  if  affectionate  regard  for  me  influences  thee,
lay  thy  intrepid  hands43  on  what  is  thy  right.  Should  any
one  carry  off  the  herds  from  the  enclosed  folds,  wouldst  thou
not  wield  arms  ?  and,  thy  wife  carried  off,  wilt  thou  be
hesitating?  Let  thy  father-in-law  be  thy  example,  the  re-
claimer of  his  wife,  when  borne  away  ;  for  whom  a  female  was,
in  his  affection,  the  cause  of  warfare.  If  thy  father-in-law44
had  sat  down  idle  in  his  deserted  house,  my  mother  would  still
be  the  wife  of  Paris,  as  formerly  she  was.  And  do  not  thou
prepare  a  thousand  ships,  and  the  swelling  sails,  or  num-
bers of  Grecian  soldiers  :  do  thou  come  thyself.  And  yet,
thus  ought  I  to  be  demanded  back  :  and  it  is  no  disgrace  to
a  husband  to  wage  a  dreadful  war  for  a  beloved  wife.

Besides,  have  we  not  the  same  grandfather,  Atreus,  the
son  of  Pelops  ?45  and  wast  thou  not  my  husband,  still  thou  art

41  Name  of  Orestes."] — Ver.  9.  Hermione  here  uses  great  artifice  to
move  Orestes  in  her  favour.  She  says  that  she  not  only  loves  him,  but
that  she  has  had  the  boldness  to  assert  it  before  Pyrrhus,  and  to  declare
that  she  depended  upon  him  for  redress.

42  Afflict  Andromache.'] — Ver.  13.  Andromache,  the  wife  of  Hector,
falling  to  the  share  of  Pyrrhus,  after  the  overthrow  of  Troy,  was  carried
captive  by  him  to  Epirus,  and  given  in  marriage  to  Helenus,  one  of  the
sons  of  Priam,  on  whom  he  bestowed  a  part  of  his  kingdom.  It  is  with
reason,  therefore,  that  Hermione  complains  that  even  Andromache  met
with  better  usage  from  Pyrrhus  than  she  had  received.

43  Thy  intrepid  hands.] — Ver,  16.  '  Injice,'  here  used,  is  a  legal  term  ;
for  '  injicere  manus'  signified  '  to  recover  forcibly  one's  right,  without  re-
course to  authority ';  or,  as  we  say,  '  to  take  the  law  in  one's  own  hands.'

44  Thy  father-in-law.] — Ver.  21. Menelaiis,  her  father.

45  Son  of  Pelops.] — Ver.  27.  She  is  here  using  her  best  arguments  to
persuade  Orestes  to  interest  himself  in  her  behalf.  Among  other  grounds,
she  urges  him  from  motives  of  consanguinity,  as  they  were  both  of  the
same  race.  Pelops,  the  son  of  Tantalus,  was  the  father  of  Atreus,  Plis-
thenes,  and  Thyestes.  Plisthenes  was,  according  to  some  accounts,  the
father  of  Agamemnon  and  Menelaiis,  who  were  adopted  by  Atreus.  Aga-
memnon was  the  father  of  Orestes,  and  Menelaiis,  by  Helen,  of  Hermione.


76  THE EPISTLES OF THE HEROINES.  [EP.  VIII.

my  cousin.  Husband,  help  thy  wife,  I  entreat,  cousin,  aid  thy
cousin  :  two  titles  are  demanding  thy  sympathy.  Tyndarus,
a  giver  of  weight  both  by  his  life  and  by  his  years,  bestowed
me  on  thee ;  the  grandsire  had  the  disposal  of  his  grand-
daughter. But,  not  knowing  what  had  past,  my  father  pro-
mised me  to  the  descendant  of  iEacus :  still,  my  grandsire,
who  was  first  in  time,  ought  to  have  most  weight.  When  T
was  married  to  thee,  my  marriage  affected  no  person  ;  should
I  be  united  to  Pyrrhus,  thou  wilt  be  offended  at  me.  My
father,  Menelaiis,  too,  will  forgive  our  affection  :  he  himself
fell  a  victim  to  the  weapons  of  the  winged  God.  That  love
which  he  indulged  in  himself,  he  will  indulge  in  his  son-in-
law  :  my  mother  so  beloved,  will  aid  us  by  her  example.

Thou  art  to  me46  what  my  father  was  to  my  mother  :  the
part  which  the  Dardanian  stranger  once  acted,  Pyrrhus  acts.
Let  him  boast  without  ceasing  of  the  acts  of  his  father :  thou,
too,  hast  the  deeds  of  a  parent  to  relate.  The  descendant  of
Tantalus47  ruled  over  all,  and  even  Achilles  himself ;  the  one
was  a  part  of  the  expedition  :  the  other  was  the  leader  of  the
chiefs.  Thou  hast  also  Pelops  for  thy  ancestor,  and  the  father  of
Pelops  :  shouldst  thou  reckon  aright,  thou  art  the  fifth  from
Jove.  Nor  art  thou  wanting  in  valour :  thou  hast  wielded
arms,  a  cause  of  reproach:48  but  what  couldst  thou  do?
'Twas  thy  father  caused  thee49  to  assume  them. I  could  have

Thyestes  was  the  father  of  iEgisthus,  who,  having  seduced  Clytemnestra,
the  wife  of  his  cousin  Agamemnon,  while  engaged  in  the  Trojan  war,  con-
spired with  the  adultress  to  kill  him  on  his  return  home,  which  was  ac-
cordingly effected.

46  Art  to  me.] — Ver.  41,  '  Tu  mihi  quod  matri  pater  es.'  The  mean-
ing is,  '  As  my  father  was  lawful  husband  to  my  mother  Helen,  so  are
you  to  me ;  and  as  Paris  was  no  lawful  husband  to  my  mother,  but  a
ravisher,  so  does  Pyrrhus  act  the  same  part  to  me,  in  detaining  me  from
Orestes,  who  is  my  lawful  husband.'

4,7  Of  Tantalus.'] — Ver.  45.  Tantalus,  the  father  of  Pelops,  was  the
great-grandfather  of  Agamemnon  ;  who  was  chosen  commander  of  all  the
Grecian  troops  in  the  expedition  against  Troy,  and  consequently  had  com-
mand over  Achilles  himself,  in  whose  valour  Pyrrhus  gloried  so  much.

4s  Cause  of  reproach.'] — Ver.  49.  Her  meaning  is,  '  Though  your  vir-
tues are  not  publicly  known,  you  are  not  therefore  destitute  of  them ;  but
you  have  unhappily  assumed  arms  in  an  ungracious  cause.'  She  speaks  thus
because  he  had  killed  his  mother  Clytemnestra  in  revenge  for  his  father,
whom,  in  conjunction  with  ^Egisthus  she  had  murdered.  Hermione  industri-
ously conceals  this  act  of  dreadful  vengeance,  and  mentions  only  JEgisthus.

49  Father  caused  thee.] — Ver.  50. In  this  line,  instead  of  '  induit  ilia


EP.  VIII.]  HEBMIONE TO OEESTES.  77

wished  that,  on  a  better  occasion,  thou  hadst  been  brave  ;  the
task  was  not  chosen,50  but  was  allotted  to  thy  agency.  Still
thou  didst  fulfil  it ;  and,  his  throat  pierced,  iEgisthus  stained
with  his  blood  the  dwelling  that  once  thy  father  did.  The
descendant  of  iEacus  blames  thee,  and  turns  thy  praises  into
reproach  :  and  yet  does  he  endure  my  looks.51

I  am  distracted,  and  my  cheeks  as  well  as  my  feelings
swell  with  rage ;  my  breast,  too,  suffers,  parched  with  the
fires  within.  And  shall  any  one,  in  the  presence  of  Hermione,
dare  to  blame  Orestes  ?  I  have  no  strength  ;  nor  have  I  the
hostile  sword.  At  least  I  may  weep  :  by  weeping  do  we  dissi-
pate our  anger ;  and  adown  my  breast  do  my  tears  flow  like  a
stream.  These  alone52  do  I  ever  possess,  and  ever  let  fall:
my  neglected  cheeks  are  moistened  by  a  continual  stream.

By  this  fatality  of  our  race,  which  extends  even  to  our
years,  are  we  matrons  of  the  house  of  Tantalus,  a  sure  prey.
I  will  not  mention63  the  device  of  the  swan  of  the  stream :
nor  will  I  complain  that  Jove  lay  concealed  beneath  the
feathers. Where  the  Isthmus,54  extending  afar,  divides  the  two

pater,'  most  of  the  MSS.  read  '  induit  ilia  patrem ;'  and  the  sentence  is
then  understood  to  refer  to  the  method  hy  which  Clytemnestra  contrived
the  death  of  Agamemnon,  namely,  by  killing  him  at  a  moment  when  his
hands  were  impeded  by  a  garment  which  he  was  putting  on,  and  of  which
the  arms  were  purposely  sewed  up.  But  'induit  ilia  pater'  is  undoubt-
edly the  correct  reading ;  the  word  '  pater '  in  this  place  signifying  the
same  as  '  pietas  erga  patrem,'  « filial  piety,'  or,  'just  resentment  on  the
death  of  a  father.'

50  Task  was  not  chosen.'} — Ver.  52.  She  excuses  the  deed  as  not  having
been  voluntary,  but  the  effect  of  necessity  and  constraint.

51  Endure  my  looks.] — Ver.  56.  We  must  suppose  this  to  be  said
with  extreme  indignation,  either  at  the  presumption  of  Pyrrhus  in  re-
proaching to  her  face  her  relative  and  the  man  whom  she  loved,  or  at  the
tameness  of  Orestes,  in  thus  quietly  leaving  her  to  endure  the  insults  of  a
rival. In  1.  59,  '  quisquam '  is  the  reading  adopted.

53  These  alone.] — Ver.  63.  This  portion  of  the  Epistle  is  very  affecting.
She  says  that  tears  are  now  her  only  refuge ;  these  come  always  at  her
command,  and  these  she  sheds  in  abundance.

53  /  will  not  mention.] — Ver.  67.  She  here  makes  use  of  a  rhetorical
artifice,  in  telling  a  thing  by  declining  to  do  so.  She  touches  upon  the
story  of  Leda,  who  was  her  grandmother  by  the  mother's  side,  and
whom  Jupiter  was  said  to  have  seduced  under  the  shape  of  a  swan,  of
which  intrigue  Castor  and  Pollux,  and  Helen  and  Clytemnestra,  were  the
fruit.

54  Where  the  Isthmus.] — Ver.  69. The  Isthmus  here  mentioned  is


78  THE EPISTLES OE THE HEROINES. [EP.  VIII.

seas,  Hippodamia55  was  borne  on  the  stranger  chariot.  By-
Castor  of  Amy  else,56  and  by  Amyclsean  Pollux,  was  their
Taenarian  sister  rescued  from  the  Mopsopian  city.57  That
damsel  of  Tsenarus,  borne  over  the  seas  by  the  stranger  from
Ida,  summoned  the  Argive  bands  in  arms  for  her.  For  my
part,  hardly  do  I  remember  it ;  still  I  do  remember  it.  All
places  were  full  of  mourning,  all  were  full  of  anxious  appre-
hensions. My  grandsire,  Tyndarus,  was  weeping,  and  her
sister,  Phoebe,58  and  her  twin  brothers  ;  to  the  Gods  was  Leda
praying,  and  to  her  own  Jove.

I  myself,  having  my  hair,  not  as  yet59  so  very  long,  cut
short,  used  to  exclaim,  "  Mother,  dost  thou  depart  without
me,  me  left  behind  V  For  her  husband  was  away.  Lest  I
should  be  supposed  not  to  be  of  the  race  of  Pelops,  lo ! I

that  of  Corinth,  near  which  lived  (Enomaiis,  the  king  of  Pisa  and  Elis,  and
the  father  of  Hippodamia.  Being  solicited  in  marriage  by  many  who
admired  her  extreme  beauty,  her  father  proposed  as  his  terms  to  the
suitors,  that  they  should  contend  with  him  in  a  chariot  race.  If  they  should
be  overcome,  they  were  to  lose  their  lives ;  while  the  first  that  should  prove
victorious,  was  to  have  her  as  his  prize.  Pelops  the  Phrygian,  having
first  bribed  Myrtilus,  the  charioteer  of  (Enomaiis,  to  draw  the  lynch-pin
from  the  wheel  of  his  master's  chariot,  overcame  him  in  the  contest,  and
bore  off  Hippodamia,  as  the  reward  of  his  victory.

55  Hippodamia."] — Ver.  70.  Commentators  are  at  a  loss  to  account
how  Leda  and  Hippodamia  can  with  any  propriety  be  reckoned  among
those  whom,  a  little  before,  Hermione  called  "  matres  Tantalides."  This
difficulty  may,  however,  be  readily  obviated.  Hippodamia  is  so  called,
because  she  was  the  wife  of  Pelops,  the  son  of  Tantalus,  and  the  mother
of  the  race  of  Tantalidse  that  sprang  from  him ;  Leda  for  a  similar
reason.

56  Amyclce.] — Ver.  71.  Amy  else  was  a  city  of  Laconia,  where  Castor
and  Pollux  were  said  to  have  been  born.

57  Mopsopian  city.'] — Ver.  72.  Strabo  says  that  Attica  was  called
Mopsopia  from  one  of  its  ancient  kings.  She  here  alludes  to  the  re-
covery of  Helen  from  Theseus  by  Castor  and  Pollux.  The  city  here
alluded  to  was  Aphidna,  to  which  place  Theseus  had  carried  her.  Helen
is  called  '■  Taenaris,'  from  Tsenarus,  the  promontory  of  Laconia.

58  Her  sister  Phoebe.] — Ver.  77.  We  learn,  on  the  authority  of  Eu-
ripides, in  his  '  J.phigenia,'  that  Leda  had,  besides  Helen  and  Clytemnestra,
a  daughter  named  Phoebe.

59  Not  as  yet.] — Ver.  79.  Most  of  the  MSS.  read  'nunc,'  but  one
reads  '  tunc,'  which  appears  more  conformable  to  sense,  for  it  would
be  absurd  in  Hermione  to  say  that  the  hair,  which  was  cut  short  before
the  beginning  of  the  Trojan  war,  had  not  had  time  to  grow,  even  then,
when  the  war  had  been  long  concluded.


EP.  Till.]  HEKMIONE TO ORESTES.  7'J

have  formed  a  prey  for  Neoptolemus.60  Would  that01  the  son
of  Peleus  had  escaped  the  bow  of  Apollo  !  the  father  would
have  condemned  the  insolent  doings  of  the  son.  It  neither
pleased62  Achilles  formerly,  nor  would  it  now  have  pleased
him,  that  a  husband  should  mourn,  bereft  of  his  ravished
wife.  What  crime  of  mine  has  made  the  Gods  of  heaven
thus  hostile  ?  What  star  (unhappy  that  I  am  !)  shall  I  com-
plain of  as  hostile  to  myself  ?

When  little,  I  was  deprived  of  my  mother ;  my  father  was
wielding  arms  ;  and,  though  the  two  were  alive,  of  the  two
was  I  deprived.  I  did  not,  my  mother,  in  my  early  years,
when  a  child,  pour  forth  to  thee  fond  accents  uttered  with
lisping  tongue.  I  did  not  embrace  thy  neck  with  my  little
arms  :  I  did  not  sit,  a  pleasing  burden,  on  thy  lap.  No  care
of  my  education  hadst  thou  ;  nor,  engaged  to  a  husband,  did  I
enter  the  new  bridal  chamber,  my  mother  preparing  it.63  I
came  out  to  meet  thee  at  thy  return  ;  and  (I  will  confess  the
truth),  the  face  of  my  parent  was  not  recognized  by  me.  Still
I  knew  thee  to  be  Helen,  because  thou  wast  most  beauteous  ;
thou  thyself  didst  make  enquiry  which  was  thy  daughter.
The  only  circumstance64  that  turned  out  to  my  advantage  was

60  Neoptolemus.'] — Ver.  82.  Pyrrlms  having  gone  to  the  Trojan  war
when  very  youthful,  ohtained  the  surname  of  Neoptolemus  in  conse-
quence. It  was  decreed  by  the  Fates  that  Troy  should  not  be  taken
without  the  presence  of  one  of  the  descendants  of  ^Eacus.

61  Would  that.'} — Ver.  83.  She  says  that  the  brave  and  heroic  spirit
of  Achilles  would  have  highly  blamed  an  action  so  base  ;  had  he  been
alive,  he  would  probably  have  done  her  justice.  The  arrows  of  Apollo
are  mentioned,  because  Achilles  was  slain  in  the  temple  of  Apollo,  by
an  arrow  directed  by  the  hand  of  Paris,  but  said  to  have  been  guided
by  Apollo  to  the  heel,  the  only  vulnerable  part  of  the  body  of  Achilles.

62  It  neither  pleased. .] — Ver.  85.  For  Achilles,  when  Brisei's  was  un-
justly taken  from  him,  carried  his  resentment  so  far,  that  he  refused  to
join  his  countrymen  in  prosecuting  the  Trojan  war,  and  actually  with-
drew from  the  Grecian  camp,  to  which  he  could  not  be  prevailed  upon  to
turn,  till  Brisei's  was  restored  to  him.  Hermione,  by  this,  artfully  inti-
mates to  Orestes  that  he  ought  to  imitate  the  example  of  Achilles,  and
act  with  the  same  firmness  and  resolution.

63  Mother  preparing  it.~\ — Ver.  96.  It  was  the  custom  for  either  the
mother,  or  the  nearest  female  relative,  to  conduct  the  bride  into  the  nup-
tial chamber.

64  Only  circumstance.] — Ver.  101.  Hermione,  after  giving  a  detail  of
her  misfortunes,  says  that  there  was  one  point  in  which  she  had  accounted
herself  happy,  and  that  was  the  being  affianced  to  Orestes  ;  and  yet  even


80  THE EPISTLES OF THE HEROINES.  [EP.  VIII.

Orestes  for  my  husband  ;  he,  too,  unless  he  shall  fight  on  his
own  behalf,  will  be  torn  away  from  me.

My  father  returned  and  victorious,  Pyrrhus  possesses  me
thus  ravished  ;  and  ruined  Troy65  has  conferred  on  me  this
advantage.  But  when  Titan,  on  high,66  presses  on  with  his
radiant  steeds,  then,  in  my  distress,  I  enjoy  a  greater  freedom
from  sorrow.  When  night  has  consigned  me  to  my  chamber,
shrieking  and  giving  utterance  to  bitter  lamentations,  and
when  I  have  laid  me  down  on  my  sorrowing  couch,  in  place
of  sleep,  my  eyes  are  filled  with  gushing  tears  ;  and  so  far
as  I  can,  I  fly  from  my  husband,  as  though  from  an  enemy.
Often  am  I  bewildered  by  my  sorrows  ;  and,  unmindful  both
of  circumstances  and  of  the  place,  with  unconscious  hand
I  touch  the  limbs  of  him  of  Scyros.67  Soon  as  I  am  sen-
sible of  my  error,  I  start  from  the  body  that  I  have  unfortu-
nately touched  ;  and  I  believe  myself  to  have  polluted  hands.

Often,  instead  of  the  name  of  Neoptolemus,  the  name  of
Orestes  escapes  me ;  and  I  am  pleased  with  the  mistake  of
my  words,  as  an  omen  of  good.  By  our  unhappy  race68  do
I  swear,  and  the  parent  of  our  race,69  who  shakes  the  seas,  the

here,  as  if  the  Fates  had  decreed  that  her  life  should  be  uniformly  un-
happy, she  is  likely  to  meet  with  the  strongest  opposition ;  nor  can
Orestes  in  any  way  maintain  his  right  hut  by  the  sword.

65  Ruined  Troy.~] — Ver.  104.  This  seems  to  be  said  by  way  of  an-
tithesis to  what  had  happened  to  her  mother.  Troy  when  standing,  sent
Paris,  as  a  ravisher,  to  carry  off  Helen ;  when  destroyed,  it  sent  Pyrrhus
to  act  the  same  part  to  her.

66  Titan,  on  high. — Ver.  105.  She  here  mentions  the  nature  of  her
grief,  which,  though  it  lay  heavy  upon  her  at  all  times,  was  the  most
sensibly  felt  during  the  night.  Then  it  was  that  she  wept  incessantly,
the  images  of  her  distress  occurring  to  her  more  vividly,  and  affecting
her  more  strongly.

67  Him  of  Scyros."] — Ver.  112.  She  speaks  of  the  '  Scyria  membra,'
'  those  Scyrian  limbs/  in  a  tone  of  contempt :  Pyrrhus  was  born  in  the
island  of  Scyros,  while  Achilles  was  concealed  in  female  apparel  among
the  daughters  of  Lycomedes,  that  he  might  avoid  going  to  the  Trojan
war,  whence  it  had  been  prophesied  that  he  would  never  return.

68  Our  unhappy  race.] — Ver.  117.  This  family  was  remarkable  for
the  number  of  rapes  and  murders  that  were  perpetrated  by  and  on
its  members;  insomuch  that  the  writers  of  Tragedy  very  frequently
borrowed  their  subjects  from  it.

69  Parent  of  our  race.]  — Ver.  117.  This  was  Jupiter,  who  was  said
to  have  been  the  father  of  Tantalus.


EP.  IX.]  DE1AH1BA TO HERCULES.  81

earth,  and  his  own  realms  ;  by  the  bones  of  thy  father,  my
uncle,  which  are  indebted  to  thee,  that,  thou  having  bravely
avenged  them,  they  are  lying  in  the  tomb  ;  either  will  I
prematurely  die,  and  be  cut  off  in  my  early  years ;  or  I,  a
descendant  of  Tantalus,  will  be  the  wife70  of  one  descended
from  Tantalus.


EPISTLE  IX.
DE1ANIRA  TO  HERCULES.

Jupiter  being  inflamed  with  a  passion  for  Alcmena,  assumed  the  form  of
her  husband,  Amphitryon,  and  by  that  stratagem  obtained  possession  of
her,  and  became  the  father  of  Hercules.  Juno,  burning  with  jealousy
and  hatred  at  the  innocent  offspring  of  this  stolen  embrace,  prompted
Eurystheus,  king  of  Mycenae,  to  join  her  in  attempting  to  destroy  him  ;
an  object  which  he  endeavoured  to  effect,  by  urging  Hercules  to  many
perilous  undertakings;  in  which,  however,  he  had  always  the  good  fortune
to  be  victorious.  After  subduing  many  monsters  and  robbers,  the  hero
married  Dei'anira,  the  daughter  of  (Eneus,  king  of  iEtolia,  who  had  been
betrothed  to  Achelous,  and  from  whom  Hercules  won  her  in  a  contest  of
strength.  On  crossing  a  river,  Nessus,  the  Centaur,  offered  his  as-
sistance in  carrying  her  over ;  but,  treacherously  waiting  till  Hercules
had  gained  the  other  side,  he  attempted  to  ravish  her.  Perceiving
his  design,  the  hero  pierced  him  with  an  arrow  that  had  been  poisoned
with  the  blood  of  the  Hydra.  Nessus,  while  dying  of  the  wound,  pre-
sented Dei'anira  with  a  garment  dipped  in  his  own  blood  ;  assuring  her
that  it  would  prevent  her  husband  from  wavering  in  his  affection  to-
wards her.  It  was  not  long  before  Hercules  gave  proof  of  his  incon-
stancy ;  for,  becoming  enamoured  of  lole,  the  daughter  of  Eurytus,  king
of  (Echalia,  he  applied  to  her  father  for  permission  to  marry  her.  His
suit  being  rejected,  he  captured  the  city,  slew  the  king,  and  carried  off
the  princess.  His  passion  for  her  became  so  extravagant,  that,  at  her
desire,  he  laid  aside  his  club,  his  lion's  skin,  and  the  other  insignia  of
valour,  and,  putting  on  woman's  apparel,  was  not  ashamed  to  spin
among  her  maids.  Dei'anira,  hearing  of  this  degeneracy,  and  giving  credit
to  the  words  of  the  Centaur,  sent  him  the  poisoned  garment.  This  cir-
cumstance is  supposed  to  be  followed  by  the  Epistle  now  before  us,  in
which  she  upbraids  him  with  his  unmanly  weakness,  and  endeavours  to
awaken  him  to  a  sense  of  glory,  by  reminding  him  of  his  former  ex-

70  Will  be  the  wife  ] — Ver.  122.  Hermione  was  more  fortunate  than
most  of  the  heroines  of  Ovid,  as  she  obtained  her  wish.  Orestes  slew
Pyrrhus  in  the  temple  of  Apollo,  and  afterwards  married  Hermione,  and
had  a  son  by  her.

G


82  THE EPISTLES OE THE HEROINES.  [EP.  IX.

ploits.  But  on  hearing,  before  she  has  concluded  the  Epistle,  the  fatal
effects  of  the  garment,  she  exclaims  most  vehemently  against  her  own
rashness,  and  threatens  to  end  her  life  by  her  own  hands .

I,  this  letter,71  the  confidant  of  her  feelings,  am  sent  by  his
wife  to  Alcides,  if,  indeed ',  Deianira  is  thy  wife.

I  congratulate  thee  that  (Echalia72  is  added  to  thy  glories  ;73
I  lament  that74  the  conqueror  has  succumbed  to  the  conquered.
A  report  of  thy  dishonour  has  suddenly  reached  the  Pelasgian
cities,75  and  one  that  by  thy  deeds  must  be  contradicted ;
namely,  that  lole  has  imposed  the  yoke  upon  him,  whom
Juno,  and  the  endless  series  of  his  labours,  could  never
subdue.  This  would  Eurystheus76  desire  ;  this  would  the
sister  of  the  Thunderer  desire  ;  and  joyous  would  be  thy  step-
mother77 at  this  stain  upon  thy  life. But  he  would  not  desire

71  /,  this  letter. .] — These  first  two  lines  are  generally  considered  to  be
spurious : —

1  Mittor  ad  Alciden  a  conjuge  conscia  mentis
Litera,  si  conjux  Deianira  tua  est.'
"•2  (Echalia.'] — Ver.  1. Ancient  writers  make  mention  of  three  cities
of  the  name  of  (Echalia ;  one  in  Thessaly,  one  in  Arcadia,  and  a  third  in
Eubcea. Commentators  generally  suppose  that  the  last  is  the  one  which
is  here  meant.  .  Deianira  is  here  speaking  ironically.

73  To  thy  glories.] — Ver*  1.  The  general  reading  is  '  nostris ;'  but
'  vestris  '  seems  to  be  the  more  correct :  as  it  is  not  likely  that  Deianira
would  assume  credit  to  herself  for  an  event  which  had  caused  her  so
much  uneasiness  as  the  capture  of  (Echalia.

74  I  lament  that.] — Ver.  2.  '  I  rejoice  in  your  victory  ;  but  I  complain
that  you  are  now  the  slave  of  those  whom  you  have  conquered,  by  suffer-
ing lole  to  gain  possession  of  your  heart,  and  submitting  to  her  disgrace-
ful exactions.'

75  Pelasgian  cities.] — Ver.  3.  The  Pelasgi  were  the  most  ancient  of
all  the  people  of  Greece,  and  derived  their  name  from  Pelasgus,  the  son
of  Jupiter.  The  appellation  of  '  Pelasgia'  was  at  first  given  to  only  a  part
of  Thessaly,  afterwards  to  Peloponnesus,  and  latterly  it  became  a  common
appellation  for  the  whole  of  Greece.

76  Eurystheus.] — Ver.  7.  Eurystheus  was  the  son  of  Sthenelus  and
the  king  of  Mycenae.  Wishing  to  destroy  Hercules,  Juno  applied  to
him ;  and,  by  her  solicitations,  prevailed  so  far,  that  he  engaged  Her-
cules in  several  hazardous  attempts,  in  the  hope  that  he  might  miscarry,
and  be  slain.  But  all  this  tended  only  to  increase  his  fame,  and  to
place  his  glory  in  a  more  conspicuous  point  of  view  ;  for  he  had  the  good
fortune  to  be  always  the  conqueror,  and  thus  gained  the  character  of  a
hero.

77  Thy  stepmother.] — Ver.  8.  Juno  being  the  wife  of  the  father  of
Hercules,  was  consequently  his  stepmother


MP.  IX. J  DElAXIEA TO HEECULES.  83

it,  for  whom  (if  credit  is  only  given)  one  night  was  not  suffi-
cient78 for  one  so  great  as  thee  to  be  begotten.  Venus  has
injured  thee  more  than  Juno.  The  one,  by  depressing  thee,
elevated  thee ;  the  other  keeps  thy  neck  beneath  her  lowly
foot.

Look  around  upon  the  world,  at  peace79  through  thy  aveng-
ing might,  wherever  the  azure  Nereus  surrounds  the  extended
earth.  To  thee,  the  earth  in  peace,80  to  thee  all  seas  are  in-
debted ;  either  abode  of  the  Sun  hast  thou  filled  with  thy
deserts.  The  heavens  which  will  support  thee,  thou  thyself
didst  first  support ;  Hercules  placed  beneath,  Atlas  bore  the
stars.  What  is  it  butsl  notoriety  gained  for  thy  shocking
lapse,  if  thou  dost  blemish  thy  former  exploits  by  the  stain  of
unchasteness  ?  Do  they  say  that,  with  firm  grasp,  thou  didst
strangle  the  two  serpents,  at  the  time  when,  a  babe  in  the
cradle,82  thou  wast  worthy  of  Jove?  With  more  honour  didst
thou  begin  than  thou  dost  close  ;  the  last  scene  falls  short
of  the  first ;  how  unlike  are  the  present  man  and  the  child  of
that  day.  Him,  whom  a  thousand  monsters,  whom  the  son  of
Sthenelus,  his  enemy,  whom  Juno  could  not  overcome,  Love
subdues.

But  I  am  considered  to  be  honourably  wedded,  because  I
am  styled  the  wife  of  Hercules  ;  and  because  he  is  my  father-
in-law,  who  thunders  aloft  on  his  furious  steeds. In  the

,8  Not  sufficient.'] — Ver.  9.  She  here  alludes  to  Jupiter,  who  was  said
to  have  united  three  nights  into  one  when  he  begot  Hercules.

79  World  at  peace.] — Ver.  13.  She  alludes  to  the  fact  of  Hercules
having  cleared  the  earth  of  robbers,  monsters,  and  tyrants.

90  Earth  in  peace.] — Ver.  15.  The  Greeks  attributed  numberless  ex-
ploits to  Hercules.  They  said  that  he  traversed  the  whole  earth,  and
established  peace  and  tranquillity  in  all  the  kingdoms  through  which  he
passed.  It  is  most  probable  that  there  were  several  heroes  of  that  name,
the  enterprizes  of  ail  of  whom  were  ascribed  by  the  Greeks  to  the  Theban
Hercules.

S1  What  is  it  but.] — Ver.  19.  This  may  be  thus  paraphrased  :  '  What
have  you  gained  by  all  your  mighty  achievements,  but  the  propagation  of
the  fame  of  your  sad  degeneracy  V  Marius,  in  the  Jugurthine  war  of  Sal-
lust,  expresses  himself  nearly  to  the  same  effect ;  '  Majorum  gloria  posteris
lumen  est,  neque  mala  eorum  in  occulto  patitur.'  '  The  bravery  of  our
ancestors  is  a  light  to  their  posterity  ;  nor  does  it  suffer  their  failings  to
be  concealed  from  public  notice.'

*  Babe  in  the  cradle.]— -Ver.  21.  She  alludes  to  the  serpents  sent  by
Juuo,  w'hich  he  killed  while  he  was  vet  an  infant  in  the  cradle.

u  2


84  THE EPISTLES OE THE HEROINES.  [EP. IX.

same  degree  that  oxen  of  unequal  size  are  badly  matched  for
the  plough,  so  is  a  wife  of  inferior  rank  injured  by  an  illus-
trious husband.  'Tis  no  honour,83  but  a  burden  ;  a  distinc-
tion destined  to  injure  her  who  supports  it.  Should  any  of
you  women  wish  to  marry  happily,  marry  your  equal.  My
husband  is  for  ever  absent,  and  a  stranger  is  better  known
to  him  than  his  wife  ;  and  he  is  always  in  pursuit  of  mon-
sters,84 and  dreadful  wild  beasts.85  I,  myself,  in  my  forlorn
dwelling,  sacrificing  with  chaste  vows,  am  living  in  torment,  lest
my  husband  should  fall  by  the  hand  of  the  hostile  foe.  Amid
serpents  am  I  distracted,  and  wild  boars,  and  ravenous  lions,  and
dogs  that  eat  with  their  three  mouths.  The  entrails  of  victims,86
and  the  empty  phantoms  of  sleep, and the forebodings67

33  'Tis  no  honour, .] — Ver.  31 .  Her  meaning  maybe  thus  paraphrased  :
1  To  be  married  to  one  so  much  above  us  is  no  honour,  but  a  burden ;  it
is  a  dignity  that  hurts  the  person  on  whom  it  is  conferred.  One  thus
matched  has  many  hardships  to  encounter,  must  bear  sometimes  with  ill-
usage  without  daring  to  complain,  and  must  pretend  to  feel  greatly  honoured
by  every  instance  of  favour.'

S4  Of  monsters.'] — Ver.  34.  Such  as  the  Hydra  of  Lerna,  which  had
seven,  nine,  or  according  to  some,  a  hundred  heads,  Cerberus,  Cacus,  and
others.

85  Wild  beasts.~] — Ver.  34.  Such  as  the  lion  of  Nemsea,  and  the  wild
boar  of  the  Erymanthian  forest.

86  Entrails  of  victims. .] — Ver.  39.  The  examination  of  the  '  fibrae,'  or
'  exta,'  the  entrails  of  beasts,  devolved  upon  the  persons  who  were  called
'  aruspices,'  or  '  haruspices,'  who  explained  the  will  of  the  Gods  from  the
appearance  of  the  entrails  of  the  animals  offered  in  sacrifices,  and  also
from  lightning,  earthquakes,  and  the  other  extraordinary  phsenomena  of
nature.  The  art  of  the  '  aruspices'  originally  came  to  Rome  from
Etruria,  and  resembled  that  of  the  augurs  in  many  respects  ;  but  it
appears  that  these  soothsayers  themselves  had  little  religious  authority,  and
were  only  regarded  as  a  means  of  ascertaining  the  will  of  the  Gods.  In
the  time  of  the  Emperors,  we  read  of  a  '  collegium,'  or  order  of  sixty
'  aruspices,'  but  the  time  of  its  institution  is  not  known.  At  one
period  of  the  Republic  this  art  was  considered  so  important,  that  the
Senate  decreed  that  a  certain  number  of  youth  from  Etruria,  belonging  to
the  principal  families  in  the  state,  should  always  be  instructed  in  it.  The
Senate  sometimes  consulted  the  '  aruspices,'  as  also  did  private  persons.
In  later  times,  however,  their  art  fell  into  disrepute  among  the  well-
educated  Romans,  and  Cicero  relates  a  saying  of  Cato,  that  he  wondered
how  one  '  aruspex  '  could  refrain  from  laughing  when  he  met  another.

87  The  forebodings.] — Ver.  40.  By  the  word  '  omina,'  some  would
here  understand  '  auguries  ;'  while  other  Commentators  think  it  to  mean
'  oracular  responses,'  or  '  prophecies.'  It  probably  means  neither ;  but
merely  random  conceptions,  formed  from  any  objects,  indifferently,  during


EP.  IX.]  DElANTRA TO HEKCTTLES.  85

formed  in  the  stilly  night  are  for  ever  tormenting  me.  In
my  misery  I  am  ever  watching  after  the  whisperings  of  doubt-
ful reports  ;  and  by  doubtful  hopes  my  fear  is  dispelled,  and
then,  by  fear  my  hopes.

Thy  mother  is  absent;88  and  she  regrets  that  she  had
charms  for  the  mighty  God ;  neither  thy  father,  Amphitryon,
nor  thy  son,  Hyllus,b9  is  here.  Eurystheus,  the  minister  of
the  unjust  rage  of  Juno,  is  felt  by  me,  the  prolonged  wrath,
too,  of  that  Goddess.  To  endure  this  is  too  little  ;  thou  dost
add  thy  passion  for  strangers  :  and  any  woman  may  become
a  mother  by  thee.  I  will  not  make  mention  of  Auge,90  de-
flowered in  the  Parthenian  vales,91  nor  yet,  Nymph,  daughter
of  Ormenus,92  of  thy  offspring  ; the  Sisters,93  the  Teuthran-

the  night ;  for  nothing  is  more  common,  with  the  ignorant  and  timid,  than
to  convert  the  screeching  of  an  owl,  the  ticking  of  a  death-watch,  or  the
most  trifling  circumstances  in  nature,  into  omens  and  prognostics  of  ill.

88  Mother  is  absent.] — Ver.  43.  She  here  enumerates  the  several
circumstances  of  her  distress.  Not  only  has  she  been  abandoned  by  her
husband,  but  she  has  no  friend,  even  to  console  her.  She  tells  him  that
his  mother  Alcmena  is  not  with  her ;  for  Hercules  having  at  an  enter-
tainment slain  the  cup-bearer  of  OEneus,  had  retired  to  the  court  of  Ceyx,
at  Trachyn,  in  which  place  he  had  left  Dei'anira.

89  Thy  son,  Hyllus.] — Ver.  44.  Hyllus  was  the  son  of  Hercules,  by
Dei'anira.  He  had,  before  this,  been  sent  into  exile  by  Eurystheus.  Ac-
cording to  Strabo,  Amphitryon,  who  was  the  putative  father  of  Hercules,
was  at  this  time  engaged,  together  with  Cephalus,  in  fighting  against  the
Teleboans  and  the  Taphians.

90  Of 'Auge .] — Ver.  49.  Auge  was  the  daughter  of  Aleus,  king  of  Arca-
dia, and,  being  seduced  by  Hercules,  she  had  a  son  by  him,  named  Telephus.

91  Parthenian  vales.] — Ver.  49.  '  Parthenian'  is  here  an  epithet,  sig-
nifying '  Arcadian  ' ;  for  '  Parthenius'  was  a  mountain  of  Arcadia,  which
derived  its  name  from  the  sacrifices  offered  on  it  to  Venus,  by  a  select
company  of  virgins,  in  Greek  called  TtapQtvoi.

92  Of  Ormemcs.] — Ver.  50.  She  here  alludes  to  Astydamia,  the  daugh-
ter of  king  Ormenus.  Hercules  demanded  her  in  marriage  from  her
father  ;  but  he  refused,  knowing  him  to  be  already  married  to  Deianira.
On  this,  Hercules,  being  enraged  at  the  rejection  of  his  addresses,  made
war  upon  him,  took  his  city  by  storm,  and  slew  him.  Astydamia  was
made  prisoner  by  the  conqueror,  and  afterwards  bore  to  him  a  son,  named
Ctesippus.

93  The  Sisters.] — Ver.  51.  This  refers  to  the  fifty  daughters  of  Thes-
pius,  the  son  of  Erectheus,  king  of  Athens.  All  these,  according  to
some  writers,  Hercules  debauched  in  one  night,  and  begot  fifty  sons,
who  were  called  Thespiades.  The  story  is,  however,  told  in  a  different
manner  by  other  authors.  According  to  them,  Hercules  visited  Thestius,
the  king  of  the  Thespians,  at  the  time  when  he  was  about  to  engage  the


86  THE EPISTLES OF  .THE HEEOIKES.  [EP.  IX.

tian  throng,94  shall  not  be  a  reproach  against  thee  ;  of  whose
number  not  one  was  omitted  by  thee.  One  paramour,95  a
recent  transgression,  is  preferred  before  me ;  through  her
am  I  become  the  step-mother  of  Lydian  Lamus.96  Meeander,
who  wanders  so  many  times  in  the  same  spots,  who  turns
back  so  often  to  himself  his  weary  waters,  has  beheld  the
necklace97  hanging  on  the  neck  of  Hercules ;  that  neck,  to
which  the  heavens  were  an  easy  load.

He  was  not  ashamed  to  encircle  his  strong  arms  with  gold,5
and  to  fit  the  gems  on  his  solid  muscles. And  yet99  under

lion  of  Cithseron.  Being  entertained  there  for  fifty  days,  each  night  one  of
the  fifty  daughters  of  Thestius  was  admitted  to  the  couch  of  the  hero  ;  as
Thestius  was  anxious  to  propagate  the  race  of  the  son  of  Jupiter.  Her-
cules, being  unaware  of  his  design,  all  the  time  imagined  that  only  one  of
the  maidens  had  been  admitted  to  his  embraces.  Revolving  time,  however,
beheld  fifty  of  his  progeny.  Thestius  is  frequently  called  by  the  name  of
Thespius.

94  Teuthrantian  throng.] — Ver.  51.  Commentators  are  somewhat  at  a
loss  to  know  why  the  Thestiades  are  here  called  '  Teuthrantia  turba,' '  the
Teuthrantian  multitude?  Stephanus  suggests  that  Teuthras,  the  son  of
Pandion,  was  the  father  of  Thestius,  or  Thespius  ;  but  the  most  probable
conjecture  is,  that  they  are  so  called  from  Teuthrantus,  a  town  of  Attica,
where  was  to  be  seen  a  most  masterly  picture,  in  which  this  story  of  Her-
cules was  represented.

95  One  paramour.] — Ver.  53.  This  is  not  to  be  understood  of  Iole,
but  of  Omphale,  the  queen  of  Lydia,  to  whom  Hercules  subjected  himself
in  the  most  degrading  manner ;  receiving  with  abject  submission  all  her
commands,  which  Dei'anira  enumerates  here  at  length.

96  Lydian  Lamm.] — Ver.  54.  Lamus  was  the  son  of  Omphale  by
Hercules.

97  The  necklace.] — Ver.  57.  On  the  necklaces  worn  among  the  an-
cients, see  the  Note  to  Book  x.  of  the  Metamorphoses,  1.  113.  The
beauty  and  splendour,  as  well  as  the  value  of  their  necklaces,  were  con-
siderably enhanced  by  the  insertion  of  pearls  and  precious  stones  ;  and  for
this  purpose,  as  we  learn  from  Juvenal,  emeralds,  or  stones  of  a  greenish
hue,  were  often  employed.  Amber  necklaces  are  also  mentioned  in  the
Odyssey.  Necklaces  of  great  value  were  often  presented  as  offerings  to
Venus,  Minerva,  and  other  Goddesses.

98  Arms  with  gold.] — Ver.  60.  She  alludes  to  either  bracelets  or  arm-
lets, or  rings  set  with  gems.  For  an  instance  of  the  servitude  of  Hercules,
see  the  Fasti,  Book  ii.  1.  305.

99  And  get.] — Ver.  61.  Astonished  at  her  husband's  effeminacy,  she
breaks  out  into  reproaches,  and  endeavours  to  make  him  sensible  of  his
degeneracy,  by  comparing  his  past  with  his  present  conduct :  in  which  the
disproportion  is  too  manifest  not  to  make  him  ashamed  of  his  recent  be-
haviour. She  tells  him  that  those  powerful  arms,  which  were  formerly
more  than  a  match  for  the  lion  of  Nemsea,  and  were  since  adorned  with


EP.  IX.]  DE1A23XRA  TO HERCULES.  87

these  arms  did  the  Nemsean  plague  breathe  forth  his  life  ;
from  which  his  left  shoulder  derives  its  covering.  Thou  didst
go  so  far  as  to  encircle  thy  shaggy  hair  with  the  cap  ; l  the
white  poplar2  was  better  suited  to  the  locks  of  Hercules.  And
dost  thou  not  think  it  unbecoming  for  thee,  after  the  manner
of  a  wanton  girl,  to  be  encircled  with  the  Mseonian  girdle?3
The  form  of4  savage  Diomedes5  did  not  then  recur  to  thee,
who  barbarously  fed  his  mares  on  human  flesh.  If  Busiris6  had
beheld  thee  in  that  garb,  thou  wouldst  have  been,  forsooth,  acon-
queror  for  the  conquered  to  be  ashamed  of.  Antaeus  would
have  torn  off  the  ribands7  from  thy  hardy  neck  ;  that  he  might
not  be  disgraced,  in  having  submitted  to  an  effeminate  man.
Amid  the  Ionian  damsels,8  thou  art  said  to  have  held  the  work-
basket,9  and  to  have  trembled  at  the  threats  of  thy  mistress.

his  skin  as  a  token  of  their  victory,  are  now  decked  with  bracelets,  and
employed  in  the  unmanly  exercises  of  spinning  and  weaving.

1  With  the  cap.~] — Ver.  63.  For  some  account  of  the  '  mitra,'  see  the
Note  to  the  Metamorphoses,  Book  xv.  1.  654.

2  White  poplar. 1 — Ver.  64.  Hercules  is  said  to  have  adorned  his  head
with  a  garland  of  poplar,  when  he  went  down  into  the  infernal  regions,  in
quest  of  Cerberus.  Hence,  the  white  poplar  became  sacred  to  Hercules,
and  those  who  sacrificed  to  him  were  crowned  with  it.

3  Mceonian  girdle.'] — Ver.  66.  '  She  gives  him  her  fine-wrought  gown,
dyed  with  Gastulian  purple  ;  she  gives  him  the  net- work  zone,  with  which
just  now  she  had  been  girt.  The  zone  is  too  small  for  his  girth  ;  she  un-
looses the  laces  of  the  gown,  that  he  may  get  his  huge  hands  through.'
Fasti,  Book  ii.  1.  319—324.

4  The  form  of.] — Ver.  67.  The  note  of  interrogation  at  tbe  end  of  the
next  line  seems  to  be  unnecessary.

5  Savage  Diomedes.] — Ver.  67.  According  to  the  ancient  writers,
Diomedes  was  a  cruel  king  of  Thrace,  who  was  in  the  habit  of  feeding
his  horses  with  the  flesh  of  strangers  whom  he  had  murdered,  and  of
sometimes  nailing  their  heads  to  the  gates  of  his  palace.  Hercules  slew
him,  and  subjected  him  to  the  cruel  usage  he  had  shown  to  others.

6  If  Bmiris.] — Ver.  69.  This  king  of  Egypt  is  said  to  have  been  in
the  habit  of  sacrificing  strangers,  in  order  to  procure  from  the  Deities  a
favourable  inundation  of  the  Nile.  Orosius  says,  that  he  was  in  the  habit
of  drinking  the  blood  of  his  victims  in  honour  of  his  Gods.  Intending  to
put  Hercules  to  death,  he  was  slain  by  that  hero.

7  The  riband*.] — Ver.  71.  For  the  '  redimicula,'  which  consisted  probr.-
bly  of  ribands,  or  bows,  see  Metamorphoses,  Book  x.  1.  265,  and  the  Note.

8  Ionian  damsels.] — Ver.  73.  The  maids  of  Omphale  are  called  '  Ioni-
cae  puellaa,'  from  the  circumstance  of  Ionia  being  adjacent  to  Lydia.  In
some  MSS.,  however,  we  find  *  Maeonia,'  which  signifies  '  Lydian,'  and  is
perhaps  a  preferable  reading.

9  Tke  work-basket,] — Ver.  73. The '  calathus,'  the  diminutive of


88  THE  EPISTLES  OE  THE  HEROINES.  [EP.  IX.

Dost  thou  not  hesitate,  Alcides,10  to  place  those  hands  that
have  been  victorious  in  a  thousand  toils,  upon  the  smooth
baskets?  And  art  thou  drawing  out  the  coarse  threads
with  thy  stout  fingers,  and  returning  thy  task11  in  its  full
weight  to  thy  illustrious  mistress  ?  Oh  !  how  often,  while
thou  art  twisting  the  threads'2  with  thy  hardy  fingers,  have
thy  too  powerful  hands  destroyed13  the  spindles.  Thou  art
believed,14  unfortunate  man,  trembling  at  the  thongs  of  the

which  was  '  calathiscus,'  usually  signified  the  basket  in  which  women
placed  their  work  and  materials  for  spinning.  These  baskets  were  gene-
rally made  of  osiers  and  reeds,  but  sometimes  of  more  valuable  materials,
such  as  silver,  and  in  such  cases,  probably  of  filagree  work.  Baskets  of  this
kind  were  also  used  for  other  purposes,  such  as  carrying  fruit  and  flowers.
The  name  was  of  Greek  origin,  and  was  also  given  to  a  kind  of  cup  for
holding  wine.  The  term  '  rasilis,'  here  used,  may  possibly  apply  to  the
twigs,  as  being  peeled  or  scraped.

10  Alcides.']—  Ver.  75.  Alcides  was  a  name  given  to  Hercules,  as  some
say,  from  his  grandfather  Alcaeus  ;  though,  according  to  others,  and  with
more  probability,  it  was  derived  from  the  Greek  ciXk?),  '  strength.'

11  Returning  thy  task.] — Ver.  78.  '  Pensum  '  was  the  portion  weighed
out  to  female  slaves,  for  the  purpose  of  being  dressed  or  spun :  when
that  was  completed,  they  returned  it  to  their  mistress,  first  weighing  it
again,  (rependentes)  as  in  the  present  instance,  to  show  that  they  had  re-
turned the  full  quantity.  A  few  words  here  may  not  be  inappropriate  as  to
the  method  of  spinning  among  the  ancients.  The  spindle,  which  was
called  *  fusus,'  was  always  accompanied  with  the  distaff,  '  colus.'  The
wool,  or  flax,  having  been  prepared  and  dyed,  was  rolled  into  balls
loose  enough  to  allow  of  being  easily  pulled  apart.  The  upper  part  of  the
distaff  being  inserted  in  this  mass,  the  lower  part  was  held  in  the  left
hand,  under  the  left  arm,  in  such  a  position  as  was  found  convenient  for
the  process.  The  fibres  were  drawn  out  and  twisted  chiefly  by  the  use  of
the  fore-finger  and  thumb  of  the  right  hand ;  and  the  thread  so  produced
was  wound  upon  the  spindle,  which  was  turned  by  a  wheel.  The  distaff
was  about  three  times  the  length  of  the  spindle,  and  commonly  made  of
a  stick  or  a  reed,  but  sometimes  of  richer  materials,  and  highly  orna-
mented. Theocritus  has  left  a  poem  composed  on  his  sending  an  ivory
distaff  to  the  wife  of  a  friend.  Golden  spindles  were  also  sometimes  sent
as  presents  to  ladies  of  high  rank.  In  the  rural  parts  of  Italy,  women
were  forbidden  to  spin  while  travelling  on  foot,  the  act  being  considered
to  be  of  ill  omen.  The  spinning  wheel  was  a  favourite  implement  in  in-
cantations and  magical  operations. See  the  Fasti,  Book  ii.  1.  577.

12  Twisting  the  threads.] — Ver.  79.  '  Stamen '  signifies  not  only  the
warp,  but  also  the  thread  of  which  the  warp  was  made.

13  Hands  destroyed.] — Ver.  80.  She  accuses  him  of  clumsiness  in  such
trivial  pursuits,  for  which  his  fingers  were  never  made.

14  Thou  art  believed.] — Ver.  81.  This  and  the  following  line  are  wanting


EP.  IX.]  DElAKCRA TO HEBCULES.  89

whip,15  to  have  crouched  down  before  the  feet  of  thy  mistress.
Thou  didst  talk  of  thy  surpassing  glories,16  the  vaunted  praises
of  thy  triumphs,  and  the  exploits  which  ought  to  have  been
concealed  by  thee.  And  dost  thou  say,  forsooth,  how  that  in
the  cradle  thy  youthful  hand  grasped  the  huge  serpents  with
their  tightened  jaws  ?  How,  too,  the  Tegesean  boar17  fell  upon
Erymanthus  that  bears  the  cypress,  and  oppressed  the  ground
with  its  vast  weight  ?  Are  not  the  heads,  suspended  in  the
Thracian  abodes,  passed  over  by  thee  in  silence,  and  are  not  the
mares  fattened  by  the  slaughter  of  men  ?  The  threefold  mon-
ster, too,  Geryon,  abounding  in  Iberian  herds,  although  he
was  three  in  one  1  Cerberus,  also,  branching  from  one  trunk
into  as  many  dogs,  his  hair  wreathed  with  threatening  snakes  ?
The  serpent,  too,13  which,  in  its  fecundity,  multiplied  by  its
teeming  wounds,  and  itself  became  enriched  by  its  own  losses  ?
He,  too,  who  hung,19  his  throat  having  been  squeezed  be-
tween thy  left  side  and  thy  left  arm,  an  enormous  burden  ?

in  many  of  the  MSS.,  and  the  distich  is  supposed  by  Heinsius  to  be
spurious.

15  Thongs  of  the  whip.]— Ver.  81.  She  represents  him  here  as  sub-
mitting even  to  the  lash,  the  instrument  of  the  punishment  of  slaves
in  ancient  times.  The  '  scutica '  was  a  simple  whip,  while  the  '  flagel-
lum  •  was  probably  an  instrument  of  shocking  severity,  the  lash  being  made
of  cords  or  thongs  of  leather,  or  the  raw  hide  of  an  ox.  The  '  flagellum  '
is  thought  to  have  been  generally  used  for  the  torture  of  slaves,  and
is  justly  called  by  Horace,  '  horribile  flagellum,'  as  it  was  knotted  with
bones  or  pieces  of  metal,  or  terminated  by  hooks,  in  which  case  it  was
called  by  the  name  of  '  scorpio.'  The  punishment  was  generally  inflicted
by  another  slave,  who  was  called  '  lorarius,'  and  death  was  frequently
the  result.

16  Surpassing  glories.] — Ver.  83.  This  distich  is  also  suspected  by
Heinsius  to  be  spurious.  Deianira  alludes  to  the  pomp  and  magnificence
of  the  triumphs  of  Hercules,  that  the  idea  of  his  lying  prostrate  at  the
feet  of  his  mistress,  may,  by  the  contrast,  appear  the  more  ridiculous.

17  Tegecean  boar. 2 — Ver.  87.  Tegeasa  was  in  Arcadia.  The  Eryman-
thian  boar  was  brought  alive  by  Hercules  to  Eurystheus.

18  The  serpent,  too.] — Ver.  95.  This  was  the  Hydra  of  Lerna,  from
whose  body  whenever  one  head  was  cut  off,  two  sprang  up  from  the  blood
in  its  place.  Hercules  overcame  this  difficulty,  by  causing  Iolaus  to  apply
a  brand  to  the  neck  whence  the  head  was  cut,  by  which  means  the  flow
of  the  blood  was  stopped.

19  Who  hung.'] — Ver.  97.  This  is  in  allusion  to  Antaeus,  whom  Her-
cules, to  deprive  him  of  the  continual  supply  of  strength  which  he  re-
ceived from  his  mother  Earth,  lifting  him  up  with  his  left  arm,  strangled
with  his  right.


90  THE EPISTLES OF THE HEROINES.  [EP.  IX.

The  troop  also  of  horsemen,20  who,  vainly  trusting  in  their
feet  and  their  double-limbed  figure,  were  driven  from  the
mountain  ridges  of  Thessaly  ?

Canst  thou  tell  of  all  these  things,  when  decked  out21  in  the
Sidonian  garb  1  Is  not  thy  tongue  silent,  shamed  by  this
dress?  The  nymph,  the  daughter,  too,  of  Iardanus,22  has
adorned  herself  with  thy  armour,  and  has  carried  off  the  well-
known  trophies23  from  the  captive  hero.  Come  now,  arouse
thy  courage,  and  recount  thy  warlike  deeds.  Because  thou
wast  not  so  rightfully,  she  has  become  the  hero.  Than  her
thou  art  as  much  inferior,  as  it  was  a  greater  thing  for  her
to  conquer  thee,  the  greatest  man  in  the  world,  than  to  con-
quer men  whom  thou  thyself  hast  conquered.  To  her  accrues
the  renown  of  thy  exploits.  Yield  thy  advantages  ;  thy  mis-
tress is  the  inheritor  of  thy  fame.

For  shame  !  Has  the  rough  hide  torn  from  the  ribs  of  the
shaggy  lion  covered  her  soft  sides  ? Thou  art  deluded,  and

20  Of  horsemen.'] — Ver.  100.  When  Hercules  was  on  his  road,  for  the
purpose  of  capturing  the  Erymanthian  boar,  he  was  hospitably  entertained
by  Pholus  the  Centaur,  the  son  of  Silenus  and  of  the  Nymph  Melia.  The
Centaur  set  before  his  guest  roasted  meat,  though  he  himself  fared  on  it
in  a  raw  state.  Hercules  asking  for  wine,  Pholus  told  him  that  he  was
afraid  to  open  the  jar,  which  was  the  common  property  of  the  Centaurs  ;
but  upon  being  pressed  by  the  hero,  he  consented  to  unclose  it  for  him.
The  fragrance  of  the  wine  spread  throughout  the  mountain,  and  soon
brought  all  the  Centaurs,  armed  with  stones  and  staves,  to  the  cave  of
Pholus.  Anchius  and  Agrius,  the  first  who  ventured  to  enter,  were  driven
back  by  Hercules  with  burning  brands  ;  and  he  pursued  the  remainder  with
his  arrows  to  the  Malian  promontory,  in  the  South  of  the  Peloponnesus.
Eurytion  fled  to  Pholoe,  Nessus  to  the  river  Evenus,  and  Neptune  took
the  rest  into  his  protection.  When  Hercules  returned  to  the  cave  of
Pholus,  he  found  his  entertainer  lying  dead  among  several  others  ;  for,
having  drawn  the  arrow  out  of  the  body  of  one  of  them,  while  he  was
wondering  how  so  small  an  object  could  destroy  beings  of  such  magnitude,
it  dropped  out  of  his  hand,  and  sticking  in  his  foot,  he  died  instantly  of
the  wound.  Hercules  buried  him,  and  then  set  out  to  hunt  the  boar,  the
object  of  his  search.

21  When  decked  out.'] — Ver.  102.  See  the  comical  story  of  the  mis-
take  made  by  Faunus,  in  consequence  of  this  interchange  of  garments  by
Hercules  and  Omphale,  related  in  the  Fasti,  Book  ii.  1.  307,  et  seq.

32  Of  Iardanus.] — Ver.  103.  Omphale  was  the  daughter  of  Iardanus,
King  of  Lydia.

26  Well-known  trophies.] — Ver.  104.  Many  copies  have  '  bina  tropsea,'
making  one  trophy  refer  to  his  love,  the  other  to  the  spoils  with  which  she
had  decked  herself.


EP.  IX.]  DElAKTEA TO HERCULES.  ~  91

thou  knowest  it  not ;  that  is  not  the  spoil  of  the  lion,  but
thine  own  ;  and  thou  art  the  conqueror  of  the  monster  ;  she,  of
thee.  A  woman  has  wielded  the  weapons  black  with  the  venom
of  the  Lernaean  Hydra,  who  was  hardly  well  fitted  to  support
the  loaded  distaff ;  she  has  armed  her  hand  too  with  the  club
of  the  subduer  of  wild  beasts,  and  in  a  mirror  has  she  viewed
the  arms  of  her  spouse.  Still,  these  things  I  only  heard  ;  and
it  was  permitted  me  not  to  believe  report.  Lo  !  the  softened
grief24  is  removed  from  my  ears  to  my  feelings.  Before  my
eyes  is  brought  a  foreign  rival,25  and  I  am  not  permitted  to
conceal  from  myself  what  I  suffer.  Thou  allowest  me  not  to
shun  her  ;  through  the  midst  of  the  city  the  captive  comes,
to  be  beheld  by  my  unwilling  eyes  :  and  she  comes  not,  after
the  wont  of  captives,26  with  dishevelled  locks,  confessing  her
fate  by  concealing  her  features.  She  enters,27  conspicuous
far  and  wide,  with  plenteous  gold  ;28  just  as  in  Phrygia29  thou
too  wast  attired.  High  does  she  carry  her  head  among  the
throng  subdued  by  Hercules  ;  you  would  suppose  that,  her
parent  alive,  (Echalia  was  still  standing.

Perhaps,  too,  the  iEtolian30  Deianira  being  repudiated,  the
name  of  concubine  laid  aside,  she  will  be  thy  wife ;  and  a

24  Softened  grief .~\—  Ver.120.  'Mollis'  here  means  •molliued.'or'softened.'
Deianira  is  not  willing  to  provoke  her  husband  beyond  redress  ;  and,
therefore,  after  having  thrown  out  against  him  keen  reproaches,  she  en-
deavours to  soothe  him,  by  showing  her  readiness  to  discredit  mere  reports
to  his  disadvantage  ;  or,  at  least,  she  laments  that  she  has  had  in  other  in-
stances, too  strong  and  sensible  proofs  of  his  baseness  and  inconstancy.

25  A  foreign  rival'] — Ver.  121.  She  alludes  tolole,  the  present  favour-
ite of  Hercules.

26  Wont  of  captives.'] — Ver.  125.  She  alludes  to  the  taking  of  (Echa-
lia, the  native  place  of  Iole,  and  the  fact  of  Hercules  having  led  her  cap-
tive, and  complains  that,  on  that  occasion,  she  did  not  present  herself
in  the  guise  of  a  captive,  with  her  hair  dishevelled.

27  She  enters.] — Ver.  127.  It  has  been  well  observed,  that  the  words
'  late'  and  'ingreditur'  are  very  skilfully  used  here,  as  indicating  the  careless-
ness and  freedom  of  the  air  which  Iole,  the  captive,  assumed  on  finding
the  conquest  she  had  made  of  the  victorious  Hercules.

28  Plenteous  geld.] — Ver.  127.  Probably,  by  'lato  auro,'  are  meant
broad  hems  of  embroidered  gold.

29  As  in  Phrygia.] — Ver.  128.  She  alludes  to  the  time  when  Hercules
was  with  Omphale  in  Lydia,  clothed  in  female  apparel ;  and  thus  she  deals
a  two-fold  blow  at  the  same  moment.

30  Mtolian.] — Ver.  131.  Deianira  was  the  daughter  of  the  king  of
jEtolia.


92  THE  EPISTLES  OE  THE  HEROINES.  [EP.  EX.

shameful  marriage  will  unite  the  disgraced  bodies  of  Iole,  the
daughter  of  Eurytus,  and  of  the  infatuated  Alcides.  My  mind
shudders  at  the  apprehension,  and  a  chill  creeps  over  my
limbs,  and  my  hands,  becoming  numbed,  lie  upon  my  lap.
Me,  too,  along  with  many  others,  didst  thou  love,  but  me  with-
out a  crime  ;  take  it  not  amiss,  that  twice  I  was  the  cause  of  a
contest  for  thee.  Acheloiis,32  weeping,  gathered  up  his  horns
on  his  watery  banks,  and  concealed  his  mutilated  temples  in
the  muddied  water.  Nessus,  the  half-man,32  lay  dead  in  the
fatal  Evenus  :  and  the  blood  of  the  horse-man  stained  its
waters.

But  why  am  I  mentioning  these  things  ?  As  I  write,  report
comes,  bearing  the  tidings,  that  my  husband  is  perishing
through  the  venom  in  my  garment.33  Ah  me  !  what  have  I
done?  Whither  has  madness  impelled  me  in  my  love?  Unnatural
Deianira,  why  dost  thou  hesitate  to  die  ?  And  shall  thy  hus-
band be  rent  in  pieces  in  the  midst  of  (Eta?34 And  shalt

31  Acheloiis.'] — Ver.  139.  Acheloiis  was  the  son  of  Oceanus  and  Terra  ;
or,  according  to  some  writers,  of  Thetis.  He  had  obtained  this  property
from  his  mother,  that  with  whomsoever  he  might  engage,  he  should  have  it
in  his  power  to  assume  whatever  form  he  should  choose.  Contending
with  Hercules  for  the  hand  of  Deianira,  he  fought  first  in  the  shape  of  a
serpent,  and  then  of  a  bull.  He  was  at  length  overcome,  and  one  of
his  horns  was  torn  off  in  the  contest.  See  the  Ninth  Book  of  the  Meta-
morphoses.

33  The  half -man."] — Ver.  141.  She  alludes  to  the  Centaur  Nessus,
whom  Hercules  pierced  with  an  arrow,  because  in  passing  over  the  river
£venus,  he  attempted  to  carry  off  Deianira.  The  story  is  related  at  length
Jn  the  Metamorphoses.

ys  In  my  garment.] — Ver.  144.  This  was  the  tunic  poisoned  with  the
blood  of  the  Lernaean  Hydra,  and  of  Nessus  the  Centaur.  Hercules,
after  overcoming  the  Hydra,  dipped  some  arrows  in  its  blood,  that  with
them  he  might  ensure  a  mortal  wound.  It  was  with  one  of  these  poisoned
arrows  that  he  pierced  Nessus  ;  who,  finding  himself  on  the  point  of
expiring,  and  wishing  that  his  death  might  not  pass  unrevenged,  called
Deianira,  and  advised  her,  if  she  hoped  to  secure  her  husband's  love,  to  dip
a  garment  in  the  blood  that  flowed  from  his  wound.  Deianira  listened
to  his  advice,  and,  on  hearing  that  Hercules  was  captivated  by  the  charms
of  lole,  sent  the  garment  to  him.  He  had  no  sooner  put  it  on,  than,  con-
sumed to  the  bones  by  the  virulence  of  the  poison,  he  threw  himself
on  the  funeral  pile,  and  caused  fire  to  be  set  to  it.  The  whole  story
js  related  at  considerable  length  in  the  Ninth  Book  of  the  Metamor-
phoses.

3i  Midst  of  (Eta.] — Ver.  147. CEta  was  a  mountain  of  Thessaly, where,


EP.  IX. J  EElAXIEA TO HEECELES.  93

thou,  the  cause  of  wickedness  so  great,  survive?  If  I  still
possess  any  means  of  acting,  so  as  to  be  believed  the  wife  01
Hercules,  death  shall  be  my  confirmation  of  our  union.
Thou  too,  Meleager,  shalt  recognize  in  me  thy  sister.35  Un-
natural Deianira,  why  dost  thou  hesitate  to  die  ?35  Alas  !  ill-
fated  house !  Agrios  is  seated 37  on  the  lofty  throne ;  a  be-
reaved old  age  weighs  down  the  forlorn  (Eneus.  Tydeus,  my
brother,  is  an  exile  on  shores  unknown  ;38  another,  while
living,  was  amid  the  fatal  flames.  Through  her  entrails  did
my  mother  thrust  the  sword.39  Unnatural  Deianira,  why  dost
thou  hesitate  to  die  ?

This  thing  alone  do  I  plead  in  my  own  behalf,  by  the  most
hallowed  ties  of  our  union,  that  I  may  not  appear  to  have
contrived  thy  death.  Nessus,  when40  his  eager  breast  was
transfixed  with the  shaft,41 said, "  This blood  contains  a

by  the  admonition  of  the  oracle,  the  pile  was  erected  on  which  Hercules
was  consumed.

35  Me  thy  sister.] — Ver.  151.  Inasmuch  as  her  brother,  Meleager,  met
with  his  death  on  account  of  his  passion  for  Atalanta,  so  is  it  befitting
that  she  should  die  in  consequence  of  her  extreme  and  reckless  passion
for  Hercules.

36  Hesitate  to  die.] — Ver.  152.  This  is  what  the  critics  call  'versus
intercalaris,'  and  is  four  times  repeated  by  Deianira  as  the  burden  or  re-
frain of  her  lamentations.  Virgil,  in  his  Eclogues,  has  a  similar  instance  :
4  Incipe  Msenalios  mecum,  mea  tibia,  versus.'

37  Agrios  is  seated.] — Ver.  153.  Agrios,  the  brother  of  (Eneus,  taking
advantage  of  the  disasters  in  his  brother's  family,  invaded  the  kingdom  of
^Etolia,  and  made  himself  master  of  it.  This  is  justly  recounted  by
Deianira  among  the  calamities  of  her  house.

38  Shores  unknown.] — Ver.  154,  It  has  been  remarked  that  'ignotis,'
'-  unknown,'  cannot  well  be  the  correct  reading  here,  as  it  was  known
that  Tydeus  had  fled  to  Argos.  Heinsius  suggests  the  reading  « Ina-
chiis,'  which  was  an  epithet  given  to  Argos  from  Inachus,  one  of  its
former  kings.  Her  brother,  Tydeus,  having  slain  his  uncle,  or,  according
to  Hyginus,  his  brother  Menahppus,  while  hunting,  fled  to  Adrastus,  the
king  of  Argos,  whose  daughter  Deiphile  he  afterwards  married.

39  Thrust  the  sword.] — Ver.  147.  According  to  this  account,  Althaea
stabbed  herself;  but  Diodorus  Siculus  says,  that,  overcome  with  remorse
for  having  caused  the  death  of  her  son  Meleager,  she  committed  self-
destruction  by  hanging  herself.

40  Nessus,  when.] — Ver.  161.  She  implores  to  be  acquitted  of  the
suspicion  of  having  intentionally  caused  her  husband's  death.

41  With  the  shaft.] — Ver.  161.  '  Arundo,'  which  literally  signifies  a
reed,  is  here  used  for  '  sagitta,'  as  the  shaft  of  the  arrow  was  frequently
formed  of  a  reed. Hesiod  describes  three  parts  of  the  arrows  of  Hercules,


94  THE  EPISTLES  OF  THE  HEBOIFES.  [EP.  X.

power  over  love.5'  To  thee  I  sent  a  robe  stained  with  the  poison
of  Nessus.  Unnatural  De'ianira,  why  dost  thou  hesitate  to
die  ?  And  now  farewell,  both  my  aged  father,  and  my  sister,
Gorge,43  and  thou,  my  country,  and  thou,  my  brother,  torn
away  from  thy  country  ;  thou  also,  the  light  of  this  day,  the
closing  light  to  my  eyes,  my  husband,  too,  (oh  !  that  thou
couldst  !43)  and  Hyilus,  my  child,  farewell !


EPISTLE  X.
ARIADNE  TO  THESEUS.

Minos,  the  son  of  Jupiter  and  Europa,  incensed  against  the  Athenians  for
the  murder  of  his  son  Androgeus,  made  war  upon  them,  and  at  last
obliged  them  to  sue  for  peace,  on  the  condition  of  their  sending  each  year
seven  youths  and  as  many  virgins,  to  be  devoured  by  the  Minotaur,  the
offspring  of  Pasiphae.  The  lot  falling  on  Theseus,  on  his  arrival  in
Crete,  he  slew  the  Minotaur  ;  and  being  instructed  by  Ariadne  how  to
escape  from  the  Labyrinth,  he  fled  with  her  to  the  isle  of  Naxos,
or  of  Dia.  There,  according  to  some  accounts,  at  the  desire  of  Bac-
chus, he  deserted  Ariadne,  and  carried  Phaedra,  her  sister,  (whom  he  had
also  taken  away  from  Crete)  with  him  to  Athens.  Ariadne,  having
been  left  behind  in  a  deep  sleep,  on  awaking,  finds  herself  deserted,
and  is  supposed  then  to  write  the  present  Epistle,  in  which  she  accuses
him  of  perfidy  and  inhumanity,  and,  after  recounting  the  kindnesses  she
has  shown  to  him,  entreats  him  to  return.

She,  perjured  Theseus,44  who  was  left  a  prey  to  the  wild

the  head  or  point,  the  shaft,  and  the  feather.  The  heads  of  the  arrows
of  the  ancients  were  often  made  of  flint.  The  Scythians  used  them  of
bronze,  and  the  Greeks  did  the  same.  They  were  often  three-sided,  to
make  the  wound  larger  and  more  dangerous.  Barbed  and  poisoned  arrows
were  used  among  the  barbarous  nations  of  antiquity.  Ovid,  in  his  Tristia
and  Pontic  Epistles,  mentions  this  fact  in  relation  to  the  Sauromatse  and
the  Getae,  who  lived  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Tomi,  the  place  of  his  exile.
We  learn  from  other  writers  that  the  Arabs,  Moors,  and  Scythians,  used
the  same  barbarous  practice.  The  arrows  were  long,  light  and  smooth  ;
and  being  frequently  made  of  a  cane  or  reed,  thence  received  the  name  of
*  arundo,'  or  '  calamus.'  The  arrows  of  Hercules  were  said  to  have  been
feathered  from  the  wings  of  a  black  eagle.

42  Sister,  Gorge.'] — Ver.  165.  Gorge  was  her  sister,  being  a  daughter
of  (Eneus  and  Althea.

4j  That  thou  couldst.'] — Ver.  168.  '  Sed  o  possis  !'  The  meaning  is,
1  Oh  !  that  thou  really  couldst  fare  well.'

44  Perjured  Theseus.]  These  two  lines  in  the  older  editions,  and  in
some  of  the  MSS.,  commence  this  Epistle : —


EP.  X.]  AKIAD3E TO THESE¥S,  95

beasts,  even  yet  survives  :  and  you  could  wish  her  to  endure
this  with  calmness.

I  have  found45  the  whole  race  of  wild  beasts  more  merciful
than  thyself :  to  none  could  I  have  been  more  unsafely  trusted
than  to  thee.  What  thou  art  reading,46  I  send  thee,  Theseus,
from  those  shores,  whence,  without  me,  its  sails  bore  thy  bark ;
on  which,  both  my  sleep  fatally  betrayed  me,  and  thou  thyself,
who  shamefully  didst  watch  the  opportunity  of  my  slumbers.

It  was  the  season,  at  which  the  earth  is  first  besprinkled
with  the  glassy  hoar  frost,  and  the  birds,  concealed  by  the
leaves,  utter  their  complaints.  Uncertain  whether  awake,  and
languid  with  sleep,  half  reclining,  I  moved  my  hands  to  clasp
my  Theseus.  No  Theseus  was  there;  my  hands  I  drew  back,
and  again  I  stretched  them  forth :  and  along  the  couch  did  I
move  my  arms  ;  no  one  was  there.  Apprehensions  dispelled
sleep  :  alarmed,  I  arose  ;  and  my  limbs  were  hurried  from  my
deserted  couch.  Immediately,  my  breast  resounded  with  the
striking  of  my  hands  ■  and  just  as  they  were  dishevelled  from
sleep,  my  locks  were  torn.  The  Moon  was  up  :  I  looked  out
to  see  if  I  could  perceive  any  thing  but  the  shore  :  my  eyes
had  nothing  to  behold  but  the  sea-shore.  Now  this  way,  now
that,  and  both  ways,  without  method, did  I  run  ;  the  deep

'  Ilia  relicta  feris  etiam  nunc,  iraprobe  Theseu,
Vivit,  et  haec  aequa.  mente  tulisse  velis.'
But,  from  their  meagreness,  they  are  considered  by  Heinsius  and  other
Commentators  to  be  spurious.

45  I have  found. ,] — Ver.  1.  The  whole  of  this  Epistle  is  an  expostu-
lation with  Theseus  for  his  cruelty  and  ingratitude.  She  begins,  there-
fore, with  reproaching  him  as  being  more  cruel  than  the  fiercest  beasts.
She  has  felt  the  effects  of  his  barbarity,  in  his  desertion  of  her,  whereas,
hitherto,  the  wild  beasts  have  given  her  nc  disturbance.

46  Thou  art  reading.'] — Ver.  3.  Apollonius  Rhodius,  in  the  Fourth  Book
of  his  Argonautics,  says  that  Dia  was  the  island  on  which  Ariadne  was
deserted  by  Theseus.  Others,  among  whom  is  Plutarch,  say  tbat  sbe  was
left  in  the  island  of  Naxos.  Hyginus,  in  his  Fables,  gives  the  following
statement:  ; Theseus  being  detained  by  a  tempest  in  the  island  of  Dia,
thinking  that  if  he  took  Ariadne  with  him  to  his  own  country,  she  might
disgrace  him,  left  her  asleep  in  the  island  of  Dia.  Bacchus,  falling  in  love
with  her,  took  her  to  be  his  wife.  Theseus,  on  setting  sail,  forgot  to
change  his  black  sails  [for  white  ones]  ;  ^Egeus,  therefore,  supposing  that
Theseus  had  been  devoured  by  the  Minotaur,  threw  himself  into  the
waves,  which  thence  derived  the  name  of  the  iEgean  Sea.  Theseus  after-
wards married  Pha.-dra,  the  sister  of  Ariadne.'  Some  writers  think  that
Dia  was  another  name  of  the  isle  of  Naxos.


96  THE EPISTLES OF THE HEEOENES.  [EP.  X.

3and47  retarded  my  feminine  steps.  Meanwhile,  as  I  shouted
"  Theseus !"  along  all  the  shore,  the  hollow  rocks  reechoed  with
thy  name  •  and  as  oft  as  I  called  on  thee,  so  oft  did  that  spot
call  thee  by  name  ;  the  spot  itself  was  wishful  to  give  aid  to
wretched  me.

There  was  a  mountain  :48  a  few  shrubs  were  seen  on  its
summit :  hence,  a  rock,  hollowed  out,  hung  over  the  hoarse
waves.  This  I  ascended,  (my  passion  gave  me  strength)  and
thus,  far  and  wide  did  I  survey  the  deep  sea  with  my  gaze.
Thence  did  I  see  (for  even  by  the  cruel  winds  have  I  been  ill
used)  thy  canvass  swelled  by  the  precipitate  South  wind.
Either  I  did  see  this,49  or  even,  when  I  was  imagining  I  saw  it,  I
was  colder  than  ice,  and  half  dead  with  despair.  Grief  did  not
long  allow  me  to  be  motionless  :  at  this  I  was  aroused,  yes,  I
was  aroused:  and  with  my  loudest  voice  I  called  upon  Theseus.
"  Whither  art  thou  flying  ?"  I  exclaimed,  "  perjured  Theseus,
return  ;  change  the  course  of  thy  ship  :  she  contains  not  her
complement."50  Thus  said  I  ;51  what  was  wanting  in  words
I  made  up  in  beating  my  bosom  :  with  my  words52  were  blows

47  The  deep  sand.'] — Ver.  20.  Sand,  when  half  dry,  yields  to  the  pres-
sure of  the  feet,  and  speedily  fatigues  them.

48  A  ■mountain.'] — Ver.  25.  Catullus,  Poem  lxiv.  1.  126,  says  that  the
name  of  this  mountain  was  Dryos,  and  that  thither  Ariadne  was  afterwards
taken  by  Bacchus.

4a  /  did  see  this.] — Ver.  30.  It  is  natural  to  suppose  that  the  concern  of
Ariadne  would  readily  lead  her  to  exaggerate  her  misfortunes.  She  was
left  by  herself  on  an  unknown  and  desolate  island ;  when  she  ran  down  to
the  shore,  she  found  that  the  ship  had  sailed,  and  was  on  its  way.  Her  sad
case  was  then  irretrievable,  and  her  imagination  multiplied  the  dangers.
She  accuses  the  winds  of  having  conspired  against  her,  and  as  having
been  too  favourable  to  the  fatal  project  of  Theseus  :  even  now,  she  says,
they  seemed  striving  to  bear  the  vessel  out  of  sight.

50  Her  complement.] — Ver.  36.  '  Your  ship  has  not  her  full  number  on
board :  for  Ariadne,  whom  she  brought  with  her  from  Crete,  is  not  on
board.'

51  Thus  said  I.] — Ver.  37.  The  unhappy  circumstances  of  Ariadne  are
here  painted  with  great  spirit  and  life.  Ovid  shows  extreme  skill  in  de-
picting the  violent  emotions  and  transports  of  the  mind,  arising  from  a
sudden  conflict  of  the  passions.  Her  surprise  on  awaking  and  missing  The-
seus, then  running  instantly  to  the  shore,  her  despair  on  seeing  his  ship
under  sail,  her  accusations  of  the  winds,  her  exclamations,  and  the  beat-
ing of  her  breast,  are  all  so  many  symptoms  of  a  heart  pierced  with
grief,  from  the  sense  of  losing  what  is  most  dear  and  valuable.

bi  With  my  words.] — Ver.  38. 'Verbera  cum  verbis,' 'Blows  with


EP.  X.J  AKIADKE TO THESEUS.  97

intermingled.  If  thou  couldst  not  hear,  my  hands  waved
aloft  gave  the  signal,  that,  at  least,  thou  mightst  be  able  to
perceive  me.  I  placed,  too,  a  white  robe  upon  along  stick,  to
remind  those  who,  forsooth,  had  forgotten  me.

And  now  thou  wast  withdrawn  from  my  eyes  :  then  at  length
did  I  weep  :  my  tender  cheeks  before  had  grown  rigid  with
grief.  What  could  my  eyes  do  better  than  lament  my  state,
after  they  had  ceased  to  look  upon  thy  sails  1  Either  I  wan-
dered alone,  with  dishevelled  locks,  just  as  a  Bacchanal  in-
spired by  the  Ogygian  Deity;53  or  else,  looking  down  upon  the
sea,  I  sat,  chilled,  upon  the  cliff ;  and,  as  much  a  rock  was  I,
as  my  seat  was  a  rock.  Often  did  I  repair  to  the  bed,  which
had  received  us  both  :  but  it  was  not  again  to  show  those  it
had  so  received.  And,  wherever  I  could,  in  place  of  thyself,
I  touched  thy  impress,  and  the  bed54  which  had  been  warmed
by  thy  limbs.  I  laid  me  down,55  and,  the  couch  drenched  with
my  flowing  tears,  I  exclaimed,  "  We  two  have  pressed  thee  :
bring  back  those  two. Hither  we  both  have  come  ;  why  do

words.'  Ovid  never  loses  the  opportunity  of  a  play  upon  words,  or  a
smooth  piece  of  alliteration.  Even  the  grief  of  Ariadne  cannot  be  proof
against  so  strong  a  temptation.

53  Ogygian  Deity. ,]  —  Ver.  48.  Bacchus  was  the  son  of  Semele,  the
daughter  of  Cadmus,  who  founded  the  city  of  Thebes,  in  Bceotia.  Ogyges
was  an  ancient  king  of  Bceotia,  whom  Pausanias  calls  avroxOwv, '  or  sprung
from  the  earth.'  He  says  that  his  people  being  destroyed  by  a  pestilence,
the  country  was  repeopled  by  the  Hyantes  and  the  Aones,  up  to  the
period  of  the  arrival  of  Cadmus,  by  whom  Thebes  was  founded.

54  And  the  bed.] — Ver.  54.  The  '  strata,'  which  we  generally  call  '  bed-
clothes,' consisted  of  blankets  or  counterpanes,  which,  among  the  Romans,
were  often  of  a  very  costly  description.  These  were  called  '  vestes  stra-
gulae,'  '  stragula,'  '  peristromata,'  and  '  peripetasmata.'  The  cloth  or  tick-
ing of  which  the  beds  or  mattresses  were  made,  was  called  '  toral,'  '  torale,'
'  linteum  '  or  '  segestre.'  Pillows  called  '  lecticae,'  were  also  used  on  the
beds.

55  /  laid  me  down.~\ — Ver.  55.  Nothing  can  be  more  happily  conceived,
than  this  description  of  the  behaviour  of  Ariadne.  The  whole  picture  is
extremely  natural,  and  suits  so  well  her  present  situation,  that  a  reader
is  apt  to  think  that  she  coidd  not  have  acted  otherwise,  and  fancies  that
the  same  sentiments  must  occur  to  every  one  when  placed  in  a  similar
position ;  a  sure  sign  that  the  description  is  faithful  to  nature  and  truth.
Horace  admirably  describes  this  test  of  true  poetry  in  his  Art  of  Poetry :

' Ut  sibi  quivis

Speret  idem,  sudet  rnultum  frustraque  laboret
Ausus  idem.'

H


98  THE EPISTLES OF THE HEEOINES.  |_EP- X*

we  not  both  depart  ?  Perfidious  couch,  where  is  the  more
valued  half  of  us?"  What  shall  I  do  ?56  Whither,  deserted,
betake  myself  ?  The  island  is  without  cultivation  :  I  see  no
traces  of  men,  none  of  oxen.  The  sea  surrounds  every  side
of  the  land  ;  nowhere  is  there  a  mariner  :  no  ship  to  go  upon
its  veering  path.  Suppose  both  companions,  and  winds,  and
a  ship  to  be  granted  me  ;  what  shall  I  attempt  ?  My  native
land  denies  me  access.  Suppose,  in  a  bark  favourably  speed-
ing, I  traverse  the  appeased  seas  ;  though  iEolus  should
moderate  the  winds,  I  shall  be  an  exile.

Crete,  I  shall  not  behold  thee,  divided  into  thy  hundred
cities,57  a  land  known  to  Jove  in  his  childhood.  For  my
father,  and  the  land  ruled  by  my  great  parent,  names  so  dear,
have  been  betrayed  bymy  agency ;  at  the  time  when,  for  thy  guid-
ance, I  gave  thee  the  clue  which  was  to  guide  thy  footsteps,
that  thou  victorious  mightst  not  perish  in  the  winding  abode  ;58
when  thou  didst  say  to  me,  "  By  these  very  dangers  do  I
swear  that  thou  shalt  be  my  own,  while  each  of  us  shall  sur-

56  What  shall  I  do .?] — Ver.  59.  The  island  being  uninhabited  and  un-
cultivated, the  cruelty  of  Theseus  was  the  more  remarkable.

57  Hundred  cities.] — Ver.  67.  The  hundred  cities  of  the  isle  of  Crete
are  often  mentioned  in  the  writings  of  the  ancients ;  and  for  this  proof  of
its  populousness.  it  was  especially  famous.  The  notion  most  probably
took  its  rise  from  Homer ;  but  we  may  suppose,  that  the  small  towns,  and
even  villages,  were  included  in  that  number.

58  Winding  abode. ~\ — Ver.  71.  She  means  the  Labyrinth,  from  which
Theseus  extricated  himself,  after  he  had  conquered  the  Minotaur,  by
means  of  a  clue  which  he  had  received  from  her.  Although  the  Cretan
Labyrinth  is  repeatedly  mentioned  by  ancient  authors,  yet  none  of  them
speak  as  having  ever  seen  it ;  indeed,  Diodorus  Siculus  and  Pliny  the
Elder  expressly  state  that  not  a  trace  of  it  was  to  be  seen  in  their  days.
This  fact,  together  with  the  extreme  difficulty  of  accounting  for  the  rea-
sons which  could  have  induced  the  king  of  an  island  of  but  moderate  size
to  construct  such  a  building,  have  induced  most  modern  writers  to
doubt  the  existence  of  the  Cretan  Labyrinth.  This  opinion  is  sup-
ported, not  only  by  the  testimonies  of  some  of  the  ancients,  but,  in  some
measure,  by  the  peculiar  nature  of  the  island.  The  author  of  the  'Etymolo-
gicum  Magnum'  calls  the  Cretan  Labyrinth  '  a  mountain  with  a  cavern  -,'
and  Eustathius,  in  his  Commentary  on  the  Odyssey,  Book  xi.,  calls  it  '  a
subterraneous  cavern.'  Such  caverns  still  exist  in  some  parts  of  Crete,
especially  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  ancient  town  of  Gortys  ;  perhaps
some  such  cavern  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Cnossus,  where  Minos  resided,
gave  rise  to  the  story  of  a  Labyrinth  built  there  in  his  reign.  The  word
'  Labyrinth'  is  supposed  to  be  of  Greek  origin,  though  an  Egyptian  deri-
vation has  been  suggested  by  some  scholars.


EP.  X.]  AETADXE TO THESEUS.  99

vive."  We  do  survive ;  and,  Theseus,  I  am  not  thine ;  if
only  thou  dost  survive,  a  woman,  entombed  by  the  treachery  of
thy  perjured  husband.  Me  too,  perjured  man,  thou  shouldst
have  slain  with  the  club  with  which  thou  didst  slay  my  bro-
ther; the  vow  which  thou  hadst  uttered  would  have  been
cancelled  by  my  death.69  Now,  not  only  do  I  bring  to  mind
the  things  which  I  am  destined  to  suffer,  but  whatever  any
female,  when  deserted,  can  endure.  A  thousand  shapes60  of
destruction  suggest  themselves  to  my  mind ;  and  death  is  a
less  punishment  than  the  delay  of  death.

Each  moment  do  I  apprehend  that,  this  way  or  that,  the
wolves  are  about  to  come  to  tear  my  entrails  with  ravening
teeth.  Perhaps,  too,  this  land  nourishes  tawny  lions ;
who  knows  whether  this  isle  does  not  contain  the  savage
tigers?  The  seas,  also,  are  said  to  send  forth  huge  sea-
calves  :C1  what  prevents  the  sword,62  too,  from  piercing  my
side  ?  Only  may  I  not,  as  a  captive,63  be  bound  in  cruel
chains  ;  and  may  I  not  with  the  hand  of  servitude  draw  out
my  weary  task — I,  whose  father  is  Minos,  whose  mother  is  the
daughter  of  Phoebus  ;  and,  what  I  better  recollect,  I,  who  was
promised  to  thee. If  I  behold  the  sea,  the  earth  and  the  ex-

59  By  my  death, .] — Ver.  78.  The  note  of  Crispinus  on  this  passage  is
worth  transcribing :  '  Because  Theseus  had  only  plighted  his  faith  as  long
as  both  of  them  were  living. — The  idea  is  an  ingenious  one ;  as  though
he  had  been  guilty  of  such  a  crime,  that,  had  he  slain  his  wife,  he  would
have  then  appeared  to  keep  his  word:

60  A thousand shapes, .] — Ver.  81.  She  saysthatdeathpresentshimself  before
her  imagination  in  a  thousand  shapes.  She  finds  herself  left  on  a  desolate
island,  without  even  one  person  to  protect  her ;  and,  as  she  apprehends,
surrounded  with  wild  beasts.  We  must  not  wonder,  then,  if  she  is  alarmed
by  the  apprehension  of  dangers  that  may  turn  out  to  be  imaginary.  Such
fear  is  natural  and  fully  to  be  expected,  under  the  circumstances  of  the
case.

61  Huge  sea-calves.] — Ver.  87.  Pliny  says,  that  the  sleep  of  the  seal,  or
sea-calf,  is  sounder  than  that  of  any  other  animal.

63  The  sivord.~\ — Ver.  88.  This,  of  course,  as  the  island  was  uninhabited,
must  mean  the  sword  of  any  person  who  might  chance  to  land  there,  such
as  pirates,  or  other  lawless  characters.

03  As  a  captive.'] — Ver.  90.  Slavery  is  what  she  is  most  in  dread  of.
It  appears  shameful  for  her,  the  daughter  of  a  king  and  a  descendant  of
Phoebus,  and,  above  all,  one  who  has  been  united  to  Theseus,  to  be  made
a  captive,  and  to  be  subjected  to  the  imperious  humour  of  a  mistress,
who,  without  regard  to  her  birth,  may  require  the  most  servile  submis-
sion and  obedience.

H  2


100  THE  EPISTLES  OE  THE  HEROINES.  [EP.  X.

tended  shore,  greatly  is  the  land  threatening  to  me,  greatly
the  seas.  The  heavens  still  remain  :64  I  dread  the  forms  of
the  Gods.  I  am  left  a  prey  and  a  food  for  ravening  wild
beasts.  Or,  if  men  cultivate  and  inhabit  this  place,  them
do  I  distrust :  once  a  sufferer,  I  have  learned  to  dread  strange
men.65

Would  that  Androgeus66  had  lived  ;  and  that  thou,  land  of
Cecrops,  hadst  not  atoned  for  thy  impious  deeds,  by  the
death  of  thy  natives !  that  thy  right  hand,  too,  Theseus,
lifted  on  high,  had  not  slain  with  the  knotted  club  him  who
was,  partly  a  man,  partly  a  bull !  And  would  that  I  had
not  given  thee  the  clue  to  show  thee  how  to  return  ;  the
thread  so  oft  wound  up  by  thy  tightened  hands !  For  my
part,  I  wonder  not  that  victory  rests  with  thee,  and  the  pros-
trate monster  stained  with  its  blood  the  Cretan  ground.  A
heart  of  iron  could  not  be  pierced  by  his  horn  ;  even  though
thou  hadst  not  covered  thyself,  with  thy  breast  thou  wast
safe.  There  dost  thou  bear  flint,  there,  too,  adamant.67  There,
Theseus,  thou  hast  that  which  surpasses  flint-stones.  Cruel
slumbers,68  why  did  you  keep  me  in  unconsciousness  ?  Rather
ought  I,  at  once,  to  have  been  overwhelmed  with  eternal  night.
You,  too,  cruel  winds,  and  far  too  well  prepared  against  me;  and
you,  ye  breezes,  ready  causes  of  my  tears.

6i  Still  remain.'} — Ver.  95.  Burmann  thinks  that  this  line  is  spurious,
and  that  the  original  one  has  been  lost.  Ariadne  may  mean  hy  the  ex-
pression '  simulacra  Deorum,'  either  the  various  frightful  or  fanciful  forms
into  which  the  Gods  were  in  the  habit  of  changing  themselves,  or,  perhaps,
the  Constellations,  which  were  known  under  the  names  of  serpents,  Cen-
taurs, and  other  monsters.

65  Strange  men.} — Ver.  98.  The  ill-usage  which  she  has  received  at
the  hands  of  strangers,  makes  her  suspicious  and  distrustful.  In  so  say-
ing, she  intends  especially  to  reflect  on  Theseus,  who  was  a  stranger  to
her  native  country,  and  had  deceived  and  forsaken  her.

68  Androgeus. — Ver.  99.  She  wishes  that  her  brother,  Androgeus,  had
not  been  slain  by  iEgeus  ;  and  that  the  penalty  had  not  been  imposed  by
Minos  upon  the  Athenians,  of  sending  yearly  the  young  men  and  virgins
to  be  devoured  by  the  Minotaur.

67  Adamant.} — Ver.  109.  'Adamas'  means  'adamant,'  and,  figu-
ratively, any  thing  extremely  hard  or  inpenetrable.  The  Greek  word
dda/idg,  in  Homer,  is  supposed  to  mean  '  steel.'  Our  word  '  diamond  '  is
a  corruption  of  the  word  '  adamant.'

68  Cruel  slumbers.} — Ver.  111.  Nothing  could  be  more  natural  than
to  represent  her  as  inveighing  against  sleep,  during  which  Theseus  took
the  opportunity  of  deserting  her


EP.  X.]  AEIADKE TO THESEUS.  J 01

Cruel  was  the  right  hand,  which  has  slain  both  myself  and
my  brother  ;65  andyow,  vows,  an  empty  name,  plighted  at  my
request.  Against  me  conspired  sleep,  and  the  winds,  and  vows ;
but  one  maiden,  by  three  causes  was  I  betrayed.  And  shall  I
then,70  when  about  to  die,  behold  no  tears  of  my  mother  ?  And
will  there  be  no  hand  to  close  my  eyes  ?  Will  my  mournful
soul71  go  forth  in  foreign  air?  and  will  no  friendly  hand  anoint72

69  My  brother.'] — Ver,  115.  Like  her  sister  Phaedra,  she  is  not  ashamed
to  acknowledge,  her  relationship  to  this  monster,  and  to  complain  that
Theseus  had  put  him  to  death.

70  Shall  I  then.'} — Ver.  119.  The  particle  'ergo'  is  not  here  intro-
duced as  drawing  towards  a  conclusion,  but  because  she  is  full  of  indig-
nation. She  is  unable,  without  horror,  to  reflect  on  her  desolate  situation.
It  brings  back  all  her  miseries  to  her  mind,  and  occasions  a  sad  remem-
brance of  those  enjoyments  of  which  she  is  now,  apparently  for  ever,
deprived.

71  Mournful  soul. ] — Ver.  121.  Crispinus  thinks  that  this  manner  of
speaking,  in  Ariadne,  proceeds  from  her  innocent  simplicity,  as  though
she  thought  that,  thus  dying  at  a  distance  from  her  friends,  her  spirit  would
be  doomed  to  wander  through  strange  regions  of  air.  Her  soul  would,
according  to  the  belief  of  the  ancients,  be  especially  '  infelix,'  as,  her  body
being  unburied,  it  would  have  to  hover  about  the  banks  of  the  Styx  for  a
hundred  years.

72  Hand  anoint."] — Ver.  122.  The  following  rites  are  said  to  have  been
performed  by  the  Greeks,  immediately  after  the  death  of  a  person.  It  was
the  custom  at  once  to  place  in  his  mouth  an  '  obolus,'  or  small  coin,  with
which  he  might  pay  Charon,  whose  duty  it  was  to  ferry  him  over  the
river  Styx  to  the  Shades.  The  body  was  then  washed  and  anointed  with
perfumed  oil,  and  the  head  wras  crowned  with  such  flowers  as  might  be  in
season.  The  deceased  was  then  dressed  in  a  handsome  robe,  in  order
that,  according  to  Lucian,  he  might  not  be  cold  on  his  passage  to  the
Shades,  or  be  seen  by  Cerberus  in  a  state  of  nudity.  These  duties  were
performed  by  the  women  of  the  family.  The  corpse  was  afterwards  laid
out  on  a  bed,  with  a  pillow  supporting  the  head  and  back,  and  by  the
side  of  the  bed  were  placed  earthen  vessels,  which  were  buried  with  the
body.  Among  the  Romans,  immediately  after  death,  those  who  were
present  called  on  the  deceased  by  name,  or  made  a  loud  noise,  for  the
purpose  of  recalling  the  person  to  life,  if  he  should  be  only  in  a  trance.
The  corpse  was  then  taken  from  the  bed,  and  washed  with  warm  water,
perhaps  to  try  to  restore  it  to  life.  When  so  removed  from  the  bed,  the
body  was  said  to  be  '  depositus.'  Ovid  says,  in  the  Tristia,  Book  iii.  El.
iii.  1.  40 :  '  depositum  nee  me  qui  fleat  ullus  erit  ?' — '  will  there  be  no
one  to  lament  me,  laid  out  ?'  The  funeral  was  then  ordered  of  the  '  Libi-
tinarius,'  or  '  undertaker.'  These  persons  were  so  called  from  '  Venus
Libitina,'  near  whose  temple  their  establishments  were  situated.  The
Libitinarii  furnished  the  '  pollinctores,'  '  vespillones,'  '  praeficze,'  and  other
requisites  for  the  funeral,  at  a  certain  rate  of  payment. The business  of


102  THE EPISTLES OF THE HEEOINES.  [EP.  X.

my  limbs,  laid  out  ?  Shall  the  sea  birds  stand  upon  my  un-
buried  bones  ?  Is  that  a  sepulchre  worthy  of  my  deserts  ?  Thou
wilt  repair  to  the  Cecropian  harbour,  and,  received  into  thy
country,  when  thou  shalt  be  standing  aloft,  in  the  citadel  of
thy  city,  and  shalt  be  joyously  telling  of  the  death  of  him,  both
bull  and  man,  and  the  rocky  abode,  divided  into  intricate  pas-
sages ;  relate,  as  well,  how  I  was  abandoned  in  a  solitary
land  ;  I  must  not  be  omitted  amid  thy  exploits.  Surely
iEgeus  is  not  thy  father,73  and  thou  art  not  the  son  of
iEthra,  the  daughter  of  Pittheus :  the  rocks  and 'the  ocean  are
thy  parents.  Oh  !  that  the  Gods  had  granted  that  thou  hadst
beheld  me  from  the  stern74  of  thy  ship  !  My  mournful  figure
would  have  moved  thy  eyes.

Even  now,  regard  me,  not  with  thy  eyes,  but,  as  thou
canst  with  thy  imagination,  hanging  over  the  rocks  which
the  dashing  waves  beat  against.  Behold  the  dishevelled
hair  over  my  features  as  I  weep ;  my  garments,  too,  heavy

the  '  pollinctor,'  who  was  a  slave,  was  to  anoint  the  body  with  oil  and  per-
fumes. The  corpse  was  then  clad  in  a  garment  suitable  to  his  rank  ;
but  free  persons  always  wore  the  '  toga,'  and  those  of  magisterial  rank,
who  wore  the  '  toga  prsetexta,'  were  buried  in  it.  When  the  '  pollinctor '
had  completed  his  task,  the  corpse  was  laid  on  a  bed.  which  was  often
strewed  with  flowers.  A  branch  of  Cyprus  was  usually  placed  at  the
door  of  the  house,  if  the  deceased  was  a  person  of  consequence,  and  a
censer  was  placed  near  the  bed  on  which  the  body  lay.  It  is  doubtful
whether  a  small  coin  was  placed  in  the  hand  or  mouth  of  the  corpse,  as
among  the  Greeks.

73  Not  thy  father.'] — Ver.  131.  It  has  been  remarked  that  this  censure
of  Ariadne  is  well  founded,  inasmuch  as,  by  many,  Theseus  was  considered
to  be  the  son,  not  of  iEgeus,  but  of  Neptune ;  and  the  poets  generally
depict  the  offspring  of  Neptune,  as  being  of  cruel  and  repulsive  cha-
racter. '  iEgeus,'  she  probably  means  to  say,  '  was  susceptible  of  the
tender  passion  ;  whereas,  so  far  from  being  capable  of  loving,  you  are  des-
titute of  common  humanity.'

74  From  the  stern.'] — Ver.  133.  She  appropriately  mentions  the  stern,
4  puppis,'  because  it  was  elevated  above  the  other  parts  of  the  deck,  and
on  it  the  helmsman  had  his  seat.  It  was  rounder  than  the  prow,  and,  like
it,  was  adorned  in  various  ways,  but  especially  with  the  image  of  the  tute-
lary Deity  of  ihe  vessel.  In  some  representations  a  kind  of  roof  is  formed
over  the  head  of  the  steersman,  and  the  upper  part  of  the  stern  often
had  an  elegant  ornament,  called  '  aplustre,'  which  formed  the  highest
part  of  the  poop.  It  is  not  improbable  that  the  form  of  it  was  borrowed
from  the  tail  of  the  fish.  The  '  aplustre,'  rising  behind  the  pilot,  served,
in  some  measure,  to  shelter  him  from  the  wind  and  rain.  A  lantern  was
sometimes  suspended  from  it.


EP.  X.]  AEIADNE TO THESEUS.  103

with  tears,  as  though  with  a  shower.  My  body  trembles  like  the
standing  corn,  shaken  by  the  North  winds  ;  and  the  letters
described  by  my  trembling  fingers  are  irregular.  I  do  not  en-
treat thee  by  my  deserts,  since  they  have  turned  out  to  my
disadvantage.  Let  there  be  no  thanks  due  for  my  deeds.
But  still,75  let  there  be  no  ill-treatment ;  if  I  have  not  been
the  cause  of  thy  safety,  still,  there  is  no  reason  why  thou
shouldst  be  the  cause  of  my  destruction.  These  hands,  in  my
misery,  do  I  extend  to  thee  over  the  wide  seas — hands  wea-
ried with  beating  my  wretched  breast.  Of  these  tresses76
which  remain  to  me,  in  my  sorrow  do  I  remind  thee.  By
those  tears  do  I  entreat  thee,  which  thy  deeds  excite ;  turn,
Theseus,  the  course  of  thy  ship,  and  shifting  thy  sails,  return.
Should  I  first  die,77  still  wilt  thou  collect  my  bones.78

75  But  still.] — Ver.  143.  Her  meaning  is,  that  if  he  will  make  no  return
for  her  kind  offices,  and  if  he  shall  think  them  to  be  unworthy  of  a
recompense,  yet  that  they  are  far  from  meriting  that  he  should  thus  neg-
lect and  cruelly  abandon  her.

76  Of  these  tresses.] — Ver.  147.  Ariadne  is  endeavouring,  by  every
argument,  to  move  Theseus  to  pity,  and,  if  possible,  to  prevail  upon
him  to  return.  For  this  reason,  she  paints,  in  the  strongest  colours,  her
distressed  situation,  her  fears  and  anxieties,  and  the  treatment  which  she
has  experienced  at  her  own  hands  during  her  paroxysms  of  despair.  The
whole  forms  such  a  natural  picture  of  misery  and  suffering,  that  we  cannot
sufficiently  admire  the  inventive  imagination  displayed  by  the  Poet,  in
being  thus  able  to  assemble  a  set  of  ideas  so  well  fitted  to  answer  the  pur-
pose of  exciting  sympathy  and  commiseration.  With  even  her  bitterest  re-
proaches, she  mingles  tenderness  and  affection ;  and  we  may  easily  perceive
that  love  is  the  most  deeply  rooted  in  her  heart,  while  her  invectives  are
the  result  of  impulse,  and  are  prompted  by  a  sense  of  injury.  She  concludes
in  a  most  affecting  manner,  by  entreating  him  to  return,  if  only  to  pay  her
the  last  duties,  and  to  collect  her  scattered  bones. — Of  the  fate  of  Ariadne,
varying  accounts  are  given ;  but  the  most  commonly  received  opinion
makes  her  to  have  afterwards  become  the  wife  of  Bacchus,  by  whom  accord-
ing to  some  accounts,  Theseus  had  been  advised  or  ordered  to  desert  her.
Ovid,  in  the  Third  Book  of  the  Fasti,  1.  465,  et  seg.,  represents  her  as  after-
wards congratulating  herself  on  having  got  rid  of  Theseus.  '  What  was  I
mourning  for,  like  a  country  lass  as  I  was  ?  It  was  a  good  thing  for  me
that  he  was  faithless.'  And  then,  as  being  again  reduced  to  the  necessity
of  lamenting  the  faithlessness  of  Bacchus,  who  afterwards,  on  returning
to  her,  places  her,  and  the  diadem  which  he  had  before  given  her,  in
the  number  of  the  Constellations.

77  First  die.] — Ver.  150.  Pason  of  Amathus,  an  ancient  author  whose
works  are  now  lost,  related  how  Theseus  left  Ariadne  on  an  island,  because
she  was  wearied  with  her  voyage,  and  that  he  afterwards  returned  and


104  THE EPISTLES OE THE HEROINES.  [EP.  XI.

EPISTLE  XL

CANACE  TO  MACAREUS.

Macareus  and  Canace,  the  son  and  daughter  of  iEolus,  the  God  of  the
Winds,  indulging  a  criminal  passion  for  each  other,  concealed  their
familiarities  under  the  pretence  of  consanguinity.  At  length,  Canace,
hecoming  pregnant,  was,  by  the  contrivance  of  her  nurse,  secretly  de-
livered of  a  son;  iEolus,  sitting  at  that  time  in  council,  in  his  palace,
the  nurse  attempted  to  carry  out  the  child,  under  the  pretence  of
being  engaged  in  the  celebration  of  certain  sacred  rites.  But  when
she  had  almost  made  her  way  through  the  hall  where  iEolus  was  sit-
ting, the  unhappy  infant  betrayed  itself  to  his  grandfather  by  its  crying.
jEolus,  surprised  at  the  noise,  on  discovery  of  the  truth,  was  greatly
incensed  at  the  impious  conduct  of  his  children,  and  commanded
the  babe  to  be  exposed  to  wild  beasts.  After  reflecting  on  the  turpitude
of  her  conduct,  he  sent  an  officer  to  Canace,  with  a  drawn  sword,  and
ordered  her  to  use  it  in  such  a  way  as  she  was  conscious  her  impiety
deserved.  With  it  she  slew  herself.  Before  she  gives  the  fatal  blow,
she  is  supposed  to  write  this  Epistle  to  Macareus,  who  has  taken  refuge
in  the  temple  of  Apollo.  She  represents  her  sorrows,  inveighs  against
the  cruelty  of  her  father,  and  begs  her  brother  to  collect  the  bones  of
her  infant,  and  to  enclose  them  in  the  same  urn  with  her  own.

The  daughter  of  iEolus,  to  the  son  of  iEolus,  sends  that
health  which  she  herself  has  not,  and  words  penned  with  an
armed  hand.

But  if  any79  of  the  characters  shall  be  indistinct  through

found  her  dead,  and  left  a  sum  of  money  to  ensure  to  her  bones  an
honourable  sepulture.  Plutarch,  in  the  life  of  Theseus,  says  that  after  the
departure  of  Theseus,  she  married  a  priest  of  Bacchus,  whose  name  was
Onarus.  Ion,  a  poet  of  Chios,  mentioned  (Enopius  and  Staphylus,  as
the  names  of  two  sons  which  she  had  by  Theseus.

78  Collect  my  bones.] — Ver.  150.  Among  the  Romans,  when  the  pile
had  been  burnt  down,  it  was  the  custom  for  the  nearest  relatives  to  collect
the  bones  and  ashes  of  the  deceased  into  a  mourning  robe ;  they  then
sprinkled  them  with  wine,  and  again  with  milk,  and  afterwards  dried
them  on  a  linen  cloth.  Perfumes  were  mingled  with  the  ashes,  which
were  placed  in  an  urn  of  marble,  alabaster,  or  baked  clay.  The  collecting
of  the  bones  from  the  funeral  pile  was  called  '  ossilegium.'

79  But  if  any."] — Ver.  1.  The  word  'tamen,'  in  this  line,  has  induced
some  Commentators  to  put  faith  in  the  genuineness  of  these  two  lines,
of  which  the  translation  is  given  above,

iEolis  iEolidae,  quam  non  habetipsa  salutem
Mittit,  et  armata  verba  notata  manu,
but  they  are  generally  rejected  as  spurious. Indeed,  on  examination,  we


EP.  XI.]  CAFACE TO MACAKEUS.  105

blots  that  obscure  them,  by  the  blood  of  its  author  will  the
letter  be  stained.  My  right  hand  holds  the  pen  ;80  the  other
wields  a  drawn  sword  ;  and  the  paper  is  lying  unfolded  in  my
lap81  This  is  the  true  picture  of  Ca?iace,  the  daughter  of
iEolus,82  as  she  is  writing  to  her  brother :  thus  do  I  seem  to
be  able  to  satisfy  a  hard-hearted  father.  I  could  wish  that
he  himself  were  present,  the  spectator  of  my  death,  and  that
the  deed  were  done  before  the  eyes  of  him  who  enjoins  it.  As
he  is  stern,  and  much  more  unrelenting  than  his  own  Eastern
blasts,  with  dry  cheeks  would  he  have  beheld  my  wounds.
'Tis  something,  forsooth,83  to  dwell  with  the  raging  winds  ;  he
is  suited  to  the  disposition  of  his  subjects.  He  commands  the
South  wind  and  the  Zephyr,  the  Sithonian84  North  wind,  too,
and,  boisterous  Eurus,  thy  wings.85  He  controls  the  winds,
alas !  he  controls  not  his  own  furious  wrath  ;  a  realm  does  he
possess,  even  less  stormy  than  his  own  failings.

shall  find  that  this  beginning  is  superfluous ;  for  Canace  afterwards  re-
lates the  matter  fully,  and  her  abrupt  manner  of  beginning  has  a  peculiar
beauty,  which  would  be  completely  lost  by  prefixing  the  above  lines.

80  Holds  the  pen.'] — Ver.  3.  The  '  calamus  '  was  a  reed  which  the  an-
cients used  as  a  pen  for  writing,  when  '  papyrus,'  or  the  other  substitutes
for  paper  were  used.  The  superior  kinds  of  '  calami '  were  obtained  from
iEgypt  and  Cnidos.  When  the  reed  became  blunted  with  use,  it  was
sharpened  with  a  knife,  which  was  called  '  scalprum  librarium.'  They
were  used  split,  like  our  pens.  The  ink  of  the  ancients  was  made  from
the  lees  of  wine,  or  the  black  matter  exuded  by  the  '  sepia,'  or  cuttle-fish,
and  was  more  unctuous  and  durable  than  that  used  by  us.  The  ink-stands
were  either  single  or  double,  and  had  covers  to  keep  off  the  dust.

61  In  my  lap.] — Ver.  4.  The  parchment  on  which  she  was  writing
is  lying  unfolded  in  her  lap.  This  would  seem  to  be  a  very  awkward
position  ;  but  it  is  one  which  we  often  see  represented  in  the  old  pictures
of  the  Evangelists.

82  Daughter  of  JEolus.] — Ver.  5.  Servius,  in  his  Commentary  on  the
First  Book  of  the  .ZEneid,  1.  75,  says,  that  Macareus  and  Canace  were  the
children,  not  of  iEolus,  the  God  of  the  Winds,  but  of  another  person  of
the  same  name.  This  version,  however,  is  not  generally  adopted  by  ancient
writers.

83  Something  forsooth.] — Ver.  11.  She  here  seemingly  offers  some
excuse  for  her  father's  cruelty ;  but  it  must  be  considered  as  expressed  in
a  spirit  of  indignation  and  bitter  irony.

84  Sithonian.] — Ver.  13.  Sithoniswas  a  mountain  situate  in  the  North
of  Thrace.

85  Thy  wings.]— Ver.  14.  The  Winds  were  feigned  by  the  poets  to
have  wings.


]  06  THE  EPISTLES  OP  THE  HEROINES.  [EP.  XI.

What  avails  it  that,  raised  to  the  heavens  by  the  titles  of  my
ancestors,86  I  am  able  to  recount  Jove  among  my  kindred  ?  Do
I  any  the  less,  for  that,  wield  in  my  feminine  hand  the  destruc-
tive sword,  the  fatal  gift,  no  weapon  suited  to  me  ?  0  Maca-
reus,  would  that  the  hour  which  brought  us  together,  had
arrived  later  than  my  death  !  Why,  my  brother,87  didst  thou
ever  love  me,  otherwise  than  as  a  brother  1  and  why  was  I  to
thee  that  which  a  sister  ought  not  to  be  1  I,  myself,  caught
the  flame  as  well ;  and  as  my  breast  warmed,  I  felt  some  God,
I  know  not  which,  such  I  had  been  wont  to  hear  of.  Colour
had  fled  from  my  features,  leanness  had  shrivelled  my  limbs  ;
with  reluctance88  did  my  mouth  receive  the  slightest  nourish-
ment. No  gentle  slumbers  had  I,  and  the  night  was  as  long
as  a  year  to  me ;  and,  afflicted  with  no  pain,  I  used  to  utter
sighs.  Why  I  did  this,  I  was  unable  to  tell  myself  the  cause  ;
arid  I  knew  not  what  it  was  to  be  one  in  love  ;  but  I  was  so.

First  did  my  nurse b9  guess  my  malady  in  her  aged  mind  ;

86  Of  my  ancestors.'} — Ver.  17.  Crispinus,  the  Delphin  Editor,  has  the
following  remark  on  the  use  here  of  the  word  '  avorum,'  '  ancestors.'  "  The
word  '  avorum/  used  here  in  the  plural  number,  seems  designed  not  only
to  aid  the  versification,  but  to  add  a  dignity  to  the  thing  itself.  And
yet,  upon  a  closer  examination,  it  has  quite  a  contrary  effect.  For  the
nearer  the  Poet  places  Canace  to  Jupiter,  the  more  illustrious  would  be  her
pedigree,  and  this  he  might  (justly)  have  done,  inasmuch  as,  according  to
some,  iEolus  was  the  son  of  Jupiter.  But  not  to  be  too  rash  in  passing  a
censure  on  the  Poet,  it  must  be  owned  that  the  race  of  iEolus  is  very  ob-
scure, and  little  known,  and  that  the  Mythologists  differ  very  much  in  their
opinions  on  the  subject.  The  Poet  then  makes  it  his  business  to  deduce
Canace  from  Jupiter  by  a  long  line  of  ancestors,  not  only  on  the  mother's,
but  on  the  father's  side."  According  to  some  writers,  iEolus  was  the  son
of  Helen,  whose  father  was  Jupiter.

87  My  brother.'] — Ver.  23.  iEolus  was  said,  by  some  writers,  to  have
had  six  sons,  to  whom  he  gave  their  sisters  for  wives.  To  this  tradition,
the  incestuous  Byblis  alludes,  in  the  Metamorphoses,  Book  ix.  1.  506.
'  But  the  sons  of  iEolus  did  not  shun  the  embraces  of  their  listers,'  are
her  words,  when  she  is  seeking  for  a  precedent  whereby  to  justify  her
criminal  desires.

88  With  reluctance.} — Ver.  28.  She  says  that  she  has  loathed  food,  and
has  swallowed  it  with  reluctance.  Canace's  describing  herself  as  wholly
a  stranger  to  love,  and  wondering  at  its  effects,  as  not  knowing  whence
they  come,  or  how  they  are  produced,  are  admirably  depicted  by  the  Poet.

89  Did  my  nurse.'] — Ver.  33.  The  nurse  is  here  the  confidant  of  the
lovesick  damsel ;  but,  as  there  are  degrees  even  in  iniquity,  notwithstand-
ing her  criminal  attempts  to  promote  abortion,  she  does  not  act  quite  so
disgraceful  a  part  as  the  nurse  of  Myrrha  did,  whose  shocking  story  is
related  in  the  Tenth  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses.


EP.  XI.]  CANACE TO MACAKEUS.  107

first  did  my  nurse  say  to  me,  "  Daughter  of  iEolus,  thou  art  in
love."  I  blushed,  and  modesty  directed  my  eyes  upon  my
bosom ;  these  signs  in  one,  that  spoke  not,  were  sufficiently
the  signs  of  one  confessing.  And  now  did  the  burden  swell  of
my  polluted  womb,  and  the  secret  weight  was  pressing  down  my
weakened  limbs.  What  herbs,  what  drugs,90  did  not  my  nurse
bring  to  me,  and  apply  them  with  rash  hand,  that  entirely
(this  alone  did  I  conceal  from  thee)  the  increasing  burden
might  be  discharged  from  my  womb  ?  Alas  !  the  infant,  too
tenacious  of  life,  still  remained,  on  the  application  of  our  reme-
dies, and  was  secure  in  its  abode91  from  the  enemy.  Now,
nine  times  had  the  most  beauteous  sister  of  Phoebus  risen,
and  the  tenth  Moon  was  guiding  her  steeds,  bearers  of  her
light.  Some  reason,  I  knew  not  what,  caused  me  sudden
pains.  I  was  both  a  stranger  to  childbirth,  and  a  mere
novice.  I  suppressed  not  my  cries.  "Why,"  said  she,
"dost  thou  betray  thy  guilt?"  and  the  old  woman,  my
confidant,  closed  my  lips92  as  I  cried.

What  could  I  do93  in  my  misery  ?  Pain  compelled  me  to
utter  groans  ;  but  fear,  and  my  nurse,  and  very  shame  forbade
me.  I  repressed  my  groans,  and  checked  my  words  as  they  es-
caped ;  and  I  was  forced,  myself,  to  drink  down  my  own  tears.
Death  was  before  my  eyes,  and  Lucina  denied  her  aid ;  and
even  death,  had  I  expired,  was  a  grievous  crime.  When,
hanging  over  me,  thy  garments  and  thy  locks  dishevelled,
thou  didst  warm  my  breast  pressed  close94  to  thine. And  thou

90  What  drugs."] — Ver.  39.  The  newspaper  reports  of  our  day  show
that,  even  in  a  Christian  world,  there  are  too  many,  who,  for  lucre,  are
ready  to  tread  the  path  of  iniquity  which  was  here  trodden  by  the  nurse  of
Canace.

91  In  its  abode, .] — Ver.  44.  She  alludes  not  only  to  the  attempts  which
the  hag  had  made  to  procure  abortion,  but  to  the  herbs  and  drugs  them-
selves, which  had  been  administered  to  her.

92  Closed  my  lips.~] — Ver.  50.  This  description  may  be  pronounced
to  be  natural  in  the  extreme,  indeed,  painfully  so.

93  What  could  I  do.] — Ver.  51.  We  have  here  a  strong  picture  of
the  distress  of  the  unfortunate  Canace,  at  this  particular  moment.  She
is  urged  by  contrary  and  powerful  motives,  pain  on  the  one  hand,  and
shame  on  the  other.  She  endeavours  to  suppress  her  anguish,  which  it
is  not  wholly  in  her  power,  with  all  her  resolution,  to  stifle.

94  Pressed  close.] — Ver.  58.  The  whole  of  this  scene,  as  here  repre-
sented, is  very  affecting.  Canace  is  conscious  of  her  guilt,  and  there-
fore cannot  attempt  to  vindicate  herself. Her  main  object,  then,  is  to


108  THE  EPISTLES  OF  THE  HEROINES.  [EP.  XI.

didst  say,  "  Live,  sister,  oh,  dearest  sister,  live  on,  and  in  the
body  of  one  destroy  not  two.  Let  hopes  for  the  best  afford
thee  strength  ;  for  of  thy  brother  shalt  thon  be  the  wife  ;  of
him  by  whom  thou  art  a  mother,  thou  shalt  be  the  wife  as
well."  Though  dying,  (believe  me)  still,  at  thy  words,  did  I
recover,  and  the  guilt  and  burden  of  my  womb  was  brought
forth.

Why  dost  thou95  congratulate  thyself?  In  the  midst  of
the  hall96  is  iEolus  seated.  The  guilt  must  be  removed
from  the  eyes  of  my  parent.  The  careful  old  woman  con-
ceals the  infant  amid  corn,97  and  boughs  of  the  white  olive,
and  light  fillets,  and  she  celebrates  feigned  rites,  and  utters
the  words  of  prayer.  The  people  make  way98  for  the  rites;
my  father,  himself,  makes  way.  Now,  she  was  near  the  thresh-
old ;  the  cry  of  the  babe  came  to  the  ears  of  my  father,  and
by  its  own evidence  was it betrayed. iEolus  seizes  the

move  feelings  of  compassion,  in  which,  to  a  wonderful  degree,  she  suc-
ceeds. By  her  pathetic  representation  of  her  distress,  the  reader's  atten-
tion is  gradually  withdrawn  from  the  consideration  of  the  enormity  of
her  guilt,  and  he  feels  compassion  take  the  place  of  deserved  indig-
nation.

95  Why  dost  thou.] — Ver.  65.  She  here  soliloquises  and  addresses  her-
self. '  Though  you  are  safely  delivered  of  your  burden,  the  danger  is  far
from  being  past.  This  crime  must  be  most  carefully  concealed  from  your
father  JSolus,  who  will  refuse  you  all  forgiveness.'  She  then  proceeds  to
describe  the  difficulty  that  attends  this  material  point.  The  only  way
from  her  apartment  lies  through  the  hall,  where  iEolus  is  sitting  in
council ;  and  to  carry  away  the  babe,  without  a  discovery,  will  be  next  to
an  impossibility.  The  nurse  then  devises  an  expedient,  which,  but  for  an
unhappy  accident,  might  have  been  attended  with  success.

96  Midst  of  the  hall] — Ver.  65.  It  must  be  remembered  that,  in
general,  most  of  the  inner-rooms  of  the  houses  of  the  ancient  Romans
communicated  with  the  '  atrium,'  or  room  in  the  centre,  so  that  to  pass  from
thence  to  the  exterior  of  the  building,  it  would  be  necessary  to  pass  through
the  'atrium.'

97  Amid  corn.'] — Ver.  67.  The  corn  which  the  nurse  was  pretending
to  carry  for  the  purpose  of  sacrifice,  was  the  parched  barley-meal,  mixed
with  salt,  which  was  strewed  on  the  head  of  the  victim.  The  '  vittae,'  or
•  fillets,'  were  used  for  adorning  the  horns  of  the  victim,  while  the  use  of
the  olive  branch  was,  perhaps,  intended  to  signify  that  the  sacrifice
was  about  to  be  made  in  honour  of  Minerva,  to  whom  it  was  sacred.

,J8  People  make  way.~\ — Ver.  70.  It  was  the  custom  on  all  occasions,
and  for  all  classes,  to  make  way  for  a  sacrificial  procession,  however
humble ;  and  it  was  accounted  the  height  of  impiety  to  interrupt  the  so-
lemnity.


EP.  XI.]  CAtfACE TO MACAEEUS.  109

child,  and  unveils  the  feigned  solemnity ;  the  palace  re-
echoes with  his  raging  voice.  As  the  sea  becomes  shudder-
ing when  it  is  skimmed  over  by  a  light  breeze  ;  as  the  twig
of  ash  is  shaken  by  the  warm  South  wind ;  so  rnightst  thou
have  beheld  my  pallid  limbs  to  shiver  ;  the  bed  was  shaken
by  my  body  laid  upon  it.  He  rushes  in,  and  by  his  clamour
he  publishes  my  shame  ;  and  hardly  does  he  withhold  his
hands  from  my  wretched  face.  Filled  with  shame,  to  nothing
but  tears  did  I  give  utterance ;  my  tongue,  withheld  by  chilling
fears,  was  benumbed.  And  now  had  he  commanded  his  little
grandchild  to  be  thrown  to  dogs  and  to  birds,  and  to  be  left
in  a  desert  spot.  The  wretched  babe  uttered  cries  (thou
wouldst  have  thought  it  was  sensible  of  it)  ;  and  with  what
accents  it  could,  it  entreated  its  grandsire.  What,  my  brother,
couldst  thou  imagine  my  feelings  then  to  have  been  (for  from
thy  own  feelings  thou  thyself  art  able  to  guess),  when  in  my
presence,  my  foe  was  carrying  off  my  entrails  into  the  dense
woods,  to  be  eaten  by  the  wolves  of  the  mountain  ?

He  had  departed  from  my  chamber;95  then  at  length1  J  was
at  liberty  to  bare  my  breast,  and  with  my  nails  to  attack  my
cheeks.  In  the  meantime,  a  servant2  of  my  father  came  with
sorrowing  countenance,  and  uttered  with  Ins  lips  these  cruel
accents  :  ''iEolus  sends  thee  this  sword,"  and  he  presented  to
me  a  sword  ;  "  and  commands  thee  to  understand  from  thy
guiltiness  what  it  means."  I  do  know ;  and  boldly  will  I
wield  the  piercing  sword  ;  the  gift  of  my  father  will  I  bury
in  my  breast.  With  these  gifts,  my  parent,  dost  thou  honour
my  nuptials  ?  With  this  dowry,  my  father,  will  thy  daughter
be  enriched?  Deluded  Hymenseus,  remove  afar  the  nuptial
torch ;  and  fly  from  these  accursed  abodes  with  hurried  step.

99  My  chamber.]  — Ver.  91.  The  '  thalamus,'  or  OaXatxdg  of  the
Greeks,  was  properly  the  principal  bedchamber  of  the  house,  and  here
seem  to  have  been  kept  the  principal  valuable  articles  of  ornament  be-
longing to  the  family.

1  Then  at  length.] — Ver.  91.  By  'tunc  demum,'  she  means  that  she
was  then  at  liberty  to  vent  her  rage  against  herself,  and  to  give  way  to
her  paroxysm  of  despair.

2  A  servant.'] — Ver.  93.  It  is  supposed  that  the  various  particulars
here  enumerated  were  borrowed  from  Euripides,  whom  Plutarch  re-
marks as  being  skilled  in  depicting  the  effects  of  guilty  or  unrequited
love ;  the  more  especially  as  it  is  known  that  one  of  bis  Tragedies,  of
which  a  few  fragments  still  remain,  had  the  title  of  /Eolus


110  THE EPISTLES OF THE HEROINES.  [EP.  XT.

Ye  gloomy  Furies,3  brandish  against  me  those  torches  which
you  wield,  that  with  those  flames  my  funeral  pile  may  be
illumed.  Do  you,  my  sisters,  under  Destinies  more  propi-
tious, be  wedded  in  happiness  ;  but  still  be  you  mindful  of  my
error.

What  has  my  child  committed,  born  for  a  few  hours?
Hardly  brought  forth,  by  what  deeds  has  it  injured  its
grandsire  ?  If  it  could  be4  deserving  of  death,  let  it  be  deemed
to  have  been  deserving.  Alas !  to  its  misfortune,  for  my
criminality  is  it  punished !  My  child,  the  grief  of  thy  mother,
the  prey  of  ravening  wild  beasts!  Ah!  wretched  me!  torn
to  pieces  on  the  day  of  thy  birth.  My  son,  the  luckless
pledge  of  my  unfortunate  love,  this  was  thy  first  day  of  life,  this
thy  last.  It  was  not  allowed  me  to  bathe  thee  in  the  tears  thy
due,  nor  yet  to  place  my  shorn  locks5  upon  thy  tomb.6  Over
thee  I  did  not  hang,  no  cold  kisses  did  I  snatch ;  in  pieces
are  the  ravenous  wild  beasts  tearing  my  entrails.  I,  as  well,
shall,  with  wounds,  attend  thy  infant  shade  ;  neither  will  I  long
be  called  either  thy  mother,  or  childless.  But  do  thou,7  alas  !
hoped  for  in  vain  by  thy  wretched  sister,  collect,  I  pray,  the
scattered  limbs  of  thy  child  ;  and  bear  them  back  to  its  mo-
ther, and  place  them  in  their  common  tomb ;  and  let  the
same  urn,  small  though  it  be,  receive  the  two.  Live,  mindful
of  me,  and  shed  thy  tears  over  my  wounds  ;  and  thou  who
didst  love,  shudder  not  at  the  body  of  her  who  loved.

3  Gloomy  Furies. .] — Ver.  103.  The  Furies  were  frequently  represented
in  the  act  of  waving  torches.

4  It  could  be.'] — Ver.  109.  By  this  seeming  admission,  she  more
strongly  asserts  the  innocence  of  the  habe.  '  A  new-horn  infant  can  be
guilty  of  no  crime,  and  to  punish  it  for  the  guilt  of  its  parents,  in  which
it  had  no  share,  is  cruel  and  unjust  in  the  extreme.'

5  My  shorn  locks.] — Ver.  116.  Some  Commentators  would  read  the
two  words  '  non  tonsas'  together,  as  meaning  '  my  hair  not  cut  off,
hut  pulled  out  by  the  roots.'  It  seems,  however,  more  likely,  that  the
word  '  non'  is  used  to  qualify  '  licuit,'  understood  from  the  preceding
line,  as  meaning  '  nor  yet.'

6  Upon  thy  tomb.] — Ver.  116.  Ste  the  Metamorphoses,  Book  iii.,
1.  506,  and  the  Note  to  the  passage.  The  female  relatives  of  the  dead
were  wont  to  lay  their  hair,  not  only  on  the  funeral  pile,  but  on  the
sepulchre  as  well.

7  But  do  thou.] — Ver.  121.  From  lamenting  her  own  fate,  and  that  of
her  child,  she  addresses  herself  to  her  brother  Macareus,  and  entreats
him  to  collect  the  scattered  bones  of  that  dear  pledge  of  their  former
affection,  and  to  deposit  them  in  the  same  urn  with  her  own.


EP.  XII.]  MEDEA TO JA.SO^r.  1 1 1

Do  thou,8  I  entreat  thee,  execute  the  injunctions  of  thy  most
hapless  sister ;  I  myself  will  ohey  the  injunctions  of  my
sire.

EPISTLE  XII.

MEDEA  TO  JASON.

Jason,  upon  his  arrival  in  Colchis,  was  kindly  received  by  Medea,  the
daughter  of  ^Eetes,  the  king  of  that  country,  and  she  speedily  became  ena-
moured of  him.  The  conditions  of  obtaining  the  Golden  Fleece  hav-
ing been  stated  to  Jason,  despairing  of  success  without  her  assistance,
he  applied  to  Medea  and  having  promised  to  marry  her  he  was  enabled,
by  her  instructions,  to  surmount  every  difficulty.  After  obtaining  the
Golden  Fleece,  he  fled  from  Colchis  with  Medea,  who,  hearing  that
Metes  was  in  close  pursuit  of  her,  cut  in  pieces  the  body  of  her  brother
Absyrtus,  and  strewed  his  mangled  limbs  along  the  road,  that  her
father  might  be  delayed  in  collecting  the  bones  of  his  son.  By  this
artifice,  the  fugitives  were  enabled  to  reach  Thessaly  in  safety  ;  where
Medea  restored  JEson,  the  father  of  Jason,  who  was  worn  out  with
years,  to  youth.  Jason  afterwards  transferred  his  affections  to  Creiisa,
the  daughter  of  Creon,  king  of  Coriuth,  and  married  hen  Enraged  at
his  perfidy,  Medea  is  supposed  to  write  the  present  Epistle,  in  which  she
charges  him  with  ingratitude,  and  threatens  a  speedy  vengeance,  unless
he  shall  restore  her  to  her  former  place  in  his  affections.

Exiled,  in  want,9  and  despised  by  her  new  husband,  Medea
asks  whether  no  leisure  can  be  spared  from  thy  kingly
duties  1

But  (ivell  I  remember10)  when  queen  of  the  Colchians,11  I

8  Do  thou.] — Ver.  127.  This  distich  is  wanting  in  some  MSS.,  and  is
rejected  by  most  of  the  Commentators,  and  by  Heinsius  in  particular,  as
unworthy  of  the  poetical  genius  of  Ovid.

9  Exiled  in  ivant.~\ — These  two  lines,

Exul,  inops,  contempta  novo  Medea  marito
Dicit  an  a  regnis  tempora  nulla  vacant  ?
are  wanting  in  many  of  the  MSS.,  and  are  generally  rejected  as  spurious.

10  Well  I  remember, .] — Ver.  1.  There  is  a  singular  beauty  in  the  Epistle
beginning  thus  abruptly,  and  with  an  air  of  perfect  bewilderment,  to  be
deserted  by  Jason,  who  had  so  often  vowed  eternal  fidelity,  and  whom
she  had  bound  to  her  by  such  important  sendees !  what,  of  all  things,
she  had  the  least  apprehended,  and  upon  which  she  could  not  reflect
without  extreme  astonishment.  Many  of  tbe  Epistles  will  be  found
to  begin  in  a  similar  manner,  and  this  feature  forms  one  of  their
especial  beauties.  But  injudicious  critics,  probably  in  the  middle
ages,  have  considered  this  to  be  a  defect,  and  have  wasted  their  time  in
attempts  to  remedy  it.

11  The Colchians.']— Yer.  1. The  territory  of Colchis  lay on  the


112  THE EPISTLES OF THE HEROINES.  [EP.  XII.

spared  leisure  to  thee,  when  thou  didst  entreat  that  my
skill12  should  give  thee  aid.  Then,  ought  the  sisters  who
measure  out  the  threads  of  human  life,  to  have  unwound  my
spindle.13  Then  might  I,  Medea,  have  honourably  died ;
whatever  portion  of  my  life  I  have  protracted  from  that
time,  has  been  a  penalty  to  me.  Ah  me  !  why  did  ever  the
ship  from  Pelion, u  impelled  by  youthful  arms,  seek  the  sheep
of  Phryxus  1  Why  at  Colchis  did  I  ever  behold  the  Magnesian
Argo?15  and  why  did  you,  the  Grecian  band,  drink  of  the
Phasian  waters  ? 16  Why,  to  an  unbecoming  degree,  did  thy
yellow  locks  please  me  ?  thy  gracefulness,  too,  and  the  dis-
sembling charms  of  thy  tongue?17

Eastern  side  of  the  Black  Sea,  or  '  Pontus  Euxinus.'  Medea  calls  her-
self '  regina,'  *  queen/  or  rather,  '  princess'  of  the  Colchians,  as  being
the  daughter  of  king  iEetes.

12  My  skill] — Ver.  2.  She  alludes  to  her  magic  arts;  as  she  was
famous  for  her  enchantments.

13  My  spindle.] — Ver.  4.  The  'Parcae,'  or  '  Fates,'  are  here  referred  to.
They  were  three  sisters,  Clotho,  Lachesis  and  Atropos,  to  whom  was  sup-
posed to  be  committed  the  duration  of  human  life.  The  poets  represent
this  by  a  thread  assigned  at  birth  to  each  individual ;  relative  to  which,
each  sister  had  her  own  particular  province.  The  first  was  employed
in  spinning  it  out,  the  second  in  winding  it  up,  and  the  duty  of  the
third  was  to  cut  it,  and  thereby  put  an  end  to  life.  This  may  serve
to  illustrate  the  mode  of  expression  here  used;  the  strict  meaning  of
which  is  '  ought  to  have  rolled  off  the  thread  — ;'  or,  in  other  words,
'  should  have  put  an  end  to  my  life/

14  Ship  from  Pelion.] — Ver.  8.  She  alludes  to  the  ship  Argo,  which
was  built  of  wood  cut  on  mount  Pelion.

15  Magnesian  Argo  ] — Ver.  9.  Magnesia  was  a  region  of  Thessaly,  in
which  Pelion  was  situate,  though,  according  to  some  accounts,  it  was
only  adjacent  to  Pelion.

16  Phasian  ivaters.] — Ver.  10.  The  Argonauts  were  obliged  to  sail  up
the  river  Colchis  before  they  could  reach  the  residence  of  iEetes,  the  father
of  Medea.  To  drink  of  the  waters  of  any  place  is  a  mode  of  expression
very  often  used  by  the  ancients  to  signify  the  inhabiting  of  that  place,
or  the  arriving  at  or  residing  in  it  for  any  time.  The  interrogation  here  is
much  stronger  than  if  she  merely  said  that  she  wished  the  Argonauts  had
never  seen  Colchis.

17  Of  thy  "tongue.] — Ver.  12.  She  artfully  invents  an  excuse  for  her
own  weakness,  in  becoming  so  much  enamoured  of  Jason,  and  breaking
through  so  many  obligations  for  the  purpose  of  assisting  him.  His  charms,
she  says,  were  such  as  might  easily  ensnare  an  innocent  heart,  unversed
in  guile.  Add  to  this,  the  irresistible  eloquence  of  a  smooth  and  deceit-
ful tongue.


EP.  XII.]  MEDEA. TO JASON.  113

Either  (when  the  strange  ship18  had  for  the  first  time
come  to  our  sands,  and  had  brought  those  enterprising  men)
the  ungrateful  son  of  iEson  ought,  unfortified  by  spells 19
beforehand,  to  have  met  the  flames  and  the  hollow  nostrils
of  the  bulls.  He  ought  to  have  sowed  the  seed ;  as  many
enemies,  too,  he  ought  to  have  found ;  that  by  his  own
harvest  the  sower  himself20  might  fall.  How  much  perfidy,
perjured  man,  would  have  perished  with  thyself!  How
many  an  evil  would  have  been  removed  from  my  head  !
5Tis  some  relief  to  reproach  the  ungrateful  man  with  the
favours  he  has  received.  This  shall  I  enjoy;  this  pleasure
alone  shall  I  receive  from  thee.  Commanded  to  steer  thy
unproved  ship  to  Colchis,  thou  didst  enter  the  happy  realms
cf  my  native  land.  There  was  I,  Medea,  the  same  that  here
is  thy  new-made  bride.  My  father  was  as  opulent  as  is  hers.
The  one  possesses  Ephyre,5;1  between  its  two  seas,  the  other
all  that  part  of22  snowy  Scythia  where  the  left  side  of  the
Euxine  Sea  is  situate. iEetes  received  the  Pelasgian  youths

18  The  strange  ship.'] — Ver.  13.  Some  writers  assert  that  the  Argo
was  the  first  ship  in  which  men  ventured  upon  the  sea.  The  word  '  nova,'
in  this  passage,  may,  however,  possibly  mean  simply  '  uncommon ;'  as  a
ship  was  probably  an  unusual  object  in  a  district  so  remote  as  Colchis.  In-
deed, it  may  have  been  the  first  to  make  its  appearance  on  that  coast.

19  Unfortified  by  spells.] — Ver.  15.  '  Not  fortified  by  my  drugs  and
medicines ';  for  it  was  by  means  of  Medea's  instructions  and  the  magic
potions  with  which  she  furnished  him,  that  he  was  enabled  to  withstand
the  fiery  blasts  of  the  brazen-footed  bulls,  and  to  lull  to  sleep  the  watch-
ful dragon  that  guarded  the  Golden  Fleece.

20  Sower  himself.] — Ver.  18.  Her  meaning  is,  that  Jason,  who  had
cast  the  teeth  of  the  dragon  in  the  earth  after  the  manner  of  a  sower,
ought  to  have  perished  by  the  hands  of  the  armed  men  who  sprang  from
the  seed  so  sown.

21  Ephyre.] — Ver.  27.  Ephyre  was  the  ancient  name  of  Corinth.  Ac-
cording to  Velleius  Paterculus,  Haletes,  the  sixth  in  descent  from  Her-
cules, and  the  son  of  Hippotes,  changed  the  name  of  the  place  from
Ephyre  into  Corinthus.  Hyginus  says,  Fable  275,  i  The  Nymph  Ephyre,
the  daughter  of  Oceanus,  founded  the  city  of  Ephyre,  which  was  after-
wards called  Corinthus.'  Being  situate  on  an  Isthmus,  between  the
iEgean  and  the  Ionian  seas,  the  poets  frequently  gave  it  the  appellation  of
1  bimaris,'  '  between  the  two  seas.'

22  That  part  of  .] — Ver.  28.  The  reading,  '  Scythiae  latus  ille  nivosse
Omne  tenet,'  seems  preferable  to  that  which  is  most  frequently  adopted,
•  Scythia  tenus  ille,  nivosa  Omne  tenet.'

I


114  THE  EPISTLES  OE  THE  HEKOT^ES.  [EP.  XII;

with  hospitality,  and  you,  Grecian  bodies, pressed  the  em-
broidered couches.23

Then  did  I  behold  thee  ;  then  did  I  begin  to  know  what
thou  wast ;  that  was  the  first  downfall  of  mj  peace  of  mind.
How  did  I  gaze,24  how  did  I  pine,  and  how  did  I  burn  with
flames  I  knew  not  before;  just  as  the  torch  of  pine-wood25
burns  before the great  Divinities. Both  thou  thyself  wast

23  Embroidered  couches.'] — Ver.  30.  The  '  torus '  here  mentioned  is
properly  the  purple  or  embroidered  stuff  cushion,  which  was  placed  on
the  '  lectus,'  or  couch,  on  which  the  guests  reclined  while  taking  their
meals.  The  '  lecti  tricliniares '  were  low,  and  so  were  the  tables  that
were  spread  before  them.  The  '  lecti '  are  supposed  to  have  been  very
similar  to  the  '  lecti  cubiculares,'  or  beds  for  sleeping  in  ;  as  they  had
girths  and  mattresses,  with  gorgeous  coverlets,  and  were  ornamented  with
copper,  silver,  tortoiseshell,  and  ivory.

21  How  did  I  gaze.] — Ver.  33.  The  whole  aceount  here  given  of  Ja-
son's first  appearance,  and  the  beginning  and  progress  of  her  passion,  is
highly  poetical.  We  may  compare  it  with  some  lines  of  Virgil  on  the  same
subject,  and  expressed  in  a  very  similar  manner.  The  words  of  Damon  in
the  Eighth  Eclogue,  when  relating  the  rise  and  growth  of  his  passion,  are
as  follow : —

'  Sepibus  in  nostris  parvam  te  roscida  mala
(Dux  ego  vester  eram)  vidi  cum  matre  legentem :
Alter  ab  undecimo  turn  me  jam  ceperat  annus  ;
Jam  fragiles  poteram  a  terra  contingere  ramos.
Ut  vidi,  ut  perii,  ut  me  malus  abstulit  error.'
'  1  beheld  you  in  your  childhood,  (for  I  was  your  guide)  together  with  your
mother,  picking  dewy  apples  in  our  hedges. I  was  at  that  time  just
twelve  years  old ;  and  I  could  hardly  reach  from  the  ground  the  brittle
branches. How  did  I  gaze,  how  was  I  undone,  how  did  a  fatal  bewilder-
ment seize  me ! '

25  Torch  of  pine-wood.] — Ver.  34.  The  '  tseda,'  or  '  teda,'  of  the
ancients  was  a  torch,  made  of  the  wood  of  the  fir.  The  following  was
the  method  adopted  in  making  them.  A  large  incision  having  been
made  in  a  pine-tree  near  the  root,  the  turpentine  flowing  downwards
accumulated  in  its  vicinity.  This  resinous  wood  was  called  by  the  Greeks
'  dag,'  '  torch-wood.'  After  the  lapse  of  about  a  year,  the  part  that
was  thus  impregnated  was  cut  out,  and  then  divided  into  the  proper
.lengths,  and  as  the  tree  gradually  decayed,  the  heart  of  the  trunk  was
extracted,  and  the  roots  were  finally  dug  up  for  the  same  purpose.  When
persons  went  out  at  night  they  took  these  torches  in  their  hands,  like
the  links  used  in  this  country  up  to  the  commencement  of  the  present
century.  They  were  also  used  in  nuptial  processions.  From  the  present
passage  it  appears,  that  'tsedae'  were  burning  before  the  images  of  the
Gods  ;  probably  in  a  frame,  like  the  wax  candles  which  are  burnt  before
the  altars  and  chapels  in  the  churches  of  Catholic  countries.


EP.  XII.]  MEDEA TO JASON.  115

beauteous,  and  my  destinies  were  urging  me  onward  ;  thy
eyes  had  ravished  my  sight.26  Perfidious  man,  thou  didst
perceive  this ;  for  who  can  successfully  conceal  love  ?  The
flame  is  manifest,  betrayed  by  its  own  evidence.  In  the
meantime  the  conditions27  are  repeated  to  thee ;  that  with
the  unwonted  ploughshare  thou  shouldst  load  the  unbroken
necks  of  the  fierce  bulls.  These  bulls  of  Mars28  were  more
terrible  than  by  reason  of  their  horns  alone;  their  breath  was
dreadful  flames.  Their  feet  were  solid  with  brass,  and  brass
was  extended  over  their  nostrils  ;  black,  too,  was  this  ren-
dered by  their  breath.  Thou  art  ordered,  also,  to  scatter  the
seed  with  thy  devoted  hand29  over  the  wide  fields,  to  give  birth
to  a  race,  who  are  to  attack  thee  with  the  weapons  that  spring
up  with  themselves.  Such  is  the  crop,  unfavourable  to  the
husbandman.  The  last  labour  is,  by  some  stratagem,  to  elude
the  eyes  of  the  keeper,  that  know  not  how  to  yield  to  sleep.

iEetes  had  now  spoken;  in  sorrow  you  all  arose,  and  the
high  table  left  the  purple  couches.  How  far  from  thee,30
then,  was  the  kingdom,  the  dower  of  Creiisa,  and  thy  father-
in-law,  and  the  daughter  of  the  great  Creon  ?  In  sadness
didst  thou  depart ;  as  thou  didst  depart  I  followed  thee  with
tearful  eyes,  and  with  a  gentle  murmur  thy  tongue  said,
'Farewell!'  When,  fatally  wounded,  I  reached  the  bed
placed  in  my  chamber ;  that  night,  long  as  it  was,  was  passed
by  me  in  tears.  Before  my  eyes  were  both  the  savage  bulls
and  the  dreadful  harvest ;  before  my  eyes  was  the  ever  watchful

26  Ravished  my  sight.'] — Ver.  36.  That  is,  '  my  eyes  were  so  immove-
ably  fixed  on  you,  that  they  could  regard  no  other  object.'  This  is  said  to
be  one  of  the  characteristics  of  love.

27  The  conditions.'] — Ver.  39.  Medea,  after  describing  the  manner  in
which  her  passion  began,  and  its  rapid  growth,  adverts  to  the  many  ob-
ligations she  had  conferred  on  him.  the  dangers  to  which  he  was  exposed
before  he  could  obtain  the  wished-for  prize,  and  the  care  she  had  taken  to
fortify  him  against  them  :  from  all  which  she  infers  his  baseness  and  in-
gratitude in  deserting  her.

28  Bulls  of  Mars.] — Ver.  41.  This  and  the  next  line  are  thought  by
Heinsius  to  be  spurious,  and  unworthy  of  the  genius  of  Ovid.  There  is
probably  some  ground  for  this  ;  but  yet  it  does  not  seem  from  the  con-
text that  they  could  be  well  dispensed  with.

29  Thy  devoted  hand.] — Ver.  46.  Some  would  render  '  devota,'  '  con-
secrated' ;  it  seems  rather  to  mean  *  devoted  to,'  or  '  destined  for  the
purpose.'

30  Far  from  tJiee.] — Ver.  53. This  is  said  in  the  most  bitter  irony.

I  2


116  THE EPISTLES OE THE HEBOTNES.  [EP.  XII.

dragon.  On  one  side  was  love,  on  the  other,  fear  ;  fear  in-
creased that  love.  It  was  now  morning,  and  my  sister31  was
received  in  my  chamber ;  she  found  me,  too,  with  dishevelled
locks  and  lying  upon  my  face,  and  every  thing  saturated  with
my  tears.  She  entreats  aid32  for  the  Minyse  :  one  female
asks,  and  another  will  receive  it.  What  she  entreats,  that  do
I  give  to  the  youth,  the  son  of  iEson.

There  is  a  grove,  darksome  both  with  pitch  trees  and  with
the  leaves  of  the  holm  oak,  hardly  can  one  enter  that  by  the
rays  of  the  sun.  In  it  there  was,  and  there  long  had  been,
a  shrine  to  Diana  ;33  the  Goddess  stood  in  gold  wrought  by  a
barbarian  hand.34  Dost  thou  know  it,  or  has  the  spot  escaped
thy  memory  along  with  me  ?  Thither  did  we  come ;  and
thus  with  deceiving  lips  didst  thou  begin  first  to  speak.

"  Fortune  has  given  thee  the  command  and  the  disposal  of
my  safety  ;  and  in  thy  hand  is  my  life  and  my  death.  If  the
power  itself  delights  any  one,  'tis  enough  to  be  able  to  destroy  ;
but,  preserved,  I  shall  prove  a  greater  honour  to  thee.  By  my
misfortunes  do  I  pray,  of  which  thou  canst  be  the  solace ;  by
thy  race,  and  by  the  majesty  of  thy  grandsire  that  sees  all
things  ;  by  the  features, and  the  secret  rites  of  the  three-

31  My  sister.] — Ver.  62.  Chalciope  was  anxious  for  the  safety  of  the
Argonauts,  because,  according  to  Hyginus,  her  four  sons  by  Phryxus  were
of  the  number.

33  Entreats  aid.] — Ver.  65.  There  was  good  reason  for  this  friendly
feeling,  as  Jason  had  relieved  her  sons  when  shipwrecked  and  in  distress.

33  Shrine  to  Diana.] — Ver.  70.  '  Delubra  Dianse.'  It  is  extremely  diffi-
cult to  say  how  the  '  templum'  of  the  Romans  differed  from  the  «  delubrum.'
Some  of  the  ancient  writers  think  that  '  delubrum'  was  originally  the
place  at  the  entrance  which  contained  a  vessel  filled  with  water,  for
the  purpose  of  purification  before  entering  the  temple.  Other  authors
again  suppose  that  * delubrum'  was  originally  the  name  for  the  wooden
statue  of  a  Divinity,  which  derived  its  name  from  '  liber,'  •  the  bark'  of  a
tree,  which  was  removed,  (delibrabatur)  before  the  tree  was  wrought  into
the  image,  and  that  in  time  the  name  '  delubrum'  was  applied  to  the  place
where  this  image  was  erected.  Some,  again,  think  it  to  have  been  a
sanctuary,  or  place  set  apart  from  the  adjacent  soil,  which  was  applied  to
common  purposes.

34  Barbarian  hand.] — Ver.  70.  Though  Medea's  own  nation  was '  bar.
barus,'  and  she  was  'barbara,'  she  probably  means  here,  that  the
!  barbaricus  manus,'  which  made  the  golden  statue,  was  not  that  of  a  person
of  her  own  country;  but  that  it  was  of  Phrygian,  or  probably  of  Oriental
workmanship..


EP.  XII.]  MEDEA TO JA.S03".  117

formed  Diana  j35  and  if  perchance  this  nation  has  any  other
Deities  :  take  pity  upon  me,  0  maiden !  take  pity  on  my  com-
panions !  by  thy  good  offices,  make  me  thine  for  all  future
time.  And  if  perchance36  thou  dost  not  despise  a  Pelasgian
man,  (but  why  should  I  imagine  the  Gods  so  propitious,  and
so  favourable  to  me  ?)  first  may  my  breath  vanish  into  the
yielding  air,  before  there  shall  be  any  bride  but  thee  for  my
nuptial  chamber.  May  Juno,  who  presides  over  the  conjugal
solemnities,  be  witness,  that  Goddess,  too,  in  whose  marble
temple  we  are."

These  words*7  (and  how  small  a  part  is  this  of  them?)
moved  the  feelings  of  a  confiding  maid ;  thy  right  hand,  too,
joined  to  my  right  hand.  I  saw  tears  as  well :  was  a  portion
of  thy  deceit38  in  them  ?  Thus  speedily  was  I,  a  maid,  be-
trayed by  thy  words. Thou  didst  both  yoke39  the  brazen-

36  Three-formed  Diana."] — Ver.  79.  The  three-formed  Diana  was  sup-
posed to  be  the  same  Divinity  as  Hecate.  Her  mysteries  were  performed
in  the  night-time.

36  And  if  perchance.'] — Ver.  83.  We  have  here  a  remarkable  instance
how  ready  the  views  and  sentiments  of  mankind  are  to  alter  upon  a
change  of  circumstances.  When  Jason  was  in  the  capital  of  Colchis,
almost  overpowered  by  the  dangers  that  attended  his  enterprize,  and  had
no  hopes  of  relief  but  in  the  aid  of  Medea,  he  addressed  her  with  suppliant
humility.  He  then  thought  it  the  greatest  happiness  to  enjoy  her  favour,
and  dreaded  lest  she  should  despise  him  as  a  stranger.  Now,  however,
the  case  is  changed :  he  has  obtained  his  great  object,  brought  his  enter-
prise to  a  successful  issue,  and  escaped  safe  to  Thessaly.  As  he  has  now
no  interests  of  his  own  to  influence  him,  his  heart  is  open  to  impressions
from  others.  A  more  advantageous  match  presents  itself,  and  Medea  is
abandoned  and  reduced  to  supplicate  in  her  turn.

37  These  words.] — Ver.  89.  She  here  endeavours  to  set  his  baseness
in  the  strongest  light,  by  representing  how  many  of  his  promises  he  had
falsified.

38  Part  of  thy  deceit.] — Ver.  91.  This  is  much  the  same  sentiment  that
the  Poet  has  before  expressed  in  the  Epistle  from  Phyllis  to  Demophoon  :

1  Credidimus  lacrymis :  an  et  has  simulare  docentur  ?
Hae  quoque  habent  artes,  quaque  jubentur  eunt  ?'

39  Didst  both  yoke.] — Ver.  93.  Medea,  after  reminding  him  of  the  pro-
mises made  to  her,  his  insinuating  address,  and  the  success  which  it  has  had
in  gaining  her  love,  proceeds  to  relate  how,  by  means  of  the  assistance
which  she  gave  him,  he  had  the  good  fortune  to  accomplish  the  several
tasks  assigned  to  him  by  her  father.  She  then  proceeds  to  reproach  him
with  his  baseness  in  deserting  her,  after  he  had  obtained  his  aims.  ;;nri  then
attaching  himself  to  another,  who  had  only  her  riches  to  recommend  her,
objects  which,  in  the  day  of  his  perplexity,  were  far  from  his  thoughts.


118  THE EPISTLES OE THE HEEOI^ES.  [EP.  XII.

footed  bulls40  with  a  body  not  even  singed,  and  thou  didst
cleave  the  firm  earth  with  the  ploughshares,  as  enjoined.
Thou  didst  fill  the  fields  with  the  envenomed  teeth,  in  place
of  seed :  it  sprang  up,  and  the  soldiers  wore  swords  and
bucklers.  I  myself,  who  had  given  thee  the  charms,  sat
pale,  when  I  saw  the  men  so  suddenly  spring  up,  brandishing
their  arms  ;  until  (dreadful  catastrophe !)  the  brothers,  sprung
from  the  earth,  turned  against  each  other  their  armed  hands.
Behold !  the  ever-watchfal  dragon,  dreadful  with  his  rattling
scales,  is  hissing,  and  is  sweeping  the  ground  with  his  wind-
ing breast.  Where,  then,  were  the  riches  of  thy  dowry  ?
Where,  then,  thy  royal  wife  ?  This  Isthmus,  too,  which  divides
the  waters  of  the  twofold  sea  ?  Those  flaming  eyes  did  I,  by
a  sleep  caused  by  drugs,  withdraw  from  thee,  I,  who  now  at
length  am  become  a  barbarian  to  thee,  who  seem  to  thee  now
poor,  now  a  criminal ;  to  thee,  too,  did  I  give  the  fleece  to
carry  away  in  safety.

My  father  was  betrayed  :  both  my  kingdom  and  my  coun-
try did  I  forsake :  and  I  considered  that  there  was  an  ad-
vantage in  any  kind  of  exile.  My  virginity  became  the  prey
of  a  foreign  robber  :  my  best  of  sisters  was  forsaken  together
with  my  dear  mother.41  But,  my  brother,42  when  flying,  I
did  not  leave  thee  without  me.  In  this  passage  alone  is  my
letter  defective.43  What  my  right  hand  has  dared  to  do  it
dares  not  to  write  ;  thus  ought  I,  but  together  with  thy-
self, to  have  been  torn  in  pieces. And  yet  I44  dreaded  not,  (for,

40  Brazen-footed  bulls."\ — Ver.  93.  According  to  Apollonius  Rhodius,
these  bulls  were  two  in  number,  and  of  immense  magnitude.

41  My  dear  mother.'] — Ver.  112.  By  some  writers  her  mother  is  called
Hypsea,  by  others  Idyia.

42  My  brother.'] — Ver.  113.  Her  misfortunes  have  at  length  opened
her  eyes  to  her  criminality,  and  have  left  her  at  liberty  to  reflect  upon  her
crimes  in  all  the  hideousness  of  their  guilt.  She  was  before  so  infatuated
by  her  passion  for  Jason,  that  no  sacrifice  appeared  too  great,  if  made  for
his  sake.  "When  she  fled  from  Colchis  with  Jason,  her  brother  Absyrtus
accompanied  her.  It  has  been  already  stated  how  and  for  what  purpose
she  murdered  that  unhappy  youth.

43  My  letter  defective.] — Ver.  114.  She  avoids  a  direct  mention  of  her
cruelty  to  her  brother,  and  satisfies  herself  with  barely  hinting  at  it ;  as
though  she  would  say,  '  Of  all  the  things  that  I  have  done  for  you,  this  is
the  only  one  over  which  shame  and  the  sense  of  guilt  oblige  me  to  draw  a
veil.'

44  And  yet  /.] — Ver.  117. Heinsius  thus  explains  the  meaning  of  this


EP.  XII.]  MEDEA TO JASOtf.  119

after  that,  what  could  I  dread  ?)  a  woman,  and  one  so  guilty,
to  entrust  myself  to  the  waves.  Where  is  the  providence  of
the  Gods  ?  Where  the  Divinities  ?  We  should  have  suffered  our
deserts  on  the  deep,  thou,  the  penalty  of  thy  treachery,  I,  of
my  simplicity.  I  wish  that  the  Symplegades45  had  crushed
us,  caught  between  them,  and  that  my  bones46  had  been
pressed  into  thy  bones  !  Or,  would  that  ravenous  Scylla
had  sent  us  to  be  devoured  by  her  dogs !  (Scylla  was  bound
to  be  injurious  to  ungrateful  men.47) Would,  too,  that  she,

passage.  '  Although  I  now  dare  not  write,  what  I  yet  dared  to  commit,
I  was  not  however  afraid,  even  at  that  time,  to  expose  myself  to  the  dan-
gers of  the  sea.  For  what  would  I  not  have  ventured  upon,  after  so
many  crimes  against  my  brother  and  my  father/  The  sea  was  thought  by
the  ancients  to  be  an  especial  source  of  retribution  for  those  who  were
guilty  of  heinous  offences.

45  The  Symjrtegades.] — Ver.  121.  The  Symplegades,  or  Cyanean  rocks,
were  two  rocky  islands  in  the  Thracian  Bosphorus,  which  were  said  by
ancient  writers  sometimes  to  part  asunder,  and  at  other  times  to  rush
together  with  great  force.  It  was  considered  extremely  dangerous  to  sail
between  them,  because  if  the  ship  should  be  by  any  accident  detained  a
longer  time  than  was  originally  expected,  the  rocks,  closing  together,
would  be  certain  to  crush  it  to  pieces.  Jason  is  said  to  have  passed  be-
tween them  with  imminent  danger  to  his  ship ;  for  the  rocks,  meeting
before  the  Argo  had  passed  quite  through,  carried  away  her  stern.  The
fable  probably  arose  from  the  appearance  that  these  rocks  bore  to  those
who  sailed  between  them  :  for  in  bearing  straight  down  upon  them,  while
the  ship  was  yet  at  some  distance,  they  seemed  to  be  joined  in  one ;
but  as  she  approached  nearer  they  would  appear  to  open  by  degrees,  and
when  the  vessel  had  passed  through  them  and  had  proceeded  to  some  dis-
tance on  the  other  side,  they  would  again  seem  to  run  together  and  unite.
This,  in  the  first  ages  of  the  world,  and  while  navigation  was  in  its  in-
fancy, and  optical  phaenomena  were  little  understood,  might  pass,  among
ignorant  persons,  for  a  real  motion  of  the  rocks.

46  That  my  bones.'] — Ver.  122.  We  are  told  by  Apollodorus  that  Ju-
piter, being  deservedly  indignant  at  the  slaughter  of  Absyrtus,  sent  a  fu-
rious tempest  against  the  Argonauts,  by  reason  of  which  they  were  carried
beyond  the  shores  of  Libya,  Gaul,  Sardinia  and  Etruria.  They  were  in-
formed that  his  wrath  would  not  be  propitiated  before  they  had  repaired
to  Ausonia,  and  had  been  purified  by  Circe.  It  is  in  allusion  to  this  tem-
pest that  Medea  here  makes  mention  of  Scylla  and  Charybdis.

47  Ungrateful  men.'] — Ver.  124.  Ovid,  by  here  alluding  to  the  ingrati-
tude of  men,  falls  into  his  usual  error  of  confounding  the  Scylla  who  was
changed  by  Circe,  in  her  jealousy,  into  a  whirlpool,  with  the  Scylla  who
betrayed  her  father,  Nisus,  to  Minos.  They  were,  however,  different
persons.  Minos,  who  made  no  return  to  the  passion  of  the  latter  Scylla,
is  the  '  ingratus  vir'  here  mentioned : though  some  Commentators  think


1 20  THE EPISTLES OE THE HEROISTES.  [EP.  XII.

who48  so  many  times  vomits  forth  the  waves,  and  as  many
times  sucks  them  in  again,  had  buried  us  beneath  the  Trina-
crian  waves  !49

In  safety  hast  thou  returned,  a  conqueror  too,  to  the  Hee-
monian  cities  :  the  golden  fleece  is  offered  to  the  Gods  of
thy  country.  Why  should  I  make  mention  of  the  daughters
of  Pelias,5u  criminal  in  their  affection,  and  the  limbs  of  their
father  torn  asunder  by  their  virgin  hands  ?  Though  others
should  blame  me,  thou  art  bound  to  commend  me,  for  whom
so  often  I  have  been  forced  to  be  guilty. Thou  didst  dare,

Oh (words  are  wanting  to  the  true  extent  of  my  grief )

thou  didst  dare  to  say,  "Depart  from  the  house51  of  iEson !"
Thus  commanded,  I  was  departing  from  the  house,  accompanied
by  my  two  children,  and  by  that  love  of  thyself  that  ever  attends
me.  When,  suddenly,  thy  nuptials,  honoured  with  hymns,52
reached  my  ears,  and  the  torches53  gleamed  with  the  lighted

that  the  passage  may  refer  to  the  passion  of  Seylla  for  Glaucus,  the  sea
God.  The  story  of  Seylla,  the  daughter  of  Nisus,  is  told  in  the  Eighth,  and
that  of  the  other  Seylla,  in  the  Fourteenth  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses.

48  That  she  who.'] — Ver,  125.  Charybdis  is  here  alluded  to ;  a  rapid
whirlpool  on  the  coast  of  Sicily,  which  draws  in  and  throws  out  the  water
with  tremendous  force  and  swiftness,  twice  every  twenty-four  hours.  This
Charybdis,  as  the  poets  feign,  was  a  voracious  woman,  who  stole  the  oxen
of  Hercules,  on  which  Jupiter  struck  her  with  a  thunderbolt,  and  threw
her  into  the  sea,  where  she  retains  her  former  voracity,  and  swallows  up  all
that  comes  near  her.

49  Trinacrian  waves."]. — Ver.  126.  Sicily  was  called  Trinacria,  from
the  fact  of  its  having  a  triangular  form.

50  Of  Pelias.] — Ver.  129.  Medea  here  reminds  Jason  of  another  act
of  kindness  which  she  had  done  him.  Pelias  was  the  king  of  Thessaly,
and  uncle  to  Jason,  and,  with  the  view  of  removing  him,  suggested  to  him
the  expedition  for  the  recovery  of  the  Golden  Fleece.  He  had  three
daughters,  Alceste,  Amphinome,  and  Evadne,  who,  trusting  to  the  false
promises  of  Medea,  cut  their  father  in  pieces,  as  she  had  made  them
believe,  that  after  they  had  done  so,  she  would  restore  him  to  youth.
Her  only  object,  however,  was  to  remove  him  out  of  the  way,  on  account
of  the  ill-will  which  he  bore  to  Jason.  This  story  is  related  in  the  Seventh
Book  of  the  Metamorphoses.

51  From  the  house.] — Ver.  134.  '  Cede  domo  '  was  the  formula  used
in  the  Roman  repudiation  or  divorce.

52  Honoured  with  hymns.] — Ver.  137.  'Hymen  cantatus': — this  al-
ludes to  the  Hymenseal  song,  which  was  sung  at  the  nuptial  ceremony.

53  And  the  torches.] — Ver.  138.  '  Lampades  '  may  refer  either  to  the
torches  which  were  used  in  the  nuptial  ceremony,  or  to  the  lanterns  with
which  the  house  was  huns  on  the  festive  occasion.


EP.  XII. J  MEDEA TO JASON.  12l

flames  :  the  pipe  too54  poured  forth  the  songs  of  wedded  joys  to
yourselves,  but  to  me  more  mournful  than  the  funereal  trum-
pet ;55  I  was  struck  with  alarm ;  nor  did  I  as  yet  suppose  that
wickedness  existed  so  great ;  but  still  there  was  a  chill  through-
out all  my  breast.

The  crowds  rushed  on,  and  "  Hymen  I"  they  cried  ;  "  Hy-
menseus  !"  they  shouted  with  redoubled  cries.  The  nearer
the  sound  came,  the  more  dreadful  to  me  it  was.  The  servants
were  weeping  in  different  quarters,  and  were  concealing  their
tears.  Who  could  wish  to  be  the  messenger  of  a  calamity  so
great  1  To  me,  too,  it  was  more  pleasing  to  be  ignorant  of  itj
whatever  it  was  ;  but,  as  though  I  knew,  my  mind  was  sad-
dened. When  the  younger  of  my  sons,  by  my  order,  and
through  a  desire  of seeing, stood  at  the  very  threshold  of

54  The  pipe  too.] — Ver.  139.  The  'tibia'  was  a  pipe  or  flute,  and
formed  the  commonest  musical  instrument  among  the  Greeks  and
Romans.  It  was  very  frequently  a  hollow  cane  perforated  with  holes,  in
regular  order ;  sometimes  it  was  made  of  a  cylinder  of  hollowed  box-
wood, pierced  with  holes.  The  Phoenicians  used  a  very  small  pipe,
which  was  made  of  a  reed  or  straw,  which  was  called  '  gingrus.'  The
player,  when  the  single  pipe  was  used,  was  called  '  monaulos.'  Thus  em-
ployed, it  was  much  in  fashion  at  Alexandria.  It  was  sometimes  bound
with  metal  or  ivory  rings,  and  must  have  then  resembled  the  flageolet  or
clarionet  of  modern  times.  It  was  much  more  usual,  however,  among
the  Greeks  and  Romans,  to  play  on  two  pipes  at  the  same  time  ;  the  pipes
being  entirely  distinct,  and  with  separate  mouth-pieces.  The  pipe  was
used  at  sacrifices,  entertainments,  and  funerals.  The  worshippers  of
Bacchus  and  Cybele  used  the  Phrygian  pipe,  which  had  but  two  holes,
and  terminated  in  a  bend  upwards,  somewhat  similar  to  our  horn.  The
Phrygian  pipe  was  also  used  at  funerals.  This  instrument  was  also  em-
ployed to  regulate  the  time  in  dancing,  and  was  used  on  private  occasions
in  domestic  life,  and  especially,  as  in  the  present  instance,  on  the  celebra-
tion of  nuptials. The  Thebans  greatly  excelled  in  the  use  of  the  •  tibia.'

55  Funereal  trumpet.'] — Ver.  140.  The  •  tuba,'  or  •  trumpet'  of  bronze,
was  distinguished  from  the  '  cornu,'  oi  curved  trumpet,  by  being  straight.
The  '  tuba'  was  employed  in  war  and  at  funeral  solemnities,  whence  pro-
bably its  epithet  in  the  present  instance,  '  funesta.'  We  learn,  however,
from  Aulus  Gellius,  that  those  who  sounded  the  trumpet  at  funerals,  were
called  '  Siticines,'  and  that  their  instruments  were  of  a  peculiar  form.
The  sound  of  the  '  tuba'  was  of  a  harsh  nature  ;  Ennius  has  endeavoured
to  imitate  it  in  the  line ; — *  At  tuba  terribili  sonitu  taratantara  dixit.'
It  is  generally  supposed  to  have  been  of  Etrurian  origin,  and  was  attributed
to  Maleus,  a  fabulous  king  of  Etruria,  said  to  have  been  the  son  of  Her-
cules and  Omphale.


122  THE EPISTLES OE THE HEROINES.  [EP.  XII;

the  folding  doors  ;  he  said  to  me,  "  My  mother,  begone  ;  my
father  Jason  will  head  the  procession  :  and,  glistening  in  gold,56
he  is  driving  the  harnessed  steeds."  Forthwith,  tearing  my
garments,  I  beat  my  breast :  and  my  features  were  not  in  safety
from  my  hands.  My  feelings  prompted  me  to  rush  into  the
ranks  of  the  midst  of  the  throng,  and  to  tear  away  the  garlands
snatched  from  thy  well  trimmed  locks.  Hardly  did  I  withhold
myself  from  thus  exclaiming,  as  I  tore  my  hair,  "He  is
mine/'  and  from  laying  hands  on  thee.

My  injured  father,57  rejoice  :  forsaken  Colchians,  be  glad  :
shade  of  my  brother,  receive  my  sacrifice.58  I  am  deserted
(my  kingdom,  my  country,  and  my  home,  now  lost,)  by
my  husband:  him,  who  alone  was  all  these  things  to  me.
I  could  then  subdue  serpents,  and  raging  bulls  ;  and  could
I  not  vanquish  a  single  man  ?  And  am  I,  who  could  con-
trol by  my  skilful  potions  the  raging  flames,  unable,  my-
self, to  escape  from  my  own  flames  ?  Do  my  very  charms,
and  my  herbs,  and  my  skill  forsake  me  ?  Does  the  Goddess
avail  nought,  do  the  rites  of  the  powerful  Hecate  avail  nothing  ?
To  me  the  day  is  not  pleasing  !  the  bitter  nights  are  spent  in
watching ;  no  placid  slumber  visits  my  wretched  breast.  I
could  lull  to  sleep  the  dragon,  who  cannot  do  so  for  myself  :
my  art  is  more  useful  to  any  one  than  to  myself.

Those  limbs  which  I  have  preserved,  a  rival  is  embracing  ;
and  she  is  enjoying  the  fruit  of  my  toil.  Perhaps,  too,  while
thou  art  seeking  to  exalt  thyself 59  before  thy  silly  wife,  and  to

56  Glistening  in  gold,'] — Ver.  152.  According  to  some  Commentators,
*  aureus'  here  means  '  arrayed  in  vestments  of  gold,'  while  Burmann  thinks
that  it  signifies  '  borne  in  his  chariot  of  gold,'  as  in  the  First  Book  of  the
Art  of  Love,  1.  214.  '  Quatuor  in  niveis  aureus  ibis  equis.'  The  '  pompa'
is  the  nuptial  procession  which  Jason  is  supposed  to  head,  probably  in  a
chariot,  resplendent  with  gold.

&7  My  injured  father. ,] — Ver.  159-  From  reflecting  upon  her  own
calamities,  she  turns  her  thoughts  to  those  whom  she  has  injured,  and
concludes  that  her  present  misfortunes  are  the  judgment  of  heaven  for  her
past  offences.

f  My  sacrifice.']— Ver.  160.  '  Inferise'  were  the  sacrifices  which
were  offered  to  the  '  Manes'  or  <  shades  '  of  the  departed.  These  were
thought  to  be  especially  propitiated,  when  such  as  had  been  their  enemies
died  or  met  with  any  signal  misfortune.

69  To  exalt  thyself.] — Ver.  175.  This  notion  is  very  appositely  intro-
duced here.  Medea  had  been  rejected,  and  another  one  occupied  her  place.
We  may  therefore  readily  suppose  that  her  thoughts  would  be  intent  upon


EP.  XII. J  MEDEA TO JASOK.  123

utter  what  is  agreable  to  her  hostile  ear,  thou  mayst  be  in-
venting some  new  charges  against  my  face  and  my  manners  :
she,  perhaps,  may  be  laughing,  and  may  be  joyous  at  my  fail-
ings. Let  her  laugh,  and  let  her  lie  in  her  vanity  on  Tyrian  pur-
ple.: she  shall  weep,  and,  burnt,  she  shall  transcend  my  flame.60
So  long  as  there  shall  be  the  sword,  and  flames,  and  poisonous
potions  to  be  had,  no  enemy  of  Medea  shall  be  unpunished.
And  if,  perchance,  entreaties  touch  thy  obdurate  heart,  now
listen  to  words  less  strong  than  my  feelings.  To  thee  as  much
a  suppliant  am  I  as  thou  hast  often  been  to  me ;  and  I  hesi-
tate not  to  throw  myself  before  thy  feet.  If  I  am  despicable
to  thee,  think  of  the  children  of  us  both  :  a  cruel  step-
mother will  exercise  her  vengeance  against  my  offspring.
And  they  are  too  like  to  thyself:  even  I  am  moved  by  the
likeness,  and  oft  as  I  look  on  them,  my  eyes  are  moist  with
tears.  By  the  Gods  above  do  I  entreat,  by  the  light  of  the
flames  of  my  grandsire,61  by  my  own  deserts,62  and  by  my
two  sons,  our  pledges  of  love  ;  restore  to  me  my  bed ;  for
which,  in  my  folly,  I  left  so  many  things :  make  good  thy
speeches,  and  afford  me  relief.

the  good  fortune  of  her  rival ;  she  would  be  frequently  imagining  the
lovers  together,  and  fancying  to  herself  what  might  possibly  pass  be-
tween  them.  In  this  train  of  reflection,  it  would  naturally  come  into  her
mind  that  their  discourse  would  sometimes  turn  upon  her ;  and  as  she  was
no  stranger  to  the  infirmities  of  the  human  heart,  especially  when  inflamed
by  love,  she  readily  comes  to  the  conclusion,  that  Jason,  upon  these  occa-
sions, would  endeavour  to  recommend  himself  to  his  new  mistress  by
depreciating  and  disparaging  her  charms,  and  that  she,  on  the  other  side,
would  feel  a  sensible  joy  in  being  thus  preferred  to  her  rival.

60  Transcend  my  flame.] — Ver.  180.  She  threatens  her  here,  with  real,
and  not  with  figurative  flames,  a  threat  which  she  afterwards  acted  upon.
Apollodorus  says,  '  Medea  calling  those  Gods  to  witness,  by  whom  Jason
had  sworn,  and  abhorring  his  ingratitude,  sent  to  his  wife  a  garment
steeped  in  poison.  Soon  as  she  had  put  it  on,  she  and  her  father  Creon
were  burnt  with  an  intense  fire.'

61  Of  my  grandsire.] — Ver.  191.  She  refers  to  her  descent  from
Phoebus,  or  the  Sun.

62  My  own  deserts.] — Ver.  192.  It  will  be  observed  that  she  does  not
confine  herself  solely  to  threats ;  she  mingles  with  them  prayers  and
entreaties,  while  her  expressions  are  still  full  of  love  and  tenderness.  Not-
withstanding the  many  reproaches  that  she  throws  out  against  him,  she
occasionally  lets  fall  some  sentence  that  shews  the  sure  hold  he  still  has
on  her  affections.  Her  reproaches,  too,  far  from  manifesting  any  decay
of  her  passion,  are  the  clearest  evidence  of  its  strength,  and  flow  solely
from  a  sense  of  ill-requited  love.


124  THE EPISTLES OF THE HEROINES.  [EP.  XIII.

I  am  not  imploring  thee  against  bulls  and  men,  and  that  by
thy  aid  the  dragon  overcome  may  be  lulled.  I  am  asking  thee,
whom  I  have  purchased  ;  whom  thou  hast  thyself  presented  to
me ;  with  whom,  when  made  a  parent,  at  the  same  moment  I
was  made  a  parent.  You  enquire  where  my  dowry  is  1  In
that  field  have  I  reckoned  it  out  which  had  to  be  ploughed
by  thee  when  about  to  bear  away  the  fleece.  That  golden  ram
is  my  dower,  beauteous  with  his  fleece  of  gold ;  which,
should  I  say  to  thee,  "  Give  it  me  back,"  thou  wouldst  refuse
me.  My  dowry  was  thy  being  in  safety  ;  my  dowry  was  the
youths  of  Greece.  Go  then,  perjured  man,  compare  the  wealth
of  Sisyphus63  with  mine.  That  thou  art  living,  that  thou  art
possessing  a  wife,  and  a  powerful  father-in-law,  even  this  very
fact,  that  thou  canst  be  ungrateful,  is  all  my  own. Whom  I

this  very  instant !  but  of  what  use  is  it  to  threaten

vengeance  before-hand  ?  Rage  is  giving  birth  to  these  violent
threats. Whither  anger  shall  lead  me,  thither  will  I  follow.

Perhaps  I  shall  repent  of  my  deeds.  I  repent  too  that  I
assisted  a  faithless  man.  Let  the  God54  see  to  it,  who  now  is
.swaying  my  breast.  My  mind  for  sure,  is  conceiving  some-
thing great,  to  an  extent  which  I  know  not.


EPISTLE  XIII.
LAODAMIA  TO  PROTESILAUS.

\Vhilb  the  Greeks  were  preparing  for  the  expedition  against  Troy,  Pro-
tesilaiis,  the  son  of  Iphiclus,  as  we  learn  from  Homer,  joined  them  with
forty  ships. The  fleet  being  detained  by  contrary  winds  at  Aulis,  the

63  Wealth  of  Sisyphus.'] — Ver.  204.  She  alludes  to  the  dowry  which
he,  doubtless,  would  have  received  from  Creon,  the  son  of  Sisyphus,  with
his  daughter  Glauca,  or  Creiisa.

64  Let  the  God.] — Ver.  211.  Jason,  paying  no  regard  to  the  prayers
and  entreaties  of  Medea,  but  commanding  her  forthwith  to  leave  the  city,
(for  she  was  at  that  time  in  Corinth)  she,  with  some  difficulty,  obtained  of
Creon  a  respite  of  one  day.  Disguising  herself  so  as  not  to  be  known,
and  entering  the  palace  in  the  night,  she  set  fire  to  it  by  means  of  a  com-
position invented  by  Circe,  of  which  the  nature  was  such  that  the  flames
raised  by  it  could  not  be  extinguished.  Jason  escaped  by  leaping  from
the  burning  mass ;  but  Creon  and  Creiisa  perished  in  the  flames.  This  is
the  account  given  by  many  authors  ;  though  it  will  be  seen  to  vary  from
the  narrative  of  Apollodorus  above  quoted.


EP.  XIII.]"  LAODAMIA TO PROTESILAUS.  125

oracle  was  consulted,  and  an  answer  was  returned,  that  Agamemnon  had
offended  Diana  by  killing  one  of  her  sacred  stags,  and  that  nothing  would
appease  the  Goddess  for  the  offence  but  the  sacrifice  of  one  of  his
children.  Iphigenia  was  thereupon  proposed  as  the  victim  for  obtaining
a  propitious  voyage.  During  the  time  that  the  fleet  is  lying  wind-bound,
Laodamia,  the  daughter  of  Acastus  and  the  wife  of  Protesilaiis,  who
is  ardently  attached  to  her  husband,  and  has  often  been  alarmed  by
ominous  dreams,  is  supposed  to  write  the  present  Epistle,  in  which  she
endeavours  to  dissuade  him  from  engaging  in  the  war.  The  Greeks
had  been  told  by  an  oracle,  that  whoever  should  first  set  foot  upon
Trojan  ground  was  doomed  to  perish.  Laodamia  is  unable  to  conceal
her  concern,  and  sensible  of  his  undaunted  bravery,  she  desires  him,  for
her  sake,  to  moderate  his  intrepidity,  and  to  keep  in  mind  that  the  same
wound  will  prove  fatal  to  them  both.  She  exacts  his  compliance
as  a  testimony  of  the  continuance  of  his  affection,  and  tells  him
that  she  will  judge  of  his  love  for  her  by  the  care  he  takes  of  him-
self.

Laodamia  of  Haemonia,65  both  sends  health  to  her  Hsemo-
nian  husband,  and,  in  her  love,  wishes  it  to  reach  the  place
whither  it  is  sent.  There  is  a  report  that  thou  art  detained
at  Aulis  by  contrary  winds.66  Alas !  when  thou  didst  flee
from  me,  where  were  those  winds  ?  Then  ought  the  seas  to
have  opposed  themselves  to  thy  oars.  That  was  the  proper
season  for  the  waves  to  be  boisterous.  Many  a  kiss  would
I  have  given  to  my  husband,  and  many  an  injunction  ;  and
many  things  there  are  which  I  wished  to  say  to  thee.

Suddenly  wast  thou  hurried  hence  ;  and  the  breeze  that  in-
vited thy  sails,  was  such  as  the  mariners  desired,  not  I.  The
wind  was  suited  for  sailors,  not  suited  for  one  who  loved.  I
was  torn,  Protesilaiis,  from  thy  embraces,  and  my  tongue,
as  I  enjoined  thee,  left  its  words  unfinished,  hardly  was  it
able  to  pronounce  the  sad farewell. Boreas  sprang  up,67

65  Hamonia."} — Ver.  2.  In  addition  to  the  derivation  already  mentioned,
Thessaly  was  said  to  have  had  the  name  of  Haemonia,  or  iEmonia,  from
^Emonia,  the  daughter  of  Deucalion.

fifi  Contrary  winds.'] — Ver.  3.  The  fleet  being  detained  at  Aulis  by  con-
trary winds,  Iphigenia,  the  daughter  of  Agamemnon,  was  led  to  the  altar
as  a  propitiatory  sacrifice  to  the  wrath  of  Diana.  Virgil  and  Propertius
affrm  that  she  was  actually  slain  ■  but  Ovid  (in  the  Twelfth  Book  of  the
Metamorphoses),  Martial,  Juvenal,  and  other  authors,  say  that  she  was
saved,  and  that,  by  the  direction  of  the  Goddess,  a  hind  was  substituted
for  her,  while  she  herself  afterwards  became  the  priestess  of  Diana.

67  Boreas  sprang  up.~\ — Ver.  15.  The  North  wind  would  be  favourable
to  Protesilaiis  when  sailing  from  Thessaly  to  Aulis,  the  place  of  meeting,


]  26  THE  EPISTLES OE THE HEEOItfES.  [EP.  XIII.

and  swelled  the  sails  caught  by  him,  and  soon  was  my  Pro-
tesilaiis  far  away.  So  long  as  I  could  look  on  my  husband,
I  was  delighted  to  gaze  upon  him  ;  and  without  ceasing  did  I
follow  thy  eyes  with  mine.  When  I  could  no  longer  see  thee,
I  could  see  thy  sails  ;  long  did  the  sails  detain  my  gaze.  But
after  I  beheld  neither  thyself  nor  thy  flying  sails,  and  there
was  nothing  but  sea  for  me  to  behold,  together  with  thee,
life  fled  as  well ;  a  darkness  coming  on,  I  am  reported,  turn-
ing pale,  to  have  fallen  fainting  with  tottering  knees.

Hardly  did  my  father-in-law  Iphiclus,  hardly  did  the  aged
Acastus,68  hardly  did  my  sorrowing  mother,  revive  me  with
cold  water.  They  did  an  affectionate  act  of  kindness,  but
quite  useless  to  me ;  I  am  grieved,  that  in  my  misery,  I  was
not  allowed  to  die.  Soon  as  my  senses  returned,  my  sorrows
returned  as  well ;  and  a  lawful  passion  tormented  my  chaste
breast.  No  care  have  I  to  give  my  hair69  to  be  combed;70
no  pleasure  have  I  for  my  person  to  be  adorned  with  garments
embroidered  in  gold.  Just  as  those  whom  the  two-horned
Bacchus11  is  believed,  to  have  touched  with  his  lance  clothed

68  Aged  Acastus.] — Ver.  25.  Burmann,  in  the  list  of  the  Argonauts,
which  he  has  prefixed  to  his  edition  of  Valerius  Flaccus,  is  in  doubt
whether  this  Acastus  is  the  same  with  Acastus,  the  son  of  Pelias,  and
the  companion  of  Jason  in  the  Argonautic  expedition.  It  appears  to  him
that  this  Acastus  could  hardly  he  living  at  the  time  of  the  Trojan  war ;  but
it  is  evident,  from  a  passage  of  the  Troades  of  Euripides,  that  Acastus,
the  son  of  Pelias,  was  existing  after  the  destruction  of  Troy.  That  person
is  probably  here  meant,  and  the  more  so,  as  they  were  both  Thessalians.
Iphiclus,  the  father  of  Protesilaus,  was  one  of  the  Argonauts,  and  was
noted  for  his  great  swiftness  in  running.

69  Give  my  hair.'] — Ver.  31.  In  early  times  the  Roman  women  were
in  the  habit  of  dressing  their  hair  with  great  simplicity  ;  but  in  the  Au-
gustan period  a  variety  of  head-dresses  came  into  fashion,  many  of  which
will  be  found  described  in  the  Art  of  Love,  Book  iii.  1. 136.  These  head-
dresses were  sometimes  raised  to  a  considerable  height  by  rows  of  false
ringlets.  Slaves  were  trained  especially  for  the  purpose  of  dressing  the
hair  of  the  Roman  ladies  ;  they  were  called  '  ornatrices,'  and  were  in-
structed by  masters  in  the  art.  One  of  the  simplest  modes  of  wearing
the  hair  was  allowing  it  to  fail  in  tresses  behind,  and  only  confining  it  by
a  band  encircling  the  head.  Another  favourite  method  was  that  of  plat-
ting the  hair,  and  confining  it  with  a  '  crinale,'  or  hair-pin,  behind  the
head.  The  Athenian  women  wore  the  hair  in  a  knot  on  the  top  of  the
head,  which  was  fastened  with  a  clasp  in  the  shape  of  a  grasshopper.

70  To  be  combed.] — Ver.  31.  On  the  combs  in  use  among  the  ancients,
see  the  Note  to  1.  311,  of  the  Fourth  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses.

71  Two-homed  Bacchus.'] — Ver.  33. Bacchus  was  frequently  repre-


EP.  XIH.J  LAODAMIA TO PBOTESILAUS.  12/

in  vine,  so  do  I  go  to  and  fro,  whither  madness  impels  me.
The  matrons  of  Phyllus7-  throng  around  me,  and  cry  out  to  me,
"  Put  on,  Laodamia,  thy  royal  attire."  Shall  I  myself,  for-
sooth, put  on  garments  steeped  in  purple,73  and  is  he  to  be74,
waging  war  under  the  walls  of  Ilium  ?  Shall  I  myself  have
my  hair  arrayed,  and  must  he  have  his  head  burdened  with  a
helmet  ?75  Shall  I  myself  put  on  new  garments,  and  must  my
husband  wear  rugged  armour  ?

So  far  as  I  can,  I  will  be  said,  by  my  neglected  guise,  to
have  imitated  thy  hardships ;  and  these  times  of  war  will  I
spend  in  sadness.  Paris,  thou  chieftain,76  son  of  Priam,
beauteous  to  the  destruction  of  thy  family,  mayst  thou  prove
as  cowardly  a  foe,  as  thou  wast  a  treacherous  guest.  Either,
I  could77  have  wished  that  thou  hadst  disliked  the  form  of  the

sented  by  the  poets  as  wearing  horns  ;  because,  as  some  writers  say,  in  the
war  with  the  Giants,  he  wore  a  helmet  with  two  horns.  The  '  pampinea
hasta'  is  the  Thyrsus,  which  he  wielded.  The  persons  whom  this  Deity
was  supposed  to  touch  with  it,  were  supposed  to  be  immediately  seized  with
a  prophetic  frenzy.

72  Of  Phi/Uus.]—Yer.  35. Phyllus  was  a  town  of  Thessaly.

73  Steeped  in  purple.] — Ver.  37.  On  the  Tyrian  purple,  see  the  Notes
to  the  Fasti,  Book  ii.  1.  107.

7i  Is  he  to  be.~\ — Ver.  38.  This  is  the  answer  of  Laodamia  to  those
who  urged  her  to  assume  the  air  and  appearance  of  royalty.  It  is  full  of
affection  and  tenderness  for  Protesilaiis.  She  is  so  nearly  concerned  in
whatever  regards  him,  that  she  can  take  pleasure  in  nothing,  unless  he  is
a  participator,  and  she  affects  to  imitate  him,  so  far  as  she  can,  in  his
very  dangers  and  hardships.

75  With  a  helmet. .] — Ver.  39.  The  helmets  of  the  Greeks  and  Romans
were  originally  made  of  skin  or  leather,  and  were  adorned  with  metal,  and
occasionally,  even  gold.  Those  of  metal  were  called  '  cassides ;'  though  the
words  '  galea'  and  '  cassis'  often  mean  the  same  object.  Felt  and  sponge
were  among  the  materials  used  for  lining  helmets.  The  helmet  often
had  a  crest,  which  was  usually  made  of  horse  hair.  Cheek-pieces  and
visors  were  also  used.

76  Thou  chieftain.'] — Ver.  43.  Instead  of  '  dux  Pari,'  some  of  the
MSS.  have  here  '  Dyspari ;'  which,  adapted  from  the  Greek,  would  mean
'  wretched,'  or  '  unfortunate  Paris.'  Homer,  in  the  Third  Book  of  the
Iliad,  1.  39,  uses  the  expression  Avairapi,  elSog  dpicrre,  'Wretched  Pans,
most  beauteous  in  form.'  The  Poet  here,  most  probably,  had  that  line  in
view  ;  and  there  is  every  probability  that  Heinsius  is  right  in  thinking  this
to  be  the  correct  reading,  though  Burmann  does  not  admit  the  cogency
of  his  arguments.

77  Either  I  could.] — Ver.  45.  The  making  Laodamia  here  trace  back
the  war  to  its  source,  is  a  masterly  stroke  of  art  in  the  Poet.  Nothing  is
more  common,  when  misfortune  overtakes  us,  than  to  examine  each
minute  circumstance  which  may  have  contributed  to  it,  and  to  lament


128  THE EPISTLES OP THE HEEOINES.  [EP.  XIII,

Taenarian  wife,  or  that  thy  own  had  been  displeasing  to  her.
Thou,  Menelaiis,78  who  art  taking  too  much  pains  for  her
torn  from  thee,  ah  me !  how  fatal  an  avenger79  to  many  a
one,  wilt  thou  be  !  Avert,  ye  Gods,  I  pray,  the  direful  omen80
from  me,  and  let  my  husband  present  his  vows  to  Jove,  the
author  of  his  return.  But  I  am  fearful  ;  and  so  oft  as  the
dreadful  war  recurs  to  me,  my  tears  flow  just  like  the  snow
when  melted  by  the  sun.  Ilion,  and  Tenedos,81  and  Simois,
and  Xanthus,  and  Ida,  are  names  almost  to  be  dreaded82  at
their  very  sound.83

that  it  was  not  prevented.  Had  Paris  found  Helen  less  beautiful,  he
would  never  have  thought  of  carrying  her  away,  or  have  given  occasion  to
that  unhappy  war,  through  which  Laodamia  was  deprived  of  her  husband,

78  Thou,  Menelaiis.] — Ver.  47.  She  certainly  speaks  like  a  sensible
woman,  in  saying  that  Menelaiis  took  too  much  trouble  in  recovering  his
worthless  wife.

79  Fatal  an  avenger.] — Ver.  48.  We  are  usually  very  quick-sighted
in  what  more  nearly  concerns  ourselves.  As  Menelaiis  was  determined,
if  possible,  to  recover  Helen,  and  to  avenge  the  injury  done  to  him  by
Paris,  he  had  engaged  almost  the  whole  of  Greece  to  take  up  arms  in  his
cause,  and  was  conducting  into  Asia  an  army,  headed  by  the  flower  of  the
Grecian  princes.  As  Troy  was  a  most  powerful  city,  it  was  natural  to
think  how  much  blood  must  be  shed  in  the  forthcoming  war,  and  how
many  thousands  must  lose  their  lives.  Laodamia,  in  her  apprehensions
for  her  husband,  reflects  on  this,  and  then  prays  the  Gods  to  avert  the
omen  from  her.  She  says,  that  the  revenge  which  Menelaiis  is  about  to
take,  must  prove  fatal  to  many ;  wives  will  have  to  grieve  for  the  loss  of
their  husbands,  and  children  for  that  of  their  parents ;  but  she  hopes
that  the  Divinities  will  shield  her  from  such  a  calamity.

80  Direful  omen.] — Ver.  49.  It  seems  to  her  an  ominous  presage  of
future  woes,  that  she  has  just  inadvertently  called  Menelaiis  by  the  epi-
thet, '  flebilis,'  '  Cause  of  woe.'

81  Tenedos.] — Ver.  53.  This  was  an  island  within  sight  of  Troy,  to
which  the  Grecian  fleet  retired,  while  the  stratagem  of  the  wooden  horse
was  being  brought  to  completion.

82  To  be  dreaded.] — Ver.  54.  She  does  not  mean  to  say  that  the
names  in  themselves  are  repulsive,  but  that,  from  the  places  being  the
scenes  of  future  danger  to  her  husband,  she  dreads  the  mention  of  them.
Curiously  enough,  it  was  these  very  names  that  so  much  enchanted  the
French  Poet  Boileau.  In  his  Fourth  Epistle  to  the  King  of  France,  rela-
tive to  the  passage  of  the  Rhine,  he  complains  of  the  difficulty  of  intro-
ducing into  rhyme  such  barbarous  names  as  Woerden,  Zuyderzee,  Wagen>
inghen,  &c,  and  regrets  that  he  has  not  occasion  to  mention  as  the
subject  of  his  verse,  the  harmonious  names  of  the  rivers  and  cities  of  Asia,

'  Oh  !  que  le  ciel,  soigneux  de  notre  poesie,
Grand  roi,  ne  nous  fit-il  plus  voisins  de  l'Asie !


EP.  XIII.]  LAODA.MIA TO PEOTESILATJS.  129

And  no  stranger  would  have  attempted  to  carry  her  off,  had
he  not  been  able  to  defend  himself ; he  well  knew  his own
strength. He  came,  as  fame  reports,  bedecked  with  much
gold,  and  as  carrying  on  his  person  the  wealth  of  Phrygia ;
powerful  was  he  in  ships  and  in  men,  by  means  of  which
wars  are  waged ; and  how  small  a  part84  of his  kingdom
attended  him  ? By  these, daughter  of  Leda,  sister  of  the
twins,85 1  suspect  that  thou  wast  overcome  :  'twas  these  things,
I  think,  that  could  so  injure  the  Greeks. I  dread  a  certain
Hector,86  who  he  is, I  know  not. Paris  used  to  say  that
Hector  waged  the  war  with blood-stained hand. Of  this
Hector,  whoever  he  is,  if  I  am  dear  to  thee,  do  thou  have  a
care  :  have  his  name  imprinted  on  thy  mindful  breast. When
thou  hast  avoided  him,  remember  to avoid  the  others  ; and
imagine  that  there  is  many  a  Hector  there ;  and  take  care  and
say,  so  oft  as  thou  shall  prepare  to  fight,  "  Laodamia  bade  me
be  mindful  of  her/' If  it  is  ordained  for  Troy  to  fall  be-
ll n'est  plaine  en  ces  lieux  si  seche  et  si  sterile
Qu'il  ne  soit  en  beaux  mots  partout  riche  et  fertile,
La,  plus  d'un  bourg  fameux  par  son  antique  nom,
Veut  offrir  a  l'oreille  un  agreable  son.
Quel  plaisir  de  te  suivre  aux  rives  de  Scamandre,
D'y  trouver  d'llion  la  poetique  cendre.'

83  Their  very  sound.] — Ver.  54.  It  is  very  natural  for  Laodamia  to
express  her  apprehensions  in  this  manner.  The  fame  and  wealth  of  Troy,
the  number  of  its  tributary  provinces,  and  the  improbability  that  Paris
would  have  engaged  in  an  attempt  so  hazardous  had  he  not  known  that
his  strength  was  equal  to  it,  must  all,  of  necessity,  appear  terrible  to  her.
The  sentiments  are  admirably  adapted  both  to  the  person  and  her  cir-
cumstances. Fear  multiplies  dangers  and  begets  a  thousand  foreboding
apprehensions.

84  Small  a  part.] — Ver.  60.  She  means  to  say,  that  Paris  came  to
Greece  attended  with  a  large  fleet,  and  a  numerous  crowd  of  followers  ;
and  yet  these  were  an  inconsiderable  part  of  what  his  kingdom  could
furnish.  By  this  she  would  insinuate  to  Protesilaus,  that  he  had  engaged
in  a  perilous  warfare,  of  which  the  success  was  very  doubtful.

w  Of  the  twins.] — Ver.  61.  Pollux  and  Helen,  and  Castor  and  Cly-
temnestra,  were  born  of  the  two  eggs  produced  by  Leda,  when  embraced
by  Jupiter  in  the  form  of  a  swan.

86  A  certain  Hector.] — Ver.  63.  We  may  suppose,  that  though  the
Trojan  warfare  had  not  yet  commenced,  Hector  had  already  by  his
prowess  acquired  considerable  fame,  and  that  this,  though  obscurely,
had  reached  the  ears  of  Hippodamia.  There  is  great  propriety  in  the
Poet  thus  making  her  speak  as  if  she  knew  him  only  by  name.

K


130  THE EPISTLES OE THE HEROINES.  [EP.  XIII.

neath  the  Argive  force  ;  may  if  fall  as  well  with  thee  re-
ceiving no  wound.  Let  Menelaiis  fight,  and  let  him  march
against  the  opposing  foe  ;  that  he  may  take87  from  Paris,
what  Paris  before  took  from  him.  Let  him  rush,  on  ;  and
him,  whom  he  conquers  in  the  justice  of  his  cause,  may  he
conquer,  too,  in  arms  :  from  the  midst  of  the  foe  is  the  wife
to  be  recovered  by  her  husband.

Thy  case  is  a  different  one  :  do  thou  only  fight  to  live,  and
to  be  enabled  to  return  to  the  affectionate  bosom  of  thy
spouse.  Spare,  0  descendants88  of  Dardanus,  this  one  (I  be-
seech you)  out  of  foes  so  many  :  let  not  my  blood  flow  from
that  body.  He  is  not  one  whom  it  becomes  to  engage  with
the  naked  sword,  and  to  present  an  undaunted  breast  to  the
opposing  side.  Much  more  valiantly89  is  he  able  to  engage,
when  he  engages  in  the  contests  of  Love.  Let  others  wage
the  warfare  ;  let  Protesilaiis  love.  Now  I  own  it ;  I  wished  to
call  thee  back,  and  my  feelings  prompted  me  ;  but  my  tongue
stopped  short,  through  fear  of  a  bad  omen.  When  thou  didst
wish  to  go  forth  to  Troy  from  thy  father's  doors,  thy  foot,  by
striking  against  the  threshold,90  gave  a  presage. When  I  saw

87  He  may  take.] — Ver.  74.  This  line  and  the  next  are  wanting  in
some  few  of  the  MSS. ;  but  Heinsius  thinks  that  they  are  genuine,  as
bearing  the  authentic  marks  of  being  composed  by  Ovid.  In  each  there  is
a  strained  attempt  at  antithesis,  which  is  more  oratorical  than  poetical.

83  O  descendants.'] — Ver.  79.  There  is  considerable  beauty  in  the
manner  in  which  the  Poet  makes  her  impulsively  address  the  Trojans.
The  apprehension  of  her  husband's  danger  possesses  her  so  strongly,  that
she  fancies  herself  present  on  the  field  of  battle  :  she  sees  the  hands  of
his  enemies  lifted  up  against  him,  and,  in  a  transport  of  passion,  she  en-
treats them  to  spare  a  life  so  dear  to  her.

89  Much  more  valiantly.] — Ver.  83.  This  is  most  beautifully  expressed  ;
she  has  been  no  stranger  to  the  ardour  of  his  love,  and  as  her  heart  is
wholly  devoted  to  him,  she  can  easily  think  him  invincible  in  that  re-
spect. But  to  his  abilities  as  a  warrior  she  is  quite  a  stranger,  and  is
moreover  desirous  that  his  inclinations  may  not  lead  him  to  attempt  to
excel  as  such,  lest  he  should  be  prompted  too  much  to  expose  himself  to
danger.  Contrary  to  her  anticipations,  Protesilaiis  may  be  considered,
from  the  event,  to  have  shown  more  bravery  than  any  man*  in  the  Grecian
army.

y0  The  threshold.] — Ver.  88.  Stumbling,  and  being  called  back  when
setting  out  on  a  journey  or  expedition,  were  considered  to  be  ill  omens ;
Laodamia  is  sensible  of  this,  but  she  tries  to  persuade  herself,  in  spite  of
her  forebodings,  that  it  might  be  ominous  of  her  husband's  safe  return.


EP.  XIII.]  LAODAMIA TO PEOTESILAlJS.  131

it,  how  I  sighed,  and  silently  in  my  heart  did  I  say,  { '  May  this,
I  pray,  be  a  presage  of  my  husband  being  destined  to  return."

This,  now,  do  I  relate  to  thee,  that  thou  mayst  not  be  too
brave  in  arms  ;  cause  all  these  apprehensions  of  mine  to  vanish
in  the  breeze.  Fate  also91  destines  some  one,  I  know  not  whom,
for  an  unhappy  lot,  who  shall  be  the  first92  of  the  Greeks  to
touch  the  Trojan  soil.  Unhappy  she,  who  shall  be  the  first
to  lament  her  husband  torn  away  !  May  the  Gods  grant  that
thou  mayst  not  desire  to  be  thus  courageous !  Amid  the
thousand  ships,  may  thy  bark  be  the  thousandth,  and  now
may  it  be  ploughing  the  buffeted  waves  the  last  of  all.  This,  too,
do  I  admonish  thee  ;  go  forth  the  last  from  thy  ship  :  it  is
not  thy  native  soil  for  thee  to  hasten  to.  When  thou  shalt
be  returning,  urge  on  thy  bark  both  with  oars  and  sails,  and
place  thy  foot  with  speed  upon  thy  own  shore.  Whether
Phoebus  is  concealed,  or  whether  more  on  high  he  is  visible,
thou  com  est  to  me  by  day,  thou  earnest  to  me  by  night,  an
anxious  care.  And  yet,  by  night  still  more  than  by  day  ;  night
is  pleasing  to  the  fair,  whose  neck  the  arm  placed  beneath
supports.  In  a  forlorn  bed  am  I  pursuing  empty  dreams ;
while  I  am  deprived  of  the  real  ones,  false  joys  are  soothing  me.

But  why  does  thy  pallid  form  present  itself  to  me  ?  Why
does  many  a  complaint  arise  from  thy  accents  ? I  arouse  my-

91  Fate  also.] — Ver.  93.  The  Greeks  had  heen  informed  hy  the
oracle,  that  he  of  their  number  who  should  first  set  foot  upon  Trojan
ground,  was  doomed  to  fall.  Laodamia,  whose  fears  cause  her  a  thou-
sand apprehensions,  begs  that  he  will  not  be  too  rash,  and  expose  him-
self to  an  unavoidable  fate.  In  the  sequel  this  proved  to  be  the  case ;  for
when  the  Grecian  fleet  arrived  before  Troy,  all  the  Greeks,  mindful  of  the
prediction  of  the  oracle,  scrupled  to  be  the  first  to  land :  til],  at  length,
Protesilaiis,  full  of  indignation  at  such  unmanly  hesitation,  boldly  leaped
on  shore,  and  soon  after  fell  by  the  hand  of  Hector.

92  Who  is  the  first. ,] — Ver.  94.  The  story  of  Protesilaiis  is  thus  told
by  Hyginus,  Fable  103.  'It  had  been  foretold  to  the  Greeks  that  he
should  perish  who  should  be  the  first  to  touch  the  Trojan  shore.  When
the  Greeks  had  come  close  to  the  shore,  the  rest  hesitating,  Iolaiis,  the
son  of  Iphiclus  and  Diomeda,  was  the  first  to  leap  on  shore  from  his
ship.  He  was  immediately  slain  by  Hector,  and  all  called  him  Protesi-
laiis, since  he  was  the  first  of  all  to  land.  When  his  wife,  Laodamia,  the
daughter  of  Acastus,  heard  of  his  death,  she  asked  of  the  Gods  that
she  might  be  allowed  to  converse  with  him  for  three  hours.  This  was
granted ;  and  being  brought  back  [from  the  Shades]  by  Mercury,  she  con-
versed with  him  for  that  space  of  time.  After  he  had  died  a  second
time,  Laodamia  was  unable  to  bear  up  against  her  grief.'

k2


132  THE EPISTLES OF THE HEEOIKES.  [EP.  XIII.

self  from  my  sleep,  and  I  adore  the  shadows  of  the  night ;  no
altar  of  Thessaly9;i  is  without  the  smoke  of  my  frankincense.
Incense  do  I  present,  and  on  it  tears  ;  sprinkled  with  which
the  flame  bnrns  bright,  just  as  it  is  wont  to  arise  when  wine
is  poured  upon  it.  When  shall  I,  embracing  thee,  safe  re-
turned, in  my  longing  arms,  in  my  weakness  even  faint  away
from  my  excess  of joy  ?  When  will  it  be,  that  happily  united
to  me94  in  the  same  bed,  thou  shalt  relate  the  splendid
achievements  of  thy  warfare  ?  Whilst  thou  shalt  be  relating
these  to  me,  although  I  shall  be  delighted  to  hear  them,
still  many  a  kiss95  shalt  thou  receive,  many  a  one  wilt  thou
give.  Always,  amid  these,  the  words  of  a  narrator  are  agreably
interrupted  ;  the  tongue  is  more  fluent  that  pauses  with  delays
so  sweet.

But  when  Troy  recurs,  and  the  winds  and  the  deep  recur
to  me,  flattering  hopes,  overcome  by  anxious  fears,  give  way.
This,  too,  alarms  me,  that  the  winds  hinder96  your  ships  from
departing  ;  you  are  ready  to  go,  while  the  waves  are  unwilling.
Who  could  wish  to  return  to  his  country  when  the  winds  are
against  him  ?  From  your  country,  while  the  sea  forbids,  you
are  setting  sail.  Neptune  himself  does  not  afford  a  passage  to
his  own  city.97 Whither  are  you  hurrying  ?  Return,  each  of

93  Altar  of  Thessaly.~\ — Ver.  112.  She  means  to  say  that  no  altar  of
Thessaly  is  without  the  smoke  of  sacrifices,  or  of  frankincense,  supplied  at
her  expense.

94  United  to  me.'}—  Ver.  117.  Ulysses,  on  a  similar  occasion,  narrates
to  Penelope  the  tale  of  his  wanderings.  See  the  Odyssey,  Book  xxiii,  com-
mencing at  line  306.

95  Many  a  kiss.} — Ver.  120.  It  is  difficult  to  conceive  any  thing  more
finely  depicted  than  this  account  of  Laodamia.  In  spite  of  her  appre-
hensions, she  cannot  forbear,  in  some  degree,  alleviating  her  sorrow  with
the  pleasing  anticipation  of  his  return  and  the  happy  scenes  that  will
then  pass  between  them.  Ker  extreme  concern  for  him  will  then  make
her  anxious  to  know  all  that  has  happened  to  him  during  his  absence ;  and
he  must  gratify  her  curiosity  by  relating  every  particular.  As  he  will  have
frequent  occasion  to  mention  his  dangers  and  his  narrow  escapes,  her  joy  to
find  him  still  safe  will  repeatedly  express  itself  in  fond  and  endearing
caresses.  These  will  cause  an  agreable  interruption  of  his  recital  and  will
make  him  enter  again  upon  the  story  with  renewed  pleasure.

96  Winds  hinder.} — Ver  125.  She  alludes  to  their  detention  in  the
port  of  Aulis.

97  His  own  city.} — Ver.  129.  Because  he  and  Apollo  had  built  the
walls  of  Troy  for  king  Laomedon.


EP.  XIII.]  LA.ODAMIA TO PEOTESILAUS.  133

you,  to  your  own  homes.  Whither  do  you  hurry,  ye  Greeks  ?
Listen  to  the  winds  that  forbid  you;  this  delay  arises  not  from
a  sudden  accident,  but  from  the  Divinity.  What  is  sought  in
a  war  so  great,  but  a  shameless  adulteress  ?  While  yet  you  may,
turn  back  your  sails,  ye  Inachian  barks.  But  why98  do  I  recall
them  ?  Afar  be  the  omen  of  one  recalling,"  and  let  a  propi-
tious breeze  still  the  lulled  waves.

I  envy  the  Trojan  dames  ;*  if  they  behold2  the  mournful
funerals  of  their  relatives,  and  if  the  enemy  is  not  far  away,
still  the  new-made  bride  with  her  own  hands  will  place  the
helmet  on  her  valiant  husband,  and  will  hand  him  the  barba-
rian arms.3  She  will  hand  him  his  arms ;  and  while  she  shall  be
handing  him  his  arms,  at  the  same  moment  will  she  snatch  a

98  But  why.] — Ver.  135.  There  is  an  infinity  of  readings  for  this
line  in  the  various  MSS.  The  suggestion  of  Heinsius,  as  to  the  whole  of
the  line,  seems  the  best : — '  Sed  quid  ego  hos  revoco  ?  revocaminis  omen
abesto  ;'  '  hos,'  referring  to  the  Greeks.

99  Of  one  recalling.] — Ver.  135.  It  has  been  stated  in  the  Note  to
line  88,  that  to  be  recalled  when  setting  put  on  a  journey  was  a  bad  omen.
In  the  First  Book  of  the  Fasti,  1.  561,  however,  Hercules  thinks  the
"  revocamen,'  by  his  oxen,  when  lowing  in  the  cave  of  Cacus,  to  be  a  good
sign.

1  Trojan  dames.] — Ver.  137.  'Troasin'  here  is  the  Greek  dative
plural.  Similarly,  Ovid  uses  '  Lemniasin,'  and  '  heroism  ;'  while  Proper-
tius  has  '  Dryasin,'  and  '  Hamadryasin.'

2  They  behold.] — Ver.  138.  This  sentiment  is  beautifully  expressed,
and  is  a  perfect  refinement  upon  her  sorrow,  while  it  fully  accords  with
that  strength  of  passion  which  Laodamia  breathes  throughout  the  whole
of  the  Epistle.  So  impatient  is  she  under  the  irksomeness  of  her  hus-
band's absence,  that  she  is  ready  to  think  any  condition  preferable  to  her
own.  The  Trojan  matrons  are  far  happier  than  herself,  in  her  estima-
tion, although  immediate  spectators  of  the  danger  and  the  fate  of  their
husbands  and  children.  They  can  be  employed  in  many  pleasing  offices
about  them,  can  buckle  on  their  armour,  give  them  their  last  injunc-
tions, and  be  delivered  from  the  tortures  of  a  cruel  suspense.  On  the
other  hand,  it  is  her  sad  fate  to  be  distracted  between  hope  and  fear,
while  her  foreboding  mind  suggests  a  thousand  dangers,  and  keeps  her  in
a  perpetual  state  of  anxiety  and  alarm.

3  Barbarian  arms.] — Ver.  140.  From  Homer  we  learn  that  the  fol-
lowing were  the  particulars  of  the  armour  of  the  heroes  of  the  Homeric
age,  and  which  continued  afterwards  to  be  used  by  the  Grecian  soldiers.
The  warrior  having  a  tunic  on  his  body,  put  on,  first,  the  greaves ;
secondly,  his  cuirass,  with  the  belt ;  thirdly,  his  sword,  which  hung  from
the  left  side  by  a  belt  slung  over  the  right  shoulder  ;  fourthly,  the  large
round  shield,  which  was  also  supported  by  a  belt ;  fifthly,  his  helmet ;
and  lastly,  he  wielded  one  or  two  spears.


134  THE EPISTLES OE THE HEROLKES.  [EP.  XIII.

kiss  (that  kind  of  duty  will  be  pleasing  to  the  two).  She
will  detain  her  husband  too,  and  will  give  him  injunctions  to
return,  and  will  say,  "  Take  care,  and  bring  back  these  arms
for  Jupiter."  He?  bearing  in  his  mind  the  fresh  injunctions  of
his  spouse,  will  fight  with  due  caution,  and  will  have  some
regard  for  his  home.  She  will  take  from  him  his  shield  at
his  return,  and  will  unloose  his  helmet,  and  will  receive  his
wearied  breast  in  her  bosom.  .  We  are  full  of  uncertainty ;
anxious  apprehensions  compel  us  to  fancy  every  thing  to  be
done,  that  can  happen.

But  while  as  a  warrior  thou  shalt  be  wielding  arms  in  a  dis-
tant region,  I  haveawaxen/^wre4  which  represents  thyfeatures.
To  it  do  I5  utter  endearing  expressions,  to  it  the  words  that
are  due  to  thee ;  my  embraces  does  it  receive.  Believe  me,
the  image  is  more  than  what  it  seems  to  be  ;  give  language  to

4  Waxen  figure.'] — Ver.  152.  Among  the  Romans,  it  was  the  custom
to  preserve  '  cerse,'  or  '  imagines/  portraits  made  in  wax  of  their  an-
cestors, which  were  kept  in  '  armaria,'  '  cases,'  or  '  cupboards,'  in  the
'  atria,'  or  '  halls,'  by  those  who  had  the-  '  jus  imaginum.'  These  are
generally  supposed  to  have  been  busts ;  and  such  may  be  the  meaning  of
'  cera,'  in  the  present  instance,  though  it  may  possibly  mean  only  a  pro-
file in  wax  on  a  plane  surface.  Hyginus  says,  Fable  104,  that  after
Protesilaiis  was  removed  from  Laodamia  by  a  second  death — '  she  made
a  brazen  (sereum)  image  of  her  husband,  and  placing  it  in  her  cham-
ber, pretended  that  it  was  a  sacred  relic,  and  began  to  worship  it.'
The  word  'sereum'  is  supposed  by  Heinsius  to  be  a  corruption  for  '  cereum,'
1  waxen' ;  and  Hyginus  may  probably  refer  to  the  same  tradition  to
which  Ovid  here  alludes,  although  she  is  here  represented  to  be  in  pos-
session of  the  portrait  before  she  has  heard  of  his  death.

5  To  it  do  /.] — Ver.  153.  It  may  be  remarked  of  this  Epistle,  as  has
been  observed  of  the  poems  of  Homer,  that  the  Poet,  far  from  showing
all  his  strength  at  the  commencement,  grows  upon  his  reader,  and  in-
creases his  admiration  the  further  he  proceeds.  After  the  endearing  ex-
pressions of  love  and  tenderness  which  we  meet  with  in  the  foregoing
parts  of  the  Epistle,  and  the  natural  images  by  which  Laodamia  so  faith-
fully depicts  her  affectionate  feelings,  we  might  suppose  it  impossible  for
the  Poet  to  pourtray  her  feelings  in  a  stronger  manner.  And  yet  a  new
feature  of  her  affection  is  reserved  for  the  close.of  her  Epistle.  Her  only
consolation,  she  says,  in  the  absence  of  Protesilaiis,  is  a  likeness  of  him,
which  she  often  takes  a  delight  in  contemplating.  To  this,  by  habit,
she  has  transferred  that  fondness  which  she  feels  for  the  original,  and
she  bestows  on  it  the  same  caresses  that  she  has  been  wont  to  give  to  her
dear  Protesilaiis.  To  such  a  height  is  her  love  carried  at  last,  that  she
is  apt  to  imagine  it  more  than  simply  an  image.  She  fancies  that  it  only
wants  a  voice  to  be  Protesilaiis  himself,  and  is  in  the  habit  of  uttering  her
complaints  to  it,  as  though  she  expects  it  to  return  an  answer.


EP.  XIY.]  HTPERM^ESTEA TO LT^CEUS.  135

the  wax,  and  it  will  be  Protesilaiis  himself.  At  this  do  I  look,
and  to  my  bosom  do  I  press  it,  in  place  of  my  real  husband,
and,  as  though  it  could  utter  words  in  answer,  do  I  com-
plain, By  thy  return,  and  by  thy  person,  Divinities  to  me,
do  I  swear  ;  and  by  the  torches  of  affection  and  of  wedlock,
equally  glowing;  by  that  head,  too,  which  mayst  thou  with
thyself  restore  to  me,  that  I  may  behold  it  white  with  its  hoary
locks ;  that  I  am  ready  to  come  as  thy  companion  wherever

thou  shalt  summon  me  ; whether (a  thing,  alas  ! 6  that

I  dread,)  or  whether  thou  shalt  be  still  surviving.

The  end  of  my  Epistle  shall  be  closed  with  this  short  injunc-
tion :  "  If  thou  hast  any  care  for  me,  have  a  care  for  thyself.'*


EPISTLE  XIV
HYPERMNESTRA  TO  LYNCEUS7

Danaus,  the  son  of  Belus,  had,  by  several  wives,  fifty  daughters.
iEgyptus,  his  brother,  who  had  the  like  number  of  sons,  wished  them
to  marry  the  daughters  of  Danaiis,  and  applied  to  him  for  his  per-
mission. Danaiis,  having  been  informed,  by  an  oracle,  that  he  should
fall  by  the  hands  of  a  son-in-law,  and  wishful,  if  possible,  to  avoid  the
danger,  took  ship,  and  in  course  of  time  possessed  himself  of  Argos.
Enraged  to  find  himself  thus  slighted,  iEgyptus  raised  a  great  army,
and  putting  his  sons  at  the  head  of  it,  sent  it  into  Greece,  with  an
express  command  not  to  return  until  they  should  have  either  slain
Danaiis,  or  obliged  him  to  consent  to  receive  them  as  his  sons-in-law.
On  being  pressed  by  a  close  siege,  Danaiis  was  under  the  necessity  of
promising  them  his  daughters ;  but  they,  having  previously  received
swords  from  their  father,  by  his  command  killed  their  husbands  on  the
night  of  the  nuptials,  while,  overcome  with  wine,  they  were  buried
in  sleep.  Hypermnestra  was  the  only  exception,  who  spared  her  hus-
band Lynceus,  and  having  acquainted  him  with  the  treachery  of  Danaiis,
advised  him  to  fly  with  all  speed  to  his  father  iEgyptus.  Danaiis,  on
finding  that  his  commands  had  been  strictly  obeyed  by  all  his  daughters
except  Hypermnestra,  was  so  enraged  at  her  disobedience,  that  he
loaded her  with  chains,  and  thrust  her  into  prison. On  this,  she  is

6  A  thing,  alas  /] — Ver.  164.  This  is  a  very  happy  instance  of  Aposio-
pesis ;  as  she  fears  to  mention  death,  through  fear  of  its  proving  an  ill
omen.  She  proved  as  good  as  her  word,  for  she  did  not  long  survive  her
unfortunate  husband.

7  Lr/nceus.'] — This  name  is  given  as  '  Linus'  in  some  of  the  Editions.


136  THE EPISTLES OE THE HEROINES.  [EP.  XIY.

supposed  to  have  written  the  following  Epistle  to  her  husband,  in
which  she  entreats  him  to  come  to  her  assistance,  or,  if  she  shall  be  put
to  death  before  he  can  bring  her  relief,  to  bestow  upon  her  the  rites  of
burial.

Htpeemnestea  sends8  to  the  only  survivor  of  so  many  bro-
thers but  recently  existing ;  the  rest  of  that  multitude  have
perished  through  the  crimes  of  their  wives.  Shut  up,  I  am  con-
fined in  prison,  and  am  fettered  with  heavy  chains.  The  cause
of  my  punishment  is,  that  I  was  dutiful.  I  am  deemed  guilty,
because  my  hand  trembled  at  plunging  the  sword  in  my  hus-
band's throat ;  had  I  dared  criminality,  I  should  have  been
applauded.  It  is  better  to  be  deemed  guilty,  than  in  this
manner  to  have  pleased  a  parent.  I  cannot  repent  of  having
my  hands  free  from  blood.  Let  my  father  torture  me  with
the  flames9  which  I  have  not  polluted  ;  and  let  him  thrust  the
torches  in  my  face,  which  were  present  at  the  nuptial  rites  ;
or  let  him  stab  me  with  that  sword  which,  for  no  good
purpose,  he  entrusted  to  me ;  so  that  I,  the  wife,  may
perish  by  a  death  by  which  my  husband  perished  not ;  still,
he  shall  not  cause  my  dying  lips  to  say,  "  I  repent ;"  thou  art
not  one,  Hypermnestra,  to  regret  having  been  dutiful.

Let  Danaiis  and  my  cruel  sisters  repent  of  their  crime  ;
this  result  is  wont  to  attend  upon  deeds  of  guilt. My  heart

8  Hypermnestra  sends. ] — Ver.  1.  Hypermnestra,  in  her  communi-
cation with  Lynceus,  skilfully  commences  with  such  a  representation  of
her  case,  as  may  most  effectually  awaken  his  resentment,  and  beget  in  him
a  desire  for  revenge.  She  reminds  him  that  he  is  the  only  surviving  bro-
ther of  fifty,  all  the  rest  having  been  cut  off  by  the  barbarous  con-
trivance of  her  father,  and  that  all  her  sufferings  are  occasioned  by  her
tenderness  for  him.  Yet,  she  says,  far  from  repenting  of  it,  the  re-
flection always  affords  her  pleasure,  nor  will  all  the  tortures  and  miseries
in  the  world  be  able  to  make  her  own  the  contrary.  She  then  asks  how
Lynceus  can  possibly  deny  his  aid  to  one  who  has  treated  him  so  gene-
rously, or  avoid  attempting  to  rescue  her  from  that  bondage  into  which
she  has  been  reduced  for  preserving  his  life.

9  With  the  flames.'] — Ver.  9.  She  here  alludes  not  only  to  the  flame  of
the  marriage  torches,  which,  as  typifying  her  conjugal  duty,  she  says  she
will  not  violate,  but,  probably,  the  fire  also,  which,  together  with  water,
on  entering  her  husband's  house  on  the  evening  of  the  nuptials,  the  bride
was  required  to  touch.  This  was  either  symbolical  of  perfect  purity,  or
of  an  expression  of  welcome,  as  the  interdiction  of  fire  and  water  was  the
formula  for  banishment  among  the  Romans.  Hypermnestra  then  means
thereby  to  say  that  she  has  not,  like  the  rest  of  her  sisters,  violated  the
nuptial  contract  by  the  murder  of  her  husband.


EP.  XIV.]  HYFERMNESTEA TO LT^CETJS.  137

shudders  at  the  recollections  of  that  night,  denied  with  blood  ;
and  a  sudden  trembling  enervates  the  bones  of10  my  right
hand.  The  hand  which  you  might  suppose  could  perpetrate
the  murder  of  a  husband,  dreads  to  write  about  a  murder
not  committed  by  itself.  But  still  I  will  attempt  to  describe
the  dreadful  scene.  Twilight  had11  just  risen  over  the  earth  :
it  was  the  closing  portion1*  of  the  day,  and  the  first  of  the
night.  We,  the  descendants  of  Inachus,  are  led  into  the
abode  of  the  great  Pelasgus,13  and  our  father-in-law  receives
his  armed  daughters-in-law  in  his  house.  Lamps  edged  with
gold  are  shining  on  every  side,  and  propitious  frankincense
is  offered  on  the  reluctant  altars.14  The  people  shout  "  Hymen !"
"  Hymenseus  !"  he  flies  from  them  as  they  call.  The  wife  of
Jove,15  herself,  has  fled  from  her  own  city.

10  The  bones  of  '.] — Ver.  18.  '  Ossa,' signifying '  the  bones' of  the  fingers
and  hand  with  which  she  is  writing,  seems  a  more  probable  reading  than
'  orsa.'  The  latter,  however,  is  preferred  by  Burmann,  who  thinks  that
it  means  •  what  she  has  commenced'  to  write  down,  which  is  now  inter-
rupted by  her  fears.

11  Twilight  had.] — Ver.  21.  '  Crepusculum'  was  the  twilight  be-
tween evening  and  night,  while  '  diluculum'  was  the  twilight,  or  dawn,
between  night  and  morning.

12  Closing  portion.] — Ver.  22.  '  Ultima  pars  lucis,  primaque  noctis
erat'  is  the  usual  reading,  but  Heinsius,  upon  the  authority  of  someMSS.,
gives  a  very  different  reading:  '  ultima  pars  noctis,  primaque  lucis  erat.'
*  It  was  the  concluding  part  of  the  night,  and  the  beginning  of  the  day.'
He  thinks  that  the  meaning  is,  that  the  supper  was  prolonged  till  day-
break, and,  that  on  the  brides  being  conducted  to  the  nuptial  chamber,
they  slew  their  husbands.  However,  Hypermnestra  afterwards  speaks  of
their  going  to  sleep ;  and  she  says,  that  during  this,  the  massacre  wras
committed,  while  all  Argos  was  in  profound  quiet,  and  that  at  length,  the
morning  approached.  She  is  now  describing  the  '  deductio,'  or  taking
home  of  the  brides.

13  Great  Pelasgus.'] — Ver.  23.  Instead  of  '  Pelasgi,'  some  of  the  MSS.
have  '  Tyranni.'  If  we  adopt  the  first  reading,  the  meaning  cannot  be
'  Pelasgian,'  for  Danaiis  was  an  Egyptian.  The  word  must  consequently
allude  to  Pelasgus,  the  ancient  king  of  Argos,  son  of  Jupiter  and  Niobe,
who  had  perhaps  built  the  palace.  The  Danaides  are  called  '  Inachides,'
inasmuch  as  they  were  descendants  of  Inachus;  for  Inachus  was  the
father  of  Io,  who,  by  Jupiter,  had  Epaphus,  whose  son  was  Belus,  the
father  of  iEgyptus  and  Danaiis.

14  Reluctant  altars.]— Ver.  26.  '  Foci,'  '  the  altars,'  implies  '  the  Dei-
ties,' to  whom  sacritices  offered  at  marriages  solemnized  with  a  design  so
wicked,  could  not  be  acceptable.

15  Wife  of  Jove.] — Ver.  28. Juno  might  have  been  expected  to  be


138  THE EPISTLES OE THE HEUOITTES.  [EP.  XIY,

Behold  !  confused  with  wine,  and  surrounded  with  the  cla-
mour of  their  attendants,  fresh  flowers  binding16  their  anointed
locks,  the  joyous  husbands  are  escorted  to  their  nuptial  cham-
bers, chambers,  their  sepulchres,  alas  !  and  with  their  bodies
they  press  the  beds  more  befitting  their  funeral  rites.  And
now,  overpowered  with  feasting,  and.  wine,  and  sleep,  they  lay  ;
and  there  was  deep  silence  throughout  unsuspecting  Argos.
Around  me  did  I  seem  to  hear  the  groans  of  the  dying ;  and
still17  I  did  hear  them,  and  it  was  what  I  dreaded.  My  blood
forsook  me,  the  vital  heat  deserted  my  senses  and  my  body  ;
and  turning  cold,  I  lay  upon  my  bridal  couch.  Just  as  the
bending  heads  of  corn  are  shaken  by  the  mild  Zephyrs  ;  just
as  the  cold  breeze  agitates  the  foliage  of  the  poplars  ;  either  so,
or  even  more  so,  did  I  tremble.  Thou  thyself  didst  lie  quiet,
and  the  wine  which  they  had  given  thee  was  a  sleepy  draught.
The  commands  of  a  violent  father  banished  fear ;  I  started
up,  and  with  a  trembling  hand  I  seized  the  weapon.

I  will  not  say  what  is  false  ;  three  times  did  my  hand  raise
the  sharp  sword ;  three  times  did  it  fall  with  the  sword  so
guiltily  wielded. I  aimed  it18  at  thy  throat  ; permit  me  to

present  for  a  twofold  reason.  One  of  her  titles  was  '  Pronuba,'  '  the
guardian  of  marriage  ;'  and  she  was  especially  venerated  at  Argos,  where
her  chariot  was  said  to  be  kept,  and  where  the  nuptials  were  being  cele-
brated.

16  Flowers  Mnding.] — Ver.  30.  Among  the  Greeks,  both  the  bride  and
bridegroom  were  dressed  in  their  best  attire  on  the  day  of  the  marriage,
with  chaplets  on  their  heads,  and  the  doors  of  their  houses  were  hung
with  festoons  of  ivy  and  laurel.

17  And  still.'] — Ver.  36.  The  force  of  the  particle  '  tamen,'  in  this
verse,  deserves  particular  attention.  Hypermnestra  would  denote  by  it
that  she  was  so  disturbed  by  fear,  and  a  consciousness  of  the  baseness  of
the  crime,  as  to  be  almost  deprived  of  her  senses,  and  to  be  doubtful
whether  she  really  heard  the  groans  of  people  dying  around  her,  or  was
deceived  by  the  suggestions  of  her  fancy.

18  I  aimed  it.] — Ver.  47.  Instead  of  this  and  the  following  line,  as
existing  in  most  of  the  MSS.,  one  of  the  MSS.  has  these  four  lines :

1  Admovi  jugulo  : sine  me  tibi  vera  fateri ;

Mente  sequi  dira  jussa  paterna  volens.
Tandem  victa  mei  saeva  formidine  patris,

Audeo  per  jugulum  tela  movere  tuum.'

'  I  applied  it  to  thy  throat ;  permit  me  to  confess  the  truth  to  thee  ;  in-
tending, with  relentless  feelings,  to  obey  the  commands  of  my  father.
At  length,  overpowered  by  cruel  fears  of  my  father,  I  dared  to  aim  the


EP.  XIV.]  HYPEBMtfESTEA TO LYNCETTS.  139

confess  the  truth  to  thee  ;  I  aimed  the  weapon  of  my  father  at
thy  throat.  But  fear  and  duty  opposed  the  cruel  deed  ;  and  my
pure  right  hand  revolted  at  the  task  enjoined.  Rending  my
purple  garments,  tearing  my  hair,  in  faint  accents  did  I
utter  such  words  as  these  :

"  Hypermnestra,  thou  hast  a  cruel  father.  Perform  the
commands  of  thy  parent ;  and  let  him  be  the  companion  in
death  of  his  brothers.  I  am  a  woman,  and  a  virgin  ;  merci-
ful by  nature  and  by  years ;  gentle  hands  are  not  suited  to
cruel  weapons.  But  come,  and  while  he  lies  defenceless,  imi-
tate thy  valorous  sisters  :  'tis  to  be  supposed  that  their  hus-
bands have  been  slain  by  them  all.  If  this  hand  could
possibly  commit  any  murder,  it  should  be  blood-stained
through  the  death  of  its  owner.  How  have  they19  deserved
death,  by  possessing  their  uncle's  realms,20  which  must  still
have  been  given  to  foreign  sons-in-law  ?  Suppose  our  hus-
bands have  deserved  to  die ;  what  have  we  done  ourselves  ?
Through  what  crime  am  I  forbidden  to  be  dutiful  1  What
have  I  to  do  with  the  sword  ?  What  has  a  maiden  to  do  with
the  weapons  of  warfare  ?  The  wool  and  the  distaff  are  more
suited  to  my  fingers.' '

Thus  said  I ;  and  as  I  complained,  tears  followed  their  own

weapon  at  thy  throat.'  These  lines  however  are  universally  considered  to
be  spurious.  Instead  of  the  47th  hue,  as  above  translated,  which  is, '  Ad-
movi  jugulo,  sine  me  tibi  vera  fateri ;'  some  of  the  MSS.  have  '  At  rursus
monitis  jussuque  coacta  parentis :  '  But  again  impelled  by  the  precepts
and  the  commands  of  my  parent.'  Heinsius  thinks  that  both  the  47th
and  48th  lines  ought  in  any  shape  to  be  rejected,  as  being  the  inter-
polations of  some  ignorant  grammarian,  who  imagined  them  necessary
to  fill  up  and  connect  the  sense ;  and  the  same  Commentator  observes,
that,  without  them,  the  connexion  is  evident,  if  we  merely  change  the
'  sed,'  '  but,'  of  the  next  line  into  '  et,'  '  and.'

19  How  have  they.'] — Ver.  61.  This  speech  of  Hypermnestra  is  ad-
mirably adapted  to  the  occasion.  The  Poet,  with  great  skill,  puts  into
her  mouth  those  arguments  which  are  the  most  suitable  for  one  of  her  sex,
and  placed  under  her  circumstances.  Her  father's  commands,  she  says,
were  cruel  and  unjust ;  it  was  not  for  a  woman  to  handle  deadly  weapons.
Her  husband,  too,  could  be  charged  with  no  crime  that  deserved  so  severe
a  fate;  or,  even  if  his  guilt  should  be  admitted,  hers  was  not  the  proper
hand  to  punish  him.

20  Their  uncle's  realms.] — Ver.  61.  It  must  be  remembered  that
Danaiis  had  not  only  been  compelled  by  iEgyptus  to  give  his  daughters  in
marriage  to  his  sons,  but  that  he  had  been  also  forced  to  resign  his  kingdom
to  his  sons-in-law.


140  THE EPISTLES OF THE HEROINES.  [EP.  XIV.,

language,  and  fell  from  my  eyes  upon  thy  limbs.  While  thou
didst  seek  to  embrace  me,  and  didst  extend  thy  arms  but  half-
awake,  very  nearly  was  thy  hand  wounded  by  the  weapon.
And  now  I  dreaded  my  father,  and  the  servants  of  my  father,
and  the  dawn.  These  words  of  mine  dispelled  thy  slumbers  :
"Haste  and  arise,  descendant  of  Belus,  the  only  survivor  of  so
many  brothers  who  existed  so  lately ;  this  night,  if  thou  dost  not
make  haste,  will  be  an  eternal  niyhtn ."  Alarmed,  thou  didst
arise ;  all  the  sluggishness  of  sleep  vanished.  Thou  didst
behold  in  my  timid  hand  the  daring  weapon.  When  thou
didst  enquire  the  cause,  I  said,  "  While  night  permits,  escape  ;
while  dark  night  permits,  thou  dost  escape,  I  remain  here"
It  was  now  morning ;  and  Danaiis  numbered  over  his  sons-
in-law  who  had  been  slain  in  this  massacre.  For  the  comple-
tion of  the  crime,  thou  alone  art  wanting.  He  is  disap-
pointed at  missing  the  death  of  a  kinsman  in  even  one  in-
stance ;  and  he  complains  that  too  little  blood  has  been  shed.
I  seem  torn  from  the  feet  of  my  father,  and,  dragged  by  my
hair,  the  prison  receives  me  ;  this  reward  did  my  duteous
conduct  earn.

From  that  time  does  the  wrath  of  Juno,22  forsooth,  endure,
when  a  cow  was  made23  out  of  a  human  being,  a  Goddess
from  a  cow.  But  'twas  enough  that  the  charming  maid  was
turned  into  the  animal  that  lowed  :  and  that  beauteous  so  lately,
she  could  no  longer  be  pleasing  to  Jove.  The  new-made  heifer
stood  upon  the  banks  of  her  flowing  parent,24 and  in  the

21  Eternal  night. .] — Ver.  74.  Catullus  also  calls  death  'nox  perpetua,'
'  everlasting  night/

22  Wrath  of  Juno. 1 — Ver.  85.  The  Poet  has  here  followed  the  same
plan  which  he  has  adopted  in  former  Epistles ;  that  is,  he  makes  Hy-
permnestra,  after  the  manner  of  others  of  her  sex,  trace  her  misfortunes  to
very  remote  events.  She  considers  herself  as  the  object  of  the  vengeance
of  Juno,  who  still  persecutes  her  race,  because  Io  had  been  her  rival  in
the  affections  of  Jupiter.

23  Cow  was  made.] — Ver.  86.  The  story  of  Io,  in  the  number  of  whose
descendants  were  Danaiis  and  iEgyptus,  will  be  found  related  in  the
First  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses.

24  Flowing  parent."] — Ver.  89.  The  '  liquidus  parens'  was  her  sire',  the
river  Inachus.  The  present  description  of  the  astonishment  of  Io,  after
being  changed  into  a  cow,  is  extremely  poetical.  Ovid  had  a  great  com-
mand of  ingenuity  ;  indeed,  critics  have,  in  some  instances,  accused  him,
perhaps  not  unjustly,  of  being  too  lavish  of  it.  He  may  possibly
appear,  in  the  present  instance,  too  diffuse  and  circumstantial  in  the


EP.  XIV.]  HYPEKMNESTKA TO LYKCETJS.  141

waters  of  her  sire  she  beheld  horns  not  her  own  ;  from  lips  too
that  endeavoured  to  complain  she  sent  forth  lowings,  and
she  was  alarmed  by  her  figure,  alarmed  by  her  own  voice.
Why,  unhappy  one,  dost  thou  rage  ?  Why  dost  thou  wonder
at  thyself  on  seeing  thy  shadow  ?  Why  dost  thou  number  the
feet25  made  for  thy  new  limbs  ?  Thou,  that  favourite  of
great  Jove,  so  dreaded  by  his  sister,  dost  satisfy  thy  excessive
hunger  with  leaves  and  with  grass.  From  the  running  stream
dost  thou  drink,  and  in  astonishment  dost  thou  look  upon  thy
shape  ;  and  thou  dost  tremble  at  the  arms26  which  thou  dost
wear,  lest  they  should  strike  thyself.  Thou  too,  who  of  late
wast  so  rich  that  thou  mightst  seem  worthy  even  of  Jove,
naked,  art  reclining  upon  the  naked  ground.  Through  the  sea,
over  lands,  and  through  kindred  streams  dost  thou  run  :  the
sea  gives  thee,  the  rivers  give  thee,  the  dry  land  gives  thee  a
path.  What  is  the  cause  of  thy  flight  ?  Why,  Io,27  dost  thou
cross  the  spacious  main  ?  Thyself,  thou  canst  not  fly  from
thy  own  features.  Daughter  of  Inachus,  whither  dost  thou
hasten  ?  Thou  art  the  same28  who  dost  pursue  and  who  dost
fly.  Thou  art  the  leader  of  thyself  as  the  follower  ;  thou  art
the  follower  of  thyself  as  the  leader.

The  Nile,29  which  flows  into  the  ocean  through  seven
channels,  removes  the  form  of  the  maddened  cow  from  the
beloved  of  Jove. Why  shall  I  mention30  things  of  remote

account ;  and  towards  the  end  of  it,  lie  degenerates  into  one  of  his  fre-
quent failings,  a  mere  play  upon  words.  This,  however,  ought  not  to
preclude  an  acknowledgment  of  the  extreme  beauty  of  the  first  part  of
the  description.  Scaliger,  with  little  taste,  would  strike  out  thirty-four
lines,  beginning  at  1.  83,  on  the  ground  of  their  being  misplaced,  and  not  in
connexion  with  the  rest  of  the  Epistle.

25  Number  the  feet.'] — Ver.  94. Because  now  she  has  four  feet.

26  At  the  arms.] — Ver.  98.  The  meaning  is,  that  seeing  her  horns  in
the  water  as  she  stoops  to  drink,  she  is  fearful  lest  they  may  strike  her.

27  Why,  Io.] — Ver.  103.  The  first  syllable  of  the  name  Io,  is  usually
long.  On  one  occasion,  in  the  'Ibis',  Ovid  makes  it  short.  It  is  doubtful
whether  he  here  means  to  address  Io  by  her  name,  or  whether  the  word
1  Io  '  is  an  interjection,  signifying,  with  the  '  quid,'  which  precedes,  '  Oh
why  ?•'

26  Art  the  same.] — Ver.  105.  This  is  an  instance  of  that  trifling  with
words  by  which  Ovid  frequently  disfigures  his  poetry.

*9  The  Nile.] — Ver.  107.  It  was  in  Egypf,  the  country  of  the  Nile,
that  Io  recovered  her  former  shape,  and  was  first  worshipped  as  a  Divinity.

60  Shall  I  mention.] — Ver.  109. Instead  of  the  future,  'referam,'


142  THE EPISTLES OF THE HEEOIKES.  [EP.  XIV.

times,  on  which  hoary  old  age  has  been  my  informant  ?31  Be-
hold !  my  own  years  are  affording  things  for  me  to  complain
of.  My  father 32  and  my  uncle  are  at  war ;  and  we  are  ex-
pelled from  both  our  kingdom  and  our  home  :  remotest
regions33  receive  us  thus  banished.  That  savage  man  singly
gains  possession  of  the  throne  and  the  sceptre  ;  with  a  needy
old  man  we  wander,  a  destitute  set.34  Of  a  multitude  of
brothers,  thou  alone,  the  smallest  portion,  dost  survive :  I  lament
both  those  who  have  been  put  to  death,  and  those  who  so  put
them  to  death.  For,  as  many  sisters35  of  mine  as  cousins  have
perished:  let  either  multitude  receive  my  tears.  Lo  !  I,  because
thou  dost  survive,  am  reserved  to  be  tormented  by  punishment :
what  shall  become  of  the  guilty,  when,  meriting  praises,  I  am
condemned  ?  And,  once  the  hundredth  of  a  kindred  throng,
must  I,  wretched  woman,  perish,  while  but  one  brother
remains.

But  thou,  Lynceus,  if  thou  hast  any  regard  for  thy  affec-
tionate cousin,  and  dost  worthily  enjoy  the  blessings  that  I

here,  Heinsius  strongly  insists  on  the  present,  '  refero,'  which  he  thinks  to
be  necessary  to  the  sense,  though  contrary  to  the  authority  of  the  greater
part  of  the  manuscripts.  It  is,  however,  difficult  to  discover  upon  what
he  can  found  such  a  conjecture,  as  the  sense  is  quite  clear  without
any  alteration.  Hypermnestra  intimates  to  her  husband  that  she  could
relate  much  more  that  has  happened  in  time  past  to  her  family,  did  not
the  present  times  afford  her  ample  matter  for  complaint.  Although  she
has  related  all  the  story  of  lo,  she  has  many  other  subjects  to  treat  of.

31  My  informant.']  —  Ver.  110.  By  the  word  '  auctor/  she  means  the
relating  of  the  history  of  her  family  traditionally,  in  which  the  narratives
of  the  most  aged  men  would  be  the  most  likely  to  prove  correct.

32  My  father.'] — Ver.  111.  She  now  comes  to  what  has  happened  in
her  own  time.

33  Remotest  regions.] — Ver.  112.  She  calls  Peloponnesus  'ultimus
orbis,'  either  because  she  fancies  it  to  be  a  remote  quarter  of  the  earth,
and  at  a  vast  distance  from  Egypt,  her  native  land ;  or  because,  being
nearly  surrounded  by  the  sea,  it  seems  to  be  the  boundary  of  that  part  of
earth.

34  Destitute  set.] — Ver.  114.  According  to  Apollodorus,  Danaiis,  with
his  daughters,  taking  ship,  fled  from  Egypt,  and  landed  first  at  Rhodes,
whence  they  proceeded  to  the  Peloponnesus,  where  they  were  honourably
and  hospitably  entertained  by  Gelanor,  king  of  Argos.  Danaiis  afterwards
dispossessed  him  of  his  throne,  and  seized  the  kingdom.

35  As  many  sisters.] — Ver.  117.  Either  because  she  considers  her
sisters  as  lost  to  her,  since,  by  their  barbarity  they  have  forfeited  that
title ;  or  because  she  feels  certain  that  for  their  crimes  they  may  be  con-
sidered as  doomed  to  the  punishment  of  death.


EP.  XT.]  SAPPHO TO PHAON".  143

have  bestowed  upon  thee  ;  either  bring  me  aid,36  or  consign
me  to  death  ;  and  besides,  on  a  stealthy  pile  place  my  limbs
when  bereft  of  life  ;  and  bury  my  bones37  sprinkled  with  un-
feigned tears,  and  let  my  tomb  be  inscribed  with  this  short
epitaph — "  The  exiled  Hypermnestra,  as  an  undue  reward  for
her  affection,  herself  received  that  death,  which  she  averted
from  her  cousin."

I  could  wish  to  write  more  ;  but  my  hand  is  wearied  with  the
weight  of  my  chains  ;  and  my  very  fears  deprive  me  of  strength.


EPISTLE  XV.
SAPPHO  TO  PHAON.

According  to  some  writers,  there  were  two  celebrated  females  of  the
name  of  Sappho  ;  the  one  was  a  poetess,  who  flourished  in  the  time
of  Tarquinius  Priscus,  and  was  the  inventress  of  the  '  plectrum1  ;
while  the  other  lived  at  a  later  period,  and  was  a  native  of  Mity-
lene.  According  to  iElian,  Phaon  was  a  youth  of  surpassing  beauty,
who  was  greatly  admired  by  all  the  females  of  Lesbos  ;  while  he  him-
self was  deeply  enamoured  of  Sappho,  from  whom  he  met  with  the
tenderest  return  of  passion.  His  affection  afterwards  decaying,  he
deserted  her,  and  sailed  for  Sicily.  Unable  to  bear  the  loss  of  her
lover,  she  hearkened  to  the  suggestions  of  despair,  and  seeking  no
other  remedy  for  her  present  miseries,  she  resolved  to  throw  her-
self into  the  sea  from  Leucate,  a  promontory  of  Acarnania,  in  Epirus,
which  was  wont  to  be  done  in  cases  of  unrequited  love,  from  which

35  Bring  me  aid.] — Ver.  125.  According  to  some  authors,  Lynceus
actually  did  lead  an  expedition  against  Danaiis,  and  slew  him,  and  then
released  Hypermnestra.  But  Pausanias,  and  Apollodorus  in  his  Second
Book,  give  a  different  version  of  the  narrative.  The  former  says
that  Danaiis,  being  enraged  at  the  conduct  of  his  daughter  Hypermnestra,
caused  her  to  be  brought  up  for  judgment  before  an  assembly  of  the
people,  who  acquitted  her ;  on  which  she  consecrated  a  statue  to  Ve-
nus, viKr}<popoQ,  '  the  giver  of  victory.'  According  to  Apollodorus,  Lyn-
ceus was  afterwards  reconciled  to  Danaiis,  and  had  by  Hypermnestra  a
son,  whose  name  was  Abas.

37  Bury  my  bones.'] — Ver.  127.  According  to  one  account,  the  Dana-
i'des  cut  off  the  heads  of  their  husbands,  and  threw  them  into  the  Lerna,
while  their  bodies  were  buried  outside  of  the  city  of  Argos  ;  and,  by  the
command  of  Jupiter,  Mercury  and  Minerva  purified  them  from  the  guilt
of  their  crime.  It  was  said,  however,  by  many  of  the  ancient  poets,  that
the  crime  of  the  Danaides  did  not  pass  without  due  retribution  in  the  In-
fernal regions,  where  they  were  condemned  eternally  to  draw  water  in
perforated  vessels.


144  THE EPISTLES OE THE HEKOIKES.  [EP.  XV".

circumstance,  the  place  had  obtained  the  name  of  the  Lover's  Leap.
Before  doing  so,  entertaining  some  fond  hopes  that  she  may  be  able
to  reclaim  her  inconstant  lover,  she  is  supposed  to  write  the  present
Epistle,  in  which  she  strongly  depicts  her  misery  and  distress,  occa-
sioned by  his  absence,  and  endeavours,  by  artful  insinuations  and  pa-
thetic remonstrances,  to  inspire  in  him  feelings  of  compassion  and  regard
for  her.

So  soon  as38  this  letter,  from  my  anxious  right-hand,  has
been  looked  at  by  thee,  is  it  not  at  once  recognized  by  thine
eyes?  Or,  if  thou  hadst  not  read  the  name  of  their  writer,
Sappho,39  wouldst  thou  have  been  ignorant  whence  came  these
short  lines.

38  So  soon  as."] — Ver.  1.  This  mode  of  beginning  serves  to  heighten
the  compassion  of  the  reader  for  the  sorrows  of  Sappho.  She  is  full  of
the  tenderest  sentiments  of  love  ;  and  yet  so  far  has  she  been  neglected
by  the  object  of  her  passion,  that  notwithstanding  the  mutual  endear-
ments which  have  often  passed  between  them,  he  has  entirely  banished
her  from  his  remembrance,  insomuch  that  probably  he  will  not  even  know
her  writing,  but  by  seeing  her  name  subscribed.

39  Their  writer,  Sappho.] — Ver.  3.  Sappho  was  a  native  of  the  isle  of
Lesbos,  and,  as  she  grew  up,  discovered  a  great  genius  for  lyric  poetry.
She  seems  not  to  have  had  any  great  reputation  for  chastity,  even  in  her
youngest  years,  and  is  even  taxed  with  an  improper  degree  of  afteccion
for  her  own  sex.  At  length  an  unhappy  passion  for  Phaon  engrossed  her
entire  soul,  and  proved  the  occasion  to  her  of  grievous  calamities.  At
first  he  returned  her  affection,  but  soon  afterwards  neglected  her.  Love
had,  however,  taken  too_deep  a  root  in  her  heart  to  be  extinguished  by
this  slight.  She  resolved  to  find  him  at  all  hazards,  and  made  a  voyage
to  Sicily  for  that  purpose.  In  that  island,  and  on  that  occasion,  she  is
supposed  to  have  written  her  hymn  to  Venus,  so  justly  celebrated  and  ad-
mired. It  failed,  however,  to  procure  for  her  the  happiness  for  which  she
prayed.  Phaon  still  continued  obdurate,  and  Sappho,  agitated  by  her
passion,  resolved  to  repair  to  the  Acarnanian  promontory,  on  the  summit
of  which  was  a  temple  sacred  to  Apollo,  where  it  was  usual  for  despairing
lovers  to  make  their  vows,  and  to  beg  the  favour  and  protection  of  the  Di-
vinity. This  done,  it  was  the  custom  to  throw  themselves  from  the  preci-
pice into  the  sea,  where  they  were  sometimes  taken  up  alive.  Whether  it
was  the  shock  received  from  their  fall,  or  some  other  cause  not  now  to  be
accounted  for,  it  was  said  that  those  who  had  taken  this  leap  and  sur-
vived, never  relapsed  into  their  former  passion.  Sappho  tried  this  rash
mode  of  cure,  but  perished  in  the  attempt.  Besides  her  Hymn  to  Venus,
there  is  also  preserved  the  fragment  of  another  Ode,  not  less  esteemed
by  the  learned.  It  seems  to  have  been  intended  to  represent  a  lover
sitting  by  the  side  of  his  mistress,  and  is  generally  allowed  to  be  a  picture
painted  in  the  most  natural  colours.  Plutarch  tells  us,  in  the  famous
story  of  Antiochus,  that  being  enamoured  of  his  mother-in-law  Stratonice,
and  not  daring  to  discover  his  passion,  he  pretended  to  be  confined  to  his
bed  by  sickness. Stratonice  was  in  the  room  when  the  physician  Erasis ;


EP.  XV.]  SAPPHO TO PHAON".  145

Perhaps,  too,  thou  mayst  enquire  why  my  lines  are  in  al-
ternate measure  ;40  since  I  am  better  suited  for  lyric  numbers.
My  blighted  love  must  be  mourned  ;  Elegy  is  the  verse  of
mourning  ;  my  lyre41  is  not  adapted  to  my  tears.  I  burn,
just  as,  when  the  untamed  East  winds  are  driving  the
flames,  the  fertile  field  blazes,  the  crops  all  on  fire.  Phaon
is  inhabiting  the  distant  fields  of  iEtna,  placed  upon  Typhosus :
a  heat,  not  less  than  the  flames  of  iEtna,  is  burning  me.  No
verses  flow  for  me  to  adapt  to  the  harmonizing  strings ;
verses,  the  work  of  a  mind  at  ease.  Neither  the  damsels  of
Pyrrha,42  nor  those  of  Methymne,  nor  the  rest  of  the  throng
of  the  Lesbian  damsels,  have  any  charms  for  me.  Anactorie4,i
is  disregarded,  fair  Cydno  is  worthless  for  me,  Atthis  is  no

tratus  came  to  visit  him  ;  and  it  is  probable  that  his  symptoms  were  the
same  with  those  which  Sappho  describes  in  the  above  Ode ;  as  it  is  said,
that  the  physician  discovered  the  nature  of  his  malady  from  the  symptoms
of  love  which  he  had  found  depicted  in  the  writings  of  Sappho.  By  some
of  the  ancient  authors  sbe  is  called  the  tenth  Muse,  and  by  Plutarch  sbe
is  compared  to  Cacus,  the  son  of  Vulcan,  who  breathed  forth  nothing  b«.it
flames.  From  the  voluptuous  character  that  is  given  of  her  works,  perhaps
it  is  for  the  benefit  of  mankind  that  they  are  lost.

40  Alternate  measure.] — Ver.  5.  All  the  compositions  of  Sappho  were
of  the  Lyric  kind,  whereas  this  Epistle  is  written  in  the  Elegiac  measure;
consisting  of  Hexameter  and  Pentameter  lines  alternately.  From  her  the
Sapphic  measure  derived  its  name.

41  My  lyre.] — Ver,  8.  '  Barbitos,'  or  '  barbiton,'  is  supposed  to  have
been  the  name  of  a  musical  instrument,  somewhat  of  the  nature  of  the
lyre,  but  perhaps  more  nearly  resembling  our  harp.  Theocritus  calls  it
7ro\vxopSog,  'many  stringed' ;  many  of  these  instruments  are  supposed  to
have  had  a  compass  of  more  than  two  octaves.

42  of  Pyrrha.]— Ver.  15.  Some  think  that  the  word  '  Pyrrliiades '
here  refers  to  the  Muses,  who  are  so  called  from  Pyrrha,  or  Pyrrhaea,  an
epithet  of  Thessaly,  it  being  usual  for  the  poets  to  give  them  appellations
from  the  names  of  the  places  which  they  inhabited,  among  which  Thes-
saly was  especially  honoured.  But  the  term  may,  with  much  more  pro-
bability, be  referred  to  the  young  women  of  Pyrrha,  a  city  of  Lesbos :
because  she  immediately  after  mentions,  the  '  Methymniades,'  or  women
of  Methymne,  which  was  likewise  a  celebrated  city  of  that  island  ;  and
then,  in  the  next  verse,  she  subjoins — '  Lesbiadurn  caetera  turba,'  '  the  rest
of  the  Lesbian  females.'

43  Anactorie.] — Ver.  17.  Suidas  gives  the  name  of  three  females,  to-
wards whom  Sappho  was  said  to  have  indulged  an  impure  flame,  as  Te-
lesippa,  Megara,  and  Atthis.  Tn  place  of  Cydno,  Maximus  Tyrius  gives
the  name  of  Yupivva,  which  some  think  ought  to  be  written  'Hpivva  ;  for
Erinnais  supposed  to  have  been  a  contemporary  of  Sappho,  being  a  native

L


146  THE  EPISTLES  OE  THE  HEROINES.  [EP.  XV.

longer  pleasing  to  my  eyes,  as  formerly.  A  hundred  other
damsels  besides,  whom  I  hare  loved  not  without  censure.
Perfidious  man  I44  thou  dost  possess  alone  that  which  be-
longed to  many.  In  thee  is  beauty;  years  too  fitted  for
dalliance. Ah  !  beauty  so  fatal  to  my  eyes  !

Take  up  the  lyre  and  the  quiver,45  and  thou  wilt  clearly  be-
come Apollo  ;  let  horns  be  placed  upon  thy  head,  thou  wilt  be
Bacchus.  Both  Phoebus  loved  Daphne,46  and  Bacchus  the
Gnossian47  maid  :  neither  the  one48  nor  the  other  was  ac-
quainted with  lyric  measures.  But  the  Pegasian  maids49  dictate
to  me  the  sweetest  lays  ;  now  are  my  glories  sung  all  over  the
earth  ;  not  even  Alcaeus,  the  partner  of50  my  country  and  my
lyre,  has  more  fame,  although  he  sings in  a  loftier  strain.

of  the  island  of  Tenos,  and  one  of  her  favourites.  Diphilus,  in  one  of  his
comedies,  introduces  Archilochus  and  Hipponax  as  admirers  of  Sappho ;
this  is,  however,  generally  discredited,  as  well  as  the  account  which  makes
Anacreon  to  have  been  one  of  her  admirers,  inasmuch  as  that  poet  flourished
nearly  eighty  years  after  her  time.  The  poet  Alcaeus  was  a  contemporary
and  rival  of  Sappho.

44  Perfidious  man.~] — Ver.  20.  Some  Commentators  suggest  that  the
word  '  improbus  '  has  here  the  sense  of  '  avidus,'  and  that  by  its  use  Sappho
intends  to  reproach  Phaon  as  one,  who,  not  content  with  a  moderate  share,
had  engrossed  all  her  affections,  and  had  robbed  others  of  that  part  which
they  had  in  them.  There  appears,  however,  to  be  no  ground  for  such  a
refinement.  '  Improbus  '  is  evidently  used  here  for  '  malus' ;  and  she
means  to  accuse  Phaon  of  treachery  in  abandoning  her.

45  And  the  quiver.] — Ver.  23.  The  lyre  and  the  quiver  were  the  two
distinguishing  insignia  of  Apollo,  as  he  was  remarkable  both  for  his  skill
in  music  and  his  dexterity  in  managing  the  bow.

46  Loved  Daphne.] — Ver.  25.  The  story  of  Daphne  is  told  at  length
in  the  first  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses.

47  The  Gnossian.'] — Ver.  25.  Cnossus,  or  Gnossus,  was  the  place  where
Minos,  the  father  of  Ariadne,  resided.

*8  Neither  the  one.~] — Ver.  26.  She  implies  that  she  is  superior  to
either  Daphne  or  Ariadne,  who  were  beloved  by  Divinities,  although  they
were  unskilled  in  poetry  and  music.  By  putting  forward  her  talents,  she
hopes  to  atone  for  the  defects  of  her  person.

49  Pegasian  maids.] — Ver.  27.  The  Muses  are  so  called  here  from
7rj/yi7,  'a  spring,'  which  Pegasus  was  said  to  have  opened  with  a  blow  of
his  hoof,  on  Mount  Helicon,  their  favourite  retreat.

50  The  partner  of  .] — Ver.  29.  She  calls  Alcaeus,  *  Consors  patriaeque
lyraeque,'  because  he  was  a  lyric  poet  of  Mitylene,  in  her  native  Lesbos.
He  was  remarkable  for  the  grandeur  and  sublimity  of  his  style,  for  which
reason  the  ancients  attributed  to  him  a  golden  '  plectrum.'


EP.  XV.]  SAPPHO TO PHA02T.  147

I  am  of  small  stature ; 51  but  I  have  a  name  that  fills  all
lands  :  I  myself  have  produced  this  extended  renown  for  my
name.  If  I  am  not  fair,  Andromeda,  the  daughter  of
Cepheus,53  who  was  swarthy,53  through  the  complexion  of  her
country,  was  pleasing  to  Perseus.  White  pigeons,  too,  are
often  mated  with  spotted  ones  ;  and  the  black  turtle  dove  is
often  beloved  by  a  bird  that  is  green.54  If  no  woman  is  to
be  thine,  but  one  that  shall  be  able  to  appear  worthy  of  the*
for  beauty,  thine  no  woman  will  be.

But  when  thou  didst  read  my  lines,  even  beauteous  did  I
appear :  constantly  didst  thou  swear  that  me  alone  did  it  be-
come to  speak.  I  used  to  sing,  I  remember  (lovers  remem-
ber every  thing)  ;  thou  used  to  ravish  kisses  from  me  as  I
sang.  These,  too,  thou  didst  praise,  and  in  every  respect  did
I  please  thee,  but  especially  when  amid  the  transports  of  love.
Then  more  than  usual  did  my  amorous  flame  delight  thee  ;
both  my  every  movement  and  my  expressions  fitted  for  dalli-
ance, and  that  languor  which,  when  the  joys  of  us  both  were
terminated,  pervaded  our  wearied  limbs.  Now  the  Sicilian  dam-
sels fall  to  thy  lot,  a  fresh  prey.  What  have  I  to  do  with  Les-
bos ?55  I  would  I  were  a  Sicilian  damsel.56  But  you,  ye  matrons

51  Small  stature."] — Ver.  33.  Heinsius,  who  was  one  of  the  most  learned
of  scholars,  here  travels  a  little  out  of  his  usual  province  and  turns  critic
in  female  beauty.  "  Sappho  confesses  that  she  is  not  beautiful  (pulchra),
because  she  is  so  short  of  stature.  Women  of  that  kind  are  not  beautiful
(pulchrae),  but  pretty,  *  venustae  :'  for  beauty,  in  the  opinion  of  Aristotle,
is  only  consistent  with  largeness  of  stature."

52  Daughter  of  Cepheus.'] — Ver.  35.  Tbe  story  of  Perseus  and  Andro-
meda, the  daughter  of  Cepheus,  is  related  at  length  in  the  Fourth  and
Fifth  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses.

53  Who  was  swarthy.]  — Ver.  36.  Being  a  native  of  ^Ethiopia,  she
would  be  swarthy,  indeed  almost  black ;  some  accounts,  however,  repre-
sent her  as  being  a  Phoenician.

54  That  is  green.] — Ver.  37.  She  probably  means  that  turtle  doves  are
kept  in  the  same  cages  with  parrots,  which  are  generally  supposed  to  be
meant  by  the  green  birds  here  mentioned ;  though  one  Commentator  seems
to  think  that  peacocks  are  hinted  at :  it  is  possible,  however,  that  he  may
take  that  to  be  the  meaning  of  the  birds  that  are  called  ■  variae  '  in  the
preceding  line.  iElian  mentions  the  turtle  dove  as  a  bird  remarkable  for
its  constancy.

55  With  Lesbos.] — Ver.  52.  Lesbos,  now  called  Metelin,  was  an  island
in  the  vEgean  sea,  which  received  its  name  from  Lesbos,  the  son  of  Her-
mes the  Lapithan.  It  was  famous  for  its  vineyards  and  the  excellency  of
its  wine.

56  Sicilian  damsel] — Ver.  52. Burmann  says,  on  the  authority  of  the


148  THE EPISTLES OP THE HEROINES.  [EP.  XV.

of  Nisa,  and  ye  Nisian  brides,57  send  back  this  wanderer  of  mine
from  your  land.  Let  not  the  fictions  of  his  insinuating  tongue
deceive  you  ;  what  he  says  to  you  he  has  already  said  to  me.
Thou,  too,  Goddess  Erycina,58  who  dost  frequent  the  moun-
tains of  Sicily,  have  a  care  for  thy  poetess,  for  thine  I  am.

Does  cruel  Fortune  still  pursue  the  track  on  which  she
has  commenced,  and  does  she  ever  remain  unkind  in  her  on-
ward course  ?  Six  of  my  birthdays  had  gone  by,  when  the
bones  of  my  father,  gathered  up  before  their  time,  drank  in
my  tears.  My  needy  brother,59  captivated  with  passion  for  a
harlot,60  endured  losses,  and  those  intermingled  with  shameful
disgrace.  Reduced  to  want,  he  plied  the  azure  seas  with
active  oars,61  and  now  is  basely  seeking  that  wealth  which  he
disgracefully  lost.  Me,  too,  because  with  fidelity  I  gave  him
much  good  advice,  he  hates ;  this  did  candour,  this  did  an
affectionate  tongue  produce  for  me.  And,  as  though  things
might  be  wanting  to  torment  me  without  ceasing,  a  little
daughter62  increases  my  cares. Thou  art  added  as  the  last

Arundelian  marbles,  that  Sappho  left  her  country,  and  declared  herself  an
exile,  in  the  archonship  of  Aristocles.

57  Nisian  brides.'] — Ver.  54.  Nisa  was  a  city  of  Sicily,  not  far  from
Syracuse.  It  was  founded  by  colonists  from  Megara  in  Attica,  who  called
it  Nisa,  in  honour  of  their  former  king  Nisus.

58  Erycina.'] — Ver.  57.  Venus  was  called  Erycina,  from  mount  Eryx,
in  Sicily,  on  which  she  had  a  temple,  said  to  have  been  founded  by  her
son  iEneas,  in  her  honour.  Sicily  was  called  '  Sicania/  from  Sicanus,  one
of  its  former  kings.

59  My  needy  brother.]  — Ver.  63.  Sappho  had  three  brothers,  Lary-
chus,  Eurigius,  and  Charaxus,  who  all  were  in  love  with  the  courtezan
Rhodope.  Sappho  here  refers  to  the  last,  who  foolishly  squandered  away
all  his  substance  upon  her,  and  then,  as  some  suppose,  betook  himself  to
piracy  to  repair  his  losses.

60  For  a  harlot.] — Ver.  63.  Herodotus,  in  his  Second  Book,  Chapter
105,  says  that  Rhodope  was  the  fellow  slave  of  iEsop  the  fabulist,  and
that  she  was  redeemed  from  servitude  by  Charaxus  at  a  very  heavy  expense.
Athenseus,  in  his  Thirteenth  Book,  Chapter  7,  calls  her  Dorica,  and  thinks
that  Herodotus  has  confounded  her  with  another  person  of  the  name  of
Rhodope.  AopiKrj  may,  however,  possibly  have  been  only  an  epithet  given
to  Rhodope,  from  Doria,  her  native  country.

bl  With  active  oars.] — Ver.  65.  Petronius  Arbiter  seems  to  hint  that
Charaxus  turned  pirate.  From  the  expressions  here  used,  we  might  con-
clude that  he  adopted  the  menial  occupation  of  a  rower.

63  A  little  daughter.] — Ver.  70.  The  name  of  this  daughter  was
Cleis ;  and  we  learn  from  Suidas,  that  she  was  the  daughter  of  Sappho  by


EP.  XV. J  SAPPHO TO PHAON.  149

cause  of  my  complaints  ;  my  bark  is  impelled  by  no  favouring
gales.  Behold!  my  locks  are  lying  disheveUed,  without  any
order,  upon  my  neck  ;  no  shining  gem63  now  presses  my
fingers.  In  homely  garb  am  I  clad ;  in  my  locks  there  is
no  gold;64  with  no  essences  of  Arabia65  is  my  hair  per-
fumed.

For  whom,  unhappy  wretch,  should  I  adorn  myself,  or
whom  should  I  study  to  please  ?  The  only  prompter  of  atten-
tion to  my  person  is  gone.  My  heart  is  tender,  and  is  easily
hurt  by  the  light  shafts  of  Cupid,  and  there  is  ever  a  cause
for  me  always  to  love.  Whether  it  is  that  at  my  birth  the
sisters  so  pronounced  my  doom,  and  no  threads  devoid  of
feeling  were  allotted  to  my  life  ;  or  whether  it  is  that  my
pursuits  are  fashioned  to  the  manners  and  the  skill  of
their  mistress  ;  Thalia  causes66  my  feelings  to  be  susceptible.
What  wonder  if  the  age  of  early  youth  has  captivated  me,  and
those  years  which  a  male  might  be  enamoured  of.  I  was  in
fear,  Aurora,  that  thou  mightst  have  taken  him  for  Cephalus,67
and  this  thou  wouldst  have  done,  but  that  thy  former  prize  en-
gages thee. If,  Phoebe,  thou  shouldst  look  on  him,  thou  who

a  former  husband,  of  the  name  of  Cercyla,  or  Cercola,  a  native  of  the  isle
of  Andros.

63  No  shining  gem.'] — Ver.  74.  During  mourning,  it  was  the  custom  of
the  ancients  to  lay  aside  all  ornaments,  such  as  rings  and  other  jewels.

64  Is  no  gold.] — Ver.  75.  She  probably  alludes  to  the  '  crinale,'  or
golden  bodkin,  or  hair-pin.

06  Essences  of  Arabia.] — Ver.  76.  She  alludes  to  myrrh  or  nard,  which
was  much  used  in  ointments  and  perfumes  for  the  hair.  The  unguents
or  ointments,  and  soaps  used  by  the  ancients  were  very  numerous.
Among  the  oils  used  for  the  skin  or  the  hair,  were  the  following  ;  '  men-
desium,'  'megalesium/  '  metopium,'  'amaracinum,'  '  cyprinum,' '  susinum,'
'  nardinum,'  *  spicatum,'  'jasminum,'  '  rosaceum,'  and  crocus  oil;  which
last  was  considered  the  most  costly.  Powders  were  also  used  as  per-
fumes ;  they  wrere  called  '  diapasmata.'  The  Greeks  used  these  expensive
kinds  of  perfumes  from  very  early  times,  and  both  they  and  the  Ro-
mans carried  them  about  with  them  in  small  boxes  of  elegant  work-
manship. In  the  luxurious  city  of  Capua,  there  was  one  great  street,
called  the  '  Seplasia,'  which  consisted  entirely  of  shops  in  which  un-
guents and  perfumes  were  sold.

66  Thalia  causes.'] — Ver.  84.  Thalia  was  one  of  the  nine  Muses,  so
called  from  the  sweetness  of  her  voice.  Her  name,  as  used  here,  typifies
the  art  of  poetry.

67  For  Cephalus.] — Ver.  87.  The  story  of  Cephalus  and  Aurora  is  re-
lated in  the  Seventh  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses.


150  THE EPISTLES OE THE HEEOIKES.  [EP.  XV.

dostlook  on  every  thing,  Phaon  would  be  commanded  to  prolong
his  slumbers.68  Venus  would  have  borne  him  off  to  heaven  in
her  ivory  chariot,69  but  she  sees  that  he  might  be  pleasing70  to
her  Mars  as  well.  Oh,  thou!  not  yet  a  youth,  and  a  boy  no
longer ;  delightful  age !  Oh,  grace  and  supreme  glory  of  thy
age  !  Come  hither,  and,  beauteous  one,  return  to  my  bosom  ;
I  ask  thee  not  to  love  me,  but  to  permit  me71  to  love  thee.  I
write,  and  my  eyes  are  bedewed  with  gushing  tears  ;  see  how
many  blots  there  are  in  this  place.

If  thou  wast  so  determined  to  go  hence,  thou  mightst  have
gone  in  a  kinder  way  ;  and  at  least  thou  mightst  have  said,
"  Les*bian  damsel,  farewell !"  Thou  didst  not  bear  away  with
thyself  my  tears  or  my  parting  kisses.  In  fact,  I  did  not  appre-
hend72 what  I  was  so  soon  to  bewail.  Nothing  of  thine  have
I,  but  ill  treatment  only ;  nor  hast  thou  any  pledge73  of  my.
love  to  remind  thee  of  me. I  gave  thee  no  injunctions ;  and,

68  To  prolong  his  slumbers.'] — Ver.  90.  Sappho  is  here  referring  to  the
story  of  Endymion,  who  was  said  to  have  been  a  beautiful  shepherd,  who
having  been  condemned  by  Jupiter  to  a  perpetual  sleep,  or,  according  to
wine  versions,  having  been  thrown  into  a  trance  by  Diana  herself,  was
then  beloved  by  her.  Pliny  says,  that  the  origin  of  this  story  was  the  fact,
that  he  was  the  first  to  discover  the  course  of  the  moon.

63  Ivory  chariot.'] — Ver.  91.  The  poets  attribute  a  silver  chariot  to
Diana  or  the  moon,  and  an  ivory  car  to  Venus.

70  Might  be  pleasing.] — Ver.  92.  Venus  would  be  afraid  lest  Mars
should  fall  in  love  with  him.  The  story  of  the  intrigues  of  Mars  and  Ve-
nus is  told  in  the  Fourth  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses.

71  To  permit  me.] — Ver.  96.  Pliny  the  Elder,  in  his  Twenty-second
Book,  ch.  8,  attributes  the  passion  of  Sappho  to  a  singular  cause  :  he  is
speaking  of  the  root  of  a  white  plant  called  '  centum  capita,'  a  kind  of
thistle  called  by  us  s  eringo,'  of  which  this  wonderful  story  is  told  by  him  ;
that  its  roots  bear  respectively  the  resemblance  of  the  two  sexes ;  that  it  is
scarce  to  be  found,  and  that  if  the  male  kind  is  found  by  a  man,  he  be-
comes an  object  of  female  passion  ;  on  this  account,  according  to  Pliny,
Phaon  was  beloved  by  Sappho.

72  Did  not  apprehend.] — Ver.  102.  She  reproaches  him  for  not  having
given  her  any  notice  of  his  intended  departure.

73  Any  pledge.] — Ver.  104.  We  have  here  the  reason  stated  why
friends,  at  parting,  gave  and  took  pledges  of  mutual  affection  ;  that  they
might  serve  as  memorials  of  each  other,  and  help  to  recall  the  memory
of  the  person  absent.  Crispinus  gives  another  meaning  to  the  words,
which  he  thus  paraphrases, '  Nee  pignora.quse  habes  mei  amoris,te  admonu-
erunt,  ut  saltern  discedens  valediceres :'  '  Not  all  the  tokens  which  you  have
received  of  my  affection  have  moved  you  so  much  as  to  grant  me  the  con-
solation of  one  parting  farewell.'  This  does  not,  however,  appear  to  be
the  meaning  of  the  passage.


EP.  XV.]  SAPPHO TO PHAON".  151

indeed,  no  injunctions  had  I  to  give  thee,  except  that  thou
shouldst  be  loth  to  be  forgetful  of  me.  /  By  the  God  of
Love  (and  may  he  never  depart  afar  from  me),  and  by  the
nine  Goddesses,  my  own  Divinities,  do  I  swear  to  thee,  when
some  one,  I  know  not  who,  said  to  me,  "  Thy  joys  are  fled  ;"
for  long  I  could  neither  weep74  nor  speak.  Both  tears  failed
my  eyes,  and  my  tongue  my  mouth ;  my  breast  was  frozen
by  an  icy  chill.  After  my  grief  had  found  a  vent,  I  did  not
hesitate  for  my  breast  to  be  beaten,  nor  to  shriek  aloud  as  I
rent  my  hair ;  in  no  other  manner  than  if  an  aiFec donate
mother  is  bearing  the  lifeless  body75  of  her  son  carried  off  to
the  erected  pile.

My  brother,  Charaxus,  rejoices  and  triumphs  in  my  sorrow,
and  before  my  eyes  he  comes  and  goes  ; 7G  and  that  the  cause
of  my  grief  may  appear  worthy  of  reproach,  he  says,  "Why
is  she  grieving;  surely  her  daughter  still  lives?"77  Shame  and
love78  unite  not  in  the  same  object ;  all  the  multitude  were
witnesses ;  I  had  my  bosom  bared79  with  garments  rent.
Phaon,  thou  art  my  care ;  thee  do  my  dreams  bring  before
me;  dreams  more  fair  than  the  beauteous  day.  There  do  I
find  thee,  though  in  distant  regions  thou  art  away ;  but  sleep
has  not  its  joys  sufficiently  prolonged.  Often  do  I  seem  to
be  pressing  thy  arms  with  my  neck,  often  to  be  placing  mine
beneath  thy  neck.  Sometimes  I  am  caressing  thee,  and  am
uttering  words  exactly  resembling  the  truth, and  my  lips

74  Could  neither  weep."] — Ver.  110.  This  is  a  true  picture  of  grief ;
and  all  the  different  modes  in  which  it  can  express  itself  are  here  admira-
bly delineated.

75  The  lifeless  body .] — Ver.  115.  Witness  the  burial  of  Iphis  by  his
mother,  in  the  story  of  Iphis  and  Anaxarete,  in  the  Fourteenth  Book  of
the  Metamorphoses.

76  He  comes  and  goes.] — Ver.  118.  His  frequent  intrusions  on  the
privacy  of  her  sorrow,  either  were,  or  were  supposed  to  be,  so  many
methods  of  insulting  her  misfortunes.

77  Daughter  still  lives.] — Ver.  120.  Charaxus,  in  saying  this,  hints
that  she  could  not  have  shewn  more  grief  had  even  her  daughter  died.

78  Shame  and  love.] — Ver.  121. This  is  said  in  order  to  serve  as a
reason  for  what  follows. '  Love  and  shame,'  she  says,  '  are  inconsistent ;
and  as  I  am  wholly  a  slave  to  the  former,  the  other  has  no  influence  upon
me.'

79  Bosom  bared.] — Ver.  122.  This  would,  and  very  justly,  be  looked
upon  as  a  violation  of  the  rules  of  propriety  ;  and  the  more  especially,  when
she  knew  that  the  eyes  of  all  people  were  upon  her.


152  THE EPISTLES OF THE HEROINES.  [EP.  XV.

keep  watch80  upon  my  feelings.  I  recognize  the  kisses  which
thou  wast  wont  to  give,  and  which  so  pleasing  thou  wast
accustomed  to  receive,  and  so  delightful  to  return.  Further  I
am  ashamed  to  relate  ;  but  no  particular  is  omitted.  It  both
delights  and  it  pleases  me  not  to  be  without  thee.

Bat  when  Titan  shows  himself,  and  with  himself  all  things
besides,  I  complain  that  my  slumbers  have  deserted  me  so
soon.  The  caves  and  groves  do  I  seek,  as  though  groves  and
caves  could  avail  me  :  they  were  conscious  of  thy  joys.  Thither
am  I  borne,  bereft  of  my  senses,  like  one  whom  the  raving
Erictho81  has  infatuated,  my  locks  lying  upon  my  neck.  My
eyes  behold  the  caverns  roofed  with  the  rough  pebbles,  which
to  me  were  equal  to  Mygdonian  marble.*52  I  find  the  wood
that  has  oft  afforded  us  a  couch,  and  overshadowing,  has
covered  us  with  its  dense  foliage ;  but  I  find  not  the  master
both  of  the  wood  and  of  myself.  A  worthless  spot  is  the
place  ;  he  was  the  recommendation  of  the  spot.  I  recognised
the  pressed  grass,83  of  the  turf  so  well  known  to  me;  by
our  weight  were  the  blades  bent.  I  lay  me  down,  and  I
touched  the  place  on  the  spot  in  which  thou  wast;  the
grass,  once  so  pleasing,  drank  in  my  tears. Moreover,  the

80  Lips  keep  watch.'] — Ver.  130.  Whether  sleeping  or  waking,  her  lips
are  ever  on  the  watch  to  express  the  intensity  of  her  feelings.

81  Raving  Erictho.] — Ver.  139.  Erictho  was  the  name  of  a  famous
sorceress  of  Thessaly,  whose  aid  Pompey  sought,  according  to  Lucan,  in
tne  Sixth  Book  of  his  Pharsalia.  Ovid  here  uses  the  name  as  signifying
any  enchantress,  species  pro  genere.

82  Mygdonian  marble.'] — Ver.  142.  'Marble  of  Phrygia;'  because  it  was
considered  the  best.  The  poets  call  Phrygia  '  Mygdonia,'  because  the
latter  region  adjoined  it  on  the  South.

*3  The  pressed  grass.] — Ver.  147.  According  to  this,  Phaon  must
have  forsaken  her  and  left  the  island  at  the  same  moment.  The  whole
of  this  passage,  from  the  122nd  line,  is  wrought  with  extreme  beauty.
Critics  have  observed  that  this  Epistle  seems  to  be  the  most  finished
of  the  works  of  Ovid ;  and  the  present  passage  certainly  appears  to  cor-
roborate that  belief.  What  can  be  more  beautifully  painted  than  her
enraptured  dreams  ?  Or  how  can  imagination  form  a  more  interesting
scene  than  that  of  her  retiring  to  the  caves  and  groves  which  they  had
formerly  frequented  together,  and  soothing  her  mind  with  the  remem-
brance of  past  joys  ?  Ovid  has  omitted  no  circumstance  that  may  possibly
serve  to  heighten  the  description,  or  awaken  the  attention  of  the  reader  ;
and  if  some  portion  should  perchance  seem  to  be  too  highly  coloured,  the
impassioned  character  of  Sappho  will  furnish  some  excuse  for  the  Poet.


TP.  XT.]  SAPPHO TO PHAO".  153

branches,  their  foliage  laid  aside,  appear  to  mourn,  aDd
no  birds  send  forth  their  sweet  complaints.  The  Daulian
bird"4  alone,  that  most  disconsolate  mother,  who  took  so  cruel
a  vengeance  on  her  husband,  sings  of  Ismarian  Itys  ;Sa  the
bird  sings  of  Itys,  while  Sappho  sings  of  her  forsaken  love.
Thus  much  :  all  else  is  silent  as  though  in  the  midst  of  night.
There  is  a  sacred  spring,  limpid,  and  more  pellucid  than  the
glassy  stream  ;  many  suppose  that  this  harbours  a  Divinity  ;
over  it  the  lotus, s6  delighting  in  waters,  spreads  its  brandies,  it-
self alone  a  grove  :sr  the  earth  is  green  with  the  springing  turf.
"When  here  I  was  reclining  my  limbs,  wearied  with  weeping,
one  of  the  Naiads  stood  before  my  eyes.  She  stood,  and  she
said,  "Since  thou  art  being  consumed  by  an  unrequited  flame,
the  Ambracian  land88  must  be  sought  by  thee.b9 Phoebus,

8i  The  Daulian  bird.'] — Ver.  154.  Progne,  in  the  character  of  the
nightingale,  is  here  called  '  Daulias,'  from  Daulis,  a  city  of  Phocis,  where,
according  to  Thucydides,  her  hushand  Tereus  reigned.  It  is  remarkable
that  Ovid  differs  here  from  the  common  tradition,  in  making  Progne  to  have
been  changed,  not  into  a  swallow,  but  a  nightingale ;  still,  there  are  some
authors  who  agree  with  him  in  this  statement.

&  Ismarian  Itys.] — Ver.  154.  See  the  story  of  Tereus  and  Prognp,
and  the  fate  of  Itys,  in  the  Sixth  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses,  where  Ovid
represents  Progne  as  having  been  changed  into  a  swallow,  and  Philomela
into  a  nightingale.

86  71ie  lotus.] — Ver,  159.  The  '  lotus'  is  a  tree  much  spoken  of  by  the
ancients.  It  grew  in  various  parts  of  Africa,  being,  according  to  Diodorus
Siculus,  not  uncommon  in  Egypt.  The  fruit  of  this  tree  was  said  to  be
so  pleasing  to  the  taste,  that  they  who  had  once  eaten  of  it  could  never
be  prevailed  upon  to  return  to  their  own  country,  or  abandon  the  climate
in  which  it  grew.  Hence  the  word  '  Lotophagus'  became  a  common  term
for  a  person  who  had  forgotten  his  native  country ;  and  the  phrase  '  lotum
gustavit,'  was  a  proverb  signifying  that  a  man  had  been  long  absent  from
home. Its  wood  was  much  used  for  making  '  tibiae/  '  pipes,'  or  '  flutes.'

87  Itself  a  grove.]  — Ver.  160.  He  means  to  say,  that  the  branches  of
this  tree,  by  spreading  out  to  a  great  length,  and  then  bending  to-
wards the  ground,  formed  a  kind  of  grove.  The  banyan  tree  of  the  East
sends  forth  branches,  which  bending  downwards  take  root,  and  thus  one
tree  literally  often  forms  a  grove.  Perhaps  the  '  lotus '  here  alluded  to  may
have  had  a  similar  quality.  The  word  '  lotus  '  is  supposed  to  have  been
applied  to  three  different  kinds  of  tree,  besides  the  plant  which  we  call
'  trefoil,'  or  '  melilot.'

s^  Ambracian  land.] — Ver.  164.  She  alludes  to  Acarnania,  situate  in
the  Ambracian  gulf.

59  Sought  by  thee.]  — Ver.  165.  Leucadia  was  an  island  off  the  coast
of  Acarnania,  which  was  formerly  said  to  have  joined  the  shore  by  au
Isthmus. Actium  was  the  more  ancient  name  of  the  island.


154  THE EPISTLES OE THE HEROINES.  [EP.  XV,

from  on  high,  looks  down  upon  the  sea  so  far  as  it  extends  ;
the  people  call  it  the  Actian  and  the  Leucadian  sea.  Hence  did
Deucalion,90  inflamed  with  love  for  Pyrrha,  throw  himself,  and
dash  the  waters  with  unharmed  body.  There  was  no  de-
lay;  love  changing,  touched  the  most  obdurate  '  breast  of
Pyrrha;  Deucalion  was  cured  of  his  flame.  This  result
does  that  place  afford.  At  once  repair  to  lofty  -Leucas,  and
fear  not  to  leap91  from  the  rock."

When  she  had  thus  advised  ;  with  her  words,  she  departed.
Chilled  with  fear,  I  arose  ;  and  my  swelling  cheeks  did  not
withhold  my  tears.  I  will  go,  0  Nymph,  and  I  will  repair  to  the
rocks  so  pointed  out ;  afar  be  fear,  conquered  by  frenzied  pas-
sion. Whatever  it  shall  be,  my  fate  shall  be  better  than  now
it  is.  Ye  breezes,  arise  ;  this  body  of  mine  has  no  great
weight.  Do  thou  too,  gentle  Love,  place  wings  beneath92
me  as  I  fall ;  that  I  may  not,  by  my  death,  be  the  censure  of
the  Leucadian  waves.  Then  will  I  hang  up  my  lyre93  to
Phoebus,  our  common  attribute  ;94  and  under  it  shall  be  this

90  Deucalion.'] — Ver.  167.  How  Deucalion  and  Pyrrha  repeopled  the
earth,  will  be  found  in  the  First  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses  ;  but  the  story
here  told  of  them  is  not  so  generally  known.

91  Fear  not  to  leap.] — Ver.  171.  The  names  of  many  that  threw  them-
selves from  this  rock,  which  was  called  '  the  Lover's  Leap/  have  been  pre-
served by  ancient  writers.  Athenaeus,  Bookxiv.  ch.  3,  mentions  a  female,
named  Calyca,  who  leaped  thence,  on  being  slighted  by  her  lover  Enathlus,
and  was  killed.  Menander,  as  quoted  by  Strabo,  Bookx.,  says  that  Sappho
was  the  first  who  took  this  fatal  leap.  See  the  amusing  articles  in  Addison's
Spectator,  Nos.  223,  227,  229,  and  233.

92  Wings  beneath.] — Ver.  179.  In  the  solemnities  performed  in  honour
of  the  Actian  Apollo,  it  was  customary  to  doom  some  guilty  criminal  to
be  thrown  from  the  top  of  the  Promontory.  This  was  supposed  to
avert  the  anger  of  the  God,  and  to  render  him  propitious.  It  was,  how-
ever, the  merciful  custom  to  furnish  the  victim  with  wings  which  might
perhaps,  by  buoying  him  up,  break  his  fall,  and  to  have  several  small
boats  waiting  below,  that,  if  possible,  he  might  be  picked  up  out  oi  the
sea ;  after  which  he  was  banished  from  the  territory.  It  is  very  possible
that  in  this  line  Sappho  alludes  to  this  custom.

95  My  lyre.] — Ver.  181.  'Chelys  '  is  from  the  Greek  word  %£Xvf,  or
XeXwvjj,  '  a  tortoise.'  The  first  lyres,  or  '  citharse,'  were  made  by  fitting
strings  on  the  shell  of  a  tortoise,  as  we  are  informed  by  Homer  in  his  Hymn
to  Mercury,  where  he  ascribes  the  invention  to  that  God.  '  Testudo,'  or '  tor-
toise,' is  often  used,  among  the  Latin  poets,  to  signify  a  'lyre,'  or  a  'cithara.'

94  Common  attribute.] — Ver.  181.  The  lyre  was  common,  '  communis,'
to  Sappho  and  Apollo,  because  he  invented  it.  and  she  was  in  the  habit  of
composing  Lyric  music  to  be  played  upon  it,  or  to  be  sung  in  concert  with  it.


EP.  XT.]  SAPPHO TO PHAOTT.  155

line  and  a  second  one :  "Phoebus,  I,  the  poetess  Sappho,  have,
in  gratitude,95  offered  my  lyre  to  thee  ;  it  is  suited  to  me,
to  thee  is  it  suited."  But  why,  in  my  misery,  dost  thou  send
me  to  the  Actian  coasts,  when  thou  thyself  canst  trace  back
thy  retreating  steps  ?  Thou  canst  be  more  beneficial  to  me
than  the  Leucadian  waves  ;  both  in  beauty  and  in  merit,  thou
shalt  be  Phoebus  to  me.  Canst  thou  endure,  0  thou  more
hard-hearted  than  the  rocks  and  waves,  if  I  die,  to  have  the
discredit  of  my  death  ?  And  how  much96  more  becomingly
could  my  bosom  be  pressed  to  thine,  than  to  be  given  to  be
hurled  down  from  the  rocks?  This  is  the  breast,  Phaon,
which  thou  wert  wont  to  praise,  and  which  so  often  seemed
the  seat  of  genius  to  thee.  I  wish  that  now  it  was  eloquent.
Grief  checks  my  skill,  and  all  my  genius  is  impeded98  by  my
woes.  My  former  powers  avail  me  not  for  my  lines  ;  my
*  plectrum '  is  silent  in  grief;  in  grief  my  lyre  is  mute.

Ye  ocean  daughters,  Lesbian  dames,  a  progeny  both  mar-
ried and  destined  to  marry;  ye  Lesbian  fair,  names  celebrated
by  the  iEolian  lyre  ;99  ye  Lesbian  dames,1  who,  beloved  by  me,
have  caused  my  disgrace,  cease  to  come  a  throng,  to  my  lyre.

93  Have,  in  gratitude.] — Ver.  183.  Grateful  for  a  two-fold  reason,  be-
cause he  had  preserved  her  life  in  the  leap,  and  because  he  had  effectu-
ally cured  her  passion.

96  And  how  much.] — Ver.  191.  This  is  Sappho's  last  attempt  to
move  the  obdurate  Phaon.  She  has  acquainted  him  with  her  resolution
to  throw  herself  headlong  from  Leucate.  The  despair  which  has  been
the  result  of  his  neglect,  has  driven  her  to  make  trial  of  this  dangerous
remedy,  and  nothing  but  a  change  in  his  behaviour  can  now  induce  her
to  desist  from  her  purpose  ;  for  her  passion  is  so  strong  as  to  make  life  in-
supportable without  him,  and  all  other  attempts  to  remove  it  have  proved
ineffectual.  Sappho  has  omitted  no  circumstance  that  may  tend  to  soften
the  human  heart  to  emotions  of  pity.

38  Is  impeded.'] — Ver.  196.  It  is  commonly  said  that  necessity  is  the
mother  of  invention.  Such  is  often  the  fact  but,  as  in  the  case  of
Sappho,  it  will  sometimes  overwhelm  the  mind  with  a  tide  of  sorrow,
and  thereby  render  it  entirely  incapable  of  attending  to  the  means  of  self-
preservation.

95  JEolian  lyre.] — Ver.  200.  According  to  Strabo,  Lesbos  was  among
the  chief  states  of  JSolia.  Sappho  wrote  in  the  jEolic  dialect,  of  which
Bacchus  was  said  to  be  the  inventor.

1  Lesbian  dames.] — Ver.  201.  Sappho  here  calls  upon  the  Lesbian
maids,  whom  she  had  formerly  loved  and  taught.  Critics  have  observed
that  the  repetition  here  used  by  the  Poet,  is  not  only  intended  to  make  the
lines  more  affecting, but  is  also  an  imitation  of Sappho's  manner  of


156  THE EPISTLES OF THE HEROINES.  [EP.  XV.

Phaon  has  deprived  me  of  all  that  before  was  pleasing  to  you.
(Ah,  wretched  me !  How  very  nearly  had  I  called  him
mine  !)  Make  him  to  return  ;  your  poetess  will  return  as
well.  He  gives  the  impulse  to  my  genius  ;  he  takes  it  away.
And  what  do  I  avail  by  prayers?  Is  his  savage  breast
moved?  Or  is  it  still  obdurate,  and  do  the  Zephyrs  waft
away  my  unavailing  words  ?  Would  that  the  winds,  which
bear  away  my  words,  would  bring  back  thy  sails ;  that  act,
wast  thou  but  wise,  even  thus  late,  were  befitting  thee.  Or
art  thou  now  returning,  and  are  the  votive  offerings2  prepared
for  thy  bark  ?  Why  dost  thou  rend  my  heart  with  delays  ?
Unmoor  thy  ship.  Venus,  who  sprang  from  the  waves,
smooths  the  waves  for  the  lover.  The  breezes  will  speed  thy
course  ;  do  thou  only  unmoor  thy  ship.  Cupid  himself,  sit-
ting at  the  helm,  will  be  the  pilot ;  with  his  tender  hand,  he
himself  will  open  and  gather  in  the  sails.

Or,  if  it  is  thy  pleasure  that  Pelasgian3  Sappho  should  be
far  away  ;  (yet,  thou  wilt  not  find  any  reason  why  I  am  wor-
thy of  thy  aversion); — at  least,4  let  an  unkind  letter  tell  me
this,  in  my  misery ;  so  that  the  lot  of  the  Leucadian  waves
may  be  tried  by  me.

writing  ;  as  she  took  great  delight  in  this  figure,  which  is  called  Anaphora
and  Epanophora.

2  Votive  offerings. .] — Ver.  211.  It  was  the  custom  to  send  congratu-
latory presents  to  friends  who  had  escaped  from  tempest  or  other  immi-
nent dangers.

3  Pelasgian.'] — Ver.  217.  Straho  tells  us  that  the  Pelasgi  wandered
all  over  Greece,,  and  had  left  their  names  in  many  places.  '  Pelasgis
Sappho'  therefore  means  '  Sappho  of  Lesbos,'  a  Greek  colony  having  been
established  there.

4  At  least.'] — Ver.  219.  Instead  of  '  hoc  saltern,'  some  read  here,
'  0  saltern.'  Whatever  the  reading,  Heinsius  entirely  rejects  this  distich
as  not  being  the  production  of  Ovid,  and  is  not  able  to  conceive  what
it  can  mean.  Crispinus,  however,  the  Delphin  Editor,  thinks  that  the
sense  is  very  evident,  and  he  thus  paraphrases  it :  *  Si  velis  (inquit)  longe
a' me  fugere.  moneat  saltern  epistola,  ut  huic  malo  remedium  in  aquis
Leucadiis  quaeram :'  '  If  it  is  your  intention  to  abandon  me,  at  least  let  a
letter  from  you  tell  me  so ;  that,  as  a  remedy  for  it,  I  may  seek  a  death
in  the  Leucadian  waves.'


EP.  XVI.]  PAEIS TO HEI/O".  157


EPISTLE  XVI.
PARIS TO HELEN.

Paris,  the  son  of  Priam,  who  is  also  sometimes  called  by  the  name  of
Alexander,  haying,  in  the  contest  for  the  Golden  Apple,  given  his  de-
cision in  favour  of  Venus,  received  from  that  Goddess  a  promise  of
the  possession  of  Helen,  at  that  time  the  most  beautiful  woman  in  the
world  ;  and  for  that  purpose,  he  sailed  for  Sparta,  where  he  was  kindly
receivedby  her  husband,  Menelaiis.  After  sometime,  Menelaiisdeparted
for  Crete ;  and  when  leaving  home,  he  particularly  recommended  his
guest  to  the  care  of  Helen.  Paris,  being  deeply  enamoured  of  her,
considered  that  this  opportunity  ought  not  to  be  neglected,  and  en-
deavoured by  every  artifice  to  gain  her.  For  this  purpose  he  is  sup-
posed to  write  the  present  Epistle,  in  which  he  informs  her  of  his
passion,  and  endeavours  to  insinuate  himself  into  her  good  graces,  by
all  those  engaging  qualities  and  charms  which  are  supposed  to  recom-
mend a  lover ;  while,  studying  the  foibles  of  the  fair  sex,  and  knowing
the  influence  of  appearance  upon  them,  he  omits  nothing  which  he
imagines  may  engage  the  affection  of  Helen,  or  make  her  husband
appear  contemptible.  He  then  urges  her  to  comply  with  his  desires,
and  endeavours  to  palliate  the  guilt  by  telling  her  that  he  wishes  to
make  her  his  wife  ;  and  he  concludes  with  pressing  her  to  fly  with
him  to  Troy,  where  he  promises  her  a  life  of  pleasure  and  affluence,
and  assures  her  that  he  shall  be  enabled  to  defend  her  against  all
attempts  to  recover  her.

Daughter  of  Leda,  I,  the  son  of  Priam,  send  to  thee  that
health  which  can  be  presented  to  me,  thee  alone  bestowing  it.
Shall  I  speak5  out  ?  Or  is  there  no  need  to  declare  a  name
well  known,  and  is  my  love  more  evident  than  I  conld  wish
it  to  be  ?  I  could,  indeed,  wish  it  to  he  concealed,  until  a
time6  should  be  presented,  that  would  not  have  apprehensions
mingled  with  joy.  But  in  vain  do  I  dissemble  ;  for  who  can
conceal  a  fire,  which  always  betrays  itself  by  its  own  light  ?
Still,  if  thou  dost  expect  me  to  add  language  as  well  to
actions,  *  I  burn.' Thou  here  hast  words,  the  interpreters  of

5  Shall  I  speak.] — Ver.  3.  This  implies  the  notion  of  one  debating
with  himself,  and  doubting  whether  he  shall  speak  his  mind  with  plain-
ness) or,  conscious  of  the  badness  of  his  cause,  rather  leave  her  to  conjec-
ture it  from  hints  and  signs.

6  Until  a  time.] — Ver.  6.  That  is  to  say,  '  Till  1  should  understand  that
I  am  not  disagreable  to  you,  and  by  the  return  of  a  like  passion,  have  a
pleasure  unmixed  with  those  doubts  and  anxieties  which  so  much  perplex
me  at  present.'


158  THE EPISTLES OE THE HEROINES.  [EP. XVI.

my  feelings.  Pardon  the  confession,  I  entreat  thee;  and
read  not  over  the  rest  with  a  severe  countenance,  but  with
one  that  well  becomes  thy  beauty.

Already7  it  is  a  pleasing  matter,  that,  my  letter  received,
gives  me  hopes  that  I,  as  well,  may  be  received  in  the
same  manner.  May  this  be  fulfilled  ;  and  I  trust  that  the
mother  of  Love,  who  has  prompted  me  to  this,  may  not
have  promised  thee  in  vain.  For,  that  thou8  mayst  not  offend
through  ignorance,  I  am  brought  hither  by  a  Divine  admoni-
tion ;  and  no  feeble  Divinity  favours  my  undertaking.  A  great
prize,9  indeed,  do  I  claim,  but  not  other  than  my  due;  Cytherea
has  promised  thee  for  my  nuptial  chamber.  Under  her  guid-
ance have  I  made  my  hazardous  passage  in  the  ship  built  by
Phereclus,10  from  the  Sigaean  shore,  over  the  extended  seas.
She  has  granted  me  propitious  breezes,  and  favouring  gales  ;
for,  sprung  from  the  sea,  she  has  a  control  over  the  sea.
May she  persevere ;  and as she calms the  raging of  the

7  Already.'] — Ver.  13.  Some  Commentators  have  found  a  source  of
aiffieulty  in  the  use  of  the  word  'jamdudum.'  But  it  is  obvious  that
Paris  is  implying  an  anticipated  pleasure,  and  is  promising  himself  be-
fore-hand that  his  letter  will  be  well  received,  which  forethought  gives
him  much  joy.  We  may  suppose,  as  he  seems  to  have  been  a  man  of
some  discernment  in  the  affairs  of  love,  that  he  found  that  Helen  had
no  aversion  to  him,  and  that  he  thence  was  able  to  judge  of  the  suc-
cess of  his  Epistle.  So  in  the  '  Eunuchus'  of  Terence,  Gnatho,  speaking
to  Thraso,  says,  respecting  the  courtesan  Thais —

'  Quando  illud,  quod  tu  das,  expectat  atque  amat,
Jamdudum  amat  te ;  jamdudum  illi  facile  fit  quod  doleat.'
*  When  she  is  expecting  and  longing  for  the  presents  which  you  give  her,
it  is  a  sure  sign  that  she  is  already  in  love  with  you — .'

8  For  that  thou.} — Ver.  17.  This  is  an  artful  insinuation  on  the  part
of  Paris.  He  would  persuade  Helen  that  he  has  been  prompted  by  a
divine  impulse  to  come  in  quest  of  her,  and  thus  prevail  upon  her,  from
a  principle  of  religion,  to  favour  his  addresses ;  thus  making  her  believe
that  a  denial,  in  his  case,  will  be  no  less  than  opposition  to  the  will  of
heaven.

9  A  great  prize .] — Ver.  19.  He  considers  her  favour  his  due  because,
in  anticipation  of  it  and  in  the  hope  of  a  full  performance  of  the  promise  of
Venus,  he  had  rejected  the  glorious  offers  made  him  by  Juno  and  Minerva.

10  Built  by  Phereclus.'] — Ver.  22.  Phereclus  was  the  builder  of  the
fleet  of  Paris,  '  the  commencement  of  woe'  to  Troy,  as  Homer  calls  it.
He  was  slain  in  the  Trojan  war  by  Meriones,  as  Homer  says,  '  because
he  knew  not  the  decrees  of  the  Gods ;'  in  allusion  to  an  oracular  response
which  had  warned  the  Trojans  not  to  meddle  with  naval  matters.


EP.  XYI.]  PAEIS TO HELE^.  '159

ocean,  so  may  she  calm  that  of  my  breast ;  and  may  she  bring
home  my  desires  to  their  harbour.  These  flames  have  I
brought,11  I  have  not  found  them  here  ;  these  were  my  cause
for  so  long  a  voyage.

For  neither  threatening  storms  nor  mistaken  course  has
driven  us  hither ;  the  Tsenarian  land  was  sought  by  my
fleet.  And  do  not  suppose  that  I  ploughed  the  deep  in  a  ship
that  carried  merchandize  ;  may  the  Gods  preserve  the  wealth12
that  I  have.  Neither  do  1  come  as  a  spectator  to  the  cities  of
Greece  ;  the  towns  of  my  own  kingdom  are  more  opulent
than  they.  It  is  thee  that  I  seek  ;  thee,  whom  the  resplendent
Venus  has  promised  for  my  couch.  Thee  did  I  sigh  for,
before  thou  wast  known  to  me.  I  beheld  thy  features  with
my  mind,  before  I  did  with  my  eyes  ;  fame  was  the  first  har-
binger of  the  beauty  of  thy  features.  And  yet13  it  is  not  to
be  wondered  at,  if,  as  is  not  unlikely,  struck  from  afar  by  the
missile  darts  from  thy  bow,  I  am  in  love.  Thus  has  it  pleased
the  Destinies,14  whom,  that  thou  mayst  not  strive  to  resist,
hear  a  narrative15  related  with  strict  truthfulness.

Still  was  I  retained  in  the  womb  of  my  mother,  my  birth
being  impeded ;  now  was  her  womb  pregnant  with  its  le-
gitimate burden  ;  she  seemed  to  herself,  in  a  vision  of  sleep,

11  Have  I  brought.] — Ver.  27.  He  tells  her  that  he  was  enamoured  of
her  by  reason  of  the  description  he  had  heard  of  her  charms,  before  he  had
ever  seen  her.

12  Preserve  the  wealth.'] — Ver.  32.  He  means  to  say,  '  Wealth  can  be
no  motive  to  me  for  exposing  myself  to  the  hazards  of  storms  and  tem-
pests ;  I  have  already  abundance  of  riches,  if  the  Gods  will  only  preserve
them  to  me.'  Besides,  he  is  probably  afraid  that  Helen  may  look  down
upon  him,  if  she  should  suppose  him  to  be  a  mere  merchant.

13  And  yet.] — Ver.  39.  Most  of  the  Commentators  are  of  opinion  that
all  the  lines  from  39  to  143  are  spurious,  and  ought  to  be  rejected,  as
not  worthy  of  the  genius  of  Ovid,  and  the  work  of  some  busy  interpo-
lator. They  are  wanting  in  all  the  older  MSS.  Scaliger,  however,
seems  to  be  content  to  consider  only  the  four  lines,  from  1. 39  to  1. 42  in-
clusively, as  spurious.

14  The  Destinies.] — Ver.  41.  He  here  puts  the  strongest  complexion
on  his  passion,  as  he  attributes  it  to  the  will  of  the  Gods,  or  the  decrees
of  Fate,  in  order  that  he  may  be  the  better  able  to  influence  Helen.

13  Hear  a  narrative.] — Ver.  42.  He  now  makes  a  long  digression  to
explain  the  causes  and  origin  of  his  love.  He  begins  with  the  circum-
stances of  his  birth  ;  and  he  states  the  reason  of  his  being  exposed  on  mount
Ida  and  bred  among  shepherds,  the  judgment  which' he  gave  relative  to
the  three  Goddesses,  and  the  motives  which  had  determined  him  to  visit
Sparta.


160  THE  EPISTLES  OF  THE  HEROINES.  [EP.  XVI.

to  be  bearing  from  her  teeming  womb  a  huge  naming  torch.
Alarmed  she  arose,16  and  she  related  the  fearful  visions  of  the
dark  night  to  the  aged  Priam,  and  he  to  the  soothsayers.  A
soothsayer  prophesies  that  Ilion  shall  be  burnt  through  the
flames  of  Paris  ;17  surely  that  was  the  torch  of  my  breast18  as
it  now  exists.  Although,19  to  appearances,  I  seemed  to  be  of
the  lower  order,20  my  beauty  and  the  vigour  of  my  mind  were
signs  of  my  concealed  nobleness  of  birth.  There  is  a  spot  in
the  shady  vales  of  the  middle  of  Ida,  retired,  and  filled  with
pitch-trees  and  holm  oaks  ;  a  spot  which  is  cropped  neither  by
the  teeth  of  the  harmless  sheep  nor  of  the  goat  that  delights
in  rocks,  nor  by  the  broad  mouth  of  the  browsing  cow ;
hence,  looking  down  upon  the  walls  of  Dardania,21  and  the
lofty  abodes,  and  the  ocean,  I  was  leaning  against  a  tree.
Behold !  by  the  tread  of  feet22  did  the  ground  seem  to  me

16  Alarmed,  she  arose.] — Ver.  47.  Spurious  though  these  lines  may
possibly  be,  the  expression  here,  '  territa  consurgit,'  savours  strongly  of
0 vidian  composition.  In  the  First  Book  of  the  Fasti,  1.  435,  he  has  the
words  '  Territa  consurgens  Nymphe.'

17  Flames  of  Paris.} — Ver.  49.  This  is  a  Prolepsis,  or  anticipation,  in
applying  to  himself,  by  name,  what  the  prophet  said  about  the  flames  of
Troy  :  he  was  not  then  born,  and  of  course  could  not  have  been  mentioned
by  name.

18  Torch  of  my  breast.  ] — Ver.  50.  The  flames  which  were  foretold  by
the  seers  as  destined  to  threaten  Troy,  are  here  interpreted  by  Paris  to  mean
the  flames  of  love  that  were  then  raging  in  his  breast.  This  is  inge-
nious, as  it  was  perfectly  natural  for  a  mind  that  could  attend  to  nothing
but  what  concerned  its  passion,  to  put  this  construction  on  the  predic-
tions of  the  soothsayers.

19  Although.] — Ver.  51.  This  and  the  following  line  are  thought  by
Heinsius  to  be  misplaced,  and  properly  to  come  after  the  ninetieth  line  ;
'  Regius  agnoscor  per  rata  signa  puer,'  The  remark  cannot  fad  to  be
allowed  to  be  just  by  all  who  consider  the  two  passages  with  any  degree
of  attention.

20  The  lower  order.] — Ver.  51 .  Priam  had  ordered  the  child,  as  soon  as
born,  to  be  exposed  on  mount  Ida  ;  but  the  persons  whom  he  had  employed
for  that  purpose,  being  charmed  with  the  beauty  of  the  infant,  took  care
of  him,  and  he  long  passed  for  the  son  of  one  of  the  royal  shepherds.

ul  Walls  of  Dardania.'] — Ver.  57.  Ovid  here  improperly  uses  the  word
'  Dardania,'  as  signifying  the  city  of  Troy  with  its  walls,  it  really  meant
the  region  or  district  in  which  Troy  was  situate.  Pliny  the  Elder  applies
the  word  to  the  isle  of  Samothrace.

-2  Tread  of  feet.] — Ver.  59.  This  thundering  step,  which  shook  the
earth,  poi*tended  the  approach  of  Divinities,  however  strongly  it  might  be
in  contrast  to  the  sethereal  nature  and  the  sex  of  the  three  beauteous
Goddesses.


EP.  XVI.]  PAEIS TO HELEN.  161

to  be  moved ;  I  will  speak  the  truth,  though  it  will  scarcely
gain  credit  for  the  truth.  There  stood  before  my  eyes,  im-
pelled by  his  swift  wings,  the  grandson  of  the  great  Atlas  and
of  Pleione  ;23  (it  was  allowed  me  to  see,  may  it  be  allowed
me  to  relate  what  was  seen);  and  between  the  fingers  of  the
Divinity  was  a  golden  wand.  Three  Goddesses,  too,  at  the  same
moment,  Venus,  and  Juno  with  Pallas,  placed  their  charming
feet  upon  the  grass.  I  was  astounded,  and  a  chilling  dread24
had  raised  my  hair  erect,  when  the  winged  messenger25  said
to  me,  "  Lay  aside  thy  fear.  Thou  art  the  umpire  in  a  dis-
pute on  beauty ;  settle  the  contest  between  the  Goddesses  ;
which  one  of  them  is  deserving  to  surpass  the  other  two  in
charms.3'  And  that  I  might  not  refuse,  he  gave  the  injunc-
tion in  the  words  of  Jupiter;  and  then  straightway26  he
mounted  aloft  to  the  stars  by  the  sethereal  track.  My  mind
gathered  strength,  and  on  a  sudden  confidence  arose,  and  I
feared  not  to  scrutinize  each  one  of  them  with  my  eyes.
They  were  all  deserving  of  the  victory ;  and,  the  umpire,  I
was  grieved27  that  all  could  not  have  their  cause  triumphant.
But  still,  of  them,  one  even  pleased  me  more  than  the  others,
so  that  you  might  know  that  it  was  she  by  whom  love  is  in-
spired. And  so  great28  was  the  desire  for  superiority,  that

23  And  of  Pleione."] — Ver.  62.  Maia,  the  mother  of  Mercury,  by  Ju-
piter, was  the  daughter  of  Pleione  and  Atlas.  Oceanus  and  Tethys  were
the  parents  of  Pleione.

24  A  chilling  dread.] — Ver.  67.  '  Horror  '  must  here  mean  '  dread,'  or
simply  •  fear ';  for  there  was  nothing  terrible  in  the  appearance  of  the
Divinities,  and  that  alone  could  have  produced  horror,  in  our  sense  of  the
word.

25  Winged  messenger.] — Ver.  68.  The  insignia  of  Mercury  were  the
'  talaria,'  or  wings  on  his  ancles,  the  '  petasus,'  or  winged  cap,  and  the
1  caduceus,'  or  wand,  which  he  bore  as  the  herald  of  the  Gods.

26  Then  straightway .] — Ver.  72.  Ovid  says,  that  when  Mercury  had
delivered  his  message,  he  betook  himself  to  the  heavens.  The  painters,
however,  frequently  represent  him  as  though  remaining  to  assist  Paris  in
the  adjudication.

27  I  was  grieved.]— -Ver.  75.  Heinsius  suggests  '  querebar'  at  the  end
of  this  line,  instead  of  '  verebar ';  and  this  is  the  more  likely  to  be  the
true  reading,  as  the  next  line  in  its  present  state  is  not  correct  Latin.  The
suggestion  of  Heinsius  ought  no  doubt  to  be  adopted,  and  '  causa  sua '
to  be  substituted  for  '  causam  suam,'  the  meaning  being,  '  and  I,  the  judge,
was  sorry  that  they  could  not  be  victorious,  each  in  her  own  cause.'

23  And  so  great.] — Ver.  79. The  poets  were  so  sensible  of  the  desire

M


162  THE EPISTLES OE THE HEROINES.  [EP.  XVI.

tliey  were  eager  to  canvass  for  my  decision  with  large  pre-
sents.

The  wife  of  Jove29  offered  me  a  kingdom,  his  daughter
valour,  I  myself  was  in  doubt  whether  I  would  wish  to  be
powerful,  or  whether  to  be  brave.  Venus  sweetly  smiled,
and  said,  "  Paris,  let  not  either  offer,  full  of  anxious  fears,
influence  thee ;  I  will  give  thee  an  object  to  love ;  and  the
daughter  of  beautiful  Leda,  herself  still  more  beauteous,  shall
rush  into  thy  embrace."  Thus  she  spoke  ;  and  equally  pre-
ferred for  her  gift  and  for  her  beauty,  she  turned  her  victorious
steps  towards  the  heavens.  In  the  meantime  (the  Fates,30  I
suppose,  commencing  to  be  propitious)  I  was  recognised  to  be
the  son  of  the  king  by  undoubted  signs.  His  palace  was
joyous,  his  son  being  recovered  after  so  long  a  time ;  and
Troy  added  this  day  as  well  to  her  festive  ones.  And  as  I
languish  for  thee,  so  did  the  fair  ones  languish  for  me ;  thou
alone  canst  gain  what  is  the  wish  of  so  many.  And  not  only
have  the  daughters  of  kings  and  of  chieftains  courted  me,
but  even  to  the  Nymphs31  ha^e  I  been  an  object  of  anxiety
and  affection. But  a  disdain32  of  all  these  came  upon  me,

implanted  in  the  female  mind  for  excelling  in  beauty,  that  they  have  here
represented  the  Goddesses  as  not  exempt  from  this  weakness.  The  affront
given  to  Pallas  and  Juno,  by  the  decision  of  Paris  in  favour  of  Venus,  was
resented  by  those  Goddesses  upon  the  whole  Trojan  nation  :  and  so  un-
forgiving did  they  prove,  that  their  anger  was  not  appeased  before  they
had  overthrown  that  ancient  kingdom.

29  The  wife  of  Jove.] — Ver.  81.  Such  is  the  infirmity  of  human  na-
ture, that  as  soon  as  a  decision  is  to  be  given,  it  seems  to  be  a  matter  of
course  that  a  bribe  should  be  offered,  and  an  equal  matter  of  course  that
it  should  be  accepted.

30  The  Fates] — Ver.  89.  Hitherto  the  Fates  had  proved  adverse  to
Paris  :  he  was  an  exile  from  his  father's  house,  deprived  of  his  rights  as  a
prince  of  the  royal  blood,  and  humbly  and  meanly  educated.  On  his  ori-
gin becoming  known,  he  was  removed  into  the  family  of  Priam.

31  To  the  Nymphs.'] — Ver.  96.  We  have  seen  this  in  some  measure  con-
firmed in  the  Epistle  written  to  him  by  the  Nymph  (Enone.  He  was  also
beloved  by  Arisba,  the  daughter  of  Merops,  king  of  Lesbos.  As  it  is  his
design  to  commend  himself,  and  to  set  a  high  value  on  his  affection,  he  falls
into  the  common  foible  of  lovers,  of  exaggerating  when  speaking  of  himself.

32  But  a  disdain.] — Ver.  97.  Before  this  line  the  Palatine  and  some
other  ancient  MSS.  have  these  two  lines  ;

'  Quas  super  (Enonen  facies  mutarer  in  orbem
Nee  Priamo  est  ad  te  dignior  ulla  nurus.'
Heinsius  has  no  doubt  of  their  having  been  composed  by  Ovid,  but  thinks


EP.  XVI.]  PAKIS TO HELEN.  163

after,  daughter  of  Tyndarus,  there  was  a  hope  given  of  a
union  with  thee.  When  awake,  I  beheld  thee  with  my  sight,
at  night,  in  my  imagination,  when  my  eyes  lay  overpowered
with  placid  slumbers.

What  wilt  thou  effect  by  thy  presence,  who,  not  yet  seen,
didst  thus  charm  1  I  burned,33  although  far  thence  was  the
name.  Nor  could  I  any  longer  defer  those  hopes,  in
seeking  the  object  of  my  desires  over  the  azure  paths.  The
Trojan  pine  groves  were  hewed  down  with  the  Phrygian  axe,
and  each  tree  that  was  useful  on  the  waters  of  the  deep  ;  the
lofty  Gargarian  chain34  was  despoiled  of  its  towering  woods,
and  steep  Ida  afforded  me  numberless  planks.  The  oaks  were
bent,  destined  to  be  the  foundation  of  swift  ships  ;  and  the
curving  keel  was  knit  to  the  ribs.  Sail-yards  did  we  add,  and
sails  attached  to  the  masts  ;  and  the  bending  stern  received
the  painted  Gods.35  Besides,  on  the  ship  in  which  I  was
borne,  attended  by  a  little  Cupid,  stood  the  Goddess36  em-
blazoned, the  promiser  of  her  endearments.  After  the  finish-
ing hand  was  given  to  the  fleet  when  built,  forthwith  was  I
bidden  to  go  on  the  iEgean  waves.37

that  as  the  first  is  extremely  corrupt,  for  that  very  bad  reason,  the  distich
has  been  rejected  by  the  Copyists.  In  the  second  line,  instead  of  '  ad  te,'
'a  te'  seems  to  be  the  proper  reading;  and,  allowing  for  the  corruptions,  the
meaning  seems  to  be,  '  But  be  you  preferred  before  them,  and  even  be-
fore (Enone,  than  whom,  after  yourself,  there  is  no  one  more  deserving  to
be  the  daughter-in-law  of  Priam.'  It  is  supposed  by  some  Commentators
that  Helen  refers  to  these  lines  in  the  Seventeenth  Epistle,  1.  195-6.

1  Tu  quoque  dilectam  multos,  infide,  per  annos
Diceris  CEnonen  destituisse  tuam.'

33  /  burned.'] — Ver.  102.  Alluding  still  to  the  flame  of  his  love  as  the
subject  of  the  vision  of  Hecuba,  he  calls  Helen  his  '  ignis,'  or  '  flame,'  a
mode  of  expression  common  with  the  Latin  poets.

34  Gargarian  chain.']  — Ver.  107.  Gargara  was  a  part  of  mount  Ida,
where  stood  a  town  of  the  same  name,  so  called  from  Gargarus,  the  son
of  Jupiter  and  Larissa.

35  Painted  Gods.] — Ver.  112.  He  here  alludes  to  the  figures  of  the
Gods  that  were  placed  at  the  stern  of  the  vessel,  as  its  protectors  or
tutelary  Divinities.

36  Stood  the  Goddess.] — Ver.  113,  He  means  that  Venus  and  Cupid
were  represented  as  the  tutelary  Deities  of  his  own  ship.

37  JEgean  waves.] — Ver.  116.  If  we  adopt  •  jubebar  '  as  the  reading  in
this  line,  his  meaning  must  be,  that  he  was  bidden,  or  ordered,  to  go  to
Sparta  by  the  Fates. Heinsius  conjectures  ■  lubebat,'  or  '  juvabat,'  ■  he

M  2


164  THE EPISTLES OE THE HEROINES.  [EP.  XVI.

Both  my  father  and  my  mother,  by  their  entreaties,  opposed
my  desires,  and  delayed  my  proposed  voyage  with  affectionate
remonstrances.  My  sister,  Cassandra,38  too,  just  as  she  was,
with  dishevelled  locks,  when  now  my  ships  were  ready  to  set
sail,  exclaimed,  "Whither  dost  thou  rush  1  Flames  wilt  thou
bring  back  with  thee ;  through  these  waters  thou  knowest
not  how  vast  the  flames  that  are  sought."  Truth-telling  wa3
the  prophetess  ;  the  flames  she  mentioned  have  I  found,  and
raging  love  burns  in  my  yielding  breast.  I  went  out  of  har-
bour, and  employing  propitious  gales,  (Ebalian  Nymph,39  I
neared  thy  shores.  Thy  husband  received  me  with  hos-
pitality ;  this,  too,  happened40  not  without  the  design  and
authority  of  the  Divinities.  He,  indeed,  showed  me  what-
ever in  all  Lacedsemon  was  worthy  to  be  shown  and  remark-
able. But  for  me  who  desired  to  behold41  thy  celebrated
beauty,  there  was  nothing  else  by  which  my  eyes  could  be
attracted.  When  I  beheld  thee,  I  was  amazed ;  and  smitten
with  thy  charms,  I  felt  my  heart,  to  its  very  centre,  palpitate
with  renewed  passion./  Features  like  to  those,  so  far  as  I
recollect,  had  Cytherea,42  when  she  came  to  submit  to  my
decision.  If  thou  hadst  come  together  with  her  to  that  con-
test, the  victory43  of  Venus  would  have  been  a  matter  of  dis-
chose,' or  'it  pleased  him  to  go.'  Although  he  here  says  that  Priam  op-
posed his  going,  some  accounts  state  that  he  was  sent  on  an  embassy
from  Priam  to  Menelaiis.

33  Sister,  Cassandra.] — Ver.  119.  The  prophecies  of  Cassandra  on  this
occasion  have  been  already  referred  to  in  the  Epistle  of  (Enone.

39  (Ebalian  Nijmph.]—Ver.  126.  (Ebalus,  the  father  of  Tyndarus,  the
putative  father  of  Helen,  gave  to  Laconia  the  name  of  (Ebalia.

40  This  too,  happened.] — Ver.  127.  This  is '  said  speciously,  to  cloak
his  gross  ingratitude  towards  Menelaiis,  who  had  so  kindly  entertained
him.

41  Desired  to  behold.] — Ver.  131.  It  is  worthy  of  remark  how  skilfully
Paris  takes  the  opportunity,  from  the  circumstance  of  the  civility  of
Menelaiis  in  showing  him  all  the  things  worthy  to  be  seen  in  Sparta,  to
give  the  matter  an  ingenious  turn,  by  representing  his  thoughts  as  so  much
engaged  with  the  idea  of  Helen,  that  he  could  regard  nothing  else,  and
was  full  of  impatience  to  see  her.

43  Had  Cytherea.] — Ver.  136.  This  is  the  highest  compliment  that  he
can  possibly  pay  her.

43  The  victory.] — Ver.  138.  It  is  well  known  that  those  who  were
victorious  in  the  Olympic  games,  were  crowned  with  branches  of  the  palm-
tree.  Hence  the  word  '  palma'  came  to  be  used  for  the  badge  of  victory
in  all  cases.


EP-  XYI.J  PAKIS TO HELEN.  165

pute.  Fame,  indeed,  has  given  a  wondrous  report  of  thee,
and  no  land  is  there  that  is  ignorant  of  thy  charms ;  nor
is  there  anywhere  thy  equal  in  Phrygia,  nor  has  any  other
one  among  the  beauteous,  from  the  rising  of  the  Sun,  an
equal  fame.  And  dost  thou  believe  me  in  this  ?  Thy  glory
is  still  inferior  to  the  truth ;  and  fame  has  almost  proved
grudging  as  to  thy  charms.  More  do  I  find  here  than  she
has  eve?'  promised,  and  thy  glories  are  eclipsed  by  their
source.

With  good  reason,  then,  was  Theseus  inflamed,44  who  knew
every  thing  ;  and  thou  didst  seem  a  prey  worthy  of  a  hero
so  great ;  while,  after  the  custom  of  thy  nation,  thou,  didst
contend  naked  in  the  *  paleestra  '45  shining  with  oil ;  and  thou,
a  woman,  wast  mingled  with'  the  naked  men.  I  commend
him  for  carrying  thee  off ;  I  only  wonder  that  he  ever  restored
thee ;  so  valuable  a  prize  should  have  been  firmly  held.  First
should  this  head  have  parted  with  my  bleeding  neck,  before
thou  shouldst  have  been  torn  from  my  nuptial  chamber.  And
would  my  hands  have  eve*r  proved  willing  to  let  thee  go  ?  And
would  I,  while  living,  have  permitted  thee  to  depart  from  my
bosom  ?  If  thou  must  have  been  restored,  still,  first  would  I
have  gained  some  pledge  of  love  ;  and  my  passion  should  not
have  proved  entirely  harmless.  Either  thy  virgin  charms
should  have  been  tasted  of  by  me,  or,  at  least,  that,46  which,
thy  virginity  safe,  could  have  been  snatched  from  thee.  Do
but  yield  thyself,  and  thou  shalt  know  how  great  is  the  con-
stancy of  Paris.  The  flame  of  the  funeral  pile  alone  shall
put  an  end  to  my  flame.

Thee  have  I  preferred  to  the  kingdom,  which  once  the  most

44  Theseus  inflamed.'] — Ver.  147.  Who  had  carried  her  off  when  a
girl,  as  already  stated.

45  The  ' pal<Estra.'~] — Ver.  149.  The  word  '  palaestra'  must  be  taken  here
to  mean  the  place  for  exercise  in  wrestling,  which  was  much  cultivated  by
the  Laconians,  with  whom  the  young  women  mingled  with  the  men  in  a
state  of  nudity  on  such  occasions ;  to  which  circumstance,  reference  is
here  made.  The  '  palaestrae'  are  thought,  by  some  writers,  to  have  been
appropriated  to  the  use  of  the  boys  and  youths,  while  the  '  gymnasia'  were
intended  for  the  men.  They  were,  however,  most  probably  intended  as
places  of  exercise  for  the  '  athletae,'  or  persons  who  contended  in  the
public  games.

46  Or,  at  least,  that.]— Ver.  159. Kisses,  to  wit.


166  THE  EPISTLES  OE  THE  HEROINES.  [EP.  XVI.

.powerful  wife,  and  sister  of  Jove  promised  to  me.  And,  so  long
as  I  could  throw  my  arms  around  thy  neck,  the  valour  that
Pallas,  offered  was  despised  by  me. And  I  regret  it  not,  nor

"shall  I  ever  seem  to  have  made  a  foolish  choice  ;47  my  mind48
continues  firm  in  its  resolve.  Only,  do  not  thou  permit  my
hopes  to  be  vain  ;  I  entreat  thee,  0  thou,  who  dost  deserve
to  be  acquired  through  labours  so  great.  I  do  not,  of  ignoble
birth,  sigh  for  an  alliance  with  a  noble  spouse  ;  and  thou  wilt
not,  believe  me,  be  my  wife  to  thy  discredit.  Thou  wilt  find,
shouldst  thou  enquire,  a  Pleiad49  and  Jupiter,  in  my  pedigree  ;
not  to  mention  my  intervening  ancestors.  My  father  wields
the  sceptre  of  Asia,  than  which  region  none  is  more  fertile,
hardly  to  be  contained  within  its  boundless  limits.  Innu-
merable cities,  and  golden  roofs,50  wilt  thou  behold;  and
temples,  which  thou  wilt  say  are  becoming  to  their  Gods.
Thou  wilt  see  Ilion,  and  the  walls  strengthened  with  lofty
towers,  built  by  the  harmony51  of  the  lyre  of  Phoebus. Why

47  A  foolish  choice.'] — Ver.  167.  '  Legisse'  is  used  here  in  the  sense  of
'  eligisse.' '  That  I  chose  you  in  preference.'

48  My  mind.] — Ver.  168.  After  this  line,  in  some  of  the  MSS.,  the
following  distich  is  found —

'  Cum  Venus  et  Juno,  Pallasque  in  vallibus  Idee,
Corpora  judicio  supposuere  meo.'

'  When  Venus,  and  Juno,  and  Pallas,  in  the  vales  of  Ida,  submitted  their
persons  to  my  judgment.'  It  is  however  generally  considered  as  spurious,
inasmuch  as,  Paris  having  already  given  a  full  account  of  his  decision,  we
cannot  well  suppose  that  he  would  trouble  the  reader  with  an  unnecessary
repetition.

49  A  Pleiad.] — Ver.  173.  Paris  boasts  here  that  he  is  descended  of
an  ancient  race,  deducing  his  pedigree  from  Jupiter  and  Electra,  the
daughter  of  Pleione,  and  one  of  the  seven  Pleiades  that  were  said  to  have
been  translated  into  heaven  among  the  stars.  By  her  Jupiter  had  Dar-
danus,  of  whom  Virgil  says,  '  Dardanus  lliacae  primus  pater  urbis  et
auctor.'  From  her,  Paris  derived  his  descent,  through  Ericthonius,  Tros,
Ilus,  Laomedon  and  Priam.

50  And  golden  roofs.] — Ver.  177.  It  has  been  always  a  custom  of
Oriental  nations,  to  gild  the  roofs  of  their  chief  buildings.  The  Romans
adopted  this  practice  in  several  instances,  after  the  fall  of  the  Republic.

51  By  the  harmony.] — Ver.  180.  When  Neptune  and  Apollo  built  the
walls  of  Troy  for  Laomedon,  the  latter,  by  the  sweetness  of  his  music,
was  said  to  have  made  the  stones  of  themselves  come  together,  and  take
their  places  in  the  walls  of  the  city


EP.  XVI.]  IAEI3 TO HELEN.  167

should  I  speak  to  thee  of  the  multitude  and  the  number  of
its  men  1  Hardly  can  that  country  contain  its  inhabitants.
In  dense  crowds  will  the  Trojan  matrons52  meet  thee:  and  my
halls  will  hardly  contain  the  Phrygian  brides.

0,  how  often  wilt  thou  say,  "  How  poor  is  our  Achaia !  one
house  here  wiH  contain  the  entire  riches  of  a  city  of  ours ."
And  be  it  not  becoming  me  to  despise  thy  Sparta  ;53  the  land
in  which  thou  wast  born,  is  ever  dear  to  me.  Still,  Sparta  is
poor  :54  thou  art  worthy  of  the  attire  of  opulence  ;  this  place  is
not  suited  to  such  gracefulness.  It  becomes  those  charms  to
employ  rich  ornaments  to  an  unlimited  extent,  and  to  abound
in  luxurious  refinements.55  Since  thou  beholdest  the  dress
of  our  race  of  men,  what  sort  of  dress  dost  thou  suppose  that
the  Dardanian  dames  have  ? Only  show  thyself  kind  ; and


52  Trojan  matrons.'] — Ver.  182.  As  Paris  wishes  Helen  to  abandon  her
husband  and  her  native  land,  it  is  material  to  let  her  know  that  the  change
will  be  advantageous  to  ber.  This  is  the  reason  why  he  commends  the
wealth  and  opulence  of  Phrygia,  and  extols  it  above  that  of  Lacedaemon.
He  endeavours  to  tempt  her  by  a  prospect  of  the  honours  that  will  be
paid  to  her  upon  her  arrival  in  her  new  kingdom,  and  skilfully  dwells
on  that  which  he  thinks  most  likely  to  engage  the  notice  of  the  fair  sex,
namely,  dress  and  magnificence.  Sparta,  and  Greece  in  general,  in  those
days,  were  far  removed  from  the  affluence  of  Asia.  There,  the  refinements
of  luxury,  even  then,  were  probably  earned  to  a  considerable  height.

53  Thy  Sparta.'} — Ver.  187.  Paris  adds  this  the  more  effectually  to
win  the  regard  of  Helen.  He  represents  his  affection  for  her  as  being  so
great,  that  it  induces  him  to  respect  every  thing  in  any  way  connected
with  her.  Even  Sparta,  however  savage  and  unpolished,  and  however
much  a  stranger  to  the  refinements  of  Asia,  is  yet  dear  to  him,  because  it
is  her  country.

54  Sparta  is  poor.] — Ver.  189.  Some  Commentators  would  force  Odd
to  be  guilty  here  of  a  gross  anachronism,  as  referring  to  the  institutions
of  Lycurgus,  the  Spartan  lawgiver,  who  flourished  long  after  the  death  of
Paris  and  the  destruction  of  Troy.  As  Sparta  avowedly  came  very  far
short  of  the  Asiatic  cities,  in  wealth  and  magnificence,  it  must  naturally
have  appeared  to  Paris  as  a  poor  and  inconsiderable  place,  in  comparison
with  that  which  he  had  left ;  Troy  then  being  the  capital  of  Asia  Minor,
and  one  of  the  most  opulent  cities  in  the  world.  He  merely  calls  it'  parca,'
in  comparison  "with  the  magnificence  of  Asia,  and  not  in  relation  to  its
peculiar  political  institutions.

65  Luxurious  refinements.] — Ver.  192.  'Novis' may  here  be  properly
translated  '  recherches ;'  if,  indeed,  that  word  may  be  considered  as  adopted
in  the  English  language.


168  THE  EPISTLES  OE  THE  HEEOINES.  [EP.  XTT.

do  not  aespise36  a  Phrygian  for  a  husband,  thyself  a  damsel
born  in  the  Therapneean  territory.57

He  was  of  Phrygia,53  and  born  of  our  blood,  who  now
mingles  the  water59  with  the  nectar  to  be  drank  of  by  the
Gods.  The  husband  of  Aurora60  was  a  Phrygian  ;  still  did
the  Goddess,  who  terminates  the  closing  career  of  night,  bear
him  off.  A  Phrygian,  too,  was  Anchises,61  with  whom  the
mother  of  the  winged  Loves  was  pleased  to  associate  on
the  mountain  ridges  of  Ida.  And  I  think  that  Menelaiis,  our
looks  and  years  compared,  will  not  be  worthy  to  be  preferred
to  me  in  thy  estimation.

At  least,  I  shall  not  be  presenting  thee  with  a  father-in-law,62

66  Do  not  despise.-] — Ver.  195.  He  alludes,  probably,  to  the  well-known
fact,  that  the  inhabitants  of  Greece  in  general,  affected  to  have  a  great
contempt  for  the  Phrygians.

57  Therapncean  territory.'] — Ver.  196.  Therapnse  was  the  name  of  a
district  of  Laconia  upon  the  river  Eurotas,  not  far  from  Sparta.

58  Of  Phrygia.] — Ver.  197.  Paris  is  not  satisfied  with  enlarging  upon
the  wealth  and  grandeur  of  his  nation  ;  he  produces  examples  to  prove
the  great  regard  that  had  been  always  shewn  to  the  Phrygians,  and  the
success  they  had  met  with,  in  attempts  of  the  kind  which  he  is  now
meditating.  The  story  which  he  here  refers  to  is  that  of  Ganymede,  the
son  of  Tros  and  the  brother  of  Ilus,  the  grandfather  of  Priam,  who  was
said  to  have  been  carried  away  while  hunting  on  Mount  Ida,  by  Jupiter
in  the  shape  of  an  eagle,  who  made  him  the  cup-bearer  of  the  Gods,  in
the  place  of  Hebe,  the  Goddess  of  Youth.

59  Mingles  the  water.] — Ver.  198.  It  must  be  remembered  that  the
ancients  mixed  water  with  their  wine ;  generally  in  the  proportion  of
three  parts  of  water  to  two  of  wine.  The  cup-bearer  of  the  Gods  would
have  to  mix  their  nectar,  which  they  drank  in  the  place  of  wine,  perhaps
in  the  same  proportions.

60  Husband  of  Aurora.] — Ver.  199.  Tithonus  was  the  brother,  or,  as
some  writers  say,  the  son  of  Laomedon.  Aurora  admired  him  for  his
beauty,  and  conferred  upon  him  the  gift  of  immortality ;  but  not  being
able  to  avoid  the  inconveniences  of  old  age,  he  at  last  found  life  an  in-
supportable burden,  and  desired  to  be  changed  into  a  grasshopper.  By
him,  Aurora  was  the  mother  of  Memnon,  who  came  to  the  assistance  of
the  Trojans,  and  was  slain  by  Achilles.-

61  Was  Anchises.] — Ver.  201.  He  was  the  son  of  Capys.  Venus,  for
his  extreme  beauty,  fell  in  love  with  him,  and  by  him  was  the  mother  of
iEneas,  whom  she  bore  on  the  banks  of  the  Simoi's.

62  A  father-in-law.] — Ver.  205.  Paris  here  alludes  to  the  shocking
revenge  of  Atreus,  the  father,  or,  according  to  some  accounts,  the  adoptive
father  of  Menelaiis.  Atreus  and  Thyestes  were  brothers,  the  sons  of  Pe-
lops  and  Hippodamia,  the  former  of  whom  had  married  Mrope.  Thyestes
being  enamoured  of  her,  used  all  possible  means  to  seduce  her,  and  at  last


EP.  XVT.]  PABIS TO HELE3".  169

who  drove  away  the  bright  light  of  day ;  and  who  turned
away  the  frightened  steeds  from  his  banquet.  The  father,
too,63  of  Priam,  is  not  one  stained  with  blood  by  the  murder  of
his  father-in-law,  and  one  who  names  the  Myrtoan  waves  by
his  crime.64  No  apples  are  caught  at65  by  my  great-grandfather
in  the  Stygian  waves,  and  no  moisture  is  longed  for  by  him  in
the  midst  of  the  stream.  And  yet,  what  matters  this,  if  one
descended  from  these  possesses  thee  ?  And  if  Jupiter  is  com-
pelled to  be  a  father-in-law66  for  one  of  this  house.  Oh,  dread-
ful fate  !  whole  nights  does  he  unworthily  possess  thee  and
enjoy  thy  embraces.  But  by  myself  hardly67  art  thou  seen,
the  table  at  length  being  placed  before  us  ; and  that  time,  as

succeeded.  Incensed  at  this  injury,  Atreus  at  first  banished  him ;  but,
resolving  on  a  more  barbarous  revenge,  he  recalled  him,  and  inviting  him
to  a  banquet,  ordered  the  two  children  he  had  by  her  to  be  killed,  and
presented  to  him  as  a  dish  at  the  feast.  The  Sun  is  said  to  have  gone
back  in  his  course,  being  stricken  with  horror  at  the  sight.  Atreus  is  sup-
posed to  have  been  the  first  to  remark  the  eclipse  of  the  Sun,  whence  it
is  thought  that  the  last  part  of  the  story  may  have  had  its  rise.

e3  The  father,  too.] — Ver.  207.  Atreus,  the  father  of  Pelops,  slew
(Enomaus,  the  king  of  Pisa,  the  father  of  Hippodamia,  whom  he  after-
wards married.

64  By  his  crime.~\ — Ver.  208.  Myrtilus,  the  charioteer  of  (Enomaus,
betrayed  him,  at  the  request  of  Atreus  ;  and  when  the  latter  had  won  the
race,  Myrtilus  asking  for  the  promised  reward,  Atreus  cruelly  flung  him
into  the  sea,  which  thence  received  the  name  of  '  Myrtoan.'

65  Are  caught  at.] — Ver.  209.  Tantalus  was  the  father  of  Pelops,  and
consequently  the  great-grandfather  of  Menelaiis.  Entertaining  the  Gods
at  a  banquet,  to  make  trial  of  their  divinity,  he  killed  his  son  Pelops,  and
set  him  before  them  baked  in  a  paste.  They  all  abstained  from  the  feast
except  Ceres,  who  tasted  a  part  of  his  shoulder,  for  which  reason,  when
he  was  restored  to  life,  he  had  a  shoulder  given  to  him  of  ivory.  As  a
punishment  for  his  impiety,  Tantalus  was  condemned  in  hell  to  perpetual
hunger  and  thirst,  and  was  obliged  to  stand  up  to  the  chin  in  water,  with
apples  close  to  his  mouth,  without  being  able  to  touch  either.  Some
however  say  that  his  crime  was  divulging  the  secrets  of  the  Gods,  and
his  punishment  was  continual  fear  of  a  great  stone  ever  ready  to  fall  upon
his  head.  Ovid,  in  the  Amores,  Book  iii.,  represents  the  latter  to  have
been  his  crime,  but  gives  the  same  account  of  his  punishment  as  above
stated,  as  the  penalty  of  his  impious  and  cruel  conduct.

66  A  father-in-law.] — Ver.  212.  Inasmuch  as  Jupiter  was  the  father
cf  Helen.

67  By  myself  hardly.] — Ver.  215.  From  this,  it  would  seem  that
Menelaiis  was  somewhat  cautious  of  introducing  his  wife  at  first  to  Paris  ;
or  else  that  it  was  not  the  custom  for  the  ladies  to  be  in  the  society  of
male  friends  in  the  early  part  of  the  day


170  THE EPISTLES OE THE HEKOIKES.  [EP.  XYI.

well,  has  many  things  to  give  pain.  May  such  feasts  fall  to  the
lot  of  my  enemies,  as  I  often  meet  with  when  the  wine  is  set  on.
I  am  disgusted  with08  my  entertainment,  when,  as  I  look  on,
that  barbarian  throws  his  arms  around  thy  neck.  I  am  burst-
ing, and  I  envy  him,  (and  yet  why  should  I  thus  mention  all
particulars  ?)  when  he  is  warming  his  limbs  with  thy  garments
thrown  around  him.

But  when  thou  art  giving  him  kisses,  in  my  presence,  with  no
reluctance,69  taking  up  the  cup  I  place  it  before  my  eyes.  My
glances  I  cast  downwards,  when  he  is  holding  thee  closely
locked  in  his  embrace ;  and  the  food,  but  slowly  masticated,
increases  in  my  mouth.70  Often  have  I  given  sighs  ;  and  I  have
observed  thee,  wanton  one,  not  suppressing  thy  smiles  at  my
sighs.  Often  do  I  wish  with  wine  to  soothe  my  passion  ;  but  it
increases,  and  drinking  is  flame  upon  flame.  And  that  I  may
not  see  many  things,  turning  my  neck,  I  recline  ;71  but,  the
same  instant,  thou  dost  call  back  my  gaze.  I  am  in  doubt
what  to  do  :  'tis  pain  to  me  to  see  these  things,  but  it  is  a
still  greater  pain  to  be  away  from  thy  presence.  So  far  as  I
can  and  may,  I  strive  to  conceal  my  frenzied  desire ;  but
still  my  dissembled  passion  is  evident.

Nor  am  I deceiving  thee  ; thou  knowest  of  my  wounds,

68  Am  disgusted  with.'] — Ver.  219.  The  description  given  by  Paris,  of
what  he  has  suffered,  when  forced  to  witness  the  mutual  endearments  of
Helen  and  Menelaiis,  is  finely  conceived,  and  set  off  with  all  the  embel-
lishments that  imagination  can  give.  Paris,  as  a  lover,  was  attentive  to
every  motion  and  every  look.  He  could  not  bear  that  Helen  should  show
any  signs  of  tenderness  even  for  her  own  husband ;  and,  on  such  occa-
sions, his  uneasiness  was  so  great,  that  he  was  scarcely  able  to  conceal  it.
At  the  same  time,  as  he  found  that  Helen  was  not  entirely  ignorant  of
what  he  was  enduring  for  her  sake,  he  has  omitted  no  opportunity  of
giving  her  hints  of  his  passion.  While  he  has  pretended  to  be  giving
only  the  history  of  others,  he,  under  borrowed  names,  has  given  her  a  de-
scription of  his  love,  and  has  made  her  acquainted  with  all  his  tender  sen-
timents. He  sometimes  has  even  counterfeited  drunkenness,  that  he
might  use  greater  liberty,  without  having  any  particular  notice  taken  of  it.

69  No  reluctance.'] — Ver.  223.  The  ideas  of  etiquette  between  husband
and  wife  before  company  seem  to  have  undergone  a  considerable  revolution
since  those  times ;  indeed,  Paris,  even  had  he  not  been  an  admirer  of
Helen,  might  well  put  the  cup  before  his  eyes.

70  In  my  mouth.] — Ver.  226.  He  means  to  say  that  he  cannot  swal-
low his  food,  by  reason  of  his  agitated  feelings.

71  I  recline.] — Ver.  231.  It  must  be  remembered,  that  he  is  repre-
senting them  as  following  the  Roman  and  later  Greek  fashion  of  reclining
at  meals.


EP.  XVI.]  PAEIS TO HELEN.  171

thou  knowest  of  them  ;  and  would  that  they  were  known  to
thee  alone  !  Alas  !  how  often  when  the  tears  have  started,
have  I  turned  away  my  face,  that  he  might  not  enquire  the
cause  of  my  weeping  !  Alas  !  how  often,  warmed  with  wine,
have  I  related  the  passion  of  youths,  addressing  each  word
to  thy  features  !  Under  a  feigned  name,  too,  have  I  made  a
discovery  of  myself.  I,  if  thou  knowest  it  not,  was  the  real
lover  in  those  instances.  Moreover,  that  with  greater  freedom
I  might  employ  my  discourse,  not  on  one  occasion  only  has  in-
toxication been  feigned  by  me.  Thy  breasts,  as  I  remember,
were  exposed,  thy  tunic  hanging  loose  ;  and  bared,  they  gave
access  to  my  eyes ;  breasts  more  fair  than  either  the  bleached
snow  or  than  milk,  and  than  Jove,72  when  he  embraced  thy
mother.  While  I  was  astounded  on  beholding  them  (for  by
chance  I  was  holding  a  cup),  the  wreathed  handle73  slipped  from
between  my  fingers.  If  thou  dost  give  kisses  to  thy  daughter:
at  once  do  I  joyously  snatch  them74  from  the  youthful  hps  of
Hermione.  And  sometimes,  lying  at  my  length,75 1  hum  old-
fashioned  love  songs ;  and  sometimes,  by  nods,  I  give  secret
signs.  Lately,  too,  have  I  ventured  with  kindly  words  to
address  Clymene  and  iEthra,76  the  chiefs  of  thy  attendants  :
they,  saying  nothing  else  to  me,  but  that  they  were  afraid,  left
my  entreaties  half-finished  as  I  besought  them.

72  And  than  Jove.'] — Ver.  250.  On  which  occasion  he  transformed
himself  into  a  swan,  a  hird  remarkable  for  its  whiteness.

73  The  wreathed  handle.] — Ver.  252.  The  '  pocula,' or  drinking  cups,
had  handles  probably  on  both  sides.  The  wreathed  or  twisted  handle
was  much  in  fashion  among  the  Romans.  The  '  pocula'  were  filled  from
the  '  cratera,'  or  '  bowl,'  with  the  '  cyathus,'  or  '  ladle.'

74  Snatch  them.] — Ver.  254.  This  he  could  easily  do,  under  the  mere
pretext  of  carressing  so  young  a  child.

75  At  my  length  ] — Ver.  255.  Assuming  an  air  of  carelessness,  he
sang  his  own  passion,  under  the  pretext  of  repeating  old-fashioned  love
songs.

*6  Clymene  and  Mthra.] — Ver.  257.  According  to  some  authors,  this
./Ethra  was  the  wife  of  Theseus ;  but  this  couid  not  be  the  fact,  as  she
must  thus  have  been  long  dead.  Some  writers  again  say,  that  these  were
two  female  relatives  of  Menelaus,  left  by  him  to  keep  watch  upon  Helen.
Dictys  the  Cretan  says  that  Clvmene  was  the  daughter  of  ^thra,  and
that  they  were  both  carried  off  by  Paris,  in  company  with  Helen.  He
further  says,  that  after  the  taking  of  Troy,  they  fell  by  lot  to  Demophoon
and  Acamas,  the  sons  of  Theseus,  but  that  they  afterwards  fell  into  the
hands  of  Mnestheus,  on  the  sons  of  Theseus  being  banished  from  Athens.


172  THE EPISTLES OF THE HEROINES.  [EP.  XYI.

0  that  the  Gods  would  grant  thee  to  be  the  reward  of
some  great  contest,  and  that  the  conqueror  might  have  thee
for  his  bed ;  just  as  Hippomenes77  bore  off  the  daughter  of
Schoeneus,78  the  reward  of  the  race,  just  as  Hippodamia79
came  to  the  Phrygian  breast ;  just  as  the  stern  Alcides  broke
the  horn  of  Achelous, 80  while,  De'ianira,  he  was  a  candidate
for  thy  embraces  ;  on  those  terms,81  my  valour  would  have
proved  more  bold ;  and  I  should  have  known  thee  to  be  the  re-
sult of  my  toils.  Now  nought  remains  to  me,  beauteous  one,
but  to  entreat  thee,  and,  if  thou  wilt  permit  me,  to  embrace
thy  feet.  0  thou  ornament !  0  thou  glory,  here  present,  of
thy  two  brothers  !  0  thou  !  worthy  of  Jove  for  thy  husband,
hadst  thou  not  been  the  daughter  of  Jove  ! Either  with  thee

77  Hippomenes.'] — Ver.  263.  Paris,  the  further  to  convince  Helen  how
deeply  he  is  enamoured  of  her,  assures  her  that  there  is  no  hazard  that  he
will  not  gladly  submit  to  for  her  sake.  He  proceeds  so  far  as  to  express  a
wish  that  she  had  been  designated  by  the  Gods  as  the  reward  of  some
dangerous  enterprise,  that  he  might  show  her  how  cheerfully  he  would
engage  in  the  boldest  attempt,  when  forced  by  the  hope  of  so  glorious  a
prize.  Upon  this,  he  takes  the  opportunity  to  mention  others  who  have
before  engaged  in  the  like  attempts,  that  he  may  represent  them  as
illustrations  of  that  courage  in  which  he  is  prepared  to  excel.

78  Of  Schoeneus.] — Ver.  263.  The  story  of  Hippomenes  and  Atalanta
is  told  in  the  Ninth  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses.

79  Hippodamia.] — Ver.  264.  He  alludes  to  Pelops,  the  Phrygian,  who
gained^  Hippodamia,  on  conquering  her  father  (Enomaus  in  the  chariot
race,  under  the  circumstances  before  mentioned.

30  Of  Achelous.]  — Ver.  265.  The  contest  of  Hercules  and  Achelous,
while  contending  for  the  hand  of  De'ianira,  is  related  in  the  Ninth  Book
of  the  Metamorphoses.

81  On  those  terms.] — Ver.  267.  Paris,  after  enumerating  these  in-
stances, speaks  of  his  own  courage  as  being  in  no  way  inferior,  if  he  can
only  find  a  proper  field  for  its  exertion.  However,  like  one  expert  in  the
art  of  insinuating  himself  into  the  favour  of  the  softer  sex,  he  has  recourse
to  prayers  and  flattery,  and  paints  the  violence  of  his  passion  with  all  the
lively  strokes  that  occur  to  his  imagination.  But  before  he  comes  to  the
point,  that  he  may  by  degrees  prepare  her  for  the  discovery  of  his  inten-
tions, he  endeavours  to  make  her  believe  that  he  has  been  moved  to  address
her  by  a  heavenly  impulse,  and  that  to  resist,  will  be  to  oppose  the  will
of  the  Fates.  This  is  well  contrived  by  the  Poet :  for,  as  it  was  not
his  design  to  represent  Helen,  as  a  vicious  character,  but  as  one  who,
having  naturally  a  tender  and  amorous  complexion,  was  gained  over  by  an
insinuating  address,  he  found  it  necessary  to  give  this  turn  to  the  matter,
that  Helen  might  not  be  too  much  shocked  at  the  proposal,  or  reject  her
lover's  addresses  with  indignation  and  disdain.


EP.  XVI.]  PARIS TO HELEN.  1/3

for  my  wife  will  I  re-enter  the  Sigaean  harbour,  or  else,  an  ex-
ile, will  I  be  buried  in  Tsenarian  ground.  In  no  slight  degree
has  my  breast  been  pierced  with  the  point  of  the  arrow ;  the
wound  has  penetrated  even  to  my  bones.

Truly  did  my  sister  prophesy  this  to  me,  (for  now  I  call  it
to  mind)  that  it  would  come  to  pass  that  I  should  be  trans-
fixed by  a  heavenly  dart.  Refrain  then,  Helen,  from  despis-
ing a  passion  sent  by  the  Fates  :  and  then  mayst  thou  have  the
Gods  propitious  to  thy  desires.  Many  things  indeed  occur  to
me ;  but  that  in  thy  presence  I  may  say  still  more,  receive
me  in  thy  couch,  in  the  silence  of  the  night.  Art  thou
ashamed,  and  dost  thou  dread  to  defile  conjugal  love,  and  to
violate  the  chaste  rights  of  lawful  wedlock  ?  Ah,  too  silly
Helen,52  not  to  call  thee  foolish,  dost  thou  suppose  that  such
beauty  can  be  free  from  criminality?  Either  thou  must  change
thy  features,  or  thou  must  not  be  cruel ;  great  is  the  strug-
gle83 of  beauty  with  chastity.  Jupiter  takes  pleasure  in  these
stealthy  caresses,  resplendent  Venus  delights  in  them  ;  'twas
these  stolen  caresses,  in  fact,  that  gave  thee  Jove  for  thy  father.

82  Too  silly  Helen.']  — Ver.  285.  We  have  here  a  collection  of  those
arguments  and  deluding  speeches,  with  which  men  of  gallantry  in  all  ages
have  laid  siege  to  the  fair.  That  shame  and  reluctance  which  she  would
be  likely  to  feel  upon  his  proposal,  he  ascribes  to  simplicity  and  want  of
knowledge  of  the  world.  Beauty,  he  tells  her,  was  formed  for  soft  and
tender  complexions :  and  the  practice  even  of  the  Gods  might  convince  her
that  to  listen  to  him  will  be  no  crime.  He  further  urges  her,  on  the  ground  of
the  opportunity  they  have,  in  consequence  of  the  absence  of  her  husband,
whom  he  endeavours  to  depreciate,  and  to  make  to  appear  contemptible  in  her
eyes.  In  a  word,  opportunity  and  importunity  are  here,  as  in  too  many
other  instances,  wielded  as  his  two  most  efficient  and  powerful  weapons.

83  The  struggle.'] — Ver.  288.  The  sentiment  conveyed  in  this  line  is
one  very  commonly  to  be  found  among  the  poets,  many  of  whom  do  not
scruple  to  take  it  for  a  general  maxim.  For  the  sake  of  human  nature,  it  is
to  be  hoped  that  in  this  general  assertion  they  have  utterly  miscarried.
It  must  be  remembered,  that  beauty  ever  attracts  the  attention  of  the
world,  and  that  they  who  are  distinguished  by  it,  are  more  likely  to  be
exposed  to  attacks  and  solicitations  ;  besides,  a  false  step  in  them  is
always  more  noticed,  and  makes  a  greater  noise  than  in  the  case  of  another.
Hence  it  is,  that  both  history  and  private  observation  often  furnish  more
examples  of  frailty  in  females  of  extraordinary  beauty,  than  in  those  of
less  dazzling  exterior.  This  has  occasioned  the  multitude,  who  are  never
deep  thinkers,  to  throw  that  reproach  upon  beauty  itself,  which  is
merely  imputable  to  those  accidental  circumstances  which  usually  accom-
pany it.


174  THE EPISTLES OF THE HEEOINES.  [EP.  XYI.

Hardly  canst  thou  possibly  be  chaste,  if  there  is  anty  influ-
ence84 in  the  blood  of  thy  ancestors,  being  the  daughter  both
of  Jove  and  of  Leda.85

Still,  mayst  thou  then80  be  chaste  when  my  Troy  shall  receive
thee;  and  let  me,  alone,  I  pray,  prove  thy  cause  for  crime.  Now,
let  us  commit  a  fault  which  the  conjugal  hour  may  amend ;  if
only  Venus  has  not  promised  me  in  vain.  But  to  this  step
does  even  thy  husband  persuade  thee  by  deeds,  and  not  by
words  ;  and,  that  he  may  not  be  an  obstacle  to  the  stolen  joys
of  thy  guest,  he  is  absent.  He  had  no  time  more  opportune
to  visit  the  Cretan  realms  ;  0  husband  of  wondrous  sagacity  !
He  went,  and  when  about  to  go,  he  said,  "  My  wife,  I  recom-
mend thee  to  take  care  of  myldfean  guest  in  my  place."  Thou  art
neglecting  (I  aver  it)  the  injunctions  of  thy  absent  husband :
no  care  hast  thou  of  thy  guest.  And  canst  thou  hope,  daughter
of  Tyndarus,  that  this  man,  without  common  discretion,  can
sufficiently  appreciate  the  value  of  thy  charms  ?  Thou  art
mistaken  ;  he  is  ignorant  of  them  :  and,  if  he  thought  the
blessings  he  possesses  of  supreme  value,  he  would  not  entrust
them  to  a  man  and  a  stranger.  Should  neither  my  words,
nor  the  ardour  of  my  passion  prevail  on  thee :  we  are  persuaded
to  make  use  of  the  very  opportunity87  of  thy  husband's  absence.
Otherwise  we  should  be  foolish,  so  as  to  surpass  even  himself,
if  so  safe  an  occasion  should  pass  by  unemployed.  Almost
with  his  own  hands  has  he  introduced  a  lover  to  thee  ;  make
use  then  of  the  simplicity  of  thy  thoughtless  husband.

Thou  liest  alone  in  thy  forlorn  chamber,  during  the  night  so
long;  I  myself,  too,  am  lying  alone  on  my  forlorn  couch.  Should
joys  shared  in  common  unite  thee  to  me,  and  me  to  thee;  that
night  would  be  more  shining  than  the  mid-day. Then  will  I

84  Is  any  influence.] — Ver.  291. What  Ovid  here  supposes  to  be  effi-
cacious in  the  promotion  and  propagation  of  vice,  is  by  another  poet  much
more  worthily  put  forth  as  the  promoter  of  virtue ;
'  Fortes  creantur  fortibus  et  bonis.'

b5  And  of  Leda.] — Ver.  292.  Who,  as  her  parents,  were  both  guilty
of  adultery.

66  Mayst  thou  then."\ — Ver.  293.  He  did  not  show  himself  to  be  much
of  a  man  of  the  world,  in  expecting  this  to  be  the  case.

h7  The  very  opportunity.] — Ver.  310.  '  Ipsius  commoditate'  may  mean,
either  '  his  obligingness,'  or  '  the  convenience  of  his  absence.'  Accord-
ing to  Dictys  the  Cretan,  Menelaus  had  sailed  to  Crete  to  recover  the
property  left  by  his  maternal  uncle,  a  son  of  Minos.


EP.  XVI.]  PARIS TO IIELE5".  1 7$

swear  to  thee  by  any  Divinities  whatever  ;  and  by  thy
own  wordsSs  will  I  bind  myself  to  thy  hallowed  ties  ;  then,  if
my  confidence  in  myself  is  not  deceiving,  I  will  prevail,  by
my  presence,  that  thou  shalt  repair  to  my  realms.  Jf  thou  art
ashamed,  and  art  afraid  lest  thou  shouldst  seem  to  have  followed
me  ;  I  myself,  without  thee,  will  take  the  blame  of  this  crime.
For  I  will  imitate  the  actions  of  the  son  of  iEgeus,  and  of  thy
brothers  ;  thou  canst  not  be  influenced  by  a  nearer  example.
Theseus  carried  thee  off ;  they,  the  twin  daughters  of  Leucip-
pus  ;89  the  fourth  among  these  instances  shall  I  be  reckoned.80
The  Trojan  fleet  is  at  hand,  well  provided  with  arms  and
men  ;  soon  shall  oars  and  the  breezes  procure  a  speedy  passage.
As  a  mighty  queen  shalt  thou  go  through  the  Bardanian  cities :
and  the  populace  shall  think  that  thou  art  come  as  a  new
Goddess  :91  wherever,  too,  thou  shalt  turn  thy  steps,  the  flames
shall  burn  cinnamon,  and  the  slain  victim  shall  beat  the
llood-stained  ground.  My  father  and  brothers,  and,  with  my
mother  my  sisters,  and  all  the  matrons  of  Ilium,  and  the
whole  of  Troy,  shall  present  gifts.  Ah  me  !  hardly  is  any
portion  of  the  future  told  of  by  me  ;  more  shalt  thou  meet
with  than  what  my  letter  mentions.  And  do  not  thou,  when
carried  off,  be  in  dread  lest  ruthless  warfare  should  ensue,
and  lest  mighty  Greece  should  summon  her  resources  :  so
many  carried  off  before,  tell  me  which92  one  was  regained

8S  Thy  own  ivords.] — Ver.  320.  '  Verbis  tuis'  signifies,  'in  words,  the
form  of  which  is  prescribed  by  yourself.'

89  Of  Leucippus.] — Ver.  327.  Castor  and  Pollux  are  said  to  have
carried  off  by  force  Phcebe  and  Elai'ra,  the  daughters  of  Leucippus,  who
had  been  betrothed  to  their  cousins,  Idas  and  Lynceus,  the  sons  of
Aphareus.  Their  story  is  related  in  the  Fifth  Book  of  the  Fasti,  1.  693,
et  seq.

90  /  he  reckoned.'] — Ver.  328.  As  the  fourth  individual ;  the  three  pre-
vious ravishers  having  been  Theseus,  Castor  and  Pollux.

91  A  new  Goddess.] — Ver.  332.  It  absolutely  was  the  custom  of  some
of  the  vain  females  of  high  station,  to  assume  the  title  of  a  new-made
Goddess.  Cleopatra  was  called,  on  her  coins,  '  the  new-made  Goddess,'
and,  according  to  Plutarch,  '  the  new  Isis.'

92  Tell  me  which.] — Ver.  341.  Paris  is  not  satisfied  with  showing  to
Helen  the  possibility  of  their  escaping  together  safely  into  Phrygia:  he
wishes  also  to  remove  all  apprehensions  of  his  being  forced  to  restore  her
to  her  hushand.  He  foresees  that  she  may  possibly  be  in  fear  lest  Mene-
laiis  should  enlist  all  Greece  in  his  cause,  and  demand  her  back  at  the
head  of  a  powerful  army.  To  quiet  her  apprehensions,  he  assures  her
that  all  history  affords  no  instance  of  the  kind,  and  he  then  proceeds  to


1/6  THE EPISTLES OE THE HEROINES.  [EP.  XVI.

by  arms  ? Believe  me,  that  matter  produces  groundless  ap-
prehensions.

The  Thracians,  under  the  name  of  the  North  wind,93  bore  off
the  daughter  of  Erectheus  ;  and  the  Bistonian  regions94  were
secure  from  war.  The  Pagassean95  Jason  carried  off  the  Pha-
sian  damsel  in  his  stranger  ship  ;  and  yet  the  Thessalian  land
was  not  injured  by  the  Colchian  hand.  Theseus,  too,  who
carried  thee  away,  carried  off  the  daughter  of  Minos  ;  and
still  Minos  summoned  no  Cretans  to  arms.  The  alarm  on
these  occasions  is  wont  to  be  greater  than  the  danger  itself ;  and
she  who  is  pleased  to  fear,  is  ashamed  that  she  has  been
alarmed.  Suppose,  however,  if  thou  dost  choose,  that  a  great
war  should  arise  ;  I,  too,  have  strength  ;  and  my  weapons  inflict
wounds.  Not  less  are  the  resources  of  Asia,  than  those  of
thy  country  ;  it  is  powerful  in  men,  and,  in  its  opulence,
it  abounds  in  horses.  Menelaiis,  too,  the  son  of  Atreus,  will
not  possess  more  courage  than  Paris,  nor  will  he  be  to  be
preferred  in  arms.  When  almost  a  boy,  slaying  the  enemy,  I
regained  my  flocks  carried  off:  and  thence  did  I  derive
the  occasion  of95  my  name.  When  almost  a  boy,  I  surpassed
the  youths  in  the  varied  contest  ;97  among  wrhom  were  Ilio-

enumerate  several  who  have  been  safely  borne  away  in  the  manner  in  which
he  proposes  to  carry  her  off.

93  The  North  wind.] — Ver.  343.  Boreas,  the  North  wind,  was  said  to
have  carried  off  Orithyia,  the  daughter  of  Erectheus,  king  of  Athens.  Ovid
here  attributes  the  deed  to  the  Thracians,  who  speciously  assumed  the
name  of  Boreas.  The  story  is  related  at  the  close  of  the  Sixth  Book  of
the  Metamorphoses.

94  Bistonian  regions.'] — Ver.  344.  Thrace  is  said  to  have  been  so
called,  either  from  the  Bistonian  lake  there  situate,  or  from  Biston,  the
son  of  Mars  and  Calirrhoe,  who  was  said  to  have  built  the  city  of  Bis-
tonia,  upon  the  coast  of  Thrace,  and  to  have  given  his  name  both  to  the
lake  and  the  country.

95  The.  Pagascean.] — Ver.  345.  Jason  is  called  '  Pagasaeus'  from  the
city  of  Pagasse,  in  Thessaly,  near  which  the  ship  Argo  was  built.  From
this  place,  the  neighbouring  bay,  whence  Jason  set  sail,  was  called
'  Sinus  Pagasaeus.'

90  The  occasion  of.~\ — Ver.  358.  According  to  Apollodorus,  Book  iii.
ch.  12,  Paris  received  the  name  of  Alexander,  'AXe^avdpoc,  from  the  Greek
verb  cr'Afglw,  which  signifies  '  to  help,'  by  reason  of  the  aid  which  his
strength  gave  to  the  shepherds  of  Ida.

97  Varied  contest.'] — Ver.  359.  The  'varium  certamen'  here  men-
tioned, is  thought  by  some  to  refer  to  the  '  pentathlon.' If  so,  Ovid  is


EP.  XVI.]  PAEIS TO HELEF.  1/7

neus9S  and  Deipliobus."  And  do  not  suppose  that  I  am  not
to  be  dreaded  but  in  close  combat ;  my  arrows  are  fixed  in
the  required  spot.

And  canst  thou  ascribe  to  him  these  deeds  of  early  youth  ?
Canst  thou  furnish  the  son  of  Atreus  with  my  skill  ?  If  thou
shouldst  give  him  everything,  couldst  thou  give  him  Hector
for  a  brother?  He,  singly,  is  as  good  as  soldiers  innumerable.
Thou  knowest  not1  what  is  my  power,  and  my  strength  is
concealed  from  thee ;  thou  art  not  aware  what  kind  of  man
thou  art  about  to  marry.  Either,  then,  thou  wilt  be  demanded
back  in  no  tumult  of  warfare,  or  the  Doric  camp  will  yield
to  my  forces.  Nor  yet  should  I  think  it  unbecoming  to  take
up  arms  for  a  wife  so  great ;  great  prizes  provoke  the  contest.
Thou  too,  if  the  whole  world  should  contend  for  thee,  wilt
acquire  a  fame  from  everlasting  posterity.  Only,  with  no
wavering  hopes,  going  hence  with  the  Gods  propitious,  de-
mand with  full  assurance  the  return  that  I  have  promised
thee.

here  guilty  of  an  anachronism,  as  the  pentathlon  was  not  practised  until
the  time  when  the  great  national  games  of  Greece  began  to  nourish.  It
consisted  of  five  kinds  of  games,  leaping,  the  foot-race,  the  throwing  of
the  discus,  the  throwing  of  the  spear,  and  wrestling ;  all  of  which  ex-
ercises were  performed  in  one  day,  and  in  a  certain  order,  by  the  same
athletes.  The  pentathlon  was  introduced  in  the  Olympic  games  in  the
Eighteenth  Olympiad.  The  leaping  was  accompanied  by  the  music  of  flutes.
It  required  and  developed  very  great  elasticity  of  all  parts  of  the  body,
for  which  reason  it  was  principally  performed  by  young  men.

9S  Ilioneus.'] — Ver.  360.  Ilioneus,  the  son  of  the  opulent  Phorbas,  is
here  referred  to,  who  was  killed  in  the  Trojan  war.  There  was  another
Ilioneus,  who  accompanied  iEneas,  and  was  famous  both  for  his  eloquence
and  his  valour.

99  Deipliobus.^  — Ver.  360.  Deiphobus  married  Helen  after  the  death
of  Paris,  and  was  betrayed  by  her  to  Menelaus.

1  Thou  knotvest  not.~] — Ver.  367.  Paris  omits  nothing  that  may  tend
in  any  manner  to  quiet  Helen's  doubts  or  remove  her  scruples.  After
showing,  by  a  variety  of  examples,  that  there  is  little  probability  of  any
attempt  to  recover  her,  he  tells  her,  that  even  should  this  happen,  he  has
strength  and  power  to  defend  her  ;  and  that  such  an  accident,  far  from
bringing  any  infamy  upon  herself,  will  tend  highly  to  her  glory.


178  THE EPISTLES OE THE HEKOINES.  [EP.  XYII.

EPISTLE  XVII.

HELEN TO PARIS.

Helen,  after  reading  the  Epistle  sent  by  Paris,  as  if  offended  by  his  pre-
sumption, commences  by  reprimanding  him,  and  then,  with  an  assumed
modesty,  seems  to  reject  his  proposals,  as  contrary  to  virtue  and  honour ;
but  in  such  a  manner,  that  she  may  not  be  thought  entirely  insensible  to
his  passion.  By  degrees  she  opens  her  mind  more  plainly,  and  at  length
discloses  her  inclination  to  be  favourable  to  him.  The  whole  Epistle
is  a  skilful  specimen  of  the  arts  of  female  inconstancy,  and  pourtrays
their  seeming  reluctance  to  comply,  even  when  it  is  their  most  earnest
desire,  in  the  strongest  light.  The  same  foible  of  the  sex  is  admirably
depicted  by  the  Poet  in  the  Art  of  Love,  Book  i.  1.  483.

'  Forsitan  et  primo  veniet  tibi  litera  tristis,
Quseque  roget  ne  se  solicitare  velis.
Quod  rogat  ilia,  timet ;  quod  non  rogat  optat,  ut  instes.'

'  Perhaps,  even  at  first,  a  discouraging  letter  will  come  to  you :  and
one  that  entreats  you  will  not  molest  her.  What  she  entreats  you  to  do,
she  dreads :  what  she  does  not  entreat  you  to  do,  namely,  to  persist,
she  wishes  you  to  do.'  Helen  concludes  by  requesting  him  to  corre-
spond with  her,  not  by  letter,  but  through  Glymene  and  ^Ethra,  her
confidants.

It  is  conjectured  by  some  Commentators  that  this  Epistle  was  not
written  by  Ovid,  but  by  Sabinus,  who  has  written  the  answers  to  some
others  of  his  Epistles.  But  it  bears  such  evident  marks  of  the  skill  of
Ovid,  and  is  so  complete  a  model  of  poetic  feeling,  that  it  is  extremely
improbable  that  any  other  person  was  the  author.

Ie,  Paris,2  it  had  not  been  allowed  me  to  read  what  I  have  read,  I
should,  as  before,  have  observed  the  duties  of  a  virtuous  woman.
When  thy  Epistle  just  now  shocked  my  chaste  eyes,  not  small
did  the  glory  3  of  writing  thee  an  answer  appear .  Hast  thou  dared,

2  Jf,  Paris.] — The  first  two  lines  are —

'  Si  mihi  quse  legi,  Pari,  non  legisse  liceret,
Servarem  numeros,  sicut  et  ante,  probae.'

But  they  are  wanting  in  most  of  the  MSS.,  and  are  generally  considered
to  be  spurious.  The  peculiar  signification  of  the  word  '  numeros '  de-
serves attention.  In  the  Consolation  to  Livia  Augusta,  it  has  the  same
signification,  '  Numeros  principis  implere,'  '  to  fulfil  the  obligations  of  a
ruler.'  In  the  Palatine  MS.  this  Epistle  is  attributed  to  the  poet
Sabinus.

3  Did  the  glory.'] — Ver.  2.  Some  Commentators  have  observed  that
this  line  is  capable  of  a  double  sense,  according  as  we  refer  the  particle
'  non '  to  '  rescribendi,'  or  '  levis.' The  latter,  as  being  more  plain  and


EP.  XVII.]  HELEN TO PABIS.  ]  79

a  stranger,  violating  the  rites  of  hospitality,4  to  tempt  the  due
allegiance  of  a  wife  ?  And  has,  forsooth,  for  this,  the  Tsena-
rian  shore  received  thee  in  her  harbours,  carried  over  the
boisterous  seas  ?  Our  palace,  too,  did  not  have  its  doors
closed  against  thee,5  although  thou  didst  come  from  a  foreign
nation  ; 6  and  was  it  that  injury  might  be  the  reward  of  kind-
ness so  great  ?  Wast  thou  a  guest  or  an  enemy,7  who  thus
didst  make  thy  entrance  ?

And  I  doubt  not,  but  that,  in  thy  judgment,  this  complaint
of  mine,  though  it  is  so  called  for,  will  be  styled  the  result  of
coyness.  Coy,  indeed,  let  me  be,  so  long  as  i"  am  not  forget-
ful of  modesty  ;  and  so  long  as  the  course  of  my  life  is  with-
out a  blemish.8 If  I  have  not9  a  countenance  sad  with  dis-

expressive,  seems  to  be  the  right  construction.  However,  '  the  glory  of
writing  in  answer  seemed  not  small,'  and  '  the  glory  of  not  writing  in  answer
seemed  small,'  amount  to  nearly  the  same  thing.  Helen  would  here  make
her  very  writing  to  him  appear  not  so  much  the  effect  of  inclination  and
compliance,  as  of  a  just  indignation  and  resentment  at  his  presumption.

4  Of  hospitality .~\ — Ver.  3.  The  rites  of  hospitality  were  deemed  so
sacred  among  the  ancients,  that  the  violation  of  them  was  considered  to  be
branded  with  the  most  heinous  criminality.  For  this  reason,  the  poets,
when  they  wish  to  give  an  idea  of  an  utterly  abandoned  character,  never
fail  to  represent  a  violation  of  hospitality  as  one  of  its  distinguishing
features.

5  Against  thee.'} — Ver.  7.  From  Thucydides  we  learn,  that  the  Spar-
tans had  a  law  which  forbade  strangers  to  be  admitted  within  their  city.

6  Foreign  nation.] — Ver.  7.  Meaning,  '  a  nation  essentially  differing  from
ours  in  its  laws  and  customs.'  Before  the  reader  can  fully  enter  into  the
meaning  of  this  verse,  he  must  remember  that  all  foreign  people  were
looked  down  upon  by  the  Greeks  as  barbarians,  and  that  the  Spartans  in
particular  had  an  extreme  aversion  to  strangers.  Paris  was  therefore
bound  by  a  double  tie  of  gratitude  to  Menelaus,  who,  among  a  people  of
such  a  disposition,  had  afforded  him  a  reception  so  remarkable  for  its  ex-
treme hospitality.

7  An  enemy.'] — Ver.  10.  In  the  conjunction  of  '  hospes  an  hostis,'
we  see  another  instance  of  the  fondness  of  the  Poet  for  alliteration  and
attempts  at  punning.

8  Without  a  blemish.] — Ver.  14.  Her  reasoning  here  is  strong  and
just,  and  only  makes  us  regret,  that  before  the  end  of  her  letter,  she  de-
generates into  such  base  compliances.  Mankind  err  more  frequently  from
want  of  courage  to  withstand  the  passions,  than  from  want  of  knowing
better.

9  I  have  not.] — Ver.  15.  Helen  seems  to  wonder  whence  he  can
have  possibly  formed  a  notion  so  much  to  her  disadvantage,  as  to  believe
that  he  may  hope  for  success  in  his  attempts  on  her  virtue.  Her
smiling  looks,  her  easv  and  frank  behaviour,  she  thinks  most  likely  to

N  2


180  THE  EPISTLES  OF  THE  HEROINES.  [EP.  XVIT.

sembling  looks,  and  do  not  sit  frowning  with  contracted
eyebrows  ;  still  is  my  fame  unspotted,  and  hitherto  without  a
fault  have  I  lived,  and  through  me  no  paramour  receives  any
glory.  The  more,  therefore,  am  I  astonished  at  the  boldness  of
thy  enterprise  ;  and  wonder  what  cause  gave  thee  hopes  of  my
favours.  Is  it,  because10  the  hero,  descendant  of  Neptune,11
offered  violence  to  me,  once  ravished,  that  I  seem  deserving  a
second  time,  too,  to  be  ravished  1  The  crime  would  have  been
my  own,  if  I  had  been  enticed  away :  bat  as  I  was  carried
away,  what  part  was  mine  but  to  be  reluctant  ?

Still,  from  his  deed  he  did  not  reap  the  desired  reward  ;
fear  excepted,  I  returned,  having  suffered  nothing.  He  only,
in  his  forwardness,  snatched  a  few  kisses  as  I  struggled ;
nothing  further  did  he  obtain  of  me.  Such  is  thy  wanton-
ness, it  had  not  been  satisfied  with  these.  The  Gods  were
more  favourable  ;  he  was  not  like  to  thee.  He  restored  me
unhurt,12  and  his  respectful  conduct  diminished  his  crime  ;
and  it  is  evident  that  the  youth  repented  of  his  deed.  Theseus
repented,  that  Paris  might  succeed  him  ;  and  shall  my  name
at  no  time  cease  to  be  upon  busy  tongues  ?

And  yet  I  am  not  displeased  ;13  (for  who  can  be  displeased

have  raised  this  presumption.  She  therefore  ohserves  that  as  her  fame
has  hitherto  been  spotless,  this  ought  to  have  given  him  no  encouragement,
and  she  seems  to  imply  that  those  who  affect  a  rigid  severity,  are  sooner
won  than  the  free  and  open.

10  Is  it  because.'} — Ver.  21.  She  here  touches  upon  another  ground
upon  which  Paris  may  possibly  have  based  his  hopes.  '  I  have  been  carried
away  before,  and  perhaps  you  may  think  partly  by  my  own  consent.'  To
this  she  pleads  her  innocence,  and  says  that  when  force  was  used,  all
she  could  do  was  to  offer  resistance,  and  that  in  this  she  succeeded  so
well  that  nothing  ensued  to  her  dishonour.

11  Descendant  of  Neptune.'] — Ver.  21.  Neptune  was  the  grandfather
of  Theseus.

12  Restored  me  unhurt.] — Ver.  31.  It  was  only  natural  that  she  should
give  this  account,  which  has,  however,  in  general,  been  credited.  Pau-
sanias,  however,  and  Antoninus  Liberalis  say  that  there  were  reports  that
Iphigenia  was  the  daughter  of  Helen,  by  Theseus.

13  Not  displeased.] — Ver.  35.  We  now  discover,  that  hitherto  all
Helen's  protestations  have  been  merely  to  save  appearances,  and  the
result  of  an  affected  modesty.  She  now  begins  to  discover  her  real
sentiments,  but  with  considerable  artifice,  for  she  repeatedly  launches
forth  in  commendation  of  chastity  and  insinuates  her  own  resolution  not
to  offend  against  its  rules. This she  does,  with  the  view  of  making  it


EP.  XVII.  I  HELEN TO PAEISi  181

at  a  lover?)  if  only  the  affection  which  thou  dost  profess  is
not  pretended.  For  about  that,  too,  I  am  in  doubt ;  not  thatu
trust  in  thee  is  wanting,  or  that  my  own  charms  are  not  well
known  to  myself;  but  because  too  easy  faith  is  wont  to  be
injurious  to  the  fair,  and  the  words  of  you  men  are  said  to  be
void  of  truth.  But  other  women  sin  ;  and  suppose  that
few  matrons  are  chaste.  What  forbids  that  my  name  should
be  among  those  few  ?  But  inasmuch  as  my  mother  seemed  a
fitting  subject  to  thee,  by  whose  example  thou  dost  suppose  that
I  too  can  be  influenced  ;  deceit  was  the  cause  of  my  mother's
fault,  who  was  beguiled  under  a  false  form ;  beneath  fea-
thers15 was  the  adulterer  concealed.  Were  I  to  sin,16  of  no-
thing could  I  be  ignorant,  and  there  would  be  no  mistake  to
veil  the  criminality  of  the  act.  With  reason  did  she  do
wrong,  and  she  atoned  for  her  fault  by  the  perpetrator ;
with  what  Jove17  shall  I,  in  my  faultiness,  be  said  to  be
blessed  ?  Whereas  thou  dost  boast  of  thy  race,  and  thy  ances-
tors, and  thy  royal  names  ;  this  house  is  sufficiently  ennobled
by  its  ancestry.

Should  Jupiter  not  be  named18  as  the  great  grandsire  of

appear  that  her  concessions  are  purely  the  result  of  accident,  and  have
slipped  from  her  quite  unperceived.

14  Not  that. .] — Ver.  37.  Some  editions  have  'non  quo,'  but  'non
quod'  seems  preferable.

15  Feathers.~\ — Ver.  46.  She  pleads  that  her  mother  was  imposed  upon,
and  that  the  bird,  which  was  Jupiter  in  disguise,  she  thought  to  be  really
a  swan.

16  Were  I  to  sin.'] — Ver.  47.  We  here  form  a  notion  of  the  ground
on  which  Helen  speaks  so  resolutely  of  her  determination  in  favour  of
chastity.  It  is  more  the  fear  of  reproach  and  infamy,  than  any  detest-
ation of  vice,  that  keeps  her  from  giving  way  to  her  passion ;  and  ac-
cordingly we  find  in  the  end,  that  this  restraint  is  too  feeble  to  retain
her  in  her  duty.  True  virtue  is  of  a  very  different  nature,  and  derives
its  value  from  itself,  without  any  regard  to  the  opinions  of  others.
Horace  justly  says,  '  Oderunt  peccare  boni  virtutis  amore,'  •  The  good
hate  to  sin,  from  their  love  of  virtue.'  To  the  truly  virtuous,  despair
of  escaping  undiscovered  operates  as  no  motive ;  they  justly  place  their
happiness  in  self-approbation,  and  dread  the  reproaches  of  their  own  con-
science much  more  than  those  of  the  world.

17  With  what  Jove.] — Ver.  50.  She  says  that  her  mother  was  so  far
fortunate,  that  she  could  plead  that  it  was  through  the  agency  of  a
Divinity  that  she  sinned ;  whereas,  if  she  should  listen  to  his  overtures,  she
would  be  able  to  have  no  such  plea  in  her  own  favour.

18  Not  be  named.'] — Ver.  53.  Jupiter  was  the  father  of  Tantalus,  by
the  Nymph  Pluto  or  Plota,  and  was  consequently  the  great-grandfather  of


182  THE EPI3TLES OF THE HEROINES.  [EP.  XVIT. .

my  father-in-law,  and  all  the  honourable  line  of  Pelops,  the
son  of  Tantalus,  and  of  Tyndarus ;  Leda,  deceived  by  the
swan,  gives  me  Jove  as  my  parent ;  she  who,  unsuspecting,
cherished  the  fictitious  bird  in  her  bosom.  Go  then,  and  re-
late at  length  the  first  commencement  of  thy  Phrygian  des-
cent ;  and  make  mention  of  Priam  with  his  Laomedon  ;  them
do  I  reverence  ;  but  he  who,  as  thy  fifth  ancestor,  is  thy  great
glory,  the  same  is  the  first19  from  my  own20  name.  Although
I  should  believe  the  sceptre  of  thy  Troy  to  be  powerful,  still
I  do  not  fancy  that  this  is  less  so  than  it.  If  now,21  this  place
is  surpassed  in  riches,  and  in  number  of  people  ;  still,  thy
country  is  at  least  a  barbarian  one.  Thy  bountiful  Epistle
promises,  indeed,  gifts  so  great,  that  it  might  be  enabled  to
influence  the  Goddesses  themselves  ;  but  if  now,  I  should  be
inclined  to  transgress  the  limits  of  chastity,  thou  wouldst  be  a
preferable  cause  for  my  faultiness.

Either  I  will  for  ever  keep  my  honour  without  a  stain,  or
I  will  follow  thyself  rather  than  thy  presents.  And  not  that
I  despise  them ;  for  those  gifts  are  always  the  most  accept-

Atreus  or  Plisthenes,  who  were  brothers,  and  either  of  whom  may  here  he
deemed  the  father-in-law  of  Helen.

w  Is  the  first, .] — Ver.  60.  As  already  stated,  the  genealogy  of  Paris,
generally  given  by  the  ancients,  is  the  following — Priam,  Laomedon,  Ilus,
Tros,  Ericthonius,  Dardanus,  Jupiter.  According  to  this  account,  Paris
is  the  seventh  from  Jupiter,  whereas  Helen  here  makes  him  only  the
fifth.  "We  must  therefore  conclude  either  that  the  text  is  corrupt,  or  that
the  genealogy  here  referred  to  hy  Ovid  differs  from  that  which  is  usually
adopted.  Perhaps  he  makes  Helen  designedly  fall  into  this  error,  as  she
may  be  supposed  not  to  have  been  very  conversant  on  these  points.  V/e
meet  with  several  examples  of  the  kind  in  this  Poet.

20  prom  my  own.'] — Ver.  60.  As  Helen  was  the  daughter  of  Jupiter,
it  is  with  some  reason  that  she  boasts  of  her  own  pedigree  as  being  more
illustrious  than  that  of  Paris.

21  If  now.] — Ver.  63.  Helen  allows  that  Asia  is  more  wealthy  and
better  stocked  with  inhabitants ;  but  then,  as  it  is  a  country  of  bar-
barians, it  can  prove  no  temptation  to  her  to  abandon  Sparta.  This
passage  deserves  to  be  particularly  remarked.  Paris,  in  his  Epistle  to
Helen,  endeavours  to  prevail  on  her  by  great  promises,  while  boasting  of
his  illustrious  descent  and  the  wealth  and  opulence  of  Phrygia.  Helen  is
equally  eager  to  convince  him  that  none  of  these  things  can  be  of  any
weight  with  her.  All  this  is  done,  however,  only  with  the  object  of  ingra-
tiating herself  the  more  with  him,  by  insinuating  that  to  her  he  himself
is  the  only  temptation,  and  that  no  other  passion  but  what  he  himself  has
inspired  can  possibly  make  her  swerve  from  the  paths  of  virtue.


EP.  XYII.]  HELEN TO PARIS.  183

able,  -which  the  giver  makes  to  be  of  worth.  Much  more22  is
it  that  thou  dost  love  me ;  that  I  am  the  cause  of  thy  care  ;
that  thy  hopes  range  over  the  waves  so  distant.  The  things
too,  which,  shocking  man,  thou  art  in  the  habit  of  doing  when
the  table  is  placed,  I  observe,  although  I  try  to  conceal  it.
When,  for  instance,  wanton  man,  thou  art  eying  me  sometimes
with  languishing  looks,  which,  as  they  solicit  me,  my  eyes  can
hardly  endure;  and  sometimes  thou  dost  sigh,  sometimes
thou  dost  take  the  cup  next  after  me,  and  from  the  side  on
which  I  have  drunk,  thou  dost  drink  as  well.  0,  how  often23
with  thy  fingers,  how  often  with  thy  brow,  that  almost  gave
utterance,  have  I  observed  the  secret  signs  given  !  And  often
have  I  dreaded  lest  my  husband  should  observe  them ;  and
have  blushed  at  the  hints24  not  sufficiently  concealed.  Often
did  I  say,  with  murmurs  either  faint  or  prolonged,25  "  This

22  Muchmore.] — Ver.  72.  She  still  continues  the  same  artifice  to  gain.
upon  Paiis.  She  has,  before,  seemingly  slighted  his  gifts  ;  now,  she  re-
tracts, and  speaks  of  them  as  having  been  very  acceptable  to  her,  but  at
the  same  time  she  is  careful  to  intimate  that  they  have  derived  their  value
entirely  from  the  giver.  This  being  deemed  a  sure  sign  that  love  has
taken  deep  root,  Paris  has  reason  thence  to  form  sanguine  hopes  of  suc-
cess. Terence,  in  the  '  Eunuchus,'  where  he  introduces  the  Parasite  flat-
tering his  master  that  he  is  greatly  in  favour  with  Thai's,  makes  him  offer
as  an  evidence  of  it,  the  value  she  set  upon  his  present : —

« , Laeta  est,  non  tarn  ipso  quidem  dono,

Quam  abs  te  datum  esse  ;  id  vero  serio  triumphat.'

*■  She  is  pleased,  not  so  much  with  the  present  itself,  as  that  it  was  given
by  you :  it  is  that  in  reality  that  gives  her  the  greatest  pleasure.'

23  How  often.] — This  and  the  following  lines  are  evidently  an  imitation
of  two  lines  of  Propertius,  Book  iii.  Ode  7.

'  Tecta  superciliis  si  quando  verba  remittis,
Aut  tua  cum  digitis  scripta  silenda  notas.'

'  If  at  any  time  you  utter  language  concealed  in  your  eye-brows,  or  trace
your  silent  letters  with  your  fingers/

24  At  the  hints."] — Ver.  84.  Helen  does  not  censure  Paris  for  these
freedoms,  signs  and  tokens  of  his  affection  ;  she  only  blames  him  for  not
having  taken  care  to  dissemble  better,  lest  he  should  excite  the  suspicions
of  Menelaiis.  The  whole  of  these  circumstances  are  cleverly  described,
and  with  that  luxuriance  of  imagination  which  distinguishes  the  Poet.

25  Or  prolonged.'] — Ver.  85.  '  Longo'  seems  here  a  preferable  reading
to  '  nullo;'  '  a  long-drawn  sigh.'  This  reading  is  preferred  by  Ileinsius ;
but  Burmann  prefers  '  nullo,'  as  he  says  that  she  would  avoid  a  long-
drawn  sigh,  lest  her  husband  might  chance  to  hear  it.


184  THE  EPISTLES  OE  THE  HEROINES.  [EP.  XTII.

man  has  no  shame  ;"2G  and  those  words  of  mine  were  not  un-
true. On  the  round  surface,27  too,  of  the  table,  have  I  read
beneath  my  name,  that,  which  the  letters,  traced  in  wine,  de-
scribed— "  I  love  thee."26  Still,  with  a  frowning  eye,  I  de-
nied that  I  believed  this.  Ah  me  !  now  have  I  learned  to  be
enabled  so  to  speak29  as  well.

With  these  allurements,  if  I  had  been  likely  to  sin,  I  should
have  been  won  ;  by  these  could  my  heart  have  been  enthralled.
Thou  hast  too,  I  confess,  surpassing  beauty  ;  and  any  damsel
might  desire  to  rush  into  thy  embrace.  Rather  let  some  other
woman  be  made  happy  without  guilt,  than  that  my  chastity
should  fail  through  the  love  of  a  stranger.  Learn  by  my
example,50  to  be  enabled  to  go  without  the  beauteous  ;  there

2G  Has  no  shame."] — Ver.  86.  'Nil  pudet  hanc,'  is  translated  by
Davison,  more  expressively  than  elegantly, '  This  man  will  stick  at  nothing.'

27  The  round  surface.'] — Ver.  87.  The  tables  of  the  ancients  were  of
various  shapes.  The  round  table  with  three  legs  was  very  commonly
used,  especially  among  the  lower  classes.  The  Grecian  tables  are  thought
to  have  had  four  legs,  from  the  origin  of  the  word  rpa-KiCa,  the  Greek
name  for  a  table.  Maple-wood  was  much  valued  by  the  Romans,  as  the
material  for  their  tables ;  the  wood  also  of  the  '  citrus'  of  Africa,  which  is
thought  to  have  been  a  kind  of  cedar,  was  much  for  the  same  purpose.  The
legs  were  very  tasteful,  being  sometimes  made  of  ivory,  in  imitation  of
lions'  feet.  The  '  monopodium,'  or  round  table  with  one  foot,  resembling
our  loo  tables,  was  introduced  into  Rome,  from  Asia  Minor,  by  Cn.
Manlius.  Semicircular  tables  were  also  used  at  meals  ;  the  meat  was  cut
on  them  by  the  slaves  in  waiting,  and  was  brought  to  the  guests  as  they
reclined.  The  Greeks  did  not  use  table-cloths,  but  had  their  tables  cleansed
with  wet  sponges  called  '  peniculi'  by  the  Romans,  or  with  fragrant  herbs.
The  Romans  used  a  thick  cloth,  called  '  gausape,'  for  the  purpose  of
table-cloths.  The  tables  were  considered  sacred,  and  frequently  had  small
statues  of  the  Gods  placed  upon  them,

28  /  love  thee.] — Ver.  88.  Love  is  ever  fertile  in  expedients  to
attract  the  notice  of  the  object  beloved.  The  ingenuity  of  Paris,  on
these  occasions,  certainly  would  have  deserved  commendation  in  a  better
cause ;  the  notice  taken  of  it  by  Helen,  is  a  sure  sign  that  it  has  not
failed  of  its  intended  effect.

29  So  to  speak.] — Ver.  90.  The  grammarian  Hephsestion  represents
Helen  as  having  been  the  discoverer  of  the  art  of  talking  with  her  fingers.
Burmann  enquires  whether,  having  learned  it  of  Paris,  she  may  not  have
taught  the  art  to  others  ?

30  By  my  example^] — Ver.  97.  Notwithstanding  the  insinuation  of
Helen,  that  her  husband  was  no  beauty,  we  must,  if  we  are  to  believe
Homer,  give  him  the  credit  of  having  been  a  handsome  man.  Even  Paris
himself,  in  his  Epistle  to  Helen,  does  not  deny  him  that  small  merit ;  he


JEP,  XVII.]  HELEN  TO ±»AiLIS.  185

is  a  virtue31  in  abstaining  from  joys  that  delight  us.  How
many  youths  dost  thou  suppose  to  long  for  that  which  thou
dost  long,  who  still  are  discreet  ?  Or  dost  thou,  Paris,  alone
possess  eyes  ?  Not  more  dost  thou  see  than  others  ;  but  in
thy  rashness,  thou  art  more  daring;  not  more  passion  is  in
thee,  but  a  greater  confidence.32  Then  could  I  have  wished  that
thou  hadst  come  in  thy  swift  bark,  at  the  time  when  my
virginity  was  sought  by  a  thousand  suitors.33  Had  I  beheld
thee,31  the  first  of  the  thousand  shouldst  thou  have  been ;
my  husband,  himself,  will  grant  pardon  to  my  choice.  Thou
earnest  too  late  to  joys  that  are  gained  and  forestalled  ;  thy
hopes  were  of  late  growth  ;  what  thou  dost  seek,  another
possesses.

Still,  although  I  could  have  wished  to  become  thy  Trojan
wife,  yet  Menelaiis35  does  not  possess  me  thus  against  my  in-
only  thinks  that  a  comparison  will  not  be  to  his  own  disadvantage.
Helen,  indeed,  here  plainly  gives  the  preference  to  Paris,  and  even  owns
that  she  loves  him,  but  that  she  is  restrained  by  virtuous  considerations
from  yielding  to  his  desires.

31  Is  a  virtue.] — Ver.  98.  This,  indeed,  is  a  degree  of  virtue,  to  which
very  few  are  able  to  attain.  It  comprehends  a  perfect  mastery  over  the
passions,  and  a  well  informed  judgment,  able  to  distinguish  between  what
is  really  profitable  and  what  is  hurtful ;  for  virtue  does  not  absolutely
forbid  all  pleasures  and  enjoyments,  but  only  such  as  are  injurious  to
others,  or  prejudicial  to  ourselves.  Epictetus,  one  of  the  most  consum-
mate of  moralists,  was  in  the  habit  of  saying  that  the  perfection  of  virtue
was  comprised  in  those  two  words,  '  endure'  and  '  abstain.'

32  Greater  confidence.] — Ver.  102.  Exactly  corresponding  to  our  vul-
gar phrase,  i  plus  oris  '  literally  means,  '  more  face.'

33  TJiousand  suitors.'] — Ver.  104.  The  number  of  Helen's  suitors  was
said  to  have  been  twenty-nine.  Their  names  are  given  by  Apollodorus  in
bis  Third  Book.  Among  them  we  find  those  of  Ulysses,  Diomedes,  Ajax
Telamon,  Ajax  Oileus,  and  Philoctetes.

34  /  beheld  thee.] — Ver.  105.  While  she  is  seemingly  endeavouring  to
convince  Paris  of  the  impossibility  of  his  ever  gaining  his  object,  she
goes  on  to  give  him  all  the  proofs  of  her  affection  that  he  can  possibly
wish  for,  and  thus  artfully  encourages  his  hopes  that  she  may  one  day  be
brought  to  yield  to  his  utmost  wishes.  '  Had  you  addressed  me,'  she  says,
'  while  I  was  yet  under  no  engagement,  and  free  to  bestow  my  heart
wherever  my  inclination  led  me,  you  would  have  succeeded  in  gaining  the
prize  from  my  thousand  suitors,  and  Menelaiis  himself  must  have  justified
my  choice.'

35  Yet  Menelaiis.] — Ver.  110.  Helen  still  maintains  her  character  of
an  admirable  dissembler,  and  occasionally  drops  some  expression  which
seems  to  bespeak  a  virtuous  and  well-regulated  mind. If  she  is  not  able


186  THE EPISTLES OE THE HEROINES.  [EP.  XYII.

clination.  Cease,  I  entreat  thee,  to  move  with  thy  words  my
sensitive  breast,  and  do  not  hurt  me,  whom  thou  sayest  that
thou  dost  love ;  but  suffer  me  to  enjoy  the  lot  which  For-
tune has  assigned  to  me,  and  gain  not  the  dishonourable  spoil
of  my  chastity.  But  Venus  promised  this  reward,  and  in
the  vales  of  lofty  Ida,  three Goddesses36  showed  themselves

\  naked  to  thee  ;  and  whereas  one  offered  a  kingdom,  another
the  glories  of  war,  the  third  said,  "  Thou  shalt  be  the  husband
of  the  daughter  of  Tyndarus." For  my  part,  I  can  hardly

/believe,  that  heavenly  beings  have  submitted  their  beauty
to  thy  judgment ;  and  though  this  were  true,  at  least,  the
other  part  is  a  fiction,  in  which  I  am  said  to  have  been  given
as  the  reward  of  thy  decision.  I  have  not  so  great  confidence  'i7
in  my  own  person,  that  I  can  suppose  that  I  was  the  greatest
reward,  in  the  opinion  of  a  Goddess.  My  charms  are  content
to  be  approved  of  by  the  eyes  of  men  ;  for  Venus  to  be  my
praiser,  is  a  source  of  envy  against  me.  But  I  deny  nothing  ;
I  even  approve  of  those  commendations ;  for,  why  should
my  voice  deny  that  to  be  which  it  wishes  to  be  ?

And do  not38  thou,  too  slowly  believed  by  me,  be  dis-

entirely  to  conquer  her  growing  inclination  for  Paris,  she  still  pretends
to  struggle  against  it,  and  to  retain  that  regard  for  Menelaiis,  which
propriety  and  her  nuptial  vows  demand.  She  therefore  prays  Paris  not
to  urge  her  to  what  is  so  contrary  to  her  honour  and  her  duty,  or  to  take
advantage  of  the  strong  and  seemingly  irresistible  inclination  which  she
has  for  him.  There  is  great  artifice  in  this  ;  for  she  insinuates  that  it  will
not  be  in  her  power  to  hold  out  long  against  him,  if  he  shall  persist  in
his  solicitations ;  and  from  what  passes  in  her  own  mind,  she  does  not
believe  that  her  faint  entreaties  will  prevail  upon  him  to  desist.

36  Three  Goddesses.'] — Ver.  116.  He  does  not  say  in  his  Epistle  that
he  saw  the  Goddesses  naked.

37  So  great  confidence.']  — Ver.  123.  Helen  here  speaks  of  the  pro-
mise made  by  Venus  to  Paris,  as  a  circumstance  too  much  to  her  honour
to  be  rashly  credited.  Indeed,  her  fancy  is  so  full  of  the  imaginary
honour  done  her  by  the  Goddess,  in  preferring  her  beauty  to  that  of  every
other  woman,  that  she  does  not  consider  how  far  it  implies  infidelity  to
her  husband,  and  breach  of  her  nuptial  vow.

38  And  do  not.]— Ver.  129.  It  is  curious  to  trace  Helen  through  all
the  changes  of  her  feelings,  and  to  observe  how  she  gradually  rises  in  her
advances  to  her  lover.  She  owns  that  she  is  pleased  with  the  promise
made  to  her  by  Venus,  and  wishes  that  it  had  been  true.  She  even  pro-
ceeds so  far  as  to  shew  an  anxiety  lest  he  should  be  offended  with  her
hesitation  to  credit  his  narration ;  and  to  soften  the  matter,  she  pretends
that  she  has  considered  it  an  affair  of  too  great  moment  to  be  rashly  be-


EP.  XYII.]  HELEK TO PAEIS.  187

pleased ;  slow  belief  is  wont  to  be  given  to  things  of  im-
portance. 'Tis  then,  my  chief  delight  to  have  been  pleasing
to  Venus ;  the  next,  that  I  was  esteemed  the  greatest  reward
by  thee  ;  that  thou  didst  prefer  neither  the  honours  of  Pallas
nor  of  Juno  to  the  charms  of  Helen,  of  winch  thou  hadst
heard.  Am  I,  then,39  as  good  as  valour  to  thee  ?  Am  I  as  good
as  a  noble  kingdom  to  thee  ?  I  were  made  of  iron,  if  I  did
not  esteem  this  affection.  Of  iron,  believe  me,  I  am  not
made  ;  but  I  decline  to  love  that  man  who  I  hardly  think  can
become  my  own.  Why  do  I40  strive  to  turn  up  the  thirsty
shore  with  the  crooked  plough,  and  to  cherish  a  hope  which

lieved,  because  a  disappointment  would  expose  her  to  the  most  cruel
mortification.

33  Am  I  then.'] — Ver-  155.  Her  reasoning  is  admirably  calculated  to
excuse  her  weakness,  and  to  quiet  the  alarms  which  her  own  reflections
would  be  apt  to  give  her.  She  sets  forth  the  merits  of  Paris,  and  what  he
has  done  for  her,  in  the  most  engaging  light,  in  order  to  make  her  com-
pliance appear  a  point  of  gratitude.  When  the  mind  has  once  deter-
mined on  a  thing,  it  is  never  at  a  loss  to  discover  excuses  and  palliating
reasons  to  avoid  its  own  reproaches.  What  would  appear  shocking  to  it
when  well-disposed  and  untainted,  will  now  be  set  off  with  such  allure-
ments, as  will  disarm  it  of  all  its  terrors  and  guilt.  This  is  exempli-
fied in  Helen  in  the  most  lively  manner.  How  different  now  do  her  senti-
ments appear  from  what  they  were  at  the  beginning  of  the  Epistle  ?  There
she  is  full  of  resentment,  accuses  Paris  of  violating  the  sacred  rites  of
hospitality,  and  wonders  at  his  insolence  in  offering  to  make  any  attempt
on  her  honour.  How  vastly  is  the  case  changed  since  then  !  She  now
views  everything  that  he  has  done  with  a  different  eye.  His  preferring
her  before  valour  and  a  kingdom,  his  exposing  himself  to  the  dangers  of
the  sea  for  her  sake,  and  his  suffering  all  the  anguish  of  a  concealed  love,
are  now  placed  to  the  account  of  merit.  She  no  longer  considers  him  as
the  enemy  of  her  virtue  and  honour,  and  one  who  intends  to  rob  her  of  what
ought  to  be  most  valuable  and  most  dear  to  her,  and  to  expose  her  to
eternal  infamy ;  but  as  a  suffering  lover,  one  more  deserving  of  pity  and
compassion  than  of  severity  and  repulse.  By  this  she  is  led  to  think  that
gratitude  and  humanity  require  her  to  make  some  return,  and  she  would,
if  possible,  persuade  herself,  that  her  weakness,  in  not  at  once  rejecting
his  addresses,  has  been  rather  a  virtue  than  a  crime.

40  Why  do  I.~\ — Ver.  139.  It  is  more,  we  see,  from  an  apprehension
of  the  impossibility  of  the  thing,  than  from  any  abhorrence  of  the  crime,
that  Helen  shows  such  an  extreme  reluctance.  She  looks  upon  it  as  a
vain  project  to  indulge  a  passion  for  a  stranger,  and  as  likely  to  yield  no
more  profit  than  ploughing  up  the  sandy  beach.  Many  obstacles  may
intervene  to  obstruct  their  happiness ;  busy  whispers,  the  suspicions  of
her  husband,  and  the  necessity  of  his  speedy  return  to  his  own  country  ;
all  of  which  are  represented  by  her  with  a  happy  vein  of  fancy.


188  THE  EPISTLES  OE  THE  HEKOIKES.  [EP.  XYII.

the  spot  itself  denies  me  ?  I  am  a  stranger  to  the  artifices  of
love,  and  by  no  artfulness  (the  Gods  are  my  witnesses)  have
I  deceived  a  confiding  husband.  And  now  that  I  commit
my  words  to  the  silent  paper,  my  writing  performs  an  office
entirely  new.  Happy  they  who  have  had  experience  !  I,
unacquainted  with  the  world,  imagine  the  way  to  culpability
to  be  a  rugged  one.41  This  fear  is  an  evil.  Even  now  am  I
confused,  and  I  imagine  all  eyes  to  be  fixed  on  my  features.

Nor  do  I  imagine  this  without  reason ;  I  have  heard  the
evil  stories  among  the  multitude  ;  and  iEthra  reported  to  me
some  observations.  But  do  thou  dissemble,  unless  thou
hadst  rather  desist.  But  why  shouldst  thou  desist?  thou
canst  dissemble.  Continue  thy  sport,42  but  secretly  ;  a  greater,
but  not  an  absolute,  freedom  is  granted  me,  because  Menelaiis
is  absent.  He,  indeed,  has  gone  to  a  distance,  business  com-
pelling him  to  do  so  ;  the  cause  of  his  sudden  departure
was  urgent43  and  reasonable. Or  else  so  it  seemed  to  me  ;

41  A  rugged  one.'] — Ver.  146.  The  Poet's  sentiments  are  just,  and  are
depicted  in  accordance  with  truth  and  nature.  Those  who  have  been
tramed  up  to  the  practice  of  virtue,  are  much  shocked  at  the  first  advances
to  vice.  They  feel  a  reluctance  which  disquiets  them  and  makes  them
feel  unhappy,  and  are  apt  to  fancy  that  everything  betrays  them.  Helen
very  naturally  describes  this  to  be  the  case  with  herself.  Although  no
undue  familiarities  have  actually  passed  between  herself  and  Paris,  yet,
being  conscious  of  what  is  likely  to  happen,  she  already  imagines  that  it
has  been  discovered.  Guilt  makes  her  quick-sighted  in  observing  every
nod  and  whisper  ;  looks  and  gestures,  that  at  another  time  would  have
passed  unobserved,  are  now  construed  to  have  a  meaning.

42  Continue  thy  sport.]  — Ver.  153.  She  is  now  disposed  openly  to
sanction  his  passion,  and  to  allow  him  whatever  liberties  he  can  find  the
opportunity  of  taking,  consistently  with  prudence.  Paris,  in  his  Epistle,
has  told  her,  that  Menelaiis,  by  his  own  behaviour,  has  urged  her  to  a
compliance  with  his  own  wishes,  as  his  absence  has  afforded  her  the  best
possible  opportunity  of  indulging  in  an  amorous  correspondence.  She
allows  it,  but  at  the  same  time  she  thinks  that  they  ought  to  act  with
great  circumspection,  because,  notwithstanding  her  husband's  absence*
there  are  still  spies  upon  her  conduct,  who  will  not  fail  to  aggravate  each
possible  circumstance.  What  is  this  but  to  tell  him  that  she  will  with-
hold none  of  her  favours  from  him,  when  a  fair  opportunity  shall  be
offered  of  granting  them  without  danger  of  a  discovery  ?

43  Was  urgent.] — Ver.  156.  As  we  have  before  observed,  according
to  some,  he  had  gone  to  claim  the  property  of  his  uncle  Crethaeus ;  while
others  say,  that  he  went  to  Crete  to  take  his  share  of  the  property  of  Atreus,
which  was  there  divided.  John  of  Antioch,  in  a  fragment,  says,  that  he
had  gone  to  Crete  to  perform  certain  sacred  rites.


EP.  XVII.]  HELEtf TO PARIS.  189

when  he  was  hesitating  whether  he  should  go,  I  said  to  him,
"  Take  care,  and  do  come  hack  as  soon  as  possible."  Over-
joyed at44  the  omen,  he  gave  me  kisses,  and  said,  "  Let  my
property  and  my  palace  and  my  Trojan  guest  be  objects
of  thy  care."  Hardly  did  I45  refrain  from  laughter;  and
while  I  struggled  to  restrain  it,  I  could  say  nothing  to  him  in
answer,  except  "  It  shall  be  so."

He,  indeed,  with  favouring  winds,  set  sail  for  Crete,  but  do
not  thou,  for  that  reason,  suppose  that  every  thing  is  per-
mitted thee.  My  husband  is  in  such  manner  absent  from
this  place,  that  in  his  absence  he  watches  me.  Dost  thou  not
know  that  Kings  have  long  hands  ?46  My  fame,  too,  is  an
obstacle,  for  the  more  constantly  I  am  praised  by  thy  lips,
with  the  greater  justice  does  he  fear.  The  same  celebrity
which,  as  it  now  is,  is  to  my  advantage,  is  an  injury  to
me  ;47  and  better  would  it  have  been  to  have  deceived
report. And  do  not,48  because  he  is  absent,  be  surprised

44  Overjoyed  at.'] — Ver.  159.  At  the  omen  of  her  parting  words  being
so  affectionate  ;  by  which,  too,  he  was  disarmed  of  all  suspicion.

45  Hardly  did  I.] — Ver.  161.  We  cannot  help  feeling  shocked  both  at
the  deceit  of  the  woman,  and  her  impudent  manner  of  confessing  it.
The  concessions  she  has  hitherto  made,  have  been  made  with  some  air
of  modesty  and  reserve,  and  she  would  rather  have  them  ascribed  to
pity  and  tenderness,  than  to  any  loose  inclination.  Here,  however,  she
seems  to  own  that  even  before  her  husband's  departure,  she  had  not  only
entertained  favourable  impressions  of  Paris,  but  had  determined  to  yield
herself  up  to  him  without  reserve,  and  had  gone  so  far  as  to  ridicule
Menelaiis,  and  despise  him  for  his  easy  credulity.  Her  smiling,  on  Mene-
laiis  committing  the  Trojan  guest  to  her  care,  might  also  proceed  from  her
own  consciousness,  that  she  was  more  than  fully  disposed  to  obey  his
commands,  and  a  certain  pleasure  she  might  take  in  perceiving  that  he
had  no  suspicion  of  her  criminal  intentions.

43  Have  long  7iands.] — Ver.  166.  This  was  a  Greek  proverb :  it  is
quoted  by  Heredotus,  and  noticed  by  other  writers.

47  Injury  to  me.'] — Ver.  169.  Some  of  the  Commentators  give  a  con-
fused and  unsatisfactory  version  of  this  passage.  Helen  says  that  the
reputation  for  beauty  which,  on  many  accounts,  could  not  be  disagreable
to  her,  was  in  this  case  rather  a  disadvantage,  because  it  made  her  con-
spicuous, and  the  object  of  general  notice.  This  has  obliged  her  to  ex-
ercise a  strict  attention  to  her  actions,  and  even  to  her  looks  and  words,  it
being  almost  impossible  that  the  least  slip  should  pass  unobserved.  She
fears,  therefore,  that  her  present  sentiments  for  Paris  cannot  long  be  a
secret,  and  wishes  that  her  fame  had  been  less,  rather  than  she  should
be  thus  exposed  to  the  hazard  of  a  discovery.

48  And  do  not.] — Ver.  171. Perhaps  this  passage  may  shew  that  we


190  THE EPISTLES OF THE HEROINES.  [EP.  XYII.

that  I  am  left  here  with  thee ;  he  trusted  my  virtue49
and  my  unspotted  life.  For  my  beauty  he  felt  apprehen-
sions ;  in  my  morals  he  put  trust ;  and  my  prudence  makes
him  at  ease,  while  my  beauty  makes  him  fear.  Thou  advisest
that  the  opportunity  should  not  be  lost,  so  willingly  presented,
and  that  we  should  enjoy  the  convenient  absence  of  my  unsus-
pecting husband.  I  am  willing,  and  yet  I  fear  ;  my  resolution,
too,  is  not  sufficiently  fixed  5  my  feelings  hesitate  in  sus-
pense.50

Both  my  husband  is  absent51  from  me,  and  thou  dost  sleep
without  a  partner;  thy  beauty,  too,  pleases  me,  and  mine
thee,  each  in  our  turn.  The  nights,  too,  are  long,  and  now
we  join  in  conversation ;  and  thou  (ah  wretched  me  I)  art
pressing,  and  one  house  receives  us  both.  And  may  I  die  if
every  thing  does  not  tempt  to  criminality ;  but  yet  I  myself
am  held  back  by  a  fear  I  know  not  what. I  wish  that52  thou

ought  not  to  interpret  Helen's  smiling  at  her  husband's  recommending
the  Trojan  guest  to  her  care,  as  shewing  her  contempt  for  his  easy  temper
and  simplicity.  She  seems  here  to  be  so  far  from  viewing  it  in  that  light,
that,  on  the  contrary,  she  thinks  that  he  had  all  the  reason  in  the  world  to
trust  her ;  for  that,  however  much  her  beauty  and  fame  might  expose  her
to  solicitations,  her  known  virtue  was  sufficient  to  secure  him  against  all
suspicions  of  her  ever  proving  unfaithful  to  him.

49  My  virtue."] — Ver.  172.  Helen,  as  she  more  than  once  tells  us,  has
hitherto  lived  without  reproach  ;  Menelaiis,  therefore,  cannot  be  charged
with  imprudence  in  leaving  her  in  the  company  of  this  stranger,  whom
doubtless  he  thought  well  of,  and  in  whose  honour  and  integrity  he  re-
posed  an  undeserved  confidence.

50  In  suspense.] — Ver.  178.  Heinsius  thinks  that  the  true  reading
here,  instead  of  '  in  dubio,'  is  '  in  bivio,''  '  my  mind  is  distracted  in  oppo-
site directions.'  He  also  suggests  that  this  expression  alludes  to  the  two
paths  of  virtue  and  vice,  as  mentioned  in  the  '  Vision  of  Hercules '  by  Pro-
dicus,  and  other  Pythagorean  philosophers.  Burmann,  however,  thinks
that  '  in  dubio'  is  the  proper  reading.

51  Is  absent.] — Ver.  179.  This  detail  of  the  combination  of  circum-
stances is  very  happily  put  together  by  the  Poet.  She  collects  all  the
grounds  that  invite  her  to  a  compliance,  with  a  minuteness  and  strength
of  fancy,  that  show  distinctly  how  often  her  thoughts  have  been  employed
upon  the  subject,  and  that  now,  her  only  concern  is,  how  to  attain  the
gratification  of  her  desires,  without  ruining  her  reputation  with  the  world
for  shocking  the  delicacy  of  her  admirer.

53  I  wish  that.] — Ver.  185.  She  now  entirely  throws  off  the  mask,  and
avows  her  willingness,  if  proper  care  is  taken  to  afford  her  some  excuse
for  her  weakness  ;  for  she  does  not  wish  the  victory  to  appear  to  have  been
too  easily  gained.


EP.  XVII.]  HELEN TO PAEIS.  101

couldst  opportunely  use  force,  for  that  to  which  thou  dost
persuade  me  to  my  disgrace !  My  coyness  might  have  been
overcome  by  violence.  Wrongs  are53  sometimes  advantageous
to  those  who  have  suffered  them.  Thus,  at  least,  could  I  have
wished  to  be  forced  to  be  happy.  While  it  is  still  young,  let
us  rather54  struggle  with  the  growing  passion  ;  the  kindling
name  is  quenched,  when  sprinkled  with  a  little  water.  In
strangers  there  is  no  lasting  love ;  it  wanders  just  as  them-
selves ;  and  while  you  are  hoping  that  nothing  cau  be  more
lasting,  it  is  gone.55

Hypsipyle  is  a  witness,  the  virgin  daughter  of  Minos  is  a
witness  ;  each  was  deceived  in  a  fidelity  that  was  not  re-
turned. Thou,  too,  faithless  man,  art  said  to  have  deserted  thy
(Enone,  beloved  for  many  a  year.  Nor  yet  must  thou
deny  it ;  it  has  been,  if  thou  knowest  it  not,  my  greatest
care  to  make  all  enquiries  about  thee.  Besides,  even  shouldst
thou  wish  to  remain  constant  in  thy  affection,  thou  canst
not ;  already  the  Phrygians  are  preparing  thy  sails.  While
thou  art  conversing  with  me,  while  the  wished-for  night  is
being  appointed,  just  then  wilt  thou  have  a  wind  to  waft
thee  to  thy  native  land.  In  the  midst  of  thy  career  thou
wilt  leave  delights  that  are  full  of  novelty ;  together  with  the
winds  will  thy  love  depart.  Or  shall  I  accompany  thee  as  thou
dost  persuade  ?  And  shall  I  visit  Pergamus  so  be-praised,  and
shall  I  become  the  wife  of  the  grandson  of  great  Laomedon  ?

I  do  not56  so  despise  the  reports  of  winged  Fame,  that  it

53  Wrongs  are.~\ — Ver.  187.  Because  it  is  by  the  seeming  injury  that
they  excuse  their  fault.  Ovid  has  cleverly  used  all  his  ingenuity  in  this
Epistle  ;  indeed,  in  none  of  his  writings  does  he  so  minutely  enter  into
the  reasonings  of  the  female  mind.

54  Let  us  rather.'] — Ver.  189.  This  is  a  strong  picture  of  her  inconstancy,
and  of  the  irresolution  of  her  wavering  mind.  By  this  sudden  change,
she  not  only  assumes  the  semblance  of  modesty  and  reluctance,  but  at  the
same  time  tends  to  inflame  her  lover  and  to  raise  his  ardour  to  a  greater
height.

55  It  is  gone.'] — Ver.  192.  'Fuit.'  Literally,  « it  was.'  So  •  Troja  fuit,'
'  Troy  was,'  meaning  '  Troy  is  no  more.'

56  I  do  not.] — Ver.  207.  We  have  here  a  long  detail  of  the  reasons
that  prevent  her  from  following  Paris  to  Troy.  None  of  them,  however,
are  drawn  from  the  amiableness  of  virtue,  or  from  the  baseness  of  the
crime  itself.  With  her  these  considerations  have  no  weight;  she  is  only
concerned  for  her  reputation,  and  she  particularly  wishes  to  avoid  infamy.
She  foresees  too,  and  with  good  reason,  that  such  a  step  may  bring  her


192  THE EPISTLES OF THE HEROINES.  [EP.  1TIT.

should  fill  the  earth  with  reproaches  of  me.  What  shall
Sparta  say  of  me?  What  the  whole  of  Achaia,  what  the
nations  of  Asia,  what  thy  own  Troy?  What  will  Priam
think  of  me,  what  will  the  wife  of  Priam  think  ?  Thy  bro-
thers, too,  so  many  in  number,  and  the  Dardanian  matrons  ?
And  even  thou,  how  wilt  thou  be  able  to  hope  that  I  shall  be
faithful  to  thee,  and  not  be  anxious  by  reason  of  thine
own  example  ?  Every  stranger  that  shall  enter  the  harbours
of  Ilium,  the  same  will  be  a  cause  for  anxious  apprehension  to
thee.  Enraged  at  me  thyself,  how  often  wilt  thou  say,  "Thou
adultress  P'57  forgetting  that  thy  crime  was  embraced  in  my
own.  Thou,  the  same  person,  wilt  become  the  reprover  and
the  cause  of  my  guilt.  May  the  earth,  I  pray,  first  over-
whelm my  features.  But  I  shall  enjoy  the  Ilian  wealth  and
rich  garments ;  and  I  shall  receive  gifts  more  abundant  than
thy  promises.  Garments  of  purple,  and  costly,  in  fact,  shall
be  given  to  me ;  and  I  shall  be  rich  in  heaped-up  masses  of
gold.

Grant  pardon  to  me  confessing  it ;  thy  gifts  are  not  of  so
much  value  ;  this  land  has  charms  for  me,  I  know  not  to  what
extent.  Should  I  be  insulted,  who  shall  help  me  on  the
Phrygian  shores?  Whence  shall  I  seek  the  aid  of  a  bro-
ther,58 whence  that  of  a  parent  ?  The  deceitful  Jason  pro-
mised every  thing  to  Medea  ;  was  she59  any  the  less  expelled
from  the  house  of  iEson  ? There  was  no  iEetes  to  whom,

into  contempt,  even  with  the  person  in  favour  of  whom  it  is  taken.
'  What  security,'  she  says  to  Paris,  '  can  you  afterwards  have  for  my
fidelity  ?  Will  not  my  easy  consent  to  your  proposal  make  you  suspect
me  with  every  stranger  that  lands  upon  your  coast  ?'  This  reasoning  is
unanswerable,  inasmuch  as  no  union  is  at  all  likely  to  be  lasting,  that  is
not  founded  upon  virtue.

57  Thou  adultress  /] — Ver.  217.  This  reminds  us  of  the  Latin  proverb,
'  Clodius  accusat  maechos.'  '  Clodius  accuses  the  adulterers.'  The
negroes  are  very  much  in  the  habit  of  calling  each  other  '  black  rascals.'

53  Aid  of  a  brother.]  — Ver.  228.  She  had  at  this  time  only  one  brother
surviving,  inasmuch  as  Castor  had  been  slain  by  Lyncaeus.

59  Was  she.'] — Ver.  230.  Paris  had  made  large  promises  to  Helen :
but  these  are  usual  in  soliciting  favours  of  this  kind,  and,  though  given
with  the  greatest  air  of  sincerity,  are  apt  to  be  but  little  regarded  after-
wards. She  therefore  tells  him  that  his  promises  have  given  her  but  little
security,  since  it  has  appeared,  from  numerous  instances,  that  those  who
trust  to  them  are  in  the  end  deceived.  She  instances  Medea  in  particular,
and  insinuates  her  fears  of  a  like  fate  for  herself.


EP.  XYTI.]  HELES TO PAEIS.  193

when  despised,  she  might  return ;  no  mother  Ipsea,60  no  sister
Chalciope.  I  apprehend  no  such  thing;61  but  neither  did
Medea  apprehend  ;  fair  expectations  are  often  deceived  in  their
own  surmises.6-  For  all  the  ships,  which  are  now  being  tossed
upon  the  deep,  thou  wilt  find  that  the  sea  was  calm  when  sailing
out  of- harbour.  The  torch,  too,63  terrifies  me;  which,  stained
with  blood,  thy  mother  thought,  before  the  day  of  her  labour,
she  was  bearing.  I  fear,  too,  the  presages  of  the  prophets,
which,  they  say,  forewarns  us  that  Ilion  shall  be  burnt  by
Pelasgian  flames.  And  as  Cytherea  favours  thee,  because  she
has  triumphed,  and  has  by  thy  decision  gained  a  two-fold
trophy,64  so  do  I  fear  the  others,  which  two,  if  thy  praises
are  not  assumed,  lost  their  cause  on  thy  arbitration.

And  I  have  no  doubt  but  that,  if  I  should  accompany  thee,
arms  will  be  resorted  to  ;  our  love,  ah  me  !  will  have  through
swords  to  make  its  way. Did  Atracian  Hippodamia65  compel

60  No  mother  Ipsea.] — Ver.  232.  It  is  generally  supposed  that  the
word  'Ipsea'  is  a  corrupt  reading  for  Idyi'a;  as  the  latter  is  usually  the
name  given  to  the  mother  of  Medea,  and  the  former  occurs  in  no  other
iustance.  Diodorus  Siculus,  however,  says  that  Medea  and  Chalciope
were  the  daughters  of  iEetes,  by  Hecate,  the  daughter  of  his  brother.
Apollonius  Rhodius  says  that  Absyrtus  was  the  son  of  vEetes,  not  by  his
wife,  but  by  his  concubine  Asterodsea.  Sophocles  calls  the  mother  of
Medea,  Eurylyte.

61  No  such  thing.] — Ver.  233.  This  reflection  is  just  and  well-timed.
She  would  not  appear  to  suspect  her  lover's  honour  and  fidelity,  and
therefore  is  willing  to  trust  him  ;  but  she  immediately  recollects  that  the
same  was  the  case  with  Medea.  She  had.  no  distrust  of  Jason,  but  con-
fided in  his  promises,  and  the  event  testified  how  far  she  had  been  in
error.  She  concludes,  then,  that  she  may  possibly  have  some  reason  to
fear  a  similar  fate.

62  Surmises.'] — Ver.  234.  She  here  refers  to  the  lot  of  Medea,  on  being
abandoned  by  Jason.  According  to  some  accounts,  iEetes  had  been  pre-
viously slain  in  a  skirmish  with  the  Ax-gonauts,  before  they  left  Colchis.
Apollodorus,  however,  assures  us  that  Medea  actually  did  return  to  iEetes,
and  was  instrumental  in  restoring  him  to  his  kingdom,  from  which  he
had  some  time  before  been  expelled.

63  The  torch,  too.] — Ver.  237.  Her  suspicions  suggest  to  her  a  less
accommodating  explanation  of  Hecuba's  dream,  than  the  passion  of  Paris
had  suggested  to  him.

64  Two-fold  trophy.] — Ver.  242.  In  having  surpassed  the  other  two
Goddesses  in  beauty.

65  Hippodamia.  Ver.  248.  Atrax,  or  Atracia,  a  town  of  Thessaly,  was
built  by  Atrax,  the  son  of  Peneus. Hence  the  term  '  Atracian '  came


194  THE EPISTLES OP THE HEROINES.  [EP.  XYII.

the  men  of  Hsemonia65  to  proclaim  cruel  warfare  with  the
Centaurs  ?  And  dost  thou  suppose  that  Menelaiis  will  be  tardy
in  anger  so  reasonable,  and  my  two  brothers,67  and  Tyndarus  ?
Although  thou  dost  boast  so  highly,  and  dost  talk  of  thy  valiant
deeds,  those  features  deprive  their  words  of  credit.  Thy  body
is  better  suited  to  Venus  than  to  Mars.  Let  the  valiant  wage
the  warfare  ;  do  thou,  Paris,  ever  be  the  lover.  Bid  Hector,
whom  thou  dost  praise,  to  fight  for  thee ;  a  different  warfare68  is
deserving  of  thy  pursuits.  Of  those  would  I  take  advantage,
if  I  were  wise,  and  were  a  little  bolder ;  any  woman  would
take  advantage  of  them,  if  she  were  wise.  Or  else,  perhaps,
I  shall  do  so,  all  modesty  laid  aside ;  and,  in  time,  overcome,
I  shall  extend  my  joined  hands.

As  for  thy  asking,  that  in  private  we  may  speak  a  few  words
together  ;  I  know  what69  thou  dost  aim  at,  and  call  a  conversa-
tion. But  thou  art  too  urgent ;  and  still  is  thy  harvest70  in
the  blade  ;  this  delay  may,  perhaps,  prove  friendly  to  thy  de-
sires. At  this  point,  my  fingers  now  being  weary,  let  my
writing,  the  confidant  of  my  concealed  thoughts,  bring  to  an
end  its  secret  task.  The  rest  we  may  say  through  my
companions,'1  Clymene  and  iEthra,  which  two  are  both  my
attendants  and  my  counsellors.

to.  be  given  generally  to  a  native  of  Thessaly,  like  Hippodamia.  Some
writers  would  have  her  to  be  the  daughter  of  Atrax,  a  river  of  Thessaly,  hut
on  what  authority  is  not  known.

66  H&monia.] — Ver.  248.  The  '  Haemonii  viri'  are  the  Lapithse,  who
were  assisted  by  Nestor,  Theseus,  and  Hercules.  The  battle  of  the  Cen-
taurs and  the  Lapithae  is  vividly  described  in  the  Twelfth  Book  of  the
Metamorphoses.

67  My  two  brothers.] — Ver.  250.  Ovid  is  at  fault  here,  in  speaking  of
her  '  gemini  fratres'  as  being  then  alive ;  for,  according  to  his  account  in
the  Fasti,  Castor  was  slain  in  the  combat  with  Lynceus,  to  which  she  has
previously  referred.

68  Different  warfare.'] — Ver.  255.  This  is  'in  accordance  with  the
spirit  of  the  line  in  the  '  Amores,'  '  Militat  omhis  amans,  et  habet  sua
castra  Cupido.' '  Every  lover  is  a  soldier,  and  Cupid  has  his  camp.'

69  /  know  what.] — Ver.  262.  It  is  pretty  clear  that  all  shame  and  re-
serve have  now  deserted  her.

70  Thy  harvest.] — Ver.  263.  Helen  having  given  a  particular  answer
to  every  thing  that  Paris  has  said  in  his  letter,  in  such  a  manner  as  if  she
felt  half  inclined  to  reject  his  suit,  concludes  with  a  promise  that  she  will
prove  favourable  to  his  wishes,  but  requests  him  to  have  patience.

71  My  companions.] — Ver.  267.  In  addition  to  the  former  remarks
on  these  confidants  of  Helen,  we  may  here  observe,  that  Hyginus  says  that


EP.  XTIII.]  LEANDER TO HEEO.  195

EPISTLE  XVIII.

LEANDER TO HERO.'2

The  Hellespont  (now  the  straits  of  Gallipoli,  or  the  Dardanelles)  is  a
narrow  sea,  that  divides  Europe  from  Asia.  Sestos  and  Abydos
were  two  cities  that  stood  directly  opposite  to  each  other:  the  one  on
the  European  side,  the  native  place  of  Hero  ;  the  other  in  Asia,  where
Leander  lived.  These  young  persons,  being  violently  enamoured  of
^each  other,  and  fearing  to  let  their  passion  be  known  by  their
parents,  Leander  can  devise  no  other  expedient  for  obtaining  the
society  of  his  mistress,  than  by  swimming  over  the  Hellespont  in
the  night,  which  he  is  in  the  habit  of  frequently  doing.  But  a
storm  arising,  by  which  he  is  detained  from  Hero  for  seven  days,
he  writes  this  Epistle  to  her,  and  engages  a  bold  mariner,  in  spite
of  the  tempest,  to  cross  over  with  it  to  Sestos.  He  endeavours,  first,
to  convince  her  that  his  love  is  unchanged  and  unalterable,  and  he
then  launches  forth  into  comlpaints  that,  by  the  unrelenting  fury  of  the
waves,  he  has  been  precluded  from  an  opportunity  of  visiting  her.
In  conclusion,  he  promises  that  he  will  be  with  her  very  soon  ;  and
that,  should  the  sea  continue  to  rage,  he  will  even  prefer  exposing
himself  to  danger,  than  continue  to  be  deprived  of  the  pleasure  of
seeing  and  conversing  with  her.

He  of  Abydos,  Sestian  fair,  sends  that  health  to  thee  which
he  would  rather  bring  himself,  if  the  rage72*  of  the  sea  should
abate.73 If  the  Gods74  are  favourable  to  me,  and  are  propiti-

Helen  was  accompanied  to  Troy  by  her  two  handmaids,  /Ethra  and  Phisais,
whom  Castor  and  Pollux  had  given  to  her  as  slaves,  and  who  had  once
been  queens.

72  Leander  to  Hero.'] — Barthius,  in  his  Commentaries  on  the  Thebaid
of  Statius,  Book  vi.,  1.  545,  can  hardly  venture  to  ascribe  this  Epistle  to
Ovid,  because  he  finds  that  lines  247  and  248  are  translations  from  Mu-
sffius,  unless,  indeed,  the  author  that  goes  by  that  name  is  of  much  more
ancient  date  than  that  usually  assigned  to  him  by  the  learned.  But  this
opinion  is  not  in  general  supported ;  and  the  Epistle  is,  without  hesita-
tion, assigned  to  Ovid.

?2*  If  the  rage.'] — Ver.  2.  Instead  of  this  and  the  preceding  line,  one
oftheMSS.  has

*  Quam  cuperem  solitas,  Hero,  tibi  ferre  per  undas,
Accipe,  Leandri,  dum  venit  ipse,  manum' —
'  Receive,  Hero,  until  he  himself  comes,  the  penmanship  of Leander,
which  I  could  have  wished  to  bear  to  thee  through  the  waves  as  usual.'

73  Should  abate.] — Ver.  2.  Heinsius  conjectures  that  '  Sesti,'  and  not
'  Sesta,'  is  a  more  correct  reading,  were  not  all  the  MSS.  against  it.  So
impatient  is  Leander  of  lieing  detained  from  Hero,  that  he  canDot  forbear
complaining  of  it  at  the  very  beginning  of  his  letter.

74  If the  Gods.] — Ver.  3.  Commentators  generally  suppose  that  the
1  Di '  here  mentioned,  are  Venus  and  Cupid. There  is  reason,  however,  to

02


196  THE EPISTLES OF THE HEEOINES.  [EP.  XTIII.

ous  to  my  love,  these  words  of  mine  thou  wilt  read  with  dis-
contented eyes.75  But  they  are  not  favourable  ;  for  why  do
they  delay  my  hopes,  and  permit  me  not  to  pass  through  the
well-known  waves  ? 7s Thou  thyself  dost  behold  the  heavens

think  that  Neptune  and  the  other  marine  Deities  are  also  included,  for  in
the  fifth  verse  he  says  '  Sed  non  sunt  faciles,'  and  gives,  as  a  reason,  that
he  is  detained  from  his  mistress  by  the  tempestuous  sea.

75  Discontented  eyes.] — Ver.  4.  Not  that  his  letter  will  be  unaccept-
able to  her,  but  because  she  would  rather  see  him,  than  barely  hear  from
him.

76  Well-known  waves.] — Ver.  6.  Relative  to  the  passage  of  Leander
over  the  Hellespont,  we  cannot  do  better  than  transcribe  the  following
narrative.  After  Lord  Byron  had  visited  the  Morea,  as  we  learn  from
one  of  his  biographers,  he  embarked  for  Constantinople  on  board  the
frigate,  the  Salsette,  commanded  by  Captain  Bathurst.  While  the  ship
was  at  anchor  in  the  Dardanelles,  a  discussion  arose  among  the  officers  on
the  possibility  of  swimming  across  the  Hellespont,  and  thus  verifying  the
narratives  of  Ovid  and  Musseus.  Lord  Byron  and  Lieutenant  Ekenhead
determined  to  try  it ;  and  on  the  3rd  of  May,  1810,  they  accomplished
it.  A  fit  of  fever  was  the  consequence,  in  the  case  of  Lord  Byron.  Some
time  after  this  adventure,  an  Englishman,  of  the  name  of  Turner,  made
a  similar  attempt,  but  without  success  ;  and  in  an  account  of  his  travels,
hs  made  some  remarks  on  the  narrative  which  Lord  Byron  had  given
of  his  exploit.  The  latter,  offended  at  the  doubts  thrown  on  his  veracity,
thus  writes  to  his  friend  Mr.  Murray,  from  Ravenna,  in  a  letter  dated  the
21st  February,  1821  (vol.  v.,  p.  129,  of  the  Edition  in  17  volumes) :  "  In
the  forty-fourth  page,  Volume  First,  of  Turner's  Travels  (which  you  lately
sent  me),  it  is  stated  that *  Lord  Byron,  when  he  expressed  such  confidence
of  its  practicability,  seems  to  have  forgotten  that  Leander  swam  both
ways,  with  and  against  the  tide  ;  whereas  he  (Lord  Byron)  only  per-
formed the  easiest  part  of  the  task,  by  swimming  with  it  from  Europe  to
Asia.'  I  certainly  could  not  have  forgotten  what  is  known  to  every  school-
boy, that  Leander  crossed  in  the  night,  and  returned  towards  the  morning.
My  object  was,  to  ascertain  that  the  Hellespont  could  be  crossed  at  all  by
swimming,  and  in  this  Mr.  Ekenhead  and.  myself  both  succeeded ;  the
one  in  an  hour  and  ten  minutes,  the  other,  in  an  hour  and  five  minutes.
The  tide  was  not  in  our  favour ;  on  the  contrary,  the  great  difficulty  was
to  bear  up  against  the  current,  which,  so  far  from  helping  us  unto  the
Asiatic  side,  sent  us  right  down  towards  the  Archipelago.  Neither  Mr.
Ekenhead  nor  myself,  nor,  I  will  venture  to  add,  any  person  on  board  the

frigate ,  had  any  notion  of  a difference of  the  current  on  the

Asiatic  side,  of  which  Mr.  Turner  speaks.  I  never  heard  of  it  till  this
moment,  or  I  would  have  taken  the  other  course.  Lieutenant  Eken-
head's  sole  motive,  and  mine  also,  for  setting  out  from  the  European  side
was,  that  the  little  cape  above  Sestos  was  a  more  prominent  starting
place,  and  the  frigate  which  lay  below,  close  under  the  Asiatic  castle,
formed  a  better  point  of  view  for  us  to  swim  towards ; and,  in  fact,  we


EP.  XYITI.]  LEANDER TO HERO.  IS/

blacker  than  pitch  :  the  seas, '  too,  swelling  with  the  winds,
and  hardly  to  be  stemmed  by  the  hollow  barks. One  mari-

landed  immediately  below  it.  Mr.  Turner  says,  '  Whatever  is  thrown
into  the  stream  on  this  part  of  the  European  bank,  must  arrive  at  the
Asiatic  shore.'  This  is  so  far  from  being  the  case,  that  it  must  arrive  in
the  Archipelago,  if  left  to  the  current,  although  a  strong  wind  in  the
Asiatic  direction  might  have  such  an  effect  occasionally.  Mr.  Turner
attempted  the  passage  from  the  Asiatic  side,  and  failed;  '  after  five  and
twenty  minutes,  in  which  he  did  not  advance  a  hundred  yards,  he  gave
it  up,  from  complete  exhaustion.'  This  is  very  possible,  and  might  have
occurred  to  him  just  as  readily  on  the  European  side.  He  should  have
set  out  a  couple  of  miles  higher,  and  could  then  have  come  out  below
the  European  castle.  I  particularly  stated,  and  Mr.  Hobhouse  has  done
so  also,  that  we  were  obliged  to  make  the  passage  of  one  mile
extend  to  between  three  and  four,  owing  to  the  force  of  the  stream.
I  can  assure  Mr.  Turner  that  his  success  would  have  given  me  great  plea-
sure, as  it  would  have  added  one  more  instance  to  the  proofs  of  the  pro-
bability. It  is  not  quite  fair  in  him  to  infer  that,  because  he  failed,  Lean-
der  could  not  succeed.  There  are  still  four  instances  on  record  :  a  Nea-
politan, a  young  Jew,  Mr.  Ekenhead,  and  myself ;  the  two  last  done  in  the
presence  of  hundreds  of  English  witnesses.  With  regard  to  the  difference
of  the  current,  I  perceived  none:  it  is  unfavourable  to  the  swimmer  on  either
side,  but  may  be  stemmed  by  plunging  into  the  sea,  a  considerable  way
above  the  opposite  point  of  the  coast  which  the  swimmer  wishes  to  make,
but  still  bearing  up  against  it ;  it  is  strong,  but  if  you  calculate  well,  you
may  reach  land.  My  own  experience,  and  that  of  others,  bids  me  pro-
nounce the  passage  of  Leander  perfectly  practicable.  Any  young  man,
in  good  and  tolerable  skill  in  swimming,  might  succeed  in  it  from  either
side. I  was  three  hours  in  swimming  across  the  Tagus,  which  is  much

more  hazardous,  being  two  hours  longer  than  the  Hellespont. 1

crossed  the  Hellespont  in  one  hour  and  ten  minutes  only.  I  am  now  ten
years  older  in  time,  and  twenty  in  constitution,  than  I  was  when  I  crossed
the  Dardanelles,  and  yet  two  years  ago  I  was  capable  of  swimming  four
hours  and  twenty  minutes  :  and  I  am  sure  that  I  could  have  continued
two  hours  longer,  though  I  had  on  a  pair  of  trowsers,  an  accoutrement
which  by  no  means  assists  the  performance.  With  this  experience  in  swim-
ming at  different  periods  of  life,  not  only  upon  the  spot,  but  elsewhere
of  various  persons,  what  is  there  to  make  me  doubt  that  Leander's  ex-
ploit was  perfectly  practicable  ? If  these  individuals  did  more  than  the

passage  of  the  Hellespont,  why  should  he  have  done  less  ? That  a

young  Greek,  of  the  heroic  times,  in  love,  and  with  his  limbs  in  full
vigour,  might  have  succeeded  in  such  an  attempt,  is  neither  wonderful
nor  doubtful.  Whether  he  attempted  it  or  not,  is  another  question,  be-
cause he  might  have  had  a  small  boat  to  save  him  the  trouble."  With
reference  to  this  last  remark,  we  will  only  add,  that  there  is  no  proof  that
Leander  had  sufficient  funds  of  his  own  to  purchase  a  small  boat ;  and  in
the  next  place,  the  use  of  it  must  have  greatly  facilitated  that  discovery


198  THE EPISTLES OF THE HEEOLfTES.  [EP.  XVIII.

ner,  and  he  a  bold  one,  by  whom  my  letter  is  delivered  to  thee,
has  steered  his  course  from  the  harbour  ,•  I  would  have  em-
barked,77 were  it  not  that  all  Abydos  was  on  the  heights,78  when
he  unfastened  the  moorings  of  his  prow.  I  could  not  have
been  concealed  from  my  parents,  as  before ;  and  that  love
which  we  wish  to  be  concealed,  could  not  have  been  hidden.

At  once,  writing  this,  I  said,  "  Go,  happy  Epistle  ;  soon
will  she  be  extending  her  beauteous  hand  to  thee.  Perhaps
thou  wilt  be  pressed  by  the  lips  of  my  mistress  applied  to  thee ;
while  she  shall  be  attempting  to  break  thy  fastenings79  with  her
snow-white  teeth."  Such  words  being  spoken  by  me  in  a  low
whisper,  the  rest  has  my  right  hand  uttered  together  with  the
paper.  But  how  much  would  I  rather  that  right  hand  should
do  its  part  in  swimming,  than  that  it  should  write,  and  that,
labouring,  it  should  bear  me  through  the  accustomed  waves  !
Better  fitted,  indeed,  is  it  to  lash  the  placid  deep  :  and  yet  it  is
the  fitting  minister  of  my  feelings.  The  seventh  night  is  now
passing,  a  space  to  me  more  tedious  than  a  year,  since  the
troubled  sea  has  raged  with  its  hoarse  billows.  If  on  these
nights  I  have  experienced  sleep  that  soothes  the  breast,  lasting
may  prove  this  delay  of  the  boisterous  deep.  Seated  on  some
rock,  in  sadness  I  look  upon  thy  shores  ;  and  in  thought  I
am  carried  whither  I  cannot  be  carried  in  person.  My  eyes,
too,  either  behold,  or  think  that  they  behold,  the  light 80  that
keeps  the  watch  on  the  summit  of  thy  tower.  Three  times
have  I  thrown  aside  my  garments SJ  on  the  dry  sand ;  thrice,

which  he  was  so  anxious  to  avoid,  and  which  precluded  him  from  ventur-
ing in  the  boat  which  carried  his  letter.

77  Have  embarked.] — Ver.  11.  He  says  this,  to  satisfy  her  that  his  not
venturing  with  the  mariner  is  not  from  want  of  courage  or  inclination,
but  because  the  influx  of  spectators  renders  it  impossible  for  him  to  be
concealed ;  he  haying  hitherto  kept  his  passion  from  the  knowledge  of  his
parents.

78  On  the  heights.] — Ver.  12.  '  Specula '  frequently  means  '  a  watch-
tower,'  but  here  it  signifies'  the  heights  adjoining  the  town.

79  Thy  fastenings.'] — Ver.  18.  This  was  the  pack-thread  with  which
the  tablets  were  fastened  together,  and  which  was  sealed  with  wax.  In
her  impatience  she  would  be  likely  to  break  it  with  her  teeth,  instead  of
waiting  for  knife  or  scissars.

80  Behold  the  light.] — Ver.  31.  He  alludes  to  the  torch  which  she  kept
burning,  as  his  guide  when  swimming.

81  My  garments.] — Ver.  33. We  must  suppose  that  he  was  in  the


EP.  XYIII.]  LEAKDER TO HERO.  199

stripped,  have  I  attempted  to  proceed  ou  the  perilous  way.
The  swelling  sea  opposed  my  youthful  attempts/2  and  over-
whelmed my  features  as  I  swam  in  its  hostile  waves.

But  thou,  most  inexorable  of  the  boisterous  winds,  why,
with  determined  mind,  dost  thou  wage  war  with  me  ?  Against
me,  Boreas,  if  thou  knowest  it  not,  and  not  against  the  ocean,
dost  thou  rage.  What  wouldst  thou  do,  if  love  were  not
known  to  thee  ?  So  cold  as  thou  art,  still,  perverse  wind,
thou  dost  not  deny  that  thou  once  wast  warm  with  Actsean
fires.83  When  about  to  snatch  thy  joys,  if  any  one  had  wished
to  shut  against  thee  the  aerial  paths,  in  what  manner  wouldst
thou  have  submitted  to  it  ?  Pity  me,  I  pray;  and  more  mildly
impel  the  gentle  gales  :  then  may  the  grandson  of  Hippotas84
lay  no  harsh  commands  on  thee.  In  vain  do  I  entreat,  and
against  my  petitions  does  he  murmur  ;  the  billows,  too,  which
he  agitates,  in  no  measure  does  he  restrain.  0  that  Daedalus85
would  now  grant  me  the  daring  wings  !  although  the  Icarian
shore  is  so  near  to  this.  Whatever  shall  be  the  event,  I  will
endure  it ;  only  let  me  raise  my  body  into  the  air,  which  so
oft  has  poised  itself  in  the  uncertain  waves.

In  the  meantime,  while  the  the  winds  and  the  waves  are
denying  me  everything,  in  my  mind,  I  revolve  the  first  mo-
ments of  my  stolen  joys.  5Twas  the  beginning  of  night  (for
there  is  a  delight  in  remembering  it)  when,  full  of  love,  I  de-
habit  of  depositing  his  clothes  in  some  recess  of  a  rock,  or  other  spot,
where  they  would  remain  safe  until  his  return.

82  Youthful  attempts.'] — Ver.  35.  That  is,  attempts  which  more  mature
years  would  not  have  ventured  upon.

83  Actcean  fires.] — Ver.  42.  It  has  been  already  remarked  that  Boreas
was  said  to  have  carried  off  Orithyia,  the  daughter  of  Erectheus,  king  of
Athens ;  the  shores  of  which  were  called  '  Actsean.'

84  Of  Hippotas.] — Ver.  46.  Commentators  think  that  there  were  two
persons  of  the  name  of  ^Eolus ;  the  one,  the  son  of  Jupiter,  by  Segesta,
Egesta,  or  Acesta,  the  daughter  of  Hippotas,  (though  the  Scholiast  on
Homer  makes  him  the  son  of  Hippotas)  and  the  other,  the  son  of  Hellen,
who  was  the  son  of  Jupiter.  The  former  was  the  one  who  was  visited
by  Ulysses,  while  the  latter  is  supposed  to  have  been  the  father  of  Sal-
moneus,  Sisyphus,  Creteus,  Athamas,  and  others.

85  That  Dadalus.]  — Ver.  49.  The  story  of  Daedalus  and  Icarus  is
beautifully  told  in  the  Eighth  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses.  Leander  al-
ludes to  the  fate  of  Icarus,  to  make  Hero  sensible  of  the  strength  of  his
passion,  to  which  no  danger  appears  considerable,  when  opposed  to  the
hope  of  conversing  with  her.


200  THE EPISTLES OF THE HEEOIXE3.  [EP.  XVTII.

parted  from  my  father's  door.  There  was  no  delay ;  throwing
off  all  fear  together  with  my  clothes,  I  dashed  my  pliant
arms  in  the  yielding  sea.  The  Moon,  like  a  kind  attendant
upon  my  path,  offered  an  almost  tremulous  light  as  I  speeded.
Looking  up  at  her,  I  said,  "  Favour  me,  bright  Goddess  ;  and
let  the  Latmian  cliffs86  recur  to  thy  mind.  Endymion  can-
not permit  thee  to  be  of  unrelenting  disposition ;  turn  thy
features,87  I  pray,  to  these  my  stolen  delights.  Thou,  God-
dess,88 descending  from  heaven,  didst  go  in  quest  of  a  mortal ;
let  me  be  allowed  to  say  the  truth ;  she,  whom  I  pursue,  is
herself  a  Goddess.  Not  to  mention  her  disposition,  worthy  of
a  heavenly  breast ;  that  beauty  is  not  ranked  but  among  the
real  Goddesses.  After  the  face  of  Venus  and  thine  own  there
is  not  one  superior;  and  do  not  trust  my  words,  thou  beholdest
her  thyself.  As  much  as,  when  thou  dost  shine  with  thy  pure
rays  in  silvery  effulgence,  all  the  stars  gave  way  before  thy
flames,  so  much  is  she  more  beauteous  than  all  the  beau-
teous ;  if  thou  dost  doubt  it,  Cynthia,89  thou  hast  a  darkened
light."

Having  said  these  words,  or,  at  least,  words  not  differing
from  them  in  meaning,  in  the  night  was  I  borne  along  the
yielding  waters.  The  waves  shone  with  the  brightness  of
the  reflected  Moon,  and  there  was  the  brilliancy  of  day  in
the  silent  night ;  and  no  voice,  no  murmur  came  to  my
ears,  but  that  of  the  water  moved  by  my  body.  The
halcyons  alone,90  remembering  the  once  loved  Ceyx,  seemed
to  utter  I know  not  what  sweet  complaints. And  now,  my

56  Latmian  cliffs.'] — Ver.  62.  Latmos  was  a  mountain  of  Caria,  near
the  coast  of  the  iEgean  Sea.  It  was  famous  for  the  Amours  there  of
Cynthia,  or  Diana,  and  Endymion.

87  Thy  features. .] — Ver.  64.  He  rightly  uses  '  vultus,' '  features,'  rather
than  '  cor,'  '  feelings,'  because  at  this  time  he  stood  in  need  chiefly  of  her
light,  to  aid  him  in  swimming.

88  Thou,  Goddess.] — Ver.  65.  Here  he  enforces  his  prayer  by  mention-
ing the  reason  on  which  he  grounds  his  hope  of  her  favour.  Love  was
so  powerful  with  Cynthia,  that  she  left  heaven  in  quest  of  a  mortal.  What
wonder,  then,,  if  he  is  so  eager  in  the  pursuit  of  one  whom  he  esteems  as
a  Goddess  ?

89  Cynthia.] — Ver.  74.  Diana  is  called  'Cynthia,'  from  Cynthus,  a
mountain  of  the  isle  of  Delos,  the  place  of  her  hirth.

90  The  halcyons  alone.] — Ver.  81.  This  affecting  story,  so  very  touch  -
ingly  referred  to,  is  related  in  the  Eleventh  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses.


EP.  rVIII.]  LEANEEB, TO HEEO.  201

arms  fatigued  from  below  each  shoulder,91  with  an  effort,  I
raised  myself92  on  high,  on  the  surface  of  the  waves.  .  When
I  beheld  a  light  afar  off,  I  said,  "My  flame  is  in  that  flame ;
my  light93  do  those  shores  contain."  And  suddenly  the
strength  returned  to  my  wearied  shoulders  ;  and  the  waves
seemed  to  me  more  pliant  than  they  had  been.  The  love  which
warmed  in  my  eager  breast  caused  me  not  to  be  able  to  feel
the  chill  of  the  cold  sea.  The  more  I  advanced,  and  the
nearer  was  the  shore  and  the  less  the  distance  that  remained,
the  more  was  I  delighted  to  proceed.

But  when  I  could  be  seen  as  well,  at  once  thou  as  specta-
tress,94 didst  give  me  spirits,  and  didst  cause  me  to  feel  vi-
gour. Now,  even  by  my  swimming  do  I  strive  to  please  my
mistress,  and  before  thy  eyes  do  I  throw  out  my  arms.  Thy
nurse,95  with  difficulty,  hinders  thee  from  descending  into
the  deep.  For  this  did  I  see  also  ;  and  thou  wast  not  de-
ceiving me.  And  yet  she  did  not,  although,  when  proceed-
ing, she  held  thee  back,  hinder  thy  foot  from  becoming  wet
with  the  water  at  the  margin.  Thou  didst  receive  me  in
thy  embrace,  and  didst  give  me  delightful  kisses  ;  kisses,  ye
great  Gods,95  worthy  to  be  sought  beyond  the  seas.  And
thy  garments,97  taken  from  thy  shoulders,  thou  didst  hand

91  Beloiv  each  shoulder.] — Ver.  83.  It  is  just  beneath  the  shoulder
that  pain  and  weariness  is  first  felt  after  long  swimming.

92  Raised  myself.'] — Yer.  84.  Probably  to  catch  a  glimpse  of  the  light
above  the  billows  that  were  dashing  around  him.

93  My  light.] — Ver.  86.  'Lumen,'  'light/  and  not '  numen,'  '  divinity,'
would  seem  to  be  the  proper  reading,  as  a  reiteration  of  the  meaning
conveyed  by  the  word  '  ignis,'  '  fire,'  in  the  preceding  line.

94  As  spectatress.] — Ver.  94.  Hero,  standing  as  'spectatrix'  on  the
heights  of  Sestos,  can  hardly  fail  to  remind  us  of  the  equally  hapless
Eliza  of  modern  times,  immortahzed  by  Darwin  :

1  Now  stood  Eliza  on  the  wood-crowned  height,
O'er  Minden's  plain,  spectatress  of  the  fight.'

95  Thy  nurse.] — Ver.  97.  We  may  here  remark,  that  the  'nutrices,'  or
1  nurses  '  of  antiquity,  do  not  seem  to  have  been  so  relentless  to  the  fair
damsels  committed  to  their  charge,  as  the  more  unaccommodating  duennas
of  modern  Spain  and  Italy.

96  Ye  great  Gods.] — Ver.  102.  These  exclamations  are  frequent  with
the  Poet,  and  have  considerable  beauty  in  them,  when  aptly  introduced.

9"  Thy  garments.] — Ver.  103.  There  is  something  comical  in  the
notion  of  Leander  wearing  Hero's  petticoats  ;  but  perhaps  they  were  only


202  THE EPISTLES OE THE HEROINES.  [EP.  XVIII.

to  me ;  and  thou  didst  wring  the  water  of  the  sea  from
my  wet  hair.  The  night,  ourselves,  and  the  conscious  tower,
and  that  light  which  showed  me  the  way  through  the  deep,
know  the  rest.  No  more  can  the  joys  of  that  night  be
reckoned,  than  can  the  weeds  of  the  Hellespontic  sea.  The
shorter  the  time  that  was  afforded  for  our  stolen  joys,  the
greater  was  our  care  that  it  should  not  be  idly  spent.

And  now,  the  wife  of  Tithonus  about  to  banish  the  night,
Lucifer,  the  forerunner  of  Aurora,98  had  risen.  We  mutually
snatched  repeated  kisses  without  intermission,  and  we  com-
plained that  too  short  was  the  duration  of  the  night.  And
thus  delaying, "  at  the  hateful  warning  of  thy  nurse,  leaving
the  tower,  I  repaired  to  the  cold  sea-shore.  Weeping,  we
parted,  and  I  entered  again  the  sea  of  the  Virgin  -,1  always,
so  long  as  I  could,  looking  back 2  on  my  mistress.  If  there  is
any  believing  the  truth,  as  I  went  to  thee,  I  seemed  to  be
really  a  swimmer;3  as  I  returned,  I  seemed  to  myself  to  be
a shipwrecked man.4 This  too.  if  thou  canst  believe  it ;

lent  him  by  the  damsel  till  he  could  get  under  shelter,  where  he  may  pos-
sibly have  had  a  change  of  garments  in  readiness.

98  Of  Aurora.] — Ver.  112.  It  may  he  remarked  that  the  planet  which
we  call  Venus,  when  appearing  in  the  morning  before  sunrise,  was  called
by  the  ancients  Lucifer  and  Phosphorus,  and  by  us  is  called  the  Morning
Star ;  when  it  appeared  after  sunset,  they  called  it  Hesperus,  as  we  call  it
the  Evening  Star.

9S  Thus  delaying.] — Ver.  115.  The  force  of  the  word  'cunctatus'
cannot  be  very  easily  expressed  in  English  :  it  signifies  '  having  from  time
to  time  disregarded  the  warnings  of  the  nurse,  and  having  delayed  giving
obedience  to  them.'  As  morning  draws  near,  the  nurse  warns  him  of  the
necessity  of  his  departing,  but  he  still  insists  on  prolonging  his  stay.

1  Of  the  Virgin.'] — Ver.  117.  Helle,  the  sister  of  Phryxus,  who  gave
her  name  to  the  Hellespont,  is  here  alluded  to.

2  Looking  back.] — Ver.  118.  '  Respiciens'  alludes  probably  to  the
time  when  he  was  going  down  to  the  shore  ;  or  it  may  possibly  mean,  that
while  he  was  swimming,  he  continually  looked  back  on  his  mistress.

3  A  swimmer.] — Ver.  119.  'Natator'  here  means,  '  a  regular  swim-
mer,' 'one  that  knows  how  to  swim,'  in  contradistinction  to  '  naufragus;'
as  a  shipwrecked  person  is  obliged  to  swim,  whether  he  understands  the
art  or  not,  if  he  wishes  to  escape  death.

4  A  shipwrecked  man.] — Ver.  120.  A  critic  of  the  name  of  Robertus
Titius,  whose  work  is  mentioned  by  Burmann,  explains  this  passage,  as
thinking  that  Leander  means  to  say,  that  when  he  swam  to  his  mistress
he  swam  perpendicularly,  but  that  when  he  left  her  he  floated  on  his
back,  like  the  body  of  a  shipwrecked  person ;  this  he  thinks  to  be  the


EJ.  XVIII.]  LEANDER TO HERO.  -203

towards  thee  the  path  seemed  a  declivity  ;  when  I  returned
from  thee,  it  seemed  a  steep  mountain  of  sluggish  water.  Re-
luctantly did  I  repair  to  my  native  place ;  who  could  have
believed  it?  With  reluctance,  assuredly,  do  I  now  remain
in  my  own  city.  Ah  me !  why,  joined  in  inclination,  are
we  disjoined  by  the  waves  1  And  why  does  one  mind,  and  not
one  land,  possess  us  two  ?  Either  let  thy  Sestos  receive  me,  or
my  Abydos  thee.  Thy  land  is  as  pleasing  to  me  as  is  my
own  to  thee.  Why  am  I  troubled  myself,  so  oft  as  the  sea  is
troubled  1 Why  is  the  wind,  so  slight  a  cause,  able  to  annoy


me


Now  are  the  curving  dolphins  acquainted  with  our  loves  ;
and  to  the  fishes5  I  do  not  think  that  I  am  unknown.  Now  is
the  beaten  path  of  the  well-known  waves  distinctly  marked;  no
otherwise  than  a  highway,  worn 6  by  many  a  wheel.7  I  used  to
complain  that  it  was  not  possible  for  me  to  cross  in  any
manner  but  this ;  but  now  I  complain,  that,  through  the
winds,  even  this  is  withdrawn  from  me.  The  seas  of  the
daughter  of  Athamas  are  white  with  enormous  billows,  and

more  probable,  from  Leander  saying  that  he  kept  looking  back  on  his  mis-
tress, which,  according  to  him,  he  could  not  do  unless  he  was  floating.
But  this  notion  seems  to  be  more  ingenious  than  well  founded  ;  for,  when
going,  Leander  says  that  he  felt  like  one  who  was  a  regular  swimmer,  who
knew  how  to  swim  and  took  a  delight  in  it,  and  that  he  passed  through
the  water  with  ease  ;  whereas,  on  his  return,  he  had  to  labour,  as  though
he  was  ascending  a  hill  of  water,  and  his  struggles  against  the  waves
resembled  the  convulsive  efforts  of  a  shipwrecked  person.  •  Respicere,'
clearly  means  to  look  back,  by  turning  the  head  round.  If  he  had  looked
on  his  mistress  while  floating,  '  adspicere'  would  have  been  used.

5  To  the  fishes.'] — Ver.  132.  There  is  something,  almost  comical  in  the
notion  of  the  fishes  having  made  his  acquaintance.

6  Highway  worn.'] — Ver.  134.  The  Romans  not  understanding  the
improvement  of  macadamizing  their  roads,  ruts  were  soon  worn  in  the
streets  by  the  chariots  and  carts.  The  imprint  of  Roman  wheels  is  (or
was  till  lately)  discernible  in  the  streets  of  Pompeii.

7  Many  a  wheel.] — Ver.  134.  The  wheels  used  by  the  ancients  re-
volved on  the  axle,  as  in  the  carriages  of  modem  times,  and  were  pre-
vented, by  pins  inserted,  from  falling  off.  The  wheels  consisted  of
naves,  spokes,  which  varied  much  in  number,  the  felly,  or  wooden
circumference,  made  of  elastic  wood,  such  as  the  poplar  and  wild  fig,
and  composed  of  several  segments  united,  and  the  tire,  which  was  of
metal.  Some  of  their  carts  and  waggons  had  wheels  made  of  a  solid
circle  of  "wood,  in  shape  like  a  milestone,  with  the  axle  running  through
the  middle  ;  similar  wheels  are  used  in  the  South  of  Europe  at  the  pre-
sent day.


204  THE EPISTLES OE THE HEROINES.  [EP.  XVJTI.

hardly  does  the  bark  remain  safe  in  its  harbour.  I  think
that  this  sea,  when  it  first  obtained  the  name  from  the  Virgin
that  was  drowned,  which  it  now  retains,  was  such  as  now  it
appears.  This  place,  too,  is  sufficiently  disgraced  by  the
loss  of  Helle ;  and  though  it  should  spare  me,  it  has  a
name  from  its  misdeeds.  I  envy  Phryxus,  whom  the  golden
sheep,  with  its  woolly  fleece,  bore  in  safety  over  the  stormy
seas.

And  yet,  I  require  the  aid  neither  of  the  ram  nor  of  the
bark  ;  let  only  the  waters  be  granted  me,  for  me  to  cleave
with  my  body.  Of  no  art  do  I  stand  in  need  ;  let  me  only
have  the  opportunity  of  swimming,  I,  the  same  individual,
will  be  both  ship,  mariner,  and  passenger.8  I  will  neither
follow  Helice,9  nor  Arctos,  which  Tyre  observes ;  my  passion
has  no  regard  for  stars  that  belong  to  the  public.10  Let  others
watch  Andromeda,  or  the  bright  Crown,11  and  the  Parrhasian
Bear,12  which  glitters  in  the  frozen  sky.  But  the  object  which
Perseus  and  Liber13  loved,  together  with  Jove,  does  not  please
me  to  be  the  guide14  of  my  uncertain  path.  There  is  another
light,  much  more  unerring  than  they  ;  that  the  guide,  my
passion,  will  not  be  in  the  dark.  So  long  as  I  should  keep
that  in  sight,  I  could  go  to  Colchis,15  and  to  the  remotest  re-

s  And  passenger. ~\ — Ver.  148.  The  primary  meaning  of  the  word  'vector'
1  is  one  who  carries,'  but  here  it  evidently  means,  '  passenger ;'  though
in  Davison's  translation,  '  pilot,'  or  '  master,'  is  suggested  as  being  possibly
its  signification.

3  Follow  Helice.'] — Ver.  149.  For  an  account  of  Helice  and  Arctos,
see  the  Notes  on  the  Fasti,  Book  iii.  1.  207.

10  To  the  public.'] — Ver.  150.  '  Publica  sidera,'  may  be  rendered,  in  the
language  of  the  present  day,  'the  stars  of  the  million.'

11  Bright  Crown.] — Ver.  151.  He  refers  to  the  crown  of  Ariadne;  see
the  Fasti,  Book  iii.  1.  516.

12  Parrhasian  Bear.] — Ver.  152.  For  an  account  of  the  Parrhasian
or  Arcadian  bear,  see  the  Fasti,  book  ii.  1.  153,  et  seq.

13  Perseus  and  Liber.] — Ver.  153.  He  alludes  to  the  intrigue  of
Jupiter  with  Calisto,  the  love  of  Bacchus  for  Ariadne,  and  of  Perseus  for
Andromeda.  See  the  story  of  Perseus  and  Andromeda,  in  the  Meta-
morphoses, at  the  end  of  the  Fourth  Book.

u  To  be  the  guide.] — Ver.  154.  He  determines  that  he  will  have  no
other  guide  than  his  own  mistress  ;  he  may  perhaps  intend  by  the  mention
of  '  lumen'  in  the  next  line,  to  refer  to  the  light  of  her  torch.

15  Go  to  Colchis.] — Ver.  157.  He  here  alludes  to  the  expedition  of
the  Argonauts,  to  shew  with  what  security  and  confidence  he would


EP.  XVIII.]  LEA^DEE TO HEEO.  205

gions  of  Pontus,  and  where  the  Thessalian  ship  cleaved  its
path  ;  I  could  excel  even  the  youthful  Palsemon16  in  swim-
ming, and  him  whom  the  wondrous  grass17  suddenly  changed
into  a  Divinity.

Often  do  my  arms  grow  weak  with  the  constant  movements,
and  they  are  moved  with  difficulty  along  the  boundless  waters.
When  to  them  I  say,  "  No  unworthy  reward  is  there  for  your
labour  ;  soon  shall  I  give  you  the  neck  of  my  mistress  to  be
pressed;"  forthwith  do  they  become  vigorous,  and  press  on  for
their  prize,  just  like  the  swift  steed  sent  forth  from  the  Elean
starting-place.18  I,  myself,  therefore,  observe19  the  passion
with  which  I  am  consumed  :  and  thee  do  I  follow,  fair  one
better  deserving  of  the  heavens.  Deserving,  indeed,  of  the
heavens,  but  still  abide  on  earth  ;  or  say  what  path  there  is
for  me  as  well  to  the  Gods  above.  Here  on  earth  art  thou,
and  seldom  dost  thou  fall  to  the  lot  of  thy  unhappy  lover  ;
and,  together  with  my  feelings,  do  the  seas  become  troubled.
What  avails  it  me  that  I  am  not  separated  by  the  vast  ocean
from  thee  ?  Is  this  strip  of  water  so  narrow,  any  the  less  an  ob-
stacle to  us  ? I  am  in  doubt,20  whether,  removed  afar  by  the

trust  himself  to  the  direction  of  his  propitious  star ;  and  he  says  that,
depending  upon  this  guide,  he  would  even  venture  upon  the  most  dan-
gerous expedition,  like  that  of  Jason  to  Colchis,  in  quest  of  the  Golden
Fleece.

16  Palcemon.] — Ver.  159.  Palsemon  was  the  name  which  Melicerta,
the  son  of  Ino,  received  as  a  Divinity  among  the  Greeks.  The  story  of
Ino  and  Melicerta  is  told  in  the  Fourth  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses,  and
is  referred  to  in  the  Sixth  Book  of  the  Fasti.

17  Wondrous  grass.] — Ver.  160.  He  alludes  to  Glaucus,  who  was
changed  into  a  Sea-God,  on  tasting  a  certain  plant.  The  story  is  told
at  the  end  of  the  Thirteenth  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses.

18  Elean  starting-place.'} — Ver.  166.  He  alludes  to  the  Olympic  games,
which  were  celebrated  iu  the  territory  of  Elis,  in  the  Peloponnesus.

19  Therefore  observe.'] — Ver.  167.  'Servo'  means  here 'to  watch,' as
the sailors watch the stars  ;  '  to  take  observations  from.' It  must  be

,  remembered  that  the  stars  and  constellations  were  the  only  guides  with
the  mariners  of  ancient  times,  by  which  to  steer  their  course.

20  I  am  in  doubt.] — Ver.  175.  Leander  here  expresses  himself  in  the
language  of  peculiar  anxiety  and  distress.  He  is  almost  within  sight  of
his  mistress,  and  yet  he  is  as  much  deprived  of  her  company  as  if  they
were  separated  from  each  other  by  the  greatest  distance.  That  nearness  has
given  him  hopes  of  being  with  her  soon  ;  but  accidents  intervene  to  prevent
it,  and  his  hope  changes  into  impatience  and  distraction.  In  this  anxiety
of  mind,  he  thinks  it  would  be  better  for  him  to  be  at  a  distance  from


206  THE EPISTLES OF THE HEROINES.  [EP.  XTIII.

earth's  whole  extent,  I  would  not  prefer  to  have  my  hopes,
together  with  my  mistress,  so  far  removed.

The  nearer  thou  now  art,  with  the  more  violent  flame  am  I
warmed ;  and  the  object  is  not  ever  present  to  me,  the  hope  is.
With  my  hand  almost,21  (so  great  is  our  proximity)  do  I  touch
the  object  that  I  love  ;  but,  oftentimes,  alas  !  this  almost  moves
me  to  tears. 22  What  else  is  this  than  to  attempt  to  grasp  the
retreating  apples,  and  with  one's  lips  to  pursue  the  hopes  of
the  receding  stream  ?  And  shall  I  then  never  clasp  thee,  but
when  the  waves  shall  choose  ?  And  shall  no  storms  look  upon
me  in  a  state  of  blessedness  ?  And,  though  there  is  nothing  less
constant  than  the  wind  and  the  waves,  in  the  wind  and  the  water
shall  my  hopes  be  for  ever  centred  ?  Besides,  as  yet  it  is  the
warm  season  ;  what  will  it  be  when  the  Pleiades23  shall  arouse
the  waves  for  me,  and  Arctophylax,24  and  the  Olenian  goat  !25
Either  I  do  not  know  to  what  extent  he  is  venturesome,  or  else,
even  then,  Love  will  send  me  in  my  rashness  into  the  sea.  And
do  not  suppose  that  I  make  promises  for  that  time,  because  it
is  at  a  distance  ;  I  will  give  thee  no  slow  proofs  of  the  reality
of  my  promises. Even  now  let  the  sea  be  boisterous  for  a  few

her,  because  in  that  case  he  would  endeavour  quietly  to  submit  to  his  fate,
and  he  would  not  feel  himself  exposed  to  the  mortification  of  frequent
disappointments.

21  My  hand  almost .] — Ver.  179.  It  must  be  remembered  that  only
about  a  mile  intervened  between  them.

23  Moves  me  to  tears."] — Ver.  180.  We  have  here  an  admirable  picture
of  a  man  fluctuating  between  hope  and  disappointment.  Hi3  manner
and  expressions  betray  the  impatience  of  his  soul,  and  his  comparison  of
himself  to  Tantalus  is  happy  in  the  extreme.  There  was  some  resem-
blance between  their  two  cases,  and  it  was  natural  for  such  gloomy
ideas  to  present  themselves  to  a  mind  labouring  under  such  peculiar  per-
plexities.

23  The  Pleiades.'] — Ver.  188.  For  an  account  of  the  Pleiades,  see  the
Fasti,  Book  iv.  1.  169,  and  Note.

24  Arctophylax.] — Ver.  188.  For  the  story  of  Arctophylax,  Bootes,  or
the  Bearward,  see  the  Fasti,  Book  ii.  1.  19L

25  Olenian  goat.] — Ver.  188.  For  the  history  of  the  Olenian  she-goat,
see  the  Fasti,  Book  v.  1.  113,  et  seq.  In  addition  to  what  is  there  stated,
we  may  remark  that  the  epithet  '  Olenian  '  is  by  some  thought  to  have
been  derived  from  Olenus,  a  son  of  Vulcan,  the  father  of  iEga  and  ^Elia,
Jupiter's  nurses  ;  but  how  Vulcan's  grandchildren  can  possibly  have  been
the  nurses  of  Jupiter,  is  a  mythological  anachronism  that  it  would  be  use-
less to  attempt  to  rectify.


EP.  XVin.] LEANDER  TO  HEEO.  207

nights  longer,  and  I  will  attempt  to  pass  through  the  resist-
ing waves.

Either,  in  safety,  shall  my  boldness  meet  with  success,  or
else  death  shall  be  the  end  of  my  anxious  affection.  Still  I
shall,  wish26  to  be  thrown  up  on  that  side ;  and  for  my
shipwrecked  limbs  to  reach  thy  harbour.  But  thou  wilt
weep,  and  wilt  honour  my  breathless  body  with  thy  embrace,
and  thou  wilt  say,  "  I  was  the  cause  of  his  death."  No
doubt  thou  wilt  be  hurt  at  this  omen  of  my  death  ;  and  my
letter  in  this  part  is  a  cause  of  trouble  to  thee.  I  desist;  forbear
to  complain  ;  but  that  the  seas  may  put  an  end  to  their  fury,
let  thy  prayer  be  added,  I  pray,  to  my  own.  I  have  need
of  a  short  calm,  until  I  am  carried  over  to  the  other  side  ;
when  I  shall  have  reached  thy  shore,  let  the  storm  continue.
There  is  the  dock27  best  suited  for  my  bark;  and  in  no
waters  does  my  ship  more  conveniently  stand  at  anchor.

Let  Boreas  shut  me  up  there,  where  it  is  so  delightful  to
abide ;  then  shall  I  be  slow  to  swim,  then  shall  I  be  pru-
dent. I  will  neither  utter  any  reproaches  to  the  deaf  waves,
nor  will  I  complain  that  the  sea  is  rough  for  me  about  to
swim.  Let  both  the  winds  and  thy  arms  as  well  detain  me ;  and
may  I  be  delayed  there  by  a  twofold  cause.  When  the  storm
shall  allow  of  it,  I  will  employ  my  arms,  the  oars  of  my  body  ;
only  do  thou  always  hold  the  torch  in  sight.  In  the  mean-
time, instead  of  myself,  let  my  letter  pass  the  night  with  thee  ;
I  pray  that  I  may  follow  it  with  very  little  delay.

26  I  shall  irish.] — Ver.  197.  Nothing  can  be  more  affecting  than  this
wish  of  Leander,  as  it  gives  a  strong  picture  of  the  violence  of  his  pas-
sion, and  shews  at  the  same  time  the  tender  and  pathetic  sentiments  with
which  it  has  inspired  him.  As  love,  when  firmly  implanted  in  the  heart,
is  attentive  to  a  thousand  little  particulars,  which  a  mind  not  similarly
affected  would  overlook  or  perhaps  despise  as  trifling,  Leander  seems  here
to  take  a  pleasure  in  the  imagination  of  what  may  happen,  should  his
body  be  thrown  on  shore  in  the  sight  of  Hero.  Her  tender  complaints
and  her  transports  of  grief  are  all  foreseen,  and  he  considers  them  a  re-
compense for  his  hard  fate.  It  may  be  here  remarked,  that  this,  in  the
end,  proved  to  be  Leander's  fate.  After  he  had  often  crossed  successfully,
a  storm  arising  one  fatal  night,  Hero  in  the  morning  beheld  his  body
floating  near  the  shore.

27  Is  the  dock.] — Ver.  207.  '  Navale'  was  properly  a  dock  where
ships  were  either  built,  refitted,  or  laid  up.  There  were  •  navalia'  at
Rome  connected  with  the  Tiber.  The  docks  of  the  Piraeus  of  Athens
cost  a  thousand  talents  in  their  erection.


208  THE EPISTLES OF TITE HEROINES.  [ZP. XI  \.

EPISTLE  XIX.
HERO TO LEANDER.

rang  the  letter  of  Lewder,  retrain  this  answer. Her
chad  .  ray  her  ardent  return  of  his  passion,  and  with  thu

view  she  s<-  ; ; i m  of  neglect,  while  i  berown

constancy  and  unalterable affect  ion.

I to  a  fear  that Lander  may have  transferred  his aA
another;  hut  I  the  unkind  suspicion,  and  ascribes  all  to

the  well-known anxiety  of  lovers,  who are  apt  to  fancy themselves
threatened  wi'  Alarmed  by  an ominous  dream, she

entreats  him  not  to  venture  till  the  sea  is  calm.

Loo  that  I may  in  reality enjoy  that  health  which

thov  • to  me  in  words, come  hither. Tedious  is

every  delay  for  me,  that  postpones  our  delights.  Pardon  the
confession  ;  I  love  with  no  ordinary  endurance.  With  equal
flames  do  we  burn  ;  but  I  am  not  equal  to  thee  in  strength  ;
1  think  that  the  feelings  of  men  must  be  more  resolute. As

thai  body,  so,  with  females,  is  the  mind  weak  ;  add  the
delay  of  hnf  a  short  time,  and  I  shall  be  overpowered.

You  hunting,  sometimes  by  cultivating

the  prolific  earth,  dispose  of  the  long  hours in  various  pur-

Either  the courts of  justice3"  occupy  you, or i\\c

honours  of  the  anointed  'palaestra'  ;* or  else  with  the  rein

mriSer.] — Ver.  1. Thi.1  ling  one,  with

an  affecti'  on,  and  ardent  expressions  of  her

Leander  once  again.

r.  10. Hero  proceeds  to  give  some  reasons  why  bo
ration  must  prove  more  irksome  to  her  than  to  himself. Men,
Med  by nature  with  more  resolution  and strength of  mind,
may.  ppased  to  be  more  capable  of  enduring  distress. They

have  it,  r  their  power  to  dispel  anxiety  by  a  variety  of  amuse-

>men,  on  the  contrary,  are  deprived  of  these  resources  :
in  particular,  is  able  to  do  nothing  but  to  think  and to  talk of  her
:er. Her  whole  reasoning  is  wonderfully  adapted  not  only  to  prove
ana  advanced,  but  also  to  win  the  affections  of  her  lover,  by  in-
how  dear  I
-'  . •• — Yfj-.  11. Pleading  11  ■  i  their  clients

in  the courts,  was a  favourite  pursuit  with the noble  youth of  B
Indeed,  it  may  be  said  to  have  been  almost  universally  pru

minted Pat&asfra.] — Ver.  11. The  'palaestrae'  of  thi  I
where  wrestling  and  other  athletic  exercises  were  practised,  were  public
buildings ; but among  the Romans, they were  not public, but a


EP.  XIX.]  EEEO TO LEAOT)EE.  209

you  guide  the  neck  of  the  swift  steed.  At  one  time  you  are
catching  the  bird  with  the  snare,  at  another,  the  fish  with  the
hook  ;  the  later  hours  are  drenched  in  the  wine  set  on  table.22
To  me,  removed  from  these  pursuits,  nothing  is  left  to  do,
even  if  I  were  inflamed  less  intensely,  but  to  love.  That
which  is  left  me,  I  do  ;  and  thee,  0  my  only  happiness !  do
I  love,  even  more  than  can  possibly  be  returned  to  me.
Either  I  am  whispering  about  thee  with  my  dear  nurse,  and
am  wondering  what  cause  can  be  delaying  thy  passage  ;  or
else,  looking  out  on  the  sea,  I  reprove  the  ocean,  aroused  hj
the  hateful  winds,  almost  in  thy  own  words  ;  or,  when  the
angry  waves  remit  a  little  of  their  rage,  I  complain  that  thou
mights  t  indeed,  but  that  thou  art  not  desirous  to,  come.  And
as  I  complain,  the  tears  trickle  from  my  loving  eyes,  which
with  palsied  fingers,  the  old  woman,  my  confidant,  dries  up.

Often  do  I  search  if  thy  foot-prints  are  on  the  shore  ;  as
though  the  sand33  would  retain  the  marks  once  placed  there.
And  that  I  may  enquire  about  thee,  and  may  write  to  thee,
I  enquire  if  any  one  has  either  come  from  Abydos,  or  if
one  is  going  to  Abydos.34  Why  should  I  mention,  how  often
I  give  kisses  to  the  clothes,35  which  thou  didst  put  off  when
about  to  go  into  the  waters  of  the  Hellespont  ? So,  when

attached  to  the  villas  of  the  wealthy.  The  'palaestra'  is  here  called  'uncta,'
from  the  '  ceroma'  or  oil  with  which  the  wrestler  was  anointed.

32  Set  on  table.'} — Ver.  14.  After  the  busines-s  of  the  day  was  over,
the  Romans  took  their  '  coena,'  or  principal  meal.  The  time  for  the
■  coena'  is  supposed  to  have  been  from  two  to  three  o'clock  ;  after  that
was  over,  the  rest  of  the  evening  was  devoted  by  many  to  wine  and  con-
versation. The  meal  often  occupied  as  much  as  three  hours,  or  even
more.

33  As  though  the  sand.~\ — Ver.  28.  Nothing  can  be  more  natural  or
better  conceived  than  this.  Lovers  are  ready  to  believe  everything  that
conduces  to  soothe  their  passion  j  and  even  impossibilities  are  by  them
strongly  fancied  to  be  possible.  What  can  be  more  unlikely  than  that
the  sand,  constantly  washed  by  the  sea,  should  retain  the  traces  of  his  foot-
steps ?  And  yet  Hero,  as  if  fully  persuaded  of  it,  runs  to  the  sea-shore  to
look  for  them.

34  Going  to  Jbydos.] — Ver.  30.  Heinsius  thinks  that  this  line  and  the
preceding  one  are  in  a  very  corrupt  state,  and  that  the  distich  which
follows  ought  to  be  placed  before  them.

35  To  the  clofhesJ — Ver.  31.  This  perhaps  refers  to  the  change  of
clothes  which  Hero  was  in  the  habit  of  keeping  for  him  ;  or,  possibly,  to
her  own  garments,  which  she  was  accustomed  to  throw  over  him  when  he
had  landed.


210  THE EPISTLES OP THE HEROINES.  [EP.  XIX.

light  has  been  dispelled,  and,  the  day  chased  away,  the  more
grateful  hour  of  night  has  shewn  the  bright  stars  ;  straightway
do  I  set  the  watchful  light  at  the  top  of  the  tower,  the  guide
and  the  mark  of  thy  wonted  path.  And  lengthening  the
twisted  threads  with  the  turning  spindle,  in  feminine  employ-
ment we  beguile  the  tedious  hours.  Dost  thou  enquire  what  I
am  saying  in  the  meanwhile,  during  this  period  so  long?
Nothing  but  the  name  of  Leander  is  on  my  lips.  "  Dost
thou  think,  nurse,  that  my  love  has  now  left  his  home  ?  Or
are  they  all  on  the  watch,  and  is  he  afraid  of  his  relations  ?
Dost  thou  think  that  he  is  now  putting  his  garments  from  off
his  shoulders,  and  that  he  is  now  anointing  his  limbs  with
unctuous  oil?'*30

Mostly  she  gives  a  nod  of  assent ;  not  that  she  is  alluding
to  my  kisses ;  but  slumber,  creeping  on,  shakes  her  aged
head.37  And  then,  after38  a  very  short  delay,  I  say,  "Now  for
certain,  he  is  swimming,  and  is  moving  his  pliant  arms  in
the  divided  waves."  And  when  I  have  finished  a  few
threads,  they  touching  the  ground,39  I enquire  whether  thou

36  Unctuous  oil.'] — Ver.  44.  '  Pallade'  is  here  used  instead  of  '  oleo,'
'  oil' ;  as  Pallas,  or  Minerva,  is  said  to  have  first  taught  men  the  use  of
oil.  Such  as  excelled  in  swimming,  when  they  were  aware  that  they
should  have  occasion  to  use  all  their  strength,  were  accustomed  to  anoint
themselves  with  this,  as  being  of  great  service  to  them ;  inasmuch  as  it  not
only  made  the  joints  active  and  supple,  but  prevented  them  from  being
numbed  by  the  coldness  of  the  water.

37  Her  aged  head.] — Ver.  46.  This  description  of  the  nurse  nodding
in  her  doze,  is  extremely  natural ;  it  was  not  likely  that  she  should  take
as  much  interest  in  these  lucubrations  as  her  charge  did.

33  And  then  after.] — Ver.  47.  The  Poet's  ingenuity  is  here  shewn
in  its  perfection.  He  knew  full  well  that  the  imagination  is  never  more
actively  engaged,  than  when  employed  about  an  absent  and  beloved  ob-
ject. It  is  not  only  apt  to  run  over  all  the  scenes  that  have  passed  be-
tween them,  but  also  to  fancy  the  manner  in  which  the  absent  person
may  be  at  that  moment  employed.  The  wish  being  '  father  to  the  thought,'
Hero  naturally  imagines  every  instant  what  she  earnestly  desires,  namely,
that  Leander  is  preparing  to  swim  across  to  her.

33  Touching  the  ground.] — Ver.  49.  'Tacta  perfeci  stamina  terra,'
Heinsius  rejects  the  common  reading  here,  and  professes  that  he  is  not
able  to  understand  what  the  Poet  means  by  '  tacta  terra.'  Several  copies,
he  observes,  have  '  tela,' ;  the  thread ;'  an  emendation  which  he  highly
approves.  He  also  conjectures  that,  by  a  mistake  of  the  transcribers,
'  tacta'  has  been  put  in  the  place  of  '  tracta  ;'  for  '  trahere  telam,'  to  '  draw
out  the  thread/  was  as  common  a  phrase  as  '  trahere  lanam,'  '  trahere


HP.  XIX.]  HEBO TO ISA3TDEB.  .  I  I

canst  be  in  the  midst  of  the  sea.  And  sometimes  I  look  out ;
sometimes,  with  faltering  voice,  I  pray  that  a  propitious  breeze
may  give  thee  an  easy  passage.  Sometimes  I  catch  the  noises
with  my  ear,  and  I  believe  that  every  sound  is  that  of  thy
approach.  When  thus  the  greatest  part  of  the  beguiled
night*  has  been  past  by  me,  sleep  insensibly  steals  upon
wearied  eyes.  Then,  perhaps,  unkind  one,  though  unwil-
lingly, thou  art  sleeping  together  with  me  ;  and  though  thou
thyself  desirest  not  to  come,  thou  dost  come.  For  sometimes
I  seem  to  behold  thee  swimming  close  to  me ;  and  now,
placing  thy  dripping  arms  upon  my  shoulders  ;  now,  as  I
am  wont,  I  seem  to  be  reaching  thee  the  garments  for  thy
wet  hmbs,  and  now  to  be  clasping  thy  breast  close  to  my
bosom.  And  many  a  thing  besides,  not  to  be  mentioned  by
a  modest  tongue  ;  which  give  delight  in  the  doing,  but  which
;n  done,  I  am  ashamed  to  name.

Ah,  wretched  me  !"::  a  short-lived  and  an  unsubstantial  plea-
sure is  this  ;  for  with  my  slumbers  thou  art  ever  wont  to  de-
part. 0  that  we4'-  eager  lovers  may  at  length  be  more  closely
united,  and  that  our  delights  may  not  be  deprived  of  a  firm
assurance.  Why,  chilled,  have  I  passed  so  many  forlorn
nights  f  "Why,  slothful  swimmer,  ait  thou  so  often  absent  from

pensnm.'  This  conjecture  has  the  merit  of  ingenuity,  but  the  Delphin
Editor  thinks,  and  apparently  with  justice,  that  there  is  no  necessity  for
such  an  alteration,  as  the  words,  according  to  the  common  reading,  may
be  very  easily  understood,  as  in  lengthening  out  a  thread  it  is  usual  to
Let  the  spindle  gradually  descend  till  it  touches  the  ground;  after  which
it  is  wound  up,  and  the  same  operation  is  repeated  in  constant  succession.

40  The  beguiled  night, '_ — Ver.  55.  'Decipere  noctem,'  means  '  to  be-
guile,' or  '  elude  the  night.'  to  get  over  the  tedious  hours  by  means  of
some  employment.  It  has  been  suggested  that  the  word  '  deceptaV
ought  to  be  referred  to  Hero  herself,  as  meaning,  that  having  waited  ah  i

for  her  lover,  in  the  morning  she  found  herself  deceived  or  disappc:
The  word  seems,  however,  better  applied  to  the  night  itself,  as  in  the
other  case  it  would  imply  a  harshness  ill-suited  to  the  affectionate  tone  o:
the  letter.

41  Ah,  wretched  mef] — Ver.  65.  Heinsius  says,  apparently  without  any
sound  reason,  that  this  and  the  following  lines  are  probably  spurious.

42  0  thai  we.~\ — Ver.  67. This  wish  is  introduced  with  great  pro-
priety. Hero,  after  recounting  her  dreams  and  the  short  unsatis; a
joys  that  ensued  from  them,  could  not  conclude  in  a  more  natural  way
than  by  expressing  her  earnest  wishes  that  these  fleeting  joys  might  soon
be  converted  into  real  transports.

p  2


212  THE EPISTLES OP THE HEROINES,  [EP.  XIX.

me  ?  The  sea  (I  confess  it)  is  not  yet  tractable  for  the  swim-
mer, but  last  night  more  gentle  were  the  gales.  Why  has
that43  night  passed  by?  Why  didst  thou  not  dread  what
might  ensue  ?  Why  did  an  opportunity  so  fair  pass  away,
not  seized  by  thee  ?  Though  a  like  opportunity  for  passing
over  should  at  once  be  presented  thee,  that,  at  least,44  was
better  than  it,  inasmuch  as  it  was  the  first.  But  soon45  the
face  of  the  troubled  deep  was  changed ;  often  hast  thou
come  over  in  a  less  time,  when  thou  hast  used  speed.  If  de-
tained here,40  I  think  thou  wouldst  have  no  reason  to  com-
plain ;  and  in  my  embraces  no  storms  could  hurt  thee.  At
least,  I  could  then  listen  unconcerned  to  the  roaring  winds,
and  I  could  pray  that  the  waters  might  never  be  calm.

But  why  has  it  happened  that  thou  art  more  fearful  of  the
waves  1 And  why  dost  thou  now  fear  the  sea,  which  before


13  Why  has  that.] — Ver.  73.  Throughout  the  whole  Epistle,  Hero  fully
maintains  the  character  which  she  has  given  herself  at  first,  that  of  an
ardent  and  anxious  lover.  She  sedulously  watches  times  and  seasons,  and
complains  if  she  is  disappointed  in  what  she  may  expect  from  them.  As,
the  night  hefore,  the  storm  had  somewhat  ahated,  she  wonders  that  he
did  not  take  the  opportunity  of  coining  to  her.

44  That,  at  least.] — Ver.  76.  Although  she  owns  in  the  next  verse  that
the  storm  was  lulled  only  for  a  very  short  time,  still  she  does  not  ascribe
his  staying  away  to  that  circumstance,  but  is  rather  apt  to  fear  that  his
concern  for  her  begins  to  diminish.  We  have  here  a  faithful  picture  of '
the  human  heart,  which,  in  proportion  to  the  high  value  it  sets  on  any
object,  is  extremely  apprehensive  about  losing  it.  The  case  is  still  more
remarkable  with  lovers,  whom  the  most  trivial  circumstances  in  life  often
fill  with  a  thousand  anxieties  and  alarms.

45  But  soon.] — Ver.  77.  This  is  to  be  considered  as  an  objection  and
excuse  offered  on  the  part  of  Leander ;  as  if  Hero  had  said,  '  I  know  you
will  plead  that  the  cessation  of  the  storm  was  short,  and  that,  dreading  this
with  reason,  you  were  unwilling  to  venture,'  She  immediately  replies,
'  Allow  that  you  were  afraid  of  the  raging  sea,  yet  why  did  you  not  come
when  it  was  calm  ?  The  interval,  though  short,  continued  longer  than
you  usually  take  to  swim  across.'  This  answer,  rejecting  Leander's  ex-
cuse, is  happily  imagined  by  the  Poet ;  for,  however  good  his  plea  might
be,  yet  passion  ever  pays  but  little  regard  to  the  voice  of  reason.

4(5  Detained  here.] — Ver.  79.  Leander  had  already  owned  this  in  his
letter  ;  but  we  are  to  consider  it  on  both  sides  as  only  the  language  of
thoughtless  passion.  Their  chief  concern  was  to  conceal  their  passion
from  their  parents ;  and  such  an  accident  as  this  must  of  necessity  have
discovered  all.  It  was  not,  however,  to  be  expected  that,  at  the  height
of  their  disappointment,  they  would  be  in  such  a  frame  of  mind  as  to
think  of  consequences.


EP.  XIX.]  HEEO TO LEANDEE.  213

thou  didst  despise?  For  I  remember,  when,  on  thy  arrival,
the  sea  was  not  less  boisterous  and  threatening,  or  at  least
not  much  less,  I  exclaimed  to  thee,  "  Do  thou  be  bold  in
such  a  manner  that  thy  intrepidity  may  not  have  to  be  be-
wailed by  wretched  me."  Whence  these47  new  fears  1  And
whither  has  that  boldness  fled?  Where  is  that  notable
swimmer  who  despised  the  waves  ?  Yet  mayst  thou  rather
be  thus,  than  as  thou  wast  wont  to  be  before  ;  and  mayst  t^ou
in  safety  make  thy  way  through  the  becalmed  sea  ;  provided
only  thou  dost  remain  the  same  ;  provided  I  am  so  loved  as  thou
dost  write  that  I  am;  and  that  thy  flame  proves  not  cold  ashes.
Not  so  much  do  I  dread  the  winds  that  disappoint  my  wishes,
as  that  thy  affection,  like  the  wind,  should  prove  inconstant.
I  fear  that  I  may  not  be  held  in  such  high  esteem,  and  that
the  dangers  may  outweigh  the  occasion  ;  and  that  I  may  seem
to  be  a  reward  too  small  for  the  labour.  Sometimes  I  am
afraid  that  I  may  be  injured  through  my  native  place,  and
that  I,  a  Thracian  girl,4s  may  be  deemed  unequal  for  an  alli-
ance in  Abydos.

47  Whence  these."] — Ver.  89.  Hero  still  discovers  the  height  of  her
passion  by  her  anxiety.  That  anxiety,  too,  is  that  of  a  lover,  which
magnifies  every  difficulty,  and  fills  the  breast  with  groundless  fears.
She  knows  well  enough,  that  since  his  first  corning,  there  has  been  no
storm  at  all  equal  to  the  present*  There  is  no  cause  then  to  wonder
why  his  courage  is  abated,  as  it  has  never  yet  been  put  to  a  similar  trial.
Hero,  thinking  only  of  his  long  absence,  will  not  allow  herself  to  reflect
upon  the  danger,  but  charges  him  with  want  of  courage  in  not  attempt-
ing to  do  what  is  quite  impossible.

48  Thracian  girl.'] — Ver.  100.  Heinsius  gives  his  opinion  in  favour  of
the  reading  '  Thressa,'  instead  of  '  Sesta,'  in  this  line.  This  is  the  more
probable,  inasmuch  as  we  learn  from  history,  that  the  Thracians  were
held  in  general  contempt  by  the  Greeks.  Thus  we  learn,  from  Cornelius
Nepos,  that  it  was  objected  to  Themistocles,  that  he  was  born  of  a  Thra-
cian mother.  Athenseus  also  remarks,  that  Timotheus,  the  celebrated
general,  had  for  his  mother  a  Thracian  and  a  courtesan.  Hence,  too,  in
the  Argonautics  of  Valerius  Flaccus,  Book  hi.,  we  find  that  Zethes  and  Calais
are  called  by  Jason,  in  a  contemptuous  manner,  •  Thracia  proles :'  '  The
Thracian  progeny.'  We  learn,  too,  from  Diogenes  Laertius,  that  it  was
made  an  objection  to  the  philosopher  Antisthenes,  that  he  was  born  of  a
Thracian  mother ;  and  in  like  manner,  Demosthenes  was  censured  as
being  the  offspring  of  a  Scythian  female,  A  great  part  of  the  courtesans
at  Athens,  as  well  as  the  female  domestics,  were  Thracians  by  birth.  The
people  of  Abydos  were  likewise  despised  by  the  Greeks,  and  were  made
the  subject  of  certain  proverbs.


214  THE EPISTLES OE THE HEEOIXES.  [EP.  XIX.

Yet  I  am  able  to  endure  every  thing  with  more  patience,
than  if  thou  shouldst  be  taking  thy  ease  captivated  with
some  rival49  I  know  not  whom ;  than  if  the  arms  of
another  should  come  around  thy  neck  ;  and  than  if  a  new
love  were  the  termination  of  thy  passion  for  me.  Oh  !  rather
might  I  perish,  than  be  wounded  by  such  criminality ;  and
may  my  doom  happen  before  thy  guilt.  Not  that  I  mention
these  things  because  thou  hast  given  me  symptoms  of  future
grief ;  or  because  I  am  alarmed  by  recent  rumours.  But  I  ap-
prehend every  thing  ;  (for  who  has  loved50  without  anxieties  ?)
and  locality  compels  those  at  a  distance  to  be  most  in  dread.
Happy  they,  whose  presence  allows  them  to  know  of  real
faults,  and  forbids  them  to  apprehend  imaginary  ones.51  As
much  do  unfounded  injuries  disturb  us,  as  do  injuries  really
committed  escape  our  observation ;  and  each  error  begets
equal  affliction.

0,  would  that  thou  wouldst  come  !  that  either  the  winds  or
thy  father,  and  no  female,  may  be  the  cause  of  thy  so  long52
staying  away !  But  should  I  hear  of  any  rival,  believe  me,  I
shall  die  of  grief.  Long  time  already  hast  thou  been  guilty,
if  thou  art  seeking  my  destruction.  But  thou  wilt  not  be
guilty,  and  in  vain  am  I  alarmed  at  these  things ;  and  the

49  Some  rival.']^- Ver.  102.  Jealousy  is  said  to  be  inseparable  from
love,  especially  when,  by  reason  of  distance,  the  lovers  are  often  obliged  to
be  absent  from  each  other.  Ovid  seldom  fails  to  introduce  symptoms  of
it  in  his  Epistles ;  but  he  generally,  with  some  degree  of  partiality,  de-
picts it  more  strongly  in  those  from  the  females.

50  Who  has  loved.] — Ver.  109.  If  Hero  is  unable  wholly  to  hide  her
suspicions  from  her  lover,  yet  they  are  expressed  in  a  manner  so  delicate,
that  it  is  next  to  impossible  for  him  to  take  offence.  She  owns  that  he
has  never  given  her  any  cause  for  them,  and  that  they  are  nothing  more
than  those  unavoidable  disquiets  which  ever  attend  upon  love.  It  would
have  been  inconsistent  with  the  Poet's  object  to  introduce  a  jealousy
fraught  with  sinister  suspicions  on  either  side.

51  Imaginary  ones.] — Ver.  112.  There  is  no  state  of  mind  more  un-
easy than  that  of  uncertainty,  especially  in  cases  where  it  highly  concerns
us  to  be  resolved,  and  where,  in  consequence,  there  must  necessarily  be  a
great  degree  of  impatience.  The  reflection,  therefore,  which  Hero  makes,
is  just ;  and  as  she  is  herself  in  a  state  of  great  uncertainty,  it  comes  from
her  with  great  propriety.

52  Of  thy  so  long.] — Ver.  116.  '  Tantae'  seems  a  preferable  reading
to  '  certse,'  though  the  signification  here  is  much  the  same.


EP.  XIX.]  s HERO TO LEANDEE.  215

envious  storm  rages,  in  order  that  thou  mayst  not  come.  Ah,
wretched  me !  by  what  vast  billows  the  shores  are  beaten  !
and  how  the  day  is  hidden,  obscured  by  the  darkening  clouds'!
Perhaps  the  affectionate  mother53  has  come  to  the  sea  of
Helle,  and  her  daughter,  who  was  drowned,  is  being  bewailed
in  the  streaming  torrents.  Or  does  her  stepmother, 5i  changed
into  a  Goddess  of  the  ocean,  disturb  the  sea  that  was  called
by  the  hated  name  of  her  stepdaughter  ?  This  spot,  such  as
it  now  is,  is  not  favourable  for  tender  maids.  In  these  waves
did  Helle  perish ;  by  these  waves  am  I  crossed.

But  surely,  Neptune,55  no  love  ought  to  have  been  opposed
by  the  winds  through  thee,  if  thou  dost  remember  thy  own
flames  ;  if  neither  Amymone,56  nor  Tyro,57  most  celebrated
for  beauty,  is  a  vain  pretext  for  a  charge  against  thee.  The
bright Halcyone,58 too, acd the daughter of Circe and

53  Affectionate  mother. .] — Ver.  123.  Hero  supposes  that  the  storm
may  haye  been  raised  by  Nephele,  the  mother  of  Helle,  who  had  come
down  to  lament  the  unhappy  fate  of  her  daughter.  This,  perhaps,  was
suggested  by  the  mention  of  the  clouds  in  the  previous  line,  as  well  as  the
locality,  '  Nephele'  meaning,  in  Greek,  *  a  cloud-*

34  Her  step-mother.']  — Ver.  126.  Ino,  who  was  afterwards  changed
into  a  sea  Goddess,  under  the  name  of  Leucothoe.

55  Neptune.] — Ver.  129.  Hero  now  addresses  herself  to  Neptune,  and
expostulates  with  him  for  keeping  Leander  so  long  from  her.  She  tells
him  that  this -treatment  was  least  of  all  to  have  been  expected  from  him,
who  had  himself  so  often  been  sensible  of  the  power  of  love.  She  then
mentions  several  damsels  of  whom  the  poets  had  represented  Neptune  as
being  enamoured.

56  Jmymone.] — Ver.  131.  Amymone  was  one  of  the  fifty  daughters
of  Danaus,  who,  with  the  exception  of  Hypermnestra,  made  themselves
so  notorious  by  the  murder  of  their  husbands.  As  she  was  hunting  one
day  in  a  wood,  being  closely  pursued  by  a  Satyr,  she  implored  the  aid  of
Neptune,  who  came  and  rescued  her ;  but  he  was  so  enchanted  with  her
beauty,  that  she  soon  afterwards  proved  pregnant  by  him,  and,  according  to
Strabo,  became  the  mother  of  Nauplius.

57  Nor  Tyro.]— Ver.  132.  We  learn  from  Homer  that  Tyro  was  the
daughter  of  Salmoneus,  and  that  being  in  love  with  the  river  God  Enipeus,
Neptune  deceived  her  under  that  form,  on  which  she  became  the  parent
of  the  twins  Neleus  and  Pelias.

58  Halcyone.] — Ver.  133.  Alcyone,  or  Halcyone,  was  one  of  the  Plei-
ades, daughters  of  Atlas  and  Pleione ;  by  Neptune  she  was  the  mother  of
Lycaon,  Hyrieus,  and  Halcyone,  the  wife  of  Ceyx,  whose  story  is  tohi  ia
the  Eleventh  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses.


216  THE EPISTLES OF THE HEEOIKES.  [EP.  XIX.

Alymon,59  and  Medusa,60  with  her  locks  not  yet  wreathed
with  serpents ;  the  yellow-haired  Laodice,61  too,  and  Celseno,
received  into  the  heavens,  and  others,  whose  names  I  remem-
ber to  have  been  read  by  me.  The  poets,  at  least,  Neptune,
sing  how  these  and  many  others  placed  their  delicate  sides
by  thy  own  side.  Why,  then,  dost  thou,  who  hast  so  often  ex-
perienced the  power  of  love,  obstruct  for  us,  with  thy  whirl-
winds, the  wonted  path  ?  Forbear,  stern  Deity,  and  wage
thy  battles  upon  the  wide  ocean.  These  narrow  waves  merely
divide  two  lands.  It  becomes  thee  either  in  thy  might  to
buffet  the  mighty  ships,  or  else  to  be  hostile  to  whole  fleets.
It  is  a  disgraceful  thing  for  a  God  of  the  sea  to  alarm  a
youth  that  swims  ;  and  such  glory  as  that  is  unworthy  of  any
common  pond.  Noble,  indeed,  is  he,  and  illustrious  is  his
birth ;  but  he  does  not  derive  his  origin  from  Ulysses,  who
was  suspected62  by  thee.

59  Circe  and  Alymon.'] — Ver.  133.  For  the  words  '  Circeque  et  Aly-
mone  nata,'  there  are  about  forty  different  readings  in  the  various  MSS.
The  common  reading  is  possibly  the  right  one,  in  which  case  the  daughter
of  Circe  and  Alymon,  here  referred  to,  will  probably  be  Iphimedia,  the
wife  of  Alocus,  who  is  mentioned  by  Homer  in  the  Odyssey  ;  where  he
tells  us  that  she  was  ravished  by  Neptune,  and  bore  to  him  the  giants
Otus  and  Ephialtes,  who  grew  nine  inches  in  stature  every  month.

60  Medusa.] — Ver,  134.  Medusa,  the  daughter  of  Phorcus,  was  re-
markable for  the  beauty  of  her  hair.  She  was  ravished  by  Neptune,  in
the  temple  of  Minerva.  Provoked  at  her  seeming  impiety,  the  Goddess
changed  her  hair  into  serpents,  and  all  that  looked  upon  her  into  stones.

61  Laodice.'] — Ver.  135.  There  were  several  Nymphs  of  this  name
mentioned  by  the  ancient  poets.  One  was  the  daughter  of  Priam  and
Hecuba,  and  the  wife  of  Helicaon  ;  another,  a  daughter  of  Agamem-
non and  Clytemnestra,  who  was  offered  in  marriage  to  Achilles  ;  while  a
third  was  the  daughter  of  Cygnus.  There  was  another  Nymph  of  this
name,  the  mother  of  Apis  and  Niobe.  The  daughter  of  Priam  is  pro-
bably the  person  here  alluded  to.  Celseno  was  a  daughter  of  Atlas  and
Pleione,  being  one  of  the  Pleiades,  who  formed  the  Constellation  which
the  Romans  called  '  Vergilise.'

02  Who  was  suspected.] — 148.  "Ulysses  was  an  object  of  the  hatred  of
Neptune,  as  some  said,  because  he  had  contrived  the  death  of  his  grand-
son, Palamedes,  before  Troy ;  while,  according  to  others,  in  consequence
of  Ulysses  having  thrust  out  the  eye  of  his  son,  Polyphemus,  in  Sicily,  he
was  retarded  by  Neptune  on  his  return  to  his  native  country.  We  may
here  remark,  that  Ovid  evidently  intends  to  represent  Hero  and  Leander
as  living  after  the  fall  of  Troy  ;  Statius,  however,  makes  them  to  have
lived  before  the  Theban  war,  as  he  mentions  them  in  the  description  of


EP.  XIX.]  HEEO TO LEANDEB.  217

Show  mercy,  and  preserve  the  two  ;  he  only  swims ;  but
od  the  same  waves  depend  the  body  of  Leander  and  my  hopes.
The  lamp,  too,  crackles,63  (for  with  it  placed  beside  me,64, 1  am
writing)  ;  it  crackles,  and  it  gives  me  a  propitious  omen.  See  1
my  nurse  is  pouring  wine65  upon  the  flames  of  favourable
omen,  and  she  says,  "  To-morrow  we  shall  be  more ;"  and
then  she  drinks.66  Do  make  us  to  be  more,  gliding  through
the  surmounted  waves,  0  thou  that  art  so  thoroughly  im-
pressed upon  my  heart.  Return  to  thy  camp,  thou  deserter
of  social  Love.  Why  are  my  limbs  extended  in  the  middle
of  my  couch  ?  There  is  nothing  for  thee  to  fear.  Venus
herself  will  favour  the  attempt ;  and,  born  of  the  sea,fi?  she  will
smooth  the  path  over  the  sea.  I  myself  am  often  prompted
to  pass  over  the  boisterous  waves,  but  this  sea  is  wont  to
be  more  safe  for  the  male  sex.6s For  why,  when  Phryxus

the  garment  which  is  given  as  a  prize  to  Admetus,  in  the  games  celebrated
at  the  tomb  of  Archemorus.

63  Lamp,  too,  crackles.] — Ver.  151.  The  sputtering  or  crackling  of  the
lamp  is  mentioned  as  being  a  good  omen,  in  the  177th  Epigram  of  the
Seventh  Book  of  the  Gi-ecian  Anthology.

04  Placed  beside  me. ]— Ver.  151.  Before  oil  lamps  were  invented,
camlles  made  either  of  wax  or  tallow  were  universally  used  by  the  Ro-
mans. The  bulrush,  called  'sen-pus,'  was  used  for  the  wick.  At  a
later  period,  candles  were  only  used  by  the  poorer  classes.  The  lamps
were  mostly  of  an  oval  form,  and  flat  upon  the  top,  and  were  made  of
baked  clay,  or  bronze.  There  were  at  the  extremity  of  the  lamp  as
many  holes  or  nozzles  as  there  were  wicks  in  it.  They  were  sometimes
suspended  by  chains,  but  more  frequently  stood  upon  a  stand,  where  statues
sometimes  held  them. Perfumed  oil  was  sometimes  burnt.

65  Is  pouring  wine.] — Ver.  154.  This  was  done,  perhaps,  as  a  sort  of
libation,  and  with  the  view  of  making  the  lamp  burn  up  more  cheerfully.

66  Then  she  drinks.] — Ver.  154.  The  nurse  does  not  forget  that  very
essential  part  of  the  ceremonial.  Similarly  with  the  old  woman  mentioned
in  the  Fasti,  Book  II.  1.  571,  when  performing  the  rites  of  Tacita.
4  Wine  too  she  drops  on  it ;  whatever  of  the  wine  is  left,  she  either
drinks  it  herself,  or  her  attendants,  yet  she  herself  takes  the  greater  part.'

97  Born  of  the  sea.] — Ver.  160.  Hero  is  endeavouring  to  persuade  her
lover  to  shake  off  all  fear,  and  to  venture  boldly.  To  encourage  him,  she
reminds  him  that  Venus  is  not  only  the  Goddess  of  Love,  and  will  there-
fore be  propitious  to  a  chaste  flame  like  theirs,  but  that  also,  as  sprung
from  the  sea,  she  may  be  accounted  in  some  sense  a  Sea  Goddess,  and
be  supposed  to  have  power  over  that  element.

6*  The  male  sex.] — Ver.  162.  To  make  Leander  the  more  sensible  of
her  impatience  and  anxiety,  she  tells  him  that  she  herself  is  often  ready


218  THE EPISTLES OF THE HEKOTNES.  [EP. XTX.

and  the  sister  of  Phryxus  were  borne  on  this  sea,  did  the
female  alone  give  a  name  to  these  tremendous  waves  ?

Perhaps  thou  art  afraid  that  opportunity  may  be  wanting
for  thy  return,  or  art  unable  to  endure  the  weight  of  a  re-
doubled toil.  Let  us  then,  setting  out  from  the  opposite  sides,
meet  in  the  midst69  of  the  deep  ;  and  let  us  give  kisses  on  our
meeting  upon  the  surface  of  the  waves  ;  and  then  let  us  each
return  again  to  our  respective  cities.  That  would  be  a  small  en-
joyment, but  still,  better  than  none.  Either  could  I  wish  that
this  shame,  which  forces  us  to  love  in  secret,  could  give  way,
or  that  love,  so  apprehensive  as  to  character,  could  yield !
Now,  passion  and  propriety,  things  but  badly  united,  are  at
variance.  Which  I  should  follow  is  a  matter  of  doubt ;  the
one  is  proper,  the  other  ministers  to  pleasure.  When  once
Pagassean  Jason70  entered  Colchis,  he  bore  off  the  Phasian
damsel  placed  on  board  the  swift  ship.  When  once  the  para-
mour from  Ida  had  come  to  Lacedeemon,  he  forthwith  re-
turned with  his  prize.  Thou,  so  often  as  thou  dost  obtain  the
object  which  thou  dost  love,  dost  as  often  abandon  her  ;  and
ofr  as  it  is  dangerous  for  ships  to  proceed,  thou  dost  swim.

But  still,  0  youth,  the  conqueror  of  the  boisterous  waters,
do  thou  take  care  and  so  despise  the  sea,  as  to  have  due  caution.
The  ships,  formed  with  art,  are  overpowered  with  the  tem-
pest ;  dost  thou  suppose  that  thy  arms  can  effect  more  than
oars  ?  Whereas,  Leander,  thou  dost  wish  to  swim,  the  mariners
dread  it  :71  that  is  wont  to  be  the  catastrophe  when  the  ves-
sel is  wrecked. Ah  wretched  me ! I  wish  not  to  persuade

to  rush  into  the  waves,  and  is  only  kept  back  by  reflecting  how  fatal  that
sea  has  been  to  her  sex.

69  In  the  midst, .] — Ver.  167.  Nothing  could  have  been  more  happily
imagined  than  this  passage,  in  order  to  give  us  a  just  idea  of  the  tender
affection  with  which  Hero  and  Leander  loved  each  other,  or  of  the  plea-
sure that  a  real  meeting  must  have  afforded  them.  Who,  after  reading
this,  can  wonder  at  the  impatience  which  they  express  under  the  misfor-
tune of  separation  ?

70  Payasaan  Jason.] — Ver.  175.  Weary  of  her  present  state  of  doubt
and  uncertainty,  and  reflecting  on  her  lover's  danger  whenever  he  visits
her,  she  thinks  it  would  be  better  for  her  if  she  should  suffer  from
Leander  the  treatment  which  Medea  did  from  Jason,  and  Helen  from
Paris,  in  being  carried  away.

71  Mariners  dread  it.] — Ver.  185.*'  It  is  a  curious  fact,  that  by  far  the
greater  part  of  the  seafaring  class  are  unable  to  swim.


EP.  XIX.]  HERO TO LEAJNDEE.  219

thee  that  to  do  which  I  entreat  thee ;  and  mayst  thou  thyself,
I  pray,  be  bolder  than  my  precepts  ;  only  do  thou  come,  and
do  thou  throw  thy  wearied  arms,  so  oft  impelled  through  the
waves,  around  my  shoulders.

But,  oft  as  I  turn  my  view  to  the  azure  waves,  I  know
not  what  chill  possesses  my  heaving  breast.  Not  less  am
I  disturbed  by  the  vision  of  last  night,  although  it  has  been
expiated  by  rites  performed  by  me.  For,  towards  dawn,
the  lamp  now  nickering,  (at  the  time72  when  true  visions
are  wont  to  be  seen)  the  threads  fell  from  my  fingers  deadened
with  sleep,  and  I  laid  my  neck  to  be  supported  on  a
pillow.73  Here  did  I  seem  to  myself,  with  reality  beyond
mistake,  to  see  a  dolphin  swimming  over  the  waves  tossed  by
the  winds  ;  after  the  billows  had  dashed  it  on  the  soaking
sands,  at  the  same  moment,  the  waters  and  its  life  abandoned
it.  "Whatever  that  means,  I  dread  it ;  and  do  not  thou  laugh
at  my  visions,  nor  trust  thy  arms  but  to  an  untroubled  sea,
If  thou  art  regardless  of  thyself,  be  regardful  of  thy  much-
loved  mistress  ;  who  will  never  be  unhurt,74  but  while  thou  art
uninjured.

Still,  I  have  some  hope  of  an  ensuing  calm  for  the  subdued
waves  ;  then,  with  breast  free  from  peril,  cleave  the  tranquil
path.  Meantime,  since  the  deep  is  not  to  be  passed  by  one
swimming,  let  this  letter  that  is  sent  soothe  the  hateful  delay;

72  At  the  time."] — Ver.  196.  Apollonius  Tyanaeus,  in  his  Life  of  Phi-
lostratus,  tells  us  that  the  interpreters  of  dreams  made  it  always  their
first  question,  at  what  hour  the  vision  appeared ;  for,  if  it  was  towards
morning,  they  conjectured  that  the  dream  was  true,  hecause  at  that  time
the  soul  is  quite  disengaged  from  the  vapours  of  wine  and  food.  Horace,
in  his  Tenth  Satire,  Book  i.,  alludes  to  the  same  belief.  Theocritus,  also,
in  the  Idyll  called  '  Europa,'  which  some  ascribe  to  Moschus,  marks  dis-
tinctly the  time  of  night  when  dreams  are  true.  '  Venus  sent  an  agre-
able  dream  to  Europa,  when  the  third  watch  of  the  night  had  almost
elapsed,  and  Aurora  was  approaching/  A  few  verses  after,  be  adds,
'  About  the  time  that  the  troop  of  real  visions  hovers  round  those  who  are
still  in  the  arms  of  sleep.'

73  On  a  pillow.] — Ver.  198.  Davison  thus  translates  this  line,  '  And
my  neck  was  gently  reclined  on  the  ban-en  ridge.'  '  Pulvinus'  is  cer-
tainly sometimes  '  a  heap  of  sand  and  stones  as  a  foundation  for  a  pillar,'
and  in  one  instance  it  means  '  a  sand  bank' ;  but  how  he  came  to  mistake
here  what  so  obviously  means  '  a  pillow,'  it  is  difficult  to  conceive.

74  Be  unhurt.] — Ver.  206.  When  she  beheld  his  dead  body  floating
below,  she  threw  herself  from  the  tower,  and  was  drowned.


220  THE EPISTLES OF THE HEROINES.  [EP.  XX.

EPISTLE  XX.

ACONTIUS  TO  CYDIPPE.

Delos  was  an  island  in  the  iEgean  sea,  the  most  celebrated  of  the  Cy-
clades.  The  Goddess  Diana  had  a  temple  there,  in  which  she  was
worshipped  with  great  pomp.  A  youth  named  Acontius,  being  present
at  the  celebration  of  these  rites,  beheld  Cydippe  there,  and  became
deeply  enamoured  of  her.  Not  daring  to  make  known  his  passion  to
her,  and  fearing  a.  repulse,  he  devised  a  novel  stratagem,  and  taking
the  most  beautiful  apple  he  could  procure,  he  wrote  upon  it  the  two
following  verses  ■

*  Juro  tibi  sane,  permystica  sacra  Dianse,
Me  tibi  venturum  comitem,  sponsamque  futuram.'

'  I  swear  to  thee  inviolably,  by  the  mystic  rites  of  Diana,  that  I  will  join
myself  to  thee  as  thy  companion  and  will  be  thy  bride.'  Having  done
this,  he  threw  it  at  the  foot  of  the  damsel,  who  not  suspecting  the  de-
vice, took  it  up  and  read  it,  and  thereby  undesignedly  devoted  herself
to  Acontius ;  as  there  was  at  that  time  a  law  in  force  at  Delos,  that
whatever  any  person  should  swear  in  the  temple  of  Diana  should  be
performed  and  inviolably  observed.  Her  father  (not  knowing  what
had  happened),  having  some  time  after  promised  her  to  another,  she
was  suddenly  seized  with  a  violent  fever,  at  the  time  when  the  marriage
solemnities  Avere  about  to  be  performed.  Acontius  hearing  of  this,
and  still  retaining  some  hopes  of  success,  is  supposed  to  -write  the
present  Epistle  to  Cydippe,  in  which  he  endeavours  to  persuade  her
that  the  fever  has  been  sent  by  Diana,  as  a  punishment  for  the  breach
of  the  vow  made  in  her  presence.  These  representations  are  enforced
by  the  various  arguments  that  would  be  likely,  on  such  an  occasion,  to
occur  to  a  lover.

Receive,  Cydippe,75  the  name  of  the  despised  Acontius  ;  of
him  who,  by  means  of  the  apple,  deceived  thee. Lay  aside76

75  Receive,  Cydippe.'] — The  first  two  lines  are —

'  Accipe,  Cydippe,  despecti  nomen  Aconti,
Illius,  in  porno  qui  tibi  verba  dedit.'

They  are  generally  considered  to  be  spurious.  We  may  here  remark,  that
in  the  Tenth  Epistle  of  his  First  Book,  Aristsenetus  tells  this  story  in  a
very  pleasing  manner.  Callimachus  also  depicted  the  love  of  Acontius  for
Cydippe  in  one  of  his  poems,  which  is  now  lost.  Antoninus  Liberalis  tells  a
similar  story  in  his  first  book,  respecting  Ctesilla  and  Hermocharus.  Bur-
mann  and  Ruhnken  think  that  this  and  the  following  Epistle  were  not
written  by  Ovid. Scaliger  attributes  the  authorship  of  them  to  Sabinus.

76  Lay  aside.-] — Ver.  1.  Heinsius  observes  of  this  Epistle,  that  it  has
suffered  more,  perhaps,  than  any  other  from  the  carelessness  and  incor-
rectness of  transcribers ;  and  that  in  many  places  it  is  so  defaced,  that  we
are  at  a  loss  how  to  gather  any  consistent  sense.


EP.  XX.]  ACONTIUS TO CTDIPPE.  221

thy  fears  ;  nothing  shalt  thou  swear  here  again77  in  favour  of
thy  lover  :  'tis  enough  that  thou  hast  once  been  promised  to
me.  Read  this  through  ;  then  may  thy  malady,  which,  when
any  part  of  thee78  is  in  pain,  is  my  pain  as  well,  depart  from
that  body  of  thine.  Why  do  blushes  arise  on  thy  cheeks  ?
For,  as  in  the  temple  of  Diana,  I  fancy  that  thy  modest  features
turn  red.  I  ask  for  thy  alliance  and  thy  plighted  faith,  and
nothing  criminal ;  as  thy  lawful  husband  do  I  love  thee,  not
as  an  adulterer.

Shouldst  thou  repeat  the  words,  which,  the  fruit  taken  from
off  the  tree,  when  I  threw  it,  bore  to  thy  chaste  hands,  thou
wilt  find  that  thou  dost  there  promise  that  which  I  desire79
thyself,  maiden,  rather  than  the  Goddess  to  bear  in  mind.  Now,
too,  do  I  apprehend  this  latter  thing  ;  but  still  does  this  latter
alternative  increase  my  ardour,  and  the  flame  augments
by  delay ;  the  passion,  too,  that  never  was  small,  is  now
increased  by  length  of  time,  and  the  hopes  which  thou
hadst  given  me.  Hopes  didst  thou  give  me  ;  this  passion  of
mine  put  trust  in  thee ;  thou  canst  not  deny  that  this  took
place,  a  Goddess  the  witness.  She  was  present,  and  in  per-
son she  marked  thy  words  just  as  they  were  ;  and  shaking  her
locks,  she  seemed  to  approve  of  thy  sayings.  Thou  mayst  be
enabled  to  say  that  thou  wast  deceived  by  my  stratagem  ;  so

77  Swear  here  again.'] — Ver.  1.  As  Acontius  has  already  deceived
Cydippe,  she  may  possibly  be  apprehensive  of  some  new  fraud,  and,
having  that  notion,  refuse  to  read  the  letter.  Acontius  endeavours  to
prevent  this,  by  assuring  her  that  he  has  no  further  intentions  of  that
kind  ;  and  that,  satisfied  with  having  once  obtained  her  promise,  he  means
no  more  than  to  remind  her  of  her  engagement,  and  to  give  her  such
advice  as  may  lead  to  her  recovery.

7B  Any  part  of  thee. ~] — Ver.  4.  If  Acontius  has  been  the  cause  of  any
disaster  to  Cydippe,  he  wishes  to  persuade  her  that  he  has  been  so  purely
from  accident.  His  intention  was  no  more  than  to  secure  her  to  himself;
and  her  own  disregard  of  her  vow  has  occasioned  that  illness,  of  which
he  has  suffered  all  the  anguish  in  the  most  sensible  manner.

79  Which  I  desire.] — Ver.  11.  After  '  quod  opto,'  some  of  the  MSS.
insert  the  two  following  hues  :

'  Ni  tibi  cum  verbis  excidit  ilia  fides.
Id  metui,  ut  Diva?  diffusa  est  ira ;  decebat.'

'  Unless that  promise  of  thine  has  passed  away  with the  words,  as

soon  as  read.  This  did  I  fear,  when  the  wrath  of  the  Goddess  was

poured  forth.  It  befitted  thee,  0  maiden,  to  bear  it  in  mind  rather  than

the  Goddess.'  Some  editions  adopt  these  lines  in  the  text.


222  " THE EPISTLES OE THE HEROINES.  [ep.  XX.

long  as  love  is  said  to  have  been  the  cause  of80  my  stra-
tagem.

What  was  the  object  of  my  artifice,  but  that  I  might  be
united  to  thee  alone  ?  That,  of  which81  thou  dost  complain,
ought  to  recommend  me.  I  am  not  so  cunning  by  nature,  nor
yet  from  long  practice ;  'tis  thou,  dear  girl,  believe  me,  that  didst
make  me  so  inventive.  'Twas  Love,82  fertile  in  expedients,  that
bound  thee  to  me,  by  the  words  put  together  by  me,  if,  indeed,
I  have  effected  aught.  In  words  dictated  by  him  did  I  com-
pose the  marriage  contract  j83  and  by  the  advice  of  Love  did  I
become  skilled  in  the  law.  Let  fraud  be  the  name  of  this  de-
vice, and  let  me  called  deceitful,  (if  indeed84  it  is  deceit,  to
wish  to  possess  what  you  love).  Lo  !  a  second  time85  do  I  write
and  send  the  words  of  entreaty ;  this  is  a  second  fraud,  and
thou  hast  reason  to  complain. If  I  offend  in  that  I  love,

80  Been  the  cause  of.~] — Ver.  22.  Acontius  seems  here  to  accuse  him-
self, but  with  considerable  cunning  and  art.  He  has  discovered  a  method
of  owning  his  crime  in  such  a  manner  as  to  give  it  rather  the  air  of  a
merit.  It  was  excess  of  love  that  hurried  him  on  to  that  bold  step.  A  fault
arising  from  this  can  plead  many  circumstances  to  alleviate  it ;  and  the
person  against  whom  it  is  committed  is  usually  the  first  to  forgive  it.

S1  That  of  which.'] — Ver.  24.  Heinsius  remarks  severely  ou  this  line,
and  is  so  displeased  with  it,  that  he  rejects  the  couplet  as  utterly  un-
worthy of  Ovid.

82  'Twas  Love.] — Ver.  28.  The  reader  cannot  fail  to  be  struck  with
the  ingenious  manner  in  which  Acontius  excuses  his  fraud,  by  throwing
the  blame  entirely  upon  love.  He  asserts  that  he  has  neither  a  natural
turn  for  expedients  of  this  kind,  nor  an  aptness  produced  by  use  and
practice.  This  assertion  is  extremely  well  calculated  to  gain  on  Cydippe,
as  it  speaks  a  passion  strong  and  lasting,  and  at  the  same  time  insinuates
that  she  has  been  the  first  to  make  an  impression  on  his  heart.

83  Marriage  contract.] — Ver.  29.  Among  the  Romans  the  '  sponsalia'
was  a  contract  made  between  a  man  and  woman,  in  such  a  form  as  to  give
each  party  a  right  of  action  in  case  of  non-performance.  Instead  of  the
woman,  however,  the  person  who  betrothed  her  was  a  party  to  the
contract.

84  If  indeed.] — Ver.  32.  This  reflection,  thrown  out  after  owning  his
fraud,  quite  effaces  that  idea,  and  leads  us  insensibly  to  excuse  a  step  for
which  he  alleges  so  plausible  an  excuse.

S5  A  second  time.] — Ver.  33.  It  is  worth  while  to  observe  with  how
much  artifice  and  ingenuity  Acontius  blends  his  former  fraud  of  the  in-
scription on  the  apple,  with  this  latter  one  of  writing  her  a  love  Epistle,
and  in  each  case  throws  the  blame  entirely  upon  the  person  and  attractive
charms  of  Cydippe.  By  this  he  means  to  insinuate,  that,  as  in  the  latter
instance,  there  is  nothing  really  criminal,  so,  in  like  manner,  it  ought  to
inferred,  that  the  former  was  equally  harmless.


EP.  XX.]  ACONTIUS  TO  CTDIPPE.  223

I  confess,  I  shall  offend  without  end  ;  and  thee  shall  I  seek,
even  shouldst  thou  thyself  take  precautions  not  to  be  found.
Amid  swords  have  others  borne  off  the  maidens  that  pleased
them,  and  shall  a  few  letters  written  by  me,  with  design,  be
a  crime  ?  0  that  the  Gods  would  grantS6  that  I  might  be
enabled  to  find  many  other  ties !  so  that  thy  plighted  troth
might  remain  at  liberty  in  no  degree.  A  thousand  stratagems
are  left :  at  the  bottom  of  the  hill  am  I  perspiring  ;  my  pas-
sion will  allow  nothing  to  be  untried.

Itmay  be  uncertain  whether  thou  canst  be  won;  assuredly  thou
shalt  be  attempted  to  be  won  ;  the  event  is  with  the  Gods  ;  but
still  shalt  thou  be  won.  Though  thou  shouldst  avoid  apart,  thou
shalt  not  escape  the  whole  of  the  toils,  which  Love  has  extended
for  thee,  more  in  number  than  thou  dost  think  for.  If  arti-
fice is  of  no  avail,  to  force  will  1 87  resort ;  and,  carried  off,  thou
shalt  be  borne  in  the  bosom  that  is  so  eager  for  thee.  I  am
not  one  who  is  wont  to  blame  the  deeds88  of  Paris  ;  nor  of
any  one,  indeed,  who,  that  he  might  be  enabled  to  become  a
husband,89  has  proved  himself  a  man. I  also  will —  but

88  Gods  would  grant.'] — Ver.  39.  It  may  at  first  appear  somewhat
strange  that  Acontius,  who  has  just  before  owned  his  crime,  and  endea-
voured to  alleviate  it  by  reason  of  the  circumstances  in  which  he  found  him-
self, should  suddenly  so  far  change  his  mind  as  to  avow  it  openly,  and  pro-
fess his  readiness  to  repeat  it  a  thousand  times,  did  the  case  admit.  But,  as
we  have  already  remarked,  he  has  by  the  ingenious  turn  he  gives  it,  en-
deavoured to  make  it  appear  rather  as  a  merit.  It  is  therefore  well-judged,
after  this,  to  boast  rather  of  an  action  that,  as  he  avers,  bespeaks  the
strength  of  his  passion,  and  to  avow  that  far  from  repenting  of  it,  he  is
ready  to  repeat  it,  in  order  to  give  a  fresh  testimony  of  his  continued
and  unalterable  love.  He  has  already  bound  her  by  one  tie ;  and  so  earnest
is  he  to  secure  her  to  himself,  that  were  it  possible  to  bind  her  by  a  thou-
sand more,  he  would  gladly  take  that  method  to  prevent  a  possibility  of
losing  her.

87  To  force  will  I.] — Ver.  47.  From  a  remark  in  the  47th  Chapter  of
Petronius  Arbiter,  we  find  that  '  sudare  in  clivo,'  was  a  common  proverb
among  the  Romans,  used  to  describe  a  difficulty  which  it  required  great
pains  to  surmount.

88  Blame  the  deeds.] — Ver.  49.  Acontius  makes  this  remark,  to  show
that  his  resolution  is  fixed  and  unalterable,  and  that  he  is  not  to  be  de-
terred by  any  sense  of  danger.  His  temper  naturally  makes  him  incline
to  soft  and  gentle  measures ;  but  if  these  are  not  successful,  he  wants  not
courage  to  take  an  effectual  course.  His  disposition  does  not  lead  him
to  blame  either  Paris  or  Theseus  ;  and  even  a  certainty  that  death  must
be  the  consequence,  will  not  shake  his  resolution.

60  A  husband.]— Ver.  50. The  word  '  vir'  has  the  two  significations  of


224  THE EPISTLES OF THE HEROINES.  [EP.  XX.

I  am  silent.  Though  death  should  be  the  reward  of  this  vio-
lence, it  will  be  a  less  punishment  than  not  to  have  possessed
thee.  Or,  hadst  thou  been  less  beauteous,  thou  mightst  be
sought  with  moderation  ;  by  thy  very  beauty  am  I  forced  to
be  audacious.

This  dost  thou90  effect,  and  thy  eyes,  to  which  the  burning
stars  yield,  those  eyes,  which  were  the  cause  of  my  flames.
This  do  thy  yellow  locks  and  thy  ivory  neck  effect ;  those
hands  too,  which  I  trust,  may  meet  around  my  neck.  Thy
gracefulness  too,  and  thy  features,  modest  without  coyness,
and  thy  feet,  such91  as  I  can  hardly  believe  Thetis  to  possess.
Were  I  able  to  commend  the  rest,  I  should  be  more  happy ;
and  I  question  not  but  that  the  whole  frame  is  uniform  in
itself.  Impelled  by  these  charms,  'tis  not  to  be  wondered  at,
if  I  wished  to  have  a  pledge  from  thy  own  lips.  In  fine,  since
thou  art  compelled  to  confess  that  thou  hast  been  deceived,
prove  thyself  a  damsel  deceived92  by  my  device.  I  will  endure
the  obloquy;  let  his  reward  be  given  to  him  who  submits  to  it.
Why  is  its  reward  withheld  from  a  crime  so  great  ?  Telamon
took  Hesione,93  Achilles,  the  daughter  of  Brises  ;  each  con-
quered damsel  attended  her  conqueror.

Thou  mayst  accuse  me  as  much  as  thou  shalt  please,  and
mayst  be  enraged  ;  only  let  it  be  granted  me  to  be  able  to  obtain
thee  thus  enraged. I,  the  same  person  who  causes  this  anger,

'  husband,'  and  t  man.'  Ovid  here  plays  upon  it ;  the  word  '  vir '  being
understood  after  '  fuit ';  '  who,  that  he  might  be  a  husband,  has  proved
himself  a  man.'

90  This  dost  thou.'] — Ver.  55.  He  studiously  softens  what  he  says,  by
giving  it  such  a  turn  as  is  most  likely  to  make  it  agreable  to  his  mis-
tress. Cydippe  can  scarcely  refuse  to  forgive  a  fault  that  took  its  rise
in  admiration  of  her  charms.  Flattery  is  one  of  the  methods  too  often
used  for  promoting  our  advances  with  the  fair  sex,  and  it  is  very  often
crowned  with  an  ill-deserved  success.

91  Thy  feet  such.]— Ver.  60.  We  may  take  it  for  granted  that  Thetis
was  noted  for  the  whiteness  of  her  feet,  inasmuch  as  Homer  gives  her  the
epithet  of  dpyvpoireZa,  'the  silver-footed'  Goddess.

92  A  damsel  deceived.]  — Ver.  66.  Ovid  here  falls  into  his  usual  failing
of  playing  upon  words,  whenever  he  has  the  opportunity.  '  Capta  '  may
mean  either  '  deceived,'  or  '  obligated,'  according  to  the  context.  Cydippe
would  readily  own  that  she  had  been  deceived,  and  would  complain  of  it
as  an  injury.

93  Took  Hesione.] — Ver.  69.  Hercules,  after  punishing  Laomedon  for
his.  perfidy,  gave  his  daughter  Hesione  to  his  friend  Telamon.


EP.  XX.]  ACONTHJS TO CYD1PPE.  225

will  appease  it  when  caused  ;  only  let  me  have  a  little  oppor-
tunity of  soothing  thee.  Let  me  stand  weeping  before  thy
face,  and  let  me  add  words  to  their  appropriate  tears ;  and  as
slaves  are  wont,  when  they  dread  the  cruel  lash,  allow  me  to
stretch  my  hands  in  supplication  to  thy  feet.  Thou  art  ignorant
of  thy  rights;94  call  me;  why,  thus  absent,  am  I  accused  1  Com-
mand me  to  come,  in  the  manner  of  one  who  has  long  been
my  mistress.  Though  tyrannically  thou  shouldst  tear  my
locks,  and  my  features  should  be  made  livid  with  thy  fingers,
all  this  will  I  endure  ;  perhaps  I  shall  only  be  fearful  lest
those  hands  of  thine  should  be  hurt  by  my  body.  But  secure
me  neither  with  fetters  nor  with  chains  ;  bound  by  constant
affection  for  thee  I  shall  be  retained.

When  thy  wrath  shall  have  quite  expended  itself,  and  as  much
as  it  shall  wish,  thou  wilt  say  to  thyself,  "  How  patiently
does  he  love  !"  When  thou  shalt  see  me  enduring  everything,
thou  wilt  say  to  thyself,  "  He  who  serves  so  well,  still  let  him
serve  me/'  Now,  to  my  sorrow,  I  am  condemned  in  my  ab-
sence ;  and  my  cause,  though  it  is  most  just,  fails,  no  one
defending  it.  And  let  this*5  writing  of  mine,  as  is  proper  to  be
done,  be  an  injury  on  my  part ;  thou  hast  reason  then  to  com-
plain of  me  alone.  The  Delian  Goddess  ought  not  to  be  de-
ceived,96 as  well,  with  me ;  if  thou  dost  not  wish  to  perform  thy
promise  for  me,  perform  it  for  the  Goddess.  She  was  present,
and  she  saw  when  thou,  deceived,  didst  blush  ;  and  with  te-
nacious ear,  she  treasured  up  thy  words.  Let  omens  fail  of
being  realized  ;  nothing  is  more  infuriate  than  she,  when,  as
I  wish  she  may  not,  she  beholds  her  divine  power  set  at
nought.

94  Of  thy  rights.'] — Ver.  79.  Acontius  professes  himself  to  be  her
slave,  and  is  willing  to  submit  to  all  that  can  be  exacted  of  one  in  that
position  ;  but  he  seems  to  insinuate  at  the  same  time,  that  she  uses  him  with
more  rigour  than  is  commonly  used,  even  towards  the  very  lowest  of  that  ill-
treated  class.  He  complains  that  she  will  not  allow  him  to  plead  his  own
cause,  but  condemns  him  without  a  hearing.

95  And  let  this.} — Ver.  93.  Heinsius  is  so  dissatisfied  with  the  cor-
rupt state  of  this  and  the  following  line,  that  he  is  inclined  to  reject  the
distich  altogether.

96  To  be  deceived.']  — Ver.  95.  '  Fallere  Deos,'  '  to  deceive  the  Gods,'
was  a  common  way  of  speaking  among  the  Romans,  when  they  wished  to
express  the  neglect  of  a  vow  made  to  any  of  the  Divinities;

Q


226  THE EPISTLES OE THE HEEOINES.  [EP.  XX.

The  boar  of  Calydon97  shall  be  my  witness ;  for  we  know
how  a  mother  was  found  more  savage  than  it  towards  her
child.98  Actaeon,  too,99  is  a  witness,  who  was  once  believed
to  be  a  wild  beast  by  those  hounds  with  which  before  he  pur-
sued the  wild  beasts  to  the  death.  The  vain-glorious  mother,
too,  who  even  now  exists,  as  she  weeps  in  the  Mygdonian
land,1  the  rock  growing  over  her  body.  Alas!  Cydippe!  I  dread
to  tell  thee  the  truth,  lest  I  should  appear  to  be  admonishing
thee  falsely  for  my  own  sake.  Still,  speak  I  must ;  it  is  on
this  account,  believe  me,  that  thus  often  thou  art  lying  ill  at
the  time  for  thy  nuptials.  She  herself  has  a  care  for  thee  ;
she  is  striving  that  thou  mayst  not  prove  perjured ;  and  she
desires  thee  to  be  safe,  thy  oath  being  unbroken.  Thence
it  arises,  that  as  often  as  thou  dost  attempt  to  prove  perfidious,
so  often  does  she  correct  thy  guiltiness.  Cease  to  provoke  the
hostile  bow  of  the  implacable  Virgin ;  still  may  she  become
softened,  if  thou  wilt  permit  her.

Forbear,  I  pray,  to  enfeeble  thy  tender  limbs  with  fevers  ;
let  that  form  be  preserved  to  be  enjoyed  by  me ;  let  those
features  be  preserved  that  were  produced  for  the  purpose  of
inflaming  me ;  those  lively  blushes,  too,  that  are  upon  thy
snow-white  complexion.  If  any  one  of  my  enemies  should
strive  that  thou  mayst  not  be  mine,  then  may  he  be,  as,  when
thou  art  ill,  it  is  wont  to  be  with  me.  Whether  thou  dost
wed  another,  or  whether  thou  art  ill,  I  am  equally  tortured ;
nor  can  I  say  myself  which  I  would  the  least  desire.  Some-
times I  am  distracted,  because  I  am  the  cause  of  thy  being

97  Boar  of  Calydon."] — Ver.  101.-  The  story  of  the  Calydonian  hoar
which  was  sent  by  Diana,  is  told  in  the  Eighth  Book  of  the  Metamor-
phoses.

9S  Towards  her  child.'] — Ver.  102.  Heinsius  inveighs  much  against
this  passage,  which  he  thinks  has  been  inserted  by  some  Scholiast,  who,
having  added  the  instance  of  the  Calydonian  boar  to  those  of  Niobe  and
Actaeon,  might  perhaps  turn  it  into  a  distich,  and  afterwards,  in  tran-
scribing, insert  it  in  the  text ;  Lennep,  however,  thinks  it  to  be  genuine.

99  Actaeon,  too.] — Ver.  103.  The  sad  fate  of  Actaeon  is  related  in  the
Third  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses.

1  Mygdonian  land.] — Ver.  106.  Mygdonia  was  properly  a  portion  of
Macedonia,  between  the  rivers  Axius  and  Strymon.  Lydia,  in  Asia
Minor,  is  supposed  to  have  received  a  colony  from  Mygdonia,  and  is  here
called  by  the  epithet  Mygdonia.  The  story  of  Niobe,  which  is  here  re-
ferred to,  is  related  in  the  Sixth  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses.


EP.  XX.]  ACONTIUS  TO  CYDIPPE.  227

in  pain ;  and  I  reflect  that  through  my  cunning  thou  art
afflicted.  May  the  perjuries  of  my  mistress,  I  pray,  fall  upon
this  head2  of  mine;  let  her  be  safe  from  a  punishment  that
is  my  due.  Still,  that  I  may  not  be  ignorant  how  thou
dost  fare,  many  a  time,  in  my  anxiety,  do  1  go  secretly  to  thy
threshold,  to  and  fro.  Stealthily  do  I  follow  after  some  hand-
maid or  servant,  enquiring  what  sleep  or  what  nourishment
has  refreshed  thee.

Ah  wretched  me !  that  I  do  not  administer  the  prescrip-
tions of  the  physicians,  and  chafe  thy  hands,3  and  press  upon
thy  couch.  And  again,  ah  wretched  me  !  that,  myself  removed
far  thence,  perhaps  another,  one  whom  I  could  far  from
wish,  is  there.  He  chafes  those  hands  of  thine,  and  sits  by
thee  in  thy  illness,  hated  by  the  Gods  above,  and,  with  the
Gods  above,  by  myself.  And  while  with  his  thumb  he  feels  the
throbbing  pulse,4  on  this  pretence  he  often  grasps  thy  fair
arms  ;  and  he  touches  thy  bosom,  and  perhaps  gives  thee
kisses  ;  too  ample  for  his  services  is  that  reward.

"  Who  has  given  thee  leave  to  reap  my  harvest  beforehand  ?
Who  has  granted  thee  a  path  to  the  boundaries  of  another  ?
That  bosom  is  mine ;  basely  dost  thou  usurp  kisses  that  are
mine ;  keep  thy  hands  off  the  body  that  is  promised  to  me.
Wretch  !  keep  off  thy  hands ;  she  whom  thou  art  touching
is  to  be  mine  ;  if  thou  shouldst  do  this  again,  thou  wilt  be
an  adulterer.  Choose  from  among  those  disengaged  one  that
another  may  not  claim  for  himself ;  if  thou  knowest  it  not,
this  property  has  its  owner.  And  do  not  trust  me  ;  let  the
form  of  her  engagement  be  read  over ;  and  that  thou  mayst
not  say  it  is  false,  make  herself  repeat  it.  To  thee  I  say,
to  thee,  depart  from  the  nuptial  chamber  of  another  man.
What  art  thou  doing  here  ?  Begone,  this  bed  is  not  disengaged.
For,  although  thou,  too,  hast  another  form  of  an  engagement
sanctioned  by  man,  still  thy  cause  will  not  for  that  reason  be
equal  to  my  own.  To  me  did  she  bind  herself ;  to  thee  did
her  father  promise  her,  the  next  after  herself ; but  surely  she

2  Upon  this  head.'] — Ver  127.  This  was  an  imprecation  much  in  use
among  the  Greeks.

3  Chafe  thy  hands.]— Ver.  134.  '  Effingo  '  means  '  to  press  gently,'  pro-
bably '  to  chafe.'

4  Throbbing  pulse.] — Ver.  139.  The  feeling  cf  her  pulse  and  other
minute  circumstances  are  very  naturally  described.

Q2


228  THE EPISTLES OE THE HEROINES.  [EP.  XX.

herself  is  one  degree  nearer  to  herself  than  is  her  father.
Her  father  has  promised  hers,  he  has  vowed  herself  to  her
lover  ;  he  called  men  to  witness,  she  appealed  to  the  testimony
of  a  Goddess.  He  fears  to  be  called  a  deceiver,  she,  to  be
called  perjured.  Canst  thou  question  whether  this  or  that  is
the  more  substantial  fear  ?  In  fine,  that  thou  mayst  be  able
to  compare  the  dangers  of  both,  look  at  the  results ;  she
keeps  her  bed,  while  he  is  well.5  We  are  entering  the  lists,  too,
with  unequal  feelings  ;  neither  have  we  equal  hopes,  nor  yet
equal  fears.  Thou  art  wooing  without  fear  for  the  result  ;  a
repulse  is  more  insupportable  than  death  to  me.  And  that
object  I  am  now  in  love  with,  which  thou,  perhaps,  wilt  love
at  a  future  time.  If  thou  hadst  any  regard  for  justice,  if  any
for  propriety,  at  least  thou  thyself  wouldst  have  given  way
to  my  passion."

Now,  since  he  inhumanly  contends  for  an  unjust  claim,  to
what,  Cydippe,  does  my  letter  tend?  He  is  causing  thee  to  lie  in
sickness,  and  to  be  suspected  by  Diana :  if  thou  wast  wise,  thou
wouldst  forbid  him  to  approach  thy  threshold.  While  he  does
this,  thou  art  undergoing  so  severe  a  struggle  for  thy  life  ;
and  I  wish  that  he  who  causes  it  may  perish  instead  of  thee.
Shouldst  thou  reject  him,  and  not  love  one  whom  the  Goddess
condemns  ;  instantly  thou  wouldst  recover,  and  doubtless  I
should  be  healed.  Banish  thy  fears,  maiden,  thou  shalt  enjoy
established  health ;  only  take  care  and  venerate  the  temple6
that  was  conscious  of  thy  engagement.  The  powers  of  heaven  re-
joice not  in  the  slaughtered  ox,  but  in  the  faith  which  even  with-
out a  witness  to  be  kept.  Let  others  endure  iron  and  fire  to
recover  health ;  to  others  the  bitter  potions  give  an  unpleasant
relief.  Of  these  thou  hast  no  need  ;  only  avoid  the  guilt  of
perjury,  and  preserve  at  the  same  moment  thyself,  and  me,
and  thy  plighted  vows.  The  being  unaware  will  give  thee
pardon  for  thy  past  faults ;  the  agreement  read  by  thee  may
have  escaped  thy  recollection,7

5  He  is  well"] — Ver.  164.  This  argument  is  more  specious  than  good.
There  was  no  reason  for  her  father  incurring  the  wrath  of  the  Divinities  ;
for  so  far,  he  had  adhered  to  his  promise  made  in  betrothing  her.

6  Venerate  the  temple.'] — Ver.  180.  He  is  chiefly  anxious  that  Cydippe
shall  not  forget  her  vow.  He  is  therefore  very  properly  represented  as
admonishing  her  to  repair  frequently  to  the  temple,  that  being  the  most
likely  method  of  reminding  her  of  her  obligation.

1  Escaped  thy  recollection.] — Ver. 188. This  is  artfully  introduced


EP.  XX.]  ACOKTIUS  TO  CYDIPPE.  229

Now  art  thou  put  in  mind  by  my  words,  now  by  these
toils;8  which,  so  oft  as  thou  dost  endeavour  to  escape  them,
thou  art  wont  to  carry  together  with  thyself.  Even  on  these
being  avoided,  still,  in  child-birth  thou  wilt  have  to  entreat
her  to  extend  to  thee  the  hands  that  give  the  light.9  She  will
hearken  to  thee;  and  calling  to  mind  what  has  been  heard,  she
will  enquire  by  what  husband  thy  travail  is  occasioned.  Then
wilt  thou  be  making  vows  ;  she  knows  that  thou  dost  make  false
promises  ;  then  wilt  thou  be  swearing  ;  she  knows  that  thou  art
capable  of  deceiving  the  Deities.  I  am  not  concerned  for
myself ;  by  greater  cares  am  I  harassed  ;  my  breast  is  anxious
on  account  of  thy  life.  Why  now  are  thy  trembling  parents
lamenting  thee  in  this  doubtful  state,  whom  thou  dost  cause  to
be  in  ignorance  of  thy  transgression  ?  And  why  should  they
be  in  ignorance  ?  Thou  shouldst  disclose  every  thing  to  thy
mother.  Thy  actions,  Cydippe,  have  nothing  for  thee  to  be
ashamed  of.

Take  care  and  state  in  order  how  thou  wast  first  known
to  me,  while  thou  wast10  performing  the  rites  of  the  quivered
Goddess ;  how,  on  beholding  thee,  suddenly  (if  perchance
thou  didst  observe  it) I  stood  with  my  gaze  fixed  upon  thy

by  Acontius,  who  must  be  aware  that  a  promise  of  this  kind  is  not  likely
to  slip  out  of  Cydippe's  memory.  It  is  however,  his  interest  to  suppose
it,  because,  by  furnishing  her  with  this  excuse,  he  gives  her  a  fairer
opportunity  of  owning  that  she  has  before  been  in  the  wrong,  in  neg-
lecting a  promise  so  solemnly  made  in  the  presence  of  the  Goddess.

8  By  these  toils.] — Ver.  189.  The  word  '  cassibus'  signifies  '  nets'  or
'  toils ';  but  some  of  the  editions  have  '  casibus,' '  misfortunes,'  in  its  place.
The  former  is,  perhaps,  the  correct  reading,  as  both  Ovid  and  Tibullus
use  the  words  '  cassis'  in  subjects  relating  to  love.  Heinsius  and  Bur-
mann  approve  of  'cassibus,'  while  Lennep  and  Amor  prefer  'casibus'
The  word  evidently  alludes  to  the  sickness  by  which  Diana  had  endea-
voured to  prevent  Cydippe  from  incurring  the  guilt  of  perjury.

9  Give  tJie  light.'] — Ver.  192.  Women,  in  childbirth,  invoked  Diana
Lucina,  who  was  supposed  peculiarly  to  have  the  charge  of  them,  and  to
assist  in  bringing  the  child  to  light.  Hence  the  Poet  gives  the  title  of
'  luciferas'  to  her  hands.

10  While  thou  ivast.] — Ver.  204.  '  Dum  facit  ipsa'  seems  more  likely
to  be  the  true  reading  than  '  dum  facis  ipsa.'  '  While  she  (your  mother)
was  performing  the  rites.'  For  we  learn  from  the  Epistle  of  Cydippe,
that  she  and  her  nurse  were  walking  about  and  viewing  the  remarkable
things  in  the  place,  while  her  mother  was  performing  the  sacrifice  ;  and
that  while  she  was  so  walking,  the  apple  fell  at  her  feet.


230  THE EPISTLES OE THE HEBOLNES.  [EP.  XX.

limbs  ;  how,  while  I  was  admiring  thee  too  much,  a  sure
sign  of  my  distraction,  my  cloak11  slipped  and  fell  from  off  my
shoulders.  How,  afterwards  an  apple  came  rolling,  whence  I
know  not,  bearing  in  skilful  characters  the  ensnaring  words  ;
how,  because  this  was  read  in  the  presence  of  the  holy  Diana,  thy
faith  was  pledged,  a  Divinity  the  witness.  But  that  she  may
not  be  ignorant  what  was  the  meaning  of  the  inscription,
repeat  now  as  well  the  words  once  read  by  thee.  She  will
say,  I  trust,  "  Marry  him  to  whom  the  gracious  Deities  unite
thee  ;  let  him  be  my  son-in-law  who  thou  hast  sworn  shall  so
be.  Whoever  he  is,  let  him  be  agreable  to  me  ;  since  he  has
already  proved  agreable  to  Diana.  Such  will  thy  mother
prove,  if  only  she  shall  prove  a  mother.

But  still  do  thou  bid  her,  too,  enquire  who  and  what  I  am  ;
she  will  find  that  the  Goddess  has  been  considerate  for  thee.
An  island,  Cea12  by  name,  once  very  much  ennobled  by  the
Corycian13  Nymphs,  is  encircled  by  the  iEgean  sea.  That  is
my  native  land  ;  and  if  thou  hast  any  esteem  for  noble  names,
I  am  not  said  to  be  descended  from  despicable  ancestors.  I
have  also  riches  ;  my  morals,  too,  are  without  reproach  ;  and,

11  My  cloak.] — Ver.  208.  Though  commonly  translated  by  the  word
'  cloak,'  the  '  pallium'  of  the  ancients  differed  very  materially  from  that
article  of  dress.  It  was  a  square  piece  of  cloth  which  came  direct  from
the  loom  in  that  shape,  and  did  not  require  any  forming  or  cutting  out
by  the  tailor.  The  '  pallia  '  were  mostly  worn  in  an  undyed  state,  con-
sequently white,  brown,  and  grey  were  the  prevailing  colours.  They
were  sometimes  dyed  of  crimson,  purple,  and  satfron  colour.  Some-
times they  were  striped,  and  they  then  resembled  our  checks  or  plaids.
Flowers  were  sometimes  interwoven,  and  occasionally  with  gold  thread.
Wool  was  the  most  common  material.  They  were  not  only  used  for
wearing,  but  also  for  spreading  over  beds  and  couches,  and  for  covering
the  body  during  sleep  ;  in  fact,  the  word  'pallium'  as  often  means  a  coverlet
as  a  garment.  Sometimes  they  were  used  as  carpets,  and  sometimes  as
awnings  or  curtains.  When  worn,  it  was  passed  over  the  left  shoul-
der, then  drawn  behind  the  back  and  under  the  right  arm,  leaving  it  bare,
and  then  thrown  again  over  the  left  shoulder.  For  a  very  full  account  of
the  '  pallium,'  see  Dr.  Smith's  Dictionary  of  Greek  and  Roman  Antiquities.

12  An  island,  Cea.~\ — Ver.  222.  Cea,  or  Ceos,  was  an  island  of  the
^Egean  Sea,  near  Eubcea.

13  Corycian.] — Ver.  221.  The  Muses  are  so  called  from  Corycus,  the
name  of  a  cave  on  Mount  Parnassus.  The  reading  is  probably  cor-
rupt, as  it  is  not  known  that  there  was  any  particular  relation  between
the  Muses  and  the  island  of  Cea,


EP.  XXI.]  CYDIPPE TO ACONTITTS.  231

though  there  "were  nothing  more,  affection  unites  me  to  thy-
self. Even  hadst  thou  not  made  the  vow,  thou  mightst  have
longed  for  such  a  husband ;  such  a  one  had  been  acceptable,
even  if  thou  hadst  not  made  the  vow.  These  words  in  my  sleep
did  Phoebe,  who  hurls  the  javelin,  bid  me  write  to  thee  ;  these
words  did  Love  bid  me,  while  awake,  to  write  to  thee.  Our
welfare  is  united ;  have  compassion  both  on  me  and  on  thy-
self. Why  dost  thou  hesitate  to  give  one  relief  for  us  both?

And  if  it  should  fall  to  my  lot,  when  now  the  appointed
signal14  shall  sound,  and  Delos  shall  be  stained  with  votive
blood;  a  golden  likeness  of  the  lucky  apple  shall  be  erected,
and  the  reason  shall  be  inscribed  in  these  two  lines  ;  "  Acon-
tius  declares,  by  the  resemblance  of  this  apple,  that  what  was
written  upon  it  was  performed."

That  too  long  an  Epistle  may  not  harass  thy  weakened
frame,  and  that  it  may  be  closed  for  thee  with  the  usual  con-
clusion— Farewell.

EPISTLE  XXI.

CYDIPPE TO ACONTIUS.

Having  received  the  foregoing  Epistle  from  Acontius,  and  on  perusing  it,
finding  reason  to  suspect  that  her  present  illness  has  proceeded  from
the  resentment  of  Diana  at  her  broken  vow,  Cydippe  is  inclined  to
yield  to  the  wishes  of  Acontius,  even  against  the  will  of  her  parents,
ra'ther  than  continue  under  her  present  affliction.  She  begins  by  pro-
fessing her  unwillingness  to  be  too  free  in  acquainting  him  with  her  sen-
timents, lest,  as  before,  in  the  case  of  the  apple,  she  may  insensibly
enter  into  a  new  engagement.  After  this,  she  takes  the  opportunity
of  mentioning  her  first  arrival  at  Delos,  and  the  manner  in  which  she
was  ensnared  by  the  contrivance  of  her  lover ;  and  her  narrative  is
beautified  by  its  circumstantial  relation,  and  the  justice  of  her  re-
flections. Towards  the  conclusion  of  the  Epistle,  after  inveighing
against  his  treachery,  she  gradually  softens  to  compliance,  and  shows
concern  to  remove  his  suspicions  and  the  jealousy  which  he  entertains
against  his  rival.  In  conclusion,  she  gives  her  consent,  and  ends  with
a  hope  that  the  nuptials  may  be  celebrated  immediately.

Thy  letter15  has  come  as  usual,  Acontius,  and  had  almost
betrayed  my  eyes.

14  Appointed  signal.] — Ver.  235.  People  were  summoned  to  the  sa-
crifice by  the  sound  of  the  trumpet ;  it  was  performed  to  the  music  of
the  pipe  and  other  instruments.

15  Thy  letter.'] — These  two  lines,

•  Litera  pervenit  tua,  quo  consuevit,  Aconti,
Et  pene  est  oculis  insidiata  meis?


232  THE  EPISTLES  OF  THE  HEROINES.  [EP.  XXI.

I  was  much  alarmed,  and  without  a  murmur16  did  I  read
thy  writing,  lest  unconsciously  my  tongue  might  swear  by
some  Divinities.  And  I  think  thou  wouldst  again  have  en-
snared me,17  unless,  as  thou  thyself  dost  confess,  thou  didst
know  that  it  was  enough  for  me  once  to  have  been  promised.
Nor  would  I  have  read  it ;  but,  if  I  had  proved  obdurate  to
thee,  perhaps  the  wrath  of  the  cruel  Goddess  would  have
been  increased.  Though  I  do  every  thing,  though  I  offer
pious  frankincense  to  Diana,  still  does  she  favour  thee  in  more
than  an  ordinary  degree ;  and  as  thou  dost  wish  it  to  be
supposed,  she  avenges  thee  with  resentful  anger.

Hardly  did  she  prove  such  towards  her  own  Hippolytus.13
But  with  more  propriety  would  she,  a  virgin,  have  proved  kind
to  the  years  of  a  virgin ;  which,  I  fear,  she  wishes  to  be  of
but  short  duration  for  me.19  For  my  illness  continues,  while
the  cause  is  not  perceptible  ;  and,  in  my  exhaustion,  I  am
refreshed  by  no  aid  of  the  physician.  Canst  thou  believe
how,  thin  as  I  am,  I  can  hardly  write  this  to  thee,  and  how
I  can  hardly  rest  on  my  elbow  my  wearied  limbs?  To  this
are  added  my  apprehensions  lest  any  one  but  my  nurse,  my
confidant,  should  know  that  we  have  an  interchange  of  cor-
respondence. Before  the  door  is  she  seated ;  and,  that  I
may  be  enabled  to  write  in  safety,  to  those  who  enquire  what

are  found  in  some  of  the  MSS.,  but  are  generally  considered  to  be  spu-
rious. Indeed,  the  last  line  seems  to  contradict  the  next,  which  usually
commences  the  Epistle,  and  in  which  she  says  that  she  has  read  his  letter.

16  Without  a  murmur.'] — Ver.  1.  That  is,  in  perfect  silence,  without
so  much  as  a  whisper  ;  as  she  fears  that  she  may  commit  another  error,  and
unadvisedly  contract  some  fresh  engagement.

17  Have  ensnared  me.] — Ver.  3.  Cydippe  has  reason  to  form  this
conclusion,  from  the  earnestness  which  he  has  shown  in  his  letter  to
secure  her.  He  even  says  himself,  expressly,  that  had  it  been  possible  to
secure  her  by  yet  stronger  ties,  no  means  would  have  been  left  untried  by
him.

18  Her  own  Hippolytus.] — Ver.  10.  Hippolytus  was  dear  to  Diana,
by  reason  of  his  extreme  chastity  and  his  fondness  for  the  chase.

19  For  me.] — Ver.  12.  We  may  here  remark,  that  in  all  the  MSS.,
with  the  exception  of  three,  there  is  a  deficiency  of  the  rest  of  this
Epistle.  Many  of  the  critics  are  therefore  of  opinion,  that  the  verses
which  follow  this  line  are  not  the  composition  of  Ovid,  but  have  been
supplied  by  some  other  Poet.  This  notion  possibly  receives  some  weight
from  the  remark  of  many  of  the  learned,  that  ihe  whole  Epistle  falls  short
of  the  usual  spirit  and  elegance  of  Ovid.

\


EP.  XXI.]  CYDIPPE TO ACONTITJS.  233

I  am  doing  within,20  she  says,  "  She  is  asleep."  Afterwards,
when  sleep,  the  best  pretext  for  long  privacy,  ceases,  through
the  length  of  time  slowly  passing,  to  be  a  plausible  excuse,  and
when  she  sees  some  one  coming  whom  it  is  a  difficult  matter
not  to  admit,  she  coughs,21  and  by  this  feigned  signal  she  gives
me  warning.  Just  as  I  am,  in  haste,  I  leave  the  words  un-
finished, and  the  concealed  letter  is  hidden  in  my  palpipating
bosom.  Afterwards,  taken  out  again  it  wearies  my  fingers  ;
thou  thyself  seest22  how  great  a  labour  it  is  to  me.

May  I  die,  to  speak  the  truth,  if  thou  art  deserving  of
this ;  but  I  am  kinder  than  thy  due,  and  than  what  thou
dost  deserve.  And  have  I,  then,  on  thy  account,  uncertain
of  my  recovery,  so  often  paid  the  penalty  for  thy  artifices,  and
do  I  still  pay  it  ?  Is  this  the  reward  that  falls  to  me  for
my  extraordinary  beauty,  thou  being  my  admirer  ?  And  is  it
criminal  to  have  proved  agreable  ?  If,  which  I  would  have
preferred,  I  had  appeared  ugly  to  thee,  my  body,  censured
for  its  imperfections,  would  have  been  requiring  no  assistance.
Now,  when  admired,  I  am  groaning  with  anguish  ;  now  with
your  contentions23  you  are  destroying  me  ; and  from  my  own

-°  Am  doing  within.'] — Ver.  19.  '  Intus'  is  a  reading  very  happily-
substituted  by  Heinsius  for  '  inter,'  which  was  the  general  reading  before,
'  rogantibus  inter'  being  taken  to  mean  '  interrogantibus.'  This  was  one
of  the  passages  severely  censured  by  the  critics,  and  pronounced  to  be  un-
worthy of  the  genius  of  Ovid.  They  could  not  imagine  it  probable  that
a  Poet  so  distinguished  by  plainness  and  evenness  of  style,  would
have  used  the  figure  Tmesis  in  this  word,  and  at  the  end  of  a  line.  We
may  here  remark,  that  the  word  '  Tmesis'  is  derived  from  the  Greek  word
tsuvoj,  *  to  divide,'  and  that  it  is  a  figure  by  which  the  parts  of  a  compound
word  are  divided  by  the  interposition  of  another.

21  She  coughs.] — Ver.  24.  '  Exscreo'  seems  to  imply  a  combination  of
coughing  and  spitting.  This  inelegant  method  of  giving  a  signal  is
elsewhere  mentioned  by  Ovid.  She  alludes  here  to  the  visits  of  the  per-
sons of  her  family,  who  had  a  right  to  enter  her  chamber.

22  Thyself  seest.] — Ver.  28.  Probably  in  allusion  to  the  un evenness  of
the  writing.  We  are  to  suppose  that  she  writes  while  sitting  up  in  bed  ;
consequently,  from  her  position,  the  labour  of  writing  would  be  materi-
ally increased.

-3  Your  contentions.] — Ver.  37.  The  word  '  vestro '  being  used,  we
must  understand  this  censure  as  being  directed  against  both  Acontius  and
his  rival,  though,  in  reality,  only  the  former  was  in  fault.  But,  as  the  ad-
dresses of  the  other  were  an  obstruction  to  her  being  the  wife  of  Acon-
tius, and  consequently  both  brought  on  her  present  illness  and  retarded
her  recovery,  he,  too,  is  complained  of  as  having  contributed  to  her  mis-
fortune.


234  THE EPISTLES OF THE HEKOINES.  [EP.  XXI.

merits  do  I  receive  the  wound.  While  neither  dost  thou
give  way,  nor  does  he  think  himself  thy  inferior  ;  thou  dost
prove  an  obstacle  to  his  desires,  he  to  thine.  I  myself  am
tossed  to  and  fro,  just  like  a  ship,  which  the  strong  Boreas  is
driving  out  to  the  open  sea,  as  the  tide  and  the  waves  carry
it  back.

And  when  now  the  day,  wished  for  by  my  dear  parents,  is  at
hand,  just  then  an  extreme  fever  pervades  my  body  ;  and  at
the  very  moment  for  my  forced  marriage  stern  Persephone24
is  knocking  at  my  door.  I  am  ashamed  now,  for  some  unde-
fined reason;  and  I  am  in  dread,  although  I  am  not  conscious
to  myself  of  guilt,  lest  I  should  appear  to  have  deserved  the
Gods  to  be- angry.  One  affirms  that  this  happens  through
chance ;  and  another  declares  that  this  husband  is  not  accept-
able to  the  Gods  above.  And  do  not  suppose  that  report
says  nothing  against  thee  as  well ;  a  part  believe  that  this
happens  through  thy  enchantments.  The  cause  is  unknown  ;
my  sufferings  are  evident ;  you  two,  banishing  peace,  wage
hostile  warfare  ;  I  bear  the  punishment.  Continue  still,25  and
deceive  me26  in  thy  usual  manner ;  what  wilt  thou  do  in  hatred,
when  in  love  thou  dost  thus  afflict  me  ?  If  thou  dost  injure27
what  thou  dost  love,  to  good  purpose  wilt  thou  love  thy  enemy.

24  Stern  Persephone.~] — Ver.  46.  When  Cydippe  says  that  Persephone
is  knocking  at  the  door,  she  means  that  the  fever  rages  with  such  violence
as  to  threaten  her  with  death.  Tibullus  has  a  similar  passage.  '  At  mini
Persephone  nigram  denunciat  horam.'  '  But  Persephone  warns  me  of  the
gloomy  hour.'

25  Continue  still.] — Ver.  55.  The  usual  reading  is  '  Dicam  nunc/  'Now
I  will  tell  you  :'  but  Heinsius  thinks  it  should  be  '  I  jam  nunc'  This
has  been  adopted,  as  it  renders  the  sense  clear  and  distinct,  which  the
other  reading  does  not.

26  Deceive  me.'] — Ver.  55.  Cydippe  hints  at  her  sufferings  and  the
cause  of  them,  which,  according  to  his  own  account,  is  his  love.  If  then
his  love  is  so  fatal  to  her,  what  must  she  not  fear  from  his  hatred.  This
gives  rise  to  her  injunction,  that  he  shall  still  persist  in  deceiving  her  ;
as  she  has  less  reason  to  apprehend  danger  from  that,  than  if  he  should
change  his  mind.

27  Thotl  dost  injure.] — Ver.  57.  If,  as  has  been  suggested,  Ovid
really  was  not  the  author  of  this  Epistle,  it  is  clear  that  whoever
composed  it  has  copied  him  very  closely  in  his  ingenious  turns  and  wit-
ticisms, as  they  are  imitated  with  the  greatest  exactness.  The  present
distich  is  an  admirable  instance  of  those  argumentative  turns  which  bear
such  strong  marks  of  the  forensic  education  of  the  writer.


EP.  XXI.]  CTDIPPE TO ACOKTIUS.  235

That  thou  mayst  save  me,  I  pray  thee,  wish  to  be  ready28  to
destroy  me.  Either  thou  hast29  now  no  regard  for  the  fair
for  whom  thou  didst  sigh,  whom  in  thy  cruelty  thou  art
allowing  to  perish  by  an  undeserved  fate  ;  or  else,  if  in  vain
the  unrelenting  Goddess  is  entreated  by  thee  in  my  behalf,
why  boast  about  thyself  to  me  ?  Thou  hast  no  influence
with  her.  Choose  which30  to  adopt.  If  thou  dost  not  choose
to  propitiate  Diana,  then  thou  art  forgetful  of  me  ;  if  thou
canst  not,  then  is  she  forgetful  of  thee.

I  could  wish  either  that  Delos  had  never  been  known
by  me  in  the  iEgean  waves,  or,  at  least,  not  on  that  occa-
sion. At  that  moment  was  my  bark  launched  in  an  in-
auspicious sea,  and  unlucky  was  the  hour  for  my  intended
voyage.  With,  which  foot31  did  I  commence  my  journey  ?
With  which  foot  did  I  move  from  the  threshold?  With
which  foot  did  I  touch  the  painted  sides  of  the  swift
bark  ?  But  twice  with  adverse  gales  did  our  canvass  bear  us
back. Alas !  in  my  distraction,  I  am  speaking  falsely  ! those

28  To  be  ready.'] — Ver.  58.  Heinsius  contends,  and  with  considerable
justice,  that  there  must  be  some  mistake  here  on  the  part  of  the  tran-
scribers. '  Velle  velis '  is  a  way  of  speaking,  harsh  and  unpoetical  in  the
extreme.  He  would  therefore  substitute  for  it '  perdere,  dure,  velis,' '  that,
cruel  one,  thou  mayst  wish  to  injure  me.'

29  Either  thou  hast.] — Ver.  59.  This  reasoning  of  Cydippe,  with  re-
ference to  the  wrath  of  the  offended  Goddess,  is  specious,  but  still  it  is  fal-
lacious. Whatever  degree  of  favour  Acontius  might  enjoy  from  the  God-
dess, his  prayers  could  not  avail  to  pacify  her  resentment,  unless  Cydippe
at  the  same  time  should  resolve  to  perform  her  engagement  ;  for,  as
the  breach  of  her  vow  had  first  provoked  her  wrath,  so  there  was  no  way
left  to  remove  it,  but  by  removing  the  offence.  Acontius  therefore  had
done  all  that  could  be  expected  from  him  ;  he  had  acquainted  Cydippe  in
what  manner  she  was  to  hope  for  relief,  and,  if  she  should  refuse  the
terms,  the  blame  would  not  be  his.

20  Choose  which.] — Ver.  63.  The  argument  that  Cydippe  here  uses
against  Acontius  is  what  we  commonly  term  a '  dilemma,'  in  which  method
of  reasoning  an  adversary  is  puzzled  whichever  side  he  takes.  Cydippe
tells  him,  that  take  which  he  pleases,  there  is  nothing  on  either  side
of  the  argument  in  the  least  favourable  to  his  cause.  '  Either  you
do  not  wish  to  appease  Diana,  or  you  cannot  do  it.  If  the  former  is
the  case,  you  are  regardless  of  me ;  if  the  latter,  Diana  is  regardless  of
you.'

31  With  which  foot.] — Ver.  69.  Among  other  superstitions,  the  an-
cients were  careful  not  to  set  out  on  a  journey  by  moving  the  left  foot
first,  as  that  was  an  omen  of  ill.


236  THE EPISTLES OE THE HEROINES.  [EP.  XXI.

gales  were  propitious.  Propitious  were  those  gales  that  bore
me  back  as  I  sped ;  and  that  opposed  my  ill-fated  voyage.
And  would  that  they  had  remained  obstinately  opposed  to  my
sails !  but  it  is  ridiculous  to  complain  of  the  inconstancy  of
the  winds.

Attracted  by32  the  fame  of  the  place,  I  hastened  to  visit
Delos  ;  and  I  seemed  to  be  making  the  voyage  in  a  slow  ship.
How  often  did  I  utter  reproaches  against  the  oars,  as  though
tardy ;  and  I  complained  that  too  little  sail  was  given  to  the
winds.  And  now  had  I  passed  Myconos,  now  Tenos  and
Andros  ;33  and  bright  Delos  was  before  my  eyes.  Soon  as  I
beheld  it  from  afar,  I  said,  "  Island,  why  dost  thou  retreat
from  me  ?  Art  thou  floating  in  the  great  sea  as  in  former
times  ?"  I  reached  the  land,  when  now,  day  nearly  past,  the
Sun  was  preparing  to  take  the  harness  off  his  purple  steeds.
After  he  had  recalled  them  to  their  wonted  rising,  my  locks
were  dressed  by  the  order  of  my  mother.  She  herself  put
jewels  on  my  fingers,  and  gold  upon  my  locks,34  and  she  her-
self placed  the  garments  upon  my  shoulders.  At  once,  going
forth,  we  presented  to  the  Gods  above,  to  whom  the  island
is  sacred,  saluted  by  us,  yellow  frankincense  and  wine.  And
while  my  mother  was staining  the  altars  with  votive  blood,

32  Attracted  by.] — Ver.  77.  The  descriptions  of  the  Poet  are  gene-
rally consistent  with  truth  and  nature.  There  is  nothing  more  common
when  any  misfortune  has  happened  to  us,  than  to  recal  to  our  mind  all  the
little  circumstances  and  particulars  that  have  concurred  to  produce  it.  We
are  apt  to  imagine  a  certain  fatality  in  things,  and  to  see  ourselves  hurried
on  by  a  train  of  circumstances  that  rendered  it  unavoidable.  Thus,  Cy-
dippe,  from  a  reflection  on  her  misfortune,  is  led  to  revert  to  its  origin,
and  the  several  steps  by  which  it  has  been  brought  about.  The  narrative
is  diversified  with  very  apt  reflections ;  and  all  the  particulars  that  may
have  conduced  to  her  sorrows  are  mentioned  with  great  exactness.
Delos  was  an  island  in  the  iEgean  Sea,  the  chief  of  the  Cyclades,  especially
famous  for  the  birth  there  of  Apollo  and  Diana.  It  was  said  to  have  for-
merly floated  under  the  waves.

33  And  Andros.'] — Ver.  81.  Andros  was  an  island  in  the  ^Egean  sea,
opposite  the  coast  of  Euboea.  Myconos  was  one  of  the  Cyclades.  Tenos
was  also  an  island  in  the  vEgean  sea.

34  Upon  my  locks.'] — Ver.  89.  Burmann  would  prefer  '  cruribus,'  in
place  of  '  crinibus,'  and  would  take  the  word  '  aurum,'  to  refer  to  leggings
or  garters  embroidered  with  gold.  Ovid  seems,  however,  really  to  refer
to  the  '  crinale,'  or  '  bodkin,'  worn  in  the  hair.  The  mother's  pride  in
dressing  the  girl  in  all  her  finery  is  beautifully  depicted.


EP.  XXI.]  CYDIPPE TO ACONTITJS.  237

and  was  heaping  up  the  hallowed  entrails  on  the  smoking
altars  ;  my  attentive  nurse  led  me  also  to  the  other  temples,
and  with  wandering  steps  we  strayed  through  the  holy  spots.
And  sometimes  I  sauntered  in  the  porticos,  sometimes  I
admired  the  gifts  of  the  kings,  and  the  statues  that  stood  in
every  quarter  ;  I  admired,  too,  the  altar  built  of  horns35  innu-
merable, and  the  tree36  against  which  the  Goddess  leaned  in
her  labour ;  the  other  things,  too,  besides,  which  Delos  pos-
sesses, (for  neither  do  I  remember,  nor  do  I  care  to  mention,
whatever  I  saw  there.)

Perhaps,  Acontius,  while  beholding  these  things,  I  was
beheld  by  thee,  and  my  simplicity  seemed  to  be  able  to  be
ensnared.  I  returned  to  the  temple  of  Diana,  lofty  with
its  steps  ;37  what  place  ought  to  have  been  more  secure  than
that  ?  An  apple  is  thrown  before  my  feet  with  an  inscription
like  this — Ah  me  !  now,  again,  had  I  almost  sworn  to  thee. —
My  nurse  took  this  up,  and,  surprised,  she  said,  "  Read  it
over."  Then,  wondrous  poet,  did  I  read  thy  ensnaring  words.
The  name  of  wedlock  mentioned,  confused  with  shame  I
felt  that  I  was  blushing  all  over  my  cheeks ;  my  eyes,  too,
I  kept  as  though  fixed  on  my  bosom ;  eyes  that  had  been
made  the  accomplices  of  thy  design.  Traitor !  why  dost  thou
rejoice  ?  Or  what  glory  has  been  acquired  by  thee  ?  Or  what
renown  hast  thou,  a  man,  for  having  deceived  a  maiden  ?  De-
fended by  a  buckler,33  I  had  not  taken  my  stand,  wielding
the  battle-axe  ;  like  Penthesilea39  on  the  Ilian  shores. No

35  Built  of  horns.'] — Ver.  99.  Callimachus  says  that  this  altar  was
built  by  Apollo,  with  the  horns  of  beasts  that  had  been  slain  by  Diana
in  the  chase.  An  anonymous  author  adds,  that  they  were  all  the  right
horns  of  beasts  that  had  been  slain  in  one  day.

36  And  the  tree.]— Y  ex.  100.  We  are  told  in  the  Sixth  Book  of  the
Metamorphoses,  1.  335,  that  Latona,  when  she  was  delivered  of  Apollo  and
Diana,  leaned  against  an  olive  and  a  palm  tree.

37  With  its  steps.] — Ver.  105.  The  ancients,  in  building  their  temples
to  the  Gods,  generally  made  choice  of  an  elevated  situation.

38  By  a  buckler.] — Ver.  117.  The  'pelta'  was  a  small  light  shield,
first  introduced  among  the  Greeks  by  Iphicrates.  It  was  generally  made
of  wood  or  wicker,  covered  with  skin  or  leather.  It  is  said  by  some  au-
thors to  have  been  quadrangular.  A  light  shield  of  that  character  having
been  part  of  the  national  armour  of  Thrace,  it  was  attributed  to  the
Amazons,  in  whose  hands  it  is  sometimes  represented  as  elliptical,  and
sometimes  with  a  semi-circular  indentation,  in  shape  like  a  half  moon.

35  Penthesilea.] — Ver.  118. Penthesilea  was  a  queen  of  the  Amazons,


238  THE  EPISTLES  OF  THE  HEEOLNES.  [EP.  XXI.

belt,  embossed  with  Amazonian  gold,  was  borne  off  as  a  booty
by  thee,  as  though  from  Hippolyta.40

Why  dost  thou  exult  if  thy  words  did41  act  the  deceiver  for
me  ;  and  if  I,  a  thoughtless  girl,  was  caught  by  thy  stratagem  ?
An  apple  beguiled  Cydippe,  so  did  an  apple  deceive  the
daughter  of  Schoeneus.42  Thou  wilt  now  be  a  second  Hippo-
menes,  forsooth.  But  it  had43  been  better  (if  that  boy  had  pos-
session of  thee,  who,  as  thou  sayest,  carries  I  know  not  what
torches),  after  the  usual  manner  with  honourable  men,  not  to
debase  thy  hopes  by  fraudulence  ;  I  ought  to  have  been  so-
licited, not  circumvented  by  thee.  Why,  since  thou  didst
sigh  for  me,  didst  thou  not  think  that  those  points  ought  to
be  urged  on  account  of  which  thou  thyself  wast  worthy  to
be  desired  by  me  ?  Why  wast  thou  willing  rather  to  force
than  to  persuade  me,  if,  on  learning  thy  proposal,  I  could
have  been  won  over  ?  Of  what  advantage  to  thee  now  is  the
form  of  the  oath,  and  the  tongue  that  called  the  Goddess
personally  to  witness  1  It  is  the  intention44  that  takes
the  oath  ;  in  that  I  have  not  sworn ;  that  alone  is  able  to
give  weight  to  what  we  say. Design  and  the  avowed  pur-

who  was  said  to  have  invented  the  battle-axe.  Going  to  the  Trojan  war
to  assist  Priam,  she  was  slain  by  Achilles,  who  afterwards  manifested
extreme  sorrow  for  her  fate.

40  Hippolyta.'] — Ver.  120.  She  alludes  to  the  task  enjoined  by  Eurys-
theus  upon  Hercules,  of  obtaining  the  belt  of  Hippolyta,  the  queen  of
the  Amazons.  Cydippe  means  that  Acontius,  in  triumphing  over  her,  can
acquire  no  such  glory  as  Hercules  did  in  vanquishing  Hippolyta.

41  Thy  words  did.] — Ver.  121.'  As  usual  on  all  possible  occasions,  he
puns  on  the  word  '  verba.'  '  Verba '  alone  means  '  words,'  but  '  verba
dare,'  is  a  phrase  meaning  '  to  deceive.'

42  Daughter  of  Schoeneus.] — Ver.  123.  The  story  of  Atalanta,  the
daughter  of  Schceneus,  and  how  she  was  vanquished  in  the  race  by  Hippo-
menes,  is  related  in  the  Tenth  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses.

43  But  it  had.] — Ver.  125.  Cydippe  here  begins  to  relent,  and  to
betray  her  affection  for  Acontius.  She  could  be  content  to  fall  to
his  lot,  but,  if  possible,  with  less  danger  and  misery  to  herself.  She
therefore  blames  him  for  not  having  addressed  her  in  the  usual  and
approved  mode.  It  would  have  been  both  a  more  honorable  and  a
safer  way  of  proceeding.  He  has  now  nothing  to  trust  to  but  the  sem-
blance of  an  oath,  which,  as  it  was  pronounced  without  the  assent  of  the
will  or  the  judgment,  cannot,  with  any  appearance  of  reason,  be  deemed
binding.

44  The  intention.] — Ver.  135.  Here,  at  least,  her  argument  is  quite
unanswerable.


EP.  XXI.]  CYD1PPE TO ACONTITJS.  239

pose  of  the  intention  form  the  oath,  and  no  fetters  but  those
of  the  judgment  are  binding.

If  I  intended  to  engage  myself  to  thee  in  wedlock  ;  then
insist  upon  the  due  rights  of  the  promised  alliance.  But  if  I
have  given  thee  nothing  except  mere  words  without  meaning  ;
thou  dost  vainly  depend  upon  words  destitute  of  their  proper
force.  I  have  taken  no  oath ;  I  have  read  the  form  of  an
oath.  Not  in  such  manner  as  that  wast  thou  to  be  chosen  for
my  husband.  Deceive  others  in  the  same  manner ;  let  an
epistle  come  after  the  apple.  If  this  is  binding,  carry  off  the
great  wealth  of  the  rich  man  ;  make  kings  to  swear45  that  they
will  give  to  thee  their  realms ;  and,  whatever  pleases  thee
throughout  the  whole  world,  let  it  be  thine.  By  that  same
(believe  me)  thou  art  much  greater  than  Diana  herself,  if  thy
writing  has  a  divine  power  so  efficacious  in  its  favour.

And  yet,  when  I  have  said  these  things,  when  I  have  reso-
lutely refused  myself  to  thee,  when  the  reason  of  my  promise  has
been  so  well  discussed  ;  I  confess  that  I  stand  in  dread  of  the
wrath  of  the  relentless  daughter  of  Latona ;  and  I  suspect  that
from  that  quarter  my  body  is  afflicted.  For  why,  so  oft  as  the
nuptial  rites  are  in  preparation,  do  the  languid  limbs  of  the  des-
tined bride  as  often  fail  ?  Three  times  has  approaching  Hyme-
naeus  now  fled  at  the  altars  erected  for  me,  and  turned  his
back  on  the  threshold  of  my  nuptial  chamber.  The  lamps,  too,
so  often  filled  by  the  wearied  hand,  with  difficulty  are  lighted
up ;  hardly  do  the  torches  keep  alight  on  the  flame  being
waved.  Often  do  the  unguents  drop  from  his  hair  crowned
with  garlands,  and  his  mantle,  beautiful  with  plenteous  crim-
son,46 is  swept  along  the  ground.  When  he  reached  our
threshold,  he  perceived  my  tears47  and  my  apprehensions  of

45  Kings  to  swear.] — Ver.  147.  By  a  '  reductio  ad  absurdum,'  Cy-
dippe  endeavours  to  put  Acontius  out  of  conceit  with  his  device,  b'y
representing  it  as  contrary  to  common  sense.  But  as  the  absurd  law  then
in  force  at  Delos,  bound  persons  by  their  words  and  not  by  the  intention,
Cydippe  was  still  obliged  to  make  good  her  vow  ;  and  her  reasoning,
though  just  in  the  abstract,  is  irrelevant  in  this  particular  case.

46  Plenteous  crimson.'] — Ver.  162.  The  Romans,  with  a  singular  want
of  perspicuity,  were  in  the  habit  of  calling  any  yellow,  red,  or  pink
colour,  by  the  general  name  of  '  croceum,'  or  '  crocus,'  which  originally
meant  '  saffron  colour'  alone.

i7  My  tears.'] — Ver.  163. Hymen  was  always  supposed  to  be  received


240  THE EPISTLES OF THE HEBOIKES.  [EP.  XXI.

death,  and  many  things  the  reverse  of  his  own  rites.  He  him-
self threw  down  his  chaplets  torn  from  his  contracted  brow,
and  he  wiped  the  thick  amomum  from  his  shining  locks.  He
was  ashamed,  too,  to  arise  joyous  in  a  sorrowing  crowd,  and
the  red  that  was48  on  his  mantle  was  transferred  to  his  face.

But,  ah  wretched  me  !  my  limbs  are  parched  with  fever  ;
and  the  coverings49  have  a  weight  greater  than  usual.  I
behold  my  parents,  too,  lamenting  over  my  features  ;  and  in-
stead of  the  torch  of  marriage,  the  torch  of  death  is  prepared
for  me.  Compassionate  my  sufferings,  Goddess,  that  dost
delight  in  the  painted  quiver ;  and  grant  me  now  the  health-
restoring  aid  of  thy  brother.  It  is  a  reproach  to  thee,  that
he  does  avert  the  causes  of  death ;  and  that  thou,  on  the
other  hand  dost  have  the  credit  of  my  destruction.  Have
I  ever,  unawares,  turned  my  looks  towards  thy  bath,50  when
thou  wast  preparing  to  bathe  at  the  fountain  ?  Have  I
passed  by  thy  altars  alone  out  of  so  many  inhabitants  of
heaven?  And  has  thy  mother  ever  been  slighted  by  my
mother?51  In  nought  have  I  offended,  except  that  I  have
read  the  perjured  lines  ;  and  I  have  been  learned  in  the  matter
of  the  verse  so  far  from  fortunate  to  me.

But  do  thou  as  well,  if  thou  art  not  pretending  thy  affec-
tion, offer  frankincense  in  my  behalf;  those  hands  which
have  done  the  injury  may  furnish  the  relief.  Why  does  the
Goddess,  who  is  enraged  that  the  damsel  already  promised  to
thee  does  not  become  thine,  cause  her  not  to  be  able  to  be-
come thine  ?  Every  thing  must  be  hoped  by  thee  while  I
am  alive ;  why  does  the  cruel  Goddess  take  away  life  from  me,
and  the  hope  of  gaining  me  from  thee  ? But  do  not52  thou

with  joy  and  gladness.  Consequently,  on  entering  a  house  full  of  tears
and  apprehensions,  he  saw  nothing  that  hespoke  his  usual  reception.

48  The  red  that  was.'] — Ver.  168.  This  shows  that  the  colour  of  his
'  palla'  was  not  saffron,  hut  pink  or  crimson.  The  '  flammeum'  or  veil
worn  hy  the  bride,  was  of  the  colour  called  '  croceum ;'  probably  of  a  red
or  fiery  hue,  if  we  may  judge  from  j  flamma,'  the  origin  of  the  word.

40  The  coverings.'] — Ver.  170.  Here  the  word  '  palhum '  seems  to  have
the  meaning  of  '  blanket,'  or  '  counterpane.'

50  Towards  thy  bath.] — Ver.  178.  She  alludes  to  the  offence  of
which  Actaeon  was  guilty,  and  in  the  next  line  to  that  of  OEneus,  the  king
of  Calydon.

51  By  my  mother.] — Ver.  180. She  here  alludes  to  the  guilt  of  Niobe.

52  But  do  not.] — Ver.  189. Cydippe  now  begins  to  open  her  mind


EP.  XXI.]  CYDIPPE TO ACONTIUS.  241

suppose  that  he,  to  whom  I  am  destined  for  a  wife,  chafes  my
weakened  limbs  with  his  hand  laid  upon  them.  He  sits  by,
indeed,  so  far  as  is  allowed  him ;  but  he  remembers  that
mine  is  the  bed  of  a  virgin.  Now,  too,  he  seems  to  have
discovered  I  know  not  what  about  me  ;  for,  the  cause  lying
concealed,  his  tears  often  fall.  And  he  caresses  me  with  less
boldness,  and  seldom  snatches  a  kiss  ;  and  he  calls  me  his  own
with  faltering  voice.  Nor  am  I  surprised  that  he  has  dis-
covered it,  since  I  am  betrayed  by  manifest  signs.  When  he
comes,  I  turn  myself  upon  my  right  side  ;53  I  do  not  speak,
and  closing  my  eyes,  sleep  is  pretended  by  me;  and  I  push
away  his  hand  as  it  tries  to  touch  me.  He  groans  and  sighs
with  silent  breast ;  and  he  finds  me  averse,  although  he  de-
serves it  not.  Ah  me  !  that  thou  dost  rejoice,  and  that  this
pleasure  delights  thee !  Ah  me !  that  I  have  avowed  to  thee
my  feelings !

If  utterance54  were  allowed  me,  then  art  thou  justly  de-
serving of  my  anger,  who  didst  lay  these  toils  for  me.  Thou
writest  that  it  may  be  allowed  thee  to  visit  my  languishing
body;  thou  art  far  away  from  me  ;  and  yet  from  a  distance  dost
thou  wound.  I  used  to  wonder  why  thy  name  was  Acontius  ;
thou  hast  a  dart55  which  inflicts  wounds  from  afar.  At  least,  I
have  not  yet  recovered  from  such  a  wound  ;  pierced  from  afar
by  thy  letter,  as  though  by  a  javelin.  But  why  shouldst
thou  come  here  ? To  behold  my  wretched  body  indeed,  the

more  plainly,  so  as  to  give  Acontius  reason  to  think  that  he  is  not  alto-
gether indifferent  to  her.  She  takes  pains  to  remove  all  his  jealousies
and  fears,  and  to  satisfy  him  that  his  rival  has  had  no  reason  to  boast  of
her  indulgence.

53  My  right  side.'] — Ver.  198.  Some  suggest  that  this  means  that  she
would  be  lying  at  other  times  on  her  left  side,  for  the  purpose  of  extend-
ing her  right  hand,  that  the  physician  might  feel  her  pulse.  But  '  dexter '
probably  means  here,  the  opposite  side  to  that  on  which  her  lover  was
standing.

54  If  utterance.'] — Ver.  205.  This  and  the  two  preceding  lines  are
generally  supposed  to  be  hopelessly  corrupt.

55  Hast  a  dart.'] — Ver.  210.  By  reason  of  this  pun  upon  his  name,
Burmann  will  not  admit  this  line  and  the  next  to  have  been  composed  by
Ovid  ;  inasmuch  as  a  play  upon  a  name  is  never  found  in  the  better  poets.
To  us  it  would  appear  to  be  particularly  O vidian,  as  the  Poet  seldom  ap-
pears to  have  resisted  such  a  temptation.  '  Acumen'  means  '  the  point  of  a
javelin,  or  dart' ;  and  she  here  alludes  to  his  name  in  its  original  significa-
tion, as  cckovtiop  was  the  Greek  for  '  a  javelin.'

Pv


242  THE  EPISTLES  OF  THE  HEROINES.  [EP.  XXI.

twofold  trophy56  of  thy  ingenuity.  I  am  fallen  away  with
thinness  ;  my  complexion  is  bloodless  ;  just  as  I  call  to  mind
that  it  was  on  thy  apple.  My  fair  features,  too,  are  not  tinted
with  a  mixture  of  red  ;  the  appearance  of  new  marble  is  wont
to  be  such.  The  colour  of  silver  plate  at  a  feast  is  such,  which
turns  pale  when  touched  with  the  chill  of  cold  water.  If  thou
wast  now  to  see  me,  thou  wouldst  deny  that  thou  hadst  seen
me  before,  and  thou  wouldst  say,  "  She  is  not  worthy  to  be
sought  after  by  my  artifices  ;"  and  thou  wouldst  release  me
from  the  stringency  of  my  promise,  that  I  might  not  be
united  to  thee  ;  and  thou  wouldst  desire  the  Goddess  not  to
bear  that  in  mind.  Perhaps,  too,  thou  wouldst  make  me  swear
over  again  the  contrary,  and  wouldst  be  sending  other  words
to  me  to  read.

But  still  I  wish  that  thou  couldst  see  me,  as  thou  hast
requested,  and  couldst  perceive  the  weakened  limbs  of  her
who  is  engaged  to  thee.  Hadst  thou  a  heart,  Acontius,
even  harder  than  iron,  yet  thou  thyself  wouldst  entreat  pardon
in  my  own  words.  But  that  thou  mayst  not  be  ignorant  by
what  means  I  may  be  restored  to  health  ;  enquiries  have  been
made  at  Delphi  of  the  God  who  predicts  futurity.  He,  too,
as  a  floating  report  now  whispers,  complains  that  some  damsel,
I  know  not  who,  has  neglected  her  oath,  he  attesting  it.  This,
the  God57  and  the  prophetess,  this,  too,  do  my  own  ill-written
lines  proclaim ;  but  no  verses58  are  wanting  for  thy  wishes.
Whence  this  favour  to  thee  ?  Unless,  perchance,  some  new
characters  have  been  discovered  by  thee,  which,  when  read,

56  Two-fold  trophy.] — Ver.  214.  This  is  generally  supposed  to  mean,
a  trophy  gained,  first,  by  his  deceiving  her  through  the  stratagem  of  the
apple,  and  then  by  his  exciting  against  her  the  enmity  of  Diana.  The  pas-
sage is,  however,  of  very  obscure  signification  ;  it  may  possibly  mean  the
alternative  of  death  or  marriage.

57  This,  the  God.'] — Ver.  235.  This  and  the  following  line  are  in  a
very  corrupt  state.  Some  would  take '  vates'  to  refer  to  Acontius  ;  it  appears
rather  to  mean  the  Pythia,  or  priestess  of  Apollo  at  Delphi.  Cydippe
seems  to  mean  that  the  '  carmina,'  or  '  verses,'  had  been  a  cause  of  woe  to
her,  while  they  had  succeeded  so  much  to  his  wishes.

58  No  verses.] — Ver.  236.  She  seems  to  play  upon  the  word  '  carmina'
here  in  its  various  significations,  of  '  prophecies/  4  incantations,'  '  lines,'
'  poetical  composition,'  through  the  medium  of  which  Acontius  had  been
successful ;  both  as  regarded  his  '  carmina'  or  '  line,'  written  on  the  apple,
the  '  carmina,'  or  '  answer,'  given  by  the  Pythia,  and  her  own  '  carmina,'

\ox  '  lines,'  which,  by  the  bad  writing,  testified  the  wrath  of  the  Goddess.


EP.  XXI.]  CYDIPPE  TO  ACOKTIUS.  243

deceive69  the  great  Gods.  And  thus,  thou  obtaining  the  favour
of  the  Gods,  I  myself  submit  to  the  power  of  the  Gods  ;  and  I
willingly  extend  my  conquered  hands  in  obedience  to  thy  de-
sires. I  have  confessed,  too,  to  my  mother,  the  engagement
made  by  my  deceived  tongue,  while  keeping  my  eyes,  full  of
shame,  fixed  upon  the  ground.

The  rest  is  thy  care ;  even  this  that  I  have  done  is  more
than  becomes  a  maiden,  in  that  my  paper  has  not  hesitated  to
hold  converse  with  thee.  Now  have  I  sufficiently  wearied
my  weakened  limbs  with  the  pen,  and  my  feeble  hand  refuses
its  duty  any  longer.  But  that  I  wish  now  to  unite  myself  with
thee,  what  remains60  but  that  I  should  write?  Farewell.

59  When  read,  deceive.]  — Ver.  238.  Some  would  render  '  capiat '  as
signifying  'please,'  or  'win  over.'  The  meaning  seems  rather  to  be
'  deceive,'  or  '  beguile,'  in  the  same  manner  as  she  has  been  beguiled  by
his  writing.

60  What  remains.] — Ver.  247.  Some  Commentators  remark  that  this
conclusion  is  as  inelegant  as  the  Epistle  itself :  a  censure  which  neither  the
Epistle  nor  its  conclusion  seems  to  us  to  deserve.  It  is  worthy  of  observa-
tion, that  of  these  twenty-one  Epistles,  Ovid,  in  the  Eighteenth  Elegy  of
the  Second  Book  of  the  '  Amores,'  avows  himself  to  be  the  author  of  the
following  nine.  Penelope  to  Ulysses,  Phyllis  to  Demophoon,  (Enone  to
Paris,  Phaedra  to  Hippolytus,  Hypsipyle  to  Jason,  Dido  to  iEneas,  Ariadne
to  Theseus,  Canace  to  Macareus,  and  Sappho  to  Phaon.


THE

THREE RESPONSIVE EPISTLES

OF

AULUS SABINUS,

A POET OF THE AUGUSTAN PERIOD.


EPISTLE  I.

ULYSSES TO PENELOPE.

This  Epistle  is  written  in  answer  to  that  of  Ovid  from  Penelope  to
Ulysses.  He  accounts  to  his  wife  for  his  delay,  now  that  Troy  has  heen
levelled  with  the  ground  ;  he  informs  her  of  his  numerous  afflictions,
and  assures  her  of  his  continued  affection.

Chajstce,  Penelope,  has  brought,  at  last,  thy  words,  inscribed
on  the  affectionate  paper,  to  the  wretched  Ulysses.  I  recog-
nized both  the  dear  hand,  and  the  faithful  signet  ;*  they
proved  a  consolation  amid  my  protracted  woes ;  thou  dost
blame  me  as  being  slow  to  return ;  perhaps  I  could  even
wish  I  were  so ;  rather  than  tell  thee  what  I  have  endured  and
what  I  still  endure.  Greece  did  not  accuse  me  of  that  fault ;"
when  feigned  madness  detained  my  sails  on  my  native  shores  ;
but  rather  that3  I  was  not  desirous,  and  was  not  able  to  forego
thy  society ;  and  thou  thyself  didst  prove  the  cause  of  my
dissembling  as  to  my  sanity.

'Tis  thy  anxiety  that  I  should  write  nothing  in  return,4  and

1  The  faithful  signet.] — Ver.  3.  '  Gemmasque  fideles  :'  literally,  '  and  the
faithful  gems.'  '  Gemma '  is  especially  used  to  signify  the  precious  stone
that  is  fixed  in  the  bezel  of  a  ring.

2  Of  that  fault.] — Ver.  7.  Of  being  '  lentus,' '  inert '  or  '  inactive  in  my
love  for  you/

3  But  rather  that.] — Ver.  9.  He  says  that  the  objection  made  to  him
was,  that  he  was  too  fond  of  his  wife,  when  he  feigned  madness  to  avoid
parting  with  her  ;  a  stratagem  which  was  discovered  by  Palamedes.

i  Write  nothing  in  return.] — Ver.  11.  He  alludes  to  the  second  line
of  the  Epistle  of  Penelope,  '  Nil  mihi  rescribas  attamen  ;  ipse  veni.'


EP.  I.]  ULYSSES TO PENELOPE.  245

that  I  should  hasten  to  come.  As  I  was  hastening,  the  hostile
South  winds  bore  back  my  sails.  Troy,  so  hateful  to  the  Grecian
fair,  does  not  detain  me  ;  Troy  is  now  only  ashes,  and  a  dismal
plain.  Deiphobus,  too,  lies  prostrate,  Asius  is  prostrate,5
and  Hector  is  prostrate  ;  and  whoever,  besides,  was  the  cause
of  thy  apprehensions.  I  have  escaped,  too,  the  onsets  of  the
Thracians,  their  leader  Rhesus  slain,  being  borne  back  to
my  tents  by  his  captured  steeds  \  in  safety,  also,  from  the
midst  of  the  citadel  of  the  Phrygian  Tritonis,  did  I  bear  off  the
captured  pledge  of  victory  decreed  by  the  Fates.6  Entrust-
ing myself  to  the  horse,7  I  feared  not ;  although  the  pro-
phetess,3 disastrously  anxious,  cried  aloud,  "  Ye  Trojans,  burn
the  horse  ;  burn  it ;  within  the  deceiving  wood  Greeks  are  con-
cealed; and  they  are  making  their  last  attack9  upon  the  wretched
Phrygians."  Achilles  had  gone  without  the  last  honours  of
sepulture,  but  by  my  shoulders  was  he  restored  to  Thetis.

And  for  labours  so  great,  the  Greeks  did  not  refuse  due  praise ;
as  my  reward,10  I  received  the  arms  of  the  body  which  I  had
rescued.  But  what  matters  that  ?  In  the  ocean  are  they  sunk.11
No  fleets,  no  companions  survive  for  me  ;  the  deep  has  them
all.  Love  only  still  remains  with  me,  who,  patient  under  mis-
fortunes, has  hardened  me  by  so  many  woes.  The  virgin
daughter  of  Nisus12  has  not  discouraged  him  with  her  raven -

5  Asius  is  prostrate.] — Ver.  15.  Asius  was  a  Trojan,  the  son  of  Hyr-
tacus  ;  he  was  killed  by  Idomeneus.

6  Decreed  by  the  Fates.] — Ver.  20.  The  several  points  here  referred  to
by  Ulysses  will  be  found  detailed  and  explained  in  his  speech  in  the
Thirteenth  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses.

7  To  the  horse.] — Ver.  21.  Ulysses  was  one  of  the  warriors  who  were
enclosed  in  the  wooden  horse,  when  it  was  admitted  within  the  walls  of
Troy.

8  Although  the  prophetess.] — Ver.  22.  This  was  Cassandra,  who  advised
them  to  burn  the  wooden  horse  ;  but  it  was  her  fate  never  to  be  believed.

9  Making  their  last  attack.] — Ver.  24.  '  Ultima  bella  ferunt,'  may  mean
this,  or  possibly,  '  are  bringing  the  warfare  home  to.'

10  As  my  reward.] — Ver.  28.  He  contended  with  Ajax  Telamon  for
the  honour  of  receiving  the  arms  of  Achilles.  See  the  narrative  in  the
Thirteenth  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses.

1 1  In  the  ocean  are  they  sunk.] — Ver.  29.  When  his  vessel  was  wrecked
on  his  return  from  Troy.

13  Daughter  of  Nisus.] — Ver.  33.  In  common  with  both  Virgil  and
Ovid,  Sabinus  falls  into  the  error  of  supposing  that  the  Scylla,  who  was
changed  into  the  Sicilian  whirlpool,  was  identical  with  the  Scylla  who  be-


246  THE RESPONSIVE EPISTLES OF SABHSUS.  [EP.  I.

mg  dogs ;  nor  yet  Charybdis,  whirling  with  her  swelling
waves  ;  nor  savage  Antiphates,13  nor  Parthenope14  partaking  of
two  forms  in  one  body,  assiduous  with  her  charming  melody.
Not  because  Circe  tried  her  Colchian  herbs,15  not  because  an-
other Goddess16  employed  her  embraces  so  solemnly  pledged.17
Both  of  them  used  to  give  hopes  that  they  were  able  to  take
away  from  me  my  mortal  threads,18  and  both,  the  Stygian  paths.
But,  despising  even  this  gift,  I  have  sought  thyself,  doomed
to  suffer  so  many  evils  by  land,  and  so  many  by  sea.  But  thou,
perhaps  now  influenced  by  the  name  of  a  female,  wilt  not
read  the  rest  of  my  words  free  from  anxiety.  Thou  wilt,  too,
be  tormented  with  apprehensions,  before  unknown,  what  Circe
had  to  do  with  me,  and  what  the  cunning  Calypso.18*

Assuredly,  when  I  read  of  Antinoiis,  and  Polybus,  and
Medon,19  alas  !  in  all  my  body  did  no  blood  remain  !  Amid
so  many  youths,  so  much  streaming  wine,20  thou  dost  continue
(ah  me  !  on  what  proof  shall  I  credit  it  ?) still  chaste. Or

trayed  her  father  Nisus  to  Minos,  when  besieging  the  city  of  Megara.
The  story  of  the  one  is  to  be  found  in  the  Eighth,  and  of  the  other  in  the
Fourteenth  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses.

13  Antiphates.} — Ver.  35.  He  was  the  king  of  the  Laestrygons,  who
were  cannibals.

14  Parthenope.'] — Ver.  36.  This  was  one  of  the  Sirens,  who,  when
she  was  unable  to  arrest  Ulysses  in  his  course  by  the  melody  of  her  voice,
precipitated  herself  from  a  rock  in  despair,  and  was  carried  by  the  waves
to  the  spot  which  was  afterwards  called  by  her  name,  and  was  the  site  of
the  city  of  Naples.

15  Colchian  herds."] — Ver.  37.  Circe,  as  being  the  sister  of  Medea,  was
supposed  to  be  a  native  of  Colchis.

16  Another  Goddess.] — Ver.  38.  This  was  Calypso,  who  was  charmed
with  Ulysses,  and  strongly  opposed  his  departure  from  her  island.

17  Solemnly  pledged.] — Ver.  38.  '  Solennes  '  may  have  this  meaning,
or  perhaps  that  of  '  acknowledged,'  '  avowed/  or  '  usual,'  as  a  matter  of
course.

18  My  mortal  threads.] — Ver.  39.  That  is,  i  They  both  declared  them-
selves able  to  withdraw  my  life  from  the  power  of  the  Fates,  and  to
protect  me  from  having  to  cross  the  Stygian  waves/

!8*  Cunning  Calypso.] — Ver.  45.  '  Cauta,'  '  cunning,'  or  '  wary,'  seems
better  than  the  usual  reading,  <  causa.' Heinsius  approves  of  the  former.

19  Antinoiis,  and  Polybus.  and  Medon.] — Ver.  47.  These  were  three  of
the  suitors  who  were  pestering  Penelope  with  their  addresses,  and  squander-
ing the  substance  of  her  husband.

20  Much  streaming  wine.] — Ver.  49.  '  Vina  liquentia.'-  This  reading
seems  preferable  to  '  vina  licentia,'  meaning  '  wine  unrestrained,'  or  '  with-
out limit,'  though  the  latter  is  preferred  by  Heinsius  and  Barthius.


EP.  I.]  ULYSSES TO PENELOPE.  247

"why  do  thy  features  please  any  one  if  they  are  in  tears,21  and
why  do  not  those  charms  of  thine  decay  with  weeping  ?  To
marriage  too,  hast  thou  been  pledged,  did  not  the  deceiving-
web  detain  thee,  and  didst  thou  not  cunningly  always  undo  the
work  thou  hadst  commenced.  A  duteous  contrivance  indeed  ;
but  how  often22  wilt  thou  deceive  their  eyes  with  the  wool  ?
Will  that  contrivance  ensure  thee  success  as  often  ?

Oh  Polyphemus !  overwhelmed  in  thy  cavern,  I  should  have
finished  my  days,  wretched  by  reason  of  calamities23  so  great !
Better  had  I  fallen  conquered  by  the  Thracian  soldiers,24  at
the  time  when25  my  wandering  barks  arrived  at  Ismaros.  Or
I  might  have  satisfied  the  cruel  Pluto  by  my  destruction  at
the  time  when,  having  delayed  my  death,  1  returned  from  the
Stygian  waves ;  where  I  saw  (a  thing  that  thy  epistle  in  vain
conceals26  from  me)  her,  who,  when  I  departed,  was  my  still
surviving  mother.  She  reported  the  same  misfortunes  of  my
house  ;  and  she  fled  from  me  as  I  sought  to  embrace  her,  thrice
gliding  away  from  my  embrace.  I  saw,  too,  him  of  Phylace  ;27
despising  the  prophecy,28  he  was  the  first  to  carry  the  warfare

"l  They  are  in  tears.]— Ver.  51.  He  hints  that  she  cannot  have  wept
so  much  as  she  professes,  or  else  all  her  beauty  would  have  vanished,  and
she  would  have  ceased  to  inflame  her  hearts  of  the  suitors.  Saltonstali
renders  this  line  rather  quaintly —

'  Could  they  delight  in  thy  tear-blubbered  face  ?'

32  But  how  often.'] — Ver.  55.  In  accordance  with  the  suggestion  of
Heinsius,  a  note  of  interrogation  is  here  read  after  '  lana,'  and  another  after
•  tibi.'

23  Of  calamities.']— Ver.  58.  'Ob  mala'  seems  to  be  a  preferable  read-
ing to  '  ad  mala.'

24  The  Thracian  soldiers.]  —  Ver.  59.  On  setting  out  homewards,
Ulysses  landed  in  Thrace,  in  the  country  of  the  Ciconians,  where  his  fol-
lowers took  and  burned  the  town  of  Ismarus  ;  but  while  they  delayed
on  the  coast,  they  were  attacked  by  the  Ciconians  and  driven  to  their
ships,  with  the  loss  of  six  men  out  of  each  ship.  See  the  Ninth  Book  of
the  Odyssey.

25  At  the  time  when.] — Ver.  62.  He  refers  here  to  his  descent  to,
and  return  from,  the  Infernal  regions.

26  In  vain  conceals.] — Ver.  63.  He  accuses  her  of  having  concealed
the  fact,  that  his  mother  Anticlea  had  died  since  he  had  set  out  for  the
Trojan  war.

2?  Him  of  Phylace.] — Ver  67.  He  alludes  to  Protesilaiis,  who  was  of
Phylax,  or  Phylace,  in  Thessaly.

2*  Despising  the  prophecy.] — Ver.  67.  The  prophecy  which  foretold
death  to  the  first  person  that  should  land  on  the  Troja*n  shores.


218  THE EESPONSITE EPISTLES OF SABTFUS.  [EP.  I.

into  the  home  of  Hector.  Blest  is  he,  with  his  much  praised
wife!29  joyous,  amid  the  valiant  shades  she  walks,  accom-
panying her  husband.  And  yet  Lachesis  had  not  numbered
for  her  her  allotted  years  ;  but  she  is  delighted  thus  to  have
perished  before  her  time.  I  beheld,  and  my  eyes  did  not
withhold  the  falling  tears,  the  son  of  Atreus,  (ah  me !)
mangled  by  his  recent  murder.30  That  hero  Troy  had  not
injured  ;  he  had  passed  by  both  the  infuriate  Nauplius31  and
the  Eubcean  bays.  To  what  purpose  ?  Through  a  thousand
wounds  did  he  pour  forth  his  soul,  now  as  he  was  performing
his  vows  due  to  Jove,  the  guardian  of  his  return.  This
penalty  had  the  daughter  of  Tyndarus  prepared  for  him,  on
account  of  his  breach  of32  the  nuptial  contract ;  she  who  her-
self consorted  with  strange  men.33

Alas  !  of  what  use  is  it  to  me  that  (when  the  wife  and
the  sister  of  Hector  were  standing  amid  the  Trojan  captives)
I  rather  chose  Hecuba,34  with  her  failing  years,  in  order
that  the  love  of  a  rival  might  not  be  suspected  by  thee  ?  She
was  the  first  to  give  a  dreadful  omen  for  my  ships  ;  when
she  was  discovered  with  limbs  not  her  own.35 With  bark-

29  Much-praised  wife.'} — Ver.  69.  Laodamia.  It  is  said  by  some
authors,  that  she  had  a  statue  of  her  husband,  to  which  she  paid  divine
honours,  but  that  her  father  Acastus  caused  it  to  he  hurned,  on  which
she  threw  herself  into  the  flames  which  consumed  it.  See  her  Epistle  to
Protesilaus.

■°  His  recent  murder."] — Ver.  74.  Agamemnon  was  slain  by  his  wife
Clytemnestra,  and  her  paramour,  iEgisthus,  while  he  was  getting  out  of
the  bath.

31  The  infuriate  Nauplius.'] — Ver.  76.  Palamedes  was  treacherously
slain  by  the  contrivance  of  Ulysses.  (See  the  Thirteenth  Book  of  the
Metamorphoses.)  Upon  this,  his  father  Nauplius,  the  king  of  Euboea,
with  the  view  of  avenging  the  death  of  his  son,  caused  lighted  torches
to  be  exhibited  on  the  promontory  of  Caphareus,  in  Euboea,  in  conse-
quence of  which  many  of  the  Grecian  ships  suffered  shipwreck  on  the
rocks  of  that  island.

32  His  breach  of] — Ver.  79.  This  alludes  to  Cassandra,  who  fell  to
the  lot  of  Agamemnon,  and  about  whom  the  infamous  Clytemnestra
professed  to  be  jealous. She  was  afterwards  slain  by  Clytemnestra.

33  With  strange  men.] — Ver.  80.  She  intrigued  with  ^Egisthus,  the
cousin  of  Agamemnon.

34  Chose  Hecuba.]— Ver.  83.  The  story  of  the  last  days  of  the  wretched
Hecuba  is  pathetically  told  in  the  Thirteenth  Book  of  the  Metamor-
phoses.

35  Not  her  oivn.]—Yer.  86. This  was  when  she  was  turned  into


IP.  I.]  TJ1TSSES TO PENELOPE.  249

ing  did  the  wretched  creature  put  an  end  to  her  woful  com-
plaints ;  and  suddenly36  she  stood  there  changed  into  a  raving
bitch.  Through  such  a  portentous  sight  Thetis  removed  the
calmness  of  the  ocean,  and  pouring  forth  the  South  winds
.zEolus  brooded  over  it.  Wandering  thence,  no  longer  happy,
I  have  been  carried  over  all  the  earth,  and  wherever  the
waves  and  the  breezes  call  me,  thither  am  I  borne.  But  if
Tiresias37  was  a  soothsayer  as  prescient  of  what  is  fortunate
as  he  was  a  true  prophet  with  regard  to  my  misfortunes ;
having,  by  land  and  by  sea,  experienced  in  travel  whatever
he  prophesied  of  evil  to  me,  I  am  now  wandering  under  more
propitious  auspices.

Now,  on  what  shores  I  know  not,  Pallas  unites  herself  as  a
companion  to  me,  and  leads  me  through  spots  safe  with  kind
entertainers.  Now,  for  the  first  time  since  the  destruction  of
ruined  Troy,  has  Pallas  been  seen  by  me  ;  in  the  interven-
ing time  her  anger  withdrew  her.  In  whatever  the  son  of
Oileus38  had  offended,  one  man  was  guilty  for  all  ;  for  all  the
Greeks  was  her  wrath  destructive.  Not  even  thee,  son  of  Ty-
deus,  did  she  exempt,  whose  arms  she  had  so  lately  encouraged ;
thou,  too,  art  returning  from  wandering  over  the  world.39  Not
Teucer  sprung  from  Telamoni0  by  his  captured  wife ; not

a  bitch,  after  having  wreaked  her  vengeance  on  Polymnestor  for  the
murder  of  Polydorus.

36  And  suddenly.'] — Ver.  88. Saltonstall  thus  renders  this  line —

1  But  she  out  of  her  former  shape  did  slip.'

37  But  if  Tiresias.'] — Ver.  93.  The  story  of  Tiresias  is  related  in  the
Third  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses.

355  The  son  of  Oileiis.] — Ver.  101.  He  alludes  to  the  crime  of  Ajax
Oileus,  who  had  attempted  to  commit  violence  on  Cassandra ;  in  return
for  which,  Minerva  sent  a  storm  that  dispersed  the  ships  of  the  Greeks
on  their  return.

89  Oven  the  u-orld.] — Ver.  104.  Diomedes,  the  son  of  Tydeus,  being
expelled  from  his  native  country  on  returning  from  the  Trojan  war,  led
a  colony  into  the  South  of  Italy.  See  the  Fourteenth  Book  of  the  Meta-
morphoses.

40  Sprung  from  Telamon.] — Ver.  105.  Teucer  was  the  son  of  Telamon
by  Hesione,  the  captive  daughter  of  Laomedon.  After  Ajax  Telamon
had  put  himself  to  death  on  being  refused  the  arms  of  Achilles,  Teucer
was  requested  by  his  father  to  avenge  the  fate  of  his  brother,  which,  how-
ever, he  declined  to  do.  On  this,  he  was  expelled  from  Salamis,  and  flying
to  Cyprus,  he  there  founded  a  city  which  he  named  Salamis.


250  THE KESPONSIVE EPISTLES OE SAPINUS.  [EP.  I.

himself  for  whose  command  were  the  thousand  ships.41  For-
tunate son  of  Plisthenes,42  whatever  lot  thou  didst  experience
with  thy  beloved  wife,  it  was  not  a  deadly  one.  Whether
the  winds,  or  whether  the  ocean  caused  you  delay  ;  by  no
misfortunes  was  your  love  checked.  At  least,  neither  did
the  winds  nor  the  waves  forbid  thy  kisses  ;  and  thy  arms  were
ever  in  readiness  for  the  embrace.

Would  that  I  had  been  thus  a  wanderer ;  thou  wouldst  have
made  the  ocean  smooth,  my  wife ;  with  thee  for  my  com-
panion, there  would  have  been  nothing  sad  for  me.  Even
now,  when  I  read  that  Telemachus  is  safe  and  well  with  thee,
all  my  misfortunes  are  already  lightened  to  my  feelings.  Still
do  I  complain  that  he  is  going43  again  over  the  adverse  waves
to  Sparta,  the  city  of  Hercules,  and  Pylos,  the  land  of  Nestor.
Displeasing  is  the  affection  which  so  many  perils  attend  ;  for
to  his  misfortune,  has  he  been  entrusted  to  the  waves.

But  my  labours44  are  at  their  close  :  the  prophet  has  foretold
our  meeting  on  the  shore ;  in  the  embrace  that  belongs  to
thee,  dear  son,  shalt  thou  be  clasped.  To  be  recognised  by
thee  alone  shall  I  come ;  do  thou  carefully  repress  thy  joy,
and  conceal  thy  gladness  in  thy  silent  breast.  I  must  not
contend  by  force,  nor  must  I  rush  into  open  warfare  ;  thus
has  Apollo  declared  that  his  laurels45  forewarn.

Perhaps  before  a  banquet,  and  amid  the  listlessness  of  wine,
there  will be  a  fitting  opportunity  for  the  quivers  of  the

41  The  thousand  ships.']— Vex.  106.  He  alludes  to  Agamemnon  in  his
capacity  of  generalissimo  of  the  Greek  forces.

42  Son  of  Plisthenes.'] — Ver.  107.  He  alludes  to  Menelaus,  who  was
said,  with  Agamemnon,  to  have  heen  the  son  of  Plisthenes,  and  adopted
by  Atreus.  He  says  that  whatever  his  lot  may  have  been  after  leaving
Troy,  still  it  was  not  a  deadly  one.  His  wife  must,  indeed,  have  been  truly
'  dilecta'  to  him,  considering  all  the  trouble  he  took  to  regain  so  worth-
less a  person.

43  That  he  is  going.] — Ver.  117.  She  has  mentioned  in  her  Epistle  the
fact  that  he  has  been  sent  to  those  places.

44  But  my  labours.] — Ver.  120.  This  had  been  prophesied  to  him  by
Tiresias.  It  was  fulfilled  when  he  met  his  son  Telemachus  in  the  cottage
of  Euraseus.  situate  on  the  sea-shore  of  Ithaca.

45  That  his  laurels.] — Ver.  126.  The  laurel  was  sacred  to  Apollo,  ana
bis  image  was  decorated  with  boughs  of  it.  Persons  who  went  to  con-
sult the  Delphic  oracle,  were  adorned  with  garlands  of  laurel.  The
Roman  priests,  on  certain  festivals,  wore  wreaths  of  laurel.


EP.  II.]  DEMOPHOON TO PHYLLIS.  25 1

avenger.46  And  then  suddenly  will  they  be  surprised  by  Ulysses
so  lately  despised.47  Alas  !  I  pray  that  that  day  may  hasten  to
approach  !  That  joyous  day,  which  shall  renew  the  compact
of  our  marriage  in  days  gone  by  ;  and  then,  at  length,  my  dear
one,  mayst  thou  begin  to  be  blest  in  thy  husband.


EPISTLE  II.

DEMOPHOON  TO  PHYLLIS.

This  Epistle  is  written  in  answer  to  that  of  Ovid  from  Phyllis  to  Demo-
phoon. In  it,  he  excuses  himself,  on  several  grounds,  for  having  failed
to  perform  his  promise  of  immediately  returning  to  her.

Demophoon  sends  this  to  thee,  Phyllis,  from  his  native  city  ;
and  he  remembers  that  his  native  land  was  thy  gift.48  "With  no
other  flame  or  wife  is  Demophoon  engaged ;  but  no  so  happy49
is  he,  as  when  he  was  known  to  thee.  A  disgraceful  thine
for  me  to  endure — the  ruthless  enemy  has  expelled  Thesius
from  his  realms,  in  whom,  Phyllis,  thou  didst  vainly  pride
thyself  as  thy  father-in-law,  (and  perhaps  he  may  have  even
given  an  impulse50  to  thy  flame) ;  this  end  did  prolonged  old  age
provide51  for  him. He  who  so  lately  routed51*  the  shield-bear-

46  Quivers  of  the  avenger.] — Ver.  128.  He  alludes  prophetically  to
the  manner  in  which  the  suitors  were  doomed  to  meet  with  destruction
at  his  hands.

47  So  lately  despised."] — Ver.  129.  As  having  appeared  in  the  garb  of
a  beggar.

48  Was  thy  gift.] — Ver.  2.  As  she  gave  him  a  hospitable  shelter,  and
provided  him  with  a  ship  to  return  to  Athens.

49  But  not  so  happy.] — Ver.  4.  '  Sed  tarn  non  felix  '  seems  a  par-
ticularly awkward  expression,  and  it  is  probably  corrupt :  but  it  does  not
seem,  as  Hemsius  thinks  it  to  be,  contrary  to  the  sense  of  the  passage ;  for
he  is  evidently  complaining  that  he  is  not  now  so  light-hearted  as  when
he  was  with  her,  nor  so  ready  to  be  attracted  by  a  new  passion.

50  Given  an  impulse.] — Ver.  6.  This  is  certainly  not  very  complimen-
tary to  the  disinterestedness  of  Phyllis.

51  Old  age  provide.] — Ver.  8.  Demophoon  had  left  Phyllis  to  proceed
to  Athens,  on  hearing  of  the  death  of  Mnestheus,  who  had  succeeded
to  the  throne  on  the  expulsion  of  Theseus.

51*  So  lately  routed.] — Ver.  9.  Theseus  accompanied  Hercmes  in  his
expedition  against  the  Amazons,  who  dwelt  on  tbe  banks  of  the  Tber-
modon  ;  and  distinguished  himself  so  much  on  the  occasion,  that  Her-
cules bestowed  on  him  the  hand  of  the  vanquished  queen,  Antiope,  or,  as


252  THE BESPONSIVE EPISTLES OF SABIFTJS. [EP.  II.

ing  female  dwellers  in  Mseotis52  with  his  arms,  the  companion
of  the  great  Alcides,  himself  no  less.  He  who  formerly  made
Minos  to  be  his  father-in-law53  from  a  vengeful  enemy,  as  he
wondered  how  the  horns  of  his  monster  were  overcome.

I  am  accused  (who  could  have  believed  it  ?)  of  having  been
the  cause  of  his  exile  ;  and  my  brother54  does  not  allow  me  to
be  silent  under  the  accusation.  "  While,"  says  he,  "  thou  art
pressing  for  an  alliance  with  thy  beloved  Phyllis,  and  thy  pas-
sion is  occupied  in  love  for  a  stranger,  time  has  sped  in  the
meanwhile  gliding  on  with  fleeting  foot,  and  the  hour  of
sorrow  has  anticipated  thy  delay.  Perhaps  thou  mightst  have
been  able  either  to  arrive  while  our  affairs  were  not  as  yet  in
a  ruinous  state,  or  even  if  ruined,  thou  still  mightst  have  been
able  to  be  useful.  Why  have  the  Rhodopeian  realms  proved
more  delightful  to  thee,  and  the  fair  one  who  has  been
more  dear  to  thee  than  kingdoms?"  In  these  words  does
Acamas55  thunder  aloud :  presently  does  iEthra56  blame  me  in
the  same  terms  ;  a  wretched  old  woman  who  has  now  nearly
finished  her  days.  She  is  always  declaring,  too,  that  my  delay
has  been  the  cause  that  the  hands  of  her  son  do  not  close  her
dying  eyes.

For  my  part  I  do  not  deny  it ;  much  did  they  both57  call  for

she  is  sometimes  called,  Hippolyta,  who  became  by  him  the  mother  of
Hippolytus,  and  whom  he  afterwards  put  to  death.  According  to  some
writers,  the  Amazons,  in  revenge,  invaded  the  Attic  territory,  and  were  sig-
nally defeated  by  Theseus.

52  Dwellers  in  Mmotis.] — Ver.  9.  The  Palus  Maeotis,  situate  at  the
north  of  the  Euxine,  is  now  called  the  sea  of  Azeph.  In  its  vicinity  the
Amazons  were  said  to  dwell.

53  His  father-in-law. ] — Ver.  11.  This  was  when  he  had  conquered  the
Minotaur  by  the  aid  of  Ariadne,  whom  he  then  carried  away  from  Crete.

54  And  my  brother.'] — Ver.  14.  This  was  Acamas,  who  is  afterwards
referred  to  by  name.

55  Does  Acamas.']  — Ver.  23.  Acamas  was  a  son  of  Theseus,  and  a
brother  of  Demophoon,  whom  he  accompanied  to  the  Trojan  war.  Vir-
gil mentions  him  in  the  number  of  those  who  were  enclosed  in  the
wooden  horse,  on  which  occasion  he  was,  according  to  Pausanias,  accom-
panied by  his  brother  Demophoon,  though  the  latter,  is  not  named  by  Virgil.
Lucian,  in  one  passage,  seems  to  hint  that  it  was  Acamas  who  was  beloved
by  Phyllis.  He  finally  obtained  the  throne  at  Athens,  and  gave  its  name
to  the  Acamantian  tribe.

56  Does  A?thra.]—Ver.  23.  She  was  the  wife  of  ^Egeus,  and  the
mother  of  Theseus.

67  Did  they  both.] — Ver.  27. Acamas  and  iEthra,  namely.


EP.  II.]  DEMOPHOON TO PHYLLIS.  253

me,  when  my  ship  was  standing  at  anchor  in  the  Thracian
waves.  "  The  winds,  Demophoon,  invite  thy  sails,  why  art
thou  lingering  ?  Obdurate  Demophoon,  have  regard  for  the
Gods  of  thy  native  land.  Have  some  regard ;  and  take
Phyllis,  with  whom  thou  art  so  pleased,  as  an  example.  She
so  loves,  as  to  be  unwilling  to  depart  from  her  native  land.
And  she  entreats  thee  that  thou  wilt  be  ready  to  return,  that  she
may  not  attend  thee  when  departing  ;  and  she  prefers  her  bar-
barian realms  to  thine."  Still,  though  silent  amid  these  re-
proaches, I  remember  that  full  oft  I  offered  my  prayers  to  the
adverse  South  winds  ;  and  that  often,  placing  my  arms  about
to  depart  around  thy  neck,  I  rejoiced  that  the  seas  were
heaved  up  into  threatening  billows.

Nor  should  I  fear  to  confess  this  before  my  father  himself ;
the  power  of  so  doing  has  been  given  me  by  thy  kindness  ;  to
say,  "  I  left  not  dear  Phyllis  with  an  ungrateful  heart,  and
I  have  not  precipitately  given  my  sails  to  be  borne  on  by  the
ivinds.  I  wept  too,  and,  full  often,  consoling  her  as  she
wept,  I  tarried  on,  when  now  a  certain  day  had  been  fixed  by
me  for  my  departure.  At  last,  I  came  hither  in  a  Thracian
ship  ;  the  bark  which  Phyllis  was  so  unwilling58  to  give,  she
commanded  to  go  at  a  slow  speed.  Pardon,  too,  the  con-
fession ;  thou  thyself  dost  bear  in  mind59  the  daughter  of  Mi-
nos. That  old  flame  has  not  yet  quitted  thy  heart ;  and  so
often  as  the  stars  surround  thy  eyes,  thou  dost  say,60 '  She,  who
now  shines  in  the  heavens,  was  my  mistress.'  "

Bacchus  ordered  him  to  yield  his  dear  wife  up  to  himself ;
but  he  incurs  the  charge  of  having  deserted  her.61  After  the
example  of  my  father,  I  too,  myself,  am  called  forsworn  ;  and,

58  Was  so  unwilling.'] — Ver.  46.  '  Non  voluit'  seems  to  be  much  prefer-
able to  '  non  potuit,'  which  will  hardly  admit  of  any  meaning.

59  Thyself  dost  bear  in  mind.']  — Ver.  47.  He  is  supposing  himself  to
be  pleading  his  own  cause  before  Theseus,  and  to  be  recalling  to  his  re-
collection his  own  passion  for  Ariadne.

60  Surround  thy  eyes,  thou  dost  say.] — Ver.  49.  The  common  reading
1  circumdat  sidera,  dixit,'  is  evidently  corrupt,  as  he  is  supposed  to  be  still
addressing  Theseus  in  the  second  person.  It  is  not  improbable  that  the
passage  was  written  '  circumstant  sidera,  dixti :'  and  that  reading  has  been
adopted.

61  Having  deserted  her.]  — Ver.  52.  He  says  that  Theseus  was  un-
justly accused  of  deserting  Ariadne,  when,  in  fact,  he  was  ordered  by
Bacchus  t'  yield  her  to  him  ;  and  that  he,  in  like  manner,  has  been  wrong-
fully charged  with  similar  perfidy.


254  THE RESPONSIVE EPISTLES OE SABINTTS. [EP.  II.

cruel  Sithonian  fair,  thou  dost  not  inquire  the  cause  of  my
delaying  ;  and  thou  dost  not  think  that  I  give  thee  a  sufficiently
large  assurance  that  I  will  return,  if  no  love  for  another,  no
passion  whatever  is  detaining  me.  And  has  no  report,  Phyllis,
mentioned  to  thee  the  troubled  home  of  Theseus  and  the  for-
tunes of  his  wretched  house  ?  Dost  thou  not  hear  how  I  am  be-
wailing the  halter62  of  my  wretched  mother  ?  A  cause  (ah
me !)  exists,  more  full  of  sorrow  than  that  halter.  Nor  yet  of
my  brother  Hippolytus  ?63  Miserably  has  he  perished,  drag-
ged headlong  through  the  sea  by  his  frightened  steeds.

Still  I  am  not  excusing  myself  from  returning,  though  the
Destinies  should  accumulate  reasons  from  every  quarter  ;  I
ask  but  for  a  little  time.  What  is  left  for  me  to  do,  my  father
Theseus  will  I  first  entomb  ; 6i  let  him  be  becomingly  placed
in  the  sepulchre  not  without  honour.  Grant  me  time  and
pardon,  I  entreat;  I  am  not  absent  through  perfidiousness  ;  and
now  no  land  is  more  safe  to  me  than  is  thy  own.  Whatever
has  been  pleasing  to  me  since  Pergamus  was  levelled ;  whatever
either  warfare  or  the  delays  of  the  ocean  have  been  withhold-
ing from  me ;  that  is  Thrace  alone  ;  even  in  my  very  country60
am  I  buffeted  about ;  thou  alone  dost  survive  as  my  aid  in
my  misfortunes.  If  only  thou  hast66  the  same  feelings  ;  and
if  it  does  not  elevate  thee  so  much  that  thou  hast  a  palace,

62  Bewailing  the  halter."] — Ver.  59.  He  alludes  to  the  fate  of  his
mother  Phsedra,  who  hanged  herself  on  being  unsuccessful  in  her  criminal
passion  for  Hippolytus,  the  son  of  Theseus,  hy  Hippolyta.  He  hints
in  the  next  line,  that  the  cause  of  her  suicide  was  a  disgraceful  one.

6a  Hippolytus.']  — Ver.  61.  It  is  clear  that  a  note  of  interrogation
ought  to  be  placed  after  '  Hippolytum,'  though  it  is  wanting  in  the  com-
mon reading  of  the  text.  His  story  is  related  in  the  Fifteenth  Book  of  the
Metamorphoses.

64  Will  I  first  entomb.] — Ver.  65.  Theseus,  on  being  expelled  from
Athens,  fled  to  the  court  of  Lycomedes,  the  king  of  Scyros  ;  where  he  was
treacherously  murdered  by  order  of  the  king,  or,  as  some  say,  he  accident-
ally fell  from  a  cliff  in  the  dark.

55  In  my  very  country.] — Ver.  71.  'In  ipsa  '  is  suggested  by  Heinsius,
with  good  reason,  as  being  preferable  to  the  usual  reading,  *  in  ilia.'

66  If  only  thou  hast.]— Ver.  73.  The  usual  reading  is  evidently  cor-
rupt, and  deficient  in  sense  ;  that  suggested  by  Heinsius  has  been  adopted.

'  Nee  tarn  quod  sit  tibi  dives.'

'  Jam,'  '  now,'  is  certainly  incorrect,  as  there  had  been  no  change  in
the  fortunes  of  Phvllis.


EP.  II.]  DEMOPHOON TO PHYLLIS.  255

rich,  and  not  less  than  the  Cecropian  citadel ;  and  if  the  mis-
fortunes of  my  father  do  not  offend  thee,  nor  the  criminality
of  my  mother ;  and  if  Demophoon  is  not  now  of  unhappy
omen.

What  if,  with  thee  for  my  wife,  I  had  repaired  to  Troy,  the
city  of  Phoebus,  and  for  ten  years  had  so  followed  the  pur-
suits of  war  1  Thou  hast  heard  of  Penelope  ;  over  the  whole
world  is  she  praised ;  she  who  has  become  no  slight  example
of  a  faithful  wife.  She,  so  rumour  says,  has  invented  the
contrivance  of  the  duteous  web,  and  by  her  skill  has  put  off
the  urgent  suitors ;  when  by  night67  she  has  undone  the  threads
that  in  their  presence  were  hurried  on  towards  comple-
tion, and  all  the  work  has  returned  again  to  raw  wool.  But,
Phyllis,  thou  art  afraid  lest  the  slighted  Thracians  should
hereafter  avoid  an  alliance  with  thee  ;  and  canst  thou,  cruel
one,  marry  any  one  of  them  ?  And  hast  thou  the  heart  to
accept  the  offer68  of  any  one  ?  And  do  not  these  apprehensions
prove  an  obstacle  to  thy  perfidiousness  ?  Alas  !  how  great  will
be  thy  shame  at  thy  deeds  !  Alas  !  how  great  thy  grief,  when
thou  shalt  behold  my  sails  from  afar !  Too  late,  in  thy  rash-
ness, thou  wilt  condemn  thy  own  complaints  !  "Ah  me  !"  wilt
thou  say,  "  after  all,  Demophoon  was  faithful  to  me  !  Behold !
my  Demophoon  !69  and  he  has  returned  after  having  endured
the  raging  East  winds  and  the  wintry  waves  as  he  ploughed
the  deep.  Wretched  me !  why,  alas !  did  I  not  know  the
guilty  step  which  I  was  hastening  ?  I  have  broken  that  faith
which  I  complained  of  as  broken  towards  myself."

And  yet  thus,70  ah  !  thus,  mayst  thou  rather  persist  in  thy
determination,  than  that  any  further  grief  should,  Phyllis,  afflict

67  When  by  night.'] — Ver.  83.  Instead  of  the  usual  reading,  '  nocti,'
'  noctu,'  which  is  found  in  one  edition,  seems  to  be  preferable.

68  Accept  the  offer.~\ — Ver.  87.  '  Accedere  tsedae.'  Literally,  '  to  ap-
proach the  nuptial  torch.'

fi9  Behold  !  my  Demophoon  .'] — Ver.  93.  Instead  of  the  common  read-
ing, that  of  the  edition  of  Gryphius  seems  preferable,  and  has  been
adopted  ;

1  En  mihi  Demophoon !  et  saevos  redditur  Euros
Passus,  et  hybernas  dum  freta  sulcat,  aquas  !'

70  And  yet  thus.] — Ver.  97.  He  tells  her  that  he  would  rather  that
she  should  persist  in  a  determination  to  contract  a  Thracian  alliance,  than
that  she  should  continue  to  torment  herself  on  his  account,  and  thus
afford  him  cause  for  sorrow.


256  THE RESPONSIVE EPISTLES OE SABINUS. [EP.  III.

my  heart  on  thy  account.  Ah  wretched  me  !  what  halters,
what  death,  art  thou  threatening  against  thyself  ?  How  far
too71  ruthless  Deities  does  that  nation  worship.  Desist,  I
pray  ;  and  do  not,  cruel  fair,  impress  with  a  twofold  mark72
the  character  of  my  house,  that  already  incurs  the  charge
of  perfidiousness.  Let  the  Gnossian  fair,73  left  to  her  des-
tiny and  to  become  a  prey  to  another,  be  the  accuser  of
my  father.  I  have  not  deserved  myself  to  be  considered
guilty.

Now  let  those  winds  bear  my  words,  which  have  borne  on-
ward my  sails.  It  is  my  intention  to  return ;  but  a  reason  of
duty  is  detaining  me.


EPISTLE  III.

PARIS TO (ENONE.

Paris  is  supposed  to  write  this  Epistle  in  his  own  defence,  in  answer  to
the  one  of  Ovid,  written  by  (Enone,  in  which  she  reproaches  him  for
his  inconstancy.

I  confess,  0  Nymph,  that  my  hand  is  in  search  of  words,
sufficiently  well-suited  for  me  to  write  in  answer  to  thee
making  complaints  so  just.  It  seeks  them,  but  they  suggest
themselves  not.  It  is  only  sensible  of  its  own  criminality.  That
which  it  is  sensible  of,  another  passion  allows  it  not  to  atone  for.
If  this  confession  mitigates  thy  wrath,  then,  myself  the  judge,
I  am  condemned.  What  matters  it  ?  Still,  with  thy  cause  the
better  one,  thou  art  vanquished.74

Condemned,  too,  by  thee,  Cupid  brings  me  back  under  his

71  How  far  too.] — Ver.  100.  '  Ut  nimis/  as  suggested  by  Heinsius,
seems  better  than  '  et  nimis' ;  with  either  reading,  the  meaning  is  ob-
scure, and  the  passage  probably  corrupt.  He,  perhaps,  means  to  say,
that  as  the  Thracian  Gods  were  of  ferocious  manners,  their  worshippers
were  too  apt  to  imitate  them  and  to  seek  to  gain  their  favour  by  precipi-
tate and  violent  conduct,  such  as  suicide.

72  A  twofold  mark.~\ — Ver.  102.  He  implores  her  not  to  censure  him
for  treachery,  as  the  conduct  of  Theseus  is  already  open  to  that  charge.

73  The  Gnossian  fair.'] — Ver.  104.  This  line  seems  to  be  in  a  corrupt
state.  The  reading  of  the  edition  of  Gryphius  has  been  here  adopted, '  Accu-
set  patrem  fatis  praedseque  relicta/  as  approaching  the  nearest  to  any  de-
finite sense.

74  Thou  art  vanquished."] — Ver.  6.  'Cales'  is  evidently  a  corrupt
reading. At  the  suggestion  of  Burmann,  '  cadis '  has  been  adopted.


EP.  III.]  PARIS TO (ENONE.  257

own  subjection  :  and  thus  am  I  the  prize  of  another.75  First
wast  thou  engaged  for  my  bed,  and  my  love  acknowledged
its  youthfulness  on  receiving  thee  first  for  a  wife.  Not  as
yet  was  I  so  great  a  person.  Then  could  I  have  been  claimed
by  him  as  my  master,  of  whom  for  my  father  thou  dost
blame  me  'as  being  proud.  I  hoped  not  for  Deiphobus  or
Hector  as  a  brother,  when,  thou  accompanying  me,  I  drove
the  flocks  to  pasture  ;  Hecuba,  too,  I  knew  by  the  name  of
queen,76  and  not  of  mother ;  and  worthy  wast  thou  to  re-
main her  daughter-in-law.  But  Love  is  not  endowed  with
reason.  Nymph,  consult  thyself.77  Thou  hast  been  wronged  ;
but,  though  wronged,  thou  writest  that  thou  still  dost  love.
And  whereas  the  Satyrs,  whereas  the  Pans  seek  thy  hand,
still  art  thou  ever  mindful  of  thy  rejected  alliance.

Besides,  this  passion  is  promoted  by  the  Fates,  and  long
since  did  my  sister,7S  prescient  of  the  future,  see  it.  Not
yet  had  the  name  of  the  daughter  of  Tyndarus  reached  my  ear,
and  still  she  prophesied  that  a  Grecian  alliance79  would  invite
me.  All  this  thou  seest  hast  come  to  pass  ;  my  wounds  alone
survive  ;  and  the  fact  that  I  am  forced  suppliantly  to  entreat
thy  aid.80  In  thy  power  is  the  decision  upon  my  life  and  my
death ;  now  as  the  conqueror81  hear  my  confessions.  Still,
as  I  remember,  thou  didst  weep  at  these  words  as  she  pro-
phesied ;  and  thou  didst  say,  "  May  these  evils,  I  pray,  be  afar
off.  Neither,  if  the  Fates  ordain  it,  nor  though  other  things
should  ordain  it,  could  I,  afflicted  (Enone,  endure  to  lose  my
Paris."


75  Of  another.] — Ver.  8. Of  Helen,  namely.

76  Name  of  queen.'] — Ver.  15.  The  usual  reading  of  this  line  is  evi-
dently corrupt,  and  void  of  sense,  Heinsius  suggests  '  Reginasque  Hecu-
ben  non  matris  nomine,  noram,'  which  reading  has  been  adopted.

77  Consult  thyself] — Ver.  17.  As  to  the  truth  of  the  allegation,  that
love  is  not  ruled  by  reason.

78  Did  my  sister.] — Ver.  22.  He  pleads  the  decrees  of  fate,  which
were  long  since  revealed  by  his  sister  Cassandra.

79  A  Grecian  alliance.] — Ver.  24.  Instead  of  the  common  reading  for
this  line,  which  is  manifestly  corrupt,  the  following  has  been  adopted  :
1  Me  cecinit  Graios  ilia  vocare  toros.'

60  Entreat  thy  aid.] — Ver.  26. Because  she  was  prescient  of  the  future.

81  As  the  conqueror.] — Ver.  28.  Heinsius  considers  this  line  to  be
hopelessly  corrupt.  '  Victurae,'  as  found  in  the  earliest  edition  of  the
author,  is  probably  more  correct  than  '  victuri.'


258  THE RESPONSIVE EPISTLES OF SAEINITS. [EP.  III.

The  same  love  which  (grant  me  pardon)  compels  me  to
subdue  my  many  apprehensions  and  not  to  believe  this.,  is
deceiving  thee  as  well.  He  rules  the  Deities ;  when  he
chooses,  he  humbles  Jove  to  the  horns  of  a  bull,82  when  he
chooses,  to  the  feathers  of  a  bird.  There  would  be  no  daughter
of  Tyndarus  on  the  earth  wondrous  for  beauty  so  great,  (a
fair,  alas !  born  for  my  destruction  !)  if  Jupiter  had  not
changed  his  features  for  those  of  the  swan.

Before  this,  he  had  flowed  as  a  shower  of  gold  into  the  bosom
of  Danae;  as  a  fictitious  bird83  he  had  surveyed  the  pine-bearing
Ida,  and  he  had  stood  among  the  cattle  of  Agenor.  Who
could  have  thought  that  victorious  Alcides  would  hold  the  task
allotted  by  his  mistress  ?84  But  it  was  Love  that  forced  him  to
spin.  He  is  said,  too,  to  have  sats5  in  the  Coan  garment86  of  the
damsel ;  she  was  covered  with  the  skin  of  the  lion  of  Cleonse.87
I  remember,  (Enone,  (I  speak  to  my  own  disparagement)  that
thou  didst  fly  from  Phoebus,  and  didst  prefer  my  embraces.
I  was  not  preferable  to  Phoebus  ;  but  Cupid  was  determined
that  on  these  conditions  his  arrows  should  be  launched  against
thee.  Still,  alleviate  thy  misfortunes  in  a  rival  worthy  of
thyself;  the  fair  whom  I  have  preferred  to  thee,  is  the  daughter

83  The  horns  of  a  bull.'] — Ver.  35.  He  means  the  change  of  Jupiter
into  a  bull,  when  enamoured  of  Europa,  and  into  a  swan,  for  the  purpose
of  deceiving  Leda.

83  A  fictitious  bird.] — Ver.  41.  He  alludes  to  the  ravishment  of  Gany-
mede, which  was  said  to  have  been  effected  by  Jupiter  on  Mount  Ida,  in
the  form, of  an  eagle.

84  By  Ms  mistress.'] — Ver.  44.  He  alludes  either  to  Omphale  or  Iole  ;
with  both  of  which  amours  Deianira  reproaches  him  in  her  Epistle.

85  To  have  sat.] — Ver.  45.  Probably  she  alludes  here  to  Omphale  and
the  story  related  in  the  Second  Book  of  the  Fasti.

86  In  the  Coan  garment .] — Ver.  45.  The  Coan  cloth  was  remarkable
for  its  extreme  fineness  and  transparency,  and  is  mentioned  by  both
Horace,  Tibullus,  and  Propertius.  In  the  Augustan  age  it  was  probably
only  worn  by  women  of  light  reputation,  as  every  feature  of  the  body
could  be  discerned  through  it.  It  was  sometimes  of  a  purple  colour,
and  adorned  with  gold  embroidery.  It  is  supposed  to  have  been  made
of  silk,  as  the  island  of  Cos,  in  the  iEgean  sea,  was  famous  for  the  weaving
and  spinning  of  silk  at  a  very  early  period.  '  Silk  gauze '  is  probably  the
proper  name  for  the  texture.  A  female  of  the  name  of  Pamphila  was
said  to  have  invented  it.

8?  The  lion  of  Cleon(B.]—Yer.  46.  Cleonas  was  a  town  on  the  borders
of  Argolis  in  Peloponnesus,  near  the  wood  in  which  Hercules  killed  the
Nemean  lion,  which  is  here  referred  to.


EP.  III.]  PA.MS TO CEtfOKE.  259

of  Jove.  But  that  she  is  born  of  Jove,  affects  me  in  her  the
least  of  all;  that  there  is  not  any  face  more  beauteous  than
hers,  does  the  mischief.

And  I  wish  that  I  had  been  deemed  an  unskilful  judge  of
beauty,  Nymph  of  the  streams,  on  the  heights  of  Ida !  No
wrath  of  Juno  nor  yet  of  Pallas  would  have  persecuted  me,  be-
cause Cytherea  was  commended  by  my  eyes.  For  others  she
divides  the  flame  both  rapid  and  mutually  burning ;  just  as
she  pleases  she  modifies  the  fires  of  her  son.  And  yet  she
was  not  able  to  avoid  the  weapons  of  her  own  house.  The
bow  which88  she  wielded  against  others,  unrelenting,  she
wielded  too  against  herself.  Her  husband  grieved  that  she  was
detected  with  Mars.  The  Gods  being  witnesses,  to  Jove  did
he  complain.  And  next  does  Mars  now  grieve,  and  of  his  own
accord  he  leaves  the  earth  ;  about  to  have  him89  as  her  own,
she  has  preferred  Anchises  to  him.  For  the  sake  of  Anchises
has  she  wished  to  appear  beauteous ;  and  twice  has  she  pined,90
taking  vengeance  on  the  slighted  Gods.  What  wonder  that
it  was  possible  for  Paris  to  yield  to  Love,  from  whom  even  his
own  mother  was  not  safe  ?  Her  whom  injured  Menelaiis  loves,
uninjured  do  I  love.91  Add  the  fact,  that  she  was  the  com-
panion of  me  thus  uninjured.

Carried  off,  she  prepares  (I  see)  for  me  vast  troubles ;  and
a  thousand  armed  ships  are  making  for  Troy.  I  do  not  fear
that  the  cause  of  the  war  will  not  be  approved  of ;  she  has
features  worthy  to  arouse  the  chieftains.  If  thou  believest  me
not,  look  at  the  sons  of  Atreus  in  arms.  She,  whom  in  such
manner  they  are  attempting  to  recover  for  themselves,  in  such
manner  must  be  retained92  for  me. But  if  thou  dost  conceive

88  The  bow  which.'] — Ver.  62.  This  line  appears  to  be  in  a  corrupt
state.

89  About  to  have  him.'] — Ver.  66.  Of  course  this  must  refer  to  a  time
long  since  past ;  as  at  this  period  Anchises  was  an  aged  man.

90  Twice  has  she  pined.] — Ver.  68.  This  line  appears  as  '  Visaque  post-
latam  jacuit  ulta  Deam,'  which  is  evidently  corrupt,  and  makes  perfect
nonsense.  The  suggestion  of  Heinsius  has  been  adopted :  '  Bisque  ita
post  latos  marcuit  ulta  Deos.'

91  Uninjured  do  I  love.] — Ver.  71.  His  meaning  seems  to  be,  that  Me-
nelaiis, though  injured,  still  loves  Helen  ;  how  much  more  then  must  he,
who  has  received  no  injury,  but,  on  the  contrary,  a  return  of  affection
from  her  ?

92  Must  be  retained.] — Ver.  78. The  common  reading  is  '  metuenda/

S2


260  THE KESPONSIYE EPISTLES OF SABIFUS. [EP.  III.

any  hopes  of  changing  this  determination,  why  are  thy  herbs  or
thy  charms  unemployed  ?  For  no  female  is  more  skilled  than
thee  in  the  arts  of  Phoebus ;  and  thou  dost  behold  the  true
visions  of  Hecate,  the  sister  of  Phoebus.  I  remember  that  thou93
didst  bring  down  the  Moon  covered  with  clouds,  together  with
the  stars,  and  that  thou  didst  withdraw  the  light  of  day.  I  was
feeding  my  bulls  ;  and  I  was  amazed  that  at  thy  voice  the  tamed
lions  went  amid  the  herds.  Why  should  I  add  that  Xanthus,
called  back,  Simois,  called  back,  did  not  keep  on  their  course  ?
Thy  father  Cebren94  himself,  not  in  safety  from  the  words  of
his  daughter,  how  often  has  he  stood  still  amid  his  charmed
waves  ?

Now  is  the  opportunity  for  CEnone,  now  display  her  ;  whe-
ther thou  shalt  attempt  to  dispel  my  passion  or  thine  own.

which  is  clearly  objectionable.  '  Retinenda,'  as  suggested  by  Heinsius,  is
decidedly  preferable

93  I  remember  that  thou."] — Ver.  83.  This  line  is  evidently  corrupt.
Heinsius  suggests  '  Te  cum  sideribus  tectam  deducere  lunam,'  which  has
been  adopted.

94  Thy  father  Cebren."] — Ver.  89.  (Enone  was  said  to  be  the  daughter
of  the  river  Cebren  or  Cebrenus,  who  was  also  the  sire  of  the  Nymph
Hesperie,  beloved  by  iEsacus,  and  mentioned  in  the  Eleventh  Book  of
the  Metamorphoses,  1.  769.


THE AMORES; OR, AMOURS.


BOOK  THE  FIRST.


AN  EPIGRAM  ON  THE  AMOURS.

We  who  of  late  were  five  books1  of  Naso,  are  now  hut  three  :
this  work  our  author  has  preferred  to  the  former  one.  Though
it  should 2  now  be  no  pleasure  to  thee  to  read  us  ;  still,  the
labour  will  be  less,  the  two  being  removed.


ELEGY  I.

He  says  that  he  is  compelled  by  Cupid  to  write  of  love  instead  of  battles ;
and  that  the  Divinity  insists  on  making  each  second  Hexameter  line
into  a  Pentameter.

I  was  preparing  to  write  of  arms  and  impetuous  warfare  in
serious  numbers,3  the  subject-matter  being  suited  to  the  mea-
sure.4 The  second  verse  was  of  equal  measure  ivith  the  first ;
but  Cupid  is  said  to  have  smiled,  and  to  have  abstracted  one
foot.5  "■  Who,  cruel  boy,  has  given  thee  this  right  over  my
lines  ? We  poets  are  the  choir  of  the  Muses,  the  Pierian  maids,

1  Were  Jive  boohs."]— rVer.  1.  From  this  it  is  clear,  that  the  first  edi-
tion which  Ovid  gave  to  the  public  of  his  '  Amores  '  was  in  five  Books  ;
but  that  on  revising  his  work,  he  preferred  (prastulit)  these  three  books
to  the  former  five.  It  is  supposed  that  he  rejected  many  of  those  Elegies
which  were  of  too  free  a  nature  and  were  likely  to  embroil  him  with
the  authorities,  by  reason  of  their  licentiousness.

2  Though  it  should.'] — Ver.  3.  Burmann  has  rightly  observed,  that
4  ut  jam/  in  this  line,  has  exactly  the  force  of  '  quamvis,'  '  although.'

3  In  serious  numbers.] — Ver.  1.  By  the  '  graves  numeri,'  he  means
Heroic  or  Hexameter  verses.  It  is  supposed  that  he  alludes  to  the  battle
of  the  Giants  or  the  Titans,  on  which  subject  he  had  begun  to  write  an
heroic  poem.  In  these  lines  Ovid  seems  to  have  had  in  view  the  com-
mencement of  the  first  Ode  of  Anacreon.

4  Suited  to  the  measure.]  — "Ver.  2.  The  subject  being  of  a  grave  cha-
racter, and,  as  such,  suited  to  Heroic  measure.

5  Abstracted  one  foot.] — Ver.  4.  He  says  that  every  second  line  (as
is  the  case  in  Heroic  verse)  had  as  many  feet  as  the  first,  namely,  six :  but
that  Cupid  stole  a  foot  from  the  Hexameter,  and  reduced  it  to  a  Penta-
meter, whereby  the  Poet  was  forced  to  recur  to  the  Elegiac  measure.


262  THE AMOEES  ;  [b.  I.

not  thine.  "What  if  Venus  were  to  seize  the  arms  of  the
yellow-haired  Minerva,  and  if  the  yellow-haired  Minerva  were
to  wave  the  lighted  torches  of  Love  ?  Who  would  approve  of
Ceres  holding  her  reign  in  the  woods  on  the  mountain  ridges,
or  of  the  fields  being  tilled  under  the  control  of  the  quivered
Virgin  ■?  Who  would  arm  Phoebus,  graceful  with  his  locks,
with  the  sharp  spear,  while  Mars  is  striking  the  Aonian
lyre  ?  Thy  sway,  0  youth,  is  great,  and  far  too  potent ;
why,  in  thy  ambition,  dost  thou  attempt  a  new  task  1  Is  that
which  is  everywhere,  thine  ?  Is  Heliconian  Tempe  thine  ?  Is
even  his  own  lyre  hardly  safe  now  for  Phoebus  ?  When  the
new  page  has  made  a  good  beginning  in  the  first  line,  at  that
moment  does  he  diminish  my  energies.8  I  have  no  subject
fitted  for  these  lighter  numbers,  whether  youth,  or  girl  with
her  flowing  locks  arranged."

Thus  was  I  complaining ;  when,  at  once,  his  quiver  loosen-
ed,9 he  selected  the  arrows  made  for  my  destruction  ;  and  he
stoutly  bent  upon  his  knee  the  curving  bow,  and  said,  "  Poet,
receive  a  subject  on  which  to  sing."  Ah  wretched  me !  un-
erring arrows  did  that  youth  possess.  I  burn ;  and  in  my
heart,  hitherto  disengaged,  does  Love  hold  sway.  Henceforth,
in  six  feet 10  let  my  work  commence  ;  in  five  let  it  close.  Fare-
well, ye  ruthless  wars,  together  with  your  numbers.  My  Muse,11
to  eleven  feet  destined  to  be  attuned,  bind  with  the  myrtle  of
the  sea  shore  thy  temples  encircled  with  their  yellow  locks.

8  Diminish  my  energies.'] — Ver.  18. See  the  Note  to  the  fourth  line.

9  His  quiver  loosened.'] — Ver.  21.  The  '  pharetra,'  or  quiver,  filled  with
arrows,  was  used  by  most  of  the  nations  that  excelled  in  archery,  among
whom  were  the  Scythians,  Persians,  Lycians,  Thracians,  and  Cretans.
It  was  made  of  leather,  and  was  sometimes  adorned  with  gold  or  paint-
ing. It  had  a  lid,  and  was  suspended  by  a  belt  from  the  right  shoulder.
Its  usual  position  was  on  the  left  hip,  and  it  was  thus  worn  by  the  Scy-
thians and  Egyptians.  The  Cretans,  however,  wore  it  behind  the  back,
and  Diana,  in  her  statues,  is  represented  as  so  doing.  This  must  have
been  the  method  in  which  Cupid  is  intended  in  the  present  instance
to  wear  it,  as  he  has  to  unloose  the  quiver  before  he  takes  out  the  arrow.
Some  Commentators,  however,  would  have  '  soluta '  to  refer  simply  to  the
act  of  opening  the  quiver.

10  In  six  feet.] — Ver.  27.  He  says  that  he  must  henceforth  write  in
Hexameters  and  Pentameters,  or,  in  other  words,  in  the  Elegiac  measure.

11  My  Muse.] — Ver.  30.  The  Muse  addressed  by  him  would  be  Erato,
under  whose  protection  were  those  Poets  whose  theme  was  Love.  He  bids
her  wreathe  her  hair  with  myrtle,  because  it  was  sacred  to  Venus ;  while,
on  the  other  hand,  laurels  would  be  better  adapted  to  the  Heroic  Muse.
The  myrtle  is  said  to  love  the  moisture  and  coolness  of  the  sea-shore.


E.  II.]  OB, AMOURS.  263

ELEGY  II.

He  says,  that  being  taken  captive  by  Love,  he  allows  Cupid  to  lead  him
away  in  triumph.

Why  shall  I  say  it  is,  that  my  bed  appears  thus  hard  to  me,
and  that  my  clothes  rest  not  upon  the  couch  ?  The  night,
too,  long  as  it  is,  have  I  passed  without  sleep  ;  and  why
do  the  weary  bones  of  my  restless  body  ache  ?  But  were
I  assailed  by  any  flame,  I  think  I  should  be  sensible  of
it.  Or  does  Love  come  unawares  and  cunningly  attack  in
silent  ambush  ?  'Tis  so  ;  his  little  arrows  have  pierced  my
heart ;  and  cruel  Love  is  tormenting  the  breast  he  has  seized.
Am  I  to  yield  1  Or  by  struggling  against  it,  am  I  to  in-
crease this  sudden  flame?  I  must  yield;  the  burden  becomes
light  which  is  borne  contentedly.  I  have  seen  the  flames  in-
crease when  agitated  by  waving  the  torch ;  and  when  no
one  shook  it,  I  have  seen  them  die  away.  The  galled  bulls
suffer  more  blows  while  at  first  they  refuse  the  yoke,  than
those  whom  experience  of  the  plough  avails.  The  horse
which  is  unbroken  bruises  his  mouth  with  the  hard  curb  ;  the
one  that  is  acquainted  with  arms  is  less  sensible  of  the  bit.
Love  goads  more  sharply  and  much  more  cruelly  those  who
struggle,  than  those  who  agree  to  endure  his  servitude.  Lo  !
I  confess  it ;  I  am  thy  new-made  prey,  0  Cupid ;  I  am  ex-
tending my  conquered  hands  for  thy  commands.  No  war
between  us  is  needed  ;  I  entreat  for  peace  and  for  pardon  ;  and
no  credit  shall  I  be  to  thee,  unarmed,  conquered  by  thy
arms.  Bind  thy  locks  with  myrtle  ;  yoke  thy  mother's  doves  ;
thy  stepfather1*  himself  will  give  a  chariot  which  becomes  thee.
And  in  the  chariot  so  given  thee,  thou  shalt  stand,  and  with
thy  skill  shalt  guide  the  birds  so  yoked15,  while  the  people
shout  "  lo  triumphe"16  aloud.  The  captured  youths  and  the
captive  fair  shall  be  led  in  triumph  ;  this  procession  shall  be  a
splendid  triumph  for  thee.

14  Thy  step-father.'] — Ver.  24.  He  calls  Mars  the  step-father  of  Cupid,
in  consequence  of  his  intrigue  with  Venus.

15  Birds  so  yoked.] — Ver.  26.  These  are  the  doves  which  were  sacred
to  Venus  and  Cupid.  By  yoking  them  to  the  chariot  of  Mars,  the  Poet
wishes  to  show  the  skill  and  power  of  Cupid.

16  lo  triumphe.] — Ver.  25.  '  Clamare  triumphum,'  means  '  to  shout
lo  triumphe,'  as  the  procession  moves  along.  Lactantius  speaks  of  a
poem  called  '  the  Triumph  of  Cupid,'  in  which  Jupiter  and  the  other  Gods
were  represented  as  following  him  in  the  triumphal  procession.


264  THE AHOEES  ;  [b.  I.

I  myself,  a  recent  capture,  shall  bear  my  wound  so  lately
made  ;  and  with  the  feelings  of  a  captive  shall  I  endure  thy
recent  chains.  Soundness  of  Understanding  shall  be  led
along  with  hands  bound  behind  his  back,  Shame  as  well,  and
whatever  beside  is  an  enemy  to  the  camp  of  Love.  All  things
shall  stand  in  awe  of  thee  :  towards  thee  the  throng,  stretch-
ing forth  its  hands,  shall  sing  "  Io  triumphe "  with  loud
voice.  Caresses  shall  be  thy  attendants,  Error  too,  and  Mad-
ness, a  troop  that  ever  follows  on  thy  side.  With  these
for  thy  soldiers,  thou  dost  overcome  both  men  and  Gods  ;
take  away  from  thee  these  advantages,  and  thou  wilt  be  help-
less. From  highest  Olympus  thy  joyous  mother  will  applaud
thee  in  thy  triumph,  and  will  sprinkle  her  roses  falling  on  thy
face.  While  gems  bedeck  thy  wings,  and  gems  thy  hair ;  in  thy
golden  chariot  shalt  thou  go,  resplendent  thyself  with  gold.17

Then  too,  (if  well  I  know  thee)  wilt  thou  influence  not  a
few  ;  then  too,  as  thou  passest  by,  wilt  thou  inflict  many  a
wound.  Thy  arrows  (even  shouldst  thou  thyself  desire  it)
cannot  be  at  rest.  A  glowing  flame  ever  injures  by  the  pro-
pinquity of  its  heat.  Just  such  was  Bacchus  when  the  Gan-
getic  land 18  was  subdued  ;  thou  art  the  burden  of  the  birds  ;  he
was  that  of  the  tigers.  Therefore,  since  I  may  be  some  portion
of  thy  hallowed  triumph,  forbear,  Conqueror,  to  expend  thy
strength  on  me.  Look  at  the  prospering  arms  of  thy  kinsman
Csesar  ;19  with  the  same  hand  with  which  he  conquers  does  he
shield  the  conquered.20


ELEGY  III.

He  entreats  his  mistress  to  return  his  affection,  and  shows  that  he  is
deserving  of  her  favour.

I  ask  for  what  is  just ;  let  the  fair  who  has  so  lately  captivated

V  Thyself  with  gold.] — Ver.  42.  The  poet  Moschus  represents  Cupid
as  having  wings  of  gold.

18  The  Gangetic  land.] — Ver.  47.  He  alludes  to  the  Indian  triumphs
of  Bacchus,  which  extended  to  the  river  Ganges.

19  Thy  kinsman  Ccesar.] — Ver.  51.  Because  Augustus,  as  the  adopted
son  of  Julius  Caesar,  was  said  to  be  descended  from  Venus,  through  the
line  of  iEneas.

20  Shield  the  conquered.] — Ver.  52.  Although  Augustus  had  many
faults,  it  must  be  admitted  that  he  was,  like  Julius,  a  most  merciful  con-
queror, and  was  generally  averse  to  bloodshed.


E.  III.]  OE, AMOUES.  265

me,  either  love  me,  or  let  her  give  me  a  cause  why  I  should
always  love  her.  Alas  !  too  much  have  I  desired  ;  only  let  her
allow  herself  to  be  loved  ;  and  then  Cytherea  will  have  listened
to  my  prayers  so  numerous.  Accept  one  who  will  be  your
servant  through  lengthened  years  ;  accept  one  who  knows  how
to  love  with  constant  attachment.  If  the  great  names  of  ancient
ancestors  do  not  recommend  me,  or  if  the  Equestrian  founder
of  my  family21  fails  to  do  so;  and  if  no  field  of  mine  is
renewed  by  ploughs  innumerable,  and  each  of  my  parents 22
with  frugal  spirit  limits  my  expenditure  ;  still  Phoebus  and
his  nine  companions  and  the  discoverer  of  the  vine  may  do  so  ;
and  Love  besides,  who  presents  me  as  a  gift  to  you  ;  a  fidelity,
too  that  will  yield  to  none,  manners  above  reproach,  ingenu-
ousness without  guile,  and  modesty  ever  able  to  blush.

A  thousand  damsels  have  no  charms  for  me  ;  I  am  no  rover
in  affection  ;23  you  will  for  ever  be  my  choice,  if  you  do  but
believe  me.  May  it  prove  my  lot  to  live  with  you  for  years
as  many  as  the  threads  of  the  Sister  Destinies  shall  grant  me,
and  to  die  with  you  sorrowing  for  me.  Grant  me  yourself
as  a  delightful  theme  for  my  verse  ;  worthy  of  their  matter
my  lines  will  flow.  Io,  frightened  by  her  horns,  and  she
whom  the  adulterer  deceived  in  the  shape  of  the  bird24  of  the
stream  have  a  name  in  song  ;  she,  too,  who,  borne  over  the  seas
upon  the  fictitious  bull,  held  fast  the  bending  horns  with  her
virgin  hand.  We,  too,  together  shall  be  celebrated  through-
out all  the  world  ;  and  my  name  shall  ever  be  united  with  thy
own.

21  Founder  of my  family .] — Ver.  8.  See  che  Life  of  Ovid  prefixed  to
the  Fasti ;  and  the  Second  Book  of  the  Tristia.

22  Each  of  my  parents. .] — Ver.  10.  From  this  it  appears  that  this
Elegy  was  composed  during  the  life-time  of  both  of  his  parents,  and  while,
probably,  he  was  still  dependent  on  his  father.

23  No  rover  in  affection.'] — Ver.  15.  •  Desultor,'  literally  means  'one
who  leaps  off.'  The  figure  is  derived  from  those  equestrians  who  rode
upon  several  horses,  or  guided  several  chariots,  passing  from  the  one  to
the  other.  This  sport  was  very  frequently  exhibited  in  the  Roman  Circus.
Among  the  Romans,  the  '  desultor'  generally  wore  a  '  pileus/  or  cap  of
felt.  The  Numidian,  Scythian,  and  Armenian  soldiers,  were  said  to  have
been  skilled  in  the  same  art.

24  Of  the  Wrrf.]— Ver.  22. He  alludes  to  Leda  and  Europa.


266  THE AMOKES  ;  [B.  I.

ELEGY  IV.

He  instructs  his  mistress  what  conduct  to  observe  in  the  presence  of  her
husband  at  a  feast  to  which  he  has  been  invited,

Yotje  husband  is  about  to  come  to  the  same  banquet26  as
ourselves  :  I  pray  that  it  may  be  the  last  meal27  for  this
husband  of  yours.  And  am  I  then  only  as  a  guest  to
look  upon  the  fair  so  much  beloved  ?  And  shall  there  be
another,  to  take  pleasure  in  being  touched  by  youl  And
will  you,  conveniently  placed  below,  be  keeping  warm  the
bosom  of  another  ?28  And  shall  he,  when  he  pleases,  be  placing
his  hand  upon  your  neck  ?  Cease  to  be  surprised  that  the
beauteous  damsel  of  Atrax29  excited  the  two-formed  men  to
combat  when  the  wine  was  placed  on  table.  No  wood  is  my
home,  and  my  limbs  adhere  not  to  those  of  a  horse  ;  yet  I  seem
to  be  hardly  able  to  withhold  my  hands  from  you.  Learn,
however,  what  must  be  done  by  you  ;  and  do  not  give  my
injunctions  to  be  borne  away  by  the  Eastern  gales,  nor  on  the
warm  winds  of  the  South.

26  The  same  banquet."] — Ver.  1.  He  says  that  they  are  about  to  meet
at  '  ccena,'  at  the  house  of  a  common  friend.

27  The  last  meal.'] — Ver.  2.  The  '  ccena'  of  the  Romans  is  usually
translated  by  the  word  '  supper' ;  but  as  being  the  chief  meal  of  the  day,
and  being  in  general,  (at  least  during  the  Augustan  age)  taken  at  about
three  o'clock,  it  really  corresponds  to  our  '  dinner.'

28  Warm  the  bosom  of  another."] — Ver.  5.  As  each  guest  while  re-
clining on  the  couch  at  the  entertainment,  mostly  leaned  on  his  left  elbow
during  the  meal,  and  as  two  or  more  persons  lay  on  the  same  couch,  the
bead  of  one  person  reached  to  the  breast  of  him  who  lay  above  him,  and
the  lower  person  was  said  to  lie  on  the  bosom  of  the  other.  Among  the
Romans,  the  usual  number  of  persons  occupying  each  couch  was  three.
Sometimes,  however,  four  occupied  one  couch ;  Avhile,  among  the  Greeks,
only  two  reclined  upon  it.  In  this  instance,  he  describes  the  lady  as  oc-
cupying the  place  below  her  husband,  and  consequently  warming  his  breast
with  her  head.  For  a  considerable  time  after  the  fashion  of  reclining  at
meals  had  been  introduced  into  Rome,  the  Roman  ladies  sat  at  meals
while  the  other  sex  was  recumbent.  Indeed,  it  was  generally  considered
more  becoming  for  females  to  be  seated,  especially  if  it  was  a  party  where
many  persons,  were  present.  Juvenal,  however,  represents  a  bride  as
reclining  at  the  marriage  supper  on  the  bosom  of  her  husband.  On  the
present  occasion,  it  is  not  very  likely  that  the  ladies  were  particular  about
the  more  rigid  rules  of  etiquette.  It  must  be  remembered  that  before  lying
down,  the  shoes  or  sandals  were  taken  orT.

29  Damsel  of  Atrax.] — Ver-  8.  He  alludes  to  the  marriage  of  Hippo-
damia  to  Pirithous,  and  the  battle  between  the  Centaurs  and  the  Lapithae,
described  in  the  Twelfth  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses.


E.  IV.]  OE, AMOUItS.  267

Come  before  your  husband  ;  and  yet,  T  do  not  see  what
can  be  done,  if  you  do  come  first ;  but  still,  do  come  first.31
When  he  presses  the  couch,  with  modest  air  you  will  be  going
as  his  companion,  to  recline  by  him  ;  then  secretly  touch  my
foot.32  Keep  your  eye  on  me,  and  my  nods  and  the  expression
of  my  features  ;  apprehend  my  secret  signs,33  and  yourself  re-
turn them.  Without  utterance  will  I  give  expression  to  words
by  my  eyebrows  ;34  you  shall  read  words  traced  by  my  fingers,
words  traced  in  the  wine.35  When  the  delights  of  our  dal-
liance recur  to  your  thoughts,  press  your  blooming  cheeks36
with  your  beauteous  finger.  If  there  shall  be  anything,  of
which  you  may  be  making  complaint  about  me  silently  in
your  mind,  let  your  delicate  hand  reach  from  the  extremity  of
your  ear.  When,  my  life,  I  shall  either  do  or  say  aught
which  shall  give  you  delight,  let  your  ring  be  continually
twisted  on  your  fingers.37

31  Do  come  first.'] — Ver.  14.  He  hardly  knows  why  he  asks  her  to  do
so,  but  still  she  must  come  before  her  husband  ;  perhaps,  that  he  may
have  the  pleasure  of  gazing  upon  her  without  the  chance  of  detection  ;
the  more  especially  as  she  would  not  recline  till  her  husband  had  arrived,
and  would,  till  then,  probably  be  seated.

32  Touch  my  foot.] — Ver.  16.  This  would  show  that  she  had  safely  re-
ceived his  letter.

33  My  secret  signs.] — Ver.  18.  See  the  Note  in  this  Volume,  to  the
90th  line  of  the  17th  Epistle.

34  By  my  eye-brows.] — Ver.  19. See  the  82nd  line  of  the  17th  Epistle.

35  Traced  in  the  wine.] — Ver.  20.  See  the  88th  line  of  the  17th  Epistle.
33 Your  blooming  cheeks.] — Ver.  22. Probably  by  way  of  check  to  his

want  of  caution.

37  Twisted  on  your  fingers.] — Ver.  26.  The  Sabines  were  the  first  to  in-
troduce  the  practice  of  wearing  rings  among  the  Romans.  The  Romans
generally  wore  one  ring,  at  least,  and  mostly  upon  the  fourth  finger  of  the
left  hand.  Down  to  the  latest  period  of  the  Republic,  the  rings  were
mostly  of  iron,  and  answered  the  'purpose  of  a  signet.  The  right  of
wearing  a  gold  ring  remained  for  several  centuries  the  exclusive  privilege
of  Senators,  Magistrates,  and  Knights.  The  emperors  were  not  very
scrupulous  on  whom  they  conferred  the  privilege  of  wearing  the  gold  ring,
and  Severus  and  Aurelian  gave  the  right  to  all  Roman  soldiers.  Vain  per-
sons who  had  the  privilege,  literally  covered  their  fingers  with  rings,  so
much  so,  that  Quintilian  thinks  it  necessary  to  warn  the  orator  not  to  have
them  above  the  middle  joint  of  the  fingers.  The  rings  and  the  gems  set
in  them,  were  often  of  extreme  beauty  and  value.  From  Juvenal  and  Mar-
tial we  learn  that  the  coxcombs  of  the  day  had  rings  for  both  winter  and
summer  wear.  They  were  kept  in  '  dactyliotheccC,'  or  ring  boxes,  where
they  were  ranged  in  a  row.


268  THE AMOEES  ;  [b.  I.

Take  hold  of  the  table  with  your  hand,  in  the  way  in  which
those  who  are  in  prayer38  take  hold  of  the  altar,  when  you
shall  be  wishing  many  an  evil  for  your  husband,  who  so  well
deserves  it.  The  cup  which  he  has  mixed  for  you,  if  you  are
discreet,39  bid  him  drink  himself ;  then,  in  a  low  voice,  do  you
ask  the  servant41  for  what  wine  you  wish.  I  will  at  once  take
the  cup  which  you  have  put  down  ;42  and  where  you  have
sipped,  on  that  side  will  I  drink.  If,  perchance,  he  shall  give
you  any  morsels,  of  which  he  has  tasted  beforehand,  reject
them  thus  touched  by  his  mouth.43  And  do  not  allow  him  to
press  your  neck,  by  putting  his  arms  around  it ;  nor  recline
your  gentle  head  on  his  unsightly  breast.44  Let  not  your
bosom,  or  your  breasts  so  close  at  hand,45  admit  his  fingers  ;  and
especially  allow  him  to  give  you  no  kisses.  If  you  do  give  him
any  kisses,  I  shall  be  discovered  to  be  your  lover,  and  I  shall
say,  "  Those  art  my  own,"  and  shall  be  laying  hands  upon  him.

Still,  this  I  shall  be  able  to  see  ;  but  what  the  clothing  care-
fully conceals,  the  same  will  be  a  cause  for  me  of  apprehension
full  of  doubts.  Touch  not  his  thigh  with  yours,  and  cross
not  legs  with  him,  and  do  not  unite  your  delicate  foot  with  his
uncouth  leg.  To  my  misery,  I  am  apprehensive  of  many  a
thing,  because  many  a  thing  have  I  done  in  my  wantonness  ;
and  I  myself  am  tormented,  through  fear  of  my  own  precedent.

33  Who  are  in  prayer."] — Ver.  27.  It  was  the  custom  to  hold  the  altar
while  the  suppliant  was  praying  to  the  Deities ;  he  here  directs  her,  while
she  is  mentally  uttering  imprecations  against  her  husband,  to  fancy  that
the  table  is  the  altar,  and  to  take  hold  of  it  accordingly.

39  If  you  are  discreet.] — Ver.  29.  •  Sapias  '  is  put  for  'si  sapias,'  '  if
you  are  discreet,'  '  if  you  would  act  sensibly.'

41  Ask  the  servant.'} — Ver.  30.  This  would  be  the  slave,  whose  office
it  was  to  mix  the  wine  and  water  to  the  taste  of  the  guests.  He  was  called
oivoxooQ  by  the  Greeks,  '  pincerna'  by  the  Romans.

42  Which  you  have  put  down.} — Ver.  31.  That  is,  which  she  either
puts  upon  the  table,  or  gives  back  to  the  servant,  when  she  has  drunk.

43  Touched  by  his  mouth.] — Ver.  34.  This  would  appear  to  refer  to
some  choice  morsel  picked  out  of  the  husband's  plate,  which,  as  a  mark  of
attention,  he  might  present  to  her.

44  On  his  unsightly  breast.] — Ver.  36.  This,  from  her  position,  if  she
reclined  below  her  husband,  she  would  be  almost  obliged  to  do.

45  So  close  at  hand.] — Ver.  37.  A  breach  of  these  injunctions  would
imply  either  a  very  lax  state  of  etiquette  at  the  Roman  parties,  or,  what  is
more  probable,  that  the  present  company  was  not  of  a  very  select  cha-
racter.


S.  IV.]  OB, AMOUES.  269

Oft  by  joining  hands  beneath  the  cloth,48  have  my  mistress  and
I  forestalled  our  hurried  delights.  This,  I  am  sure,  you  will
not  do  for  him  ;  but  that  you  may  not  even  be  supposed  to
do  so,  take  away  the  conscious  covering49  from  your  bosom.
Bid  your  husband  drink  incessantly,  but  let  there  be  no
kisses  with  your  entreaties  ;  and  while  he  is  drinking,  if  you
can,  add  wine  by  stealth.50  If  he  shall  be  soundly  laid  asleep
with  dozing  and  wine,  circumstances  and  opportunity  will  give
us  fitting  counsel.  When  you  shall  rise  to  go  home,  we  all
will  rise  as  well ;  and  remember  that  you  walk  in  the  middle
rank  of  the  throng.  In  that  rank  you  will  either  find  me,  or
be  found  by  me ;  and  whatever  part  of  me  you  can  there
touch,  mind  and  touch.

Ah  wretched  me  !  I  have  given  advice  to  be  good  for  but  a
few  hours  ;  then,  at  the  bidding  of  night,  I  am  separated  from
my  mistress.  At  night  her  husband  will  lock  her  in ;  I,  sad
with  my  gushing  tears,  will  follow  her  as  far  as  I  may,  even
to  her  obdurate  door.  And  now  will  he  be  snatching  a  kiss  ;
and  now  not  kisses  only  will  he  snatch ;  you  will  be  com-
pelled to  grant  him  that,  which  by  stealth  you  grant  to  me.
But  grant  him  this  (you  can  do  so)  with  a  bad  grace,
and  like  one  acting  by  compulsion  ;  let  no  caresses  be  heard ;
and  let  Venus  prove  inauspicious.  If  my  wishes  avail,  I
trust,  too,  that  he  will  find  no  satisfaction  therein  ;  but  if  other-
wise, still  at  least  let  it  have  no  delights  for  you.  But,  however,
whatever  luck  may  attend  upon  the  night,  assure  me  in  posi-
tive language  to-morrow,  that  you  did  not  dally  with  him.


ELEGY  V.

The  beauties  of  Corinna.
'Twas  summer  time,51  and  the  day  had  passed  the  hour  of  noon;

48  Beneath  the  cloth.] — Ver.  48.  '  Vestis'  means  a  covering,  or  cloth-
ing for  anything,  as  for  a  couch,  or  for  tapestry.  Let  us  charitably  sup-
pose it  here  to  mean  the  table  cloth ;  as  the  passage  will  not  admit  of
further  examination,  and  has  of  necessity  been  somewhat  modified  in  the
translation.

49  The  conscious  covering.'] — Ver.  50.  The  '  pallia,'  here  mentioned,  are
clearly  the  coverlets  of  the  couch  which  he  has  before  mentioned  in  the
41st  line;  and  from  this  it  is  evident,  that  during  the  repast  the  guests  were
covered  with  them.

60  Add  wine  by  stealth.] — Ver.  52.  To  make  him  fall  asleep  the  sooner.

51  'Twas  summer  time.] — Ver.  1. In  all  hot  climates  it  is  the  custom

to  repose  in  the  middle  of  the  day. This  the  Spaniards  call  the  '  siesta.'


2/0  THE AMORES  ;  [B.  I.

v)hen  I  threw  my  limbs  to  be  refreshed  on  the  middle  of  the
couch.  A  part  of  the  window53  was  thrown  open,  the  other
part  shut ;  the  light  was  such  as  the  woods  are  wont  to
have  ;  just  as  the  twilight  glimmers,  when  Phoebus  is  re-
treating ;  or  as  when  the  night  has  gone,  and  still  the  day  is
not  risen.  Such  light  should  be  given  to  the  bashful  fair,  in
which  coy  modesty  may  hope  to  have  concealment.

Behold  !  Corinna54  came,  clothed  in  a  tunic55  hanging  loose,
her  flowing hair56  covering  her  white  neck  ;  just  such  as  the

53  A  part  of  the  window.'] — Ver.  3.  On  the  '  fenestra/  or  windows  of
the  ancients,  see  the  Notes  to  the  Pontic  Epistles,  Book  iii.  Ep.  iii.  1.  5,
and  to  the  Metamorphoses,  Book  xiv.  1.  752.  He  means  that  one  leaf  of
the  window  was  open,  and  one  shut.

54  Corinna.]—  Ver.  9.  In  the  Fourth  Book  of  the  Tristia,  Elegy  x.  1.  60,
be  says,  '  Corinna,  (so  called  by  a  fictitious  name)  the  subject  of  song
through  the  whole  city,  had  imparted  a  stimulus  to  my  genius.'  It  has
been  supposed  by  some  Commentators,  that  under  this  name  he  meant  Julia,
either  the  daughter  or  the  grand-daughter  of  the  emperor  Augustus,  but
there  seems  really  to  be  no  ground  for  such  a  belief ;  indeed,  the  daughter
of  Augustus  had  passed  middle  age,  when  Ovid  was  still  in  boyhood.
It  is  most  probable  that  Corinna  was  only  an  ideal  personage,  existing  in
the  imagination  of  the  Poet ;  and  that  he  intended  the  name  to  apply  to  his
favourite  mistress  for  the  time  being,  as,  though  he  occasionally  denies  it,
still,  at  other  times,  he  admits  that  his  passion  was  of  the  roving  kind.
There  are  two  females  mentioned  in  history  of  the  name  of  Corinna.  One
was  a  Theban  poetess,  who  excelled  in  Lyric  composition,  and  was  said
to  have  vanquished  Pindar  himself  in  a  Lyric  contest ;  while  the  other
was  a  native  of  Thespiae,  in  Boeotia.  The  former,  who  was  famous  for  both
her  personal  charms  and  her  mental  endowments,  is  supposed  to  have  sug-
gested the  use  of  the  name  to  Ovid.

55  Clothed  in  a  tunic.'] — Ver.  9.  '  Tunica'  was  the  name  of  the  under-
garment with  both  sexes  among  the  Romans.  "When  the  wearer  was  out  of
doors,  or  away  from  home,  it  was  fastened  round  the  waist  with  a  belt  or
girdle,  but  when  at  home  and  wishing  to  be  entirely  at  ease,  it  was,  as  in  the
present  instance,  loose  or  ungirded.  Both  sexes  usually  wore  two  tunics.
In  female  dress,  Varro  seems  to  call  the  outer  tunic  '  subucula,'  and  the
'  interior  tunica'  by  the  name  also  of  '  indusium.'  The  outer  tunic
was  also  called  '  stola,'  and,  with  the  '  palla'  completed  the  female
dress.  The  '  tunica  interior,'  or  what  is  here  called  '  tunica,'  was  a
simple  shift,  and  in  early  times  had  no  sleeves.  According  to  Nonius,  it
fitted  loosely  on  the  body,  and  was  not  girded  when  the  b  stola'  or  outer
tunic  was  put  on.  Poor  people,  who  could  not  afford  to  purchase  a  '  toga,'
wore  the  tunic  alone ;  whence  we  find  the  lower  classes  called  by  the
name  of '  tunicati.'

56  Her  flowing  hair.] — Ver.  10.  'Dividuis,'  here  means,  that  her  hair
was  scattered,  flowing  over  her  shoulders  and  not  arranged  on  the  head
in  a  knot.


E.  VI. J  OE, AMOURS.  271

beauteous  Semiramis57  is  said  to  have  entered  her  chamber,  and
Lais,58  beloved  by  many  a  hero.  I  drew  aside  the  tunic  ;
in  its  thinness59  it  was  but  a  small  impediment ;  still,  to  be
covered  with  the  tunic  did  she  strive  ;  and,  as  she  struggled
as  though  she  was  not  desirous  to  conquer,  without  difficulty
was  she  overcome,  through  betrayal  of  herself.  When,  her
clothing  laid  aside,  she  stood  before  my  eyes,  throughout  her
whole  body  nowhere  was  there  a  blemish.  What  shoulders,
what  arms  I  both  saw  and  touched  !  The  contour  of  her  breast,
how  formed  was  it  to  be  pressed  !  How  smooth  her  stomach
beneath  her  faultless  bosom  !  How  full  and  how  beauteous
her  sides  !  How  plump  with  youthfulness  the  thigh  !  But  why
enlarge  on  every  point  ?  Nothing  did  I  behold  not  worthy  of
praise  ;  and  I  pressed  her  person  even  to  my  own.

The  rest,  who  knows  not  ?  Wearied,  we  both  reclined. May
such  a  midday  often  prove  my  lot.


ELEGY  VI.
He  entreats  the  porter  to  open  to  him  the  door  of  his  mistress's  house.

Porter,  fastened  (and  how  unworthily !)  with  the  cruel  fet-
ter,60 throw  open  the  stubborn  door  with  its  turning  hinge.
What  I  ask,  is  but  a  trine  ;  let  the  door,  half-opened,  admit
me  sideways  with  its  narrow  passage. Protracted  Love  has

57  Semiramis.'] — Ver.  11.  Semiramis  was  the  wife  of  Ninus,  king  of
Babylon,  and  was  famous  for  her  extreme  beauty,  and  the  talent  which  she
displayed  as  a  ruler.  She  was  also  as  unscrupulous  in  her  morals  as  the
fair  one  whom  the  Poet  is  now  describing.

58  And  Lais. ] — Ver.  12.  There  are  generally  supposed  to  have  been
two  famous  courtesans  of  the  name  of  Lais.  The  first  was  carried
captive,  when  a  child,  from  Sicily,  in  the  second  year  of  the  91st  Olym-
piad, and  being  taken  to  Corinth,  became  famous  throughout  Greece  for
her  extreme  beauty,  and  the  high  price  she  put  upon  her  favours.  Many
of  the  richest  and  most  learned  men  resorted  to  her,  and  became  smitten
by  her  charms.  The  second  Lais  was  the  daughter  of  Alcibiades,  by  his
mistress,  Tiinandra.  When  Demosthenes  applied  for  a  share  of  her
favours,  she  made  the  extravagant  demand  of  ten  thousand  drachmae,  upon
which,  regaining  his  wisdom  (which  had  certainly  forsaken  him  for  a
time)  he  said  that  he  would  not  purchase  repentance  at  so  high  a  price.

59  In  its  thinness.] — Ver.  13.  Possibly  it  was  made  of  Coan  cloth,  if
Corinna  was  as  extravagant  as  she  was  vicious.

60  The  cruel  fetter.] — Ver.  1.  Among  the  Romans,  the  porter  was
frequently  bound  by  a  chain  to  his  post,  that  he  might  not  forsake  it.


2/2  THE AMOBES;  [jB.  I.

made  my  body  thin  for  such  an  emergency,  and  by  dimi-
nishing my  bulk,  has  rendered  my  limbs  quite  supple.  'Tis
he  who  shows  me  how  to  go  softly  amid  the  watches  of  the
keepers  ;62  'tis  he  directs  my  feet  that  meet  no  harm.  But,  at
one  time,  I  used  to  be  afraid  of  the  night  and  imaginary
ghosts  ;  and  I  used  to  be  surprised  if  any  one  was  about  to  go
in  the  dark:  Cupid,  with  his  graceful  mother,  laughed,  so  that
I  could  hear  him,  and  he  softly  said,  "  Thou  too  wilt  become
bold."  Without  delay,  love  came  upon  me;  then,  I  feared  not
spectres  that  flit  by  night,63  or  hands  uplifted  for  my  de-
struction.

I  only  fear  you,  thus  too  tardy ;  you  alone  do  I  court ;
you  hold  the  lightning  by  which  you  can  effect  my  de-
struction. Look  (and  that  you  may  see,  loosen  the  obdurate
bars)  how  the  door  has  been  made  wet  with  my  tears.  At  all
events,  'twas  I,  who,  when,  your  garment  laid  aside,  you  stood
ready  for  the  whip,64  spoke  in  your  behalf  to  your  mistress
as  you  were  trembling.  Does  then,  (0  shocking  thought !)  the
credit  which  once  prevailed  in  your  behalf,  now  fail  to  prevail
in  my  own  favour  ?  Give  a  return  for  my  kindness ;  you
may  now  be  grateful.  As  you  wish,65  the  hours  of  the  night
pass  on  ;66  from  the  door-post 67  strike  away  the  bar.

62  Watches  of  the  keepers.] — Ver.  7.  Properly,  the  '  excubiae'  were  the
military  watches  that  were  kept  on  guard,  either  by  night  or  day,  while
the  term  '  vigiliae,'  was  only  applied  to  the  watch  by  night.  He  here
alludes  to  the  watch  kept  by  jealous  men  over  their  wives.

63  Spectres  that  flit  by  night. .] — Ver.  13.  The  dread  of  the  ghosts  of  the
departed  entered  largely  among  the  Roman  superstitions.  See  an  account
of  the  Ceremony,  in  the  Fifth  Book  of  the  Fasti,  1.  422,  et  seq.f  for  driving
the  ghosts,  or  Lemures,  from  the  house.

^ Ready  for  the  whip.]— -Ver.  19.  See  the  Note  to  the  81st  line  of
the  Epistle  of  Deianira  to  Hercules.  Ovid  says,  that  he  has  often  pleaded
for  him  to  his  mistress  ;  indeed,  the  Roman  ladies  often  showed  more  cruelty
to  the  slaves,  both  male  and  female,  than  the  men  did  to  the  male  slaves.

65  As  you  wish.] — Ver.  28.  Of  course  it  would  be  the  porter's  wish
that  the  night  should  pass  quickly  on,  as  he  would  be  relieved  in  the
morning,  and  was  probably  forbidden  to  sleep  during  the  night.

68  Hours  of  the  night  pass  on.] — Ver.  24.  This  is  an  intercalary  line,
being  repeated  after  each  seventh  one.

67  From  the  door-post.] — Ver.  24.  The  fastenings  of  the  Roman  doors
consisted  of  a  bolt  placed  at  the  bottom  of  each  '  foris,'  or  wing  of  the
door,  which  fell  into  a  socket  made  in  the  sill.  By  way  of  additional  pre-
caution, at  night,  the  front  door  was  secured  by  a  bar  of  wood  or  iron,
here  called  '  sera,'  which  ran  across,  and  was  inserted  in  sockets  on  each


E.  VI.]  OE, AMOUES.  2/3

Strike  it  away  ;  then  may  you  one  day  be  liberated  from
your  long  fetters,  and  may  the  water  of  the  slave68  be  not
for  ever  drunk  of  by  you.  Hard-hearted  porter!  you  hear
me,  as  I  implore  in  vain ;  the  door,  supported  by  its  hard
oaken  posts,  is  still  unmoved.  Let  the  protection  of  a  closed
gate  be  of  value  to  cities  when  besieged  ;  but  why,  in  the
midst  of  peace  are  you  dreading  warfare?  What  would
you  do  to  an  enemy,  who  thus  shut  out  the  lover  ?  The  hours
of  the  night  pass  on  ;  from  the  door-post  strike  away  the  bar.

I  am  not  come  attended  with  soldiers  and  with  arms  ;
I  should  be  alone,  if  ruthless  Love  were  not  here.  Him,
even  if  I  should  desire  it,  I  can  never  send  away ;  first
should  I  be  even  severed  from  my  limbs.  Love  then,  and  a
little  wine  about  my  temples,69  are  with  me,  and  the  chaplet
falling  from  off  my  anointed  hair.  Who  is  to  dread  arms
such  as  these  ?  Who  may  not  go  out  to  face  them  ?  The
hours  of  the  night  pass  on ;  from  the  door-post  strike  away
the  bar.

Are  you  delaying  ?  or  does  sleep  (who  but  ill  befriends
the  lover)  give  to  the  winds  my  words,  as  they  are  repelled
from  your  ear  ?  But,  I  remember,  when  formerly  I  used  to
avoid  you,  you  were  awake,  with  the  stars  of  the  midnight.
Perhaps,  too,  your  own  mistress  is  now  asleep  with  you ;
alas  !  how  much  superior  then  is  your  fate  to  my  own  !  And
since  'tis  so,  pass  on  to  me,  ye  cruel  chains.  The  hours  of
the  night  pass  on  ;  from  the  door-post  strike  away  the  bar.

Am  I  mistaken  ?  Or  did  the  door-posts  creak  with  the
turning  hinge,  and  did  the  shaken  door  give  the  jarring
signal  1  Yes,  I  am  mistaken ;  the  door  was  shaken  by  the
boisterous  wind. Ah  me  !  how  far  away  has  that  gust  borne

side  of  the  doorway. Hence  it  was  necessary  to  remove  or  strike  away
the  bar,  '  excutere  seram/  before  the  door  could  be  opened.

68  Water  of  the  slave.] — Ver.  26.  Water  was  the  principal  beverage  of
the  Roman  slaves,  but  they  were  allowed  a  small  quantity  of  wine,  which
was  increased  on  the  Saturnalia.  '  Far/  or  '  spelt/  formed  their  general
sustenance,  of  which  they  received  one  '  libra  '  daily.  Salt  and  oil  were
also  allowed  them,  and  sometimes  fruit,  but  seldom  vegetables.  Flesh  meat
seems  not  to  have  been  given  to  them.

69  About  my  temples.']  — Ver.  37.  'Circa  mea  tempora/  literally,
'  around  my  temples/  This  expression  is  used,  because  it  was  supposed
that  the  vapours  of  excessive  wine  affect  the  brain.  He  says  that  he  has
only  taken  a  moderate  quantity  of  wine,  although  the  chaplet  falling  from
off  his  hair  would  seem  to  bespeak  the  contrary.

T


2/4  the  amohe3  ;  [b.  i.

my  hopes !  Boreas,  if  well  thou  dost  keep  in  mind  the
ravished  Orithyia,  come  hither,  and  with  thy  blast  beat  open
this  relentless  door.  'Tis  silence  throughout  all  the  City  ;
damp  with  the  glassy  dew,  the  hours  of  the  night  pass  on  ;
from  the  door-post  strike  away  the  bar.

Otherwise  I,  myself,'3  now  better  prepared  than  you,  with
my  sword,  and  with  the  fire  which  I  am  holding  in  my
torch,74  will  scale  this  arrogant  abode.  Night,  and  love,  and
wine,75  are  persuasive  of  no  moderation  ;  the  first  is  without
shame,  Bacchus  and  Love  are  without  fear.

I  have  expended  every  method  ;  neither  by  entreaties  nor
by  threats  have  I  moved  you,  0  man,  even  more  deaf  your-
self than  your  door.  It  becomes  you  not  to  watch  the
threshold  of  the  beauteous  fair;  of  the  anxieties  of  the
prison,76  are  you  more  deserving.  And  now  Lucifer  is  moving
his  wheels  beset  with  rime ;  and  the  bird  is  arousing  77
wretched  mortals  to  their  work.  But,  chaplet  taken  from
my  locks  joyous  no  longer,  be  you  the  livelong  night  upon  this
obdurate  threshold.  You,  when  in  the  morning  she  shall  see
you  thus  exposed,  will  be  a  witness  of  my  time  thus  thrown
away.  Porter,  whatever  your  disposition,  good  bye,  and  one
day  experience  the  pangs  of  him  who  is  now  departing;

73  Otherwise  I  myself  .] — Ver.  57.  Heinsius  thinks  that  this  and  the
following  line  are  spurious.

74  Holding  in  my  torch.} — Ver.  58.  Torches  were  usually  carried  by  the
Romans,  for  their  guidance  after  sunset,  and  were  generally  made  of
wooden  staves  or  twigs,  bound  by  a  rope  around  them,  in  a  spiral  form,  or
else  by  circular  bands  at  equal  distances.  The  inside  of  the  torch  was
filled  with  flax,  tow,  or  dead  vegetable  matter,  impregnated  with  pitch,
wax,  rosin,  oil,  or  other  inflammable  substances.

75  Love  and  wine.] — Ver.  59.  He  seems,  by  this,  to  admit  that  he  has
taken  more  than  a  moderate  quantity  of  wine,  '  modicum  vinum,'  as  he
says  above.

76  Anxieties  of  the  prison.'] — Ver.  64.  He  alludes  to  the  '  ergastulum,'
or  prison  for  slaves,  that  was  attached  to  most  of  the  Roman  farms,  whither
the  refractory  slaves  were  sent  from  the  City  to  work  in  chains.  It  was
mostly  under  ground,  and,  was  lighted  with  narrow  windows,  too  high
from  the  ground  to  be  touched  with  the  hand.  Slaves  who  had  displeased
their  masters  were  usually  sent  there  for  a  punishment,  and  those  of  un-
couth habits  were  kept  there.  Plutarch  says  that  they  were  established,  on
the  conquest  of  Italy,  in  consequence  of  the  number  of  foreign  slaves  im-
ported for  the  cultivation  of  the  conquered  territory.  They  were  finally
abolished  by  the  Emperor  Hadrian.

77  Bird  is  arousing.] — Ver.  66.  The  cock,  whom  the  poets  universally
consider  as  '  the  harbinger  of  morn.'


E.  VII.]  OE, AMOUES.  2/5

sluggish  one,  and  worthless  in  not  admitting  the  lover,  fare
you  well.  And  you,  ye  cruel  door-posts,  with  your  stubborn
threshold  ;  and  you,  ye  doors,  equally  slaves,78  hard-hearted
blocks  of  wood,  farewell.


ELEGY  VII.

He  has  beaten  his  mistress,  and  endeavours  to  regain  her  favour.
Put  my  hands  in  manacles  (they  are  deserving  of  chains),
if  any  friend  of  mine  is  present,  until  all  my  frenzy  has
departed.  For  frenzy  has  raised  my  rash  arms  against  my
mistress  ;  hurt  by  my  frantic  hand,  the  fair  is  weeping.
In  such  case  could  I  have  done  an  injury  even  to  my  dear
parents,  or  have  given  unmerciful  blows  to  even  the  hal-
lowed Gods.  Why ;  did  not  Ajax,  too,80  the  owner  of  the
sevenfold  shield,  slaughter  the  flocks  that  he  had  caught
along  the  extended  plains  ?  And  did  Orestes,  the  guilty
avenger  of  his  father,  the  punisher  of  his  mother,  dare  to  ask
for  weapons  against  the  mystic  Goddesses?81

And  could  I  then  tear  her  tresses  so  well  arranged ;  and  were
not  her  displaced  locks  unbecoming  to  my  mistress?  Even
thus  was  she  beauteous ;  in  such  guise  they  say  that  the
daughter  of  Schceneus82  pursued  the  wild  beasts  of  Meenalus

73  Equally  slaves.] — Ver.  74.  He  called  the  doors,  which  were  bivalve
or  folding-doors,  his  '  conservse,'  or  '  fellow  slaves,'  from  the  fact  of  their
being  obedient  to  the  will  of  a  slave.  Plautus,  in  the  Asinaria,  act.  ii.
sc.  3,  has  a  similar  expression : — '  Nolo  ego  fores,  conservas  meas  a  te
verberarier.' '  I  won't  have  my  door,  my  fellow-slave,  thumped  by  you.'

80  Did  not  Ajax  too.~\ — Yer.  7.  Ajax  Telamon,  on  being  refused  the
arms  of  Achilles,  became  mad,  and  slaughtered  a  flock  of  sheep,  fancying
that  they  were  the  sons  of  Atreus,  and  his  enemy  Ulysses.  His  shield,
formed  of  seven  ox  hides,  kirTafiotiov,  is  celebrated  by  Homer.

bl  Mystic  Goddesses.] — Ver.  10.  Orestes  avenged  the  death  of  his
father,  Agamemnon,  by  slaying  his  own  mother,  Clytemnestra,  together
with  her  paramour,  iEgistheus.  He  also  attempted  to  attack  the  Furies,
when  they  haunted  him  for  the  murder  of  his  mother.

b2  Daughter  of  Schceneus. — Ver.  13.  Atalanta,  the  Arcadian,  or  Mae  -
nalian,  was  the  daughter  of  Iasius,  and  was  famous  for  her  skill  in  the
chase.  Atalanta,  the  Boeotian,  was  the  daughter  of  Schceneus,  and  was
renowned  for  her  swiftness,  and  for  the  race  in  which  she  was  outstripped
byHippomenes.  The  Poet  has  here  mistaken  the  one  for  the  other,  calling
the  Arcadian  one  the  daughter  of  Schceneus.  The  story  of  the  Arcadian
Atalanta  is  told  in  the  Eighth  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses,  and  that  of  the
daughter  of  Schceneus,  at  the  end  of  the  Tenth  Book  of  the  same  work.


276  THE AMOEES  ;  [b.  I.

with  iier  bow.  In  such  guise  did  the  Cretan  damsel83  weep,
that  the  South  winds,  in  their  headlong  flight,  had  borne
away  both  the  promises  and  the  sails  of  the  forsworn  Theseus.
Thus,  too,  chaste  Minerva,  did  Cassandra84  fall  in  thy  temple,
except  that  her  locks  were  bound  with  the  fillet.

Who  did  not  say  to  me,  "  You  madman  !"  who  did  not  say
to  me,  "  You  barbarian  !"  She  herself  said  not  a  word  ;  her
tongue  was  restrained  by  timid  apprehensions.  But  still  her
silent  features  pronounced  my  censure  ;  by  her  tears  and  by
her  silent  lips  did  she  convict  me.

First  could  I  wish  that  my  arms  had  fallen  from  off  my
shoulders  ;  to  better  purpose  could  I  have  parted  with  a  por-
tion of  myself.  To  my  own  disadvantage  had  I  the  strength  of
a  madman  ;  and  for  my  own  punishment  did  I  stoutly  exert
my  strength.  What  do  I  want  with  you,  ye  ministers  of
death  and  criminality  ?  Impious  hands,  submit  to  the  chains,
your  due.  Should  I  not  have  been  punished  had  I  struck
the  humblest  Roman85  of  the  multitude  ?  And  shall  I  have  a
greater  privilege  against  my  mistress  ?  The  son  of  Tydeus
has  left  the  worst  instance  of  crime  :  he  was  the  first  to  strike
a  Goddess,86  I,  the  second.  But  less  guilty  was  he ;  by  me,
she,  whom  I  asserted  to  be  loved  by  me,  was  injured  ;  against
an  enemy  the  son  of  Tydeus  was  infuriate.

Come  now,  conqueror,  prepare  your  boastful  triumphs ;
bind  your  locks  with  laurel,  and  pay  your  vows  to  Jove,  and
let  the  multitude,  the  train,  that  escorts  your  chariot,  shout
aloud,  "  Io  t?'iumpke  !  by  this  valiant  man  has  the  fair  been
conquered !"  Let  the  captive,  in  her  sadness,  go  before  with
dishevelled  locks,  pale  all  over,  if  her  hurt  cheeks87  may  allow

83  The  Cretan  damsel.] — Ver.  16.  Ariadne,  the  daughter  of  Minos,
when  deserted  on  the  island  of  Naxos  or  Cea.

84  Cassandra.] — Ver.  17.  Cassandra  being  a  priestess,  would  wear  the
sacred  fillets,  '  vittse.'  She  was  ravished  by  Ajax  Oileus,  in  the  temple  of
Minerva.

85  The  humblest  Roman.] — Ver.  29.  It  was  not  lawful  to  strike  a  free-
born  Roman  citizen.  See  Acts,  c.  xxii.  v.  25.  '  And  as  they  bound  him
with  thongs,  Paul  said  unto  the  Centurion  that  stood  by,  Is  it  lawful  for
you  to  scourge  a  man  that  is  a  Roman,  and  uncondemned  ?'  This  privi-
lege does  not  seem  to  have  extended  to  Roman  women  of  free  birth.

86  Strike  a  Goddess.} — Ver.  32.  He  alludes  to  the  wound  inflicted
by  Diomedes  upon  Venus,  while  protecting  her  son  iEneas.

87  Her  hurt  cheeks.]— Ver.  40.  He  implies  by  this,  to  his  disgrace,
that  he  has  made  her  cheeks  black  and  blue  by  his  violence.


E.  VII.]  OR, AMOURS.  277

it.  'Twere  more  fitting  for  her  face  to  be  pale  from  the
impress  of  kisses,  and  for  her  neck  to  bear  the  marks  of  the
toying  teeth.  In  short,  if,  after  the  manner  of  a  swelling
torrent,  I  was  impelled,  and  if  impetuous  anger  did  make  me
its  prey  ;  would  it  not  have  been  enough  to  have  shouted  aloud
at  the  trembling  girl,  and  not  to  have  thundered  out  ray
threats  far  too  severe  ?  Or  else,  to  my  own  disgrace,  to  have
torn  her  tunic  from  its  upper  edge  down  to  the  middle  1
Her  girdle  should,  at  the  middle,89  have  come  to  its  aid.
But  now,  in  the  hardness  of  my  heart,  I  could  dare,
seizing  her  hair  on  her  forehead,  to  mark  her  free-born
cheeks90  with  my  nails.  There  she  stood,  amazed,  with  her
features  pale  and  bloodless,  just  as  the  marble  is  cut  in  the
Parian  mountains.91  I  saw  her  fainting  limbs,  and  her  palpi-
tating members  ;  just  as  when  the  breeze  waves  the  foliage  of
the  poplars  ;  just  as  the  slender  reed  quivers  with  the
gentle  Zephyr ;  or,  as  when  the  surface  of  the  waves  is
skimmed  by  the  warm  South  wind.  Her  tears,  too,  so  long
repressed,  flowed  down  her  face,  just  as  the  water  flows  from
the  snow  when  heaped  up.

Then,  for  the  first  time,  did  I  begin  to  be  sensible  that  I
was  guilty  ;  the  tears  which  she  was  shedding  were  as  my  own
blood.  Yet,  thrice  was  I  ready,  suppliantly  to  throw  myself
before  her  feet;  thrice  did  she  repel  my  dreaded  hands.
But,  dearest,  do  not  you  hesitate,  (for  revenge  will  lessen  your
grief)  at  once  to  attack  my  face  with  your  nails.  Spare  not
my  eyes,  nor  yet  my  hair ;  let  anger  nerve  your  hands,  weak
though  they  may  be.

And  that  tokens  so  shocking  of  my  criminality  may  no
longer  exist,  put  your  locks,  arranged  anew,  in  their  proper
order.92

S9  At  the  middle.] — Ver.  48.  He  says  that  he  ought  to  have  heen  satis-
fied with  tearing  her  tunic  down  to  the  waist,  where  the  girdle  should
have  stopped  short  the  rent ;  whereas,  in  all  probability,  he  had  torn  it
from  the  top  to  the  bottom.

90  Her  free-born  cheeks.'] — Ver.  50.  It  was  a  common  practice  with
many  of  the  Romans,  to  tear  and  scratch  their  slaves  on  the  least  provo-
cation.

91  The  Parian  mountains.] — Ver.  52.  The  marble  of  Paros  was  greatly
esteemed  for  its  extreme  whiteness.  Paros  was  one  of  the  Cyclades,  situate
about  eighteen  miles  from  the  island  of  Delos.

92  Their  proper  order.] — Ver.  68.  '  In  statione,'  was  originally  a  military
phrase,  signifying  '  on  guard' ;  from  which  it  came  to  be  applied  to  any
thing  in  its  place  or  in  proper  order.


278  THE AMOEES;  [b.  I.

ELEGY  VIII.

He  curses  a  certain  procuress,  whom  he  overhears  instructing  his  mis-
tress in  the  arts  of  a  courtesan.

There  is  a  certain (whoever  wishes  to  make  acquaintance

with  a  procuress,  let  him  listen.) — There  is  a  certain  old  hag,
Bipsas  byname.  From  fact  does  she  derive9,1  her  name;
never  in  a  sober  state  does  she  behold  the  mother  of  the
swarthy  Memnon  with  her  horses  of  roseate  hue.  She  knows
well  the  magic  arts,  and  the  charms  of  iEsea,95  and  by  her
skill  she  turns  back  to  its  source  %  the  flowing  stream.  She
knows  right  well  what  the  herbs,  what  the  thrums  impelled
around  the  whirling  spinning-wheel,97  and  what  the  venomous
exudation93  from  the  prurient  mare  can  eifect. When  she

91  Does  she  derive.'] — Ver.  3.  He  says  that  her  name,  '  Dipsas,'  is
derived  from  reality,  meaning  thereby  that  she  is  so  called  from  the  Greek-
verb  Stxpdio,  '  to  thirst' ;  because  she  was  always  thirsty,  and  never  rose
sober  in  the  morning.

y5  The  charms  of  JEcsa.] — Ver.  5.  He  alludes  to  the  charms  of  Circe
and  Medea. According  to  Eustathius,  JEsea.  was  a  city  of  Colchis.

93  Turns  back  to  its  source.] — Ver.  6.  This  the  magicians  of  ancient
times  generally  professed  to  do.

97  Spinning  wheel.] — Ver.  8.  '  Rhombus,'  means  a  parallelogram  with
equal  sides,  but  not  having  right  angles,  and  hence,  from  the  resemblance,
a  spinning  wheel,  or  winder.  The  '  licia  '  were  the  cords  or  thrums  of
the  old  warp,  or  the  threads  of  the  old  web  to  which  the  threads  of  the
new  warp  were  joined.  Here,  however,  the  word  seems  to  mean  the
threads  alone.  The  spinning-wheel  was  much  used  in  magical  incanta-
tions, not  only  among  the  Romans,  but  among  the  people  of  Northern
and  Western  Europe.  It  is  not  improbable  that  the  practice  was  founded
on  the  so-called  threads  of  destiny,  and  it  was  the  province  of  the
wizard,  or  sorceress,  by  his  or  her  charms,  to  lengthen  or  shorten
those  threads,  according  as  their  customers  might  desire.  Indeed,  in
some  parts  of  Europe,  at  the  present  day,  charms,  in  the  shape  of  forms
of  words,  are  said  to  exist,  which  have  power  over  the  human  life  at  any
distance  from  the  spot  where  they  are  uttered ;  a  kind  of  superstition
which  dispenses  with  the  more  cumbrous  paraphernalia  of  the  spinning-
wheel.  Some  Commentators  think  that  the  use  of  the  '  licia'  implied  that
the  minds  of  individuals  were  to  be  influenced  at  the  will  of  the  enchanter,
in  the  same  way  as  the  old  thrums  of  the  warp  are  caught  up  and  held
fast  by  the  new  threads ;  this  view,  however,  seems  to  dispense  with  the
province  of  the  wheel  in  the  incantation.  See  the  Second  Book  of  the
Fasti,  1.  572.  The  old  woman  there  mentioned  as  performing  the  rites  of
the  Goddess,  Tacita,  among  her  other  proceedings,  '  binds  the  enchanted
threads  on  the  dark-coloured  spinning-wheel.'

38 Venomous  exudation,]  —  Ver.  8. This  was  the  substance  called


E.  Till.]  OE, AMOURS.  279

wills  it,  the  clouds  are  overspread  throughout  all  the  sky ;  when
she  wills  it,  the  day  is  bright  with  a  clear  atmosphere.

I  have  beheld  (if  I  may  be  believed)  the  stars  dripping  with
blood  :  the  face  of  the  moon  was  empurpled"  with  gore.  I
believe  that  she,  transformed,1  was  flying  amid  the  shades  of
night,  and  that  her  hag's  carcase  was  covered  with  feathers.
This  I  believe,  and  such  is  the  report.  A  double  pupil,  too,*
sparkles  in  her  eyes,  and  light  proceeds  from  a  twofold  eye-
ball. Forth  from  the  ancient  sepulchres  she  calls  our  great
grandsires,  and  their  grandsires 3  as  well ;  and  with  her  long
incantations  she  cleaves  the  solid  ground.  She  has  made  it  her
occupation  to  violate  the  chaste  bed  ;  and  besides,  her  tongue  is

'  hippomanes,'  which  was  said  to  flow  from  mares  when  in  a  prurient  state.
Hesiod  says,  that  '  hippomanes '  was  a  herb  which  produced  madness  in
the  horses  that  ate  of  it.  Pliny,  in  his  Eighth  Book,  says  that  it  is  a  poi-
sonous excrescence  of  the  size  of  a  fig,  and  of  a  black  colour,  which  grows
on  the  head  of  the  mare,  and  which  the  foal  at  its  birth  is  in  the  habit  of
biting  off,  which,  if  it  neglects  to  do,  it  is  not  allowed  by  its  mother  to
suck.  This  fictitious  substance  was  said  to  be  especially  used  in  philtres.

99  Moon  was  empurpled  A — Ver.  12.  If  such  a  thing  as  a  fog  ever  ex-
ists in  Italy,  he  may  very  possibly  have  seen  the  moon  of  a  deep  red
colour.

1  That  she,  transformed.] — Ver.  13.  '  Versam,'  '  transformed,'  seems
here  to  be  a  preferable  reading  to  '  vivam,'  '  alive.'  Burmann,  however,
thinks  that  the  « striges '  were  the  ghosts  of  dead  sorcerers  and  wizards,
and  that  the  Poet  means  here,  that  Dipsas  had  the  power  of  transforming
herself  into  a  '  strix '  even  while  living,  and  that  consequently  '  vivam  '  is
the  proper  reading.  The  '  strix '  was  a  fabulous  bird  of  the  owl  kind,
which  was  said  to  suck  the  blood  of  children  in  the  cradle.  See  the  Sixth
Book  of  the  Fasti,  1.  141,  and  the  Note  to  the  passage.

2  A  double  pupil,  too.'] — Ver.  15.  The  pupil,  or  apple  of  the  eye,  is
that  part  through  which  light  is  conveyed  to  the  optic  nerve.  Some  per-
sons, especially  females,  were  said  by  the  ancients  to  have  a  double
pupil,  which  constituted  what  was  called  '  the  evil  eye.'  Pliny  the  Elder
says,  in  his  Seventh  Book,  that  'all  women  injure  by  their  glances,  who
have  a  double  pupil.'  The  grammarian,  Hsephestion, 'tells  us,  in  his  Fifth
Book,  that  the  wife  of  Candaules,  king  of  Lydia,  had  a  double  pupil.
Heinsius  suggests,  that  this  was  possibly  the  case  with  the  lalysiau
Telchines,  mentioned  in  the  Seventh  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses,  1.  365,
*  whose  eyes  corrupting  ail  things  by  the  very  looking  upon  them,  Jupiter,
utterly  hating,  thrust  them  beneath  the  waves  of  his  brother.'

3  And  their  grandsires.'] — Ver.  17.  One  hypercritical  Commentator
here  makes  this  remark :  '  As  though  it  were  any  more  difficult  to  sum-
mon forth  from  the  tomb  those  who  have  long  been  dead,  than  those  who
are  just  deceased.'  He  forgot  that  Ovid  had  to  make  up  his  line,  and
that  '  antiquis  proavos  atavosque'  made  three  good  feet,  and  two-thirds  of
another.


280  THE AMOEES  ;  [B.  I.

not  wanting  in  guilty  advocacy.  Chance  made  me  the  witness
of  her  language  ;  in  such  words  was  she  giving  her  advice  ;
the  twofold  doors  5  concealed  me.

"  You  understand,  my  life,  how  greatly  you  yesterday  pleased
a  wealthy  young  man ;  for  he  stopped  short,  and  stood
gazing  for  some  time  on  your  face.  And  whom  do  you  not
please  ?  Your  beauty  is  inferior  to  no  one's.  But  woe  is  me  !
your  person  has  not  a  fitting  dress.  I  only  wish  you  were  as
well  off,  as  you  are  distinguished  for  beauty ;  if  you  became
rich,  I  should  not  be  poor.  The  adverse  star  of  Mars  in  op-
position G  was  unfortunate  for  you ;  Mars  has  gone ;  now
Venus  is  befriending  you  with  her  planet.  See  now  how
favourable  she  is  on  her  approach  ;  a  rich  lover  is  sighing  for
you,  and  he  makes  it  his  care 7  what  are  your  requirements.
He  has  good  looks,  too,  that  may  compare  with  your  own ;
if  he  did  not  wish  to  have  you  at  a  price,  he  were  worthy
himself  to  be  purchased. "

On  this  the  damsel  blushed  :s  "  Blushing,"  said  the  hag,
"  suits  a  fair  complexion  indeed  ;  but  if  you  only  pretend  it,
'tis  an  advantage  ;  if  real,  it  is  wont  to  be  injurious.  When,
your  eyes  cast  down,9  you  are  looking  full  upon  your  bosom,

5  The  twofold  doors.']—  Ver.  20.  The  doors  used  by  the  ancients  were
mostly  bivalve,  or  folding  doors.

6  Mars  in  opposition.'] — Ver.  29.  She  is  dabbling  here  in  astrology,
and  the  adverse  and  favourable  aspects  of  the  stars.  We  are  to  suppose
that  she  is  the  agent  of  the  young  man  who  has  seen  the  damsel,  and  she
is  telling  her  that  the  rising  star  of  Venus  is  about  to  bring  her  good  luck.

7  Makes  it  his  care.] — Ver.  32.  Burmann  thinks  that  this  line,  as  it
stands  at  present,  is  not  pure  Latin  ;  and,  indeed,  '  curse  habet,'  '  makes  it
his  care,'  seems  a  very  unusual  mode  of  expression.  He  suggests  another
reading — '  et,  cultae  quod  tibi  dent,  habet,'  '  and  he  possesses  that  which
is  wanting  for  your  being  well-dressed,'  namely,  money.

3  The  damsel  blushed.] — Ver.  35.  He  says  that  his  mistress  blushed  at
the  remark  of  the  old  hag,  that  the  young  man  was  worthy  to  be  purchased
by  her,  if  he  had  not  been  the  first  to  make  an  offer.  We  must  suppose
that  here  the  Poet  peeped  through  a  chink  of  the  door,  as  he  was  on  the
other  side,  listening  to  the  discourse  ;  or  he  may  have  reasonably  guessed
that  she  did  so,  from  the  remark  made  in  the  same  line  by  the  old  woman.

9  Your  eyes  cast  down.] — Ver.  37.  The  old  woman  seems  to  be  ad-
vising her  to  pretend  modesty,  by  looking  down  on  her  lap,  so  as  not  to
give  away  even  a  look,  until  she  has  seen  what  is  deposited  there,  and
then  only  to  give  gracious  glances  in  proportion  to  her  present.  It  was
the  custom  for  the  young  simpletons  who  lavished  their  money  on  the
Roman  courtesans,  to  place  their  presents  in  the  lap  or  bosom.


E.  VIII.]  OH, AMOT7BS.  281

each  man  must  only  be  looked  at  m  the  proportion  in  which
he  offers.  Possibly  the  sluttish  Sabine  females,11  when  Tatius
was  king,  were  unwilling  to  be  accommodating  to  more  men
than  one.  Now-a-days,  Mars  employs  the  bravery  of  our  men  in
foreign  warfare  ;12  but  Venus  holds  sway  in  the  City  of  her  own
iEneas.  Enjoy  yourselves,  my  pretty  ones  ;  she  is  chaste,
whom  nobody  has  courted  ;  or  else,  if  coyness  does  not  pre-
vent her,  she  herself  is  the  wooer.  Dispel  these  frowns  13  as
well,  which  you  are  carrying  upon  your  lofty  brow  ;  with  those
frowns  will  numerous  Mings  be  removed.  Penelope  used  to
try14  the  strength  of  the  young  men  upon  the  bow  ;  the  bow
that  tested  the  strength  of  their  sides,  was  made  of  horn.
Age  glides  stealthily  on,  and  beguiles  us  as  it  flies ;  just,  as
the  swift  river  glides  onward  with  its  flowing  waters.  Brass
grows  bright  by  use  ;  good  clothes  require  to  be  worn  ;  un-
inhabited buildings  grow  white  with  nasty  mould.  Unless  you
entertain  lovers,  beauty  soon  waxes  old,  with  no  one  to  enjoy
it ;  and  even  one  or  two  lovers  are  not  sufficiently  profitable.
From  many  of  them,  gain  is  more  sure,  and  not  so  difficult
to  be  got.  An  abundant  prey  falls  to  the  hoary  wolves  out
of  a  whole  flock.

"  See  now !  what  does  this  poet  of  yours  make  you  a  present
of  besides  his  last  verses  ?  You  will  read  many  thousands  of

11  Sabine  females. ~\ — Ver.  39.  The  Sabines  were  noted  for  their  do-
mestic virtues.  The  hag  hints,  that  the  chastity  of  the  Sabine  women
was  only  the  result  of  their  want  of  good  breeding.  '  Tatio  regnante '
seems  to  point  to  the  good  old  times,  in  the  same  way  as  our  old  songsters
have  it,  '  When  good  king  Arthur  reigned.'  Tatius  reigned  jointly  at  Rome
with  Romulus. See  the  Fourteenth  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses,  1.  804.

12  In  foreign  warfare^ — Ver.  41.  She  says,  that  they  are  now  in  a
more  civilized  state,  than  when  they  were  fighting  just  without  the  walls
of  Rome ;  now  they  are  solely  engaged  in  foreign  conquests,  and  Venus
reigns  in  the  city  of  the  descendants  of  her  son,  iEneas.

13  Dispel  these  frowns. ,] — Ver.  45.  The  damsel  has,  probably,  frowned
here  at  her  last  remark,  on  which  she  tells  her  she  must  learn,  to  dis-
pense with  these  frowns,  and  that  when  she  dispels  them,  '  excutit,'  so
many  faults  which  might  otherwise  prove  to  her  disadvantage,  will  be
well  got  rid  of.

14  Penelope  used  to  try.~\ — Ver.  47.  Penelope,  in  order  that  she  might
escape  the  importunity  of  the  suitors,  proposed  that  they  should  try  to
bend  the  bow  of  Ulysses,  promising  her  hand  to  him  who  should  prove
successful.  The  hag,  however,  says  that,  with  all  her  pretended  chastity,
Penelope  only  wanted  to  find  out  who  was  the  most  stalwart  man  among
her  lovers,  in  order  that  she  might  choose  him  for  a  husband.


232  THE AMOEES  ;  [b.  I.

them  by  this  new  lover.  The  God  himself  of  poets,  grace-
ful in  his  mantle16  adorned  with  gold,  strikes  the  harmonious
strings  of  the  gilded  lyre.  He  that  shall  make  you  presents,
let  him  be  to  you  greater  than  great  Homer  ;  believe  me,  it
is  a  noble  thing  to  give.  And,  if  there  shall  be  any  one
redeemed  at  a  price  for  his  person17,  do  not  you  despise  him  ;
the  fault  of  having  the  foot  rubbed  with  chalk18  is  a  mere
trifle.  Neither  let  the  old-fashioned  wax  busts  about  the  halls 1<J
take  you  in  ;  pack  off  with  your  forefathers,  you  needy  lover.
Nay  more,  should20  one,  because  he  is  good-looking,  ask  for  a
night  without  a  present ;  why,  let  him  first  solicit  his  own
admirer  for  something  to  present  to  you.

"  Be  less  exacting  of  presents,  while  you  are  laying  your
nets,  for  fear  lest  they  should  escape  you  :  once  caught,  tease
them  at  your  own  pleasure.  Pretended  affection,  too,  is  not
a  bad  thing  ;  let  him  fancy  he  is  loved ;  but  have  you  a  care
that  this  affection  is  not  all  for  nothing.  Often  refuse  your
favours;  sometimes  pretend  ahead-ache;  and  sometimes  there
will  be  Isis21  to  afford  a  pretext.  But  soon  admit  him  again  ;
that  he  may  acquire  no  habits  of  endurance,  and  that  his  love,

16  Graceful  in  his  mantle, ,] — Ver.  59.  The  '  palla '  was  especially  worn
by  musicians.  She  is  supposed  to  refer  to  the  statue  of  Apollo,  which  was
erected  on  the  Palatine  Hill  by  Augustus  ;  and  her  design  seems  to  be,
to  shew  that  poetry  and  riches  are  not  so  incompatible  as  the  girl  may,
from  her  lover's  poverty,  be  led  to  imagine.

17  At  a  price  for  his  person.'] — Ver.  63.  That  is  to  say,  some  rich
slave  who  has  bought  his  own  liberty.  As  many  of  the  Roman  slaves
were  skilful  at  various  trades  and  handicrafts,  and  were  probably  allowed
the  profits  of  their  work  after  certain  hours  in  the  day,  it  would  be  no
uncommon  thing  for  a  slave,  with  his  earnings,  to  purchase  his  liberty.
Some  of  the  slaves  practised  as  physicians,  while  others  followed  the  occu-
pation of  literary  men.

18  Rubbed  with  chalk.~\ — Ver.  64.  It  was  the  custom  to  mark  with
chalk,  '  gypsum,'  the  feet  of  such  slaves  as  were  newly  imported  for  sale.

19  Busts  about  the  halls.'] — Ver.  65.  Instead  of  '  quinquatria,'  which
is  evidently  a  corrupt  reading,  '  circum  atria '  has  been  adopted.  She  is
advising  the  girl  not  to  be  led  away  by  notions  of  nobility,  founded  on  the
number  of  '  cerse,'  or  waxen  busts  of  their  ancestors,  that  adorned  the
4  atria/  or  halls  of  her  admirers.  See  the  Fasti,  Book  i.  line  591,  and  the
Note  to  the  passage  ;  also  the  Epistle  of  Laodamia  to  Protesilaus,  line  152.

20  Nay,  more,  should.] — Ver.  67.  '  Quin  '  seems  to  be  a  preferable
reading  to  '  quid  ?'

21  There  will  be  Isis.] — Ver.  74.  The  Roman  women  celebrated  the  fes-
tival of  Isis  for  several  successive  days,  and  during  that  period  they  care-
fully abstained  from  the  society  of  men.


E.  TUT.]  OE, AMOrES.  283

so  often  repulsed,  may  not  begin  to  flag.  Let  your  door  be
deaf  to  him  who  entreats,  open  to  him  who  brings.  Let  the
lover  that  is  admitted,  hear  the  remarks  of  him  who  is  ex-
cluded. And,  as  though  you  were  the  first  injured,  sometimes
get  in  a  passion  with  him  when  injured  by  you.  His  cen-
sure, when  counterbalanced  by  your  censure/7  may  wear  away.
But  do  you  never  afford  a  long  duration  for  anger  ;  prolonged
anger  frequently  produces  hatred.  Moreover,  let  your  eyes
learn,  at  discretion,  to  shed  tears ;  and  let  this  cause  or  that
cause  your  cheeks  to  be  wet.  And  do  not,  if  you  deceive  any
one,  hesitate  to  be  guilty  of  perjury  ;  Venus  lends  but  a  deaf
hearing28  to  deceived  lovers.

"  Let  a  male  servant  and  a  crafty  handmaid29  be  trained  up  to
their  parts  ;  who  may  instruct  him  what  may  be  conveniently
purchased  for  you.  And  let  them  ask  but  little  for  them-
selves ;  if  they  ask  a  little  of  many,30  very  soon,  great  will  be  the
heap  from  the  gleanings.31  Let  your  sister,  and  your  mother,
and  your  nurse  as  well,  fleece  your  admirer.  A  booty  is  soon
made,  that  is  sought  by  many  hands.  When  occasions  for
asking  for  presents  shall  fail  you,  call  attention  with  a  cake32
to  your  birthday  Take  care  that  no  one  loves  you  in  security,
without  a  rival ;  love  is  not  very  lasting  if  you  remove  all
rivalry. Let  him  perceive  the  traces  of  another  person  on  the

27  By  your  censure.] — Ver.  80.  When  she  has  offended  she  is  to  pre-
tend a  counter  grievance,  so  as  to  outweigh  her  faults.

28  A  deaf  hearing.]— Yer.  86. Literally, 'deaf  Godhead.'

29  A  crafty  handmaid.'] — Ver.  87.  The  comedies  of  Plautus  and  Te-
rence show  the  part  which  the  intriguing  slaves  and  handmaids  acted  on
such  occasions.

30  A  little  of  many.] — Ver.  89.  '  Multos/  as  suggested  hy  Heinsius,
is  preferable  to  '  multi,'  which  does  not  suit  the  sense.

31  Heap  from  the  gleanings.] — Ver.  90.  '  Stipula '  here  means  '  glean-
ings.'  She  says,  that  each  of  the  servants  must  ask  for  a  little,  and  those
little  sums  put  together  will  make  a  decent  amount  collected  from  her
lovers.  No  doubt  her  meaning  is,  that  the  mistress  should  pocket  the
presents  thus  made  to  the  slaves.

32  With  a  cake.] — Ver.  94.  The  old  woman  tells  her,  when  she  has
exhausted  all  other  excuses  for  getting  a  present,  to  have  the  birth-day
cake  by  her,  and  to  pretend  that  it  is  her  birth- day  ;  in  order  that  her  lover
may  take  the  hint,  and  present  her  with  a  gift.  The  birth-day  cake,  ac-
cording to  Servius,  was  made  of  flour  and  honey  ;  and  being  set  on  table
before  the  guests,  the  person  whose  birth- day  it  was,  ate  the  first  slice,
after  which  the  others  partook  of  it,  and  wished  him  happiness  and  pros-
perity. Presents,  too,  were  generally  made  on  birth-days.


284  THE AMOKES  ;  [b.  I.

conch ;  all  your  neck,  too,  discoloured  by  the  marks  of  toy-
ing. Especially  let  him  see  the  presents,  which  another  has
sent.  If  he  gives  you  nothing,  the  Sacred  Street33  must  be
talked  about.  When  you  have  received  many  things,  but
yet  he  has  not  given  you  every  thing,  be  continually  asking
him  to  lend  you  something,  for  you  never  to  return.  Let
your  tongue  aid  you,  and  let  it  conceal  your  thoughts  ;34
caress  him,  and  prove  his  ruin.35  Beneath  the  luscious  honey
cursed  poisons  lie  concealed.  If  you  observe  these  precepts,
tried  by  me  thoughout  a  long  experience  ;  and  if  the  winds
and  the  breezes  do  not  bear  away  my  words  ;  often  will  you
bless  me  while  I  live  ;  often  will  you  pray,  when  I  am  dead,
that  in  quietude  my  bones  may  repose."

She  was  in  the  middle  of  her  speech,  when  my  shadow  be-
trayed me  ;  but  my  hands  with  difficulty  refrained  from
tearing  her  grey  scanty  locks,  and  her  eyes  bleared  with  wine,
and  her  wrinkled  cheeks.  May  the  Gods  grant  you  both  no
home, 3G  and  a  needy  old  age  ;  prolonged  winters  as  well,  and
everlasting  thirst.37


ELEGY  IX.

He  tells  Atticus  that  like  the  soldier,  the  lover  ought  to  be  on  his  guard  ;
and  that  Love  is  a  species  of  warfare.

Every  lover  is  a  soldier,  and  Cupid  has  a  camp  of  his  own ;

33  The  Sacred  Street.]— Ver.  100.  The  'via  sacra,'  or'  Sacred  Street,'
led  from  the  old  Senate  house  at  Rome  towards  the  Amphitheatre,  and  up
the  Capitoline  hill.  For  the  sale  of  all  kinds  of  luxuries,  it  seems  to  have
had  the  same  rank  in  Rome  that  Regent  Street  holds  in  London.  The
procuress  tells  her,  that  if  her  admirer  makes  no  presents,  she  must  turn
the  conversation  to  the  '  Via  Sacra ;'  of  course,  asking  him  such  questions
as,  What  is  to  be  bought  there  ?  What  is  the  price  of  such  and  such  a
thing  ?  And  then  she  is  to  say,  that  she  is  in  want  of  this  or  that,  but  un-
fortunately she  has  no  money,  &c.

34  Conceal  your  thoughts.'] — Ver.  103.  This  expression  resembles  the
famous  one  attributed  to  Machiavelli,  that  '  speech  was  made  for  the  con-
cealment of  the  thoughts.'

35  prove  his  ruin,] — Ver.  103.  'Let  your  lips  utter  kind  things,  but
let  it  be  your  intention  to  ruin  him  outright  by  your  extravagance.'

3S  Grant  thee  both  no  home'] — Ver.  113.  The  '  Lares,'  being  the  house-
hold Gods, i  nullos  Lares,'  implies  '  no  home.'

37  Everlasting  thirst.] — Ver.  114.  In  allusion  to  her  thirsty  name ;  see
the  Note  to  the  second  line.


E.  IX.]  OB, AMOURS.  285

believe  me,  Atticus,38  every  lover  is  a  soldier.  The  age  which
is  fitted  for  war,  is  suited  to  love  as  well.  For  an  old  man  to  be
a  soldier,  is  shocking  ;  amorousness  in  an  old  man  is  shock-
ing. The  years  which39  generals  require  in  the  valiant  sol-
dier, the  same  does  the  charming  fair  require  in  her  husband.
Both  soldier  and  lover  pass  sleepless  nights  ;  both  rest  upon
the  ground.  The  one  watches  at  the  door  of  his  mistress ;
but  the  other  at  that  of  his  general.40  Long  marches  are  the
duty  of  the  soldier ;  send  the  fair  far  away,  and  the  lover
will  boldly  follow  her,  without  a  limit  to  his  endurance.  Over
opposing  mountains  will  he  go,  and  rivers  swollen  with  rains  ;
the  accumulating  snows  will  he  pace.

About  to  plough  the  waves,  he  will  not  reproach  the  stormy
East  winds  ;  nor  will  he  watch  for  Constellations  favourable
for  scudding  over  the  waves.  Who,  except  either  the  soldier  or
the  lover,  will  submit  to  both  the  chill  of  the  night,  and  the
snows  mingled  with  the  heavy  showers  ?  The  one  is  sent  as  a
spy  against  the  hostile  foe ;  the  other  keeps  his  eye  on  his
rival,  as  though  upon  an  enemy.  The  one  lays  siege  to  stubborn
cities,  the  other  to  the  threshold  of  his  obdurate  mistress  :  the
one  bursts  open  gates,  and  the  other,  doors.42  Full  oft  has  it  an-
swered to  attack  the  enemy  when  buried  in  sleep ;  and  to
slaughter  an  unarmed  multitude  with  armed  hand.  Thus
did  the  fierce  troops  of  the  Thracian  Rhesus43  fall ;  and  you,
captured  steeds,  forsook  your  lord.  Full  oft  do  lovers  take
advantage  of  the  sleep  of  husbands,  and  brandish  their  arms
against  the  slumbering  foe. To  escape  the  troops  of  the  sen-

38  Atticus.'] — Ver.  2.  It  is  supposed  that  this  Atticus  was  the  same
person  to  whom  Ovid  addresses  the  Fourth  and  Seventh  Pontic  Epistle  in
the  Second  Book.  It  certainly  was  not  Pomponius  Atticus,  the  friend  of
Cicero,  who  died  when  the  Poet  was  in  his  eleventh  year.

a9  Tlie  years  tvhich.~\ — Ver.  5.  The  age  for  serving  in  the  Roman
armies,  was  from  the  seventeenth  up  to  the  forty-sixth  year.

40  Of  his  general] — Ver.  8.  He  alludes  to  the  four  night-watches  of
the  Roman  army,  which  succeeded  each  other  every  three  hours.  Each
guard,  or  watch,  consisted  of  four  men,  of  whom  one  acted  as  sentry,  while
the  others  were  in  readiness,  in  case  of  alarm.

4J  The  othert  doors.] — Ver.  20.  From  the  writings  of  Terence  and
Plautus,  as  well  as  those  of  Ovid,  we  find  that  the  youths  of  Rome  were
not  very  scrupulous  about  kicking  down  the  door  of  an  obdurate  mistress.

43  Thracian  Rhesus-]  — Ver.  23.  See  the  preceding  Epistle  of  Pene-
lope to  Ulysses,  and  the  speech  of  Ulysses  in  the  Thirteenth  Book  of  the
Metamorphoses.


286  THE AilOEES  ;  [S.  I.

tinels,  and  the  bands  of  the  patrol,  is  the  part  both  of  the
soldier,  and  of  the  lover  always  in  misery.  Mars  is  wayward,
and  Venus  is  uncertain  ;  both  the  conquered  rise  again,  and
those  fall  whom  you  would  say  could  never  possibly  be  pros-
trate.

Whoever,  then,  has  pronounced  Love  mere  slothfulness,  let
him  cease  to  love  :4i  to  the  discerning  mind  does  Love  belong.
The  mighty  Achilles  is  inflamed  by  the  captive  Brise'is.  Tro-
jans, while  you  may,  destroy  the  Argive  resources.  Hector  used
to  go  to  battle  fresh  from  the  embraces  of  Andromache  ;  and
it  was  his  wife  who  placed  his  helmet  on  his  head.  The  son  of
Atreus,  the  first  of  all  the  chiefs,  on  beholding  the  daughter
of  Priam,  is  said  to  have  been  smitten  with  the  dishevelled
locks  of  the  raving  prophetess}*  Mars,  too,  when  caught,  was
sensible  of  the  chains  wrought  at  the  forge  ;47  there  was  no
story  better  known  than  his,  in  all  the  heavens.

I  myself  was  of  slothful  habit,  and  born  for  a  lazy  inac-
tivity ;13  the  couch  and  the  shade49  had  enervated  my  mind.
Attentions  to  the  charming  fair  gave  a  fillip  to  me,  in  my  in-
dolence ;  and  Love  commanded  me  to  serve50  in  his  camp.
Hence  it  is  that  thou  seest  me  active,  and  waging  the  warfare
by  night.  Let  him  who  wishes  not  to  become  slothful,  fall
in  love.

44  Cease  to  love."]  — Ver.  32.  It  is  hard  to  say  whether  the  word
'  Desinat'  means  '  Let  him  leave  off  saying  so,'  or  '  Let  him  cease  to  love'  :
perhaps  the  latter  is  the  preferable  mode  of  rendering  it.

46  The  raving  prophetess.] — Ver.  38.  '  Msenas '  literally  means  'a
raving  female,'  from  the  Greek  word  fiaivojiai,  'to  be  mad.'  He  alludes
to  Cassandra  when  inspired  with  the  prophetic  spirit.

17  At  the  forge.~] — Ver.  39.  When  he  was  detected  by  means  of  the
iron  net,  as  related  in  the  Fourth  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses.

43  A  lazy  inactivity, .] — Ver.  41.  When  persons  wished  to  be  at  ease
in  their  leisure  moments  at  home,  they  were  in  the  habit  of  loosening  the
girdle  which  fastened  the  tunic ;  from  this  circumstance,  the  term  '  dis-
cinctus '  is  peculiarly  applied  to  a  state  of  indolence.

49  Couch  and  the  shade.] — Ver.  42.  *  Lectus  et  umbra'  means  '  lying  in
bed  and  reclining  in  the  shade.'  The  shade  of  foliage  would  have  peculiar
attractions  in  the  cloudless  climate  of  Italy,  especially  for  persons  natu-
rally inclined  to  be  idle.

50  To  serve.] — Ver.  44.  '  2Era  merere '  has  the  same  meaning  as
'  stipendum  merere,'  '  to  earn  the  pay  of  a  soldier,'  whence  it  came  to
signify,  '  to  serve  as  a  soldier.'  The  ancient  accounts  differ  materially  as
to  the  pay  which  the  Roman  soldiers  received.


E.  X.]  OB, A3IOTJBS.  287


ELEGY  X.

He  tells  his  mistress  that  she  ought  not  to  require  presents  as  a  return
for  her  love.

Such  as  she,  who,  borne  away  from  the  Eurotas,51  in  the
Phrygian  ships,  was  the  cause  of  warfare  to  her  two  hus-
bands ;  such  as  Leda  was,  whom  her  crafty  paramour,  con-
cealed in  his  white  feathers,  deceived  under  the  form  of  a
fictitious  bird  ;  such  as  Amymone52  used  to  wander  in  the
parched  fields  of  Argos,  when  the  urn  was  pressing  the  locks
on  the  top  of  her  head ;  such  were  you  ;  and  I  was  in  dread
of  both  the  eagle  and  the  bull  with  respect  to  you,  and  what-
ever form  besides  Love  has  created  of  the  mighty  Jove.

Now,  all  fears  are  gone,  and  the  disease  of  my  mind  is
cured  ;  and  now  no  longer  does  that  form  of  yours  rivet  my
eyes.  Do  you  inquire  why  I  am  changed  ?  It  is,  because  you
require  presents.  This  reason  does  not  allow  of  your  pleasing
me.  So  long  as  you  were  disinterested,  I  was  in  love  with
your  mind  together  with  your  person;  now,  in  my  estimation,
your  appearance  is  affected  by  this  blemish  on  your  disposi-
tion. Love  is  both  a  child  and  naked  ;  he  has  years  without
sordidness,  and  he  wears  no  clothes,  that  he  may  be  with-
out concealment,  Why  do  you  require  the  son  of  Venus  to
be  prostituted  at  a  price  ?  He  has  no  fold  in  his  dress,53  in
which  to  conceal  that  price.  Neither  Venus  is  suited  for
cruel  arms,  nor  yet  the  son  of  Venus  ;  it  befits  not  such  uii-
warlike  Divinities  to  serve  for  pay.  The  courtesan  stands
for  hire  to  any  one  at  a  certain  price ;  and  with  her  sub-
missive body,  she  seeks  for  wretched  pelf.  Still,  she  curses
the  tyranny  of  the avaricious procurer  ;54 and she does,

51  The  Eurotas.'] — Ver.  1.  The  Eurotas  was  the  river  which  flowed
past  the  walls  of  Sparta. He  is  alluding  to  Helen.

52  Amymone.] — Ver.  5.  She  was  one  of  the  Dana'ides,  and  was  carrying
water,  when  she  was  attacked  by  a  Satyr,  and  rescued  by  Neptune.  See
the  Epistle  of  Hero  to  Leander,  1.  131,  and  the  Note  to  the  passage.

53  Fold  in  his  dress.'] — Ver.  18.  The  '  sinus  '  of  the  '  toga,'  among  the
men,  and  of  the  '  palla/  among  the  women,  which  extended  infolds
across  the  breast,  was  used  as  a  pocket,  in  which  they  carried  money,
purses,  letters,  and  other  articles.  When  the  party  was  seated,  the  '  sinus'
would  almost  correspond  in  meaning  with  our  word  '  lap.'

54  Avaricious  procurer .] — Ver.  23.  '  Leno  '  was  a  person  who  kept  a
house  for  the  purposes  of  prostitution,  and  who  generally  robbed  his


288  THE AM0EE3  ;  [b.  I.

by  compulsion/5  what  you  are  doing  of  your  own  free
will.

Take,  as  an  example,  the  cattle,  devoid  of  reason  ;  it  were  a
shocking  thing  for  there  to  be  a  finer  feeling  in  the  brutes.
The  mare  asks  no  gift  of  the  horse,  nor  the  cow  of  the  bull ;
the  ram  does  not  woo  the  ewe,  induced  by  presents.  Woman
alone  takes  pleasure  in  spoils  torn  from  the  man ;  she  alone
lets  out  her  nights ;  alone  is  she  on  sale,  to  be  hired  at  a
price.  She  sells,  too,  joys  that  delight  them  both,  and  which
both  covet ;  and  she  makes  it  a  matter  of  pay,  at  what
price  she  herself  is  to  be  gratified.  Those  joys,  Which  are  so
equally  sweet  to  both,  why  does  the  one  sell,  and  why  the
other  buy  them  ?  Why  must  that  delight  prove  a  loss  to  me,
to  you  a  gain,  for  which  the  female  and  the  male  combine  with
kindred  impulse?  Witnesses  hired  dishonestly,56  sell  their
perjuries  ;  the  chest57  of  the  commissioned  judge58  is  dis-
gracefully open  for  the  bribe.

'Tis  a  dishonourable  thing  to  defend  the  wretched  criminals
with  a  tongue  that  is  purchased  ; 59  'tis  a  disgrace  for  a  tri-
bunal to  make  great  acquisitions.  'Tis  a  disgrace  for  a  woman
to  increase  her  patrimonial  possessions  by  the  profits  of  her
embraces,  and  to  prostitute  her  beauty  for  lucre. Thanks  are

victims  of  the  profits  of  their  unfortunate  calling.  This  was  called  '  le-
nocinium,'  and  the  trade  was  not  forbidden,  though  the  '  lenones  '  were
considered  '  infames,'  or  '  disgraced,'  and  thereby  lost  certain  political
rights.

55  By  compulsion. — Ver.  24.  Being  probably  the  slave  of  the  '  leno,'
he  would  use  force  to  make  her  comply  with  his  commands.

56  Hired  dishonestly.'] — Ver.  37.  The  evidence  of  witnesses  was  taken
by  the  Praetor,  and  was  called  '  jusjurandum  in  judicio,'  whereas  the  evi-
dence of  parties  themselves  was  termed  '  jusjurandum  in  jure.'  It  was
given  on  oath  by  such  as  the  Praetor  or  other  judge  chose  to  call,  or  as
either  party  might  propose  for  examination.

57  The  chest. ,] — Ver.  38.  The  'area'  here  means  the  strong  box,  or
chest,  in  which  the  Romans  were  accustomed  to  place  their  money;  they
were  generally  made  of,  or  bound  with,  iron  or  other  metal.

58  Commissioned  judge.] — Ver.  38.  The  '  judices  selecti '  were  the  'cen-
tumviri,'  a  body  of  one  hundred  and  five  officers,  whose  duty  it  was  to
assist  the  Praetor  in  questions  where  the  right  to  property  was  litigated.
In  the  Second  Book  of  the  Tristia,  1.  93,  we  are  informed  that  the  Poet
himself  filled  the  office  of  a  '  judex  selectus.'

59  That  is  purchased.] — Ver.  39.  Among  the  Romans,  the  'patroni'  de-
fended their  '  clientes  '  gratuitously,  and  it  would  have  been  deemed  dis-
graceful for  them  to  take  a  fee  or  present.


S.  X.]  OR, AMOURS.  289

justly  due  for  things  obtained  without  purchase ;  there  are
no  thanks  for  an  intercourse  disgracefully  bartered.  He  who
hires,60  pays  all  his  due ;  the  price  once  paid,  he  no  longer
remains  a  debtor  for  your  acquiescence.  Cease,  ye  beauties,
to  bargain  for  pay  for  your  favours.  Sordid  gains  bring  no
good  results.  It  was  not  worth  her  while  to  bargain  for  the
Sabine  bracelets,61  in  order  that  the  arms  should  crush  the
head  of  the  sacred  maiden.  The  son  pierced63  with  the
sword  those  entrails  from  which  he  had  sprung,  and  a  simple
necklace 64  was  the  cause  of  the  punishment.

But  yet  it  is  not  unbecoming  for  a  present  to  be  asked  of
the  wealthy  man  ;  he  has  something  to  give  to  her  who  does
ask  for  a  present.  Pluck  the  grapes  that  hang  from  the  loaded
vines;  let  the  fruitful  soil  of  Alcinoiis65  afford  the  apples.  Let
the  needy  man  proffer  duty,  zeal,  and  fidelity ;  what  each  one
possesses,  let  him  bestow  it  all  upon  his  mistress.  My  en-
dowments, too,  are  in  my  lines  to  sing  the  praises  of  those
fair  who  deserve  them ;  she,  whom  I  choose,  becomes  cele-
brated through  my  skill.  Vestments  will  rend,  gems  and
gold  will  spoil ;  the  fame  which  poesy  confers  is  everlasting.

Still  I  do  not  detest  giving  and  revolt  at  it,  but  at  being
asked  for  a  price.  Cease  to  demand  it,  and  I  will  give  you
that  which  I  refuse  you  while  you  ask.

60  He  who  hires.'] — Ver.  45.  The  '  conductor'  was  properly  the  person
who  hired  the  services,  or  the  property  of  another,  for  a  fixed  price.  The
word  sometimes  means  '  a  contractor,'  or  the  person  with  whom  the  bar-
gain by  the  former  party  is  made.  See  the  public  contract  mentioned  in
the  Fasti,  Book  v.  1.  293..

61  The  Sabine  bracelets."] — Ver.  49.  He  alludes  to  the  fate  of  the  Vestal
virgin  Tarpeia.  See  the  Fasti,  Book  i.  1.  261,  and  Note ;  also  the  Trans-
lation of  the  Metamorphoses,  p.  516.

63  The  son  pierced.] — Ver.  52.  Alcmseon  killed  his  mother  Eriphyle,
for  having  betrayed  his  father  Amphiaraus.  See  the  Second  Book  of  the
Fasti,  1.  43,  and  the  Third  Book  of  the  Pontic  Epistles,  Ep.  i.  1.  52,  and
the  Notes  to  the  passages.

64  A  simple  necklace.] — Ver.  52.  See  the  Epistle  of  De'i'anira  to  Her-
cules, and  the  Tenth  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses,  L  113,  with  the  Note
to  the  passage.

65  Soil  of  Alcinoiis.] — Ver.  56.  The  fertile  gardens  of  Alcinoiis,  king
of : the  Phseacians,  are  celebrated  by  Homer  in  the  Odyssey


290  THE  AMORE3  ;  [b.  I.

ELEGY  XL

He  begs  Nape  to  deliver  his  letter  to  her  mistress,  and  commences  by
praising  her  neatness  and  dexterity,  and  the  interest  she  has  hitherto
manifested  in  his  behalf.

Nape,  skilled  at  binding  the  straggling  locks60  and  arranging
them  in  order,  and  not  deserving  to  be  reckoned67  among  the
female  slaves ;  known,  too,  by  experience  to  be  successful  in
the  contrivances  of  the  stealthy  night,  and  clever  in  giving  the
signals  ;68  you  who  have  so  oft  entreated  Corinna,  when  hesi-
tating, to  come  to  me  ;  who  have  been  found  so  often  faithful
by  me  in  my  difficulties ;  take  and  carry  these  tablets,69  so
well-filled,70  this  morning  to  your  mistress  ;  and  by  your
diligence  dispel  all  impeding  delay.  Neither  veins  of  flint,
nor  hard  iron  is  in  your  breast,  nor  have  you  a  simplicity
greater  than  that  of  your  clever  class.  There  is  no  doubt
that  you,  too,  have  experienced  the  bow  of  Cupid;  in  my
behalf  defend  the  banner  of  your  service.  If  Corinna  asks
what  I  am  doing,  you  will  say  that  I  am  living  in  expectation
of  the  night.  The  wax  inscribed  with  my  persuasive  hand  is
carrying  the  rest.

While  I  am  speaking,  time  is  flying  ;  opportunely  give  her

66  The  straggling  locks.] — Ver.  1.  The  duty  of  dressing  the  hair  of  the
Roman  ladies  was  divided  among  several  slaves,  who  were  called  by  the
general  terms  of '  cosmetae,'  and  '  ornatrices.'  It  was  the  province  of  one
to  curl  the  hair  with  a  hot  iron,  called  '  calamistrum,'  which  was  hollow,
and  was  heated  in  wood  ashes  by  a  slave  who,  from  '  cinis,'  '  ashes,'  was
called  '  ciniflo.'  The  duty  of  the  l  psecas'  came  next,  whose  place  it  was
to  anoint  the  hair.  Then  came  that  of  the  '  ornatrix,'  who  parted  the  curls
with  a  comb  or  bodkin  ;  this  seems  to  have  been  the  province  of  Nape.

67  To  be  reckoned.'] — Ver.  2.  The  Nymphs  of  the  groves  were  called
vairaiai ;  and  perhaps  from  them  Nape  received  her  name,  as  it  is  evi-
dently of  Greek  origin.  One  of  the  dogs  of  Actaeon  is  called  by  the  same
name,  in  the  Metamorphoses,  Bookiii.l.  214.

68  Giving  the  signals.] — Ver.  4.  '  Notis'  may  mean  here,  either  '  hints,'
'  signs,'  '  signals,'  or  '  letters.'  In  Nizard's  French  translation  it  is  ren-
dered '  missives.'

69  Carry  these  tablets.] — Ver.  7.  On  the  wax  tablets,  see  the  Note  to
the  Pontic  Epistles,  Book  ii.  El.  9. 1.  69,  and  the  Metamorphoses,  Bookix.
1.  521,  with  the  Note.

'°  So  well  filled.]  —Ver.  7.  '  Peraratas'  literally  means  •  ploughed
over' ;  which  term  is  properly  applied  to  the  action  of  the  '  stylus,'  in
ploughing  through  the  wax  upon  the  tablets.  Suetonius  relates  that  Julius
Caesar,  when  he  was  murdered  in  the  Senate  House,  pierced  the  arm  of
the  assassin  Cassius  with  his  '  stylus.'


E.  XI.]  OB, AMOTJHS.  291

my  tablets,  when  she  is  at  leisure  ;  but  still,  make  her  read
them  at  once.  I  bid  you  watch  her  eyes  and  her  forehead  as
she  reads  ;  from  the  silent  features  we  may  know  the  future.
And  be  there  no  delay ;  when  she  has  read  them  through,
request  her  to  write  a  long  answer;72  I  hate  it,  when  the
bleached  wax  is  empty,  with  a  margin  on  every  side.  Let
her  write  the  lines  close  as  they  run,  and  let  the  letters  traced
in  the  extreme  margin  long  detain  my  eyes.

But  what  need  is  there  for  wearying  her  fingers  with  hold-
ing the  pen  ?75  Let  the  whole  of  her  letter  contain  this  one
word,  "  Come."  Then,  I  should  not  delay  to  crown  my  victo-
rious tablets  with  laurel,  nor  to  place  them  in  the  midst  of  the
temple  of  Venus.  Beneath  them  I  would  inscribe  "  Naso  con-
secrates these  faithful  servants  of  his  to  Venus  ;  but  lately,
you  were  pieces  of  worthless  maple."76


ELEGY  XII.

He  curses  the  tablets  which  he  has  sent,  because  his  mistress  has  writ-
ten an  answer  on  them,  in  which  she  refuses  to  grant  his  request.

Lameistt  my  misfortune ;  my  tablets  have  returned  to  me
with  sad  intelligence.  Her  unlucky  letter  announces  that
she  cannot  be  seen  to-day.  There  is  something  in  omens ;
just  now,  when  she  was  preparing  to  go,  Nape  stopped  short,
having  struck  her  foot78  against  the  threshold.  When  sent  out
of  doors  another  time,  remember  to  pass  the  threshold  more
carefully,  and  like  a  sober  woman  lift  your  foot  high  enough.

72  A  long  answer.'] — Ver.  19.  She  is  to  write  at  once,  on  having  read
his  letter  through.  This  she  could  do  the  more  readily,  as  she  could  use
the  same  tablets,  smoothing  the  wax  with  the  broad  end  of  the  '  graphium/
or  '  stylus.'

75  Holding  the  pen.]  — Ver.  23.  '  Graphium'  was  the  Greek  name  for
the  '  stylus,'  or  pen  used  for  writing  on  the  wax  tablets.  It  was  generally
of  iron  or  copper,  but  sometimes  of  gold.  The  case  in  which  it  was  kept
was  called  *  graphiarium,'  or  '  graphiaria  theca.'

76  Of  worthless  maple.]  — Ver.  28.  He  calls  the  wood  of  the  tablets
'vile,'  in  comparison  with  their  great  services  to  him  :  for,  according
to  Pliny,  Book  xvi.  c.  15,  maple  was  the  most  valued  wood  for  tablets,
next  to  '  citrus,'  cedar,  or  citron  wood.  It  was  also  more  useful  than  citron,
because  it  could  be  cut  into  leaves,  or  laminae,  of  a  larger  size  than  citron
would  admit  of.

78  Struck  her  foot.] — Ver.  4.  This  is  mentioned  as  a  bad  omen  by
Laodamia,  in  her  Epistle  to  Protesilaiis,  1.  88.  So  in  the  Tenth  Book  of
the  Metamorphoses,  in  the  shocking  story  of  Cinyras  and  Myrrha  ;  '  Three
times  was  she  recalled  by  the  presage  of  her  foot  stumbling.'

u"2


292  THE AMOEES  ;  [b.  I;

Away  with  you,  obdurate  tablets,  fatal  bits  of  board  ;  and  you
wax,  as  well,  crammed  with  the  lines  of  denial.  I  doubt  the
Corsican  bee80  has  sent  you  collected  from  the  blossom  of  the
tall  hemlock,  beneath  its  abominable  honey.

Besides,  you  were  red,  as  though  you  had  been  thoroughly
dyed  in  vermilion  ;sl  such  a  colour  is  exactly  that  of  blood.
Useless  bits  of  board,  thrown  out  in  the  street,  there  may  you
lie ;  and  may  the  weight  of  the  wheel  crush  you,  as  it  passes
along.  I  could  even  prove  that  he  who  formed  you  to  shape
from  the  tree,  had  not  the  hands  of  innocence.  That  tree
surely  has  afforded  a  gibbet  for  some  wretched  neck,  and
has  supplied  the  dreadful  crosses82  for  the  executioner.  It
has  given  a  disgusting  shelter  to  the  screeching  owls ;  in  its
branches  it  has  borne  the  eggs  of  the  vulture  and  of  the
screech-owl.83  In  my  madness,  have  I  entrusted  my  court-
ship to  these,  and  have  I  given  soft  words  to  be  thus  carried  to
my  mistress  ?

These  tablets  would  more  becomingly  hold  the  prosy  sum-
mons,84 which  some  judge85  pronounces,  with  his  sour  face.

80  The  Corsican  lee.] — Ver.  10.  From  Pliny,  Bookxvi.,  we  learn  that
the  honey  of  Corsica  was  of  a  bitter  taste,  in  consequence  of  the  box-
trees  and  yews,  with  which  the  isle  abounded,  and  which  latter,  according
to  him,  were  poisonous.  From  Diodorus  Siculus  we  learn  that  there
were  many  turpentine  trees  on  the  island;  this  would  not  tend  to  improve
the  flavour  of  the  honey.

81  Dyed  in  vermilion.'] — Ver.  11.  'Minium,'  'red  lead,'  or  'ver-
milion,' was  discovered  by  Callias,  an  Athenian,  according  to  Theophrastus.
It  was  sometimes  mixed  with  the  wax  used  for  tablets :  probably  not
the  best,  but  that  which  was  naturally  of  a  bad  colour.  This  censure  of
the  tablets  is  a  good  illustration  of  the  grapes  being  sour.  In  the  last
Elegy,  before  he  has  received  his  repulse,  he  declares  the  wax  to  be  '  splen-
dida,'  '  of  brilliant  whiteness  through  bleaching ;'  now,  on  the  other  hand,
he  finds,  most  ominously,  that  it  is  as  red  as  blood.

82  Dreadful  crosses.]— Ver.  18.  See  the  First  Book  of  the  Pontic
Epistles,  Ep.  vi.  1.  38,  and  the  Note  to  the  passage.

83  The  screech-owl.] — Ver.  20.  '  Strix '  here  means  a  screech-owl ;  and
not  the  fabulous  bird  referred  to  under  that  name,  in  the  Sixth  Book  of
the  Fasti,  and  the  thirteenth  line  of  the  Eighth  Elegy  of  this  Book.

8i  The  prosy  summons.]  —  Ver.  23.  '  Vadimonium  legere '  probably
means,  '  to  call  a  man  on  his  bail '  or  '  recognizances.'  When  the  Praetor
had  granted  an  action,  the  plaintiff  required  the  defendant  to  give  security
for  his  appearance  on  the  day  named.  The  defendant,  on  finding  a  surety,
was  said  '  vades  dare,'  or  '  vadimonium  facere  ';  and  the  '  vas,'  or  surety,
was  said  '  spqndere.'  The  plaintiff,  if  satisfied  with  the  surety,  was  said
4  vadari  reum,'  '  to  let  the  defendant  go  on  his  sureties.'

85  Some  judge.] — Ver.  24. Some  Commentators  think  that  the  word


E.  XII.]  OB, AMOtJES.  293

Much  better  would  they  lie  amid  diaries  and  day-books,86  over
which  the  avaricious  huncks  might  lament  his  squandered
substance.  And  have  I  then  in  reality  as  well  as  in  name
found  you  full  of  duplicity  ?87  The  very  number  of  you  was
not  one  of  good  omen.  What,  in  my  anger,  ought  I  to  pray,
but  that  an  old  age  of  rottenness  may  consume  you,  and
that  your  wax  may  be  white  with  nasty  mould  ?


ELEGY  XIII.

-He  entreats  the  morning  not  to  hasten  on  with  its  usual  speed.

Now  over  the  Ocean  does  she  come  from  her  aged  husband
Tithonus,  who,  with  her  yellow  locks,  brings  on  the  day  with
her  frosty  chariot.  Whither,  Aurora,  art  thou  hastening  ?  Stay;
and  then  may  the  yearly  bird,  with  its  wonted  death,  honour
the  shades89  of  thy  Memnon,  its  parent.  Now  do  I  delight  to
recline  in  the  soft  arms  of  my  mistress  ;  now,  if  ever,  is  she
deliciously  united  to  my  side. Now,  too,  slumbers  are  sound,

'  cognitor '  here  means,  the  attorney,  or  procurator  of  the  plaintiff,  who
might,  in  his  ahsence,  carry  on  the  cause  for  him.  In  that  case  they  would
translate  '  duro,'  '  shameless,'  or  '  impudent.'  But  another  meaning  of  the
word  '  cognitor '  is '  a  judge,'  or  '  commissioner,'  and  such  seems  to  be  the
meaning  here,  in  which  case  '  durus  '  will  mean  '  severe,'  or  '  sour ;'  '  as,'
according  to  one  Commentator,  '  judges  are  wont  to  be.'

86  And  day-books."] — Ver.  25.  Seneca,  at  the  end  of  his  19th  Epistle,
calls  a  Calendar  by  the  name  of  '  Ephemeris,'  while  a  day-book  is  meant
by  the  term  as  used  by  Ausonius.  The  word  here  seems  to  mean  a
1  diary ;'  while  '■  tabula'  is  perhaps  a  ■  day-book,'  in  which  current  expenses
are  set  down,  and  over  which  the  miser  weeps,  as  the  record  of  past  ex-
travagance.

37  Full  of  duplicity.']— Ver.  27.  The  word  '  duplex'  means  either
'  double,'  or  '  deceitful,'  according  to  the  context.  He  plays  on  this
twofold  meaning,  and  says  that  double  though  they  might  be,  still  truly
deceitful  they  were ;  and  that  the  two  leaves  of  the  tablets  were  of  no
good  omen  to  him. Two-leaved  tablets  were  technically  called  '  diptycha,.'

89  Honour  the  shades.]— Ver.  4.  '  Parento'  means  '  to  celebrate  the
funeral  obsequies  of  one's  parents.'  Both  the  Romans  and  the  Greeks
were  accustomed  to  visit  the  tombs  of  their  relatives  at  certain  times,
and  to  offer  sacrifices,  called  '  inferise,'  or  '  parentalia.'  The  souls  of  the
departed  were  regarded  by  the  Romans  as  Gods,  and  the  oblations  to  them
consisted  of  milk,  wine,  victims,  or  wreaths  of  flowers.  The  Poet  here
refers  to  the  birds  which  arose  from  the  funeral  pile  of  Memnon,  and  were
said  to  revisit  it  annually.  See  the  Thirteenth  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses.


294  THE AMOEES  ;  [b.  I.

and  now  the  moisture  is  cooling  ;90  the  birds,  too,  are  sweetly
warbling  with  their  little  throats.  Whither  art  thou  hastening,
hated  by  the  men,  detested  by  the  fair  ?  Check  thy  dewy
reins  with  thy  rosy  hand.

Before  thy  rising,  the  sailor  better  observes  his  Constel-
lations ;  and  he  wanders  not  in  ignorance,  in  the  midst  of
the  waves.  On  thy  approach,  the  wayfarer  arises,  weary
though  he  be ;  the  soldier  lays  upon  his  arms  the  hands  used
to  bear  them.  Thou  art  the  first  to  look  upon  the  tillers  of
the  fields  laden  with  the  two-pronged  fork ;  thou  art  the  first
to  summon  the  lagging  oxen  to  the  crooked  yoke.  'Tis  thou
who  dost  deprive  boys  of  their  sleep,  and  dost  hand  them
over  to  their  masters;92  that  their  tender  hands  may  suffer
the  cruel  stripes.93  ^Tis  thou,  too,  who  dost  send  the  man
before  the  vestibule  of  the  attorney, 94  when  about  to  become
bail  ;95  that  he  may  submit  to  the  great  risks  of  a  single  word.

90  Moisture  is  cooling.'] — Ver.  7.  '  Humor*  seems  to  mean  the  dew,
or  the  dampness  of  the  night,  which  would  tend,  in  a  hot  climate,  to  mo-
dify the  sultriness  of  the  atmosphere.  One  Commentator  thinks  that  the
word  means  the  humours  of  the  brain.

92  To  their  masters.'] — Ver.  17.  The  schools  at  Rome  were  mostly
kept  by  manumitted  slaves ;  and  we  learn  from  the  Fasti,  Book  iii.
1.  829,  that  people  were  not  very  particular  about  paying  them.

93  The  cruel  stripes.] — Ver.  18.  The  punishment  here  mentioned  was
generally  inflicted  on  the  hands  of  the  Roman  school-boys,  with  a  '  ferula,'
or  stalk  of  giant-fennel,  as  we  learn  from  Juvenal,  Satire  1.

94  The  attorney.] — Ver.  19.  The  business  of  the '  jurisconsultus  '  was
to  expound  and  give  opinions  on  the  law,  much  like  the  chamber  counsel
of  the  present  day.  They  were  also  known  by  the  name  of  '  juris  periti,'
or '  consulti'  only.  Cicero  gives  this  definition  of  the  duty  of  a  '  consultus/
'  He  is  a  person  who  has  such  a  knowledge  of  the  laws  and  customs  which
prevail  in  a  state,  as  to  be  able  to  advise,  and  secure  a  person  in  his  deal-
ings.' They  advised  their  clients  gratuitously,  either  in  public  places,  or
at  their  own  houses.  They  also  drew  up  wills  and  contracts,  as  in  the
present  instance.

95  To  become  bail] — Ver.  19.  This  passage  has  given  much  trouble  to
the  Commentators,  but  it  has  been  well  explained  by  Burmann,  whose
ideas  on  the  subject  are  here  adopted.  The  word  '  sponsum '  has  been
generally  looked  upon  here  as  a  noun  substantive,  whereas  it  is  the  active
supine  of  the  verb  '  spondeo,'  '  to  become  bail '  or  '  security.'  The  meaning
then  is,  that  some  rise  early,  that  they  may  go  and  become  bail  for  a  friend,
and  thereby  incur  risk  and  inconvenience,  through  uttering  a  single  word,
'  spondeo,'  '  I  become  security,'  which  was  the  formula  used.  The  obli-
gation was  contracted  orally,  and  for  the  purpose  of  evidencing  it,  witnesses
were  necessary  ;  for  this  reason  the  undertaking  was  given,  as  in  the  pre-
sent instance,  in  the  presence  of  a  '  jurisconsultus.,


E.  XIII.]  OE, AMOTJES.  295

Thou  art  no  source  of  pleasure  to  the  pleader,98  nor  yet  to
the  counsel ;  for  fresh  combats  each  is  forced  to  rise.  Thou,
when  the  labours  of  the  females  might  have  had  a  pause,  dost
recal  the  hand  of  the  worker  in  wool  to  its  task.

All  this  I  could  endure  ;  but  who  could  allow  the  fair  to
arise  thus  early,  except  the  man  who  has  no  mistress  of  his
own  1  How  often  have  I  wished  that  night  would  not  make
way  for  thee ;  and  that  the  stars  when  put  to  flight  would
not  fly  from  thy  countenance.  Many  a  time  have  I  wished  that
either  the  wind  would  break  thy  chariot  to  pieces,  or  that  thy
steed  would  fall,  overtaken  by  some  dense  cloud.  Remorse-
less one,  whither  dost  thou  hasten  ?  Inasmuch  as  thy  son  was
black,  such  was  the  colour  of  his  mother's  heart.  What  if"
she  had  not  once  burned  with  passion  for  Cephalus  ?  Or  does
she  fancy  that  her  escapade  was  not  known  ?  I  only  wish  it
was  allowed  Tithonus  to  tell  of  thee ;  there  would  not  be  a
more  coarse  tale  in  all  the  heavens.  While  thou  art  avoiding
him,  because  he  is  chilled  by  length  of  years,  thou  dost  rise
early  in  the  morning  from  the  bed  of  the  old  man  to  thy
odious  chariot.  But  if  thou  wast  only  holding  some  Cephalus
embraced  in  thy  arms  ;  then  wouldst  thou  be  crying  out,
"  Run  slowly  on,  ye  horses  of  the  night.' '

Why  should  I  be  punished  in  my  affections,  if  thy  husband
does  decay  through  length  of  years  ?  Wast  thou  married
to  the  old  fellow  by  my  contrivance?  See  how  many  hours
of  sleep  the  Moon  gave l  to  the  youth  beloved  by  her ;  and
yet  her  beauty  is  not  inferior  to  thine.  The  parent  of  the
Gods  himself,  that  he  might  not  see  thee  so  often,  joined  two
nights  together2  for  the  attainment  of  his  desires.

I  had  finished  my  reproaches;  you  might  be  sure  she  heard
them  ;  for  she  blushed.  However,  no  later  than  usual  did
the  day  arise.

98  To  the  pleader.] — Ver.  21.  '  Causidicus'  was  the  person  who  pleaded
the  cause  of  his  client  in  court,  before  the  Praetor  or  other  judges.

99  What  if.] — Ver.  33.  Heinsius  and  other  Commentators  think  that
this  line  and  the  next  are  spurious.  The  story  of  Cephalus  and  Procris
is  related  at  the  close  of  the  Seventh  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses.

1  The  Moon  gave.] — Ver.  43.  Ovid  says  that  Diana  sent  the  sleep  upon
Endymion,  whereas  it  was  Jupiter  who  did  so,  as  a  punishment  for  his  pas-
sion for  Juno  ;  he  alludes  to  the  youthfulness  of  the  favorite  of  Diana,  anti-
thetically to  the  old  age  of  Tithonus,  the  husband  of  Aurora.

2  Two  nights  together.] — Ver.  46.  When  he  slept  with  Alcmena,  under
the  form  of  her  husband  Amphion.


296  THE AMORES  ;  [B.  T.


ELEGY  XIV.

His  mistress  having  been  in  the  habit  of  dyeing  her  hair  with  noxious
compositions,  she  has  nearly  lost  it,  becoming  almost  bald.  He  re-
minds her  of  his  former  advice,  and  entreats  her  to  abstain  from  the
practice,  on  which  there  may  be  a  chance  of  her  recovering  it.

I  always  used  to  say  ;  "  Do  leave  off  doctoring  your  hair."3
And  now  you  have  no  hair  left,  that  you  can  be  dyeing.  But,
if  you  had  let  it  alone,  what  was  more  plenteous  than  it  ?  It
used  to  reach  down  your  sides,  so  far  as  ever4  they  extend.
And  besides  :  Was  it  not  so  fine,  that  you  were  afraid  to  dress5
it ;  just  like  the  veils 6  which  the  swarthy  Seres  use  ?  Or  like
the  thread  which  the  spider  draws  out  with  her  slender  legs,
when  she  fastens  her  light  work  beneath  the  neglected  beam  1
And  yet  its  colour  was  not  black,  nor  yet  was  it  golden,  but
though  it  was  neither,  it  was  a  mixture  of  them  both.  A
colour,  such  as  the  tall  cedar  has  in  the  moist  vallies  of
craggy  Ida,  when  its  bark  is  stript  off.

Besides,  it  was  quite  tractable,  and  falling  into  a  thousand
ringlets ;  and  it  was  the  cause  of  no  trouble  to  you.  Neither
the  bodkin,8  nor  the  tooth  of  the  comb  ever  tore  it ;  your  tire-

3  Doctoring  your  hair.} — Ver.  1.  Among  the  ancient  Greeks,black  hair
was  the  most  frequent,  but  that  of  a  blonde  colour  was  most  valued.  It  was
not  uncommon  with  them  to  dye  it  when  turning  grey,  so  as  to  make  it
a  black  or  blonde  colour,  according  to  the  requirement  of  the  case.  Blonde
hair  was  much  esteemed  by  the  Romans,  and  the  ladies  were  in  the  habit
of  washing  their  hair  with  a  composition  to  make  it  of  this  colour.  This
was  called  '  spuma  caustica,'  or  '  caustic  soap,'  which  was  first  used  by
the  Gauls  and  Germans ;  from  its  name,  it  was  probably  the  substance
which  had  been  used  inthe  present  instance.

4  So  far  as  ever.] — Ver.  4. By  this  he  means  as  low  as  her  ancles.

5  Afraid  to  dress.]  — Ver.  5.  He  means  to  say,  that  it  was  so  fine  that
she  did  not  dare  to  curl  it,  for  fear  of  injuring  it.

6  Just  like  the  veils.]  — Ver.  6.  Burmann  thinks  that  'fila,'  'threads,'
is  better  here  than  '  vela,'  and  that  it  is  the  correct  reading.  The  swarthy
Seres  here  mentioned,  were  perhaps  the  Chinese,  who  probably  began  to
import  their  silks  into  Rome  about  this  period.  The  mode  of  producing
silk  does  not  seem  to  have  been  known  to  Virgil,  who  speaks,  in  the  Second
Book  of  the  Georgics,  of  the  Seres  combing  it  off  the  leaves  of  trees.
Pliny  also,  in  his  Sixth  Book,  gives  the  same  account.  Ovid,  however,
seems  to  refer  to  silkworms  under  the  name  of  '  agrestes  tineas,'  in  the
Fifteenth  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses,  1.  372.

8  Neither  the  bodkin.}  — Ver.  15.  This  was  the  '  discerniculura,'  or
*  bodkin,'  which  was  used  in  parting  the  hair.


E.  XIV.]  OR, AMOTTBS.  297

woman  always  had  a  whole  skin.  Many  a  time  was  it  dressed
before  my  eyes ;  and  yet,  never  did  the  bodkin 10  seized
make  wounds  in  her  arms.  Many  a  time  too,  in  the  morning,
her  locks  not  yet  arranged,  was  she  lying  on  the  purple
couch,  with  her  face  half  upturned.  Then  even,  unadorned,
was  she  beauteous ;  as  when  the  Thracian  Bacchanal,  in  her
weariness,  throws  herself  carelessly  upon  the  green  grass.
Still,  fine  as  it  was,  and  just  like  down,  what  evils,  alas !  did
her  tortured  hair  endure  !  How  patiently  did  it  submit  itself
to  the  iron  and  the  fire  ; u  that  the  curls  might  become  crisp
with  their  twisting  circlets.  "  'Tis  a  shame,"  I  used  to  cry,
"  'tis  a  shame,  to  be  burning  that  hair ;  naturally  it  is  be-
coming ;  do,  cruel  one,  be  merciful  to  your  own  head.
Away  with  all  violence  from  it ;  it  is  not  hair  that  deserves  to
be  scorched ;  the  very  locks  instruct13  the  bodkins  when
applied."

Those  beauteous  locks  are  gone ;  which  Apollo  might  have
longed  for,  and  which  Bacchus  might  have  wished  to  be  on  his
own  head.  With  them  I  might  compare  those,  which  naked
Dione  is  painted13  as  once  having  held  up  with  her  dripping
hand.  Why  are  you  complaining  that  hair  so  badly  treated
is  gone  ?  Why,  silly  girl,  do  you  lay  down  the  mirror14  with
disconsolate  hand  ?  You  are  not  seen  to  advantage  by
yourself  with  eyes  accustomed  to  your  former  self.  For  you
to  please,  you  ought  to  be  forgetful  of  jour  former  self.

10  Did  the  bodkin.] — Ver.  18.  The  '  acus  '  here  mentioned,  was  proba-
bly the  '  discerniculum,'  and  not  the  '  crinale,'  or  hair-pin  that  was  worn
in  the  hair  ;  as  the  latter  was  worn  when  the  hair  was  bound  up  at  the
back  of  the  head ;  whereas,  judging  from  the  length  of  the  hair  of  his
mistress,  she  most  probably  wore  it  in  ringlets.  He  says  that  he
never  saw  her  snatch  up  the  bodkin  and  stick  it  in  the  arm  of  the
'  ornatrix.'

11  Iron  and  the  fire.']  — Ver.  25.  He  alludes  to  the  unnecessary  ap-
plication of  the  curling-iron  to  hair  which  naturally  curled  so  well.

12  The  very  locks  instruct .~\ — Ver.  30.  Because  they  naturally  assume
as  advantageous  an  appearance  as  the  bodkin  coidd  possibly  give  them,
when  arranged  with  the  utmost  skill.

13  Dione  is  painted.]  —  Ver.  34.  Pliny,  book  xxxv.  c.  4,  mentions
a  painting,  by  Apelles,  in  which  Venus  was  represented  as  rising  from
the  sea.  It  was  placed,  by  Augustus,  in  the  temple  of  Julius  Caesar  ;  and
the  lower  part  having  become  decayed,  no  one  could  be  found  of  sufficient
ability  to  repair  it.

14  Lay  down  the  mirror.] — Ver.  16.  The  mirror  was  usually  held  by
the  '  ornatrix,'  while  her  mistress  arranged  her  hair.


298  THE AMOEES  ;  [B.  T.

No  enchanted  herbs  of  a  rival15  have  done  you  this  injury;  no
treacherous  hag  has  been  washing  you  with  Heemonian  water.
The  effects,  too,  of  no  disease  have  injured  you  ;  (far  away  be
all  bad  omens  ;16)  nor  has  an  envious  tongue  thinned  your
abundant  locks ;  'twas  your  own  self  who  gave  the  prepared
poison  to  your  head.  Now  Germany  will  be  sending17  for  you
her  captured  locks;  by  the  favour  of  a  conquered  race  you  will
be  adorned.  Ah!  how  many  a  time  will  you  have  to  blush,  as
any  one  admires  your  hair ;  and  then  you  will  say,  "  Now  I  am
receiving  praise  for  a  bought  commodity !  In  place  of  myself,
he  is  now  bepraising  some  Sygambrian  girl18  unknown  to  me;
still,  I  remember  the  time  when  that  glory  was  my  own."

Wretch  that  I  am !  with  difficulty  does  she  restrain  her
tears ;  and  she  covers  her  face  with  her  hand,  having  her
delicate  cheeks  suffused  with  blushes.  She  is  venturing  to
look  at  her  former  locks,  placed  in  her  bosom ;  a  treasure,
alas  !  not  fitted  for  that  spot.19

Calm  your  feelings  with  your  features  ;  the  loss  may  still
be  repaired.  Before  long,  you  will  become  beauteous  with
your  natural  hair.

ELEGY  XV.

He  tells  the  envious  that  the  fame  of  Poets  is  immortal,  and  that  theirs
is  not  a  life  devoted  to  idleness.

Why,  gnawing  Envy,  dost  thou  blame  me  for  years  of  sloth-
fulness  ;  and  why  dost  thou  call  poesy  the  employment  of  an
idle  mind  1  Thou  say  est  that  I  do  not,  after  the  manner  of  my
ancestors,  while  vigorous  years  allow  me,  seek  the  prizes  of

15  Herbs  of  a  rival.']  — Ver.  39.  No  person  would  be  more  likely
than  the  '  pellex,'  or  concubine,  to  resort  to  charms  and  drugs,  for  the
purpose  of  destroying  the  good  looks  of  the  married  woman  whose  hus-
band she  wishes  to  retain.

16  All  bad  omens.']  — Ver.  41.  So  superstitious  were  the  Romans,  that
the  very  mention  of  death,  or  disease,  was  deemed  ominous  of  ill.

17  Germany  will  be  sending.] — Ver.  45.  Germany  having  been  lately
conquered  by  the  arms  of  Augustus,  he  says  that  she  must  wear  false  hair,
taken  from  the  German  captives.  It  was  the  custom  to  cut  short  the
locks  of  the  captives,  and  the  German  women  were  famed  for  the  beauty
of  their  hair.

18  Sygambrian  girl.] — Ver.  49.  The  Sygambri  were  a  people  of  Ger-
many, living  on  the  banks  of  the  rivers  Lippe  and  Weser.

19  For  that  spot.] — Ver.  53.  She  carries  a  lock  of  the  hair,  which  had
fallen  off,  in  her  bosom.


E.  XT.]  OB, AMOTJES.  299

warfare  covered  with  dust ;  that  I  do  not  make  myself  ac-
quainted with  the  prosy  law,  and  that  I  have  not  let  my
tongue  for  hire21  in  the  disagreable  courts  of  justice.

The  pursuits  of  which  thou  art  speaking,  are  perishable ;
by  me,  everlasting  fame  is  sought ;  that  to  all  time  I  may  be
celebrated  throughout  the  whole  world.  The  Mseonian  bard22
will  live,  so  long  as  Tenedos  and  Ida23  shall  stand ;  so  long
as  Simois  shall  roll  down  to  the  sea  his  rapid  waves.  The
Ascraean,  too,24  will  live,  so  long  as  the  grape  shall  swell
with  its  juices  ;25  so  long  as  the  corn  shall  fall,  reaped  by  the
curv  ng  sickle.  The  son  of  Battus26  will  to  all  time  be  sung
throughout  the  whole  world  ;  although  he  is  not  powerful  in
genius,  m  his  skill  he  shows  his  might.  No  mischance  will
ever  come  to  the  tragic  buskin27  of  Sophocles  ;  with  the  Sun
and  Moon  Aratus 28  will  ever  exist. So  long  as  the  deceitful

S1  My  tongue  for  hire.'} — Ver.  6.  Although  the  '  patronus  pleaded  the
cause  of  the  '  cliens,'  without  reward,  still,  by  the  use  of  the  word  '  pros-
tituisse,'  Ovid  implies  that  the  services  of  the  advocate  were  often  sold
at  a  price.  It  must  be  remembered,  that  Ovid  had  been  educated  for  the
Roman  bar,  which  he  had  left  in  disgust.

22  Maonian  bard."] — Ver.  9.  Strabo  says,  that  Homer  was  a  native
of  Smyrna,  which  was  a  city  of  Maeonia,  a  province  of  Phrygia.  But
Plutarch  says,  that  he  was  called  '  Maeonius,'  from  Maeon,  a  king  of
Lydia,  who  adopted  him  as  his  son.

23  Tenedos  and  Ida.] — Ver.  10.  Tenedos,  Ida,  and  Simois,  were  the
scenes  of  some  portions  of  the  Homeric  narrative.  The  first  was  near
Troy,  in  sight  of  it,  as  Virgil  says — •  est  in  conspectu  Tenedos.'

24  The  Ascrcean,  too.] — Ver.  11.  Hesiod  of  Ascraea,  in  Bceotia,  wrote
chiefly  upon  agricultural  subjects.  See  the  Pontic  Epistles,  Book  iv.  ep.
xiv.  1.  38.

25  With  its  juices.] — Ver.  11.  The'mustum'  was  the  pure  juice  of
the  grape  before  it  was  boiled  down  and  became  '  sapa,'  or  '  defrutum.'
See  the  Fasti,  Book  iv.  1.  779,  and  the  Note  to  the  passage.

25  The  son  of  Battus.] — Ver.  13.  As  to  the  poet  CalUmachus,  the  son
of  Battus,  see  the  Tristia,  Book  ii.  1.  367,  and  the  Ibis,  1.  55.

27  To  the  tragic  buskin.]  —Ver.  15.  On  the  '  cothurnus,'  or  '  buskin,'  see
the  Tristia,  Book  ii.  1.  393,  and  the  Note  to  the  passage.  Sophocles  was  one
of  the  most  famous  of  the  Athenian  Tragedians.  He  is  supposed  to  have
composed  more  than  one  hundred  and  twenty  tragedies,  of  which  only
seven  are  remaining.

28  Aratus.] — Ver.  16.  Aratus  was  a  Greek  poet,  a  native  of  Cilicia,
in  Asia  Minor.  He  wrote  some  astronomical  poems,  of  which  one,  called
'  Phenomena,'  still  exists.  His  style  is  condemned  by  Quintilian,  although
it  is  here  praised  by  Ovid.  His  '  Phaenomena'  was  translated  into  Latin  by
Cicero,  Germanicus  Caesar,  and  Sextus  Avienus.


300  THE AMOEES  ;  [b.  I.

slave,29  the  harsh  father,  the  roguish  procuress,  and  the  co-
zening courtesan  shall  endure,  Menander  will  exist.  Ennius,30
without  any  art,  and  Accius,31  with  his  spirited  language,  have
a  name  that  will  perish  with  no  lapse  of  time.

What  age  is  to  be  forgetful  of  Varro,32  and  the  first  ship
that  sailed,  and  of  the  golden  fleece  sought  by  the  chief,  the
son  of  iEson  ?  Then  will  the  verses  perish  of  the  sublime  Lu-
cretius,33 when  the  same  day  shall  give  the  world  to  destruction.
Tityrus,34  and  the  harvests,  and  the  arms  of  iEneas,  will  be
read  of,  so  long  as  thou,  Rome,35  shalt  be  the  ruler  of  the  con-
quered earth.  So  long  as  the  flames  and  the  bow  shall  be  the
arms  of  Cupid,  thy  numbers,  polished  Tibullus,36  will  be  repeated.
Gallus37  will  be  known  by  the  West,  and  Gallus  known  by  the

29  The  deceitful  slave.'] — Ver.  17.  Although  the  plays  of  Menander
have  perished,  we  can  judge  from  Terence  and  Plautus,  how  well  he  de-
picted the  craftiness  of  the  slave,  the  severity  of  the  father,  the  dis-
honesty of  the  procuress,  and  the  wheedling  ways  of  the  courtesan.  Four
of  the  plays  of  Terence  are  translations  from  Menander.  See  the  Tristia,
Book  ii.  1.  369,  and  the  Note  to  the  passage.

z0  Ennius.~\ — Ver.  19.  Quintus  Ennius  was  a  Latin  poet,  a  Calahrian
by  birth.  He  flourished  about  408  years  before  Christ.  The  few  frag-
ments of  his  works  that  remain,  show  the  ruggedness  and  uncouth  nature
of  his  style. He  wrote  the  Annals  of  Italy  in  heroic  verse.

31  Accius.]— Ver.  19.  See  the  Second  Book  of  the  Tristia,  1.  359,  and
the  Note  to  the  passage.

33  Of  Varro.] — Ver.  21.  He  refers  to  Publius  Terentius  Varro  Atta-
cinus,  who  wrote  on  the  Argonautie  expedition.  See  the  Tristia,  Book  ii.
1.  439,  and  the  Pontic  Epistles,  Book  iv.  Ep.  xvi.  1.  21.

33  Lucretius.] — Ver.  23.  Titus  Lucretius  Carus  is  referred  to,  whose
noble  poem  on  the  Epicurean  philosophy  is  still  in  existence  {translated  in
Bohn's  Classical  Library).  See  the  Tristia,  Book  ii.  1.  261  and  426,  and
the  Notes  to  those  passages.

34  Tityrus.]—  Ver.  25.  Under  this  name  he  alludes  to  Virgil,  who
introduces  himself  under  the  name  of  Tityrus,  in  his  first  Eclogue,
See  the  Pontic  Epistles,  Book  iv.  Ep.  xvi.  1.  33.

35  So  long  as  thou,  Rome.] — Ver.  26.  His  prophecy  has  been  surpassed
by  the  event.  Rome  is  no  longer  the  '  caput  urbis/  but  the  works  of  Virgil
are  still  read  by  all  civilized  nations.

36  Polished  Tibullus.]— Ver.  28.  Albius  Tibullus  was  a  Roman  poet
of  Equestrian  rank,  famous  for  the  beauty  of  his  compositions.  He  was
born  in  the  same  year  as  Ovid,  but  died  at  an  early  age.  Ovid  mentions
him  in  the  Tristia,  Book  ii.  1.  447  and  463,  Book  iv.  Ep.  x.  1.  52,  and
Book  v.  Ep.  i.  1.  18.  In  the  Third  Book  of  the  Amores,  El.  9,  will  be
found  his  Lament  on  the  death  of  Tibullus.

37  Gallus  ]—  Ver.  29. Cornelius  Gallus  was  a  Roman  poet  of  consi-


E.  XV.]  OE, AMOTJES.  301

East,38  and  with  Gallus  will  his  Lycoris  be  known.  Though
flint-stones,  then,  and  though  the  share  of  the  enduring  plough
perish  by  lapse  of  time,  yet  poetry  is  exempt  from  death.
Let  monarchs  and  the  triumphs  of  monarchs  yield  to  poesy  ;
and  let  the  wealthy  shores  of  the  golden  Tagus39  yield.

Let  the  vulgar  throng  admire  worthless  things ;  let  the
yellow-haired  Apollo  supply  for  me  cups  filled  from  the  Cas-
talian  stream ;  let  me  bear,  too,  on  my  locks  the  myrtle  that
dreads  the  cold  ;  and  let  me  often  be  read  by  the  anxious  lover.
Envy  feeds  upon  the  living ;  after  death  it  is  at  rest,  when
his  own  reward  protects  each  according  to  his  merit.  Still  then,
when  the  closing  fire40  shall  have  consumed  me,  shall  I  live
on ;  and  a  great  portion  of  myself  will  ever  be  surviving.

derable  merit.  See  the  Tristia,  Book  ii.  1.  445,  and  the  Note  to  the  passage,
and  the  Am  ores,  Book  hi.  El.  1.

38  By  the  East.]— Ver.  29.  Gallus  was  the  Roman  governor  of  Egypt,
which  was  an  Eastern  province  of  Rome.

39  The  golden  Tagus.'] — Ver.  34.  Pliny  and  other  authors  make  men-
tion of  the  golden  sands  of  the  Tagus,  which  flowed  through  the  province
of  Lusitania,  now  Portugal.

40  The  closing  fire.] — Ver.  41.  Pliny  says  that  the  ancient  Romans
buried  the  dead ;  but  in  consequence  of  the  bones  being  disturbed  by  con-
tinual warfare,  they  adopted  the  system  of  burning  them.


BOOK  THE  SECOND.


ELEGY  I.

He  says  that  he  is  obliged  by  Cupid  to  write  of  Love  instead  of  the  Wars
of  the  Giants,  upon  which  subject  he  had  already  commenced.

This  work,  also,  I,  Naso,  born  among  the  watery  Peligni,1
have  composed,  the  Poet  of  my  own  failings.  This  work,
too,  has  Love  demanded.  Afar  hence,  be  afar  hence,  ye
prudish  matrons  ;  you  are  not  a  fitting  audience  for  my  wanton
lines.  Let  the  maiden  that  is  not  cold,  read  me  in  the  pre-
sence of  her  betrothed ;  the  inexperienced  boy,  too,  wounded
by  a  passion  hitherto  unknown  ;  and  may  some  youth,  now
wounded  by  the  bow  by  which  I  am,  recognise  the  con-
scious symptoms  of  his  flame  ;  and  after  long  wondering,  may
he  exclaim,  "  Taught  by  what  informant,  has  this  Poet  been
composing  my  own  story  ?"

I  was  (I  remember)  venturing  to  sing  of  the  battles  of  the
heavens,  and  Gyges2  with  his  hundred  hands ;  and  I  had
sufficient  power  of  expression  ;  what  time  the  Earth  so  dis-
gracefully avenged  herself,  and  lofty  Ossa,  heaped  upon
Olympus,  bore  Pelion  headlong  downwards.  Having  the
clouds  in  my  hands,  and  wielding  the  lightnings  with  Jove,
which  with  success  he  was  to  hurl  in  behalf  of  his  realms  of
the  heavens,  my  mistress  shut  her  door  against  me  ;  the  light-
nings together  with  Jove  did  I  forsake.  Jupiter  himself  dis-
appeared from  my  thoughts.  Pardon  me,  0  Jove ;  no  aid
did  thy  weapons  afford  me  ;  the  shut  door  was  a  more  potent
thunderbolt  than  thine.  I  forthwith  resumed  the  language
of  endearment  and  trifling  Elegies,  those  weapons  of  my  own  ;
and  gentle  words  prevailed  upon  the  obdurate  door.

Verses  bring  down3  the  horns  of  the  blood-stained  Moon ;

1  The  watery  Peligni.] — Ver.  1.  In  the  Fourth  Book  of  the  Fasti,  1.
81,  and  the  Fourth  Book  of  the  Tristia,  1.  x.  El.  3,  he  mentions  Sulmo,
a  town  of  the  Peligni,  as  the  place  of  his  birth.  It  was  noted  for  its
many  streams  or  rivulets.

2  And  Gyges.] — Ver.  12.  This  giant  was  more  generally  called  Gyas.
He  and  his  hundred-handed  brothers,  Briareus  and  Caeus,  were  the  sons
of  Coelus  and  Terra.

3  Verses  bring  down."] — Ver.  23.  He  alludes  to  the  power  of  magic
spells,  and  attributes  their  efficacy  to  their  being  couched  in  poetic  measures;
from  which  circumstance  thev  received  the  name  of  '  carmina.'


E.  II.]  THE AMOBES ; OB,  AMOTJBS.  303

and  they  recall  the  snow-white  steeds  of  the  Sun  in  his  career.
Through  verses  do  serpents  burst,  their  jaws  rent  asunder,
and  the  water  turned  back  flows  upward  to  its  source.
Through  verses  have  doors  given  way  ;  and  by  verses4  was
the  bar,  inserted  in  the  door-post,  although  'twas  made  of
oak,  overcome.  Of  what  use  is  the  swift  Achilles  celebrated
by  me  ?  What  can  this  or  that  son  of  Atreus  do  for  me  ?  He,
too,  who  wasted  as  many  of  his  years  in  wandering  as  in  war-
fare ?  And  the  wretched  Hector,  dragged  by  the  Haemonian
steeds  ?  But  the  charms  of  the  beauteous  fair  being  ofttimes
sung,  she  presents  herself  to  the  Poet  as  the  reward  of  his  verse.
This  great  recompense  is  given  ;  farewell,  then,  ye  illustrious
names  of  heroes  ;  your  favour  is  of  no  use  to  me.  Ye  charm-
ing fair,  turn  your  eyes  to  my  lines,  which  blushing  Cupid
dictates  to  me.


ELEGY  II.

Hb  has  seen  a  lady  walking  in  the  portico  of  the  temple  of  Apollo,  and
has  sent  to  know  if  he  may  wait  upon  her.  She  has  replied  that  it  is
quite  impossible,  as  the  eunuch  Bagoiis  is  set  to  watch  her.  Ovid
here  addresses  Bagoiis,  and  endeavours  to  persuade  him  to  relax  his
watch  over  the  fair  ;  and  shows  him  how  he  can  do  so  with  safety.

Bagotts,5  with  whom  is  the  duty  of  watching  over  your  mis-
tress, give  me  your  attention,  while  I  say  a  few  but  suitable
words  to  you.  Yesterday  morning  I  saw  a  young  lady  walking
in  that  portico  which  contains  the  choir  of  the  daughters  of
Danaus.6 At  once,  as  she  pleased  me,  I  sent  to  her,  and  in

4  And  by  verses.! — Ver.  28.  He  means  to  say  that  in  the  same  manner
as  magic  spells  have  brought  down  the  moon,  arrested  the  sun,  and  turned
back  rivers  towards  their  source,  so  have  his  Elegiac  strains  been  as  wonder-
fully successful  in  softening  the  obduracy  of  Ms  mistress.

5  Bagoiis.'] — Ver.  1.  The  name  Bagoas,  or,  as  it*  is  here  Latinized,
Bagoiis,  is  said  to  have  signified,  in  the  Persian  language,  '  an  eunuch.'
It  was  probably  of  Chaldaean  origin,  having  that  meaning.  As  among  the
Eastern  nations  of  the  present  day,  the  more  jealous  of  the  Romans  con-
fided the  care  of  their  wives  or  mistresses  to  eunuch  slaves,  who  were  pur-
chased at  a  very  large  price.

6  Daughters  of  Danaus.] — Ver.  4.  The  portico  under  the  temple  of
Apollo,  on  the  Palatine  Hill,  was  adorned  with  the  statues  of  Danaus,  the
son  of  Belus,  and  his  forty-nine  guilty  daughters.  It  was  built  by  Augustus,
on  a  spot  adjoining  to  his  palace.  Ovid  mentions  these  statues  in  the
Third  Elegy  of  the  Third  Book  of  the  Tristia,  1.  10.


304  THE  AMOKES  ;  [b.  II.

my  letter  I  proffered  my  request ;  with  trembling  hand,  she  an-
swered me,  "  I  cannot."  And  to  my  inquiry,  why  she  could
not,  the  cause  was  announced  ;  namely,  that  your  surveillance
over  your  mistress  is  too  strict.

0  keeper,  if  you  are  wise  (believe  me  now),  cease  to  de-
serve my  hatred ;  every  one  wishes  him  gone,  of  whom  he
stands  in  dread.  Her  husband,  too,  is  not  in  his  senses  ;  for
who  would  toil  at  taking  care  of  that  of  which  no  part  is  lost,
even  if  you  do  not  watch  it  ?  But  still,  in  his  madness,  let
him  indulge  his  passion  ;  and  let  him  believe  that  the  object
is  chaste  which  pleases  universally.  By  your  favour,  liberty
may  by  stealth  be  given  to  her ;  that  one  day  she  may  return
to  you  what  you  have  given  her.  Are  you  ready  to  be  a
confidant ;  the  mistress  is  obedient  to  the  slave.  You  fear  to
be  an  accomplice  ;  you  may  shut  your  eyes.  Does  she  read  a
letter  by  herself ;  suppose  her  mother  to  have  sent  it.  Does
a  stranger  come  ;  bye  and  bye  let  him  go,7  as  though  an  old
acquaintance.  Should  she  go  to  visit  a  sick  female  friend,
who  is  not  sick  ;  in  your  opinion,  let  her  be  unwell.  If  she
shall  be  a  long  time  at  the  sacrifice,8  let  not  the  long  waiting
tire  you ;  putting  your  head  on  your  breast,  you  can  snore
away.  And  don't  be  enquiring  what  can  be  going  on  at  the
temple  of  the  linen-clad  Isis  ;9  nor  do  you  stand  in  any  fear
whatever  of  the  curving  theatres.

An  accomplice  in  the  escapade  will  receive  everlasting
honour ;  and  what  is  less  trouble  than  merely  to  hold  your
tongue  ?  He  is  in  favour ;  he  turns  the  house10  upside  down
at  his  pleasure,  and  he  feels  no  stripes  ;  he  is  omnipotent ;
the  rest,  a  scrubby  lot,  are  grovelling  on.  By  him,  that  the  real

7  Let  him  go.~\ — Ver.  20.  '  Eat '  seems  here  to  mean  '  let  him  go
away '  from  the  house ;  but  Nisard's  translation  renders  it  '  qu'il  entre,'
'  let  him  come  in.'

8  At  the  sacrifice.'] — Ver.  23.  It  is  hard  to  say  what  '  si  faciet  tarde'
means :  it  perhaps  applies  to  the  rites  of  Isis,  mentioned  in  the  25th  line.
'  If  she  shall  be  slow  in  her  sacrifice/

9  Linen-clad  Ms.] — Ver.  25.  See  the  74th  line  of  the  Eighth  Elegy  of
the  preceding  Book,  and  the  Note  to  the  passage ;  and  the  Pontic  Epistles,
Book  i.  line  51,  and  the  Note.  The  temple  of  Isis,  at  Rome,  was  in  the
Campus  Martius,  or  Field  of  Mars,  near  the  sheep  market.  It  was  noted
for  the  intrigues  and  assignations  of  which  it  was  the  scene.

10  He  turns  the  house.]— Ver.  29.  As  the  Delphin  Editor  says,  '  II  peut
renverser  la  maison/  *  he  can  turn  the  house  upside  down.'


E.  III.]  OE, AMOTJES.  305

circumstances  may  be  concealed,  false  ones  are  coined ;  and
both  the  masters  approve11  of,  what  one,  and  that  the  mistress,
approves  of.  When  the  husband  has  quite  contracted  his
brow,  and  has  pursed  up  his  wrinkles,  the  caressing  fair
makes  him  become  just  as  she  pleases.  But  still,  let  her
sometimes  contrive  some  fault  against  you  even,  and  let
her  pretend  tears,  and  call  you  an  executioner.12  Do  you,  on
the  other  hand,  making  some  charge  which  she  may  easily  ex-
plain ;  by  a  feigned  accusation  remove  all  suspicion  of  the
truth.13  In  such  case,  may  your  honours,  then  may  your
limited  savings14  increase  ;  only  do  this,  and  in  a  short  time
you  shall  be  a  free  man.

You  behold  the  chains  bound  around  the  necks  of  in-
formers ;15  the  loathsome  gaol  receives  the  hearts  that  are
unworthy  of  belief.  In  the  midst  of  water  Tantalus  is  in  want
of  water,  and  catches  at  the  apples  as  they  escape  him  ;  'twas

11  The  masters  approve.] — Ver.  30.  He  means  to  say  that  the  eunuch
and  his  mistress  will  be  able  to  do  just  as  they  please.

12  An  executioner.'] — Ver.  36.  To  blind  the  husband,  by  pretending
harshness  on  the  part  of  Bagoiis.

13  Of  the  truth.] — Ver.  38  This  line  is  corrupt,  and  there  are  about
ten  various  readings.  The  meaning,  however,  is  clear  ;  he  is,  by  making
false  charges,  to  lead  the  husband  away  from  a  suspicion  of  the  truth  ;
and  to  put  him,  as  we  say,  in  common  parlance,  on  the  wrong  scent.

14  Your  limited  savings.] — Ver.  39.  '  Peculium,'  here  means  the  stock
of  money  which  a  slave,  with  the  consent  of  his  master,  laid  up  for  his
own, '  his  savings.'  The  slaves  of  the  Romans  being  not  only  employed
in  domestic  offices  and  the  labours  of  the  field,  but  as  agents  or  factors
for  their  masters,  in  the  management  of  business,  and  as  mechanics  and
artisans  in  various  trades,  great  profits  were  made  through  them.  As
they  were  often  entrusted  with  a  large  amount  of  property,  and  consider-
able temptations  were  presented  to  their  honesty,  it  became  the  practice
to  allow  the  slave  to  consider  a  part  of  his  gains,  perhaps  a  per  centage,
as  his  own ;  this  was  termed  his  '  peculium.'  According  to  the  strict
letter  of  the  law,  the  '  peculium'  was  the  property  of  the  master,  but,  by
usage,  it  was  looked  upon  as  the  property  of  the  slave.  It  was  sometimes
agreed  upon  between  the  master  and  slave,  that  the  latter  should  purchase
his  liberty  with  his  '  peculium,'  when  it  amounted  to  a  certain  sum.  If
the  slave  was  manumitted  by  the  owner  in  his  lifetime,  his  '  peculium  '  was
considered  to  be  given  him,  with  his  liberty,  unless  it  was  expressly  re-
tained.

15  Necks  of  informers.] — Ver.  41.  He  probably  alludes  to  informers
who  have  given  false  evidence.  He  warns  Bagoiis  of  their  fate,  intend-
ing to  imply  tbat  both  his  mistress  and  himself  will  deny  all,  if  he  should
attempt  to  criminate  them.

I


306  THE AMOEES  ;  [B.  II.

his  blabbing  tongue  caused  this.25  While  the  keeper  ap-
pointed by  Juno,26  is  watching  Io  too  carefully,  he  dies  be-
fore his  time  ;  she  becomes  a  Goddess.

I  have  seen  him  wearing  fetters  on  his  bruised  legs,
through  whom  a  husband  was  obliged  to  know  of  an  in-
trigue. The  punishment  was  less  than  his  deserts  ;  an  unruly
tongue  was  the  injury  of  the  two  ;  the  husband  was  grieved ;
the  female  suffered  the  loss  of  her  character.  Believe  me  ;  ac-
cusations are  pleasing  to  no  husband,  and  no  one  do  they
delight,  even  though  he  should  listen  to  them.  If  he  is  indif-
ferent, then  you  are  wasting  your  information  upon  ears  that
care  nothing  for  it ;  if  he  dotes  on  her,  by  your  officiousness
is  he  made  wretched.

Besides,  a  faux  pas,  although  discovered,  is  not  so  easily
proved ;  she  comes  before  him,  protected  by  the  prejudices
of  her  judge.  Should  even  he  himself  see  it,  still  he  himself
will  believe  her  as  she  denies  it ;  and  he  will  condemn  his
own  eyesight,  and  will  impose  upon  himself.  Let  him  but
see  the  tears  of  his  spouse,  and  he  himself  will  weep,  and
he  will  say,  "  That  blabbing  fellow  shall  be  punished."  How
unequal  the  contest  in  which  you  embark !  if  conquered,
stripes  are  ready  for  you ;  while  she  is  reposing  in  the  bosom
of  the  judge.

No  crime  do  we  meditate  ;  we  meet  not  for  mixing  poisons  ;
my  hand  is  not  glittering  with  the  drawn  sword.  We  ask
that  through  you  we  may  be  enabled  to  love  in  safety  ;  what
can  there  be  more  harmless  than  these  our  prayers  ?


ELEGY  III.

He  again  addresses  Bagoiis,  who  has  proved  obdurate  to  his  request,  and
tries  to  effect  his  object  by  sympathising  with  his  unhappy  fate.

Alas  !  that,27  neither  man  nor  woman,  you  are  watching  your
mistress,  and  that  you  cannot experience  the  mutual  trans-

25  Tongue  caused  this,'] — Ver.  44.  According  to  one  account,  his  pun-
ishment was  inflicted  for  revealing  the  secrets  of  the  Gods.

2(3  Appointed  by  Juno.'] — Ver.  45.  This  was  Argus,  whose  fate  is  re-
lated at  the  end  of  the  First  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses.

27  Alas!  that.] — Ver.  1.  He  is  again  addressing  Bagoiis,  and  begins
in  a  strain  of  sympathy,  since  his  last  letter  has  proved  of  no  avail  with
the  obdurate  eunuch.


E.  IT.]  OS, AMOXJES.  307

ports  of  love !  He  who  was  the  first  to  mutilate  boys,28  ought
himself  to  have  suffered  those  wounds  which  he  made.  You
would  be  ready  to  accommodate,  and  obliging  to  those  who
entreat  you,  had  your  own  passion  been  before  inflamed  by
any  fair.  You  were  not  born  for  managing,  the  steed,  nor
are  you  skilful  in  valorous  arms  ;  for  your  right  hand  the
warlike  spear  is  not  adapted.  With  these  let  males  meddle  ;
do  you  resign  all  manly  aspirations  ;  may  the  standard  be
borne29  by  you  in  the  cause  of  your  mistress.

Overwhelm  her  with  your  favours  ;  her  gratitude  may  be  of
use  to  you.  If  you  should  miss  that,  what  good  fortune  will
there  be  for  you  1  She  has  both  beauty,  and  her  years  are  fitted
for  dalliance  ;  her  charms  are  not  deserving  to  fade  in  listless
neglect.  Ever  watchful  though  you  are  deemed,  still  she  may
deceive  you ;  what  two  persons  will,  does  not  fail  of  accom-
plishment. Still,  as  it  is  more  convenient  to  try  you  with  our
entreaties,  we  do  implore  you,  while  you  have  still  the  op-
portunity of  conferring  your  favours  to  advantage.30


ELEGY  IV.

He  confesses  that  he  is  an  universal  admirer  of  the  fair  sex.
I  would  not  presume  to  defend  my  faulty  morals,  and  to
wield  deceiving  arms  in  behalf  of  my  frailties.  I  confess  them,
if  there  is  any  use  in  confessing  one's  errors  ;  and  now,  having
confessed,  I  am  foolishly  proceeding  to  my  own  accusation.
I  hate  this  state ;  nor,  though  I  wish,  can  I  be  otherwise
than  what  I  hate.  Alas  !  how  hard  it  is  to  bear  a  lot  which
you  wish  to  lay  aside  !  For  strength  and  self-control  fail  me
for  ruling  myself ;  just  like  a  ship  carried  along  the  rapid
tide,  am  I  hurried  away.

There  is  no  single  style  of  beauty  which  inflames  my  pas-
sion ;  there  are  a  hundred  causes  for  me  always  to  be  in  love.

28  Mutilate  boys.'] — Ver.  3.  According  to  most  accounts,  Semiramis
was  the  first  who  put  in  practice  this  abominable  custom.

29  Standard  be  borne.'] — Ver.  10.  He  means,  that  he  is  bound,  with  his
mistress  to  follow  the  standard  of  Cupid,  and  not  of  Mars.

30  Favours  to  advantage.]  — Ver.  13.  '  Ponere  '  here  means,  literally,
'  to  put  out  at  interest.'  He  tells  the  eunuch  that  he  has  now  the  oppor-
tunity of  conferring  obligations,  which  will  bring  him  in  a  good  interest
by  way  of  return.

x  2


308  TILE AMOEES  ;  [b.  IT.

Is  there  any  fair  one  that  casts  down  her  modest  eyes?  I  am
on  fire  ;  and  that  very  modesty  becomes  an  ambush  against
me.  Is  another  one  forward  ;  then  I  am  enchanted,  because
she  is  not  coy  ;  and  her  liveliness  raises  all  my  expectations.
If  another  seems  to  be  prudish,  and  to  imitate  the  repulsive
Sabine  dames  ;32  I  think  that  she  is  kindly  disposed,  but  that
she  conceals  it  in  her  stateliness.33  Or  if  you  are  a  learned
fair,  you  please  me,  thus  endowed  with  rare  acquirements ;
or  if  ignorant,  you  are  charming  for  your  simplicity.  Is
there  one  who  says  that  the  lines  of  Callimachus  are  un-
couth in  comparison  with  mine ;  at  once  she,  to  whom  I  am
so  pleasing,  pleases  me.  Is  there  even  one  who  abuses  both
myself,  the  Poet,  and  my  lines ;  I  could  wish  to  have  her
who  so  abuses  me,  upon  my  knee.  Does  this  one  walk
leisurely,  she  enchants  me  with  her  gait ;  is  another  uncouth,
still,  she  may  become  more  gentle,  on  bemg  more  intimate
with  the  other  sex.

Because  this  one  sings  so  sweetly,  and  modulates  her  voice34
with  such  extreme  ease,  I  could  wish  to  steal  a  kiss  from  her
as  she  sings.  Another  is  running  through  the  complaining
strings  with  active  finger  ;  who  could  not  fall  in  love  with
hands  so  skilled  1  And  now,  one  pleases  by  her  gestures,  and
moves  her  arms  to  time,35  and  moves  her  graceful  sides  with
languishing  art  in  the  dance ;  to  say  nothing  about  myself,

32  Sabine  dames.'] — Ver.  15.  Juvenal,  in  his  Tenth  Satire,  1.  293,  men-
tions the  Sabine  women  as  examples  of  prudence  and  chastity.

33  In  her  stateliness.']  — Ver.  16.  Burmann  would  have  '  ex  alto  '  to
mean  '  ex  alto  pectore,'  '  from  the  depths  of  her  breast.'  In  such  case
the  phrase  will  correspond  with  our  expression,  '  to  dissemble  deeply,'  '  to
be  a  deep  dissembler.'

34  Modulates  her  voice.]  — Ver.  25.  Perhaps  '  flectere  vocem '  means
what  we  technically  call,  in  the  musical  art,  '  to  quaver.'

35  Her  arms  to  time.] — Ver.  29.  Dancing  was,  in  general,  discouraged
among  the  Romans.  That  here  referred  to  was  probably  the  pantomimic
dance,  in  which,  while  all  parts  of  the  body  were  called  into  action,  the
gestures  of  the  arms  and  hands  were  especially  used,  whence  the  expressions
*  manus  loquacissimi,'  '  digiti  clamosi,'  '  expressive  hands,'  or  '  fingers.'
During  the  Republic,  and  the  earlier  periods  of  the  Empire,  women  never
appeared  on  the  stage,  but  they  frequently  acted  at  the  parties  of  the  great.
As  it  was  deemed  disgraceful  for  a  free  man  to  dance,  the  practice  at  Rome
was  probably  confined  to  slaves,  and  the  lowest  class  of  the  citizens.  See
the  Fasti,  Book  iii.  1.  536,  and  the  Note  to  the  passage.


E.  V.]  OE, AMOTJES.  309

who  am  excited  on  every  occasion,  put  Hippolytus36  there ;
he  would  become  a  Priapus.  You,  because  you  are  so  tall,
equal  the  Heroines  of  old  ;37  and,  of  large  size,  you  can  fill  the
entire  couch  as  you  he.  Another  is  active  from  her  short-
ness ;  by  both  I  am  enchanted ;  both  tall  and  short  suit  my
taste.  Is  one  unadorned  ;  it  occurs  what  addition  there  might
be  if  she  was  adorned.  Is  one  decked  out ;  she  sets  out  her
endowments  to  advantage.  The  blonde  will  charm  me  ;  the
brunette 3S  will  charm  me  too;  a  Venus  is  pleasing,  even  of
a  swarthy  colour.  Does  black  hair  fall  upon  a  neck  of  snow ;
Leda  was  sightly,  with  her  raven  locks.  Is  the  hair  flaxen ;
with  her  saffron  locks,  Aurora  was  charming.  To  every  tra-
ditional story  does  my  passion  adapt  itself.  A  youthful  age
charms  me  ;  an  age  more  mature  captivates  me  ;  the  former
is  superior  in  the  charms  of  person,  the  latter  excels  in  spirit.
In  fine,  whatever  the  fair  any  person  approves  of  in  all
the  City,  to  all  these  does  my  passion  aspire.


ELEGY  V.

He  addresses  Ms  mistress,  whom  he  has  detected  acting  falsely  towards

him.

Awat  with  thee,  quivered  Cupid  :  no  passion  is  of  a  value  so
great,  that  it  should  so  often  be  my  extreme  wish  to  die.  It
is  my  wish  to  die,  as  oft  as  I  call  to  mind  your  guilt.  Fair
one,  born,  alas  !  to  be  a  never-ceasing  cause  of  trouble !  It  is
no  tablets  rubbed  out39  that  discover  your  doings  ;  no  presents
stealthily  sent  reveal  your  criminality. Oh !  would  that  I  might

36  Hippolytus.]  — Ver.  32.  Hippolytus  was  an  example  of  chastitv,
while  Priapus  was  the  very  ideal  of  lustfulness.

V  Heroines  of  old.]  —Ver.  33.  He  supposes  the  women  of  the  Heroic
ages  to  have  been  of  extremely  tall  stature.  Andromache  was  remarkable
for  her  height.

3S  The  brunette.']—  Ver.  39.  ■  Flava,'  when  coupled  with  a  female
name,  generally  signifies  ■  having  the  hair  of  a  flaxen,'  or  ■  golden  colour' ;
here,  however,  it  seems  to  allude  to  the  complexion,  though  it  would  be
difficult  to  say  what  tint  is  meant.  Perhaps  an  American  would  have  no
difficulty  in  translating  it  '  a  yellow  girl.'  In  the  43rd  line,  he  makes
reference  to  the  hair  of  a  '  flaxen,'  or  '  golden  colour.'

39  Tablets  rubbed  out.]— Ver.  5.  If  <  deletae'  is  the  correct  reading
here,  it  must  mean  '  no  tablets  from  which  in  a  hurry  you  have  rubbed
otf  the  writing.'  <  Non  intercepts  '  has  been  suggested,  and  it  would
certainly  better  suit  the  sense. <  No  intercepted  tablets  have,  &c.'


310  THEAMOEES;  [b.  If,

so  accuse  you,  that,  after  all,  I  could  not  convict  you  !  All
wretched  me  !  and  why  is  my  case  so  sure  ?  Happy  the  man
who  boldly  dares  to  defend  the  object  which  he  loves ;  to
whom  his  mistress  is  able  to  say,  "I  have  done  nothing
wrong."  Hard-hearted  is  he,  and  too  much  does  he  encourage
his  own  grief,  by  whom  a  blood-stained  victory  is  sought  in
the  conviction  of  the  accused.

To  my  sorrow,  in  my  sober  moments,  with  the  wine  on
table,42  I  myself  was  witness  of  your  criminality,  when  you
thought  I  was  asleep.  I  saw  you  both  uttering  many  an  ex-
pression by  moving  your  eyebrows  ;43  in  your  nods  there  was
a  considerable  amount  of  language.  Your  eyes  were  not
silent,44  the  table,  too,  traced  over  with  wine  ;45  nor  was  the  lan-
guage of  the  fingers  wanting;  I  understood  your  discourse,46
which  treated  of  that  which  it  did  not  appear  to  do ;  the
words,  too,  preconcerted  to  stand  for  certain  meanings.  And
now,  the  tables  removed,  many  a  guest  had  gone  away;  a  couple
of  youths  only  were  there  dead  drunk.  But  then  I  saw  you  both
giving  wanton  kisses  ;  I  am  sure  that  there  was  billing  enough
on  your  part ;  such,  in  fact,  as  no  sister  gives  to  a  brother  of
correct  conduct,  but  rather  such  as  some  voluptuous  mistress
gives  to  the  eager  lover  ;  such  as  we  may  suppose  that  Phoebus
did  not  give  to  Diana,  but  that  Venus  many  a  time  gave  to
her  own  dear  Mars.

"  What  are  you  doing  V  I  cried  out ;  "  whither  Are  you
taking  those  transports  that  belong  to  me  ?  On  what  belongs  to
myself,  I  will  lay  the  hand  of  a  master.4* These  delights  must

42  The  wine  on  table."] — Ver.  14.  The  wine  was  probably  on  this  oc-
casion placed  on  the  table,  after  the  '  ccena,'  or  dinner.  The  Poet,  his
mistress,  and  his  acquaintance,  were,  probably,  reclining  on  their  respective
couches ;  he  probably,  pretended  to  fall  asleep  to  watch,  their  conduct,
which  may  have  previously  excited  his  suspicions.

43  Moving  your  eyebrows.] — Ver.  15.  See  the  Note  to  the  19th  line
of  the  Fourth  Elegy  of  the  preceding  Book,

44  Were  not  silent,] — Ver.  17.  See  the  Note  to  the  20th  line  of  the
same  Elegy.

45  Traced  over  with  wine.] — Ver.  18.  See  the  22nd  and  26th  lines  of
the  same  Elegy.

46  Your  discourse.] — Ver.  19.  He  seems  to  mean  that  they  were  pre-
tending to  be  talking  on  a  different  subject  from  that  about  which  they
were  really  discoursing,  but  that  he  understood  their  hidden  meaning.
See  a  similar  instance  mentioned  in  the  Epistle  of  Paris  to  Helen,  1.  241.

47  Hand  of  a  master.] — Ver.  30.  He  asserts  the  same  right  over  her
favours,  that  the  master  (dominus)  does  over  the  services  of  the  slave.


E.  V.'J  OR, AMOURS.  311

be  in  common  with  you  and  me,  and  with  me  and  you ;  but
why  does  any  third  person  take  a  share  in  them  V

This  did  I  say ;  and  what,  besides,  sorrow  prompted  my
tongue  to  say ;  but  the  red  blush  of  shame  rose  on  her  con-
scious features  ;  just  as  the  sky,  streaked  by  the  wife  of  Titho-
nus,  is  tinted  with  red,  or  the  maiden  when  beheld  by  her  new-
made  husband;48  just  as  the  roses  are  beauteous  when  mingled
among  their  encircling  lilies  ;  or  when  the  Moon  is  suffering
from  the  enchantment  of  her  steeds  ;49  or  the  Assyrian  ivory50
which  the  Mseonian  woman  has  stained,51  that  from  length  of
time  it  may  not  turn  yellow.  That  complexion  of  hers  was  ex-
tremely like  to  these,  or  to  some  one  of  these  ;  and,  as  it  hap-
pened, she  never  was  more  beauteous  than  then.  She  looked  to-
wards the  ground  ;  to  look  upon  the  ground,  added  a  charm  ;
sad  were  her  features,  in  her  sorrow  was  she  graceful.  I  had
been  tempted  to  tear  her  locks  just  as  they  were,  (and  nicely
dressed  they  were)  and  to  make  an  attack  upon  her  tender
cheeks.

When  I  looked  on  her  face,  my  strong  arms  fell  powerless ;
by  arms  of  her  own  was  my  mistress  defended.  I,  who  the
moment  before  had  been  so  savage,  now,  as  a  suppliant  and  of
my  own  accord,  entreated  that  she  would  give  me  kisses  not
inferior  to  those  given  to  my  rival.  She  smiled,  and  with
heartiness  she  gave  me  her  best  kisses  ;  such  as  might  have
snatched  his  three-forked  bolts  from  Jove.  To  my  misery  I
am  now  tormented,  lest  that  other  person  received  them  in
equal  perfection ;  and  I  hope  that  those  were  not  of  this
quality.52

43  New-made  husband.] — Ver.  36.  Perhaps  this  refers  to  the  moment
of  taking  off  the  bridal  veil,  or  '  flammeum,'  when  she  has  entered  her
husband's  house.

49  Of  her  steeds.'] — Ver.  38.  "When  the  moon  appeared  red,  probably
through  a  fog,  it  was  supposed  that  she  was  being  subjected  to  the  spells  of
witches  and  enchanters.

50  Assyrian  ivory.] — Ver.  40.  As  Assyria  adjoined  India,  the  word
'  Assyrium '  is  here  used  by  poetical  licence,  as  really  meaning  '  Indian.'

51  Woman  has  stained.] — Ver.  40.  From  this  we  learn  that  it  was  the
custom  of  the  Lydians  to  tint  ivory  of  a  pink  colour,  that  it  might  not
turn  yellow  with  age.

52  Of  this  quality. — Ver.  54.  '  Nota,'  here  mentioned,  is  literally  the
mark  which  was  put  upon  the  '  amphorae,'  or  '  cadi,'  the  •  casks  '  of  the  an-
cients, to  denote  the  kind,  age,  or  quality  of  the  wine.  Hence  the  word
figuratively  means,  as  in  the  present  instance,  '  sort/  or  '  quality.' Our


312  THE AMOEES;  [b.  II.

Those  kisses,  too,  were  far  better  than  those  which  I  taught
her  ;  and  she  seemed  to  have  learned  something  new.  That
they  were  too  delightful,  is  a  bad  sign  ;  that  so  lovingly  were
your  lips  joined  to  mine,  «wc?mine  to  yours.  And  yet,  it  is  not
at  this  alone  that  I  am  grieved  ;  I  do  not  only  complain  that
kisses  were  given  ;  although  I  do  complain  as  well  that  they
were  given ;  such  could  never  have  been  taught  but  on  a
closer  acquaintanceship.  I  know  not  who  is  the  master  that
has  received  a  remuneration  so  ample.


ELEGY  VI.

He  laments  the  death  of  the  parrot  which  he  had  given  to  Corinna.
The  parrot,  the  imitative  bird53  sent  from  the  Indians  of  the
East,  is  dead  ;  come  in  flocks  to  his  obsequies,  ye  birds.  Come,
affectionate  denizens  of  air,  and  beat  your  breasts  with  your
wings;  and  with  your  hard  claws  disfigure  your  delicate  features.
Let  your  rough  feathers  be  torn  in  place  of  your  sorrowing
hair  ; instead  of  the  long  trumpet,54  let  your  songs  resound.

Why,  Philomela,  are  you  complaining  of  the  cruelty  of  Tereus,
the  Ismarian  tyrant  ?  Surely,  that  grievance  is  worn  out  by  its
length  of  years.  Turn  your  attention  to  the  sad  end  of  a
bird  so  prized. Itys  is  a  great  cause  of sorrow,  but,  still,

word  '  brand '  has  a  similar  meaning.  The  finer  kinds  of  wine  were
drawn  off  from  the  '  dolia,'  or  large  vessels,  in  which  they  were  kept
into  the  '  amphorae,'  which  were  made  of  earthenware  or  glass,  and  the
mouth  of  the  vessel  was  stopped  tight  by  a  plug  of  wood  or  cork,  which
was  made  impervious  to  the  atmosphere  by  being  rubbed  over  with  pitch,
clay,  or  a  composition  of  gypsum.  On  the  outside,  the  title  of  the  wine
was  painted,  the  date  of  the  vintage  being  denoted  by  the  names  of  the
Consuls  then  in  office  :  and  when  the  vessels  were  of  glass,  small  tickets,
called  '  pittacia,'  were  suspended  from  them,  stating  to  a  similar  effect.
For  a  full  account  of  the  ancient  wines,  see  Dr.  Smith's  Dictionary  of
Greek  and  Roman  Antiquities.

53  The  imitative  bird.} — Ver.  1.  Statius,in  his  Second  Book,  calls  the
parrot  '  Humana?  sollers  imitator  linguae,'  '  the  clever  imitator  of  the  human
voice.'

54  The  long  trumpet.'] — Ver.  6.  We  learn  from  Aulus  Gellius,  that  the
trumpeters  at  funerals  were  called  '  siticines.'  They  headed  the  funeral
procession,  playing  mournful  strains  on  the  long  trumpet,  '  tuba,'  here
mentioned.  These  were  probably  in  addition  to  the  '  tibicines,'  or  '  pipers,'
whose  number  was  limited  to  ten  by  Appius  Claudius,  the  Censor.  See
the  Sixth  Book  of  the  Fasti,  1.  653.


E. VI.]  OE, AMOUES.  313

that  so  old.  All,  who  poise  yourselves  in  your  career  in  the
liquid  air  ;  but  you,  above  the  rest,  affectionate  turtle-dove,60
lament  him.  Throughout  life  there  was  a  firm  attachment
between  you,  and  your  prolonged  and  lasting  friendship  endured
to  the  end.  What  the  Phocian  youth61  was  to  the  Argive
Orestes,  the  same,  parrot,  was  the  turtle-dove  to  you,  so  long
as  it  was  allowed  by  fate.

But  what  matters  that  friendship  ?  What  the  beauty  of
your  rare  plumage  ?  What  your  voice  so  ingenious  at  imitating
sounds  ?  What  avails  it  that  ever  since  you  were  given,  you
pleased  my  mistress  ?  Unfortunate  pride  of  all  birds,  you  are
indeed  laid  low.  With  your  feathers  you  could  outvie  the
green  emerald,  having  your  purple  beak  tinted  with  the  ruddy
saffron.  There  was  no  bird  on  earth  more  skilled  at  imitating
sounds  ;  so  prettily62  did  you  utter  words  with  your  lisping
notes.

Through  envy,  you  were  snatched  away  from  us  :  you  were
the  cause  of  no  cruel  wars ;  you  were  a  chatterer,  and  the
lover  of  peaceful  concord.  See,  the  quails,  amid  all  their
battles,63  live  on ;  perhaps,  too,  for  that  reason,  they  be-
come old.  With  a  very  little  you  were  satisfied ;  and,  through
your  love  of  talking,  you  could  not  give  time  to  your  mouth
for  much  food.  A  nut  was  your  food,  and  poppies  the  cause
of  sleep  ;  and  a  drop  of  pure  water  used  to  dispel  your  thirst.
The  gluttonous  vulture  lives  on,  the  kite,  too,  that  forms  its
circles  in  the  air,  and  the  jackdaw,  the  foreboder64  of  the

80  Affectionate  turtle-dove.'}  — Ver.  12.  This  turtle-dove  and  the  par-
rot had  been  brought  up  in  the  same  cage  together.  He  probably  refers
to  these  birds  in  the  thirty-eighth  line  of  the  Epistle  of  Sappho  to  Phaon
where  he  mentions  the  turtle-dove  as  being  black.  This  Elegy  is  re-
markable for  its  simplicity  and  pathetic  beauty,  and  can  hardly  fail  to
remind  the  reader  of  Cowper's  Elegies,  on  the  death  of  the  bullfinch,  and
that  of  his  pet  hare.

61  The  Phocian  youth.]  — Ver.  15.  He  alludes  to  the  friendship  of
Orestes  and  Pylades  the  Phocian,  the  son  of  Strophius.

62  So  prettily.']  — Ver.  24.  '  Bene  '  means  here,  '  prettily,'  or  '  cleverly,'
rather  than  '  distinctly,'  which  would  be  inconsistent  with  the  signification
of  blsesus.

63  All  their  battles^]  — Ver.  27.  Aristotle,  in  the  Eighth  Chapter  of
the  Ninth  Book  of  his  Histoiy  of  Animals,  describes  quails  or  ortolans,
and  partridges,  as  being  of  quarrelsome  habits,  and  much  at  war  among
themselves.

64  The  foreboder.']  — Ver.  34.  Festus  Avienus,  in  his  Prognostics,
mentions  the  jackdaw  as  foreboding  rain  by  its  chattering.


314  THE AMOEES  ;  [fi.  IT.

shower  of  rain.  The  crow,  too,  lives  on,  hateful  to  the  armed
Minerva  ;66  it,  indeed,  will  hardly  die  after  nine  ages.67  The
prattling  parrot  is  dead,  the  mimic  of  the  human  voice,  sent
as  a  gift  from  the  ends  of  the  earth.  What  is  best,  is  gene-
rally first  carried  off  by  greedy  hands  ;  what  is  worthless,
fills  its  destined  numbers.68  Thersites  was  the  witness  of
the  lamented  death  of  him  from  Phylax ;  and  now  Hector
became  ashes,  while  his  brothers  yet  lived.

Why  should  I  mention  the  affectionate  prayers  of  my  anx-
ious mistress  in  your  behalf ;  prayers  borne  over  the  seas  by
the  stormy  North  wind  ?  The  seventh  day  was  come,69  that
was  doomed  to  give  no  morrow  ;  and  now  stood  your  Destiny,
with  her  distaff  all  uncovered.  And  yet  your  words  did  not
die  away,  in  your  faltering  mouth  ;  as  you  died,  your  tongue
cried  aloud,  "Corinna,  farewell!"70

At  the  foot  of  the  Elysian  hill71  a  grove,  overshaded  with
dark  holm  oaks,  and  the  earth,  moist  with  never-dying  grass,
is  green.  If  there  is  any  believing  in  matters  of  doubt,  that
is  said  to  be  the  abode  of  innocent  birds,  from  which  obscene
ones  are  expelled.  There  range  far  and  wide  the  guiltless
swans ;  the  long-lived  Phoenix,  too,  ever  the  sole  bird  of  its
kind.  There  the  bird  itself  of  Juno  unfolds  her  feathers  ;  the
gentle  dove  gives  kisses  to  its  loving  mate.  Received  in  this
home  in  the  groves,  amid  these  the  Parrot  attracts  the  guile-
less birds  by  his  words.72

66  Armed  Minerva.'] — Ver.  35.  See  the  story  of  the  Nymph  Coronis,
in  the  Second  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses.

67  After  nine  ages.~\  — Ver.  36.  Pliny  makes  the  life  of  the  crow  to
last  for  a  period  of  three  hundred  years.

68  Destined  numbers  J] — Ver.  40.  'Numeri'  means  here,  the  similar
parts  of  one  whole :  '  the  allotted  portions  of  human  life.'

69  Seventh  day  was  come.]  —  Ver.  45.  Hippocrates,  in  his  Aphorisms,
mentions  the  seventh,  fourteenth,  and  twentieth,  as  the  critical  days  in  a
malady.  Ovid  may  here  possibly  allude  to  the  seventh  day  of  fasting,
which  Was  supposed  to  terminate  the  existence  of  the  person  so  doing.

70  Corinna,  farewell  /] — Ver.  48.  It  may  have  said  '  Corinna ;'  but  Ovid
must  excuse  us  if  we  decline  to  believe  that  it  said  '  vale,'  '  farewell,'  also ;
unless,  indeed,  it  had  been  in  the  habit  of  saying  so  before  ;  this,  perhaps,
may  have  been  the  case,  as  it  had  probably  often  heard  the  Poet  say
'  vale'  to  his  mistress.

71  The  Elysian  hill.] — Ver.  49.  He  kindly  imagines  a  place  for  the
souls  of  the  birds  that  are  blessed.

72  By  his  words.] — Ver.  58. His  calling  around  him,  in  human  ac-


E. VII.]  0"R, AMOTTKS.  315

A  sepulchre  covers  his  bones  ;  a  sepulchre  small  as  his  body ;
on  which  a  little  stone  has  this  inscription,  well  suited  to  itself  :
"  From  this  very  tomb77 1  may  be  judged  to  have  been  the  fa-
vorite of  my  mistress.  I  had  a  tongue  more  skilled  at  talking
than  other  birds."


ELEGY  VII.

He  attempts  to  convince  his  mistress,  who  suspects  the  contrary,  that  he
is  not  in  love  with  her  handmaid  Cypassis.

Am  I  then78  to  be  for  ever  made  the  object  of  accusation  by
new  charges  ?  Though  I  should  conquer,  yet '  I  am  tired  of
entering  the  combat  so  oft.  Do  I  look  up  to  the  very  top
of  the  marble  theatre,  from  the  multitude,  you  choose  some
woman,  from  whom  to  receive  a  cause  of  grief.  Or  does  some
beauteous  fair  look  on  me  with  inexpressive  features ;  you  find
out  that  there  are  secret  signs  on  the  features.  Do  I  praise
any  one  ;  with  your  nails  you  attack  her  ill-starred  locks  ;  if
I  blame  any  one,  you  think  I  am  hiding  some  fault.  If  my
colour  is  healthy,  then  I  am  pronounced  to  be  indifferent  to-
wards you ;  if  unhealthy,  then  I  am  said  to  be  dying  with
love  for  another.  But  I  only  wish  I  was  conscious  to  myself
of  some  fault ;  those  endure  punishment  with  equanimity,
who  are  deserving  of  it.  Now  you  accuse  me  without  cause  ;
and  by  believing  every  thing  at  random,  you  yourself  forbid
your  anger  to  be  of  any  consequence.  See  how  the  long-
eared  ass,79  in  his  wretched  lot,  walks  leisurely  along,  although
tyrannized  over  with  everlasting  blows.

And  lo  !  a  fresh  charge  ; Cypassis,  so  skilled  at  tiring,80  is

cents,  the  other  birds  in  the  Elysian  fields,  is  ingeniously  and  beautifully
imagined.

77  This  very  tomb.'] — Ver.  61.  This  and  the  following  line  are  con-
sidered by  Heinsius  to  be  spurious,  and,  indeed,  the  next  line  hardly  looks
like  the  composition  of  Ovid.

78  Am  I  then.] — Ver.  1.  '  Ergo'  here  is  very  expressive.  '  Am  I  always
then  to  be  made  the  subject  of  fresh  charges  V

79  Long-eared  ass.] — Ver.  15.  Perhaps  the  only  holiday  that  the
patient  ass  got  throughout  the  year,  was  in  the  month  of  June,  when  the
festival  of  Vesta  was  celebrated,  and  to  which  Goddess  he  had  rendered
an  important  service. See  the  Sixth  Book  of  the  Fasti,  1.  311,  et  seq.

80  Skilled  at  tiring.] — Ver.  17.  She  was  the  'ornatrix,'  or  'tiring
woman' of  Corinna. As slaves  very  often  received  their  names  from


316  THE AMORES.  [E.  II.

blamed  for  having  been  the  supplanter  of  her  mistress.  May
the  Gods  prove  more  favourable,  than  that  if  I  should  have  any
inclination  for  a  faux  pas,  a  low-born  mistress  of  a  despised
class  should  attract  me  !  What  free  man  would  wish  to  have
amorous  intercourse  with  a  bondwoman,  and  to  embrace  a
body  mangled  with  the  whip  ?87  Add,  too,  that  she  is  skilled  in
arranging  your  hair,  and  is  a  valuable  servant  to  you  for  the
skill  of  her  hands.  And  would  I,  forsooth,  ask  such  a  thing
of  a  servant,  who  is  so  faithful  to  you  1  And  for  why  ?  Only
that  a  refusal  might  be  united  to  a  betrayal  ?  I  swear  by
Venus,  and  by  the  bow  of  the  winged  boy,  that  I  am  accused
of  a  crime  which  I  never  committed.


ELEGY  VIII.

He  wonders  how  Corinna  has  discovered  his  intrigue  with  Cypassis,  her
handmaid,  and  tells  the  latter  how  ably  he  has  defended  her  and
himself  to  her  mistress.

CvPASsis,  perfect  in  arranging  the  hair  in  a  thousand  fash-
ions, but  deserving  to  adorn  the  Goddesses  alone  ;  discovered,
too,  by  me,  in  our  delightful  intrigue,  to  be  no  novice  ;  useful,
indeed,  to  your  mistress,  but  still  more  serviceable  to  myself ;
who,  I  wonder,  was  the  informant  of  our  stolen  caresses  ?
Whence  was  Corinna  made  acquainted  with  your  escapade  ?
Is  it  that  I  have  blushed  ?  Is  it  that,  making  a  slip  in  any  ex-
pression, I  have  given  any  guilty  sign  of  our  stealthy  amours  ?
And  have  I  not,  too,  declared  that  if  any  one  can  commit
the  sin  with  a  bondwoman,  that  man  must  want  a  sound
mind?

The  Thessalian  was  inflamed  by  the  beauty  of  the  captive
daughter  of  Brises ;  the  slave  priestess  of  Phcebus  was  beloved
by  the  general  from  Mycense.  I  am  not  greater  than  the
descendant  of  Tantalus,  nor  greater  than  Achilles ;  why
should  I  deem  that  a  disgrace  to  me,  which  was  becoming  for
monarchs  ?

articles  of  dress,  Cypassis  was  probably  so  called  from  the  garment
called  '  cypassis,'  in  Greek  TLvitckjoiq,  which  was  worn  by  women  and  men
of  effeminate  character,  and  extended  downwards  to  the  ancles.

87  With  the  whip.'] — Ver.  22.  From  this  we  see  that  the  whip  was
applied  to  the  female  slaves,  as  well  as  the  males.


E.  VIII.]  OR, AMOURS.  317

But  when  she  fixed  her  angry  eyes  upon  you,  I  saw  you
blushing  all  over  your  cheeks.  But,  if,  perchance,  you  re-
member, with  how  much  more  presence  of  mind  did  I  my-
self make  oath  by  the  great  Godhead  of  Venus !  Do  thou,
Goddess,  do  thou  order  the  warm  South  winds  to  bear  away
over  the  Carpathian  ocean88  the  perjuries  of  a  mind  unsullied.
In  return  for  these  services,  swarthy  Cypassis,89  give  me  a
sweet  reward,  your  company  to-day.  Why  refuse  me,  ungrate-
ful one,  and  why  invent  new  apprehensions  ?  'Tis  enough  to
have  laid  one  of  your  superiors  under  an  obligation.  But  if,
in  your  folly,  you  refuse  me,  as  the  informer,  I  will  tell  what
has  taken  place  before  ;  and  I  myself  will  be  the  betrayer  of
my  own  failing.  And  I  will  tell  Cypassis,  in  what  spots  I  have
met  you,  and  how  often,  and  in  ways  how  many  and  what.


ELEGY  IX.

To  Cupid.

0  Cupid,  never  angered  enough  against  me,  0  boy,  that  hast
taken  up  thy  abode  in  my  heart !  why  dost  thou  torment  me,
who,  thy  soldier,  have  never  deserted  thy  standards  ?  And
why,  in  my  own  camp,  am  I  thus  wounded  ?  Why  does  thy
torch  burn,  thy  bow  pierce,  thy  friends?  'Twere  a  greater
glory  to  conquer  those  who  war  with  thee.  Nay  more,
did  not  the  Hsemonian  hero,  afterwards,  relieve  him,  when
wounded,  with  his  healing  aid,  whom  he  had  struck  with  his
spear  ?90  The  hunter  follows  the  prey  that  flies,  that  which
is  caught  he  leaves  behind  ;  and  he  is  ever  on  the  search
for  still  more  than  he  has  found.  We,  a  multitude  devoted  to
thee,  are  too  well  acquainted  with  thy  arms  ;  yet  thy  tardy
hand  slackens  against  the  foe  that  resists.  Of  what  use  is  it
to  be  blunting  thy  barbed  darts  against  bare  bones  ?  for  Love
has  left  my  bones  quite  bare.  Many  a  man  is  there  free  from
Love,  many  a  damsel,  too,  free  from  Love ;  from  these,  with
great  glory,  may  a  triumph  be  obtained  by  thee.

88  Carpathian  ocean.']  — Ver.  20. See  the  Metamorphoses,  Book  xi.
1.  249,  and  the  Note  to  this  passage.

89  Swarthy  Cypassis.] — Ver.  22. From  this  expression,  she  was  pro-
bably a  native  of  Egypt  or  Syria.

90  With  his  spear.] — Ver.  7. He  alludes  to  the  cure  of  Telephus  by
the  aid  of  the  spear  of  Achilles,  which  had  previously  wounded  him.


318  THE AMOEES;  [B.  II.

Rome,  had  she  not  displayed  her  strength  over  the  bound-
less earth,  would,  even  to  this  day,  have  been  planted  thick
with  cottages  of  thatch.91  The  invalid  soldier  is  drafted  off
to  the  fields92  that  he  has  received ;  the  horse,  when  free
from  the  race,93  is  sent  into  the  pastures ;  the  lengthened
docks  conceal  the  ship  laid  up  ;  and  the  wand  of  repose91  is
demanded,  the  sword  laid  by.  It  were  time  for  me,  too,  who
have  served  so  oft  in  love  for  the  fair,  now  discharged,  to  be
living  in  quiet.

And  yet,  if  any  Divinity  were  to  say  to  me,  '  Live  on,  re-
signing love ;'  I  should  decline  it ;  so  sweet  an  evil  are  the
fair.  When  I  am  quite  exhausted,  and  the  passion  has
faded  from  my  mind,  I  know  not  by  what  perturbation  of
my  wretched  feelings  I  am  bewildered.  Just  as  the  horse  that
is  hard  of  mouth  bears  his  master  headlong,  as  he  vainly
pulls  in  the  reins  covered  with  foam  ;  just  as  a  sudden  gale,
the  land  now  nearly  made,  carries  out  to  sea  the  vessel,  as
she  is  entering  harbour ;  so,  many  a  time,  does  the  uncertain
gale  of  Cupid  bear  me  away,  and  rosy  Love  resumes  his
well-known  weapons.  Pierce  me,  boy  ;  naked  am  I  exposed
to  thee,  my  arms  laid  aside  ;  hither  let  thy  strength  be
directed :  here  thy  right  hand  tells  with  effect.  Here,  as
though  bidden,  do  thy  arrows  now  spontaneously  come  ;  in
comparison  to  myself,  their  own  quiver  is  hardly  so  well
known  to  them.

Wretched  is  he  who  endures  to  rest  the  whole  night,  and
who  calls  slumber  a  great  good. Fool,  what  is  slumber  but

91  Cottages  of  thatch.']— V er.  18.  In  the  First  Book  of  the  Fasti,  1. 199,
he  speaks  of  the  time  when  '  a  little  cottage  received  Quirinus,  the  be-
gotten of  Mars,  and  the  sedge  of  the  stream  afforded  him  a  scanty  couch.'
The  straw-thatched  cottage  of  Romulus  was  preserved  at  Rome  for  many
centuries. See  the  Fasti,  Bookiii.  1.  184,  and  the  Note  to  the  passage.

92  Off  to  the  fields.]— Ver.  19.  The  '  emeriti,'  or  veterans  of  the  Ro-
man legions,  who  had  served  their  full  time,  received  a  regular  discharge,
which  was  called  '  missio,'  together  with  a  bounty,  either  in  money,  or  an
allotment  of  land.  Virgil  was  deprived  of  his  property  near  Mantua,  by
the  officers  of  Augustus  ;  and  in  his  first  Eclogue,  under  the  name  of  Ti-
tyrus,  he  relates  how  he  obtained  restitution  of  it  on  applying  to  the
Emperor.

93  Free  from  the  race.] — Ver.  20. Literally,  'the  starting  place.'

94  Wand  of  repose] — Ver.  22.  For  an  account  of  the  'rudis,'  and  the
privilege  it  conferred,  see  the  Tristia,  Book,  iv,  El.  8.  1.  24.


E.  IX.]  OB, AHOUES.  319

the  image  of  cold  death  ? The  Fates  will  give  abundance  of
time  for  taking  rest.

Only  let  the  words  of  my  deceiving  mistress  beguile  me  ;
in  hoping,  at  least,  great  joys  shall  I  experience.  And
sometimes  let  her  use  caresses  ;  sometimes  let  her  find  fault ;
oft  may  I  enjoy  the  favour  of  my  mistress  ;  often  may  I  be
repulsed.  That  Mars  is  one  so  dubious,  is  through  thee,  his
step-son,  Cupid  ;  and  after  thy  example  does  thy  step-father
wield  his  arms.  Thou  art  fickle,  and  much  more  wavering  than
thy  own  wings  ;  and  thou  both  dost  give  and  refuse  thy  joys  at
thy  uncertain  caprice.  Still  if  thou  dost  listen  to  me,  as  I  en-
treat thee,  with  thy  beauteous  mother ;  hold  a  sway  never  to
be  relinquished  in  my  heart.  May  the  damsels,  a  throng  too
flighty  by  far,  be  added  to  thy  realms  ;  then  by  two  peoples
wilt  thou  be  revered.


ELEGY  X.

He  tells  Grsscinus  how  he  is  in  love  with  two  mistresses  at  the  same
time.

Thou  wast  wont  to  tell  me,  Grsecinus95  (I  remember  well), 'twas
thou,  I  am  sure,  that  a  person  cannot  be  in  love  with  two
females  at  the  same  time.  Through  thee  have  I  been  deceived;
through  thee  have  I  been  caught  without  my  arms.96  Lo  !  to
my  shame,  I  am  in  love  with  two  at  the  same  moment.  Both
of  them  are  charming  ;  both  most  attentive  to  their  dress  ;
in  skill,  'tis  a  matter  of  doubt,  whether  the  one  or  the  other  is
superior.  That  one  is  more  beauteous  than  this  ;  this  one,
too,  is  more  beauteous  than  that ;  and  this  one  pleases  me
the  most,  and  that  one  the  most.  The  one  passion  and  the
other  fluctuate, like  the  skiff,97  impelled  by  the  discordant

95  GrcecinusJ] — Ver.  1.  He  addresses  three  of  his  Pontic  Epistles,
namely,  the  Sixth  of  the  First  Book,  the  Sixth  of  the  Second  Book,  and
the  Ninth  of  the  Fourth  Book,  to  his  friend  Grsecinus.  In  the  latter
Epistle,  he  congratulates  him  upon  his  being  Consul  elect.

96  Without  my  arms.']  — Ver.  3.  '  Inermis,'  may  be  rendered,  '  off  my
guard.'

97  Like  the  skiff.] — Ver.  10.  '  Phaselos'  is  perhaps  here  used  as  a
general  name  for  a  boat  or  skiff;  but  the  vessel  which  was  particu-
larly so  called,  was  long  and  narrow,  and  probably  received  its  name
from  its  resemblance  to  a  kidney-bean,  which  was  called  'phaselus.'
The  '  phaseli'  were  chiefly  used  by  the  Egyptians,  and  were  of  various


320  THE AMOEES  ;  [b.  II.

breezes,  and  keep  me  distracted.  Why,  Erycina,  dost  thou
everlastingly  double  my  pangs  ?  Was  not  one  damsel  suf-
ficient for  my  anxiety  ?  Why  add  leaves  to  the  trees,  why
stars  to  the  heavens  filled  with  them  1  Why  additional  waters
to  the  vast  ocean  ?

But  still  this  is  better,  than  if  I  were  languishing  without
a  flame  ;  may  a  life  of  seriousness  be  the  lot  of  my  foes.
May  it  be  the  lot  of  my  foes  to  sleep  in  the  couch  of  solitude,
and  to  recline  their  limbs  outstretched  in  the  midst  of  the
bed.  But,  for  me,  may  cruel  Love  ever  disturb  my  sluggish
slumbers  ;  and  may  I  be  not  the  solitary  burden  of  my  couch.
May  my  mistress,  with  no  one  to  hinder  it,  make  me  die
with  love,  if  one  is  enough  to  be  able  to  do  so  ;  but  if  one  is
not  enough,  then  two.  Limbs  that  are  thin,1  but  not  without
strength,  may  suffice  ;  flesh  it  is,  not  sinew  that  my  body
is  in  want  of.  Delight,  too,  will  give  resources  for  vigour  to
my  sides  ;  through  me  has  no  fair  ever  been  deceived.  Often,
robust  through  the  hours  of  delicious  night,  have  I  proved
of  stalwart  body,  even  in  the  morn.  Happy  the  man,  who
proves  the  delights  of  Love  ?  Oh  that  the  Gods  would  grant
that  to  be  the  cause  of  my  end !

Let  the  soldier  arm  his  breast2  that  faces  the  opposing  darts,
and  with  his  blood  let  him  purchase  eternal  fame.  Let
the  greedy  man  seek  wealth ;  and  with  forsworn  mouth,  let
the  shipwrecked  man  drink  of  the  seas  which  he  has  wearied
with  ploughing  them.  But  may  it  be  my  lot  to  perish  in  the
service  of  Love  :  and,  when  I  die,  may  I  depart  in  the  midst
of  his  battles  ;3  and  may  some  one  say,  when  weeping  at  my
funeral  rites  : "  Such  was  a  fitting  death  for  his  life."

sizes,  from  that  of  a  mere  boat  to  a  vessel  suited  for  a  long  voyage.
Appian  mentions  them  as  being  a  medium  between  ships  of  war  and  mer-
chant vessels.  Being  built  for  speed,  they  were  more  noted  for  their
swiftness  than  for  their  strength.  Juvenal,  Sat.  xv.,  1.  127,  speaks  of
them  as  being  made  of  clay ;  but,  of  course,  that  can  only  refer  to  '  pha-
seli'  of  the  smallest  kind.

1  That  are  thin.'] — Ver  23. The  Poet  was  of  slender  figure.

2  Arm  his  breast.'] — Ver.  31.  He  alludes  to  the  '  lorica,'  or  cuirass,
which  was  worn  by  the  soldiers.

3  Of  his  battles.] — Ver.  36.  He  probably  was  thinking  at  this  moment
of  the  deaths  of  Cornelius  Gallus,  and  T.  Haterius,  of  the  Equestrian
order,  whose  singular  end  is  mentioned  by  Valerius  Maximus,  15.  ix.,
c.  12,  s.  8,  and  by  Pliny  the  Elder,  B.  vii.,  c.  53.


35.  XI.]  OE, AMOUES.  321

ELEGY  XL

He  endeavours  to  dissuade  Corinna  from  her  voyage  to  Baia?.

The  pine,  cut  on  the  heights  of  Pelion,  was  the  first  to  teach
the  voyage  full  of  danger,  as  the  waves  of  the  ocean  won-
dered :  which,  boldly  amid  the  meeting  rocks,4  bore  away
the  ram  remarkable  for  his  yellow  fleece.  Oh !  would  that,
overwhelmed,  the  Argo  had  drunk  of  the  fatal  waves,  so  that
no  one  might  plough  the  wide  main  with  the  oar.

Lo  !  Corinna  flies  from  both  the  well-known  couch,  and  the
Penates  of  her  home,  and  prepares  to  go  upon  the  deceitful
paths  of  the  ocean.  Ah  wretched  me !  why,  for  you,  must
I  dread  the  Zephyrs,  and  the  Eastern  gales,  and  the  cold
Boreas,  and  the  warm  wind  of  the  South  ?  There  no  cities
will  you  admire,  there  no  groves  ;  ever  the  same  is  the  azure
appearance  of  the  perfidious  main.

The  midst  of  the  ocean  has  no  tiny  shells,  or  tinted  pebbles  ;5
that  is  the  recreation6  of  the  sandy  shore.  The  shore  alone,
ye  fair,  should  be  pressed  with  your  marble  feet.  Thus
far  is  it  safe  ;  the  rest  of  that  path  is  full  of  hazard.  And  let
others  tell  you  of  the  warfare  of  the  winds  :  the  waves  which
Scylla  infests,  or  those  which  Charybdis  haunts  :  from  what
rocky  range  the  deadly  Ceraunia  projects  :  in  what  gulf  th
Syrtes,  or  in  what  Malea7  lies  concealed.  Of  these  let  others
tell :  but  do  you  believe  what  each  of  them  relates :  no  storm
injures  the  person  who  credits  them.

After  a  length  of  time  only  is  the  land  beheld  once  more,
when,  the  cable  loosened,  the  curving  ship  runs  out  upon  the
boundless  main  :  where  the  anxious  sailor  dreads  the  stormy
winds,  and  sees  death  as  near  him,  as  he  sees  the  waves.  What
if  Triton  arouses  the  agitated  waves  ?  How  parts  the  colour,
then,  from  all  your  face ! Then  you  may  invoke  the  gracious

4  The  meeting  rocks.'] — Ver.  3.  See  the  121st  line  of  the  Epistle  of
Medea  to  Jason,  and  the  Note  to  the  passage.

5  Tinted  pebbles.] — Ver.  13.  The  '  picti  lapilli'  are  probably  carnelians,
which  are  found  on  the  sea  shore,  and  are  of  various  tints.

6  The  recreation.] — Ver.  14.  'Mora/  'delay,'  is  put  here  for  that
which  causes  the  delay. '  That  is  a  pleasure  which  belongs  to  the  shore.'

'  In  what  Malea.] — Ver.  20.  Propertius  and  Virgil  also  couple  Ma-
lea, the  dangerous  promontory  on  the  South  of  Laconia,  with  the  Syrtes
or  quicksands  of  the  Libyan  coast.

T


322  THE AMOEES  ;  [b.  II.

stars  of  the  fruitful  Leda  :9  and  may  say,  "  Happy  she,  whom
her  own  dry  land  receives  !  'Tis  far  more  safe  to  lie  snug  in
the  couch,10  to  read  amusing  books,11  and  to  sound  with  one's
fingers  the  Thracian  lyre."

But  if  the  headlong  gales  bear  away  my  unavailing  words,
still  may  Galatea  be  propitious  to  your  ship.  The  loss  of
such  a  damsel,  both  ye  Goddesses,  daughters  of  Nereus,  and
thou,  father  of  the  Nereids,  would  be  a  reproach  to  you.  Go,
mindful  of  me,  on  your  way,  soon  to  return  with  favouring
breezes  :  may  that,  a  stronger  gale,  fill  your  sails.  Then  may
the  mighty  Nereus  roll  the  ocean  towards  this  shore  :  in  this
direction  may  the  breezes  blow :  hither  may  the  tide  impel
the  waves.  Do  you  yourself  entreat,  that  the  Zephyrs  may
come  full  upon  your  canvass  :  do  you  let  out  the  swelling  sails
with  your  own  hand.

I  shall  be  the  first,  from  the  shore,  to  see  the  well-known
ship,  and  I  shall  exclaim,  "  'Tis  she  that  carries  my  Divinities  :12
and  I  will  receive  you  in  my  arms,  and  will  ravish,  indiscrimi-
nately, many  a  kiss  ;  the  yictim,  promised  for  your  return,
shall  fall ;  the  soft  sand  shall  be  heaped,  too,  in  the  form  of
a  couch  ;  and  some  sand-heap  shall  be  as  a  table13  for  us.
There,  with  wine  placed  before  us,  you  shall  tell  many  a  story,
how  your  bark  was  nearly  overwhelmed  in  the  midst  of  the
waves  :  and  how,  while  you  were  hastening  to  me,  you  dreaded
neither  the  hours  of  the  dangerous  night,  nor  yet  the  stormy

9  Stars  of  the  fruitful  Leda,] — Ver.  29.  Commentators  are  divided
upon  the  exact  meaning  of  this  line.  Some  think  that  it  refers  to  the
Constellations  of  Castor  and  Pollux,  which  were  considered  to  he  favour-
able to  mariners ;  and  which  Horace  mentions  in  the  first  line  of  his
Third  Ode,  B.  L,  '  Sic  fratres  Helenas,  lucida  sidera,'  '  The  brothers  of
Helen,  those  brilliant  stars.'  Others  think  that  it  refers  to  the  luminous
appearances  which  were  seen  to  settle  on  the  masts  of  ships,  and  were
called  by  the  name  of  Castor  and  Pollux ;  they  were  thought  to  be  of
good  omen  when  both  appeared,  but  unlucky  when  seen  singly.

10  In  the  couch.] — Ver.  31.  •  Torus'  most  probably  means  in  this
place  a  sofa,  on  which  the  ladies  would  recline  while  reading.

11  Amusing  books.] — Ver.  31.  By  using  the  diminutive  '  libellus'
here,  he  probably  means  some  light  work,  such  as  a  bit  of  court  scandal,
or  a  love  poem.

12  My  Divinities.]— Ver.  44.  See  the  Second  Epistle,  1,  126,  and  the
Note  to  the  passage.

13  As  a  table.] — Ver.  48.  This  denotes  his  impatience  to  entertain  her
once  again,  and  to  hear  the  narrative  of  her  adventures.


E. XII.]  OK, AMOTJES.  323

Southern  gales.  Though  they  be  fictions,14  yet  all  will  I  be-
lieve as  truth  ;  why  should  I  not  myself  encourage  what  is
my  own  wish  ?  May  Lucifer,  the  most  brilliant  in  the  lofty
skies,  speedily  bring  me  that  day,  spurring  on  his  steed.


ELEGY  XII.

He  rejoices  in  the  possession  of  his  mistress,  having  triumphed  over
every  obstacle.

Come,  triumphant  laurels,  around  my  temples  ;  I  am  victo-
rious :  lo  !  in  my  bosom  Corinna  is  ;  she,  whom  her  husband,
whom  a  keeper,  whom  a  door  so  strong,  (so  many  foes  !)  were
watching,  that  she  might  by  no  stratagem  be  taken.  This
victory  is  deserving  of  an  especial  triumph  :  in  which  the
prize,  such  as  it  is,  is  gained  without  bloodshed.  Not  lowly
walls,  not  towns  surrounded  with  diminutive  trenches,  but  a
fair  damsel  has  been  taken  by  my  contrivance.

When  Pergamus  fell,  conquered  in  a  war  of  twice  five
years  :15  out  of  so  many,  how  great  was  the  share  of  renown
for  the  son  of  Atreus  I  But  my  glory  is  undivided,  and
shared  in  by  no  soldier  :  and  no  other  has  the  credit  of  the
exploit.  Myself  the  general,  myself  the  troops,  I  have  at-
tained this  end  of  my  desires  :  I,  myself,  have  been  the  cavalry,
I  the  infantry,  I,  the  standard-bearer  too.  Fortune,  too,  has
mingled  no  hazard  with  my  feats.  Come  hither,  then,  thou
Triumph,  gained  by  exertions  entirely  my  own.

And  the  cause 16  of  my  warfare  is  no  new  one ;  had  not  the
daughter  of  Tyndarus  been  carried  off,  there  would  have
been  peace  between  Europe  and  Asia.  A  female  disgrace-
fully set  the  wild  Lapithae  and  the  two-formed  race  in  arms,
when  the  wine  circulated. A  female  again,17  good  Latinus,

14  Though  they  be  fictions.] — Ver.  53.  He  gives  a  sly  hit  here  at  the
tales  of  travellers.

15  Twice  jive  years.] — Ver.  9.  On  the  '  lustrum '  of  the  Romans,  see
the  Fasti,  Book  iii.  1.  166,  and  the  Tristia,  Book  iv.  El.  10.

10  And  the  cause.] — Ver,  17.  This  passage  is  evidently  misunderstood
in  Nisard's  translation,  '  Je  ne  serai  pas  non  plus  la  caus  d'une  nouvelle
guerre,'  '  I  will  never  more  be  the  cause  of  a  new  war.'

17  A  female  again  ] — Ver.  22.  He  alludes  to  the  war  in  Latium,  between
iEneas  and  Turnus,  for  the  hand  of  Lavinia,  the  daughter  of  Latinus  and
Amata. See  the  narrative  in  the  Fourteenth  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses.

Y 2


324  THE AMOEES  ;  [b.  II.

forced  the  Trojans  to  engage  in  ruthless  warfare,  in  thy  realms,
'Twas  the  females,21  when  even  now  the  City  was  but  new,
that  sent  against  the  Romans  their  fathers-in-law,  and  gave
them  cruel  arms.  I  have  beheld  the  bulls  fighting  for  a  snow-
white  mate  :  the  heifer,  herself  the  spectator,  afforded  fresh
courage.  Me,  too,  with  many  others,  but  still  without  blood-
shed, has  Cupid  ordered  to  bear  the  standard  in  his  service.


ELEGY  XIII.

He  entreats  the  aid  of  Isis  and  Lucina  in  behalf  of  Corinna,  in  her
labour.

While  Corinna,  in  her  imprudence,  is  trying  to  disengage
the  burden  of  her  pregnant  womb,  exhausted,  she  lies  pros-
trate in  danger  of  her  life.  She,  in  truth,  who  incurred  so
great  a  risk  unknown  to  me,  is  worthy  of  my  wrath ;  but
anger  falls  before  apprehension.  But  yet,  by  me  it  was  that
she  conceived  ;  or  so  I  think.  That  is  often  as  a  fact  to  me,
which  is  possible.

Isis,  thou  who  dost22  inhabit  Parsetonium,23  and  the  genial
fields  of  Canopus,24  and  Memphis,25  and  palm-bearing  Pharos,26

21  ''Tivas  the  females. .] — Ver.  23.  The  rape  of  the  Sabines,  by  the
contrivance  of  Romulus,  is  here  alluded  to.  The  narrative  will  be  found
in  the  Third  Book  of  the  Fasti,  1.  203,  et  seq.  It  has  been  suggested,  but
apparently  without  any  good  grounds,  that  Tarpeia  is  here  alluded  to.

22  Thou  who  dost.] — Ver.  7.  Io  was  said  to  be  worshipped  under
the  name  of  Isis.

23  Pareetonium.] — Ver.  7.  This  city  was  situate  at  the  Canopic  mouth
of  the  Nile,  at  the  Western  extremity  of  Egypt,  adjoining  to  Libya.  Ac-
cording to  Strabo,  its  former  name  was  Ammonia.  It  still  preserves  its
ancient  name  in  a  great  degree,  as  it  is  called  al-Baretoun.

24  Fields  of  Canopus.'] — Ver.  7.  Canopus  was  a  city  at  one  of  the
mouths  of  the  Nile,  now  called  Aboukir.  The  epithet  '  genialis,'  seems
to  have  been  well  deserved,  as  it  was  famous  for  its  voluptuousness.  Strabo
tells  us  that  there  was  a  temple  there  dedicated  to  Serapis,  to  which
multitudes  resorted  by  the  canal  from  Alexandria.  He  says  that  the
canal  was  filled,  night  and  day,  with  men  and  women  dancing  and  play-
ing music  on.  board  the  vessels,  with  the  greatest  licentiousness.  The
place  was  situate  on  an  island  of  the  Nile,  and  was  about  fifteen  miles
distant  from  Alexandria.  Ovid  gives  a  similar  description  of  Alexandria,
in  the  Tristia,  Book  i.  El.  ii.  1.  79. See  the  Note  to  the  passage.

25  Memphis.] — Ver.  8.  Memphis  was  a  city  situate  on  the  North  of
Egypt,  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile. It  was  said  to  have  been  built  by  Osiris.

26  Pharos.] — Ver.  8.  See  the  Metamorphoses,  Book  ix.  1.  772,  and
Book  xv.  1.  287,  with  the  Notes  to  the  passages.


E.  XIII.]  OB, AMOUES.  325

and  where  the  rapid  Nile,  discharged  from  its  vast  bed,
rushes  through  its  seven  channels  into  the  ocean  waves  ;  by
thy  *  sistra'28  do  I  entreat  thee  ;  by  the  faces,  too,  of  revered
Anubis  ;29  and  then  may  the  benignant  Osiris30  ever  love  thy
rites,  and  may  the  sluggish  serpent31  ever  wreath  around  thy
altars,  and  may  the  horned  Apis32  walk  in  the  procession  as
thy  attendant ;  turn  hither  thy  features,33  and  in  one  have
mercy  upon  two ;  for  to  my  mistress  wilt  thou  be  giving  life,
she  to  me.  Full  many  a  time  in  thy  honour  has  she  sat  on
thy  appointed  days,34  on  which35  the  throng  of  the  Galli36
wreathe  themselves  with  thy  laurels.37

28  By  thy  sistra."] — Ver.  11.  For  an  account  of  the  mystic  'sistra'  of
Isis,  see  the  Pontic  Epistles,  Book  i.  El.  i.  1.  38,  and  the  Note.

29  Anubis.} — Ver.  11.  For  an  account  of  Anuhis,  the  Deity  with  the
dog's  head,  see  the  Metamorphoses,  Book  ix.  1.  689,  and  the  Note.

30  Osiris.] — Ver.  12.  See  the  Metamorphoses,  Book  ix.  1.  692,  and
the  Note  to  the  passage.

31  The  sluggish  serpent.] — Ver.  13.  Macrohius  tells  us,  that  the  Egyp-
tians accompanied  the  statue  of  Serapis  with  that  of  an  animal  with  three
heads,  the  middle  one  that  of  a  lion,  the  one  to  the  right,  of  a  dog,  and
that  to  the  left,  of  a  ravenous  wolf;  and  that  a  serpent  was  represented
encircling  it  in  its  folds,  with  its  head  helow  the  right  hand  of  the  statue
of  the  Deity.  To  this  the  Poet  possibly  alludes,  or  else  to  the  asp,  which
was  common  in  the  North  of  Egypt,  and  perhaps,  was  looked  upon  as
sacred.  If  so,  it  is  probable  that  the  word  '  pigra,'  *  sluggish,'  refers  to
the  drowsy  effect  produced  by  the  sting  of  the  asp,  which  was  generally
mortal.  This,  indeed,  seems  the  more  likely,  from  the  fact  of  the  asp
being  clearly  referred  to,  in  company  with  these  Deities,  in  the  Ninth
Book  of  the  Metamorphoses,  1.  93 ;  which  see,  with  the  Note  to  the
passage.

32  The  horned  Apis.] — Ver.  14.  See  the  Ninth  Book  of  the  Metamor-
phoses, 1.  691,  and  the  Note  to  the  passage.

33  Thy  features.] — Ver.  15.  Isis  is  here  addressed,  as  being  supposed
to  be  the  same  Deity  as  Diana  Lucina,  who  was  invoked  by  pregnant  and
parturient  women.  Thus  Isis  appears  to  Telethusa,  a  Cretan  woman,  in
her  pregnancy,  in  the  Ninth  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses,  1.  665,  et  seq.

34  Thy  appointed  days.] — Ver.  17.  Votaries  who  were  worshipping  in
the  temples  of  the  Deities  sat  there  for  a  considerable  time,  especially
when  they  attended  for  the  purpose  of  sacrifice.  In  the  First  Book  of  the
Pontic  Epistles,  Ep,  i.  1.  50,  Ovid  says,  '  I  have  beheld  one  who  confessed
that  he  had  offended  the  Divinity  of  Isis,  clothed  in  linen,  sitting  before
he  altars  of  Isis.'

35  On  which.] — Ver.  18. '  Queis  '  seems  a  preferable  reading  to  '  qua.'
3S  The  Galli.] — Ver.  18. Some  suppose  that  Isis  and  Cybele  were  the

same  Divinity,  and  that  the  Galli,  or  priests  of  Cybele, attended  the
rites  of  their  Goddess  under  the  name  of  Isis. It  seems  clear,  from  the


326  THE AMORES  ;  [b.  II.

Thou,  too,  who  dost  have  compassion  on  the  females  who
are  in  labour,  whose  latent  burden  distends  their  bodies  slowly
moving  ;  come,  propitious  Ilithyia,38  and  listen  to  my  prayers.
She  is  worthy  for  thee  to  command  to  become  indebted  to  thee.
I,  myself,  in  white  array,  will  offer  frankincense  at  thy  smoking
altars ;  I,  myself,  will  offer  before  thy  feet  the  gifts  that  I
have  vowed.  I  will  add  this  inscription  too;  "  Naso,  for  the
preservation  of  Corinna,  offers  these"  But  if,  amid  appre-
hensions so  great,  I  may  be  allowed  to  give  you  advice,  let  it
suffice  for  you,  Corinna,  to  have  struggled  in  this  one  combat.


ELEGY  XIV.

He  reproaches  his  mistress  for  having  attempted  to  procure  abortion.
Op  what  use  is  it  for  damsels  to  live  at  ease,  exempt  from  war,
and  not  with  their  bucklers,39  to  have  any  inclination  to  follow
the  bloodstained  troops ;  if,  without  warfare,  they  endure
wounds  from  weapons  of  their  own,  and  arm  their  imprudent
hands  for  their  own  destruction  1  She  who  was  the  first  to
teach  how  to  destroy  the  tender  embryo,  was  deserving  to
perish  by  those  arms  of  her  own.  That  the  stomach,  for-
sooth, may  be  without  the  reproach  of  wrinkles,  the  sand
must40  be  lamentably  strewed  for  this  struggle  of  yours.

If  the  same  custom  had  pleased  the  matrons  of  old,  through
such criminality mankind would have  perished ; and he

present  passage,  that  the  priests  of  Cybele,  who  were  called  Galli,  did  per-
form the  rites  of  Isis,  but  there  is  abundant  proof  that  these  were  con-
sidered as  distinct  Deities.  In  imitation  of  the  Corybantes,  the  original
priests  of  Cybele,  they  performed  her  rites  to  the  sound  of  pipes  and
tambourines,  and  ran  to  and  fro  in  a  frenzied  manner.

V  With  thy  laurels.}— Yer.  18.  See  the  Note  to  the  692nd  line  of
the  Ninth  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses.  While  celebrating  the  search  for
the  limbs  of  Osiris,  the  priests  uttered  lamentations,  accompanied  with
the  sound  of  the  '  sistra ';  but  when  they  had  found  the  body,  they  wore
wreaths  of  laurel,  and  uttered  cries,  signifying  their  joy.

38  Ilithyia.'} — Ver.  21.  As  to  the  Goddess  Ilithyia,  see  the  Ninth  Book
of  the  Metamorphoses,  1.  283,  and  the  Note  to  the  passage.

39  With  their  bucklers.]  — Ver.  2.  Armed  with  '  peltae,'  or  bucklers,
like  the  Amazons.

40  The  sand  must.~\ — Ver.  8.  This  figure  is  derived  from  the  gladia-
torial fights  of  the  amphitheatre,  where  the  spot  on  which  they  fought
was  strewed  with  sand,  both  for  the  purpose  of  giving  a  firm  footing  to
the  gladiators,  and  of  soaking  up  the  blood  that  was  shed;


E.  XIV.]  OE, AM0T7RS.  327

would  be  required,  who  should  again  throw  stones41  on  the
empty  earth,  for  the  second  time  the  original  of  our  kind.
Who  would  have  destroyed  the  resources  of  Priam,  if  Thetis,
the  Goddess  of  the  waves,  had  refused  to  bear  Achilles,  her  due
burden  ?  If  Ilia  had  destroyed43  the  twins  in  her  swelling
womb,  the  founder  of  the  all-ruling  City  would  have  perished.
If  Venus  had  laid  violent  hands  on  iEneas  in  her  pregnant
womb,  the  earth  would  have  been  destitute  of  its  Csesars.
You,  too,  beauteous  one,  might  have  died  at  the  moment  you
might  have  been  born,  if  your  mother  had  tried  the  same  ex-
periment which  you  have  done.  I,  myself,  though  destined
as  I  am,  to  die  a  more  pleasing  death  by  love,  should  have
beheld  no  days,  had  my  mother  slain  me.

Why  do  you  deprive  the  loaded  vine  of  its  growing  grapes  ?
And  why  pluck  the  sour  apples  with  relentless  hand  ?  When
ripe,  let  them  fall  of  their  own  accord ;  once  put  forth,  let
them  grow.  Life  is  no  slight  reward  for  a  little  waiting.
Why  pierce43  your  own  entrails,  by  applying  instruments,
and  ivhy  give  dreadful  poisons  to  the  yet  unborn  ?  People
blame  the  Colchian  damsel,  stained  with  the  blood  of  her
sons ;  and  they  grieve  for  Itys,  slaughtered  by  his  own  mo-
ther. Each  mother  was  cruel ;  but  each,  for  sad  reasons,
took  vengeance  on  her  husband,  by  shedding  their  common
blood.  Tell  me  what  Tereus,  or  what  Jason  excites  you  to
pierce  your  body  with  an  anxious  hand  ?

This  neither  the  tigers  do  in  their  Armenian  dens,44  nor  does
the  lioness  dare  to  destroy  an  offspring  of  her  own.  But
delicate  females  do  this,  not,  however,  with  impunity  ;  many
a  time45  does  she  die  herself,  who  kills  her  offspring  in  the
womb.  She  dies  herself,  and,  with  her  loosened  hair,  is  borne
upon  the  bier ; and  those  whoever  only  catch  a  sight  of  her,

41  Again  throw  stones."] — Ver.  12.  He  alludes  to  Deucalion  and  Pyr-
rha. See  the  First  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses.

42  Ilia  had  destroyed] — Ver.  16.  Romulus  was  her  son.  See  her
story,  related  at  the  beginning  of  the  Third  Book  of  the  Fasti.

43  Why  pierce.]  —  Ver.  27.  He  alludes  to  the  sharp  instruments
which  she  had  used  for  the  purpose  of  procuring  abortion ;  a  practice
which  Canace  tells  Macareus  that  her  nurse  had  resorted  to.  Epistle  xi.
1.  40—43.

44  Armenian  dens.] — Ver.  35.  See  the  Metamorphoses,  Book  viii.
1.  126,  and  the  Note  to  the  passage.

45  Many  a  time.] — Ver.  38.  He  seems  here  to  speak  of  this  practice  as
being  frequently  resorted  to.


328  THE AMORES  ;  [b.  II.

cry  "  She  deserved  it."46  But  let  these  words  vanish  in  the  air
of  the  heavens,  and  may  there  be  no  weight  in  these  presages
of  mine.  Ye  forgiving  Deities,  allow  her  this  once  to  do
wrong  with  safety  to  herself;  that  is  enough  ;  let  a  second
transgression  bring  its  own  punishment.


ELEGY  XV.

He  addresses  a  ring  which  he  has  presented  to  his  mistress,  and  envies
its  happy  lot.

0  king,47  about  to  encircle  the  finger  of  the  beauteous  fair,  in
which  there  is  nothing  of  value  but  the  affection  of 'the  giver ;
go  as  a  pleasing  gift ;  and  receiving  you  with  joyous  feelings,
may  she  at  once  place  you  upon  her  finger.  May  you  serve
her  as  well  as  she  is  constant  to  me  ;  and  nicely  fitting,  may
you  embrace  her  finger  in  your  easy  circle.  Happy  ring,
by  my  mistress  will  you  be  handled.  To  my  sorrow,  I  am
now  envying  my  own  presents.

0  !  that  I  could  suddenly  be  changed  into  my  own  present,
by  the  arts  of  her  of  iEaea,  or  of  the  Carpathian  old  man  !4S
Then  could  I  wish  you  to  touch  the  bosom  of  my  mistress,
and  for  her  to  place  her  left  hand  within  her  dress.  Though
light  and  fitting  well,  I  would  escape  from  her  finger  ;  and
loosened  by  some  wondrous  contrivance,  into  her  bosom
would  I  fall.  I  too,  as  well,  that  I  might  be  able  to  seal13
her  secret  tablets,  and  that  the  seal,  neither  sticky  nor  dry,
might  not  drag  the  wax,  should  first  have  to  touch  the  lips 50
of  the  charming  fair.  Only  I  would  not  seal  a  note,  the
cause  of  grief  to  myself. Should  I  be  given,  to  be  put  away

46  She  deserved  it.~\ — Ver.  40.  From  this,  it  would  seem  that  the  prac-
tice was  considered  censurable  ;  but,  perhaps  it  was  one  of  those  cases
whose  heinousness  is  never  fully  discovered  till  it  has  brought  about  its
own  punishment.

4?  0  ring."] — Ver.  1.  On  the  rings  in  use  among  the  ancients,  see  the
note  to  the  First  Book  of  the  Amores,  El.  iv.,  1.  26.  See  also  the  subject;
of  the  seventh  Elegy  of  the  First  Book  of  the  Tristia.

48  Carpathian  old  man.] — Ver.  10.  For  some  account  of  Proteus,  who
is  here  referred  to,  see  the  First  Book  of  the  Fasti,  1.  363,  and  the  Note.

49  Be  able  to  seal] — Ver.  15.  From  this,  it  appears  to  have  been  a
signet  ring.

50  Touch  the  lips.]— Ver.  17.  See  the  Tristia,  Book  v.,  El.  iv.  1.  5,  and
the  Note  to  the  passage.


E.  XV.]  OK, AMOTTKS.  329

in  her  desk,59  I  would  refuse  to  depart,  sticking  fast  to  your
fingers  with  my  contracted  circle.

To  you,  my  life,  I  would  never  be  a  cause  of  disgrace,  or
a  burden  which  your  delicate  fingers  would  refuse  to  carry.
Wear  me,  when  you  are  bathing  your  limbs  in  the  tepid
stream ;  and  put  up  with  the  inconvenience  of  the  water
getting  beneath  the  stone.  But,  I  doubt,  that  on  seeing  you
naked,  my  passion  would  be  aroused ;  and  that,  a  ring,  I
should  enact  the  part  of  the  lover.  But  why  wish  for  impos-
sibilities ?  Go,  my  little  gift ;  let  her  understand  that  my  con-
stancy is  proffered  with  you.


ELEGY  XVI.

He  enlarges  on  the  beauties  of  his  native  place,  where  he  is  now  stay-
ing ;  but,  notwithstanding  the  delights  of  the  country,  he  says  that  he
cannot  feel  happy  in  the  absence  of  his  mistress,  whom  he  invites  to
visit  him.

Sulmo,60  the  third  part  of  the  Pelignian  land,61  now  receives
me  ;  a  little  spot,  but  salubrious  with  its  flowing  streams.
Though  the  Sun  should  cleave  the  earth  with  his  approaching
rays,  and  though  the  oppressive  Constellation62  of  the  Dog  of
Icarus  should  shine,  the  Pelignian  fields  are  traversed  by
flowing  streams,  and  the  shooting  grass  is  verdant  on  the
soft  ground.  The  earth  is  fertile  in  corn,  and  much  more
fruitful  in  the  grape  ;  the  thin  soil63  produces,  too,  the  olive,
that  bears  its  berries.64  The  rivers  also  trickling  amid  the
shooting  blades,  the  grassy  turfs  cover  the  moistened  ground.

59  In  her  desk.] — Ver.  19.  '  Loculi'  used  in  the  plural,  as  in  the  pre-
sent instance,  signified  a  receptacle  with  compartments,  similar,  perhaps,
to  our  writing  desks  ;  a  small  box,  coffer,  casket,  or  cabinet  of  wood  or
ivory,  for  keeping  money  or  jewels.

60  Sulmo.'] — Ver.  1.  See  the  Note  to  the  first  line  of  the  First  Elegy  of
this  Book.

61  Pelignian  land.] — Ver.  1.  From  Pliny  the  Elder,  we  learn  that  the
Peligni  were  divided  into  three  tribes,  the  Corfinienses,  the  Superequani,

;-^and  the  Sulmonenses.

62  Constellation.] — Ver.  4.  He  alludes  to  the  heat  attending  the  Dog
star,  see  the  Fasti,  Book  iv.,  1.  939,  and  the  Note  to  the  passage.

63  The  thin  soil.]  — Ver.  8.  '  Rarus  ager '  means,  a  '  thin '  or  '  loose  '
soil,  which  was  well  suited  for  the  cultivation  of  the  grape.

64  That  bears  its  berries.] — Ver.  8.  In  Nisard's  translation,  the  words
!  bacciferam  Pallada,'  which  mean  the  olive,  are  rendered  '  L'amande  chere
a  Pallas,'  '  the  almond  dear  to  Pallas.'


330  THE AMOEES  ;  [b.  II.

But  my  flame  is  far  away.  In  one  word,  I  am  mistaken  ;
she  who  excites  my  flame  is  far  off ;  my  flame  is  here.  I
would  not  choose,  could  I  be  placed  between  Pollux  and
Castor,  to  be  in  a  portion  of  the  heavens  without  yourself.
Let  them  lie  with  their  anxious  cares,  and  let  them  be  pressed
with  the  heavy  weight  of  the  earth,  who  have  measured  out  the
earth  into  lengthened  tracks.65  Or  else  they  should  have
bid  the  fair  to  go  as  the  companions  of  the  youths,  if  the
earth  must  be  measured  out  into  lengthened  tracks.  Then,
had  I,  shivering,  had  to  pace  the  stormy  Alps,66  the  journey
would  have  been  pleasant,  so  that  I  had  been  with  my  love.
With  my  love,  I  could  venture  to  rush  through  the  Libyan
quicksands,  and  to  spread  my  sails  to  be  borne  along  by  the
fitful  Southern  gales.  Then,  I  would  not  dread  the  mon-
sters which  bark  beneath  the  thigh  of  the  virgin  Scylla  ;  nor
winding  Malea,  thy  bays  ;  nor  where  Charybdis,  sated  with
ships  swallowed  up,  disgorges  them,  and  sucks  up  again  the
water  which  she  has  discharged.  And  if  the  sway  of  the
winds  prevails,  and  the  waves  bear  away  the  Deities  about  to
come  to  our  aid  ;  do  you  throw  your  snow-white  arms  around
my  shoulders  ;  with  active  .body  will  I  support  the  beauteous
burden.  The  youth  who  visited  Hero,  had  often  swam  across
the  waves  ;  then,  too,  would  he  have  crossed  them,  but  the
way  was  dark.

But  without  you,  although  the  fields  affording  employment
with  their  vines  detain  me  ;  although  the  meadows  be  over-
flowed by  the  streams,  and  though  the  husbandman  invite
the  obedient  stream67  into  channels,  and  the  cool  air  refresh
the  foliage  of  the  trees,  I  should  not  seem  to  be  among  the
healthy  Pelignians ;  I  should  not  seem  to  be  in  the  place  of
my  birth — my  paternal  fields ;  but  in  Scythia,  and  among
the  fierce  Gilicians,68  and  the  Britons  painted  green,69  and
the  rocks  which  are  red  with  the  gore  of  Prometheus.

65  Lengthened  tracks, .]  — Ver.  16.  To  the  Delphin  Editor  this  seems
a  silly  expression.

66  The  stormy  Alps. .] — Ver.  19.  See  the  Metamorphoses,  Book  ii.
1.  226,  and  the  Note  to  the  passage.

67  The  obedient  stream.'] — Ver.  35.  This  was  a  method  of  irrigation
in  agriculture,  much  resorted  to  hy  the  ancients.

68  Fierce  Cilicians.'] — Ver.  39.  The  people  of  the  interior  of  Cilicia,
in  Asia  Minor,  were  of  rude  and  savage  manners  ;  while  those  on  the  coast


E.  XVI.]  Oft, AMOUES.  331

The  elm  loves  the  vine,71  the  vine  forsakes  not  the  elm :  why
am  I  so  often  torn  away  from  my  love  ?  But  you  used  to  swear,
both  by  myself,  and  by  your  eyes,  my  stars,  that  you  would
ever  be  my  companion.  The  winds  and  the  waves  carry  away,
whither  they  choose,  the  empty  words  of  the  fair,  more  worth-
less than  the  falling  leaves.  Still,  if  there  is  any  affectionate
regard  in  you  for  me  thus  deserted  :  now  commence  to  add
deeds  to  your  promises  :  and  forthwith  do  you,  as  the  nags72
whirl  your  little  chaise 7J  along,  shake  the  reins  over  their
manes  at  full  speed.  But  you,  rugged  hills,  subside,  wherever
she  shall  come ;  and  you  paths  in  the  winding  vales,  be  smooth.


ELEGY  XVII.

He  says  that  he  is  the  slave  of  Corinna,  and  complains  of  the  tyranny
which  she  exercises  over  him.

If  there  shall  be  any  one  who  thinks  it  inglorious  to  serve  a
damsel :  in  his  opinion  I  shall  be  convicted  of  such  baseness.
Let  me  be  disgraced ; if  only  she,  who  possesses  Paphos,

had  been  engaged  in  piracy,  until  it  had  been  effectually  suppressed  by
Pompey.

69  Britons  painted  green.] — Ver.  39.  The  Britons  may  be  called  '  viri-
des,'  from  their  island  being  surrounded  by  the  sea ;  or,  more  probably,
from  the  colour  with  which  they  were  in  the  habit  of  staining  their  bodies.
Caesar  says,  in  the  Fifth  Book  of  the  Gallic  war,  '  The  Britons  stain  them-
selves with  woad,  '  vitrum,'  or  '  glastum,'  which  produces  a  blue  colour:
and  thus  they  become  of  a  more  dreadful  appearance  in  battle.'  The  con-
quest of  Britain,  by  Caesar,  is  alluded  to  in  the  Fifteenth  Book  of  the
Metamorphoses,  1.  752.

71  Loves  the  vine.]  — Ver.  41.  The  custom  of  training  vines  by  the
side  of  the  elm,  has  been  alluded  to  in  a  previous  Note.  See  also  the
Metamorphoses,  Book  xiv.  1.  663,  and  the  Note  to  the  passage.

72  As  the  nags.]  — Ver.  49.  The  '  manni'  were  used  by  the  Romans
for  much  the  same  purpose  as  our  coach-horses  :  and  were  probably  more
noted  for  their  fleetness  than  their  strength;  They  were  a  small  breed,
originally  imported  from  Gaul,  and  the  possession  of  them  was  supposed  to
indicate  the  possession  of  considerable  wealth.  As  the  '  esseda '  was  a  small
vehicle,  and  probably  of  light  structure,  we  must  not  be  surprised  at
Corinna  being  in  the  habit  of  driving  for  herself.  The  distance  from
Eome  to  Sulmo  was  about  ninety  miles ;  and  the  journey,  from  his  ex-
pressions in  the  fifty-first  and  fifty-second  lines,  must  have  been  over  hill
and  dale.

73  Your  little  chaise.]  —  Ver.  49.  For  an  account  of  the  '  essedum,'  or
4  esseda,'  see  the  Pontic  Epistles,  Book  ii.  Ep.  10,  1.  34,  and  the  Note  to
the  passage.


332  THE AMORES  ;  [b. II.

and  Cythera,  beaten  by  the  waves,  torments  me  with  less
violence.  And  would  that  I  had  been  the  prize,  too,  of  some
indulgent  mistress  ;  since  I  was  destined  to  be  the  prize
of  some  fair.  Beauty  begets  pride ;  through  her  charms  Co-
rinna  is  disdainful.  Ah  wretched  me  !  why  is  she  so  well
known  to  herself  ?  Pride,  forsooth,  is  caught  from  the  re-
flection of  the  mirror :  and  there  she  sees  not  herself,  unless
she  is  first  adorned.

If  your  beauty  gives  you  a  sway  not  too  great  over  all  things,
face  born  to  fascinate  my  eyes,  still,  you  ought  not,  on  that
account,  to  despise  me  comparatively  with  yourself.  That
which  is  inferior  must  be  united  with  what  is  great.  The
Nymph  Calypso,  seized  with  passion  for  a  mortal,  is  believed
to  have  detained  the  hero  against  his  will.  It  is  believed  that
the  ocean-daughter  of  Nereus  was  united  to  the  king  of
Phthia,74  and  that  Egeria  was  to  the  just  Numa  :  that  Venus
was  to  Vulcan  :  although,  his  anvil75  left,  he  limped  with  a  dis-
torted foot.  This  same  kind  of  verse  is  unequal ;  but  still
the  heroic  is  becomingly  united76  with  the  shorter  measure.

You,  too,  my  life,  receive  me  upon  any  terms.  May  it
become  you  to  impose  conditions  in  the  midst  of  your  caresses.
I  will  be  no  disgrace  to  you,  nor  one  for  you  to  rejoice  at  my
removal.  This  affection  will  not  be  one  to  be  disavowed  by
you.77  May  my  cheerful  lines  be  to  you  in  place  of  great
wealth :  even  many  a  fair  wishes  to  gain  fame  through  me.
I  know  of  one  who  publishes  it  that  she  is  Corinna.78  What
would  she  not  be  ready  to  give  to  be  so  ?  But  neither  do  the
cool  Eurotas,  and  the  poplar-bearing  Pad  us,  far  asunder,
roll  along  the  same  banks;  nor  shall  any  one  but  yourself  be

74  King  of  Phthia. — Ver.  17.]  He  alludes  to  the  marriage  of  Thetis,
the  sea  Goddess,  to  Peleus,  the  king  of  Phthia,  in  Thessaly.

75  His  anvil.'] — Ver.  19.  It  is  a  somewhat  curious  fact,  that  the  anvils
of  the  ancients  exactly  resembled  in  form  and  every  particular  those  used
at  the  present  day.

76  Becomingly  united.'] — Ver.  22.  He  says,  that  in  the  Elegiac  measure
the  Pentameter,  or  line  of  five  feet,  is  not  unhappily  matched  with  the
Hexameter,  or  heroic  line  of  six  feet.

77  Disavowed  by  you.]  — Ver.  26.  '  Vobis  '  seems  more  agreable  to
the  sense  of  the  passage,  than  '  nobis.'  '  to  be  denied  by  us ;'  as,  from
the  context,  there  was  no  fear  of  his  declining  her  affection.

7S  That  she  is  Corinna.]— Ver.  29.  This  clearly  proves  that  Corinna
was  not  a  real  name ;  it  probably  was  not  given  by  the  Poet  to  any  one
of  his  female  acquaintances  in  particular.


E.  XVIII.]  OE, AMOITES.  333

celebrated  in  my  poems. You,  alone,  shall  afford  subject-
matter  for  my  genius.

ELEGY  XVIII.

He  tells  Macer  that  he  ought  to  write  on  Love.
While  thou  art  tracing  thy  poem  onwards 79  to  the  wrath  of
Achilles,  and  art  giving  their  first  arms  to  the  heroes,  after
taking  the  oaths ;  I,  Macer,80  am  reposing  in  the  shade  of
Venus,  unused  to  toil ;  and  tender  Love  attacks  me, when  about
to  attempt  a  mighty  subject.  Many  a  time  have  I  said  to  my
mistress,  "At  length,  away  with  you:"  and  forthwith  she  has
seated  herself  in  my  lap.  Many  a  time  have  I  said,  "  I  am
ashamed  of  myself :"  ivhen,  with  difiiculty,  her  tears  repressed,
she  has  said,  "  Ah  wretched  me !  Now  you  are  ashamed  to
love."  And  then  she  has  thrown  her  arms  around  my  neck:
and  has  given  me  a  thousand  kisses,  which  quite  overpowered
me.  I  am  overcome:  and  my  genius  is  called  away  from  the
arms  it  has  assumed ;  and  I  forthwith  sing  the  exploits  of
my  home,  and  my  own  warfare.

Still  did  I  wield  the  sceptre  :  and  by  my  care  my  Tragedy
grew  apace  ;81  and  for  this  pursuit  I  was  well  prepared.  Love
smiled  both  at  my  tragic  pall,  and  my  coloured  buskins,  and

70  Thy  poem  onwards.] — Ver.  1.  Macer  translated  the  Iliad  of  Homer
into  Latin  verse,  and  composed  an  additional  poem,  commencing  at  the
beginning  of  the  Trojan  war,  and  coming  down  to  the  wrath  of  Achilles,
with  which  Homer  begins.

80  7,  Macer.] — Ver.  3.  ^milius  Macer  is  often  mentioned  by  Ovid  in
his  works.  In  the  Tristia,  Book  iv.  Ep.  10, 1. 44,  he  says,  '  Macer,  when
stricken  in  years,  many  a  time  repeated  to  me  his  poem  on  birds,  and  each
serpent  that  is  deadly,  each  herb  that  is  curative.'  The  Tenth  Epistle  of
the  Second  Book  of  Pontic  Epistles  is  also  addressed  to  him,  in  which
Ovid  alludes  to  his  work  on  the  Trojan  war,  and  the  time  wrhen  they
visited  Asia  Minor  and  Sicily  together.  He  speaks  of  him  in  the  Sixteenth
Epistle  of  the  Fourth  Book,  as  being  then  dead.  Macer  was  a  native  of
Verona,  and  was  the  intimate  friend  of  Virgil,  Ovid,  and  Tibullus.  Some
suppose  that  the  poet  who  wrote  on  natural  history,  was  not  the  same
with  him  who  wrote  on  the  Trojan  war ;  and,  indeed,  it  does  not  seem
likely,  that  he  who  was  an  old  man  in  the  youth  of  Ovid,  should  be  the
same  person  to  whom  he  writes  from  Pontus,  when  about  fifty-six  years
of  age. The  bard  of  Ilium  died  in  Asia.

81  Tragedy  grew  apace.] — Ver.  13.  He  alludes  to  his  tragedy  of  Medea,
which  no  longer  exists.  Quintilian  thus  speaks  of  it ;  •  The  Medea  of
Ovid  seems  to  me  to  prove  how  much  he  was  capable  of,  if  he  had  only
preferred  to  curb  his  genius,  rather  than  indulge  it.'


334  THE AMOHES  ;  [b.  II.

the  sceptre  wielded  so  well  by  a  private  hand.  From  this
pursuit,  too,  did  the  influence  of  my  cruel  mistress  draw  me
away,  and  Love  triumphed  over  the  Poet  with  his  buskins.
As  I  am  allowed  to  do,  either  I  teach  the  art  of  tender  love,
(alas !  by  my  own  precepts  am  I  myself  tormented :)  or  I
write  what  was  delivered  to  Ulysses  in  the  words  of  Pene-
lope, or  thy  tears,  deserted  Phyllis.  What,  too,  Paris  and
Macareus,  and  the  ungrateful  Jason,  and  the  parent  of  Hip-
polytus,  and  Hippoly tus  himself  read  :  and  what  the  wretched
Dido  says,  brandishing  the  drawn  sword,  and  what  the  Lesbian
mistress  of  the  iEolian  lyre.

How  swiftly  did  my  friend,  Sabinus,  return82  from  all  quar-
ters of  the  world,  and  bring  back  letters83  from  different  spots !
The  fair  Penelope  recognized  the  seal  of  Ulysses  :  the  step-
mother read  what  was  written  by  her  own  Hippolytus.  Then
did  the  dutiful  iEneas  write  an  answer  to  the  afflicted  Elissa  ;
and  Phyllis,  if  she  only  survives,  has  something  to  read.  The
sad  letter  came  to  Hypsipyle  from  Jason  :  the  Lesbian  damsel,
beloved  by  Apollo,  may  give  the  lyre  that  she  has  vowed  to
Phoebus.84  Nor,  Macer,  so  far  as  it  is  safe  for  a  poet  who
sings  of  wars,  is  beauteous  Love  unsung  of  by  thee,  in  the
midst  of  warfare.  Both  Paris  is  there,  and  the  adultress,
the  far-famed  cause  of  guilt :  and  Laodamia,  who  attends  her
husband  in  death.  If  well  I  know  thee  ;  thou  singest  not  of
wars  with  greater  pleasure  than  these ;  and  from  thy  own
camp  thou  comest  back  to  mine.

82  Sabinus  return.'] — Ver.  27.  He  represents  his  friend,  Sabinus,  here
in  the  character  of  a  '  tabellarius,'  or  '  letter  carrier/  going  with  extreme
speed  (celer)  to  the  various  parts  of  the  earth,  and  bringing  back  the
answers  of  Ulysses  to  Penelope,  Hippolytus  to  Phsedra,  iEneas  to  Dido,
Demophoon  to  Phyllis,  Jason  to  Hypsipyle,  and  Phaon  to  Sappho.  All
these  works  of  Sabinus  have  perisbed,  except  the  Epistle  of  Ulysses  to
Penelope,  and  Demophoon  to  Phyllis.  His  Epistle  from  Paris  to  (Enone,
is  not  here  mentioned.  See  the  Pontic  Epistles,  Book  iv.  Ep.  xvi.  1.  13,
and  the  Note  to  the  passage.

83  Bring  back  letters."] — Ver.  28.  As  the  ancients  had  no  establish-
ment corresponding  to  our  posts,  they  employed  special  messengers  called
'  tabellarii,'  for  the  conveyance  of  their  letters.

8i  Vowed  to  Phoebus.] — Ver.  34.  Sappho  says  in  her  Epistle,  that  if
Phaon  should  refuse  to  return,  she  will  dedicate  her  lyre  to  Phoebus,  and
throw  herself  from  the  Leucadian  rock.  This,  he  tells  her,  she  may  now
do,  as  by  his  answer  Phaon  declines  to  return.


E.  XIX.]  OE, AMOTTES.  335

ELEGY  XIX.

He  tells  a  husband  who  does  not  care  for  his  wife  to  watch  her  a  little
more  carefully.

If,  fool,  thou  dost  not  need  the  fair  to  be  well  watched ;  still
have  her  watched  for  my  sake  :  that  I  may  be  pleased  with
her  the  more.  What  one  may  have  is  worthless ;  what  one
may  not  have,  gives  the  more  edge  to  the  desires.  If  a  man
falls  in  love  with  that  which  another  permits  him  to  love,  he  is
a  man  without  feeling.  Let  us  that  love,  both  hope  and
fear  in  equal  degree  ;  and  let  an  occasional  repulse  make  room
for  our  desires.

Why  should  I  think  of  Fortune,  should  she  never  care  to
deceive  me  ?  I  value  nothing  that  does  not  sometimes  cause
me  pain.  The  clever  Corinna  saw  this  failing  in  me  ;  and
she  cunningly  found  out  the  means  by  which  I  might  be
enthralled.  Oh,  how  many  a  time,  feigning  a  pain  in  her  head85
that  was  quite  well,  has  she  ordered  me,  as  I  lingered  with
tardy  foot,  to  take  my  departure  !  Oh,  how  many  a  time
has  she  feigned  a  fault,  and  guilty  herself,  has  made  there  to
be  an  appearance  of  innocence,  just  as  she  pleased  !  When
thus  she  had  tormented  me  and  had  rekindled  the  lan-
guid flame,  again  was  she  kind  and  obliging  to  my  wishes.
What  caresses,  what  delightful  words  did  she  have  ready  for
me  !  What  kisses,  ye  great  Gods,  and  how  many,  used  she
to  give  me !

You,  too,  who  have  so  lately  ravished  my  eyes,  often  stand
in  dread  of  treachery,  often,  when  entreated,  refuse  ;  and  let
me,  lying  prostrate  on  the  threshold  before  your  door-posts,
endure  the  prolonged  cold  throughout  the  frosty  night.  Thus
is  my  love  made  lasting,  and  it  grows  up  in  lengthened  experi-
ence ;  this  is  for  my  advantage,  this  forms  food  for  my  affec-
tion. A  surfeit  of  love,83  and  facilities  too  great,  become  a  cause
of  weariness  to  me,  just  as  sweet  food  cloys  the  appetite.
If  the  brazen  tower  had  never  enclosed  Danae, 87  Danae  had
never  been  made  a  mother  by  Jove. While  Juno  is  watching

8r>  Pain  in  her  head.'] — Ver.  11.  She  pretended  a  head-ache,  when
nothing  was  the  matter  with  her ;  in  order  that  too  much  familiarity,  in
the  end,  might  not  breed  contempt.

8(5  A  surfeit  of  love.] — Ver.  25.  '  Pinguis  amor'  seems  here  to  mean  a
1  satisfied '  or  a  '  pampered  passion  ;'  one  that  meets  with  no  repulse.

87  Enclosed  Danae.] — Ver.  27. See  the  Metamorphoses,  Book  iv.,  1.  608.


336  THE AMOEES;  [b.  II.

Io  with  her  curving  horns,  she  becomes  still  more  pleasing
to  Jove  than  she  has  been  before.

Whoever  desires  what  he  may  have,  and  what  is  easily  ob-
tained, let  him  pluck  leaves  from  the  trees,  and  take  water
from  the  ample  stream.  If  any  damsel  wishes  long  to  hold
her  sway,  let  her  play  with  her  lover.  Alas !  that  I,  myself,
am  tormented  through  my  own  advice.  Let  constant  indul-
gence be  the  lot  of  whom  it  may,  it  does  injury  to  me  :  that
which  pursues,  from  it  I  fly  ;  that  which  flies,  I  ever  pursue.
But  do  thou,  too  sure  of  the  beauteous  fair,  begin  now  at
nightfall  to  close  thy  house.  Begin  to  enquire  who  it  is  that
so  often  stealthily  paces  thy  threshold  ?  Why,  too,  the  dogs
bark88  in  the  silent  night.  Whither  the  careful  handmaid  is
carrying,  or  whence  bringing  back,  the  tablets  ?  Why  so  oft  she
lies  in  her  couch  apart  ?  Let  this  anxiety  sometimes  gnaw
into  thy  very  marrow ;  and  give  some  scope  and  some  oppor-
tunity for  my  stratagems.

If  one  could  fall  in  love  with  the  wife  of  a  fool,  that  man
could  rob  the  barren  sea-shore  of  its  sand.  And  now  I  give  thee
notice  ;  unless  thou  begin  to  watch  this  fair,  she  shall  begin
to  cease  to  be  aflame  of  mine.  I  have  put  up  with  much,
and  that  for  a  long  time  ;  I  have  often  hoped  that  it  would
come  to  pass,  that  I  should  adroitly  deceive  thee,  when  thou
hadst  watched  her  well.  Thou  art  careless,  and  dost  endure
what  should  be  endured  by  no  husband ;  but  an  end  there
shall  be  of  an  amour  that  is  allowed  to  me.  And  shall  I  then,
to  my  sorrow,  forsooth,  never  be  forbidden  admission  ?  Will
it  ever  be  night  for  me,  with  no  one  for  an  avenger  1  Am  I  to
dread  nothing  ?  Shall  I  heave  no  sighs  in  my  sleep  ?  What
have  I  to  do  with  one  so  easy,  what  with  such  a  pander  of
a  husband?  By  thy  own  faultiness  thou  dost  mar  my  joys.
Why,  then,  dost  thou  not  choose  some  one  else,  for  so  great
long-suffering  to  please  ?  If  it  pleases  thee  for  me  to  be  thy
rival,  forbid  me  to  be  so.

88  The  dogs  barle.'j—Ver.  40.  The  women  of  loose  character,  among  the
Romans,  were  much  in  the  habit  of  keeping  dogs,  for  the  protection  of
their  houses.


BOOK  THE  THIRD,


ELEGY  I.

The  Poet  deliberates  whether  he  shall  continue to  write  Elegies,  of
whether  he  shall  turn  to  Tragedy,

These  stands  an  ancient  grove,  and  one  uncut  for  many  a
year ;  'tis  worthy  of  belief  that  a  Deity  inhabits  that  spot.
In  the  midst  there  is  a  holy  spring,  and  a  grotto  arched  with
pumice  ;  and  on  every  side  the  birds  pour  forth  their  sweet
complaints.  Here,  as  I  was  walking,  protected  by  the  shade
of  the  trees,  I  was  considering  upon  what  work  my  Muse
should  commence.  Elegy  came  up,  having  her  perfumed
hair  wreathed ;  and,  if  I  mistake  not,  one  of  her  feet  was
longer  than  the  other}  Her  figure  was  beauteous  ;  her  robe
of  the  humblest  texture,  her  garb  that  of  one  in  love ;  the
fault  of  her  foot  was  one  cause  of  her  gracefulness.

Ruthless  Tragedy,  too,  came  with  her  mighty  stride ;  on
her  scowling  brow  were  her  locks ;  her  pall  swept  the  ground.
Her  left  hand  held  aloft  the  royal  sceptre ;  the  Lydian  bus-
kin- was  the  high  sandal  for  her  feet.  And  first  she  spoke  ;
"  And  when  will  there  be  an  end  of  thy  loving  ?  0  Poet,  so
slow  at  thy  subject  matter  !  Drunken  revels3  tell  of  thy
wanton  course  of  life  ;  the  cross  roads,  as  they  divide  in  their
many  ways,  tell  of  it.  Many  a  time  does  a  person  point  with
his  finger  at  the  Poet  as  he  goes  along,  and  say,  'That,
that  is  the  man  whom  cruel  Love  torments.' Thou  art  talked

1  Than  the  other.'] — Ver.  8.  He  alludes  to  the  unequal  lines  of  the
Elegiac  measure,  which  consists  of  Hexameters  and  Pentameters.  In  per-
sonifying Elegy,  he  might  have  omitted  this  remark,  as  it  does  not  add  to
the  attractions  of  a  lady,  to  have  one  foot  longer  than  the  other  ;  he  says,
however,  that  it  added  to  her  gracefulness.

2  The  Lydian  buskin.'] — Ver.  14.  As  Lydia  was  said  to  have  sent  co-
lonists to  Etruria,  some  Commentators  think  that  the  word  '  Lydius'  here
means  '  Etrurian  ;'  and  that  the  first  actors  at  Rome  were  Etrurians.  But,
as  the  Romans  derived  their  notions  of  tragedy  from  the  Greeks,  we  may
conclude  that  Lydia  in  Asia  Minor  is  here  referred  to  ;  for  we  learn  from
Herodotus  and  other  historians,  that  the  Greeks  borrowed  largely  from
the  Lydians.

3  Drunken  revels.] — Ver.  17.  He  probably  alludes  to  the  Fourth  Elegy
of  the  First,  and  the  Fifth  Elegy  of  the  Second  Book  of  the  '  Amores.'

z


338  THE AMOEES  ;  [b.  III.

of  as  the  story  of  the  whole  City,  and  yet  thou  dost  not  per-
ceive it ;  while,  all  shame  laid  aside,  thou  art  boasting  of  thy
feats.  'Twere  time  to  be  influenced,  touched  by  a  more
mighty  inspiration  ;5  long  enough  hast  thou  delayed  ;  com-
mence a  greater  task.  By  thy  subject  thou  dost  cramp  thy
genius  ;  sing  of  the  exploits  of  heroes  ;  then  thou  wilt  say,
■  This  is  the  field  that  is  worthy  of  my  genius. '  Thy  Muse  has
sportively  indited  what  the  charming  fair  may  sing ;  and  thy
early  youth  has  been  passed  amidst  its  own  numbers.  Now
may  I,  Roman  Tragedy,  gain  a  celebrity  by  thy  means  ;  thy
conceptions  will  satisfy  my  requirements."

Thus  far  did  she  speak  ;  and,  supported  on  her  tinted  bus-
kins, three  or  four  times  she  shook  her  head  with  its  flowing
locks.  The  other  one,  if  rightly  I  remember,  smiled  with
eyes  askance.  Am  I  mistaken,  or  was  there  a  branch  of
myrtle  in  her  right  hand  1  "  Why,  haughty  Tragedy,"  said  she,
"  dost  thou  attack  me  with  high-sounding  words  1  And  canst
thou  never  be  other  than  severe  ?  Still,  thou  thyself  hast
deigned  to  be  excited  in  unequal  numbers  !G  Against  me  hast
thou'  strived,  making  use  of  my  own  verse.  I  should  not
compare  heroic  measures  with  my  own  ;  thy  palaces  quite
overwhelm  my  humble  abodes.  I  am  a  trifler  ;  and  with  my-
self, Cupid,  my  care,  is  a  trifler  too  ;  I  am  no  more  substan-
tial myself  than  is  my  subject-matter.  Without  myself,  the
mother  of  wanton  Love  were  coy  ;  of  that  Goddess  do  I  show
myself  the  patroness7  and  the  confidant.  The  door  which
thou  with  thy  rigid  buskin  canst  not  unlock,  the  same  is
open  to  my  caressing  words. And  yet  I  have  deserved  more

5  Mighty  inspiration.'] — Ver.  23.  The  'thyrsus'  was  said  to  have  been
first  used  by  the  troops  of  Bacchus,  in  his  Indian  expedition,  when,  to
deceive  the  Indians,  they  concealed  the  points  of  their  spears  amid  leaves
of  the  vine  and  ivy.  Similar  weapons  were  used  by  his  devotees  when
worshipping  him,  which  they  brandished  to  and  fro.  To  be  touched
with  the  thyrsus  of  Bacchus,  meant  '  to  be  inspired  with  poetic  frenzy.'
See  the  Notes  to  the  Metamorphoses,  Book  hi.  1.  542.

6  In  unequal  numbers.'] — Ver.  37.  Some  have  supposed,  that  allusion
is  made  to  the  Tragedy  of  Medea,  which  Ovid  had  composed,  and  that  it
had  been  written  in  Elegiac  measure.  This,  however,  does  not  seem  to
be  the  meaning  of  the  passage.  Elegy  justly  asks  Tragedy,  why,  if  she
has  such  a  dislike  to  Elegiac  verses,  she  has  been  talking  in  them  ?
which  she  has  done,  from  the  15th  line  to  the  30th.

7  Myself  the  patroness.] — Ver.  44  She  certainly  does  not  give  herself
a  very  high  character  in  giving  herself  the  title  of  '  lena.'


&  I.]  OR, AMOT7BS.  339

power  than  thou,  by  patting  up  with  many  a  thing  that  would
not  have  been  endured  by  thy  haughtiness.

"  Through  me  Corinna  learned  how,  deceiving  her  keeper,  to
shake  the  constancy  of  the  fastened  door,8  and  to  slip  away
from  her  couch,  clad  in  a  loose  tunic,9  and  in  the  night  to  move
her  feet  without  a  stumble.  Or  how  often,  cut  in  the  ivood,1"
have  I  been  hanging  up  at  her  obdurate  doors,  not  fearing  to  be
read  by  the  people  as  they  passed  !  I  remember  besides,  how,
when  sent,  I  have  been  concealed  in  the  bosom  of  the  hand-
maid, until  the  strict  keeper  had  taken  his  departure.  Still
further — when  thou  didst  send  me  as  a  present  on  her  birth-
day11— but  she  tore  me  to  pieces,  and  barbarously  threw  me
in  the  water  close  by.  I  was  the  first  to  cause  the  prospering
germs  of  thy  genius  to  shoot ;  it  has,  as  my  gift,  that  for
which  she  is  now  asking  thee."

They  had  now  ceased  ;  on  which  I  began  :  "  By  your  own
selves,  I  conjure  you  both  ;  let  my  words,  as  I  tremble,  be  re-
ceived by  unprejudiced  ears.  Thou,  the  one,  dost  grace  rne
with  the  sceptre  and  the  lofty  buskin ;  already,  even  by  thy
contact  with  my  lips,  have  I  spoken  in  mighty  accents.
Thou,  the  other,  dost  offer  a  lasting  fame  to  my  loves  •  be
propitious,  then, and  with the  long  lines  unite  the  short.

8  The  fastened  door, ,] — Ver.  50.  He  alludes,  probably,  to  one  of  the
Elegies  which  he  rejected,  when  he  cut  down  the  five  books  to  three.

9  In  a  loose  tunic] — Ver.  51.  He  may  possibly  allude  to  the  Fifth  Elegy
of  the  First  Book,  as  the  words  '  tunica  velata  recincta,'  as  applied  to  Co^-
rinna,  are  there  found.  But  there  he  mentions  midday  as  the  time  when
Corinna  came  to  him,  whereas  he  seems  here  to  allude  to  the  middle  of
the  night.

10  Cut  in  the  wood.'] — Ver.  53.  He  alludes  to  the  custom  of  lovers
carving  inscriptions  on  the  doors  of  their  obdurate  mistresses  :  this  we
learn  from  Plautus  to  have  been  done  in  Elegiac  strains,  and  sometimes
with  charcoal.  '  Implentur  mese  fores  elegiamm  carbonibus.'  '  My  doors
are  filled  with  the  coal-black  marks  of  elegies.'

11  On  her  birthday.] — Ver.  57.  She  is  telling  Ovid  what  she  has  put  up
with  for  his  sake  ;  and  she  reminds  him  how,  when  he  sent  to  his  mistress
some  complimentary  lines  on  her  birthday,  she  tore  them  up  and  threw
them  in  the  water.  Horace  mentions  '  the  flames,  or  the  Adriatic  sea/
as  the  end  of  verses  that  displeased.  Athenseus,  Book  xiii.  c.  5,  relates  a
somewhat  similar  story.  Diphilus  the  poet  was  in  the  habit  of  sending
his  verses  to  his  mistress  Gnathasna.  One  day  she  was  mixing  him  a  cup
of  wine  and  snow-water,  on  which  he  observed,  how  cold  her  well  must
be ;  to  which  she  answered,  yes,  for  it  was  there  that  she  used  to  throw
his  compositions.

Z2


340  THE AMOEE3  ;  [b.  Ut.

Do,  Tragedy,  grant  a  little  respite  to  the  Poet.  Thou  art  an
everlasting  task  ;  the  time  which  she  demands  is  but  short."
Moved  by  my  entreaties,  she  gave  me  leave  ;  let  tender
Love  be  sketched  with  hurried  hand,  while  still  there  is  time  ;
from  behind14  a  more  weighty  undertaking  presses  on.


ELEGY  II.

To  his  mistress,  in  whose  company  he  is  present  at  the  chariot  races  in
the  Circus  Maximus. He  describes  the  race.

I  am  not  sitting  here15  an  admirer  of  the  spirited  steeds  ;18  still
I  pray  that  he  who  is  your  favourite  may  win.  I  have  come
here  to  chat  with  you,  and  to  be  seated  by  you,17  that  the

14  From  behind.'] — Ver.  70.  It  is  not  known,  for  certain,  to  what  he
refers  in  this  line.  Some  think  that  he  refers  to  the  succeeding  Elegies
in  this  Book,  which  are,  in  general,  longer  than  the  former  ones,  while
others  suppose  that  he  refers  to  his  Metamorphoses,  which  he  then  con,,
templated  writing.  Burmann,  however,  is  not  satisfied  with  this  expla-
nation, and  thinks  that,  in  his  more  mature  years,  he  contemplated  the
composition  of  Tragedy,  after  having  devoted  his  youth  to  lighter  subjects;
and  that  he  did  not  compose,  or  even  contemplate  the  composition  of  his
Metamorphoses,  until  many  years  afterwards.

15  I  am  not  sitting  here.'] — Ver.  1.  He  is  here  alluding  to  the  Circen-
sian  games,  which  were  celebrating  in  the  Circus  Maximus,  or  greatest
Circus,  at  Rome,  at  different  times  in  the  year.  Some  account  is  given  of
the  Circus  Maximus  in  the  Note  to  1.  392  of  the  Second  Book  of  the
Fasti.  The  '  Magni,'  or  Great  Circensian  games,  took  place  on  the  Fourth
of  the  Ides  of  April.  The  buildings  of  the  Circus  were  burnt  in  the  con-
flagration of  Rome,  in  Nero's  reign  ;  and  it  was  not  restored  till  the  days
of  Trajan,  who  rebuilt  it  with  more  than  its  former  magnificence,  and  made
it  capable,  according  to  some  authors,  of  accommodating  385,000  persons.
The  Poet  says,  that  he  takes  no  particular  interest  himself  in  the  race,  but
hopes  that  the  horse  may  win  which  is  her  favourite.

16  The  spirited  steeds.] — Ver.  2.  The  usual  number  of  chariots  in  each
race  was  four.  The  charioteers  were  divided  into  four  companies,  or  '  fac-
tiones,'  each  distinguished  by  a  colour,  representing  the  season  of  the  year.
These  colours  were  green  for  the  spring,  red  for  the  summer,  azure  for  the
autumn,  and  white  for  the  winter.  Originally,  but  two  chariots  started  in
each  race  ;  but  Domitian  increased  the  number  to  six,  appointing  two  new
companies  of  charioteers,  the  golden  and  the  purple  ;  however  the  number
was  still,  more  usually,  restricted  to  four.  The  greatest  interest  was  shewn
by  all  classes,  and  by  both  sexes,  in  the  race.  Lists  of  the  horses  were
circulated,  with  their  names  and  colours ;  the  names  also  ofHhe  charioteers
were  given,  and  bets  were  extensively  made,  (see  the  Art  of  Love,  Book  i.
1.  167,  168,)  and  sometimes  disputes  and  violent  contests  arose.

17  To  be  seated  by  you.] — Ver.  3. The  men  and  women  sat  together


K.  II.]  OE, AMOTJItS.  341

passion  which  you  cause  may  not  be  unknown  to  you.  You
are  looking  at  the  race,  I  am  looking  at  you  ;  let  us  each  look
at  what  pleases  us,  and  so  let  us  each  feast  our  eyes.  0,  happy
the  driver18  of  the  steeds,  whoever  he  is,  that  is  your  favourite  ;
it  is  then  his  lot  to  be  the  object  of  your  care  ;  might  such  be
my  lot ;  with  ardent  zeal  to  be  borne  along  would  I  press  over
the  steeds  as  they  start  from  the  sacred  barrier.19  And  now  I
would  give  rein  ;20  now  with  my  whip  would  I  lash  their  backs  ;
now  with  my  inside  wheel  would  I  graze  the  turning-place.21
If  you  should  be  seen  by  me  in  my  course,  then  1  should  stop  ;
and  the  reins,  let  go,  would  fall  from  my  hands.

Ah !  how  nearly  was  Pelops22  falling  by  the  lance  of  him  of
Pisa,  while,  Hippodamia,  he  was  gazing  on  thy  face  !  Still  did
he  prove  the  conqueror  through  the  favour  of  his  mistress  ;23  let
us  each  prove  victor  through  the  favour  of  his  charmer.  Why
do  you  shrink  away  in  vain  ? 24 The  partition  forces  us  to  sit

when  viewing  the  contests  of  the  Circus,  and  not  in  separate  parts  of  the
building,  as  at  the  theatres.

13  Happy  the  driver.] — Ver.  7. He  addresses  the  charioteer.

19  The  sacred  barrier."]— Ver.  9.  For  an  account  of  the  'career/  or
'starting-place,'  see  the  Notes  to  the  Tristia,  Book  v.  El.  ix.  1.  29.  It  is
called  '  sacer/  because  the  whole  of  the  Circus  Maximus  was  sacred  to
Consus,  who  is  supposed  by  some  to  have  been  the  same  Deity  as  Neptune.
The  games  commenced  with  sacrifices  to  the  Deities.

20  I  would  give  rein.] — Ver.  11.  The  charioteer  was  wont  to  stand
within  the  reins,  having  them  thrown  round  his  back.  Leaning  back-
wards, he  thereby  threw  his  full  weight  against  the  horses,  when  he  wished
to  check  them  at  full  speed.  This  practice,  however,  was  dangerous,  an  1
by  it  the  death  of  Hippolytus  was  caused.  In  the  Fifteenth  Book  of  the
Metamorphoses,!.  524,  he  says,  'I  struggled,  with  unavailing  hand,  to  guide
the  bridle  covered  with  white  foam,  and  throwing  myself  backwards,  I
pulled  back  the  loosened  reins/  To  avoid  the  danger  of  this  practice,  the
charioteer  carried  a  hooked  knife  at  his  waist,  for  the  purpose  of  cutting
the  reins  on  an  emergency.

21  The  turning-place.] — Ver.  12.  For  an  account  of  the  'meta/see
the  Tristia,  Book  iv.  El.  viii.  1.  35.  Of  course,  those  who  kept  as  close  to
the  '  meta'  as  possible,  would  lose  the  least  distance  in  turning  round  it.

23  How  nearly  was  Pelops.] — Ver.  15.  In  his  race  with  CEnomaiis,
king  of  Pisa,  in  Arcadia,  for  the  hand  of  his  daughter,  Hippodamia,  when
Pelops  conquered  his  adversary  by  bribing  his  charioteer,  Myrtilus.

23  Of  his  mistress.] — Ver.  17.  He  here  seems  to  imply  that  it  was
Hippodamia  who  bribed  Myrtilus.

24  Shrink  away  in  vain.] — Ver.  19.  She  shrinks  from  him,  and  seems
to  think  that  he  is  sitting  too  close,  but  he  tells  her  that  the  '  linea '
forces  them  to  squeeze. This  *  linea'  is  supposed  to  have  been  either  a


342  THE AMOEES;  [b.  III.

close  ;  tlie  Circus  has  this  advantage  25  in  the  arrangement  of
its  space.  But  do  you26  on  the  right  hand,  whoever  you  are,  be
accommodating  to  the  fair  ;  she  is  being  hurt  by  the  pressure
of  your  side.  And  you  as  well,27  who  are  looking  on  behind  us  ;
draw  in  your  legs,  if  you  have  any  decency,  and  don't  press
her  back  with  your  hard  knees.  But  your  mantle,  hanging
too  low,  is  dragging  on  the  ground  ;  gather  it  up  ;  or  see,  I
am  taking  it  up2*  in  my  hands.  A  disobliging  garment  you  are,
who  are  thus  concealing  ancles  so  pretty ;  and  the  more  you
gaze  upon  them,  the  more  disobliging  garment  you  are.  Such
were  the  ancles  of  the  fleet  Atalanta,29  which  Milanion  longed
to  touch  with  his  hands.  Such  are  painted  the  ancles  of  the
swift  Diana,  when,  herself  still  bolder,  she  pursues  the  bold
beasts  of  prey.  On  not  seeing  them,  I  am  on  fire  ;  what  would
be  the  consequence  if  they  were  seen  ?  You  are  heaping  flames
upon  flames,  water  upon  the  sea. From  them  I  suspect  that

cord,  or  a  groove,  drawn  across  the  seats  at  regular  intervals,  so  as  to  mark
out  room  for  a  certain  number  of  spectators  between  each  two  '  lineae.'

25  Has  this  advantage.] — Ver.  20.  He  congratulates  himself  on  the
construction  of  the  place,  so  aptly  giving  him  an  excuse  for  sitting  close
to  his  mistress.

2(3  But  do  you.] — Ver.  21.  He  is  pretending  to  be  very  anxious  for
her  comfort,  and  is  begging  the  person  on  the  other  side  not  to  squeeze
so  close  against  his  mistress.

27  And  you  as  ivell] — Ver.  23.  As  in  the  theatres,  the  seats,  which
were  called  '  gradus,'  '  sedilia,''  or  '  subsellia,'  were  arranged  round  the
course  of  the  Circus,  in  ascending  tiers ;  the  lowest  being,  very  probably,
almost  flush  with  the  ground.  There  were,  perhaps,  no  backs  to  the
seats,  or,  at  the  best,  only  a  slight  railing  of  wood.  The  knees  conse-
quently of  those  in  the  back  row  would  be  level,  and  in  juxta-position  with
the  backs  of  those  in  front.  He  is  here  telling  the  person  who  is  sitting
behind,  to  be  good  enough  to  keep  his  knees  to  himself,  and  not  to  hurt
the  lady's  back  by  pressing  against  her.

23  /  am  taking  it  upJ\ — Ver.  26.  He  is  here  showing  off  his  polite-
ness, and  will  not  give  her  the  trouble  of  gathering  up  her  dress.  Even
in  those  days,  the  ladies  seem  to  have  had  no  objection  to  their  dresses
doing  the  work  of  the  scavenger's  broom.

29  The  fleet  Ataianta.] — Ver.  29.  Some  suppose  that  the  Arcadian
Atalanta,  the  daughter  of  Iasius,  was  beloved  by  a  youth  of  the  name  of
Milanion.  According  to  Apollodorus,  who  evidently  confounds  the  Ar-
cadian with  the  Boeotian  Atalanta,  Milanion  was  another  name  of  Hippo-
menes,  who  conquered  the  latter  in  the  foot  race,  as  mentioned  in  the
Tenth  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses.  See  the  Translation  of  the  Meta-
morphoses, p.  375.  From  this  and  another  passage  of  Ovid,  we  have
reason  to  suppose  that  Atalanta  was,  by  tradition,  famous  for  the  beauty
of  her  ancles.


E.  II.]  OR, AMOURS.  343

the  rest  may  prove  charming,  which  is  so  well  hidden,  con-
cealed beneath  the  thin  dress.

But,  meanwhile,  should  you  like  to  receive  the  gentle  breeze
which  the  fan  may  cause,50  when  waved  by  my  hand  1  Or  is
the  heat  I  feel,  rather  that  of  my  own  passion,  and  not  of  the
weather,  and  is  the  love  of  the  fair  burning  my  inflamed
breast  ?  "While  I  am  talking,  your  white  clothes  are  sprinkled
with  the  black  dust ;  nasty  dust,  away  from  a  body  like  the
snow.

But  now  the  procession31  is  approaching ;  give  good  omens
both  in  words  and  feelings.  The  time  is  come  to  applaud  ;  the
procession  approaches,  glistening  with  gold.  First  in  place  is
Victory  borne3' with  expanded  wings  ;33  come  hither,  Goddess,
and  grant  that  this  passion  of mine  may  prove  victorious.

30  The  fan  may  cause.] — Ver.  38.  Instead  of  the  word  '  tabella/
'  flabella'  has  been  suggested  here ;  but  as  the  first  syllable  is  long,  such
a  reading  would  occasion  a  violation  of  the  laws  of  metre,  and  '  tabehV  is
probably  correct.  It  has,  however,  the  same  meaning  here  as  '  flabella  •;
it  signifying  what  we  should  call  '  a  fan  ';  in  fact,  the  (  flabellum'  was  a
s  tabella/  or  thin  board,  edged  with  peacocks'  feathers,  or  those  of  other
birds,  and  sometimes  with  variegated  pieces  of  cloth.  These  were  gene-
rally waved  by  female  slaves,  who  were  called  '  flabellifene' ;  or  else
by  eunuchs  or  young  boys.  They  were  used  to  cool  the  atmosphere,  to
drive  away  gnats  and  flies,  and  to  promote  sleep.  We  here  see  a  gentle-
man offering  to  fan  a  lady,  as  a  compliment ;  and  it  must  have  been  espe-
cially grateful  amid  the  dust  and  heat  of  the  Roman  Circus.  That  .which
was  especially  intended  for  the  purpose  of  driving  away  flies,  was  called
'  muscarium.'  The  use  of  fans  was  not  confined  to  females  ;  as  we  learn  from
Suetonius,  that  the  Emperor  Augustus  had  a  slave  to  fan  him  during  his
sleep.  The  fan  was  also  sometimes  made  of  linen,  extended  upon  a  light
frame,  and  sometimes  of  the  two  wings  of  a  bird,  joined  back  to  back,
and  attached  to  a  handle.

31  Noiv  the  procession.] — Ver.  34  All  this  time  they  have  been  waiting
for  the  ceremony  to  commence.  The  '  Pompa,'  or  procession,  now  opens
the  performance.  In  this  all  those  who  were  about  to  exhibit  in  the  race
took  a  part.  The  statues  of  the  Gods  were  borne  on  wooden  platforms
on  the  shoulders  of  men,  or  on  wheels,  according  as  they  were  light  or
heavy.  The  procession  moved  from  the  Capitol,  through  the  Forum,  to  the
Circus  Maximus,  and  was  also  attended  by  the  officers  of  state.  Musicians
and  dancers  preceded  the  statues  of  the  Gods.  See  the  Fasti,  Book  iv.
1.  391,  and  the  Note  to  the  passage.

32  Victory  borne.]  —  Ver.  45.  On  the  wooden  platform,  which  was
called  '  ferculuin,'  or  '  thensa,'  according  as  it  was  small  or  large.

33  With  expanded  wings."] — Ver.  45.  Victory  was  always  represented
with  expanded  wings,  on  account  of  her  inconstancy  and  volatility.

I


344  THE AMOBES  ;  [B.  III.

Salute  Neptune,34  you  who  put  too  much  confidence  in  the
waves ;  I  have  nought  to  do  with  the  sea ;  my  own  dry  land
engages  me.  Soldier,  salute  thy  own  Mars  ;  arms  I  detest  j35
Peace  delights  me,  and  Love  found  in  the  midst  of  Peace.  Let
Phoebus  be  propitious  to  the  augurs,  Phoebe  to  the  huntsmen  ;
turn,  Minerva,  towards  thyself  the  hands  of  the  artisan.30  Ye
husbandmen,  arise  in  honour  of  Ceres  and  the  youthful  Bac-
chus ;  let  the  boxers37  render  Pollux,  the  horseman  Castor  pro-
pitious. Thee,  genial  Venus,  and  the  Loves,  the  boys  so  potent
with  the  bow,  do  I  salute  ;  be  propitious,  Goddess,  to  my  as-
pirations. Inspire,  too,  kindly  feelings  in  my  new  mistress;  let
her  permit  herself  to  be  loved."  She  has  assented  ;  and  with
her  nod  she  has  given  a  favourable  sign.  What  the  Goddess
has  promised,  I  entreat  yourself  to  promise.  With  the  leave
of  Venus  I  will  say  it,  you  shall  be  the  greater  Goddess.  By
these  many  witnesses  do  I  swear  to  you,  and  by  this  array  of
the  Gods,  that  for  all  time  you  have  been  sighed  for  by  me.
But  your  legs  have  no  support ;  you  can,  if  perchance  you
like,  rest  the  extremities  of  your  feet  in  the  lattice  work.38

34  Salute  Neptune.'] — Ver.  47.  •  Plaudite  Neptuno  '  is  equivalent,  in  our
common  parlance,  to  '  Give  a  cheer  for  Neptune.'  He  is  addressing  the
sailors  who  may  be  present :  but  he  declines  to  have  anything  to  do  with
the  sea  himself.

35  Arms  I  detest.] — Ver.  49.  lake  his  contemporary,  Horace,  Ovid
was  no  lover  of  war.

:i6  Of  the  artisan.] — Ver.  52.  We  learn  from  the  Fasti,  Book  hi.  1.  815,
that  Minerva  was  especially  venerated  as  the  patroness  of  handicrafts.

37  Let  the  boxers.]  — Ver.  54.  Boxing  was  one  of  the  earliest  athletic
games  practised  by  the  Greeks.  Apollo  and  Hercules,  as  well  as  Pollux,
are  celebrated  by  the  poets  for  excelling  in  this  exercise.  It  formed  a
portion  of  the  Olympic  contests  ;  while  boys  fought  in  the  Nemean  and
Isthmian  games.  Concerning  the  '  csestus '  used  by  pugilists,  see  the  Fasti,
Book  ii.  1.  367,  and  the  Note  to  the  passage.  The  method  in  fighting
most  practised  was  to  remain  on  the  defensive,  and  thus  to  wear  out  the
opponent  by  continual  efforts.  To  inflict  blows,  without  receiving  any  in
return  on  the  body,  was  the  great  point  of  merit.  The  right  arm  was
chiefly  used  for  attack,  while  the  office  of  the  left  was  to  protect  the  body.
Teeth  were  often  knocked  out,  and  the  ears  were  much  disfigured.  The
boxers,  by  the  rules  of  the  game,  were  not  allowed  to  take  hold  of  each
other,  nor  to  trip  up  their  antagonist.  In  Italy  boxing  seems  to  have
been  practised  from  early  times  by  the  people  of  Etruria.  It  continued
to  be  one  of  the  popular  games  during  the  period  of  the  Republic  as  well
as  of  the  Empire.

38  In  the  lattice  work.]  — Ver.  64.  The  '  cancelli '  were  lattice  work,
which  probably  skirted  the  outer  edge  of  each  wide  '  praecinctio/  or  pas-


E.  II.]  OX,  AMOURS.  345

Now  the  Prsetorj39  the  Circus  emptied,  has  sent  from  the  even
barriers40  the  chariots  with  their  four  steeds,  the  greatest  sight
of  all.  I  see  who  is  your  favourite  ;  whoever  you  wish  well
to,  he  will  prove  the  conqueror.  The  very  horses  appear  to
understand  what  it  is  you  wish  for.  Oh  shocking !  around
the  turning-place  he  goes  with  a  circuit  far  too  wide. ^  What
art  thou  about  1  The  next  is  overtaking  thee  with  his  wheel
in  contact.  What,  wretched  man,  art  thou  about  ?  Thou  art
wasting  the  good  wishes  of  the  fair ;  pull  in  the  reins,  I  en-
treat, to  the  left,42  with  a  strong  hand. We  have  been  inte-

sage.  that  ran  along  in  front  of  the  seats,  at  certain  intervals.  As  the  knees
would  not  there  be  so  cramped,  these  seats  would  be  considered  the  most
desirable.  It  is  clear  that  Ovid  and  the  lady  have  had  the  good  fortune
to  secure  front  seats,  with  the  feet  resting  either  on  the  lowest  «  praecinctio/
or  the  '  praecinctio '  of  a  set  of  seats  higher  up.  Stools,  of  course,  could
not  be  used,  as  they  would  be  in  the  way  of  passers-by.  He  perceives,  as
the  seat  is  high,  that  she  has  some  difficulty  in  touching  the  ground  with
her  feet,  and  naturally  concludes  that  her  legs  must  ache ;  on  which  he
tells  her,  if  it  will  give  her  ease,  to  rest  the  tips  of  her  feet  on  the  lattice
work  railing  which  was  opposite,  and  which,  if  they  were  on  an  upper
*  praecinctio,'  ran  along  the  edge  of  it :  or  if  they  were  on  the  very  lowest
tier,  skirted  the  edge  of  the  '  podium  -  which  formed  the  basis  of  that
tier.  This  she  might  do,  if  the  '  praecinctio  '  was  not  more  than  a  yard
wide,  and  if  the  '  cancelli '  were  as  much  as  a  foot  in  height.

30  Now  the  Praetor.] — Ver.  65.  The  course  is  now  clear  of  the  pro-
cession, and  the  Praetor  gives  the  signal  for  the  start,  the  'carceres'  being
first  opened.  This  was  sometimes  given  by  sound  of  trumpet,  or  more
frequently  by  letting  fall  a  napkin ;  at  least,  after  the  time  of  Nero,  who
is  said,  on  one  occasion,  while  taking  a  meal,  to  have  heard  the  shouts  of
the  people  who  were  impatient  for  the  race  to  begin,  on  which  he  threw
down  his  napkin  as  the  signal.

40  The  even  barriers.]  — Ver.  66.  From  this  description  we  should  be
apt  to  think  that  the  start  was  effected  at  the  instant  when  the  '  carceres  '
were  opened.  This  was  not  the  case :  for  after  coming  out  of  the  '  car-
ceres,'  the  chariots  were  ranged  abreast  before  a  white  line,  which  was  held
by  men  whose  office  it  was  to  do,  and  who  were  called  'moratores.'  When
all  were  ready,  and  the  signal  had  been  given,  the  white  line  was  thrown
down,  and  the  race  commenced,  which  was  seven  times  round  the  course.
The  '  career  '  is  called  '  aequum,'  because  they  were  in  a  straight  line,
and  each  chariot  was  ranged  in  front  of  the  door  of  its  '  career.'

41  Circuit  far  too  wide.]  — Ver.  69.  The  charioteer,  whom  the  lady
favours,  is  going  too  wide  of  the  '  meta,'  or  turning-place,  and  so  loses
ground,  while  the  next  overtakes  him.

42  To  the  left.'] — Ver.  72.  He  tells  him  to  guide  the  horses  to  the  left,
so  as  to  keep  closer  to  the  '  meta,'  and  not  to  lose  so  much  ground  by
going  wide  of  it.


346  THE AMOE.ES  ;  [b.  III.

resting  ourselves  in  a  blockhead  ;  but  still,  Romans,  call  him
back  again,43  and  by  waving  the  garments,44  give  the  signal  on
every  side.  See !  they  are  calling  him  back ;  but  that  the
waving  of  the  garments  may  not  disarrange  your  hair,45  you
may  hide  yourself  quite  down  in  my  bosom.

And  now,  the  barrier46  unbarred  once  more,  the  side  posts
are  open  wide  ;  with  the  horses  at  full  speed  the  variegated
throng47  bursts  forth.  This  time,  at  all  events,48  do  prove  vic-
torious, and  bound  over  the  wide  expanse  ;  let  my  wishes,  let
those  of  my  mistress,  meet  with  success.  The  wishes  of  my
mistress  are  fulfilled ;  my  wishes  still  exist.  He  bears  away
the  palm  ;49  the  palm  is  yet  to  be  sought  by  me.  She  smiles,
and  she  gives  me  a  promise  of  something  with  her  expressive
eye.  That  is  enough  for  this  spot ;  grant  the  rest  in  another
place.

43  Call  him  back  again.'] — Ver.  73.  He,  by  accident,  lets  drop  the  ob-
servation, that  they  have  been  interesting  themselves  for  a  blockhead.
But  he  immediately  checks  himself,  and,  anxious  that  the  favourite  may
yet  distinguish  himself,  trusts  that  the  spectators  will  call  him  back.
Crispinus,  the  Delphin  Editor,  thinks,  that  by  the  calling  back,  it  is  meant
that  it  was  a  false  start,  and  that  the  race  was  to  be  run  over  again.  Bur-
mann,  however,  is  not  of  that  opinion  ;  but  supposes,  that  if  any  chariot
did  not  go  well,  or  the  horses  seemed  jaded,  it  was  the  custom  to  call  the
driver  back  from  the  present  race,  that  with  new  horses  he  might  join  in
the  next  race.  This,  from  the  sequel,  seems  the  most  rational  mode  of
explanation  here.

44  Waving  the  garments."] — Ver.  74.  The  signal  for  stopping  was
given  by  the  men  rising  and  shaking  and  waving  their  outer  garments,  or
'  togae,'  and  probably  calling  the  charioteer  by  name.

45  Disarrange  your  hair.] — Ver.  75.  He  is  afraid  lest  her  neighbours,
in  their  vehemence  should  discommode  her  hair,  and  tells  her,  in  joke,
that  she  may  creep  into  the  bosom  of  his  own  '  toga.'

48  And  now  the  barrier.] — Ver.  77.  The  first  race  we  are  to  suppose
finished,  and  the  second  begins  similarly  to  the  first.  There  were  gene-
rally twenty-five  of  these  '  missus,'  or  races  in  a  day.

47  The  variegated  throng.] — Ver.  78. See  the  Note  to  the  second  line.

48  At  all  events.]  —  Ver.  79.  He  addresses  the  favourite,  who  has
again  started  in  this  race.

49  Bears  away  the  palm.] — Ver.  82.  The  favourite  charioteer  is  now
victorious,  and  the  Poet  hopes  that  he  himself  may  gain  the  palm  in  like
manner.  The  victor  descended  from  his  car  at  the  end  of  the  race,  and
ascended  the  '  spina,'  where  he  received  his  reward,  which  was  generally  a
considerable  sum  of  money.  For  an  account  of  the  '  spina,'  see  the
Metamorphoses,  Book  x.  1.  106,  and  the  Note  to  the  passage.


E.  III.]  OE, AHOUES.  347

ELEGY  III.

He  complains  of  his  mistress,  whom  he  has  found  to  be  forsworn.

Go  to,  believe  that  the  Gods  exist ;  she  who  had  sworn
has  broken  her  faith,  and  still  her  beauty  remains50  just  as  it
was  before.  Not  yet  forsworn,  flowing  locks  had  she  ;  after
she  has  deceived  the  Gods,  she  has  them  just  as  long.  Be-
fore, she  was  pale,  having  her  fair  complexion  suffused  with
the  blush  of  the  rose ;  the  blush  is  still  beauteous  on  her
complexion  of  snow.  Her  foot  was  small ;  still  most  dimi-
nutive is  the  size  of  that  foot.  Tall  was  she,  and  graceful ;
tall  and  graceful  does  she  still  remain.  Expressive  eyes  had
she,  which  shone  like  stars  ;  many  a  time  through  them  has  the
treacherous  fair  proved  false  to  me.51

Even  the  Gods,  forsooth,  for  ever  permit  the  fair  to  be
forsworn,  and  beauty  has  its  divine  sway.52  I  remember  that
of  late  she  swore  both  by  her  own  eyes  and  by  mine,  and  mine
felt  pain.53  Tell  me,  ye  Gods,  if  with  impunity  she  has  proved
false  to  you,  why  have  I  suffered  punishment  for  the  de-
serts of  another  ?  But  the  virgin  daughter  of  Cepheus  is  no
reproach,  forsooth,  to  you,54  who  was  commanded  to  die  for
her  mother,  so  inopportunely  beauteous.  ,rTis  not  enough
that  I  had  you  for  witnesses  to  no  purpose  ;  unpunished,  she
laughs  at  even  the  Gods  together  with  myself ;  that  by  my.
punishment  she  may  atone  for  her  perjuries,  am  I,  the  de-
ceived, to  be  the  victim  of  the  deceiver  ? Either  a  Divinity

50  Her  beauty  remains."] — Yer.  2.  She  has  not  been  punished  with
ugliness,  as  a  judgment  for  her  treachery.

61  Proved  false  to  me.] — Ver.  10.  Tibullus  has  a  similar  passage,  4Et
si  perque  suos  fallax  juravit  ocellos :'  '  and  if  with  her  eyes  the  deceitful
damsel  is  forsworn.'

52  Its  divine  stvay.] — Ver.  12.  '  Numen'  here  means  a  power  equal
to  that  of  the  Divinities,  and  which  puts  it  on  a  level  with  them.

53  Mine  felt  pain.'] — Ver.  14.  When  the  damsel  swore  by  them,  his
eyes  smarted,  as  though  conscious  of  her  perjury.

54  Forsooth  to  you.] — Ver.  17.  He  says  that  surely  it  was  enough  for
the  Gods  to  punish  Andromeda,  the  daughter  of  Cepheus,  for  the  sins  of
her  mother,  without  making  him  to  suffer  misery  for  the  perjury  of  his
mistress.  Cassiope,  the  mother  of  Andromeda,  having  dared  to  compare
her  own  beauty  with  that  of  the  Nereids,  her  daughter  was,  by  the  com-
mand of  Jupiter,  exposed  to  a  sea-monster,  which  was  afterwards  slain
by  Perseus. See  the  Metamorphoses,  Book  iv.  1.  670.


348  THE AMOEES ;  [b.  II.

is  a  name  without  reality,  and  he  is  revered  in  vain,  and  in-
fluences people  with  a  silly  credulity ;  or  else,  if  there  is  any
God,  he  is  fond  of  the  charming  fair,  and  gives  them  alone
ioo  much  licence  to  be  able  to  do  any  thing.

Against  us  Mavors  is  girded  with  the  fatal  sword ;  against  us
the  lance  is  directed  by  the  invincible  hand  of  Pallas  ;  against
us  the  flexible  bow  of  Apollo  is  bent ;  against  us  the  lofty
right  hand  of  Jove  wields  the  lightnings.  The  offended  Gods
of  heaven  fear  to  hurt  the  fair ;  and  they  spontaneously  dread
those  who  dread  them  not.  And  who,  then,  would  take  care
to  place  the  frankincense  in  his  devotion  upon  the  altars  ?  At
least,  there  ought  to  be  more  spirit  in  men.  Jupiter,  with  his
fires,  hurls  at  the  groves55  and  the  towers,  and  yet  he  forbids
his  weapons,  thus  darted,  to  strike  the  perjured  female;  Many
a  one  has  deserved  to  be  struck.  The  unfortunate  Semele50
perished  by  the  flames  ;  that  punishment  was  found  for  her
by  her  own  compliant  disposition.  But  if  she  had  betaken
herself  off,  on  the  approach  of  her  lover,  his  father  would
not  have  had  for  Bacchus  the  duties  of  a  mother  to  perform.

Why  do  I  complain,  and  why  blame  all  the  heavens  ?  The
Gods  have  eyes  as  well  as  we ;  the  Gods  have  hearts  as  well .
Were  I  a  Divinity  myself,  I  would  allow  a  woman  with  im-
punity to  swear  falsely  by  my  Godhead.  I  myself  would
swear  that  the  fair  ever  swear  the  truth ;  and  I  would  not
be  pronounced  one  of  the  morose  Divinities.  Still,  do  you,
fair  one,  use  their  favour  with  more  moderation,  or,  at  least,
do  have  some  regard57  for  my  eyes.

55  Hurls  at  the  groves.] — Ver.  35.  A  place  which  had  heen  struck  by
lightning  was  called  'bidental/  and  was  held  sacred  ever  afterwards.
The  same  veneration  was  also  paid  to  a  place  where  any  person  who  had
been  killed  by  lightning  was  buried.  Priests  collected  the  earth  that
had  been  torn  up  by  lightning,  and  everything  that  had  been  scorched,
and  buried  it  in  the  ground  with  lamentations.  The  spot  was  then  con-
secrated by  sacrificing  a  two-year-old  sheep,  which  being  called  '  bidens,'
gave  its  name  to  the  place.  An  altar  was  also  erected  there,  and  it  was
not  allowable  thenceforth  to  tread  on  the  spot,  or  to  touch  it,  or  even
look  at  it.  When  the  altar  had  fallen  to  decay,  it  might  be  renovated,  but
to  remove  its  boundaries  was  deemed  sacrilege.  Madness  was  supposed  to
ensue  on  committing  such  an  offence  ;  and  Seneca  mentions  a  belief,  that
wine  which  had  been  struck  by  lightning,  would  produce  death  or  mad-
ness in  those  who  drank  it.

56  Unfortunate  Semele.] — Ver.  37.  See  the  fate  of  Semele,  related  in
the  Third  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses,

5?  Have  some  regard.'] — Ver.  48.  Or,  in  other  words,  '  Don't  swear
any  more  by  my  eye3.'


E.  IV.]  OB, AMOUB3.  349


ELEGY  .IV.

He  tells  a  jealous  husband,  who  watches  his  wife,  that  the  greater  his
precautions,  the  greater  are  the  temptations  to  sin.

Ceuel  husband,  by  setting  a  guard  over  the  charming  fair,
thou  dost  avail  nothing  ;  by  her  own  feelings  must  each  be
kept.  If,  all  apprehensions  removed,  any  woman  is  chaste,
she,  in  fact,  is  chaste ;  she  who  sins  not,  because  she  cannot,
still  sins.58  However  well  you  may  have  guarded  the  person,
the  mind  is  still  unchaste  ;  and,  unless  it  chooses,  it  cannot
be  constrained.  You  cannot  confine  the  mind,  should  you  lock
up  every  thing ;  when  all  is  closed,  the  unchaste  one  will  be
within.  The  one  who  can  sin,  errs  less  frequently ;  the  very
opportunity  makes  the  impulse  to  wantonness  to  be  the  less'
powerful.  Be  persuaded  by  me,  and  leave  off  instigating  to
criminality  by  constraint ;  by  indulgence  thou  mayst  restrain
it  much  more  effectually.

I  have  sometimes  seen  the  horse,  struggling  against  his  reins,
rush  on  like  lightning  with  his  resisting  mouth.  Soon  as
ever  he  felt  that  rein  was  given,  he  stopped,  and  the  loosened
bridle  lay  upon  his  flowing  mane.  We  are  ever  striving  for
what  is  forbidden,  and  are  desiring  what  is  denied  us  ;  even  so
does  the  sick  man  hanker  after  the  water  that  is  forbidden  him.
Argus  used  to  carry  a  hundred  eyes  in  his  forehead,  a  hundred
in  his  neck  ;59  and  these  Love  alone  many  a  time  evaded.
Danae,  who,  a  maid,  had  been  placed  in  the  chamber  which
was  to  last  for  ever  with  its  stone  and  its  iron,60  became  a
mother.  Penelope,  although  she  was  without  a  keeper,  amid
so  many  youthful  suitors,  remained  undefiied.

Whatever  is  hoarded  up,  we  long  for  it  the  more,  and  the
very  pains  invite  the  thief ;  few  care  for  what  another  grants.

53  Became  she  cannot,  still  sins.~] — Ver.  4.  It  is  not  a  little  singular  that
a  heathen  poet  should  enunciate  the  moral  doctrine  of  the  New  Testa-
ment, that  it  is  the  thought,  and  not  the  action,  that  of  necessity  consti-
tutes the  sin.

59  A  hundred  in  his  neck.'] — Ver.  18.  In  the  First  Book  of  the  Meta-
morphoses, he  assigns  to  Argus  only  one  hundred  eyes  ;  here,  however,  he
uses  a  poet's  license,  probably  for  the  sake  of  filling  up  the  line.

6,J  Its  stone  and  its  iron.} — Ver.  21.  From  Pausanias  and  Lucian  we
learn  that  the  chamber  of  Danae  was  under  ground,  and  was  lined  vfitii
copper  and  iron.


350  THE AM0EE3  ;  [d.  lit.

Not  through  her  beauty  is  she  captivating,  but  through  the
fondness  of  her  husband ;  people  suppose  it  to  be  something
unusual  which  has  so  captivated  thee.  Suppose  she  is  not
chaste  whom  her  husband  is  guarding,  but  faithless  ;  she  is
beloved  ;  but  this  apprehension  itself  causes  her  value,  rather
than  her  beauty.  Be  indignant  if  thou  dost  please  ;  forbidden
pleasures  delight  me :  if'  any  woman  can  only  say,  "I  am
afraid,"  that  woman  alone  pleases  me.  Nor  yet  is  it  legal61  to
confine  a  free-born  woman  ;  let  these  fears  harass  the  bodies  of
those  from  foreign  parts.  That  the  keeper,  forsooth,  may  be
able  to  say,  "  I  caused  it ;"  she  must  be  chaste  for  the  credit
of  thy  slave.  He  is  too  much  of  a  churl  whom  a  faithless
wife  injures,  and  is  not  sufficiently  acquainted  with  the
ways  of  the  City ;  in  which  Romulus,  the  son  of  Ilia,  and
Remus,  the  son  of  Ilia,  both  begotten  by  Mars,  were  not  born
without  a  crime  being  committed.  Why  didst  thou  choose  a
beauty  for  thyself,  if  she  was  not  pleasing  unless  chaste  ?
Those  two  qualities6'2  cannot  by  any  means  be  united.

If  thou  art  wise,  show  indulgence  to  thy  spouse,  and  lay
aside  thy  morose  looks  ;  and  assert  not  the  rights  of  a  severe
husband.  Show  courtesy,  too,  to  the  friends  thy  wife  shall
find  thee,  and  many  a  one  will  she  find.  'Tis  thus  that  great
credit  accrues  at  a  very  small  outlay  of  labour.  Thus  wilt
thou  be  able  always  to  take  part  in  the  festivities  of  the  young
men,  and  to  see  many  a  thing  at  home,63  which  you  have  not
presented  to  her.

ELEGY  V.

A  vision,  and  its  explanation.
'Twas  night,  and  sleep  weighed  down  my  wearied  eyes. Such
a  vision  as  this  terrified  my  mind.

Beneath  a  sunny  hill,  a  grove  was  standing,  thick  set  with
holm  oaks ;  and  in  its  branches  lurked  full  many  a  bird.  A  level

61  Nor  yet  is  it  legal.']— Ver.  33.  He  tells  him  that  he  ought  not  to
inflict  loss  of  liberty  on  a  free-born  woman,  a  punishment  that  was  only
suited  to  a  slave.

62  Those  two  qualities.}— Ver.  42.  He  says,  the  wish  being  probably
the  father  to  the  thought,  that  beauty  and  chastity  cannot  possibly  exist
together.

63  Many  a  thing  at  home.']— Ver.  48.  He  tells  him  that  he  will
grow  quite  rich  with  the  presents  which  his  wife  will  then  receive  from
her  admirers.


E.  V.]  OTt, AMOTJES.  351

spot  there  was  beneath,  most  verdant  with  the  grassy  mead,
moistened  with  the  drops  of  the  gently  trickling  stream.  Beneath
the  foliage  of  the  trees,  I  was  seeking  shelter  from  the  heat  j
still,  under  the  foliage  of  the  trees  it  was  hot.  Lo  !  seeking  for
the  grass  mingled  with  the  variegated  flowers,  a  white  cow  was
standing  before  my  eyes  ;  more  white  than  the  snows  at  the
moment  when  they  have  just  fallen,  which,  time  has  not  yet
turned  into  flowing  water.  More  white  than  the  milk  which
is  white  with  its  bubbling  foam,64  and  at  that  moment  leaves
the  ewe  when  milked.65  A  bull  there  was,  her  companion,
he,  in  his  happiness,  was  her  mate  ;  and  with  his  own  one  he
pressed  the  tender  grass.  While  he  was  lying,  and  slowly
ruminating  upon  the  grass  chewed  once  again;  and  once  again
was  feeding  on  the  food  eaten  by  him  before ;  he  seemed,  as
sleep  took  away  his  strength,  to  lay  his  horned  head  upon  the
ground  that  supported  it.  Hither  came  a  crow,  gliding  through
the  air  on  light  wings ;  and  chattering,  took  her  seat  upon
the  green  sward  ;  and  thrice  with  her  annoying  beak  did  she
peck  at  the  breast  of  the  snow-white  cow  ;  and  with  her  bill
she  took  away  the  white  hair.  Having  remained  awhile,  she
left  the  spot  and  the  bull ;  but  black  envy  was  in  the  breast
of  the  cow.  And  when  she  saw  the  bulls  afar  browsing  upon
the  pastures  (bulls  were  browsing  afar  upon  the  verdant  pas-
tures), thither  did  she  betake  herself,  and  she  mingled  among
those  herds,  and  sought  out  a  spot  of  more  fertile  grass.

"  Come,  tell  me,  whoever  thou  art,  thou  interpreter  of  the
dreams  of  the  night,  what  (if  it  has  any  truth)  this  vision
means."  Thus  said  I :  thus  spoke  the  interpreter  of  the  dreams
of  the  night,  as  he  weighed  in  his  mind  each  particular  that
was  seen  ;  "  The  heat  which  thou  didst  wish  to  avoid  beneath
the  rustling  leaves,  but  didst  but  poorly  avoid,  was  that  of
Love.  The  cow  is  thy  mistress  ;  that  complexion  is  suited  to
the  fair.  Thou  wast  the  male,  and  the  bull  with  the  fitting
mate.  Inasmuch  as  the  crow  pecked  at  her  breast  with  her
sharp  beak  ; an  old  hag  of  a  procuress66 will  tempt  the

61  Its  bubbling  foam.'] — Ven  13.  He  alludes  to  the  noise  which  the
milk  makes  at  the  moment  when  it  touches  that  in  the  pail.

05  Ewe  when  milked.] — Ver.  14.  Probably  the  milk  of  ewes  was  used
for  making  cheese,  as  is  sometimes  the  case  in  this  country.

66  Hag  of  a  procuress.] — Ver.  40.  We  have  been  already  introduced
lo  one  amiable  specimen  of  this  class  in  the  Eighth  Elegy  of  the  First
Book.


352  THE AMOEES  ;  [B.  III.

affections  of  thy  mistress.  In  that,  after  hesitating  long,  his
heifer  left  the  bull,  thou  wilt  be  left  to  be  chilled  in  a  deserted
couch.  Envy  and  the  black  spots  below  the  front  of  her
breast,  show  that  she  is  not  free  from  the  reproach  of  incon-
stancy."

Thus  spoke  the  interpreter ;  the  blood  retreated from  my
chilled  face  ;  and  profound  night  stood  before  my  eyes.


ELEGY  VI.

He  addresses  a  river  which  has  obstructed  his  passage  while  he  is  going
to  his  mistress.

River  that  hast67  thy  slimy  banks  planted  with  reeds,  to  my
mistress  I  am  hastening  ;  stay  thy  waters  for  a  moment.  No
bridges  hast  thou,  nor  yet  a  hollow  boat03  to  carry  one  over
without  the  stroke  of  the  oar,  by  means  of  the  rope  thrown
across.  Thou  wast  a  small  stream,  I  recollect ;  and  I  did  not
hesitate  to  pass  across  thee  ;  and  the  surface  of  thy  waves  then
hardly  reached  to  my  ancles.  Now,  from  the  opposite  moun-
tain69 thou  dost  rush,  the  snows  being  melted,  and  in  thy  tur-
bid stream  thou  dost  pour  thy  muddied  waters.  What  avails
it  me  thus  to  have  hastened  ?  What  to  have  given  so  little  time
to  rest  ?  What  to  have  made  the  night  all  one  with  the  day  ?69*

67  River  that  hast.] — Ver.  1.  Ciofanus  has  this  interesting  Note  : —
1  This  river  is  that  which  flows  near  the  walls  of  Sulmo,  and,  which,  at
the  present  day  we  call  '  Vella.'  In  the  early  spring,  when  the  snows
melt,  and  sometimes,  at  the  beginning  of  autumn,  it  swells  to  a  wonderful
degree  with  the  rains,  so  that  it  becomes  quite  impassable.  Ovid  lived  not
far  from  the  Fountain  of  Love,  at  the  foot  of  the  Moronian  hill,  and  had
a  house  there,  of  which  considerable  vestiges  still  remain,  and  are  called
*  la  botteghe  d'Ovidio.'  Wishing  to  go  thence  to  the  town  of  Sulmo,
where  his  mistress  was  living,  this  river  was  an  obstruction  to  his  passage.'

63  A  hollow  boat.] — Ver.  4.  '  Cymba'  was  a  name  given  to  small  boats
used  on  rivers  or  lakes.  He  here  alludes  to  a  ferry-boat,  which  was  not
rowed  over ;  but  a  chain  or  rope  extending  from  one  side  of  the  stream  to
the  other,  the  boatman  passed  across  by  running  his  hands  along  the  rope.

69  The  opposite  mountain.'] — Ver.  7.  The  mountain  of  Soracte  was
near  the  Flaminian  way,  in  the  territory  of  the  Falisci,  and  may  possibly
be  the  one  here  alluded  to.  Ciofanus  says  that  its  name  is  now '  Majella,'
and  that  it  is  equal  in  height  to  the  loftiest  mountains  of  Italy,  and  capped
with  eternal  snow.

69*  All  one  with  the  day.] — Ver.  10.  He  means  to  say  that  he  has  risen
early  in  the  morning  for  the  purpose  of  proceeding  on  his  journey.


E.  VI. J  OB, AMOtTES.  353

If  still  I  must  be  standing  here  ;  if,  by  no  contrivance,  thy  op-
posite banks  are  granted  to  be  trodden  by  my  foot.

Now  do  I  long  for  the  wings  which  the  hero,  the  son  of
Danae,70  possessed,  when  he  bore  away  the  head,  thickset  with
the  dreadful  serpents  ;  now  do  T  wish  for  the  chariot,71  from
which  the  seed  of  Ceres  first  came,  thrown  upon  the  uncul-
tivated ground.  Of  the  wondrous  fictions  of  the  ancient
poets  do  I  speak ;  no  time  has  produced,  nor  does  produce,
nor  will  produce  these  wonders.  Rather,  do  thou,  stream
that  dost  overflow  thy  wide  banks,  flow  within  thy  limits,
then  for  ever  mayst  thou  run  on.  Torrent,  thou  wilt  not,
believe  me,  be  able  to  endure  the  reproaches,  if  perchance  I
should  be  mentioned  as  detained  by  thee  in  my  love.

Rivers  ought  rather  to  aid  youths  in  their  loves  ;  rivers
themselves  have  experienced  what  love  is.  Inachus72  is  said
to  have  flowed  pale  with  love  for  Melie,73theBithynian  Nymph,
and  to  have  warmed  throughout  his  cold  fords.  Not  yet  was
Troy  besieged  for  twice  five  years,  when,  Xanthus,  Neaera  at-
tracted thy  eyes.  Besides  ;  did  not  enduring  love  for  the
Arcadian  maid  force  Alpheus74  to  run  through  various  lands  ?
They  say,  too,  that  thou,  Peneus,  didst  conceal,  in  the
lands  of  the  Phthiotians,  Creusa,75  already  betrothed  to  Xan-
thus. Why  should  I  mention  Asopus,  whom  Thebe,  beloved
by  Mars,76  received,  Thebe,  destined  to  be  the  parent  of  five

70  The  son  of  Danae. ] — Ver.  13.  Mercury  was  said  to  have  lent  to
Perseus  his  winged  shoes,  '  talaria,'  when  he  slew  Medusa  with  her
viperous  locks.

71  Wish  for  the  chariot.} — Ver.  15.  Ceres  was  said  to  have  sent  Trip-
tolemus  in  her  chariot,  drawn  by  winged  dragons,  to  introduce  agriculture
among  mankind. See  the  Fourth  Book  of  the  Fasti,  1.  558.

72  Inachus.']— Ver.  25.  Inachus  was  a  river  of  Argolis,  ir  Peloponnesus.

73  Love  for  Melie.] — Ver.  25.  Melie  was  a  Nymph  beloved  by  Nep-
tune, to  whom  she  bore  Amycus,  king  of  Bebrycia,  or  Bithynia,  in  Asia
Minor,  whence  her  present  appellation.

74  Alpheus.~\ — Ver  29.  See  the  story  of  Alpheus  and  Arethusa,  in  the
Fifth  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses,  1.  57*6.

75  Creusa.} — Ver.  31.  Creusa  was  a  Naiad,  the  mother  of  Hypseas,
king  of  the  Lapithae,  by  Peneus,  a  river  of  Thessaly.  Xanthus  was  a
rivulet  near  Troy.  Of  Creusa  being  promised  to  Xanthus  nothing  what-
ever is  known.

76  Thebe  beloved  by  Mars.] — Ver.  33.  Pindar,  in  his  Sixth  Olympic
Ode,  says  that  Metope,  the  daughter  of  Ladon,  was  the  mother  of  five
daughters,  by  Asopus,  a  river  of  Boeotia. Their  names  were  Corcyra,

A  A


354  THE AMOBES  ;  [b.  III.

daughters  ?  Should  I  ask  of  Achelous,  "  Where  now  are  thy
horns  ?"  thou  wouldst  complain  that  they  were  broken  away  by
the  wrathful  hand  of  Hercules.77  Not  of  such  value  was  Caly-
don,78  nor  of  such  value  was  the  whole  of  iEtolia ;  still,  of
such  value  was  De'ianira  alone.  The  enriching  Nile,  that  flows
through  his  seven  mouths,  who  so  well  conceals  the  native
spot7s  of  waters  so  vast,  is  said  not  to  have  been  able  to  over-
power by  his  stream  the  flame  that  was  kindled  by  Evadne,
the  daughter  of  Asopus.80  Enipeus,  dried  up,81  that  he  might
be  enabled  to  embrace  the  daughter  of  Salmoneus,  bade  his
waters  to  depart ;  his  waters,  so  ordered,  did  depart.

Nor  do  I  pass  thee  by,  who  as  thou  dost  roll  amid  the  hol-
low rocks,  foaming,  dost  water  the  fields  of  Argive  Tibur  ;82
whom  Ilia83  captivated, although  she  was  unsightly  in  her

jEgina,  Salamis,  Thebe,  and  Harpinna.  Ovid,  in  calling  her  Thebe,  pro-
bably follows  some  other  writer.  She  is  called  '  Martia,'  because  she  was
beloved  by  Mars,  to  whom  she  bore  Evadne.

77  Hand  of  Hercules.} — Ver.  36.  For  the  contest  of  Hercules  and
Achelous  for  the  hand  of  De'ianira,  see  the  beginning  of  the  Ninth  Book
of  the  Metamorphoses.

78  Cali/don.] — Ver.  37.  (Eneus,  the  father  of  Meleager  and  De'ianira,
reigned  over  iEtolia,  of  which  Calydon  was  the  chief  city.

79  The  native  spot.~\ — Ver.  40;  He  alludes  to  the  fact  of  the  source  or
native  country  of  the  Nile  being  then,  as  it  probably  still  is,  quite  un-
known.

80  Daughter  of  Asopus.] — Ver.  41.  Evadne  is  called  'Asopide,'  from
her  mother  being  the  wife  of  Asopus. See  the  Note  on  line  33  above.

81  Enipeus  dried  up.] — Ver.  43.  Probably  the  true  reading  here  is
1  Actus,'  '  the  false  Enipeus.'  Tyro  was  the  daughter  of  Salmoneus,  king
of  Pisa,  in  Elis.  She  being  much  enamoured  of  the  river  Enipeus,  Nep-
tune is  said  to  have  assumed  his  form,  and  to  have  been,  by  her,  the  father
of  Pelias  and  Neleus.

82  Argive  Tibur,"] — Ver.  46.  Tibur  was  a  town  beautifully  situate  in
the  neighbourhood  of  Rome ;  it  was  said  to  have  been  founded  by  three
Argive  brothers,  Tyburtus,  Catillus,  and  Coras.

83  Whom  Ilia.] — Ver.  47.  Ilia  was  said  to  have  been  buried  alive,  by
the  orders  of  Amulius,  on  the  banks  of  the  river  Tiber ;  or,  according  to
some,  to  have  been  thrown  into  that  river,  on  which  she  is  said  to  have
become  the  wife  of  the  river,  and  was  deified.  Acron,  an  ancient  his-
torian, wrote  to  the  effect  that  her  ashes  were  interred  on  the  banks  of
the  Anio  ;  and  that  river  overflowing,  carried  them  to  the  bed  of  the
Tiber,  whence  arose  the  story  of  her  nuptials  with  the  latter.  Accord-
ing to  one  account,  she  was  not  put  to  death,  but  was  imprisoned,
(having  been  spared  by  Amulius  at  the  entreaty  of  his  daughter,  who  was
of  the  same  age  as  herself,)  and  at  length  regained  her  liberty.


E.  VI.]  OB, AMOURS.  355

garb,  bearing  the  marks  of  her  nails  on  her  locks,  the
marks  of  her  nails  on  her  cheeks.  Bewailing  both  the  crimes
of  her  uncle,  and  the  fault  of  Mars,  she  was  wandering  along
the  solitary  spots  with  naked  feet.  Her  the  impetuous  stream
beheld  from  his  rapid  waves,  and  raised  his  hoarse  mouth
from  the  midst  of  his  fords,  and  thus  he  said  :  "  Why,  in  sor-
row, art  thou  pacing  my  banks,  Ilia,  the  descendant  of  Lao-
medon84 of  Ida  ?  Whither  have  gone  thy  vestments  ?  Why
wandering  thus  alone  1  And  why  does  no  white  fillet85  bind
thy  hair  tied  up  ?  Why  weepest  thou,  and  why  spoil  thy
eyes  wet  with  tears  ?  And  why  beat  thy  open  breast  with
frenzied  hand  ?  That  man  has  both  flints  and  ore  of  iron  in  his
breast,  who,  unconcerned,  beholds  the  tears  on  thy  delicate
face.  Ilia,  lay  aside  thy  fears  ;  my  palace  shall  be  opened
unto  thee  ;  the  streams,  too,  shall  obey  thee  ;  Ilia,  lay  aside
thy  fears.  Among  a  hundred  Nymphs  or  more,  thou  shalt
hold  the  sway  ;  for  a  hundred  or  more  does  my  stream  con-
tain. Only,  descendant  of  Troy,  despise  me  not,  I  pray ;  gifts
more  abundant  than  my  promises  shalt  thou  receive."

Thus  he  said  ;  she  casting  on  the  ground  her  modest  eyes,  as
she  wept,  besprinkled  her  warm  breast  with  her  tears.  Thrice
did  she  attempt  to  fly ;  thrice  did  she  stop  short  at  the  deep
waves,  as  fear  deprived  her  of  the  power  of  running.  Still,  at
last,  as  with  hostile  fingers  she  tore  her  hair,  with  quivering
lips  she  uttered  these  bitter  words ;  "  Oh !  would  that  my
bones  had  been  gathered  up,  and  hidden  in  the  tomb  of  my
fathers,  while  yet  they  could  be  gathered,  belonging  to  me  a
virgin !  Why  now,  am  I  courted86  for  any  nuptials,  a  Vestal
disgraced,  and  to  be  driven  from  the  altars  of  Ilium  1  Why
do  I  hesitate  ?  See  !  by  the  fingers  of  the  multitude  am  I
pointed  at  as  unchaste.  Let  this  disgrace  be  ended,  which
marks  my  features.

Thus  far  did  she  speak,  and  before  her  swollen  eyes  she  ex-

s-*  Descendant  of  Laomedon.] — Ver.  54.  She  was  supposed  to  be
descended  from  Laomedon,  through  Ascanius,  the  son  of  Creiisa,  the
granddaughter  of  Laomedon.

85  No  white  fillet.']—  Ver.  56.  The  fillet  with  which  the  Vestals
bound  their  hair.

m  Am  I  courted."] — Ver.  75.  The  Vestals  were  released  from  their
duties,  and  were  allowed  to  marry  if  they  chose,  after  they  had  served
for  thirty  years.  The  first  ten  years  were  passed  in  learning  their  duties,
the  next  ten  in  performing  them,  and  the  last  ten  in  instructing  the  novices.

A  A  2


356  THE AMOEES  ;  [b.  ITT.

tended  her  robe  ;  and  so,  in  her  despair,  did  she  throw  her-
self87 into  the  rapid  waters.  The  flowing  stream  is  said  to
have  placed  his  hands  beneath  her  breast,  and  to  have  con-
ferred on  her  the  privilege  of  his  nuptial  couch.

'Tis  worthy  of  belief,  too,  that  thou  hast  been  inflamed
with  love  for  some  maiden ;  but  the  groves  and  woods  conceal
thy  failings.

While  I  have  been  talking,  it  has  become  more  swollen
with  its  extending  waves,  and  the  deep  channel  contains
not  the  rushing  waters.  What,  furious  torrent,  hast  thou
against  me  ?  Why  thus  delay  our  mutual  transports  ?  Why,
churlish  river,  interrupt  the  journey  once  commenced  ?  What
if  thou  didst  flow  according  to  some  fixed  rule,88  a  river  of
some  note  ?  What  if  thy  fame  was  mighty  throughout  the
earth  ?  But  no  name  hast  thou  collected  from  the  exhausted
rivulets ;  thou  hast  no  springs,  no  certain  abode  hast  thou.
In  place  of  spring,  thou  hast  rain  and  melted  snow  ;  resources
which  the  sluggish  winter  supplies  to  thee.  Either  in  muddy
guise,  in  winter  time,  thou  dost  speed  onward  in  thy  course  ;
or  filled  with  dust,  thou  dost  pass  over  the  parched  ground.
What  thirsty  traveller  has  been  able  to  drink  of  thee  then  ?
Who  has  said,  with  grateful  lips,  "  Mayst  thou  flow  on  for
ever?"

Onward  thou  dost  run,  injurious  to  the  flocks,89  still  more
injurious  to  the  fields.  Perhaps  these  mischiefs  may  move
others  ;  my  own  evils  move  me.  And,  oh  shocking !  did  I  in
my  madness  relate  to  this  stream  the  loves  of  the  rivers  ?  I  am
ashamed  unworthily  to  have  pronounced  names  so  great.
Gazing  on  I  know  not  what,  could  I  speak  of  the  rivers90
Achelous  and  Inachus,  and  could  I,  Nile,  talk  of  thy  name  ?
But  for  thy  deserts,  torrent  far  from  clear,  I  wish  that  for
thee  there  may  be  scorching  heat,  and  winter  always  dry.

87  Did  she  throw  herself. .] — Ver.  80.  The  Poet  follows  the  account
which  represented  her  as  drowning  herself.

88  To  some  fixed  rule. 1 — Ver.  89.  '  Legitimum' means  'according  to
fixed  laws  ;'  so  that  it  might  he  depended  upon,  '  in  a  steady  manner.'

89  Injurious  to  the  flocks. ~\ — Ver.  99.  It  would  he  'damnosus'  in
many  ways,  especially  from  its  sweeping  away  the  cattle  and  the  produce
of  the  land.  Its  waters,  too,  being  turbid,  would  be  unpalatable  to  the
thirsty  traveller,  and  unwholesome  from  the  melted  snow,  which  would
be  likely  to  produce  goitre,  or  swellings  in  the  throat.

90  Could  I  speak  of  the  rivers.] — Ver.  103.  He  apologizes  to  the  Ache-
loiis,  Inachus,  and  Nile,  for  presuming  to  mention  their  names,  in  address-
ing such  a  turbid,  contemptible  stream.


B.  VII.]  OE, AMOTJES.

ELEGY  VII.

At  non  formosa  est,  at  non  bene  culta  puella ;

At,  puto,  non  votis  ssepe  petita  meis.
Hanc  tamen  in  nullos  tenui  male  languidus  usus,

Sed  jacui  pigro  crimen  onusque  toro.
Nee  potui  cupiens,  pariter  cupiente  puella,

Inguinis  effceti  parte  juvante  frui.
Ilia  quidem  nostro  subjecit  eburnea  collo

Brachia,  Sithonia  candidiora  nive  ;
Osculaque  inseruit  cupidse  lactantia  linguse  ;

Lascivum  femor^supposuitque  femur ;
Et  mibi  blanditias  dixit,  Dominumque  vocavit,

Et  quae  prseterea  publica  verba  juvant.
Tacta  tamen  veluti  gelida  mea  membra  cicuta,

Segnia  propositum  destituere  suum.
Truncus  iners  jacui,  species,  et  inutile  pondus  :

Nee  satis  exacturri  est,  corpus  an  umbra  forem,
Quae  mihi  ventura  est,  (siquidem  ventura),  senectus,

Cum  desit  numeris  ipsa  juventa  suis  1
Ah  pudet  annorum  !  quo  me  juvenemque  virumque,

Nee  juvenem,  nee  me  sensit  arnica  virum.
Sic  flammas  aditura  pias  eeterna  sacerdos

Surgit,  et  a  caro  fratre  verenda  soror.
At  nuper  bis  flava  Chlide,  ter  Candida  Pitho,

Ter  Libas  officio  continuata  meo.
Exigere  a  nobis  angusta  nocte  Corinnam,

Me  memini  numeros  sustinuisse  novem.
Num  mea  Thessalico  languent  devota  veneno

Corpora  ?  num  misero  carmen  et  herba  nocent  ?
Sagave  Punicea  defixit  nomina  cera,

Et  medium  tenues  in  jecur  egit  acus  ?
Carmine  lsesa  Ceres  sterilem  vanescit  in  herbam :

Deficiunt  lsesse  carmine  fontis  aquae  :
Ilicibus  glandes,  cantataque  vitibus  uva

Decidit ;  et  nullo  poma  movente  fluunt.
Quid  vetat  et  nervos  magicas  torpere  per  artes  ?

Forsitan  impatiens  sit  latus  inde  meum.
Hue  pudor  accessit :  facti  pudor  ipse  nocebat :

Ille  fuit  vitii  causa  secunda  mei.
At  qualem  vidi  tantum  tetigique  puellam,

Sic  etiam  tunica  tangitur  ipsa  sua.
Illius  ad  tactum  Pylius  juvenescere  possit,

Tithonusque  annis  fortior  esse  suis.


358  THE AMORES  ;  [b.  III.

Hsec  mihi  contigerat ;  sed  vir  non  contigit  illi.

Quas  nunc  concipiam  per  nova  vota  preces  ?
Credo  etiam  magnos,  quo  sum  tarn  turpiter  usus,

Muneris  oblati  pcenituisse'  Deos.
Optabam  certe  recipi ;  sura  nempe  receptus  :

Oscula  ferre  ;  tuli :  proxiraus  esse  ;  fui.
Quo  mihi  fortunse  tantura  ?  quo  regna  sine  usu  1

Quid,  nisi  possedi  dives  avarus  opes  ?
Sic  aret  mediis  taciti  vulgator  in  undis  ;

Pomaque,  quae  nullo  tempore  tangat,  habet,
A  tenera  quisquam  sic  surgit  mane  puella,

Protinus  ut  sanctos  possit  adire  Deos.
Sed  non  blanda,  puto,  non  optima  perdidit  in  me

Oscula,  non  omni  solicitavit  ope.
Ilia  graves  potuit  quercus,  adamantaque  durum,

Surdaque  blanditiis  saxa  movere  suis.
Digna  movere  fuit  certe  vivosque  virosque  ;

Sed  neque  turn  vixi,  nee  vir,  ut  ante,  fui.
Quid  juvet,  ad  surdas  si  cantet  Phemius  aures  ?

Quid  miserum  Thamyran  picta  tabella  juvet  ?
At  quse  non  tacita  formavi  gaudia  mente !

Quos  ego  non  finxi  disposuique  modos !
Nostra  tamen  jacuere,  velut  praemortua,  membra

Turpiter,  hesterna  languidiora  rosa.
Quae  nunc  ecce  rigent  intempestiva,  valentque ;

Nunc  opus  exposcunt,  militiamque  suam.
Quin  istic  pudibunda  jaces,  pars  pessima  nostri  ?

Sic  sum  pollicitis  captus  et  ante  tuis.
Tu  dominam  fallis ;  per  te  deprensus  inermis

Tristia  cum  magno  darana  pudore  tuli.
Hanc  etiam  non  est  mea  dedignata  puella

Molliter  admota  solicitare  raanu.
Sed  postquam  nullas  consurgere  posse  per  artes>

Imraemoremque  sui  procubuisse  videt ;
Quid  me  ludis  ?  ait ;  quis  te,  male  sane,  jubebat

Invitum  nostro  ponere  membra  toro  ?
A,ut  te  trajectis  iEaea  venefica  lanis

Devovet,  aut  alio  lassus  amore  venis.
Nee  mora  ;  desiluit  tunica  velata  recincta  :

Et  decuit  nudos  proripuisse  pedes.
Neve  suae  possent  intactam  scire  ministrse,

Dedecus  hoc  sumta  dissimulavit  aqua.


E.  Till. J  OE, AMOURS.  359

ELEGY  VIII.

He  laments  that  he  is  not  received  by  his  mistress,  and  complains  that
she. gives  the  preference  to  a  wealthy  rival.

Akd  does  any  one  still  venerate  the  liberal  arts,  or  suppose
that  soft  verses  have  any  merit  1  Genius  once  was  more  pre-
cious than  gold ;  but  now,  to  be  possessed  of  nought  is  the
height  of  ignorance.  After  my  poems91  have  proved  very
pleasing  to  my  mistress,  it  is  not  allowed  me  to  go  where  it
has  been  allowed  my  books.  When  she  has  much  bepraised
me,  her  door  is  shut  on  him  who  is  praised ;  talented  though
I  be,  I  disgracefully  wander  up  and  down.

Behold  !  a  Knight  gorged  with  blood,  lately  enriched,  his
wealth  acquired92  through  his  wounds,93  is  preferred  before
myself.  And  can  you,  my  life,  enfold  him  in  your  charming
arms  ?  Can  you,  my  life,  rush  into  his  embrace  1  If  you  know
it  not,  that  head  used  to  wear  a  helmet ;  that  side  which  is  so
at  your  service,  was  girded  with  a  sword.  That  left  hand,
which  thus  late94  the  golden  ring  so  badly  suits,  used  to  bear
the  shield ;  touch  his  right,  it  has  been  stained  with  blood.
And  can  you  touch  that  right  hand,  by  which  some  person
has  met  his  death  ?  Alas  !  where  is  that  tenderness  of  heart
of  yours  ?  Look  at  his  scars,  the  traces  of  his  former  fights  ;
whatever  he  possesses,  by  that  body  was  it  acquired.95  Per-
haps, too,  he  will  tell  how  often  he  has  stabbed  a  man  ;
covetous  one,  will  you  touch  the  hand  that  confesses  this  1
I,  unstained,  the  priest  of  the  Muses  and  of  Phoebus,  am  he

91  After  my  poems. 1 — Ver.  5.  He  refers  to  his  lighter  works;  such,
perhaps,  as  the  previous  books  of  his  Amores.  This  explains  the  nature
of  the  '  libelli,'  which  he  refers  to  in  his  address  to  his  mistress,  in  the
Second  Book  of  the  Amores,  El.  xi.  1.  31.

92  His  wealth  acquired. ,] — Ver.  9.  '  Censu.'  For  the  explanation  of
this  word,  see  the  Fasti,  B.  i.  1.  217,  and  the  Note  to  the  passage.

93  Through  his  wounds.'] — Ver.  9.  In  battle,  either  by  giving  wounds,
or  receiving  them.

94  Which  thus  late."] — Ver.  15.  By  'serum,'  he  means  that  his  posi-
tion, as  a  man  of  respectable  station,  has  only  been  recently  acquired,  and
has  not  descended  to  him  through  a  long  line  of  ancestors.

95  Was  it  acquired.] — Ver.  20.  This  was  really  much  to  the  merit  of
his  rival ;  but  most  of  the  higher  classes  of  the  Romans  affected  to  des-
pise anything  like  gain  by  means  of  bodily  exertion ;  and  the  Poet  has
extended  this  feeling  even  to  the  rewards  of  merit  as  a  soldier.


360  THE AMORES  ;  [b.  I  [J.

who  is  singing  his  bootless  song  before  your  obdurate
doors.

Learn,  you  who  are  wise,  not  what  we  idlers  know,  but  how
to  follow  the  anxious  troops,  and  the  ruthless  camp  ;  instead
of  good  verses  hold  sway  overy6  the  first  rank ;  through  this,
Homer,  hadst  thou  wished  it,  she  might  have  proved  kind  to
thee.  Jupiter,  well  aware  that  nothing  is  more  potent  than
gold,  was  himself  the  reward  of  the  ravished  damsel.*7  So  long
as  the  bribe  was  wanting,  the  father  was  obdurate,  she  herself
prudish,  the  door-posts  bound  with  brass,  the  tower  made  of
iron  ;  but  after  the  knowing  seducer  resorted  to  presents,98
she  herself  opened  her  lap  ;  and,  requested  to  surrender,  she
did  surrender.

But  when  the  aged  Saturn  held  the  realms  of  the  heavens,
the  ground  kept  all  money  deep  in  its  recesses.  To  the  shades
below  had  he  removed  brass  and  silver,  and,  together  with  gold,
the  weight  of  iron ;  and  no  ingots  were  there  in  those  times.
But  she  used  to  give  what  was  better,  corn  without  the
crooked  plough-share,  apples  too,  and  honey  found  in  the
hollow  oak.  And  no  one  used  with  sturdy  plough  to  cleave
the  soil ;  with  no  boundaries"  did  the  surveyor  mark  out
the  ground. The  oars  dipped  down  did  not  skim  the  up-

96  Hold  sway  over.] — Ver.  27.  He  here  plays  upon  the  two  meanings
of  the  word  '  deducere.'  4  Deducere  carmen '  is  '  to  compose  poetry  ';
'  deducere  primum  pilum  '  means  '  to  form  '  or  '  command  the  first  troop
of  the  Triarii.'  These  were  the  veteran  soldiers  of  the  Roman  army,  and
the  '  Primipilus'  (which  office  is  here  alluded  to)  being  the  first  Centurion
of  the  first  maniple  of  them,  was  the  chief  Centurion  of  the  legion,  holding
an  office  somewhat  similar  to  our  senior  captains.  Under  the  Empire  this
office  was  very  lucrative.  See  the  Note  to  the  49th  line  of  the  Seventh
Epistle,  in  the  Fourth  Book  of  the  Pontic  Epistles.

97  The  ravished  damsel.] — Ver.  30. He  alludes  to  Danae.

98  Resorted  to  presents.] — Ver.  33.  He  seems  to  allude  to  the  real
meaning  of  the  story  of  Danae,  which,  no  doubt,  had  reference  to  the
corrupting  influence  of  money.

99  With  no  boundaries.] — Ver.  42.  The  'limes  '  was  a  line  or  bound-
ary, between  pieces  of  land  belonging  to  different  persons,  and  consisted
of  a  path,  or  ditch,  or  a  row  of  stones.  The  '  ager  limitatus'  was  the
public  land  marked  out  by  '  limites,'  for  the  purposes  of  allotment  to  the
citizens.  On  apportioning  the  land,  a  line,  which  was  called  'limes,'  was
drawn  through  a  given  point  from  East  to  West,  which  was  called
'  decumanus,'  and  another  line  was  drawn  from  North  to  South.  The  dis-
tance at  which  the  '  limites'  were  to  be  drawn  depended  on  the  magnitude
of  the  squares  or  '  centuriae,'  as  they  were  called,  into  which  it  was  pur-
posed to  divide  the  tract.


E.  VIII. J


OE, AMOUBS.  361


turned  waves  ;  then  was  the  shore1  the  limit  of  the  paths  of
men.  Human  nature,  against  thyself  hast  thou  been  so
clever ;  and  for  thy  own  destruction  too  ingenious.  To  what
purpose  surround  cities  with  turreted  fortifications?2  To
what  purpose  turn  hostile  hands  to  arms  ?  What  hast  thou
to  do  with  the  sea  ?  With  the  earth  thou  mightst  have  been
content.  Why  not  seek  the  heavens3  as  well,  for  a  third
realm  ?  To  the  heavens,  too,  dost  thou  aspire,  so  far  as  thou
mayst.  Quirinus,  Liber,  and  Alcides,  and  Caesar  but  recently,4
have  their  temples.

Instead  of  corn,  we  dig  the  solid  gold  from  the  earth ;  the
soldier  possesses  riches  acquired  by  blood.  To  the  poor
is  the  Senate-house5  shut ;  wealth  alone  confers  honours  ;6
hence,  the  judge  so  grave ;  hence  the  knight  so  proud.  Let
them  possess  it  all ;  let  the  field  of  Mars7  and  the  Forum8

1  Then  was  the  shore."] — Ver.  44.  Because  they  had  not  as  yet  learnt
the  art  of  navigation.

2  Turreted  fortifications.] — Ver.  47.  Among  the  ancients  the  fortifica-
tions of  cities  were  strengthened  by  towers,  which  were  placed  at  intervals
on  the  walls  ;  they  were  also  generally  used  at  the  gates  of  towns.

3  Why  not  seek  the  heavens. — Ver.  50.  With  what  indignation  would
he  not  have  spoken  of  a  balloon,  as  being  nothing  less  than  a  downright
attempt  to  scale  the  '  tertia  regna !'

4  Cmar  hut  recently.] — Ver.  52.  See  the  end  of  the  Fifteenth  Book
of  the  Metamorphoses,  and  the  Fasti,  Book  hi.  1.  704.

5  The  Senate-house. — Ver.  55.  'Curia' was  the  name  of  the  place
where  the  Senate  held  its  meetings,  such  as  the  '  curia  Hostilia,'  *  Julia,'
Marcelli,'  and  others.  Hence  arose  the  custom  of  calling  the  Senate
itself,  in  the  various  Roman  towns,  by  the  name  of  '  curia,'  but  not  the
Senate  of  Rome.  He  here  means  to  say,  that  poverty  excluded  a  man  from
the  Senate-house,  and  that  wealth  alone  was  the  qualification  for  the
honours  of  the  state.

6  Wealth  alone  confers  honours.] — Ver.  55.  The  same  expression  occurs
in  the  Fasti,  Book  i.  1.  217,  where  a  similar  complaint  is  made  on  the
worldly-mindedness  of  the  age.

7  The  Field  of  Mars.] — Ver.  57.  The  'comitia,'  or  meetings  for  the
elections  of  the  magistrates,  were  held  on  the  '  Campus  Martius  '  or  field
of  Mars. See  the  Notes  to  the  Fasti,  Book  i.  1.  53.

8  And  the  Forum.] — Ver.  57.  The  '  Fora'  were  of  two  kinds  at  Rome  ;
some  being  market-places,  where  all  kinds  of  goods  were  exposed  for  sale,
while  others  were  solely  courts  of  justice.  Among  the  latter  is  the  one
here  mentioned,  which  was  simply  called  '  Forum,'  so  long  as  it  was
the  only  one  of  its  kind  existing  at  Rome,  and,  indeed,  after  that  period,
as  in  the  present  instance.  At  a  later  period  of  the  Republic,  and  under
the  Empire,  when  other  'fora,'  for  judicial  purposes,  were  erected,  this
'  Forum'  was  distinguished  by  the  epithets  '  vetus,'  '  old,'  or  '  magnum,'


362  THE AMOBES  ;  [b.  III.

obey  them ;  let  these  administer  peace  and  cruel  warfare.
Only,  in  their  greediness,  let  them  not  tear  away  my  mistress  ;
and  'tis  enough,  so  they  but  allow  something  to  belong  to
the  poor.

But  now-a-days,  he  that  is  able  to  give  away  plenty,  rules
it  over  a  woman  like  a  slave,  even  should  she  equal  the
prudish  Sabine  dames.  The  keeper  is  in  my  way ;  with  re-
gard to  me,9  she  dreads  her  husband.  If  I  were  to  make  pre-
sents, both  of  them  would  entirely  disappear  from  the  house.
Oh !  if  any  God  is  the  avenger  of  the  neglected  lover,  may  he
change  riches,  so  ill-gotten,  into  dust.


ELEGY  IX.

He  laments  the  death  of  the  Poet  Tibullus.
If  his  mother  has  lamented  Memnon,  his  mother  Achilles,
and  if  sad  deaths  influence  the  great  Goddesses ;  plaintive
Elegy,  unbind  thy  sorrowing  tresses  ;  alas  !  too  nearly  will  thy
name  be  derived  from  fact !  The  Poet  of  thy  own  inspiration,10
Tibullus,  thy  glory,  is  burning,  a  lifeless  body,  on  the  erected
pile.11 Lo !  the  son  of  Venus  bears  both  his  quiver  inverted,

'  great.'  It  was  situate  between  the  Capitoline  and  Palatine  hills,  and
was  originally  a  swamp  or  marsh,  which  was  filled  up  by  Romulus  or
Tatius.  It  was  chiefly  used  for  judicial  proceedings,  and  is  supposed  to
have  been  surrounded  with  the  bankers'  shops  or  offices,  '  argentaria.'
Gladiatorial  games  were  occasionally  held  there,  and  sometimes  prisoners
of  war,  and  faithless  legionary  soldiers,  were  there  put  to  death.  A
second '  Forum,'  for  judicial  purposes,  was  erected  by  Julius  Caesar,  and
was  called  by  his  name.  It  was  adorned  with  a  splendid  temple  of  Venus
Genitrix.  A  third  was  built  by  Augustus,  and  was  called  '  Forum  Au-
gusts' It  was  adorned  with  a  temple  of  Mars,  and  the  statues  of  the
most  distinguished  men  of  the  republic.  Having  suffered  severely  from
fire,  this  Forum  was  restored  by  the  Emperor  Hadrian.  It  is  mentioned
in  the  Fourth  Book  of  the  Pontic  Epistles,  Ep.  xv.  1.  16.  See  the  Fasti,
Book  hi.  1.  704.

9  With  regard  to  me.] — Ver.  63.  He  says  that  because  he  is  poor  she
makes  excuses,  and  pretends  that  she  is  afraid  of  her  husband  and  those
whom  he  has  set  to  watch  her.

10  Of  thy  own  inspiration.'] — Ver.  5.  Burmann  remarks,  that  the
word  '  opus '  is  especially  applied  to  the  sacred  rites  of  the  Gods ;  literally
'  the  priest  of  thy  rites.'

11  The  erected  pile.] — Ver.  6.  Among  the  Romans  the  corpse  was  burnt
on  a  pile  of  wood,  which  was  called  '  pyra,'  or  'rogus.'  According  to
Servius,  it  was  called  by  the  former  name  before,  and  by  the  latter  after,


E.  IX.]  OR, AMOURS.  363

and  his  bow  broken,  and  his  torch  without  a  flame  ;  behold
how  wretched  with  drooping  wings  he  goes  :  and  how  he  beats
his  naked  breast  with  cruel  hand.  His  locks  dishevelled
about  his  neck  receive  his  tears,  and  his  mouth  resounds  with
sobs  that  convulse  his  body.  'Twas  thus,  beauteous  Iiilus,  they
say  that  thou  didst  go  forth  from  thy  abode,  at  the  funeral
of  his  brother  iEneas.  Not  less  was  Venus  afflicted  when
Tibullus  died,  than  when  the  cruel  boar12  tore  the  groin  of
the  youth.

And  yet  we  Poets  are  called  f  hallowed,'  and  the  care  of  the
Deities  ;  there  are  some,  too,  who  believe  that  we  possess  in-
spiration.13 Inexorable  Death,  forsooth,  profanes  all  that  is
hallowed  ;  upon  all  she  lays  her14  dusky  hands.  What  availed
his  father,  what,  his  mother,  for  Ismarian  Orpheus  ? 15  What,
with  his  songs  to  have  lulled  the  astounded  wild  beasts  ?  The
same  father  is  said,  in  the  lofty  woods,  to  have  sung  '  Linus !
Alas ! Linus !  Alas  !' 16  to  his  reluctant  lyre. Add  the  son  of

it  was  lighted,  but  this  distinction  is  not  observed  by  the  Latin  writers.
It  was  in  the  form  of  an  altar  with  four  equal  sides,  but  it  varied  in  height
and  the  mode  of  decoration,  according  to  the  circumstances  of  the  de-
ceased. On  the  pile  the  body  was  placed  with  the  couch  on  which  it  had
been  carried  ;  and  frankincense,  ointments,  locks  of  hair,  and  garlands,
were  thrown  upon  it.  Even  ornaments,  clothes,  and  dishes  of  food  were
sometimes  used  for  the  same  purpose.  This  was  done  not  only  by  the
family  of  the  deceased,  but  by  such  persons  as  joined  the  funeral  pro-
cession.

12  The  cruel  boar. ,]  — Ver.  16.  He  alludes  to  the  death  of  Adonis,  by
the  tusk  of  a  boar,  which  pierced  his  thigh.  See  the  Tenth  Book  of  the
Metamorphoses,  I.  716.

13  We  possess  inspiration. .] — Ver.  17. In  the  Sixth  Book  of  the  Fasti,
6,  he  says. '  There  is  a  Deity  within  us  (Poets) :  under  his  guidance

we  glow  with  inspiration ;  this  poetic  fervour  contains  the  impregnating
particles  of  the  mind  of  the  Divinity.'

14  She  lays  her.} — Ver.  20.  It  must  be  remembered  that,  whereas  we
personify  Death  as  of  the  masculine  gender ;  the  Romans  represented  the
grim  tyrant  as  being  a  female.  It  is  a  curious  fact  that  we  find  Death
very  rarely  represented  as  a  skeleton  on  the  Roman  monuments. The

keleton  of  a  child  has,  in  one  instance,  been  found  represented  on  one
of  the  tombs  of  Pompeii.  The  head  of  a  horse  was  one  of  the  most
common  modes  of  representing  death,  as  it  signified  departure.

15  Ismarian  Orpheus.} — Ver.  21.  Apollo  and  the  Muse  Calliope  were
the  parents  of  Orpheus,  who  met  with  a  cruel  death.  See  the  beginning
of  the  Eleventh  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses.

16  Linus  !  Alas  /] — "Ver.  23.  '  jElinon '  was  said  to  have  been  the  ex-
clamation of  Apollo,  on  the  death  of  his  son,  the  poet  Linus. The  word


364  THE AMORES  ;  [b.  lit.

Maeon,17  too,  by  whom,  as  though  an  everlasting  stream,  the
mouths  of  the  poets  are  refreshed  by  the  waters  of  Pieria :
him,  too,  has  his  last  day  overwhelmed  in  black  Avernus  ;
his  verse  alone  escapes  the  all-consuming  pile.  The  fame  of
the  Trojan  toils,  the  work  of  the  Poets  is  lasting,  and  the  slow
web  woven18  again  through  the  stratagem  of  the  night.  So
shall  Nemesis,  so  Delia,19  have  a  lasting  name ;  the  one,  his
recent  choice,  the  other  his  first  love.

What  does  sacrifice  avail  thee?20  Of  what  use  are  now
the  'sistra'  of  Egypt  ?  What, lying  apart21  in  a  forsaken  bed?
When  the  cruel  Destinies  snatch  away  the  good,  (pardon  the
confession)  I  am  tempted  to  think  that  there  are  no  Deities,
Live  pioilsly ;  pious  though  you  be,  you  shall  die  ;  attend  the
sacred  worship  ;  still  ruthless  Death  shall  drag  the  worshipper
from  the  temples  to  the  yawning  tomb.22  Put  your  trust  in
the  excellence  of  your  verse  ;  see  !  Tibullus  lies  prostrate ;  of  so
much,  there  hardly  remains  enough  for  a  little  urn  to  receive.

And,  hallowed  Poet,  have  the  flames  of  the  pile  consumed
thee,  and  have  they  not  been  afraid  to  feed  upon  that  heart
of  thine  ? They  could  have  burned  the  golden  temples  of  the

is  derived  from  the  Greek,  'at  Aivbg,'  *  Alas  !  Linus.'  A  certain  poetic
measure  was  called  by  this  name ;  but  we  learn  from  Athenaeus,  that  it  was
not  always  confined  to  pathetic  subjects.  There  appear  to  have  been  two
persons  of  the  name  of  Linus.  One  was  a  Theban,  the  son  of  Apollo,
and  the  instructor  of  Orpheus  and  Hercules,  while  the  other  was  the  son
of  an  Argive  princess,  by  Apollo,  who,  according  to  Statius,  was  torn  to
pieces  in  his  infancy  by  dogs.

17  The  son  of  Meson.'] — Ver.  25.  See  the  Note  to  the  ninth  line  of  the
Fifteenth  Elegy  of  the  First  Book  of  the  Amores.

18  Slow  web  woven.] — Ver.  30. The  web  of  Penelope.

19  Nemesis,  so  Delia.]  — Ver.  31.  Nemesis  and  Delia  were  the  names
of  damsels  whose  charms  were  celebrated  by  Tibullus.

20  Sacrifice  avail  thee.]  —  Ver.  33.  He  alludes  to  two  lines  in  the
First  Elegy  of  Tibullus.

'  Quid  tua  nunc  Isis  mihi  Delia  ?  quid  mihi  prosunt
Ilia  tua  toties  sera  repulsa  manu.'

'  What  have  I  now  to  do,  Delia,  with  your  Isis  ?  what  avail  me  those  sistra
so  often  shaken  by  your  hand  ? '

21  What  lying  apart.] — Ver.  34.  During  the  festival  of  Isis,  all  inter-
course with  men  was  forbidden  to  the  female  devotees.

22  The  yawning  tomb.] — Ver.  38.  The  place  where  a  person  was
burnt  was  called  'bustum,'  if  he  was  afterwards  buried  on  the  same
spot,  and  '  ustrina,'  or  '  ustrinum,'  if  he  was  buried  at  a  different  place.
See  the  Notes  to  the  Fasti,  B.  ii.  1.  534.


E.  IX.]  OK, AMOURS.  365

holy  Gods,  that  have  dared  a  crime  so  great.  She  turned
away  her  face,  who  holds  the  towers  of  Eryx;23  there  are
some,  too,  who  affirm  that  she  did  not  withhold  her  tears.  But
still,  this  is  better  than  if  the  Phseacian  land24  had  buried  him
a  stranger,  in  an  ignoble  spot.  Here,25  at  least,  a  mother
pressed  his  tearful  eyes26  as  he  fled,  and  presented  the  last
gifts27  to  his  ashes  ;  here  a  sister  came  to  share  the  grief  with
her  wretched  mother,  tearing  her  unadorned  locks.  And  with
thy  relatives,  both  Nemesis  and  thy  first  love28  joined  their

23  The  towers  of  Eryx.~\ — Ver.  45.  He  alludes  to  Venus,  who  had  a
splendid  temple  on  Mount  Eryx,  in  Sicily.

24  The  Phceacian  land.] — Ver.  47.  The  Phaeacians  were  the  ancient
people  of  Corcyra,  now  the  isle  of  Corfu.  Tibullus  had  attended  Messala
thither,  and  falling  ill,  was  unable  to  accompany  his  patron  on  his  return  to
Rome,  on  which  he  addressed  to  him  the  First  Elegy  of  his  Third  Book,
in  which  he  expressed  a  hope  that  he  might  not  die  among  the  Phaeacians.
To  this  Elegy  Ovid  here  refers.  Tibullus  afterwards  recovered,  and  died
at  Rome.  When  he  penned  this  line,  Ovid  little  thought  that  his  own
bones  would  one  day  rest  in  a  much  more  ignoble  spot  than  Corcyra,  and
one  much  more  repulsive  to  the  habits  of  civilization.

25  Here.'] — Ver.  49.  '  Hie'  here  seems  to  be  the  preferable  reading  ;
alluding  to  Rome,  in  contradistinction  to  Corcyra.

26  His  tearful  eyes.] — Ver.  49.  He  alludes  to  the  custom  of  the
nearest  relative  closing  the  eyes  of  the  dying  person.

27  The  last  gifts.] — Ver.  50.  The  perfumes  and  other  offerings  which
were  thrown  on  the  burning  pile,  are  here  alluded  to.  Tibullus  says,  in
the  same  Elegy —

'  Non  soror  Assyrios  cineri  quae  dedat  odores,
Et  neat  efFusis  ante  sepulchra  comis  '
'  No  sister  have  I  here  to  present  to  my  ashes  the  Assyrian  perfumes,  and
to  weep  before  my  tomb  with  dishevelled  locks.' To  this  passage  Ovid
makes  reference  in  the  next  two  hues.

28  Thy  first  love.] — Ver.  53.  '  Prior ;'  his  former  love  was  Delia,  who
was  forsaken  by  him  for  Nemesis.  They  are  both  represented  here  as
attending  his  obsequies.  Tibullus  says,  in  the  First  Elegy  of  the  First
Book,  addressing  Delia : —

'  Te  spectem,  suprema  mihi  cum  venerit  hora,

Te  teneam  moriens,  deficiente  manu.
Flebis  et  arsuro  positum  me,  Delia,  lecto,

Tristibus  et  lacrymis  oscula  mista  dabis.'
1  May  I  look  upon  you  when  my  last  hour  comes,  when  dying,  may  I  hold
you  with  my  failing  hand.  Delia,  you  will  lament  me,  too,  when  placed
on  my  bier,  doomed  to  the  pile,  and  will  give  me  kisses  mingled  with  the
tears  of  grief.'  To  these  lines  Ovid  evidently  here  refers.  It  would
appear  from  the  present  passage,  that  it  was  the  custom  to  give  the  last
kiss  when  the  body  was  laid  on  the  funeral  pile.


366  THE AMORES  ;  [b.  III.

kisses  ;  and  they  left  not  the  pile  in  solitude.  Delia,  as  she
departed,  said,  "  More  fortunately  was  I  beloved  by  thee ;  so
long  as  I  was  thy  flame,  thou  didst  live."  To  her  said
Nemesis :  "  What  dost  thou  say  ?  Are  my  sufferings  a  pain  to
thee  ? When  dying,  he  grasped  me  with  his  failing  hand."  29

If,  however,  aught  of  us  remains,  but  name  and  spirit,  Ti-
bullus  will  exist  in  the  Elysian  vales.  Go  to  meet  him,  learned
Catullus,30  with  thy  Calvus,  having  thy  youthful  temples  bound
with  ivy.  Thou  too,  Gallus,  (if  the  accusation  of  the  injury
of  thy  friend  is  false)  prodigal  of  thy  blood31  and  of  thy  life.

Of  these,  thy  shade  is  the  companion  ;  if  only  there  is  any
shade  of  the  body,  polished  Tibullus  ;  thou  hast  swelled  the
blessed  throng.  Rest,  bones,  I  pray,  in  quiet,  in  the  un-
touched urn ;  and  may  the  earth  prove  not  heavy  for  thy
ashes.

29  With  his  failing  hand.] — Ver.  58.  Nemesis  here  alludes  to  the
above  line,  and  tells  Delia,  that  she,  herself,  alone  engaged  his  affection,
as  it  was  she  alone  who  held  his  hand  when  he  died.

30  Learned  Catullus.] — Ver.  62.  Catullus  was  a  Roman  poet,  a  native
of  Verona.  Calvus  was  also  a  Roman  poet  of  great  merit.  The  poems
of  Catullus  and  Calvus  were  set  to  music  by  Hermogenes,  Tigellius,  and
Demetrius,  who  were  famous  composers.  See  the  Tristia,  Book  ii.  lines
427  and  431,  and  the  Notes  to  the  passages.

31  Prodigal  of  thy  blood.] — Ver.  64.  He  alludes  to  the  fact  of  Gallus
having  killed  himself,  and  to  his  having  been  suspected  of  treason  against
Augustus,  from  whom  he  had  received  many  marks  of  kindness.  Ovid
seems  to  hint,  in  the  Tristia,  Book  ii.  1.  446,  that  the  fault  of  Gallus  was
his  having  divulged  the  secrets  of  Augustus,  when  he  was  in  a  state  of
inebriety.  Some  writers  say,  that  when  Governor  of  Egypt,  he  caused
his  name  and  exploits  to  be  inscribed  on  the  Pyramids,  and  th  t  this
constituted  his  crime.  Others  again,  suppose  that  he  was  guilty  of
extortion  in  Egypt,  and  that  he  especially  harassed  the  people  of  Thebes
with  his  exactions.  Some  of  the  Commentators  think  that  under  the
name  '  amicus,'  Augustus  is  not  here  referred  to,  inasmuch  as  it  would
seem  to  bespeak  a  familiar  acquaintanceship,  which  is  not  known  to  have
existed.  Scaliger  thinks  that  it  must  refer  to  some  misunderstanding
which  had  taken  place  between  Gallus  and  Tibullus,  in  which  the  former
was  accused  of  having  deceived  his  friend.


E.  X.]  GE, AMOURS.  36 7


ELEGY  X.

He  complains  to  Ceres' that  during  her  rites  he  is  separated  from  his
mistress.

The  yearly  season  of  the  rites  of  Ceres32  is  come :  my  mistress
lies  apart  on  a  solitary  couch.  Yellow  Ceres,  having  thy
floating  locks  crowned  with  ears- of  corn,  why  dost  thou  inter-
fere with  my  pleasures  by  thy  rites  ?  Thee,  Goddess,  nations
speak  of  as  bounteous  everywhere :  and  no  one  is  less  unfa-
vorable to  the  blessings  of  mankind.

In  former  times  the  uncouth  peasants  did  not  parch  the
corn  ;  and  the  threshing  floor  was  a  name  unknown  on  earth.
But  the  oaks,  the  early  oracles,33  used  to  bear  acorns  ;  these,
and  the  grass  of  the  shooting  sod,  were  the  food  of  men.
Ceres  was  the  first  to  teach  the  seed  to  swell  in  the  fields,  and
with  the  sickle  did  she  cut  her  coloured  locks ;  she  first  forced
the  bulls  to  place  their  necks  beneath  the  yoke ;  and  she
with  crooked  tooth  turned  up  the  fallow  ground.  Can  any  one
believe  that  she  takes  delight  in  the  tears  of  lovers,  and  is
duly  propitiated  with  misery  and  single-blessedness  ?  Nor
yet  (although  she  loves  the  fruitful  fields)  is  she  a  coy  one  ;
nor  has  she  a  breast  devoid  of  love.  The  Cretans  shall  be  my
witnesses  ;  and  the  Cretans  do  not  feign  everything ;  the
Cretans,  a  nation  proud  of  having  nurtured  Jove.34  There,
he  who  rules  the  starry  citadel  of  the  world,  a  little  child,
drank  milk  with  tender  lips.  There  is  full  confidence  in
the  witness  ;  by  its  foster-child  the  witness  is  recommended.
I  think  that  Ceres  will  confess  her  frailties,  so  well  known.

The  Goddess  had  beheld  Iasius35  at  the'foot  of  Cretan  Ida,

32  The  rites  of  Ceres.'] — Ver.  1.  This  festival,  of  Ceres  occurred  on
the  Fifth  of  the  Ides  of  April,  heing  the  12th  day  of  that  month.  See
the  Fasti,  Book  iv.  1.  393.  White  garments  were  worn  at  this  festival,
and  woollen  robes  of  dark  colour  were  prohibited.  The  worship  was
conducted  solely  by  females,  and  all  intercourse  with  men  was  forbidden,
who  were  not  allowed  to  approach  the  altars  of  the  Goddess.

33  The  oaks,  the  early  oracles.'] — Ver.  9.  On  the  oaks,  the  oracles  of
Dodona,  see  the  Translation  of  the  Metamorphoses,  pages  253  and  467.

34  Having  nurtured  Jove.] — Ver.  20.  See  an  account  of  the  educa-
tion of  Jupiter,  by  the  Curetes,  in  Crete,  in  the  Fourth  Book  of  the  Fasti,
1.  499,  et  seq.

35  Beheld  Jusius.] — Ver.  25. Iasius,  or  Iasion,  was,  according  to  mort


368  THE AMOBES  ;  [B.  III.

as  he  pierced  the  backs  of  the  wild  beasts  with  unerring  hand.
She  beheld,  and  when  her  tender  marrow  caught  the  flame;  on
the  one  side  Shame,  on  the  other  Love,  inflamed  her.  Shame
was  conquered  by  Love  ;  you  might  see  the  furrows  lying  dry,
and  the  crops  coming  up  with  a  very  small  proportion  of
their  wheat.™  When  the  mattocks  stoutly  wielded  had  turned
up  the  land,  and  the  crooked  plough  had  broken  the  hard
earth,  and  the  seed  had  fallen  equally  scattered  over  the  wide
fields  ;  the  hopes  of  the  deceived  husbandman  were  vain.

The  Goddess,  the  guardian  of  corn,  was  lingering  in  the  lofty
woods  ;  the  wreaths  of  corn  had  fallen  from  her  flowing  locks.
Crete  alone  was  fertile  in  its  fruitful  year  ;  all  places,  whither
the  Goddess  had  betaken  herself,  were  one  continued  harvest.
Ida,  the  locality  itself  for  groves,  grew  white  with  corn,  and
the  wild  boar  cropped  the  ears  in  the  woods.  The  law-giving
Minos37  wished  for  himself  many  like  years  ;  he  wished  that
the  love  of  Ceres  might  prove  lasting.

Whereas,  yellow-haired  Goddess,  single-blessedness  would
have  been  sad  to  thee  ;  this  am  I  now  compelled  by  thy
rites  to  endure.  Why  should  I  be  sad,  when  thy  daughter
has  been  found  again  by  thee,  and  rules  over  realms,  only  less
than  Juno  in  rank  ?  This  festive  day  calls  for  both  Venus,
and  songs,  and  wine.  These  gifts  is  it  fitting  to  bear  to  the
ruling  Gods.

accounts,  the  son  of  Jupiter  and  Electra,  and  enjoyed  the  favour  of  Ceres,
by  whom  he  was  the  father  of  Plutus.  According  to  the  Scholiast  on
Theocritus,  he  was  the  son  of  Minos,  and  the  Nymph  Phronia.  According
to  Apollodorus,  he  was  struck  dead  by  the  bolts  of  Jupiter,  for  offering  vio-
lence to  Ceres.  He  was  also  said  by  some  to  be  the  husband  of  Cybele.
He  is  supposed  to  have  been  a  successful  husbandman  when  agriculture
was  but  little  known  ;  which  circumstance  is  thought  to  have  given  rise
to  the  story  of  his  familiarity  with  Ceres.  Ovid  repeats  this  charge
against  the  chastity  of  Ceres,  in  the  Tristia,  Book  ii.  1.  300.  See  the
Note  to  the  passage.

36  Proportion  of  their  wheat.'] — Ver.  30.  "With  less  corn  than  had
been  originally  sown.

37  The  law-giving  Minos.'] — Ver.  41.  Minos  is  said  to  have  been  the
first  who  gave  laws  to  the  Cretans.


E.  XI.]  OK, AMOTTBS.  369

ELEGY  XI.

He  tells  his  mistress  that  he  cannot  help  loving  her.

Much  and  long  time  have  I  suffered ;  by  your  faults  is  my
patience  overcome.  Depart  from  my  wearied  breast,  disgrace-
ful Love.  In  truth  I  have  now  liberated  myself,  and  I  have
burst  my  chains  ;  and  I  am  ashamed  to  have  borne  what  it
shamed  me  not  to  endure.  I  have  conquered ;  and  Love  sub-
dued I  have  trodden  under  foot;  late  have  the  horns38  come
upon  my  head.  Have  patience,  and  endure,39  this  pain  will
one  day  avail  thee ;  often  has  the  bitter  potion  given  refresh-
ment to  the  sick.

And  could  I  then  endure,  repulsed  so  oft  from  thy  doors,
to  lay  a  free-born  body  upon  the  hard  ground  ?4&  And  did  I
then,  like  a  slave,  keep  watch  before  thy  street  door,  for  some
stranger  I  know  not  whom,  that  you  were  holding  in  your  em-
brace ?  And  did  I  behold  it,  when  the  wearied  paramour  came
out  of  your  door,  carrying  off  his  jaded  and  exhausted  sides  ?
Still,  this  is  more  endurable  than  the  fact  that  I  was  beheld
by  him  ;41  may  that  disgrace  be  the  lot  of  my  foes.

When  have  I  not  kept  close  fastened  to  your  side  as  you
walked,42  myself  your  keeper,  myself  your  husband,  myself
your  companion  ?  And,  celebrated  by  me  forsooth,  did  you
please  the  public:  my  passion  was  the  cause  of  passion,  in  many.
Why  mention  the  base  perjuries  of  your  perfidious  tongue  ?
andwAy  the  Gods  forsworn43  for  my  destruction  ?  Why  the  silent

38  Late  have  the  horns.] — Ver.  6.  This  figure  is  derived  from  the
horns,  the  weapons  of  the  bull.  '  At  length  I  have  assumed  the  weapons
of  defence.' It  is  rendered  in  a  singular  manner  in  Nisard's  Translation,

Trop  tard,  helas ! J'ai  connu  l'outrage  fait  a  mon  front.' '  Too  late,
alas  !  I  have  known  the  outrage  done  to  my  forehead.' ! ! !

39  Have  patience  and  endure.'] — Ver.  7.  He  addresses  himself,  recom-
mending fortitude  as  his  only  cure.

40  The  hard  ground.] — Ver.  10. At  the  door  of  his  mistress  ; a  prac-
ce  which  seems  to  have  been  very  prevalent  with  the  Roman  lovers.

41  J  was  beheld  by  him.]— Yer.  15.  As,  of  course',  his  rival  would  only
augh  at  him  for  his  folly,  and  very  deservedly.

42  As  you  walked.]— Yer.  17.  By  the  use  of  the  word  '  spatiantis,'  he
lludes  to  her  walks  under  the  Porticos  of  Rome,  which  were  much  fre-
quented as  places  for  exercise,  sheltered  from  the  heat.

43  The  Gods  forsworn.]  — Ver.  22.  This  forms  the  subject  of  the
Third  Elegy  of  the  present  Book.

B  B


370  THE AMOEES;  [B.  T.

nods  of  young  men  at  banquets,44  and  words  concealed  in
signs  arranged  beforehand  ?  She  was  reported  to  me  to  be  ill ;
headlong  and  distracted  I  ran ;  I  arrived ;  and,  to  my  rival
she  was  not  ill.45

Bearing  these  things,  and  others  on  which  I  am  silent,  I
have  oft  endured  them ;  find  another  in  my  stead,  who  could  put
up  with  these  things.  Now  my  ship,  crowned  with  the  votive
chaplet,  listens  in  safety  to  the  swelling  waves  of  the  ocean.
Cease  to  lavish  your  blandishments  and  the  words  which  once
availed ;  I  am  not  a  fool,  as  once  I  was.  Love  on  this  side,
Hatred  on  that,  are  struggling,  and  are  dragging  my  tender
heart  in  opposite  directions  ;  but  Love,  I  think,  still  gets  the
better.  I  will  hate,46  if  I  can  ;  if  not,  reluctantly  will  I  love  ;
the  bull  loves  not  his  yoke  ;  still,  that  which  he  hates  he  bears.

I  fly  from  treachery ;  your  beauty,  as  I  fly,  brings  me  back  ;
I  abhor  the  failings  of  your  morals  ;  your  person  I  love.  Thus,
I  can  neither  live  without  you,  nor  yet  with  you  ;  and  I  ap-
pear to  be  unacquainted  with  my  own  wishes.  I  wish  that
either  you  were  less  handsome,  or  less  unprincipled.  So
beauteous  a  form  does  not  suit  morals  so  bad.  Your  actions
excite  hatred ;  your  beauty  demands  love.  Ah  wretched  me  !
she  is  more  potent  than  her  frailties.

0  pardon  me,  by  the  common  rites  of  our  bed,  by  all  the
Gods  who  so  often  allow  themselves  to  be  deceived  by  you,
and  by  your  beauty,  equal  to  a  great  Divinity  with  me,  and  by
your  eyes,  which  have  captivated  my  own  ;  whatever  you  shall
be,  ever  shall  you  be  mine  ;  only  do  you  make  choice  whether
you  will  wish  me  to  wish  as  well  to  love  you,  or  whether  I  am
to  love  you  by  compulsion.  I  would  rather  spread  my  sails
and  use  propitious  gales  ;  since,  though  I  should  refuse,  I  shall
still  be  forced  to  love.

44  Young  men  at  banquets.'] — Ver.  23.  See  the  Fifth  Elegy  of  the
Second  Book  of  the  Amores.

45  She  was  not  ill.] — Ver.  26.  When  he  arrived,  he  found  his  rival  in
her  company.

46  I  will  hate.] — Ver.  35-  This  and  the  next  line  are  considered  by
Hekisms  and  other  Commentators  to  be  spurious.


XII.]  OB, AMOTJES.  371


ELEGY  XII.

He  complains  that  he  has  rendered  his  mistress  so  celebrated  by  his
verses,  as  to  have  thereby  raised  for  himself  many  rivals.

What  day  was  that,  on  which,  ye  birds  of  no  white  hue,  you
sent  forth  your  ominous  notes,  ever  sad  to  me  in  my  loves  ?
Or  what  star  must  I  consider  to  be  the  enemy  of  my  destiny  ?
Or  what  Deities  am  I  to  complain  of,  as  waging  war  against
me  ?  She,  who  but  lately47  was  called  my  own,  whom  I  com-
menced alone  to  love,  I  fear  that  with  many  she  must  be
shared  by  me.

Am  I  mistaken  ?  Or  has  she  gained  fame  by  my  poems  I
'Tis  so ;  by  my  genius  has  she  been  made  public.  And
justly  ;  for  why  have  I  made  proclamation48  of  her  charms  ?
Through  my  fault  has  the  fair  been  put  up  for  sale.  She
pleases,  and  I  the  procurer ;  by  my  guidance  is  the  lover  in-
troduced ;  by  my  hands  has  her  door  been  opened.  Whe-
ther verses  are  of  any  use,  is  matter  of  doubt ;  at  all  events,
they  have  injured  me  ;  they  have  been  envious  of  my  happi-
ness. While  Thebes,49 while Troy, while the exploits of

47  She  who  but  lately.'] — Ver.  5.  Commentators  are  at  a  loss  to  know
whether  he  is  here  referring  to  Corinna,  or  to  his  other  mistress,  to  whom
he  alludes  in  the  Tenth  Elegy  of  the  Second  Book,  when  he  confesses  that
he  is  in  love  with  two  mistresses.  If  Corinna  was  anything  more  than  an
ideal  personage,  it  is  probable  that  she  is  not  meant  here,  as  he  made  it  a
point  not  to  discover  to  the  world  who  was  meant  under  that  name ;
whereas,  the  mistress  here  mentioned  has  been  recommended  to  the  notice
of  the  Roman  youths  by  his  poems.

48  Made  proclamation.'] — Ver.  9.  He  says  that,  unconsciously,  he  has
been  doing  the  duties  of  the  '  praeco'  or  '  crier,'  in  recommending  his
mistress  to  the  public.  The  '  praeco,'  among  the  Romans,  was  employed
in  sales  by  auction,  to  advertise  the  time,  place,  and  conditions  of  sale,
and  very  probably  to  recommend  and  praise  the  property  offered  for  sale.
These  officers  also  did  the  duty  of  the  auctioneer,  so  far  as  calling  out  the
biddings,  but  the  property  was  knocked  down  by  the  '  magister  auctionum.'
The  "praecones'  were  also  employed  to  keep  silence  in  the  public  assemblies,
to  pronounce  the  votes  of  the  centuries,  to  summon  the  plaintiff  and  de-
fendant upon  trials,  to  proclaim  the  victors  in  the  public  games,  to  invite
the  people  to  attend  public  funerals,  to  recite  the  laws  that  were  enacted,
and,  when  goods  were  lost,  to  cry  them  and  search  for  them.  The  office
of  a  '  praeco'  was,  in  the  time  of  Cicero,  looked  upon  as  rather  disreputable.

49  Thebes.] — Ver.  15.  He  speaks  of  the  Theban  war,  the  Trojan  war,  and
the  exploits  of  Caesar,  as  being  good  subjects  for  Epic  poetry  ;  but  he  says

B  B  2


372  THE AMOEES  ;  [b.  III.

Caesar  existed  ;  Corinna  alone  warmed  my  genius.  Would  that
I  had  meddled  with  verses  against  the  will  of  the  Muses  ;  and
that  Phoebus  had  deserted  the  work  commenced  !  And  yet,  it  is
not  the  custom  to  listen  to  Poets  as  witnesses  ;50  I  would  have
preferred  all  weight  to  be  wanting  to  my  words.

Through  us,  Scylla,  who  robbed  her  father  of  his  white
hair,  bears  the  raging  dogs51  beneath  her  thigh  and  loins.
We  have  given  wings  to  the  feet,  serpents  to  the  hair  ;  the
victorious  descendant  of  Abas52  is  borne  upon  the  winged  steed.
We,  too,  have  extended  Tityus53  over  the  vast  space,  and
have  formed  the  three  mouths  for  the  dog  bristling  with
snakes.  We  have  described  Enceladus,54  hurling  with  his
thousand  arms  ;  and  the  heroes  captivated  by  the  voice  of  the
two-shaped  damsels.55 In  the  Ithacan  bags56  have  we  en-

that  he  had  neglected  them,  and  had  wasted  his  time  in  singing  in  praise
of  Corinna.  This,  however,  may  be  said  in  reproof  of  his  general  habits
of  indolence,  and.  not  as  necessarily  implying  that  Corinna  is  the  cause
of  his  present  complaint.  The  Roman  poet  Statius  afterwards  chose  the
Theban  war  as  his  subject.

50  Poets  as  witnesses. ,] — Ver.  19.  That  is,  '  to  rely  implicitly  on  the
testimony  of  poets.'  The  word  '  poetas '  requires  a  semicolon  after  it,  and
not  a  comma.

51  The  raging  dogs.] — Ver.  21.  He  here  falls  into  his  usual  mistake  of
confounding  Scylla,  the  daughter  of  Nisus,  with  Scylla,  the  Nymph,  the
rival  of  Circe,  in  the  affections  of  Glaucus.  See  the  Note  to  1.  33  of  the
First  Epistle  of  Sabinus,  and  the  Eighth  and  Fourteenth  Books  of  the
Metamorphoses.

62  Descendant  of  Abas.] — Ver.  24.  In  the  Fourth  Book  of  the  Meta-
morphoses he  relates  the  rescue  of  Andromeda  from  the  sea  monster,  by
Perseus,  the  descendant  of  Abas,  and  clearly  implies  that  he  used  the
services  of  the  winged  horse  Pegasus  on  that  occasion.  It  has  been  sug-
gested by  some  Commentators,  that  he  here  refers  to  Bellerophon  ;  but
that  hero  was  not  a  descendant  of  Abas,  and,  singularly  enough,  he  is  not
on  any  occasion  mentioned  or  referred  to  by  Ovid.

53  Extended  Tityus.'] — Ver.  25.  Tityus  was  a  giant,  the  son  of  Jupiter
and  Elara.  Offering  violence  to  Latona,  he  was  pierced  by  the  darts
of  Apollo  and  hurled  to  the  Infernal  Regions,  where  his  liver  was  doomed
to  feed  a  vulture,  without  being  consumed.

54  Enceladus.] — Ver.  27.  He  was  the  son  of  Titan  and  Terra,  and
joining  in  the  war  against  the  Gods,  he  was  struck  by  lightning,  and
thrown  beneath  Mount  iEtna. See  the  Pontic  Epistles,  Book ii.  Ep.ii.  1. 11.

55  The  two-shaped  damsels.] — Ver.  28.  He  evidently  alludes  to  the
Sirens,  with  their  two  shapes,  and  not  to  Circe,  as  some  have  imagined.

56  The  Ithacan  bags.] — Ver.  29.  /Eolus  gave  Ulysses  favourable  winds
sewn  up  in  a  leather  bag,  to  aid  him  in  his  return  to  Ithaca.  See  the
Metamorphoses,  Book  xiv.  1.  223


e.  in.]  ob,  amours.  373

closed  the  winds  of  iEolus  ;  the  treacherous  Tantalus  thirsts
in  the  middle  of  the  stream.  Of  Niobe  we  have  made  the
rock,  of  the  damsel,  the  she-bear  ;  the  Cecropian57  bird  sings
of  Odrysian  Itys.  Jupiter  transforms  himself,  either  into
a  bird,  or  into  gold ; 58  or,  as  a  bull,  with  the  virgin  placed
upon  him,  he  cleaves  the  waves.  Why  mention  Proteus,  and
the  Theban  seed,59  the  teeth  1  Why  that  there  were  bulls,  which
vomited  flames  from  their  mouths  1  Why,  charioteer,  that  thy
sisters  distil  amber  tears  ?60  Why  that  they  are  now  Goddesses
of  the  sea,  who  once  were  ships  ?61  Why  that  the  light  of  day
fled  from  the  hellish  banquet62  of  Atreus  ?  And  why  that  the
hard  stones  followed  the  lyre63  as  it  was  struck  ?

The  fertile  license  of  the  Poets  ranges  over  an  immense
space  ;  and  it  ties  not  its  words  to  the  accuracy  of  history.
So,  too,  ought  my  mistress  to  have  been  deemed  to  be  falsely
praised  ;  now  is  your  credulity  a  mischief  to  me.


ELEGY  XIII.

He  describes  the  Festival  of  Juno,  as  celebrated  at  Falisci,  the  native
place  of  his  wife.

As  my  wife  was  born  at  Falisci,  so  fruitful  in  apples,  we  repaired

57  The  Cecropian  bird.'] — Ver.  32.  He  calls  Philomela  the  daughter  of
Pandion,  king  of  Athens,  '  Cecropis  ales ;'  Ct  crops  having  been  the  first
king  of  Athens.  Her  story  is  told  in  the  Sixth  Book  of  the  Metamor-
phoses.

58  A  bird,  or  into  gold.]  —  Ver.  33.  He  alludes  to  the  transformation
of  Jupiter  into  a  swan,  a  shower  of  gold,  and  a  bull ;  in  the  cases  of
Leda,  Danae,  and  Europa.

59  The  Theban  seed.] — Ver.  35.  He  alludes  to  the  dragon's  teeth  sown
by  Cadmus. See  the  Third  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses.

60  Distil  amber  tears.] — Ver.  37.  Reference  is  made  to  the  transfor-
mation of  the  sisters  of  Phaeton  into  poplars  that  distilled  amber.  See
the  Second  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses,  1.  364.

61  Who  once  were  ships.] — Ver.  38.  He  alludes  to  the  ships  of  iEneas,
which,  when  set  on  fire  by  Turnus,  were  changed  into  sea  Nymphs.

62  The  hellish  banquet.] — Ver.  39.  Reference  is  made  to  the  revenge
of  Atreus,  who  killed  the  children  of  Thyestes,  and  set  them  on  table  be-
fore their  father,  on  which  occasion  the  Sun  is  said  to  have  hidden  his  face.

63  Stones  followed  the  lyre.] — Ver.  40.  Amphion  is  said  to  have  raised
the  walls  of  Thebes  by  the  sound  of  his  lyre.


374  THE AMOEES  ;  [b.  III.

to  the  walls  that  were  conquered,  Camillus,  by  thee.64  The
priestesses  were  preparing  the  chaste  festival  of  Juno,  with
distinguished  games,  and  the  heifer  of  the  country.  'Twas
a  great  remuneration  for  my  stay,  to  be  acquainted  with  the
ceremony  ;  although  a  path,  difficult  from  the  ascent,  leads
the  way  thither.  There  stands  a  grove,  ancient,  and  shaded
with  numberless  trees  ;  look  at  it,  you  must  confess  that  a
Divinity  exists  in  the  spot.  An  altar  receives  the  prayers,
and  the  votive  incense  of  the  pious  ;  an  altar  made  without
skill,  by  ancient  hands.

When,  from  this  spot,  the  pipe  has  given  the  signal  with
its  usual  note,  the  yearly  procession  moves  along  the  covered
paths.65  Snow-white  heifers66  are  led,  as  the  crowd  applauds,
which  the  Faliscan  grass  has  fed  on  its  own  plains  ;  calves,
too,  not  yet  threatening  with  the  forehead  to  inspire  fear  ;
and  the  pig,  a  smaller  victim,  from  its  lowly  sty  ;  the  leader
too,  of  the  flock,  with  his  horns  bending  back  over  his  hardy
temples  ;  the  goat  alone  is  odious  to  the  Goddess  queen.
By  her  betrayal,  discovered  in  the  lofty  woods,67  she  is  said  to
have  desisted  from  the  flight  she  had  commenced.  Even
now,  by  the  boys,  is  she  aimed  at  as  a  mark  ; 68  and  she  is
given,  as  a  prize,  to  the  author  of  her  wound.  Where  the
Goddess  is  to  come,  the  youths  and  bashful  girls  sweep  the

64  Camillus,  by  thee.~\ — Ver.  2.  Marcus  Furius  Camillus,  the  Roman
general,  took  the  city  of  Falisci.

65  The  covered  paths.'}— Ver.  12.  The  pipers,  or  flute  players,  led  the
procession,  while  the  ground  was  covered  with  carpets  or  tapestry.

66  Snow-white  heifers.']  —  Ver.  14.  Pliny  the  Elder,  in  his  Second
Book,  says,  '  The  river  Clitumnus,  in  the  state  of  Falisci,  makes  those
cattle  white  that  drink  of  its  waters.'

67  In  the  lofty  woods.] — Ver.  20.  It  is  not  known  to  what  occasion
this  refers.  Juno  is  stated  to  have  concealed  herself  on  two  occasions  ;
once  before  her  marriage,  when  she  fled  from  the  pursuit  of  Jupiter,  who
assumed  the  form  of  a  cuckoo,  that  he  might  deceive  her ;  and  again,
when,  through  fear  of  the  giants,  the  Gods  took  refuge  in  Egypt  and
Libya. Perhaps  the  former  occasion  is  here  referred  to.

68  As  a  mark.] — Ver.  21.  This  is  similar  to  the  alleged  origin  of  the
custom  of  throwing  sticks  at  cocks  on  Shrove  Tuesday.  The  Saxons  being
about  to  rise  in  rebellion  against  their  Norman  oppressors,  the  conspiracy
is  said  to  have  been  discovered  through  the  inopportune  crowing  of  a
cock,  in  revenge  for  which  the  whole  race  of  chanticleers  were  for  cen-
turies submitted  to  this  cruel  punishment.


E.  XIII.]  OE, AMOUES.  3/5

roads  before  her,  with  garments69  as  they  lie.  Their  virgin  hair
is  adorned  with  gold  and  gems  ;  and  the  proud  mantle  conceals
their  feet,  bedecked  with  gold.  After  the  Grecian  manner70
of  their  ancestors,  clad  in  white  garments,  they  bear  the
sacred  vessels  entrusted  to  them  on  their  heads,  placed  be-
neath. The  people  hold  religious  silence,71  at  the  moment
when  the  resplendent  procession  comes  up  ;  and  she  herself
follows  after  her  priestesses.

Argive  is  the  appearance  of  the  procession  ;  Agamemnon
slain,  Halesus72  fled  from  both  his  crime  and  his  father's
wealth.  And  now,  an  exile,  having  wandered  over  both  land
and  sea,  he  erected  lofty  walls  with  prospering  hand.  He
taught  his  own  Falisci  the  rites  of  Juno.  May  they  be  ever
propitious  to  myself,  may  they  be  ever  so  to  her  own  people.


ELEGY  XIV.

He  entreats  his  mistress,  if  she  will  not  be  constant,  at  least,  to  conceal
her  intrigues  from  him.

Beauteous  since  you  are,  I  do  not  forbid  your  being  frail ;
but  let  it  not  be  a  matter  of  course,  that  wretched  I  should
know  it.  Nor  does  any  severity  of  mine  command  you  to
be  quite  correct ;  but  it  only  entreats  you  to  try  to  conceal
the  truth.  She  is  not  culpable,  whoever  can  deny  that
she  has  been  culpable ;  and  'tis  only  the  confession  of  error
that  makes  a  woman  disgraced.  What  madness  is  it  to
confess  in  light  of  day  what  lies  concealed  in  night  ?  And
what  you  do  in  secret,  to  say  openly  that  it  is  done  ? The

69  With  garments. ,] —  Ver.  24.  As  '  vestis '  was  a  general  name  for
a  covering  of  any  kind,  it  may  refer  to  the  carpets  which  appear  to  be
mentioned  in  the  twelfth  line,  or  it  may  mean,  that  the  youths  and  dam-
sels threw  their  own  garments  in  the  path  of  the  procession.

'°  After  the  Grecian  manner.] — Ver.  27.  Falisci  was  said  to  have
been  a  Grecian  colony.

71  Hold  religious  silence.}  —  Ver.  29.  ' Favere  Unguis  '  seems  here  to
mean,  'to  keep  religious  silence :'  as  to  the  general  meaning  of  the  term,
see  the  Fasti,  Book  i.  1.  71.

'2  Halesus.) — Ver.  33.  Halesus  is  said  to  have  been  the  son  of  Aga-
memnon, by  a  concubine.  Alarmed  at  the  tragic  death  of  his  father,  and
of  the  murderers,  ^Egisthus  and  Clytemnestra,  he  fled  to  Italy,  where  he
founded  the  city  of  Phalesus,  which  title,  with  the  addition  of  one  letter,
wps  given  to  it  after  his  name.  Phalesus  afterwards  became  corrupted,
to '  Faliscus,'  or  •  Falisci/


37 Q  THE AMOEES  ;  [b.  III.

strumpet  about  to  entertain  some  obscure  Roman,  first  keeps
out  the  public  by  fastening  up  the  bar.  And  will  you  make
known  your  frailties  to  malicious  report  ?  And  will  you  make
proof  of  your  own  criminality  ?  May  your  mind  be  more
sound,  or,  at  least,  may  you  imitate  the  chaste  ;  and  although
you  are  not,  let  me  suppose  that  you  are  chaste.  What  you
do,  still  do  the  same ;  only  deny  that  you  do  so  ;  and  be  not
ashamed  in  public  to  speak  the  language  of  chastity.  There
is  the  occasion  which  demands  wantonness  ;  sate  it  with  every
delight ;  far  thence  be  all  modesty.  Soon  as  you  take  your
departure  thence ;  away  at  once  with  all  lasciviousness,  and
leave  your  frailties  in  your  chamber —

Illic  nee  tunicam  tibi  sit  posuisse  rubori,
Nee  femori  impositum  sustinuisse  femur :

Illic  purpureis  condatur  lingua  labellis  :
Inque  modos  Venerem  mille  figuret  amor ;

Illic  nee  voces,  nee  verba  juvantia  cessent ;
Spondaque  lasciva  mobilitate  tremat.

With  your  garments  put  on  looks  that  dread  accusation ;  and
let  modesty  disavow  improper  pursuits.  Deceive  the  public,
deceive  me,  too  ;  in  my  ignorance,  let  me  be  mistaken,  and
allow  me  to  enjoy  my  silly  credulity.

Why  do  I  so  often  espy  letters  sent  and  received  ?  Why  one
side  and  the  other73  tumbled,  of  your  couch  ?  Why  do  I  see
your  hair  disarranged  more  than  happens  in  sleep,  and  your
neck  bearing  the  marks  of  teeth  ?  The  failing  itself  alone  you
do  not  bring  before  my  eyes  ;  if  you  hesitate  consulting  your
own  reputation,  still,  spare  me.  My  senses  fail  me,  and  I
am  expiring,  oft  as  you  confess  your  failings  ;  and  the  drops
flow,  chilled  throughout  my  limbs.  Then  do  I  love  you ;  then,
in  vain,  do  I  hate  what  I  am  forced  to  love  ;73*  then  I  could
wish  myself  to  be  dead,  but  together  with  you.

No  enquiries,  for  my  part,  will  I  make,  nor  will  I  try  to
know  what  you  shall  attempt  to  conceal ;  and  to  me  it  shall
be  the  same  as  a  false  charge.  If,  however,  you  shall  be  found
detected  in  the  midst  of  your  guilt,  and  if  criminality  shall  be

73  One  side  and  the  other.']  —  Ver.  32.  For  the  '  torus  exterior '  and
1  interior,'  and  the  construction  of  the  heds  of  the  ancients,  see  the  Note
to  the  Eighth  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses,  1.  659.

73*  Forced  to  love.] — Ver.  39.  This  passage  seems  to  be  hopelessly
corrupt.


B.  XT.]  OB, AMOTJES.  377

beheld  by  my  eyes  ;  what  has  been  plainly  seen,  do  you  deny
to  have  been  plainly  seen ;  my  own  eyes  shall  give  way  to
your  assertions,  ,rTis  an  easy  conquest  for  you  to  vanquish
me,  who  desire  to  be  vanquished.  Let  your  tongue  only  be
mindful  to  say — "  I  did  not  do  it !"  since  it  is  your  lot  to
conquer  with  two  words  ;73*  although  not  by  the  merit  of  your
cause,  still  conquer  through  your  judge.


ELEGY  XV.

He  tells  Venus  that  he  now  ceases  to  write  Elegies.

Seek  a  new  Poet,  mother  of  the  tender  Loves  ;  here  the  ex-
treme turning-place  is  grazed74  by  my  Elegies,  which  I,  a
foster-child  of  the  Pelignian  fields,  have  composed  ;  nor  have
my  sportive  lays  disgraced  me.  Me,  I  say,  who,  if  that  is  aught,
am  the  heir  to  my  rank,75  even  through  a  long  line  of  ances-
tors, and  not  lately  made  a  Knight  in  the  hurly-burly  of
warfare.  Mantua  delights  in  Virgil,  Verona  in  Catullus  ;  I
shall  be  called  the  glory  of  the  Pelignian  race  ;  which  its  own
liberties  summon  to  glorious  arms,76  when  trembling  Rome
dreaded77  the  allied  bands.  And  some  stranger  will  say,  as  he
looks  on  the  walls  of  the  watery  Sulmo,  which  occupy  but  a
few  acres  of  land,  "  Small  as  you  are,  I  will  call  you  great,
who  were  able  to  produce  a  Poet  so  great."  Beauteous  boy,
and  thou,  Amathusian  parent78  of  the beauteous  boy,  raise

73*  Two  words.] — Ver.  49. '  Non  feci.'  '  I  did  not  do  it/

74  Turning -place  is  grazed.] — Ver.  2.  On  rounding  the  f  meta '  in  the
chariot  race,  from  which  the  present  figure  is  derived,  see  the  Note  to  the
69th  line  of  the  Second  Elegy  of  this  Book.

75  Heir  to  my  rank.]— Ver.  5.  See  the  Tristia,  Book  ii.  1.  112,  where
he  enlarges  upon  the  rank  and  circumstances  of  his  family.

76  To  glorious  arms.] — Ver.  9.  He  alludes  to  the  Social  war  which
was  commenced  in  the  year  of  the  City  659,  by  the  Marsi,  the  Peligni,
and  the  Picentes,  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  equal  rights  and  privileges
with  the  Roman  citizens.  He  calls  them  '  arma  honesta,'  because  wielded
in  defence  of  their  liberties.

77  Rome  dreaded.] — Ver.  10.  The  Romans  were  so  alarmed,  that  they
vowed  to  celebrate  games  in  honour  of  Jupiter,  if  their  arms  should  prove
successful.

78  Amathusian  parent.] — Ver.  15.  Venus  was  worshipped  especially
at  Amathus,  a  city  of  Cyprus ;  it  is  mentioned  by  Ovid  as  abounding  in
metals. See  the  Metamorphoses,  Book  x.  1.  220  and  531,


378  THE AMOEES  ; OE, AMOTJES.  [b.  III.

your  golden  standard  from  my  fields.  The  horned79  Lyaeus80
has  struck  me  with  a  thyrsus  more  potent ;  with  mighty  steeds
must  a  more  extended  plain  be  paced.  Unwarlike  Elegies,
my  sportive81  Muse,  farewell ;  a  work  destined  to  survive  long
after  I  am  dead  and  gone.

79  The  horned.'] — Ver.  17.  In  addition  to  the  reasons  already  men-
tioned for  Bacchus  being  represented  as  horned,  it  is  said  by  some,  that
it  arose  from  the  fact,  of  wine  being  drunk  from  horns  in  the  early
ages.  It  has  been  suggested,  that  it  had  a  figurative  meaning,  and  im-
plied the  violence  of  those  who  are  overtaken  with  wine.

80  Lyceus.] — Ver.  17.  For  the  meaning  of  the  word  Lyaeus,  see  the
Metamorphoses,  Book  iv.  1.  11,  and  the  Note  to  the  passage.

31  My  sportive.] — Ver.  19.  Genialis ;  the  Genii  were  the  Deities  of
pure,  unadorned  nature.  See  the  Fasti,  Book  iii.  1.  58,  and  the  Note  to
the  passage.  '  Genialis,'  consequently  means,  '  voluptuous,'  or  '  pleasing
to  the  impulses  of  nature.'


ARS  AMATORIA;

OR, THE ART Of LOVE


BOOK  THE  FIKST.


Shotjld  any  one  of  the  people  not  know  the  art  of  loving,  let
him  read  me  ;  and  taught  by  me,  on  reading  my  lines,  let  him
love.  By  art  the  ships  are  onward  sped  by  sails  and  oars  ;  by
art  are  the  light  chariots,  by  art  is  Love,  to  be  guided.  In  the
chariot  and  in  the  flowing  reins  was  Automedon  skilled  :  in  the
Hsemonian  ship  of  Jason  Tiphys  was  the  pilot.  Me,  too,  skilled
in  my  craft,  has  Venus  made  the  guardian  of  Love.  Of  Cupid
the  Tiphys  and  the  Automedon  shall  I  be  styled.  Unruly  indeed
he  is,  and  one  who  oft  rebels  against  me  ;  but  he  is  a  child ;  his
age  is  tender  and  easy  to  be  governed.  The  son  of  Phillyra
made  the  boy  Achilles  skilled  at  the  lyre  ;  and  with  his  sooth-
ing art  he  subdued  his  ferocious  disposition.  He  who  so  oft
alarmed  his  own  companions,  so  oft  the  foe,  is  believed  to  have
stood  in  dread  of  an  aged  man  full  of  years.  Those  hands
which  Hector  was  doomed  to  feel,  at  the  request  of  his  master
he  held  out  for  stripes1  as  commanded.  Chiron  was  the  pre-
ceptor of  the  grandson  of  ZEacus,  I  of  Love.  Both  of  the
boys  were  wild ;  both  of  a  Goddess  born.  But  yet  the  neck
of  even  the  bull  is  laden  with  the  plough  ;  and  the  reins  are
champed  by  the  teeth  of  the  spirited  steed.  To  me,  too,  will
Love  yield ;  though,  with  his  bow,  he  should  wound  my
breast,  and  should  brandishhis  torches  hurled  against  me.  The
more  that  Love  has  pierced  me,  the  more  has  he  relentlessly
inflamed  me ;  so  much  the  fitter  avenger  shall  I  be  of  the
wounds  so  made.

Phoebus,  I  pretend  not  that  these  arts  were  bestowed  on  me

1  For  stripes."] — Ver.  16. Statins,  in  the  Thebaid,  mentions  the  strict,
ness  of  the  discipline  of  Chiron. See  the  Amores,  Book  i.  El.  xiii.  1.  18.


380  ABS  AMATOBIA ;  [B.  i.  25—56.

by  thee;  nor  by  the  notes  of  the  birds  of  the  air  am  I  inspired.
Neither  Clio  nor  the  sisters  of  Clio  have  been  beheld  by  me,
while  watching,  Ascra,  in  thy  vales,  my  flocks.  To  this  work
experience  gives  rise  ;  listen  to  a  Poet  well-versed.  The
truth  will  I  sing  ;  Mother  of  Love,  favour  my  design.  Be  ye
afar,2  ye  with  the  thin  fillets  on  your  hair,  the  mark  of  chastity  ;
and  thou,  long  flounce,  which  dost  conceal  the  middle  of  the
foot.  We  will  sing  of  guiltless  delights,  and  of  thefts  allowed  ;
and  in  my  song  there  shall  be  nought  that  is  criminal.

In  the  first  place,  endeavour  to  find  out  an  object  which
you  may  desire  to  love,  you  who  are  now  coming  for  the  first
time  to  engage  as  a  soldier  in  a  new  service.  The  next  task
after  that,  is  to  prevail  on  the  fair  by  pleasing  her.  The
third  is,  for  her  love  to  prove  of  long  duration.  This  is  my
plan  ;  this  space  shall  be  marked  out  by  my  chariot ;  this  the
turning-place  to  be  grazed  by  my  wheels  in  their  full  career.

While  you  may,  and  while  you  are  able  to  proceed  with  flow-
ing reins  ;  choose  one  to  whom  you  may  say,  "  You  alone  are
pleasing  to  me."  She  will  not  come  to  you  gliding  through
the  yielding  air  ;  the  fair  one  that  suits  must  be  sought  with
your  eyes.  The  hunter  knows  full  well  where  to  extend  the
toils  for  the  deer  ;  full  well  he  knows  in  what  vale  dwells  the
boar  gnashing  with  his  teeth.  The  shrubberies  are  known  to
the  fowlers.  He  who  holds  out  the  hooks,  knows  what  waters
are  swam  in  by  many  a  fish.  You,  too,  who  seek  a  subject  for
enduring  love,  first  learn  in  what  spot  the  fair  are  to  be  met
with.  In  your  search,  I  will  not  bid  you  give  your  sails  to  the
wind,  nor  is  a  long  path  to  be  trodden  by  you,  that  you  may
find  her.

Let  Perseus  bear  away  his  Andromeda  from  the  tawny  In-
dians,3 and  let  the  Grecian  fair  be  ravished  by  Paris,  the  Phry-
gian hero.  Rome  will,  present  you  damsels  as  many,  and  full  as
fair; so  that  you  will  declare,  that  whatever  has  been  on  the

2  Be  ye  afar.'] — Ver.  31.  He  quotes  this  and  the  following  line  in  the
Tristia,  Book  ii.  1.  248,  to  show  that  it  was  not  his  intention,  by  his  pre-
cepts, to  inculcate  breaches  of  chastity  among  the  Roman  matrons.  See
the  Note  to  the  passage,  and  to  the  Fasti,  Book  ii.  1.  30.  The  '  vitta,'  or
1  fillet,'  was  worn  solely  by  women  of  pure  character.

3  The  tawny  Indians.] — Ver.  53.  Herodotus  considers  the  ^Ethiopians
to  be  Indians.  According  to  some,  the  father  of  Andromeda  was  king  of
-Ethiopia ;  but  she  is  more  frequently  represented  as  a  native  of  Joppa,  on
the  coast  of  Syria.


B.  i.  56—72.]  OR, THE AET OP LOVE.  381

earth,  she  possesses.  As  many  ears  of  corn  as  Gargara  has,  as
many  clusters  as  Methymna ;  as  many  fishes  as  are  concealed  in
the  seas,  birds  in  the  boughs ;  as  many  stars  as4  heaven  has,
so  many  fair  ones  does  your  own  Rome  contain  ;  and  in  her
own  City  does  the  mother  of  iEneas  hold  her  reign.  Are  you
charmed  by  early  and  still  dawning  years,  the  maiden  in
all  her  genuineness  will  come  before  your  eyes ;  or  do  you
wish  a  riper  fair,5  a  thousand  riper  will  please  you ;  you
will  be  forced  not  to  know  which  is  your  own  choice.  Or
does  an  age  mature  and  more  staid  delight  you ;  this  throng
too,  believe  me,  will  be  even  greater.

Do  you  only  saunter  at  your  leisure  in  the  shade  of  Pom-
pey's  Portico*  when  the  sun  approaches  the  back  of  the
Lion  of  Hercules  ;7  or  where  the  mother8  has  added  her  own
gifts  to  those  of  her  son,  a  work  rich  in  its  foreign  marble.
And  let  not  the  Portico  of  Livia9  be  shunned  by  you,  which,
here  and  there  adorned  with  ancient  paintings,  bears  the  name

4  As  many  stars  as.] — Ver.  59.  Heinsius  considers  this  and  the  next
line  to  be  spurious.

5  Wish  a  riper  fair.'] — Ver.  63.  '  Juvenis,'  applied  to  a  female,  would
mean  something  more  than  a  mere  girl.  '  Juventus '  "was  that  age  in
which  a  person  was  in  his  best  years,  from  about  twenty  to  forty.

6  Pompey's  Portico.'] — Ver.  67.  He  alludes  to  the  Portico  which  had
been  erected  by  Pompey  at  Rome,  and  was  shaded  by  plane  trees  and  re-
freshed by  fountains.  The  Porticos  were  walks  covered  with  roofs,  sup-
ported by  columns.  They  were  sometimes  attached  to  other  buildings,
and  sometimes  were  independent  of  any  other  edifice.  They  were  much
resorted  to  by  those  who  wished  to  take  exercise  without  exposure  to  the
heat  of  the  sun.  The  Porticos  of  the  temples  were  originally  intended  for
the  resort  of  persons  who  took  part  in  the  rites  performed  there.  Law-
suits were  sometimes  conducted  in  the  Porticos  of  Rome,  and  goods  were
sold  there.

7  The  lion  of  Hercules.} — Ver.  68.  The  Nemean  lion  ;  which  formed
the  Constellation  Leo  in  the  Zodiac.

8  Where  the  mother.] — Ver.  69.  He  alludes  to  the  Theatre  and  Portico
which  Augustus  built ;  the  former  of  which  received  the  name  of  his  ne-
phew Marcellus,  the  latter  of  his  sister  Octavia,  the  mother  of  Marcellus.
After  the  death  of  Marcellus,  Octavia  added  a  public  library  to  this  Portico
at  her  own  expense.  Here  there  were  valuable  paintings  of  Minerva,
Philip  and  Alexander,  and  Hercules  on  Mount  (Eta.  Some  suppose  that
the  temple  of  Concord,  built  by  Livia,  and  mentioned  in  the  Fasti,  is  here
referred  to.

9  The  Portico  of  Livia.] — Ver.  72.  The  Portico  of  Livia  was  near  the
street  called  Suburra.  This  Portico  is  also  mentioned  in  the  Fasti.  We
learn  from  Strabo  that  it  was  near  the  Via  Sacra,  or  Sacred  Street.


382  AES AMATOJIIA  ;  [b.  I.  72—83.

of  its  founder.  Where,  too,  are  the  grand-daughters  of  Be-
lus, 10  who  dared  to  plot  death  for  their  wretched  cousins,  and
where  their  enraged  father  stands  with  his  drawn  sword.  Nor
let  Adonis,  bewailed  by  Venus,11  escape  you  ;  and  the  seventh
holy-day  observed  by  the  Jew  of  Syria.12  Nor  fly  from  the
Memphian  temples  of  Isis  the  linen-wearing  heifer ;  she  has
made  many  a  woman13  that  which  she  was  herself  to  Jove.  Even
the  Courts,  (who  would  have  believed  it?)  are  favourable  to
Love  ;  and  oft  in  the  noisy  Forum  has  the  flame  been  found.
Where  the  erection14 of  Appius,15  adjoining  the  temple  of  Venus,
built  of  marble, beats  the  air  with  its  shooting  stream  ;16  in

10  Granddaughters  of  Belus.] — Ver.  73.  This  was  the  Portico  of  the
Dana'ides,  in  the  temple  of  Apollo.  It  is  referred  to  in  the  Second  Elegy
of  the  Second  Book  of  the  Amores.

11  Bewailed  by  Venus.] — Ver.  75.  He  alludes  to  the  temple  of  Venus,
at  Rome,  which,  according  to  Juvenal,  was  notorious  as  the  scene  of  in-
trigues and  disgraceful  irregularities.  It  was  a  custom  of  the  Romans,
borrowed  from  the  Assyrians,  to  lament  Adonis  in  the  temple  of  Venus.
See  the  Tenth  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses.  This  worship  of  the  Assyrians
is  mentioned  by  the  Prophet  Ezekiel,  chap.  viii.  ver.  13,  '  women  weeping
for  Thammuz.'

12  The  Jew  of  Syria."] — Ver.  76.  He  alludes  to  the  rites  performed  in
the  Synagogues  of  the  Jews  of  Rome,  on  the  Sabbath,  to  which  numbers  of
females  were  attracted,  probably  by  the  music.  There  were  great  num-
bers of  Jews  at  Rome  in  the  reign  of  Augustus,  who  were  allowed  to  fol-
low their  own  worship,  according  to  the  law  of  Moses.  The  Roman
females  visiting  the  Synagogues,  assignations  and  gross  irregularities  be-
came the  consequence.  Tiberius  withdrew  this  privilege  from  the  Jews,
and  ordered  the  priests'  vestments  and  ornaments  to  be  burnt.  This  line
is  thus  rendered  in  Dryden's  version  :

'  Nor  shun  the  Jewish  walk,  where  the  foul  drove,
On  Sabbaths  rest  from  everything  but  love.'
This  wretched  paraphrase  is  excused  by  the  following  very  illiberal  note,
'  If  this  version  seems  to  bear  a  little  hard  on  the  ancient  Jews,  it  does  not
at  all  wrong  the  modern.'

13  Many  a  woman.]  — Ver.  78.  Io,  or  Isis,  was  debauched  by  Jupiter.
Martial  and  Juvenal  speak  of  the  irregularities  practised  on  these  occasions.

14  Where  the  erection.] — Ver.  81.  He  refers  to  the  Forum  of  Caesar
and  the  temple  of  Venus,  which  was  built  by  Julius  Caesar  after  the  battle
of  Pharsalia.

15  Of  Appius.]— Ver.  82.  He  alludes  to  the  aqueduct  which  had  been
constructed  by  the  Censor  Appius.  This  passed  into  the  City,  through
the  Latin  gate,  and  discharged  itself  near  the  spot  where  the  temple  of
Venus  was  built.

13  Shooting  stream.] — "Ver.  82;  He  alludes  to  the  violence  with  which
the  water  was  discharged  by  the  pipes  of  the  aqueduct  into  the  reservoir.


B.  i.  83—111.]  OE, THE AET OF LOYE.  383

that  spot  full  oft  is  the  pleader  seized  by  Love  ;  and  he  that
has  defended  others,  the  same  does  not  defend  himself.  Oft
in  that  spot  are  their  words  found  wanting  to  the  eloquent  man ;
and  new  cares  arise,  and  his  own  cause  has  to  be  pleaded.  From
her  temple,  which  is  adjoining,17  Venus  laughs  at  him.  He
who  so  lately  was  a  patron,  now  wishes  to  become  a  client.

But  especially  at  the  curving  Theatres  do  you  hunt  for  prey :
these  places  are  even  yet  more  fruitful  for  your  desires.  There
you  will  find  what  you  may  love,  what  you  may  trifle  with,  both
what  you  may  once  touch,  and  what  you  may  wish  to  keep.
As  the  numberless  ants  come  and  go  in  lengthened  train,  when
they  are  carrying  their  wonted  food  in  the  mouth  that  bears
the  grains  ;  or  as  the  bees,  when  they  have  found  both  their
own  pastures  and  the  balmy  meads,  hover  around  the  flowers
and  the  tops  of  the  thyme  ;  so  rush  the  best-dressed  women
to  the  thronged  spectacles  ;  a  multitude  that  oft  has  kept  my
judgment  in  suspense.  They  come  to  see,  they  come  that  they
themselves  may  be  seen  ;  to  modest  chastity  these  spots  are
detrimental.

Romulus,  'twas  thou  didst  first  institute  the  exciting  games;
at  the  time  when  the  ravished  Sabine  fair18  came  to  the  aid  of  the
solitary  men.  Then,  neither  did  curtains19  hang  over  the  mar-
ble theatre,20  nor  was  the  stage21  blushing  with  liquid  saffron.
There,  the  branches  were  simply  arranged  which  the  woody
Palatium  bore  ;  the  scene  was  void  of  art.  On  the  steps  made
of  turf  sit  the  people;  the  branches  promiscuously  overshadow-
ing their  shaggy  locks.  They  look  about  them,  and  they  mark
with  their  eyes,  each  for  himself,  the  damsel  which  to  choose  ;
and  in  their  silent  minds  they  devise  full  many  a  plan. And

17  Which  is  adjoining.'] — Ver.  87.  The  temple  of  Venus  was  near  the
Forum.

18  Ravished  Sabine  fair.]— Vex.  102. See  the  Fasti,  Book  iii.  I.  199.

19  Neither  did  curtains.] — Ver.  103.  The  4  vela,'  here  referred  to,  may
mean  either  the  '  siparia,'  or  curtains  of  the  theatres,  or  the  awnings
which  were  hung  over  them.  See  the  Note  on  the  '  siparia'  of  the  theatres,
referred  to  in  the  Third  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses,  1.  111.  The  '  vela-
ria,' or  '  awnings,'  were  stretched  over  the  whole  space  of  the  theatres,  to
protect  the  spectators  from  the  sun  and  rain.

20  Marble  theatre.] — Ver.  103.  The  Theatres  of  Pompey  and  Scaurus
were  of  marhle.

21  Nor  was  the  stage.]— Ver.  104.  The  '  pulpita'  was  that  part  of  the
stage  where  the  actors  stood  who  spoke.  It  was  elevated  above  the  or-
chestra, where  the  Chorus,  and  dancers  and  musicians  were  placed.


384  AES AMATOEIA;  [b.  I.  111—145.

while,  as  the  Etrurian  piper  sends  forth  his  harsh  notes,  the
actor  with  his  foot  thrice  heats  the  levelled  ground ;  in  the  midst
of  the  applause,  (in  those  days  applause  was  void  of  guile,)  the
King  gives  to  his  people  the  signal  to  be  awaited  for  the  spoil.
At  once,  they  start  up,  and,  disclosing  their  intentions  with  a
shout, lay  their  greedy  hands  upon  the  maidens.22 As  the
doves,  a  startled  throng,  fly  from  the  eagles,  and  as  the  young
lamb  flies  from  the  wolves  when  seen ;  in  such  manner  do
they  dread  the  men  indiscriminately  rushing  on ;  the  com-
plexion remains  in  none,  which  existed there  before. For
their  fear  is  the  same ; the  symptoms  of  their  fear  not  the
same. Some  tear  their  hair;  some  sit  without  conscious-
ness ;  one  is  silent  in  her  grief ;  another  vainly  calls  upon  her
mother ;  this  one  laments ;  this  one  is  astounded ;  this  one
tarries  ;  that  one  takes  to  flight. The  ravished  fair  ones  are
carried  off,  a  matrimonial  spoil ;  and  shame  itself  may  have
been  becoming  to  many  a  one. If  one  struggled  excessively,
and  repelled  her  companion  ; borne  off, the  man  himself
lifted  her  into  his  eager  bosom. And  thus  he  spoke  : "  Why
spoil  your  charming  eyes  with  tears  ? What  to  your  mother
your  father  was,  the  same  will  I  be  to  you." Romulus,  'twas
thou  alone  didst  understand  how  to  give  rewards  to  thy  sol-
diers. Give  such  a  reward  to  me,  and  I  will  be  a  soldier. In
good  truth,  from  that  transaction,  the  festive  Theatres, even
to  this  day,  continue  to  be  treacherous  to  the  handsome.

And  let  not  the  contest  of  the  noble  steeds  escape  you  ;  the
roomy  Circus  of  the  people  has  many  advantages.  There  is
no  need  there  of  fingers,  with  which  to  talk  over  your  se-
crets ;  nor  must  a  hint  be  taken  by  you  through  nods.  Be
seated  next  to  your  mistress,  there  being  no  one  to  prevent  it ;
press  your  side  to  her  side  as  close  as  ever  you  can ;  and
conveniently  enough,  because  the  partition23  compels  you  to  sit
close,  even  if  she  be  unwilling  ;  and  because,  by  the  custom  of
the  place,  the  fair  one  must  be  touched  by  you.  Here  let  the
occasion  be  sought  by  you  for  some  friendly  chat,  and  let  the
usual  subjects24  lead  to  the  first  words. Take  care,  and  enquire,

22  Upon  the  maidens."] — Ver.  116.  Some  writers  say  that  only  thirty
women  were  carried  off.  Valerius  Antius  made  the  number  427,  and
Plutarch  mentions  a  statement  that  it  was  600.

23  The  partition.]— Ver.  141. See  the  Amores,  Book  iii.  El.  ii.  1.  19.

24  Let  the  usual  subjects.] — Ver.  144.  '  Publica  verba '  means  the
'  compliments  of  the  day,'  and  the  '  topics  suited  to  the  occasion.'


B.  i.  145—167.]  OR,  THE AET OF LOYE.  335

with  an  air  of  anxiety,  whose  horses  those  are,  coming ;  and
without  delay,  whoever  it  is  to  whom  she  wishes  well,  to  him
do  you  also  wish  well.  But  when  the  thronged  procession  shall
walk  with  the  holy  statues  of  ivory,25  do  you  applaud  your
mistress  Venus  with  zealous  hand.  And,  as  often  happens,  if
perchance  a  little  dust  should  fall  on  the  bosom  of  the  fair,  it
must  be  brushed  off  with  your  fingers  ;26  and  if  there  should  be
no  dust,  still  brush  off  that  none  ;  let  any  excuse  be  a  prelude
to  your  attentions.  If  her  mantle,  hanging  too  low,  shall  be
trailing  on  the  earth,  gather  it  up,  and  carefully  raise  it  from
the  dirty  ground.27  At  once,  as  the  reward  of  your  attention,
the  fair  permitting  it,  her  ancles  will  chance  to  be  seen  by  your
eyes.  Look,  too,  behind,  who  shall  be  sitting  behind  you,  that
he  may  not  press  her  tender  back  with  his  knee  against  it.23
Trifles  attract  trifling  minds.  It  has  proved  to  the  advantage  of
many  a  one,  to  make  a  cushion  with  his  ready  hand.29  It  has
been  of  use,  too,  to  waft  a  breeze  with  the  graceful  fan,  and  to
place  the  hollow  footstool  beneath  her  delicate  feet.  Both  the
Circus,  and  the  sand  spread  for  its  sad  duties30  in  the  bustling
Forum,  will  afford  these  overtures  to  a  dawning  passion.  On
that  sand,  oft  has  the  son  of  Venus  fought ;  and  he  who  has
come  to  be  a  spectator  of  wounds,  himself  receives  a  wound.31
While he is talking, and  is touching her  hand, and  is

25  Statues  of ivory. ,] — Ver,  149.  For  an  account  of  this  procession,  see
the  Amores,  Book  iii.  El.  ii.  1.  43.

26  Your  fingers.]-— Ver.  150. See  1.  42,  of  the  same  Elegy.

27  Dirty  ground.] — Ver.  154. See  1.  26,  of  the  same  Elegy.

28  Knee  against  it.] — Ver.  158. See  1.  24,  of  the  same  Elegy.

29  With  his  ready  hand.] — Ver.  160.  As  the  seats  of  the  Circus  were
hard,  the  women  often  made  use  of  a  cushion  to  sit  upon.  Those  who
were  not  so  fortunate  as  to  get  a  front  seat,  and  so  rest  their  feet  in  the
railings  opposite  (see  the  Second  Elegy  of  the  Third  Book  of  the  Amores,
1.  64,  and  the  Note),  used  a  footstool,  'scamnum,'  (which  is  mentioned
here  in  the  162nd  line,)  on  which  they  rested  their  feet.

30  Its  sad  duties.] — Ver.  164.  Juvenal  tells  us  that  gladiatorial  spec-
tacles were  sometimes  exhibited  in  the  Forum.

31  Himself  receives  a  wound.] — Ver.  166.  The  word  'habet,'  here
used,  is  borrowed  from  the  usage  at  the  gladiatorial  games.  When  a
gladiator  was  wounded,  the  people  called  aloud  '  habet,'  or  '  hoc  habet ;'
and  the  one  who  was  vanquished  lowered  his  arms,  in  token  of  submission.
If  the  people  chose  that  he  should  be  saved,  they  pressed  down  their
thumbs  ;  but  they  turned  them  up,  if  they  desired  that  he  should  be  killei.

C  C


386  A.BS  AMATOEIA;  [b.  i.  167— 181.

asking  for  the  racing  list  ;32  and,  having  deposited  the  stake,33  is
enquiring  which  has  conquered,  wounded,  he  sighs,  and  feels
the  flying  dart,  and,  himself,  becomes  a  portion  of  the  spec-
tacle so  viewed.

Besides  ;  when,  of  late,34  Csesar,  on  the  representation  of  a
rival  fight,  introduced35  the  Persian  and  Athenian  ships ;  in
truth,  from  both  seas  came  youths,  from  both  came  the  fair
and  in  the  City  was  the  whole  of  the  great  world.  Who,  in  that
throng,  did  not  find  an  object  for  him  to  love  ?  How  many,
alas  !  did  a  foreign  flame  torment  ?  See  !  Csesar  prepares36
to  add  what  was  wanting  to  the  world  subdued  ;  now,  re-
mote East,  our  own  shalt  thou  be  !  Parthian,  thou  shalt
give  satisfaction  ;  entombed  Crassi,  rejoice;37  ye  standards,  too,
that  disgracefully  submitted  to  barbarian  hands.  Your
avenger  is  at  hand,  and  proves  himself  a  general  in  his  earliest

32  Asking  for  the  racing  list.]— Vex.  167.  The  '  libellus,'  here  men-
tioned, was  the  list  of  the  horses,  with  their  names  and  colours,  and  those
of  the  drivers.  It  served  the  same  purpose  as  the  race-cards  on  our
courses.

33  Having  deposited  the  stake.'] — Ver  168.  When  a  bet  was  made,
the  parties  betting  gave  to  each  other  a  pledge,  '  pignus,'  in  the  shape  of
some  trinket,  such  as  a  ring.  "When  the  bet  was  completed,  they  touched
hands.

34  When  of  late, ,] — Ver.  171.  He  speaks  of  a  'Naumachia,'  or  mimic
sea-fight,  which  had  been  lately  exhibited  at  Rome  by  Augustus,  in  com-
memoration of  the  battle  of  Actium.  As  Antony  had  collected  his  forces
from  the  East  and  all  parts  of  Greece,  his  ships  are  alluded  to  as  the  Persian
and  Cecropian,  or  Athenian  ships.  The  term,  '  Naumachia,'  was  applied
both  to  the  representation  of  a  sea-fight,  and  to  the  place  where  it  was  given.
They  were  sometimes  exhibited  in  the  Circus  or  Amphitheatre,  the  water
being  introduced  under-ground,  but  more  generally  in  spots  constructed
for  the  purpose.  The  first  was  shown  by  Julius  Csesar,  who  caused  a  lake
to  be  dug  for  the  purpose  in  a  part  of  the  Campus  Martius,  which  Sueto-
nius calls  '  the  lesser  Codeta.'  This  was  filled  up  by  Augustus,  who  dug  a
lake  near  the  Tiber  for  the  same  purpose  ;  to  which,  probably,  reference
is  here  made.

35  Introduced.'] — Ver.  172.  '  Induxit.'  By  the  use  of  this  word,  it,
would  seem  that  Augustus  Caesar  introduced  the  ships,  probably,  from  the  |
river  Tiber  into  the  lake.

36  See!  Ccesar  prepares.] — Ver.  177.  Augustus  sent  his  grandson,  Caius,
the  son  of  his  daughter  Julia  and  Agrippa,  to  head  an  expedition  against  J
Phra'ates,  the  king  of  the  Parthians,  the  conquerors  of  Crassus  ;  from|
this  expedition  he  did  not  live  to  return,  but  perished  in  battle.

37  Crassi,  rejoice.] — Ver.  180.  See  the  Fasti,  Book  v.  1.  583-8,  with]
the  Note  to  the  passage. Also  Book  vi.  1.  465.


b.  i.  181 — 209.]  OR, THE  AET  OE  LOVE.  387

arms  ;  and,  while  a  boy,  is  conducting  a  war  not  fitted  to  be
waged  by  a  boy.  Cease,  in  your  fears,  to  count  the  birth-days
of  the  Gods:bS  valour  is  the  lot  of  the  Caesars,  in  advance  of  their
years.  The  divine  genius  rises  more  rapidly  than  its  years,
and  brooks  not  the  evils  of  slow  delay.  The  Tirynthian
hero  was  a  baby,  and  he  crushed  two  serpents  in  his  hands  ;
even  in  his  cradle  he  was  already  worthy  of  Jove.  Bacchus,
who  even  now  art  a  boy,  how  mighty  wast  thou  then,  when
conquered  India  dreaded  thy  thyrsi  S  With  the  auspices  and
the  courage  of  thy  sire,  thou,  Youth,  shalt  wield  arms  ;  and
with  the  courage  and  the  auspices  of  thy  sire  shalt  thou  con-
quer. Such  first  lessons  are  thy  due,  under  a  name  so  great ;
now  the  first  of  the  youths,39  at  a  future  day  to  be  the  first  of  the
men.  Since  thou  hast  brothers,40  avenge  thy  brethren  slain ;
and  since  thou  hast  a  sire,41  vindicate  the  rights  of  thy  sire.
He,  the  father  of  thy  country  and  thine  own,  hath  put  thee  in
arms  ;  the  enemy  is  tearing  realms  away  from  thy  reluctant
sire.  Thou  wilt  wield  the  weapons  of  duty,  the  foe  arrows
accursed ;  before  thy  standard,  Justice  and  Duty  will  take
their  post.  By  the  badness  of  their  cause,  the  Parthians  are
conquered ;  in  arms,  too,  may  they  be  overcome  ;  may  my
hero  add  to  Latium  the  wealth  of  the  East.  Both  thou,  father
Mars,  and  thou,  father  Caesar,  grant  your  divine  favour  as  he
sets  out ;  for  the  one  of  you  is  now  a  Deity,  thou,  the  other,
wilt  so  be.

Lo  !  I  utter  a  prophecy ;  thou  wilt  conquer,  and  I  shall
offer  the  lines  which  I  have  vowed ;  and  with  a  loud  voice
wilt  thou  have  to  be  celebrated  by  me.  Thou  wilt  there  be
taking  thy  stand,  and  in  my  words  thou  wilt  be  animating
thy  troops.  0  that  my  words  may  not  prove  unworthy  of  thy
spirit !  I  will  celebrate  both  the  backs  of  the  Parthians  as
they  fly,  and  the  valour  of  the  Romans,  and  the  darts  which

33  Of  the  Gods.'] — Ver.  183.  In  a  spirit  of  adulation,  he  deifies  Cains
Ca:sar,  and  his  brother  Lucius.

39  First  of  the  youths.] — Ver.  194.  The  '  princeps  juvenum  '  had  the
honour  of  riding  first,  in  the  review  of  the  Equestrian  ranks  by  the  Em-
peror. See  the  Tristia.  Book  ii.  1.  90.  Caius  did  not  live  to  "fulfil  this
prophecy,  as  he  was  slain  through  the  perfidy  of  the  Parthian  general.

40  Since  thou  hast  brothers.] — Ver.  195.  He  alludes,  probably,  to
Lucius  Caesar,  the  other  grandson  of  Augustus,  and  Marcus  Agrippa,  the
husband  of  Julia,  the  daughter  of  Augustus.

11  Hast  a  sire.]  —Ver.  196. He  had  been  adopted  bv  Augustus.

'  c  c  2


388  AES AilATOEIA  ;  [u.  i.  209—237.

the  foeman  hurls  from  his  flying  steed.  What,  Parthian,
dost  thou  leave  to  the  conquered,  who  dost  fly  that  thou
mayst  overcome  ?  Parthian,  even  now  has  thy  mode  of  warfare
an  unhappy  omen.  And  will  that  day  then  come,  on  which
thou,  the  most  graceful  of  all  objects,  glittering  with  gold,
shalt  go,  drawn  by  the  four  snow-white  steeds  ?  Before  thee
shall  walk  the  chiefs,  their  necks  laden  with  chains  ;  that  they
may  no  longer,  as  formerly,  be  secure  in  flight.  The  joyous
youths,  and  the  mingled  fair,  shall  be  looking  on  ;  and  that  day
shall  gladden  the  minds  of  all.  And  when  some  one  of  the
fair  shall  enquire  the  names  of  the  Monarchs,  what  places,
what  mountains,  or  what  rivers  are  borne41  in  the  procession  ;
answer  to  it  all ;  and  not  only  if  she  shall  make  any  inquiry  ;
even  what  you  know  not,  relate,  as  though  known  perfectly
well.41*

This  is  the  Euphrates,42  with  his  forehead  encircled  with
reeds ;  the  one  whose43  azure  hair  is  streaming  down,  will  be
the  Tigris.  Make  these  to  be  the  Armenians  ;  this  is  Persia,
sprung  from  Danae  ;44  that  was  a  city  in  the  vales  of  Achse-
menes.  This  one  or  that  will  be  the  leaders  ;  and  there  will
be  names  for  you  to  call  them  by  ;  correctly,  if  you  can  ;  if
not,  still  by  such  as  suggest  themselves.

Banquets,  too,  with  the  tables  arranged,  afford  an  introduc-
tion; there  is  something  there  besides  wine  for  you  to  look  for.
Full  oft  does  blushing  Cupid,  with  his  delicate  arms,  press  the
soothed  horns  of  Bacchus  there  present.  And  when  the  wine
has  besprinkled  the  soaking  wings  of  Cupid,  there  he  re-
mains and  stands  overpowered  on  the  spot  of  his  capture.
He,  indeed,  quickly  flaps  his  moistened  wings  ;  but  still  it  is
fatal45  for  the  breast  to  be  sprinkled  by  Love.  Wine  composes

41  What  rivers  are  borne. ~\ — Ver.  220.  See  the  twentieth  line  of  the
Second  Elegy,  Book  iv.  of  the  Tristia.

4i*  Perfectly  well.]—\ex.  222.  See  a  similar  passage  in  the  Tristia*
Book  iv.  El.  ii.  1.  24.

42  The  Euphrates.'] — Ver.  223.  The  rivers  were  generally  personified
by  the  ancients  as  being  crowned  with  reeds.

' 43 The  one  whose.] — Ver.  224. The  young  man  is  supposed  to  be  ad-
dressing the  damsel  in  these  words.

44  From  Danae.] — Ver.  225.  He  means,  that  Persia  was  so  called  from
Perses,  the  son  of  Andromeda,  by  Perseus,  the  son  of  Danae.  It  is  more
generally  thought  to  have  been  so  called  from  a  word  signifying  '  a  horse.'
Achagmenes  was  one  of  the  ancient  kings  of  Persia.

45  Stillit  is  fatal.]— Ver.  236.  '  Solet,'  « is  wont,'  is  certainly  a  pre-
ferable reading  here  to  '  nocet.'


B.  I.  237—264,]  OR, THE A.UT OF LOVE.  3S9

the  feelings,  and  makes  them  ready  to  be  inflamed  ;  care  ilies,
and  is  drenched  with  plenteous  wine.  Then  come  smiles  ;
then  the  poor  man  resumes  his  confidence  ;  then  grief  and
cares  and  the  wrinkles  of  the  forehead  depart.  Then  candour,
most  uncommon  in  our  age,  reveals  the  feelings,  the  God  ex-
pelling all  guile.  On  such  occasions,  full  oft  have  the  fair
captivated  the  hearts  of  the  youths  ;  and  Venus  amid  wine,  has
proved  flames  in  flame.  Here  do  not  you  trust  too  much  to  the
deceiving  lamp;46  both  night  and  wine  are  unsuited  to  a  judg-
ment upon  beauty.  In  daylight,  and  under  a  clear  sky,  did
Paris  view  the  Goddesses,  when  he  said  to  Venus  :  "  Thou,
Venus,  dost  excel  them  both."  By  night,  blemishes  are  con-
cealed, and  pardon  is  granted  to  every  imperfection ;  and  that
hour  renders  every  woman  beauteous.  Consult  the  daylight
about  jewels,  about  wool  steeped  in  purple ;  consult  the  day-
light about  the  figure  and  the  proportion.

Why  enumerate  the  resorts  of  fair  ones  suited  for  your
search  ?  The  sands  would  yield  to  my  number.  Why
mention  Baise,47  and  the  shores  covered  with  sails,  and  the
waters  which  send  forth  the  smoke  from  the  warm  sulphur  ?
Many  a  one  carrying  thence  a  wound  in  his  breast,  has  ex-
claimed ;  "  This  water  was  not  so  wholesome  as  it  was  said
to  be."  See,  too,  the  temple  in  the  grove  of  suburban  Diana,
and  the  realms  acquired  with  the  sword  by  hostile  hand.48
Because  she  is  a  virgin,  because  she  hates  the  darts  of  Cupid,
she  has  given  many  a  wound  to  the  public,  and  will  give  many
still.

Thus  far,  Thalia  borne  upon  unequal  wheels,49  teaches  where

46  Deceiving  lamp.'] — Ver.  245.  This  is  as  much  as  to  remind  him  of
the  adage  that  women  and  linen  look  best  by  candle-light.

*7  JVhy  mention  Baia.} — Ver.  255.  Baise  was  a  town  on  the  sea-shore,
near  Naples,  famous  for  its  hot  baths.  It  was  delightfully  situate,  and
here  Pompey,  Caesar,  and  many  of  the  wealthy  Romans,  had  country  seats.
Seneca  and  Propertius  refer  to  it  as  famous  for  its  debaucheries,  and  it
was  much  frequented  by  persons  of  loose  character.  It  was  the  custom
at  Baiae,  in  the  summer-time,  for  both  sexes  to  cruise  about  the  shore
in  boats  of  various  colours,  both  in  the  day-time  and  at  night,  with
sumptuous  feasts  and  bands  of  music  on  board.

48  Hostile  hand.]— Ver.  260.  See  the  Fasti,  Book  iii.  1.  263.  He  means
that  the  Arician  grove  was  much  resorted  to  by  those  engaged  in  courtship
and  intrigues.

49  Borne  upon  unequal  wheels.] — Ver.  264.  He  alludes  to  Thalia,  the
Muse  who  inspires  him,  preferring  the  unequal  or  Hexameter  and  Penta-
meter measure  of  Elegiac  verse.


390  ARS  AMATOEIA ;  [B.  i.  264—298.

to  choose  an  object  for  you  to  love,  where  to  lay  your  nets.
Now,  I  attempt  to  teach  you,  by  what  arts  she  must  be  captured
who  has  pleased  you,  a  work  of  especial  skill.  Ye  men,
whoever  you  are,  and  in  every  spot,  give  attention  eager  to
be  informed  ;  and  give,  all  people,  a  favourable  ear  to  the
realization  of  my  promises.  First  of  all,  let  a  confidence
enter  your  mind,  that  all  women  may  be  won  ;  you  will  win
them  ;  do  you  only  lay  your  toils.  Sooner  would  the  birds  be
silent  in  spring,  the  grasshoppers  in  summer,  sooner  would
the  Msenalian  dog  turn  its  back  upon  the  hare,  than  the  fair,
attentively  courted,  would  resist  the  youth.  She,  however,
will  wish  you  to  believe,  so  far  as  you  can,  that  she  is  re-
luctant.

As  stealthy  courtship  is  pleasing  to  the  man,  so,  too,  is  it  to
the  fair.  The  man  but  unsuccessfully  conceals  his  passion  ;
with  more  concealment  does  she  desire.  Were  it  agreed
among  the  males  not  to  be  the  first  to  entreat  any  female,
the  conquered  fair  would  soon  act  the  part  of  the  suppliant.
In  the  balmymeads,the  female  lows  after  the  bull ;  the  female
is  always  neighing  after  the  horny-hoofed  horse.  Passion  in
us  is  more  enduring,  and  not  so  violent;  among  men  the  flame
has  reasonable  bounds.  Why  mention  Byblis,  who  burned
with  a  forbidden  passion  for  her  brother,  and  who  resolutely
atoned  with  the  halter  for  her  crimes  ?  Myrrha  loved  her
father,  but  not  as  a  daughter  ought;  and  she  now  lies  hid,
overwhelmed  by  the  bark50  that  grew  over  her.  With  her
tears  too,  which  she  distils  from  the  odoriferous  tree,  are  we
perfumed ;  and  the  drops  still  retain  the  name  of  their  mistress.

By  chance,  in  the  shady  vales  of  the  woody  Ida,  there  was
a  white  bull,  the  glory  of  the  herd,  marked  with  a  little  black
in  the  middle  between  his  horns  ;  there  was  but  one  spot ;
the  rest  was  of  the  complexion  of  milk.  The  heifers  of  Gnossus
and  of  Cydon51  sighed  to  mate  with  him.  Pasiphae  delighted
to  become  the  paramour  of  the  bull;  in  her  jealousy  she
hated  the  beauteous  cows.  I  sing  of  facts  well  known  :  Crete,
which  contains  its  hundred  cities,  untruthful  as  it  is,52  cannot

50  By  the  lark.] — Ver.  286. See  the  Metamorphoses,  Book  x.

51  Of  Cydon.']— Ver.  293. This  was  a  city  of  Crete.

53  Untruthful  as  it  is.] — Ver.  298.  The  Cretans  were  universally
noted  in  ancient  times  for  their  disregard  for  truth.  St.  Paul,  in  his  Epistle
to  Titus,  ch.  i.  ver,  12,  says,  quoting  from  the  Cretan  poet  Epimenides:


B.  I.  298— 330.]  OB, THE AET OF LOVE.  391

gainsay  them.  She  herself  is  said  to  have  cut  down  fresh  leaves
and  the  tenderest  grass  with  hand  unused  to  such  employ-
ment. She  goes  as  the  companion  of  the  herds ;  so  going,  no
regard  for  her  husband  restrains  her;  and  by  a  bull53  is  Minos
conquered.  "  Of  what  use,  Pasiphae,  is  it  to  put  on  those
costly  garments?  This  love  of  thine  understands  nothing
about  wealth.  What  hast  thou  to  do  with  a  mirror,  when  ac-
companying the  herds  of  the  mountain  ?  Why,  foolish  one,
art  thou  so  often  arranging  thy  smoothed  locks  ?  Still,  do
thou  believe  that  mirror,  that  denies  that  thou  art  a  heifer.
How  much  couldst  thou  wish  for  horns  to  spring  up  upon
thy  forehead  !  If  Minos  still  pleases  thee,  let  no  paramour  be
sought ;  but  if  thou  wouldst  rather  deceive  thy  husband,  de-
ceive him  through  a  being  that  is  human."

Her  chamber  abandoned,  the  queen  is  borne  over  the  groves
and  the  forests,  just  as  a  Bacchanal  impelled  by  the  Aonian
God.  Alas  !  how  oft  with  jealous  look  does  she  eye  a  cow,
and  say,  "Why  is  she  thus  pleasing  to  my  love  ?  See  how  she
skips  before  him  on  the  tender  grass  !  I  make  no  doubt
that  the  fool  thinks  that  it  is  becoming  to  her."  Thus  she
spoke,  and  at  once  ordered  her  to  be  withdrawn  from  the  vast
herd,  and,  in  her  innocence,  to  be  dragged  beneath  the  bend-
ing yoke  ;  or  else  she  forced  her  to  fall  before  the  altars,  and
rites  feigned  for  the  purpose ;  and,  with  joyous  hand,  she
held  the  entrails  of  her  rival.  How  often  did  she  propitiate
the  Deities  with  her  slain  rivals,  and  say,  as  she  held  the  en-
trails, "  Now  go  and  charm  my  love  /"  And  sometimes  she
begged  that  she  might  become  Europa,  sometimes  Io  ;  be-
cause the  one  was  a  cow,  the  other  borne  upon  a  bull.  Still,
deceived  by  a  cow  made  of  maple-wood,  the  leader  of  the  herd
impregnated  her;  and  by  the  offspring  was  the  sire54  betrayed.

If  the  Cretan  dame55  had  withheld  from  love  for  Thyestes
(alas !  how  hard  it  is  for  a  woman  possibly  to  be  pleasing  to
one  man  only!)  Phoebus  would  not  have  interrupted  his  career

"  One  of  themselves,  even  a  prophet  of  their  own,  said,  '  The  Cretans
are  alway  liars,  evil  heasts,  slow  bellies.' This  witness  is  true."

53  By  a  bull.'] — Ver.  302.  See  this  story  explained  in  the  Translation
of  the  Metamorphoses,  p.  70.

54  The  sire.]—  Ver.  326.  This  was  the  Minotaur.  See  the  Metamor-
phoses, Bookviii.

55  If  the  Cretan  dame.] — Ver.  327.  This  was  jErope,  the  wife  of
Atreus,  who  slew  the  children  of  his  brother  Thyestes,  and  set  them  on
table  before  their  father.


i


392  ABS AMATORIA ;  [B.  I.  330—353.

in  the  midst,  and,  his  chariot  turned  back,  retreated,  with  his
returning  steeds,  to  the  morn.  The  daughter,  who  spoiled56  Nisus
of  his  purple  locks,  presses  beneath  her  thigh  and  groin  the
raying  dogs.  The  son  of  Atreus,  who  escaped  from  Mars  by-
land,  and  Neptune  on  the  waves,  was  the  mournful  victim  of
his  wife.  By  whom  have  not  been  lamented  the  flames67  of  the
Ephyrean  Creusa  1  Medea,  the  parent,  too,  stained  with  the
blood  of  her  children  ?  Phoenix,  the  son  of  Amyntor,58  wept
with  his  blinded  eyes  ;  you,  startled  steeds,  tore  Hippolytus  in
pieces.  Why,  Phineus,  dost  thou  tear  out  the  eyes  of  thy  guilt-
less sons  ?59 That  punishment  will  revert  to  thy  own  head.

All  these  things  have  been  caused  by  the  passion  of  females.
It  is  more  violent  than  ours,  and  has  more  frenzy  in  it.  Come
then,  and  doubt  not  that  you  can  conquer  all  the  fair  :  out  of
so  many,  there  will  be  hardly  one  to  deny  you.  What  they
yield,  and  what  they  refuse,  still  are  they  glad  to  be  asked
for.  Even  if  you  are  deceived,  your  repulse  is  without  danger.
But  why  should  you  be  deceived,  since  new  pleasures  are  de-
lightful, and  since  what  is  strange  attracts  the  feelings  more
than  what  is  one's  own  ?60  The  crop61  of  corn  is  always  more
fertile  in  the  fields  of  other  people  ;  and  the  herds  of  our
neighbours  have  their  udders  more  distended.

But  first,  be  it  your  care  to  make  acquaintance  with  the
handmaid  of  the  fair  one  to  be  courted  ;  she  can  render  your
access  easy.62 Take  care  that  she  is  deep  in  the  secrets  of  her

56  Who  spoiled.] — Ver.  331.  He  falls  into  his  usual  mistake  of  con-
founding Scylla,  the  daughter  of  Nisus,  with  the  daughter  of  Phorcys.

57  The  flames.] — Ver.  335.  See  the  Metamorphoses,  Book  vii.  ].  391,
and  the  Epistle  of  Medea  to  Jason.

58  The  son  of  Amyntor.] — Ver.  337.  Phoenix,  the  son  of  Amyntor,
according  to  Homer,  became  blind  in  his  latter  years.  See  the  Note  to
the  307th  line  of  the  Eighth  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses.

59  Of  thy  guiltless  sons.] — Ver.  339.  Phineus  was  a  king  of  Arcadia,
or,  according  to  some,  of  Thrace  or  Paphlagonia.  His  wife,  Cleopatra,
being  dead  or  divorced,  he  married  a  Scythian,  named  Harpalice,  at  whose
suggestion  he  put  out  the  eyes  of  his  sons  by  Cleopatra.  He  was  perse-
cuted by  the  Harpies,  as  a  punishment.

60  What  is  one's  own.] — Ver.  348.  '  Suis'  seems  preferable  here  to
'  suos.'

61  The  crop.] — Ver.  349.  These  lines  are  referred  to  by  Juvenal  in
the  Fourteenth  Satire,  1. 143.

62  Your  access  easy.] — Ver.  352.  See  his  address  to  Nape,  in  the
A  mores.  Book  i.  El.  ii.  Cypassis  seems  to  have  been  a  choice  specimen
of  this  class. See  the  Amores,  Book  ii.  El.  viii.


B.  i.  353—386.]  OR, THE  ART  OP  LOVE.  393

mistress,  and  not  too  little  entrusted  with  her  secret  frolics.
Her  do  you  bribe  with  promises,  her  with  entreaties  ;  you
will  obtain  what  you  ask  with  little  trouble,  if  she  shall  be
willing.  Let  her  choose  the  time  (physicians,  even,  watch
their  time)  when  the  feelings  of  her  mistress  are  pliant,  and
easy  to  be  influenced.  Then  will  her  feelings  be  easily  in-
fluenced, when,  in  the  best  humour  in  the  world,  she  shall
be  smiling,  just  as  the  corn  on  the  rich  soil.  While  hearts  are
joyous,  and  not  closed  by  sadness,  then  are  they  assailable  ;
then  with  soothing  arts  does  Venus  steal  on  apace.  At  the
time  when  Troy  was  in  sorrow,  she  was  defended  by  arms ;
when  joyous,  she  admitted  the  horse  pregnant  with  its  soldiers.
Then,  too,  must  she  be  assailed,  when  she  shall  be  fretting
on  being  offended  by  a  rival ;  then  effect  it  by  your  means
that  she  go  net  unrevenged.  Let  her  handmaid,  as  she  combs
her  hair  in  the  morning,  urge  her  on  ;  and  to  the  sail  let  her
add  the  resources  of  the  oar.  And,  sighing  to  herself,  let  her
say,  in  gentle  murmurs  :  "  In  my  idea,  you  yourself  can-
not pay  him  in  return."63  Then  let  her  talk  about  you  ;  then
let  her  add  persuasive  expressions;  and  let  her  swear  that  you
are  perishing  with  frantic  passion.  But  speed  on,  let  not  the
sails  fall,  and  the  breezes  lull :  like  brittle  ice,  anger  dis-
appears in  lapse  of  time.

You  inquire  if  it  is  of  use64  to  win  the  handmaid  her-
self? In  such  attempts  there  is  a  great  risk.  This  one  be-
comes more  zealous  after  an  intrigue  ;  that  one  more  tardy  ;
the  one  procures  you  as  a  gift  for  her  mistress,  the  other  for
her  own  self.  The  result  is  doubtful ;  although  she  should
favour  your  advances,  still  it  is  my  advice,  to  refrain  from  so
doing.  I  shall  not  go  over  headlong  tracks,  and  over  sharp
crags  ;  and,  under  my  guidance,  no  youth  shall  be  deceived.
Even  if  she  pleases  you,  while  she  gives  and  receives  the  letters,
by  her  person,  and  not  only  by  her  zealousness  alone  ;  take
care  and  gain  her  mistress  first ;  let  the  other  follow  as  her
companion ; your  courtship  must  not  be  commenced  with  a

63  Pay  him  in  return.'] — Ver.  370.  This  seems  to  mean,  '  I  do  not
think  you  can  make  sufficient  return  for  his  ardent  affection,'  referring  to
the  lover.  Some  of  the  Commentators  think  that  it  signifies  a  hint  from
the  servant,  that  as  her  mistress's  husband  has  offended  her  by  his  infi-
delities, she  ought  to  repay  him  in  his  own  coin.

64  Is  of  use.] — Ver.  375.  This  abominable  notion  seems  to  have  been
acted  upon  by  the  Poet  himself, See  the  Amores,  Book  ii.  El.  viii.


394  ARS  AHATOEIA ;  [b.  i.  386 — 413.

servant-maid.  This  one  thing  I  advise  you  (if  you  only  put
some  trust  in  my  skill,  and  if  the  boisterous  wind  does  not  bear
my  words  over  the  seas)  :  either  do  not  attempt,  or  else  do  you
persist ;  the  informer  is  removed,  when  once  she  herself  has
shared  in  the  criminality.  The  bird  does  not  easily  escape
when  its  wings  are  bird-limed  ;  the  boar  does  not  readily  get
away  from  the  loose  nets  :  the  wounded  fish  can  be  held  by
the  hook  it  has  seized.  Once  tried,  press  her  hard,  and  do
not  retreat,  but  as  the  conqueror.  Then,  guilty  of  a  fault  that
is  common  to  you  both,  she  will  not  betray  you  ;  and  the
sayings  and  doings  of  her  mistress  will  be  well  known  to  you.
But  let  this  be  well  concealed  ;  if  your  informant  shall  be
well  concealed,  your  mistress  will  ever  be  under  your  eye.

He  is  mistaken  who  supposes  that  time  is  the  object  of  those
only  who  till  the  fields,  and  is  to  be  observed  by  mariners  alone.
Neither  must  the  corn  be  always  trusted  to  the  treacherous
soil ;  nor  the  hollow  ships  at  all  times  to  the  green  waves  ;  nor
is  it  safe  to  be  ever  angling  for  the  charming  fair.  The  same
thing  may  often  be  better  done  when  an  opportunity  offers.
Whether  it  is  her  birthday65  that  comes,  or  whether  the
Calends,66  which  Venus  delights  to  have  as  the  successor  of  the
month  of  Mars ;  or  whether  the  Circus  shall  be  adorned,  not
with  statues,  as  it  was  before,  but  shall  be  containing  the
wealth  of  kings67  exposed  to  view ;  delay  your  project ;  then
the  storm  is  boisterous,  then  the  Pleiades  prevail  ;68  then,
the  tender  Kid  is  sinking  in  the  ocean  wave.  Then,  'tis
well  to  desist ;  then,  if  one  trusts  the  deep,  with  difficulty
he  grasps  the  shipwrecked  fragments  of  his  dismantled
bark. You  may  make  a  beginning  on  the  day  on  which  tear-

65  Her  birthday. .] — Ver.  405. See  the  Amores,  Book  i.  El.  viii.  1.  94.

®  Whether  the  Calends.] — Ver.  405.  The  Matronalia  were  celebrated
on  the  first  day  of  the  Calends  of  March.  It  was  usual  on  that  day,  for
husbands  to  make  presents  to  their  wives,  and  lovers  to  the  objects  of
their  affection.  The  Calends  of  March  preceded  April,  which  month  was
sacred  to  Venus. See  the  Fasti,  Book  iii.  1.  170.

67  The  wealth  of  kings."} — Ver.  408.  It  was  the  custom  to  bring  the
spoils  of  the  enemy,  or  the  most  curious  portions  of  it,  to  Rome,  where  it
was  exposed  to  view  in  the  Circus  and  the  Theatres.  Ovid  tells  his  readers
that  they  must  not  think  that  the  ladies  can  give  them  any  of  their  leisure
on  such  occasions,  as,  being  so  much  engaged  with  the  sights,  they  will
have  no  time  for  love-making.

68  Pleiades  prevail.} — Ver.  409. This  is  said  figuratively.


B.  I.  413—431.]  OE, THE AKT OF LOVE.  395

ful  Allia69  was  stained  with  the  blood  of  the  Latian  wounds ;
on  the  day,  too,  when  the  festival  recurs,  observed  each
seventh  day  by  the  Syrian  of  Palestine,  a  day  not  suited  for70
the  transaction  of  business.

Great  must  be71  your  dread  of  the  birthday  of  your  mistress,
and  unlucky  be  that  day  on  which  any  present  must  be  made.
Though  you  should  cleverly  avoid  her,  still  she  will  spoil  you ;
a  woman  finds  contrivances,  by  means  of  which  to  plunder
the  riches  of  the  eager  lover.  The  loosely-clad  pedlar72  will
be  coming  to  your  mistress,  so  fond  of  buying,  and  while  you
are  by,  will  be  exposing  his  wares.  She  will  ask  you  to  exa-
mine them,  only  that  you  may  appear  to  be  knowing  ;  then  she
will  give  you  a  kiss,  and  then  entreat  you  to  purchase.  She  will
swear  that  she  will  be  content  with  this  for  many  a  year  ;  she
will  say  that  now  she  has  need  of  it,  now  it  may  be  bought  a
bargain.  If  you  shall  make  the  excuse  that  you  have  not  the
money  at  home  to  give ;  a  promissory  note73  will  be  asked
for ;  it  would  then  profit  you  not  to  have  learned74  to  write.
Besides,  too  ;  when  she  asks  for  a  present,  as  though  for  the
birth-day  cake,75  and  is  born  for  her  own  pleasure  as  often
as  she  pleases. And  further  ;  when,  full  of  tears,  she  laments

69  Tearful  Allia.']— -Ver  413.  The  16th  of  July,  the  day  on  which  the
Romans  were  defeated  by  the  Gauls  at  the  Allia,  was  deemed  unlucky,
and  no  business  was  transacted  on  it.

70  A  day  not  suited  for.] — Ver.  415.  The  Jews  are  here  alluded  to.
and  he  refers  to  their  Sabbath.  How  some  Commentators  can  have
dreamed  that  the  feast  of  the  Saturnalia  is  referred  to,  it  is  hard  to  say.

71  Great  must  be.] — Ver,  417.  The  meaning  is,  '  Be  careful  not  to
make  your  first  advances  on  the  birthday  of  your  mistress,  as  that  is  the
time  for  making  presents,  and  you  will  certainly  be  out  of  pocket.'  See
the  Amores,  Book  i.  El.  viii.  1.  94,  and  the  Note.

72  The  loosely -clad  pedlar.] — Ver.  421.  '  Institor'  was  properly  a  per-
son who  sold  wares,  and  kept  a  '  taberna'  or  '  shop'  on  account  of  another.
Sometimes  free  persons,  but  more  frequently  slaves,  were  '  institores.'

73  A  promissory  note.] — Ver.  428.  '  Syngraphus,'  or  '  syngrapha,'  was
a  '  bill '  4  bond,'  or  '  promissory  note,'  which  was  most  probably  the  kind  of
writing  that  the  pedlar  would  here  require.  It  may  possibly  mean  a  cheque
upon  his  bankers,  the  '  argentarii'  of  Rome.

74  Not  to  have  learned.] — Ver.  428.  The  reading  here  seems  to  be
1  non  didicisse  juvat.'  '  It  is  not  to  your  advantage  that  you  have  learned
(to  write).'  The  other  reading,  '  ne  didicisse  juvet,'  may  be  rendered,
4  (perhaps)  it  may  be  no  advantage  that  you  have  learned  (to  write).'

75  Birth  day  cake.] — Ver.  429. See  the  Amores,  Book  i.  El.  viii.  1.  94.


396  ARS A.MATOEIA ;  ' [b.  i.  431—462.

her  pretended  loss,  and  the  jewel76  is  feigned  to  have  fallen
from  her  pierced  ear.  They  ask  for  many  a  sum  to  be  lent  them ;
so  lent,  they  have  no  inclination  to  return  them.  You  lose  the
whole ;  and  no  thanks  are  there  for  your  loss.  Had  I  ten
mouths,  with  tongues  as  many,  they  would  not  suffice  for  me
to  recount  the  abominable  contrivances  of  courtesans.

Let  the  wax  that  is  poured  upon  the  polished  tablets  first
try  the  ford ;  let  the  wax  first  go  as  the  messenger  of  your
feelings.  Let  it  carry  your  compliments  ;  and  whoever  you
are,  add  expressions  that  feign  you  to  be  in  love,  and  entreaties
not  a  few.  Achilles,  moved  with  his  entreaties,  granted  Hector
to  Priam  ;  an  angered  Divinity  is  moved  by  the  voice  of  en-
treaty. Take  care  to  make  promises  :  for  what  harm  is  there  in
promising?  Any  person  whatever  can  be  rich  in  promises.  Hope,
if  she  is  only  once  cherished,  holds  out  for  a  long  time  ;  she
is,  indeed,  a  deceitful  Goddess,  but  still  a  convenient  one.  Should
you  give  her77  anything,  you  may  for  that  reason  be  abandoned
by  her  :  she  will  bear  off  the  gift  by-gone,  and  will  have  lost
nothing  in  return.  But  that  which  you  have  not  given,  you
may  always  seem  as  though  about  to  give  ;  thus  has  the  sterile
field  full  oft  deceived  its  owner.  So  the  gambler,  in  order
that  he  may  not  lose,  does  not  cease  to  lose ;  and  the
alluring  dice  ever  recall  the  anxious  hand.  This  is  the
task,  this  the  labour  ;  to  gain  her  without  even  the  first  pre-
sent. What  she  has  once  given,  she  will  always  give,  that  she
may  not  have  granted  to  no  purpose.  Let  the  letter  go  then,
and  let  it  be  couched  in  tender  expressions  ;  and  let  it  ascer-
tain her  feelings,  and  be  the  first  to  feel  its  way.  A  letter
borne  upon  an  apple78  deceived  Cydippe ;  and  by  her  own
words  the  fair  was  unconsciously  caught.

Youths  of  Rome,  learn,  I  recommend  you,  the  liberal  arts  ;
and  not  only  that  you  may  defend  the  trembling  accused.  Both
the  public,  and  the  grave  judge,  and  the  silent  Senate,  as  well  as

76  The  jewel."] — Ver.  432.  For  an  account  of  the  earrings  of  the  an-
cients, see  the  Notes  to  the  Metamorphoses,  Book  x.  1.  116.

77  Should  you  give  her.] — Ver.  447.  The  meaning  of  this  and  the  fol-
lowing line  is  very  obscure ;  so  much  so,  that  Burmann  is  in  doubt  on  the
subject.  It,  however,  seems  to  be,  that  it  is  not  discreet,  on  first  acquaint-
ance, to  give  presents,  as  the  damsel  may  then  have  a  reason  for  peremptorily
giving  you  up  ;  she  carries  off  your  gift,  and  gives  no  favour  in  return.

78  Upon  an  apple.]  — Ver.  457.  See  the  twentieth  and  twenty-first
Epistles  in  the  present  volume.


B.  Im  462—496.]  OE, THE AET OP LOYE.  397

the  fair,  conquered  by  your  eloquence,  shall  extend  their  hands.  "*
But  let  your  power  lie  concealed  :  and  do  not  be  eloquent  at
the  first.  Let  your  letters  avoid  difficult  words.  Who,  but
one  bereft  of  sense,  would  declaim  before  a  charming  mis-
tress 1  Full  oft  has  a  letter  proved  a  powerful  cause  for  hatred.
Let  your  language  be  intelligible,  and  your  words  the  usual
ones  ;  but  pleasing,  so  that  you  may  seem  to  be  speaking  in
person.  Should  she  not  accept  your  letter,  and  send  it  back
unread,  hope  that  she  will  read  it,  and  persist  in  your  design.
In  time  the  stubborn  oxen  come  beneath  the  ploughs  :  in  time
the  steeds  are  taught  to  submit  to  the  flowing  reins  :  by  con-
tinued use  the  ring  of  ironso  is  consumed :  by  being  in  the
ground  continually,  the  crooked  plough  is  worn  out.  What  is
there  harder  than  stone  ?  What  more  yielding  than  water  ?  Yet
hard  stones  are  hollowed  out  by  yielding  water.  Only  persist,
and  in  time  you  will  overcome  Penelope  herself.  You  see  that
Pergamus  was  taken  after  a  long  time ;  still,  it  was  taken.

If  she  reads  it,  and  will  not  write  in  answer,  do  not  attemptto
compel  her.  Do  you  only  make  her  to  be  continually  reading
your  flattering  lines.  What  she  has  been  pleased  to  read,  she
will  be  pleased  to  answer  when  read.  All  these  things  will
come  in  their  turn,  and  by  degrees.  Perhaps  even,  at  first,  a
discouraging  letter  will  come  to  you  ;  and  one  that  entreats
you  not  to  wish  to  molest  her.  What  she  entreats  you  to  do,  she
dreads ;  what  she  does  not  entreat  you  to  do,  namely,  to  persist,
shewishes  you  to  do.  Press  on ;  and  soon  you  will  be  the  gainer
of  your  desires.  In  the  meantime,  if  she  shall  be  carried
lying  along  upon  her  couch,  do  you,  as  though  quite  by  acci-
dent, approach  the  litter  of  your  mistress  ;  and  that  no  cue
may  give  a  mischievous  ear  to  your  words,  cunningly  conceal
them  so  far  as  you  can  in  doubtful  signs.  If,  with  saunter-
ing foot,  the  spacious  Portico  is  paced  by  her ;  here,  too,  do
you  bestow  your  leisure  in  her  attendance.  And  sometimes  do
you  take  care  to  go  before;  sometimes  follow  behind;  and  some-
times be  in  a  hurry,  and  sometimes  walk  leisurely.  And  be  not
ashamed  to  pass  from  the  throng  under  some  of  the  columns/1

79  Extend  their  hands.] — Ver.  462.  This  figure  is  taken  from  the  gla-
diatorial games,  where  the  conquered  extended  their  hands  in  token  of
submission.

80  Ring  of  iron.] — Ver.  473.  The  rings  worn  by  the  lower  classes  were
of  iron.

Sl Under  some  of  the  columns.'] — Yer.  495. The  learned  Heinsius  ab-


398  AES  AMATOKIA ;  [b.  i.  496—516.

or  to  walk  with  her,  side  by  side.  And  let  her  not  be  seated
long  without  you  in  the  curving  Theatre  ;  in  her  shoulders  she
will  bring  something  for  you  to  be  spectator  of.  Her  you  may
gaze  upon,  her  you  may  admire  ;  much  may  you  say  by  your
brows,  much  by  your  gestures.  Clap  too,  when  the  actor  is
dancing82  in  the  part  of  some  damsel ;  and  whatever  lover  is
represented,  him  applaud.  Rise  when  she  rises  ;  sit  as  long
as  she  is  seated ;  employ  your  time  at  the  caprice  of  your
mistress.

But  let  it  not  please  you  to  curl  your  hair  with  the  irons :!*
and  rub  not  your  legs  with  the  rough  pumice.84  Bid  those  do
this,85  in  whose  Phrygian  notes  the  Cybeleian  Mother  is  cele-
brated by  their  yells.  A  neglect  of  beauty  becomes  men.
Theseus  bore  off  the  daughter  of  Minos,  though  his  temples
were  bedecked  by  no  crisping-pin.  Phsedra  loved  Hippolytus,86
and  he  was  not  finely  trimmed.  Adonis,  habituated  to  the  wood's,
was  the  care  of  a  Goddess.  But  let  neatness  please  you  ;
let  your  body  be  bronzed  on  the  Plain  of Mars  :87  let  your  robe
be  well-fitting,  and  without  a  spot.  Let  your  tongue,  too,  not
be  clammy;88  your  teeth  free  from  yellowness;  and  let  not

solutely  thinks  that  '  columnas '  here  means  '  mile-stones  ' !  It  is  pretty
clear  that  Ovid  alludes  to  the  columns  of  the  Portico ;  and  he  seems
to  say,  that  the  attentive  lover,  when  he  sees  the  damsel  at  some  distance
before  him,  is  not  to  hesitate  to  escape  the  crowd  by  going  into  the  open
space  outside  of  the  columns,  and  then  running  on,  for  the  purpose  of  over-
taking her.  See  the  Tristia,  Book  hi.  El.  iii,  where  he  makes  mention  of
the  columns  in  the  Portico  of  the  Danaides.

82  Actor  is  dancing.] — Ver.  501. See  the  Tristia,  Book  ii.i.  497.

83  With  the  irons.] — Ver.  505.  See  the  Amores,  Book  i.  El.  xiv.  1.  25,
and  the  Note.  The  effeminate  among  the  Romans  were  very  fond  of
having  their  hair  in  curls.

84  With  the  rough  pumice.] — Ver.  506.  Pliny  the  Elder  mentions
pumice  stone  as  '  a  substance  used  by  women  in  washing  tbeir  bodies,  and
now  by  men  as  well.'  Persius,  in  his  Fourth  Satire,  inveighs  against  this
effeminate  practice.

85  Bid  those  do  this.] — Ver.  507!  He  alludes  to  the  Galli,  the  eunuch
priests  of  Cybele.

86  Hippolytus.]— Ver.  511.  Phaedra,  in  her  Epistle,  alludes  to  his  neg-
lect of  dress,  as  one  of  the  merits  of  Hippolytus.

87  Plain  of  Mars.] — Ver.  513.  The  Roman  youth  practised  wrestling,
and  other  athletic  exercises,  on  the  Campus  Martius.  Being  often  stripped
naked,  or  nearly  so,  the  oil,  combined  with  the  heat,  would  tend  to  bronze
the  skin.

88  Not  be  clammy.] — Ver.  515. Probably  this  is  the  meaning  of  'lin-


B.  I.  51G— 541.J  OK, THE AET OF LOYE.  399

your  foot  wallop  about,  losing  itself  in  the  shoe  down  at
heel.  Let  not  the  cutting  shockingly  disfigure  your  hair  bolt
upright ;  let  your  locks,  let  your  beard  be  trimmed  by  a
skilful  hand.  Let  your  nails,  too,  not  be  jagged,  and  let  them
be  without  dirt ;  and  let  no  hairs  project  from  the  cavities  of
your  nostrils.  And  let  not  the  breath  of  your  ill-smelling
mouth,  be  offensive  ;  and  let  not  the  husband  and  the  father  of
the  flock89  offend  the  nostrils.  The  rest,  allow  the  luxurious
fair  to  do  ;  and  any  man  that  perchance  disgracefully  seeks
to  attract  another.

Lo !  Bacchus  calls  his  own  Poet :  he,  too,  aids  those  who
love ;  and  he  encourages  the  flame  with  which  he  burns  him-
self. The  Gnossian  fair  was  wandering  distractedly  on  the  un-
known sands,  where  little  Dia  is  beaten  by  the  ocean  waves.
And,  just  as  she  was  on  awaking  from  her  sleep,90  clothed  in
a  loose  tunic,  with  bare  feet,  and  having  her  yellow  hair
loose,  she  was  exclaiming  to  the  deaf  waves  that  Theseus  was
cruel,  while  the  piteous  shower  of  tears  was  moistening  her
tender  cheeks.  She  exclaimed,  and  at  the  same  moment  she
wept ;  but  both  became  her,  nor  was  she  rendered  unsightly
by  her  tears.  And  now  again  beating  her  most  beauteous  bosom
with  her  hands,  she  cried — "  That  perfidious  man  has  gone  ;
what  will  become  of  me  ?"  "  What  will  become  of  me  ?"  she
said  ;  when  cymbals  resounded  over  all  the  shore,  and  tam-
bourines were  beaten  with  frantic  hand.  She  dropped  down
with  alarm,  and  stopped  short  in  her  closing  words;  and  no  blood
was  there  in  her  lifeless  body. See  !  the  Mimallonian  females,91

gua  ne  rigeat,'  although  Nisard's  French  translation  has  it,  '  let  your  tongue
have  no  roughness.'  Dryden's  translation  is,  of  course,  of  no  assistance,  as
it  carefully  avoids  all  the  difficult  passages.

89  The  father  of  the  flock. 1 — Ver.  522.  He  alludes  to  the  rank  smell
to  the  arm-pits,  which  the  Romans  called  hy  the  name  '  hircus,'  '  a  goat,'
from  a  supposed  similarity  to  the  strong  smell  of  that  animal.

90  Awaking  from  her  sleep.'] — Ver.  529.  See  the  Epistle  of  Ariadne  to
Theseus.

91  Mimallonian  females.'] — Ver.  541.  It  is  a  matter  of  douht  why
the  Bacchanalian  women  were  called  Mimallonides.  According  to  some,
they  are  so  called  from  Mimas,  a  mountain  of  Asia  Minor,  where  the
rites  of  Bacchus  were  celebrated.  Suidas  says  that  they  are  so  called,
from  jwijur/cric,  '  imitation,'  because  they  imitated  the  actions  of  men.
Bochart  thinks  that  the  word  is  of  Hebrew  origin,  and  that  they  receive
their  name  from  '  memelleran,'  '  garrulous '  or  '  noisy';  or  else  from
;  mamal,'  a  '  wine-press.'


400  AES A.MATOEIA ;  [b.  I.  541—572.

with  their  locks  flowing  on  their  backs ;  see !  the  nimble
Satyrs,  the  throng  preceding  the  God  ;  see !  Silenus,  the
drunken  old  man,92  on  his  bending  ass,  sits  there  with  diffi-
culty, and  holds  fast  by  the  mane  that  he  presses.  While
he  follows  the  Bacchanals,  the  Bacchanals  both  fly  and
return  :  while  the  unskilful  rider  is  goading  on  his  ani-
mal with  his  stick,  slipping  from  the  long-eared  ass,  he
tumbles  upon  his  head.  The  Satyrs  cry  aloud,  "  Come,  rise
up ;  rise,  father  I"  Now,  the  God,  from  his  chariot,  the  top  of
which  he  had  wreathed  with  grapes,  loosened  the  golden
reins  for  the  tigers  yoked  to  it.  Both  her  complexion,  and
Theseus,  and  her  voice  forsook  the  fair  one ;  and  thrice  she
attempted  flight,  and  thrice  was  she  detained  by  fear.  She
shuddered,  just  as  the  barren  ears  of  corn,  which  the  wind
shakes  ;  just  as  the  slender  reed  quivers  in  the  swampy
marsh.

To  her  the  Divinity  said,  "Lo!  I  come  to  thee  a  more  con-
stant lover  ;  damsel  of  Gnossus,  lay  aside  thy  fear,  the  wife  of
Bacchus  shalt  thou  be.  Receive  heaven  as  my  gift :  a  con-
spicuous Constellation  in  the  heavens,  full  oft,  Cretan  Diadem,93
shalt  thou  direct  the  veering  bark."  Thus  he  said  ;  and  he  leapt
from  the  chariot,  that  she  might  not  be  in  dread  of  the  tigers;
the  sand  yielded  to  his  foot  placed  upon  it.  And  folding  her
in  his  bosom  he  bore  her  off;  for  to  struggle  she  was  unable  :
how  easy  'tis  for  a  God  to  be  able  to  do  anything.  Some
sing  "  Hymenseus,"  some  cry  "  Evie,  Evoe  !"94  Thus  are  the
God  and  his  bride  united  in  holy  wedlock.

Therefore,  when  the  gifts  of  Bacchus  placed  before  you  fall
to  your  lot,  and  the  fair  one  shall  be  a  sharer  in  the  convivial
couch  ;  pray  both  to  father  Nyctelius,  and  his  nocturnal  rites,
that  they  will  bid  the  wine  not  to  take  effect  on  your  head.
Here,  in  secret  discourse,  you  may  say  to  her  many  a  free
word,  which  she  may  understand  is  addressed  to  her ;  and
you  may  trace  out  short  compliments  with  a  little  wine,  so

92  Drunken  old  man.'] — Ver.  543.  See  the  adventure  of  Silenus,  in
the  beginning  of  Book  xi.  of  the  Metamorphoses ;  and  in  the  Fasti,
Book  hi.  1.  742. He  seems  to  have  been  always  getting  into  trouble*

93  Cretan  Diadem .]  —Ver.  558. See  the  Fasti,  Book  in.  1.  516.

9*  Evie,  EvoeTj—Yer.  563.  In  the  combat  with  the  Giants,  Jupiter  is
said,  when  one  of  them  was  slain  by  Bacchus,  to  have  exclaimed  ev  vit,
'Well  done,  son:'  whence  the  exclamation  '  Evie!'  was  said  to  have  ori-
ginated. See  the  Metamorphoses,  Book  iv.  1,  11  and  15,  and  the  Note.


B.  i.  572—590.]  OE, THE AET OF  LOYE.  401

that  she  may  read  on  the  table95  that  she  is  your  favorite ;
and  look  on  her  eyes  with  eyes  that  confess  your  flame ;
the  silent  features  often  have  both  words  and  expression.
Take  care  to  be  the  next  to  seize  the  cup  that  has  been
touched  by  her  lips  ;  and  drink  from  the  side96  that  the  fair
drinks  from.  And  whatever  food  she  shall  have  touched
with  her  fingers,97  do  you  reach  for  it ;  and  while  you  are
reaching,  her  hand  may  be  touched  by  you.  Let  it  also  be
your  object  to  please  the  husband  of  the  fair ;  once  made  a
friend,  he  will  be  more  serviceable  for  your  designs.  If  you  are
drinking  by  lot,98  grant  him  the  first  turn  :  let  the  chaplet,
taken  from  your  own  head,  be  presented  to  him.  Whether  he
is  below  you,  or  whether  your  neighbour,  let  him  help  himself
to  every  thing  first ;  and  do  not  hesitate  to  speak  only  after
he  has  spoken.  Secure  and  much  frequented  is  the  path,  for
deceiving  through  the  name  of  friendship.  Secure  and  much  fre-
quented though  that  path  be  ;  still  it  is  to  be  condemned.  For
this  cause  'tis  that  the  agent  attends  even  too  much99  to  his
agency,  and  thinks  that  more  things  ought  to  be  looked  after
by  him  than  those  entrusted  to  him.

A  sure  rule  for  drinking  shall  be  given  you  by  me  : let

95  On  the  table.']  — Ver.  572.  See  the  Epistle  of  Paris  to  Helen ;  and
the  Amores,  Book  i.  El.  iv.  1.  20,  and  Book  ii.  El.  v.  1.  17,  and  the  Notes.

96  From  the  side.]— -Ver.  576. See  the  Amores,  Book  i.  El.  iv.  1.  32.

97  Touched  with  her  fingers.] — Ver.  577.  The  ancients  are  supposed
not  to  have  used  at  meals  any  implement  such  as  a  knife  or  fork,  hut
merely  to  have  used  the  fingers  only,  except  in  eating  soups  or  other
liquids,  or  jellies,  when  they  employed  spoons,  which  were  denoted  hy
the  names  '  cochlear '  and  '  ligula.'  At  meals  the  Greeks  wiped  their
fingers  on  pieces  of  bread ;  the  Romans  washed  them  with  water,  and
dried  them  on  napkins  handed  round  by  the  slaves.

98  Are  drinking  by  lot.] — Ver.  581.  The  '  modimperator,'  or  '  master
of  the  banquet,'  was  often  chosen  by  lot  by  the  guests,  and  it  was  his
province  to  prescribe  how  much  each  person  should  drink.  Lots  were
also  thrown,  by  means  of  the  dice,  to  show  in  what  order  each  person
was  to  drink.  This  passage  will  show  the  falsity  of  his  plea  in  the  Second
Book  of  the  Tristia,  addressed  to  Augustus,  where  he  says  that  it  was
not  his  intention  to  address  the  married  women  of  Rome,  but  only
those  who  did  not  wear  the  *  vittae '  and  the  '  instita,'  the  badges  of
chastity.

99  Agent  attends  even  too  much.] — Ver.  587.  His  meaning  seems  to  be,
that  in  the  same  way  as  the  agent  does  more  than  attend  to  the  injunctions
of  his  principal,  andputs  himself  in  a  position  to  profit  by  his  office,  so  is
the  inamorato,  through  the  confidence  of  the  husband  reposed  in  him,  to
make  a  profit  that  has  never  been  anticipated.


402  AES  AMATOEIA ;  [b.  i.  590—625.

both  your  mind  and  your  feet  ever  observe  their  duty.  Es-
pecially avoid  quarrels  stimulated  by  wine,  and  hands  too  ready
for  savage  warfare.  Eurytion1  met  his  death  from  foolishly
quaffing  the  wine  set  before  him.  Banquets  and  wine  are
rather  suited  for  pleasant  mirth.  If  you  have  a  voice,  sing  ;
if  pliant  arms,  dance  ;  and  by  whatever  talent  you  can  amuse,
amuse.  As  real  drunkenness  offends,  so  feigned  inebriety
will  prove  of  service.  Let  your  deceiving  tongue  stutter  with
lisping  accents  ;  so  that  whatever  you  shall  do  or  say  with
more  freedom  than  usual,  it  may  be  supposed  that  excess  of
wine  is  the  cause.  And  express  all  good  wishes  for  your
mistress  ;  all  good  wishes  for  him  who  shares  her  couch  ;  but
in  your  silent  thoughts  pray  for  curses  on  her  husband.  But
when,  the  tables  removed,  the  guests  shall  be  going,  (the  very
crowd  will  afford  you  access  and  room)  mix  in  the  throng  :
and  quietly  stealing  up2  to  her  as  she  walks,  twitch  her  side
with  your  fingers ;  and  touch  her  foot  with  your  foot.

Now  is  the  time  come  for  some  conversation  :  fly  afar  hence,
coy  bashfulness,  let  Chance  and  Yenus  befriend  the  daring.
Let  your  eloquence  not  be  subject  to  any  laws  of  mine ;  only
make  a  beginning,  of  your  own  accord  you  will  prove  fluent.
You  must  act  the  lover,  and  wounds  must  be  feigned  in  your
words.  Hence  let  confidence  be  sought  by  you,  by  means  of
any  contrivances  whatever.  And  'tis  no  hard  matter  to  be
believed ;  each  woman  seems  to  herself  worthy  to  be  loved.
Though  she  be  ugly  in  the  extreme,  to  no  one  are  her  own
looks  displeasing.  Yet  often,  he  that  pretends  to  love,  begins
in  reality :  full  oft  he  becomes  that  which  in  the  beginning  he
feigned  to  be.  For  this  cause,  the  rather,  0  ye  fair,  be  pro-
pitious to  those  who  pretend.  That  passion  will  become  real,
which  so  lately  was  feigned.

Now  be  it  your  part  stealthily  to  captivate  her  affection  by
attentions;  just  as  the  shelving  bank  is  encroached  on  by  the
flowing  stream.  Be  not  tired  of  praising  either  her  face  or  her
hair  ;  her  taper  fingers  too,  and  her  small  foot.  The  praise  of
their  beauty  pleases  even  the  chaste  ;  their  charms  are  the  care
and  the  pleasure  of  even  maidens. For,  why,  even  now,  are

1  Eurytion.'] — Ver.  593.  At  the  nuptials  of  Pirithoiis  and  Hippoda-
mia. See  the  Metamorphoses,  Book  xii.  1.  220,  where  he  is  called  Eurytus.

2  Stealing  up.'] — Ver.  605.  This  piece  of  impudence  he  professes  to
practise  in  the  Amores,  Book  i.  El.  iv.  L  56.


B.  I.  625—654.]  OR, THE ABT OF LOTE.  403

Juno  and  Pallas  ashamed  at  not  having  gained  the  decision  in
the  Phrygian  groves  ?  The  bird  of  Juno3  exposes  her  feathers,
when  praised  ;  if  you  look  at  them  in  silence,  she  conceals
her  treasures.  Amid  the  contests  of  the  rapid  course,  their
trimmed  manes,  and  their  patted  necks,  delight  the  steeds.

Promise,  too,  without  hesitation  :  promises  attract  the  fair  :
make  any  Gods  you  please  to  be  witnesses  of  what  you  pro-
mise. Jupiter,  from  on  high,  smiles  at  the  perjuries  of  lovers,
and  commands  the  JEolian  South  winds  to  sweep  them  away
as  worthless.  Jupiter  was  accustomed  to  swear  falsely  to
Juno  by  the  Styx :  now  is  he  himself  indulgent  to  his  own  pre-
cedent. *Tis  expedient  that  there  should  be  Gods  ;4  and  as  it
is  expedient,  let  us  believe  them  to  exist.  Let  frankincense
and  wine  be  presented  on  their  ancient  altars.  No  repose,  free
from  care  and  similar  to  sleep,  possesses  them ;  live  in  inno-
cence, for  a  Divinity  is  ever  present.  Restore  the  pledge  ;  let
piety  observe  her  duties  ;  be  there  no  fraud;  keep  your  hands
free  from  bloodshed.

Deceive,  if  you  are  wise,  the  fair  alone  with  impunity ;  for
this  one  piece  of  deceit  only  is  good  faith  to  be  disregarded.
Deceive  the  deceivers  ;  in  a  great  measure  they  are  all  a  guilty
race ;  let  them  fall  into  the  toils  which  they  have  spread.
Egypt  is  said  to  have  been  without  showers  that  refresh  the
fields  :  and  to  have  been  parched  during  nine  years.  When
Thrasius  went  to  Busiris,5  and  showed  that  Jupiter  could
be  propitiated  by  shedding  the  blood  of  strangers;  to
him  Busiris  said,  "  Thou  shalt  become  the  first  sacrifice  to
Jove,  and,  a  stranger,  thou  shalt  produce  rain  for  Egypt/'*
Phalaris,  too,  burnt  in  the  bull  the  limbs  of  the  cruel  PeriUus ;
the  unhappy  inventor  was  the  first  to  make  proof  of  his  work.

3  Bird  of  Juno.] — Ver.  627.  This  fact,  in  natural  history,  was  probably
known  only  to  Ovid,  or  the  peacocks  of  the  present  day  may  be  less  vain
than  the  Roman  ones. See  the  Metamorphoses,  Book  i.  1.  723.

4  That  there  should  he  Gods.] — Ver.  637.  This  was  the  avowed  opi-
nion of  some  of  the  philosophers  and  atheists  of  antiquity.  We  learn  from
Tertullian  that  Diogenes,  being  asked  if  the  Gods  exist,  answered  that  he
did  not  know  anything  about  it,  but  that  they  ought  to  exist.  The  doc-
trine of  the  Epicureans  was,  that  the  Gods  lived  a  happy  and  easy  life,
were  not  susceptible  of  anger,  and  did  not  trouble  themselves  about  men.

5  Went  to  Busiris.]— -Ver.  649.  See  the  Tristia,  Book  iii.  El.  xi.  1.  39,
where  the  story  of  Phalaris  is  also  referred  to.  Thrasius  was  the  brother
of  Pygmalion,  and  was  justly  punished  bv  Busiris  for  his  cruel  suggestion.

bd2


404  ABS  AMATORIA  ;■  [b.  i.  655— 691.

Each  of  them  was  just ;  and,  indeed,  no  law  is  there  more
righteous,  than  that  the  contrivers  of  death  should  perish  by
their  own  contrivances.  Therefore,  since  perjuries  with  justice
impose  upon  the  perjured,  let  woman  grieve,  deceived  through
a  precedent  her  own.

Tears,  too,  are  of  utility :  by  tears  you  will  move  adamant.
Make  her,  if  you  can,  to  see  your  moistened  cheeks.  If  tears
shall  fail  you,  for  indeed  they  do  not  always  come  in.  time,  touch
your  eyes  with  your  wet  hand.  What  discreet  person  would
not  mingle  kisses  with  tender  words  ?  Though  she  should  not
grant  them  ;  still  take  them  ungranted.  Perhaps  she  will
struggle  at  first,  and  will  say,  "  You  naughty  man!"  still,  in
her  struggling,  she  will  wish  to  be  overcome.  Only,  let  them
not,  rudely  snatched,  hurt  her  tender  lips,  and  take  care  that
she  may  not  be  able  to  complain  that  they  have  proved  a  cause
of  pain.  He  who  has  gained  kisses,  if  he  cannot  gain  the  rest
as  well,  will  deserve  to  lose  even  that  which  has  been  granted
him.  Howmuch  is  there  wanting  for  unlimited  enjoyment  after
a  kis.s  !  Oh  shocking  !  'twere  downright  clownishness,  and  not
modesty.  Call  it  violence,  if  you  like ;  such  violence  is  pleasing
to  the  fair;  they  often  wish,  through  compulsion,  to  grant  what
they  are  delighted  to  grant.  Whatever  fair  one  has  been  de-
spoiled by  the  sudden  violence  of  passion,  she  is  delighted  at
it ;  and  the  chief  is  as  good  as  a  godsend.  But  she,  who,  when
she  might  have  been  carried  by  storm,  has  escaped  untouched,
though,  in  her  features,  she  should  pretend  gladness,  will  really
be  sorry.  Phcebe  suffered 6  violence ;  to  her  sister  was  violence
offered;  and  pleasing  was  either  ravisher  to  the  ravished.  The
damsel  of  Scyros  being  united  to  the  Haemonian  hero,  is  a
well-known  story  indeed,  but  not  unworthy  to  be  related.

Now,  the  Goddess,  worthy  to  conquer  the  other  two  at  the
foot  of  mount  Ida,  had  given  her  reward  of  the  approval
of  her  beauty.  Now,  from  a  distant  region,  had  a  daughter-
in-law  come  to  Priam :  and  within  Ilian  walls  there  was  a
Grecian  wife.  All  swore  in  the  words  of  the  affronted  hus-
band ;  for  the  grief  of  one  was  the  common  cause.  A  dis-
graceful thing,  had  he  not  yielded  in  this  to  the  entreaties  of
his  mother,  Achilles  had  concealed  his  manhood  by  the  long
garments. What  art  thou  doing,  descendant  of  iEacus  1  The

6  Phoebe  suffered.'] — Ver.  679.  See  the  story  of  the  rape  of  Phoebe
and  Elaira,  by  Castor  and  Pollux,  in  the  Fasti,  Book  v.  1.  699.


B.  I.  691—728.]  OR,  THE ART OF LOYE.  405

wool  is  no  task  of  thine.  Do  thou  seek  glory  hy  other  arts
of  Pallas.  What  hast  thou  to  do  with  work-baskets  V  Thy
hand  is  fitted  for  holding  the  shield.  Why  hold  the  allotted
flax  in  thy  right  hand,  by  which  Hector  shall  fall  1  Spurn
those  spindles  enwrapped  in  the  laborious  warp  ;  the  lance
from  Pelion  is  to  be  brandished  by  that  hand.  By  chance
in  the  "same  chamber  there  was  a  royal  maiden ;  in  her  own
undoing  she  found  that  he  was  a  male.  By  force,  indeed,
was  she  overcome,  so  we  must  believe  :  but  still,  by  force  was
she  willing  to  be  overcome.  Many  a  time  did  she  say,  "  Stay,"
when  now  Achilles  was  hastening  to  depart ;  for,  the  distaff
laid  aside,  he  had  assumed  valiant  arms.  Where  now  is  this
violence  ?  Why,  with  gentle  voice,  Deidamia,  dost  thou  de-
tain the  perpetrator  of  thy  disgrace  ?  As,  forsooth,  there  is
shame  in  first  beginning  at  any  time,  so  'tis  pleasing  to  the
fair  to  submit,  when  the  other  takes  the  initiative.

Alas  !  too  great  is  the  confidence  of  any  youth  in  his  own
good  looks,  if  he  awaits  for  her  to  be  the  first  to  ask  him.
Let  the  man  make  the  first  approaches;  let  the  man  use  words
of  entreaty ;  she  will  kindly  receive  his  soft  entreaties.  To  gain
your  wish,  ask  ;  she  only  wishes  to  be  asked.  Tell  her  the
cause  and  the  origin  of  your  desires.  Jupiter  came  as  a  sup-
pliant to  the  Heroines  of  olden  times  ;8  no  fair  one  found
fault  with  great  Jove.  But  if  you  perceive  puffed-up  vanity
to  be  the  result  of  your  prayers,  desist  from  your  design,  and
withhold  your  advances.  Many  desire  that  which  flies  from
them,  and  hate  that  which  is  close  at  hand.  By  pressing  on
less  eagerly,  remove  all  weariness  of  yourself.  Nor  must
your  hope  of  enjoyment  be  always  confessed  by  you  as  you
entreat ;  let  Love  make  his  entrance  concealed  beneath  the
name  of  friendship.  By  this  introduction,  I  have  seen  the
prudish  fair  deceived ;  he  who  was  the  friend,  became  the
lover.  A  fair  complexion  is  unbecoming  in  a  sailor;  he
ought  to  be  swarthy,  from  the  spray  of  the  sea  and  the
rays  of  the  sun.  It  is  unbecoming,  too,  to  the  husbandman,
who,  with  his  crooked  plough  and  his  heavy  harrows,  is  al-
ways turning  up  the  ground  in  the  open  air.  And  if  your  body

7  Work-baskets .] — Ver.  693.  See  the  Note  to  the  seventy-third  line
of  the  Ninth  Epistle.

8  Heroines  of  olden  times.'] — Vei.  713.  Such  as  Danae,  Europa,
Semele,  Alcmena,  Io,  Calisto,  Antiope,  Maia,  Electre,  and  others.


406  ARS  AMATOEIA;  [b.  i.  728— .757.

is  fair,  you,  by  whom  the  glory  of  the  chaplet  of  Pallas9  is
sought,  you  will  be  unsightly.

Let  every  one  that  is  in  love  be  pale  ;  that  is  the  proper
complexion  for  one  in  love.  That  is  becoming ;  from  your  fea-
tures, let  the  fair  think  that  you  are  not  in  good  health.
Pale  with  love  for  Lyrice,10  did  Orion  wander  in  the  woods ;
pale  for  the  Naiad,  in  her  indifference,  was  Daphnis.11  Thin-
ness, too,  shows  the  feelings ;  and  think  it  no  disgrace  to  put
a  hood  over  your  shining  looks.  Let  sleepless  nights  atten-
uate the  bodies  of  the  youths  ;  care,  too,  and  the  grief  that
proceeds  from  violent  love.  That  you  may  gain  your  desires,
be  wretched,  that  he  who  sees  you  may  be  able  to  say,  "You
are  in  love.,,

Shall  I  complain,  or  only  remind  you  how  all  right  and
wrong  is  confused?  Friendship  is  but  a  name,  constancy  an
empty  title.  Alas !  alas !  it  is  not  safe  to  praise  the  object
that  you  love  to  your  friend.  When  he  has  credited  your
praises,  he  supplants  you.  But  the  descendant  of  Actor  did
not  defile  the  couch  of  Achilles  ;  so  far  as  Pirithous  was  con-
cerned, Phsedra  was  chaste.  Pylades  12  loved  Hermione,  with
the  affection  with  which  Phoebus  loved  Pallas ;  and  he  was
such,  daughter  of  Tyndarus,  as  thy  twin  brother  Castor  was
towards  thee.  If  any  one  expects  the  same,  let  him  expect
that  the  tamarisks  will  bear  apples,  and  let  him  look  for
honey  in  the  middle  of  the  stream.  Nothing  pleases  but
what  is  base ;  his  own  gratification  is  the  object  of  each.
This,  too,  becomes  pleasant  from  the  sorrow  of  another.  Oh
disgraceful  conduct !  no  enemy  is  to  be  dreaded  by  the  lover.
Shun  those  whom  you  think  trustworthy  ;  then  you  will  be  safe.
Shun  your  kinsman,  and  your  brother,  and  your  dear  friend  ;
this  class  will  cause  you  real  alarm.

I  was  here  about  to  conclude ;  but  there  are  various  dis-
positions in  the  fair ;  treat  these  thousand  dispositions  in  a
thousand  different  ways. The  same  soil  does  not  produce

9  Chaplet  of  Pallas.'] — Ver.  727.  A  crown  of  olive  was  presented  to
the  victors  in  the  athletic  exercises  at  the  Olympic  games.

10  Love  for  Lyrice  ] — Ver.  731.  If  Lyrice  here  is  a  female  name,  it  is
not  known  who  she  was.

II  Daphnis.']  — Ver.  732.  He  was  a  Sicilian,  the  son  of  Mercury,  and
the  inventor  of  Bucolic  poetry.

13  Pylades.] — Ver.  745.  Hermione  was  the  wife  of  Orestes,  the  friend
of  Pylades.


B.  im  757—772.]  OE,  THE AET OE LOYE.  407

everything ;  one  suits  the  vine,  another  the  olive  ;  in  this,
corn  springs  up  vigorously.  There  are  as  many  characters
in  these  various  dispositions,  as  there  are  forms  in  the  world  ;
the  man  that  is  wise,  will  adapt  himself  to  these  innumerable
characters.  And  as  at  one  moment  Proteus  will  make  him-
self flow  in  running  water ;  and  now  will  be  a  Hon,  now  a
tree,  now  a  shaggy  goat.  These  fish  are  taken  with  a  dart,13
those  with  hooks  ;  these  the  encircling  nets  draw  up,  the  rope
being  extended.  And  let  no  one  method  be  adopted  by  you
for  all  years.  The  aged  hind  will  espy  from  a  greater  distance
your  contrivances.  Should  you  seem  learned  to  the  ignorant,
or  forward  to  the  bashful,  she  will  at  once  distrust  herself,
now  apprehensive.  Thence  it  happens,  that  she  who  has
dreaded  to  trust  herself  to  the  well-bred  man,  often  falls  into
the  embrace  of  some  worthless  inferior.

A  part  remains  of  the  task  which  I  have  undertaken,  a  part
is  completed ;  here  let  the  anchor,  thrown  out,  hold  fast  my
bark.

13  With  a  dart.'] — Ver.  763.  It  appears  by  this,  that  it  was  the  custom
to  take  fish  by  striking  them  with  a  javelin.  Salmon  are  sometimes  caught
in  a  similar  manner  at  the  present  day.


BOOK  THE  SECOND.


Sing,  "Io  Paean;"1  and  "Io  Paean"  twice  sing;  the  prey
that  was  sought  has  fallen  into  our  toils.  Let  the  joyous  lover
present  my  fines  with  the  verdant  palm;  to  Hesiod  the  Ascraean
and  to  Homer  the  Maeonian  old  man  shall  I  be  preferred.
Such  did  the  stranger  son  of  Priam  set  his  whitening  sails
from  the  armed  Amy  else,2  together  with  the  ravished  wife.
Such  was  he  who  bore  thee,  Hippodamia,  in  his  victorious
chariot,  carried  by  the  wheels  ot  the  stranger.  Why  hasten
then,  young  man  ?  Thy  ship  is  sailing  in  the  midst  of  the
waves  ;  and  far  distant  is  the  harbour  for  which  I  make.  It
is  not  enough,  me  your  Poet,  for  the  fair  to  be  gained  by  you.
Through  my  skill  has  she  been  acquired ;  through  my  skill
must  she  be  retained.  'Tis  no  less  merit  to  keep  what  is
acquired,  than  to  gain  it.  In  the  former  there  is  some  chance  ;
in  the  latter  will  be  a  work  of  art.

Now,  if  ever,  Boy  Cupid  and  Cytherea,  be  propitious  to  me :
now,  Erato  ;3  for  thou  hast  a  name  from  Love.  Great  attempts
do  I  contemplate  ;  to  tell  by  what  means  Love  can  be  arrested,
the  Boy  that  wanders  over  the  world  so  wide,  He  is  both  in-
constant, and  he  has  two  wings  with  which  to  fly.  'Tis  an
arduous  task  to  impose  laws  on  these.

Minos  had  obstructed  all  means  of  escape  to  the  stranger.
He  discovered  a  bold  path4  with  his  wings. When  Daedalus

1  Sing,  'Io  Pean.'~\ — Ver.  1.  This  was  the  usual  cry  of  the  hunters,
who  thus  addressed  Apollo,  the  God  of  the  chase,  when  the  prey  had  heen
captured  in  the  toils. See  the  Metamorphoses,  Book  iv.  1.  513.

2  Amycl(e.~\ — Ver.  5.  A  town  of  Laconia.  See  the  Metamorphoses,
Book  x.  1.  219,  and  the  Note.

3  Erato.} — Ver.  16.  He  addresses  himself  to  this  Muse,  as  her  name
was  derived  from  the  Greek  lowg,  l  love.'  It  has  been  suggested  that  he
had  another  reason  for  addressing  her,  as  she  was  thought  to  take  pleasure
in  warfare,  a  state  which  sometimes,  by  way  of  variety,  exists  between
lovers.

4  A  hold  path.']  — Ver.  22.  This  story  is  again  related  in  the  Eighth
Book  of  the  Metamorphoses.  J


B.  II.  24—58.] AES  AMATOEIA  ;  OE,  THE  AET  OF  LOYE. 409

had  enclosed  the  man  half-btdl,  and  the  hull  half-man,  that
was  conceived  in  the  criminality  of  his  mother ;  he  said,
'*  Most  just  Minos,  let  there  be  a  termination  of  my  exile ;
and  let  my  paternal  land  receive  my  ashes.  And  since,
harassed  by  the  cruel  Destinies,  I  cannot  live  in  my  country,
let  me  be  enabled  to  die.  If  the  merits  of  an  old  man  are
but  small,  grant  a  return  to  this  boy ;  if  thou  art  unwilling
to  favour  the  boy,  then  favour  the  old  man."  This  he  said  :
but  both  this  and  many  more  things  he  might  have  said ;  the
other  did  not  permit  a  return  to  the  hero.  Soon  as  he  saw
this,  he  said,  "  Now,  0  now,  Daedalus,  thou  hast  a  subject,
upon  which  thou  mayst  prove  ingenious.  Lo  !  Minos  pos-
sesses the  land,  and  he  possesses  the  ocean ;  neither  earth  nor
water  is  open  for  our  escape  ;  there  remains  a  path  through  the
heavens ;  through  the  heavens  will  we  attempt  to  go.  Jupiter
on  high,  grant  pardon  to  my  design.  I  do  not  aim  to  reach
the  starry  abodes  ;  there  is  no  way  but  this  one,  by  which  I
may  escape  the  tyrant.  Should  a  road  through  Styx  be
granted ;  then  we  will  swim  through  the  Stygian  waves ;
let  the  laws  of  nature  be  changed  by  me."  Misfortunes  often
sharpen  the  genius  ;  who  could  have  ever  believed,  that  a
mortal  could  attempt  the  paths  of  the  air  ?

He  arranges  swift  feathers  in  order,  like  oars,5  and  connects
the  light  work  with  fastenings  of  thread ;  the  lower  part,  too,
is  bound  together  with  wax,  melted  by  the  fire  ;  and  now  the
work  of  the  new  contrivance  is  finished.  The  smiling  boy
handles  both  the  wax  and  the  feathers,  not  knowing  that
these  instruments  are  prepared  for  his  own  shoulders.  To
him  his  father  says  :  "  With  these  ships  must  we  reach  our
native  land  ;  by  these  means  must  we  escape  from  Minos.
The  air  Minos  could  not,  all  else  he  has,  shut  against  us.
Cleave  the  air,  which  still  thou  mayst,  with  these  my  inven-
tions. But  neither  the  virgin  of  Tegesea,  nor  the  sword-
bearing  Orion,6  the  companion  of  Bootes,  will  have  to  be  be-
held by  thee.  Follow  me  with  the  wings  given  to  thee  :  I
will  go  before  on  the  way. Be  it  thy  care  to  follow ;  me  thy

5  Like  oars.'] — Ver.  45.  He  aptly  compares  the  arrangement  of  the
main  feathers  of  a  wing  to  a  row  of  oars.

6  Orion.']  — Ver.  56.  So  in  the  Metamorphoses,  Book  v.  1.  206,  he
says  to  his  son  Icarus,  '  Fly  between  both  :  and  I  bid  thee  neither  to  look
at  Bootes,  nor  Helice,  nor  the  drawn  sword  of  Orion.'


410  AES AMATOEIA  ;  [b.  II.  58— 90.

leader,  thou  wilt  be  safe.  But  if  we  shall  go  through  the  air
of  the  heavens,  the  sun  close  to  us,  the  wax  will  not  be  able
to  endure  the  heat.  If  we  shall  wave  our  wings  below,  the
sea  near  to  us,  the  fluttering  feathers  will  be  wet  with  the
ocean  spray.  Fly  between  them  both;  dread,  too,  the  winds,
my  son ;  and  whichever  way  the  breezes  shall  blow,  set  thy
prospering  sails."

While  he  thus  advises  ;  he  fits  his  work  on  to  the  boy,  and
shows  how  it  is  to  be  moved;  just  as  their  mother  teaches  the
helpless  birds.  Then  he  places  upon  his  shoulders  the  wings
made  for  himself;  and  with  timidity  he  poises  his  body  along
this  new  track.  And  now  about  to  fly,  he  gives  kisses  to  his
little  son  ;  and  the  cheeks  of  the  father  do  not  withhold  their
tears.  There  is  a  hill,  less  than  a  mountain,  more  lofty  than
the  level  plain  ;  hence  are  their  two  bodies  entrusted  to  their
mournful  flight.  Daedalus  both  moves  his  own  wings  himself,
and  looks  back  on  those  of  his  son  ;  and  he  ever  keeps  on  his
own  course.  And  now  this  unusual  path  delights  him,  and,
fear  laid  aside,  Icarus  flies  more  courageously  with  emboldened
skill.  A  person  sees  them,  while  he  is  angling 7  for  fish  with
his  quivering  rod,  and  his  right  hand  desists  from  the  work
he  has  commenced.  Now  Samos  and  Naxos  had  been  left  be-
hind, on  the  left  hand,  and  Paros,  and  Delos  beloved  by  the
Clarian  God.8  Lebynthos  was  to  the  right,  and  Calymne 9
shaded  with  its  woods,  and  Astypalsea,10  surrounded  with  its
fishy  shallows  ;  when  the  boy,  too  venturesome  in  his  incon-
siderate daring,  took  a  higher  flight,  and  forsook  his  guide.

The  fastenings  give  way ;  and  the  wax  melts,  the  Divinity
being  so  near';  and  his  arms,  when  moved,  no  longer  catch  the
light  breeze.  Alarmed,  he  looks  down  upon  the  sea  from
the  lofty  heavens ;  darkness,  arising  from  trembling  appre-
hension, comes  over  his  eyes.  The  wax  has  now  melted  ;  he
waves  his  bare  arms,  and  he  trembles,  and  has  no  means

1  Is  angling.] — Ver.  77.  There  is  a  similar  passage  in  the  Metamor-
phoses, 1.  216.

8  The  Clarian  God.]— Yer.  80.  See  the  Fasti,  Book  i.  1.  20,  and  the
Note.

9  And  Calymne.] — Ver.  81.  These  places  are  mentioned  in  the  cor-
responding passage  in  the  Metamorphoses,  Book  viii.  1.  222.

10  Astypaloea.] — Ver.  82.  This  was  an  isle  in  the  group  of  the  Spo-
rades,  between  Crete  and  the  Cyclades.  It  contained  but  one  city,  and
was  long  and  narrow,  and  of  rugged  appearance.


B.  II.  90 — 119.]  OE, THE AST OF LOYE.  411

whereby  to  be  supported.  Downward  befalls;  and  as  he
falls,  he  cries,  "Father!  0  father!  lam  undone !"  As  he
spoke,  the  azure  waves  closed  his  mouth.  But  the  unhappy
father,  a  father  now  no  longer,  cried  aloud,  "  Icarus,  where
art  thou  ?  Or  under  what  part  of  the  sky  dost  thou  fly  ?"
"  Icarus,"  again  he  cried  aloud ;  his  feathers  he  beheld  in  the
waves. The  dry  land  covers  his  bones ;  the  sea  retains  his  name.

Minos  could  not  restrain  the  wings  of  a  mortal ;  I  myself
am  attempting  to  arrest  a  winged  Divinity.  If  any  one  has
recourse  to  the  Hsemonian  arts,  and  gives  that  which  he  has
torn  from  the  forehead  of  the  young  horse,11  he  is  mistaken.
The  herbs  of  Medea  will  not  cause  love  to  endure ;  nor  yet  the
Marsian  spells12  mingled  with  the  magic  notes.  The  Phasian
damsel  would  have  retained  the  son  of  iEson,  Circe  Ulysses,  if
love  could  only  have  been  preserved  through  incantations.  Phil-
tres, too,  causing  paleness,13  are  of  no  use  when  administered
to  the  fair.  Philtres  injure  the  intellect,  and  have  a  maddening
effect.  Afar  be  all  criminal  attempts;  to  be  loved,  be  worthy  to
be  loved;  a  property  which  comeliness,  or  beauty  alone,  will  not
confer  upon  you.  Though  you  should  be  Nireus,14  bepraised  by
ancient  Homer,  and  the  charming  Hylas,15  carried  off  by  the  cri-
minality of  the  Naiads ;  that  you  may  retain  your  mistress,  and
not  have  to  wonder  that  you  are  deserted,  add  the  endowments
of  the  mind  to  the  advantages  of  the  person.  Beauty  is  a  fleet-
ing advantage ;  and  the  more  it  increases  in  years,  the  less  it
becomes,  and,  itself,  is  consumed  by  length  of  time.

Neither  the  violets  nor  the  opening  lilies  bloom  for  ever ;
and,  the  roses  lost,  the  thorny  bush  is  prickly  left  behind.
And,  handsome  man,  soon  shall  come  to  you  the  hoary  locks ;
soon  shall  come  the  wrinkles,  to  furrow  your  body  over.  Now
form  a  disposition  which  may  be  lasting,  and  add  it  to  your

11  The  young  horse."] — Ver.  100.  See  the  Araores,  Book  i.  El.  yiii.
1.  8,  and  the  Note.

12  The  Marsian  spells .] — Ver.  102.  The  '  nzenia'  was  a  mournful  dirge
or  chaunt  uttered  by  the  sorcerer  in  his  incantations.  On  the  Marsi,  see
the  Sixth  Book  of  the  Fasti,  1.  142,  and  the  Note  to  the  passage.

13  Causing  paleness.'] — Ver.  105.  Philtres  were  noxious  potions,  made
of  venomous  or  stimulating  ingredients,  prescribed  as  a  means  of  gaining
the  affections  of  the  person  to  whom  they  were  administered.

14  Nireus.] — Ver.  109.  See  the  Pontic  Epistles,  Book  iv.  Ep.  xiii.
1.  16,  and  the  Note  to  the  passage.

15  Charming  Hylas.]— Ver.  110. See  the  Tristia,  Book  ii.  1.  406.


412  AES  AMATOftfA;  [b.  ii.  119— 150.

beauty;  that  alone  endures  to  the  closing  pile.  And  be  it  no
light  care  to  cultivate  the  mind  with  the  liberal  arts,  and  to
learn  thoroughly  the  two  languages,  the  Latin  and  the  Greek.
Ulysses  was  not  handsome,  but  he  was  fluent ;  and  yet  with
love  he  racked  the  ocean  Goddesses.16  Ah !  how  oft  did  Calypso
grieve  at  his  hastening  to  depart,  and  declare  that  the  waves
were  not  favorable  to  his  oars  !  Again  and  again  did  she  en-
quire into  the  catastrophe  of  Troy.  Often  in  another  manner
was  he  wont  to  repeat  the  same  thing.  On  the  shore  they
were  standing ;  even  there  did  the  beauteous  Calypso  enquire
about  the  blood-stained  death  of  the  Odrysian  chief.

With  a  little  stick,  for  by  chance  he  was  holding  a  stick,  he
depicted  on  the  firm  shore  the  subject  on  which  she  was  en-
quiring. "This  is  Troy,"  said  he  ;  and  the  walls  he  drew  on
the  shore  ;  "  This  must  be  Simois  for  thee,  and  suppose  these
to  be  my  tents.  There  was  a  plain,"  and  here  he  drew  the
plain,  "which  we  moistened  with  the  blood  of  Dolon,17  while,
as  a  spy,  he  was  longing  for  the  Heemonian  horses.18  There
were  the  tents  of  the  Sithonian  Rhesus  ;  in  this  direction  was
I  borne  back  again  by  the  captured  steeds."  And  many
other  things  was  he  depicting,  when  the  waves  suddenly  carried
off  both  Pergamus  and  the  tents  of  Rhesus  together  with
their  chief.  Then  the  Goddess  said,  "  Dost  thou  behold  how
famous  names  these  waves  have  swept  away,  which  thou  dost
trust  will  be  favorable  to  thee  about  to  depart  ?"

Come  then,  with  hesitation,  feel  confidence  in  beauty  so
deceiving,  whoever  you  are  ;  or  else  possess  something  of  more
value  than  comeliness.  A  beseeming  courtesy  especially  enlists
the  feelings ;  rudeness  and  harsh  language  promote  hatred.
We  dislike  the  hawk,  because  it  is  always  living  in  warfare ;
the  wolves  too,  that  are  wont  to  rush  upon  the  startled  flocks.
But  the  swallow,  because  it  is  gentle,  is  exempt  from  the  snares
of  men;  and  theChaonian  bird19  has  the  turrets  for  it  to  inhabit.

16  Ocean  Goddesses.] — Ver.  124.  Calypso  was  really  the  only  sea
Goddess  that  was  enamoured  of  Ulysses. Circe  was  not  a  sea  Goddess.

17  Blood  of  Dolon.] — Ver.  135.  See  the  Metamorphoses,  Book  xiii.
line  244.

18  Heemonian  horses.] — Ver.  136. The  steeds  of  Achilles.

19  The  Chaonian  bird.]— Ver.  150.  Chaonia  was  a  district  of  Epirus,
said  to  have  been  so  called  from  Chaon,  a  Trojan.  Dodona  was  in  Epirus,
and  in  its  forests  were  said  to  be  doves  that  had  the  gift  of  prophecy.  See
the  Translation  of  the  Metamorphoses,  pp.  467-8.


B.  II.  151— 185.]  OE, THE AET OF LOVE.  413

Afar  be  all  strife  and  contentions  of  the  abusive  tongue  ;  with
sweet  words  must  gentle  love  be  cherished.  With  strife  let
both  wives  persecute  their  husbands,  and  husbands  their  wives ;
and,  each  in  their  turn,  let  them  ever  be  thinking  that  they
must  resort  to  law.20  This  is  the  part  of  wives  ;  strife  is  the
dowry  of  the  wife.  Let  the  mistress  ever  hear  the  accents
that  she  longs  for.  At  the  bidding  of  no  law  have  you  come
to  live  together  ;  in  your  case  'tis  love  that  performs  the  duties
of  the  law.  Bring  soft  caresses,  and  words  that  delight  the
ear,  that  she  may  ever  be  joyous  at  your  approach.

I  do  not  come  as  the  instructor  of  the  wealthy  in  Love  ;  he
who  makes  presents  has  no  need  of  my  experience.  He  who
says,  whenever  he  pleases,  "Accept  this,"  has  a  genius  of  his
own.  To  him  do  I  yield:  he  has  greater  attractions  than
have  any  discoveries  of  mine.  I  am  the  instructor  of  the  poor,
because,  as  a  poor  man,  I  have  been  in  love.  When  I  could
not  give  presents,  I  gave  verses.21  Let  the  poor  man  love  with
caution,  let  the  poor  man  stand  in  fear  of  bad  language,  and  let
him  put  up  with  many  a  thing,  not  to  be  endured  by  the  rich.
I  remember  that  once,  when  in  a  rage,  I  disarranged  the  hair
of  my  mistress;  of  how  many  a  day  did  that  anger  deprive
me  !  I  do  not  think  I  did,  and  I  did  not  see  that  I  had,
torn  her  tunic,  but  she  said  so,  and  at  my  cost  it  was  replaced.
But  you  who  are  wise,  avoid  the  errors  of  your  instructor ;
and  stand  in  awe  of  the  punishment  of  my  transgressions.

Let  battles  be  with  the  Parthians,  but  be  there  peace  with
your  refined  mistress ;  mirth  too,  and  whatever  besides
contains  a  reason  for  love.  If  she  is  not  sufficiently  kind  or
affable  to  you  her  lover ;  have  patience,  and  bear  it ;  after
a  time  she  will  be  softened.  By  giving  way  the  supple  branch
is  bent  from  the  tree  ;  if  you  make  trial  of  your  strength,
you  break  it.  By  giving  way  the  waves  are  swam  across  ;
but  you  cannot  overcome  the  stream  if  you  swim  against  the
fiood  which  the  tide  carries  down.  'Tis  yielding  that  subdues
the  tigers  and  the  Numidian  lions.  By  degrees  only  does  the
bull  submit  to  the  rustic  plough. What  was  there  more  coy

20  Resort  to  law."] — Ver.  151.  He  means  to  say  'let  man  and  wife  be
always  thinking  about  resorting  to  law  to  procure  a  divorce.'

21  I  gave  verses.] — Ver.  166.  He  intends  a  pun  here.  'Verba  dare'
is  '  to  deceive,'  but  literally  it  means  '  to  give  words.'  See  the  Amores,
Book  i.  EL  viii.  1.  57.


4 1 4  AES  AMATOEIA ;  [B.  „.  185-205.

than  Atalanta  of  Nonacris  ?22  Yet,  untamed  as  she  was,  she
yielded  to  the  deserving  qualities  of  a  man.  They  say  that
many  a  time,  beneath  the  trees,  Milanion  wept  at  his  mishaps,
and  the  unkind  conduct  of  the  fair  one.  Full  oft  on  his  neck,
as  ordered,  did  he  bear  the  treacherous  toils ;  full  oft  with  his
cruel  spear  did  he  transfix  the  savage  boars.  Wounded,  too,
he  experienced  the  stretched  bow  of  Hylaeus  ;23  but  yet  there
was  another  bow  still  more  felt  than  this.

I  do  not  bid  you,  in  arms,  to  climb  the  woods  of  Maenalus,
and  I  do  not  bid  you  to  carry  the  toils  upon  your  neck.  Nor
yet  do  I  bid  you  to  expose  your  breast  to  the  discharged  arrows.
The  requirements  of  my  skill  will  be  but  light  to  the  careful
man.  Yield  to  her  when  opposing;  by  yielding,  you  will
come  off  victorious.  Only  take  care  to  perform  the  part  which
she  shall  bid  you.  What  she  blames,  do  you  blame  ;  whatever
she  approves,  do  you  approve ;  what  she  says,  do  you  say ;  what
she  denies,  do  you  deny.  Does  she  smile,  do  you  smile  ;  if
she  weeps,  do  you  remember  to  weep.  Let  her  prescribe  the
law  for  the  regulation  of  your  features.  If  she  plays,  and
throws  the  ivory  cubes24  with  her  hand,  do  you  throw  unsuc-
cessfully, do  you  make  bad  moves25  to  the  throws;  or  if  you  are
throwing26  the  dice,  let  not  the  penalty  attend  upon  her  losing ;

22  Atalanta  of  Nonacris. .] — Ver.  185.  See  the  Amores,  Book  iii.  El.  ii.
1.  29,  and  the  Note.

23  Bow  of' Hylaeus.'] — Ver.  191.  Hylaeus  and  Rhaecus  were  Centaurs,
who  were  pierced  by  Atalanta  with  her  arrows,  for  making  an  attempt  on
her  chastity. He  alludes  to  the  bow  of  Cupid  in  the  next  line.

24  The  ivory  cubes.]— Vex.  203.'  He  alludes  to  throws  of  the  '  tali '  and
'tesserae/  which  were  different  kinds  of  dice.  See  the  Note  to  1.  471  of
the  Second  Book  of  the  Tristia.  In  this  line  he  seems  to  mean  the  '  tes-
serae,' which  were  similar  to  our  dice,  while  the  '  tali,'  which  he  next
mentions,  had  only  four  flat  surfaces,  being  made  in-  imitation  of  the
knuckle-bones  of  animals,  and  having  two  sides  uneven  and  rounded.  The
dice  were  thrown  on  a  table,  made  for  the  purpose,  with  an  elevated  rim.
Some  throws,  like  our  doublets,  are  supposed  to  have  counted  for  more
than  the  number  turned  up. '  The  most  fortunate  throw  was  called '  Venus,'
or  '  Venereus  jactus' ;  it  is  thought  to  have  consisted  of  a  combination,
making  fourteen,  the  dice  presenting  different  numbers.  Games  with  dice
were  only  sanctioned  by  law  as  a  pastime  during  meals.

25  Make  bad  moves'] — Ver.  204.  '  Dare  jacta '  means  '  to  move  the
throws,'  in  allusion  to  the  game  of  '  duodecim  scripta,'  or  'twelve  points,'
which  was  played  with  counters  moved  according  to  the  throws  of  the
dice,  probably  in  a  manner  not  unlike  our  game  of  backgammon.  The
board  was  marked  with  twelve  lines,  on  which  the  pieces  moved.

26  Or  if  you  are  throwing.] — Ver.  205. By  the  use  of  the  word  '  seu,'


B.  ii.  206—217.]  OE, THE AET OP LOVE.  415

take  care  that  losing  throws  often  befall  yourself.  If  your
piece  is  moving  at  the  game  that  imitates27  the  tactics  of  war,
take  care  that  your  man  falls  before  his  enemy  of  glass.
Do  you  yourself  hold  the  screen28  stretched  out  by  its  ribs;  do
you  make  room  in  the  crowd  the  way  that  she  is  going.  And
do  not  delay  to  place  the  footstool  before  the  tasteful,  couch;29
and  take  off  or  put  on  the  sandals  for  her  delicate  feet.
Often,  too,  must  the  hand  of  your  mistress,  when  cold,  be
made  warm  in  your  bosom,  though  you  yourself  should  shiver
in  consequence.  And  think  it  no  disgrace  (although  it  should
be  a  disgrace  to  you,  still  it  will  give  pleasure),  to  hold  the
looking-glass 30  with  the  hand  of  a  free-born  man.

He  who,  by  killing  the  monsters  of  his  wearied  step-mother,

1  or,'  we  must  suppose  that  he  has,  under  the  word  '  numeric  alluded  to
the  game  with  the  '  tesserae,'  or  six-sided  dice.

27  The  game  that  imitates.'] — Ver.  207.  He  here  alludes  to  the  '  ludus
latrunculorum,'  literally  '  the  game  of  theft,'  which  is  supposed  to  have
been  somewhat  similar  to  our  chess.  He  refers  to  its  name  in  the  words,
'  latrocinii  sub  imagine.'  The  game  was  supposed  to  imitate  the  furtive
stratagems  of  warfare  :  hence  the  men,  which  were  usually  styled  '  calculi,'
were  also  called  by  the  name  of  '  lat'rones,'  '  latrunculi,'  '  milites,'  'bella-
tores,'  '  thieves,'  '  little  thieves,'  *  soldiers,1  '  warriors.'  As  we  see  by  the
next  line,  they  were  usually  made  of  glass,  though  sometimes  more  costly
materials  were  employed.  The  skill  of  this  game  consisted  either  in  tak-
ing the  pieces  of  .the  adversary,  or  rendering  them  unable  to  move.  The
first  was  done  when  the  adversary's  piece  was  brought  by  the  other  be-
tween two  of  his  own.  See  the  Tristia,  Bookii.  1. 477.  The  second  took
place  when  the  pieces  were  '  ligati,'  or  '  ad  incitas  redacti,'  brought  upon
the  last  line  and  unable  to  move.  White  and  red  are  supposed  to  have
been  the  colour  of  the  men.  This  game  was  much  played  by  the  Roman
ladies  and  nobles.

28  Hold  the  screen.'] — Ver.  209.  The  ancients  used  '  umbracula,'  or
screens  against  the  weather  (resembling  our  umbrellas),  which  the  Greeks
called  GKiadia.  They  were  used  generally  for  the  same  purposes  as  our
parasols,  a  protection  against  the  heat  of  the  sun.  They  seem  not  to
have  been  in  general  carried  by  the  ladies  themselves,  but  by  female  slaves,
who  held  them  over  their  mistresses.  See  the  Fasti,  Book  ii.  1.  209.
These  screens,  or  umbrellas,  were  much  used  by  the  Roman  ladies  in  the
amphitheatre,  to  protect  them  from  sun  and  rain,  when  the  '  velarium,'  or
awning,  was  not  extended.

29  Tasteful  couch.] — Ver.  211.  This  was  probably  the  '  triclinium '  on
which  they  reposed  at  meals.  The  shoes  were  taken  off  before  reclining
on  it. Female  slaves  did  this  office  for  the  ladies,  and  males  for  the  men.

30  Looking-glass.] — Ver.  216.  These  were  generally  held  by  female
slaves,  when  used  by  their  mistresses.  See  the  Metamorphoses,  Book  iv.
L  349,  and  the  Note.


416  AES AMATOEIA;  [b.  n.  213— 245.

earned  those  heavens  which  before  he  had  supported,  is  be-
lieved, amid  the  Ionian  girls,  to  have  held  the  work-basket,31
and  to  have  wrought  the  rough  wool.  The  Tirynthian  hero
was  obedient  to  the  commands  of  his  mistress.  Go  then,  and
hesitate  to  endure  what  he  submitted  to.  When  bidden  to
come  to  the  Forum,  take  care  always  to  be  there  before  the
appointed  time  ;  and  do  not  go  away  until  a  late  hour.  Does
she  appoint  to  meet  you  at  any  place  ;  put  off  everything  else  :
run  quickly,  and  let  not  the  crowd  stop  your  purposed  route.
Is  she  returning  home  at  night,  after  having  been  at  a  feast ;
then,  too,  if  she  calls,  come  to  her  as  though  a  servant.32  If
you  are  in  the  country  and  she  says,  "  Come,"  (love  hates  the
tardy)  if  a  vehicle 33  is  not  at  hand,  go  your  journey  on  foot.
Let  neither  bad  weather  nor  the  parching  Dog-star  detain  you,
nor  the  road  made  white  with  the  snow  that  lies  there.

Love  is  a  kind  of  warfare  ;  cowards,  avaunt !  These  are
not  the  standards  to  be  defended  by  timid  men.  In  this  ten-
der warfare,  night,  and  wintry  storms,  and  long  journies,  and
cruel  pain,  and  every  kind  of  toil,  have  their  part.  Many  a  time
will  you  have  to  endure  the  rain  pouring  from  the  clouds  of
heaven  ;  cold  and  on  the  bare  ground  full  oft  will  you  lie.
Cynthius34  is  said  to  have  fed  the  cows  of  Admetus  of  Pherse,
and  to  have  lived  in  an  humble  cottage.  What  was  becoming
to  Phoebus,  to  whom  is  it  not  becoming  ?  Away  with  all  con-
ceit, whoever  you  are,  who  have  a  care  for  a  lasting  passion.
If  access  is  denied  you  by  a  safe  and  smooth  path  ;  and  if  her
door  shall  be  fastened  by  the  bar  put  up  ;  then,  do  you  slip
straight  down  through  the open  roof:35  let  the  high  win-

31  Held  the  worJc-iasJcet.] — Ver.  219.  Hercules,  who  killed  the  ser-
pents sent  by  Juno,  is  reproached  for  doing  this,  by  Deianira  in  her
Epistle.

32  As  though  a  servant.'] — Ver.  228.  He  is  to  be  ready,  if  his  mistress
goes  to  a  party,  to  act  the  part  of  the  slave,  who  was  called  '  adversitor,'
whose  duty  it  was  to  escort  his  master  home  in  the  evening,  if  it  was
dark,  with  a  lighted  torch.

33  A  vehicle.'] — Ver.  230.  '  Rota,'  a  wheel,  is,  by  Synecdoche,  used  to
signify  '  a  vehicle.'

34  Cynthius.] — Ver.  240.  See  the  Note  to  line  51,  of  the  Epistle  from
CEnone  to  Paris.

35  Through  the  open  roof.] — Ver.  245.  He  gives  a  somewhat  hazardous
piece  of  advice  here ;  as  he  instructs  him  to  obtain  admission  by  climbing
up  the  wall,  and  getting  in  at  the  skylight,  which  extended  over  the


b.  ii.  246— 263.] OR, THE  ART  OF  LOVE.  417

dow,36  too,  present  a  secret  passage.  She  will  be  pleased  when
she  knows  that  she  has  proved  the  cause  of  risk  to  you.  This
will  be  to  your  mistress  a  pledge  of  your  unvarying  love.  Full
oft,  Leander,  couldst  thou  have  done  without  thy  mistress  ;
that  she  might  know  thy  passion,  thou  didst  swim  across.

And  be  not  ashamed  to  make  her  handmaids,  as  each  one  is
superior  in  rank,  nor  yet  her  male  servants,  entirely  your  own.
Salute  them  each  by  name,  there  will  be  nothing  thrown  away  :
press  their  humble  hands,  proud  lover,  with  your  own.  More-
over, (the  expense  is  but  trifling)  give  to  the  servant  who  asks,
some  little  present  from  your  means.  Make  a  present,  too,
to  the  handmaid,  on  the  day  on  which37  the  Gallic  army,  de-
ceived by  the  garments  of  the  matrons,  received  retribu-
tion. Follow  my  advice,  and  make  the  lower  classes38  your
own ;  in  that  number  let  there  always  be  the  porter,  and  him
who  lies  before  the  door  of  her  chamber.  And  I  do  not  bid
you  present  to  your  mistress  any  costly  gift ;  give  her
moderate  ones,  but,  in  your  discrimination,  well  selected  from

'  atrium,'  or  '  court,'  a  room  which  occupied  the  middle  of  the  house.  The
Roman  houses  had,  in  general,  but  one  story  over  the  ground-floor.

36  The  high  window!] — Ver.  246.  This  passage  may  be  illustrated  by
the  Note  to  1.  752  of  Book  xiv.  of  the  Metamorphoses.

37  Day  on  which.] — Ver.  257.  He  alluded  to  a  festival  celebrated  by
the  servants,  on  the  Caprotine  Nones,  the  seventh  of  July,  when  they
sacrificed  to  '  Juno  Caprotina.'  Macrobius  says  that  the'  servants  sacri-
ficed to  Juno  under  a  wild  fig-tree  (called  '  caprificus'),  in  memory  of  the
service  done  by  the  female  slaves,  in  exposing  themselves  to  the  lust  of
the  enemy,  for  the  public  welfare.  The  Gauls  being  driven  from  the  city,
the  neighbouring  nations  chose  the  Dictator  of  the  Fidenates  for  their
chief,  and,  marching  to  Rome,  demanded  of  the  Senate,  that  if  they  would
save  their  city,  they  should  send  out  to  them  their  wives  and  daughters.
The  Senate,  knowing  their  own  weakness,  were  much  perplexed,  when  a
handmaid,  named  '  Tutela,'  or  '  Philotis,'  offered,  with  some  others,  to  go
out  to  the  enemy  in  disguise.  Being,  accordingly,  dressed  like  free  women,
they  repaired  in  tears  to  the  camp  of  the  enemy.  They  soon  induced
their  new  acquaintances  to  drink,  on  the  pretence  that  they  were  bound
to  consider  the  day  as  a  festival ;  and  when  intoxicated,  a  signal  was  given
from  a  fig-tree  near,  that  the  Romans  should  fall  on  them.  The  camp  of
the  enemy  was  assailed,  and  most  of  them  were  slain.  In  return  for  their
service,  the  female  slaves  were  made  free,  and  received  marriage  portions
at  the  public  expense.  Another  account,  agreeing  with  the  present  pas-
sage, says,  that  the  Gauls  were  the  enemy  who  made  the  demand,  and  that
Retana  was  the  name  of  the  female  slave.

38  The  lower  classes.'] — Ver.  259.  Witness  his  own  appeals  in  the
Amores  to  Nape,  Cypassis,  Bagoiis,  and  the  porter.

E  E


4 18  AES A.MA.TOEIA;  [b.  n.  263— 286.

those  that  are  moderate.  "While  the  country  is  abundantly-
rich  in  produce,  while  the  branches  are  bending  beneath  their
load,  let  the  boy  bring  your  gifts  from  the  country  in  his
basket.  You  may  say  that  they  have  been  sent  by  you  from
your  suburban  retreat,  although  they  may  have  been  bought
even  in  the  Sacred  Street.39  Let  him  carry  either  grapes,  or
what  Amaryllis  was  so  fond  of  ;40  but,  at  the  present  day,  she
is  fond  of  chesnuts  no  longer.  And,  besides,  both  with  a
thrush  and  a  pigeon,41  sent  as  a  present,  you  may  show  how
attentive  you  are  to  your  mistress.  By  these  means42  are  the
expectations  of  death,  and  solitary  old  age,  disgracefully  made
matter  of  purchase.  Oh !  may  they  perish  through  whom
gifts  promote  criminal  objects  !

Why  should  I  recommend  you  to  send  tender  lines  as  well?
Alas  !  poetry  does  not43  gain  much  honour.  Verses  are  praised:
but  'tis  costly  gifts  that  are  sought.  If  he  is  only  rich,44  a  very
barbarian  is  pleasing.  Truly  is  this  the  golden  age ;  the
greatest  honours  accrue  through  gold ;  love  is  purchased
with  gold.  Though  thou  thyself,  Homer,  shouldst  come,  at-
tended by  the  Muses ;  if  thou  shouldst  bring  nothing  with
thee,  thou  wouldst  be  turned  out  of  doors.

And  yet  there  are  the  learned  fair,  a  very  limited  number ;
another  set  are  not  learned,  but  they  wish  to  be  so.  Both
kinds  may  be  praised  in  verse ;  the  reader  may  set  off  the
lines  of  whatever  quality  by  a  melodious  voice.  Indeed,  a
poem,  carefully  composed  in  their  honour,  will  be  to  these

39  In  the  Sacred  Street. ]— Ver.  266.  Presents  of  game  and  trout  very
often  follow  a  similar  devolution  at  the  present  day.

40  Amaryllis  was  so  fond  of.] — Ver.  267.  He  alludes  to  a  line  of  Virgil,
which,  doubtless,  was  then  well  known  to  all  persons  of  education.  It
occurs  in  the  Eclogues:  ' Castaneasque  nuces,  mea  quas  Amaryllis  amabat.'
'  Chesnuts,  too,  which  my  Amaryllis  was  so  fond  of.'  In  the  next  line,
he  hints  that  the  damsels  of  his  day  were  too  greedy  to  be  satisfied  with
chesnuts  only.

41  Thrush  and  a  pigeon.] — Ver.  269.  Probably  live  birds  of  the  kind
are  here  alluded  to ;  Pliny  tells  us  that  they  were  trained  to  imitate  the
human  voice.  Thrushes  were  much  esteemed  as  a  delicacy  for  the  table.
They  were  sold  tied  up  in  clusters,  in  the  shape  of  a  crown.

42  By  these  means.] — Ver.  271.  He  alludes  to  those  who  contrived  to
slip  into  dead  men's  shoes,  by  making  trifling  presents  of  niceties.  Ju-
venal inveighs  against  this  practice.

43  Poetry  does  not.] — Ver.  274.  See  the  remarks  of  Dipsas  in  the
Amores,  Book  i.  El.  viii.  1.  57.

44  Only  rich.] — Ver.  276. See  the  Amores,  Book  hi.  El.  ii.


B.  II.  286— 310.]  OK, THE AET OF LOYE.  419

or  to  those,  as  good,  perhaps,  as  a  little  present.  But  take
care  that  whatever  you  are  about  to  do  of  your  own  accord
and  consider  convenient,  your  mistress  shall  always  first  ask
that  of  you.  Has  freedom  been  promised  to  any  one  of  your
slaves  ;  still  cause  him  to  make  a  request  for  it  of  your  mis-
tress. If  you  forgive  punishment  and  cruel  fetters  to  your
slave,  let  her  be  indebted  to  you  for  what  you  were  about  to
do.  Let  the  advantage  be  your  own  ;  let  the  credit  be  given
to  your  mistress.  Suffer  no  loss  yourself,  and  let  her  act  the
part  of  the  person  in  power.

But  whosoever  you  are  who  have  a  care  to  retain  the  fair,
cause  her  to  believe  that  you  are  enchanted  with  her  beauty.
If  she  is  in  Tyrian  costume,  praise  the  dress  of  Tyrian  hue  ;45
if  she  is  in  that  of  Cos,46  consider  the  Coan  habit  as  becoming.
Is  she  arrayed  in  gold,  let  her  be  more  precious  in  your  eyes
than  gold  itself :  if  she  wears  a  dress  of  felt,47  praise  the  felt
dress  that  she  wears.  Does  she  stand  before  you  in  her  tunic,
exclaim,  "You  are  setting  me  on  fire  ;"48  but  entreat  her,  with
a  voice  of  anxiety,  to  beware  of  the  cold.  Is  the  parting  of
her  hair  nicely  arranged ;  praise  the  parting  of  it ;  has  she
curled  her  hair  by  aid  of  the  fire  :  curled  locks,  do  you  prove
the  attraction.  As  she  dances,  admire  her  arms,  her  voice  as
she  sings  ;  and  use  the  words  of  one  complaining  because  she
has  left  off.  Her  very  embraces49  you  may  commend,  on  the
points  that  please  yourself ;  and  with  murmuring  accents  you
may  signify  your  delight.  Though  she  be  more  fierce  than  the
grim  Medusa ;  to  her  lover  she  will  become  gentle  and  kind.

45  Tyrian  hue.]— Yer.  297.  See  the  Fasti,  Book  ii.  1.  107,  and  the
Note.

46  Of  Cos.]—  Ver.  298.  See  the  Epistles  of  Sabinus,  Ep.  iii.  1.  45,  and
the  Note.

47  A  dress  of  felt.] — Ver.  300.  *  Gausape,'  '  gausapa,'  or  '  gausapum,'
was  a  kind  of  thick  woolly  cloth,  which  had  a  long  nap  on  one  side.  It
was  used  to  cover  tables  and  heds,  and  as  a  protection  against  wind  and
rain.  It  was  worn  both  by  males  and  females,  and  came  into  use  among
the  Romans  about  the  time  of  Augustus.

48  You  are  setting  me  on  fire.] — Ver.  301.  Burmann  deservedly  cen-
sures the  explanation  of  '  moves  incendia,'  given  by  Crispinus,  the  Delphin
Editor, '  Vous  mourrez  de  chaud,'  '  You  will  die  of  heat,'  applying  the  ob-
servation to  the  lady,  and  not,  figuratively,  to  the  feelings  of  her  lover.

49  Her  very  embraces.] — Ver.  308.  The  common  reading  of  this  line
is  clearly  corrupt ;  probably  the  reading  is  the  one  here  adopted,  '  Et  qua
dat,  gaudia,  voce  proba.'

E  E  2


420  AKS  AMATOEIA  ;  [b.  n.  310— 341.

Only,  take  you  care  that  you  be  not  discovered  to  be  a  deceiver
in  these  expressions ;  and  by  your  looks  do  not  contradict
your  words.  If  devices  are  concealed,  they  are  of  use  ;  when
discovered,  they  cause  shame,  and  deservedlyremove  confidence
for  all  future  time.  Often,  at  the  approach  of  autumn  (when
the  year  is  most  beauteous,  and  the  filled  grape  is  growing
red  with  its  purple  juice  ;  at  the  time  when  at  one  moment
we  are  chilled  with  cold,  at  another  we  are  melted  with  heat),
through  the  varying  temperature  a  languor  takes  possession
of  the  body.  She,  indeed,  may  be  in  good  health ;  but  if,
through  illness  she  keeps  her  bed,  and,  ailing,  feels  the  bad
effects  of  the  weather,  then  let  your  love  and  affection  be
proved  to  the  fair  ;  then  sow,  that  hereafter  with  the  sickle
of  abundance  you  may  reap.  Let  no  disgust  at  her  malady,
that  renders  her  so  cross,  come  upon  you  :  by  your  hands  too,
let  whatever  she  will  permit,  be  done.  And  let  her  see  you
as  you  weep ;  and  be  not  tired  of  giving  her  kisses ;  and
with  her  parched  lips  let  her  dry  up  your  tears.  Make  many  a
vow  for  her  cure3  but  all  before  her  :  and  as  often  as  she  will
permit,  be  seeing  pleasant  visions  to  tell  her  of.  Let  the  old
woman  come,50  too,  to  purify  her  couch  and  chamber ;  and  in
her  palsied  hand  let  her  carry  before  her  the  sulphur  and  the
eggs.  In  all  these  things  there  will  be  traces  of  a  pleasing
attention ;  for  many  a  one  has  this  road  proved  a  path  to
another  man's  will.  But  still,  let  not  loathing  on  the  part  of
the  sick  fair  be  the  result  of  your  officiousness  ;  let  there  be
certain  limits  shown  in  your  careful  attentiveness.  Do  not
you  forbid  her  food,  nor  administer  the  cups  with  the  bitter
draught ;  let  your  rival  mingle  those.

But  when  you  have  gained  the  open  sea,  you  must  not  use
the  breeze  to  which  you  set  your  sails  from  off  the  shore.
While  Love  is  wandering  in  his  youth,  let  him  gain  strength  by
habit ;  if  you  nurse  him  well,  in  time  he  will  be  strong. Him

60  Let  the  old  woman  come.] — Ver.  329.  In  sickness  it  was  the  custom
to  purify  tbe  bed  and  chamber  of  the  patient,  with  sulphur  and  eggs.  It
seems  also  to  have  been  done  when  the  patient  was  pining  through  unre-
quited love.  Apulius  mentions  a  purification  by  the  priest  of  Isis,  who
uses  eggs  and  sulphur  while  holding  a  torch  and  repeating  a  prayer.  The
nurse  of  the  patient  seems  here  to  be  directed  to  perform  the  ceremony.
See  the  Fasti,  Book  ii.  1.  19,  and  Book  iv.  1.  728.  From  a  passage  of
Juvenal,  we  find  that  it  was  a  common  practice  to  purify  with  eggs  and-
sulphur,  in  the  month  of  September,


B.  II.  341— 376.]  OR, THE ART OF LOVE.  421

that  you  fear  as  a  bull,  as  a  calf  you  -were  wont  to  pat ;  the
tree  under  which  you  are  now  reclining,  was  once  a  twig.  A
river  at  its  rise  is  small,  but  it  acquires  strength  in  its  course  ;
and  where  it  runs,  it  now  receives  many  a  stream.  Make  her
become  used  to  you  ;  there  is  nothing  more  powerful  than
habit.  While  you  are  courting  her,  avoid  no  amount  of  trou-
ble. Let  her  be  always  seeing  you ;  let  her  be  always  lending
ear  to  you ;  let  both  night  and  day  show  your  countenance.
When  you  have  a  greater  confidence  that  you  may  be  missed  ;
then,  destined  to  be  her  care  when  absent,  go  away  to  a  dis-
tance. Give  yourself  some  repose ;  the  land  that  has  lain
fallow,  gives  back  in  abundance  what  has  been  entrusted  to
it ;  and  the  dry  ground  sucks  up  the  water  of  the  heavens.
Demophoon,  when  present,  inflamed  Phyllis  in  a  less  degree  ;
when  he  had  set  sail,  more  violently  did  she  burn.  The
crafty  Ulysses*  by  his  absence,  tortured  Penelope  :  far  away,
tearful  Laodamia,  was  thy  hero  of  Phylace.

But  a  short  respite  alone  is  safe ;  in  time,  cares  become
modified,  and  the  absent  love  decays  and  a  new  one  makes  its
entrance.  While  Menelaus  was  absent,  Helen,  that  she  might
not  he  alone,  was  received  at  night  into  the  warm  bosom  of
his  guest.  What  meant,  Menelaus,  this  stupidity  of  thine  ?
Thou  didst  go  away  alone  ;  under  the  same  roof  were  both
the  stranger  and  thy  wife.  And  dost  thou  entrust,  madman,
the  timid  doves  to  the  hawk  ?  Dost  thou  entrust  the  well-
filled  sheep-fold  to  the  mountain  wolf?  Helen  commits  no
sin  ;  this  paramour  of  hers  does  no  wrong  ;  he  does  what  thou,
what  any  one,  would  do.  Thou  dost  persuade  them  to  adul-
tery, by  giving  both  time  and  opportunity.  What  advice,51  but
thine  own,  has  the  fair  made  use  of?  What  is  she  to  do?
Her  husband  is  away,  and  a  guest,  no  repulsive  person,  is
present,  and  she  is  afraid  to  sleep  alone  in  an  empty  couch.
Let  the  son  of  Atreus  think  better  of  it :  I  acquit  Helen
of  criminality ;  she  made  use  of  the  opportunity  given  by  an
easy  husband.

But  neither  is  the  tawny  boar  so  fierce  in  the  midst  of  his
rage,  when  he  hurls  the  furious  dogs  with  the  lightning
shock  of  his  tusks  ;  nor  the  lioness,  when  she  is  giving  the
breast  to  her  sucking  whelps  ;  nor  the  little  viper,  when  in-

51  What  advice'] — Ver.  368.  These  attempts  at  argument  are  exhausted
by  Paris,  in  his  Epistle  to  Helen.


422  AES AMATOEIA;  [b.  II.  376— 412.

jured  by  the  heedless  foot ;  as  the  woman,  who  is  furious  on
detecting  the  rival  of  her  nuptial  couch,  and  bears  on  her  fea-
tures the  proofs  of  her  feelings.  To  the  sword  and  to  flames
(does  she  resort ;  and,  shame  laid  aside,  onward  she  is  impelled,
Its  though  struck  by  the  horns  of  the  Aonian  God.  The  bar-
barian fair  one  of  Phasis  avenged  the  fault  of  her  husband,  and
the  violated  rights  of  a  wife,  by  the  death  of  her  sons.  See,
how  another  cruel  parent  ('tis  the  swallow  that  you  behold)
has  her  breast  stained  with  blood.  'Tis  this  breaks  those  at-
tachments that  are  firmly  united,  this,  those  of  long  duration  ;
these  faults  must  then  be  guarded  against  by  cautious  men.

But  stilly  my  judgment  does  not  condemn  you  to  one  fair
alone.  The  Gods  forbid  !  hardly  can  the  married  woman  adhere
to  this.  Disport  yourself ;  but  let  your  faultiness  be  concealed
by  a  decent  stealthiness.  No  glory  must  be  sought  in  one's
own  delinquency.  And  do  you  give  no  present  of  which  the
other  may  know  ;  nor  be  there  any  stated  times  for  your  in-
triguing. And,  lest  the  fair  one  should  catch  you  in  the  retreat
so  well  known  to  her,  all  must  not  be  met  in  the  same  place
of  rendezvous.  And,  as  often  as  you  shall  be  writing,  do  you
first  examine  the  whole  of  the  tablet ;  many  a  woman  reads
more  than  what  has  been  sent  to  her.  A  slighted  passion
brandishes  the  arms  of  retribution,  and  hurls  back  the  wea-
pon, and  causes  yourself  to  complain  of  that  of  which  it  com-
plained so  lately.

So  long  as  the  son  of  Atreus  was  content  with  one  woman,
she,  too,  was  chaste  ;  through  the  fault  of  her  husband  did
she  become  culpable.  She  had  heard  how  that  Chryses,  bear-
ing in  his  hand  the  laurel  and  the  fillets,  had  not  prevailed  in
behalf  of  his  daughter.  She  had  heard,  too,  ravished  one
of  Lyrnesus,  of  thy  sorrows  ;  and  how  the  warfare  had  been
protracted  through  disgraceful  delays.  Still,  these  things  she
had  only  heard  of ;  the  daughter  of  Priam,  herself,  she  had
seen.  Thou,  the  conqueror,  wast  the  disgraced  captive  of  thy
own  captive.  Then  did  she  receive  the  son  of  Thyestes,  both
into  her  chamber  and  her  affections  ;  and  the  daughter  of  Tyn-
darus  avenged  herself  on  a  husband  so  deeply  criminal.

Your  actions,  which  you  have  studiously  concealed,  if  per-
chance any  of  them  are  discovered,  although  they  should  be
notorious,  still  do  you  always  deny  them.  On  such  occasions,
do  you  neither  be  subdued,  nor  more  kind  than  usual. That


B.  II.  412— 4$5.]  OB, THE AET OE LOVE.  423

bears  the  marks  of  a  mind  that  has  too  deeply  offended.
Still,  spare  not  any  endearments  on  your  side  ;  peace  is
entirely  centred  in  caresses  alone  ;  by  these  must  the  former
intrigue  be  disavowed.  There  are  some  who  would  recom-
mend you  to  use  injurious  herbs,  such  as  savory  ;  in  my
opinion  they  are  so  many  poisons.  Or  else,  they  mingle
pepper  with  the  seed  of  the  stinging  nettle  ;52  and  the  yellow
camomile  pounded  in  old  wine.  But  the  Goddess,  whom  the
lofty  Eryx  receives  beneath  his  shady  hill,  does  not  allow  us
to  be  impelled  in  such  manner  to  her  delights.  The  white
onion53  which  is  sent  from  the  Pelasgian  city  of  Alcathoiis,54  and
the  salacious  herbs  which  come  out  of  the  gardens,  and  eggs
may  be  eaten ;  the  honey  of  Hymettus  may  be  eaten,  and  the
nuts  which  the  pine-tree  with  its  sharp  leaves  produces.

Why,  learned  Erato,  art  thou  thus  diverging  into  the  medical
art  ?  The  inner  side  of  the  turning-place  must  be  grazed  by
my  chariot.  You,  who  just  now  were,  by  my  recommendation,
to  conceal  your  delinquencies,  change  your  course,  and,  by  my
advice,  disclose  your  intrigues.  Nor  yet  is  any  inconsistency
of  mine  to  be  censured ;  the  curving  ship  does  not  always
carry  those  on  board  with  the  same  breezes.  For  sometimes
we  run  with  the  Thracian  Boreas,  sometimes  with  the  East
wind  ;  full  oft  does  the  canvass  swell  with  the  Zephyrs,  with
the  South  wind  full  oft.  See  how,  in  the  chariot,  the  driver,  at
one  moment,  gives  the  flowing  rein,  at  another,  skilfully
checks  the  horses  in  full  career.  There  are  some,  with  whom
an  anxious  obsequiousness  is  ruinous,  and  if  there  is  no  rival
existing,  then  their  passion  waxes  faint.  The  feelings  often
run  riot  amid  prosperity ;  and  to  bear  good  fortune  with
equanimity  is  no  easy  task.  As  the  declining  fire,  its  strength
consuming  by  degrees,  itself  lies  concealed,  and  the  ashes  be-
come white  over  the  surface  of  the  fire ;  but  still,  when  sulphur
is  applied,  it  finds  the  flames  that  were  extinguished,  and  the
light  returns  which  existed  before ;  so,  when  the  feelings,
sluggish  through  repose,  and  free  from  care,  become  torpid,
by  sharp  stimulants  must  love  be  aroused. Make  her  to  be

53  Stinging '-nettle, .] — Ver.  417.  Pliny  prescribes  nettle-seed  as  a  stimu-
lating medicine,  mixed  with  linseed,  hyssop,  and  pepper.

53  White  onion.] — Ver.  421.  The  onions  of  Megara  are  praised  by
Cato,  the  agricultural  writer.

54  Alcathoiis.]  — Ver.  421. See  the  Metamorphoses,  Book  vii.  I.  443.


424  ABS  AMATOEIA ;  [B.  n.  445—479.

jealous  on  your  account,  and  rekindle  her  deadened  feelings  ;
let  her  turn  pale  at  the  proof  of  your  inconstancy.

Oh  four  times  blest,  and  so  oft,  that  it  is  not  possible
to  limit  it  to  numbers,  is  that  man,  on  whose  account  the
slighted  fair  is  in  grief!  who,  soon  as  the  charge  has  reached
her  unwilling  ears,  faints  away  :  and  both  her  voice  and  colour
leave  the  sorrowing  fair.  Would  that  I  were  he,  whose  locks
she  tears  in  her  fury ;  would  that  I  were  he,  whose  tender
cheeks  she  tears  with  her  nails  ;  whom  she  looks  upon  burst-
ing into  tears  ;  whom  she  beholds  with  scowling  eyes  ;  without
whom  she  cannot  exist ;  but  still  wishes  that  she  could.  If
you  enquire  as  to  its  duration  :  let  the  time  be  short  for  her  to
complain  of  her  injuries,  lest  her  anger  may  acquire  strength
in  the  slowly  passing  lapse  of  time.

And  now  let  her  fair  neck  be  encircled  in  your  arms  ;  and
as  she  weeps,  she  must  be  received  in  your  bosom.  Give  her
kisses  as  she  weeps  :  bestow  her  caresses  as  she  weeps.  Peace
will  ensue  :  by  this  method  alone  is  anger  appeased.  When
she  has  been  passionately  raving,  when  she  shall  seem  to  be  an
assured  enemy ;  then  seek  your  treaty  of  peace  in  caresses  ;
she  will  then  be  pacified.  For  'tis  there  that  Concord  dwells,
all  arms  laid  aside ;  'tis  in  that  spot,  believe  me,  that  the
Graces  were  born.  The  doves  which  fought  the  moment
before,  are  now  billing ;  their  cooing  has  the  meaning  of
caresses,  and  of  words.

At  first 55  there  was  a  confused  mass  of  things  without  ar-
rangement ;  and  the  stars,  the  earth,  and  the  ocean,  were  but
of  one  appearance.  Afterwards,  the  heavens  were  placed  above
the  earth ;  the  land  was  surrounded  by  the  sea,  and  the  con-
fused Chaos  was  divided  into  its  elements.  The  woods  received
the  beasts,  the  air  the  birds  as  its  possession  ;  in  the  flowing
waters,  you,  fishes  were  concealed.  At  that  time  the  human
race  wandered  in  the  solitary  woods  :  and  it  consisted  of
nothing  but  brute  force,  and  a  mind  quite  uninformed.  The
woods  were  their  houses,  grass  their  food,  and  leaves  their
beds ;  and  for  a  long  time  the  one  was  unknown  to  the
other.  Voluptuous  pleasure  is  said  to  have  been  the  first  to
soften  their  rude  dispositions ;  afterwards,  the  woman  and
the  man  settled  in  the  same  spot. What  should  they  do  ?

55  At  first.]— Ver.  467.  See  the  beginning  of  the  First  Book  of  the
Metamorphoses.


B.  II.  479—507.]  Oil, THE ART OF XOYE.  425

They  had  been  instructed  by  no  preceptor :  Venus  completed
this  delightful  task  without  any  art.  The  bird  has  an  object
to  love :  the  female  fish  finds  in  the  midst  of  the  waters  an
object  with  which  to  share  her  joys.  The  hind  follows  her
mate  ;  the  serpent  couples  with  the  serpent ;  the  bitch,  too,
consorts  with  the  dog.  The  delighted  sheep  unites  with  the
rams  the  heifer,  also,  is  pleased  with  the  bull ;  the  fiat-nosed
she-goat,  too,  receives  her  unclean  mate.56  Mares  are  driven
to  frenzy,  and  follow  the  horses,  separated  by  streams,  over
places  far  distant  from  each  other  in  situation.  Come,  then,
and  give  an  efficacious  remedy  to  the  angered  fair  ;  'tis  that
alone  that  puts  an  end  to  violent  grief.  JTis  that  remedy
which  excels  the  potions  of  Machaon  ; 57  through  that,  when
you  have  offended,  you  will  have  to  be  reinstated.

While  I  was  thus  singing,  Apollo,  suddenly  appearing,
touched  with  his  thumb  the  strings  of  his  lyre  inlaid  with  gold.
In  his  hands  there  was  a  laurel,  placed  on  his  holy  locks  there
was  a  laurel :  visible  as  a  Poet  he  came.58  "  Thou  instructor  in
wanton  Love,"  says  he,  "come,  lead  thy  pupils  to  my  temples.
There  is  there  a  sentence  celebrated  in  fame  over  the  universal
world,  which  bids  each  one  to  know  himself.59  He  who  shall
be  known  to  himself,  will  alone  love  with  prudence,  and  will
proportion  every  task  to  his  strength.  He  to  whom  nature  has
given  beauty,  for  that  let  him  be  admired  ;  he  who  has  a  fair
complexion,  let  him  often  he  down  with  a  shoulder  exposed.
He  who  charms  with  his  discourse,  let  him  break  the  quietude
of  silence ;  he  who  sings  with  skill,  let  him  sing ;  he  who
drinks  with  elegance,60  let  him  drink. But  in  the  middle  of  a

56  Unclean  mate.] — Ver.  486.  He  alludes  to  the  strong  smell  of  the
he-goat.

57  Machaon."] — Ver.  491.  He  was  a  famous  physician,  son  of  iEsculapius,
and  was  slain  in  the  Trojan  war. See  the  Tristia,  Book  v.  El.  vi.  1.  11.

68  He  came.]  —  Ver.  496.  '  Adest '  seems  a  preferable  reading  to
*  agit.'

59  To  know  himself.]— Ver.  500.  TNQ01  2EAYT0N,  « Know  thyself,'
was  a  saying  of  Chilo,  the  Lacedsemonian,  one  of  the  wise  men  of  Greece.
This  maxim  was  also  inscribed  in  gold  letters  in  the  temple  of  Apollo  at
Delphi.  '  Too  much  of  nothing '  was  a  second  maxim  there  inscribed  ;
and  a  third  was,  *  Misery  is  the  consequence  of  debt  and  discord.'

60  Drinks  with  elegance.] — Ver.  506.  It  is  hard  to  say  what  art  in
drinking  is  here  alluded  to ;  whether  a  graceful  air  in  holding  the  cup,
or  the  ability  of  drinking  much  without  shewing  any  signs  of  inebriety.


426  AES  AMATOETA;  [b.  ii.  507— 537.

conversation,  neither  let  those  who  are  eloquent  declaim,  and
let  not  the  insane  poet  be  reciting  his  own  compositions."

Thus  Phoebus  recommended  ;  observe  this  recommendation
of  Phoebus.  There  is  full  confidence  in  the  hallowed  lips  of
this  Divinity.  I  am  now  called  to  my  more  immediate  sub-
ject :  whoever  shall  love  with  prudence,  he  will  prove  success-
ful, and  will  obtain  from  my  skill  what  he  shall  require.  The
furrows  do  not  always  return  with  interest  that  which  has  been
entrusted  to  them  ;  nor  does  the  breeze  always  aid  the  veering
barks.  What  pleases  lovers,  is  but  a  little :  'tis  much  more
that  crosses  them ;  let  them  resolve  to  endure  many  things
with  their  feelings.  As  many  as  are  the  hares  on  Athos  ;61  as
the  bees  that  feed  on  Hybla  ;62  as  the  berries  which  the  azure-
coloured  tree  of  Pallas  bears  ;  as  the  shells  on  the  sea-shore  ;
so  many  are  the  pangs  of  love  ;  the  shafts  which  we  endure  are
reeking  with  plenteous  gall.

She,  whom  perchance  you  shall  see,  will  be  said  to  have
gone  out  of  doors  ;  believe  that  she  is  gone  out  of  doors,  and
that  you  make  a  mistake  in  your  seeing.  Is  the  door  shut
against  you  on  the  appointed  night ;  endure  even  to  lay  your
body  on  the  dirty  ground.  Perhaps,  too,  the  lying  maid  will
say  with  a  haughty  air,  "  Why  is  that  fellow  blocking  up  our
door?"  Suppliantly  entreat  even  the  door-posts  of  the  obdu-
rate fair  ;  and  place  at  the  door  the  roses  that  have  been  taken
from  off  your  head.63  Come  when  she  desires  it ;  when  she
shall  shun  you,  you'll  go  away.  It  is  not  becoming  for  men
of  good  breeding  to  cause  weariness  of  their  company.  Why
should  your  mistress  be  able  to  say  of  you,  "  There  is  no  get-
ting rid  of  this  man  ?"  The  senses64  are  not  on  the  alert  at  all
hours.  And  deem  it  no  disgrace  to  put  up  with  the  curses  of  the
fair  one,  or  her  blows,  nor  yet  to  give  kisses  to  her  delicate  feet.

But  why  dwell  upon  trifles  ?  Let  my  mind  be  occupied  with
greater  subjects.  Of  great  matters  will  I  sing  ;  people,  give
all  attention. I  attempt  an  arduous  task ;  but  merit  there

61  On  Athos.'] — Ver.  517.  See  the  Metamorphoses,  Book  ii.  1.  217,
and  the  Note-

62  On  Hybla.]— Ver.  517. See  the  Tristia,  Book  v.  EL  xiii.  1.  22.

63  Off  your  head.] — Ver.  528.  Iphis,  in  the  Fourteenth  Book  of  the
Metamorphoses,  1.  732,  raises  his  eyes  to  the  door-posts  of  his  mistress,
'  so  often  adorned  hy  him  with  wreaths.'

64  The  senses.]  — Ver.  532.  He  seems  to  believe,  with  Ninon  d'En-
clos,  in  the  existence  of  a  sixth  sense.


B.  ii.  537—567.]  OE, THE AET OF LOYE.  42/

is  none,  but  what  is  secured  by  arduous  means.  By  my  under-
taking are  laborious  attempts  required.  Endure  a  rival  with
patience  ;  the  victory  will  rest  with  yourself ;  you  will  be  the
conqueror  on  the  heights  of  mighty  Jove.65  Believe  that  not  a
mortal  tells  you  this,  but  the  Pelasgian  oaks  of  Bodona  :  my
skill  has  nothing  superior  to  this  to  teach  you.  Does  she  make
a  sign  to  him,  do  you  put  up  with  it ;  does  she  write,  don't
you  touch  the  tablets  ;  let  her  come  from  whatever  place  she
likes  ;  and  wherever  she  chooses,  let  her  go.  This  do  hus-
bands allow  to  their  lawful  wives ;  even,  too,  when  thou,  gentle
sleep,66  dost  come  to  thy  duty.  I  confess,  that  in  this  art  I
myself  am  not  yet  perfect.  What  must  I  do  ?  I  am  myself  un-
equal to  my  own  precepts.  And  is  any  one  in  my  presence  to
be  making  signs  to  my  mistress  ?  And  am  I  to  endure  it  ?  And
is  not  my  anger  to  hurry  me  away  to  any  extreme  ?  Her  own
husband 6?  (I  remember  it  well)  gave  her  a  kiss  ;  I  complained
of  kisses  being  given  ;  my  love  is  brimful  of  fierceness.  Not
once  alone  has  this  failing  proved  an  injury  to  me  ;  he  is  more
skilful,  by  whose  encouragement  other  men  visites  his  mistress.
But  'tis  still  better  to  know  nothing  of  it.  Allow  stealthy  in-
trigues to  he  concealed,  lest  the  blush  of  confession  should
fly  in  future  from  her  countenance  when  detected.

With  greater  reason  then,  ye  youths,  forbear  to  detect  your
mistresses.  Let  them  be  guilty  ;  and  guilty,  let  them  suppose
that  they  have  deceived  you.  When  detected,  the  passion  in-
creases ;  when  the  fortune  of  the  two  is  the  same,  each  per-
sists in  the  cause  of  the  disgrace.  There  is  a  story  told,
very  well  known  in  all  the  heavens,  hoiv  Mars  and  Venus69  were
caught  by  the  contrivance  of  Mulciber.  Father  Mars,  distracted
by  a  frantic  passion  for  Venus,  from  a  terrible  warrior,  became
a  lover.  Neither  did  Venus  (for,  indeed,  no  Goddess  is  there
more  kind)  proved  coy  or  stubborn  to  Gradivus. 0  how  many

65  Of  mighty  Jove.] — Ver.  540.  He  alludes  to  the  triumphal  procession
to  the  Capitol.

66  Gentle  sleep.] — Ver.  546.  See  the  Arnores,  Book  iii.  El.  i.  1.  51.  He
means  to  say  that  husbands  give  a  certain  latitude  to  their  wives,  who  do
not  fail  to  improve  upon  it.

67  Own  husband.'] — Ver.  551. See  the  Amores,  Book  i.  El.  iv.  1.  38.

66  Other  men  visit.] — Ver.  554.  'Viri' seems  to  be  a  better  reading
than  '  viro.'

t9  Mars  and  Venus.]  — Ver.  562.  See  the  Metamorphoses,  Book  iv.
1.  173.


428  AES  AMATOKIA ;  [b.  ii.  567—598.

a  time  is  she  said,  in  her  wantonness,  to  have  laughed  at  the
feet  of  her  husband,  and  at  his  hands,  hardened  with  the  fire
or  his  handicraft.  In  the  presence  of  Mars,  mocking  him,  she
imitated  her  husband,  and  she  was  beauteous  even  while  so
doing ;  and  many  a  grace  was  there  combined  with  her  charms.
But  they  were  in  the  habit  of  skilfully  concealing  their  early
intercourse ;  and  their  frailty  was  replete  with  modest  pro-
priety. Through  the  information  of  the  Sun  (who  is  there
that  can  deceive  the  Sun  ?),  the  actions  of  his  wife  became
known  to  Vulcan.  Thou  Sun,  what  a  bad  example  thou  art
setting!  Ask  a  bribe  of  her;  and  shouldst  thou  hold  thy
tongue,  she  has  a  favour  which  she  may  grant  to  thee.

Around  and  above  the  bed,  Mulciber  disposes  the  hidden
toils ;  the  work,  by  its  fineness,  escapes  their  eyes.  He  pre-
tends a  journey  to  Lemnos  ;  the  lovers  come,  according  to  the
appointment ;  entangled  in  the  toils,  they  both  He  naked.  He
calls  the  Gods  together ;  the  captives  afford  a  spectacle.
People  believe  that  Venus  could  hardly  restrain  her  tears.
They  cannot  conceal  their  faces  ;  they  cannot,  in  fact,  veil  their
modesty  with  their  hands.  Upon  this,  one  says,  laughing,70
"  Transfer  to  me  thy  chains,  most  valiant  Mavors,  if  they  are
a  burden  to  thee."  With  difficulty,  Neptune,  at  thy  entreaty,
does  he  release  their  captured  bodies.  Mars  makes  for  Thrace,71
and  she  for  Paphos.72  This,  Vulcan,  was  done  by  thee  ;  what
before  they  used  to  conceal,  they  now  do  more  openly,  since  all
modesty  is  gone.  Yet  often,  foolish  one,  dost  thou  confess  that
thou  didst  act  unwisely  ;  and  they  say  that  thou  hast  repented
of  thy  wrath.  This  I  have  already  forbidden  :  lo  !  Dione
forbids  you  to  suffer  that  detection  which  she  herself  endured.
And  do  you  arrange  no  toils  for  your  rival ;  and  intercept  no
words  written  by  the  hand  in  secret.  Let  the  men  seek  for
those,  (if,  indeed,  they  think  they  ought  to  be  sought  for)
whom  the  fire  and  water  render73  lawful  husbands.

70  Says,  laughing.] — Ver,  585.  See  a  similar  passage  in  the  Metamor-
phoses, Book  iv.  1.  187.

71  For  Thrace.] — Ver.  588.  He  was  much  venerated  by  the  warlike
Thracians.

72  Paphos.]—  Ver.  588. See  the  Metamorphoses,  Book  x.  1.  298.

73  Fire  and  water  render.] — Ver.  598.  Among  the  Romans,  when  the
bride  reached  her  husband's  house,  he  received  her  with  fire  and  water,
which  it  was  the  custom  for  her  to  touch. This  is,  by  some,  supposed  to


B.  II.  599—626.] OR, THE  ART  OE  LOVE.  429

Behold !  again  do  I  protest ;  no  sportive  subject  is  here
treated  of,  but  what  is  permitted  by  the  laws  ;  there  is  no
matron  concerned  with  my  sallies.74  Who  would  dare  to  publish
to  the  profane  the  rites  of  Ceres,75  and  the  great  mysteries
that  were  established  in  the  Thracian  Samos  1  'Tis  a  small
merit  to  hold  one's  silence  upon  matters  ;  but,  on  the  other
hand,  'tis  a  grievous  fault  to  speak  of  things  on  which  we
should  be  silent.  0  justly  does  it  happen,  that  the  blabbing
Tantalus  is  thirsting  in  the  midst  of  the  water,  the  apples  on
the  tree  being  caught  at  by  him  in  vain !  Cytherea  especially
bids  her  rites  to  be  concealed.  I  recommend  no  talkative
person  to  approach  them.

If  the  mysteries  of  Venus  are  not  enclosed  in  chests, 76  and
if  the  hollow  cymbals  do  not  resound  with  frantic  blows  ;  al-
though among  ourselves  they  are  celebrated  by  universal  cus-
tom, yet  it  is  in  such  a  manner  that  among  us  they  demand
concealment.  Venus  herself,  as  oft  as  she  lays  her  garments
aside,  conceals  her  groin  with  the  left  hand,77  a  little  bent
back.  The  cattle  couple  in  public  and  promiscuously  ;  even
when  this  is  seen,  full  oft  the  fair  one  turns  away  her  face.
Chambers  and  doors  are  provided  for  our  stealthy  dalliance;
and  our  nakedness  lies  concealed  by  garments  placed  over  it.
And  if  we  do  not  require  darkness,  still  we  do  something  of  a
retired  shade,  and  something  less  exposed  than  open  day.  In
those  times,  even,  when  tiles  did  not  as  yet  keep  out  the  sun
and  the  shower,  but  the  oak  was  affording  both  shelter  and
food  ;  in  the  groves  and  caves,  and  not  in  the  open  air,  were
shared  the  delights  of  love.  So  great  was  the  regard  for
modesty,  even  in  a  savage  race.  But  now-a-days  we  give  praises
to  the  exploits  of  the  night ;  and  nothing  beyond  the  power  of

have  been  symbolical  of  purification  ; or  it  was  an  expression  of  welcome,
as  the  interdiction  of  fire  and  water  was  the  formula  for  banishment.

74  My  sallies.]— Ver.  600.  See  Book  i.  1.  31,  and  the  Note.  See  also
the  Fasti,  Book  iv.  1.  866,  and  the  Note.

75  The  rites  of  Ceres.] — Ver.  601.  He  alludes  to  the  mysterious  rites
of  Ceres,  in  the  island  of  Samothrace.

76  Not  enclosed  in  chests.] — Ver.  609.  Certain  chests  were  carried  in
the  procession  at  the  festival  of  Ceres,  the  contents  of  which,  if  there
were  any,  was  a  mystery  to  the  uninitiated.

H  The  left  hand.]— Ver.  614.  This  is  the  attitude  of  the  Venus  de
Medicis.


430  AKS  AMATORIA  ;  [b.  ii.  626—657

talking  of  it,  is  purchased  at  a  heavy  price.7*  You  will,  for-
sooth, be  discussing  all  the  damsels  in  every  quarter,  that  you
may  say  to  every  person,  "  She,  too,  has  been  mine,"  that  none
may  be  wanting  for  you  to  point  at  with  your  fingers  ;
and  as  you  touch  upon  each,  there  will  be  a  scandalous  tale.
But  I  am  complaining  of  trifles  ;  some  pretend  things,  which,
if  true,  they  would  deny,  and  not  declare  that  there  is  not  a
woman  from  whom  they  have  not  received  the  last  favour.  If
they  cannot  meddle  with  their  persons,  so  far  as  they  can,  they
meddle  with  their  names  ;  and,  their  persons  untouched,  their
reputation  bears  the  blame.

Go  now,  odious  keeper,  and  shut  the  doors  of  the  fair :
and  add  to  the  solid  door-posts  a  hundred  bars.  What  safety
is  there,  while  the  denier  of  character  exists,  and  desires  to  be
thought  that  he  is  that  which  it  has  not  proved  his  lot  to  be  ?
Even  my  real  amours  I  confess  but  with  reserve,  and  my  se-
cret intrigues  are  concealed  with  sure  fidelity.  Especially
forbear  to  censure  the  blemishes  of  the  fair  ;  to  many  it  has
proved  of  advantage  to  conceal  them.  Her  complexion  was
not  made  an  objection  against  Andromeda  by  him,  on  whose
two  feet  were  the  waving  wings.79  To  all  others  Andromache
seemed  of  larger  stature80  than  was  becoming;  Hector  was
the  only  one  who  called  her  of  moderate  size.  What  you
endure  with  impatience,  accustom  yourself  to  ;  and  you  will
endure  it  with  patience.  Length  of  time  makes  many  things
endurable  ;  but  a  rising  passion  catches  sight  of  everything.
While  the  young  branch  is  uniting  within  the  green  bark,81
whatever  breeze  shakes  it  while  now  tender,  it  falls.  Soon,  har-
dened in  time,  the  same  tree  will  stoutly  resist  the  winds,  and
bear  the  adopted  fruit.

Time  itself  removes  all  blemishes  from  the  person ;  and
what  was  a  fault,  in  lapse  of  time  ceases  so  to  be.  The  nos-
trils that  are  unaccustomed  to  it,  are  not  able  to  endure  the
hides  of  bulls  ;  the  odour  is  not  perceived  by  those  that  have
been  rendered  used  to  it  in  length  of  time. We  may  palliate

78  At  a  heavy  price. ,] — Ver.  626.  Men  spend  their  money  on  debauch-
ery, only  for  the  pleasure  of  talking  of  it.

79  Waving  wings.]  — Yer.  644.  He  refers  to  Perseus  admiring  the
swarthy  Andromeda.

80  Of  larger  stature.] — Ver.  645. She  was  remarkable  for  her  height.

81  Green  bark.] — Ver.  639.  He  speaks  of  the  slip  engrafted  in  the
stock.


B.  H.  657—686.]  OB,  THE  AET OF LOVE.  431

faults  by  names  ;  let  her  be  called  swarthy,  whose  blood  is
blacker  than  .the  pitch  of  Illyria.  If  she  has  a  cast  in  the
eyes,  she  is  like  Venus  :  if  yellow  haired,  like  Minerva.  She
that  is  only  half  alive  through  her  leanness,  let  her  be  grace-
ful. Whatever  woman  is  small,  say  that  she  is  active ;  her
that  is  gross,  call  plump  ;  and  let  each  fault  lie  concealed  in
its  proximity  to  some  good  quality.

And  don't  you  enquire  what  year  she  is  now  passing,  nor
under  what  Consulship s2  she  was  bom  ;  a  privilege  which  the
rigid  Censor83  possesses.  And  this,  especially,  if  she  has  passed
the  bloom  of  youth,  and  her  best  years84  are  fled,  and  she
now  pulls  out  the  whitening  hairs.  This  age,  0  youths,  or  even
one  more  advanced,  has  its  advantages  ;  this  soil  will  produce
its  crops,  this  is  worth  the  sowing.  While  strength  and  years
permit,  endure  labour  ;  soon  will  bending  old  age  come  with
silent  foot.  Either  cleave  the  ocean  with  the  oars,  or  the  earth
with  the  plough  ;  or  turn  your  warlike  hands  to  cruel  arms  ;  or
devote  your  strength  and  your  attention  to  the  fair.  This,
too,  is  a  kind  of  warfare  ;85  this,  too,  seeks  its  advantages.  Be-
sides, in  these S6  there  is  a  greater  acquaintance  with  their  sub-
ject ;  and  there  is  long  practice,  which  alone  renders  skilful.
By  attention  to  dress  they  repair  the  ravages  of  years  ;  and  by
carefulness  they  cause  themselves  not  to  appear  aged.

Utque  velis,  Venerem  jungunt  per  mille  figuras.

Inveniat  plures  nulla  tabella  modos.
Illis  sentitur  non  irritata  voluptas  :

Quod  juvet,  ex  iequo  fcemina  virque  ferant.
Odi  concubitus,  qui  non  utrumque  resolvunt ;

Hoc  est,  cur  pueri  tangar  amore  minus.
Odi  quse  prsebet,  quia  sit  praebere  necesse  ;

Siccaque  de  lana  cogitat  ipsa  sua.

82  What  Consulship. .] — Ver.  663.  The  age  of  persons  was  reckoned  by
naming  the  Consulship  in  which  they  were  born  ;  the  period  of  which  was
known  by  reference  to  the  '  Fasti  Consulares.'  See  the  Introduction  to  the
Fasti.

83  Rigid  Censor,'] — Ver.  664.  It  was  the  duty  of  the  Censor  to  make
enquiries  into  the  age  of  all  individuals.-

84  Best  years.'] — Ver.  666.  Even  in  those  days,  it  was  considered  un-
gallant  to  make  too  scrutinizing  enquiries  into  the  years  of  ladies  of  '  a
certain  age.'

85  Kind  of  warfare.] — Ver.  674. See  the  Amores,  Book  i.  El.  ix.  1.  1.

86  Besides  in  these.] — Ver.  675.  In  reference  to  females  of  a  more  ad-
vanced  age.


432  ARS AMATOBIA;  [b.  n.  687— 712.

Quae  datur  officio,  non  est  mihi  grata  voluptas,

Officium  faciat  nulla  puella  mihi.
Me  voces  audire  juvat  sua  gaudia  fassas  :

Utque  morer  memet,  sustineamque  roget.
Aspiciam  dominae  victos  amentis  ocellos.

Langueat ;  et  tangi  se  vetet  ilia  diu.

Those  advantages  has  nature  given  not  to  early  youth,  which
are  wont  to  spring  up  soon  after  seven  times  five  years87  have
passed.  Those  who  are  in  a  hurry,  let  them  drink  of  new
wine  ;  for  me  let  the  cask,  stored  up  in  the  times88  of  ancient
Consuls,  pour  forth  the  wine  of  my  ancestors.  No  plane-tree
but  a  mature  one  is  able  to  withstand  Phcebus  ;  the  shooting
grass,89  too,  hurts  the  tender  feet.  And  could  you,  forsooth,
have  preferred  Hermione90  to  Helen?  And  was  Gorge91  more
attractive  than  her  mother  ?  Whoever  you  are  that  wish  to
enjoy  matured  passion,  if  you  only  persevere,  you  will  obtain
a  fitting  reward.

Conscius  ecce  duos  accepit  lectus  amantes  :

Ad  thalami  clausas,  Musa,  resiste  fores.
Sponte  sua,  sine  te,  celo»berrima  verba  loquentur  :

Nee  manus  in  lecto  heva  jacebit  iners.
Invenient  digiti,  quod  agant  in  partibus  illis,

In  quibus  occulte  spicula  figit  Amor.
Fecit  in  Andromache  prius  hoc  fortissimus  Hector ;

Nee  solum  bellis  utilis  ille  fuit.
Fecit  et  in  capta  Lyrneside  magnus  Achilles,

Cum  premeret  mollem  lassus  ab  hoste  torum.

87  Seven  times  Jive  years.'] — Ver.  694.  He  probably  means,  in  this
passage,  a  lustrum  of  five  years.  Burmann  justly  observes,  that  '  cito,'
'quickly,'  or  'soon,'  can  hardly  be  the  proper  reading,  as  it  seems  to  con-
tradict the  meaning  of  tbe  context.  He  suggests  '  nisi/  meaning  '  but,'
or  '  only.'  See  the  Fasti,  Book  hi.  1. 166,  and  the  Note,  Also  the  Tristia,
Book  iv.  El.  xvi.  1.  78.

88  Stored  up  in  the  times.'] — Ver.  696.  He  uses  this  metaphorical  ex-
pression to  signify  that  he  admires  females  when  of  a  ripe  and  mature  age
See  the  Amores,  Book  ii.  El.  v.  1.  54,  and  the  Note.

89  The  shooting  grass.] — Ver.  698.  In  Nisard's  translation,  the  words
•  prata  novella '  are  rendered  ' 1'  herbe  nouvellement  coupee,'  '  the  grass
newly  cut.'  This  is  not  the  meaning  of  the  passage.  He  intends  to  say
that  the  grass  just  shooting  up  is  apt  to  cut  or  prick  the  naked  foot.

30  Herrnione.] — Ver.  699.  She  was  the  daughter  of  Helen  and  Menelaiis.
91  Gorge.] — Ver.  700. She  was  the  daughter  of  Althea,  and  sister  of
Meleager, She  married  Andrsemon.


B.  II.  713—746.]  OE,  THE AET OE LOVE.  433

Illis,  te  tangi  manibus,  Brisei,  sinebas,

Imbutae  Phrygia  quse  nece  semper  erant.
An  fuit  hoc  ipsum,  quod  te  lasciva  juvaret

Ad  tua  victrices  membra  venire  manus  ?
Crede  mihi,  non  est  Veneris  properanda  voluptas  :

Sed  sensim  tarda  prolicienda  mora.
Cum  loca  repereris,  quse  tangi  fcemina  gaudet ;

Non  obstet,  tangas  quo  minus  ilia,  pudor.
Adspicies  oculos  tremulo  fulgore  micantes,

Ut  sol  a  liquida  ssepe  refulget  aqua.
Accedent  questus,  accedet  amabile  murmur,

Et  dulces  gemitus,  aptaque  verba  loco.
Sed  neque  tu  dominam  veils  majoribus  usus

Desine  ;  nee  cursus  anteat  ilia  tuos.
Ad  nietam  properate  simul ;  turn  plena  voluptas,

Cum  pariter  victi  foemina  virque  jacent.
Hie  tibi  servandus  tenor  est,  cum  libera  dantur

Otia ;  furtivum  nee  timor  urget  opus.
Cum  mora  non  tuta  est,  totis  incumbere  remis

Utile,  et  admisso  subdere  calcar  equo.

There  is  an  end  now  of  my  task ;  grant  me  the  palm,  ye
grateful  youths,  and  present  the  myrtle  garlands  to  my  per-
fumed locks.  As  great  as  was  Podalirius92  among  the  Greeks
in  the  art  of  healing,  as  the  descendant  of  JEacus  with  his
right  hand,  as  Nestor  with  his  eloquence  ;  as  great  as  Calchas93
was  in  soothsaying,  as  the  son  of  Telamon  was  in  arms,  as
Autoniedon94  was  in  guiding  the  chariot,  so  great  a  lover  am  I.
Celebrate  me  as  your  bard,  ye  men,  to  me  repeat  my  praises  ;
let  my  name  be  sung  throughout  all  the  earth.  Arms  have  I
given  to  you;  to  Achilles  Vulcan  gave  arms.  With  the  gifts
presented  to  you,  prove  victorious,  as  he  proved  victorious.
But  whoever  subdues  the  Amazon  with  my  weapons,  let  him
inscribe  upon  his  spoil95 — "  Naso  was  my  preceptor."

And  lo  !  the  charming  fair  are  asking  me  to  give  them  my
precepts. You  then  shall  be  the  next  care  of  my  song.

92  Podalirius.']— -Ver.  735.  The  brother  of  Machaon.  See  the  Tristia,
Book  v.  El.  xiii.  1.  32.

93  Calchas.1 — Ver.  737. See  the  Metamorphoses,  Book  xii.  1.  19.

M  Jutomedon.] — Ver.  738.  The  son  of  Diores.  He  was  the  charioteer
of  Achilles.

95  Upon  his  spoil.']  — Ver.  744.  It  was  the  custom  to  write  inscriptions
on  the  spoil. See  the  Notes  to  the  Fasti,  Book  ii.  1.  663.

F  F


BOOK  THE  THIRD.


With  arms  against  the  Amazons  I  have  furnished  the  Greeks.
Arms  remain  for  me  to  present,  Penthesilea,1  to  thee  and  to  thy
squadrons.  Go  to  the  combat  equally  prepared  ;  and  may
those  prove  the  victors,  whom  genial  Dione2  favours,  and  the
Boy  who  flies  over  the  whole  world.  It  was  not  fair  for  the
females  unprotected  to  engage  with  the  men  in  arms,  and  so
it  would  have  been  disgraceful  for  you  to  conquer,  ye  men.

One  of  the  multitude  may  say,  "  Why  add  venom  to
the  serpent  ?  And  why  deliver  the  sheep-fold  to  the  ravening
wolf?  Forbear  to  lay  the  culpability  of  the  few  upon  the
many  ;  and  let  each  fair  one  be  considered  according  to  her
own  deserts.  If  the  younger  son  of  Atreus  has  Helen,
and  the  elder  son  of  Atreus3  has  the  sister  of  Helen,  to
charge  with  criminality;  if  the  son  of  (Eclus,4  through  the
wickedness  of  Eriphyle,  daughter  of  Talaion,  alive,  and  with
living  steeds,  descended  to  Styx  ;  there  is  Penelope  con-
stant, while  her  husband  was  wandering  for  twice  five
years,  and  for  as  many  years  engaged  in  war.  Witness  the
hero  from  Phylace,5  and  her  who  is  said  to  have  descended
as  the  companion  of  her  husband,  and  to  have  died  before  her
destined  years.  The  wife  from  Pagasse  redeemed  the  son  of
Pheres6  from  death,  and  in  place  of7  the  funeral  of  her  hus-
band, the  wife  was  carried  out.  "  Receive  me,  Capaneus ;
we  will  mingle  our  ashes  ;"  said  the  daughter  of  Iphis,  and

1  Penthesilea.']— -Ver.  2. See  the  21st  Epistle,  1. 118,  and  the  Note.

2  Dione.] — Ver.  3. See  the  Fasti,  Book  ii.  1.  461,  and  the  Note.

3  Son  of  Atreus.]— Ver.  11. Helen  was  unfaithful  to  Menelaiis,  while
Clytemnestra  killed  Agamemnon.

4  Son  of  (Eclus.] — Ver.  13. See  the  Metamorphoses,  Book  viii.  1.  317,
and  the  Note.

5  From  Phylace.] — Ver.  17.  See  the  Epistle  of  Laodamia  to  Protesilaiis.

6  Son  of  Pheres.]— Ver.  19. See  the  Pontic  Epistles,  Book  iii.  El.  i.
1.  106,  and  the  Note.

7  And  in  place  of] — Ver.  20. See  the  111th  line  of  the  same  Elegy,
and  the  Note. Also  the  Tristia,  Book  v.  El.  xiv.  1.  38.


B.  in.  22—51.]  AES AMATOKIA.  435

she  leapt  on  the  midst  of  the  pile.  Virtue,  herself,  too,  is  a
female,  both  in  dress  and  name.  'Tis  not  to  be  wondered  at,
if  she  favours  her  own  sex.

But  still,  'tis  not  such  dispositions  as  these  that  are  re-
quired by  my  art.  Sails  of  less  .magnitude  are  befitting  my
skiff. s  Nothing  but  wanton  dalliance  is  taught  by  me  ;  in
what  manner  a  woman  is  to  be  loved,  I  purpose  to  teach.
The  woman  repels  neither  the  flames,  nor  the  cruel  bow  ;
those  weapons,  I  see,  make  less  havoc  among  the  men.  Many
a  time  do  the  men  prove  false  ;  not  often  the  charming  fair ;
and,  if  you  make  inquiry,  they  have  but  few  charges  of  fraud
against  them.  Jason,  the  deceiver,  repudiated  the  Phasian,
when  now  a  mother  ;  and  into  the  bosom  of  the  son  of  iEson
there  came  another  bride.9  Ariadne,  left  alone  in  an  unknown
spot,  had  fed  the  sea-birds,  so  far,  Theseus,  as  thou  wast
concerned.  Enquire  why  she  is  said  to  have  gone  on  her
nine  journies,10  and  hear  how  the  woods  lamented  Phyllis,  their
foliage  laid  aside.  And  Elissa,  she  has  the  credit  of  affection ;
and  still,  that  guest  of  thine,  Elissa,  afforded  both  the  sword
and  the  cause  for  thy  destruction.  Shall  I  tell  what  it  was
that  ruined  thee  ?  Thou  didst  not  know  how  to  love  ;  thou
wast  wanting  in  skill ;  through  skill,  love  flourishes  for  ever.

Even  still  would  they  have  been  ignorant,  but  Cytherea
commanded  me  to  instruct  them,  and  stood,  herself,  before
my  eyes.  Then  to  me  she  said,  "  Why  have  the  unfortunate
fair  deserved  this  ?  An  unarmed  multitude  is  handed  over  to
the  men  in  arms.  Two  treatises11  have  rendered  them  skilful ;
this  side,  as  well,  must  be  instructed  by  thy  advice.  He  who
before  had  uttered12  reproaches  against  the  wife  from  Therapnee,
soon  sang  her  praises  to  a  more  fortunate  lyre. If  well  I

3  My  sJciff.]—Ytx.  26.  '  Cymba.'  See  the  Amores,  Book  iii.  El,  vi.
1.  4,  and  the  Note.

9  Another  bride.'] — Ver.  34. Jason  deserted  Medea  for  Creiisa.

10  Nine  journies.]— Yer.  37. See  the  Epistle  of  Phyllis  to  Demophoon.

11  Two  treatises.] — Ver.  47. His  former  books  on  the  Art  of  Love.

12  Who  before  had  uttered.]— Yer.  49.  He  alludes  to  the  Poet  Stesi-
chorus,  on  whose  lips  a  nightingale  was  said  to  have  perched  and  sung,
when  he  was  a  child.  Pliny  relates  that  he  wrote  a  poem,  inveighing  bit-
terly against  Helen,  in  which  he  called  her  the  firebrand  of  Troy,  on
which  he  was  visited  with  blindness  by  her  brothers,  Castor  and  Pollux,
and  did  not  recover  his  sight  till  he  had  recanted  in  his  Palinodia,  which
he  composed  in  her  praise.  Suidas  says,  that  Stesichorus  composed  thirty-
six  books  of  Poems. Helen  was  born  at  Therapnae,  a  town  of  Lace

rr  2


436  ARS AMATOKIA  ;  [b.  III.  51—79.

know  thee,  injure  not  the  fair  whom  thou  dost  adore  ;  their
favour  must  be  sought  by  thee  so  long  as  thou  shalt  live."

Thus  she  said ;  and  from  the  myrtle  (for  she  was  standing
with  her  locks  wreathed  with  myrtle)  she  gave  me  a  leaf  and
a  few  berries.  Receiving  them,  I  was  sensible  of  the  divine
influence  as  well ;  the  sky  shone  with  greater  brightness,  and
all  care  departed  from  my  breast.  While  she  inspires
my  genius ;  hence  receive  the  precepts,  ye  fair,  which
propriety,  and  the  laws,  and  your  own  privileges,13  allow  you.
Even  now,  be  mindful  of  old  age,  that  one  day  will  come ;
then  will  no  time  be  passed  by  you  in  idleness.  Disport  your-
selves, while  yet  you  may,  and  while  &ven  now  you  confess
to  your  true  years ;  after  the  manner  of  the  flowing  stream,
do  the  years  pass  by.  Neither  shall  the  water  which  has  past
by,  be  ever  recalled  ;  nor  can  the  hour  which  has  past,  ever  re-
turn. You  must  employ  your  youthful  age  ;  with  swift  step
age  is  gliding  on  ;  and  that  which  follows,  is  not  so  pleasing  as
that  which  having  passed  was  charming.  Those  brakes,  which
are  withering,  I  have  beheld  as  beds  of  violets ;  from  amid
those  brambles,  has  a  beauteous  chaplet  been  gathered  for
myself.

The  time  will  be,  when  you,  who  are  now  shutting  oiit  a
lover,  will  be  lying,  an  old  woman,  chilled  in  the  lonely
night.  No  door14  of  yours  will  be  broken  open  in  the  broils
of  the  night ;  nor  will  you  find  in  the  morning  your  threshold
bestrewed  with  roses.15  How  soon,  ah  me !  are  our  bodies
pursed  with  wrinkles,  and  that  colour  which  existed  in  the
beauteous  face,  fades  away !  The  grey  hairs,  too,  which  you
might  have  sworn  that  you  had  had  from  childhood,  will
suddenly  be  sprinkled  over  all  your  head.  Old  age  is  thrown
off  by  serpents,  together  with  the  light  slough  ;  and  the  shed-
ding of  their  horns  makes  the  stags  not  to  be  old. Our

13  Your  own. privileges. ] — Ver.  58.  '  Sua'  seems  to  mean  the  privileges
sanctioned  and  conceded  by  the  law,  probably  to  those  females  'who  were
in  the  number  of  the  '  professae.'

14  No  door.'] — Ver.  71.  So  Horace  says,  in  his  address  to  Lydia,  Book  i.
Ode  i.  25  ;  '  Less  frequently  do  the  wanton  youths  shake  your  joined
windows  with  many  a  blow,  and  no  longer  deprive  thee  of  sleep,  and  the
door  adheres  to  its  threshold.'

15  Bestrewed  with  roses.] — Ver.  72.  See  line  528  in  the  last  Book.
Lucretius  speaks  of  the  admirers  of  damsels  anointing  their  doors  with  an
ointment  made  of  sweet  marjorum.


B.  in.  79—109.]  OK, THE  AET OF LOVE.  4.37

advantages  fly  irretrievably ;  pluck  the  flowers  then  ;  if  they
be  not  plucked,  they  will  lamentably  fade  themselves  to  your
sorrow.  Besides,  child-bearing  makes  the  hours  of  youth
more  short-lived ;  with  continual  crops  the  soil  waxes  old.

Endymion  of  Latmus,  0  Moon,  causes  not  thee  to  blush ;
nor  was  Cephalus  a  prey  for  the  rosy  Goddess  to  be  ashamed
of.  Though  Adonis  be  allowed  to  Venus,  whom  she  yet
laments  ;  whence  had  she  iEneas  and  Hermione16  for  her  chil-
dren ?  Follow,  0  race  of  mortals,  the  example  of  the  God-
desses ;  and  refuse  not  your  endearments  to  the  eager  men.
Even  should  they  deceive  you,  what  do  you  lose  ?  All  remains
the  same.  "Were  a  thousand  to  partake  thereof,  nothing  is
wasted  thereby.  Iron  is  worn  away,  stones  are  consumed  by
use  ;  your  persons  are  proof  against  all  apprehension  of
detriment.  Who  would  forbid  light  to  be  taken  from  another
light  presented  ?  Or  who,  on  the  deep  sea,  would  hoard  up  the
expanse  of  waters?  "But  'tis  not  right,"  you  say,  "  for  any
woman  to  grant  favours  to  a  man."  Tell  me,  what  are  you
losing  but  the  water,  which  you  may  take  up  again  ?17  Nor
are  my  words  urging  you  to  prostitution  ;  but  they  are  for-
bidding you  to  fear  evils  that  do  not  exist :  your  favours  are
exempt  from  loss  to  yourselves.

But  while  I  am  in  harbour,  let  a  gentle  breeze  impel  me,
destined  to  sail  with  the  blasts  of  a  stronger  gale.  I  begin
with  dress  :18  from  the  well-dressed  vine  Bacchus  has  birth ;  and
in  the  well-dressed  field  the  high  corn  springs  up.  Beauty
is  the  gift  of  the  Divinity ;  how  many  a  one  prides  herself
on  her  beauty?  Still,  a  great  part19  of  you  is  wanting  in
such  endowments.  Care  will  confer  charms ;  charms  neglected
will  perish,  even  though  she  be  like  the  Idalian  Goddess.  If
the  fair  of  olden  times  did  not  pay  such  attention  to  their
persons ;  neither  had  the  ancients  men  so  well-dressed. If

16  Hermione.'] — Ver.  86.  According  to  Hesiod,  Venus  was  the  mother
of  three  children  by  Mars,  of  whom  Hermione  was  one.

17  May  take  up  again.'] — Ver.  98.  This  is  not  the  proper  translation
of  the  passage ;  but  the  real  meaning  cannot  be  presented  with  a  due
regard  to  decorum.

18  /  begin  with  dress.] — Ver.  101.  He  plays  upon  the  different  meanings
of  the  word  '  cultus' ;  which  means  either  '  dress,'  or  '  cultivation,'  ac-
cording as  it  is  applied,  to  persons  or  land.

19  J  great  part.]  — Ver.  104.  This  is  a  more  ungallant  remark  than
we  should  have  expected  Ovid  to  make.


438  ARS  AMATORIA  ;  [b.  hi.  109—140.

Andromache  was  clad  in  a  coarse  tunic,  what  wonder  is  it  ?
She  was  the  wife  of  a  hardy  soldier.  And  would  his  com-
panion, forsooth,  come  bedecked  to  Ajax,  him  whose  covering
was  seven  hides  of  oxen.  Formerly  a  rustic  simplicity
existed :  now  gorgeous  Rome  possesses  the  wealth  of  the  sub-
dued earth.  See  the  Capitol,  what  it  now  is  and  what  it  was,
you  would  declare  that  they  belonged  to  different  Jupiters.
The  Senate-house,  which  is  now  right  worthy  of  an  assem-
blage so  august,  when  Tatius  held  the  sway,  was  made  of
straw.  The  fields  of  the  Palatine  hill,  which  are  now  resplen-
dent in  honour  of  Phcebus20  and  our  rulers,  what  were  they
but  pastures  for  the  oxen  that  ploughed  ?

Let  old  times  delight  others  :  I  congratulate  myself  that  I
am  born  thus  late ;  this  is  the  age  that  is  suited  to  my
tastes.  Not  because  the  pliable  gold  is  now  dug  out  of  the
earth,  and  choice  shells21  come  here  from  foreign  shores  ;  nor
yet  because,  the  marble  cut  out,  mountains  diminish;  nor
yet  because  the  azure  waves  are  kept  out  by  the  moles.22  But
because  civilization  prevails;  and  because  the  rude  manners
that  flourished  with  our  ancient  forefathers  have  not  come
down  to  our  days.

But  do  not  you  as  well  load  your  ears  with  precious  stones,
which  the  tawny  Indian  seeks  in  the  green  waves.  And  do
not  go  forth  heavily  loaded  with  clothes  embroidered  with
gold  :  by  the  wealth  through  which  you  seek  to  attract  us,
you  often  drive  us  away.  By  neatness  we  are  captivated  ;  let
not  your  hair  be  without  arrangement ;'  the  hands  applied  to  it
both  give  beauty  and  deny  it.  The  method,  too,  of  adorning
is  not  a  single  one  ;  let  each  choose  the  one  that  is  becoming  it
to  her,  and  let  her  first  consult  her  mirror.  An  oval  face
becomes  a  parting  upon  the  unadorned  head :  Laodamia  had
her  hair  thus  arranged.  Round  features23  require  a  little  knot
to  be  left  for  them  on  the  top  of  the  head,  so  that  the  ears

20  Of Phoebus.']— -Ver.  119.  He  alludes  to  the  temple  of  Apollo,  on  tlie
Palatine  Hill,  where  Augustus  and  Tiberius  resided.

21  And  choice  shells.] — Ver.  124.  He  alludes  to  pearls  which  grow  in
the  shell  of  the  pearl  oyster,  and  are  found  in  the  Persian  Gulf  and  the
Indian  Ocean.

22  By  the  moles.] — Ver.  126.  He  alludes  to  the  stupendous  moles  which
the  Romans  fabricated,  as  breakwaters,  at  their  various  bathing-places  on
the  coast  of  Italy. See  the  Odes  of  Horace,  Book  iii.  ode  1.

-3  Mound  features.] — Ver.  139.  See  the  Pontic  Epistles,  Book  iii.
Ep.  iii.  1.  15,  and  the  Note.


B.  ill.  140—166.]  OE, TIE AJST OF LOYE.  439

may  be  exposed.  Let  the  hair  of  another  be  thrown  over
either  shoulder.  In  such  guise  art  thou,  tuneful  Phoebus,  thy
lyre  being  assumed.  Let  another  have  her  hair  tied  behind
after  the  manner  of  well-girt  Diana,  as  she  is  wont  when  she
hunts  the  scared  wild  beasts.  It  becomes  another  to  have  her
floating  locks  to  flow  loosely:  another  must  be  bound  hy  fillets
over  her  fastened  tresses.  Another  it  delights  to  be  adorned
with  the  figure  of  the  tortoise 24  of  the  Cyllenian  God :  let
another  keep  up  her  curls  that  resemble  the  waves.25

But  neither  will  you  count  the  acorns  on  the  branching
native  oak,  nor  how  many  bees  there  are  in  Hybla,  nor  how
many  wild  beasts  on  the  Alps  :  nor  am  I  able  to  comprehend
in  numbers  so  many  modes  ;  each  successive  day  brings  a
new  fashion.  Even  neglected  locks  are  becoming  to  many;
often  would  you  suppose  that  they  are  lying  neglected  since
yesterday ;  the  very  moment  before  they  have  been  combed
afresh.  Let  art  imitate  chance.  'Twas  thus  that,  in  the
captured  city,  when  Hercules  beheld  Iole  ;  "  Her,"  said  he,
"  do  I  love."  In  such  guise,  deserted  fair  one  of  Gnossus,
did  Bacchus  bear  thee  away  in  his  chariot,  while  the  Satyrs
shouted  Evoe  !  0  how  indulgent  is  nature  to  your  beauty,
whose  blemishes  can  be  atoned  for  in  fashions  so  numerous  !
We  men,  to  our  misfortune,  become  bald ;  and  our  hair,  car-
ried away  by  time,  falls  off,  like  Boreas  shaking  down  the
leaves.

The  female  stains  her  grey  hair  with  the  herbs  from
Germany;26  and  by  art  a  colour  is  sought  superior  to  the
genuine  one.  The  female  walks  along,  thickly  covered  with
purchased  hair  ;  and  for  money27  she  makes  that  of  others  her

24  Figure  of  the  tortoise.'] — Ver.  147.  Salmasius  thinks  that  the
1  galerus,'  or  '  wig  of  false  hair,'  is  alluded  to  in  this  passage.  Others
think  that  a  coif  or  fillet  of  net-work  is  alluded  to.  He  probably  means
a  mode  of  dressing  the  hah  in  the  shape  of  a  lyre,  with  horns  on  each
side  projecting  outwards.  Mercury,  the  inventor  of  the  lyre,  was  born  on
Mount  Cyllene,  in  Arcadia.

26  The  waves.] — Ver.  148.  Juvenal  mentions  a  mode  of  dressing  the
hair  to  a  great  height  by  rows  of  false  curls.

26  The  herbs  from  Germany.] — Ver.  163.  He  alludes,  probably,  to  herbs
brought  from  Germany,  which  were  burnt  for  the  purpose  of  making  a
soap  used  in  turning  the  hair  of  a  blonde  colour.  See  the  Amores,
Book  i.  El.  xiv.  1.  1,  and  the  Note.

27  For  money.] — Ver.  166. See  1.  45  of  the  above  Elegy.


440  ARS  AMATOJJA;  [b.  in.  166— 189.

own. Nor  is  she  ashamed  to  buy  it  openly  :  we  see  it  being
sold  before  the  eyes  of  Hercules28  and  the  Virgin  throng.

What  am  I  to  say  on  clothing  ?  Gold  flounces,29  I  have  no
need  of  you ;  nor  you,  the  wool  which  dost  blush  twice  dipt
in  Tyrian  purple.  Since  so  many  colours  can  be  procured  at
a  lower  price,  what  folly  it  is  to  be  carrying  a  fortune  on  one's
person.30  Lo  !  there  is  the  colour  of  the  sky,  at  the  time  when
the  sky  is  without  clouds,  and  the  warm  South  wind  is  not
summoning  the  showers  of  rain.  Lo !  there  is  the  colour
like  to  thee,  that  art  said31  once  to  have  borne  away  Phryxus
and  Helle  from  the  treachery  of  Ino.  That  which  resembles
the  waves,32  has  its  name,  too,  from  the  waves ;  I  could  ima-
gine that  the  Nymphs  are  clad  in  vestments  of  this  colour.
Another  resembles  saffron;  in  saffron-coloured  garments  is  the
dewy  Goddess  dressed, when  she  yokes  her  steeds  that  bear  the
light  of  day.  Another  resembles  the  Paphian  myrtles  ;  another
the  purple  amethysts,  or  the  white  roses,  or  the  Thracian  crane.
Neither  are  there  wanting,  Amaryllis,33  thy  chesnuts,  nor  yet  al-
monds ;  and  wax34  has  given  its  own  name  to  woollen  textures.

As  many  as  the  flowers  which  the  renewed  earth  pro-
duces, when  in  warm  spring  the  vine  puts  forth  its  buds,  and
sluggish  winter  retreats  ;  so  many,  or  still  more,  shades  of
dye  does  the  wool  imbibe.  Choose  them  by  rule  ;  for  every
colour  will  not  be  suitable  to  every  complexion* Black  be-

28  The  eyes  of  Hercules.] — Ver.  168.  He  means  that  the  wig-makers'
shops  were  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Temple  of  Hercules  Musagetes,
in  the  Flaminian  Circus. See  the  Sixth  Book  of  the  Fasti,  1.  801.

29  Gold  flounces. ] — Ver.  169.  '  Segmenta' are  probably  broad  flounces
to  the  dresses  inlaid  with  plates  of  gold,  or  gold  threads  embroidered  on
them.

30  On  one's  person.] — Ver.  127.  Like  our  expression,  'To  carry  a  for-
tune on  one's  back/

31  That  art  said] — Ver.  175.  He  refers  to  the  colour  of  the  Ram  with
the  Golden  Fleece,  that  bore  Helle  and  Phryxus  over  the  Hellespont.

33  Resembles  the  waves.] — Ver.  177.  He  evidently  alluded  to  dresses
which  resemble  the  surface  of  the  waves,  and  which  we  term  '  watered' ;
and  which  the  Romans  called  '  undulatae,'  from  '  unda,'  a  '  wave.'  Varro
makes  mention  of  '  undulatae  togae.'  Some  Commentators,  however,  fancy
that  he  alludes  here  to  colour,  meaning  *  glaucus, '  or  '  sea-green,'  which
Lucretius  also  calls  '  thalassinus.'

33  Amaryllis.]— -V "er.  183. See  the  last  Book,  1.  267,  and  the  Note.

34  And  wax.] — Ver.  184.  Plautus  mentions  the  '  Carinarii,'  who  dyed
garments  of  a  waxen,  or  yellow-colour.


B.  m,  189—206.] OR, THE AET OF LOVE.  441

comes  those  of  fair  complexion  :  black  became  the  daughter
of  Brises.  When  she  was  carried  off,  then,  too,  was  she  clothed
in  a  dark  garment.  White  befits  the  swarthy ;  in  white,
daughter  of  Cepheus,  thou  wast  charming;  by  thee,  thus
clothed,  was  Seriphos35  trodden.

How  nearly  was  I  recommending  you  that  there  should  be
no  shocking  goat36  in  the  armpits,  and  that  your  legs  should
not  be  rough  with  harsh  hair.  But  I  am  not  instructing
fair  ones  from  the  crags  of  Caucasus,  and  who  are  drinking,
Mysian  Ca'icus,  of  thy  waves.  Besides;  need  I  to  recommend
that  idleness  should  not  blacken  your  teeth,  and  that  your
mouth  ought  to  be  washed  each  morning  with  water  used  for
the  purpose.  You  know,  too,  how  to  find  whiteness  in  an
application  of  wax  ;37  she  who  is  blushing  with  no  real  blood,
is  blushing  by  the  aid  of  art.  With  skill  do  you  fill  up  the
bared  edges  of  the  eye-brows,38  and  the  little  patch 39  covers
your  cheeks  in  all  their  genuineness.  'Tis  no  harm,  too,  to
mark  the  eyes 40  slightly  with  ashes ;  or  with  saffron,  produced,
beauteous  Cydnus,  near  to  thee. I  have  a  little  treatise,41  but

35  Seriphos.]  — Ver.  192.  See  the  Metamorphoses,  Book  v.  1.  242,  and
the  Note.

36  Shocking  goat.]— Vex.  193.  See  the  Note  to  1.  522  of  the  First  Book.

37  Application  of  wax.] — Ver.  199.  Wax  is  certainly  used  as  a  cos-
metic, but  '  creta'  seems  to  be  a  preferable  reading,  as  chalk  in  a  powdered
state  was  much  used  for  adding  to  the  fairness  of  the  complexion.  Ovid
would  hardly  recommend  a  cosmetic  of  so  highly  injurious  a  tendency  as
melted  wax.

33  The  eye-brows.] — Ver.  201.  We  learn  from  Juvenal,  that  the  colour
of  them  was  heightened  by  punctures  with  a  needle  being  filled  with  soot.

39  And  the  little  patch.] — Ver.  202.  'Aluta'  means  '  skin  made  soft
by  means  of  alum.'  It  is  difficult  to  discover  what  it  means  here,  whether
•  a  patch '  made  of  a  substance  like  gold-beater's  skin,  somewhat  similar
to  those  used  in  the  days  of  the  Spectator ;  or  a  liquid  cosmetic,  such  as
Pliny  calls  '  calliblepharum,'  '  an  aid  to  the  eye-brows.'  He  seems  to
use  the  word  '  sinceras '  in  its  primitive  sense, '  without  wax' ;  which  re-
commendation certainly  would  contradict  the  common  reading, '  cera,'  in
the  199th  line.

40  To  mark  the  eyes.] — Ver.  203.  To  heighten  the  colour  of  the  eye-
lashes, ashes  (and  probably  charcoal)  were  used  by  the  Roman  women.
Saffron  also  was  used.  A  black  paint,  made  of  pulverized  antimony,  is
used  by  the  women  in  the  East,  at  the  present  day,  to  paint  their  eye-
brows black.  It  is  called  '  surme,'  and  was  also  used  at  ancient  Rome.
Cydnus  was  a  river  of  Cilicia.

41  A  little  treatise] — Ver.  205.  He  alludes  to  his  book,  '  On  the  care
of  the  Complexion,'  of  whicl  a  fragment  remains.


442  AES  AMATORIA ;  [b.  hi.  206—230.

through  the  care  bestowed,  a  great  work,  in  which  I  have
mentioned  the  various  recipes  for  your  beauty.  From  that
as  well,  do  you  seek  aid  for  your  diminished  charms :  my
skill  is  not  idle  in  behalf  of  your  interests.

But  let  not  your  lover  discover  the  boxes  exposed  upon  the
table  ;  art,  by  its  concealment  only,  gives  aid  to  beauty.  Whom
would  not  the  paint  disgust,  besmeared  all  ov*er  your  face,  when,
through  its  own  weight,  it  flows  and  falls  upon  your  heated
bosom?  Why  is  the  smell  of  the  cesypum42  so  powerful,
sent  from  Athens  though  it  be,  an  extract  drawn  from  the
filthy  fleece  of  the  sheep  1  Nor  would  I  recommend  you  in
his  presence  to  apply  the  mixture  of  the  marrow  of  the  deer,43
nor  before  him  to  clean  your  teeth.  These  things  will  give
you  good  looks,  but  they  will  be  unbecoming  to  be  seen ;
there  are  many  things,  too,  which,  disgusting  while  being
done,  add  charms  when  done.  The  statues  which  now  bear
the  name  of  the  laborious  Myron,44  were  once  a  sluggish  weight
and  a  solid  mass.  That  the  ring  may  be  made,  the  gold  is
first  beaten  ;  the  clothes,  that  you  are  wearing,  were  once  dirty
wool.  While  it  was  being  wrought,  it  was  hard  stone  ;  now,
as  a  beautiful  statue,45  naked  Venus  is  wringing  the  moisture
from  her  dripping  locks.

You,  too,  while  you  are  dressing,  let  us  suppose  to  be  asleep  ;
after  the  finishing  hand,  you  will  be  seen  much  more  apropos.
Why  is  the  cause  of  the  fairness  of  your  complexion  known
to  me  ?  Shut  the  door  of  your  chamber,  why  expose  the
work  half  done  ?  It  is  proper  for  the  men  to  be  in  ignorance
of  many  a  thing. The  greatest  part  of  things  would  cause

42  Of  the  cesypum.]— V er.  213.  The  filthy  cosmetic  called  '  cesypum,'
was  prepared  from  the  wool  of  those  parts  of  the  body  where  the  sheep
perspired  most ;  it  was  much  used  for  embellishing  the  complexion.  Pliny
mentions  the  sheep  of  Athens  as  producing  the  best.  It  had  a  strong  rank
smell.  The  red  colour,  which  was  used  by  the  Roman  ladies  for  giving  a
bloom  to  the  skin,  was  prepared  from  a  moss  called  '  fucus' ;  from  which,
in  time,  all  kinds  of  paint  received  the  name  of  '  fucus.'

43  Of  the  deer.]  —  Ver.  215.  Pliny  speaks  highly  of  the  virtues  of
stag's  marrow.  It  probably  occupied  much  the  same  position  in  estima-
tion, that  bear's  grease  does  at  the  present  day.

4i  Myron.] — Ver.  219.  There  were  two  sculptors  of  this  name:  one
a  native  of  Lycia,  the  other  of  Eleuthera.

45  Beautiful  statue.] — Ver.  223.  He  alludes  to  that  of  Venus  Anady-
omene,  or  rising  from  the  sea,  which  was  made  by  Praxiteles,  and  was
often  copied  by  the  sculptors  of  Greece  and  Rome.


B.  ill.  230—260.] OK, THE ART OF LOVE.  443

disgust,  if  you  were  not  to  conceal  what  is  within.  Examine
the  gilded  statues  which  hang  in  the  decorated  theatre ;
how  thin  the  tinsel  that  covers  the  wood.  But  it  is  not  per-
mitted the  public  to  approach  them  unless  completed;  neither
ought  your  charms  to  be  heightened  unless  the  men  are  at
a  distance.  But  I  would  not  forbid  you  to  allow  your  hair
to  be  combed  in  tneir  presence,  so  that  it  may  he  flowing
along  your  back.  Only  take  care  especially  on  such  occa-
sions not  to  be  cross  ;  and  do  not  many  times  undo  your  hair,
pulled  down,  when  fastened  up.  Let  your  coiffeuse  be  with
a  whole  skin.  I  detest  her  who  tears  the  face  of  her  attend-
ant with  her  nails,  and  who,  seizing  the  hair-pin,  pierces  her
arms.46  As  she  touches  the  head  of  her  mistress,  she  curses
it ;  and  at  the  same  time,  streaming  with  blood,  she  is  crying
over  the  odious  locks.

The  fair  one  that  has  but  little  hair,  let  her  set  a  watch  on  her
threshold ;  or  let  her  always  make  her  toilet  in  the  temple47
of  the  Good  Goddess.  I  was  unexpectedly  announced  as
having  paid  a  visit  to  a  certain  lady  ;  in  her  confusion,  she  put
on  her  locks  the  wrong  side  before.  May  a  cause  of  shame
so  disgraceful  fall  to  the  lot  of  my  foes,  and  may  that  dis-
honour happen  to  the  Parthian  dames.  A  mutilated  animal
is  repulsive,  the  fields  without  grass  are  repulsive  ;  and  so  is
a  shrub  without  foliage,  and  a  head  without  hair.  You  have
not  come  to  be  instructed  by  me,  Semele,  or  Leda,  thou,  too,
Sidonian  fair,48  who  wast  borne  across  the  sea  upon  the  ficti-
tious bull;  or  Helen,  whom,  Menelaus,not  without  reason,  thou
didst  demand  to  be  restored  to  thee,  and  ivhom,  not  without
reason,  thou  Trojan  ravisher,  didst  retain.  A  multitude  comes
to  be  instructed,  both  pretty  and  ugly  damsels  ;  and  the  un-
sightly are  ever  more  in  number  than  the  good-looking.
The  beauteous  care  less  for  the  resources  and  the  precepts  of
art ;  they  have  their  own  endowments,  charms  that  are  power-
ful without  art. When  the  sea  is  calm,  the  sailor  rests  free

46  Pierces  her  arms.] — Ver.  240.  See  a  similar  passage  in  the  Amores.
Book  i.  El.  xiv.  1.  16.

47  Toilet  in  the  temple.'] — Ver.  244.  He  tells  those  who  have  not  fine
heads  of  hair,  to  he  as  careful  in  admitting  any  men  to  see  their  toilet,  as
the  devotees  of  Bona  Dea  were  to  keep  away  all  males  from  her  solem-
nities.

43  Sidonian  fair.]  — Ver.  252. Europa  was  a  Phoenician  hy  birth.


444  AES  AMATOEIA ;  [b.  hi.  260—278.

from  care  ;  when  it  becomes  boisterous,  he  appeals  to  his
own  resources.

Few,  however,  are  the  forms  free  from  defect.  Conceal  your
blemishes  ;  and,  so  far  as  you  can,  hide  the  imperfections  of
your  person.  If  you  are  short,  sit  down ;  that,  while  stand-
ing, you  may  not  appear  to  be  sitting  ;  and  if  of  a  diminutive
size,  throw  yourself  upon  your  couch.  Here,  too,  that  your
measure  may  not  be  able  to  be  taken  as  you  he,  take  care
that  your  feet  are  concealed  with  the  clothes49  thrown  over
them.  She  who  is  too  thin,  let  her  wear  clothes  of  thick
texture  ;  and  let  her  vestments  hang  loosely  from  her  shoulders.
Let  her  who  is  pale,  tint  her  complexion  with  purple  stripes  ; 50
do  you  that  are  more  swarthy,  have  recourse  to  the  aid  of  the
Pharian  fish.51  Let  an  ill-shaped  foot  be  always  concealed  in
a  boot  of  snow-white  leather  steeped  in  alum  ;  and  do  not  un-
loose their  laced  sandals  from  the  spindly  legs.  For  high
shoulders,  small  pads  are  suitable  ;52  and  let  the  girth53  encircle
the  bosom  that  is  too  prominent.  She  whose  fingers  are  dumpy,
and  whose  nails  are  rough,  should  mark  with  but  little  gesture
whatever  is  said.  She,  whose  breath  is  strong  smelling,  should
never  talk  with  an  empty  stomach ;  and  she  should  always
stand  at  a  distance54  from  her  lover's  face.

49  With  the  clothes.']— -Ver.  226.  See  the  Araores,  Book  i.  El.  iv.  1. 48,
and  the  Note.

50  With  purple  stripes.'] — Ver.  269.  Commentators  are  at  a  loss  to
know  what  '  tingere  virgis'  means ;  some  suggest,  '  to  wear  garments  with
red  '  virgae,'  or  4  stripes,'  while  others  think  that  it  means  '  to  tint  the  skin
with  fine  lines  of  a  purple  colour.'  It  is  thought  by  some  that  vermilion
is  here  alluded  to,  while  others  suppose  that  the  juice  of  the  red  flowers,
or  berries  of  the  '  vaccinium,'  is  meant.

51  The  Pharian  fish.] — Ver.  270.  The  intestines  and  dung  of  the
crocodile,  '  the  Pharian'  or  '  Egyptian  fish,'  are  here  referred  to.  We
learn  from  Pliny  that  these  substances  were  used  by  the  females  at  Rome
as  a  cosmetic,  to  add  to  the  fairness  of  the  complexion,  and  to  take  away
freckles  from  the  skin.

52  Small  pads  are  suitable.] — Ver.  273.  '  Analectides,'  or  '  Analectrides,'
(the  correct  reading  is  doubtful)  were  pads,  or  stuffings,  of  flock,  used  in
cases  of  high  shoulders  or  prominent  shoulder-blades.

53  And  let  the  girth.] — Ver.  274.  He  alludes  to  the  '  strophium,'
which  distantly  resembled  the  stays  of  the  present  day,  and  was  a  girdle,
or  belt,  worn  by  women  round  the  breast  and  over  the  interior  tunic  or
chemise.  From  an  Epigram  of  Martial,  it  seems  to  have  been  usuaiiy
made  of  leather.  Becker  thinks  that  there  was  a  difference  between  the
1  fascia '  and  the  '  strophium.'

51  At  a  distance.] — Ver.  278. One  of  the  very  wisest  of  his  suggestions.


B.  in.  278—311.] OK, THE AET OF LOYE.  445

If  your  teeth  are  black,  or  large,  or  not  growing  straight,
you  will  suffer  very  great  inconvenience  from  laughing.  Who
could  have  supposed  it  ?  The  fair  take  lessons  even  in  laugh-
ing ;  and  even  in  that  respect  is  gracefulness  studied  by  them.
Let  your  mouth  be  but  moderately  open ;  let  the  dimples
on  either  side  be  but  small ;  and  let  the  extremity  of  the
lips  cover  the  upper  part  of  the  teeth.  And  do  not  let  your
sides  be  shaking  with  prolonged  laughter ;  but  let  them  utter
sounds  gentle  and  feminine,  to  I  know  not  what  degree.  Some
there  are,  who  distort  their  face  with  an  unsightly  grin  ;  an-
other, when  she  is  joyous  in  her  laughter,  you  would  take  to
be  crying.  Another  makes  a  harsh  noise,  and  screams  in  a
disagreable  manner ;  just  as  the  unsightly  she-ass  brays  by
the  rough  mill-stone.

To  what  point  does  not  art  proceed  ?  Some  study  how
to  weep  with  grace,  and  cry  at  what  time  and  in  what
manner  they  please.  Nay,  further  ;  when  the  letters  are  de-
prived of  their  full  sound,  and  the  lisping  tongue  becomes
contracted  with  an  affected  pronunciation ;  then  is  grace
sought  in  an  imperfection  ;  to  pronounce  certain  words  badly,
they  learn  to  be  less  able  to  speak  than  they  really  are.
To  all  these  points,  since  they  are  of  consequence,  give  atten-
tion. Learn  how  to  walk  with  steps  suited  to  a  female.  Even
in  the  gait,  there  are  certain  points  of  gracefulness  not  to  be
disregarded ;  this  both  attracts  and  repels  men  who  are
strange  to  you.  This  fair  one  moves  her  sides  with  skill,  and
with  her  flowing  tunics  catches  the  breeze,  and  haughtily
moves  her  extended  feet.  Another  walks  just  like  the  red-
faced  spouse  of  some  Umbrian55  husband,  and,  straddling,
takes  huge  strides.  But,  as  in  many  other  things,  let  there  be
a  medium  here  as  well ;  one  movement  is  clownish  ;  another
movement  will  be  too  mincing  in  its  gait.  But  let  the  lower
part  of  your  shoulders,  and  the  upper  part  of  your  arm  be
bare,  to  be  beheld  from  your  left  hand  upwards.  This  is
especially  becoming  to  you,  ye  of  fair  complexion ;  when  I
see  this,  I  have  always  a  longing  to  give  a  kiss  to  the  shoulder,
where  it  is  exposed.

The  Sirens  were  monsters  of  the  deep,  which  with  their  tune-

55  Umbrian.'] — Ver.  303-  The  Umbrians  were  a  people  of  the  Marsi,
in  the  north  of  Italy.  They  were  noted  for  their  courage,  and  the  rusti-
city of  their  manners.


446  AES AMATOEIA;  [b.  hi.  311—  329-

fill  voices  detained  the  ships,  even  though  in  full  career.  On
hearing  them,  the  son  of  Sisyphus56  almost  released  his  body
from  the  mast ;  for  the  wax57  was  melted  in  the  ears  of  his
companions.  The  voice  is  an  insinuating  quality  ;  let  the  fair
learn  how  to  sing.  In  place  of  beauty,  her  voice  has  proved
the  recommendation  of  many  a  woman.  And  sometimes  let
them  repeat  what  they  have  heard  in  the  marble  theatres  ;  and
sometimes  the  songs  attuned  to  the  measures  of  the  Nile.58
Neither,  in  my  way  of  thinking,  ought  a  clever  woman  to  be
ignorant  how  to  hold  the  plectrum59  in  her  right  hand,  the
lyre  in  her  left.  Orpheus  of  Rhodope  with  his  lyre  moved
rocks,  and  wild  beasts,  and  the  lakes  of  Tartarus,  and  Cerberus
the  triple  dog.  At  thy  singing,  most  righteous  avenger  of  thy
mother,60  the  attentive  stones  built  up  the  walls.  The  fish,
(the  well-known  story  of  the  lyre  of  Arion,01)  although  he  was
dumb,  is  supposed  to  have  been  moved  by  his  voice.  Learn,
too,  to  sweep  the  chords  of  the  festive  psaltery62  with  your
two  hands  ;  'tis  an  instrument  suited  to  amorous  lays.

Let  the  songs  of  Callimachus63  be  known  to  you,  let  those

56  The  son  of  Sisyphus.] — Ver.  313.  He  here  alludes  to  a  scandalous
story  among  the  ancients,  that  Ulysses  was  the  son  of  Anticlea,  hy  Sisyphus
the  robber,  who  had  carried  her  off,  and  not  by  Laertes,  her  husband.

57  The  wax.'] — Ver.  314.  By  the  advice  of  Circe,  Ulysses  filled  the
ears  of  his  companions  with  melted  wax,  that  they  might  not  hear  the
songs  of  the  Sirens.

66  The  measures  of  the  Nile.] — Ver.  318.  These  airs  were  sung  by
Egyptian  girls,  with  voluptuous  attitudes,  and  were  much  esteemed  by  the
dissolute  Romans.  These  Egyptian  singers  were,  no  doubt,  the  forerun-
ners of  the  '  Alme '  of  Egypt  at  the  present  day.  The  Nautch  girls  and
Bayaderes  of  the  East  Indies  are  a  kindred  race.

59  Plectrum.] — Ver.  319.  See  the  Metamorphoses,  Book  ii.  1.  601,
and  the  Note;  also  the  Epistle  of  Briseis,  1.  118,  and  the  Note.

60  Thy  mother.] — Ver.323.  Amphion  and  Zethus  were  the  sons  of  Jupiter
and  Antiope.  Being  carried  off  by  her  uncle  Lycus,  Antiope  was  en-
trusted to  his  wife  Dirce.  When  her  sons  grew  up,  they  fastened  Dirce
to  wild  oxen,  by  which  she  was  torn  to  pieces.  Amphion  was  said  to  have
built  the  walls  of  Thebes  by  the  sound  of  his  lyre.

61  Arion.]—  Ver.  326. See  the  Fasti,  Book'ii.  1.  79.

03  The  festive  psaltery.] — Ver.  327.  Suidas  tells  us  that  '  nauliuin,'  or
'  nablium,'  was  a  name  of  the  psaltery.  Josephus  says  that  it  had  twelve
strings. Strabo  remarks  that  the  name  was  of  foreign  origin.

63  Callimachus.']  —Ver.  329.  See  the  Amores,  Book  ii.  El.  iv.  1.  19  ;
and  the  Pontic  Epistles,  Book  iv.  Ep.  xvi.  1.  32,  and  the  Notes  to  the
passages.


B.  ill.  329—351.] OB, THE AET OP LOVE.  447

of  the  poet  of  Cos,61  let  the  Teian  Muse  too,  of  the  drunken
old  bard.  Let  Sappho,  too,  be  well  known  ;  for  what  is  there
more  exciting  than  she  ?  Or  than  him,  through  whom65  the
father  is  deceived  by  the  tricks  of  the  crafty  Geta  ?  You  may,
too,  have  read  the  poems  of  the  tender  Propertius,66  or  some-
thing of  Gallus,  or  thy  works,  Tibullus.67  The  fleece,  too,  so
bewailed,  0  Phryxus,  of  thy  sister,  shining  with  its  yellow
hair,  celebrated  by  Varro.68  The  exiled  iEneas,  as  well,  the
first  origin  of  lofty  Rome,69  than  which  no  work  exists  in
Latium  of  greater  fame.

Perhaps,  too,  my  name  will  be  mingled  among  these,  and
my  writings  will  not  be  consigned  to  the  waters  of  Lethe.
And  people  will  one  day  say,  "  Read  the  elegant  lines  of
our  master,  in  which  he  instructs  the  two  sides.70  Or  of
his  three  books,  which  the  title  designates  as  ( The  Amours,'
choose  a  portion  to  read  with  skilful  lips,  in  a  languishing
way.  Or  let  his  Epistles  be  repeated  by  you  with  well-modu-
lated voice ;  this  kind  of  composition,71  unknown  to  others,
did  he  invent."  0  Phcebus,  mayst  thou  so  will  it ;  so  too,  ye
benignant  Divinities  of  the  Poets,  Bacchus,  graceful  with  thy
horns,  and  you,  ye  nine  Goddesses  !

Who  can  doubt  that  I  should  wish  the.  fair  one  to  know  how
to  dance,  that,  the  wine  placed  on  table,  she  may  move  her  arms
in  cadence,  when  requested. Masters  of  posture,72  the  repre-

64  Poet  of  Cos.]  — Ver.  330.  The  poet  Philetas.  He  flourished  in  the
time  of  Philip  and  Alexander  the  Great.  Anacreon  was  a  lyric  poet  of
Teios,  and  a  great  admirer  of  the  juice  of  the  grape.

65  Or  him,  through  whom.~\ — Ver.  332.  Some  think  that  he  means
Menander,  from  whom  Terence  horrowed  many  of  his  scenes ;  he  prohahly
alludes  to  the  Phormio  of  Terence,  where  the  old  men,  Chremes  and
Demipho,  are  deceived  by  Geta,  the  cunning  slave.  See  the  Tristia,
Book  ii.  1.  359  and  69.

66  Propertius.]  —  Ver.  333.  See  the  Tristia,  Book  ii.  1.  465,  and  the
Note.

67  Tibullus.']—  Ver.  334. See  the  Amores,  Book  hi.  El.  ix.

68  Varro.]—  Ver.  335.  See  the  Pontic  Epistles,  Book  iv.  Ep.  xvi.  1.  21 ;
and  the  Amores,  Book  i.  El.  xv.  1.  21,  and  the  Notes  to  the  passages.

69  Lofty  Rome.]— Ver.  338. He  refers  here  to  the  ^Eneid  of  Virgil.

70  Two  sides.] — Ver.  342. Both  the  males  and  the  females.

71  Composition.] — Ver.  346.  He  takes  to  himself  the  credit  of  being
the  inventor  of  Epistolary  composition.

72  Masters  of  posture.] — Ver.  351.  These  persons,  who  were  also
called  '  ludhV  or  '  histriones,'  required  great  suppleness  of  the  sides,  for
the  purpose  of  aptly  assuming  expressive  attitudes  ;  for  which  reason  he


448  AES  AMATOEIA  ;  [b.  hi.  351—372.

sentations  on  the  stage,  are  much  valued ;  so  much  graceful-
ness does  that  pliant  art  possess.  I  am  ashamed  to  advise  on
trifling  points,  to  understand  how  to  throw  a  cast  of  dice,  and,
thy  value,  the  cube  when  thrown.  And  now  let  her  throw  the
three  numbers  ;  now  let  her  consider,  at  which  number  she  can
cleverly  enter  most  conveniently,  and  which  one  she  must  call
for.73  And,  with  her  skill,  let  her  play  not  amiss  at  the  hostilities
of  the  pieces  ;74  when  the  single  man  perishes  between  his  two
enemies.  How  the  warrior,  too,75  wages  the  war  when  caught
without  his  companion  ;  and  how  the  enemy  full  oft  retreats  on
the  path  on  which  he  has  begun.  Let  the  smooth  balls,76  too,
be  poured  into  the  open  net ;  and  not  a  ball  must  be  moved
but  the  one  which  you  shall  be  lifting  up.  There  is  a  kind  of
game™  distributed  into  as  many  lines  on  a  small  scale,  as  the
fleeting  year  contains  months.  A  little  table  receives78  three
pebbles  on  each  side,  on  which  to  bring  one's  own  into  a
straight  line,  is  to  gain  the  victory.

Devise  a  thousand  amusements.  'Tis  shocking  for  the
fair  one  not  to  know  how  to  play  ;  many  a  time,  while  playing,
is  love  commenced.  But  the  least  matter  is  how  to  use  the
throws  to  advantage  ;  'tis  a  task  of  greater  consequence  to  lay
a  restraint  on  one's  manners.  While  we  are  not  thinking,
and  are  revealed  by  our  very  intentness,  and,  through  the  game,

calls  them  '  artifices  lateris.'  See  the  First  Book,  1.  112  ;  and  the  Tristia,
Book  ii.  1.  497,  and  the  Note.

73  Which  she  must  call  for.]  —  Ver.  356.  Prohahly  at  the  game  of
'  duodecim  scripta,'  or  '  twelve  points,'  like  our  backgammon  ;  sets  of  three
'  tesserae,'  or  dice,  were  used  for  throwing  ;  he  recommends  her  to  learn
the  game,  and  to  know  on  what  points  to  enter  when  taken  up,  and  what
throws  to  call  for.  See  the  last  Book,  1.  203  ;  and  the  Tristia,  Book  ii.
1.  473,  and  the  Note.

74  The  pieces.]—  Ver.  357. See  the  Note  to  1.  207,  in  the  last  Book.

75  The  warrior,  too.] — Ver.  359.  He  alludes  to  one  of  the  principal
pieces,  whose  fate  depends  upon  another.

"6  Let  the  smooth  balls.] — Ver.  361.  He  seems  to  allude  here  to  a
game  played  by  putting  marbles  (which  seems  to  be  the  meaning  of  '  pilae
leves,'  '  smooth  balls,')  into  a  net  with  the  mouth  open,  and  then  taking
them  out  one  by  one  without  moving  any  of  the  others.

"7  Kind  of  game.] — Ver.  363.  These  two  lines  do  not  seem  to  be  con-
nected with  the  game  mentioned  in  1.  365,  but  rather  to  refer  to  that  men-
tioned in  1.  355.

78  A  little  table  receives.] — Ver.  365.  Tbis  game  is  mentioned  in  the
Tristia,  Book  ii.  1.  481.  It  seems  to  resemble  the  simple  game  played  by
schoolboys  on  the  slate,  and  known  among  them  as  tit-tat-to.


B.  in.  372—393.] OR, THE ART OF LOVE.  449

our  feelings,  laid  bare,  are  exposed ;  anger  arises,  a  disgrace-
ful failing,  and  the  greed  for  gain ;  quarrels,  too,  and  strife,
and,  then,  bitter  regrets.  Recriminations  are  uttered  ;  the  air
resounds  with  the  brawl,  and  every  one  for  himself  invokes
the  angry  Divinities.  There  is  no  trusting79  the  tables,  and,
amid  vows,  new  tables  are  called  for  ;  full  oft,  too,  have  I  seen
cheeks  wet  with  tears.  May  Jupiter  avert  from  you  indis-
cretions so  unbecoming,  you,  who  have  a  care  to  be  pleasing
to  any  lover.

To  the  fair,  has  nature,  in  softer  mood,  assigned  these
amusements ;  with  materials  more  abundant  do  the  men  dis-
port. They  have  both  the  flying  ball,80  and  the  javelin,  and
the  hoop,  and  arms,  and  the  horse  trained  to  go  round  the
ring.  No  plain  of  Mars  receives  you,  nor  does  the  spring  of
the  Virgin,81  so  intensely  cold  j  nor  does  the  Etrurian82  river  carry
you  along  with  its  smooth  stream.  But  you  are  allowed,  and  it
is  to  your  advantage,  to  go  in  the  shade  of  Pompey's  Portico,
at  the  time  when  the  head  is  heated  by  the  steeds  of  the  Con-
stellation of  the  Virgin.83  Frequent  the  Palatium,  consecrated
to  the  laurel-bearing  Phoebus ;  'twas  he  that  overwhelmed  in  the
deep  the  ships  of  Parse tonium.84  The  memorials,  also,  which  the
sister  and  the  wifes5  of  our  Ruler  have  erected;  his  son-in-law86
too,  his  head  encircled  with  naval  honors. Frequent  the  altars

"9  No  trusting. ] — Ver.  377.  On  account  of  the  continued  run  of  bad
luck.

80  Flying  ball.]— \  ex.  380.  See  the  Tristia,  Book  ii.  1.  485-6,  and
the  Note.

81  The  Virgin.] — Ver.  385.  This  was  near  the  Campus  Martius.  See
the  Fasti,  Book  i.  1.  464  ;  and  the  Pontic  Epistles,  Book  i.  Ep.  viii.  1.  38,
and  the  Note.

82  Etrurian.]  —Yer.  386. The  Tiber  flowed  through  ancient  Etruria.

83  The  Virgin.]— Ver.  388.  He  alludes  to  the  heat  while  the  sun  is
passing  through  the  Constellation  Virgo.

84  Parcetonium.] — Ver.  390.  See  the  Amores,  Book  ii  El.  xiii.  1.  7,
and  the  Note.  He  alludes  to  the  victory  of  Augustus  over  Antony  and
Cleopatra,  at  Actium  ;  on  which  the  conqueror  built  the  temple  of  Apollo
on  the  Palatine  hill.

85  The  sister  and  the  ivife.]  — Ver.  391.  Livia,  the  wife,  and  Octavia,
the  sister  of  Augustus,  are  referred  to.

86  His  son-in-law.] — Ver.  392.  The  allusion  is  to  M.  Agrippa,  the
husband  of  Julia,  the  daughter  of  Augustus ;  after  the  defeat  of  the
younger  Pompey,  Augustus  presented  him  with  a  naval  crown.  A  Portico
built  by  Augustus  was  called  by  his  name.

G  G


450  AES AMATOEIA;  [b.  ill.  393— 119.

of  the  Meurphian  heifer,87  that  smoke  with  frankincense  ;
frequent  the  three  Theatres,83  in  conspicuous  positions.  Let
the  sand,  stained  with  the  warm  blood,  have  you  for  spectators;
the  goal,  also,  to  be  passed  with  the  glowing  wheels."9

That  which  lies  hid  is  unknown ;  for  what  is  not  known
there  is  no  desire.  All  advantage  is  lost,  when  a  pretty  face  is
without  one  to  see  it.  Were  you  to  excel  even  Thamyras D0  and
Amoebeus  in  your  singing,  there  would  be  no  great  regard  for
your  lyre,  while  unknown.  If  Apelles  of  Cos91  had  never
painted  Venus,  she  would  have  lain  concealed  beneath  the
ocean  waves.  What  but  fame  alone  is  sought  by  the  hal-
lowed Poets  ?  The  sum  of  all  my  labours  has  that  crowning
object.  In  former  days,  Poets  were52  the  care  of  rulers  and
of  kings ;  and  the  choirs  of  old  received  great  rewards.
Hallowed  was  the  dignity,  and  venerable  the  name  of  the  Poets  ;
and  upon  them  great  riches  were  often  bestowed.  Ennius,  born
in  the  mountains  of  Calabria,  was  deemed  worthy,  great  Scipio,
to  be  placed  near  to  thee.93  At  the  present  day,  the  ivy  lies
abandoned,  without  any  honor  ;  and  the  laborious  anxiety  that
toils  for  the  learned  Muses,  receives  the  appellation  of  idleness.

But  be  it  our  study  to  He  on  the  watch  for  fame ;  who
would  have  known  of  Homer,  if  the  Iliad,  a  never-dying  work,
had  lain  concealed  ?  Who  would  have  known  of  Danae,  if  she
had  been  for  ever  shut  up,  and  if,  till  an  old  woman,  she  had
continued  concealed  in  her  tower  ?  The  throng,  ye  beauteous
fair,  is  advantageous  to  you  ;  turn  your  wandering  steps  full  oft
beyond  your  thresholds. The  she-wolf  goes  on  her  way  to  the

87  Memphian  heifer.] — Ver.  393.  See  the  Amores,  Book  i.  El.  viii.  1.  74.

88  Frequent  the  three  Theatres.]  — Ver.  394.  He  probably  alludes  to
the  theatres  of  Pompey,  Balbus,  and  Marcellus,  as  they  are  mentioned  by
Suetonius  as  the  '  trina  theatra.'

89  Glowing  wheels.] — Ver.  396. See  the  Amores,  Book  hi.  El.  ii.

50  Thamyras.'] — Ver.  399.  He  was  a  Thracian  poet,  who  challenged  the
Muses  to  sing,  and,  according  to  Homer,  was  punished  with  madness.
Diodorus  Siculus  says  that  he  lost  his  voice,  while  the  Roman  poets  state
that  he  lost  his  sight. Amoebeus  was  a  famous  lute-player  of  Athens.

91  Of  Co*.]— Ver.  401. See  the  Pontic  Epistles,  Book  iv.  Ep.  i.  1.  29.

92  Poets  were.] — Ver.  405.  Euripides  was  the  guest  of  Archelaus
king  of  Macedonia,  Anacreon  of  Poly  crates  king  of  Samos,  and  Pindar
and  Bacchilides  of  Hiero  king  of  Sicily.

53  Placed  near  to  thee.] — Ver.  410.  According  to  some  accounts,  the
ashes  of  Ennius  were  deposited  in  the  tomb  of  the  Scipios,  by  the  order  of
his  friend  Scipio  Africanus.


B.  III.  419—447.] OB, THE ART OF LOTE.  451

many  sheep,  that  she  may  carry  off  but  one  ;  and  the  bird  of
Jove  pounces  down  upon  the  many  birds.  Let  the  handsome
woman,  too,  present  herself  to  be  seen  by  the  public ;  out  of
so  many,  perhaps  there  will  be  one  for  her  to  attract.  In  all
places,  let  her  ever  be  desirous  to  please  ;  and,  with  all  atten-
tion, let  her  have  a  care  for  her  charms.  Chance  is  power-
ful everywhere  ;  let  your  hook  be  always  hanging  ready.
In  waters  where  you  least  think  it,  there  will  be  a  fish.
Many  a  time  do  the  hounds  wander  in  vain  over  the  woody
mountains  ;  and  sometimes  the  stag  falls  in  the  toils,  with  no
one  to  pursue  him.  What  was  there  for  Andromeda,  when
bound,  less  to  hope  for,  than  that  her  tears  could  possibly
charm  any  one  ?  Many  a  time,  at  the  funeral  of  a  husband,
is  another  husband  found.  To  go  with  the  tresses  dishevelled,
and  not  to  withhold  your  lamentations,  is  becoming.

But  avoid  those  men  who  make  dress  and  good  looks
their  study  ;  and  who  arrange  their  locks,  each  in  its  own
position.  What  they  say  to  you,  they  have  repeated  to  a
thousand  damsels.  Their  love  is  roving,  and  remains  firm  in
no  one  spot.  What  is  the  woman  to  do,  when  the  man,  him-
self, is  still  more  effeminate,  and  himself  perchance  may  have
still  more  male  admirers?

You  will  hardly  believe  me,  but  still,  do  believe  me  ;  Troy
would  have  been  still  remaining,  if  it  had  followed  the  advice  of
its  own  Priam.94  There  are  some  men  who  range  about,  under
a  fictitious  appearance  of  love,  and,  by  means  of  such  introduc-
tions, seek  disgraceful  lucre.  And  do  not  let  the  locks  deceive
you,  shining  much  with  the  liquid  nard  ;95  nor  yet  the  narrow
belt,96  pressed  upon  the  folds  of  their  dress.  Nor  let  the  robe
of  finest  texture  beguile  you ;  nor  yet  if  there  shall  be
many  and  many  a  ring97  on  their  fingers. Perhaps  the  best

M  Its  own  Priam.]— Ver.  440.  Priam  and  Antenor  advised  that  Helen
should  be  restored  to  Menelaiis.

95  Liquid  nard.'] — Ver.  443:  There  were  two  kinds  of  nard,  the  'fo-
liated,' and  the  '  spike  '  nard.  It  was  much  esteemed  as  a  perfume  by
the  Romans.

96  Narrow  belt.] — Ver.  444.  He  probably  means  a  girdle  that  fitted
tightly,  and  caused  the  '  toga '  to  set  in  many  creases.  See  the  Notes  to
the  Fasti,  Book  v.  1.  675.

97  And  many  a  ring.] — Ver.  446.  'Alter  et  alter.'  Literally,  'one
and  another.'

G  G  2


452  ARS  AMATORIA  ;  [B.  in.  447—474.

dressed  of  the  number  of  these  may  be  some  thief,98  and  may-
be attracted  by  a  desire  for  your  clothes.  "  Give  me  back
my  property  I"  full  oft  do  the  plundered  fair  ones  cry  ;  "  Give
me  back  my  property !"  the  whole  Forum  resounding  with
their  cries.  Thou,  Venus,"  unmoved,  and  you,  ye  Goddesses,1
near  the  Appian  way,  from  your  temples  blazing  with  plenteous
gold,  behold  these  disputes.  There  are  even  certain  names
notorious  by  a  reputation  that  admits  of  no  doubt;  those
females  who  have  been  deceived  by  many,  share  the  crimi-
nality of  their  favorites.  Learn,  then,  from  the  complaints
of  others,  to  have  apprehensions  for  yourselves  ;  and  do  not
let  your  door  be  open  to  the  knavish  man.

Refrain,  Cecropian  fair,  from  believing  Theseus,2  when  he
swears  ;  the  Gods  whom  he  will  make  his  witnesses,  he  has
made  so  before.  And  no  trust  is  there  left  for  thee,  Demo-
phoon,  heir  to  the  criminality  of  Theseus,  since  Phyllis  has
been  deceived.  If  they  are  lavish  of  their  promises,  in  just  as
many  words  do  you  promise  them  ;  if  they  give,  do  you,  too,
give  the  promised  favours.  That  woman  could  extinguish  the
watchful  flames  of  Vesta,  and  could  bear  off  the  sacred  things,
daughter  of  Inachus,3  from  thy  temples,  and  could  administer
to  her  husband  the  aconite,  mixed  with  the  pounded  hemlock,
if  on  receiving  a  present  she  could  deny  a  favour.

My  feelings  are  prompting  me  to  go  too  close ;  check  the  rein,
my  Muse :  and  be  not  hurled  headlong  by  the  wheels  in
their  full  career.  Should  lines,  written  on  the  tablets  made  of
fir,  try  the  soundings  ;  let  a  maid  suited  for  the  duty  take  in
the  billets  that  are  sent.  Examine  them ;  and  collect  from
the  words  themselves,  whether  he  only  pretends  what  you  are
reading,  or  whether  he  entreats  anxiously,  and  with  sincerity.
And  after  a  short  delay,  write  an  answer :  delay  ever  stimu-
lates those  in  love,  if  it  lasts  only  for  a  short  time.

98  Some  thief.'] — Ver.  447.  Among  its  other  refinements,  Rome  seems
to  have  had  its  swell  mob.

99  Thou,  Venus.] — Ver.  451.  This  temple  is  referred  to  in  the  First
Book,  1.  81 — 87. Its  vicinity  was  much  frequented  by  courtesans.

1  You,  ye  Goddesses.] — Ver.  452.  He  probably  alludes  to  the  Nymphs
whose  statues  were  near  the  Appian  aqueduct,  mentioned  in  the  81st  line
of  the  First  Book.  The  Delphin  Editor  absolutely  thinks  that  the  '  pro-
fessas,'  or  courtesans,  are  themselves  alluded  to  as  the  '  Appiades  Deae.'

2  Theseus.] — Ver.  457. Who  deserted  Ariadne.

3  Of  Inachus.] — Ver.  464. Isis,  or  Io. See  the  Metamorphoses,  Bk.  i.


B.  III.  475—505.]  OR, THE ART OF LOYE.  453

But  neither  do  you  make  yourself  too  cheap  to  the  youth  who
entreats,  nor  yet  refuse,  with  disdainful  lips,  what  he  is  press-
ing for.  Cause  him  both  to  fear  and  to  hope  at  the  same
moment ;  and  oft  as  you  refuse  him,  let  hopes  more  assured,
and  diminished  apprehensions  arise.

Write  your  words,  ye  fair,  in  a  legible  hand,  but  of  common
parlance,  and  such  as  are  usual ;  the  recognized  forms  of  lan-
guage are  most  pleasing. — Ah !  how  oft  has  the  wavering  lover
been  inflamed  by  a  letter,  and  how  oft  has  uncouth  language
proved  detrimental  to  a  graceful  form  !  But  since,  although
you  are  without  the  honors  of  the  fillet  of  chastity,  it  is  still
your  care  to  deceive  your  husbands  ;4  let  the  skilled  hand  of
a  maid,  or  of  a  boy,  carry  the  tablets,  and  don't  entrust  your
pledges  to  some  unknown  youth.  I  myself  have  seen  the  fair
pale  with  terror  on  that  account,  enduring,  in  their  misery,
servitude  to  all  future  time.  Perfidious,  indeed,  is  he  who
retains  such  pledges  :  but  still  in  them  he  has  power  equal  to
the  lightnings  of  iEtna.

In  my  opinion  deceit  is  allowable,  for  the  purpose  of  repel-
ling deceit ;  and  the  laws  permit  us  to  take  up  arms  against  the
armed.  One  hand  should  be  accustomed  to  write  in  numerous
styles.  Perdition  to  those,  through  whom  this  advice  must  be
given  by  me  !  Nor  is  it  safe  to  write,  except  when  the  wax  is
quite  smoothed  over  ;  so  that  the  same  tablet  may  not  contain
two  hands.5  Let  your  lover  be  always  styled  a  female  when
you  write  ;  in  vour  billets  let  that  be  "  she,"  which  really  is
"he."

But  I  wish  to  turn  my  attention  from  trifles  to  things  of  more
consequence,  and  with  swelling  canvass  to  expand  my  filling
sails.  It  conduces  to  good  looks  to  restrain  habits  of  anger.
Fair  peace  becomes  human  beings,  savage  fury  wild  beasts.
With  fury  the  features  swell ;  with  blood  the  veins  grow
black  ;  the  eyes  flash  more  wildly  than  the  Gorgonian  fires.
"  Pipe,  hence  avaunt,6  thou  art  not  of  so  much  worth  to  me,"

4  To  deceive  your  husbands'] — Ver.  484.  It  is  not  improbable  that
'  viros  '  here  means  merely  '  keepers,'  and  not  '  husbands,'  especially  as  he
alludes  to  their  being  without  the  privilege  of  the  '  vitta,'  which  the  matrons
wore.

5  Two  hands.] — Ver.  496.  He  means,  that  the  writing  of  the  lover
must  be  quite  erased  before  she  pens  her  answer  on  the  same  tablets.

6  Hence,  avaunt.] — Ver.  505. See  the  Fasti,  Book  vi.  1.  G9G.


454  AUS  AMATORIA ;  [b.  hi.  505—537.

said  Pallas,  when  she  saw  her  features  in  the  stream.  You,
too,  if  you  were  to  look  at  your  mirror  in  the  midst  of  your
anger,  hardly  could  any  one  distinctly  recognize  her  own
countenance.  And,  in  no  less  degree,  let  not  a  repulsive
haughtiness  sit  upon  your  features ;  by  alluring  eyes  love
must  be  enticed.  Believe  me,  ye  fair  who  know  it  by  ex-
perience, I  hate  immoderate  conceit.  Full  oft  do  the  features
in  silence  contain  the  germs  of  hatred.  Look  at  him  who  looks
on  you ;  smile  sweetly  in  return  to  him  who  smiles.  Does  he
nod  at  you  ;  do  you,  too,  return  the  sign  well  understood.
When  the  Boy  Cupid  has  made  these  preludes,  laying  aside
his  foils,6  he  takes  his  sharp  arrows  from  his  quiver.

I  hate  the  melancholy  damsels  too.  Let  Ajax  be  charmed
with  Tecmessa  ;7  us,  a  joyous  throng,  the  cheerful  woman  cap-
tivates. Never  should  I  have  asked  thee,  Andromache,  nor
thee,  Tecmessa,  that  one  of  you  would  be  my  mistress.  I  seem
hardly  ably  to  believe  it,  though  by  your  fruitfulness  I  am
obliged  to  believe  it,  that  you  could  have  granted  your  favours
to  your  husbands.  And  could,  forsooth,  that  most  melancholy
woman  say  to  Ajax,  "  My  life  V  and  words  which  are  wont
to  please  the  men  ?

What  forbids  me  to  apply  illustrations  from  great  matters
to  small  ones,  and  not  to  be  standing  in  awe  of  the  name
of  a  general  ?  To  this  person  the  skilful  general  has  entrusted
a  hundred  to  be  ruled  with  the  twig  of  vine  ;8  to  this  one  so
many  cavalry;  to  that  one  he  has  given  the  standard  to  defend.
Do  you,  too,  consider,  to  what  use  each  of  us  is  suited,  and
class  each  one  in  his  assigned  position.  Let  the  rich  man  give
his  presents  ;  let  him  that  professes  the  law,  defend  ;  the  elo-
quent man  may  often  plead  the  cause  of  his  client.  We  who
compose  verse,  verses  alone  let  us  contribute.  This  throng,
before  all  others,  is  susceptible  of  love.  Far  and  wide  do
we  herald  the  praises  of  the  beauty  that  pleases  us.  Ne-
mesis 9  has  fame  ;  Cynthia,  too,  has  fame. The  West  and  the

H  Laying  aside  his  foils.] — Ver.  515.  The  'rudis'  was  a  stick,  which
soldiers  and  persons  exercising  used  in  mimic  combat,  probably  like  our
foil  or  singlestick.

7  With  Tecmessa.] — Ver.  517.  She  was  taken  captive  by  Ajax,  and
probably  had  good  reason  to  be  sorrowful.

8  The  twig  of  vine.] — Ver.  527.  He  alludes  to  the  Centurions,  who
had  the  power  of  inflicting  corporal  punishment,  from  which  circumstance
their  badge  of  office  was  a  vine  sapling.

9  Nemesis.] — Ver.  536. Nemesis  was  the  mistress  of  Tibullus. See


B.  Ill,  537 — 574.] OE, THE  AET OF LOVE.  455

lands  of  the  East  know  of  Lycoris :  and  many  a  one  is  en-
quiring who  my  Corinna  is.  Besides,  all  deceit  is  wanting  in
the  hallowed  Poets,  and  even  our  art  contributes  to  forming  our
manners.  No  ambition  influences  us,  no  love  of  gain  ;  des-
pising the  Courts,  the  couch  and  the  shade  are  the  objects  of
our  commendation.  But  we  are  easily  attracted,  and  are  con-
sumed by  a  lasting  heat ;  and  we  know  how  to  love  with  a
constancy  most  enduring.  Indeed,  we  have  our  feelings-
softened  by  the  gentle  art ;  and  our  manners  are  in  conformity
with  our  pursuits.

Be  kind,  ye  fair,  to  the  Aonian  bards.  In  them  there  is
inspiration,  and  the  Pierian  maids  show  favour  unto  them.  In
us  a  Divinity  exists  :  and  we  have  intercourse  with  the  heavens.
From  the  realms  of  the  skies  does  that  inspiration  proceed.
'Tis  a  crime  to  look  for  a  present  from  the  learned  Poets.
Ah  wretched  me  !  of  this  crime  no  fair  one  stands  in  dread.
Still,  do  act  the  dissemblers,  and  at  the  very  first  sight,  do  not
be  ravenous.  On  seeing  your  nets,  a  new  lover  will  stop  short.
But  neither  can  the  rider  manage  with  the  same  reins  the
horse  which  has  but  lately  felt  the  bridle,  and  that  which  is
well-trained  ;  nor  yet  must  the  same  path  be  trod  by  you
in  order  to  captivate  the  feelings  that  are  steadied  by  years,
and  inexperienced  youth.

The  latter  is  raw,  and  now  for  the  first  time  known  in  the
camp  of  Love,  who,  a  tender  prey,  has  reached  your  chamber;
with  you  alone  is  he  acquainted  ;  to  you  alone  would  he  ever
prove  constant.  Shun  a  rival ;  so  long  as  you  alone  shall  possess
him,  you  will  be  the  conqueror.  Both  sovereignties  and  love  do
not  last  long  with  one  to  share  in  them.  The  other,  the  veteran
soldier,  will  love  you  gradually,  and  with  moderation  ;  and  he
will  put  up  with  much  that  will  not  be  endured  by  the  novice.
He  will  neither  break  down  your  door-  posts,  nor  burn  them
with  raging  flames  ;  nor  will  he  fly  at  the  tender  cheek  of  his
mistress  with  his  nails.  He  will  neither  tear  his  own  clothes,
nor  yet  the  clothes  of  the  fair  ;  nor  will  her  torn  locks  be  a
cause  for  grieving.  These  things  befit  boys,  who  are
heated  with  youthful  years  and  with  passion  :  the  other,  with
tranquil  feelings,  will  put  up  with  cruel  wounds.  With  slowly
consuming  fires  will  he  smoulder,  just  like  a  damp  torch  ;  or

the  Amores,  Book  iii.  El.  ix.  Cynthia  was  the  mistress  of  Propertius,
and  Lycoris  of  G alius.


456  ABS  AMATORIA ;  [b.  hi.  574—605.

like  the  wood  that  has  been  cut  down  upon  the  mountain
ridge.  This  passion  is  more  sure  ;  the  former  is  short-lived  and
more  bounteous.  With  speedy  hand  do  you  pluck  the  fruit
that  passes  away.

Let  all  points  be  surrendered ;  the  gates  we  have  opened
to  the  enemy,  and  let  confidence  be  placed  in  this  perfidious
betrayal.  That  which  is  easily  conceded,  but  badly  supports  a
lasting  passion.  A  repulse  must  now  and  then  be  mingled  with
your  joyous  dalliance.  Let  him  lie  down  before  your  doors  :
"  Cruel  door  !"  let  him  exclaim  ;  and  let  him  do  many  a  thing
in  humble,  many  in  threatening  mood.  The  sweet  we  can-
not endure  ;  with  bitter  potions  we  may  be  refreshed.  Full  oft
does  the  bark  perish,  overwhelmed  by  favouring  gales.  This
it  is  that  does  not  permit  wives  to  be  loved ;  husbands  have
access  to  them,  whenever  they  please.  Shut  your  door,10  and
let  your  porter  say  to  you  with  surly  lips,  "  You  cannot  come
in  ;"  desire  will  seize  you,  as  well,  thus  shut  out.

Now  lay  aside  the  blunted  swords  ;  let  the  battle  be  fought
with  sharpened  ones.  And  I  doubt  not  but  that  I  myself  shall
be  aimed  at  with  weapons  of  my  own  furnishing.  While  the
lover  that  has  been  captured  only  of  late  is  falling  into  your
toils,  let  him  hope  that  he  alone  has  admission  to  your  chamber.
But  soon  let  him  be  aware  of  a  rival,  and  a  division  of
the  privileges  of  your  favours.  Remove  these  contrivances ;
and  his  passion  will  grow  effete.  Then  does  the  high-mettled
courser  run  well,  the  starting-place  being  opened,  when  he
has  both  competitors  to  pass  by,  and  those  for  him  to  follow.
Harshness  rekindles  the  flame,  even  if  gone  out.  Myself  to
wit,  I  confess  it,  I  do  not  love  unless  I  am  ill-used.

Still,  the  cause  for  grief  should  not  be  too  manifest :  and  in
his  anxiety  he  ought  to  suspect  that  there  is  more  than  what  he
actually  knows.  The  harsh  supervision,  too,  of  some  feigned
servant  should  excite  him,  and  the  irksome  watchfulness  of  a
husband  too  severe.  The  pleasure  that  is  enjoyed  in  safety,  is
the  least  valued  of  all.  Though  you  are  more  at  liberty  than
even  Thais,11  still  feign  apprehensions. Whereas  you  could

10  Shut  your  door.} — Ver.  587.  He  addresses  the  husband,  whom  he
supposes  to  be  wearied  with*  satiety.

11  Than  even  Thais.} — Ver.  604.  Thais  seems  to  have  been  a  common
name  with  the  courtesans  of  ancient  times.  Terence,  in  his  Eunuchus,  intro-
duces one  of  that  name,  who  is  pretty  much  of  the  free  and  unrestrained
character  here  depicted.


B.  in.  C05— 631.]  OE, THE AET OE LOYE.  457

do  it  far  better  by  the  door,  admit  him  through  the  window  ;
and  on  your  countenance  show  the  signs  of  fear.  Let  the  cun  •
ning  maid  rush  in,  and  exclaim,  "We  are  undone!"  and  then  do
you  hide  the  youth  in  his  fright  in  any  spot.  Still,  an  enjoy-
ment without  anxiety  must  be  interspersed  with  his  alarms  ;  lest
he  should  not  think  your  favours  to  be  worth  so  much  trouble.

But  I  was  about  to  omit  by  what  methods  the  cunning  hus-
band may  be  eluded,  and  how  the  watchful  keeper.  Let  the
wife  stand  in  awe  of  her  husband  ;  let  the  safe  keeping  of  a
wife  be  allowed.  That  is  proper  ;  that  the  laws,  and  justice,
and  decency  ordain.  But  for  you  as  well  to  be  watched,
whom  the  Lictor's  rod12  has  but  just  set  at  liberty,  who  can
endure  it  ?  Come  to  my  sacred  rites,  that  you  may  learn  how  to
deceive.  Even  if  as  many  eyes  shall  be  watching  you,  as
Argus  had,  if  there  is  only  a  fixed  determination,  you  will  de-
ceive them  all.  And  shall  a  keeper,  forsooth,  hinder  you  from
being  able  to  write,  when  an  opportunity  is  given  you  for  taking
the  bath  1  When  a  female  confidant  can  carry  the  note  you
have  penned,  which  her  broad  girth13  can  conceal  in  her  warm
bosom  ?  When  she  can  conceal  the  paper  fastened  to  her  calf,
and  carry  the  tender  note  beneath  her  sandalled  foot.

Should  the  keeper  be  proof  against  these  contrivances ;
in  place  of  paper,  let  your  confidant  afford  her  shoulders  ;
and  upon  her  own  person  let  her  carry  your  words.  Letters,
too,  written  in  new  milk,  are  safe  and  escape  the  eye  ;  touch
them  with  powdered  coals,  and  you  will  read  them.  The  writing,
too,  which  is  made  with  the  stalk  of  wetted  flax,14  will  deceive,
and  the  clean  surface  will  bear  the  secret  marks. The  care  of

12  Lictor's  rod.] — Ver.  615.  This  conferred  freedom  on  the  slave  who
was  touched  with  it.  See  the  Fasti,  Book  vi.  1.  676,  and  the  Note.  He
means,  that  free-born  women  are  worthy  to  become  wives;  but  'libertinae,'
or  ;  freed- women,'  are  only  fit  to  become  '  professse,'  or  '  courtesans,'  when
they  may  sin  with  impunity,  so  far  as  the  laws  are  concerned.

la  Broad  girth.'] — Ver.  622.  This  seems  to  be  the  kind  of  belt  men
tioned  in  line  274.

14  Stalk  of  wetted  flax.] — Ver.  629.  According  to  the  common  reading,
this  will  mean  that  the  letter  is  to  be  written  on  blank  paper,  with  a  stalk
of  wetted  flax :  which  writing  will  afterwards  appear,  when  a  black  sub-
stance is  thrown  upon  it.  Heinsius  insists  that  the  passage  is  corrupt,
and  suggests  that  '  alumine  nitri '  is  the  correct  reading  ;  in  which  case  it
would  mean  that  alum  water  is  to  be  used  instead  of  ink.  Vossius  tells
us  that  alum  water,  mixed  with  the  juice  of  the  plant  '  tithymalum,'  was
used  for  the  purposes  of  secret  correspondence.


458  AHS  AMATOEIA ;  [b.  in.  631—662.

watching  a  fair  one  fell  to  Acrisius  ;  still,  through  his  own  fault,
did  she  make  him  a  grandsire.  What  can  a  keeper  do,  when
there  are  so  many  Theatres  in  the  City  ?  When,  eagerly  she
is  a  spectator  of  the  harnessed  steeds  ?  When  she  is  sitting  in
attendance  upon  the  sistra  of  the  Pharian  heifer,  and  at  the
place  where  her  male  friends  are  forbidden  to  go  ?  While,  too,
the  Good  Goddess15  expels  the  gaze  of  males  from  her  temples,
except  any  that,  perchance,  she  bids  to  come :  while,  as  the
keeper  watches  outside  the  clothes  of  the  fair,  the  baths  may
in  safety  conceal  the  lovers  who  are  hiding  there ;  while,  so
often  as  is  requisite,  some  pretended  she-friend  may  be  sick,
and,  ill  as  she  is,  may  give  place  for  her  in  her  couch.  While
the  false  key,  too,  tells16  by  its  name  what  we  are  to  do,  and
it  is  not  the  door  alone  that  gives  the  access  you  require.

The  watchfulness  of  the  keeper  is  eluded  by  plenty  of
wine  ;  even  though17  the  grapes  be  gathered  on  the  hills  of
Spain.  There  are  drugs,  too,  which  create  deep  sleep ;  and
let  them  close  the  eyes  overpowered  by  Lethsean  night.  And
not  amiss  does  the  confidant  occupy  the  troublesome  fellow
with  dalliance  to  create  delay,  and  in  his  company  spins  out
the  time.

What  need  is  there  to  be  teaching  stratagems  and  trifling
precepts,  when  the  keeper  may  be  purchased  by  the  smallest
present?  Believe  me,  presents  influence  both  men  and  Gods :
on  gifts  being  presented,  Jupiter  himself  is  appeased.  What
is  the  wise  man  to  do,  when  even  the  fool  is  gratified  with  a
present  ?  The  husband  himself,  on  receiving  a  present,  will  be
silent.  But  once  only  throughout  the  long  year  must  the
keeper  be  bought ;  full  oft  will  he  hold  out  the  hand  which
he  has  once  extended.

I  complained,  I  recollect,  that  new-made  friends  are  to  be
dreaded ;  that  complaint  does  not  extend  to  men  alone.  If  you
are  too  trusting,  other  women  will  interrupt  your  pleasures;  and
this  hare  of  yours  will  be  destined  to  be  hunted  down  by  other

15  Good  Goddess."] — Ver.  637.  The  debauched  Clodius  was  detected
as  being  present  at  these  rites,  in  a  female  dress.

16  The  false  key,  too,  tells."]  — Ver.  643.  He  plays  upon  the  double
meaning  of  the  words,  '  adultera  clavis,'  which  properly  signifies  '  a  false
key.'

17  Even  though.] — Ver.  646.  '•  Even  though  you  should  have  to  go  to
the  expense  of  providing  the  rich  wines  of  Spain  for  the  purpose.'


B.  ill.  662—695.]  OE, THE AET OF LOYE.  4.59

persons.  Even  she,13  who  so  obligingly  lends  her  couch  and
her  room,  believe  me,  has  not  once  only  been  in  my  company.
And  do  not  let  too  pretty  a  maid  wait  upon  you ;  many  a  time
has  she  filled19  her  mistress's  place  for  me.  Whither,  in  my
folly,  am  I  led  on  1  Why  with  bared  breast  do  I  strive  against
the  foe,  and  why,  myself,  am  I  betrayed  through  information
that  is  my  own?  The  bird  does  not  instruct  the  fowler  in  which
direction  he  may  be  taken  :  the  hind  does  not  teach  the  hos-
tile hounds  how  to  run.  Stilly  let  interest  see  to  itself;  my
precepts,  with  fidelity  will  I  give.  To  the  Lemnian  dames,20  for
my  own  destruction,  will  I  present  the  sword.

Give  reason  (and  'tis  easy  to  do  so)  for  us  to  believe  our-
selves to  be  loved.  Belief  arises  readily  in  those  who  are  anx-
ious for  the  fulfilment  of  their  desires.  Let  the  fair  one  eye  the
youth  in  a  kindly  manner  ;  let  her  heave  sighs  from  her  very
heart,  and  let  her  enquire,  why  it  is  he  comes  so  late  1  Let
tears  be  added,  too,  and  feigned  apprehensions  about  a  rival,
and  with  her  fingers  let  her  tear  her  face.  Soon  will  he  be
thoroughly  persuaded,  and  he  will  pity  you  of  his  own  accord;
and  will  say  to  himself,  "This  woman  is  consumed  by  af-
fection for  me."  Especially,  if  he  shall  be  well  drest,  and
shall  please  himself  at  the  looking-glass,  he  will  believe  that
the  Goddesses  might  be  touched  with  love  for  him.  But,  who-
ever you  are,  let  an  injury  disturb  you  only  in  a  moderate  de-
gree; and  don't,  on  hearing  of  a  rival,  go  out  of  your  mind.
And  don't  at  once  believe  it ;  how  injurious  it  is  at  once  to
believe  things,  Procris  will  be  no  slight  proof  to  you.

There  is  near  the  empurpled  hills  of  blooming  Hymettus
a  sacred  spring,  and  the  ground  is  soft  with  the  verdant  turf.
The  wood,  of  no  great  height,  there  forms  a  grove;  the  straw-
berry tree  overshadows  the  grass;  rosemary,  and  laurels,  and
swarthy  myrtles  give  their  perfume.  Neither  the  box-trees  with
their  thick  foliage  and  the  slender  tamarisks,  nor  yet  the  tiny
trefoil  and  the  garden  pine,  are  wanting  there.  Moved  by  the
gentle  Zephyrs  and  the  balmy  air,  the  leaves  of  these  many
kinds,  and  the  tops  of  the  grass  quiver. Pleasant  was  this

13  Even  she.] — Ver.  663.  He  alludes  to  the  accommodating  lady  men-
tioned in  line  641.

19  Has  she  filled.']— Ver.  666.  See  his  address  to  Cypassis,  in  the
Amores,  Book  ii.  El.  viii.

20  Lemnian  dames.]— Ver.  672.  See  the  introduction  to  the  Epistle
from  Hypsipyle  to  Jason.


460  ARS AMATORIA  ;  [b.  III.  695—726.

retreat  to  Cephalus  ;21  his  servants  and  his  hounds  left  behind,
the  youth,  when  weary,  often  sat  down  in  this  spot.  And  here  he
was  in  the  habit  of  repeating,  "Come,  gentle  Aura  [breeze],  to
be  received  in  my  bosom,  that  thou  mayst  moderate  my  heat."

Some  person,  maliciously  officious,  with  retentive  lips  carried
the  words  he  had  heard  to  the  timid  ears  of  his  wife.  Procris,
when  she  heard  the  name  of  Aura  [breeze],  as  though  of  a  rival,
fainted  away,  and  with  this  sudden  apprehension  she  was  mute.
She  turned  pale,  just  as  the  late  leaves  become  wan,  which
the  coming  winter  has  nipped,  the  clusters  now  gathered  from
the  vine  ;  and  as  the  quinces 22  which  in  their  ripeness  are
bending  their  boughs  ;  and  as  the  cornels  not  yet  quite  fit  for
food  for  man.  When  her  senses  bad  returned,  she  tore  her
thin  garments  from  off  her  body  with  her  nails,  and  wounded
her  guiltless  cheeks.  And  no  delay  was  there  ;  raving,  with
dishevelled  locks,  she  flew  amid  the  tracks,  like  a  Bacchanal
aroused  by  the  thyrsus.  When  she  had  come  near  the  spot,
she  left  her  attendants  in  the  valley ;  and  with  silent  foot-
steps, in  her  boldness,  she  herself  stealthily  entered  the  grove.
What,  Procris,  were  thy  feelings,  when  thus,  in  thy  frenzy,
thou  didst  lie  concealed  %  What  the  impulse  of  thy  disquieted
breast?  Each  moment,  forsooth,  wast  thou  expecting  that
she  would  come,  whoever  Aura  might  be,  and  that  their  cri-
minality would  be  witnessed  with  thine  eyes.

Now  dost  thou  repent  of  having  come,  for  indeed  thouwouldst
not  wish  to  detect  him ;  and  now  thou  art  glad  ;  fluctuating  af-
fection is  tormenting  thy  breast.  There  is  the  spot,  and  the
name,  and  the  informant  to  bid  thee  give  credence  ;  and  the
fact  that  the  lover  always  apprehends  that  to  exist  which  he
dreads.  When  she  beheld  the  grass  beaten  down,  the  impress
of  his  body,  her  trembling  bosom  was  throbbing  with  her  palpi-
tating heart.  And  now  midday  had  made  the  unsubstantial
shadows  small,  and  at  an  equal  distance  were  the  evening
and  the  morn.  Behold !  Cephalus,  the  offspring  of  the  Cyi-
lenian  God,23  returns  from  the  woods,  and  sprinkles  his  glow-

21  Cep7ialus.~] — Ver.  695.  This  story  is  also  related  in  the  Seventh  Book
of  the  Metamorphoses.

22  The  quinces.] — Ver.  705.  These  are  called  '  cydonia,'  from  Cydon,
a  city  of  Crete.

23  Cyllenian  God.] — Ver.  725.  Cephalus  was  said  to  be  the  son  of
Mercury ;  but,  according  to  one  account,  which  is  followed  by  Ovid  in  the
Metamorphoses,  Deioneus  was  his  father.


B.  ill.  726— 757.]  OR, THE ART OE LOYE.  461

ing  face  with  water  of  the  fountain.  In  thy  anxiety,  Procris,
art  thou  lying  concealed.  Along  the  grass  he  lies  as  wont,
and  says,  "  Ye  gentle  Zephyrs,  and  thou  Aura  [breeze],  come
hither"  When  the  welcome  mistake  of  the  name  was  thus
revealed  to  the  sorrowing  fair,  both  her  senses  and  the  real
colour  of  her  face  returned.

She  arose  ;  and  the  wife,  about  to  rush  into  the  embrace  of
her  husband,  by  the  moving  of  her  body,  shook  the  leaves  that
were  in  her  way.  He,  thinking  that  a  wild  beast  had  made  the
noise,  with  alacrity  snatched  up  his  bow  ;  his  arrows  were  in
his  right  hand.  What,  wretched  man,  art  thou  about  ?  "lis
no  wild  beast ;  keep  still  thy  weapons.  Ah  wretched  me  !
by  thy  dart  has  the  fair  been  pierced.  "  Ah  me  !"  she  cries
aloud,  "a  loving  heart  hast  thou  pierced.  That  spot  has  ever
retained  the  wounds  inflicted  by  Ceplialus.  Before  my  time
I  die,  but  injured  by  no  rival ;  this,  0  Earth,  will  make  thee
light  when  I  am  entombed.  Now  is  ray  breath  departing  in
the  breeze  that  I  had  thus  suspected  ;  I  sink,  alas  !  close  my
eyes  with  those  dear  hands."

In  his  sorrowing  bosom  he  supports  the  dying  body  of  his
spouse,  and  with  his  tears  he  bathes  her  cruel  wounds.  Her
breath  departs ;  and  gradually  fleeting  from  her  senseless
breast,  her  breath24  is  received  into  the  mouth  of  her  wretched
husband.

But  let  us  return  to  our  path  ;  I  must  deal  with  my  sub-
ject undisguised,  that  my  wearied  bark  may  reach  its  port.
You  may  be  waitmg,  in  fact,  for  me  to  escort  you  to  the  ban-
quet, and  may  be  requesting  my  advice  in  this  respect  as  well.
Come  late,  and  enter  when  the  lights  are  brought  in  ;  delay
is  a  friend  to  passion  ;  a  very  great  stimulant  is  delay.  Even
should  you  be  ugly,  to  the  tipsy  you  will  appear  charming  :
and  night  itself  will  afford  a  concealment  for  your  imper-
fections. Take  up  your  food  with  your  fingers  ;25  the  method
of  eating  is  something  ;  and  do  not  besmear  all  your  face
with your dirty  hand. And do not first16  take food at

2i  Her  breath.] — Ver.  746.  See  the  corresponding  passage  in  the  Me-
tamorphoses, Book  vii.  1.  861.  It  was  the  custom  for  the  nearest  rela-
tive to  catch  the  breath  of  the  dying  person  in  the  mouth.

25  With  your  fingers.'] — Ver.  755.  Perhaps  he  means  in  moderate
quantities  at  a  time,  and  not  in  whole  handfuls.  See  the  Note  to  the
First  Book,  1.  577.

26  And  do  not  first.]  — Ver.  757. He  seems  to  give  two  precepts  here ;


462  AKS AMATOKIA  ;  [b.  in.  757—783.

home ;  but  cease  to  eat  a  little  sooner  than  you  could  wish,
and  could  have  eaten.  Had  the  son  of  Priam  seen  Helen
greedily  devouring,  he  would  have  detested  her  ;  and  he  would
have  said,  "  That  prize  of  mine  is  an  oaf."

It  is  more  proper  and  is  more  becoming  for  the  fair  to  drink
to  excess.  Thou  dost  not,  Bacchus,  consort  amiss  with  the  son
of  Venus.  This  too,  only  so  far  as  the  head  will  bear  it,  and  the
senses  and  the  feet  will  be  able  to  perform  their  duty  ;'i7  and  do
not  see  each  object  that  is  single,  as  double.  A  woman  spraw-
ling along,  and  drenched  in  plenteous  wine,  is  a  disgusting
object ;  she  is  worthy  to  endure  the  embraces  of  any  kind  of
fellows.  And  it  is  no  safe  thing  when  the  tables  are  removed  to
fall  asleep;  in  sleep  many  a  shocking  thing  is  wont  to  happen.
I  feel  ashamed  to  instruct  you  any  further,  but  genial  Dione
says,  "That  which  shames  you  is  especially  my  own  province."
Let  each  particular  then  be  known  unto  you :

modos  a  corpore  certos

Sumite  ;  non  omnes  una  figura  decet.
Quae  facie  prsesignis  eris,  resupina  jaceto  :

Spectentur  tergo,  quis  sua  terga  placent.
Milanion  humeris  Atalantes  crura  ferebat :

Si  bona  sunt,  hoc  sunt  accipienda  modo.
Parva  vehatur  equo  :  quod  erat  longissima,  nunquam

Thebais  Hectoreo  nupta  resedit  equo.
Strata  premat  genibus,  paulum  cervice  reflexa,

Fcemina,  per  longum  conspicienda  latus.
Cui  femur  est  juvenile,  carent  cui  pectora  menda,

Stet  vir,  in  obliquo  fusa  sit  ipsa  toro*
Nee  tibi  turpe  puta  crinem,  ut  Phylleia  mater,

Solvere  :  et  efFusis  colla  reflecte  comis.
Tu  quoque,  cui  rugis  uterum  Lucina  notavit,

Ut  celer  aversis  utere  Parthus  equis.
Mille  modi  Veneris. Simplex  minimique  laboris,

Cum  jacet  in  dextrum  semisupina  Litus.

first,  they  are  not  to  eat  so  much  at  home  as  to  take  away  all  appetite
at  the  banquet,  as  that  would  savour  of  affectation,  and  be  an  act  of  rude-
ness to  the  host.  On  the  other  hand,  he  warns  them  not  to  stuff  as  long
as  they  are  able,  but  rather  to  leave  off  with  an  appetite.  The  passage,
however,  is  hopelessly  corrupt,  and  is  capable  of  other  interpretations.

27  Perform  their  duty.]— -V 'er.  764,  '  Constent/  literally,  'Will  stand
together.'


B.  III.  788—812.] OR, THE ART OE LOYE.  463

Sed  neque  Phcebei  trip  odes,  nee  corniger  Amnion,

Vera  magis  vobis,  quam  mea  Musa,  canent.
Si  qua  fides  arti,  quam  longo  fecimus  usu,

Credite  :  prsestabunt  carmina  nostra  fidem.
Sentiat  ex  imis  Venerem  resoluta  medullis

Fcemina  :  et  ex  aequo  res  juvet  ilia  duos.
Nee  blandse  voces,  jucundaque  murmura  cessent ;

Nee  taceant  mediis  improba  verba  jocis.
Tu  quoque,  cui  Veneris  sensum  natura  negavit,

Duleia  mendaci  gaudia  finge  sono.
Infelix,  cui  torpet  hebes  locus  ille,  puella  es  ;

Quo  pariter  debent  fcemina  virque  frui.
Tantum,  cum  finges,  ne  sis  manifesta  caveto  :

Effice  per  motum  luminaque  ipsa  fidem.
Quod  juvet :  et  voces  et  anhelitus  arguat  oris.

Ah  pudet !  arcanas  pars  habet  ista  notas.
Gaudia  post  Veneris  quae  poscet  munus  amantem,

Ipsa  suas  nolet  pondus  habere  preces.

And  admit  not  the  light  in  your  chamber  with  the*  windows
wide  open ;  many  blemishes  of  your  person  more  becomingly
lie  concealed.

My  pastime  draws  to  a  close  ;  'tis  time  to  descend  from
the  swans,28  that  have  borne  my  yoke  upon  their  necks.  As
once  the  youths  did,  so  now  the  fair,  as  my  audience,  may
inscribe, "  Naso  was  our  preceptor,"  upon  their  spoils.

28  The  swans.] — Ver.  899.  He  also  alludes  to  them  in  the  Metamor-
phoses, as  drawing  the  car  of  Venus,  though  that  office  was  more  gene-
rally assigned  by  the  Poets  to  doves.


EEMEDIA AMORIS;


THE REMEDY OF LOVE.


The  God  of  Love  had  read  the  title  and  the  name  of  this
treatise,  when  he  said,  "  War,  I  see,  war  is  being  meditated
against  me."  Forbear,  Cupid,  to  accuse  thy  Poet  of  such
a  crime ;  me,  who  so  oft  have  borne  thy  standards  with  thee
for  my  leader.  I  am  no  son  of  Tydeus,  wounded  by  whom,1
thy  mother  returned  into  the  yielding  air  with  the  steeds  of
Mars.  Other  youths  full  oft  grow  cool;  I  have  ever  loved  ;  and
shouldst  thou  inquire  what  I  am  doing  even  now,  I  am  still  in
love.  Besides,  I  have  taught  by  what  arts  thou  mayst  be  won  ;
and  that  which  is  now  a  system,  was  an  impulse  before.  Nei-
ther thee  do  I  betray,  sweet  Boy,  nor  yet  my  own  arts  ;  nor
has  my  more  recent  Muse  unravelled  her  former  work.

If  any  one  loves  an  object  which  he  delights  to  love,  en-
raptured, in  his  happiness,  let  him  rejoice,  and  let  him  sail
with  prospering  gales.  But  if  any  one  impatiently  endures
the  sway  of  some  cruel  fair,  that  he  may  not  be  undone,  let
him  experience  relief  from  my  skill.  Why  has  one  person,
tying  up  his  neck2  by  the  tightened  halter,  hung,  a  sad  burden,
from  the  lofty  beam  ?  Why,  with  the  hard  iron,  has  another
pierced  his  own  entrails  ?  Lover  of  peace,  thou  dost  bear  the
blame  of  their  deaths.  He,  who,  unless  he  desists,  is  about
to  perish  by  a  wretched  passion,  let  him  desist ;  and  then  thou
wilt  prove  the  cause  of  death  to  none.  Besides,  thou  art  a,
boy  ;  and  it  becomes  thee  not  to  do  aught  but  play.  Play  on  ;
a  sportive  sway  befits  thy  years. For  thou  mayst  use  thy

1  Wounded  by  whom] — Ver.  5.  He  alludes  to  the  wound  received  by
Venus  from  Diomedes,  the  son  of  Tydeus.

2  Tying  up  his  neck.] — Ver.  17.  He  probably  alludes  to  the  unfortunate
end  of  the  passion  of  Iphis  for  Anaxarete,  which  is  related  at  the  close  of
the  Fourteenth  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses.


25—58.] REHEDIA  AMORIS  ; OR,  THE  REMEDY  OF  LOVE. 465

arrows,  when  drawn  from  the  quiver  for  warfare ;  but  thy
weapons  are  free  from  deadly  blood.

Let  thy  stepfather  Mars  wage  war  both  with  the  sword  and
the  sharp  lance  ;  and  let  him  go,  as  victor,  blood-stained  with
plenteous  slaughter.  Do  thou  cherish  thy  mother's  arts,  which,
in  safety,  we  pursue  ;  and  by  the  fault  of  which  no  parent  be-
comes bereft.  Do  thou  cause  the  portals  to  be  burst  open  in
the  broils  of  the  night ;  and  let  many  a  chaplet  cover  the
decorated  doors.  Cause  the  youths  and  the  bashful  damsels
to  meet  in  secret ;  and  by  any  contrivance  they  can,  let  them
deceive  their  watchful  husbands.  And  at  one  moment,  let
the  lover  utter  blandishments,  at  another,  rebukes,  against  the
obdurate  door-posts;  and,  shut  out,  let  him  sing  some  doleful
ditty.  Contented  with  these  tears,  thou  wilt  be  without  the
imputation  of  any  death.  Thy  torch  is  not  deserving  to  be
applied  to  the  consuming  pile.

These  words  said  I.  Beauteous  Love  waved  his  resplendent
wings,  and  said  to  me,  "Complete  the  work  that  thou  dost  de-
sign." Come,  then,  ye  deceived  youths,  for  my  precepts  ;  ye
whom  your  passion  has  deceived  in  every  way.  By  him,  through
whom  you  have  learned  how  to  love,  learn  how  to  be  cured  ;
for  you,  the  same  hand  shall  cause  the  wound  and  the  remedy.
The  earth  nourishes  wholesome  plants,  and  the  same  produces
injurious  ones  ;  and  full  oft  is  the  nettle  the  neighbour  of  the
rose.  That  lance  which  once  made  a  wound  in  the  enemy,  the
son  of  Hercules,  afforded  a  remedy3  for  that  wound.  But
whatever  is  addressed  to  the  men,  believe,  ye  fair,  to  be  said
to  you  as  well ;  to  both  sides  am  I  giving  arms.  If  of  these
any  are  not  suited  to  your  use,  still  by  their  example  they
may  afford  much  instruction.  My  useful  purpose  is  to  extin-
guish the  raging  flames,  and  not  to  have  the  mind  the  slave  of
its  own  imperfections.  Phyllis  would  have  survived,  if  she  had
employed  me  as  her  teacher  ;  and  along  that  road,  by  which
nine  times  she  went,4  she  would  have  gone  oftener  still.
And  Dido,  dying,  would  not  have  beheld  from  the  summit  of
her  tower  the  Dardanian  ships  giving  their  sails  to  the  wind.

3  A  remedy.] — Ver.  47.  Telephus,  the  son  of  Hercules  and  Auge,
having  been  wounded  by  the  spear  of  Achilles,  was  cured  by  the  applica-
tion of  the  rust  of  the  same  weapon.

4  Nine  times  she  went.] — Ver.  56.  See  the  Epistle  of  Phyllis  to  Demo-
phoon.

H  H


466  KEMEDIA AMORIS;  [59—88.

Grief,  too,  would  not  have  armed  Medea,  the  mother  against
her  own  offspring  ;  she  who  took  vengeance  on  her  husband,
by  the  shedding  of  their  united  blood.  Through  my  skill,
Tereus,  although  Philomela  did  captivate  him,  would  not,
through  his  crimes,  have  been  deserving  to  become  a  bird.6

Give  me  Pasiphae  for  a  pupil,  at  once  she  shall  lay  aside
her  passion  for  the  bull ;  give  me  Phaedra,  the  shocking
passion  of  Phaedra  shall  depart.  Bring  Paris  back  to  us  ;
Menelaiis  shall  possess  his  Helen,  and  Pergamus  shall  not  fall,
conquered  by  Grecian  hands.  If  impious  Scylla  had  read  my
treatise,  the  purple  lock,  Nisus,  would  have  remained  upon  thy
head.  With  me  for  your  guide,  ye  men,  repress  your  per-
nicious anxieties ;  and  onward  let  the  bark  proceed  with  the
companions,  me  the  pilot.  At  the  time  when  you  were
learning  how  to  love,  Naso  was  to  be  studied  ;  now,  too,
will  the  same  Naso  have  to  be  studied  by  you.  An  universal
assertor6  of  liberty,  I  will  relieve  the  breasts  that  are  op-
pressed by  their  tyrants  ;  do  you  show  favour,  each  of  you,
to  my  liberating  wand.7

Prophetic  Phoebus,  inventor  of  song,  and  of  the  healing
art,  I  pray  that  the  laurel  may  afford  me  its  aid.  Do  thou  shew
favour  both  to  the  poet  and  to  the  physician  ;  to  thy  guar-
dianship is  either  care  consigned.

While  still  you  may,  and  while  moderate  emotions  influence
your  breast ;  if  you  repent,  withhold  your  footsteps  upon  the
very  threshold.  Tread  under  foot  the  hurtful  seeds  of  the
sudden  malady,  while  they  are  still  fresh ;  and  let  your  steed,  as
he  begins  to  go,  refuse  to  proceed.  For  time  supplies  strength,
time  thoroughly  ripens  the  yovmg  grapes  ;  and  it  makes  that
into  vigorous  standing  corn,  which  before  was  only  blades  of
grass.  The  tree  which  affords  its  extending  shade  to  those
who  walk  beneath,  was  but  a  twig  at  the  time  when  it  was
first  planted.  At  that  time,  with  the  hand  it  could  have  been
rooted  from  the  surface  of  the  earth  ;  now,  increased  by  its

5  Become  a  bird.] — Ver.  62. See  the  Metamorphoses,  Book  vi.

6  Assertor.] — Ver.  73.  This  word  was  properly  applied  to  one  who  laid
his  hands  on  a  slave,  and  asserted  his  freedom.  By  the  Laws  of  the
'  Twelve  Tahles/  he  was  required  to  give  security  for  his  appearance  in
an  action  hy  the  master  of  the  slave,  to  the  amount  of  fifty  '  asses,'  and
no  more.

~  Liberating  wand.]— Ver.  74.  See  the  Last  Book,  1.  615,  and  the
Note.


88—126.]  OE, THE EEMEDY OF LOYE.  46/

own  powers,  it  is  standing  upon  a  large  space.  Examine  with
active  perception,  what  sort  of  object  it  is,  with  which  you  are
in  love  ;  and  withdraw  your  neck  from  a  yoke  that  is  sure  to
gall.  Resist  the  first  advances  ;  too  late  is  a  cure  attempted,
when  through  long  hesitation  the  malady  has  waxed  strong.
But  hasten,  and  do  not  postpone  to  a  future  moment ;  that
which  is  not  agreable  to-day,  will  to-morrow  be  still  less  so.
Every  passion  is  deceiving,  and  finds  nutriment"  in  delay.
Each  day's  morrow  is  the  best  suited  for  liberty.

You  see  but  few  rivers  arise  from  great  sources  ;  most  of
them  are  multiplied  by  a  collection  of  waters.  If  thou  hadst
at  once  perceived  how  great  a  sin  thou  wast  meditating,  thou
wouldst  not,  Myrrha,  have  had  thy  features  covered  with
bark.  I  have  seen  a  wound,  which  at  first  was  curable,
when  neglected  receive  injury  from  protracted  delay.  But
because  we  are  delighted  to  pluck  the  flowers  of  Venus,  we
are  continually  saying,  "  This  will  be  done  to-morrow  just
as  well."  In  the  meantime,  the  silent  flames  are  gliding  into
the  entrails  ;  and  the  hurtful  tree  is  sending  its  roots  more
deep.

But  if  the  time  for  early  aid  has  now  passed  by,  and  an  old
passion  is  seated  deeply  in  your  captured  breast,  a  greater
labour  is  provided ;  but,  because  I  am  called  in  but  late  to  the
sick,  he  shall  not  be  deserted  by  me.  With  unerring  hand
the  hero,  son  of  Poeas,8  ought  at  once  to  have  cut  out  the
part  in  which  he  was  wounded.  Still,  after  many  a  year,  he
is  supposed,  when  cured,  to  have  given  a  finishing  hand  to
the  warfare.  I,  who  just  now  was  hastening  to  dispel  maladies
at  their  birth,  am  now  tardy  in  administering  aid  to  you  at  a
later  moment.  Either  try,  if  you  can,  to  extinguish  the  flames
when  recent;  or  when  they  have  become  exhausted  by  their  own
efforts.  When  frenzy  is  in  full  career,  yield  to  frenzy  in  its
career;  each  impulse  presents  a  difficult  access.  The  swimmer
is  a  fool,  who,  when  he  can  cross  the  stream  by  going  down
with  it  sideways,  struggles  to  go  straight  against  the  tide.  A
mind  impatient,  and  not  yet  manageable  by  any  contrivance,
rejects  the  words  of  an  adviser,  and  holds  them  in  contempt.
More  successfully,  then,  shall  I  attempt  it.  when  he  shall  now

8  Son  of  Poeas]—  Ver.  111.  See  the  Metamorphoses,  Book  x.  L  45,
and  the  Note.

H  II  2


468  EEMEDIA AMOEIS  ;  [126—154-

allow  his  wounds  to  be  touched,  and  shall  he  accessible  to
the  words  of  truthfulness.

Who,  but  one  bereft  of  understanding,  would  forbid  a
mother  to  weep  at  the  death  of  her  son  ?  On  such  an  occasion
she  is  not  to  be  counselled.  When  she  shall  have  exhausted  her
tears,  and  have  satisfied  her  afflicted  feelings ;  that  grief  of  hers
will  be  capable  of  being  soothed  with  words.  The  healing  art  is
generally  a  work  of  opportunity  ;  wine,  administered  at  the
proper  time,  is  beneficial,  and  administered  at  an  unsuitable
time,  is  injurious.  And,  besides,  you  may  inflame  maladies  and
irritate  them  by  checking  them ;  if  you  do  not  combat  them  at
the  fitting  moment.  Therefore,  when  you  shall  seem  to  be
curable  by  my  skill,  take  care,  and  by  my  precepts  shun  the
first  approaches  of  idleness.  'Tis  that  which  makes  you  love,
'tis  that  which  supports  it,  when  once  it  has  caused  it :  that
is  the  cause  and  the  nutriment  of  the  delightful  malady.

If  you  remove  all  idleness,  the  bow  of  Cupid  is  broken,
and  his  torch  lies  despised  and  without  its  light.  As  much  as
the  plane-tree 9  delights  in  wine,  the  multitude  in  the  stream,
and  as  much  as  the  reed  of  the  marsh  in  a  slimy  soil,  so  much
does  Venus  love  idleness.  You  who  seek  a  termination  of
your  passion,  attend  to  your  business  ;  love  gives  way  before
business  ;  then  you  will  be  safe.  Inactivity,  and  immoderate
slumbers  under  no  control,  gaming  too,  and  the  temples
aching  through  much  wine,  take  away  all  strength  from  the
mind  that  is  free  from  a  wound.  Love  glides  insidiously
upon  the  unwary.  That  Boy  is  wont  to  attend  upon  sloth-
fulness  ;  he  hates  the  busy.  Give  to  the  mind  that  is  un-
employed some  task  with  which  it  may  be  occupied.  There  are
the  Courts,  there  are  the  laws,  there  are  your  friends  for  you
to  defend.10  Go  into  the  ranks11  white  with  the  civic  gown  ;
or  else  do  you  take  up  with  the  youthful  duties  of  blood-
stained Mars  ;  soon  will  voluptuousness  turn  its  back  on  you.

9  Plane-tree.] — Ver.  141.  The  shade  of  this  tree  was  much  valued  as
a  place  of  resort  for  convivial  parties.  Wine  was  sometimes  poured  upon
its  roots.

10  To  defend.]— N  ex.  151. See  the  Fasti,  Book  i.  1.  22,  and  the  Note.

11  Into  the  ranks.  ]— Ver.  152.  He  recommends  the  idle  man  to  become
a  candidate  for  public  honours :  on  which  occasion,  the  party  canvassing
wore  a  white  '  toga,'  whence  he  was  called  '  candidatus,'  literally,  '  one
clothed  in  white.'


155—185.]  OR, THE EEMEDY OF LOVE.  469

Lo  !  the  flying  Parthian,12  a  recent  cause  for  a  great  triumph,
is  now  beholding  the  arms  of  Caesar  on  his  own  plains.  Con-
quer equally  the  arrows  of  Cupid  and  of  the  Parthians,  and
bring  back  a  two-fold  trophy  to  the  Gods  of  your  country.
After  Yenus  had  once  been  wounded  by  the  iEtolian13  spear,
she  entrusted  wars  to  be  waged  by  her  lover.

Do  you  enquire  why  JEgisthus  became  an  adulterer  ?  The
cause  is  self-evident ;  he  was  an  idler.  Others  were  fighting
at  Ilium,  with  slowly  prospering  arms  :  the  whole  of  Greece
had  transported  thither  her  strength.  If  he  would  have  given
his  attention  to  war,  she  was  nowhere  waging  it  ;u  or  if  to  the
Courts  of  law,  Argos  was  free  from  litigation.  What  he
could,  he  did  ;  that  he  might  not  be  doing  nothing,  he  fell  in
love.  Thus  does  that  Boy  make  his  approaches,  so  does  that
Boy  take  up  his  abode.

The  country,  too,  soothes  the  feelings,  and  the  pursuits  of
agriculture :  any  anxiety  whatever  may  give  way  before  this  em-
ployment. Bid  the  tamed  oxen  place  their  necks  beneath  their
burden,  that  the  crooked  ploughshare  may  wound  the  hard
ground.  Cover  the  grain  of  Ceres  with  the  earth  turned  up,
which  the  field  may  restore  to  you  with  bounteous  interest.
Behold  the  branches  bending  beneath  the  weight  of  the  apples;
how  its  own  tree  can  hardly  support  the  weight  which  it  has
produced.  See  the  rivulets  trickling  along  with  their  pleasing
murmur ;  see  the  sheep,  as  they  crop  the  fertile  mead.  Be-
hold how  the  she-goats  clirub  the  rocks,  and  the  steep  crags  ;
soon  will  they  be  bringing  back  their  distended  udders  for
their  kids.  The  shepherd  is  tuning  his  song  on  the  unequal
reeds  ;  the  dogs,  too,  a  watchful  throng,  are  not  far  off.  In
another  direction  the  lofty  woods  are  resounding  with  low-
ings  ;  and  the  dam  is  complaining  that  her  calf  is  missing.
Why  name  the  ^wzewhen  the  swarms  fly  from  the  yew  trees,'5

12  Flying  Parthian.] — Yer.  155.  See  the  Art  of  Love,  Book  i.  1.  177,
and  the  Note.

13  JEtolian.] — Yer.  159. iEtolia  was  the  native  country  of  Diomedes.

14  Waging  it.] — Yer.  165.  He  might  have  gone  to  Troy,  and  taken  part
in  that  war  ;  unless,  indeed,  as  Ovid  hints  in  another  passage,  his  intrigue
did  not  commence  with  Clytemnestra  till  after  Troy  had  fallen,  and  Cas-
sandra had  become  the  captive  of  Agememnon.

15  Fig  from  the  yew  trees.'] — Yer.  185.  '  Fumos,'  '  smoke,'  is  a  better
reading  here  than  '  taxos,'  '  yews,'  inasmuch  as  the  swarm  of  bees  would
be  driven  away  by  smoke,  but  not  by  the  yew,  which  was  not  noxious  to


470  EEMEDIA  AMOEIS ;  [185—214.

placed  beneath  them,  that  the  honey-combs  removed  may  re-
lieve the  bending  osiers16  of  their  weight?  Autumn  affords
its  fruit ;  summer  is  beauteous  with  its  harvests  ;  spring  pro-
duces flowers  ;  winter  is  made  cheerful  by  the  fire.  At  stated
periods  the  rustic  pulls  the  ripened  grape,  and  beneath  his
naked  foot  the  juice  flows  out ;  at  stated  periods  he  binds  up
the  dried  hay,  and  clears  the  mowed  ground  with  the  wide
toothed  rake.

You  yourself  may  set  the  plant  in  the  watered  garden  ;  you
yourself  may  form  the  channels  for  the  trickling  stream.  The
grafting17  is  now  come ;  make  branch  adopt  branch,  and  let
one  tree  stand  covered  with  the  foliage  of  another.  When
once  these  delights  have  begun  to  soothe  your  mind,  Love,
robbed  of  his  power,  departs  with  flagging  wings.

Or  do  you  follow  the  pursuit  of  hunting.  Full  oft  has
Venus,  overcome  by  the  sister  of  Phoebus,  retreated  in  disgrace.
Now  follow  the  fleet  hare  with  the  quick-scented  hound ;
now  stretch  your  toils  on  the  shady  mountain  ridge.  Or  else,
alarm  the  timid  deer  with  the  variegated  feather-foils  ;17*  or  let
the  boar  fall,  transfixed  by  the  hostile  spear.  Fatigued,  at
night  sleep  takes  possession  of  you,  not  thoughts  of  the  fair  ;
and  with  profound  rest  it  refreshes  the  limbs.  'Tis  a  more
tranquil  pursuit,  still  it  is  a  pursuit,  on  catching  the  bird,
to  win  the  humble  prize,  either  with  the  net  or  with  the  bird-
limed  twigs ;  or  else,  to  hide  the  crooked  hooks  of  brass  in
morsels  at  the  end,  which  the  greedy  fish  may,  to  its  destruction,
swallow  with  its'  ravenous  jaws.  Either  by  these,  or  by  other
pursuits,  must  you  by  stealth  be  beguiled  by  yourself,  until
you  shall  have  learnt  how  to  cease  to  love.

Only  do  you  go,  although  you  shall  be  detained  by  strong
ties,  go  far  away,  and  commence  your  progress  upon  a  distant

the  swarm,  though  it  was  thought  to  make  the  honey  of  a  poisonous  na-
ture, or  bitter,  according  to  Pliny.  See  the  Amores,  B.  i.  El.  xii.  1.  10,
and  the  Note.

16  Bending  osiers.]— Ver.  186.  The  beehives,  if  stationary,  were  made
of  brick,  or  baked  cow  dung ;  if  moveable,  they  were  made  from  a  hollow
block  of  wood,  cork,  bark,  earthenware,  and,  as  in  the  present  instance,
wicker-work,  or  osier.  Those  of  cork  were  deemed  the  best,  and  those  of
earthenware  the  worst,  as  being  most  susceptible  to  the  variations  of  the
temperature.

17  The  grafting.] — Ver.  195.  The  process  of  engrafting  was  performed
in  the  spring.

1T*  Feather-foils.]— Ver.  203.  See  the  Fasti,  B.  v.  1.  173,  and  the
note.


214—242.]  OR, THE REMEDY OF LOYE.  4/1

journey.  You  will  weep  when  the  name  of  your  forsaken
mistress  shall  recur  to  you  :  and  many  a  time  will  your  foot
linger  in  the  middle  of  your  path.  But  the  less  willing  you
shall  be  to  go,  remember  the  more  surely  to  go  ;  persist ;  and
compel  your  feet  to  hasten,  however  unwillingly.  And  don't
you  fear  showers  ;  nor  let  the  Sabbaths18  of  the  stranger  detain
you  ;  nor  yet  the  Allia,19  so  well  known  for  its  disasters.  And
don't  enquire  how  many  miles  you  have  travelled,  but  how
many  are  yet  remaining  for  you  ;  and  invent  no  excuses,  that
you  may  remain  near  at  hand.  Neither  do  you  count  the
hours,  nor  oft  look  back  on  Rome :  but  fly ;  still  is20  the
Parthian  secure  in  flight  from  his  foe.

Some  one  may  style  my  precepts  harsh  :  I  confess  that
they  are  harsh ;  but  that  you  may  recover,  you  will  have  to
endure  much  that  is  to  be  lamented.  Full  oft,  when  ill,  I  have
drunk  of  bitter  potions,  though  reluctantly ;  and  when  I
entreated  for  it,  food  has  been  refused  me.  To  cure  your
body,  you  will  have  to  endure  iron  and  fire  ;  and  though
thirsty,  you  will  not  refresh  your  parched  lips  with  water.
That  you  may  be  healed  in  spirit,  will  you  refuse  to  submit  to
anything?  Inasmuch  as  that  part  is  ever  of  greater  value  than
the  body.  But  still,  most  difficult  is  the  access  to  my  art ;  and
the  one  labour  is  how  to  endure  the  first  moments  of  separa-
tion. Do  you  perceive  how  the  yoke,  at  first,  galls  the  oxen
when  caught  ?  how  the  new  girth  hurts  the  flying  steed  ?

Perhaps  you  will  be  loth  to  depart  from  your  paternal  home.
But  still  you  will  depart ;  then  you  will  be  longing  to  return.
No  paternal  home,21  but  the  love  of  your  mistress,  cloaking
its  own  faultiness  by  specious  words,  will  be  calling  you  back.
When  once  you  have  gone,  the  country,  and  your  companions,
and  the  long  journey  will  afford  a  thousand  solaces  for  your

18  Nor  let  the  Sabbaths.'] — Ver.  219.  It  is  supposed  that  the  Romans  in
some  measure  imitated  the  Jews  in  the  observance  of  their  Sabbath,  by
setting  apart  every  seventh  day  for  the  worship  of  particular  Deities.  See
the  Art  of  Love,  Book  i.  lines  76  and  416,  and  the  Notes.

19  Allia.]— Ver.  220.  See  the  Art  of  Love,  Book  i.  1.  413  ;  and  the
Ibis,  1.  221,  and  the  Notes.

20  Still  is.  ]— Ver.  224.  By  the  use  of  the  word  « adhuc,'  <  still,'  or
'  up  to  this  time,'  he  intends  to  pay  a  compliment  to  Augustus,  by  implying
that  they  will  not  long  remain  unconquered.

21  Paternal  home.] — Ver.  239,  Literally,  '  paternal  Lar.'  On  the  Lares,
see  the  Fasti,  Book  i.  1.  136  ;  and  Book  v.  1.  140,  and  the  Notes.


472  EEMEDIA AMORIS  ;  [242—270.

sorrow.  And  do  not  think  it  is  enough  to  depart ;  be  absent
for  a  long  time,  until  the  flame  has  lost  its  power  and  the  ashes
are  without  their  fire.  If  you  shall  hasten  to  return,  except
with  your  judgment  strengthened,  rebellious  Love  will  be
wielding  his  cruel  arms  against  you.  Suppose  that,  although
you  shall  have  absented  yourself,  you  return  both  hungry  and
thirsty  ;  will  not  all  this  delay  even  act  to  your  detriment  ?

If  any  one  supposes  that  the  noxious  herbs  of  the  Hsemo-
nian  lands  and  magic  arts  can  be  of  avail,  let  him  see  to  it.
That  is  the  old-fashioned  method  of  sorcery;  my  Apollo,  in  his
hallowed  lines,  is  pointing  out  an  innoxious  art.  Under  my
guidance,  no  ghost  shall  be  summoned  to  come  forth22  from
the  tomb  ;  no  hag  with  her  disgusting  spells  shall  cleave  the
ground.  No  crops  of  corn  shall  remove  from  one  field  into
another ;  nor  shall  the  disk  of  Phoebus  suddenly  be  pale.
Tiberinus23  shall  flow  into  the  waves  of  the  ocean  just  as  he  is
wont ;  just  as  she  is  wont,  shall  the  Moon  be  borne  by  her
snow-white  steeds.  No  breasts  shall  lay  aside  their  cares
dispelled  by  enchantments  ;  vanquished  by  virgin  sulphur,24
love  shall  not  take  to  flight.

Colchian  damsel,  what  did  the  herbs  of  the  Phasian  land
avail  thee,  when  thou  didst  desire  to  remain  in  thy  native  home?
Of  what  use,  Circe,  were  the  herbs  of  thy  mother  Persa  to  thee,
when  the  favouring  breeze  bore  away  the  barks  of  Neritos?25
Every  thing  didst  thou  do  that  thy  crafty  guest  might  not
depart ;  still  did  he  give  his  filled  sails  to  an  assured  flight.
Every  thing  didst  thou  do  that  the  fierce  flames  might  not
consume  thee ;  still  a  lasting  passion  settled  deep  in  thy
reluctant  breast.  Thou,  who  wast  able  to  change  men  into  a
thousand  shapes,  wast  not  able  to  change  the  bent  of  thy  own

22  To  come  forth.'] — Ver.  250.  See  the  Amores,  Booki.  El.  viii.  1.  17,
18,  and  the  Note.  This  achievement  is  similar  to  that  performed  by  the
•witch  of  Endor,  if,  indeed,  she  did  not  impose  on  the  unhappy  Saul,  and
tell  him  that  the  spirit  of  Samuel  appeared,  when  that  really  was  not  the
case.

23  Tiberinus  ]—  Ver.  257.  See  the  Fasti,  Book  ii.  1.  389,  and  the  Note.
Also  Book  iv.  1.  47  ;  the  Ibis,  1.  516  ;  and  the  Metamorphoses,  Book  xiv.
1.  614.

24  Virgin  sulphur.]— Vet.  260.  See  the  Art  of  Love,  Book  ii.  1.  329,
and  the  Note.

25  Neritos.']  —  Ver.  264.  This  island  formed  part  of  the  realms  of
Ulysses.


270—305.]  OE, THE EEMEDY OF LOVE.  4  "3

inclination. Thou  art said  to  have  detained  the  Dulichian
chief,26  when  now  he  wished  to  depart,  even  in  these  words  :

"  I  do  not  now  entreat  that  which,  as  I  remember,  I  was
at  first  wont  to  hope  for,  that  thou  shouldst  consent  to  be
my  husband.  And  still,  I  did  seem  worthy  to  be  thy  wife,
since  I  was  a  Goddess,  since  I  was  the  daughter  of  the  Sun.
Hasten  not  away,  I  entreat  thee  ;  a  little  delay,  as  a  favour,
do  I  ask.  What  less  can  be  prayed  for  by  my  entreaties  ?
Thou  seest,  too,  that  the  seas  are  troubled  ;  and  of  them  thou
oughtst  to  stand  in  dread.  Before  long,  the  winds  will  be
more  favourable  to  thy  sails.  What  is  the  cause  of  thy  flight  1
No  Troy  is  rising  here  anew ;  no  fresh  Rhesus  is  calling  his
companions  to  arms.  Here  love  abides,  here  peace  exists ;
during  which  I  alone  am  fatally  wounded :  the  whole,  too,  of
my  realms  shall  be  under  thy  sway."

She  thus  spoke  ;  Ulysses  unmoored  his  bark ;  the  South
winds  bore  away  her  unavailing  words  together  with  his  sails.
Circe  was  inflamed,  and  had  recourse  to  her  wonted  arts  ;  and
still  by  them  her  passion  was  not  diminished.

Come,  then,  whoever  you  are,  that  require  aid  from  my
skill,  away  with  all  belief  in  spells  and  charms.  If  some
weighty  reason  shall  detain  you  in  the  City  mistress  of  the
world,  hear  what  is  my  advice  in  the  City.  He  is  the  best
assertor  of  his  liberties  who  bursts  the  chains  that  gall  his
breast,  and  once  for  all  ceases  to  grieve.  If  any  one  has  so
much  courage,  even  I  myself  will  admire  him,  and  I  shall  say,
"  This  man  stands  in  no  need  of  my  admonitions."  You  who
with  difficulty  are  learning  how  not  to  love  the  object  which
you  love  ;  who  are  not  able,  and  still  would  wish  to  be  able,
will  require  to  be  instructed  by  me.  Full  oft  recall  to  your
remembrance  the  deeds  of  the  perfidious  fair  one,  and  place
all  your  losses  before  your  eyes.  Say,  "This  thing  and  that
of  mine  does  she  keep  ;  and  not  content  with  that  spoliation,
she  has  put  up  for  sale27  my  paternal  home.  Thus  did  she
swear  to  me;  thus  having  sworn,  did  she  deceive  me.  How  oft
has  she  suffered  me  to  he  before  her  doors ! She  herself  loves

26  Dulichian  chief.'] — Ver.  272.  Dulichium  was  one  of  the  Echinades,  a
group  of  islands  on  the  western  side  of  the  Peloponnesus,  and  was  subject
to  Ulysses. See  the  Metamorphoses,  Book  viii.  1.  590,  and  the  Note.

27  Put  up  for  sale.]  — Ver.  302. Through  her  extravagance.


474  EEMEDIA AMOEIS  ;  [305—336.

other  men  ;  by  me  she  loathes  to  be  loved.  Some  hawker,26,
alas !  enjoys  those  nights  which  she  grants  not  to  myself."

Let  all  these  points  ferment  throughout  your  entire  feelings  ;
repeat  them  over  and  over  ;  hence  seek  the  first  germs  of
your  hate.  And  would  that  you  could  be  even  eloquent
upon  them  !  Do  you  only  grieve  ;  of  your  own  accord  you
will  be  fluent.  My  attentions  were  lately  paid  to  a  certain
fair  one;  to  my  passion  she  was  not  favourably  disposed.
Sick,  like  Podalirius,29  I  cured  myself  with  the  proper  herbs,
and  (I  confess  it)  though  a  physician,  to  my  shame,  I  was  sick.
It  did  me  good  to  be  ever  dwelling  upon  the  failings  of  my
mistress  ;  and  that,  when  done,  often  proved  wholesome  for
me.  "  How  ill  formed,"  I  used  to  say,  "  are  the  legs  of  my
mistress !"  and  yet,  to  confess  the  truth,  they  were  not.
"  How  far  from  beautiful  are  the  arms  of  my  mistress  I"  and
yet,  to  confess  the  truth,  they  were.  "  How  short  she  is  !"
and  yet  she  was  not ;  "  How  much  does  she  beg  of  her  lover  1"
From  that  arose  the  greatest  cause  of  my  hatred.

There  are  good  qualities,  too,  near  akin  to  bad  ones ;  by
reason  of  confounding  one  for  the  other,30  a  virtue  has  often
borne  the  blame  for  a  vice.  So  far  as  you  can,  depreciate
the  endowments  of  the  fair  one,  and  impose  upon  your  own
judgment  by  the  narrow  line  that  separates  good  from  bad.
If  she  is  embonpoint,  let  her  be  called  flabby,  if  she  is  swar-
thy, black.  Leanness  may  be  charged  against  her  slender
form.  She,  too,  who  is  not  coy  may  be  pronounced  bold ;
and  if  she  is  discreet,  she  may  be  pronounced  a  prude.
Besides,  in  whatever  accomplishment  your  mistress  is  defi-
cient, ever  be  entreating  her,  in  complimentary  accents,  to
turn  her  attention  to  the  same.  If  any  damsel  is  without  a
voice,  request  her  to  sing  ;  if  any  fair  one  does  not  know  how
to  move  her  hands31  with  gracefulness,  make  her  dance.  Is  she
uncouth  in  her  language,  make  her  talk  frequently  to  you  ;  has
she  not  learnt  how  to  touch  the  strings,  call  for  the  lyre.

28  Some  hawker.] — Ver.  306.  See  the  Art  of  Love,  Book  i.  1. 421,  and
the  Note.  Being  mostly  liberated  slaves,  the  '  institores '  were  looked
upon  with  great  contempt  by  the  Romans.

29  Podalirius.]— Ver.  313.  See  the  Art  of  Love,  Book  ii.  1.  735,  and
the  Note.

30  Confounding  one  for  the  other.] — Ver.  323.  '  Errore  sub  illo.'  Lite-
rally, '  under  that  mistake.'

31  Move  her  hands, .] — Ver.  334.  He  alludes  to  the  gestures  used  in
dancing.


337—366.]  OK, THE REMEDY OE LOVE.  475

Does  she  walk  heavily,  make  her  walk  ;  does  a  swelling  bosom
cover  all  her  breast,  let  no  stomacher32  conceal  it.  If  her
teeth  are  bad,  tell  her  something  for  her  to  laugh  at :  is  she
tender-eyed,  relate  something  for  her  to  weep  at.

It  will  be  of  use,  too,  for  you,  early  in  the  morning  sud-
denly, to  turn  your  hasty  steps  towards  your  mistress,  when  she
has  dressed  for  no  one.  By  dress  are  we  enchanted  ;  by  gems
and  gold  all  things  are  concealed ;  the  fair  one  herself  is  but  a
very  trifling  part  of  herself.  Often,  amid  objects  so  many,  you
may  inquire  what  it  is  that  you  love.  By  this  iEgis 33  does  Love,
amid  his  riches,  deceive  the  eye.  Come  unexpectedly ;  in  safety
to  yourself  you  will  find  her  unarmed ;  to  her  misfortune,
through  her  own  failings  will  she  fall.  Still,  it  is  not  safe  to
trust  too  much  to  this  precept,  for  without  the  resources  fl/>art
a  graceful  form  captivates  many.  At  the  moment,  too,  when
she  shall  be  smearing  her  face  with  the  cosmetics  laid  on  it,
you  may  come  in  the  presence  of  your  mistress,  and  don't  let
shame  prevent  you.  You  will  find  there  boxes,  and  a  thousand
colours  of  objects  ;  and  you  will  see  cesypum,  the  ointment
of  the  fleece^  trickling  down  and  flowing  upon  her  heated
bosom.  These  drugs,  Phineus,  smell  like  thy  tables  ;35  not
once  only  has  sickness  been  caused  by  this  to  my  stomach.

Now  will  I  disclose  to  you,  what  should  be  done  in  the
moments  of  your  transport ;  from  every  quarter  must  love  be
put  to  flight.  Many  of  them,  indeed,  I  am  ashamed  to  mention  ;
but  do  you  conceive  in  your  imagination  even  more  than  lies  in
my  words.  For,  of  late,  certain  persons  have  been  blaming
my  treatises,  in  the  opinion  of  whom  my  Muse  is  wanton.  If
I  only  please,  and  so  long  as  I  am  celebrated  all  the  world
over,  let  this  person  or  that  attack  my  work  just  as  he  likes.
Envy  detracts  from  the  genius  of  mighty  Homer ;  whoever
thou  art, from  him, Zoilus,36  dost thou  derive thy  fame.

32  Stomacher.']— Ver.  338.  See  the  Art  of  Love,  Book  iii.  1.  374,  and
the  Note.

33  This  Mgis.]—Xer.  346.  See  the  Fasti,  Book  iii.  1.  848,  and  the
Note  ;  also  the  Metamorphoses,  Book  iv.  1.  798.

34  Of  the  fleece.]— Vex.  354.  See  the  Art  of  Love,  Book  iii.  1.  213,  and
the  Note.  Surely  Swift  must  have  borrowed  his  notion  of  describing
Chloe's  dressing-room  from  these  passages.  See  the  Art  of  Love,  Book  i.
1.  339,  and  the  Note.

35  Smell  like  thy  tables.'] — Ver.  355.  He  alludes  to  the  defilement  of
the  tables  of  Phineus  by  the  filthy  Harpies.

56  From  him,  Zoilus.'] — Ver.  366.  It  was  unknown  of  what  parentage  and


476  EEMEDIA  AMORIS;  [367—384.

Sacrilegious  hands  have  also  mangled  thy  poems,37  thou,
under  whose  guidance  Troy  brought  hither  her  conquered
Divinities.  Envy  takes  a  lofty  flight ;  on  high  the  breezes
sweep  along ;  the  lightnings  hurled  by  the  right  hand  of  Jove
take  a  lofty  range.

But  you,  whoever  you  are,  whom  my  freedom  offends,  re-
quire, if  you  are  wise,  each  subject  for  its  proper  numbers.38
Bold  warfare  delights  to  be  related  in  the  Maeonian  measure.
What  place  can  there  be  there  for  gentle  dalliance  ?  The
Tragedians  speak  in  lofty  tones  ;  anger  befits  the  buskin  of
Tragedy ;  the  sock  of  Comedy™  must  be  furnished  from  the
manners  of  every-day  life.  The  free  Iambic  measure  may  be
launched  against  the  hostile  foe  ;  whether  it  be  rapid,  or
whether  it  drag  on  its  foot40  at  its  close.  Soft  Elegy  should
sing  of  the  Loves  with  their  quivers,  and  the  sprightly  mistress
ought  to  sport  according  to  her  own  inclination.  Achilles  is
not  to  be  celebrated  in  the  numbers  of  Callimachus  ;  Cydippe41
belongs  not,  Homer,  to  thy  song.  Who  could  endure  Thais
performing  the  part  of  Andromache  ?42  If  any  one  were  to  act
Thais  in the  tones  of  Andromache,  he  would  be  making  a

country  Zoilus  was.  He  compiled  a  work  in  dispraise  of  Homer,  and
was  called  by  the  ancients,  '•  Homeromastix,'  '  the  scourge  of  Homer.'
Zoilus  was  ultimately  accused  of  parricide,  and  crucified.

37  Mangled  thy  poems. .] — Ver.  367.  He  alludes  to  Virgil,  who,  he  says,
had  his  censurers  as  well.  Carvilius  Picto  wrote  a  satire  against  the  iEneid,
called  ^neidomastix.

38  pr0per  numbers.} — Ver.  372.  He  adroitly  avows  the  essence  of  the
charge,  by  defending  the  Elegiac  measure,  in  which  he  had  written,  and
which  could  not  be  the  object  of  any  censures.  He  does  not  say  a  word
in  defence  of  the  subject  matter,  which  had  incurred  these  remarks.

39  The  sock  of  Comedy. 1— -V er.  376.  The  '  soccus '  was  a  low  shoe,
which  did  not  fit  closely,  and  had  no  tie.  These  shoes  were  worn  among
the  Greeks  by  both  men  and  women.  The  '  soccus '  was  worn  by  comic
actors,  and  was  in  this  respect  opposed  to  the  '  cothurnus,'  or  '  buskin,'
of  Tragedy.

40  Drag  on  its  foot."]— Ver.  378.  He  alludes  first  to  a  genuine  Iambic
line,  ending  with  an  Iambus,  and  then  to  a  Scazonic  line,  so  called  from
the  Greek  word,  <Ttca£ujv  '  limping,'  which  was  a  kind  of  bastard  Iambic
line,  having  a  Trochee  (or  foot  of  a  long  and  a  short  syllable)  in  the  last
place,  instead  of  an  Iambus.  Scazonic  lines  were  much  used  in  satirical
composition.

41  Cydippe.] — Ver.  382.  Callimachus  wrote  a  poem  on  the  loves  of
Acontius  and  Cydippe. See  Epistles  xx  and  xxi.

4i  Andromache.] — Ver.  383.  She  was  a  heroine  of  Tragedy,  while
Thais,  the  courtesan,  figured  in  the  Eunuchus,  a  Comedy  of  Terence.


381—419.]  Ofi, THE KEAIEDY OP LOYE.  477

mistake.  Thais  belongs  to  my  pursuit ;  licence  unrestrained
belongs  to  me.  Nought  have  I  to  do  with  the  fillet  of
chastity;  Thais  belongs  to  my  pursuit.  If  my  Muse  is  befit-
ting a  sportive  subject,  I  have  conquered,  and  on  a  false
charge  she  has  been  accused.

Burst  thyself,  gnawing  Envy ;  now  have  I  gained  great
fame  ;  'twill  be  still  greater,  let  it  only  proceed  with  the  steps
with  which  it  has  commenced.  But  you  are  making  too  great
haste  ;  let  me  only  live,  you  shall  have  more  to  complain  of;
my  intentions,  too,  embrace  full  many  a  poem.  For  it  gives
me  delight,  and  my  zeal  increases  with  my  eagerness  for  fame  ;
at  the  beginning  of  the  ascent  only  is  my  steed  now  panting.
Elegy  acknowledges  that  to  me  she  is  as  much  indebted  as  is
the  noble  Epic43  to  Virgil.

Thus  far  do  I  give  an  answer  to  Envy ;  tighten  the  reins
with  more  vigour,  and  speed  onward,  Poet,  in  thy  circle.

Ergo  ubi  concubitus,  et  opus  juvenile  petetur  ;

Et  prope  prornissae  tempora  noctis  erunt ;
Gaudia  ne  dominse,  pleno  si  pectore  sumes,

Te  capiant :  ineas  quamlibet  ante  velim.
Quamlibet  invenias,  in  qua  tibi  prima  voluptas

Desinat :  a  prima  proxima  segnis  erit.
Sustentata  Yenus  gratissima  :  frigore  soles,

Sole  juvant  umbrae  :  grata  fit  unda  siti.
Et  pudet,  et  dicam,  Yenerem  quoque  junge  figura,

Qua  minime  jungi  quamque  decere  putes.

And  'tis  no  hard  matter  to  do  this  ;  few  women  confess  the
truth  to  themselves  ;  and  there  is  no  point  in  which  they  think
that  they  are  unbecoming.  Then,  too,  I  recommend  you  to
open  all  the  windows,  and  to  remark  in  full  daylight  the  limbs
that  are  unsightly.  But  as  soon  as  your  transports  have  come
to  a  termination,  and  the  body  with  the  mind  lies  entirely  ex-
hausted ;  while  you  are  feeling  regret,  and  wishing  that  you
had  formed  a  connexion  with  no  female,  and  are  seeming  to
yourself  that  for  a  long  time  you  will  have  nothing  to  do  with
another;  then  note  in  your  memory  whatever  blemishes  there
are  in  her  person  ;  and  keep  your  eyes  always  fixed  upon  her
faulty  points.

Perhaps  some  one  will  pronounce  these  matters  trivial  (for  in-

43  Noble  Epic] — Ver.  396. 'Epos'  seems  preferable  here  to  'opus,'
the  common  reading.


4/8  EEMEDIA AMOETS  ;  [419—455.

deed  they  are  so)  ;  but  things  which,  singly,  are  of  no  avail,
when  united  are  of  benefit.  The  little  viper  kills  with  its
sting  the  bulky  bull ;  by  the  dog  that  is  not  large,  full  oft  is
the  boar  held  fast.  Do  you  only  fight  with  a  number  of  them,
and  unite  my  precepts  together ;  from  so  many  there  will
be  a  large  amount.  But  since  there  are  so  many  ways  and
attitudes,  every  point  is  not  to  be  yielded  to  my  recommenda-
tions. Perhaps,  in  the  opinion  of  another,  that  will  be  a  fault,
by  the  doing  of  which  your  feelings  may  not  be  hurt.  Be-
cause this  person,  perchance,  has  seen  the  charms  of  the
naked  person  exposed,  his  passion,  which  was  in  mid  career,
stops  short :  another,  when  his  mistress  has  received  him,  has
been  shocked  at  some  sight  which  creates  disgust.43*

Alas  !  if  these  things  could  influence  you,  you  are  trifling  ;
torches  but  luke-warm  have  been  influencing  your  breast.
That  Boy  would  more  strongly  draw  his  bended  bow  :  you,  ye
wounded  throng,  will  need  more  a  substantial  aid.  What
think  you  of  the  man  who  lies  concealed,  and  beholds  sights
that  usage  itself  forbids  him  to  see  ?  May  the  Gods  forbid
that  I  should  advise  any  one  to  adopt  such  a  course !  Though
it  should  prove  of  use,  still  it  should  not  be  tried.

I  advise  you,  also,  to  have  two  mistresses  at  the  same  time.
If  a  person  can  have  still  more,  he  is  more  secure.  When  the
feelings,  sundered  into  two  parts,  are  wavering  in  each  direc-
tion, the  one  passion  diminishes  the  strength  of  the  other.
By  many  streamlets  are  great  rivers  lessened,  and  the  exhausted
flame,  the  fuel  withdrawn,  goes  out.  But  one  anchor  does
not  sufficiently  hold  the  waxed  ships ;  a  single  hook  is  not
enough  for  the  flowing  stream.  He  who  beforehand  has  pro-
vided for  himself  a  twofold  solace,  has  already  proved  the
victor  in  the  lofty  citadel.  But,  by  you,  who,  to  your  mis-
fortune, have  devoted  yourself  to  but  one  mistress,  now,  at  all
events,  a  new  passion  must  be  sought.  For  Procris44  did
Minos  abandon  his  flame  for  Pasiphae  ;  overcome  by  the
wife  from  Ida,45  the  first  wife  gave  way.  Calirrhoe,  received  to
a  share  of  his  couch,  caused  the  brother  of46  Amphilochus  not

43*  Disgust."] — Ver.  432.  This  passage  and  that  in  1.  437,  are  neees-
sa  ily  somewhat  modified.

4i  Procris.] — Ver.  453.  See  the  Translation  of  the  Metamorphoses,
p 262.

45  Wife  from  Ida."] — Ver.  454.  He  refers  to  Clytemnestra  heing  sup-
planted by  Cassandra.

4J  The'brother  of.]-— Ver.  455. Alcmrcon  was  married  to  Alphesibea,


455—484.]  OK, THE REMEDY OF LOTE.  4/9

ilways  to  be  in  love  with  the  daughter  of  Phegeus.  (En one,
too,  would  have  retained  Paris  to  her  latest  years,  if  she  had
not  been  supplanted  by  her  (Ebalian  rival.  The  beauty  of
his  wife  would  have  pleased  the  Odrysian 47  tyrant,  but  supe-
rior were  the  charms  of  her  imprisoned  sister.

Why  occupy  myself  with  illustrations,  the  number  of  which
exhausts  me  ?  Every  passion  is  conquered  by  a  fresh  successor.
With  greater  fortitude  does  a  mother  regret  one  out  of  many,
than  she  who,48  weeping,  exclaims  : "Thou  wast  my  only  one."
But  lest,  perchance,  you  should  suppose  that  I  am  framing  new
laws  for  you,  (and  would  that  the  glory  of  the  discovery  were
my  own !)  the son  of  Atreus  perceived  this  ;  for  what  could
he  not  see,  under  whose  command  was  the  whole  of  Greece  1
He,  victorious,  loved  Chryseis,  captured  by  his  own  arms  ;  but
her  aged  parent  foolishly  went  crying  in  every  direction.  Why
dost  thou  weep,  troublesome  old  man  1 They  are  well  suited
for  each  other.  By  thy  affection,  foolish  man,  thou  art  doing  an
injury  to  thy  child. After  Calchas,  secure  under  the  protec-
tion of  Achilles,  had  ordered49  her  to  be  restored,  and  she  was
received  back  to  the  house  of  her  father :  "  There  is,"  said
the  son  of  Atreus,  "another  fair  one  very  closely  resembling  her
beauty  ; and  if the  first  syllable50  would  allow  of  it, the
name  ivould  be  the  same ;  Achilles,  if  he  were  wise,  would  give
her  up  to  me  of  his  own  accord  ;  if  not,  he  will  experience
my  might. But  if  any  one  of  you,  ye  Greeks,  disapproves  of
this  deed  ;  'tis  something  to  wield  the  sceptre  with  a  power-
ful hand. For  if  I  am  your  king,  and  if  she  does  not  pass
her  nights  with  me,  then  let  Thersites  succeed  to  my  sway."
Thus  he  said ;  and  he  had  her  as  his  great  consolation  for  her
predecessor ;  and  the  first  passion  was  entombed  in  a  new

the  daughter  of  Phegeus,  and  deserted  her  for  Calirrhoe,  the  daughter  of
the  river  Achelous.

47  Odrysian.] — Ver.  459.  He  here  alludes  to  the  story  of  Tereus  and
Progne.

48  Than  she  who.'] — Ver.  464.  'Quae'  seems  to  he  a  preferable  reading
to  '  cui ;'  though  in  either  case  the  sense  is  the  same.  Ovid  had  probably
the  instance  of  Niobe  in  his  mind,  when  he  wrote  this  passage.  See  the
Metamorphoses,  B.  vi.  1.  297.

49  Had  ordered.']— -Ver.  473.  See  the  Introduction  to  the  Epistle  of
Briseis  to  Achilles.

50  If  the  first  syllable.]  — Ver.  476.  Ovid,  with  his  propensity  for  play-
ing upon  words,  remarks  upon  the  similarity  of  the  names,  Chry-seis  and
Bri-seis  ;  the  one  being  the  daughter  of  Chryses,  and  the  other  of  Brises.


480  BEMEDIA. AMORIS;  [485—515.

passion.  By  the  example,  then,  of  Agamemnon,  admit  a  fresh
name,  that  your  love  may  be  severed  in  two  directions.  Do
you  inquire  where  you  are  to  find  them  ?  Go  and  read  through
my  treatises  on  the  art  of  Love  ;  then  may  your  bark  speed
on,  well  freighted  with  the  fair.

But  if  my  precepts  are  of  any  avail,  if  by  my  lips  Apollo
teaches  aught  that  is  advantageous  to  mortals ;  although,  to  your
misfortune,  you  should  be  burning  in  the  midst  of  iEtna,  take
care  to  appear  to  your  mistress  more  cold  than  ice.  Pretend,
too,  that  you  are  unhurt ;  if,  perchance,  you  should  grieve  at
all,  let  her  not  perceive  it ;  and  laugh  when,  within  yourself,
you  could  have  wept.  I  do  not  bid  you  to  sever  your  passion
in  the  very  midst ;  the  laws  of  my  sway  are  not  so  harsh  as
that.  Pretend  to  be  that  which  you  are  not,  and  feign  that
your  ardour  is  renounced  ;  so,  in  reality,  you  will  become
what  you  are  practising  to  be.  Often,  that  I  might  not
drink,  I  have  wished  to  appear  asleep  ;51  while  I  have  so  seemed,
I  have  surrendered  my  conquered  eyes  to  slumber.  I  have
laughed  at  his  being  deceived,  who  was  pretending  that  he
was  in  love ;  and  the  fowler  has  fallen  into  his  own  nets.

Through  habit  does  love  enter  the  mind  ;  through  habit  is  it
forgotten.  He  who  will  be  able  to  pretend  that  he  is  unhurt,
will  be  unhurt.  Does  she  tell  you  to  come  on  a  night  appointed,
do  you  come.  Should  you  come,  and  the  gate  be  closed  ;  put
up  with  it.  Neither  utter  blandishments,  nor  yet  utter  re-
proaches against  the  door-post,  and  do  not  lay  down  your
sides  upon  the  hard  threshold.  The  next  morning  comes  ;  let
your  words  be  without  complaints,  and  bear  no  signs  of  grief
upon  your  features.  She  will  soon  lay  aside  her  haughtiness,
when  she  shall  see  you  growing  cool:  this  advantage,  too,  will
you  be  gaining  from  my  skill.  And  yet  do  you  deceive  yourself
as  well,  and  let  not  this52  be  the  end  of  your  love.  Full  oft
does  the  horse  struggle  against  the  reins  when  presented.  Let

51  Appear  asleep.] — Ver.  499. See  the  Amores,  B.  ii.  El.  v.  1.  13.

52  And  let  not  this.]  — Yen.  513.  The  reading  of  this  line  and  the
next  is  probably  corrupt.  Burmann  suggests  that  '  propositus  '  should  be
substituted  for  '  propositis,'  and  that  the  stop  should  be  removed  from  the
end  of  '  amandi,'  and  a  semicolon  placed  after  '  propositus.'  In  that  case,
the  meaning  would  be,  '  You  must,  however,  act  the  deceiver  to  yourself,
and  must  not  make  any  determination  to  cease  altogether  from  loving  her  ;
lest,  as  the  horse  struggles  against  the  rein,  your  affection  should  rebel
against  such  a  determination.'


515—551.]  OR, THE REMEDY OF LOVE.  48  L

your  object  lie  concealed  ;  that  will  come  to  pass  which  you
shall  not  avow,  The  nets  that  are  too  easily  seen,  the  bird
avoids.

Let  her  not  congratulate  herself  so  much  that  she  can  hold
you  in  contempt ;  take  courage,  that  to  your  courage  she  may
yield.  Her  door  is  open,  perchance  ;  though  she  should  call
you  back,  do  you  go  out.  A  night  is  named ;  doubt  whether
you  can  come  on  the  night  appointed.  'Tis  an  easy  thing  to  be
able  to  endure  this  ;  unless  you  are  deficient  in  wisdom,  you
may  more  readily  derive  amusement  from  one  more  conde-
scending. And  can  any  person  call  my  precepts  harsh  ?  Why,  I
am  acting  the  part  of  a  reconciler  even.  For  as  some  disposi-
tions vary,  I  am  varying  my  precepts  as  well.  There  are  a  thou-
sand forms  of  the  malady  ;  a  thousand/o^ms  of  cure  will  there
be.  Some  bodies  are  with  difficulty  healed  by  the  sharp  iron:
potions  and  herbs  have  proved  an  aid  to  many.  You  are  too
weak,  and  cannot  go  away,  and  are  held  in  bonds,  and  cruel
Love  is  treading  your  neck  beneath  his  foot.  Cease  your
struggling  ;  let  the  winds  bring  back  your  sails ;  and  whither
the  tide  calls  you,  thither  let  your  oars  proceed.

That  thirst,  parched  by  which  you  are  perishing,  must  be
satisfied  by  you  ;  I  permit  it ;  now  may  you  drink  in  the
midst  of  the  stream.  But  drink  even  more  than  what  your
appetite  requires ;  make  the  water  you  have  swallowed  flow
back  from  your  filled  throat.  Always  enjoy  the  company  of
your  mistress,  no  one  preventing  it ;  let  her  occupy  your
nights,  her  your  days.  Make  satiety  your  object;  satiety  puts
an  end  to  evils  even.  And  even  now,  when  you  think  you
can  do  without  her,  do  you  remain  with  her.  Until  you  have
fully  cloyed  yourself,  and  satiety  removes  your  passion,  let  it
not  please  you  to  move  from  the  house  you  loathe.  That  love,
too,  which  distrust  nurtures,  is  of  long  endurance  ;  should  you
wish  to  lay  this  aside,  lay  aside  your  apprehensions.  Who
fears  that  she  may  not  be  his  own,  and  that  some  one  may
rob  him  of  her,  that  person  will  be  hardly  curable  with  the
skill  of  Machaon.  Of  two  sons,  a  mother  generally  loves  him
the  most,  for  whose  return  she  feels  apprehensions,  because
he  is  bearing  arms.

There  is,  near  the  Collinian53  gate,  a  venerable  temple ;  the
lofty  Eryx  gave  this  temple  its  name. There,  is  Lethaean  Love,

53  Collinian.']— Ver.  549. See  the  Fasti,  B.  iv.  1.  872,  and  the  Note.

I  I


482  JBEMEDIA  AMOHIS ;  [551—574.

who  heals  the  mind ;  and  in  cold  water  does  he  place  his  torches.
There,  too,  in  their  prayers,  do  the  youths  pray  for  forgetful-
ness  ;  and  any  fair  one,  if  she  has  been  smitten  by  an  obdurate
man.  He  thus  said  to  me  ;  (I  am  in  doubt  whether  it  was  the
real  Cupid,  or  whether  a  vision  ;  but  I  think  it  was  a  vision.)
"  0  Naso,  thou  who  dost  sometimes  cause,  sometimes  re-
lieve, the  passion  full  of  anxiety,  add  this  to  thy  precepts  as
well.  Let  each  person  recall  to  mind  his  own  mishaps  ;  let
him  dismiss  love  ;  to  all  has  the  Deity  assigned  more  or  less
of  woes.  He  that  stands  in  awe  of  the  Puteal54  and  of  Janus,55
and  of  the  Calends  swiftly  coming,  let  the  borrowed  sum
of  money  be  his  torment.  He  whose  father  is  harsh,  though
other  things  should  prove  to  his  wish,  before  his  eyes  must  his
harsh  father  be  placed.  Another  one  is  living  wretchedly
with  a  wife  poorly  dowried,  let  him  think  that  his  wife  is  an
obstacle  to  his  fortune.  You  have  a  vineyard,  on  a  generous
soil,  fruitful  in  choice  grapes,  ;  be  in  dread  lest  the  shooting
grape  should  be  blighted.  Another  has  a  ship  on  its  return
home  ;66  let  him  be  always  thinking  that  the  sea  is  boisterous,
and  that  the  sea-shore  is  polluted  by  his  losses.  Let  a  son  in
service57  be  the  torment  of  one,  a  marriageable  daughter  of
yourself.  And  who  is  there  that  has  not  a  thousand  causes  for
anxiety  ?  That,  Paris,  thou  mightst  hate  thine  own  cause  of
sorrow,  thou  oughtst  to  have  placed  the  deaths  of  thy  brothers
before  thine  eyes."

54  The  Puteal.'] — Ver.  561.  '  Puteal '  properly  means  the  enclosure
which  surrounds  the  opening  of  a  well,  to  prevent  persons  from  falling
into  it.  The  '  Puteal '  here  referred  to  was  that  called  '  Puteal  Scriboni-
anum,'  or  '  Libonis,'  and  was  situate  in  the  Forum,  near  the  Fabian  arch.
Scribonius  Libo  erected  in  its  neighbourhood  a  tribunal  for  the  Praetor,  in
consequence  of  which  the  place  was  frequented  by  persons  engaged  in
litigation,  especially  by  debtors  and  creditors ;  to  which  circumstance
reference  is  here  made.

55  And  Janus.)  — Ver.  56L  He  probably  refers  to  the  fact  of  the  tem-
ple of  Janus  being  near  the  Puteal,  and  the  tribunal  of  the  Praetor.  The
Calends,  or  first  of  January,  was  the  time  when  money  lent  became  due,
and  on  the  same  day  was  the  Festival  of  Janus. See  the  Fasti,  B.  f.  1.  89.

56  On  its  return  home.] — Ver.  569.  '  In  reditu '  may  certainly  mean
'upon  its  return;'  but  Burmann  thinks  that  'reditus'  here  means  'a  source
of  income,'  and  that  the  passage  alludes  to  the  man  whose  only  property
is  his  ship.

57  In  service.] — Ver.  571.'  Those  who  were  old  enough  to  have  sons
in  service,  or  marriageable  daughters,  were  certainly  unworthy  of  the  Poet's
sympathy  or  advice.


574—605.]  OB, THE KEHEDY OF LOYE.  4.83

Still  more  was  he  saying,  when  the  childish  form  deserted
my  placid  slumber,  if  slumber  only  it  was.  What  am  I  to
do  ?  In  the  midst  of  the  waves  Palinurus58  deserts  my  bark;  I
am  forced  to  enter  on  an  unknown  track.  Whoever  you  are
that  love,  avoid  solitary  spots  ;  solitary  spots  are  injurious.
Whither  are  you  flying  ?  In  the  throng  you  may  be  in  greater
safety.  You  have  no  need  of  lonely  places  (lonesome  spots  in-
crease the  frenzy)  ;  the  multitude  will  bring  you  aid.  You
will  be  sad,  if  you  are  alone  ;  and  before  your  eyes  will  stand
the  form  of  your  forsaken  mistress,  as  though  her  own  self.
For  this  reason  is  the  night  more  melancholy  than  the  hours
of  sunshine  ;  the  throng  of  your  companions  is  then  wanting
to  moderate  your  affliction.

And  fly  not  from  conversation,  nor  let  your  door  be  closed ;
and  do  not,  in  tears,  hide  your  countenance  in  the  shade.
Always  have  aPyladesto  console  his  Orestes ;  this,  too,  will  prove
no  slight  advantage  in  friendship.  What  but  the  solitary  woods
injured  Phyllis  ?  The  cause  of  her  death  is  well  known  ;  she
was  without  a  companion.  She  was  going,  just  as  the  barba-
rous multitude  celebrating  the  triennial 5y  sacrifice  to  the  Edo-
nian60  Bacchus,  is  wont  to  go,  with  dishevelled  locks.  And
at  one  time,  as  far  as  she  could,  she  looked  out  upon  the
wide  ocean ;  at  another,  in  her  weariness,  she  lay  her  down
upon  the  sandy  shore.  "  Perfidious  Demophoon  I"  she  cried
aloud  to  the  deaf  waves  ;  and  her  words,  as  she  grieved,  were
interrupted  by  sobs.  There  was  a  narrow  path,  a  little  dark-
ened by  the  long  shadows,  along  which,  full  oft,  did  she  turn
her  steps  towards  the  sea.  Her  ninth  journey  was  being
paced  by  her  in  her  wretchedness.  "  See  thou  to  this,"  says
she  ;  and,  turning  pale,  she  eyes  her  girdle.  She  looks,  too,
on  the  boughs  ;  she  hesitates,  and  she  recoils  at  that  which  she
dares  to  do;  and  she  shudders,  and  then  she  raises  her  fingers
to  her  throat.

Sithonian  damsel,  I  would  that,  then,  at  least,  thou  hadst

£8  Palinurus.] — Ver.  577.  The  pilot  of  ^Eneas,  who  was  drowned  off
the  coast  of  Italy. See  the  iEneid  of  Virgil.

59  Triennial.'] — Ver.  593.  See  the  Metamorphoses,  Book  vi.  1.  587  ;
and  the  Fasti,  Book  i.  1.  394,  and  the  Notes.

60  Edonian.']—  Ver.  594.  See  the  Tristia,  Book  iv.  El.  i.  1.  42,  and  the
Note.

i  l  2


484  REMEDIA AMORIS  ;  [605—641.

not  been  alone  ;  ye  woods,  your  foliage  lost,61  you  would  not
then  have  lamented  Phyllis.  Ye  men  that  are  offended  by
your  mistresses,  ye  fair  that  are  affronted  by  the  men,  from
the  example  of  Phyllis,  shun  too  lonesome  spots.  A  youth  had
done  whatever  my  Muse  recommended  him,  and  was  almost
in  the  haven  of  his  safety.  When  he  came  amid  the  eager
lovers,  he  relapsed,  and  Love  resumed  the  weapons  which  he
had  laid  aside.  If  any  one  of  you  is  loving,  and  does  not  wish
to  do  so  ;  do  you  take  care,  and  avoid  the  contagion .  This
is  often  wont  to  injure  the  herds  as  well.  While  the  eyes  are
looking  on  the  wounded,  they  themselves  are  also  wounded ;
many  things,  too,  injure  the  body  by  infection.  Sometimes
water  flows  from  a  river  that  runs  near  into  a  spot  parched
with  its  dry  clods.  Love  flows  on  concealedly,  if  you  do  not
withdraw  from  him  who  loves ;  and  we  are  all  of  us  a  set
clever  at  running  that  risk.

A  second  one  had  now  been  healed;  his  nearness  to  her
affected  him.  He  proved  unable  to  endure  meeting  with
his  mistress.  The  scar,  not  sufficiently  closed,  changed  again
into  the  former  wound ;  and  my  skill  met  with  no  success.
The  fire  next  door  is  guarded  against  with  difficulty ;  'tis  pru-
dent to  keep  away  from  the  neighbouring  haunts.  Let  not
that  Portico  which  is  wont  to  receive  her  as  she  walks,  receive
you  as  well ;  and  let  not  the  same  attentions  now  be  paid.
Of  what  use  is  it  to  rekindle  the  feelings,  that  have  cooled,
by  my  advice  ?  Another  region  must  be  resorted  to,  if  you
can  do  so-  When  hungry,  you  will  not  be  easily  restrained,
the  table  being  laid  ;  the  gushing  water,  too,  provokes  exces-
sive thirst.  'Tis  no  easy  matter  to  hold  back  the  bull  when
he  sees  the  heifer  ;  on  seeing  the  mare,  the  high-mettled
steed  is  always  neighing  after  her.

When  this  you  have  done,  when  at  last  you  reach  the  shore,
'tis  not  enough  for  you  to  have  abandoned  her.  Both  her
sister  and  her  mother  must  bid  you  farewell,  her  nurse,  too,
her  confidant,  and  whatever  other  connexion  there  shall  be  of
your  mistress.  And  let  no  servant  come  ;  and  let  no  little
handmaid,  feigning  to  weep,  say  to  you  in  the  name  of  her
mistress, "Hail!"6a Nor  yet,  though  you  should  desire  to

61  Your  foliage  lost.] — Ver.  606.  He  alludes  to  the  story  of  the  woods
losing  their  leaves  in  their  grief  for  Phyllis.

6-  Hail!] — Ver.  640.  Martial  tells  us  that  'ave'  was  the  morning
salutation  of  the  Romans.


641—671.]  OK, THE EEMEDT OF LOVE.  485

know,  should  you  ask  how  she  is  doing.  Defer  it ;  the  re-
straint of  the  tongue  will  be  to  its  own  advantage.

You,  too,  who  are  telling  the  cause  of  your  liason  being
discontinued,  and  are  relating  many  things  to  be  complained
of  about  your  mistress ;  forbear  to  complain  ;  so,  by  being
silent,  you  will  be  taking  a  better  revenge;  until  she  shall  vanish
from  your  regrets.  And  I  would  rather  that  you  were  silent,
than  that  you  should  talk  about  having  cut  her.  The  man
who  is  too  often  saying  to  many  a  one,  "  I  love  her  not,"
is  still  in  love.  But  with  greater  certainty  is  the  flame  extin-
guished by  degrees,  than  all  of  a  sudden  ;  cease  gradually,
and  you  will  be  safe.  The  torrent  is  wont  to  run  with  greater
violence  than  the  uninterrupted  river ;  but  yet  the  one  is  a
short-lived,  the  other  a  lasting,  stream.  Let  love  escape  you,
and  let  it  depart  vanishing  into  thin  air,  and  let  it  die  out  by
degrees  imperceptible.

But  'tis  a  crime  to  hate  the  fair  one  so  lately  loved  ;  such  a
termination  as  that  is  befitting  a  brutal  disposition.  'Tis
enough  not  to  care  for  her ;  he  who  terminates  his  love  with
hate,  either  still  loves  on,  or  with  difficulty  will  cease  to  be
wretched.  'Tis  a  shocking  thing  for  a  man  and  a  woman  so
lately  united  to  be  enemies  at  once ;  the  Appian63  Goddess  her-
self would  not  approve  of  such  quarrels  as  those.  Full  oft
do  men  accuse  their  mistresses,  and  still  they  love  them ;
where  no  discord  arises,  Love  released,  through  advice,  betakes
himself  away.

By  chance  I  was  in  the  company64  of  a  young  man  ;  a  litter
contained  his  mistress  ;  all  his  expressions  were  shocking  from
his  frightful  threats  ;  and  now,  about  to  cite  her  at  law,  he  said,
"  Let  her  come  out  of  the  litter  !"  She  did  come  out ;  on
seeing  his  mistress,  he  was  dumb.  His  hands  both  fell,  and
his  two  tablets  from  out  of  his  hands.  He  rushed  into  her  em-
braces ;  and  "thus,"  said  he,  "  do  you  prove  the  conqueror."

'Tis  more  safe,  and  more  becoming,  to  depart  in  peace,
than  from  the  chamber  to  repair  to  the  litigious  Courts.  The
presents  which  you  have  given  her,  request  her  to  keep  with-

63  Jppian.]—  Ver.  660. See  the  Art  of  Love,  Book  iii.  1.  451.

64  In  the  company.'] — Ver.  663.  Heinsius  thinks,  that  by  •  aderam,'  it
is  meant  that  Ovid  was  acting  as  the  counsel  of  the  youth.  The  young
man  had  probably  summoned  his  mi -tress,  to  restore  his  property  "left  in
her  possession. On  the  two  tablets  h.s  case  was  written  out.


486  EEMEDIA AMOEIS  ;  [671—704.

out  litigation ;  trivial  losses  are  wont  to  be  of  great  benefit.
But  if  any  accident  should  bring  you  together,  keep  those
arms  of  defence  which  I  am  giving,  firmly  fixed  in  your  mind.
Then,  there  is  need  of  arms  ;  here,  most  valorous  man,  use
your  energies.  By  your  weapon  must  Penthesilea  be  over-
come. Now  let  the  rival,  now  the  obdurate  threshold,  when
you  were  her  lover,  recur  to  you ;  now  your  words  uttered  in
vain  in  presence  of  the  Gods.  Neither  arrange  your  hair,  be-
cause you  are  about  to  approach  her ;  nor  let  your  robe  be
seen  with  loose  folds 63  upon  the  bosom.  Have  no  care  to  be
pleasing  to  the  alienated  fair  one  ;  now  make  her  to  be  one  of
the  multitude  so  far  as  you  are  concerned.

But  I  will  tell  what  especially  stands  in  the  way  of  my
endeavours ;  his  own  example  instructing  each  individual.
We  cease  to  love  by  slow  degrees,  because  we  hope  to  be  loved
ourselves  ;  and  while  each  one  is  satisfying  himself,  we  are  ever
a  credulous  set.  But  do  you  believe  that,  in  her  oaths,  neither
words  (for  what  is  there  more  deceptive  than  them  ?)  nor  the
immortal  Deities  have  any  weight.  Take  care,  too,  not  to  be
moved  by  the  tears  of  the  fair  ;  they  have  instructed  their  eyes
how  to  weep.  By  arts  innumerable  are  the  feelings  of  lovers
laid  siege  to  ;  just  as  the  rock  that  is  beaten  on  every  side  by
the  waves  of  the  sea.  And  do  not  disclose  the  reasons  why
you  would  prefer  a  separation,  nor  tell  her  what  you  take
amiss  ;  still,  to  yourself,  ever  grieve  on.

And  don't  recount  her  failings,  lest  she  should  extenuate
them.  You  yourself  will  prove  indulgent ;  so  that  her  cause  will
prove  better  than  your  own  cause.  He  that  is  silent,  is  strong
in  his  resolution;  he  that  utters  many  reproaches  to  the  fair  one,
asks  for  himself  to  be  satisfied  by  her  justification.  I  would
not  venture,66  after  the  example  of  him  of  Dulichium,  to  dip  the
vengeful  arrows,  nor  the  glowing  torches,  in  the  stream;  I
shall  not  clip  the  empurpled  wings  of  the  Boy,  the  God  of  Love ;
nor  through  my  skill  shall  his  hallowed  bow  be  unstrung.
'Tis  in  accordance  with  prudence,  whatever  I  sing.  Give  heed
to  me  as  I  sing ;  and  Phoebus,  giver  of  health,  as  thou  art
wont,  be  thou  propitious  to  my  attempts.

65  Loose  folds. ,] — Ver.  680.  The  Roman  fops  affected  to  wear  the 'toga.'
tightened  into  many  creases  at  the  waist,  and  as  open  as  possible  at  the
breast.

66  Not  venture.] — Ver.  699.  He  alludes  to  the  abrupt  departure  of
Ulysses  from  Calypso  and  Circe.


705—734.]  OB, THE BEMEDY OE LOTE.  487

Phoebus  is  propitious  ;  his  lyre  sounds  ;  his  quiver  resounds.
By  his  signs  do  I  recognize  the  God  ;  Pho3bus  is  propitious.
Compare  the  fleece  that  has  been  dyed  in  the  cauldrons  of
Amyclae67  with  the  Tyrian  purple ;  the  former  will  be  but  dull.
Do  you,  too,  compare  your  charmers  with  the  beauteous  fair  ;
each  one  will  begin  to  be  ashamed  of  his  own  mistress.  Both
Juno  and  Pallas  may  have  seemed  beauteous  to  Paris :  but
Venus  surpassed  them  both  when  compared  with  herself.
And  not  the  appearance  only ;  compare  the  manners  and  the
accomplishments  as  well ;  only  let  not  your  passion  prejudice
your  judgment.

What  I  shall  henceforth  sing  is  but  trifling ;  but  trifling  as
it  is,  it  has  proved  of  service  to  many  ;  among  whom  I  my-
self was  one.  Take  care  not  to  read  over  again  the  letters  that
you  have  kept  of  the  caressing  fair  one :  letters,  when  read
over  again,  shake  even  a  firm  determination.  Put  the  whole  of
them  (though  unwillingly  you  should  put  them)  into  the  de-
vouring flames  ;  and  say,  "  May  this  prove  the  funeral  pile  of
my  passion."  The  daughter  of  Thestius68  burned  her  son
Meleager  afar  off  by  means  of  the  billet.  Will  you,  with  hesita-
tion, commit  the  words  of  perfidy  to  the  flames  ?  If  you  can,
remove  her  waxen  portrait™  as  well.  Why  be  moved  by  a
dumb  likeness  ?  By  this  means  was  Laodamia  undone.  Many
localities,  too,  have  bad  effects  :  fly  from  the  spots  that  were
conscious  of  your  embraces;  a  thousand  grounds  for  sorrow  do
they  contain.  Here  she  has  been  ;  here  she  has  laid  ;  in  that
chamber  have  we  slept ;  here,  in  the  voluptuous  night,  has  she
yielded  to  me  her  embraces.

By  recollection,  love  is  excited  afresh,  and  the  wound  re-
newed is*opened ;  a  trifling  cause  is  injurious  to  the  sickly.  As,
if  you  were  to  touch  ashes  almost  cold  with  sulphur,  they  would
rekindle,  and,  from  a  small  one,  a  very  great  fire  would  be  pro-
duced ;  so,  unless  you  avoid  whatever  renews  love,  the  flame  will

67  Cauldrons  of  Amyclce.']  — Ver.  707.  The  purple  dye  of  Amyclae,  in
Laconia,  was  of  a  very  fair  quality,  but  could  not  be  compared  with  that
of  Tyre.

68  Thestius.'] — Ver.  721. See  the  Metamorphoses,  Book  viii.  1.  445.

69  Waxen  portrait.] — Ver.  723.  Waxen  profiles  seem  to  have  been
used  by  the  Romans,  as  likenesses.  They  are  evidently  referred  to  in  the
Asinaria  of  Plautus,  Act  iv.  sc.  i.  1.  19,  a  passage  which  seems  to  have
puzzled  the  Commentators.  See  the  Epistle  of  Laodamia,  1.  152,  and  the
Note.


488  REMEDIA AMORIS  ;  [734—756.

be  kindled  afresh, which  just  now  was  not  existing.  The  Argive
ships  would  fain  have  fled  from  Caphareus,70  and  from  thee,  old
man,  that  didst  avenge  thy  woes  with  the  flames.  The  daughter
of  Nisus71  past  by,  the  cautious  mariner  rejoices.  Do  you  avoid
the  spots  which  have  proved  too  delightful  for  you.  Let  these
be  your  Syrtes  ;  avoid  these  as  your  Acroceraunia  ;72  here  does
the  ruthless  Charybdis  vomit  forth  and  swallow  down  the  waves.
Some  things  there  are  which  cannot  be  recommended  at  the
bidding  of  any  one ;  still,  the  same,  if  happening  by  chance,
are  often  wont  to  be  of  service.

Had  Phaedra  lost  her  wealth,  thou  wouldst,  Neptune,  have
spared  thy  descendant  ;73  nor  would  the  bull,  sent  by  his  ances-
tor, have  startled  the  steeds.  Had  you  made  the  Gnossian74
damsel  poor,  she  would  have  loved  with  prudence.  Volup-
tuous passion  is  nourished  by  opulence.  Why  was  there  no
one  to  court  Hecale,75  no  one  to  court  Irus  ?76  It  was  because
the  one  was  in  want,  the  other  a  pauper.  Poverty  has
nothing  by  which  to  pamper  its  passion  ;  still,  this  is  not  of
so  much  consequence,  that  you  should  desire  to  be  poor.

But  let  it  be  of  so  much  consequence  to  you,  as  not  to  be  in-
dulging yourself  with  the  Theatres,  until  Love  has  entirely  de-
parted from  your  liberated  breast.  The  harps,  and  the  pipes,
and  the  lyres,  soften  the  feelings ;  the  voices,  too,  and  the
arms,  moved  to  their  proper  time.  There,  everlastingly,  the
parts  of  supposed  lovers  are  being  acted 77  in  the  dance  ;  by  his
skill,  the  actor  teaches  you  what  to  avoid,  and  what  is  service-

70  Caphareus.]— Ver.  735.  See  the  Tristia,  Booki.  El.  i.  1.  83,  and  the
Note.

71  Of  Nisus. 1  —Ver,  737.  He  falls  into  his  usual  error  of  confounding
the  daughter  of  Nisus  with  the  daughter  of  Phorcys.

72  Acroceraunia.'] — Ver.  739.  These  were  tremendous  rocks  on  the
coast  of  Epirus.

73  Thy  descendant.] — Ver.  743.  He  means  that  the  lust  of  Phaedra
was  engendered  by  ease  and  luxury.  See  the  Metamorphoses,  Book  xv.
1.  498. Neptune  was  the  great  grandfather  of  Hippolytus.

74  Gnossian.] — Ver.  745.  He  refers  to  the  love  of  Pasiphae  for  the
bull.

75  Hecale.] — Ver.  747.  Hecale  was  a  poor  old  woman,  who  entertained
Theseus  with  great  hospitality.

76  Irus.]—  Ver.  747.  See  the  Tristia,  Book  iii.  El.vii.  1.  42,  and  the
Note.

77  Being  acted.]— Vex.  755.  See  the  Tristia,  Book  ii.  1.  519,  and  the
Note.


756—784.]  OR, THE REMEDY OE LOVE.  489

able,  Unwillingly  must  I  say  it :  meddle  not  with  the  amorous
Poets ;  unnaturally  do  I  myself  withhold  my  own  produc-
tions. Avoid  Callimachus ;  no  enemy  is  he  to  Love  ;  and
together  with  Callimachus,  thou,  too,  bard  of  Cos,78  art  in-
jurious. Beyond  a  doubt,  Sappho  has  rendered  me  more
lenient  to  my  mistress  ;  and  the  Teian  Muse  has  imparted
manners  far  from  austere.  Who  can  read  in  safety  the  lines  of
Tibullus,  or  thine,  thou,  whose  sole  subject  Cynthia  was?  Who,
after  reading  Gallus,  could  retire  with  obdurate  feelings?
Even  my  own  lines  have  tones  indescribably  sweet.

Unless  Apollo,  the  inspirer  of  my  work,  is  deceiving  his
bard,  a  rival  is  the  especial  cause  of  our  torments.  But  do
you  refrain  from  conjuring  up  to  yourself  any  rival ;  and  be-
lieve that  she  lies  alone  upon  her  couch.  Orestes  loved  Her-
mione79  more  intensely  for  that  very  reason  ;  because  she  had
begun  to  belong  to  another  man.  Why,  Menelaus,  dost  thou
grieve  ?  Without  thy  wife  thou  didst  go  to  Crete  ;  and  thou
couldst,  at  thy  ease,  be  absent  from  thy  spouse.  Soon  as  Paris
has  carried  her  off,  then  at  last  thou  couldst  not  do  without
thy  wife ;  through  the  passion  of  another  was  thine  own  in-
creased. This,  too,  did  Achilles  lament,  in  the  case  of  the
daughter  of  Brises,  when  taken  away  from  him,  that  she  was
administering  to  the  pleasures  of  the  couch  of  the  son  of  Plis-
thenes.80  And  not  without  reason,81  believe  me,  did  he  lament.
The  son  of  Atreus  did  that,  which  if  he  had  not  done,  he
would  have  been  disgracefully  torpid.  At  least,  I  should
have  done  so,  and  I  am  not  any  wiser  than  he.  That  was  the
especial  reward  for  the  ill-will  he  got.  For,  inasmuch  as  he
swore  by  his  sceptre,  that  the  daughter  of  Brises  had  never
been  touched  by  him;  'tis  clear  that  he  did  not  think82  his
sceptre  was  the  Gods.

78  Of  Cos.]—  Ver.  760.  See  the  Art  of  Love,  Book  iii.  1.  329,  and  the
Note.

79  Hermione.] — Ver.  772. See  the  Epistle  to  Orestes.

80  Of  Plisthenes.~] — Ver.  778.  Agamemnon  was  said,  by  some,  to  have
been  the  son  of  Plisthenes,  and  adopted  by  his  uncle  Atreus.

81  Without  reason] — Ver.  779.  Agamemnon  declares  the  contrary  of
this  in  the  Iliad ; Brisei's,  in  her  Epistle  to  Achilles,  does  the  same.

82  He  did  not  think.'] — Ver.  784.  Ovid  has  no  reason  or  ground  for
this  wretched  quibble,  but  his  own  imagination.  This  sceptre  of  Agamem-
non was  made  by  Vulcan,  who  gave  it  to  Jupiter,  he  to  Mercury,  and  Mer-
cury to  Pelops,  who  left  it  to  Atreus ;  by  him  it  was  left  to  Thyestes,  who,
according  to  Homer,  gave  it  to  Agamemnon.


430  EEMEDIA AMOEIS.

May  the  Deities  grant  that  you  may  be  able  to  pass  the  thres-
hold of  the  mistress  that  you  have  forsaken  ;  and  that  your
feet  may  aid  your  determination.  And  you  will  be  able  ;  do  you
only  wish  to  adhere  to  your  purpose.  Now  it  is  necessary  to  go
with  boldness,  now  to  put  spur  to  the  swift  steed.  Believe
that  in  that  cave  are  the  Lotophagi,83  in  that  the  Syrens  ;
add  sail  to  your  oars.  The  man,  too,  who  being  your  rival,
you  formerly  took  it  amiss ;  I  would  have  you  cease  to  hold
him  in  the  place  of  an  enemy.  But,  at  least,  though  the
hatred  should  still  exist,  salute  him.  When  now  you  shall
be  able  to  embrace  him,  you  will  be  cured.

That  I  may  perform  all  the  duties  of  a  physician,  behold  !
I  will  tell  you  what  food  to  avoid,  or  what  to  adopt.  The
Daunian8*  onions,  or  those  sent  you  from  the  Libyan  shores,  or
whether  those  that  come  from  Megara,65  will  all  prove  injurious.
And  'tis  no  less  proper  to  avoid  the  lustful  rocket,  and  what-
ever else  provokes  our  bodies  to  lust.  To  more  advantage
may  you  use  rue  that  sharpens  the  sight,86  and  whatever  guards
our  bodies  against  lust.  Do  you  enquire  what  I  would  advise
you  about  the  gifts  of  Bacchus  ?  You  will  be  satisfied  thereon
by  my  precepts  sooner  than  you  expect.  Wine  incites  the
feelings  to  lust,  unless  you  take  it  in  great  quantities,  and,
drenched  with  much  liquor,  your  senses  become  stupefied.
By  wind  is  fire  kindled,  by  wind  is  it  extinguished.  A
gentle  breeze  nourishes  flame,  a  stronger  one  puts  it  out.
Either  let  there  be  no  drunkenness,  or  to  so  great  an  extent  as
to  remove  your  anxieties ;  if  there  is  any  medium  between  the
two,  it  is  injurious.

This  work  have  I  completed  ;  present  the  garlands  to  my
wearied  bark.  I  have  reached  the  harbour,  whither  my  course
was  directed.  Both  females  and  males,  healed  by  my  lays,  to
the  Poet  ere  long  will  you  be  fulfilling  your  duteous  vows.

83  Lotophagi.]— Yer.  789.  See  the  Tristia,  Book  iv.  El.  i.  1.  31,  and
the  Note.

84  Daunian.] — Ver.  797.  Daunia  was  a  name  of  Apulia,  in  Italy.  See
the  Metamorphoses,  Book  xiv.  1.  512,  and  the  Note.

85  Megara.]—  Ver.  798. See  the  Art  of  Love,  Book  ii.  1.  422.

86  Sharpens  the  sight.]— Yer.  801.  Pliny  says  that  painters  and  sculp-
tors were  in  the  habit  of  using  rue,  for  the  purpose  of  strengthening  the
sight.


DE  MEDICAMINE  FACIEI;

OK,

ON  THE  CARE  OF  THE  COMPLEXION
A FRAGMENT.

(SUPPOSED TO HAVE BEEN COMPOSED BY OVID IN HIS YOUTH.)


Learnt,  ye  fair,  what  methods  improve  the  complexion,  and
by  what  means  your  beauty  may  be  preserved.  'Tis  culti-
vation bids  the  sterile  earth  to  pay  the  gifts  of  Ceres  :  the
thorny  brambles  perish.  "lis  cultivation,  too,  that  improves
the  sour  juice  in  the  apple,  and  the  tree,  by  grafting,  produces
fruit  not  natural  to  it.  Cultivated  lands  give  pleasure  ;  lofty
roofs  are  gilded  with  gold  ;x  the  black  soil  lies  hid  beneath  the
marble  placed  above  it.  The  same  fleeces2  are  dyed  often  in
the  Tyrian  cauldrons  of  brass  ;  India  affords  for  our  luxury
its  ivory  in  fragments.3  Perhaps,  when  Tatius  was  king,  the
Sabine  dames  of  old  would  have  preferred  dressing  the  fields4
of  their  forefathers  to  dressing  themselves  ;  in  the  days  when
the  ruddy  matron,  seated  on  her  lofty  stool,  used  to  spin  her
rough  task  with  fingers  industriously  plying.

She  herself,  too,  used  to  shut  up  the  lambs  which  her
daughter  had  fed ;  she  herself  used  to  place  the  twigs  and
the  split  billets  upon  the  hearth.  But  your  mothers  have  pro-
duced delicate  girls ;  you  wish  your  bodies  to  be  clothed
with  garments  embroidered  with  gold.  You  desire  to  vary
the  arrangement  of  your  perfumed  locks  ;  you  wish  to  have
your  hands  adorned  with  gems. You  place  upon  your  necks

*  With  gold.}—  Ver.  7. See  the  Fasti,  Book  i.  1.  77.

2  Same  fleeces.} — Ver  9.  He  alludes  to  the  '  dibapha,'  or  twice-dyed
garments. See  the  Fasti,  Book  ii.  1.  107,  and  the  Note.

3  Its  ivory  in  fragments.} — Ver.  10.  He  alludes  to  ivory  cut  into  slips,
called  '  bractea, '  for  veneering.  It  was  used  for  inlaying  furniture  and
decorating  ceilings.

4  Dressing  the  fields.} — Ver.  12.  Literally,  '  that  the  fields  of  their
ancestors  should  rather  be  dressed  than  themselves.'  He  plays  upon  the
double  meaning  of  the  word  '  colo,'  which  means  '  to  cultivate  land,'  or
'  adorn  '  the  person,  according  to  the  context.


492  DE MEDICAMENE FACIEI  ;

stones  procured  in  the  East ;  and  so  great,  that  'tis  a  burden
for  your  ears  to  support  a  pair.

And  yet  it  is  not  unbecoming,  if  you  have  a  care  to  please,
since  our  age  produces  men  of  taste.  After  the  example  of
the  wives,  are  your  husbands  to  be  decked ;  and  hardly  has  the
bride  any  thing  to  add  to  her  own  toilet.

Let  each  fair  one  henceforth  attire  herself;  and  how  con-
quests may  be  hunted  for,  it  matters  not ;  neatness  is  deserving
of  no  reproach.  They  live  retired  in  the  country,  and  still
they  adjust  their  locks;  even  if  the  lofty  Athos5  concealed  them,
the  lofty  Athos  would  find  them  well  dressed.  Small  though
it  be,  there  is  a  delight  in  amusing  one's  self;  to  maidens  their
beauty  is  a  care  and  a  gratification.  The  bird  of  Juno  opens
out  her  admired  feathers6  for  the  view  of  man  ;  and  the  bird,
though  dumb,  is  proud  of  her  beauty.  For  such  reasons  will
love  influence  us  more  readily,  than  by  means  of  the  potent
herbs,  which  the  hand  of  the  enchanter  cuts  with  his  dreadful
skill.

Do  not  you  put  trust  in  herbs,  nor  in  mixed  potions  ;  and
do  not  try  the  injurious  venom  of  the  lusting  mare.7  No
snakes  are  cut  asunder  in  the  middle  by  the  Marsian8  spells  ;
no  waters  flow  upwards  to  their  sources,  And,  though  any
one  should  shake  the  brass  of  Temesa,9  never  will  the  Moon
be  hurled  from  her  car.  Ye  fair,  let  the  care  of  your  manners
be  your  first  object ;  when  the  disposition  attracts,  the  looks
are  pleasing.  The  love  of  the  character  is  lasting ;  time
will  lay  waste  your  beauty,  and  the  features  that  pleased  will
be  furrowed  with  wrinkles.  The  time  will  be,  when  you  will
be  sorry  to  look  at  your  mirror,  and  grief  will  come,  a  second
cause  for  wrinkles.  Virtue  supplies  its  own  resources,  and
lasts  for  time  prolonged  ;  and  it  bears  its  years  well  ;  on  this
love  with  certainty  depends.

Come,  and  learn  now,  in  what  manner,  when  sleep  has  re-
lieved your  tender  limbs,  your  fair  features  may  look  beauteous.
Strip  of  its  chaff  and  its  coverings  the  barley  which  the
Libyan  husbandmen  have  sent  in  the  ships. Let  an  equal

5  Lofty  Athos.'] — Ver.  30.  He  means  that  it  is  natural  for  females  in
all  countries  to  wish  to  appear  to  advantage.

6  Admired  feathers.] — Ver.  34. See  the  Art  of  Love,  Book  i.  1.  627.

7  Lusting  mare.'] — Ver.  38. See  the  Amores,  Book  i.  El.  viii.  1.  8.

8  Marsian.]— Ver.  39. See  the  Fasti,  Book  vi.  1.  142,  and  the  Note.

9  Temesa.]— Ver.  41.  See  the  Fasti,  Book  iii.  1.  441 ;  and  the  Me-
tamorphoses, Book  iv.  1.  333,  and  the  Notes.


On, ON THE CARE OF THE COMPLEXION.  493

quantity  of  vetches  be  made  moist  with  ten  eggs ;  but  let  the
peeled  barley  amount  to  two  pounds.  When  this  has  been
dried  in  the  airy  breezes,  bid  the  slowly-moving  ass  bruise
them  with  the  rough  mill-stone.  Pound  together  also  the
first  horns  that  fall  from  off  the  long-lived  stag ;  of  this  make
there  to  be  the  sixth  part  of  a  full  pound.  And  when  now
they  have  been  reduced  to  a  fine  powder,10  then  sift  them
all  in  the  hollow  sieve.  Add  twice  six  bulbs  of  narcissus  with-
out the  skin,  which  a  strong  right-hand  must  bruise  in  a  clean
mortar  of  marble  ;  let  it  receive  also  two  ounces11  of  gum  toge-
ther with  Etrurian  spelt  ;12  to  this  let  nine  times  as  much  more
honey  be  contributed  by  you.  Whoever  shall  rub  her  face  with
such  a  mixture,  she  will  shine  more  brightly  than  her  mirror.
And  do  not  delay  to  parch  the  pale  lupins,  and  at  the  same
time  dry  the  beans,  that  swell  out  the  body.  Let  each  of  them
have  six  pounds,  in  equal  proportions  ;  and  give  them  both
to  be  ground  fine  by  the  swarthy  mill-stones.  And  let  not
white-lead  be  wanting  to  you,  nor  the  froth  of  ruddy  nitre,13
the  sword-lily,14  too,  that  comes  from  the  lilyrian  soil.  Give
these  to  be  pounded  together  by  the  vigorous  arms  of  youths  ;
but,  when  bruised,  an  ounce  will  be  the  proper  weight.  A
tincture  added  from  the  chirping  nest  of  birds  will  dispel
freckles  from  the  complexion ; this  they  call  Halcyonea.15

10  Have  been,  reduced  to  a  fine  powder. ,] — Ver.  61.  Pliny  applies  the
word  '  farina '  to  powdered  stags'  horns.  The  ■  as,'  or  '  libra '  of  the
Romans,  which  answers  pretty  nearly  to  our  word  '  pound,'  was  in  reality
about  three-quarters  of  our  pound  avoirdupoise.

11  Also  two  ounces.'} — Ver.  65.  The  •  sextans,'  or  sixth  part  of  a
pound,  consisted  of  two  '  uncise,'  or  '  ounces,'  of  which  twelve  went  to  the
'  as,'  or  '  libra.'  They  were  somewhat  less  in  weight  than  our  ounce  avoir-
dupoise.

12  Etrurian  spelt.] — Ver.  65.  This  was  called*  zea,'  and,  according  to
Pliny,  was  much  used  for  making  fermenty.

la  The  froth  of  ruddy  nitre.] — Ver.  73.  By  this  he  means  what  was
called  '  aphronitrum,'  or  '  salt-petre.'

14  The  sword-lily.] — Ver.  74.  Pliny  informs  us  that  the  roots  of  the
Iris,  or  sword-lily,  have  a  most  delightful  smell,  and  that  its  root  was
especially  used  for  making  ointments.  He  says  that  its  flowers  were  of  the
tints  of  the  rainbow,  and  that  the  best  came  from  Illyria.

15  They  call  Halcyonea.] — Ver.  78.  He  alludes  to  a  substance  found  in
the  sea,  which  Pliny  takes  to  be  the  nest  of  the  halcyon,  or  kingfisher.
He  says  that  these  are  like  a  ball  elongated,  and  in  substance  like  a  sponge  ;
that  they  cannot  be  cut  by  a  knife,  but  may  be  broken  by  a  smart  blow,
and  that  they  were  used  for  removing  leprosy  and  freckles  from  the  skin.


494  DE MEDICAMINE FACIEI.

If  you  enquire  with  what  weight  of  it  I  am  satisfied ;  that
which  an  ounce  forms  when  divided  into  two  parts.16  That
it  may  blend,  and  may  be  easily  rubbed  upon  the  body,  add
Attic  honey  from  the  yellow  combs.

Although  frankincense  may  appease  the  Gods  and  the
angry  Divinities  ;  still  it  must  not  all  be  given  to  the  flaming
altars.  When  you  have  mingled  frankincense  with  nitre  that
removes  warts;  take  care  and  let  there  be  four  ounces17  of
each  by  fair  weight.  Add  some  gum  taken  from  the  bark,  less
by  a  fourth  part,  and  a  little  square  piece18  of  unctuous  myrrh.
When  you  have  pounded  these  together,  sift  them  through  a  fine
sieve  ;  the  powder  must  be  worked  up  with  honey  poured  upon
it.  It  has,  too,  proved  of  use  to  add  fennel  to  the  sweet-
smelling  myrrh  ;  let  the  fennel  weigh  five  scruples,19  nine  the
myrrh.  Of  dried  roses,  too,  as  much  as  one  hand  can  hold,
and  male  frankincense20  together  with  sal-ammoniac.21  Upon
this,  pour  the  thick  pulp  that  barley  produces  ;  and  let  the
frankincense,  together  with  the  sal-ammoniac,  equal  the  roses
in  weight.  Although  for  but  a  little  time  you  may  have
anointed  your  delicate  features  with  this  mixture;  a  full
colour  will  pervade  all  your  face.

I  have  seen  a  fair  one  pound  up  poppies  steeped  in  cold
water,  and  rub  them  on  her  delicate  cheeks. *
[The  rest  is  lost.~\

16  When  divided  into  two  parts.] — Ver.  80.  The  suggestion  of  Heinsius,
who  would  put '  secta'  for '  sexta,'  is  probably  correct,  and  has  been  adopted;
for  'uncia  sexta,'  'the  sixth  ounce,'  really  admits  of  no  meaning,  though
it  is  supposed,  by  some,  to  mean  half  a  pound.

17  Four  ounces.'] — Ver.  86.  '  Triens  '  was  the  third  part  of  an  '  as,'  or
'  libra.'

18  A  little  square  piece.] — Ver.  88.  This  line  is  probably  corrupt.
'  Cubus'  perhaps  means  no  definite  measure,  but  a  little  square  piece  like
a  die.

19  Five  scruples.] — Ver.  92.  The  '  scripulum,'  or  '  scrupulus,'  was  the
smallest  weight  known  to  the  Romans.  It  was  the  288th  part  of  a  pound,
From  myrrh  being  mentioned  here  again,  it  has  been  suggested  that
'  myrtis,'  '  myrtle,'  is  the  correct  reading  in  the  88th  line.

20  Male  frankincense.] — Ver.  94.  Pliny  says  that  the  drops  or  globules,
which  were  particularly  round,  were  so  called.

21  Sal- Ammoniac] — Ver.  94.  This  substance  was  so  called,  from  its
being  found  near  the  Temple  of  Jupiter  Amnion  in  Libya.  It  was  com-
monly supposed  to  exude  from  the  ground ;  but  we  learn  from  the  ancient
historians  that  it  was  formed  from  the  urine  of  the  numerous  camels  that
resorted  thither  with  pilgrims  to  the  temple.


NUX;

OR,  THE  WALNUT-TREE.'


The  Poet  introduces  a  Walnut-tree,  which  stands  near  the  high  road,  as
complaining  of  being  mercilessly  pelted  by  the  passers-by,  and  as  speak-
ing in  its  own  defence.

I,  a  walxtjt-teee,  adjoining  to  the  road,  although  my  life  is
blameless,  am  pelted  with  stones  by  the  people  as  they  pass.
Such  a  penalty  as  this  is  wont  to  overtake2  those  discovered
in  the  perpetration  of  crime,  when  the  public  indignation
brooks  slow  delay.  Nothing  wrong  have  I  done,  unless  it  be
termed  doing  wrong,  to  give  my  yearly  crop  to  my  cultivator.
Bat  once,  when  times  were  better,  there  was  a  contest
among  the  trees  about  their  fruitfulness.  When  the  grateful
owners  were  wont  to  adorn  with  garlands  the  Gods  of  the
husbandmen,  as  the  fruits  grew  apace.  Full  oft,  0  Bacchus,
hast  thou  admired  thy  own  grapes,  and  often  has  Minerva
admired  her  own  olives.  The  apples,  too,  would  have  in-
jured their  mother,  had  not  a  long  prop,  in  the  shape  of  a
fork,  placed  beneath  the  bough,  given  its  aid  to  the  labouring
branch.  Moreover,  woman  was  fruitful  after  my  example,
and  there  was  no  female3  in  those  days  that  was  not  a  mother.
But  after  a  more  abundant  honour  was  paid  to  plane-trees,4

1  The  Walnut-Tree.  Some  are  of  opinion  that  this  Poem  was  not  com-
posed by  Ovid;  it  is,  however,  more  generally  supposed  to  bear  evident  in-
ternal marks  of  being  his  composition,  and  to  have  been  the  work  of  his
youthful  years.  Erasmus  thinks  that  it  is  intended  by  the  Poet  as  a  satire
against  the  luxury  and  avarice  of  his  age.  It  is  supposed  to  have  been
suggested  by  an  Epigram  in  the  Greek  Anthology,  by  some  attributed
to  Plato.

2  To  overtake.'] — Ver.  3.  This  is  an  exactly  similar  proceeding  to  what
we  now  call  Lynch  law

3  And  t~hei*e  was  no  female.'] — Ver.  16.  He  distantly  hints  at  the
practice,  winch  extensively  prevailed  in  his  time  among  the  Romans,  of
procuring  abortion. See  the  Amores,  Book  ii.  El.  14.

4  Paid  to  plane-trees.] — Ver.  17.  He  refers  to  the  value  which  was
set  on  the  plane-tree  for  its  pleasant  shade ;  which  Virgil  mentions  as
being  much  sought  by  revellers.


496  NTTX  ; OB, THE WA.LNUT-TKEE.

that  afford  their  barren  shade,  than  to  any  other  tree  beside,
we  fruit-bearing  trees  as  well,  (if  only  I,  the  walnut-tree,  am
reckoned  among  them)  began  to  wanton  in  spreading  foliage.
Now,  fruit  is  not  produced  by  us  in  successive  years  ;  and  the
grape  comes  home  in  an  injured  state,  the  olive,  injured,  as
well.  Now-a-days,  she  that  desires  to  appear  beauteous,
injures  her  womb  ;  and  few  are  they  in  this  age,  that  desire  to
be  parents.  Undoubtedly,  I  should  have  been  more  safe,5  if
I  had  never  been  productive.  Worthy  of  Clytemnestra  were
that  complaint.  Did  the  vine  know  this,  she  would  check  her
growing  grapes  ;  and  the  tree  of  Pallas,  did  she  know  this,
would  be  destitute.  Were  this  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the
apple  and  the  pear-tree,  the  fruit  of  both  of  them  would
forsake  their  branches.  Did  the  cherry-tree  hear  this,  who
marks  her  fruits  with  varying  colours,  she  would  be  a  useless
trunk.

For  my  part,  I  envy  them  not ;  and  yet  is  any  tree  beaten,
which,  barren  as  it  is,  is  conspicuous  for  its  foliage  alone  ?
Review  in  their  order  all  the  trees  that  are  uninjured,  who,
only,  by  bearing  no  fruit,  afford  no  grounds  why  they  should
be  struck  with  blows.  Whereas,  cruel  wounds  on  my  mutilated
branches  hurt  me  ;  and,  the  bark  stripped  off,  my  bare  wood
is  exposed.  No  dislike  does  this,  but  a  gratified  hope  of  plunder.
Let  other  trees  bear  fruit ;  they  will  have  to  make  the  like
complaint.  So  is  he  generally  accused,  over  whom  a  victory
can  be  profitable  ;  the  deeds  of  the  poor  man  are  without  a
censurer.  So  does  the  traveller6  fear  an  ambush,  who  knows
that  he  is  carrying  what  may  cause  him  alarm  ;  the  needy  man
goes  on  his  way  in  safety.  So  am  I  the  only  one  attacked,
because  there  is  reason  for  attacking  me  alone ;  all  the  rest
of  the  multitude  flourish  with  boughs  untouched.

For  although,  sometimes,  the  other  shrubs  as  well  have
many  a  broken  fragment  that  lies  close  to  me  with  its  injured
twigs ;  it  is  not  their  own  deeds  that  cause  them  the  injury  ;
their  propinquity  does  them  harm.  They  receive  the  stones
that  rebound  from  my  blows.  And  this  assertion  would  not
be  believed,  if  those,  which  are  further  off,  did  not  retain,

5  More  safe."] — Ver.  25.  He  alludes  to  the  death  of  Clytemnestra.  by
the  hand  of  her  son  Orestes.

6  The  traveller.) — Ver.  43\  Juvenal  has  a  similar  passage,  Satire  x.
1.  22.  'Cantabit  vacuus  coram  latrone  viator;'  '  The  traveller  that  has
nothing  to  lose,  will  sing  in  presence  of  the  robber.'


NUX; OE, THE WALNTJT-TEEE.  497

untouched,  their  native  beauty.  Therefore,  if  they  had  sense,
and  if  speech  obeyed  their  feelings,  each  of  my  neighbours
would  curse  my  shadow.

What  a  sad  thing  is  it  for  hatred  to  be  added  to  my  mis-
fortunes, and  for  me  to  be  accused  on  account  of  my  too  near
propinquity !  But,  I  presume,  forsooth,  that  great  is  the  atten-
tion to  me  from  the  laborious  husbandman.  You  can  find  no  one
to  give  me  anything,  save  the  ground.  Spontaneously,  I
sprang  up  easily  on  waste  ground,  and  a  part  of  the  spot,
where  I  am  standing,  is  almost  the  public  way.7  That  I  may
not  injure  the  crops,  inasmuch  as  I  am  said  to  injure  the  crops,
the  most  distant  spot  of  ground  receives  me  at  the  very  extre-
mity.

No  Saturnian8  knife  prunes  away  my  exuberant  foliage  ;
no  digger  turns  up  the  hardened  earth9  for  me.  Though  I
should  struggle,  on  the  point  of  perishing,  with  the  heat  of
the  sun  and  with  parching  thirst,  no  streamlet  of  refreshing
water  will  be  granted  me.  But  when  the  young  nut  makes  its
chinks,  the  marks  of  maturity,  in  the  cleft  shell,  the  relentless
pole  comes  to  those  spots.10  The  pole  gives  cruel  wounds  to  my
full  branches,  that  I  may  not  be  able  to  complain  of  the  blows
of  stones  only.  My  fruit  falls,  not  forbidden  at  the  dessert,
aud  you  stow  up,  thrifty  wife  of  the  husbandman,  my  nuts
when  gathered  !

These,  the  boy,  either  standing  upright,11  splits  with  a  sure
stroke  ;  or,  extended  along  the  ground,  he  strikes  them  once
or  twice  with  his  fingers.  All  the  game  is  played  with  four  nuts,

"  Almost  the  public  way.~\ — Ver.  60.  Only  just  on  the  other  side  of  the
hedge.

8  Saturnian.']  —Ver.  63.  Macrobius  says  that  Saturn  was  the  guardian
Deity  of  corn  and  the  vine.  His  pruning  knife  was  said  to  have  fallen  in
Sicily.

9  Hardened  earth.'] — Ver.  64.  Erasmus  says  that  this  tree  does  not,
like  some  others,  require  the  earth  to  be  loosened  about  its  roots.

10  To  those  spots.] — Ver.  68. On  the  principle  of  the  old  proverb  : —

'  A  woman,  a  spaniel,  a  walnut-tree,

The  more  they  are  beaten,  the  better  they  be.'

11  Either  standing  upright.] — Ver.  73.  There  has  been  much  written
by  the  Commentators  on  the  difficulties  of  this  and  the  next  line,  but  the
meaning  seems  pretty  plain.  The  boys,  before  using  the  walnuts  for  their
games,  which  are  afterwards  mentioned,  are  desirous  to  shell  them.  Some
take  off  their  green  shell,  by  standing  upright  and  dropping  them  full  Ccerto
ictu)  upon  the  ground  ;  while  others,  lying  around  the  ground,  (prom),
shell  them  by  striking  them  adroitly  once  or  twice  with  their  fingers.

K  K


498  NUX; OE, THE WALNUT-TREE.

and  no  more ;  while  one  is  placed  on  the  other  three  put  be-
neath it.  Another  one  bids  me  roll  along  the  descent  of  a
smooth  surface  ;  and  hopes  that  each  one  of  the  many12  may
touch  his  own.  There  is  he,  besides,  who  is  to  say  whether  the
number  is  odd  or  even  ;  that  the  guesser  may  win  the  spoil  so
hit  upon.  A  figure ;  too,  is  made  with  chalk,  such  as  the
figure  which  the  Constellation13  in  the  heavens,  and  the  fourth
letter  among  the  Greeks,  have.  When  this  figure  has  been
divided  into  steps :  the  nut  that  stops14  within  the  triangle,
carries  off  thence  as  many  nuts  as  the  lines  which  it  has
touched.  A  hollow  vessel,  too,  is  often  placed,  a  distance
intervening  ;  in  which  the  nut  is  to  fall,15  when  thrown  with
a  steady  hand.

Happy  the  tree  which  is  produced  in  a  field  remote ;  and
which  is  enabled  to  render  tribute  to  but  one  master ! It  hears

12  Each  one  of  the  many. — Ver.  78.  '  Quaelibet'  seems  to  be  a  prefer-
able reading  to  '  quamlibet.'  He  rolls  his  walnut  down  the  board,  and
hopes  that  it  will  touch  as  many  as  possible  of  those  stationed  in  a  line
below,  because  those  so  touched  will  be  forfeited  to  him.

13  Constellation.'] — Ver.  82.  That  near  Aries,  called  'Deltoton'  by  the
Greeks.

14  The  nut  that  stops.] — Ver.  83.  '  Quse  '  seems  to  be  the  proper  reading,
as  referring  to  the  nut  thrown,  and  not  to  the  person  who  throws.  The
suggestions  of  Sentlebius  and  Burmann  seem  correct ;  and  the  following
appears  to  be  the  game  here  described.  Atriangle  is  formed;  in  that, horizon-
tal lines  (relatively  to  the  thrower)  are  drawn.  These  Ovid  calls  '  virgae ;'
and  coming  one  above  the  other,  they  mark  the  triangle  out  into  'gradus,'  or
'steps.'  All  the  players  having  joined  in  making  a  pool  or  bank  of  nuts,  the
lines  are  marked  as  of  a  certain  value.  That  which  is  the  widest  being
nearest  to  the  base  and  to  the  thrower,  reckons  as  one ;  the  next  two,
the  next  three,  and  the  last  four.  The  thrower  then  bowls  his  nut :  if  it
goes  over  the  first  line,  he  gains  one  nut  from  the  pool ;  if  over  the  first
and  second,  three ;  if  over  the  first  three,  six  ;  if  over  all  the  lines,  and
then  rests  within  the  apex  of  the  triangle,  he  gains  ten  in  all.  The  difficulty
then  is  to  make  the  nut  stop  short  of  the  apex,  the  space  between  it  and
the  fourth  line  being  extremely  small ;  the  rule  of  the  game  being,  that  if
it  goes  outside  of  it,  it  gains  nothing.  Thus,  those  who  would  be
ambitious  of  making  the  most  of  a  throw  by  touching  all  the  lines,  would
run  the  greatest  risk  of  gaining  nothing  by  throwing  too  far ;  and  the
skill  of  the  game  would  consist  in  throwing  in  a  straight  line  towards  the
very  apex  of  the  triangle,  and  accurately  measuring  the  force  necessary  to
bowl  within  it,  but  beyond  the  fourth  line.  The  touching  of  the  lines
f  tangere  virgas,'  seems  pretty  clearly  to  denote  the  object  of  the  game,
combined  with  the  '  consistere  intus,'  the  resting  within.

15  The  nut  is  to  fall.] — Ver.  86.  If  he  throws  his  nut  into  the  vessel,  he
wins  one  from  the  other  player ;  if  he  misses,  he  loses  his  own.


NUX; OR, THE WALNUT-TREE.  499

not  the  hum  of  men,  nor  yet  the  noise  of  wheels:  it  is
not  covered  with  dust  from  the  neighbouring  road.  It  is
allowed  to  present  to  its  own  cultivator  whatever  gifts  it  has
produced,  and  to  reckon  up  a  plenteous  crop.  But  I  am  never
permitted  to  bring  my  fruit  to  maturity  ;  and  my  riches  are
shaken  off  before  their  time.  While  my  shell  is  still  soft  with
the  tender  milky  pulp  that  is  within,  and  my  misfortunes
are  to  prove  a  benefit  to  no  one;  still,  even  then,  you  may
find  those  who  pelt  me,  and  seek  a  worthless  spoil  by  their
premature  blows.

If  an  account  were  taken  of  what  is  stolen,  and  were  taken
of  what  is  left ;  traveller,  you  receive  a  larger  share  than  that
of  my  owner.  Many  a  time,  when  a  person  sees  my  summit
bared  of  leaves,  he  supposes  that  it  is  the  sad  work  of  the
raging  Boreas.  This  one  thinks  I  am  stripped  by  the  heat,
that  one  by  the  cold ;  there  are  some,  too,  that  suppose  it
to  be  the  fault  of  the  hail.  But  neither  hail,  so  hated  by  the
hardy  husbandman,  nor  yet  wind,  or  sun,  or  frost  has  proved
my  injury.  My  fruit  is  my  fault ;  it  injures  me  to  bear,  it
injures  me  to  be  fruitful.  Plunder,  which  has  been  so  to
many,  is  the  cause  of  my  misfortune  as  well.

Spoil,  Polydorus,  was  the  cause  of  thy  woes  ;16  'twas  lucre
that  sent  the  Aonian  husband  "  of  the  wicked  wife  to  war.  The
orchards18  of  the  Hesperian  king  would  have  been  untouched ;
but  one  tree  was  bearing  boundless  wealth.  Yet  the  bram-
ble and  the  thorn  are  produced  only  to  injure  ;  and  the  rest  of
the  prickly  shrubs  are  safe  in  their  own  defence.  Me,  be-
cause I  am  neither  injurious,  nor  am  defended  by  crooked
thorns,  annoying  stones  pelt,  sent  by  the  greedy  hand.
What  if,  when  the  earth  is  cracking  with  the  Icarian  Dog-
star,19  I  were  not  to  afford  my  shade  so  convenient  to  those
who  fly  from  the  sunshine  ?  What  if  I  were  not  a  place  of
refuge  for  those  who  avoid  the  showers,  when  the  rain  comes
with  its  unexpected  floods  ?  Although  I  do  all  this,  although
I  carefully  perform  my  duty  to  all ;  still,  with  all  my  duty,  I
am  pelted  with  stones.

16  Of  thy  woes. .] — Ver.  109.  His  murder  by  Polymnestor.  See  the
Metamorphoses,  Book  xiii.

17  Aonian  husband.] — Ver.  110.  See  the  Metamorphoses,  Book  viii
1.  317.

18  The  orchards.]— Ver.  111. The  golden  apples  of  the  Hesperides.
lj  Dogstar.]— Ver.  118. See  the  Fasti,  Book  iv.  1.  939.

Kl2


500  NUX; OR, THE WALNUT-TREE.

When  I  have  submitted  to  this,  the  complaints  of  my  mas-
ter must  be  endured.  I  am  considered  the  cause  why  the
soil  is  so  stony.20  And  while  he  is  clearing  the  ground  again,
and  is  throwing  back  the  stones  that  are  collected,  the  roads
ever  have  weapons  at  hand  against  me.  'Tis  for  this  that  the
cold,  so  hated  by  others,  is  an  advantage  to  me  alone ;  at
that  time,  the  winter  keeps  me  safe.  Then,  indeed,  I  am
bare  ;  but  it  is  advantageous  to  be  bare,  and  the  enemy  has  not
any  spoil  to  seek  from  me.  But  soon  as  I  expose  their  own
products  upon  my  branches,  multitudes  of  stones,  in  a  per-
fect hailstorm,  are  pelting  my  young  fruit.

Perhaps  some  one  here  may  say,  "  What  encroaches  on  the
public  way,  'tis  allowed  to  take  ;  this  right  the  highway  pos-
sesses." If  this  is  allowed,  strip  off  the  olives  ;  cut  down  the
standing  corn.  Cut  down,  pilfering  wayfarer,  the  vegetables
that  are  at  hand.  Let  the  same  license  enter  the  gates  of
the  City,  too  ;  and  let  there  be  the  same  amount  of  privilege,
Romulus,  for  thy  walls.  Let  any  one  that  chooses  carry  off
the  silver21  from  the  projecting  front  of  the  shop,  and  let  any
one  else  that  pleases  turn  to  the  jewellery.  Let  this  person
carry  off  the  gold,  that  the  foreign  stones  ;  and  let  each  take
away  whatever  wealth  he  is  able  to  lay  hands  on.  But  they
are  not  taken  away  ;  nor,  so  long  as  Caesar  rules  all  things,
will  the  robber  be  safe,  a  protector  so  great  existing.  But
this  Divinity  does  not  confine  peace  within  the  walls ;  over
the  whole  world  does  he  extend  his  protection.  But  of  what
use  is  this,  if,  in  mid-day  and  openly,  I  am  thus  beaten,  and
if  I  am  not  allowed  to  be  in  safety  ?  For  this  reason  you  see
no  nests  adhering  to  my  branches,  and  no  bird22  perching  in
my  retreats.  But  such  stones  as  have  lodged  in  the  joinings
of  my  branches,  there  abide,  and  remain,  like  the  conqueror
in  the  captured  citadel.

Other  charges,  however,  can  often  be  denied,  and  the  night

20  Why  the  soil  is  so  stony."] — Ver.  124.  It  has  to  bear  the  blame  be-
cause the  end  of  the  field  is  covered  with  the  stones  thrown  at  it ;  these
being  thrown  into  the  road  by  the  owner,  are  there  in  readiness  to  pelt
the  unfortunate  tree  again.

21  Carry  off  the  silver.] — Ver.  139.  The  '  tabernarii,'  or  '  bankers'
and  !  money-changers/  seem  to  have  exposed  their  riches  in  their  shop
windows,  probably  much  in  the  same  manner  that  the  dealers  in  bullion
do  in  this  country. At  Rome,  their  shops  were  in  the  Forum.

22  No  bird.] — Ver.  150.  Probably  from  the  bitterness  of  the  leaves,
and  the  pungency  of  its  smell.


WUX) OR, THE WALNUT-TREE.  501

has  disavowed  its  own  misdeeds.  My  injuries  blacken  the
fingers  with  my  dark  juices,  the  outer  shell  staining  the  hands
that  are  touched  thereby.  This  is  my  blood ;  the  hand  which
is  stained  with  this  blood,  is  washed  with  water  to  no  purpose.
Oh  !  how  oft  have  I  wished,  when  weariness  of  my  lengthened
existence  has  come  upon  me,  becoming  withered,  to  die  !  How
oft  have  I  wished,  either  to  be  uprooted  by  the  impetuous
whirlwind,  or  to  be  struck  by  the  furious  flame  of  the  hurled
thunderbolt !  And  would  that  sudden  storms  would  tear  away
my  fruit ;  or  else,  that  I  might  be  enabled,  myself,  to  shake
off  my  produce.  Thus,  beaver23  of  Pontus,  when  by  your-
self the  cause  of  your  danger  has  been  removed  from  yourself,
you  keep  in  safety  what  remains.  What  are  my  feelings
then,  when  the  traveller  is  taking  up  his  weapons,  and  is  first
marking  with  his  eyes  the  place  for  the  blow  ?  I  am  not
allowed  to  avoid  the  cruel  wound,  by  moving  my  trunk,  which
my  root  and  my  tenacious  fibres  hold  fast.

I  expose  my  body  to  the  blows  ;  as  often  the  accused  does
to  the  arrows,  when  the  people  forbids  him24  to  remove  the
manacles ;  or  as  when  the  white  heifer  beholds  the  heavy  hatchet
raised,  or  the  knives25  made  bare  for  her  throat.  Full  oft  have
you  supposed  that  my  leaves  were  shaken  by  the  wind  ;  but
fear  was  the  cause  of  that  shaking  of  mine.

If  I  have  deserved  this,  and  if  I  appear  guilty,  place  me  in
the  flames,  and  burn  my  limbs  upon  the  smoking  hearths.  If
I  have  deserved  this,  and  if  I  appear  guilty,  cut  me  down  with
the  axe  ;  and  but  once26  allow  me,  in  my  misery,  to  be  dis-
graced. If  you  have  no  reason  either  why  I  should  be  burnt,
or  why  I  should  be  cut  down,  have  compassion  on  me  :  and
so  may  you  arrive  at  the  end  of  your  destined  journey.

23  Beaver.] — Ver.  166.  When  hunted,  the  beaver  was  said  to  bite  off
that  portion  of  its  body  which  was  the  object  of  the  pursuit,  and  to  leave
it  by  way  of  compromise  for  its  liberty.

24  The  people  forbids  him.'] — Ver.  172.  Heinsius  is  at  a  loss  to  know
to  what  particular  circumstance,  if  any,  he  here  alludes.

25  The  knives.]— Ver.  174. See  the  Fasti,  Book  i.  1.  327.

26  And  but  once.'] — Ver.  180.  Heinsius  sees  no  sense  in  this  passage,
and  thinks  that  it  is  spurious.  The  meaning,  however,  seems  to  be  pretty
clear  :  '  Let  me  be  cut  down  and  burnt  like  a  malefactor,  and  thus  be  dis-
graced and  put  an  end  to  at  once.  This  I  should  prefer,  to  being  treated
as  I  am  now  treated ;  being  disgraced  from  day  to  day  by  being  pelted
at.  If,  however,  I  do  not  deserve  to  be  cut  down  or  burnt,  I  do  not
deserve  to  be  disgraced,  but  to  receive  more  considerate  treatment.  In
such  case,  I  wish  you  passers-by  a  pleasant  journey.'


THE  CONSOLATION TO  LIVIA AUGUSTA,


DEATH  OF  HER  SON  DRUSUS  CLAUDIUS  NERO.


(Ascribed  by  some  to  Pedo  Albinovanus,  but  more  generally  supposed  to
have  been  written  by  Ovid.)


Thou,  who  so  long  didst  seem  blessed,  so  lately  styled  the
mother  of  the  Neros,  now  is  the  half  of  that  title2  lost  to  thee.
Now,  Livia,  dost  thou  read  the  mournful  lines  addressed  to
Drusus ;  but  one  hast  thou  now  to  say,  "  My  mother,"  to  thee.

1  Drusus  Claudius  Nero.~\  He  was  the  son  of  Tiberius  Nero,  by
his  wife,  Livia  Drusilla,  and  from  whom  she  was  subsequently  divorced,  and
became  the  wife  of  Augustus.  He  was  the  brother  of  Tiberius,  who  after-
wards was  emperor.  Having  obtained  victories  over  the  Gauls  and  Germans,
he.  was  elevated  to  the  Prsetorship.  In  an  expedition  to  the  Rhine,  with
Tiberius,  he  acquired  great  glory,  and  was  nominated  Proconsul.  He  also
received  the  title  of  Imperator,  and  the  honours  of  a  triumph  were  decreed
to  him.  He  died  from  the  effects  of  a  fall  from  his  horse,  in  his  thirtieth
year.

2  Half  of  that  title.'] — Ver.  2.  Being  one  of  her  two  sons  by  Tiberius
Nero.  Seneca,  in  his  "  Consolation  to  Marcia,"  has  the  following  passage: —
1  Livia  lost  her  son  Drusus,  already  a  great  general,  and  one  who  promised
to  be  a  great  prince.  He  died  in  the  service  of  the  state,  and  great  were
the  regrets  of  the  cities,  the  provinces,  and  the  whole  of  Italy ;  both  the
free-towns  and  the  colonies  flocked  to  pay  their  marks  of  sorrowful  respect,
and  the  funeral  procession  was  attended  as  far  as  the  City,  very  much
resembling  a  triumph.  His  mother  had  not  had  the  opportunity  of  giving
to  her  son  the  last  kiss,  or  of  hearing  his  parting  words.  Having,  for  a
great  distance,  followed  the  remains  of  her  Drusus,  so  many  piles  blazing
throughout  Italy,  as  though  she  had  lost  him  so  many  times  over,  so  soon
as  she  had  laid  him  in  the  tomb,  she  put  an  end  to  her  grief,  and  showed
no  further  sorrow  than  was  due  to  her  respect  for  Caesar,  or  to  her  feelings
as  a  mother.  But  she  did  not  cease  to  pay  all  honours  to  the  name  of
Drusus,  and  to  have  him  represented  (in  statues)  both  in  her  own  house
and  the  public  buildings,  and  showed  pleasure  in  speaking  of  him  and
hearing  his  praises.'  The  Senate  conferred  the  title  of  Germanicus  on  his
descendants.  Casar  Germanicus,  his  son,  was  a  youth  of  great  promise,
but  he  died  in  his  early  years  at  Antioch,  under  very  suspicious  circum-
stances. See  the  Fasti,  Book  i.  1.  312.


THE CONSOLATION TO LIVIA  AUGUSTA.  503

No  longer  does  thy  affection  distract  thee  with  the  love  of
two;  no  longer,  when  the  name  of  "son"  is  uttered,  dost
thou  say, "  Which  of  the  two  dost  thou  mean  V

And  does  any  one  dare  to  prescribe  laws  for  thy  lamenting  1
And  with  his  lips  does  any  one  restrain  thy  tears  ?  Alas  !
how  easy  'tis  (since  this  is  shared  by  all)  to  speak  big  words
upon  the  grief  of  another!  Thou  hast  been  smitten,  for-
sooth, by  a  trifling  flash  of  lightning,  that  thou  mightst
prove  more  potent  under  thy  sorrows.

A  youth  is  dead,  a  respected  model  of  virtue  ;  transcendant
was  he  in  arms,  transcendant  was  he  in  the  arts  of  peace.3
How  lately  did  he  rescue  the  Alps,  filled  with  their  coverts,
from  the  foe,  and,  he  the  leader,4  his  brother,  too,  the  leader,
bore  off  the  glories  of  the  warfare.  He  subdued  the  Suevi,s
a  fierce  race,  the  Sygambri,6  too,  unsubdued  before,  and  he
turned  to  flight  the  backs  of  the  barbarians. He  too,  earned,

0  Roman,  for  thee,  triumphs  before  unknown,7  and  extended
thy  sway8  to  lands  but  recently  discovered.

And  thou,  his  mother,  unsuspecting  of  thy  destiny,  wast
preparing  to  fulfil  thy  vows  to  Jove,  and  to  fulfil  thy  vows
to  the Goddess  in  arms,  and  to  load  father  Gradivus9  with

3  The  arts  of  peace."] — Ver.  14. Literally.  '  in  the  toga.'

4  He,  the  leader.] — Ver.  16.  Tiberius,  as  the  elder  brother,  was  really
the  '  dux  ;'  but  the  encomiast  affects  to  halve  the  glory  between  them.
Dio  Cassius  and  Velleius  Paterculus  say  that  Drusus  was  appointed  as

1  helper,'  '  adjutor,'  of  Tiberius.

5  The  Suevi.] — Ver.  17.  The  Suevi  are  supposed  to  have  occupied  the
present  country  of  Pomerania,  on  the  banks  of  the  Elbe.

6  The  Sygambri.] — Ver.  17.  See  the  Amores,  Book  i.  El.  xiv.  1.  49,
and  the  Note  to  the  passage.  Suetonius  says  that  Augustus  transplanted
the  Sygambri  from  Germany  to  Gaul.

7  Triumphs  before  unknown.] — Ver.  19.  A  triumph  over  nations  before
unknown.

8  Extended  thy  sway.] — Ver.  20.  He  nominally  reduced  a  great  part
of  Germany,  under  the  Roman  arms.  He  was  succeeded  by  Quintilius
Varus,  who,  with  his  three  legions,  was  cut  to  pieces  by  the  Germans,  who
took  the  field  under  their  great  leader  Arminius.  This  defeat,  which  was
considered  more  complete  than  that  of  Cannae,  had  a  great  effect  on  Au-
gustus, who,  according  to  Seutonius,  mourned  for  several  months,  and
leaving  his  hair  unshorn  and  his  beard  unshaven,  would  shake  his  head
and  exclaim,  '  Quinctili  Vare,  legiones  redde,'  '  Quintilius  Varus,  give  me
back  my  legions !'

9  Father  Gradivtis.] — Ver.  23.  Mars  was  sometimes  called  '  Mars
pater,'  or  '  father  Mars.'


504  THE CONSOLATION

gifts;  and  to  worship  each  Divinity  that  it  is  lawful  and
righteous  to  adore.  And  in  thy  maternal  mind  wast  thou
revolving  his  hallowed  triumphs ;  and  perhaps  even  already
was  his  chariot  an  object  of  thy  care.  Instead  of  hallowed
triumphs,  the  funeral  procession  has  to  be  led  by  thee  ;  and
instead  of  the  heights  of  Jove,10  the  tomb  awaits  thy  Drusus.
Thou  didst  fancy  him  now  returned,  and  in  thy  mind  thou
didst  entertain  the  transports  prematurely  enjoyed;  and  already
before  thine  eyes  was  the  hero  "  Soon  will  he  come,"  didst
thou  say  to  thyself ;  "  soon  will  the  multitude  see  me  con-
gratulating him  ;  now  must  I  bear  the  presents  for  my  Drusus.
I  will  go  forth  to  meet  him,  and  happy  shall  I  be  called
throughout  all  cities  ;  with  these  lips,  too,  shall  I  press  his
neck  and  his  eyes.  Like  this  will  he  be ;  in  this  manner
will  he  meet  me ;  in  this  manner  will  he  return  my  kisses  ;
these  things  will  he  recount  to  me  ;  thus  will  I  be  the  first,
myself,  to  say."

Delusive  pleasures  dost  thou  cherish;  lay  aside,  most  wretched
lady,  these  vain  hopes.  Cease,  in  thy  delight,  to  make
mention  of  thy  Drusus.  That  care  of  Caesar,11  that  second
half  of  your  anxieties,  is  dead.  Unloose,  Livia,  thy  sorrowing
tresses.  What  now  do  thy  virtues  avail  thee,  and  all  thy
life  passed  with  propriety  so  strict,12  and  the  being  beloved
by  a  personage  so  great  1  What,  too,  that  thou  art  so  inviolate
in  thy  chastity,  that  it  is  the  very  least  among  thy  praises  ?
liVhat  that  thou  hast  preserved  thy  principles  uncorrupted
against  their  own  age,  and  that  thou  hast  raised  thine  head  far
above  all  vices  1  What  that  thou  hast  injured  no  one,13  and
yet  hast  had  the  power  to  injure?  What,  too,  that  no  one
has  dreaded  thy  strength  ?  That  thy  influence  has  not  ex-
tended to  the  Plain  of  Mars™*  and  to  the  Forum ;  and  that

10  The  heights  of  Jove.] — Ver.  28.  Instead  of  the  Capitol,  which  was
sacred  to  Jupiter,  and  to  which  the  victor  proceeded  in  triumph.

11  That  care  of  Ccesar.] — Ver.  39.  According  to  Suetonius,  he  had
not  only  been  adopted  by  Caesar,  but  was  destined  by  him  to  be  his  suc-
cessor.

12  Passed  with  propriety  so  strict.'] — Ver.  43.  This  line  is  hopelessly
corrupt.  The  meaning  is  clearly  a  compliment  to  Livia  on  her  chastity  :
but  a  literal  translation  of  it  is  quite  out  of  the  question.

13  Hast  injured  no  one.] — Ver.  47.  So  Velleius  Paterculus  says,  with
regard  to  Livia,  '  No  one  was  sensible  of  her  power,  except  by  reason  of
her  assistance  in  the  moment  of  peril,  or  of  his  elevation  to  some  dignity.'

13*  Plain  of  Mars.] — Ver.  49.  See  the  Amores,  Book  iii.  El.  viii.  1.  57,
and  the  Note  to  the  passage.


TO LIYIA AUGUSTA.  505

thou  hast  forborne  to  use  it  against  any  family  whatever.
It  is,  in  fact,  through  such  principles  as  these,  that  the  slights
of  Fortune  show  her  tyranny ;  and  here,  too,  does  she  rest
upon  her  unsteady  wheel.14  Here,  too,  is  she  felt ;  that  with
no  partiality  she  may  destroy,  she  rages  ;  and  everywhere  does
she  assert  her  unjust  prerogative  for  herself.

If  Livia,  forsooth,  had  alone  been  exempt  from  sorrow,
would  the  sway  of  Fortune  have  been  diminished  ?  Suppose
that  Livia  had  not  so  conducted  herself  in  every  respect,
that  her  blessings  were  not  cause  of  envy?  Add  the  house
of  Caesar ;  that  assembly,  free  from  death,  ought  surely  to  be
above  the  calamities  of  mortals.  He,  ever  watchful,  he,  hal-
lowed and  seated  on  his  lofty  height,15  were  worthy  in  safety
to  behold  the  affairs  of  mortal  men.  Neither  himself  to  be
mourned  by  his  kindred,  nor  yet  to  mourn  any  one  of  his
kindred  ;  nor  yet,  himself  to  endure  what  we,  the  vulgar
throng,  endure.

We  have  seen  him  lamenting  on  the  offspring  of  his  sister16
being  snatched  away  ;  that,  as  for  Drusus,  was  a  public  mourn-
ing. He  has  deposited  Agrippa17  in  the  same  sepulchre,  Mar-
cellus, as  thee  ;  and  now  has  that  place  received  his  two
sons-in-law.  Agrippa  there  deposited,  hardly  had  the  gate  of
the  tomb  well  closed,  when,  lo  !  his  sister  paid  the  tribute  of
her  death.13  Lo!  three  already  experienced,  Drusus,  the  most
recent  loss,  is  the  fourth  to  receive  the  tears of  great  Caesar.

14  Upon  her  unsteady  wheel.'] — Ver.  52.  See  the  Tristia,  Book  v.  El.  viii.
1.  7,  and  the  Note  to  the  passage.

15  On  his  lofty  height.] — Ver.  61.  He  probahly  alludes  to  the  residence
of  Augustus,  in  the  Palatium,  on  the  Capitoline  Hill.  Some,  however,
think  that  he  alludes  prospectively  to  the  apotheosis  of  Augustus,  and  by
the  word  '  arce,'  means  '  the  heavens.'

16  The  offspring  of  his  sister.] — Ver.  65.  This  was  Marcellus,  the  son
of  Octavia,  the  sister  of  Augustus,  and  the  first  husband  of  his  daughter
Julia.  He  died  in  his  eighteenth  year,  universally  regretted  by  the  public.
It  is  to  him  that  Virgil  alludes  in  his  celebrated  line  in  the  Sixth  Book  of
the  Mneid,  1.  883,  '  Tu  Marcellus  eris,'  '  Thou  shalt  be  Marcellus.'

17  Agrippa.] — Ver.  67.  After  the  death  of  Marcellus,  Augustus  mar-
ried his  daughter  Julia  to  Agrippa,  who  was  previously  married  to
Marcella,  the  sister  of  the  deceased  Marcellus,  and  from  whom  he  was
then  divorced.

18  The  tribute  of  her  death.] — Ver.  70.  Almost  immediately  after  the
death  of  Agrippa,  Octavia,  the  sister  of  Augustus,  died  at  Rome,  in  her
fiftv-fourth  year.


506  THE CONSOLATION

Close  now,  ye  Destinies,  close  the  sepulchre,  that  has  been
open  too  long  ;  longer  than  is  right  does  that  abode  still  yawn
wide.  Drusus,  thou  art  gone,  and  in  vain  are  thy  glories  pro-
claimed.19 May  these  lamentations  for  thy  death  prove  the
last.  That  grief  might  fill  whole  ages  even,  and  might  have
occupied  the  extent  of  universal  mourning.

In  thee  are  many  lost ;  and  thou,  in  whom  there  was  such
a  multitude  of  good  qualities,  to  whose  lot  each  virtue  fell,
wast  not  one  alone.  And  no  one  of  mothers  was  there  more
fruitful  than  thy  parent,  who  at  two  births  produced  so  many
virtues.  Alas  !  where  is  now  that  pair  equal  in  their  merits
so  numerous  ?  And  where  that  affectionate  tenderness,  and  that
undoubted  attachment  ?  We  have  seen  Nero,20  distracted  at
the  death  of  his  brother,  weeping,  with  his  locks  hanging
over  his  pallid  features,  unlike,  too,  to  his  former  self,  as  his
countenance  bespoke  its  sorrow.  Ah  me!  what  grief  was
there  in  his  every  feature  !

But  thou  didst  look  upon  thy  brother  in  his  last  moments,
when  about  to  die  ;  he,  too,  beheld  thy  tears.  And  dying,  he
felt  thy  breast  pressed  to  his  own,  and  on  thy  features  he  held
his  eyesjirmly  fixed;  his  eyes,  as  at  that  very  instant,  they
swam  in  gloomy  death,  his  eyes  that  instant  about  to  submit
to21  the  fraternal  hand.  But  his  sorrowing  mother  neither  gave
him  the  parting  kiss,  nor  with  her  throbbing  bosom  did  she
cherish  bis  cold  limbs.  His  fleeting  breath  she  did  not  re-
ceive22 in  her  opened  lips  ;  nor  did  she  lay23  her  tresses,  cut
off,  along  thy  limbs.  Thou  wast  torn,  too,  from  her,  far  away,
while  ruthless  warfare  employed  thee,  more  useful,  Drusus,
to  thy  country  than  to  thine  own  self.

In  tears  she  dissolves  ;  as  when,  stricken  by  the  Zephyrs
and  the  rays  of  the  sun,  the  light  snow  is  melted  in  the  balmy

19  Are  thy  glories  proclaimed.'] — Ver.  75.  Probably  'vocantur'  is  the
correct  reading  here  for  '  levantur.'

20  We  have  seen  Nero.'] — Ver.  85.  The  allusion  is  to  Tiberius  Nero,
afterwards  Emperor.

21  About  to  submit  to.] — Ver.  94.  Being  the  nearest  relative  present,  it
would  be  the  duty  of  Tiberius  to  close  the  eyes  of  his  brother.

22  She  did  not  receive.] — Ver.  97.  He  says  Livia  was  not  present  to
catch  the  dying  breath  of  her  son,  which  it  was  the  custom  for  the  nearest
relative  to  do.

23  Nor  did  she  lay.] — Ver.  98.  See  the  Metamorphoses,  Book  iii.  1.  506,
and  the  Note  to  the  passage.


TO LIYIA AUGUSTA.  507

spring.  Thee  does  she  lament,  and  her  sad  misfortunes,  and
her  purposeless  vows,24  and  she  rebukes  her  years  as  having
lived  too  long.  In  such  wise,  soothed  at  length,  does  the
Dauiian  bird,25  in  the  shady  woods,  lament  the  Thracian
Itys  :  similar  complaints  of  the  halcyons  resound  with  shrill
voice  over  the  stormy  ocean  in  appeals  to  the  deaf  waves.
Thus,  did  you,  ye  birds,  so  suddenly  formed,  beating  your
breasts  with  your  new-made  wings,  warble  in  concert  around
the  descendant  of  (Eneus.26  Thus  lamented  Clymene  ;27  thus
too  did  the  daughter  of  Clymene  weep,  when,  struck  by  the
lightnings,  the  youth  fell  from  his  father's  car  on  high.  Some-
times she  dries  up  her  tears,  and  summons  her  fortitude,  and
withholds  them  ;  and  her  eyes,  with  stronger  endurance,  keep
them  held  within.  They  burst  forth,  and  again  do  they  over-
flow her  lap  and  her  bosom,  gushing  forth  from  her  over-
flowing and  swollen  cheeks.  Cessation  from  weeping  in-
creases their  strength  ;  and  more  plenteously  does  the  tide
burst  forth,  if  it  has  been  held  back  by  a  short  respite.  At
length,  when,  through  her  tears,  she  is  enabled,  thus,  as  she
weeps,  does  she  begin,  while  sobs  interrupt  her  accents  in  the
midst :

"My  son,  my  short-lived  offspring,  one  half  of  the  two
that  I  produced  ;  thou  glory  of  thy  stricken  parent,  where  art
thou  ?  Alas  !  but  lately  so  mighty,  where  art  thou  ?  To
the  tomb  and  to  the  pile  art  thou  being  carried  out.  Are  these
the  gifts  to  be  prepared  for  thy  return  ?  Is  it  thus  that  thou
didst  deserve  to  meet  the  eyes  of  thy  mother  1  Is  it  thus
that  I  was  deserving  to  see  thee  on  thy  return  ?  If  it  is  allowed
the  wife  of  Caesar  to  say  such  a  thing ;  I  am  now  in  doubt
whether  I  should  believe  that  the  great  Divinities  exist.

V  For  what  wrong  have  I  done  ?  What  Divinities,  and  what
Gods  have  I  not  been  enabled  to  deserve  well  of  by  my  pious

24  Her  purposeless  vows.~\ — Ver.  103.  Following  the  suggestion  of
Ileinsius,  we  read  'vota'  at  the  end  of  this  line,  instead  of  'tales.'
The  passage  is  evidently  corrupt.

25  The  Dauiian  bird.]— Ver.  106.  See  the  Fifteenth  Epistle  in  this
volume,  1. 154,  and  the  Note.

26  Descendant  of  (Eneus."} — Ver.  110.  He  alludes  to  the  transformation
of  the  companions  of  Diomedes,  the  grandson  of  (Eneus,  into  birds.  See
the  Fourteenth  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses,  1.  494,  and  the  Note.

27  Thus  lamented  Clymene.] — Ver.  111.  She  was  the  mother  of  Phaeton.
He  alludes  to  the  grief  of  herself  and  her  daughters  on  the  death  of  her
son. See  the  Second  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses.


508  THE CONSOLATION

devotions  ?  Is  this  the  reward  of  piety  1  I  embrace  these
lifeless  limbs ;  and  the  name  and  the  pile  is  devouring  this
same  bosom.  And  do  I,  accursed  as  I  am,  endure  to  behold
thee  laid  out  ?  And  will  my  hands,  my  son,  be  able  to  anoint
thee  ?28  Now,  to  my  misery,  for  the  last  time  do  I  clasp  thee
and  behold  thee  ?  And  do  I  compose  thy  hands  ?29  And  am
I  to  move  my  lips  upon  thy  lips  ?  Now,  for  the  first  time,  both
Consul  and  Victor,  art  thou  beheld  by  thy  parent !  Is  it  thus
to  me,  thus  to  wretched  me,  that  thou  dost  bring  home  titles
so  great  ?  Thy  first  fasces  that  I  beheld,  I  saw  in  thy  funeral
procession  •  I  beheld  them,  too,  reversed,30  and  as  tokens  of
woe.

"  Who  could  have  believed  it  ?  That  day  has  come,  a  most
abundant  source  of  sorrow  to  a  mother,  on  which  she  beheld
her  son  with  supreme  honors.  And  am  I  not  now  truly  un-
happy? Now  Drusus,  known  by  the  name31  of  his  maternal
grandsire,  one  half  of  my  Neros,  has  been  torn  away  from  me.
And  is  he  now  mine  own  no  longer,  and  does  he  no  longer
make  me  a  parent  ?  And  have  I  once  been  the  mother  of
Drusus,  and  did  he  once  exist  ?

"Nor  yet,  when  it  shall  be  reported  to  me  that  the  victorious
Nero  is  come,  shall  I  any  longer  be  enabled  to  say,  '  Is  it  the
elder  one,  or  the  other  that  is  come  V  To  the  last  am  I  re-
duced ;  from  one  only  do  I  hold  the  privilege  of  a  mother ;
from  one  arises  that  title,  which  still,  in  my  bereavement,  I  am
being  denied.  Ah  wretched  me  !  I  shudder,  and  a  chill  runs
through  my  bones.  Nothing  now,  for  certain,  can  I  call
my  own.  Lo !  he  once  was  mine ;  he  bids  me  fear  for  his
brother  ;  everything  now  do  I  dread ;  before,  I  was  more  bold.

28  Be  able  to  anoint  thee.~\ — Ver.  136.  It  was  ordinarily  the  duty  of
the  '  pollinctores,'  who  were  slaves  of  the  undertaker,  or  '  libitinarius,'  to
anoint  and  perfume  the  body  after  death.  Nisard's  translation  thus  ren-
ders the  present  passage,  '  Pourraije  l'embaumer  de  mes  propres  mains  ?'
'  Shall  I  be  able  to  embalm  him  with  my  own  hands  ?' !  !

29  Do  I  compose  thy  hands  ?~] — Ver.  138.  '  Effingere  manus  '  is  pro-
bably '  to  lay  the  hands  out  by  the  side.'

30  Beheld  them,  too,  reversed.] — Ver.  142.  The  arms  of  the  soldiers,  and
the  '  fasces '  and  other  insignia,  were  borne  in  an  inverted  position  at  the
funeral  of  a  general. The  '  fasces  '  were  also  broken  on  the  same  occasion.

31  Known  by  the  name.'] — Ver.  146.  From  Suetonius,  we  learn  that
the  father  of  Livia  was  of  the  family  of  the  Drusi,  but  that  he  was  adopted
into  the  family  of  the  Livii. Livia  was  also  called  '  Drusilla.'


TO LIYTA AUGUSTA.  509

Thee  at  least32  surviving,  Nero,  may  I  die ;  mayst  thou  close
my  eyes,  and  with  pious  lips  mayst  thou  receive  this  breath.
And  would  that  one,  the  hand  of  Drusus,  and  the  other,  that  of
his  brother,  should  have  composed  and  closed  these  eyes  !
What  may  still  be  done,  at  least,  Drusus,  in  this  one  tomb33
will  we  be  laid ;  and,  entombed  alone,  thou  shalt  not  go  to
thy  forefathers  of  old.  I  shall  be  mingled  with  thee,  ashes
with  ashes,34  and  bones  with  bones.  May  the  Destiny,  with
spindle  swiftly  whirling,  bring  that  day  round !"

This  and  more  does  she  say.  Tears  follow  her  words,
and  trickle  in  vain  down  her  lips,  still  uttering  their  com-
plaints. And,  further,  the  body,  with  extreme  reluctance,35
given  up  to  the  mother,  Livia,  was  almost  deprived  of  its  ob-
sequies. For  all  the  army  had  resolved  to  place  its  general  to
be  burnt  amid  those  arms,  amid  which  he  had  perished.  From
them,  in  their  reluctance,  did  his  brother  take36  the  venerated
corpse  ;  and,  so  far  as  was  allowed,  he  gave  Drusus  back  to
his  country.  The  funeral  train  of  Drusus  is  escorted  through
the  Roman  towns;  oh  shocking  calamity!  places,  through
which,  as  conqueror  he  was  to  have  gone  :  through  which  he
had  proceeded  when  the  Rheetian  arms37  were  subdued.  Ah
me ! How  different  was  this  progress  from  that !

A  Consul,  he  enters  the  City  with  broken  fasces.38  When  thus

32  Thee  at  least."] — Ver.  157.  She  addresses  Tiberius,  and  tells  him
that  he  is  left  to  close  her  eyes,  and  to  catch  her  dying  breath.

33  In  this  one  tomb.']  — Ver.  162.  From  Dio  Cassius,  we  learn  that
Drusus  was  buried  in  the  tomb  of  the  Caesars,  and  not  in  that  of  the
Claudian  or  Livian  family.

34  Ashes  with  ashes.]— Ver.  163.  This  is  not  unlike  the  words  of  our
funeral  service,  '  Dust  to  dust,  ashes  to  ashes.'

35  With  extreme  reluctance.] — Ver.  167.  So  great  was  the  affection  of
his  soldiers  for  Drusus,  that  they  would  hardly  allow  his  body  to  be  car-
ried to  Rome,  insisting  that  it  should  be  burnt  where  he  died.  They
built  a  splendid  cenotaph  in  his  honour,  on  the  banks  of  the  Rhine.

26  Did  his  brother  take.] — Ver.  171.  We  learn  from  Suetonius  and
Valerius  Maximus,  that  on  learning  the  accident  that  had  happened  to
Drusus,  Tiberius  took  horse  at  Tiscinum,  (now  Pavia),  and  travelled
night  and  day  till  he  reached  his  brother,  who  was  then  in  Germany,  near
the  Rhine.  He  accompanied  the  body  to  Rome,  preceding  it  on  foot  all
the  way.

37  The  Rhcetian  arms.] — Ver.  175.  The  country  of*the  Rhaeti  lay  be-
tween the  Danube,  the  Rhine,  and  the  Lieb.

38  With  broken  fasces.] — Ver.  177.  The  meaning  is,  '  If  a  Consul  and
a  conqueror  enters  the  City  amid  such  signs  of  mourning,  what  would  have


510  THE CONSOLATION

the  conqueror  enters,  what  should  the  conquered  do  ?  The
sad  abode  resounds  with  lamentations,  in  which  its  joyous
master  had  promised  to  fix  up  the  arms 39  that  were  won  by
his  hand.  The  City  is  sorrowing,  and  in  its  wretchedness  as-
sumes but  one  aspect ;  may  such  be  the  appearance  of  the
hostile  nations,  I  pray  !  Disquieted,  people  both  shut  up  their
houses,  and  throughout  the  City  do  they  clamour  aloud. ;  in
this  spot  and  in  that,  in  their  alarm,  do  they  lament,  both  in
private  and  in  public.  Justice  is  silent ;  and  the  laws,  struck
dumb,  without  their  assertors40  are  mute  ;  in  the  whole  Forum
no  purple  garment  is  beheld.

The  Deities,  too,  lie  concealed  in  their  temples,  and  turn
not  their  faces  towards  the  hateful  funereal  rites  ;  nor  ask  they
for  the  frankincense  that  must  be  laid  upon  the  funeral  pile.41
Their  shrines  hold  them  in  their  obscurity;  they  are  ashamed
to  look42  upon  the  faces  of  their  worshippers,  through  fear  of  the
hatred  which  they  have  deserved.  One,  too,  of  the  lower
ranks,  in  his  affection,  on  behalf  of  his  poor  son,  had  raised  his
trembling  hands  towards  the  lofty  heavens ;  and  now  about
to  pray — "  But  why,  in  my  credulity,"  says  he,  "should  I  ad-
dress unavailing  vows  to  Gods  who  do  not  exist  ?  Livia,  no,
not  Livia,  has  moved  them  on  behalf  of  Drusus  ;  and  shall  I
be  any  very  great  care  to  mighty  Jove  V  Thus  he  said ;  and
in  his  anger  he  left  his  vows  unperformed  ;  and.  he  hardened
his  determination,  and  ceased  from  his  prayers.

The  multitude  rushes  to  meet  the  procession :  and  while

been  the  aspect  of  things,  had  he  entered  the  City,  after  having  been
vanquished  ?'

39  To  fix  up  the  arms.] — Ver.  179.  The  arms  of  the  enemy  were  hung
up  in  the  house  of  the  conqueror,  as  a  votive  gift  to  the  Gods.

4,)  Without  their  assertors.] — Ver.  185.  In  the  Courts  of  law  at  Rome,
a  defendant  who  had  been  condemned  to  pay  a  certain  sum,  had  thirty
days  allowed  him  in  which  to  make  payment ;  after  which  time,  if  he
made  default,  he  was  liable  to  'injectio  manus,' a  kind  of  execution.  In
such  case  he  could  make  no  resistance,  and  his  only  mode  of  proceeding
was  to  find  some  responsible  person  to  undertake  his  defence,  who  was
called  '  vindex.'  This  person,  it  is  supposed,  was  liable  to  pay,  if  he
could  find  no  good  defence  to  the  plaintiff 's  claim.  The  word  '  vindex'
is  here  translated  '  assertor.'

41  The  funeral  pile.) — Ver.  188.  Nisard  seems  to  think  that'rogo'
means  the  altars  of  the' Gods,  and  not  the  funeral  pile.

42  They  are  ashamed  to  look.] — Ver.  190.  For  their  harshness  in  re-
moving a  person  so  worthy.


TO LIVIA AUGUSTA.  511

tears  bedew  their  cheeks,  they  recount  the  public  loss  in  being
deprived  of  the  Consul.  The  eyes  of  all  are  the  same  in  ap-
pearance ;  their  tearful  sympathy  is  alike.  At  the  funeral
obsequies  all  of  us  Knights43  are  present.  Every  age  is  there;
both  youths  and  aged  men  are  sorrowing  ;  Ausonian  mothers
and  Ausonian  brides.  The  victorious  laurel,  too,  which  was
owed  to  the  temples  of  the  Deities,  is  borne  first,  in  sadness,
upon  the  image  of  him  who  won  it.  The  noble  youths  contend
to  support  the  burden  of  the  bier,  and  strive  to  offer  their  zealous
necks  for  the  duty.  Both  with  thy  voice,  Caesar,44  and  in  thy
tears,  wast  thou  praising  thy  adopted  child  ;  when  grief,  in  the
midst,  interrupted  thy  sad  commencement.  The  Gods  repel-
ling the  omen,  for  death  like  this  for  thyself  didst  thou  pray  ;
if  thy  Destinies  would  permit  thee  to  die.  But  the  heavens  are
thy  due ;  thee,  the  great  palace  of  anxious  Jove,  all  powerful
with  its  thunders,  shall  receive.

What  Drusus  wished  for,  he  has  obtained,  that  his  acts
might  be  pleasing  to  thee  ;  and  in  thy  praises  he  has  a  great
recompense  for  his  death.  According  to  custom,  the  cohorts
in  arms45  throng  around  the  pile,  and  foot  and  horse  perform
the  funeral  obsequies  for  their  chief.  Again  and  again  in
their  closing  shouts  do  they  call  upon  thee ;  but  the  sound
returns,  re-echoed  by  the  opposite  hills.  Father  Tiberinus46
himself  shuddered  in  his  yellow  waves  ;  and,  lowering,  raised
his  head  from  the  midst  of  the  stream.  Then  with  his  vast
hands  did  he  remove  from  his  azure  features  his  locks  en-
twined with  willows, and  moss, and  reeds  ; and  from  his

43  All  of  us  Knights.] — Ver.  202.  The  writer  speaks  of  himself  as  being
one  of  the  '  Equites  '  in  the  funeral  procession.  Ovid  was  of  the  Equestrian
order.

44  With  thy  voice,  Ccesar.'] — Ver.  209.  According  to  Suetonius,  '  Au-
gustus had  such  affection  for  Drusus  in  his  lifetime,  that  he  nominated
him  to  be  co-heir  with  his  own  sons,  as  he  once  declared  before  the
Senate ;  and  when  dead,  he  made  an  oration  in  his  praise,  and  prayed  that
the  Gods  would  make  the  Caesars  like  him,  and  grant  him  as  honorable
an  end  as  they  had  bestowed  on  Drusus.'  Augustus  also  wrote  the  history
of  his  life.

45  The  cohorts  in  arms  ] — Ver.  217.  At  the  funeral  of  a  general,  it
was  the  custom  for  the  soldiers  to  march  three  times  round  the  funeral
pile.

46  Father  Tiberinus  ]— Ver.  221.  See  the  Note  to  line  257  of  the
Remedy  of  Love.


512  THE CONSOLATION

swollen  eyes  did  he  send  forth  streams  of  tears ;  hardly  did
his  deep  channel  contain  the  streams47  so  added.

And  now  had  he  resolved48  to  extinguish  the  flames  of  the
pile  with  the  contact  of  his  stream,  and  to  carry  off  the  body
untouched.  He  was  withholding  his  waters,  and  was  check-
ing the  speed  of  his  steeds,  that  with  all  his  stream  he  might
be  enabled  to  wash  away  the  pile.  But  Mavors  adjoining49
in  his  temple,  and  an  inhabitant  of  the  "  Plain,"  uttered  thus
many  words,  and  not  even  he  with  tearless  cheeks  ;

"  Although  anger  befits  streams,  still,  Tiberinus,  do  thou
rest ;  neither  to  thee  nor  to  any  is  it  given  to  subdue  the
Destinies.  Under  my  tutelage50  did  he  die ;  amid  arms  and
weapons  did  he  die,  and  as  a  general  in  the  service  of  his
country.  In  his  tomb  does  the  reason  lie  concealed.  What
I  could  contribute,  I  have  given  ;  the  victory  has  been  gained.
The  doer  of  the  work  is  gone,  but  still  the  work  remains.
Once  did  I  solicit  both  Clotho  and  her  two  sisters,  who  with
unerring  fingers  tease  their  rigid  tasks,  that  Remus,  the  son  of
Ilia,  and  his  brother,  founder  of  the  City,  might  by  some
method  escape  the  deep  pools  of  Styx.  One  of  them  said  to
me,  "  Take  that  half  of  the  gift  which  is  presented  thee  ;  of
those  for  which  thou  dost  ask,  one  shall  there  be ;  he  is  pro-
mised to  thee  ;  next  are  the  two  Csesars  promised51  to  Venus.
These  alone  does  Rome,  City  of  Mars,  own  as  Divinities."
Thus  did  the  Goddesses  pronounce,  and  do  not  thou,  Tiberinus,
struggle  in  vain  ;  impede  not  the  flames  with  thy  stream,  and
obstruct  not  the  last  honours  of  the  youth  now  laid  on  the  pile.
Proceed  then,  and  roll  onwards  with  thy  waters  in  their  full
career."

47  Contain  the  streams.'] — Ver.  226.  The  author  uses  the  licence  of  a
poet,  and  refers  on  this  occasion  to  what  really  happened  at  the  funeral
of  Marcellus.  Dio  Cassius  tells  us,  that  on  that  occasion  the  waters  of
the  Tiber  were  so  swollen,  that  the  Sulpician  bridge  was  carried  away,
and  the  streets  of  the  City  were  navigable  for  boats  during  three  days.

48  Now  had  he  resolved.] — Ver.  227.  The  Campus  Martius,  where  the
body  was  burnt,  adjoined  the  river  Tiber.

49  Mavors  adjoining.] — Ver.  231.  He  alludes  to  the  Temple  of  Mars,
in  the  Campus  Martius  ;  it  was  burnt  a.tj.c.  754.

60  Under  my  tutelage.] — Ver.  235.  This  line  and  the  next  are  probably
corrupt ;  it  is  difficult  to  glean  any  meaning  from  them.

51  The  two  Ccesars  promised.] — Ver.  245.  He  alludes  to  the  promise
of  immortality  by  Venus  to  Julius  Caesar  and  Augustus.  See  the  close  of
the  Fifteenth  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses.


TO LIYTA  AUGUSTA.  513

He  obeyed ;  and  far  and  wide  did  he  disengage  his  extending
waters,  and  entered  his  abode  formed  with  the  pendant  pumice.

The  flames  having  long  hesitated  to  reach  that  hallowed
head,  slowly  strayed  onwards  beneath  the  erected  pile ;  at
length,  when  they  had  caught  the  wood  and  embraced  the
fuel,  they  flickered  even  to  the  skies  and  the  stars  with  their
flakes  beneath.  Just  as  they  shone,  upon  the  peaks  of  (Eta,
sacred  to  Hercules,  when,  the  God  laid  on  the  pile,  his  limbs
were  burnt.  He  is  burning,  alas !  That  manly  grace,  that
noble  form,  those  candid  features,  that  athletic  frame,  is  being
consumed !  The  victorious  hands,  too,  and  those  eloquent
lips  of  the  prince,  and  that  breast,  the  great  and  capacious
abode  of  genius  !  In  those  same  flames  the  hopes  of  many
a  one  are  consumed  as  well.  The  offspring  of  a  wretched
mother  does  that  funeral  pile  contain.  The  exploits  of  the
chieftain  will  survive,  and  the  glory  of  his  deeds  so  laboriously
acquired :  that  still  abides,  that  alone  escapes  the  ravening
pyre.  'Twill  form  a  portion  of  history,  and  will  be  read  in
every  age,  and  will  present  itself  as  a  theme  for  genius  and
for  song.  In  the  Rostra,52  too,  shalt  thou  stand  graced  with
the  honours  of  thy  inscription  ;  and  we,  Drusus,  shall  be  pro-
nounced the  cause  of  thy  death.

But,  Germany,  for  thee  no  right  to  indulgence  now  remains  ;
henceforth,  barbarian,  by  death  shalt  thou  give  satisfaction.
I  shall  behold  the  necks  of  kings  livid  with  their  chains,
and  the  remorseless  manacles  fastened  on  their  cruel  hands,

52  In  the  Rostra.  J — Ver.  269.  Suetonius  and  Dio  Cassius  inform  us
that  the  Senate  decreed,  among  other  honours,  a  rnarhle  arch  with  trophies
in  the  Appian  way,  in  honour  of  Drusus,  and  gave  the  name  of  Germanicus
to  him  and  his  descendants.  On  his  medals  he  is  styled  'Claudius  Drusus
Germanicus  Imp.'  Florus  says  that  it  was  the  first  time  that  the  Senate
had  decreed  a  '  cognomen '  to  any  person  derived  from  the  province  which
he  had  ruled.  By  the  name  of  '  Rostra,'  or  '  the  Beaks,'  a  part  of  the
Forum  is  referred  to.  It  was  the  spot  whence  the  orators  addressed  the
people,  and  obtained  the  name  of  '  Rostra '  when  it  was  adorned  with
the  brazen  beaks  taken  from  the  ships  of  the  Antiates.  The  ■  Rostra,'  or
place  from  which  the  orators  spoke,  was  transposed  by  Julius  Caesar  to  a
corner  of  the  Forum  ;  but  the  spot  where  the  ancient '  Rostra '  had  stood,
still  continued  to  be  called  '  Rostra  Vetera,'  or  '  the  old,'  while  the  other
was  '  the  new,'  or  '  Julia  nova,'  or  '  Julia  Rostra.'  Both  the  '  Rostra '
contained  statues  of  illustrious  men :  the  new  '  Rostra '  having  eques-
trian statues  of  Julius  C&sar,  Sylla,  Pompey,  and  Augustus.  To  this
reference  is  here  made.

L  L


514  THE CONSOLATION

and  their  features  at  last  bearing  marks  of  fear,  and  the  tears
trickling  down  the  reluctant  cheeks  upon  the  features  of  those
ferocious  men.  That  spirit  so  threatening,  and  so  elated  in
the  death  of  Drusus,  in  the  mournful  prison  shall  be  sur-
rendered to  the  executioner.53  I  shall  stop,  and  with  joyous  eyes,
and  unconcernedly  will  I  behold  their  naked  bodies  strewed
about  the  unclean  roads.  Right  soon  shall  dewy  Aurora,
with  her  saffron-coloured  steeds,  bring  on  the  day  that  will
present  sights  so  mighty.  Add,  too,  the  brothers,  sons  of
Leda,54  those  stars  so  attached,  and  the  temples  conspicuous
in  the  Forum  of  Rome.55  In  how  short  a  life  of  our  prince
did  he  complete  his  years,  and  how  muck  an  aged  man  in  the
obligations  of  his  country  did  he  die  !

And  still,  ah  wretched  me !  Drusus  shall  not  behold  his
own  honours,  and  on  the  front  of  the  temple  no  name  of  his
shall  he  read.  Full  oft  shall  Nero,  as  he  weeps,  say  with  a
low  voice,  "  Why,  without  a  brother,  alas !  do  I  repair56  to
the  brother  Gods  ?"  Drusus,  thou  hadst  resolved  never  to
return  but  as  a  conqueror.  This  occasion  owed  thee  to  us  ;
thou  wast  a  conqueror.  Of  our  Consul,  of  our  general,  of
our  general  a  conqueror  are  we  now  deprived.  Lo !  through
the  whole  City  does  grief  find  a  place.  But  the  faces  of  his
companions  are  squalid  with  dishevelled  hair ;  an  unhappy
throng,  but  moved  by  affection  towards  their  own  Drusus.

53  To  the  executioner.'] — Ver.  278.  While  the  triumphal  procession
was  ascending  the  Capitoline  hill,  it  was  the  custom  to  take  aside  some
of  the  chiefs  of  the  enemy,  who  had  been  led  in  the  procession,  to  an  ad-
joining prison,  and  to  put  them  to  death.  When  it  was  announced  that
this  slaughter  had  taken  place,  the  victims  were  sacrificed  to  the  Gods,  an
offering  from  the  spoils  was  presented  to  Jupiter,  and  the  laurel  wreath  of
the  triumphant  general  was  deposited  in  the  lap  of  the  God.  The  dead
bodies  of  the  unfortunate  captives  were  dragged  through  the  streets,  and
often  left  there.

54  Sons  of  Leda. ,] — Veri  283.  For  an  account  of  this  Constellation,  see
the  Fasti,  Book  v.  1.  698.

55  In  the  Forum  of  Rome.] — Ver.  284.  Tiberius  built  a  temple  of
Castor  and  Pollux,  and  dedicated  it  in  the  name  of  Drusus  and  himself,  as
a  memorial  of  their  affection.  The  expense  was  defrayed  out  of  the  booty
taken  from  the  Germans.  He  also  restored  the  Temple  of  Concord,  in
the  name  of  Drusus  and  himself. See  the  Fasti,  Book  i.  1.  645.

66  Do  I  repair.] — Ver.  290.  Why  do  I  dedicate  a  temple  to  the  bro-
thers Castor  and  Pollux,  who  so  forcibly  remind  me  of  the  brother  taken
from  me  ?


TO LTTIA  AUGUSTA.  515

One  of  these,  as  he  raises  his  arms  towards  thee,  says,  "  Why
without  me,  why  thus  unattended  dost  thou  depart  V

What  shall  I  say  of  thee,  lady,  most  worthy  of  Drusus  for  thy
husband  ;57  a  daughter-in-law,  too,  worthy  of  the  parent  of
Drusus ;  a  pair  well  matched ;  the  one  the  bravest  of  the
youths,  the  other  the  mutual  care  of  a  hero  so  brave  ?  A
princely  woman  art  thou ;  the  daughter  of  Caesar  thou  ;58
to  him  didst  thou  appear  not  inferior  to  the  wife  of  mighty
Jove.  Thou  wast  his  acknowledged  love ;  thou  wast  his
only  love,59  and  his  last ;  thou  wast  his  pleasing  solace,  when
wearied  with  his  labours.  As  he  died,  in  his  very  last  words
did  he  lament  that  thou  wast  away ;  and  his  chilled  tongue
moved  in  repeating  thy  name.  To  thy  sorrow  thou  dost  re-
ceive him  again,  not  such  as  he  himself  had  promised ;  not
such  as  he  was  sent,  nor  returns  he  as  thine  own.

He  will  not  be  able  to  recount  to  thee  the  conquered
Sygambri,60  and  how  the  Suevi  had  turned  their  backs  on  his
sword.  The  rivers,  too,  and  the  mountains,  and  the  celebrated
names  of  spots  ;  and  if  he  has  beheld  aught  that  is  wondrous
in  this  new  portion  of  the  earth.61  Cold  is  he  brought  back
to  thee,  and  a  lifeless  corpse ;  and  lo!  the  couch  is  strewed
for  him  to  press  without  thyself.  Whither  art  thou  hurried
away,  tearing  thy  locks,  and  similar  to  one  insane  1  Whither
dost  thou  rush  ? Why  tear  thy  face  with  frenzied  hand  ?

57  For  thy  husband.] — Ver.  299.  He  now  refers  to  Antonia,  the  wife  of
Drusus.  She  was  the  daughter  of  Octavia,  the  sister  of  Augustus,  hy  Marc
Antony.  After  the  death  of  her  husband,  she  devoted  all  her  attention  to
the  education  of  her  children :  Germanicus,  the  virtuous  father  of  Caligula,
a  worthless  son ;  Claudius,  who  was  afterwards  emperor ;  and  Livia,  or
Livilla,  who  disgraced  herself  by  her  dissolute  life.  Suetonius  hints  that
she  was  poisoned  by  Caligula.

58  Daughter  of  Casar  thou.~\ — Ver.  303.  She  was  the  niece  of  Augustus;
but  probably  shared  his  affections  with  her  husband,  his  adopted  son.

69  Wast  his  only  love.]  —  Ver.  305.  Valerius  Maxiruus  praises  the
exemplary  chastity  of  Drusus.

60  The  conquered  Sygambri.'] — Ver.  311.  Florus  tells  us,  that  on  this
occasion  the  Cherusci,  Suevi,  and  Sygambri,  made  a  sacrifice  by  burning
twenty  captive  centurions,  and  took  an  oath  to  assist  each  other  in  prose-
cuting the  war ;  and  that  they  made  themselves  so  sure  of  victory,  that
they  divided  the  spoil  before  they  obtained  it.  The  Cherusci  were  to
have  the  horses,  the  Sygambri  the  captives,  and  the  Suevi  the  gold  and
silver. They  were,  however,  completely  routed  by  Drusus.

61  New  portion  of  the  earth.] — Ver.  ,314.  He  alludes  to  the  interior  of
Cermany,  which  had  been  but  recentlv  explored  by  Roman  enterprise.

ll2


516  THE CONSOLATION

Thus  was  Andromache,  when  her  husband,  bound  to  the
chariot,  besmeared  with  blood,  alarmed  the  steeds  in  their
full  career.  Thus  was  Evadne,  at  the  time  when  Capaneus
exposed  his  fearless  face  to  be  smitten  by  the  flashing  lightnings.
Why,  in  thy  sadness,  dost  thou  implore  death  for  thyself,  and
embracing  thy  sons,  hold  the  only  pledges  of  Drusus  that  are
left?  And  sometimes  in  sleep  art  thou  agitated  by  deceiving
visions,  and  dost  thou  believe  that  thou  art  folding  thy  Drusus
to  thy  bosom  ?  And  why,  with  thy  hand,  dost  thou  suddenly
feel /or  him,  and  hope  that  thou  hast  regained  him,  and  why
dost  thou  seek  him  in  the  other  half  of  thy  couch  ?62

If  these  things  are  not  believed  without  reason,  he  will  be
received  in  the  fields  of  the  blessed  among  his  illustrious
ancestors  ;  and  as  the  great  glory  of  his  maternal  and  an
equal  glory  of  his  paternal  forefathers,  glittering  in  gold  shall
he  proceed  in  the  chariot  drawn  by  four  steeds ;  ennobled,
both  in  his  regal  habit  and  in  his  chariot  adorned  with  ivory,
he  shall  have  his  temples  wreathed  with  the  triumphal  branch.
They  shall  receive  the  youth  bearing  the  standards  of  Ger-
many, and  the  honours  that  are  conspicuous  in  the  rule  of  a
Consul ;  and  with  justice  shall  they  rejoice  in  the  surname  of
their  family,  which  he  alone,63  victorious,  has  received  from  a
conquered  foe.  Hardly  will  they  believe  that  years  that  few
embraced  exploits  so  great ;  they  will  think  that  the  great
deeds  of  the  hero  demanded  an  extended  range.

These  things  shall  raise  him  on  high  ;  these  things,  best  of
mothers,  ought  to  mitigate  thy  sorrows.  Lady,  worthy  of
those  whom  the  golden  age  produced,  worthy  of  princes  for
thy  sons,  of  a  prince  for  thy  husband.  Consider  what  becomes
the  mother  of  Drusus,  and  the  mother  of  Nero  ;  consider  from
whose  couch  in  the  morning  thou  dost  rise.  The  same  things
befit  not  the  vulgar,  and  the  lights  of  the  world  ;  there  is  that
which  especially  is  due  from  that  house.  Fortune  has  placed
thee,  Livia,  on  high,  and  has  ordered  thee  to  keep  that  elevated
position  ;  support  then  its  responsibilities.  Towards  thyself,
eyes  and  ears  dost  thou  attract ;  thy  deeds  we  keep  in  view  ;
and.no  words  that  are  uttered  by  the  lips  of  an  exalted  per-

62  Other  half  of  thy  couch. ~\ — Ver.  328.  'Parte  prioretori.'  Seethe
Note  to  the  659th  line  of  the  Eighth  Book  of  the  Metamorphoses.

63  Which  he  alone.'] — Ver.  338.  '  Solus,'  as  suggested  by  Heinsivu,
seems  preferable  here  to  '  solum.'


TO LIYIA AUGUSTA.  51/

sonage  can  be  concealed.  Abide  thus  exalted ;  and  rise
superior  to  thy  woes  ;  and  ever,  as  thou  canst,  keep  thy  re-
solve unbroken.  Shall  we  to  better  advantage  seek  through
thee  an  example  of  virtue,  than  if  thou  art  performing  the
duties  of  the  Roman  female  of  rank  most  elevated  1

The  Destinies  await  us  all,  for  all  the  unsparing  ferryman64
looks  ;  and  for  the  multitude  hardly  enough  is  his  one  boat.
Hither  are  we  all  hurrying ;  towards  the  same  goal  do  we
hasten ;  gloomy  death  summons  all  to  her  sway.  See  anni-
hilation awaiting  the  heavens,  and  earth,  and  ocean  ;  and
they  predict  that  the  threefold  work65  is  destined  to  perish.
Go  then,  and  while  ruin  so  great  impends  upon  the  universe,
turn  thine  eyes  to  thyself  alone,  and  to  thy  losses.  He
lived,  the  greatest,  indeed,  of  the  youths,  the  hope  of  the
people ;  and  the  supreme  glory  of  the  house  in  which  he  was
born.  But  still  he  was  mortal ;  and  while  thy  progeny  was
waging  valorous  warfare,  thou  wast  not  free  from  care.  The
life  that  has  been  granted,  is  but  lent ;  without  any  interest
has  it  been  lent  to  us,  and  not  to  be  paid  back  on  any
certain  day.  Everywhere  does  fortune  dispose  of  our  time  at
her  own  discretion.  The  young  she  carries  off;  the  aged  does
she  spare.  And  wherever  she  rushes,  in  frenzied  manner  does
she  rush ;  and  throughout  the  whole  world  does  she  hurl  her
lightnings,  and  blindly  does  she  trample  with  her  blinded
steeds.

Forbear,  by  complaining,  to  irritate  the  realms  of  the  re-
lentless Goddess  ;  forbear  to  hurt  the  feelings  of  the  powerful
mistress  of  the  world.  Although  on  this  one  occasion  in  sad-
ness has  she  come  to  thee,  full  oft  with  friendly  feelings  has
she  shewn  favour  to  thy  fortunes.  Inasmuch,  behold !  as  thou
wast  born  of  high  station,  inasmuch  as  thou  wast  blessed  with
two  children,  inasmuch,  too,  as  thou  wast  united  to  the  great
Jove  ;  inasmuch  as  Csesar  has  always  returned  to  thee  from  a
world  subdued,  and  has  waged  successful  wars  with  uncon-

64  The  unsparing  ferryman.~]  — Ver.  358.  Charon,  the  ferryman  of  the
Infernal  regions.

65  The  threefold  work.~]—Ver.  362.  He  alludes  to  the  First  Book  of
Lucretius,  1.  95.  See  also  the  Tristia,  Book  ii.  1.  426,  and  the  Note  to  the
passage,  where  this  line,  '  Casurumque  triplex  vaticinantur  opus,'  '  They
prophesy  that  the  threefold  work  will  again  perish,'  again  occurs.  This
is  certainly  a  strong  item  of  internal  evidence  that  Ovid  was  the  author
of  this  poem.


518  THE CONSOLATION

quered  hand;  inasmuch  as  the  Neros  have  fulfilled  thy
hopes  and  thy  maternal  wishes  ;  and  inasmuch  as  the  enemy
has  been  routed  by  each  general  so  oft.  The  Rhine  and  the
valleys  of  the  Alps,  and  the  Itargus,66  discoloured  with  black
blood,  with  its  tainted  waters,  is  a  witness.  The  impetuous
Danube,  too,  and  the  Dacian  retreats,67  in  the  extremity  of  the
earth  (to  that  enemy  short  is  the  road  by  the  bridge) ;  and  the
flying  Armenian,68  and  the  Dalmatian  a  suppliant  at  last ;  and
the  Pannonians69  dispersed  along  the  high  mountain  summits;
the  German  regions,  too,  but  lately  known  to  the  Romans ;
consider  how  much  less  is  one  mishap  than  deserts  so  many.

Besides,  far  away  did  he  die  ;  thine  eyes,  too,  had  not  to
endure  those  of  thy  son  half  closed  in  death.  The  grief
as  well,  most  gently  stole  upon  thy  oppressed  feelings  ;  with
thine  ears  wast  thou  obliged  to  hear  of  thy  sorrows.  Appre-
hension, too,  anticipates  griefs  amid  long  dangers  ;  hearing  of
these,  anxious  in  mind  wast  thou.  Grief  has  not  on  a  sudden
invaded  thy  breast,  but  by  degrees,  already  made  endurable
by  apprehensions.

Jupiter  had  already  given  thee  the  sad  tokens  of  this  cruel
misfortune,  when  with  his  flaming  hand  he  hurled  against  the
three  temples ;  and  in  the  direful  night,  the  abode  of  Juno,78

66  The  Itargus.'] — Ver.  386.  The  river  Weser  is  generally  supposed  to
be  referred  to ;  though  it  is  more  generally  known  by  the  name  of
'  Isurgis,'  or  '  Visurgis.'  It  is  mentioned  by  Florus,  in  his  account  of  the
expedition  of  Drusus.  Cluverius  thinks  that  a  river  of  Suevia,  whose
modern  name  is  '  Iser,'  is  here  referred  to.

67  The  Dacian  retreats.'] — Ver.  388.  The  suggestion  of  Heinsius  has
been  adopted  here ;  'angulus '  for  '  Auplus,'  and  '  pontis  '  for  '  Pontus,'
as  the  common  reading  makes  complete  nonsense.  He  probably  alludes
to  the  bridge  which  it  was  necessary  to  throw  over  the  Danube,  for  the
purpose  of  reaching  the  Dacians,  who  inhabited  the  region  that  is  now
called  Transylvania.

68  The  flying  Armenian.] — Ver.  389.  The  Armenians  were  conquered
by  Tiberius.  The  Dalmatians  were  noted  for  their  frequent  risings  in  arms
against  the  Romans.

69  And  the  Pannonians.] — Ver.  390.  Pannonia  was  the  name  of  the
region  between  the  rivers  Danube  and  Save.  The  present  kingdom  of
Hungary  is  a  part  of  ancient  Pannonia.  Augustus  conquered  this  region  ;
according  to  Florus,  Virbius  was  his  general ;  according  to  other  accounts,
Tiberius  Nero  led  his  forces.

70  The  abode  of  Juno.] — Ver.  403.  He  alludes  to  an  ominous  confla-
gration of  the  temples,  which  are  mentioned  in  the  line  before.  He  seems
to  include  '  the  holy  house  of  Caesar '  as  one  of  these  temples.  Dio  Cassius


TO LIVIA  AUGUSTA.  519

and  of  the  undaunted  Minerva,  and  the  holy  house  of  the
all-powerful  Caesar  were  struck.  The  stars  are  said,  more-
over, to  have  fled  from  the  heavens  ;  and  Lucifer  to  have  for-
saken his  wonted  paths.  To  no  one  throughout  the  whole
earth  did  Lucifer  appear,  and  the  day  came,71  the  star  not
preceding  it.  The  disappearance  of  the  star  forewarned  that
this  was  impending  over  the  world ;  and  that  a  princely
light  was  being  extinguished  in  the  Stygian  waves.

But  thou,  who  dost72  survive  as  a  solace  to  thy  sorrowing
mother,  I  pray  that  by  her  thou  mayst  be  beheld  an  aged
man.  Long,  too,  mayst  thou  live  through  the  years  of
thy  brother  and  thine  own  ;  and,  an  aged  woman,  may  thy
mother  live  with  her  husband,  an  aged  man.  I  pray  for  what
will  come  to  pass  :  the  Deity,  while  he  shall  wish  to  atone
for  what  has  passed,  after  Drusus  is  departed,  will  provide
the  rest  as  cause  of  joy.  And  yet  thou  canst  venture73
to  indulge  in  griefs  so  great,  as  to  be  unwilling,  alas !  disas-
trously resolute,  any  longer  to  take  nourishment.  For  a  few
hours,  too,  hardly  wast  thou  alive,  when  Caesar  brought  thee,
though  reluctant,  his  aid,  and  used  his  entreaties,  and  with
them  mingled  his  commands ;  and  he  moistened  thy  parched
throat  with  water  poured  down  it.  And  not  less  is  the  care  of
the  son  to  save  his  parent ;  he  applies  soothing  entreaties,  and
not  without  commands.  The  meritorious  deeds  of  thy  hus-
band and  thy  son  came  to  the  ears  of  all ;  by  the  aid,  Iivia,  of
thy  husband  and  thy  son,  wast  thou  saved.  Now  repress
thy  tears ;  by  these  he  cannot  be  recalled,  whom  once  the
ferryman  has  borne  in  his  bark74  that  conveys  the  shades.

So  many  brothers,  and  so  many  sisters  lamented  Hector,
and  his  father,  and  his  wife,  and  Astyanax  his  son,  and  his
aged  mother ;  still,  for  the  flames  was  he  redeemed  from
Achilles,  and  no  shade  of  his  sailed  back  over  the  Stygian

mentions  the  temple  of  Jupiter,  and  one  other  near  it  as  being  burnt.  It
is  suggested  by  Heinsius,  that  this  and  the  following  line  are  spurious.

71  And  the  day  came.'j — Ver.  406.  He  means  that  the  morning  was
overclouded  in  an  unusnal  degree.

72  But  thou,  who  dost.} — Ver.  411. He  now  addresses  Tiberius.

73  Thou  canst  venture.} — Ver.  417.  He  alludes  to  a  resolution  which
Livia  had  formed  to  starve  herself,  and  which  she  would  have  persisted  in,
had  it  not  been  for  the  intervention  of  Augustus.  Seneca,  however,  says
that  she  bore  her  loss  with  the  greatest  possible  fortitude.

■*  In  his  bark.']— \ ex.  42S. The  bark  of  Charon.


520  THE CONSOLATION

waves.  This,  too,  was  the  lot  of  Thetis ;  the  devastator,
Achilles,  presses  the  fields  of  Ilium  with  his  burnt  bones.
For  him  did  his  aunt  Panope75  loosen  her  azure  locks,  and
increase  the  boundless  waves  with  her  tears;  a  hundred
kindred  Goddesses,  too,  and  the  aged  wife  of  great  Oceanus,76
and  father  Oceanus  himself;  and  Thetis  before  all;  but
neither  Thetis  herself,  nor  all  the  rest,  changed  the  relentless
decrees  of  the  devouring  God.  Why  do  I  here  recount  things
bygone  ?  Octavia  bewailed  Marcellus,77  and  before  the  public
has  Caesar  bewailed  them78  both  ;  but  of  death  the  decrees
are  inflexible  and  inevitable;  completed,  the  threads  stand,
not  by  any  hand  to  be  spun  over  again.

He  himself,  sent  forth  to  thee  from  the  shores  of  the  murky
Avernus,  if  he  were  allowed,  would  utter  such  words  as  these
with  a  loud  voice :  "  Why  dost  thou  reckon  my  years  ?  I  have
reached  a  maturity  beyond  my  years.  'Tis  his  deeds  that  make
a  man  aged  ;  these  must  be  reckoned  by  thee ;  by  these  was
my  life  to  be  completed,  and  not  by  slowly  passing  years.  Of
my  enemies  be  protracted  old  age  the  lot.  Of  this  have  my
ancestors79  forewarned  me,  and  the  Neros  my  forefathers ;
both  generals  broke  the  might  of  Carthage.  This  does  that
house  of  mighty  Caesar  warn  me,  through  thee  become  my
own.  This  end,  my  mother,  was  bound  to  be  my  own.  Nor
yet,  my  mother,  although  they  themselves  confer  the  greatest
glory,  were  honors  wanting  to  those  achievements ;  thou  be-
holdest  my  name  replete  with  distinctions.  As  Consul  am  I
read  of,  and  as  Germanicus  the  conqueror  of  regions  unknown,
the  cause  of  whose  death  was,  alas  !  the  service  of  his  country.
I  have  my  conquering  temples  wreathed  with  the  laurel  of
Apollo  ;  and  I  myself  have  beheld  my  own  funeral  obsequies ;

75  His  aunt  Panope.'] — Ver.  435.  Panope  was  a  Nymph  of  the  sea,
daughter  of  Nereus  and  Doris,  sister  of  Thetis  and  the  aunt  of  Achilles.

76  Wife  of  great  Oceanus.]— V er.  438. Tethys.

77  Octavia  bewailed  Marcellus.] — Ver.  441.  According  to  Seneca,
Octavia  lamented  Marcellus  all  her  life  as  deeply  as  she  did  at  the  moment
of  his  decease.

73  Coesar  bewailed  them.] — Ver.  442.  Augustus  pronounced  the  fune-
ral oration  over  both  Marcellus  and  Octavia.

79  My  ancestors.] — Ver.  451.  He  alludes  to  his  ancestors  of  the
Livian  and  the  Claudian  families,  namely,  Marcus  Livius  Salinator,  and
Claudius  Nero,  who,  when  Consuls,  intercepted  Hasdrubal,  on  his  road  to
join  his  brother  Hannibal,  and  slew  him.


TO LIYIA AUGUSTA.  521

and  the  evolutions e0  of  the  men  to  me  so  well  known,  and  the
offerings  of  Kings  ;  and  all  the  cities81  read  of  under  their  re-
spective titles  ;  and  with  what  affection  those  youths  bore  me,
who,  of  birth  so  noble,  were  before  my  bier.  In  fine,  I  have
merited  to  be  praised  by  the  hallowed  lips  of  Csesar,  and  from
a  God  have  I  drawn  tears.  And  am  I  then  to  be  lamented  by
any  one  ?  Now  restrain  thy  tears.  This  do  I,  who  am  the  cause
of  thy  tears,  entreat."

Thus  does  Drusus  think,  if,  in  the  shades, 82  he  only  thinks
at  all ;  and  do  not  thou  think  the  less  exaltedly  of  a  hero  so
great.  Thou  hast,  and  long  mayst  thou  have,  I  pray,  a  son  equal
to  many  ;  and  may  the  elder  half  of  thy  offspring  be  spared  to
thee.  Thou  hast  a  husband,  the  guardian  of  mankind  ;  so  long
as  he  is  safe,  it  becomes  not,  Livia,  thy  house  to  be  in  tears.

80  The  evolutions.'] — Ver.  461.  These  ;  decursus,'  or  'evolutions,'  were
performed  by  the  soldiers  marching  round  the  funeral  pile.  We  learn
from  Suetonius  that  this  custom  was  observed  annually  by  the  soldiers,  at
the  honorary  tomb  which  they  had  erected  for  Drusus.

81  And  all  the  cities.] — Ver.  462.  The  titles  of  the  towns  which  he
had  taken  were  exhibited  at  his  funeral,  in  the  same  manner  in  which  they
were  usually  shewn  at  a  triumph.

82  If  in  the  shades.]- — Ver.  469.  This  passage  savours  strongly  of  the
scepticism  of  Ovid.


FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  LOST  WRITINGS  OF
OVID,

COLLECTED  BY  HEINSIUS.


QuiNTiLTAtf,  Book  VIII.,  ch.  5,  quotes  these  words  from  the
Medea  of  Ovid —

"  I  can  save,  dost  thou  ask  if  I  can  destroy  as  well?"
Seneca,  Suasor.  Book  III.,  quotes  from  the  same  work —
"  To  and  fro  am  I  borne,  like  one  filled  with  the  Divinity."
From  the  Epigrams  of  Ovid  this  line  is  found  quoted —

"Why  should  I  not  say,  Furia,  I  will  infuriate  thee?"
Martial,  Epigr.,  Book  II.,  41,  quoting  from  the  Epigrams  of
Ovid,  says —

"  '  Laugh,  girl,  if  you  are  wise,  laugh,'  I  think  the  Pelig-
nian  Poet  said."

Priscian,  Book  V.,  quotes  this  line  from  the  Epigrams  of
Ovid—

"  Lars  Tolumnius  being  slain,  bold  Cossus  bore  off  the  chief
spoils."

From  the  Phsenomena  of  Ovid,  the  following  quotations  are
found  in —

Lactantius,  De  Orig.  Error,  of  Ovid  B.  II.  c.  5,  "  Signs  so
many  in  number,  and  of  such  a  form  did  the  Deity  place  in
the  heavens  ;  and,  scattered  over  the  darkening  shades,  he
commanded  them  to  give  their  light  to  the  frosty  night."

In  the  commentary  of  Probus  on  the  Georgics  of  Virgil,
the  two  following  lines  are  found —

"  Before  his  knee  the  seven  Pleiads  are  said  to  shine  ;  six
only  are  visible,  but  the  seventh  is  beneath  the  dark  clouds."

Some  authors  think  that  a  portion  of  the  Priapeia  is  the
composition  of  Ovid.  The  elder  Seneca  (Book  I.  Controv.  2)
quotes  this  line  of  the  Priapeia  as  having  been  written  by
him —

"  While  foolishly  she  is  dreading  a  wound  in  another  spot."


FRAGMENTS OF OVID.  523

Servius,  in  his  Commentary  on  the  Fourth  Book  of  the
Georgics,  speaking  of  Orpheus  and  Eurydice,  quotes  from
Ovid—

"  Twice  was  she  snatched  away,  and  yet  she  lived  but  once."
An  ancient  Scholiast  on  Horace,  Book  II.  Ode  5,  says —

"  Gyges  was  the  name  of  a  youth  in  the  Isle  of  Cnidos,
that  was  sacred  to  Venus  ;  of  this  boy  Ovid  likewise  praises
the  beauty."
This  passage  is  not  found  to  exist  in  any  of  his  works.

Quintilian  (Book  XII.  c.  10)  is  evidently  quoting  from  some
poetical  composition  of  Ovid  now  lost,  when  he  says,  "But  this
fades  and  dies  away  upon  comparison  with  what  is  superior,
just  as  wool  dyed  with  red  pleases  less  than  purple  ;  but  if  you
were  to  compare  it  with  the  colour  of  that  thick  coat,  it  would
be  obscured  by  the  appearance  of  that  which  is  superior,  as
Ovid  says."

In  a  very  ancient  MS.,  which  belonged  to  Peter  Scriverius,
this  Epigram  is  ascribed  to  Ovid —

"  Now  Phoebus  has  borne  his  shining  beams  into  the  flow-
ing waves,  renewing  his  exhausted  torch  in  the  stream  of
Tethys.  Phoebe  appears  borne,  by  her  snow-white  oxen,  and
gentle  sleep  glides  down  from  the  sethereal  sky.  The  tender
lambs  are  sporting  by  their  timid  dams,  the  milky  streams
support  their  lives  spotless  as  the  milk  itself"

In  another  ancient  work  this  Epigram  on  Lucretia  is
ascribed  to  Ovid —

"  When  Lucretia  pierced  her  chaste  breast  with  the  sword,
and  the  stream  of  blood  was  pouring  forth,  she  said,  *  Let
these  be  my  witnesses  that  I  was  not  pleased  with  the  tyrant ,
my  blood  before  men,  my  soul  before  the  Gods.'  "


INDEX


OF  THE

PRINCIPAL  MATTERS  CONTAINED  IN  THE  THREE  VOLUMES.

See  aho  the  Introduction  to  the  First  Volume,  and  the  Tables  of  Contents

prefixed  to  each  Book  of  the  Fasti ;  aho  the  Synoptical  View  of  the

Metamorphoses  in  the  Second  Volume.


N.B.  The  First  Volume  contains  the  Fasti,  the  Pontic  Writings,  the  Ibis,
and  the  Halieuticon ;  the  Second  Volume  contains  the  Metamorphoses,
and  the  present  is  the  Third  and  concluding  Volume.


Absyrtus,  his  death,  i.  310

Acca  Larentia,  i.  88,  170,  197

Accius,  i.  285

Acerra,  ii.  275

Acheloiis,  contends  with  Hercules,  ii.
301

Achilles,  the  pupil  of  Chiron,  i.  195  —
his  birth,  ii.  393 — his  death,  ii.
437 — the  Epistle  to,  from  Briseis,
hi.  19 — and  Deidamia,  the  story
of,  iii.  405

Achaemenides,  i.  397 — his  story,  ii.
489

"  Accursed,"  the,  a  street  in  Rome,  i.
237

Acis  and  Galatea,  the  story  of,  ii.  469

Acmonides,  the  Cyclop,  i.  146

Accetes,  his  story,  ii.  Ill

Aconite,  ii.  195

Acontius,  his  Epistle  to  Cydippe,  iii.
220  ;  the  Epistle  to,  from  Cydippe,
iii.  231

Acron,  is  slain  by  Romulus,  i.  201

Actseon,  is  transformed  by  Diana,  ii.  92
— is  killed  by  his  hounds,  ii.  93

Actium,  the  battle  of,  i.  44

Adonis,  i.  187— the  birth  of,  ii.  367—
is  beloved  by  Venus,  ii.  368 — his
death,  ii.  376 — a  flower  springs
from  his  blood,  ii.  377 — is  wor-
shipped at  Rome,  iii.  382

Adversitor,  iii.  416


iEacus,  his  speech,  ii,  249

jEgina,  the  pestilence  at,  ii.  249

jEgis,  i.  127

^Egypsus,  i.  452

iEneas,  and  Dido,  the  story  of,  i.  114,
ii.  481 — visits  Anius,  ii.  463 — is
Deified,  ii.  504 — the  Epistle  to,
from  Dido,  iii.  62

iEneid,the  first  line  of  the,  alluded  to,
i.  293

iEolus,  i.  66 — gives  fair  winds  to
Ulysses,  ii.  491 — punishes  the
guilt  of  Canace,  iii.  108

jEsacus,  is  changed  into  a  didapper,
ii.  413

iEsculapius,  the  God,  is  brought  to
Rome,  i.  21  ;  ii.  544

Agave,  kills  her  son  Pentheus,  ii.  115

Ages,  of  qualification  for  offices,i.  179

Aglauros,and  Herse,the  story of,ii.  75

Agmon,  is  changed  into  a  bird,  ii.  502

Agonalia,  the,  i.  22

Agonia,the,i.23 — are  repeated,  i.  208

Ajax,  and  Ulysses  contendfor  the  arms
of  Achilles,  ii.  439  —  kills  him-
self, and  a  flower  springs  from  his
blood,  ii.  452

Alba  Longa,i.  68— the  Kings  of,i.  132

Albula,  i.  63

Alcmena,  i.  287 — her  narrative  of
the  birth  of  Hercules,  ii.  313

Alexander  the  Great,  i.  255,  305


INDEX.


525


Alexander,  of  Pheras,  i.  414

Alexandria,  i.  255

Algidus,  the  battle  of,  i.  242

Allia,  the  battle  of,  i.  481 ;  iii.  395

Almo,  i.  73,  148

Aipheus,  ii.  184

Altar,  a  place  of  refuge,  i.  331

Althea,  causes  the  death  of  her  son

Meleager,  ii.  283
Aluta,  iii.  441
Alveus,  i.  64

Amalthea,  the  story  of,  i.  181
Amaryllis,  named  by  Virgil,  iii.  418,

440
Amazons,  the,  i.  462
Amentum,  ii.  426
Ammon,  Jupiter,  ii.  150
Amomum,  i.  301
Ampelos,  the  story  of,  i.  106
Amphiaraus,  i.  48,  420
Amphitheatre,  ii.  380
Amphitrite,  the  Goddess,  ii.  2
Amphorae,  smoked,  i.  200
Amulius,  the  death  of,  i.  89
Amusements,  of  the  male  sex,  iii.  449
Anacreon,  i.  286

Analectides,  what  they  were,  iii.  444
Anaxarete,  and  Iphis,  the  story  of,  ii.

511
Ancilia,  i.  99 — their  origin,  i.  104
Andromeda,  is  rescued  by  Perseus,  ii.

151 — is  married  to  him,  ii.  153
Anger,  forbidden,  iii.  454
Anius,  his  daughters  are  changed  into

doves,  ii.  464
Anna,  sister  of  Dido,  the  story  of,  i.

117
Anna  Perenna,  the  festival  of,i.  112—

an  inquiry  who  she  was,  i.  119
Annals,  the,  i.  282
Antenor,  i.  135
Anticyra,  i.  447
Antilochus,  iii.  3
Antiphates,  the  Laestrvgon,  i.  400  ;

ii.  491
Antonia,  the  wife  of  Drusus,  iii.  515
Anubis,  the  Divinity,  ii.  335
Anytus,  i.  363
Apelles,  i.  443
Aphidna,  i.  208


"  Apicatus,"  i.  105

Aplustre,  iii.  102

April,  devoted  to  Venus,  i.  131 —
why  so  called,  i.  134

Apollo,  flays  Marsyas,  i.  241 — kills
Python,  ii.  27 — slays Coronis.ii. 7J
— and  Daphne,  the  story  of,  ii.  32 —
his  amour  with  Leucothoe,  ii.  129
—  punishes  Niobe,  ii.  198 — and
Pan,  their  musical  contest,  ii.  387 —
and  Neptune  build  the  walls  of
Troy,  ii.  389 — multiplies  the  years
of  the  Sibyl,  ii.  484

Appius  Claudius,  restricts  the  '  T ibi-
cines/  i.  240

Aquarius,  the  Constellation,  i.  53

Aqueduct,  of  Appius,  hi.  382 — of  the
Virgin,  i.  389

Arachne,  is  transformed  into  a  spider,
ii.  195

Arbutus,  ii.  472

Areas,  becomes  a  Constellation,  ii.  66

Arctophylax,  the  Constellation,  the
story  of,  i.  54

Ardea,  i.  79 — a  bird  arises  from  its
flames,  ii.  505

Areiopagus,  ii.  191

Arena,  ii.  380

Arethusa,  ii.  178 — and  Aipheus,  the
story  of,  ii.  184

Argei,  i.  125 — rush-images  thrown
into  the  Tiber,  i.  204

Argu*,  is  killed  by  Mercury,  ii.  42

Ariadne,  and  Theseus,  the  story  of,  i.
109  ;  iii.  39— her  Epistle  to  The-
seus, hi.  94 — her  Crown  is  made  a
Constellation,  ii.  270

Aricia,  i.  99,  243

Arion,  the  story  of,  i.  50

Aristaeus,  the  story  of,  i.  25

Armour,  hi.  133

Arrows,  hi.  93

Aruspices,  iii.  84

As,  iii.  493

Ascalaphus,  the -transformation  of,  ii.
181

Ascra,  i.  211

Ass.the,  why  sacrificed  to  Priapus,  i.
26 — is  decorated  with  loaves,  i.
226


526


INDEX.


Assertor,  iii.  466

Astraea,  the  Goddess,  ii.  12

Astrology,  iii.  280

Asylum,  i.  49

Atalanta,  and  Hippomanes,  the  story
of,  ii.  370

Atalanta,  and  Meleager,  the  story  of,
ii.  280

Atergatis,  i.  67

Athamas,  and  the  handmaid,  the  story
of,  i.  235

Athens,  visited  by  Ovid,  i.  255

Atlas,  i.  68 — is  changed  into  a
mountain,  ii.  147

Atreus,andThyestes,the  story  of,  i.  74

Atri  Dies,  i.  7

Atrium  Sutorium,  i.  127

Attalus,  i.  145

Attentions,  what,  to  be  paid  by  the
lover  to  his  mistress,  iii.  415

Attis,  the  story  of,  i.  143 — his  trans-
formation, ii.  347

Auctions,  i.  449

Augur,  i.  14,  269

Augusta  Julia  (Livia  Drusilla),  i.  34

Augustus,  his  title  when  assumed,  i.
37 — is  made  Pontifex  Maximus,  i.
107 — is  saluted  Imperator,i.  163 —
his  statue  is  erected  in  the  streets,  i.
183 — is  addressed  by  Ovid  as  a
Divinity,  i.  248  —  abolishes  the
Censorship,  i.  277 — his  conquests,
i.  281— his  abode  described,  i.  296
— is  complimented, ii.  552 — his  af-
fection for  Drusus,  iii.  511

Aulaea,  ii.  371

Aulis,  the  Grecian  fleet  detained  at,
ii.  414

Aventine  Forest, the,  i.  35 — Hill,  the,
i.  101

Avernus,  ii.  181

Axenus,  the  former  name  of  the
Euxine,  i.  330

Babylon,  ii.  121 -

Bacchanals,  the, are  changed  into

trees,  ii.  382
Bacchiadae,  the,  ii.  1 73  i

Bacchus, the  birth  of,i.  111.  121  ;  ii.j

99 — conquers  India,  i.  109 — trans- '


forms  the  Etrurian  sailors,  ii.  1 1 3 —
recital  of  his  titles,  ii.  119

Bagoiis,  the,  address  to,  iii.  303,  306

Baiae,  iii.  321,  389

Balista,  i.  254;  ii.  109

Ball,  i.  291

Bankers,  iii.  500

Barbitos,  iii.  145

Bare-foot,  a  custom  of  walking  men-
tioned, i.  228

Basternae,  i.  280

Bathing-places,  the,  of  Deities  not  to
be  looked  at,  i.  167

Battus,  is  changed  into  a  touchstone,
ii.  74

Baucis,  and  Philemon,  the  story  of,  ii.
289

Beans,  and  bacon,  i.  217 — deemed
mystic,  i.  196

Bear,  Constellation  of  the,  i.  55

Bears,  the  two,  the  Constellations  of,
i.  91

Bearward,  Constellation  of  the,  i.  55

Bedclothes,  iii.  97

Beds,  iii.  46

Bedstead,  ii.  290

Beehives,  iii.  470

Beginning  of  the  year,  i.  14

Belides,  or  Danaides..  the,  i.  297

Bellerophon,  iii.  372

Bellona,  her  Temple,  is  built,  i.  219

Berecynthia,  the  Goddess,  i.  141

Betting,  iii.  386

Bidental,  iii.  348

Birthday  cake,  iii.  283  ;  iii.  395

Birthdav  lines,  iii.  339

Birthdays,  i,  318 ;  iii.  286

Boasting,  indecent,  reprehended,  iii.
430

Boeotia,  is  so  named  by  Cadmus,  ii.  83

BonaDea,  i.  183

Bootes,  the  Constellation,  i.  54

Boreas,  i.  86 — carries  off  Orithvia,  ii.
220

Bottle  of  hay,  i.  92

Bovillae,  i.  119

Boxing,  iii.  344

Boxwood,  ii.  133

Bractium,  i.  404

Brazen  Age,  the,  ii.  11


IKDEX.


527


Brazen  sickle,  ii.  232
Briareus,  the  Giant,  i.  125
Briseis,  her  Epistle  to  Achilles,  iii.  19
Britons,  with  what  colours  painted,

iii.  331
Brundisium,  i.  403
Brutus,  L.  Junius,  i.  78 — D.  Junius,

i.  231— M.  Junius,  i.  370
Buccina,  ii.  23
Bull,  the  Constellation  of  the,  i.  165 —

the  storv  of,  i.  203
Bulla,  ii,  349
Bulls,  baited  in  the  Circus,  i.  338  :  ii.

417
Burial,  iii.  56
Burranica  potio,  i.  168
Byblis,  and  Caunus,  the  story  of,  ii.

325— is  changed  into  a  fountain,

ii.  333
Byron,  Lord,  swims  over  the  Helles-
pont, iii.  196

Cacus,  and  Hercules,  the  story  of,  i.

35
Cadmus,  names  Boeotia,  ii.  83— slays

the  dragon,  ii.  87— sows  its  teeth,

ii.  87— becomes  a  serpent,  ii.  144
Caduceus,  the,  ii.  39
Caelian  plain,  the,  i.  112
Caena,  ii.  291

Caeneus,  the  death  of,  ii.  432
Caenis,  the  transformation  of,  ii.  422
Caere,  i.  227
Caestus,  i.  62

Calais,  and  Zethes,  the  birth  of,ii.  221
Calamis,  i.  443
Calamus,  iii.  105
Calathus,  ii.  119;  iii,  87
Calchas,  his  prediction,  ii.  415
Calendar,  i.  3
Calends,  the,  i.  7
Calisto,  the  story  of,  i.  54  ;  ii.  63
Callaici,  the,  conquered  by  Brutus,  i.

231
Callatia,  i.  271
Callimachus,  i.  263
Calliope,  her  song,  ii.  170
Calydonian  Boar,  the  hunt  of the,  I

ii.  275


Caraella,  i.  167

Camere,  i.  116

Camilli,  i.  75

Canace,  the  Epistle  from,toMacareus,

iii.  104
Cancelli,  iii.  344

Cancer,  or  Crab,  the  Constellation,i.  22
Candidatus,  iii,  468
Candle-light, recommended to the

fair,  iii.  389
Canens, pines away  with grief  for

Picus,  ii.  499
Canopus,  iii.  324
Canticum,  i.  293
Capenian  Gate,  the,  i.  149,  218
Caphareus,  i.  250
Capitol,  the,  i.  9 — is  besieged  by  th«

Gauls,  i.  226 — is  saved  by  Jupiter,

i.  228
"  Capitale,"  meaning  of,  i.  126
Caprea,  the  fen  of,  i.  68
Caprotine  Nones,  iii.  417
Capsa,  i.  251
Capta,  Minerva,  i.  126
Captives,  execution  of,  iii.  514
Capulus,  ii.  202
Carceres,  i.  360
Carchesium,  ii.  233
Caristia,  the  Festival  of  the,  i.  74
Carmenta,  arrives  in  Italy,  i.  30 — is

Deified,  i.  36 — the  Gate  of,  i.  55
Carna,  the  Festival  of  the  Goddess.

i.  214
Carpenta,  i.  39
Carseoli,  i.  163
Castor, i. 208  — and Pollux, the

Temple  of,  i.  44  ;  iii.  515
Catapulta,  i.  254  ;  ii.  109
Catullus,  i.  288
Caunus,  and  Byblis,  the  storv  of,  ii.

325
Causia,  ii.  39
Celer,  kills  Remus,  i.  170
Celeus,  i.  156
Celeusma,  i.  147
Celmus,  is  changed  into  adamant,  ii.

1  1
Celsus,  A.  Cornelius,  his  death,  i.  391
Cenchrese,  i.  270


528


LKDEX.


Cenotaph, ii.  399 — erected  to  Drusus,  I  Circensian  games,  the,  i.  163


ni.  509
Censors,  i.  220
Censorship,  abolished  by  Augustus,

i.  277
Centaur,  Constellation  of  the,  i.  1 94
Centaurs,  and  the  Lapithae,  the  com-
bat of  the,  ii.  423
Centumviri,  the,  i.  177;  iii.  288
Cephalus,  and  Procris,  the  story  of,

ii.  254 ;  iii.  459
Cerae,  iii.  134
Cerastae,  the  transformation  of  the,

ii.  356
Ceratus,  i.  145
Cerberus,  is  chained  by  Hercules,  ii.

243
Cercopes,  the,  are  changed  into  apes,

ii.  482
Cerealia,  or  Festival  of  Ceres,  i.  152
Ceres,  i.  12,  69 — her  search  for  Pro-
serpine,  i.  154 ;  ii.  175— and  Trip-
tolemus, the story  of,  i. 157  —
transforms  Stellio  into  a  newt,  ii.
175 — address  to,  iii.  367
"  Ceromaticus,"  ii.  201
Ceyx,  and  Halcyone,  the  story  of,  ii.

399
Chaos,  is  reduced  to  order,  ii.  1
Chaplets,  iii.  138
Chariot,  i.  326

Chariot-race,  description  of  a,  iii.  340
Chariots,  why  called  '  carpenta,'  i.  39
Charioteers,  in  the  Circus,  iii.  340
Chelys,  iii.  154

Chilo,  his  famous  saying,  iii.  425
Chimsera,  the,  ii-  206
Chione,  is  debauched  by  Mercurv,  ii.

394
Chiron,  the  death  of,i.  194 — is  tutor

of  Achilles,  iii.  379
Cinnus,  ii.  175
Cinvras,  and  Myrrha,  the  story  of,  ii.

359
Cippus,  becomes  horned,  ii.  539


Circi,  the,  i.  63

Circus,  Maximus,  the,  i.  63 — scenes

in  the,  described,  iii.  385— of  Flora,

i.  185
Ciris,  ii.  268
Cithara,  iii.  27
Citorus,  Mount,  ii.  133
Claros,  i.  3

Claudia  Quinta,  the  story  of,  i.  147
Claudii,  the,  iii.  520.
Claudius  Marcellus,  i.  172
Clausus,  i.  147
Clusius,  i.  12
Clymenus,  Pluto,  i.  243
Clytie,  her  jealousy  and  punishment,

ii.  129
Coan  cloth,  iii.  258
Cocetum,  i.  139

Cohors  (the  poultry  yard),  i.  164
Coin,  the,  and  balance,  i.  4  71
Collatia,  i.  79
Collinian  gate,  iii.  481
Colour,  the,  of  books,  i.  247
Combs,  ii.  133
Comitia,  the,  i.  6

Complexion,  on  the  care  of  the,  iii.  491
Conceit,  censured,  iii.  454
Concord,  the  Temple  of,  i.  40 ;  the

Dedication  of,  by  Livia  Augusta,

i.  238
Conductor,  iii.  289— of  lightning,  i.

103
Consular  Procession,  the,  i.  467
Consulship,  the,  established,  i.  83
Consus,  the  Divinity,  i.  97
Coral,  how  first  produced,  ii.  153
Corinna,  i.  340 — her  charms,  iii.  269

— who  she  was,  iii.  270 — addresses

to,  by  Ovid,  iii.  321,  323,  326, 331
Corinthian  brass,  ii.  210
Corniculum,  i.  237
Cornu,  ii.  9.

I  Cornua  (of  books),  i.  248
!  Cornucopia,  the,  i.  182  ;  ii.  303


Circe,  i.  135 — changes  Scylla  into  a  |  Coronae,  the  story  of  the,  ii  465
rock,  ii.  480 — and  Picus,  the  story  j  Coronis,  i.  21  —  is  changed  into  a
of,  ii.  497 — and  Ulysses,  the  stoiy  i crow,  ii.  68
of,  iii.  472  Coronis,  is  slain  by  Apollo,  ii.  71


INDEX.


529


Cortina,  ii.  544

Corvinus,Valerius,  i.  38

Corybantes,  the,  i.  143

Corytos,  i.  356

Cosmetics,  iii.  144

Costum,  i.  24  ;  ii.  360

Cothurnus,  i.  193,  287

Cotys,  king  of  Thrace,  i.  413

Couch,  iii.  114

Couch-cushion,  ii.  158

Country,  the  praises  of  the,  iii.  469

Countrymen,  are  changed  into  frogs,

ii.  205
Courts,  of  Law,  i.  13
Crab,  (Cancer),  Constellation  of  the,

i.  22
Crane,  and  Janus,  the  story  of,  i.  215
Crassi,  the  defeat  of  the,  i.  202
Cremera,  the  battle  of,  i.  56
Cretans,  their  untruthfulness,  iii.  390
Crinale,  i.  428
Crocus,  i.  187  ; becomes  a  flower,

iii.  131
Croesus,  i.  308,  446
Crosier,  i.  227
Cross,  i.  385

Cross-roads,  statues  at  the,  i.  182
Crotona,  the  foundation  of,  ii.  519
Crown,  Constellation  of  the,  i.  109  ;

ii.  270
Cupid,  address  to,  iii.  317
Cupids,  the,  i.  130
Cures,  i.  53

Curetes,  (the  priests),  i.  143 ; pro-
duced from  a  shower,  ii.  131
Curia,  iii.  361
Curiae,  the,  i.  93
Curians,  the,  i.  67
Curio,  i.  69
Curitis,  Juno,  i.  71
Curling,  the,  of  the  hair,  iii.  398
Curtian  Lake,  i.  228
Curule  chair,  the,  i.  9
Cyane,  dissolves  into  a  fountain,  ii.l  74
Cyanea,  the  isles  of,  i.  271
Cyathus,  i.  112
Cybele,  the  Festival  of,  i.  141— her

worship  is  introduced  at  Rome,  i.

145


Cycnus,  is  changed  into  a  swan,  ii.  61

Cydippe,  the  Epistle  to,  from  Acon-
tius,  iii.  220 — her  Epistle  to  Acon-
tius,  iii.  231

Cygnus,  his  death,  ii.  416

Cynosure,  Constellation  of  the,  i.  91

Cyparissus,  is  transformed  into  a  cy-
press, ii.  348

Cypassis,  the  handmaid  of  Corinna,
is  addressed,  iii.  315,  316

Cypress,  used  at  funerals,  ii.  350*

Cvrene,  the  Nymph,  i.  25

Cyrus,  the  birth  of,  i.  87

Dactyli,  the,  i.  143

Daedalion,  is  changed  into  a  hawk,

ii.  395
Daedalus,  and  Icarus,  the  story  of,  ii.

271  ;  iii.  409— kills  Perdix,'ii.  273
Danai'des,  the  Portico  of  the,  i.  297
Dancing,  i.  113;  iii.  308
Danube,  the  same  as the  Ister,  i.

388
Daphne,  is  changed  into  a  laurel,  ii.

33
Daphnis.  is  changed  into  a  stone,  ii.

131
Days,  certain,  not  propitious  for  love-
making,  iii.  394
Death,  personified,  iii.  363
Decemvir,  the  office  of,  filled  bv  Ovid,

i.  151
Decemviri,  the,  i.  48
Decursus,  iii.  521
Defrutum,  i.  168
Deianira, her  marriage  to  Hercules,

ii.  305 — her  Epistle  to  Hercules,

iii.  81
Deidamia  and  Achilles,  the  storv  of,

iii.  404
Delia,  iii.  366
Delubrum,  iii.  116
Deluge,  the,  of  Deucalion,  ii.  20
Demophobn,  the Epistle to,  from

Phyllis,  iii. 10— his Epistle to

Phyllis,  iii.  251
Dentatus,  M.  Curius,  i.  182
Dercetis,  the  Goddess,  ii.  1 20
Desultor,  iii,  265

M  it


5.30


INDEX.


Deucalion,  and  Pyrrha,  the  story  of,

ii.  24
Diana,  the  Temple  of,  on  the  Aven-

tine  Hill,  i.  129 — transforms  Ac-

taeon,ii.92 — punishes  Niobe,  ii.198
Diana,  the  Triune,  i.  26
Dibapha,  i.  51 ;  ii.  387
Didius,  i.  235
Dido,  and  ./Eneas,  the  story  of,  i.  114

ii.  481 — her Epistle to  /Eneas,

iii.  62
Dies  Fasti,  i.  6
Digamma,  the,  i.  135
Diogenes,  i.  378

Diotnedes,  the  king  of  Thrace,  i.  375
Diomede3, his companions are

changed  into  birds,  ii.  502
Dione,  the  Goddess,  i.  66
Discerniculum,  iii.  297
Discus,  ii.  353
Dodona,  the  oracle  of,  ii.  467;  iii.

412
Dog, or  Dogstar,  Constellation  of  the,

i.  173
Dogs,  are  sacrificed,  i.  26
Dolphin,  Constellation  of  the,  i.  52
"  Dominus,"  iii.  26
Dragon,  the,  slain  by  Cadmus,  ii.  87
DreSs,  of  the  men,  rules  for  the,  iii.

398 — of  the  women,  rules  for  the,

iii.  440
Drinking,  by  lot,  iii.  401 — rules  for,

iii.  462
Drusus,  i.  3,  279— the  death  of  the

elder,  iii.  502
Dryope,  is  changed  into  a  tree,  ii.  I

321  I

Duodecim  scripta,  the  game of,  i.

291  ;  iii.  414,  448
Dye,  Tyrian,  i.  51 — of  Amyclae,  iii.  48

Eagle  (Aquila),  Constellation  of  the, !

i.  209
Ear-rings,  ii.  349  |

Earth,  the,  (as  a  Goddess),  i.  43
Eating,  rules  for,  iii.  461  |

Echinades,  the  story  of  the,  ii.  287  j
Echo,  the  story  of  the  Nymph,  ii.  101 1
Eclipse,  of  the  Moon,  ii.  134  !


Egeria,  i.  101 — is changed into  a

fountain,  ii.  536
Egyptian  airs,  iii.  446
Elaira,  and  Phoebe,  the  story  of,  i.208
Elegies,  Ovid  ceases  to  write,  iii.  377
Eleleus,  a  name  of  Bacchus,  iii.  32
Elephant,  i.  333

Eleusinian  mysteries,  the,  i.  157
Eleusis,  i.  156
Elicius,  Jupiter,  i.  103
Elissa,  i.  114
Elpenor,  i.  302  ;  ii.  4913
Elvia,  the  death  of,  i.  141
Emeriti,  iii.  318
Enchanters,  iii.  57
Endymion,  i.  284
Ennius,  i.  288

Epaphus,  the  son  of  Io,  ii.  44
Ephemeris,  iii.  293
Epitaphs,  ii.  409
Equestrian  rank,  the,  of  the  family

of  Ovid,  i.  278
Equinox,  the  Vernal,  i.  129
Equina,  the,  i.  83— the  second, i.  Ill
Equites,  the,  i.  93,  339
Equus  October,  i.  166
Ergastulum,  iii.  274
Erato,  iii.  409.
Ericthonius,  i.  283,  413 ;  hi.  321—

his  birth,  ii.  68
Eringo,  iii.  150
Erisicthon,  and  Metra,  the  storv  of,

ii.  294
Eryx,  i.  171
Essedum,  i.  417
Eumenides,  the,  ii.  283
Eumolpus,  i.  413
Euphorbus,is allegedby Pythagoras  to

have  been  his  former  shape,  ii.  522
Euripus,  the,  i.  389
Europa,  is  carried  off  by  Jupiter,  i.

203;  ii.  80
Eurydice,  and  Oroheus,  the  story  of,

ii.  341
Euxinus,  why  so  called,  i.  318
Evander,  i.  180  ;  arrives  in  Italy,  i.

30
"  Evie,"  the  origin  of  the  word,  iii.

400


INDEX.


531


Evil  Eye,  the,  iii.  279
Excubiae,  iii.  272

Fabii,  the,  i.  38,  62— the  death  of,
i.  55

Fabius  Maximus,  i.  57,  222

Fair  sex,  the,  their  allurements, iii. 307

Falisci,  i.  135 — a  Festival  at,  de-
scribed, iii.  373

Fans,  iii.  343

Fasces,  the,  i.  456 — broken  on  the
death  of  a  general,  iii.  508

Fascia,  or  stomacher,  the,  hi.  47

Fasting,  i.  160

Faunus,  i.  58,  162 —  the  Festival  of,
i.  55 — and  Omphale,  the  story  of,
i.  59 — is  consulted  by  Numa,  i.  101

Faustulus,  i.  88,  170,  i97

*•  Favete  linguis,"  i.  8

Fax,  ii.  38

Februa,  i.  46

February,  why  it  was  so  called,  i.  46

Feciales,  i.  219

Fenestella,  why  Fortune  was  so  called,
i.  236

Feralia,  the,  i.  70

Ferculum,  iii.  343

Feretrum,  ii.  202

Ferry  boat,  iii.  352

Fidius,  the  Divinity,  i.  220

Fillets,  i.  87,  138  ;  ii.  29

Fingers,  snapping  the,  i.  196

Fire,  the  Sacred,  i.  87— and  water,
when  interdicted,  i.  168 — touched
by  the  bride  and  bridegroom,  i.
168  ;  iii.  428— for  cooking,  how
kept  in,  i.  199

Fish,  Constellation  of  the,  i.  66

Fish,  not  eaten  by  the  Syrians,  why,
i.  67 — taken  with  a  dart,  iii.  407

Fishermen's  holiday,  i.  221

Fistula?,  ii.  1 23

Flabella,  hi.  343

Flagellum,  iii.  89

Flamen,  i.  46— Dialis,  the,  i.  59

Flaminica,  the,  i.  106

Flammeum,  ii.  341

Flora,  the  Goddess,  her  history,  i.
186


Floralia,  the,  i.  174 — why  instituted,
i.  191 — continued  in  May,  i.  185

Flute,  invention  of  the,  i.  141

Fools,  the  Festival  of,  i.  69

Fops,  to  be  avoided,  iii.  451

Fora,  iii.  361

Fordicidia,  the  Festival  of  the,  i.  161 ;
its  origin,  i.  162

Formido,  i.  185

Fornax,  i.  69,  225

Fors  Fortuna,  the  Temple  of,  i.  244

Fortuna,  i.  358 — the  Temple  of,  is
built  by  Servius  Tullius,  i.  236

Publica,the  Temple  of,i.  209

Virilis,  i.  139


Forum,  the  Great,  i.  121

Fossores,  i.  321

|  Foxes,  are  set  fire  to  at  the  Circen-
! sian  games,  i.  164
j  Fragments,  of  the  lost  writings  of
I Ovid,  iii.  522
i  Frankincense,  i.  24 — male,  iii.  494

Frons  charta?,  i.  467

Funale,  ii.  424

Fundi,  i.  418

Funeral  followers,  ii.  512

pile,  i.  70 ;  hi.  73

rites,  hi.  101

Gabii,  i.  77

Galanthis,  is  transformed  into  a  wea-
sel, ii.  314

I  Galatea,  i.  242 — Acis  and,  the  storv
of,  ii.  469

|  Galli,  the,  iii.  33

{  Gallus,  the  Poet,  i.  289— his  death,
iii.  366

j  Games,  of  chance,  i.  290  ;  iii.  414 —
thefair  ought  to  understand,  iii.  448

!  Ganymede,  i.  53 — is  carried  off  by

Jupiter,  ii.  351
Garland -sellers,  i.  245

!  Gauls, the, besiege  the  Capitol,  i.  226;

| ii.  406;  hi.  417

j  Gausape,  iii.  419

1  Geese,  ii.  406

i  Genii,  the,  i.  70,  88

;  Germanicns,  i.  2,  279  ;  his  triumphs

I near  the  Rhine,  i.  21

M  M 2


532


INDEX.


Getae,  their  dress  described,  i.  311  —  j
their  manners  described,  i.  356

Girdle,  i.  206  ;  ii.  178

Glaucus,  i.  245 — is  transformed  into  |
a  Sea  Divinity,  ii.  475 — is  repulsed  j
by  Scylla,  ii.  478

Globe,  the  formation  of  the,  ii.  4

Goat, why  sacrificed,  i. 24  —  whys


thrown  at  bv  the  bovs,


174


Goblet,  Constellation  of  the,  i.  57
Gods,  the,  flight  of.from  the  Giants,  ii. ,

169— the  war  of,  with  the  Giants,)

ii.  12
Golden  age,  the,  ii.  9
Gorge,  iii.  432
Gracchus,  i.  473
Gradivus,  Mars,  i.  84
Grape  crushing,  i.333
Graphium,  iii.  291
Gratius  Faliscus,  i.  473
Gyges,  the  Giant,  i.  159
Gymnasia,  iii.  165
Gypsum,  iii.  282

"  Habet,"  meaning  of  the  word,  iii.

385
Fabit,  the  force  of,  iii.  480
Hair, dressing the,  iii.  126,  296 —

dyeing the, iii. 290 — modes of

dressing  the,  iii.  439
Halcyon,  the,  ii.  410
Halcyon,  and  Ceyx.  the  story  of,  ii.

399
Halcyonea,  iii.  493
Halesus,  i.  135  ;  iii.  375
Hamadryads,  the,  i.  54
Handicrafts, Minerva the tutelary

Divinity  of,  i.  126
Handmaid,  the  lover's  confidant,  iii.

390
Hannibal,  i.  94
Hares,  are  hunted  at  the  Floralia,  i.

194
Harpies,  the,  i.  216
Hasdrubal,  i.  244
Hastati,  i.  93
Hebe,  the  Goddess,  i.  213
Hecale,  iii.  488
Hecate,  the  Goddess,  i.  12;  ii.  225


Hecuba,  kills  Polymnestor,  ii.  459 —
is  transformed  into  a  bitch,  ii.  45!>

Helen,  the  Epistle  to,  from  Paris,  iii.
157 — her  Epistle  to  Paris,  iii.  178

Heliades,  their  transformation,  ii.  60

Helice,  the  Constellation  of,  i.  91

Heliotrope,  ii.  131

Helle,  and  Phryxus,  the  story  of,i.l28

Hellebore,  the  uses  of,  i.  446

Hellespont,  the,  iii.  196

Helmets,  iii.  127

Henna,  in  Sicily,  i.  153  ;  ii.  172

Hercules,  arrives  in  Italy,  i.  34— his
combat  with  Cacus,  i.  35  — and
Omphale,  i.  59 — visits  Chiron,  i.
194 — his  temple  in  the  Circus,  i.
220 — chains  Cerberus,  ii.  243 —
contends  with  Acheloiis  for  Dei-
anira,  ii.  301  —  while  dying,  re-
counts his  exploits,  ii.  308 — is  Dei-
fied, ii.  311 — rescues  Hesione,  ii.
390 — kills  Periclymenus,  ii.  435 —
the  Epistle  to,  from  Deianira,  iii.  1 8

Musagetes,  his  Temple  in

the  Circus  Flaminius,  i.  245

Hermaphroditus,  and  Salmacis,  the
story  of,  ii.  132

Hermione,  or  Harmonia,  the  wife  of
Cadmus,  becomes  a  serpent,  ii.  145

Hermione,  her  Epistle  to  Orestes,  iii.
74

Hero,  the  Epistle  to,  from  Leander,
iii.  195 — her  Epistle  to  Leander,
iii.  208

Herse,  and  Aglauros,the  story  of,  ii.  75

Hersilia,  i.  97— is  Deified  as  Ora,  ii.
515

Hesiod,  i.  211

Hesione,  is  rescued  by  Hercules  and
given  to  Telamon,  ii.  390

iHesperia,  her  death,  ii.  411

jHippocrene,  i.  108,  177

Hippodamia,  iii.  19

Hippolytus,  i.  100 — is  brought  to
life  by  iEsculapius,  and  worshipped
as  Virbius,  i.  243 — the  story  of  his
death,  ii.  537 — the  Epistle  to,  from
Phaedra,  iii.  29
Hippomanes,  iii.  279


INDEX.


533


Hippomenes,  and  Atalanta,  the  story

of,  ii.  370
Homer,  his  censurers  mentioned,  iii.

475
Honey,  i.  15  ;  iii.  292
Hoop,  i.  291
Horace,  i.  340
Horn,  of  Plenty,  ii,  303
Horns,  of  Bacchus,  i.  110;  iii.  378
Hortator,  i.  147
Hortensius,  i.  289

Hunting,  in  the  Circus,  i.  194  ;  re-
commended, iii.  470
Husband,  address  to  a  careless,  iii.

335 — addi-ess  to  a  jealous,  iii.  349
Hyacinth,  the,  i.  153,  247
Hyacinthia,  the  Festival  of  the,  ii.  355
Hyacinthus, i. 153 — is killed by

Apollo,  ii.  352 — flowers  spring  up

from  his  blood,  ii.  352
Hyades,  Constellation  of  the,  i.  184
Hybla,  i.  367
Hyginus,  Caius  Julius,  whether  he

is  attacked  in  the  "  Ibis,"  i.  475
Hylas,  i.  288
Hypermnestra,  her  Epistle to  Lyn-

ceus,  iii.  135
Hypsipyle, i. 89  —  her Epistle  to

Jason,  iii.  50
Hyrieus,  i.  199

Ianthe,  and  Iphis,  the  story  of,  ii.  335

Iasius,  i.  284  ;  iii.  367

lazyges,  the,  i.  280

Ibis,  the  Invective  against  the,  i.  475

Icarius,  i.  353

Icarus,  i. 174,  251  —  and  Daedalus,

the  story  of,  ii.  273  ;  iii.  409
Ichor,  i.  157
Idas,  i.  208
Ides,  the,  i.  7

Idleness,  to  be  avoided,  iii.  466
Ilia,  and  Mars,  the  story  of,  i.  63—

where  buried,  iii.  354
Imperfections,  how  to  hide,  iii.  444
"  Imperative,"  i.  70
Incantations,  iii.  278
Incubatio,  i.  162
"  Ingenuae,"  i.  263


Initials,  the  Festival  of  the  four,i.  209

Ino,  i.  74 — andMelicerta,  the  story  of,
i.  232  ;  ii.  J  37 — her  attendants
are  transformed  into  rocks,  ii.  143

Inscriptions,  carved  by  lovers,  iii.  339

Inscriptions,  funeral,  iii.  74

Instita,  i.  139,  282

Institor,  iii.  395,  470

Io,  is  changed  into  a  cow,  ii.  37— is
worshipped  as  Isis,  ii.  43

Io  Paean,  iii.  408

Io  Triumphe,  i.  326

Iolaiis,  is  restored  to  youth,  ii.  323

Iole,  i.  288

Iphis,  and  Anaxarete,  the  story  of,
ii.  511

Iphis,  and  Ianthe,  the  story  of,  ii.  235

Iris,  appears  to  Hersilia,  ii.  515

Iron  Age,  the,  ii.  1 1

Isis,  the  same  as  Io,  ii.  43  ;  is  in-
voked in  behalf  of  Corinna,  iii.  324

Ister,  the  river,  i.  388

Itys,  the  death  of,  ii.  216
j  lulus,  i.  132

Ivory,  i.  457

Jacinth,  ii.  533

Jani,  i.  19

Janiculum,  i.  19

Janitor,  iii.  39

Janus,  i.  7 — appears  to  the  Author,
i.  10 — his  offices,  i.  11 — why  so
called,  i.  11 — and  Crane,  the  story
of,  i.  215— the  Temple  of,  iii.  482.

Jason,  conquers  the  Dragon,  and  ob-
tains the  Golden  Fleece,  ii.  223—
the  Epistle  to,  from  Hypsipyle,  iii.
50 — the  Epistle  to,  from  Medea,
iii.  Ill

Jealousy,  female,  iii.  422

Jews,  at  Rome,  iii.  382,  395,  471

Juba,  the  conquest  of,  i.  151

Judices  selecti,  i.  278

Jugerum,  i.  459

Julius  Caesar,  made  Pontifex  Maxim  us,
i.  120 — his  assassination,  i.  121 —
is  changed  into  a  comet,  ii.  549

June,  the  origin  of  its  name,  i.  21 1

jjuno, visits  Flora, i. 188  —  bears


534


INDEX.


Mars,  i.  189 — the  Temple  of,  in
the  Capitol,  211 — changes  Calisto
into  a  bear,  i.  55  ;  ii.  65 — takes
the  form  of  Beroe,  ii.  98 — and
causes  the  destruction  of  Semele,
ii.  100 — strikes  Tiresias  with  blind-
ness, ii.  100 — the  Festival  of.,  at
Falisci,  described,  hi.  373

Juno  Caprotina,  the  Festival  of,  iii.
417

Moneta,  the  Temple  of,  is  built

by  Camillus,  i.  218

Jupiter,  and  Calisto,  the  story  of,  i.  54  ;
ii.  64— his  love  for  Juturna,  i.  73
—the  birth  of,  i.  142 — and  Maia,
the  story  of,  i.  180 — visits  Hyrieus
with Neptune and Mercury, i,
199 — and  Europa,  the  story  of,  i.
203 ;  ii.  63 — saves  the  Capitol,  i.
228— and  Alcmena,  the  story  of,!
i. 287; ii.  313 — transforms  Ly-I
caon,  ii. 16 — changes  Io into aj
cow,  ii.  37 — and  Semele,  the  story
of, ii. 97 — and Ganymede, the
story  of,  ii.  351

Amnion,  ii.  150

Feretrius,  i.  16

Pistor,  i.  226

Stator,  his  Temple,  i.  248

Tonans,  his  Temple,  i.  50

Vejovis,  i.  108

Victor,  i.  161 — his  Temple,

i.  161

Jurisconsultus,  iii.  294

Jusjurandum,  iii.  294.

Juturna,  i.  30,  73

Keeper,  the,  how  to  be  eluded,  iii.  458
Kite,  Constellation  of  the,  the  story
of,  i.  125

Lacerna,  i.  80

Lacertus,  i.  494

Lacus,  i.  1 14

Ladon,  ii.  41

Laelaps  (the  dog),  his transforma-  i

tion,  ii.  258
Laestrygons,  the,  i.  135  ;  ii.  491
Lais,  iii.  271


Lamps,  iii.  217

Lanuvium,  ii.  213

Laodamia, i.  264  —  her  Epistle  to

Protesilaiis,  iii.  125
Laomedon,  the  perjury  of,  ii.  390
Lapithae,  the,  and  Centaurs,  the  com-
bat of,  ii.  423
Lara,  the,  story  of,  i.  73
Larentalia,  the,  i.  88
Larentia,  Acca,  i.  88,  170,  197
Lares,  the,  i.  12,  70,  74,  182: their

Temple,  i.  245
Praestites,  the  statues  of  the,

are  erected  by  Curius,  i.  182
Laticlave,  the,  i.  329
Latinus,  i.  71
Latona,  transforms  the  peasants  into

frogs,  ii.  205
Latrunculi,  iii.  415
Launching,  the,  of  ships,  ii.  21  i
Laurentum,  i.  56
Lavinia,  i.  117
Leander,  his Epistle  to  Hero, iii.

195 — the Epistle  to,  from  Hero,

iii.  208
Learchus,  the  death  of,  ii.  141
Lectisternia,  the,  i.  398;  ii.  515
Lectus,  iii.  114
Legion,  i.  93
Leleges,  ii.  333
Lemures,  i.  70

Lemuria,  the  Festival  of  the,  i.  196
Leucadian  rites,  the,  i.  204  ;  hi.  144,

154
Leucothoe,  i.  234— and  Apollo,  the

story  of,  ii.  128
Lenocinium,  hi.  288
Liba,  i.  122
Libamina,  i.  122
Libation,  ii.  392
Liber  (Bacchus,)  i.  109
Libera,  a  title  of  Ariadne,  i.  1 1 1
Liberalia,  the  Festival  of  the,  i.  122
Liberty,  the  Temple  of,  297
Libra,  iii.  493
Library,  the,  on  the  Palatine  Hill,  i.

297
Lichas,  his  transformation,  ii.  309
Licia,  i.  100 ;  iii.  278


INDEX.


53;


Macareus,  the  Epistle  to,  from  Ca-
nace,  iii.  104

Macer,  i.  340 — an  address  to,  iii.  333

Msenades,  i.  154

Magic,  iii.  56,  278
I  Magna  Grsecia,  i.  135
|Maia,  and  Jupiter,  i.  180
(Majesty,  the  Goddess,  i.  170
JMamurius,  the  song  of,  i.  105
(Man,  is  formed,  ii.  8


Lictors,  i.  456
Lighthouses,  ii.  397
Lightning,  conductor  of,  i.  103
Likenesses,  on  rings,  i.  265 — in  sil

ver,  i.  41  i — in  wax,  iii.  134,  487
Limes,  iii.  360
Linea,  iii.  342

Linen- wearers,  i.  371  ;  ii.  43
Lituus,  the  Augur's  staff,  i.  227
Lituus,  a  clarion,  ii.  9
Livia  Augusta,  i. 34,  264 — endowsi Manes,  the,  i.  70

the  Temple  of  Concord,  i.  41,  238|Manipulus,  i.  92

— the  Consolation  to,  iii.  502 jManlius,  Marcus,  i.  218
Locatio,  i.  190  |Manni,  iii.  331

Loculi,  iii.  329  !  Maple,  ii.  346

"  Locuples,"  the  meaning  of,  i.  189  (Marathon,  the  hull  of,  ii.  244
Lotis,  and  Priapus,  the  story  of,  i.  27JMarcellus,  iii.  505,  512

— is  changed  into  a  tree,  ii.  121 j  March,  why  so  called,  i.  85 — the  old
Lotus,  i.  322  ;  iii.  153  Roman  year  hegan  with,  i.  94

Love,  a  species  of  warfare,  iii.  285  ;!Marcia,  her  marriage  to  Fabius  Maxi-

causes  the  refinement  of  mankind,] mus,  i.  245

iii.  424  iMarius,  i.  446


Lovemaking,  certain  days  not  pro-
pitious for,  iii.  394
Lover's  Leap,  i.  20-1;  iii.  144,  154
Luceres,  the  Tribe  of  the,  i.  93
Lucina,  the  Goddess,  i.  66,  399 ;  ii.

33
Lucretia.  and  Tarquinius,  the  story  of,

i.  79
Lucretius,  his  Poem  alluded  to,  i.  283,

288
Lupercal.  i.  63 — why  so  called,  i.  64,

65
Lupercalia,  the,  i.  58
Luperci,  i.  47,  58
Lustrum,  i.  92,  96
Lycaon,  i.  221 — is  changed  into  a

wolf,  ii.  16
Lycaeum,  i.  27

Lycurgus.  King  of  Thrace,  i.  122
Lyd'an  buskin,  iii.  337
Lymphatics,  iii.  33
Lynceus,  the  Epistle  to,  from Hy-

permnestra,  iii.  135
Lyncus,  the  transformation  of,  ii.  187
Lvre,  iii.  27 — Constellation  of  the,  i.
"41,  50

Macareus,  his  story,  ii.  489


"Maritus,"  the  term  applied  to  trees,
ii.  509

Marriage,  unfortunate  in  May,  i.  199
— auspicious  times  for,  i.  221

Mars,  the  month  of  March  devoted
to,  i.  90 — his  passion  for  Minerva,
i.  120 — the  conception  of,  by  Juno,
i.  189— the  Festival  of,  i.  218— and
Venus,  the  storv  of,  ii.  126  ;  iii.
427

Ultor,  i.  201— the  Temple  of,  i.

201

Marsi,  the,  i.  216

Marsus,  i.  472

Marsyas,  is  flaved  by  Apollo,  i.  241  ;
ii.  208

Masinissa,  i.  244

Mater  Matuta,  i.  231 — the  same  as
Ino,  i.  232 — her  Temple  is  erected
by  Servius  Tullius,  i.  232

Matronalia,  i.  96

May,  why  so  called,  i.  176

Medea,  assists  Jason,  ii.  223 — restores
jEson  to  youth,  ii.  234 — contrives
the  death  of  Pelias,  ii.  236 — slays
Creusa  and  Creon,  and  her  own
children,  ii.  241 — marries  jEgeus,
iii.  243 — attempts  to  poison  The-


536


INDEX.


seus,  iii.  243 — her  Epistle  to  Jason,
iii.  111.
Medusa,  is  slain  by  Perseus,  ii.  147,
154 — her  blood  produces  serpents,
ii.  147 — her  head  produces  coral,  ii.
153 — turns  men  into  stone,  ii.  163

Megalesian  games,  i.  141 — their  ori-
gin, i.  149

Meleager,  i.  191 — and  Atalanta,  the
story  of,  ii.  283— the  death  of,  ii.
283

Melicerta,  i.  232— and  Ino,  the  story
of,  ii.  141

Memnon,  the  death  of,  i.  3S1 ;  ii.  461

Memnonides,  the,  ii.  461

Menander,  i.  286

Mercury,  i.  73— the  birth  of,  i.  180
— the  worship  of,  i.  180 — the  ori-
gin of  his  name,  i-  206 — the  trades-
man's prayer  to,  i.  207 — slays  Ar-
gus, ii.  42 — changes  Battus  into  a
touchstone,  ii.  74 — and  Herse,  the
story  of,  ii.  75 — changes  Aglauros
into  a  statue,  ii.  79  —  debauches
Chione,  ii.  394.

Messala  Corvinus,  i.  37

Meta,  i.  336  ;  ii.  371

Metae,  ii.  348

Metellus,  saves  the  Palladium,  i.  230

Metra,  and  Erisicthon,  the  story  of,  ii.
294

MrjTpayvprai,  i.  349

Midas,  the  story  of,  ii.  385

Milanion,  iii.  414

Mildew,  i.  173

Milky  Way,  the,  ii.  13

Mimallonides,  the.  iii.  399

Mimes,  i.  497

Mind,  the,  is  Deified,  i.  221

Minerva,  is  beloved  by  Mars,  i.  320 —
and  the  pipe,  the  story  of,  i.  241 ;
iii.  453 — changes  Arachne  into  a
spider,  ii.  195

Capta,  i.  126

Minerval,  the,  L  126

Minotaur,  the,  ii.  269

Minyas,  the  daughters  of,  are  changed
into  bats,  ii.  136

Mirrors,  ii.  134

Mistress,  address  to  a  forsworn,  iii.


275,  347— address  to  his,  iii.  369.
371,  375 — a,  how  to  be  addressed,
iii.  402
Mitra,  i.  508
Modimperator,  iii.  401
Moneta,  i.  40
Moneychangers,  iii.  500
Mons  Sacer,  the  Secession  to,i. 41, 1 13
Months,  the  names  of  the,  i.  5
Moon, the, subjected to enchant-
ments, ii.  134
Moretum,  i.  150

Morning,  an  address  to  the,  iii.  293
Morpheus,  ii.  407
Mourning,  the  period  of,  i. 2 — the

colours  of,  ii.  295
Mulciber,  a  name  of  Vulcan,  i.  35
Mummy,  why  so  called,  i.  301
Mundus,  i.  169

Muses,  the,  i.  142 — are  attacked  by
Pyreneus, ii. 167 — contend  with
the  Pierides,  ii.  168
Music,  the  art  of,  recommended  to

the  fair,  iii.  446
Muta,  the  Goddess,  i.  72
Mutina,  the  battle  of,  i.  161
Myrmidons,  the  story  of  the,  ii.  352
Myron,  i.  443
Myrrha,  and  Cinyras,  the  story  of,  ii.

359
Myrtle,  the,  i. 13 — why  beloved by

Venus,  i.  139
Myrtoan  Sea,  the,  i.  487
Myscelos, the story of, ii. 517  —
founds  Crotona,  ii.  519

Naiads,  the,  i.  32

Nape,  an  address  to,  iii.  290

Narcissus,  i.  187 — and  Echo,  the  storv

of,  ii.  101
Nassa,  i.  499
Naumachia,  hi.  386
Navalia,  iii.  207
Necklace,  ii.  348

Nemesis,  the  Goddess,  i.  358  ;  ii.  103
Nemesis, the  mistress of Tibullus,

iii.  365
Neoptolemus,  ii.  456
Neptune,  and  Apollo  build  the  walls

of  Troy,  ii.  389


INDEX.


537


Neritos,  i.  135

Nero,  Drusus  Claudius,  iii.  502

Nessus,  is  slain  by  Hercules,  ii.  305

Nestor,  his  age,  i.  112 — his  narrative,
ii.  422

Night,  the  Goddess,  i.  29

Niobe,  the  punishment  of,  ii.  198

Nireus,  i.  467

Nisus,  is  betrayed  by  Scylla,  ii.  265

Nixi,  the,  ii.  313  ;  hi.  86

Nomentum,  i.  173

Nones,  the,  i.  7 — the  Capro  tine,  iii.  417

Nudipedalia,  the  rites  of  the,  ii.  231

Numa,  i.  162 — the  abode  of,  i.  49 —
adds  two  months  to  the  year,  i.  95
— attends  the  discourses  of  Pytha-
goras, ii.  536

Numicius,  i.  118

Numidicus  Q.  Caacilius  Metellus,  i.  37

Numitor,  i.  89

Nundina3,  the,  i.  6

Nuptial  torch,  the,  ii.  423

Nvctimene,  is  changed  into  an  owl,  ii.
"70

Nymphs,  the  Terrestrial,  ii.  14

Nysa,  i.  124

Ocrisia,  i,  237

Octavius,  takes  the  title  of  Augustus,

i.  37. See  "  Augustus."
Ocyrrhoe,is  changed  into  a  mare,ii.  73
Odd  numbers,  i.  197
(Enone,  her  Epistle  to  Paris,  iii.  41 —

the  Epistle  to,  from  Paris,  iii.  256
(Esypum,  iii.  442,  475
Oil,  invented  by  Pallas,  i.  132
Old  age,  respect  to,  i.  179
Olympiad,  i.  450
Omens,  bad,  iii.  291
Ophiuchus,  the  Constellation,  i.  242
Ops,  i.  275

Ora,  the  Goddess,  ii.  516
Orestes,  and  Pylades,  the  story  of,  i.

425  —  the  Epistle  to,  from  Her-

mione,  iii.  74
Orion, the Constellation,  i. 199 —

his  birth,  i.  200— his  death,  i.  200

— youths  spring  up  from  the  ashes

of  his  daughters,  ii.  465


Orithyia,  is  carried  off  by  Boreas,  ii.
220

Ornatrices,  hi.  290

Orpheus,  and  Eurydice,  the  story  of,
ii.  341 — attracts  wild  beasts  by  his
music,  ii. 346 — his  death,  ii.  381

Ortygia,  i.  207

Oscines,  i.  269

Ossilegium,  iii.  101

Ostia,  the  salt  pans  at,  i.  148

Othryades,  the  story  of,  i.  76

Ova,  in  the  Circus,  the,  ii.  371

Ovid,  mentions  his  daughter,  i.  220 —
addresses  Augustus  as  a  Divinity,  i.
248 — attributes  his  exile  to  "his
genius,  i.  249 — attempts  to  destroy
the  Metamorphoses,  i.  252 — visits
Athens,  i.  255 — describes  the  night
before  his  departure  from  Rome,  L
256 — describes  the  ship  in  whichhe
sails,  i.  270 — is  one  of  the  Cen-
tumviri,i.277 — mentionshis  Eques-
trian rank,  i.  293 — mentions  his
estate  at  Sulmo,  i.  336 — gives  an
account  of  his  life  and  family,  i.
338 — is  compelled  to  write  of  Love,
hi.  260,  302— denies  his  love  for
Cypassis,  hi.  315 — loves  two  mis-
tresses at  the  same  time,  hi.  319 —
mentions  his  wife,  iii.  375 — de-
fends himself  from  censures  cast
on  the  Art  of  Love,  iii.  476.  See
"  Corinna"  and  "  Mistress"

Owl,  the  bird  of  Pallas,  i.  50

Psestum,  ii.  547

Pagi,  i.  42

Palatium,  the,  i.  175

Palaemon,  the  same  as  Melicerta  and

Portunus,  i.  233
Palaeste,  the  Goddesses  of,  i.  144
Palaestra,  i.  206 ;  iii.  165,  208
Pales,  the  Goddess,  i.  165
Palici,  the,  i.  416  ;  ii.  173
Palilia,  the  Festival  of  the,  i.  165
Palla,  iii.  282
Palladium,  the,  i.  229 — is  saved  by

Metellus,  i.  230
Pallium,  iii.  230


MS


IKDEX.


Pan,  i.  58— pursues Syrinx,  ii.  41 — i  Pestilence, the, at  /Egina  described,  ii.

and  Apollo,  their  musical  contest,! 249

ii.  387  [Petasus,  ii.  39

Pandion,  ii.  213  I  Phaeton,  i.  108— causes  the  confla-

Parcae,  the,  hi.  112  gration  of  the  world,  ii. 54 — is

Parentalia,  the,  i.  71  ;  iii.  293  | slain  by  Jupiter,  ii.  59 — his  sisters

Paris,  the  Epistle to,  from  (Enone,  | are  changed  into  poplars,  ii.  59

iii.  41 — his Epistle  to  (Enone,  iii.  I  Phalaris,  i.  314

256 — his  Epistle  to  Helen,  iii.  157  Phaon,  the  Epistle  to,  from  Sappho,

— the  Epistle  to,  from  Helen, iii.  178 iii.  143
Paros,  iii.  277  Phaselus,  iii.  319

Parrot,  Elegy  on  the  death  of  a,iii.312 Phidias,  i.  443


Pascua,  or  public  pastures,  i.  190
Passion,  the  intensity  of,  in  females,

iii.  390
Patches,  on  the  face,  iii.  441
Patience,  recommended,  iii.  426
Patroclus,  and  Achilles,  i.  269
Patulcius,  a  name  of  Janus,  i.  12
Pausarius,  i.  147
Peace,  the  Festival  of,  i.  44


Philemon,  and  Baucis,  the  story  of,  ii.

289
Philippi,  the  battle  of,  i.  121 •
Philippus,  Marcius.  repairs  the  Tem-
ple of  Hercules,  i.  246
j  Philomela,  and  Tereus,  the  storv  of,

ii.  210
!  Philotis,  iii.  417
!  Philtres,  ii.  531


Peacocks,  receive  their  colours,  ii.  67  |  Phineus,  is  persecuted  by  the  Harpies,

Peculium,  iii.  305  i.  216

"Pecunia,"  meaning  of  the  word,  i.  Phineus,  attacks  Perseus,  ii.  158 — is


189

Pedo  Albinovanus,  i.  461
Pegasus,  the  Constellation,  i.  108
TltXavot,  i.  42
Pelasgia,  ii.  224
Pelta,  iii.  237


changed  into  stone,  ii.  164
j  Phcebe,and  Ela'ira,  the  story  of,  i.  208
j  Phoedra,  her  Epistle  to  Hippolytus,

iii.  29
j  Phoenix,  the,  ii.  532
Phraates,  i.  202


Penelope,  her  Epistle  to  Ulysses,  iii.  'Phrygian  notes,  the,  i.  143

1 — the  Epistle  to,  from  Ulysses,  I  Phryxus,  and  Helle,  the  storv  of,  i.
iii.  244  128

Pentathlon,  iii.  176  iPhyaces,  i.  461

Pentheus, opposes the  worship of  Phyllis,  her  Epistle  to  Demophoon,


Bacchus,  ii.  108— his  death,  ii.  115

Perdix,  is  transformed  into  a  par-
tridge, ii.  273

Perfumes,  iii.  149

Periclymenus,  his  death,  ii.  435

Perilla,  i.  307

Perimele,  ii.  287

Perseus,  slays  Medusa,  ii.  147 —
changes  Atlas  into  a  mountain,  ii.
147 — rescues  Andromeda,  ii.  151 —
is  married  to  her,  ii.  153 — is  at-
tacked by  Phineus,  ii.  158 — turns
him  into  stone,  ii.  164 — transforms
Prcetus,  ii.  165


iii.  10 — the  Epistle  to,  from  De-
mophoon, iii.  251

Picus,  is  consulted  by  Numa,  i.  101 — -
is  changed  by  Circe  into  a  wood-
pecker, ii.  497

Pierides,  the  contest  of  the,  with  the
Muses,  ii.  168

Pigmies,  the,  ii.  192

Pilanus,  i.  93

Pile,  the  Funeral,  iii.  362

Pinarii,  i.  36

Pincerna,  iii.  269

Pipers,  or  Tibicines,  the,  are  restricted
in numbers, i. 239-  when em-


index.


539


ploved,  i.  239 — a  story of  them,

i.  2*39
Pistor,  Jupiter,  i.  226
Plane-trees,  ii.  346  ;  iii.  495
Plaustrum,  i.  240


of  Apollo,  iii.  303 — of  Porapey,  iii-
381,  449— columns  of  the.  iii"  397
— of Oetavia,  iii.  381 — of Livia,
iii.  381
Porticos,  at  Rome,  i.  389 ;  iii.  381


Plautius, protects  the  Tibicines,  i.  240  Portraits,  waxen,  iii.  487 — See  Like.
Pleasing,  rules  for  the  art  of,  hi.  425 nesses
Plectrum,  ii.  70  Portunus,  the  Divinity,  i.  233

Pleiades,  Constellation  of  the,  i.  141,  Poms,  i.  305

180  Postumus  Tubertus,  routs  the  iEqui,

Plisthenes,  iii.  489  \ i.  242 .

Pluto,  arid  Proserpine,  the  story  of,  i. !  Postverta,  the  Goddess,  i.  40

154$172  Potitii,  the,  i.  36

Pluto,  Clymenus,  i.  243  |  Poultry-yards,  i.  164

Pocula,  iii.  171  iPrseco,  his  duties,  iii.  371

Poetry,  is  recommended  to  the  fair,  I  Prsepetes,  i.  269

iii.  447  |  Presents,  -what,  to  be  made  to  a  mis-

Poets,  their  fame  is  immortal,  iii.  298 tress,  iii.  417
Pollinctores,  iii.  508  |  Priapus,  and  Lotis.  tbe  story  of,  i.

Pollio,  Asinius  founds  the  first  public  | 27 — and  Vesta,  the  story  of,  i.  225

Library  at  Rome,  i.  297  I  Primipilus,  i.  453  ;  iii.  360

Pollution,  by  the  dead,  ii.  405  ;  Princeps,  i.  93

Pollux,  i.  208. See  "  Castor."  I  Princeps  juvenum,  iii.  387

"  Polus,"  meaning  of  the  \vord,i.  223 1  Procas,  is  attacked  by  the  Striges,  i.
Polydectes,  his  hatred  of  Perseus,  ii.  I 216


165

Polydorus,  the  death  of,  ii.  454

Polymnestor,  the  death  of,  ii.  459

Polyphemus,  kills  Acis,  ii.  469 — de-
vours the  companions  of  Ulysses,
ii.  489

Polypus,  ii.  135

Polyxena,  is  sacrificed  to  the  shade
of  Achilles,  ii.  456

Pomegranate,  ii.  180

Pomona,  and  Vertumnus,  the  story
of,  ii.  507

Pompa,  i.  152


Procession,  the, to  the  Circus,  iii.  343
Procris,  and  Cephalus.  the  story  of,

ii.  254  ;  iii.  460
Proculus,  Julius,  i.  68
Procuress,  an  address  to  a,  iii.  278
Proems,  is  turned  into  stone,  by  Per-

seus,  ii.  165
Professas,  or  prostitutes,  the,  i.  171  ;

iii.  457
Progne,  and  Tereus,  the  story  of.  i

74  •,  ii.  210
Prometheus,  forms  man,  ii.  8
Propertius,  i.  290


Pompey,  the  Great,  i.  38 — his  fate,  j  Propcetides,  the transformation of


i.  446

Pompey's  Portico,  iii.  381,  449
Pons,  the,  (for  voters),  i.  205
Ponticus,  i.  340
Pontifex,  i.  46
Pontus,  i.  267
Porrima,  the  Goddess,  i.  40
Porta  Catularia,  i.  173
Porter,  an  address  to  a,  iii.  271


Portico,the,  of  the  Danaides,  i.  297 — '  Publicii,  i.  190


the,  ii.  356
Prosecta,  or  Prosiciac,  ii.  421
Proserpine,  and  Pluto,  the  story  of,

i.  153;  ii.  172
Protesilaiis,  his  death,  ii.  416 — the

Epistle  to,  from  Laodamia,  iii.  125
Proteus,  his  transformations,  i.  25
j  Psaltery,  iii.  446
Publician  Road,  the,  i.  190


540


INDEX.


Pulpitum,  L  293

Pulvinaria,  i.  398;  ii.  515

Pumice,  used  for  smoothing  parch-
ment, i.  248

Pupil  of  the  eye,  double,  iii.  279

Puppis,  iii.  102

Purification,  i.  42 — at  the  Palilia,  i.
166 — with  eggs  and  sulphur,  iii.  420

Purity,  i.  60

Purple,  i.  51 ;  iii.  487

Puteal,  iii.  482

Pygmalion,  (of  Tyre),  i.  115

Pygmalion,  (of  Cyprus),  his  statue
is  animated  by  Venus,  ii.  357.

Pyramus,  and  Thisbe,  the  story  of,  ii.
121

Pyreneus,  attacks  the  Muses,  ii.  167
—the  death  of.ii.  167

Pyrrha,  and  Deucalion,  the  story  of,
ii.  23

Pyrrhus,  i.  219

Pythagoras,  i.  95,  197,  300— ex-
pounds his  philosophy  at  Crotona,
ii.  519,  535

Pythian  games,  the,  ii.  27

Python,  is  killed  by  Apollo,  ii.  27

Quadriga,  i.  326

Quinces,  iii.  460

Quinctilii,  the,  i.  62

Quinquatrus,  or  Quinquatria,  the  Fes-
tival of  the,  i.v125 — the  Lesser  i.
238

Quirinalia,  i.  69

Quirites,  i.  67

Quiver,  iii.  202

Racing  Lists,  iii.  386

Ram,  (or  Aries)  Constellation  of  the,

the  story  of  the,  i.  128  ;  ii.  109
Raven,  Constellation  of  the,  i.  57
Raven,  the,  is  turned  black,  ii.  67 —

reaping,  ii.  289
Reclining,  at  meals,  iii.  266
Redimiculum,  i.  138  ;  ii.  358
Regia,  i.  166
Relegatus,  i.  278
Remora,  i.  502
Remus,  i.  53,  62— the  birth  of,  i.  87


— the  death  of,  i.  170 — the  burial
j of,  i.  197
i  Reticulum,  ii,  91
I  Review,  of  the  Equites  by  Augustus,

i.  277
Rex  Nemorensis,  i.  100

I Sacrificulus,  i.  209

! Sacrorum,  i.  2

j  Rhamnes,  the  Tribe  of,  i.  93
J  Rhombus,  iii.  278

j  Ring,  with  a  portrait  engraved  there  -
| on,  i.  265— address  to  a,  iii.  328
j  Ring-dove,  i.  29
Rings,  iii.  267

I  Riper  years,  in  the  fair,  not  to  be  de-
spised, iii.  431-2
Rival,  Ovid complains that he is

supplanted  by  a,  iii.  359
River,  address  to  a,  iii.  352
Romans, and  Sabines,  the  reconci-
liation of  the,  i.  98
Rome,  the  foundation  of.  i.  169  ;  ii.
514 — is  attacked  by  the  Sabines,  i.
20 ;  ii.  514
Romulus,  divides  the  year,  i.  4 — in-
stitutes the  Lupercalia,  i.  62 — the
exposure  of,  i.  63 — is  Deified,  i.
68  ;  ii.  514— the  birth  of,  i.  87—
his  abode,  i.  96 — mourns  for  Re-
mus, i.  197 — founds  Rome,  ii.  514
Roses,  used  at  entertainments,  i.  193
Rostra,  the,  iii.  513
Rowers,  ii.  401.
Rubigo,  the  Goddess,  i.  173
Rudis,  i.  336
Ruminal,  i.  64
Rutilius,  Publius,  i.  378
Rutilius  Lupus,  is  slain,  i.  235

Sabbath,  the,  iii.  382,  395,  471
Sabine  females,  the,  iii.  281
Sabines,  the,  attack  Rome,  i.  20  ;  ii.

5 1 4 — are  recon ciled  to  the  Romans ,

i.  98— the  rape  of,  iii.  383
Sabinus,  Aulus,  i.  472 ;  iii.  334— his

Epistles,  iii.  244.
Sacra  via,  or Sacred  street,  i.  21)6  ;

iii.  284
Sacred  vessels,  i.  86


I2TDEX.


541


Sailors,  the  Etrurian,  are  transformed  j
into  fishes,  ii.  1 13

Sails,  iii.  23

Sal-Ammoniac,  iii.  494

Salii,  the,  i.  99,  105

Salmacis,  and  Hermaphroditus, the|
story  of,  ii.  132

Salpa,  i.  502

Salt,  i.  23

Salus,  the  Goddess,  i.  1 29

Sanctis,  the  Deity,  i.  220

Sand,  for  wrestling,  ii.  301

Sapa,i.  167

Sappho, i.  286  —  her Epistle to
Phaon,  iii.  143

Sarissa,  ii.  431

Sauromatae.  the,  i.  280,  311

Scamnum,  iii.  385

Saturn, arrives  in  Italy,  i.  18 — de-
vours his  offspring,  i.  142

Scazonic  lines,  iii.  476

Schoolmasters,  at  Rome,  i.  126

Scipio,  P.  Cornelius,  i.  37

Scipio Nasica,  establishes  the  wor-
ship of  Cybele  at  Rome,  i.  149

Scrinia,  i.  251

Scylla,  betrays  Nisus,  ii.  265

Scvlla,  is  transformed  into  a  rock,  ii.
480

Scython,  changes  his  sex,  ii.  131

Sea,  the.  deemed  not  navigable,  when,
i.  138

Sealing,  the,  of  letters,  i.  351

Seasons,  the,  i.  11,  186

Seats,  in  the  Theatre,  i.  151 — in  the
Circus,  iii.  342

Secret  correspondence,  hints  for,  iii.
171,  183,  267,  457

Secular  games,  the,  i.  275

Segmenta,  iii.  440

Semele,  i.  Ill— her  death,  ii.  98

Sementive  holidays,  i.  42

Semiramis,  iii.  271

Semo, Sancus,  or  Fidius,  a  Sabine !
Deity,  i.  220

Sera,  iii.  272

Serapis,  the  Deity,  his  form,  iii.  325  j

Serpents,  ii.  85

Servius  Tullius,  his  statue  concealed  i
by  a 'toga,' i.  236 — is  slain  by  J


his  daughter  Tullia,  i. 236 — his
miraculous  birth,  i.  238

Shades,  of  the  dead,  i.  70

Shaving,  i.  47

She-Goat  (Capella),  Constellation  of
the,  i.  181

Ships,  the,  of  iEneas  are  changed  into
sea  Nymphs,  ii.  504

Shipwreck,  ii.  403

Sibyl,  the,  i.  139— is  beloved  by
Apollo,  ii.  484

Siesta,  the,  iii.  269

Signal,  the,  for  starting  at  the  race,
iii.  345

Silenus,  i.  27 — stories  of,  i  123  ;  ii.
383 ;  iii.  400

Silver  Age,  the,  ii.  10.

Silvia,  and  Mars,  the  storv  of,  i.
86

Sinus,  of  the  toga,  iii.  287

Siparium,  ii.  87

Sipylus,  ii.  203

Sirpea,  i.  2-10

Sistrum,  i.  370

Sisyphus,  i.  141

Siticines,  iii.  312

Sitting,  at  meals,  i.  224

Slaves,  their  punishments,  iii,  89,
274 — their  diet,  iii.  273 — some-
times tradesmen,  iii.  282 — their
savings,  iii.  305

Sling,  ii.  76,  515

Smilax,  becomes  a  flower,  ii.  131

Smintheus,  i.  230  ;  ii.  436

Snake,  Constellation  of  the,  i.  57

Soap,  for  the  hair,  iii.  439

Socrates,  i.  363

Soothsayers,  iii.  84

Sorcery,  censured,  iii.  472

Sospita,  Juno,  i.  49,  213

Spina,  in  the  Circus,  ii.  348

Spinning,  iii.  88

Spinning-wheel,  the,  used  in  incan-
tations, iii.  278

Spolia  opima,  i.  172

Sponda,  ii.  290

"  Spondeo,"  the  meaning  of  the  word,
iii.  294

Spring,  its  amusements  at  Rome,  i.
316


542


INDEX.


Statues,  on  the  sterns  of  ships,  i.  260
—at  the  bows,  i.  260,  270

Stellio,  his  transformation  bv  Ceres,
ii.  175

Stesichorus,  iii.  435

Stimula,  the  Goddess,  i.  223

Stimulants,  iii.  423

Stips,  i.  15

Stola,i.  138,  171 ;  iii.  270

Striges,  i.  216  ;  ii.  234 ;  iii.  279

Stripes,  not  inflicted  on  Roman  citi-
zens, iii.  276

Strophium,  iii.  444,  457

Stylus,  ii.  329

Stymphalus,  i.  58

Sublician  bridge,  the,  i.  204

Suculae,  the  Hyades,  so  called,  i.  184

Sulmo,  the  birth-place  of  Ovid,  i.  1 36
— is  described,  iii.  329

Sulphur,  i.  102

Summanus,  the  Divinity,  i.  242

Suppliant,  iii.  268

Supplication,  ii.  293

Swans,  black,  i.  430

Swell-mob,  the,  of  Rome,  iii.  452

Swift,  Dean,  whence  he  may  have
borrowed  a  notion,  iii.  475

Swine,  why  sacrificed,  i.  24

Sword-lily,  iii.  493

Syene,  i.  381

Svgambri,  the,  iii.  503

Sylla,i.  220

Symplegades,  the,  i.  271 ;  iii.  119

Syngraphus,  or  Syngrapha,  iii.  395

Syphax,  conquers  Masinissa,  i.  144

Syrians,  the,  do  not  eat  fish,  i.  67

Syrinx,  is.  transformed  into  reeds,  ii.

.  41

Syrtes,  the,  ii.  267

Tables,  iii.  184'

Tablets,  i.  415— address  by  the  Poet

to  his,  iii.  291
Tacita,  the  rites  of  the  Goddess,  i.  72
Tages,  the  Diviner,  ii.  538
Taeda,  ii.  30;  iii.  17.,  276
Tamarus,  i.  160.
Talaria,  ii.  153
Tali,  iii.  414


j  Taprobane,  i.  383

I  Tarpeia,  her  treachery  and  punish-
ment, i.  20

Tarquinius  Superbus,  the  banish-
ment of,  i.  77— and  his  wife  slay
Servius  Tullius,  i.  236

Tarquinius,  and  Lucretia,  the  story
of,  i.  79

Tatius,  i.  19,  52;  ii.  514

Telchines,  the,  ii.  239

Telegonus,  i.  135

Telephus,  is  cured  by  Achilles,  i.  251

Temesa,  the  copper  of,  i.  197

Tempest,  her  Temple  erected,  i.  219

Terence,  i.  285

Terentus,  i.  32

Tereus,  and  Progne,  the  story  of,  ii.
210

Terminalia,  the,  i.  75

Terminus,  i.  48,  75

Tethys,  i.  55

Tesserae,  iii.  414

Teuthrantus,  i.  275

Thais,  iii.  456

Thamyras,  iii.  450

Theatre,  the,  of  Marcellus,  iii.  381

Theatres,  the  three,  iii.  450

Themis,  the  Goddess,  i.  119  ;  ii.  24

Themistocles,  i.  378

Thensa,  iii.  343

Therapnse,  i.  187

Thermodon,  ii.  308

Theromedon,  i.  375

Theseus,  and  Ariadne,  i.  1 09 — his  ex-
ploits, ii.  244  —  the  Epistle  to,
from  Ariadne,  iii.  94

Thesmophoria,  the,  ii.  364

Thieves,  Mercury  the  patron  of,  i.
181

Third  Deities,  who  they  were,  i.  276

Thisbe  and  Pyramus,  their  story,  ii.
121

Thracians,  the,  iii.  213

Thrasius,  iii.  403

Thrasymenus,  the  battle  of,  i.  2 13

Thyestes,  i.  74

Thyrsus,  i.  406  ;  ii.  109  ;  iii.  338

Tiber,  the  navigation  of  the,  i.  147

Tiberinus,  the  death  of,  i.  133


mDEX.


543


Tiberius  Caesar,  i.  32-1 ;  iii.  503

Tibia,  i.  141 ;  iii.  121

Tibicen,  i.  164

Tibicines,  i.  239

Tibullus,  i.  289,  340— the  Poet  la-
ments  his  death,  iii.  362

Tibur,  i.  135

Tiresias,  his  decision  on  the  pleasure
of  the  sexes,  ii.  100 — is  struck
blind  by  Juno,  ii.  100

Titian  tribe,  the,  i.  93

Titulus,  i.  467

Tivoli,  i.  35

Toga  libera,  i.  124

pretexta,  i.  355,  458

virilis,  i. 339  ;  iii.  486 — how

worn  bv  fops,  iii.  486

Togatae,  i"  171

Toilet,  rules  for  the,  iii.  442 — dis-
gusting description  of  a,  iii.  475

Tolenus,  the  battle  of  the,  i.  235

Tombs,  iii.  56,  74

Tomi,  i.  271 — why  so  called,  i.  311
— its  dangers,  i.  323 — described,  i.
489

Torches,  ii.  30;  iii.  17,  114,  274

Tori,  iii.  46

Torquatus,  Titus  Manlius,  i.  38

Torquis,  i.  428

Touchstone,  ii.  74

Tourmaline,  ii.  533

Trabea,  i.  3

Tradesman,  the,  his  prayer  to  Mer-
cury, i,  207

Tragedy,  Ovid  contemplates  the  com-
position of,  iii.  337

"  Tria  verba,"  the,  i.  6

Trieterica,  the,  i.  27  ;  ii.  116,  216

Triones,  the,  ii.  365

Tripod,  i.  128  ;  ii.  544  ;  iii.  21

Triptolemus,  is  sent  by  Ceres  to  in-
troduce agriculture,  i.  158 — trans-
forms Lyncus,  ii.  87

Triumph,  i.  395  ;  ii.  33 — description
of  a,  i.  325

Triumphal  procession,  description  of
a,  i.  395

Trivia,  (Diana),  ii.  63

Trosnus,  i.  -159


Troy,  is  built  by  Neptune  and  Apollo,

ii.  389 — its  destruction,  ii.  453
Tuba,  ii.  9;  iii.  121,  312
Tubilustrium,  the  Festival  of  the,  i.

127— is  repeated,  i.  208
Tullia,  murders  her father  Servius

Tullius,  i.  236
Tunica,  iii.  270

Turnus,  opposes  iEneas,  ii.  500
Tusculum,  i.  135

Tuticanus.his  poem  mentioned, i.  465
Twins  (or  Gemini),  Constellation  of

the,  i.  207
Tychius,  i.  126
Tympana,  ii.  108
Typhosus,  the  defeat  of  the  Giant,  ii.

170

Ulysses,  his  wanderings,  i.  262 ;  ii.
489,  495— contends  with  Ajax  for
the  arms  of  Achilles,  ii.  439 —
the  Epistle  to,  from  Penelope,  iii.
1 —  his  Epistle  to  Penelope,  iii.
244— and  Circe,  the  story  of,  iii.
472

Umbracula,  iii.  415

Unciae,  iii.  493

Undulatae,  iii.  440

Vaccinium,  i.  247

Vacuna,  the  Goddess,  i.  224

Vadimonium,  iii.  292

Vagina,  ii.  1 24

Vallum,  ii.  276

Valvae,  ii.  126

Vegrandia,  i.  108

Vejovis,  Jupiter,  i.  107

Velabra,  i.  228

Velamenta,  ii.  393

Velarium,  i.  151  ;  ii.  87

Venabulum.  iii.  35

Venulus,  ii.  502

Venus,  is  wounded  by  Diomedes,  i.

137 — and  Mars,  the story  of,  ii.

126  ; iii. 428 — loves  Adonis, ii.

368 — causes a flower  to spring

from  his  blood,  ii.  377
Anadyomene,  her  statue,  iii.

442


544


INDEX.


Venus  Ervcina,  her  Temple  at  Rome,

i.  171  '
Verticordia, i. 140  —  her

Temple,  L  141
Yertumnus,  and Pomona,  the  story

of,  ii.  507
Vesca,  i.  108
Vesta,  i.  33  —  images of,  i.  87 —

the  cleansing  of  her  shrine,  i.  221

— the Temple  of,  the  reasons  for

its  shape,  i.  222 — why  so  called,  i.

224 — and  Priapus,  the  story  of,  i.

225
Vestalia,  the  Festival  of  the,  i.  222
Vestalis,  i.  452
Vestals,  the  ilisg- i  of  certain,  i.

140
Vestis  ll'iera,  i.  I**
Via  Sacra,  i.  296  ; iii.  284
Victima,  i.  23
Vigfflae,  iii.  272,  285
Vinalia,  the,  i.  171
Vindex,  iii.  510
Vindicta,  i.  240
Vine,  the  Centurion's  badge  of  office,

iii.  454
Vintager,  Constellation  of  the,  i.  106
Virhius, a  name  of Hippolytus,  i.

243 ;  ii.  538
Virgil,  his censurers  mentioned,  iii.

476
Virgin's  Aqueduct,  the,  i.  389
Vision,  a,  and  its  explanation,  iii.  350
Vitta,  ii.  29
Volesus,  i.  427
Votive  horns,  ii.  425


Vulcan,  discovers  the  intrigue  of  Mars
and  Venus,  ii.  126  ;  iii.  428

Walking,  i.  179— rules  for,' iii.  445

Walnut-tree,  address  to  a,  iii.  495

Walnuts,  games  played  with.  iii.  498

War,  how  proclaimed  by  the  Romans,
i.  219

Washings,  of  the  statues  of  the  Di-
vinities, i.  ]  38

Water,  used  in  transformations,  ii.  92

Wax,  laid  on  ships,  i.  145  ;  ii.  403

Weaving,  ii.  405 ;  iii.  2

Wheels,  iii.  203

White-thorn,  i.  217

Wife  of  Ovid,  the,  a  native  of  Fali.sci,
iii.  375

Windows,  i.  427  ;  ii.  512

Winds,  the,  ii.  6

Wine,  iii.  5

Winter  Equinox,  the,  i.  30

Solstice,  the,  i.  13

Wolf,  a,  changed  into  marble,  ii.  39.

Woodcocks,  i.  218

Woodpecker,  i.  87;  ii.  497

Woof,  the,  ii.  431

Writing,  materials  for,  iii.  105

Writing,  rules  for,  iii.  453

Year,  beginning  of  the.  i.  14

Zancle,  i.  155

Zedoary,  i.  24

Zethes,  and  Calais,  the  birth  of.  ii.  22 1

Zoilus,  censures  Homer,  iii.  476

Zone,  ii.  178

Zones,  the,  ii.  5


ERRATA.
Page  102,'liue 23,  for  -  Cyprus,'  read  '  cypress.'

203, 43,  for  '  milestone,'  read  '  millstone.'

268, 16,  for  *  Those  art  my  own,'  read  '  Those  are  my  own.'


L6AP?9


THE END.


J. BILLING, PRINTER, WOKING,  SURRKY.


LB  My  '06


M


H
