Metamorphoses (Arthur Golding, 1567)
======================================================================
Arthur Golding's 1567 translation, the first English Metamorphoses — Shakespeare's Ovid. Public domain. Internet Archive scan.


Tne d Bookes ~~
of P. Ouidius Nafo; entytuled 5


Metamorphoſis, tranſlated oute of
Latin into Engliſß meeter,by e Ar-


. thur Golding Gentleman,


» Aworkevery pleaſaunt
and delectable.


Wich fkill,heede,and iudgement,this worke muſt be read,
For elſe to the Reader it ſtandes in ſmall ſtead,


Imprynted at London, by
2 Willyam eres.


Digitized by


gitized by Original from
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT
URBANA-CHAMPAIGN URBANA-CHAMPAIGN


STW eye we


3


W


W. M,, Wb, MIE A. SPD


8 r


And this remapnes in bzutich beaſts, and keepeth them alpue.


5 Bett alonip which with vs or loult dooth beare the name.


BWeginning with creation of the wozid, and man of flpme,


Wiſcuſled in the latter booke in that oꝛation where
Wk death, and preaching abſtinence from fleſh of liuing things.


It is not too be vnderſtand of that fame ſoule whereby
wee are endewd with reaſon and dilcretion from on hie:


C niop. Thꝛee fortes of ipfe 02 ſoule (foꝛ fo they termed bec)
Are found in things. The firk giues powꝛe too thꝛyue, encreaſe € grow,


-


Nee GOO Atle . | 2 . 5 5 2 f 8
othe ryght Honorabie and his fingu-
lar good Lord, Robert Erle of Leycefter, a

Baron of Denbygh, knyght of the 1


moſt noble order of the Garter, &c. Arthur Gol -


ding Gent. wiſheth continuance of health,
with pꝛolperous eſtate and felicitie.


9 T length my chariot wheele about the mark hath found the Wap, |


And at their weery races end mp bꝛeathleſſe hozſes tap. 97
The wooꝛk is brought too end bp which the authoz did account ea
(And tightly) with eternal fame aboue the ſtarres too mount. ‘ ay
Foz whatſoeuer hath bene writ of auncient tyme in grecke oh, eee
y ſundꝛy men difperfeoip and in the latin ceke, ; ee
Oft this fame dark Philoſophie or turned ſhapes, the fame 8 35
Path Duid into one Whole maſſe in this booke brought in frame. :
Fowꝛe kynd of things in this his woꝛke the Poet dooth contepne. 8
That nothing vnder heauen dooth ay in ſtedfaſt ſtate remapne.
And next that nothing periſheth: but that eche ſubſtance takes
Another ſhape than that it had. Ok theis twoo points he makes 5
The proof by ſhewing thzough his woozke the wonderfull exchaunge
Ok Goddes, men, beaſts, and elements, too ſundzy ſhapes right ſtraunge,


And fo proceeding with the turnes that happened till his tyme. n
Then ſheweth he the ſoule of man from dying to be free, 3
p fampics of the noblemen, who koz their vertues bee —
Accounted and canonized foꝛ Goddes by heathen men, e
And by the pepnes ef Lymbo lake, and bipffuil ſtate agen ö
Okt ſpirits in th Elyſian feelds. And though that of theis thzee
He make diſcourſe diſperſedly: pit ſpeciallp they bee


He bzingeth in Dythagozas diſſwading men from feare
But as foꝛ that opinion which Pythagoꝛas there bꝛings


Of foules remoumg out of beaſts too men, and out of men
Too birdes and beaſts both wyld and tame, both too and fro agen:


But of that ſoule oꝛ lyte the which brute beaſts as Well as wee

And this in lenſeleſſe herbes and trees and ſhzubs itſelk dooth ſhow.
The lecond giuꝛth powze too moue and vſe of ſenſes fpue,

Woth theis are moꝛtall, as the which receyued of the aire

By force of Phebus, akter death doo thither elt repapze.

The third giues vnderſtanding, wit, and reaſon: and the fame


8. j. And


Cie i :


And as the fecond dooth conteine the firſt: enen fo the third
en aes both the other twaine. And nepther beaſt, noz bird,
Noz fich, noz herb, noz tree, noꝛ ſhꝛub, noz any carthlp wypght
(Saue only man) can of the fame partake the heauenly myght.
IJ graunt that when dur breath dooth from our bodies go awap,
It dooth efkloones returne too apꝛe: and of that ayze there may
Both bird and beaſt participate, and wee of theirs like wyſe.
Foz Sohple wee liue, (the thing itlelk appeereth to aur epes)
Wothe they and wee dꝛaw all one breath. But foꝛ too deeme oz fap
Our noble fople (Which is diuine and permanent koz av)
Is common too vs with the beaſts, think it nothing lelle
han for tos bee a poynt ot him that wildome dooth pꝛofeſſe.
MF this Jam rpght wen allurde there is no Chziſten wyght
That can bp fondneſſe be fo farre leduced from the ryght.
And finallp hee dooth pꝛoceede in chewing that not alt 3
That beare the name ok men (how ſtrong, keercs, tout, bold harap, tall,
How doyle, fapze, rych, oꝛ hyghip bozne,how much renownd by fame,
So ers they bee, althaugh on earth ef odes they beare the name)
Are foz too be accounted men: but ſuch as vnder awe
tk reafons rule continuallp doo liue in vertues law: f
And that the reſt doo differ nought krom beaſts, but rather bee .
Much wooꝛſe than beaſts, bicaule they doo abace theyꝛ owne degrenr.
To na turall philoſophye the foꝛmeſt thzee perteyn ec,
The forth too moz all: and in all are pitthye, apt and plapne 71
Inſtructions which impoꝛt the pꝛayſe of vertues and the chuüne
Ok vices, with the due rewardes of eyther of the ane
Out ot the CAs ſoꝛ example, in the tale of Daphnee turnd too Bap,
Arſt bocke. A mpꝛroz of virginitie appeere vntoo vs may, fe
which peelding nepther vntoo feare, noz fozce, noz flatterpe,
Doth purchace euerlaſting fame and immostalitpe.
Out ot the ¶ In Phaetons fable vntoo ſyght the Poet dooth expꝛelle
ſecond. The natures of ambition biynd, and pouthfull Witkulneſſe.
The end whereof is miſerie, and bzingeth at the laſt
Repentance When it is to late that all redꝛeſſe is palk.
And how the weakneſſe and the Want of wit in magiſtrate
Confoundeth both his common weale and ecke his owne eſtate.
This fable alfo dooth adupſe all parents and all ſuch ‘
As bzing vp pouth, too take good heede of cockering them too much,
It further dooth commende the meane: and Willech too beware
Ok rath and haſty pꝛomiſes which moſt pernicious are,
And not too bee perkoꝛmed: and in fine it plapniy ſhowes
What forrow too the parents and too all the kinred growes
By diſobedience of the chyld: and in the chyld is ment
The diſobedient ſubiect that ageinſt his pꝛince is bent.
The tranſkoꝛmations of the Crow and Rauen doo declare
That Clawbacks and Colcariers ought wyſely too beware
Ok whom, too whom, and what they (peake. Foz fore againſt his wht
Can any freendly hart abyde too heare repoꝛted ill ö
The partie whom he fauoureth. This tale dooth ecke bewꝛay


r
—


—


PFE 1 Ese Eee


The rage of Wrath and ielozie too haue no kynd of ſtay:

And that ly ght credit too repoztes in no wyſe ſhould be giuen.
Foz feare that men too late tos iuſt repentance ſhould bee dꝛiuen.
The fable of Ocyꝛose by all ſuch folk is told

As are in ſerching things too come too curious and teo bold.

A verp good example ts deſcribde in Battus tale

Foꝛ couetous people which foꝛ gayne doo {et theyꝛ toongs too fale.
¶ Al ſuch as doo in flattring freaks, and hawks, and hownds delpght,
And dyce, and cards, and koꝛ too {pend the tyme both day and nyght

In faule exceſſe of chamberwoꝛke, oꝛ too much incate and dꝛink:
Upon the piteous ſtoꝛie of Acteon ought too think.

Foz theis and they2 adherents vlde exceſſiue are in deede

Tho dogs that daply doo Deuaur thep2 followers on with ſpeede.
Tpreſias Willes inferioz folk in any wyle too ſhun

Too iudge betweens their betters leaſt in perl they doo run.
Marciſſus is of ſcoꝛnfulneſſe and pꝛyde a myʒroꝛ cleere,

Se oath fading vanitie mot playnly map appeere.

And G cho in the ſeiklame tale dooth kyndlp repzefent ‘

The lewd behauiour of a bawd, and his due puniſhment.

¶ The piteous tale ot᷑ d pꝛamus and Thiſbee doth conteine

The headie force of frentick loue whole end is wo and payne.

The ſnares ot Mars and Menus thew that tyme will bꝛing too ipght
The fecret ſinnes that folk commit in coꝛners 02 by nyght.
Hermaphzodite and Salmacis declare that idleneſle

Is cheefeſt nurce and cheriſher of ali volupteouſneſſe, n

And that voluptuous ipfe bꝛeedes ſin: Which linking all toogither
Make men too bee effeminate, vnweeldy, weake and lither.

C Rich Piers daughters turnd too P ies doo openty declare,

That none fo bold too vaunt themſelues as blindeſt bapardes are.

The Mules playnly doo declare ageine a toother ſpde,

That whereas cheefek wildom is, moſt meildneſſe dooth abyde.

¶ Arachnee may example bee that folk ſhould not contend . 4
Ageinſt their betters, noz per ſiſt in erroꝛʒ too the end. 5

So dooth the tale of Miobee and of her chilozen ; and

The tranſtoꝛmation of the Carles that dwelt in L ycie land,

Toogither with the fleaing of of piper Marſies tin.

The fir doo allo {how that long it is ere God begin

Too pap vs foz our fauits, and that he Warnes vs oft before

Too icaue our follp : but at length his vengeance ſtriketh fore. a
And therfore that no wyght ſhould ſtriue with God in woꝛd noꝛ thought
Noz deede. But pꝛyde and fond deſpꝛe of pꝛapſe haue euer wrought. f
Confufion too the parties which accompt of them doo make. 8271
Fox ſome of ſuch a nature bee that it they once deo take

Opinion (be it ryght oꝛ wꝛong) they rather will agren

To dye, than ſeeme to take a fople: fo obftinate they bee. 5

The tale of Tereus, Philomele, and Pꝛognee dooth conteyne
That folke are blynd in thyngs that too their proper weale perteyne.
And that the man in whom the fyze ol kurious luſt dooth reigne
Dooth run too miſcheele lite a hoͤzſe that 34% looſe the reyne.
a> = Bi.


ii.


Out ot the


Out ok the
fig.


Dut of the
v.


.


Out of the 72
bj.


J


Dut of the
Oye


Dut ok the
bj.


N 2 97 pe > © or ee + 2 —
UP


The Epistle.


It allo ſhewes the cruell wꝛeake of women in their wrath

And that no hainous mifchiefeiong delay of vengeance hath.

And laſtly that diſtreſſe doth dꝛiue a man too looke about

And fecke all coʒners of his wits, what wap too wind him out.

¶ The good ſucceſſe of Jaſon in the land of Colchos, and

The dooings of Medeã ſince, doo giue too vnderſtand :

That nothing is fo hard but peyne and trauell doo tt win,

For fortune euer fauoꝛeth ſuch as boldly doo begin:

That women both in helping and in hurting haue no match

When they too eyther bend their wits: and how that koꝛ too catch

In honeſt meener vnder fapre pretence of frendſhip, is

An eaſie matter. Allo there is warning atuen of this,

That men ſhould neuer haſtely giue care too fugitiues,

Noꝛ into handes of ſoꝛcerers commit their ſtate o2 lyucg.

It ſhewes in fine of ſtepmoothers the deadly hate in part,

And vengeaunce moſt vnnaturall that was in moothers hart.

The deedes of Theleus are a ſpurre too pꝛowelſe, and a glaſſe

How princes ſonnes and noblemen their pouthfull pecres ſhould pa
Ring Minos ſhewes that kings in hand no wrongfull Wars ſhould take,
And what pꝛouiſion for the fame they ſhould befoꝛe hand make. 8
King Peacus giues allo there example how that kings
Should keepe their pꝛomile and their leages aboue all other thingg.
His graue delcription of the plage and end thercof > exprefic ee
Che wrath of Pod on man fez fin: and how that neretheleſſe
He dooth vs {pare and multiply ageine foꝛ goodmens fakes.

The whole dilcourſd of Cephalus and Pꝛocris mention makes

That maried folke ſhould warelp ſhunne the vyce of iealozie

And of ſuſpicion ſyould auoyd all cauſes vtterly.

Hepꝛouing by the wap all ſuch as cauſcleſſe doo mildeeme

The chaſte and giltleſfe for the deedes of thofe that faultie ſeeme.

¶ Che Korie of the daughter of king Miſus ſetteth but.

hat wicked luſt dꝛiues folk vntos too bring their Wills about.

And of a rightuous iudge is giuen example min the lame,

Who foz no meede noꝛ krendſhip will confent too any blame.

Wee map percepue in Dedalus how cuery man by kynd

Delpzes too bee at libertie, and with an earneſt mynd


Dooth feeke too fee hig natiue ſople, and how that freight diſtreſle


Dooth make men wyple, and ſharpes their Wits to fynd their own redzeſſe.


wee alſo lerne by Fcarus how good it is too bee


In meane eftate and not too clymb too hygh, but too agree

Too wholſome counſell: for the hyze ok dilobedience is N
Repentance When it is too late forthinking things amiffe.

And Partrich telles that excellence in anp thing procures

Men enuie, euen among thoſe krendes whom nature mot aſſureg.
Philemon and his feere are rules of godly pacient ipfe,

Ok {paring thꝛikt, and mutual loue betweene the man and fopfe,


Mt due obedience, ok the feare of God, and of reward


Foz good oz euill vlage ſhewd too Wandzing ſtraungerg Ward.
In Erilicthon dooth appecre alpuely image both . ot


The Epistle.

Ok wickedneſſe and crueltie which any wyght nap lothe,

And of the hyꝛe that longs theretoo. Me ſheweth allo plapne

That whereas pꝛodigalitie and gluttony deoth reigne,

A world of riches and of goods are euer with the leaſt

Too fatiffpe the appetite and eye of fuch a beaſt

¶ In Hercules and Achelopes encounters is ſet out

The nature and behauiour of twoo wooers that be ſtout.

wherein the Poet couertlp taunts ſuch as beeing bace

Doo lecke by forged pedegrees too ſeeme ot noble race.

who when they doo percepuc no truth vppon their ſyde tao land,

In ſtead of reaſon and of ryght vſe fozce and myght of hand.

This fable alſo ſigniſies that valiantneſſe of hart f

Conliſteth not in wooꝛds, but deedes: and that all ſlyght and Art

Giue place too pꝛoweſſe. Furthermoꝛe in Meſſus wee map fee

what breach of promife commeth too, and how that ſuch as bee

@inable for too wꝛeake theyꝛ harmes by foꝛce, doo oft deupyſfſe

Too wꝛeakce themfciues by pollicie in farre moze cruell wiſe.

And Depanira dooth declare the force of iealozie

Deccyued thꝛough too lyght belecf and fond ſimplicitie.

The pꝛoceſle following peinteth out true manipnefle ok hart
which peeldeth nepther vntoo death, too ſoꝛrow, greet, noz ſmart.
And finally it ſhewes that ſuch as liue in true renowne
Ok vertus heere, haue after death an euerlaſting crowne
Oft glozie. Cawne and Byblis are examples contrarie:

The Mapyd of moſt outrageous luſt, the man of chaſtitie.

¶ The tenth booke cheeflp dooth containe one kynd of argument
Repꝛouing moſt prodigious luſts of ſuch as haue bene bent

Too inceſt moſt vnnaturall. And in the latter end

It ſheweth in Hippomenes how greatip folk offend.

That are ingrate foz benefits which God oz man beſtow

M ppon them in the time of neede. Moꝛcouer it dooth how 5
That beawty (will they nill thep ape booth men in daũger thꝛow:
And that it is a foolyſhneſſe too ſtryue ageinſt the thing

Which God before determineth too palle in tyme too bing.

And iat of all Adonis death dooth ſhew that manhod ſtriues

A gainſt foꝛe warning though men fee the peritl of theyꝛ lyues.

¶ The death of Oꝛphey ſheweth Gods iuſt vengeance on the bple
And wicked fozt which hozriblp with inceſt them defple.

In Midas of a couetous wꝛetch the image wee may ſee

Whole riches iuſſ ly too himfcif a helliſh toꝛzment bee,

And of a foole whom neyther proof noz warning can amend,

Vnt ill he fecle the ſhame and {mart that folly doth him fend.

His Barbour repzeſents all blabs which ſeeme with chyld too bee
Untill that they haue blaaʒzd abꝛode the things they heare oz (ce.
2" Ceprand Aicpone appeeres moſt conſtant loue, te

uch as between the man and wyfe too bee it booth behoue.
This Ceyx alſo is a taut of princelp courteſie
And bountie toward fuch whom neede compelleth fo} too Ape.
Bis viage allo dooth declare how bainip men are led


Out ok the
*. ö


Out ot the


X.


Out of the
tHe


Out of the
Rly.


Dut of the
Kui,


Mat ofthe
xb.


— eee we 2


The Epiflle.


Too ptter perill through fond topes and kanſieg in their head.
Foz Idols doubtfull oracles and ſoothlapꝛes prophecies

Doo nothing clfe but make fooles fayne and blynd their bleared epes.
Dedalions daughter warnes too ble the toong with modeſtee
And not too vaunt with ſuch as are their betters in degree. :

¶ The leege of Troy, the death of men, the razing of the citie,
And laughter of king Pꝛiams ſtock without remozs of pitie,
which in the xij. and citj. bookes bee Witten, doo declare

Yow heynous wuͤlkull periurie and filthte whoꝛedome are

In ſyght ot God. The krentick frap betweene the Lapithes and
The Centaures is a note wherby is giuen too vnderſtand

The beaſtly rage of dꝛunkenneſſe. ¶ Mlpffes dooth expꝛeſſe
The image ok dilcretion, wit, and great aduiledneſſe.

And Diaz on the other {poe doth repꝛelent a man :

Stout, heavie,irefull,hanit of mynd, and ſuch a one ag can
Abyde too {utter no repulſe. And both of them declare

How couctouy of glozie and reward mens natures are.

And finally it ſheweth plapne that wildome Booth pꝛeuaple

In all attempts and purpoles when ſtrength of hand dooth kaple
The death of fapze Polpxena dooth thew a pꝛincely mynd

And firme regard of honoꝛ rare engraft in woman Rynd.

And Dolymneſtoꝛ king of Thꝛace dooth thew himlelt to bee

I glalle for wretched couttous folke wherein themlelues to ſes
This ſtoꝛie further witneſleth that murther crieth ap


Joꝛ vengeance, and itfeifone tyme oz Other dooth bewzap.


he tale ot pant Polypheme doth euidently pꝛoue
That nothing is ſo fecrce and wyld, which peeldeth not to loue.
And in the perſon of the {elf fame Gyant is let out ee -
The rude and homely wooing of a country cloyne and lout.
¶ The tale of Apes repꝛoues the vyce of wilfuil periurie,
And willeth people too beware they vle not foz too lpe.
Jeneas going Downe too hell dooth thew that vertue may
In ſaufty trauell where it Will, and nothing can it ſtay.
The length of lyfe in Spbill dooth declare it is but vapne
Too with long lyfe, ſyth length of lyfe is allo length of payne.
The grecian Achemenides dooth lerne vs how Wwe ought
Wee thankfull for the benelits that any man hath Wzought.
And in this Achemenides the Poet dooth expꝛeſſe


The image of exceeding feare in daunger and diſtreſſe.


What elle are Circes witchcrafts and enchauntments than the brle
And filthp plealures of the let which doo our foules befple ¢

And what is elle herbe Moly than the gift of ſtapedneſſe

And temperance which dooth all kowle concupiſcence repꝛeſſe?
The tals of Anaxaretee willes dames of hygh degree


Too vle their louers courteouſiy how meane fo ere they bee.


And Fphis lernes inferioꝛ folkes too fondip not too fet
Their loucon ſuch as are too hygh koz their eſtate too get.
A lemons fonne declares that men ſhould willingly obap


what God commaundes, and net bppon exceptions leemẽ to Tap.


= 2


6


The Episile. — —


For he Will find the meanes too bꝛing the purpofe Well about,
And in their moſt necellitie diſpatch them lauſiy out

Ok daunger. The oꝛation of Pithagozas implyes

A ſum ok all the former wooꝛke. what perfon can denple

A notabler example of true loue and godlyneſſe 4
Too ones owne natyue countryward than Cippus dooth expꝛeſſe ¢
The turning to a biaʒing ſtarre ot Julius Ceſar ſhowes,

That fame and immoꝛtalitie of vertuous doing growes.

And laſlly by examples of Anguſtus and a few


Oft other noble princes ſonnes the authoz there dooth ſhew


That noblemen and gentlemen ſhoulde ſtryue too paſle the fame
And vertues of their aunccters, oz elſe too match the lame.
Theis fables out of euerp booke J haue interpzeted, 5
Too ſhew how they and all the reſt may ſtand a man in ſted.
Not adding ouer curiouſly the meening of them all,
sz that were laboꝛ infinite, and tediouſneſſe not ſmall
Bothe vntoo pour good Loꝛdſhip and the reſt that ſhould them reeds
Who well myght think J did the bounds of modeſtie exceede,
If I this one epiſtle ſhould with matters onercharge
Which ſcarce a booke of many qupꝛes can well contepne at large.


And whereas in interpꝛeting theis few J attribute


The things too one, which heathen men to many Gods impute,
Concerning mercy Wzath for ſin, and other gifts of grace:
Delcribed for examples fake in proper tyme and place.

Let no man maruell at the fame. Foꝛ though that they as bipnd
Thꝛough vnbeleefe, and led aſtray through erroꝛ even of kynd,
Anew not the true eternall God, oꝛ it they did him know,

Vit did they not acknowledge him, but bapnlp did beſtow

The honoꝛ of the maker on the creature: pit it dooth

BWehoue all vs (Who ryghtiy are inſtructed in the footh )

Too thinke and ſay that God alone is he that rules ali things
And Worketh all in all, as loꝛd of loꝛds and king of kings,


with whom there are none other Gods that any ſway map beare,


No fatall law too bynd him by, no foztune foz too fears.
oz Gods, and fate, and foꝛtune are the termes of heathenneſſe,
men vlurp them in the ſenſe that Paynims doo expꝛeſſe.
ut if wee will reduce their ſenſe too ryght of CThꝛiſtian law,
Too ſigniſie theee other things theis termes wee well may dꝛaw.
By Gods wee vnderſtand all ſuch as God hath plaaſt in cheet


tate to puniſh ſin, and for the godlp folk es releek.


y kate the order which is {et and ſtabliſhed in things
y Gods eternall will and Woꝛd, which in due ſeaſon brings


All matters too their falling out. which falling out o2 end


That nothing may in Voꝛthinelle with holy 7 compare


(ibicanfe sur curious reaſon is too weake tos comprehend
The cauſe and oꝛder of the ſame, and dooth behold it fall
Unwares too vs) by name ok chaunce o2 fortune wee it call.
If any man will fap theis things map better lerned bee
Out of diuine philolophie o2 ſcripture, J agree


Mowbecit


7 OAS Ia OS Sars
i a


ola ae


The Epistle.
Mowbeeit fo karre kooꝛth ag things no whit impeachment are
Too ver tue and too godlyneſſe but furthererg ol che lame,
I truſt wee may them ſaußy vſe without deſert or blame.
Ad vet there are (and thofe not or the rude and vulgar fort.
But ſuch as haue of godlyneſle and lerning good repoꝛt)
That thinke the Poets rooke their firſt occaſion of theis things
From holy wit as fromthe well from whence all wildome ſpzings.
What man is he but woulb ſuprole the authoꝛ of this booke
he fir foundation of his wos zke from Moples wꝛpghtings tooke ?
Mot only in ettect he dooth with Geneſis agree,
Aut allo in the oꝛder ot creation, ſaue that hes f
Makes no diſtinction of the vapes: Foꝛ what is elſe at all
That chapelelle, rude, and peſtred heape which Chaos he dooth call,
Than euen that vninerſall male of things which Hod vid make.
In one whole lump before that ech their proper place did take.
D Which the wypote faith that in the firſt beginning God
Made heauen and earth: the earth was Waſte, and darkneſſe pit abod
Mppon the deepe: which holy woꝛdes declare vntoo vs playne
That fyꝛe, apꝛe, water, and the carth did vndiſtinct remapne
In one groſſe baie at the lirſt. ¶ Foꝛ God the father that
„Made all things, framing out the world according too the plat,
Concepued euerlaſtingly in mynd, made firſt of all
és Wath heauen and earth vncoꝛpozall and ſuch as could not fall
Als obiects vader ſenſe of ſight: and alſo aire lpkewyle,
And emptpneſſe: and foz theis twaine apt termes he did deuple.
se Me called aper darkneſſe: forthe ayze by kynd is Darke.
And emptpneſſe by name of depth full aptly he did marke:
Foz emptyneſſe is deepe and Matte by nature. Ouermoze
He formed al ſo bodyleſſe (as other things befoze)
c The natures bath of water and of ſpirit. And in tyne
The lyght: Which beeing made too bee a patterne moſt diuine
„ Wherebp too foʒzme the fixed ſlarres and wandzing planets ſeuen,
With all the lyghta that afterward. ſhould beawtifie the heauen, .
ac Was made by God both bodpleſſe and ot fo pure a kynd,
As that it could alonip bee perceyued by the mynd.
To thps effect are Mhilos woꝛds. And certainly this fame
Is it that Poets in their wozke contuſed Chaos name.
Not that Gods woozkes at anp tyme were pact confuſedly
Toogither: but bicauſe no place noꝛ outward ſhape whereby
Wo ſhew them too the feebie ſenle of mang deceptkull fpght
Was pit appointed vntoo things, vntill that by his myaht
And wondꝛous wildome God in tyme fet open too the eye
The things that he before all tyme had euerlaſtingly
Decreꝭd by his pꝛouidence. But let vs further fee
How Ouids ſcantlings with the whole true patterne dos agree.
Che fir dap by his mighty word (fapth Moyſeg) God made lpght,
The ſecond day the firmament, which heauen oꝛ welkin hyght.
The third day he did part the earth from fea and made it die,
TCommaundinz it too beare all kpnd of frutes abundantip.


Che


T=


2


ae |


T he Epiflle.
ht fowsth day he did make the lyghts of heanen to ſhyne from bye,
And ſtabliſhed a law in them too rule their courſes by.
he fifth day he did make the whales and Glhes of the deepe,
With all the birds and kethered kowles that in the aire dos keepe.
The firth day God made euery beaſt both Wyld and tame, and woozmes
That creepe on ground accoꝛding too their feucrall kynds and fooꝛmes.
And in the image ol himlelk he kozmed men ot clay ö
Too bee the 1.020 of all his woozkes the very felflaine day.
This is the tum et Moyles woozos. And Ouid (whether it were
y following of the text aright, oꝛ that his mynd did beare
Pim witneſle that there are no Gods but one) deeth playne bphold
That God (although he knew him not) was he that did vntold
The foꝛmer Chaos, putting it in foꝛme and lacion new,
As map appeere by theis his wooꝛdes which vnderneath enſew. 7
This ſtryte did God and nature bꝛeake and ſct in oder Dew.
The earth from heauen the fea from earth he parted o2deriy,
And from the thicke and koggie aire he tooke the lyghtlome fhye.
In theis few lynes he compꝛehends the whole effect ofthat
Which God did woork the firſt three dapes about this noble plat.
And then by diſtributions he entreateth by and by
MPozc largely of the leltlame things, and paynts them out too eye
With all their bounds and furniture: And whereas wee boo fond
The terme of nature topnd with God: (according too the mynd
St lerned men) by ioyning ſo, is ment none other thing,
But God the Loꝛd of nature who did all in ozder bring.
The diſtributions becing doone right lernediy, anon
Too ſhew the other thzee dayes woꝛkes he thus pꝛoceedeth on.
The heauenip fopic too Goddes and ſtarres and planets firſt he gaue
be waters next both freſh and ſalt he let the liches haue.
The ſuttle apʒe to flickering fowles and birds he hath affignd,
The earth too beaſts both wyld and tame of ſundꝛy ſoꝛts and kynd.
Thus partly in the outward phꝛaſe, but moze in verie deede,
He ſeemes accoꝛding too the ſenſe of ſcripture too pꝛoctede.
And when he commes to ſpeake of man, he booth not vainly fap
(As ſum haue written) that he was befoze all tyme foz ap,
Me ment ioneth mo Gods than ont in making him. But thus
He both in ſentence and in ſenſe his meening dooth diſcuſſe.
Howbecit pit of all this whyle the creature wanting was
Farre moze diuine, ot nobler mynd, which ſhould the reldew paſſe
In depth of knowledge, rcafon, wit and hygh capacitee,
And which of all the reldew ſhould the Loꝛd and ruler bee.


Then epther he that made the woꝛld and things in ozder ſet,


Pf heauenly ſeede engendzed man: oz elſe the earth as pet

yoong, luſty, freſh, and in her flowze, and parted from the ſkye

But late before, che leedes thereof as pit hild inwardly.

The which Oꝛometheus tempꝛing ſtreyght with water of the ſpꝛing.
Wid make in likenelle to the Govdes that gonerne eutry thing.

what other thing meenes -Duid heere by terme of heauenly ſeede.


5
a?


Than mang immoꝛtall ſowle, which is diuine, and commes in deede
| b. ij. From


SID Te er et CEES FE CE? 1S A CREED ZA YA c ( — ——
I A ‘ — n — 7 a —


The Epistle,


From heauen, and was inſppꝛde by God, as Moyſes theweth plapne v
And whereas of Pꝛometheus he ſeemeg too adde a vapne .
Deupce. as though he ment that he had formed man ok clay.

Although it bee a tate put in foʒ pleafure by the way:

Tit by thinterpꝛetation of the name we Well may gather,

Be did include a miſterie and ſecret meening rather.

This weoꝛd Prometheus fignifies a perſon lage and wyſe,
Ok great kozeſpght, Who headilp will nothing enterpꝛple.

It was the name of ane that firſt did images inuent:

f whom the Poets doo report that hee too heauen vp went,
And there ſtole fyꝛe, through which he made his images alyue:
And therfore that he foꝛmed men the Paynims did contryue.
Now When the Moet red perchaunce that God almyghty by
Bis pꝛouidence and by his wooꝛd (Which euerlaſtingiy

As ap his wildome) made the world, and alſo man to beare
His image, and too bee the loꝛd of all the things that wers

Erſt made, and that he ſhaped him of earth o2 llymy clap :

Lee tocke occaſion in the way of fabling foꝛ too ſay a
That tople Dꝛemetheus tempꝛing earth with water of the fpring,
Did forme ttipke the Gods aboue that gouerne euery thing.
Thus may Prometheus ſeeme too bee theternall wooꝛd of God,
Dis wiſdom, and his pꝛouidence which formed man of clod.

ce And where all other things behold the ground with groueling epes

ce De gaue too man a ftatelp looke replete with maieſtp:

ce. And Willd him too behold the heauen with countnance caſt on bye,

ce Tos mark and vnderſtand what things are in the ftarrie fkpe.

In theis fame woozdes, both parts of man the Poet dooth expꝛeſſe
As in a glaſſe, and giueth vs inſtruction too addꝛeſſe
Our ſelues too know our owne eſtate: as that wee bee not bone
Too follow luſt, oꝛ ſerue the paunch ipke bꝛutich beaſts fozlozne,
ut foꝛ too lyft our epes as well of body as of mynd
Too heauen as too our natiue ſoyle from whence Wee haue by kynd
Dut better part: and by the fight thereof too lerne too know 1
And knowledge him that dwelleth there: and wholly too beſtow
Our care and trauell too the pꝛayſe and glozie of his name
Who ſoꝛ the fakes of moꝛtali men created lirſt the lame.
Moꝛeouer by the golden age what other thing is ment,
Than Adams tyme in Paradple, who beeing innocent
Did lead a bliſt and happy Ipfe vntill that thurrough fin
„Be felt fram God e From which tyme foorth all fozrow did begin
The earth accurſed foꝛ his lake, did neuer after moze
Zeeld foode without great tople. Both heate and cold did bere him ſoze.
Dileale of body, care of mynd, with hunger,thirk and neede,
Feare, hope, iop, greefe, and trouble, fell on him and on his ſeede.
And this is termo the filuer age. Next which there did ſucceede
The kzazen age, when malice Gra in peoples harts did bꝛeede,
Which neuer cealed growing till it did ſo karre outrage,
That nothing but deſtruction could the heate thereof alfwage a
Foz Sobp meng ſtomackes Wexing hard ag Keele ageinſt their Gov, 49308
9³


The Epistle,
Pꝛouoked him from day too dap too ſtrike them With his rod.
Pꝛowd Gyants allo did aryſe that with prefumptuous Wills
Heapt wong on wong, and fin on fin lyke howge and lofty hilles
Wherebp they ſtroue too clymb too heauen and God from thence too dꝛaw,
In ſcozning of his holy wooꝛd and breaking natures law. :
For Which anon enſewd the flood which ouerflowed all
The whole round earth and dꝛowned quyght ali creatures great and fi mal,
Erccepting feaw that God did laue as ſeede whereof ſhould grow
Another ofſpꝛing. Al thele things the Moet heere dooth ſhow
In colour, altring both the names of perſons, tyme and place. 8
Foꝛ where according too the truth of leripture in this cace,
The vniucrfalt flood did fall but ſixteene hundꝛed peeres
And firandfifty after the creation (as appeeres
By reckening of the ages or the fathers) vnder Mop,
with whom leuen other perſons mo like ſaulgard did enioy
within the arke, which at the end ok one Whole pecre did ſtay
Uppon the hilles ot Armenie: The Poet following ap
The fables of the glozying Greekes (Who ſhamelelfely did take
The prapte of all things too themſelues) in fablpng Wyle dooth make
It happen in Deucalions tyme, Who reignd in Cheflalp
Epght hundꝛed winters ſince Noyes flood oz therevpon Well npe,
Wicauſe that in the reigne of him a myghty flood did fail,
That dꝛowde the greater part of Greece, townes, cattell, folk, and all,
Saue feaw that by che help of boats attepned vntoo him,
And too the higheſt of the foꝛkt Parnalos top did ſwim.
Ind foꝛʒbycauſe that hee and his were dꝛiuen a whyle to dwell
Among the ſtonnp hilles and rocks vntn the water en
The Poets herevpon did take occaſion foꝛ too fepne,
That he and Pyꝛrha did repapze mankpnd of tones ageyne.
So in the ſixth booke afterward Amphions harp is layd
The firſt foundation of the walles of Thebee too haue lapd, 8
Sycaule that by his eloqueuce and tuftice( which are ment
By true accoꝛd of harmonie and muſicall content) .
Ve gathered intoo Thebee towne, and in due oꝛder knit
The people that diſperſt and rude in hilles and rocks did ſit.
So Oꝛpher in the tenth booke is repoꝛted too delpght
The ſauage beaſts, and foz toc hold the fleeting birds from flpaht; .
@€oo mone the ſenſeielle ſtones, and ſtay ſwikt riuers, and too make
The trees too follow after him and for his muſick lake
Too peeld him chadow where he went. By which is fignifpas
That in his doctrine ſuch a force and ſweetneſte was implyde, .
Chat ſuch as Were mot wld, ſtowze, feerce, hard, witleſſe, rude, and bent
Ageinſt good oꝛder, were by him perfwanen too relent,
Ind foz too bee contoꝛmable too tine in reuerent awe ;
Aike neybours in a common weale by iuſtyce vnder law.
Conſidʒing then of things before reherſt the whole eſtect,
A trull there is already fyewd fuffictent too detect N
That Poets tooke che ground of all their checfet fables ont
Dl ſcripturs: which they havowing with 1 gloſes went abont ie
1 4 Af, :


The Epistle.


Too turne the truth too topes and lyes. And ok the ſelkſame rate
Are alſotheig: Their Phlegeton, their Styx, their bliſtull tate
Of ſpirits in th Elyũan feelds. Of which che koꝛmer twapne
Seeme countertetted of the place where damned foules reinaine,
Which wee call Hell. The third dooth ſeeme too fetch his pedegree
From Paradyſe which ſcripture ſhewes a place of bliſſe too bee.
Ik Pocts then with leeſings and with fabies ſhadowed fo

The certeine truth, what letteth vs too piucke thofe viſers fro
Their doings, and too bring ageine the darkened truth too lyght,
That all men may behold thereof the cleernelle fhining bepaht 7
The readers therefore earneſtip admoniſht are too bee

Too ſeeke a further meening than the letter giues too fee.

The traueil tane in that behalf although it haue fun payne

J it makes it double recompence with pleafure and with gapne.
With pleaſure, foꝛ varietie and ſtraungeneſſe of the things,

with gaine, foz good inſtruction which the vnderſtanding brings.
And it they happening ſoꝛ tod mecte with any wanton Wood
Oz matter lewd, accoꝛding as the perfon dooth auooꝛd

In whom the eutil is deſcribde, doo feele their myndes thereby
Pꝛouokte too vyce and wantonneſlſe, (as nature commonly

Is prone to cutil ) let them thus imagin in their mynd.

Behold, by ſent of reaſon and by perfect foght J kynd

A Panther heere, whole peinted cote with peliow ſpots like gold
And pleafant ſmell allure myne epes and fenfes too behold.”
Wut well J know his face is grim and feerce, which he dooth hpde
Too this intent, that whpie F thus ſtand gazing on his hyde,
Me map deuour mec vnbewares. Me let them more offend

At vices in this pꝛeſent wooꝛk in lyuelp colours pend,

Than it that in a chꝛyſtall glaſſe fowle images they found,

4K efembling folkes fowle vifages that ſtand about it round.

Ion ſure theis fables are not put in wꝛyghting too thent ent

Too further 02 allure too vyce: but rather this is ment, ;
That men beholding What they bee When vyce dooth reigne in ſtead
Of vertue, ſhould not let their lewd affections haue the head.
Foz as there is no creature moze diuine than man as long

As reaſon hath the ſouereintie and ſtandeth firme and ſtrong:
So is there none moꝛe beaſt iy, vyie, and deueliſh, than is hee,
Af reaſon giuing ouer, by affection mated bee.

The vſe of this lame booke therfore is this: that euery man
Endeuoꝛing foꝛ too know hinfeif as neerip as he can,)

As though he in a chariot t ate well oꝛdered chouwd direct

His mpnd by reaſon in the way of vertue, and coꝛrect

Bis feerce affectiong with the bit of tempꝛance, leaſt perchaunce
They taking bꝛidle in the teeth lyke wilkull iades doo pꝛaunce

A wap, and headlong carie him to euery Althp pit

Ok vyce, and drinking of the fame Defpic his ſoule With it:

Oꝛ elſe doo headlong harrie him vppon the rockes of ſin,

And ouerthꝛowing koꝛcibiy the chariot he fits in,

Dos teare him Moogle than euer was Hippolptus the ſonne


The Epistle.


Ok Theleus when he Went about his fathers Wrath too fhum.
This woꝛzthie woꝛke in which of good examples are fo many,
This Datpard of Alcimous in Which there wants not any

M erb, tree, oꝛ frute that may mans vle for health oꝛ pleaſure ſerus,
This plenteous hoꝛne of Acheloy which iuſtip dooth deferue
Tos beare the name of treaforie ot knowledge, J pꝛelent
Too pour good Il oꝛ dſhip once ageine not as a member rent
Oꝛ par ted from the reldew of the body any moze:

But fully now accompliched, delring pou therfoze

Too let pour noble courteſie and fauoz counteruaple

Oy faults where Art oz eloquence on my behalt dooth fapte.
Fon ſure the marke whereat J ſhoote is neyther wꝛeathes of bay,
Noz name of Poet, no noꝛ meede: but cheefip that it may

Bee lyked weil of pou and all the Wife and lerned fort,

And next that euery wyght that ſhall haue pleaſure for to ſpoꝛt
Hin in this gardeine, may as well beare wholſome frute away
As only on the picafant flowꝛes his rechleſſe lenſes ay.

But why ſeeme F theis doubts too caſt, as if that he who tooke
With kauoꝛ and wich gentleneſſe a parceil of the booke

Would not likewyſe accept the whole ? oꝛ euen as if that they
Who doo excell in wildome and in lerning, would not wey

A wyle and lerned wooꝛke arpght ; 92 elſe as if that J
Ought ap too haue a ſpeciall care how all men doo apply

My dooings too their owne behook? as of the foꝛmer twapne
I haue great hope and confidence: fo would J atfo fapne

The other ſhould accozding too good meening find ſucceſſe:
Ifother wyſe, the fault is thepzs not myne they muſt confeſſe.
And thercfoze bꝛeefly too conciude, I turne ageine too thee

O noble Erie of I. cyceſter, whole lyfe God graunt may bee

As long in honoꝛ, heith and weith as auncient Neſtoꝛs was,
Oz rather as Tithonuſlis: that all ſuch ſtudents as

Doo trauell too enrich our toong With knowledge heretofore
Not common too our vulgar fpeech map daply moze and moze
P ꝛoceede thꝛough thy good furtherance and fauoꝛ in the ſame.
Too all inens pꝛoãt and delyght, and thy eternall fame.

And that (which is a greater thing) our natpue country may
Long tyme enioy thy counlell and thy trauell too her fap.


At Bar wicke the. xx. of Apꝛill. 1567.


Your good L. moſt humbly too
commaund Arthur Golding.


**


90


Too the Reader.


Mould not wich the ſimple ſoꝛt offended foꝛ tw ber,


When in this boke the heathen names of feyned Godds they fee, |


Che trewe and euerliuing Cod the Papnims did not knowe:


T hich cauſed them the name ol Godds on creatures tw below. i


Foz nature beeing once coꝛrupt and knowledge blynded quyght
Ey Adams fall, thoſe little ſerdes and ſparkes of heauenly lyght
Chat did as pit remapne in man, endeuering fo2th tw burt
And wanting grace and polwze to growe tw that they were at kurſt,
Lo ſuperſtition did decline: and dꝛaue the fearefull mynd,
Straunge woꝛſhippes of the liuing God in creatures foꝛ to fynd.
Che which by cuſtome taking rote, and growing fo to ſtrength.
Though Sathans help poſſeſt the hartes ol ali the woꝛld at lengtg.
Some woꝛſhipt al the boffe of heauen: ſome deadmens ghoſtes ¢ bones:
Sum wicked fends : fam woꝛmes ¢ fowles, herbes, fiſhes, trees ¢ ones,
The kpꝛe, the ayꝛe, the ſea, the land, and cuery running broke,
Eche queachte groue, eche cragged clifte the name of Godhead twke,
Che nyght and dap, the flerting how2es, the ſeaſons of the pere,
And euer ſtraunge and monſtruous thing, for Godds miſfaken worre.
There was no vertue, no noꝛ vice: there was no gift of mynd
D2 bodye, but ſome God therto oꝛ Coddelle was allignde.
Ok health and ũcknelle, lyfe and death, of nerdineſſe and wealth,
Ol peace and warre, ol loue and hate, of murder, craft and ſtealth,
Ol bread and wpne, of ſlouthfull lleepe, and of thep2 ſolemne games,
And euerp other trylling toy theyꝛ Goddes did beare the names.
And loke how euery man was bent to godneſſe 02 to ill,
He did ſurmpſe his fwliſh Soddes enclyning to his will.
Foꝛ God percepuing mannes peruers and wicked will tw ſinne
Did giue him ouer to his luff t ſinke oꝛ ſwim therin.
By meanes wherok it came to palle (as in this bake per le)

That all thepꝛ Goddes with whoꝛdome, theft, oꝛ murder blotted be,
Mhich argues them to bee no Gaddes, but woꝛſer in effec
Than they whole open ponniſhment theyꝛ dings doth detect.
WU he feeing love whom heathen folke do arme with teiple lyʒe
In ſhape of Cagle, bull oꝛ ſwan to winne his foule deſpꝛe⸗


f.. .


5 = 3 —— ee — — —.— a 1
— — BE e Dr OPS PSE TT S )


The Preface.


Drgrpiiy Mars theyꝛ Cod of warre intangled in a net

By Venus hufband purpofelp to trappe him warelp tet 2

l ho feing Saturne eating vp the childꝛen he begate?

Oꝛ Venus dalping wantonly with euery luſtie mate 2

L ho leeing Iuno plap the {cold 7 oꝛ Phœbus moꝛne and reo
For loſſe of her whom in his rage thꝛough iealous mode he llew 2
D2 elſe the ſuttle Mereuriethat beares the charmed rod
Conueping neate and hyding them would take him foꝛ a God?
Ioꝛ ik theis faultes in moztall men do iuſtly merit blame,

What greater madneſſe can there bee than to impute the fame 4
La Gordes, whale natures ought to be moik perfect, pure and bꝛight,
Molt verkuous, holly, chaaſf, and topfe, moſt full of grace and lyght
But as there is no Chꝛiſten man that can ſurmpſe in mynd 12
Chat theis oꝛ other luch are Goddes which are no Goddes by kynd:

So would to God there were not now of chꝛiſfen men pꝛofeſt,

That woꝛſhipt in theyꝛ derdes theis Godds whole names they do deteff,.
d hole lawes tuck keepe his thꝛalles wer ber, and he our Cod inderde.
So long is Chꝛiſt our God as wee in chziſten lyfe procerde,

But ik wer peeld to fleſhlye luff, to lucre, oꝛ to wꝛath,

Oꝛ if that Enup, Gluttonp, oꝛ Pꝛyde the mayſtry hath.

D2 any other kynd of ſinne the thing the which wer ſerue.

To bee accounted foꝛ our God moſt ſuſtly doth deſerue.
Then muſt wer thinke the learned men that did theis names frequent
Some further things and purpoſes by thoſe deuiſes ment.

Wp loue and luno vnderſfand all ſtates of pꝛincely post +:

By Ops and Saturne auncient folke that are of cider loʒt:

By Phocbus pong and luſty bꝛutes of hand and courage ffout ¢:

Wy Mars the valeant men ok warre that loue to feight it out:

By Pallas and the famous troupe of all the Mules nyne,

Such folke as in the ſetences and vertuous artes do ſhyne.

By Mercurie the futtle fore that vie to filch and lye,

Mith therues, and Merchants who tw gayne thep2 trauell do applpe,
y Bacchus all the meaner trades and handycraftes are ment:

By Venus ſuch as of the fleſhe tos filthie luff are bent.

By Neptune fuch as ke pe the ſeas: By Phebe maydens chaff, .

And Pilgrims ſuch as wandꝛingly theyꝛ tyme in trauell wate, .


3 — Sy


The Preface.
Vy Pluto ſuch as delue in mynes, and Sholes of perſones dead:
By Vulcane ſmythes and ſuch as woꝛke in yꝛon, tynne oꝛ lead.
By Hecat witches, Conlurers, and Pecromancers rede:
With all ſuch vayne and deuliſh artes as ſuperſtition bꝛæde.
By Satyres,Syluanes, Nymphes and Faunes with other fuch beſyde,
Che playne and ſimple country tolke that cuccy where abyde.
4 know theis names tw other thinges olt may and muſt agree
In declaration of the which J will not tevions bee. ;
But leaue them tes the Readers will tw take in ſundꝛy wyſe,
As matter ryſing gineth cauſe conſtruaions to deuple.
ow when thou readſt of God oz man, in fone, in beaſt, oꝛ tr
It is a myꝛrour foꝛ thy felf thyne obne effate to fee.
Foz vnder feyned names ol Goddes it was the Poets guyſe,
The vice and faultes of all eſtates to taunt in couert tuple.
And likewyſe to ertoll with pzaple ſuch things as do deſerue.
Obleruing alwayes comlynelle trom which they do not ware.
And as the perlone greater is of birth, renowne 02 kame,
Che greater euer is his laud, oꝛ fouler is his ſhame.
Joꝛ it the States that on the earth the rome of God ſupply,
Declyne from vertue vnto vice and line diſoꝛderly,
C Eagles, Tygres, Bulles, and Beares, and other figures ſtraunge
Bothe to theyꝛ people and themſelues moſt hurtfull do they chaunges
And when the people giue themfelues to filebie life and ſynne,
M hat other kinde of ſhape thereby than filthie can they winne;
Do was Licaon made a Wolfe: and Ioue became à Bull:
Che tone foꝛ bling crueltie, the tother foꝛ his trull.
So was Elpenor and his mates tranſfozmed into ſwyne,
Soꝛ following of theyz ülthie luſt in women and in wyne.
Pot that they loſt theyꝛ manly chape as to the outward (howe.
But for that in their bꝛutich bꝛeſtes moſt beattly luſtes did grobe.
F02 why this lumpe of flech and bones this bodie is not wer.
Wie are a thing which earthly eyes denyed are to fee,
Dur foule is wer endewd by God with reaſon from aboue :
Dur bodie is but as our houſe, in which wee woꝛke and moue.
Cone part is common to vs all, with God or heauen himſelk:
Che tother common with the beattes, abple and ſtinbing pell,


Betta cs
Sie e


DAG ARC Bf EBLE LS ED INAS TS Od TNS PACA oor S ENS POETS 5)


r er


The Preface.

he tone beden with heauenly giktes and endlelle: tother groſſe,
Fraplie, filthie, weake, and boꝛne to dye as made of earthip dꝛoſſe.
Pow lmke holy long this elod of clay to reaſon bath obep,
So long foꝛ men by tuk deſert account our felues tue may.
But it wer tuffer fleſhly luſtes as lawleſſe Loꝛdes to reigne,
Chan are we beaſtes, wer are no men, wer haue our name in vaine.
And it wer be fo dꝛolond in vice that feeling once ber gone,
Chen map it well of vs ber ſapd, wer are a block oz ſtone.
This ſurely did the Poets meene when in luch ſundꝛy wyſe
Che pleafant tales of turned ſhapes they ſtudyed to deuyſe.
There purpoſe was to pꝛofite men, and alſo to delyght
And fo to handle euery thing as bef might like the fight.
Foꝛ as the Image poztrapd out in ſimpte whight and blacke
(Though well pꝛopoꝛtiond, trew and faire) if comly colours lacke,,
Delyghteth not the eye fo much, noꝛ pet contentes the mynde
Do much as that that ſhad owed is with colours in his kynde:
Cuen ſo a playne and naked tale oꝛ Foie ſimply told
(Although the matter bee in derde of valewe moze than gold)
Makes not the hearer ſo attent to pꝛint it in his hart,
As when the thing is well declarde, with pleaſant termes and are.
All which the Poets knew right well: and foꝛ the greater grace,
As Per ſian kings did neuer go abꝛode with open face,
But with fone lawne oꝛ ſilken ſkark, foꝛ reuerenee of theyꝛ fate:
Euen fo they following in their woꝛkes the ſelllame trade and rate⸗
Did vnder couert names and termes theyz doctrines fo emplye,
As that it is ryght darke and hard theyꝛ mening tw elppe.
But beeing found it is moze ſweꝛte and makes the mynd moze glad.
Chan it a man of tryed gold a treaſure gayned had. N
Foz as the body hath his top in pleaſant ſmelles and ſyghts:
Euen ſo in knowledge and in artes the mynd as much delights.
V herok aboundant hoꝛdes and heapes in Poets packed bene
So hid that (lauing bute fewe) they are not to ber ſcrne.
And therkoꝛe who dwth attempt the Poets wozkes tw rede,
Mut being with him a ſlayed head and iudgement tw pꝛocede.
Joꝛ às there bee moſt wholſome bettes and pꝛecepts to bee found.
Sn are thepe rockes and ſhallo we thelues to roune the hip a ground.

W ee Some


Pas


The Preface.


? Some naightte perfone feeing vyce Hetwd lyuely iu his betv,,


Doth take occaſion by and by like bices to enſew.

Another bæing moze feuere than wildome doth requypze,
Beeholding vice (to out ward Hele) exalted in deſpꝛe,
Condemneth by and by the boke and him that did it make.

And willes it to be burnd with kyze koꝛ lewd example fake.
hele perſons ouerſhwte themſelues, and other folkes deceyue:
Not able ofthe authoꝛs mynd the mening tw concepue.

The Authoꝛs purpoſe is to paint and (et befoze our eyes

Che lyuely Image of the thoughts that in eur ſtomackes rpfe,
Eche vice and vertue feemes to ſpeake and argue to our face,
Wich ſuch perſwaſtons as they haue thep2 doinges to embzace,


And ka wicked perfone ſerme his bices to exalt,


Eſteeme not him that wꝛate the woꝛke in (uch dekaultes to halt.


But rather with an vpꝛyght eye conſyder well thy thought:


Hee if coꝛrupted nature bane the like within ther wꝛought.


Parke what affecion doth perſwade in euery kynd of matter.


Judge tf that euen in heynous crymes thy fancy do not llatter.
And were it not foꝛ dꝛead of lawe oꝛ dꝛead of Cod aboue,


Poſt men (J feare) would do the things that fond affections moue.


Chen take theis woꝛkes as fragrant flowers moſt full of pleafant ſuce.
The which the Ber conueying home map put to waholſome bie :


And which the ſpyder fucking on tw poyſon map conuert,


CThꝛough venym ſpꝛed in all her limbes and natiue in her hart.

Foꝛ to the pure and Godly mynd are all things pure and clane,

And bnto ſuch as are coꝛrupt the beſt coꝛrupted bene:

Lpke as the fpneſt meates and dꝛinkes that can bee made by art

In ſickly folkes to nouriſhment of ſickneſſe do convert,

And therefore not regarding ſuch whole dyet is fo Fyne

Chat nothing can digeſt with them onlelle it bee deuine,

Noꝛ ſuch as to theyꝛ proper harme do wꝛeſt and wzing aboꝛpe

The thinges that to a god intent are wꝛitten pleafantlp,

Chꝛough Ouids woœꝛke of turned ſhapes J haue with peinfull pace

Pat on vntill J had atteynd the end of all my race.

And now J haue him made fo well acguainted with our tong

As that he may in Englich verſe as in his owne be ſong. ;
WMherin


iS


= reren rener . — 2 —


The Preface.


Mherein although foz pleafant ple, J cannot make account,

Co match mpne authoꝛ, who in that all other doth ſurmount:

Pit (gentle Reader) do J truſt my trauell in this cace

Map purchace fauour in thy fight my dings tw embꝛace:
Conſtdꝛing what a ſea ol godes and Jewelles thou ſhalt fond,

Mot moze delyghtkull to the eare than frutefull to the mynd.

Ioꝛ this do lerned perſons derme, of Ouids pꝛeſent woꝛke:

Chat in no one of all his bokes the which be wꝛate, do lurke

Mo darke and ſecret miſter ies, mo counſelles wyſe and lage,

Mo gwd enſamples, mo repꝛoues of byce in pauth and age,

Mo fpite inuentions to delight, mo matters clerkly knit,

No noꝛ moze ſtraunge varietie to ſhew a lerned wit.

The high. the lowe: the riche, the poꝛe: the mayſter, and the laue:
The mapd, the wife : the man, the chyld: the finiple and the bꝛaue:
Lhe pong, the old: the god, the bad: the warriour ſkrong and ſtout:
The wyſe, the fole: the countrie cloyne: the lerned and the lout:
And euerp other lining wight ſhall in this mirrour fe a
His whole eſtate, thoughtes, woꝛdes and derdes expꝛelly (helvd tw ber.
Ml hereot tf moze particular examples thou do craue,

In reading the Epiſtle thꝛough thou ſhalt thy longing haue.
Moꝛeouer thou map fynd herein deſeriptions of the tymes:

Lal ith conſtellacions of the farres and planettes in theyꝛ clymes:
The Sltes of Countries, Cities, hilles, ſeas, fozeſfes, planes and flods:
The natures both of fowles, beaſtes, woꝛmes, herbes, mettals, ones €
And finally what euer thing is ſtraunge and delectabie, (woods,
The fame conueyed (hall pou fond moſt featly in ſome fable.

And euen as in a cheyne eche linke within another wynds,

And both with that that went befoꝛe and that that followes binds;

So euerp tale within this boke doth fame to take his ground

f that that was reherſt be loꝛe, and enters in the bound

Ok that that folowes after it: and euery one giues light

To other: fo that who fo meenes tw vnderſtand them ryght.

Hut haue a care as well to know the thing that went befoze,

As that the which be pꝛeſently deſpꝛes to fee ſo ſoze.

Pow to thintent that none haue eauſe heerealter to complaine

Ol ma as (etter out ok things that are but light and bane,


— —


The Preface.
Xf any ftomacke be fo weake as that it cannot broke,
Che liuely letting forth of things deſcribed in this bwke,
4 give him counſell to abſteine vntill he ber moze ſkrong,
And for to ble VIyſſes feat ageint the Peremapds ſong.
Oz it he nerdes will bere and fee and wilfully agra
Thꝛough caufe miſconſtrued) vntw vice allured fo2 to bee,
Chen let him alſo marke the peine that doth therefentue,
And hold himſelk content with that that to his fault is due.


FINIS.


n


i
i!

;

i

* HY


¢ The firſt booke ofOuids Metamor-
phoſis, tranſlated into eng
he Meter. oe


F Mapes tranſtoꝛmde to bodies fraunge , 3 purpoſe to entreate,
ve gods vouchlalelfoꝛ you are they yᷣwꝛought this wõdꝛous feate
To further this mine enterpꝛiſe. And from the woꝛld begunne,/
Graunt that my berfe map to my time, his courſe direuly runne. i
iefore the Sea and Lande were made, and Heauen that all doth hide 4-/
In all the wozlde one onely face of nature did abide, Ae 22 her
Which Chaos hight, a huge rude heape, and nothing elle but euen of Hufes, a
A beaute lump and clottred clad of feedes togither deinen, ae
Ok things at rife among themfelues, fo2 want of oꝛder due. :
No ſunne as pet with lightſome beames the ſhapelelle woꝛld did bet. 8
No Mone in growing did repapꝛe hir hoꝛnes with boꝛowed light. „5
Noꝛ pet the earth amiddes the ayꝛe did hang by wondꝛous llight ep buns wife {
Juſt peyſed by hir proper weight. Poz winding in and out i 4 * Sa..
Did Amphitrytee with hir armes embꝛace the earth about. .
Foꝛ where was earth, was ſea and ayꝛe, ſo was the earth vnſ table
Che apꝛe all darke, the fea like wiſe tu beare a ſhip vnable. a
Po kinde ok thing had proper thape, but ech confounded other.
Foꝛ in one ſelfe fame bodie ſtroue, the hote and colde togither.
The moyſt with date, the ſolt with hard, the light with things of weight.
Chis ſtrife did God and ature bꝛeake, and fet in oꝛder ſtreight.
The earth from heauen, the fea from earth, be parted oꝛderlp,
And from the thicke and foggie ayꝛe, he tobe the lightſome (Bie.
Mhich when he once vnfolded had, and ſeuered krom the blinde
And clodded heape. He letting eche from other did them binde
In endleſſe friendſhip to agræ. Che five moſt pure and bꝛight,
The ſubſtance of the heauen it felfe, bicauſe it was ſo light
Did mount aloft, and ſet it elke in highelt place of all.
The ſecond roume of right to apꝛe, oꝛ light nelle did befall. enh
The earth more grole drew down with it eche weighty kinde of matte 5
And ſet it ſelle in lo welt place. Agatne, the wauing water =
Did laffly chalenge fo bis place, the vtmolt coaſt and bound *
Df all the compaffe of the earth, to clofe the itedlaſt groind. © =


7


Nobo when he in this foꝛeſaid toile (what Cod lo ere he was e
B. j. ae Had +. | i)


239 ee


Ihe firſt booke of


Had bꝛoke and into members put this rude confuled maſſe,
Chen firk bicauſe in euerp part, the earth ſhould equall be,

He made it like a mighty ball, in compatfe as we fe.

And here and there he caſt in ſeas, to whome he gaue a lawe: 8


To well with euery blaſt of winde, and euery ſtoꝛmie flawe.


And with their waues continually to beate vpon the ſhoꝛe,
Ol all the earth within their boundes enclofoe by them afoze.
Poꝛeouer, Spꝛings and mighty Peres and Lakes he did augment,


And flowing ſtreames of croked bꝛwkes in winding bankes he pent.


nie of
be bh -/


Ol which the earth doth dꝛinke vp ſome, and ſome with reitlene race,
Do ſcke the fea: where finding ſcope of larger roume and (pace,
In eave of bankes, they beate on ſhoꝛes. Me did cũmaund the plaine
And champion groundes ta ſtretch out wide: and valleys to remaine
Aye vnderneath: and eke the mds to hide them decently

UU ith tender leaues: and ſtonie hilles to lift themſelues on hie.
And as two Zones doe cut the Heauen vpon the tighter fide,
And other twaine vpon the left lit ewiſe the fame deuide,


The middle in outragious heat ercerding all the reit:


Euen fo likewiſe through great foꝛeſight to Ood it ſeemed bet,
The earth encluded in the fame ſhould fo deuided ber,

As with the number of the Heauen, hir Zones might full agrer.
Ok which the middle Zone in heate, the vtmoſt twame in colde
Creede fo farre, that there to dwell no creature dare be bolde.
Betwerne theſe two fo great extremes, two other Zones are fit,
Mhere tempꝛature of heate and colde indiflerently is mixt.


Now ouer this doth hang the Ayꝛe, which es it is moze lleightie


Chan earch oꝛ water: fo againe than fire it is moze weightie.
There bath he placed miſt and cloudes, and foꝛ to feare mens mindes,
The thunder and the lightning eke, with colde and bluſtring windes.
Wit pet the maker of the woꝛlde permitteth not alway,
The windes to ble the ayꝛe at will. Foꝛ at this pꝛeſent day,
Though ech from other placed be in ſundꝛy coaſts aũide:
The violence of thetr boyſtrous blaſts, things ſcarlly can abide.
They fe turmoyle as though they would the woꝛld in pieces rende,
Do cruell is thole bothers wꝛath when that thep doe contende.

f And thereloꝛe to the moꝛning graye, the Realme of Nabathie,
Ta Perſis and to other lands and countries that doe lie 5

arte


_ = gH" Faw


Farre moze deuine, ot nobler minde, which ſhould the reſidue palle


8
—


= = — — —


ein a


Mitheut all dꝛegs of earthlp fllth oꝛ groſſeneſle vtterlie. x * —


The heauenlp ſople, to Gods and Starres and Planets firſt he gaue.


Ok heauenly fede engendꝛed Pan: oꝛ elſe the earth as pet

f Bong, luſtie, frech, and in hir floures, and parted from the ſkie,
But late beſoꝛe, the {ede thereof as pet held inwardlie. 4
The which Prometheus tempꝛing ſtraight with water of the ſpꝛing⸗ 177 . 42
Did make in likeneſſe to the Gods that gouerne euerie thing. hs 50
And here all other beatts behold the ground with qroueling ele,
he gaue to Man a ſfatelp loke replete with maieſtie.


There was na man would crouch oꝛ crépe to Judge dolth cap in hand.


— — ——


Ouids Metamorphofis. |


Farce bnderneath the Moꝛning farce, did Eurus take bis Aight

X thetwife the fe fe tting of the Surne, and ſhutting in of night
long to Zephyr. And the blaſts of bluſfring Boreas raigne,
In Scy thia and in other landes Cet vnder Charles his waine.

0 vnto Auſter doth belong the coalk of all the South,

Who beareth ſhoures and rotten miſtes, continuall in his mouth. .

Aboue all thefe he fet alofe the cleare and lightſome fic,


The boundes of things were ſcarllp pet by him thus pointed out.
But that appeared in the heauen, ſtarres gliſtring all about,
Which in the laid conkuſed heape had hidden bene befoze,

And to thintent with liuelp things eche Region foz to ſtoze.


The waters next both frech and fale he let the fiſhes haue.

Che ſuttle ayꝛe to flickring fowles and birdes he hath allignde.
The earth to beaſts both wilde and tame of ſundꝛie ſoꝛt and kinde. 3
Hobbeit pet of all this while, the creature wanting was, Ue


In depth of knowledge, reaſon, wit, and high capacitie,
And which of all the reſidue ſhould the L oꝛd and ruler ber.
Then eyther he that made the woꝛlde, and things in oꝛder fet,


ue ond of


And willde him to behold the Heauen wyth countnance caſt on 12
Co marke and vnderſtand what things were in the ſtarrie (hie.
And thus the earth which late before had neyther ſhape noꝛ hew,
Did take the noble ſhape of man, and was tranſloꝛmed new.

Then ſpꝛang vp firſt the golden age, which ol it ſelfe maintainde,

The truth and right ol euery thing vnfoꝛſt and vnconſtreinde.
There was no feare otf᷑ puniſhment, there was no thꝛeatning lawe
In bꝛazen tables napled vp, to kœpe the folke in ade.


2 ra


T


- — . ee — CN aeree:
AS =x 2 — — err reer
Sr i


The firſt booke of


Chey linen fafe without a Judge, in euerie Realme and lande. 5
The loftie Pynetræ was not hewen from mountaines where it Kod,
In febing ſtraunge and loꝛren landes, to roue vpon the fd.
Pen knew none other countries pet, than where themſelues did kepe
Chere was no tone encloſed pet, wich walles and diches bape, ©
No hoꝛne noꝛ trumpet was in vſe, no fwo2d noz helmet woꝛne/,
Che woꝛlde was ſuche, that ſouldiers helpe might eally be foꝛboꝛne.
The fertile earth as pet was free, vntoucht of ſpade oꝛ plough, n,
And pet it pelded of it ſelle ol euery things inou 8.
And men themſelues contented well with plaine and {imple fode,
That on the earth of natures gift without their trauell ide, a
Did liue by Naſpis, heppes € hawes, by coꝛnelles, plummes and cherries,
By lloes and apples, nuttes and peares, and lothſome bꝛamble berries,
And by the acoꝛnes dꝛopt on ground from loues bꝛode tree in fielde.
: The Spꝛingtime laſted all the peare,and Zephyr with his milde
„ wee And gentle blaſt did cheriſh things that grew of owne accoꝛde,
er Abe ground vntilde, all kinde of fruits did plentedully auoꝛde.
7 No mucke no tillage was beſtowde on leane and barren land,
gor To mahe the coꝛne ot᷑ better head, and ranker fo2 to Mand. ne
„ Whé ſtreames ran milke, then ſtreames ran wine, r pellow honny ſiowde
: Hell From ech greene tree whereon the rapes pf firte Phebus ae (


4 a
un val


ee But when that intd Lymbo once Saturnus being thꝛzuſt, 3 ot
: fo Che rule and charge of all the woꝛlde was vnder loue bntulhy, L hl
ane And that the filuer age came in, moze ſomewhat bale than golde, | une oie
s Hope peectous pet than freckled bꝛaſſe, immediatly the olde ops: he 4
— And aunclſent Spꝛing did Ioue abꝛidge, and made therok anon, Qype” ol
Foure ſeaſons: Winter; Sommer, Spꝛing, and Autumne of and on. ies
75 firſt of all began the apꝛe with feruent heate to welt. is 50”.
Chell Ifycles hung roping downe: then loꝛ the colde was felt
Pen gan to ſhꝛoud themſelues in houſe. their houſes were the thickes,
And bulbte queaches, hollow caues, oꝛ hardels made of ſtickes.
Chen firk of all were furrowes dꝛawne, and coꝛne was caſt in ground.
The imple Dre with forte ſighes, to heauie poke was bound.

Next after this ſueceded ſtreight, the third and bꝛazen age:

Poꝛe hard of nature, ſomewhat bent to cruell warres and rage.

Bu pet not wholy pat all grace. Ot pꝛon is the laſt
In no part god and tradable as foꝛmer ages pat. 5 ;


—


7 = 3 2


-


=x = ~] =a ——ů


All godlpneſſe lies vnder fore, And Ladie Aſtrey laſt enn JHE
Pk heauenlp vertues, from this earth in laughter dꝛowned palf. / en, &


Ouids Metamorphoſis.


Foꝛ when that ofthis wicked Age once opened was the beyne
Therein all miſchiet ruſhed forth. then Fayth and Truth were faine
And honeſt ſhame to hide their heades: foꝛ whom ſlept ſroutly in,
Craft, Treaſon, Uiolence, Enuie, Pꝛide and wicked Luft to win.
The ſhipman hoyſt his ſailes to wind, whole names he did not knowe:
And ſhippes that erſt in toppes of hilles and mountaines had pgrowe,
Did leape and daunce on vncouth waues: and men began to bound,
l ith dowles and diches dꝛawen in length the fre and fertile ground,
Which was as common as the Ayꝛe and light of Sunne beloꝛe.

Not onely coꝛne and other fruites, ſoꝛ ſuſtnance and foꝛ ſtoꝛe,

Were now erarted of the Carth: but eft thy gan to digge,

And in the bowels of the ground vnſaciablp to rigge.

Soꝛ Riches coucht and hidden derpe, in places nere to Pell,

Che ſpurres and ſtirrers vnto vice, and foes to doing well.

Then hurttull yꝛon came abꝛode, then came foꝛth pellow golde

Moꝛe burtfull than the pꝛon farre. then came foꝛth battle bolde,

That feightes with bothe, and ſhakes his woꝛd in cruell blondy hand.
Men liue by rauine and by ſtelth: the wandꝛing quefk doth ſtand

In daunger of his hoſt: the bo in daunger ol his guet:

And fathers of their fonne in lawes: pea ſeldome time doth reit,
Betwerne boꝛne brothers ſuch accoꝛd and lone as ought to be.

Che godman ſerkes the godwiues death, and his againe febes the. “LA 4
The Kepoames fell their hulbandes ſonnes, with poyſon do allayle. 070 Lhe 3
To fe their fathers liue fo long the childzen doe bewayle. K Huld ec ö


2
9


And ta thintent the earth alone thus ſhould not be oppꝛeſf, 48 Hep

And heauen aboue in fouthfull cafe and careleſſe quiet reſt, % IV fOre, Libr
¶ Pen fap that Giantes went about the Kealme of Heauen to win,
Co piace themſelues to raigne as Gods and lawleſſe Loꝛdes therein. a
And hill on hill they heaped vp aloft vnto the fhic, hy: sh he Has
Lill God almighty krom the Heauen did let his thunder fife. 75 dh eee,
Che dint whereok the ayꝛie tops of high Olympus bake, a N, a
And pꝛeſſed Pelion violently from vnder Ofla ſfrake. Fe,, a
When whelmed in thetr wicked woꝛke thole curſed Caltiues lap, 1” ay ee
The Carth their mother twke their bloud pet warme and(as they fap) 5 2
Did giue it life. And fo2 bicauſe ſome pmpes ſhould ſtill remane

i 8 ; B. ij.


The firſt booke of


Ol that fame ſlocke, che gaue tt ſhape and limmes ol men againe,
Thls okſpꝛing eke againſt the Gods did beare a natiue ſpight,
In llaughter and in doing wꝛong was all their whole delight.
Their derdes declared them ol bloud engendꝛed fo2 to ber.
The which as fone as Saturns ſonne from Heauen alolt did fe,
He fetcht a ſigh, and therwithall reuoluing in his thought
mye of o Che thamefull aq which at a feaſt Lycaon late had wzought,
mm whos As pet vnknowne o2 blowne abꝛode: He gan thereat to ſtoꝛme


akuten Land ffomacke like an angry Ioͤue. And therfoze to refoꝛme
| awl Such haynous actes, he ſommonde freight his Court of Parliament,
Jrcloerq Tuhereto reſoꝛted all the Gods that had their ſommons tent,
ig Sl Pighe in the Mellin is a way apparant to the light.
on bus alter
| Zane
gu pote


In ſtarrie nights, which of his palling whiteneſſe milkie hight :
9 It is the ſtræte that to the Court and Pꝛincely Pallace loaves,
5 Ol mightie Ioue whoſe thunderclaps eche liuing creature dꝛeades.
% ae „On both the ſides ol this fame waye do ſfand in ſtatelp poꝛt
ite The ſumptuous houſes of the Pieres. Foꝛ all the common ſoꝛt
a %, Dell ſcattring here and there abꝛode: the face of all the ſkie,
The houles of the chiele eſtates and Pꝛinces doe ſupplie.
And ſure and it q map be bolde to ſpeake my fancie free
I take this place of all the Heauen the Pallace foꝛ to be.
ob when the Goddes allembled were, and eche had tane his place,
% Loue ſfanding vp aloft and leaning on his puoꝛie Mace,
‘Right dꝛeadfully his buſhie lockes did thꝛile oꝛ four times ſhake.
WMherewith he made both Sea and Land ¢ Heauen it {elf to quake,
And alter ward in wꝛathfull woꝛdes his angrie minde thus bꝛake.
I neuer was in greater care noꝛ moze perplexitle, 8
How to maintaine my ſoueraigne fate and Pꝛincelie ropaltie,
Talhen wich cher hundzeth handes a piece the-Aoderfoted rout,
Did pꝛactile ſoꝛ to conquere Heauen and foꝛ to caſt vs outs
Foz though it were a cruell foe: pet did that warre depende
abel y, Upon one ground, and in one ſtocke it had his finall ende.
ein dhe But not as farre as any fea about the woꝛlde both winde,


esel, & mut delfrop both man and beat and all the moztall klade.


eee lwearr byStyxes hidenus ſtreames that run within the graund,
2% fe, All other meanes mutt fir be fought : but wher there can be found
i Pode helpe to heale a feſtred fore, it mult ateap be cut, |


2 *


— =


=e Sear


==>


Ouids Metainorphofis.


Healt that the partes that pet are ſound, in daunger ſhould be put.
le haue a number in the woꝛlde that mans eſtate furmount,
Df ſuch whom for their pꝛiuate Gods the countrie folkes account,
As Satyres, Faunes, and ſundzy Nymphes, with Siluanes cke befide,
That in the wods and hillie grounds continually abide. 8
WMhome into Heauen ſince that as pet we bouch not fafe to take,
And of the honour of this place copartners foꝛ to make,
Such landes as to inhabite in, we erſt to them allignde, 8
What they ſhould Hill eniope the ſame, It is my will and minde;
But can pou thinke that they in reff and ſaletie Hall remaine⸗
Mhen pꝛoud Lycaon lape in waite by ſecret meanes and traine:
Co haue confounded me pour Loꝛde, who in my hand doe beare
Che dꝛeadkull thunder, and of whome cuen pou doe ahd in feare 2
Che houſe was moucdat his woꝛds and earneftlp requirde,
Che man that had fo tratteroullp againſt their Loꝛd conſpirde.


Euen fo when Nebels did ariſe to ſtroy the Romane name,


By ſhedding of our Cefars bloud, the hoꝛroꝛ of the fame,


Did pierce the heartes of all mankinde, and made the woꝛld to quake, a,


M hoſe leruent seale in thy bebalfe(D Augut) thou did take,

As thankfully as Ioue doth heare the louing care of his. 2 Sie

M ho beckning to them with his hand, ſoꝛbiddeth them to hille. 8 22 8

And therewithall thꝛough all the houſe attenttue filence is. 3 Sus

Aone as that his maieſtie all muttring had alapde, Nu

He brake the ſtlente once agame, and thus vnto them ſayde
Let paſſe this carefull thought of pours: foꝛ be that did offende,
Hath dearelp bought the wicked Act, the which he did entende.

Pet (hall pou heare what was his fault and vengeance foꝛ ene 6 7805

A foule report and inkamie vnto our bearing came,

Ok mifchiefe bled in thole times: which wilhing all vntrew

J did deſcend in ſhape of man, thinfamed Earth to bew.

It were a pꝛoceſſe ouerlong to tell pou ot the inn

That did abound in euery place where as J entred in. i onR

be bꝛute was leller than the truth, and partiall in repoꝛet.

The dꝛeadlull dennes of Menalus where ſauage beaſtes reſoꝛt

And Cyllen had J ouerpaſt, with all the Pynetres hie, N

Ok cold Lyceus, and from thence entred by and by

5 berbrougblette and cruell houle of late Ch arcadian Ring

B. lith. Huch


es rs Worst FF SF OFF SS We Se ey —
8 AS 2S tN aS FN — — — —


The firſt booke of


Such time as twilight on the Earth dim darknelle gan to being.
J gaue a ſigne that Cod was come, and ſtreight the common ſoꝛt
Deuoutly pꝛayde, whereat Lycaon firſf did make a {port

And after fatd by open pꝛoule, ere long J minde to fe,

If that this wight a mighty God oꝛ moꝛtall creature bee.

Che truth ſhall trie it ſelfe: he ment the ſequele did declare)

To feale vpon me in the night, and kyll me vnbeware.

And pet he was not fo content: but went and cut the thꝛote,

Ok one that lape in hoſtage there, which was an Epyrote:

And part of him he did to roſt, and part he did to ſtewe.

WUbich when it came vpon the boꝛde, foꝛthwith J ouerthꝛew,

The houſe with ink reuenging fire vpon the owners hed.

Who ſœing that, ſlipt out of does amazde loꝛ feare, and fled

Into the wilde and deſert wods, where being all alone,

As he endeuoꝛde (but in vaine ta ſpeake and make his mone,

Me fell a howling: where withall foꝛ beric rage and mode

He ran me quite out of his wits and waxed furious wobde.

Still pꝛactiũng his wonted tut ol laughter on the poꝛe

And flelte cattle, thiriting ill for bloud as heretofoze. |

His garments turnde to ſhackie hatre his armes to rugged pawes:

So is he made a rauening Wolfe : whoſe ſhape expꝛeſlely dꝛawes

To that the which he was beloꝛe: his Thttine is hoꝛie grape,

His loke Hill grim with glaring eyes, and cuerp kinde of ape,

His cruell heart in outward ſhape doth well it lelfe bewꝛape.

Thus was one houſe deſtroyed quite. but that one houſe alone

Deſerueth not to be deſtroyde, in all the Earth is none,

But that ſuch vice doth raigne therein, as that ye would beleue,

That all had ſwoꝛne and ſolde themſelues to miſchiefe vs to greue.

And therefore as they all offende : fo am 3 fullp bent,

That all fozthwith (as they deferue)thall haue due punichment.
Cheſe woꝛdes of Ioue ſome ot the Gods did openlp appzeue,
And with their fapings moze to wꝛath his angry courage maue.

And fome did gine allent by fignes. Pet did it grieue them all

That ſuch deſtruction vtterly on all mankinde ſhould fall.

Demaunding what he purpoſed with all the Earth to doe,

hen that he had all moꝛtall men fe cleane deſtropde, and whoe

Vn holie Altars after ward ſhould offer frankinſence, —


= Ss


7 — 2


Ouids 3 5


And whother that he were in minde to leaue the Garth fro thence:
Co ſauage beaſtes to walk and ſpople, bicauſe of mans offence.
Che king of Gods bade ceaſe their thought ¢ queſtions in that caſe,
And caſt the care thereol on him. within a little fpace,
He pꝛomiſt foꝛ to frame a newe, an other kinde of men
By wondꝛous meanes, vnlike the fri to fill the woꝛld agen.
And now his lightning had he thought on all the earth to thꝛolo.
But that be feared leaſt the flames perhaps fo hie Gould gro
As fo2 to fet the Heauen on fire, and burne vp all the thie.
He did remember furthermoze how that by deitinte,
A certaine time ſhould one day come, wherein both Ses and Lond
And Heauen it (elfe ſhoulde ferle the force of Vulcans ſcoꝛching bond,
So that the huge and godly woꝛke of all the woꝛlde fo wide
Should go to wꝛecke, foꝛ doubt whereol koꝛthwith he laide allde
His weapons that the Cyclops made, intending to cozrect,
Mans trefpatle by a puniſhment contrarp in etlect.
And namely with inceſſant ſhowꝛes from heauen ppoured done,


Pe did determine with himſelfe, the moꝛztall kinde to dꝛowne.


In Acdlus pꝛiſon by and by he fettred Boreas faſt,

With al ſuch winds as chaſe  clondes 02 bꝛeake thé with chelr blaif,,
And fet at large the Southerne winde: who raighe with watry wings
And dꝛeadtull face as blacke as pitch, foꝛth out of pꝛiſon lings.
Mis beard hung full of hideous ſtoꝛmes, all dankich was his head,
With water ſtreaming downe his hatre that on his ſhoulders (head,
His bglp foꝛehead wꝛinkled was with foggie miſtes full thicke,

And on his fetbers and his bꝛeaſt a ſtilling dew did ſticke.
Aone as he betwerne his hands the hanging clondes had crucht,


With ratling nopfe adowne from heauen the raine full fadlp gucht.


Che Rainbow Iunos meſſenger bedect in ſundꝛie bue,

Co maintaine mopfure in the cloudes, great waters thither pane: 2
The cozne was beaten to the grounde, the Tilmans hope of gaine,
Foz which he topled all the peare, lay dꝛowned in the raine.
Toues indignation and bis wꝛath began to grow ſo hat.

That for to quench the rage thereol, his Heauen ſuffilde not.

His hꝛother Neptune toith bis waues was faine to doe him eaſe:
Who ſtraight alembling all the ſtreames, that fall inte the feas,
Said to them Landing in his boule: Stirs get pou home apace,


Yr Vas Se —— 8
. . ——— ST oY


BEBO ISAS IO PN BP BD ERRORS PRB ABER) ENA PRBS BD Ee fe)


The firſt booke of


(Bou mut not loke to haue me ble, long preaching in this cafe.)

Poure out pour foꝛce(ſoꝛ ſo is nede)pour heads ech one vnpende,

And from pour open ſpꝛings, pour ſtreames with flowing waters ſende.

He had no foner (aid the woꝛd, but that returning backe,

Eche one of them vnloſde his ſpꝛing, and let his waters flacke,

And to the Sea with flowing ſkreames plwolne abone their bankes,

One rolling in anothers necke, they ruſhed foꝛth by rankes.

Himſelle with his thꝛætyned Pate, did lend the earth a blow,

That made it ſhake and open wapyes fo2 waters foꝛth to flow.

The flouds at randon there they liſt, thꝛough all the fields did ſfray,

Men, beaſtes, trees, coꝛne, with their gods, were Churches wacht away.

Ik any houſe were built fo ſtrong, againſt their force to ſtonde

Pet did the water hide the top: and turrets in that ponde

Mere ouerwhelmde: no difference was betwerne the fea and ground,

So; all was ſea: there was no ſhoꝛe noꝛ landing to be found.

Some climbed bp to tops of hils, and ſome rob de to and fro

In Wotes, where they not long beloze, to plough and Cart did go,

One ouer coꝛne and tops of townes, whome waues did ouerwhelme,

Doth ſaile in chip, an other ſittes afihing in an Elm.

In meddowes grerne were Anchors call ((o foztune did pꝛouide)

And craked ſhips did ſhado w bynes, the which the floud did hide.

And where but tother day before did fade the hungry Cote,

The bglp Seales and Poꝛkeptſces now to and fro did flote.

The Seanymphes wondꝛed onder waues the tones and groues to fe,

And Dolphines plapd among the tops and boughes ok euerp trek.

The grim and grerdy Mole did ſwim among the ſiely ſherpe,

The Lion and the Lyger fierce were boꝛne vpon the depe.

It booted not the forming Wosre his crwked tulkes to wher,

Che running Hart coulde in the ſtreame by ſwiltnelle nothing get.

The llerting towles long hauing ſought foꝛ land to reit vpon,

Into the Sea with werie wings were dꝛtuen to fall anon.

Ch outrag tous ſwelling of the Sea the letter hillockes wolunde,

Unwonted waues on higheſt tops ol mountalnes did rebolonde.

The greateſt part of men were dꝛownde, and ſuch as ſcapte the flode,

Fozlozne with faking ouerlong did die foꝛ want of fode.

Againſt the ſieldes ol Aonie and Atticke lies a lande,

That Phocis hight, a fertile ground while that it was a lande: Map
u


Ps San 8 erer 222 ao oak
IWF ES Cie ONS C¥ at CPD OT eee


ee — — . 3
See Sg ee a ae = = 1 — * —_


Ouids Metamorphofis.


But at that time a part of Sea, and euen a champion flelde,
Ol ſodaine waters which the foud by foꝛced rage did perlde.

M here as a hill with foꝛked top the which Parnaſus bight,
Doth pierce the claudes and to the farres doth raiſe his head bpzight.
When at this hill( foꝛ pet the Sea had whelmed all beſide

Deucalion and his bedfel low, without all other guide,


Arrined in a little Barke immediatly they went,


And to the ymphes of Corycus with full deuout intent

Did honoꝛ due, and to the Gods to whome that famous hill

Mas ſacred, and to Themis eke in whoſe moſt holie will

Conſiſted then the Oꝛac les. In all the woꝛld ſo rounde:

A better noz moze righteous man could neuer pet be founde.

Chan was Deucalion, noꝛ againe a woman mapde noz wife,

hat feared God fo much as ſher, noꝛ led ſo god a liſſe.
Mhen louc behelde hol all the woꝛlde ode lyke a plaſh ol raine,
And of fo manp thouſand men and women did remaine


But one of eche, howbeit thoſe both iuſt and both deuout,


He bꝛake the Cloudes, and did commaund that Boreas with his tout


_ And urdie blaſts ſhould chaſe the floud, that Earth might fe the (hte


And Heauen the Earth: the Seas alſo began immediatly

Their rag ing furie foꝛ to ceaſe. Their ruler laide awaye .

His dreadfull Mace, and with his woꝛdes their wodnefle did alape.

Me called Try ton to him ſtraight his trumpetter, who wde

In purple robe on Moulder caſt, aloft vpon the flode.

And bade him take his founding Trumpe and out of hand to blow
Retreat, that all the ſtreames might heare, and reale from thence to flow.


He toke his Trumpet in his hand, hys Trumpet was a ſhell
Pl ſome great Mhelnke o2 other filhe, in facion like a Bell
Chat gathered narrow to the mouth, and as it did deſcende.


Did ware moze wide and wꝛithen ſkill, downe to the nether ende:
Mhen that this Trumpe amid the Sea was (et to Trytons mouth,

We blew fo laude that all the ſtreames both Catt, Welt, Porth ¢ South,
Might eallp heare him blow recreate and all that heard the ſounde
Immediatly began to ebbe and dꝛaw within their bounde.

Then gan the Sea to haue a (hore, and bꝛokes to finde a banke,

And lwelling ſtreames of flowing flonds within hir chanels anke.
Chen hils did riſe aboue the waues that had them onerllowv, ae


— SS CEP 1 SCR? EDFA CAPA OCR SNS LS SS SYS SS a 3 2 *


The firſt booke of


And as the waters did decreaſe the ground did ſerme to grow.
And after long and tedious time the tres did ſhew their tops
All bare, ſaue that vpon the boughes the mud did hang in knops.
he woꝛlde reſtoꝛed was againe, which though Deucalion ioyde
Then to beholde: pet loꝛbicaule he ſaw the earth was voyde
And ſilent like a wilderneſle, with fad and werping epes
And tuthfull voyce he then did ſpeake to Pyrrha in this wiſe.
O ſiſter, O my louing ſpoule, O Lelie woman left, |
As onely remnant of thy ſexe that water bath bereft.
Mhome Nature fir by right of birth bach linked to me falt
In that we bꝛothers childꝛen bene: and ſecondly the chaſt
And ſkedfaſt bond ef lawfull bed: and laſtly now of all,
Che pꝛeſent perils of the time that latelye did befall.
On all the Earth from Eaſt to Wel where Phebus ſhelves his face
There is no moe but thou and J of all the moꝛtall race.
Che Sea hath ſwallowed all the rest: and ſcarlip are we ſure,
That our two liues from deeadfull death in fafette hall endure,
Foz euen as pet the duſkie cloudes doe make my heart adꝛad.
Alas poꝛe wꝛetched ſielie ſoule, what heart wouldit thou haue had
Lo beare theſe heauie happes, tf chaunce had let thee (cape alone?
Who ſhould haue bene thy cõloꝛt then: who ſhould haue rewd thy mone?
Now truſt me truly louing wife had thou as nolo bene dꝛotonde,
A would haue followed after thee and in the fea bene folwnde,
Mould God J could my fathers Arte, ot clape to facion men
And gine them life that people might frequent the woꝛld agen.
Mankinde alas) doth onely now wythin vs two conſiſt,
As mouldes thereby to facion men. oꝛ fo the Gods doe lyſt.
And with thefe woꝛds the bitter teares did trickle down their cherke,
Untill at length betwerne themſelues they did agree to fecke
To God bp pꝛaper foꝛ his grace, and to demaund his ayde
By aunſwere of his Oꝛacle. wherein they nothing ſtayde.
But ts Cephiſus ſadly went, whoſe ſfreame as at that time .
Bogan to run within his bankes though thicke with muddie Aime,
Whole ſacred liquoꝛ ſtraight they tute and ſpꝛinkled with the fame
Cheir heads and clothes: and afterward to I hemis chappell came,
Che role whercol with cindꝛie mole was almoſt ouergrowne.
Foꝛ ſince the time the raging floud, the woꝛlde had ouerllolune,


1


TT — ee ‘ .


Ouids Metamorphofis. :


Ns creature came within the Churche: ſo that the Altars d
Without one ſparke of holie fp2e oꝛ any ſticke of wwuwd.
Alone as that this couple came within the chappell doe,
They fell downe flat vpon the ground and trembling kiſt the floge,
And ſapde: if pꝛaper that pꝛotedes from humble heart and minde
Map in the pꝛelence of the Gods, ſuch grace and fauoꝛ finde
As to àppeaſe their woꝛthie wꝛath, then bouch thou fafe to tell
(O gentle Themis) how the loſſe that on our kinde befell,
Map not eftloresreconered be, and helpe bs torepaite

The woꝛld, which dꝛowned onder waues doth lie in great dilpalre.
The Goddelle moued with their ſute, this anlwere did them make:
Depart pon hence: Go hille pour heads, and let pour garmentes lake,
And both ol you your Graundames bones behind pour oe call.
Chey Kode amazed at theſe woꝛdes, tyll Pyrrha at the laſt, .


Rekuſing to obey the heſt the whych the Goddelle gau,


Bꝛake ſilence, and with trembling cherre did mækely pardon traue.
Fo; Cure he ſaide the was afraide hir Graundames gholt to burt ao
By taking vp hir buried bones to thꝛow them in the durt. pie

And with the aunfwere here vpon eftlones in hand they go

The doubtkull woꝛdes wheror they ſcan and canuas to and ee 2 1 11
WA hich done, Prometheus ſonne began by counſell wife and Apel.

Mis couſin germanes fearfulneffe thus gently to altw age...
ell, epther in thele doubtfull woꝛds is hid lome miſteri/
Whereot the Gods permit vs not the meaning to eſpie,

Mꝛ queſtionleſle and tf the fence of inward fenterice derme

Like as the tenour of the woꝛds apparantliy doe fame,

It is no bꝛeach of godlyneſſe to doe as God doth bid.

J take our Graundame foꝛ the earth, the ſtones within bir hid

A take fo2 bones, theſe are the bones the which are meaned here.
Though Titans daughter at this wiſe coniecture ol hir fere

Mere ſomewhat maued, pet none ol both did ſtedfaſt credit gene,

Do hardly could they in their heartes the heauenly hettes beleue.

But what and if they made a pꝛoufe : what harme could come therbp⸗
They went their wapes and veild their heades, and did their cotes vntie
And at their backes did thꝛow the ſtones by name ol bones foꝛetolde.
The ſtones (who would beleue the thing, but that the time of olde
Mepartes it fo2 à ſtedfaſt truth ?) of nature tough and harde, 3 —

gans


ee


IOS SIN ey eae e IVES LY ZR CAP LY RCA ED OR ER + ee 2 — — —.—


The fllt booke of


Began to warre both foft and ſmothe: and ſhoꝛtly afterbvarde
To winne tberwith a better ſhape: and as they did encreaſe,
A mylder nature in them grew, and rudenelle gan to teaſe.
Foꝛ at the firſt their ſhape was ſuch, as in a certaine ſoꝛt
Reſembled man, but ol the right and perfea ſhape came ſhoꝛt.


Cuen like to Marble pmages new datone and roughly wꝛought,


Beloꝛe the Caruer by his Arte to purpole bath them bꝛought.
Duch partes of them luhere any tuice oꝛ mopſture did abound,
Oꝛ elſe were earthte, turned to fleſh: and ſuch as were fo ſound,
And harde as would not bow noꝛ bende did turne to bones againe
The part that was a veyne befoꝛe, doth Mill his name retaine.
ous by the mightie potyze of God ere lenger time was patt,
The mankinde was reſtoꝛde by ſtones, the which a man did cat.
And likewiſe alſo by the fones the which a woman thzew,
The womankinde repayꝛed was and made againe of new.
Ol theſe are we the troked ympes, and ſtonie race in derde,
Bebbꝛaying by our topling life, rom thence we doe pꝛocerde.
Che luſtie earth ot owne accoꝛde fone after foꝛth did beng,
Accoꝛding to their ſundꝛie ſhapes eche other liuing thing. f
Alone as that the moyſture once taught heate agatni the Sunne,
And that the fat and ſlimie mud in mozith groundes begunne, oe
Co ſwell thꝛough warmth of Phebus beames, and that the fratttull (ede
Ol things well chericht in the fat and liuelp ſoyle in pave, U
As in their mothers wombe, began in length of time to grob.
To one 02 other kinde of ſhape wherein themſelues to ſhow.
Euen ſo when that ſeuen mouthed Nile the watrie feldes fozfoke,
And to his auncient chanelleft his bꝛidled ſtreames betwke.
So that the Sunne did heate the mud, the which he tele behinde,
The hulbandmen that tilde the ground, among the cloddes did finde,
Ol ſundꝛie creatures ſundꝛie ſhapes: of which they ſpied ſome,
Cuen in the inſtant of their birth but newly then begoune,
And ſome vnperten wanting bꝛeſt oꝛ ſhoulders in fuch wlſe,
That in one bodie oftentimes appeared to the eyes
One halle thereof aline to be, and all the reſt beide
Both bopde of life and ſermely thape,farke earth to Mill abide.
Foꝛ when that moyſture with the heate is tempꝛed equally,
Thep doe conceyue: and ot them twalne engender by and by an


ä — — eee ao * . .


1


—


With warlike weapons fo2 to top: It weren better fight,


= —


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 8
All kinde of things. Foꝛ though that fire with water ape debateth 5
Pet mopſture mixt with equall heate all lining things createth. —
And fo thole diſcoꝛdes in their kinde, one ſtruung with the other,

In generation doe agree and make one perfect mother.

And therkoꝛe when the mirie earth beſpꝛed with limite mud,

Wrought over all but late before by violence ot the lud.
Caught heate by warmneſle of the Sunne, and culmenelte of the ſkle,
Chings out ol number in the woꝛlde, ſoꝛthwith it did applie.
Vlhereot in part the like befoze in foꝛmer times had bene,

And ſome fo ſkraunge and ougly ſhapes as neuer crit were ſene.


In that ſhe did (uch Montters bꝛerde, was greatly to hir woe,


But pet thou ougly Python wert engendꝛed by hir tho.

A terroꝛ to the new made folke, which neuer erſt had knowne

So foule a Dagon in their life, ſo monſtroully loꝛegrowne.

Do great a ground thy poyſon paunch did vnderneath ther hide

Che God of hoting who no where before that pꝛeſent tive
hole kinde ol weapons put in bꝛe. but at the ſpeckled Weare,


D2 at the Koes fo wight of fote,a thouland ſhaltes well neare,


Did on that hideous ſerpent ſpende, of which there was not one,
But forced forth the venimd bloud along his foes to gone.
Ho that his quiuer almoſt voyde, he nailde him to the grounde,
And did him noblyx at the laſt by force of hot confonnde. 8


And leaſt that time might of this woꝛke delate the woꝛthy fame


Be did oꝛdeyne in minde thereof a great and ſolemne game, 3

M hich of the ſerpent that he due ol Pythians bare the name. an

Where who fo could the maiſtrie winne in feates of ſtrength. oz lleight

Ok hande oꝛ fte o2 rolling wherle, might claime to haue of right,

An Onken garland freth and bꝛaue. Where was not any wheare

As pet a Bap, by meanes whereof was Phebus falne to weare

Che leaues of euerp pleaſant tr about his goldon heare. 2
Peneian Daphne was the firſt tobere Phebus ſet his loue,
Which not blind chaunce but Cupids fierce ¢ cruel wꝛath did mone.

Whe Delian God but late befoꝛe ſurpꝛiſde with palling pꝛide:

Foꝛ killing of the monſtrous woꝛme, the God of laue elpide,

Mith bowe in hand already bent and letting arrowes go:

Lo whome he ſapd, and what halt thou thou wanton baby fo


!


Ce


SS A RS a .


The ſecond booke of
To (é this kinde of furniture on our two ſhoulders bꝛight:
Who when we LE with ſtedlaſt hand both man and beat can wound,
ho tother day wyth arrowes kerne, haue nayled to the ground,
Che ſerpent Python fo foꝛſwolne, whole filthie wombe did hide
So manp acres of the grounde in which he did abide.
Content thy ſelle forme, ſoꝛie loues tu kindle with thy bꝛand,
Fot theſe our pꝛayſes to attaine thou muſt not take in hand.
To him quoth Venus ſonne againe, well Phebus 3 agree
Thy botwto Hhote at euery beat, and fo tall mine atthe.
And loke how far that vnder God eche beaſt ts put by kinde,
So much thy gloꝛie leſle than aurs in ſhoting ſhalt thou finde.
Thls ſaide, with dꝛift of fethered wings in bꝛoken apyꝛe he llue,
And to the foꝛkt and ſhadie top of Pount Parnaſus dene.
Chere from hys quiuer full of ſhafts two arrowes did he tale
Ol ſundꝛie woꝛkes: tone cauſeth Lone, the tother doth it ake.
That cauſeth loue, is all of golde with point full ſharpe and bꝛight,
Chat chaſeth loue is blunt, whole tele with leaden head is dight.
Che Cod this fixed in the Aymph Pencis foꝛ the no nes
Che tother perſt Apollos heart and ouerratt his bones.
Ammediatly in ſmoldꝛing heate of Loue the tone did (welt,
Againe the tother in hir heart no ſparke noꝛ motton felt.
In wods and fozreſts is hir iop, the ſauage beaſts to chaſe,
And as the pꝛice ofall hir paine to take the ſkinne and caſe.
Unwedded Phebe doth the haunt and follow as bir guide,
Unoꝛdꝛed doe hir treſſes waue ſcarte in a fillet tide;
Full many a tower fought hir loue, he lothing all the rout,
Impacient and without a man walkes all the wods about.
And as foz Hymen, oꝛ foꝛ loue, and wedlocke often ſought
She take no care, they were the kurtheſt end of ali hir thought.
itt father many a time and oft would faye, my daughter dere
Thot owelt me a ſonneinlab to be thy lawfull frre. f
Hir father many a time and olt would ſay my daughter deere, 8
Ok Mephewes thou mp debtour art, their Graundfires heart to cherre.
She hating as a haynous crime the bonde of bꝛidely bed
Demurelp caſting downe hir eyes, and blulhing ſomwhat red, 8
Did folde about hir fathers necke with fauning armes: and ſed. „
Deare father graunt me while J line my maidenhead for to haue,


—


co


— 5


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 9
As to Diana here tofoze hir father freely gaue.
Thy lather Daphne could conſent to that thou dock require,
But that thy beautie and thy loꝛme impugne thy chaſte defire :
So that thy will and his content are nothing in this caſe,
By reaſon of the beautie bꝛight that chineth in thy face.
Apollo loues and longs to haue this Daphne to his ere,
And as he longs he hopes, but his foꝛedomes doe faple him there. :
And as light hame when coꝛne ts reapt, oꝛ hedges burne with bꝛandes,
Chat pallers by when day dꝛawes nerre thꝛowe lofely fro their handes,
So into flames the God is gone and burneth in his bꝛelt
And feedes his vaine and barraine lone in hoping foꝛ the belt.
Hir haire vnkembd about hir necke downe flaring did he fe
O Loꝛd and were they trimd (quoth he) how femelp would ſhe b! ⸗
He lers hir eyes as bright as fire the ſtarres to repꝛeſent,
He fees hir mouth which to haue ſerne he holdes him not content.
Hir lillie armes mid part and moꝛe aboue the elbow bare,
Hir handes, hir fingers and hir wepftes, him thought of beautie rare.
And {ure he thought ſuch other parts as garments then did hyde,


Erxcelled greatly all the reſt the which he had eſpyed.


But ſwilter than the whyꝛling winde the flees and will not ſfay,
To glue the hearing to thele woꝛdes the which he had to ſap.
J pray the ymph Penzis ap 4 chaſe not as à fo:
Stay Pymph: the Lambes fo fle p Molues, the Stags p Lions fo,
Mith flittring feathers ficlie Doues fo from the Goſlehauke flie,
And euery creature from bis foe. Loue is the cauſe that 3
Do followe ther: alas alas how would it grieue my heart, .
To (ee the fall among the bꝛiers, and that the bloud ſhould ſfart, 8


Out of thy tender legges, J wꝛetch the cauſer of thy (mart,


Che place is rough to which thou runſt, take leyſure J ther pꝛay,


Abate thy flight, and J my ſelfe my running pace will fap,
Pet would J wiſhe the take aduiſe, and wiſely foꝛ to viewe


=


Vl hat one he is that foz thy grace in humble jwite doth ſewe.

A ain not one that dwelles among the hilles and ſkonie rockes,

J am no chepehearde with a Curre, attending on the flockes:

I ain no Carle noꝛ countrie Clowne, noꝛ neathearde taki ng charge


Olk cattle graz ing here and there within this oꝛreſt large. rae
Thon dock not know poze fimple ſoule, God wote thou doſt not knobve,


1. From


SSP ES ESERIES EN EEE ED EE
ESI INS ES PTET TIS ES OF BETS SL


The firſt ake of


From whome thou hel. for Ik thou knew, thou twouldie not fe me ſo.
In Delphos is my chiefe abode, my Demples allo ſtande

At Glaros and at Pataca within the Lycian lande.

And in the ale of Tenedos the people honour mer. 3
The king of Gods bimfelfe is knowne my father fo2 to ber. f
By me is knowne that was, that is, and that that Mali onſue,
y ine men leave to ſundꝛie tunes to frame ſwerte ditties true.

In hooting haue J ſkedlaſt hand, but fares hand had be

That made this wound within my heart that heretoloꝛe was fre,

OF Phificke and of ſurgerie J found the Artes foꝛ neede

The powꝛe of euerie herbe and plant doth of my gift pzocerde.

Pobwe wo is me that neare an herbe can heale the hurt ol loue

And that the Artes that others helpe their Logo doth helpeleffe pꝛoue.

As Phoebus would haue ſpoken moꝛe, away Penzis tale
Mith fearefull ſteppes, and left him in the mids or all his tale.

And as the ran the meting windes hir garments backe warde blue,
Do that hir naked (hime apearde behinde hir as te fue,

Mir godly pellowe golden halre that banged lofe and ſlacke,

Mith euery putke of apze did waue and tolle behinde hir backe.

Wir running made hir ſteme mode layꝛe, the pouthfull God therefore
Coulde not abyde to waſte his woꝛdes in dalpance anp moꝛe.

Wut as his lone adupſed him he gan to mende his pace,

And with the better foote befoze the fiaing Hymph to chace.

And cuen as when the grerdie Gretonde doth courſe the ſielie Hare,
Amiddes the plaine and champion ſielde without all conert bare,

Both twalne of them doe ſkraine themſelues and lay on fotemanſhlp.
Mho map be runne with all his force the tother to outſtrip,

Whe tone for fafetie of his lyfe, the tother foꝛ his pꝛay,

Che Gretende ape pꝛeſt with open mouth to beare the Hare swap,
Thꝛults forth his (route and gyꝛdeth out and at bir lopnes doth ſnatch,
As though be would at euerie ſeride betwerne his teeth hir lateh:
Agatne in doubt of being caught the Mare ape ſhꝛinking aps,
Upon the ſodaine from his Jawes, and from bet werne his lips:
So karde Apollo and the Mayde: hope made Apollo ſwilft,

And feare did make the Hayden flerte deuiſing how to Hitt.
Howebeit he that did purine of bath the ſwifter went,

As furthꝛed bp the leathzed wings that Cupid had him lent.


St


10


Ouids Metamorphoſis.
So that he would nat let hir reff, but pꝛealed at hir bele
Do nere that thꝛough hir ſcattred hatre fhe might his bꝛeathing kerle.
But when the fave hir bꝛeath was gone and ſtrength began to faple,
The colour faded in hir chekes, and ginning loꝛ to quayle,
Dhes loked to Penæus ſfreame and ſayde nowe Father dere, 5
And ik pon ſtreames haue powꝛe of Gods then help pour daͤnghter here.
O let the earth deuour me quicke,on which J ſerme to faye,
Oꝛ elle this ſhape which is my harme by chaunging ſtraight appape.
This piteous pꝛaper ſcarce (ed: hir ſinewes wared ſtarke,
And therewithall about hir bꝛeaſt did grow a tender barke.
Hir have was turned into leanes, hir armes in boughes did growe,
Hir fete that were ere while fo wilt now roted were as ſlowe.
Hir crowne became the toppe, and thus of that the earſt had berne,
Remapned nothing in the woꝛlde, but beautie frech and grerne.
Which when that Phoebus did beholde ( aflection did fo mone)
The tre to which his loue was turnde be coulde no leſſe but loue,.
And as he foftlp layde his hande vpon the tender plant,
Within the barks newe ouergrotone he felt hir heart pet pant.
Ane in his armes embꝛacing falt hir doughes and bzaunches lythe,
He proferde kiſles to the træ: the tree did from him Wzithe. tte
UWiHell(quoth Apollo)though mp seve and ſpouſe thoucan not br,
Alluredly from this tyme foꝛth pet ſhalt thou be my tr.
Chou ſhalt adoꝛne my golden lokes, and eke my plealant Barpe,
Chou ſhalt adoꝛne my Qupuer full of ſhattes and arrowes ſharpe.
Thou ſhalt adoꝛne the valiant knyghts and ropall Emperours:
Muhen Foz their noble feates of armes like mightie conquerours,


Criumphantlp with rately pompe vp to the Capitol, ~


They hall alcende with ſolemne traine that doe their derdes txtoll.
Befoꝛe Auguſtus Pallace deze full duely ſhalt thou warde

The Oke amid the Wallace parde ape fapthfully to garde,

And as my heade is neuer poulde noꝛ neuer moꝛe without

Aſemelp buche of pouthlull haire that ſpꝛeadeth rounde about,

Cuen fo this honour giue J ther continnally to haue

Chy bꝛaunches clap from time to tyme with leaues both kreſh & bꝛaue.
so when that Pean of this talke had fully made an ende,
The Lalnzell to his iuſt requeſſ did fame ta condeſcende,
By bowing of hir newe made boughes and tender bꝛaunches e 5
b C. ij. An


PSF YO rte pm NE at pete 9


The firſt booke of


and wagging of hir ſermely toppe, as ik it were hir crowne.
There is a lande in Theſſalie encloſd on euerp fpoe
With woddle hilles, that Timpe hight, thꝛough mid whereol doth
Penæus guſhing full of (roth fram fte of Pindus hye.
Which with his headlong falling downe doth calt bp violently,
A miſtie ſteame lyke flakes of lmoke, beſpꝛinckling all about
Che toppes of trees on eyther ſide, and makes a roaring out
That map be heard a great way oft. This is the fired feate,
Chis is the houſe and dwelling place and chamber of the greate
And mightie Kyuer: ere he ſittes in Court of Perble fone,
And miniſters iuſtice to the waues and to the Nymphes eche one,
That in the Wꝛokes and waters dwell. ow hither did reſoꝛte,
Not knowing ik they might reioyce and vnto mirth erhoꝛt
D2 comfoꝛt him) his Countrie Bꝛookes, Sperchius well beſcne,
With ledgie heade and ſhadie bankes of Poplars freſh and arenes
Enipeus reſfleſle ſwift and quicke, olde father Apidane,
Amphriſus with his gentle ſtreame, and Aeas clad with cane:
With dyuers other Ryuers moe, which hauing runne their race,
Into the Sea their wearte wanes Boe lead with reſtleſſe pace.
From hence the carefull Inachus abfentes him felfe alone.
Miho in a coꝛner of his caue wich dwlefull teares and mone,
Augments the waters of his ſtreame, bewayl ing piteouflp :
ls daughter 16 lately loſt. He knewe not certainly
And il ſhe were a line oꝛ deade. But for he had hir ſought,
And coulde not finde hir any where, alluredlp he thought
She did not live aboue the molde, ne dꝛewe the bitall bꝛeath:
Milgiuing woꝛſer in his minde, il ought be tooale than death.
It loꝛtunde on a tertaine dap that Ioue eſpide this Mapde
Come running from hir fathers ſtreame alone: to whome he ſapde:
O Damſell woꝛthie Ioue himſele like one day fo2 to make
Some happie perfon whome thou liſt vnto thy bed to take.
A pꝛap ther let vs ſhꝛoude our ſelues in chadolwe here togtther,
DE this oꝛ that (be poynted bothhit makes na matter whither,
Untill the whoteſt of the day and Pone be ouerpaf.
And il foꝛ feare of fauage beaſtes perchaunte thou be agatt
To wander in the Mods alone, thou ſhalt not neꝛde to feare,
A God (hall ber thy guide to ſaue the harmelelle euerp where.


And


10


— Mmym̃— — —


Ohe had him in a ieloulle and thoughtkull was the Fill,


Ouids Metamorphoſis.
And not a God of meaner fort, but euen the fame that bath
Che heauenly (cepter in his hande, who in my deeadfull wꝛath,
To dart downe thunder wandꝛingly: and thereloꝛe make no balk
To runne away. She ranne apace, and had alreadie paſt
Che zen ol Lerna and the field of Lincey fet with tras :
M hen loue intending now in valne no lenger tyme to lefe,
Upon the Countrie all about did being a foggie miſt,


And caught the Mayden whome pure fole he bled as he liſf.


Queene Iuno ling downe that while pos the open felv,
Mlhen in ſo fapꝛe a day ſuch miſtes and darkenelle the behelde,
Dyd maruell much, loꝛ well ſhe knewe thole miſtes afcended not
From any Nyuer, moꝛiſhe ground, oꝛ other dankiſhe plot.
She lokt about hir for hir Loue as one that was acquainted
M ith (ach eſcapes and with the deede had often him attainted.
home when the founde not in the heauen, onleſle J gelle amille,


Some wꝛong agapnſt me (quoth the) now my huſbande woꝛking is.


And with that woꝛde the left che Heauen, and dotwne to earth He came,
Commaunding all the miſtes away. But loue foꝛeſis the ſame,
And to a Cow as bohite as milke his Leman he conuapes.
She was a godly Hecfar ſure: and Iuno did hir pꝛayſe,
Although God wot) He thought it not, and cur ioully the fought,
Where the was bred 2 whole Cow the was, who had hir thither bꝛought⸗
As though te had not knowne the truth. hir hulband by and by :
(Bycauſe (he ſhould not fearch to neare)deuiſde a cleantplie,
And tolde hir that the Cow was bꝛed euen nowe out of the grounde, -—
Then luno who hir huſbands thift at fingers endes had founde,
Deſirde to haue the Colw of gift. Uthat ſhould he doe as tho?
Great cruelneſle it were to peelde his Louer to hir fo.
And not to gine would bꝛerde mitruſt. As laſt as ſhame pꝛouoked,
Do laſt agayne a tother ſide his Loue his minde reuoked.
So much that Loue was at the poynt to put all ſhame to flight.
But that he feared it he ſhould denie a gift ſo light,
As was a Colne to hir that was his ſiſter and his wyfe,
Might make hir thinke it was no Col, ¢ bꝛerde perchaunce ſome frife,
Now when that luno had by gift hir hulbands Leman got,
Het altogether out of feare and careleiic was fhe not.


C. ij. Foz


Alas art thou my daughter deare, whome through the woꝛlde 3 bung, ö
=A N


. . T0 ee or ee yt


The firſt booke of


Joꝛ doubt he ſhould inuent ſome meanes to ſteale hir from hir: till
o Argus olde Ariſtors ſonne the put hir foꝛ to kepe,

This Argus had an hundꝛeth eyes: of which by turne did flepe
Alwayes a couple, and the reſt did duely watch and warde,

And of the charge they toke in bande had euer god regarde,

hat way fo euer Argus fwd with face, with backe, oz fide,

To lo warde, befoꝛe his eyes did Jö ſtill abide.

All day he let hir graze abꝛoade, the Sunne once vnder ground,

He ſhut hir vp and by the necke with wꝛythen Mith hir bound,

UU ith croppes of trees and bitter werdes now was ſhe daylp fer,

And in the ſtead ok cofflp couch and gad foft featherbed,

She fate a nightes vpon the ground, and on ſuch ground whereas
Mas not ſometime fo much as graſle sand oftentpmes the was
Compeld to dꝛinke of muddle pittes: and when ſhe did deutſe,

To Argus fo? to lift hir handes in merke and humble wiſe,

She lawe the had no handes at all: and when the did aap

Co make complaint, ſhe lowed out, which did hir ſo affray,

Chat oft the ſtarted at the nopſe, would haue runne awap.

Unto hir father Inachs banckes the alſo did reſoꝛte,

Vlhere many a tyme and oft before the had bene wont to ſpozte.
Nobo when he lobed in the ſtreame, and ſawe hir hoꝛned hed,

She was agaſt and from hir ſelfe would all in haſt haue fled.

Che Pymphes hir fiers knewe hir not noꝛ vet hir olone deare father,
Het followed ſhe both him and them, and ſufkred them the rather

To touch and ſcroke hir where they liſt, as one that pꝛeaced Hill

Co fet hir ſelte to wonder at and gaze vpon their fill.

Che god olde Inach pulze vp graſſe and to hir ſtraight it beares.

She as ſhe kyſt and lickt his handes did ſhed foꝛth dꝛærie teares.

And had the had hir (peach at will to vtter loꝛth hir thought.

She would haue tolde hir name and chaunce and him of helpe beſought.
But foꝛ bicanfe ſhe could not ſpeake, the pꝛinted in the lande,

Zwo letters with hir fote, whereby was giuen to vnderſtande

The ſoꝛromłull chaunging of hir ſhape. N hich lerne ſtraight erped out
Mir father Inach wo is me, and claſping hir about

Hir white and ſermely Wecfars necke and chziſtal hoznes both twaine,
Me ſhꝛicked out full piteoullp, Pow wo is me agate.


—


Deh £2 m2) AD — — aware


Oy £2 OSS Doh Ths.) enV £8 Of 2) Oh hs iO wh £9. 1) whisk As en On fo aha en oh


0 Ouids Metamorphoſis.
And could not finde? and nolo by chaunce art to my pꝛeſence brought?
Spy ſoꝛrob certeffe leſler tarre a thouſande folde had berne
It neuer had 3 (ene the moꝛe, than thus to haue thee rene.
Chou ſtandſt as dombe and to my woꝛdes no anl were can thon glue,
Wut from the bottom of thy heart full ſoꝛie ſighes dof dine
As tokens of thine inwarde gricfe,and dwlefully dolſt moe
| nto mp talke, the onelp thing leat in thy polbꝛe to doe.
But x miſtruſling nothing leſſe than this lo great miſchaunce.
VVy ſome great mariage earneilly did ſerke ther to aduaunce⸗
In hope lome plſue to haue fene betwærne my ſonne and ther.
But now thou muſt a huſband bane among the Heirds J fe,
And eke thine (fue muff be ſuch as other cattels be.
Oh that J were a moꝛtall wight as other creatures are,
Feozꝛ then might death in length of time quite rid mer of this care,
But nov bycauſe J am à God, and fate doth death dene,
There is no helpe but that my griele mut lat eternallie. .
As Inach made this piteous mone quicke ſighted Argus dꝛaue
Mis daughter into further fieldes to which he could not haue
Acceſſe, and he himſelle a lat᷑ did get him to a hill.
From whence he ſitting at his eale vie wd euerie way at will.
Now could no lenger Ioue abide his Louer fo foꝛloꝛne, N
te And therevpon be cald his ſonne that Maia had hun boꝛne,
i
tl


.


Commaunding Argus ſhould be kild. He made no long abody
But tpoe his feathers to his fete, and toke his charmed rod
( Mith which he bꝛingeth things a ſlerpe, and fetcheth toules from Hell)
And put his Hat vpon his head: and when that all was well ;

1 Me leaped from his fathers towꝛes, and downe to earth he flue.

And there both Hat and winges allo he lightly from him thaue.

0 Uetapning nothing but his Kaffe, the which he cloſelpy helde

GBWetwenne his elbowe and his ſide, and though the common ſie lde
Went plodding lyke ſome god plaine ſoule that had fome locke to fede.

And as he went he pyped ſtill vpon an Sten Rede. ;

nene Iunos Petraman farre in lone with this ſtraunge melodie,
Beſpake him thus: God fellow mine, J pꝛap the beartelp

Come Gitte dobone by me on this hill, fo better fede z knowe

Thou ſhalt not finde in all thele feldes, and (as the thing Doth ſhowe)

It is a cole and ſhads wie plot, foꝛ ſherpeheirds berie tte

1 C. iiij. Downe


P rr Oe ee


The firſt booke of


Done by his elbow by and by did Atlas nephetw fit.

And foꝛ to palle the tyme withall loꝛ ſeeming ouerlong,

He helde him talke of this and that, and now and than among,

He plapd vpon his merrie Pipe to cauſe his watching eyes

To fall a ſlæpe. Poe Argus did the beſt he could dentfe 8

Cs overcome the pleaſant nappes: and though that ſome did llerpe,

Pet of his eyes the greater part he made their watch to kope.

And alter other talke he aſtzt (foꝛ lately was it founde) i

Mho was the founder of that Pype that did fo ſwertely founde. f
Then ſayde the God, there dwelt fometime a Pymph of noble fame
Among the hilles ol Arcadie, that Syrinx had to name.

Ok all the Nymphes of Nonacris and Fairie farre and nere,

In beautie and in parſonage thys Ladie had no pre

Full often had the giuen the llippe both to the Satyrs quicke

And other Gods that dwell in Mods, and in the Foꝛreſts thicke,

D2 in the kruitkull fieldes abꝛode. It was hir whole deũre

To follow chaſfe Dianas guſſe in aydenhead and attire.

Mhome ſhe did tounterkatte lo alghe, that ſuch as did hir fe:

Might at a bluſh haue taken hir, Dia na foꝛ to be,

But that the Pymph did in hir hande abotue ol Coꝛnell holde,

hereas Diana euermoꝛe did beare a bowe of golde.

And pet the did deceyue folke fo, Upon acertatne day f

God Pan with garland on his heade of Pinetrer, ſawe hir ſtray

From Pount Lyceus all alone, and thus to hir did ſaꝝ.

VUnto a Gods requell,D ymph, voucefate thou to agræ

That doth deſtre thy wedded ſpouſe and huſband foꝛ to ber.
Chere was pet moze behinde to tell: as how that Syrinx fed,
Thꝛough wayleſſe wods and gaue no eare to that that Pan had fev,

Antill he to the gentle ſtreame of ſandie Ladon came,

Where, foꝛ bicauſe it was fo dpe, ſhe could not pale the fame,

She pitedullp to chaunge hir ſhape the water Pymphes beſought:

And how when Pan betwerne his armes, to catch p Pymph had thought,

In ſteade of hir he caught the Redes newe growne vpon the bꝛwke,

And as he fighed, with his bꝛeath the Rerdes he ſoltly hake 88

Which made a fill and maurning noyle, with ſtraungnelſe of the which

And lwietenelle of the feeble ſounde the God delighted mich,

Salde certeſle Syrinx faz thy fake it is my full intent, ö 10


A


From this day foꝛth. And in this caſe the better to beleue mer,


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 13
To make mp comfoat of theſe Redes wherein thou dock laments ~~
And hob that there of ſundꝛie Redes. with war together knit, ;
Me made the Pipe which of hir name the Greekes call Syrinx pet.

Wut as Cyllemus would haue tolde this tale, he caſt his fight

On Argus, and beholde his eyes had bid him all god night.
There was not one that did not ſlerpe, and fatt he gan to nodde,
Immediatelp he ceaſt his talke, and with his charmed rodde,
Do ffroked all his heauie eyes that earneſtly they llept.
Then with his wHooknife by and by he lightly to him ept,
And lent him ſuch a perlous blowe, where as the ſhoulders grue
Unto the necke, that ſtraight his heade quite from the bodie flue,
hen tombling downe the headlong hill his bloudie coarſe he fents
That all the way by which he rolde was ſtayned and beſpꝛent.
There liſte thou Argus vnder fte, with all thy hundꝛeth lights,


And all the light is cleane extina that was within thoſe fights.


One endelelſe night thy hundꝛed eyes bath nowe bereft fo2 apes

Pet would not Iuno ſuffer ſo hir Hetrdmans eyes decay:

But in hir painted Peacocks taple and feathers did them fet,

Mhere they remayne lyke pꝛecious ſfones and glaring eyes as yet.
She toe his death in great diſpight and as hir rage did mone,
Determinde fo to wꝛenke hir wꝛath vpon hir huſbandes L oue.

Fozthwith the calk befoze hir eyes right ſtraunge and vgly fightes,

Compelling hir to thinke the ſawe ſome Fiendes oꝛ wicked ſpꝛightes.

And in hir heart fuch fecret pꝛickes and piercing tings he gaue hir.

As though the woꝛlde from place to place with reitleſle ſoꝛrow dꝛaue hir.

Thou Ny lus wert alſignd to fap hir paynes and trauelles paſt,

To which as fone as 16 came with much a doe at laff, .

With wearie knockles on thy bꝛim he kneeled ſadly dolone,


And ſtretching forth hir faire long necke and chꝛiſtall hoꝛned crotone,


Such kinde of countnaunee asthe had the lifted to the ie,

And there with ſighing ſobbes and teares and lowing dolefully

Odd fente to make hir mone to Ioue, deſiring him to make

Some ende of thoſe hir troublous ſtoꝛmes endured for his fake. -

He toke his wife about the necke, and lwertely killing pꝛayde,

Chat Is penance pet at length might by hir graunt be ſtayde.

Chou ſhalt not nerde to feare (quoth he) that euer the ſhall grieue the?


The


Bd WN AI CE CORR tN re ree ae PPP


. ͤ BEES ws


The firft booke of


The Stygian waters of my woꝛdes briparctall witneſle bene.
Aone as Iuno was appeaſde, immediately was ſenne
That Is toke hir native ſhape in which ſhe firſt was boꝛne,
And eke became the felfe fame thing the which the was beloꝛne.
Ioꝛ by and by the caſt away hir rough and hairſe hyde,
In ſterde whereof a foft ſmouth ſkinne with tender fleſhe did byde.
Hir hoꝛnes fank dobon, hir etes and mouth were bꝛought in leller rome,
Hir handes, hir ſhoulders, and hir armes in place againe did come.
Hir clouen Cles to fingers flue againe reduced were,
On which the naples lyke polliſht Gemmes did ſhine full bꝛighe ¢ clere,
In fine, no likenelle ofa Cow ſaue whiteneſle did remaine
So pure and perfect as no ſnowe was able it to ſtaine.
She vauntt hir ſelle vpon hir feete which then was bꝛought to two.
And though he gladly would haue ſpoke: pet durſt he not ſo do,
Mithout god herde, foꝛ feare ſhe Hould haue lowed like a Cow.
And therefore foftlp with hir ſelle ſhe gan to pꝛactiſe hold
Diſtinaely to pronounce hir woꝛdes that intermitted were, ö
Now as a Goddeſſe is ſhe had in Honour euerie where, 5 a
Among the folke that dwell by Nyle yclad in linnen werde. ‘ |
Ok ber in tyme came Epaphus begotten of the ſe de ;
of myghtie Ioue. This noble ympe nowe fopntlp with his mother,
Thꝛough all the Cities of that lande haue temples tone with tother.
here was his match in heart and peares the luſtie Phaéton,
A ſtallwoꝛth ſtripling ſtrong and Tout the golden Phoebus ſonne.
Mhome making pꝛoude and ſfately vauntes of hts fo noble race,
And onto him in that refpect in nothing giuing place,
The ſonne of 16 coulde not beare: but ſapde vnto him thus.
No maruell though thou be fo pꝛoude and full of woꝛdes pions.
Soꝛ euerio fonde and trifling tale the which thy mother makes
Thy gyddie wit and hairebꝛainde heade foꝛthwith koꝛ goſpell takes.
Ml ell, vaunt thy felfe of Phoebus ſrill, foꝛ when the truth is fene,
Chou ſhalt percepue that fathers name a forged thing to bene.
At this repꝛoch did Phaeton wax as red as anp fire:
Mo beit koꝛ the pꝛeſent tyme did Mame repꝛelle his ire.
Unto his mother Ch men ffraight he goeth to detect
The ſpltetull wont that Epaphus againſt hun did obiect.
Hea mother (quae he) and which ought pour greater griele to be,


= „„ —


Ouids Metamorphofis.


J who at other tymes of talke was wont to be fo fre

And ſtoute, had nere a woꝛde to ſap, J was aſhamde to take

So fowle a foyle: the moze becauſe J could none anſwere make.
But if J be of heauenlp rate exacted as pe fap,

Then ſhewe ſome token of that highe and noble byꝛth J pap.
And bouche me foꝛ to be of heauen. Mith that he gently cal

His armes about his mothers necke, and clatping hir full fat,
Beſought hir as the loude his life, and as the loude the lyle

Ol Merops, and had kept hir ſelfe as bndefiled wyfe,

And as ſhe wiſhed welthily his titers to beſtowe,


She would fome token gine whereby his rightfull Sire to knolos


It is adonbefull matter whither Clymen moued moze

Mich this hir Phaétons earneſt fate eracting it fo fore, 8

Oꝛ with the ſlaunder of the bꝛute layde to hir charge befoze, .
Did holde bp both hir handes to heauen, and lobing on the Sunne,
My right deare childe J fafelp ſweare (queth che to Phaeton

That of this Larre the which fo bꝛight doth glitter in thine eye:

Ok this fame Sunne that cheares the woꝛld with light indiſterently
Wert thou begot: and if J fapne, then with my heart J pray,


That neuer may J fe him moze vnto my dying day.


=f =


—


Wut it thou haue fo great deũre thy father foꝛ to knowe,

Chou ſhalt not nerde in that bebalfe much labour to beſtowe.
The place from whence he doth arife adioyneth to our lande.
And ik thou thinke thy heart will ſerne, then go and vnderſtande


Che truth ol him. NMhen Phaẽton heard his mother ſaying ſo,


Me gan to leape and (hip foꝛ tope. He fed his fanſie tho,

Upon the Heauen and heauenly things: and fo with willing minde,
From Axthiop firſf bis natiue home, and afterwarde through Inde
Set vnderneath the moꝛning ſtarre he went fo long, till as

He lounde me where his fathers hauſe and daplp riſing was.


Finis primi Libri.


feces


Se a ete es
P ˖ EES ERE SL AS
— = — CS
2


THE SECONDE BOOKE
of Ouids eM etamorphofis.


—


On ately Pillars builded high of yellow burnicht golde,

Belet with ſparckling Carbuncles that like to fire did Hine.
Che rote was framed curtoully of Puoꝛie pure and fine.
The two doe leauesof ſtluer cleare à radiant light did caſt:
But pet the cunning woꝛkemanſhip of things therein karre pal
Che ſtutte wherot the doꝛes were made. Foꝛ there a perfect plat,
Had Vulcane dꝛawne of all the woꝛlde: Both ol the ſourges that
Embꝛace the earth with winding waues, and of the ſredfaſt ground,
Andol the heauen it ſelte alfo that both enclofeth round.
And fir and foꝛmeſt in the Sea the Gods thereof did ſtande
Londe founding Tryton with his ſhirle ¢ wꝛithen Crumpe in hande:
Unſtable Protevv chaunging ape his figure and his hue, .
From ſhape to ſhape a thouſande ſithes as liſt him to renue:
Aégeon leaning boyſtroully on backes of mightie Whales:
And Doris with hir daughters all: of which ſome cut the wales 8
With (plated armes, ſome fate on rockes and dide their godly halre,
And ſome did ryde bppon the backes of ſiſhes here and theare.
Not one in all popntes fully lyke an other coulde pe fee,
Poꝛ verie farre vnlike, but ſuch as ſiſters ought to ber, ö l
The Earth had townes, men, beaſts x Mods with ſundꝛie trees t rods,
And running Rpuers with their Pymphes and other countrie Gods.
Directly ouer all theſe fame the plat of heauen was pight,
Upon the two dare leaues, the fignes of all the Zodiak bꝛight,
Indiflerently fir on theleft and fir vpon the right.
WAben Clymens ſonne had climbed vp at length with werrie pace,
And fet bis kote within his doubted fathers dwelling place,
Immediately he pꝛeaced foꝛth to put him ſelfe in fight,
And ode alofe. oz nere at bande he could not bide the light.
In purple Robe and royall Thꝛone of Emeraudes freſhe and greene
Did Phoebus ſitte, and on eche hande Kode wayting well beſerne,
Dapes, Ponthes, yeares, ages, ſeaſons, times, t eke the equall houres.
There Code the ſpꝛingtime with a crowne of frelh and fragrant 2

ö ere


ale He Pꝛincely Pallace of the Sunne od gorgeous to beholde


I | Ouids Metamorphoſis.


There wapted Sommer naked farke all ſaue a wheaten Mat:


17


And Autumne ſmerde with treading grapes late at the pꝛelling Fat.


And laſtiy quaking fo2 the colde, ſtod Winter all foꝛloꝛne,

With rugged heade as white as Doue, and garments all to toꝛne.
Foꝛladen with the Iſycles that dangled vp and downe

Uppon his grap and hoarie bearde and ſnowie frozen crowne.
Che Sunne thus fitting in the middes did cakk his piercing eye,
With which full lightly when he liſt he all thinges doth elpye)
Wpon his childe that tod alwfe agat and trembling ſoꝛe

At fight of ſuch vnwonted things, and thus beſpake him thoꝛe.

O noble ympe, O Phaeton which art not ſuch (J fer)


2 z=


2


hy halt thou traueld to my court z what is thy will with mer?
Then anſwerde he, o all the woꝛlde O onelp perten light,

D Father Phoebus, (if q map bſurpe that name of right,
And that my mother fog to ſaue hir felfe from woꝛldely thame,
Hyde not hir fault with falle pꝛetence and colour of thy name)


Of whome thy father ſhould haue cauſe aſhamed foz to bee + : 2
d


Some figne apparant graunt whereby J my be knetone thy Sonne,»


And let mee hang no moze in doubt. He had no foner donne,
Gut that his father putting off the bꝛight and fierie benmes


Chat glittred rounde about his heade like cleare and golden ſtreames,
Commaunded him to dꝛaw him nere, and him embzacing ſayde?:


To take me fo thy rightfull Sire thou nerde not be akrapde.
Thy mother Clymen of a truth from falſhod ſtandeth fre.
And loꝛ to put ther out ol doubt atke what thon tilt of mer,
And J will gine ther thy deſtre, the Lake whereby of olde
We Gods da ſweare (the which mine eyes did neuer pet berholde)


}


|) Weare witnelle with ther of my graunt: he ſcarce this tale had tolde⸗


But that the fwliſh Phaeton ſfraight fora dap did craue

The gupding of his winged Sterdes, and Chariot foꝛ to haue.
Chen did his Father by and by foꝛethinke him ol bis oth. .
And ſhaking twentte tymes his heade, as one that was full worth,
Berſpake him thus: thy woꝛdes haue made me rachly to conſent

To that which ſhoꝛtly both ef vs (J feare mer) chall repent,

Oh that J might retract my graunt. mp ſonne J doe pꝛoteſt
4 would denie the nothing elle laue this thy fond requeſt.

/ A map diſſwade, there lyes herein moze perill than thou luerne:


The


2 r —
— — rer ee


The ſecond booke of


Che things the which thou doelt defive of great impoꝛtance beene:

Moꝛe than thy weakenelle well can wielde, a charge (as well appeares)

Okt greater weight, than map agra with theſe thy tender peares.

Thy fate is moꝛtall, weake and fraple, the thing thou doc defire

Is luch, whereto no moztall man is able to afptre,

Ben folith bop thou doeſt deſire ( and all foꝛ want of wit)

A greater charge than any God coulde euer haue as pet.

Foꝛ were there any ok them all fo ouerfene and blinde.

To take vpon him this my charge, full quickly ſhould he finde

That none but 3 could ſit bpon the fierie Axeltres.

No not euen he that rules this wat and endleffe (pace we fee

Hot he that darts with dꝛeadkull hande the thunder from the Skte,

Dhall dꝛiue this chare. And pet what thing in all the woꝛld perdie

Is able to compare with loue? Po firſt the moꝛning way

Lypes ſterpe bpꝛight, ſo that the ſteꝛdes in coleſt of the day

And beeing kreſh haue much a doe to climbe ag ainſt the pil.

Amiddes the heauen the gattly heigth augmenteth terroꝛ Mill.

My heart doth ware as colde ple full many a tyme and oft

Foz keare ta {ee the Sea and land from that fame place aloft,

Che Euening way doth fall plump downe requiring ſkrength to guide

That Tethis who doth harbꝛowgh mer within hir ſourges wide

oth arid in fesre leaſt from the heaut J headlong down Gould five”

Beides all this the Heauen ape lwimmes and wheles about full ſwilt

And with his rolling dꝛynes the rares their proper courte to ſhilt.

Pet doe J kepe mp natine courſe againſt this bꝛunt fo Tout,

Not giuing place ag others doe: hut boldelp bearing out

The force and ſwiltnelle of that heauen that wohpꝛleth fo avant.

Admit thou had my winged Sterdes and Chariot in thine hands:

What couldſte thou doe; doſt thinke thy ſelke well able to withſtande

The ſwiktnelte of the whyꝛled Poles v but that their bꝛunt and way

Bea doe the beſt and work thou can) ſhall beare ther quite away?

Perchaunce thou dof (maginee there lome totones of Gods to finde,

WU ith groues and Temples richt with giltes as is among mankinde.

Chou art deceyude vtterly: thou ſhalt not finde it fo,

y blinde bywayes and vgly ſhapes ol monſters mu thou go.

And though thou knewe the way fo well as that thou could not fkrayv,

Betwæne the dꝛeadful bulles ſharp haꝛnes pet muſt thou matze thy we
Again


2 Ouids Metamorphoſis. 16


Agapntk the eruell Bowe the which the Acmonian archer deatves ?
Againſt the ramping Lyon armde with grerdie teeth and pawes: 5
Againſt the Scorpion ſkretching farre his fell and venyind clawes:
And eke the Crab that caſteth forth his crwked clers albꝛie


Pot in ſuch ſoꝛt as th other dath, and pet as dꝛeadfullp.
Againe thou nepther balk the powꝛe noꝛ pet the (hill J knowe


My luſtle courſers for to guide that from their noſetrilles thꝛowe

And kram their mouthes the ſter ie bꝛeath that bꝛerdeth in their beet,

Fo2 ſcarcely will they lufter me who knowes their nature beſt

Mhen that their cruell courages begin to catch a heate. a

That hardely ſhould J deale with them, but that J know the feate,

But leaſt my gift ould to thy griele and beter pertli tend

My Sonne beware and ( whyle thou mapſt) thy fonde requeſt a mend.

Wycauſe thou woulde be knowne to ber my childe thou ſeemſt to craue

d certaine ſigne: what furer ſigne J pꝛay the cant thou haue?

Than this mp feare ſo fatherlp the which J haue of ther;

Mhich pꝛoueth me moſt certainly thy father foꝛ to be 2. re

Eeholde and marke wep countenaunce 2D would to God thy light

Coulde pierce within my wokull bꝛeſt, to fe the heauie plight,

And heapes ol cares within my heart. Lwke thꝛough the woꝛlde fo round

Ok all the wealth and godes therein: ik ought there map be found

In Heauen oꝛ Carth oz in the Sea, aſke what thou lykeſt bells -

And ſure it ſhall not be dende. This onely one requeit

That theu halk made J heartelp beſech thee to relent, i

Thich foꝛ to tearme the thing aright is even a punichment,

And not an honour as thou thinkeſt: my Phaeton thou dof craue

In ſtead of honour euen a ſcourge and puniſhment foꝛ to haue. f

Thou fondling thou, what dot thou meane with fatoning armes abort

y necke thus flattringly to hang; Thou nerdeſt not to dout.

J haue alreadie ſwoꝛne by Styx, aſe what thou wilt ol mee

And thou ſhalt haue. Pet let thy next with ſomewhat wiſer bee.
Thus ended his aduertilment: and pet the wilfull Las
Withtecd his counſell vꝛging Mill the pꝛomille that he had, 7

Deſiring foꝛ to haue the chare as if he had bene mad. N


His father hauing made delay as long as he could ſhilt,


Did lead him where his Chariot od, which was ol Vulcans gilt.


Che Axeltre was mallis golde, the Bucke was maſlie golde,


„ a ae E Se a oe a Se eR ee ee


The fecond booke of


The vtmoll fellies of the twheles,and where the tree was rolde.

The (pokes were all ol ſlpluer bight, the Chꝛyſolites and Gemmes

That od vppon the Collars, Trace, and hounces in their hemmeg

Did caſt a there and glimmering light, as Phoebus hone thereon,

No twhile the luſtie Phaéton fwd gaz ing here vpon,

And wondered at the woꝛkemanſhip of euerie thing: beeholde

Che earelp moꝛning in the Caſt bergan me to vnfolde

Mir purple Gates, and ſhewde hir boule bedeckt with Roles red.

The twinckling ſtarres withdꝛew which by the moꝛning far are led:

Mho as the Captaine of that oſt that hath no pare noꝛ match,

Doth leaue his ſtanding laſt of all within that heauenly watch.

Now when his Father ſawe the woꝛlde thus gliſter red and trim,

And that his waning ſiſters hoꝛnes began to waren dim,

He bad the fetherfoted howꝛes go harnellſe in his hole.

Che Goddeſſes with might and mapne themſelues thereto enkoꝛce.

His fierifoming Stedes full fed with tutce of Ambꝛoſie

hep take from Paunger trimlp dight: and to their heades doe tie

Strong repned bits: and to the Charpot doe them well appoint.

Then Phoebus did with heauenly ſalue his Phaẽtons heade annoint,
That ſcoꝛching fire coulde nothing hurt: which done, vpon his haire

Pe put the kreſh and golden rapes himſelfe was wont to weare.

And then as one whole heart miſgaue the loꝛrowes dꝛawing faſt,

M ith ſoꝛie ſighes he thus belpake his retchleſſe ſonne at lat.

And tf thou canſthat leat pet this thy fathers loꝛe obay⸗: f
Sonne, (pare the whip, reyne them hard, they run fo wilt atvay’

Aàs that thou ſhalt haue much a doe their fleeting courſe to fap

Directly thꝛough the Zones all flue beware thou doe not ride,

Abode bywap cut out a ſkew that bendeth on the fide,

Contaynde within the bondes of thre the midmoſt Zones doth lie: 5


Which from the griſely Poꝛthꝛen beare, & Southꝛen Pole doth flie,

hepe on this wap: my Charpot rakes thou plainelp ſhalt eſpie

And to thintent that heauen and earth may well the heate endure,

Oꝛiue nepther ouer high noꝛ pet tw lo we. Foꝛ be thou ſure,

And ff thou mount aboue thy boundes, the ſtarres thou burneſt cleane.

Againe beneath thou burnt the Earth: mot fafetie is the meane.

And leat perchaunee thou ouermuch the right hand way ſhould take,
. And fo miſtoꝛtune Mould ther azine vpon che wꝛithen Snake,


— > AS OF RY — —, = es. —
eS, OS TS EO ae le WOE 2 Bo) BK ee ED -


eras


r =


A SBS¥ee


0 * 1 in the teeth began to run aſtray.
8


\ Ouids Metametpheſts 1 17


$2 elle by taking ouermuche bpon the lefter hand.
Unto the Aultar thou be deinen that doth again it and:


Che ret J put to foꝛtunes will, who be thy friendly guide, -

And better loꝛ thee than thy felfe as in this cafe pꝛouide.

Mhiles that J pꝛattle here with ther, behold the dankiſh night

Beyond all Spaine hir vtmoſt bound is paſſed out of fight.

Me map no lenger tartance make: my wonted light is cald,

She Poꝛning with hir countnance cleare the darkneſle bath appald.

Take ratne in hand, oꝛ if thy minde by cdunſell altred bee,

Reluſe to meddle with my Mayne: and while thou pet art free,

And doſfe at eaſe within my houſe in ſafegarde well remaine,

Or this thine bnadutled with not feeling pet the paine,

Let me alone with giuing Hill the woꝛld his wonted light,

And thou thereof as beretofoze eniop the harmelefle fight. a
Thus much in vaine: foꝛ Phaeton both pong in peares and wit,
Into the Chariot lighrly lept, and bauncing hum in it.

Was not a litle pꝛoud that he the bꝛydle gotten had.

he thankt his father whom it grieude to fee his childe ſo mad.
bile Phebus and his recheleſle ſonne were entertalking this,


Inditlerently bettweene them both J wilh the loꝛ to ride. 5 pr


Aeéus, Aethon, Phlegon, and the firfe Pyrois


The reſtleſſe hoꝛſes of the Sunne began to nep fo hie


Myth flaming bꝛeath, that all the heauen might heare them perfectly.


And with their houes they mainly beate vpon the lattiſde grate.

The which when Tethis (knowing nought of this hir couſins fate)
Had put aſide, and ginen the ſtedes the fre and open (cope

Okt all the compatle of the Skie within the heauenly Cope:

They girded forth, and cutting thꝛough the Cloudes that let their rate.
WH ith (planed wings they duerſlew the Eaſterne winde a pace.

The burthen was ſo lyght as that the Genets felt it not.

Che wonted weight mas from the Maine, the which they well did wat.
Foꝛ like as Hips amids the Seas that cant ok ballace haue,

Doe rele and totter with the wynde, and perld to euery waue:
Euen fo the Maine foꝛ want of weight it erſt was wont to beare,

D d hoyſe aloft and ſcayle and reele, as though it empty were.

Which when the Cartware did percepue, thep left the beaten way


Dj. The


FNS OR TS a Lh a *


The ſecond booke of


The rider was fo ſoꝛe agaſt, he knew no bſe of Neyne,
Moꝛ pet his way: and though he had, pet had it ben in bene
Bicauſe he wanted pole to rule the hoꝛſes and the Mapne.
Chen firk did meat cold Charles his Main thꝛough force of Phebus
And in the Sea foꝛbidden him to diue in vaine aſlapes. (tapes
The Serpent at the frozen Pole both colde and low by kinde,
Thꝛough heat wart wꝛoth, and ſrird about a coler place to finde.
And thou Bootes though thou be but llolo of fotemanſhip,
Het wert thou faine (as Fame repoꝛts)about thy Maine to kp.
Now when vnhappy Phaeton from top of all the Skie
Behelde the Earth that vnderneath a great wap off did lie.
Me waxed pale fo2 ſodaine feare, his ioynts and ſinewes quoke,
The great nelle of the gliſtring light his epefight from him twke.
ob wiſht he that he nener had his fathers hoꝛſes ſer
It pꝛkt him that he thus had fought to learne his piedegre.
It grieude him that he had pꝛeuailde in gaining his requelt.
To haue bene counted Merops fonne he thought it now the bef.
Chus thinking was he headlong dꝛiuen, as when a ſhip is boꝛne
by bluſtring windes, hir ſaileclothes rent, hir ſterne in pieces toꝛne,
And tacling bꝛuſt, the which the Pilote trating all to pꝛayꝛe
Abandons wholp to the Sea and fogtune of the apꝛe.
What ould he doe 2 much of the heauen he palled had behinde
And moze he ſaw befoꝛe: both whiche he mealurde in his minde,
Eft loking foꝛward to the Meſt which to appꝛoch as then
Might not betide, and to the Calf eft loking backe agen.
He wilt not what was bef to doe, his wittes were rauiſht ſo.
Foz neither could he hold the Reynes, noꝛ pet durſt let them 90.5 ;
And of his hoꝛſes names was none that he remembꝛed tho.
Straunge vncoth Poutters did he fee diſperſed here and there
And dꝛeadlull ſhapes of vgly beaſts that in the Melkin were.
There is a certaine place in which the hidious Scoꝛpion thꝛowes
Mis armes in compaſſe far abꝛode, much like a couple of bowes,
Mith waithen taple and claſping cles, whole poyſon limmes doe ſtretch
On euerp fide, that of two ſignes they full the roume dot retch,
Mhome when the Lad beheld all moyſt with blacke and lothly ſwet,
WU th Harpe and nedlepointed ing as though he leemde to thzet,
Ve was la ſoꝛe aſtraught (oz feare, he let the bꝛidels ſlache. wai


f=


\ Ouids Metamorphofis. 18
Wibich then the hoꝛſes felt lie loſe bpon their ſweating backe,
At rouers ſtraight thꝛoughout the Apze by wayes vnknolwne they ran
M hereas they neuer came befoze ſince that the woꝛlde began.
Foz loke what way their lawleſſe rage by chaunce and fortune dꝛue.


Mithout controlment o2 reſtraint that way they freely flue


Among the ſtarres that fired are within the firmament

They ſnatcht the Chariot here and there. One while they courfing went

Upon the top of all the ſkte: anon againe full round

Thep troll me done to lower wayes and nearer to the ground.

So that the Pone was in a Mase to fee hir bꝛothers Maine

Nun vnder hirs: the finged cloudes began to ſmoke amaine.

Eche ground the higher that it was and nearer to the Skie.

The foner was it ſet on fire, and made there with fo dꝛie.

That euerp where it gan to chinke. The Medes and Pattures græue

Did feare awap: and with the leaues, the tres were burned cleene.

Che parched coꝛne did peelde wherewith to woꝛke his owne decale.
Tuſhe theſe ars trilles. Pightie townes did peri} that fame date.
Whole countries with their folke were burnt: and foꝛeſts ful of wd
Mere turnde to aches with the rocks ¢ mountains where they ſtod.


Then Athe, Cilician, Taure and T mole and Oeta flamed hie,


And Ide erſt full ot flowing ſpꝛings was then made vtter dꝛie.
Che learned birgins daily haunt the facred Helicon 5
And Thꝛacian Hemus (not as pet ſurnamde Ocagrion, )


Did ſmoke both twaine: and Aetna hote of nature ape before,


Encreaſt by fozce of Phebus flame nol raged ten times moze,


The foꝛkt Parnaſus, Eryx, Cynth, and Othrys then did ſwelt


And all the ſno bo of Rhodope did at that pꝛeſent melt. 8
The like outrage Mount Dindymus, and Mime and Micale felt.
Cytheron boꝛne to ſacred bfe with Oſſe, and Pindus hie

And Olymp greater than them both did burne exceſſiuely.

The palling tolde that Scithie had defended not the fame

But that the barren Caucafus was partner of this flame.

And ſo were eke the Airie Alpes and Appennyne beſide,

Foz all the Clondes continuallp their (notte tops doe hide.

Then whereſoeuer Phaeton did chaunce to caſt his vew,

The woꝛld was all on flaming fire. The bꝛeath the which he dꝛew,


Came ſmpking from his ſcalding mouth as from a ſœthing pot.


D. 5j His


2


Swat ot — — —— 2 .


The ſecond booke of


His Chariot alſo under him began to ware red hot.
He could no lenger dure the lparkes and cinder flyeng out,
Againe the culme and ſmouldzing ſmoke did wꝛap him round abont.
The pitchie darkenelle of the which fo wholy had hun bent
As that be wiſt not where he was noꝛ pet which way he went.
The winged hoꝛſes foꝛcibip did dꝛaw him where they wolde.
The Aethiopians at that time (as men fo2 truth bpholde)
The blond by foꝛce of that fame heate deatune to the outer part

And there aduſt from that time foꝛth became fo blacke and wart.
The mopfture was fo dꝛied vp in Lybie land that time
That altogither dꝛie and ſcoꝛcht continueth pet that Clyme.
The Pymphes W haire about their caves bewayld their ſpꝛings ¢ lakes
Bestia foꝛ hir Dyrces loffe great lamentation makes.
Foz Amimone Argos wept, and Corinth fo the ſpꝛing
Pyrene, at whole ſacred ſfreame the utes vlde to fing.
The Riuers farther from the place were not in better cafe,
F02 Tanais in his deepett ſtreame did bople and ſteme apace.
Old Penevy and Caycus of the countrie Teuthranie,

And ſwift Iſmenos in their bankes by like miffostune frie.
Chen burnde the Pſophian Erymanth: and which ſhould burne ageint
The Troian Xanthus and Lycormas with his yellow beine. 2
Meander plaping in bis bankes ape winding to and fro,
Migdonian Melas with his waues as blacke as any flo, 5
Eurotas running by the fote of Tenare boyled tho.
Then fod Euphrates cutting thꝛough the middes of Babilon
Then fod Orontes, and the Scithian wilt Thermodoon,
Then Ganges, Colchian Phafis, and the noble Iftre
Alpheus and Sperchins bankes with flaming fire did gliſtre.
The golde that Tagus freame did beare did in the chanell melt.
Amid Cayſter of this fire the raging heat was felt.
Among the quieres of finging Swannes that with their pleafant lay
Along the bankes ol Lidian beakes from place to place did ſtrap.
And Ny le foꝛ feare did run away into the furtheſt Clyme
Ok all the world, and hid his heade, which to this pꝛeſent tyme
Is pet vnkound: his mouthes all ſeuen cleane vopde of water bane.
iLike ſeuen great valleys where (ane duchcould nothing elſe be lerne.
By like miſtoꝛtune Hebrus dzide and Strymon both of Thrace,


The


4 5
The Meſterne Riuers Rhine and Rhone and Po were in like cafe:
And Tyber vnto whome the Goddes a faithfull pꝛomiſe gaue


\ Ouids Metamorphofis. 19


Ol all the woꝛld the Monarchie and ſoueraigne fate to haue.


Che ground did cranie euerie where and light did pierce to hell
And made afratoe the King and Queene that in that Kealme doe dwell.
The Sea did ſhꝛinke and where as waues did late befoꝛe rematne,
Became a Champion field of duff and euen a ſandy plaine.
The hilles erſt hid karre vnder waues like Jlelandes did appeare
So that the ſcattred Cyclades foꝛ the time augmented were.
he fiſhes dꝛew them to the derpes: the Dolphines durſt not play
Aboue the water as befoze,the Seales and Pozkpis lay
Mith bellies vpward on the wanes ſtarke dead. and fame doth go
Chat Nereus with his wife and daughters all were faine as tho
To dine within the ſcalding waues. Thꝛiſe Neptune did aduaunce
His armes aboue the ſcalding Sea with ſturdy countenaunce:
And thꝛiſe foꝛ hotenelle of the Apze, was faine himſelle to hide.
ut pet the Garth the Nurce of things enclolde on euery five
(Betwerne the waters of the Sea and Springs that now had hidden
Chemlelues within their Pothers wombo ) foꝛ all the paine abidden,
Up to the necke put forth hir head and caſting vp hir band,
SBettweene hir forehead and the ſunne as panting the did ſtand
Ml ith dꝛeadkull quaking all that was, he fearfullp did hake,
And thinking ſomewhat lower downe with facred bopce thus ſpake.

O King of Gods and ff this be thy will and my deſart,

Why doſte thou ap with deadly dint thy thunder downe ko Dart 2
And ik that needes J perilh muſt thꝛough force of firie flame,
Let thy celeſtiall fire O God J pray the doe the fame.
A comfoꝛt ſhall it be to haue ther Authoꝛ of my death.
J ſcarce haue powꝛe to {peak theſe woꝛds (the ſmoke had opt hir bꝛeath
Behold mp ſinged hatre: behold my dim and bleared epe,
Sex how about my ſcoꝛched face the ſcalding embers flie.
Is this the guerdon wherewithall pe quite nip fruitfulnelle;
Is this the honoꝛ that ye gaue me foꝛ my plenteoulneſſe
And dutie done with true intent? foꝛ ſufkring of the plough
To dꝛaw derpe woundes vpon my backe and rakes to rend me thꝛough⸗
Joꝛ that ¥ ouer all the peare continually am wꝛought ?
Joꝛ giuing foder to the beaſts and cattell all foꝛ nought ?

D. it. oz


= n ĩðVZ BRAS ES HEM ne ae
ee ee * ä i .


The feeond booke of

Foꝛ peiding come and other fode whercwith to kerpe mankinge 2
And that to honoꝛ pou withall werte krankinſence J finde?
But put the cafe that my deſert deffructon due ly craue,
What hath thy bꝛother: what the Seas deſerued foꝛ to haue;
Vlhy doe the Seas his lotted part thus ebbe and fall ſo low,
alithdꝛawing froin thy Okie to which it ought molt neare to grow⸗
But il thou neyther doſte regarde thy bꝛother, neyther mer,
At leaſt haue merey on thy heauen, loke round about and fie
Hol both the Poles begin to ſmoke which ik the fire appall
To vtter ruine(be thou ſure)thy pallace nerdes mut fall,
Behold how Atlas ginnes to faint. bis ſhoulders though full ſkrong,
Unneth are able to vphold the ſparkling Extrer long.
Ik Sea and Land doe go to wꝛecke, and heauen it ſelfe doe burne
To olde confuſed Chaos then of ſoꝛce we mutt returne.
Put to thy helping hand therfore to ſaue the little left
Il ought remaine beloꝛe that all be quite and cleane bereft.

hen ended was this piteous plaint, the Earth did hold hir peace

She could no lenger dure the heate but was tompelde to ceale,
Into hir boſome by and by the Haunke hir einged heade
Moꝛe nearer ta the Stygnan caues, and ghoites of perſones deade.
The Sire of Heauen pꝛoteſting all the Gods and him alſo
That lent the Chariot to his child, that all ot foꝛte mut go
To hauocke if he helped not, went to the higheſt part
And top of all the Heauen from whence his cuſtome was to dart,
is thunder and his lightning downe. But nepther did remaine
A Cloude wherewith to ſhade the Earth, noꝛ pet a ſhoboꝛe of raine.
Then with a dꝛeadfull thunderclap vp to his eare he bent
His fiſf, and at the Magoner a flach of lightning fent,
Mhich ſtrake his bodie from the life and thꝛew tt ouer hale
And fo with fire he quenched fire, The Sterdes did allo rele
Upon their knees, and farting vp ſpꝛang violent ly, one here,
And there another, that they baat in pieces all their gere.
They thꝛew the Collars from their neckes, and breaking quite a ſunder
Che Trace and Warnetle flang away: here lap the bꝛidles: ponder
The Extræ plucked from the Paues: and in another place
The ſheuered ſpokes of bꝛoken whales: and (oat euerp pace
The pieces of the Chariot toꝛne lap ſtrowed here and there


Bus


~~


ir fete were held with fodaine rotes. Che third about to teare


“a


* rs
\ Ouids Metamorphoſis.


But Phaeton (fire pet blating Fil among his yellow haire)

Shot headlong dolune, and glid along the Region of the Apie
Like to ſtarre in Winter nights(the wether cleare and fapꝛe)
Which though it doe not fall in derde, yet falleth to our ſight.


Mhome almoſt in another woꝛld and from his countrie quite


The Riuer Padus did receyue, and quencht his burning head.
Che water Hymphes of Italie did take his carkaſſe dead

And buried it pet ſmoking Mill, with Ioues thꝛerloꝛked flame.
And wate this Epitaph in the ſtone that lap bpon the fame,
Here lies the luſty Phaeton which toke in hand to guide


Ds fathers Chariot, fram the tobich although be chaunt to toe: |


Pet that he gaue a proud attempt it cannot be denide. ö
Myth ruthfull chere and heauie heart his father made great mone,
And would not Helv bimfelfe abꝛode, but mournd at home alone.

And ik it be to be beleued, as bꝛuted is by fame.


A dap did pale without the Sunne. The bꝛightnelle of the lama 8


Gaue light: and fo bute ſome kinde of ble that miſchiele came.
But Clymen hauing ſpoke, as much as mothers bluallp,

Are wonted in ſuch wꝛetched caſe, difcomfoztablelp,

And halfe belive hir ſelfe fo2 wo, with toꝛne and ſcratched breif,
Sercht thꝛongh the vniuerſall woꝛld, from Cat to furtheſt Welk,
Firſt febing foꝛ hir ſonnes dead coarſe, and after foꝛ his bones.
She found them by a foꝛren ſkreame, entumbled vnder ſtones.


There fell he groueling on his graue, and reading there his name,


Shed teares thereon, and layd hir bꝛealt all bare vpon the ſame.

Che daughters alſo of the Sunne no lefte than did their mother,
Bewaild in vaine with donds of teares, the foꝛtune of their bꝛother:
And beating plteouliy their bꝛeaſfs, inceſſantly did call

Che buried Phaeton day and night, who heard them not at all,
About whoſe tumbe they pꝛolkrate lay. Foure times the Pane had filve
Che Circle of hir topned hoꝛnes, and pet the fitters hilde

Cheir cuffome of lamenting fill: (for now continuall dle

bad made it cuſtome. DE the which the eloett Phaetuſe

About to kneele bpon the ground, complaynde hir fete were nom.
To whome as fapꝛe Lampetie was riſing for to tom,


Hir ruffled lockes, lilde both hir handes with leaucs in ſkeade of heare.
N D. iig. One


The fecond booke of


One wept to fo hir legges made wod: another did repine

To fe hir armes become long boughes. And ſhoꝛtly to define,

While thus they wondꝛed at themſelues, a tender barke began

Co grob about their thighes and lopnes, which ſhoꝛtly ouerran

Their bellies, bꝛeſtes, and ſhoulders eke, and hands fuccefinelp,

That nothing (laue their mouthes remainde, ape calling piteoully
Upon the wofull mothers helpe. Mhat could the mother doe⸗

But runne nom here now there, as loꝛce of nature due hir to:

And deale hir killes while he might?! he was not fo content: 8


Wut tare their tender bꝛaunches downe: and from the lliuers went
Ned dꝛops of bloud as from a wound. Lhe daughter that was rent
Cride ſpare vs mother (pare J pꝛap, loꝛ in the ſhape of tree

The bodies and the fleſh of vs pour daughters wounded ber.

And now farewell. That woꝛd once ſaid, the barke grew ouer all. 5


No from theſe trees flow gummp teares that Amber men doe call.
Mhich hardened with the heate ol funne as from the boughs they fal.
The trickling Kiuer doth recepue, and ſendes as things of pꝛice
To decke the daintie Dames of Nome and make them fine and nice,
Nobo pꝛeſent at this monſtruous hap was Cygnus Steucls fon
Mho being by the mothers ſide a kinne to Phaeton f
Mas in condicion moze a kinne. He leauing vp his charge.
Foꝛ in the land of Ligurie his Ringdome ſtretched large)
Went mourning all alone the bankes and pleafant ſtreame of Po
Among the trees encreaſed by the ſiſters late ago.
Annon his bopce became moꝛe ſmall and ſhill than foꝛ a man.
Gray fethers muffled in his face: his necke in length began
Far from his ſhoulders foꝛ to ſfretche: and furthermoꝛe there goes
A fine red fring a croffe the topntes in knitting of his toes:
lich fethers cloſed are his foes : and on his mouth there grew
a bꝛode blunt byll: and finally was Cygnus made a new
and vncoth kowle that bight a Swan, who neither to the winde,
The Apꝛe, noꝛ Ioue betakes himſelfe, as one that bare in minde
The wꝛongrull fire ſent late againſt his couſin Phaeton.
An Lakes and Rluers is his ioy: the fire he ape doth thor, 7
And choleth him the contrary continually to won. d
Foꝛloꝛne and altogether voyde of that fame bodie ſhene
Ulas Phaetons father in that while which erſt had in him wa bs


2


zs 2 i


Did Cet his heart on flaming tre. She vled not to (pinne


o


= — —— — 2 —


=
x , 0 2
\ Ouids Metamorphoſis. 21
Aſtke as he lwketh in Cheelypſe. He hates the pꝛkeſome light,
Me hates him ſelfe, he hates the day, and lettes his whole delight
In making ſoꝛrow foꝛ his ſonne, and in his griefe doth ſtoꝛme
And chaule denying to the woꝛlde his dutie to perkoꝛme.
y lotiquoth he) hath had inough of this vnquiet trate f
From fre beginning of the woꝛlde. It yꝛkes me (though tw late)
Ok reſtleſſe toples and thankeleſſe paines. Let who fo will forme.
Go dꝛiue the Chariot in the which the light ſhould carted be.
Ik none dare take the charge in hand, and all the Gods perſiſt
As inſufticient, he bimfelfe go dꝛiue it if he liſt.
That at the lea by benturing our bꝛidles foꝛ to guide .
His lightning making childleſſe Sires he once map lay ade.
By that time that he hath allapde the vnappalled foꝛce
That doth remaine and reit within my fittefoted hoꝛſe,
3 trow he hall by tried pꝛoule be able for to tell
Mob that he did not merit death that could not rule them well.
The Goddes Tode all about the Sunne thus ſtoꝛming in his rage
Beleching him in humble wile his ſoꝛrow to aflwage,,
And that he would not on the woꝛld continnall darkeneſſe bing,
Tone eke excuſde him of the fire the which he chaunſt to ling.
And with entreatance mingled thꝛeates as did become a ling.
Chen Phebus gathered vp his ſterdes that pet for feare did run
Like flaighted fiendes, and in his mode without refped begun 3
To beate his whipſtocke on their pates and lath them on the des.
It was no nerde to bid him chauke. foꝛ euer as he rides 5 .
He Kill vpbꝛaides them with his ſonne, and lapes them on the hides.
And loue almighty went about the walles of heauen to trie,
Ik ought were pericht with the fire, which when he did elpie
Continuing in their foꝛmer ſtate, all ſkrong and ſafe and found,
He went to vew the woꝛkes of men, and things vpon the ground.
Pet koꝛ his land of Arcadie he twke moſt care and charge.
The Spꝛings and ſtreames that durſt not run he fee againe at large.
He clad the earth with graffe , the trees with leaues both freth and grene
Commaunding wods to ſpꝛing againe that ert had burned bene.
Nou as he often went and came it was his chaunce to light N
Gpon a Nymph of Nonacris whaſe forme and beautie bꝛigt


The ſecond booke of [


Noz pet to curle hir frilled haire with bodkin oꝛ with pinne,

A garment with a buckled belt faſt girded did he weare 8
And in a white and llender Call flight truned was hir heare. 7
Sometime a dart ſometime a bow the vled for to beare.

She was a knight of Phebes trope. There came not at the mount
Ok Menalus of whome Diana made ſo great account.

But fauoꝛ neuer lalketh long. The Sunne had gone that day

A god way pat the poynt of wne: whon werte of hir wap

She dꝛue to ſhadowe in a wod that neuer had bene cut.

Here off hir Houlder by and by hir quiuer did fhe put.

And hung hir bow vnbent aũde, and couche hir on the ground
Hir quiuer vnderneth hir head. whom when that Ioue had found
Alone and wear ie ſureche laid) my wife ſhall neuer know
Or this elcape, and it the do, J know the work A trovwv.. _B
She can but chide, ſhall feare of chiding make me to foꝛſloſb⸗
Me counterfetteth Phebe freight in countnance and aray.

And laps O virgine of my trwpe, where didſt thou hunt to bape :
The Damſell farted from the ground and laid haple Goddelle deare,
Ok greater woꝛth than Joue ( J thinke) though Ioue himſelſe did heave,
Loue heard hir well and ſmylde thereat, it made his heart refopce

To heare the ymph pꝛelerre him thus before bimfelfe in choyce.

He fell to killing: which was ſuch as out of ſquare might ſeeme,
And in ſuch ſoꝛt as that a mayde coulde nothing leſſe beſcrme.

And as the would haue told what wods fhe ranged had foꝛ game,

He toke hir faſt betwerne his armes, and not without his thame,
Bebaped plainly what he was and whereloꝛe that he came

The wench againſt him ſtroue as much as any weman could

¥ would that Iuno had it ſene. foꝛ then 3 know thou would

not take the derde fo heynoully: with all hir might he ſtroue.

But what poze wench oꝛ who altue could vanquuiſh mighty Ioue?

Ioue hauing (ped flue ſtraight to heauen. She hateth in hir hart
Che guiltleſſe fields and wod where Ioue had playd that naughty part,
Abape the goes in luch a grlele as that the had lweinie,
Forgot hir quiuer with hir Mattes and bow that hanged by,
Dictynna garded with hir traine and pꝛoude of killing Derre,
In raunging ouer Menalus eſpping cala hir nere.

The Damſell hearing Phebe call did run away amaine,


be


“Za AE Be


O.uids Metamorphoſis. 22
1 P


She feared leaſt in Phebes ſhape that Ioue had come againe,

But when the ſam the tropeok Pymphes that garded hir about,

She thought there was no moꝛe deceyt, and came among the rout.

Oh L oꝛd how hard a matter iſt foꝛ guiitie hearts to Whitt 2

And kepe their countnance: frõ the ground hir eyes fearce durſt the lite,


She pꝛankes not by hir milkreſſe ſide, ſye pꝛeaſes not to bee


The foꝛemoſt of the companie, as when the eri was fre.
Ohe ſtandeth mnet: and by chaunging ef hir colour ay. f |
The treading of hir ſhwe awꝛie he plainely doth bewꝛay, 7
Diana might haue founde the fault but that {he was a Pap.
Athouland tokens did appeare apparant to the eye, f
Bg tohich the Pymphes themſelues (they lay hir fault did well eſpie.
Hine times the Mone full to the woꝛlde had hetvde hir hoꝛned face
Ahen fainting thꝛough hir bꝛothers flames and hunting in the chace,
She found a cole and ſhadie lawnde thꝛough midſt whereof the ſpide
A thallote bꝛoke with trickling ſtreame on grauell bottom glide.
And liking well the pleaſant place, vpon the bpper bam
She dipt hir ſwte, and finding there the water cole and trim,
Abayp (the ſayd) with ſtanders by: and let vs bath vs here. i
Chen Parrhaſis caſt done hir head with fap and bachkull chere.
The rel did ſtrip them to their ſtzinnes che only tought delap,
Until that would oꝛ would the nat hir clothes were pluckt away.
Then with hir naked body ſralght hir crime was bꝛought to light.
Vlhleh pil aſhamde as with hir hands fhe would haue hid from tight,
ie beak quoth Cynthia)get the hence thou thalt not here defile
Chis ſacred Spꝛing, and from hir traine che did hir quite exile.
Che Matrone of the thundꝛing Ioue had incling ot the fact,
Delaying till conuentent time the puniſhment to exact.
There is no cauſe ot further ſtay. Co ſpight hir heart withall,
Hit huſbands Leman bare a boy that Arcas men did call.
On whome the cating lowꝛing loke with fell and eruell minde
Saide: was there, arrant ſcrumpet thon, none other ſhikt to finde⸗
But that thou nerdes muſt be with barne 2 that all the woꝛld mut fe
My hulbandes open ſhame and thine in doing wꝛong to mer?


But neyther vnto heauen noꝛ hell this treſpaſſe hale thou beare.
I wilt bereue the ol thy ſhape thꝛough pꝛide whereol thou were


On hardy ta entyce my Ferre. Immediatly with that She


|


Thefecondbooke of f

She raught hir by the koꝛetop fall and fiercely thꝛelw hir dat

Againſk the grounde. Che wꝛetched wench hir armes vp mekelp tal,

Hir armes began with grielly hatre to waxe all rugged fall.

Hir handes gan warpe and into pawes ylfauoꝛdly to grow.

And for to ſerue in fede ol fete. Che lippes that late ago

Did like the mightie Loue ſo well, with ſide and flaring flaps

Became a wide deformed mouth. and further leaſt perhaps

Hir pꝛayers and hir humble woꝛdes might cauſe hir to relent:

She did bereue hir of hir ſpeach . In ſleade whereol there went

An prefull hoꝛce and dꝛeadull voyce out froma thꝛeatning thꝛote:

But pet the ſelle fame minde that was befoze he turnde hir cote,

Mas in hir Mill in ſhape of Weare. the griefe thereof the ſhowes

by thꝛuſting fo2th continnall ſighes, and bp We gaſtly thzowes

Such kinde of handes as then remainde vnto the ſtarrie Skie.

And forbicaute fhe could not ſpeake the thought Joue inwardly

To be bnthankfull. Oh how oft the daring not abide,

Alone among the delert wods, full many a time and tide,

Mould ttalke before hir houle in grounds that were hir owne erebohlle:

Hobo oft oh did ſhe in the hilles the barking houndes beguile ¢ ö

And in the lawndes where the hir ſelle had chaſed erſt hir game,

Po bu flie hirſelfe to ſaue hir life when hunters fought the fame :

Full oft at fight of other beaſtes He hid hir head fo2 feare,

Forgetting what the was hir felfe. foz though the were a Weare,

Pet when the (pied other Beares He quwke loꝛ verte paine:

And feared Molues although hir Sire among them did remalne.
Weholde Lycaons daughters ſonne that Archas had to name
About the age of fiftene peares within the loꝛreſt came

Ol Ery manth, not knowing ought of this his mothers caſe.

Chere after pitching of his toyles, as he the ſtagges did chale,

Upon his mother ſodenly it was his chaunce to light,

ho for deſire to fee hir ſonne did fap hirſelfe from Aight.

And wiſtly on him caſt hir loke as one that did him know.

But he not knowing what he was began his herles to how.

And when he ſaw hir ill perſiſt in faring on his kace,

Be was afrapde,and from hir ſight withdꝛew himſelfe a pace,

But when he coulde not lo be rid, he coke an armed pike,

In full intent hir thꝛough the heart with deadly wound to ſtrike.


y
by


But


— — ——


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 23
But God almightp held his hand, and lifting both away =~
Did difapoint the wicked Ad. Foꝛ ſtraight he did conuay
Them thꝛough the Apze with whirling windes to top of all the fhte,
And there did make them neighbour farres about the Pole on hie.
4 Chen uno ſhining in the heauen hir hulbands minton found,
Ohe ſwelde fo2 ſpight: and downe the comes to watry Tethys round
And vnto olde Oceanus, whome euen the Gods aloft f
Did reuerence foꝛ their (ult deſerts full many a time and ort
Co whome demaunding hir the cauſe: And atke pe(quoth the why
hat J which am the Queene of Goddes come hither from the thy
God cauſe there is J warrant pou. Another holdes my rome,
Foꝛ neuer truſt me while J line, it when the night is come,
And onercaſteth all the woꝛld with chadie darkneſle whole,
Be fee not in the heigth of heauen hard by the Hoꝛthꝛen Pole
Mhereas the btmoſt circle runnes about the Areltree
In ſhoꝛteſt circuit, gloꝛioullp enſtalled foꝛ to bee
In ſhape of ſtarres the ſtinging woundes that make me pil apapde.
Nou is there (trow pe) any cauſe why folke ſhould be afrapde
To do to Iuno what they lik 2 02 dꝛead hir wzathfull mod .
VUlhich only by my woꝛking harme doe turne my foes to gad?
O what a mightie act is done : how paling is my powꝛe⸗
J haue bereft hir womans ſhape, and at this pꝛeſent howee 7
She is become à Goddeſſe. Loe this is the ſcourge ſo owe
Wlherewith J trike mine enimies. Loe here is all the ſpight
Chat à can dos: this is the ende of all mp wandꝛous might.
Ho koꝛce. J would he ſhontd(foꝛ me) hir natine ſhape reſtoze,
And take away hir bꝛutiſh ſhape, Like as he bath beloze
Done by his Paramour that fine and pꝛoper piete
Ol Argos whom he made a Cow, 3 meane Phoronevvs Miete.
ö Nhy makes he not a full deuozce from me: and in my ſtead
Straight take his Sweetheart to his wife, and coll hir in my bede


. =


a a —


He can not doe a better derde g thinkeythan foꝛ to take a
4 Lycaon to his fatherinlatw , But tf that pou doe make 2 ;
Accompt of me pour foſter childe, then graunt that foꝛ m fake, S ?
The Mren and the wicked Maine of ſtarres in number ſeuen,
Foz whoꝛedome fake but late ago recepued into heauen, 8
ber neuer dine within pour wanes, Me let that Trumpet vyle 5
93 ; 2


rr. er


The ſecond booke of '


By bathing ol hir filebic limmes pour waters pure defile.
Che Gods did graunt hir hir requeſt: ¢ Hratgbt to heauen the flue;
In hãdſame Chariot thꝛough the Ayꝛe. which painted peacocks dane
As well befet with blaling eyes late tane from Argus bed,
As thou thou pꝛating Rauen white by nature being bꝛed,
Hadſt on thy kethers infty late a coly colour ſpꝛed.
Foz this fame birde in auncient time had lethers faire and whight
As euer was the dꝛiuen now, oꝛ ſiluer cleare and bright.
He might haue well comparde himlelfe in beautie with the Doues
That haue no blemith, oꝛ the Swan that running water lones:
Oꝛ with the Gerſe that afterward ſhould with their gagling out
Pꝛeſerue the Romaine Capitoll beſet with foes about.
His tongue was cauſe ot all his harme, his tatling tongue did make
His colour which before was white, became ſo foule and blake.
Coronis of Lariſſa was the faireſt maide of face,
In all the land of Theſſalie. Sher rode in Phebus grace
As long as that the kept hir chaſt, oꝛ at the leat as long
As that the ſcaped vneſpide in doing Phebus wzong.
But at the laſt Apollos birde hir pꝛiuie packing ſpide.
M home no entreatance could perſuade but that he lwiltlp hide
im to his maiſler to bewꝛay the doings of bis lone. a
Hob as he flue, the pꝛatling Crow hir wings apace did mone?
And onertaking fell in tatke and was tnquifittue .
Fo2 what intent and to what place he did fo ſwiftly deiue.
And when the heard the tauſe thereot, che ſald: now truſt me (are,
Chis melage on the whiche thou goſte no godneſſe will procure.
And therefoze hearken what 3 ſay: diſdaine thou not at all,
Co take ſome warning by thy kriende in things that may befall,
Coniider what 3 erſt haue bene and what thou ſerſt me now:
And what hath beue the ground hereol. J boldly dare auow,
That thou thalt finde my faithfulneſſe imputed foꝛ a crime.
Foz Pallas in a wicker cheſt had hid vpon a time
A chilpe calde Ericthonius, home neuer woman bare,
And take it vnto Maidens thꝛer that Cecrops daughters were.
Pot telling them what was within, but gate them charge to kepe
Lhe Catket chut, and foe no cauſe within the fame to pepe,
¥ Handing cloſe among the leaues vpon an Elme on hie,


5 85


22 ESTES SE


8 1 — — —— —


—— —


* * —— f
Ouids Metamorphoſis. 2

Did marke thetr doings and their woꝛdes, and there 3 did eſpie

Pow Pandrofos and Herſe kept their pꝛomiſe faithfully.

Aglauros calles them Cawardes both, and makes no moze a dos,
But takes the Caſket in hir hand and doth the knots vndoe.

And there they falv a childe whoſe partes beneath were like a Snake.
Straight to the Goddelle of this derde a iuſt repoꝛt J make,

Foz which the gaue me this reward that neuer might J moze,
Accompt hir foꝛ my Lady and my Piſtreſſe as befoꝛe.

And in my roume the put the lowle that ſlies not but by night.

A warning vnto other birdes my lucke ſhould be of right

To holde their tongues foꝛ being Ment. But yon will fap perchaunce.


A came vnſenttoꝛ of my ſolle, ſhe did me not aduaunce.


=


7


J dare well fap though Pallas now my heauie Miſtreſſe ſfand.

Pet il perhaps pe ſhould demaund the queſtion at hir hand,

As foe diſpleaſed as the is, ſhe would not this dente:

But that te chofe me firkk hir ſelle to beare hir compante.

Foz (well J know) mp father was a Pꝛince of noble fame,

Ok Phocis Ring by long diſcent, Coronevv was his name:

was his darling and bis ioy, and many a welthie Piere

would not haue pou thinke diſdalne) did ſke me foꝛ their Fere.

My forme and beautie did me hurt. Foꝛ as 3 lepſurelyp

Ment ietting vp and downe the ſhoꝛe vpon the granell dete,

As pet J cuſtomably doe the God that rules the Seas

Eſpying me fell ſtraight in loue. And when he ſaw none eaſe

In ſute, but loſſe of woꝛdes and time, he otfred violence,

And alter me be runnes apace. 3 ſkudde as faſt fro thence,

From ſand to ſhoꝛe from thoze to ſand, (ill plaping Fore to hole,

Untill J was fo tirde that he had almof got the gole.

Chen cald 3 out on God and man. But (as it did appeare)

There was na man ſo neare at hand that could my erping heare.

A Uirgin Goddelle pitted me bicanle 3 was a mapde:

And at the btter plunge and pinche did ſend me pꝛeſent ayde.

I caſt mine armes to heauẽ, mine armes wart light with tethers black

J went about to caſt in haſt my garments from mp back, 5

And all was fethers. In my ſkinne the roted fethers ſfack. a

J was about with violent hand to trike my naked becaff,

Bnt nether had J hand nog bꝛeaſt that naked moze did rea. 4
5 ran.


. —ĩ —————5 — — — = —


The ſecond booke of


J ran. but of my fete as erſt remained not the pꝛint.

Me thought J glided on the ground. Anon with ſodaine bint,

J role and houered in the Ayꝛe And from that inſtant time

Did wait on Pallas faithfully without offence oꝛ crime.

Wut what anatles all this to me, and it that in my place

Che wicked wꝛetch Ny ctyminee (who late foz lacke of grace

Nas turned to an odious birde)to honoꝛ called bee?

J pap the didſt thou neuer heare how falſe Ny ctyminee

(A thing all ouer Lelbos tznowne)deflde hir fathers couch?

Che beat is now become a birds. whole lewdneſle doth fo touch

And pꝛicke hir guiltie conſciente, that che dares not come in ſight,

Noꝛ ſhewe hirlelle abꝛode a dayes. but flerteth in the night

Foz ſhame leaſt folke ſhould fee hir fault. and euerp other birde

Doth in the Ayꝛe and Jute toddes with wondꝛing at hir girde.

A miſchiefe take thy tatling tongue the Nauen anſwerde tho.

Chy vaine koꝛſpeaking moues me not. And fo he foꝛth did go

And tels his L. oꝛde Apollo how he ſaw Coronis lie ;

Myth Iſthyis a Gentlemart that dwelt in Theſſalie. ae
hen Phebus heard his loners fault, he fterlly gan to frotvne,
And caſt᷑ his garlond from his head, and thꝛew his viall downe.

His colour chaungde, his face lot pale, and as the rage of pee

Chat bopled in his belking bꝛeaſt had (ct his heart on fyze,

He caught me vp his wonted twles, and bent his galden bow,

And by and by with deadly ſeripe of vnauoyded blow |

Strake through the bꝛeaſt the which his owne had toucht lo oft afoze.

She wounded gaue a piteous ſhꝛike, and dꝛawing from the ſoꝛe

Che deadly Dart the which the bloud purſuing after faſt

Upon hir white and tender limmes a ſcarlet colour caſt) i 12

Salde Phebus well, thou might haue wꝛeakt this treſpalle on my head 7

And pet foꝛboꝛne me till the time J had bene bꝛought a bed.

Now in one body by thy meanes a couple ſhall be dead.

Thus muche the faide : and with the blond hir life did fade away.

The bodie being voyde of ſoule became as colde as clap.

Chan all to late, alas tw late gan Phebus to repent

Chat of his louer he had tane ſo cruell puniſhment.

He blames himlelfe foꝛ giuing eare fo vnaduiledly.

He blames himſelfe in that he twke it fo outragioully.


Z See ee) ke ee
A
9


Onids Metamorphofis: 2


Me hates and bannes his fatthfull birde bicauſe he did enfoꝛme
Dim of his louers naughtineſſe that made him ſo to forme,


He hates his bo lu, he hates his ſhalt that raſhly from it went:

And eke he hates his haſty hands by whom the bow was bent.

He takes hir vp betwerne his armes endeuoꝛing all tw late

By platter made of pꝛecious herbes to ftay hir belplette fate.

But when he law there was no ſhikt: but that the nerdes muſt burne,


And that the ſolemne facred fire was pꝛeſt to ferue the turne,


Then from the bottome of his heart full ſoꝛie fighes he fer,

(3Fo2 heauenly powꝛes with watrie teares their cherkes map neuer wet
In caſe as when a Cow beholdes the eruell butcher ſtand

With launcing Axe embꝛelwod with blond and lifting vp his hand
Aloft to ſnatch hir ſucking Calfe that hangeth by the heꝛles

And of the Axe the deadly dint vpon his forehead: ferles.

Hobwbeit after werte perfumes beffotwoe vpon hir coꝛſe

And much embꝛacing, hauing foze bewailde hir wꝛong dinozle,
He followed to the place aſlignde hir bodie fo2 to burne.

There coulde he not abide to (& his ſerde to aſhes turne:

But tanke the baby from hir wombe and from the fivie flame,

And vnto double Chyrons den conueped ſtraight the fame,


The Nauen hoping for his truth to be rewarded well,


ibe maketh blacke, foꝛbidding him with whiter birdes to dwell.
The Centaure Chyron in the while was glad of Phebus bop,
And as the burthen bꝛought lome care the honoꝛ bꝛought him oy.

Upon a time with golden lockes about hir choulders ſpꝛed,

A daughter of the Centaurs whome a certaine Pymph had bꝛed

About the bꝛoke Caycus bankes)that bight Ocyroe

Came thither. This Tame fapre pong Nymph could not contented be

To learne the craft of Surgerie as perfect as hir Sire

But that to learne the ſecret domes of ate the mul aſpire.

And therfoze when the furious rage of krenzie had hir cought,

And that the ſpꝛight of Pꝛophecie enflamed had hir thought,


She lot vpon the childe and ſaide: werte babe the Gods ther make


A man. fo2 all the moꝛld Mall fare the better koꝛ thy fake.


All ſoꝛes and ſtcknelle ſhalt thou eure: thy powꝛe ſhall eke be ſyche,


Co make the dead aliue again. Noꝛ doing of the whiche


Againſt the pleat ure of the Gods, thy Graundfire hall ther ſtrike


E.j. So


Oe a Ne te a ae


Thefecondbooke of


Do with his fire, that neuer moꝛe thou ſhalt perloꝛme the like, -
And sta God a bludleſſe coꝛſe, and of a eoꝛſe full fraunge)
Thon thalt become a God againe, and twice thy nature chaunge.
And thou my father liefe and deare, who now by deſtinie,
Art boꝛne to liue faz cuermoꝛe and neuer fo2 to die,
Dhalt ſutter ſuch outragious paine thꝛoughout thy members all,
y wounding ofa venimde dart that on thy fote Gall fall,
Chat oft thou ſhalt deſtre to die, and in the latter end
The fatall dames Hall bꝛeake thy thꝛerde and thy deſtre thee ſend.
There was pet moze behinde to teil, when lodenly the let
A fore derpe figh, and dowone hir chakes the teares did trickle wet.
Mine owne miſloꝛtune(quoch ſhe)now hach ouertake me ſure.
J cannot beter any moꝛe, loꝛ woꝛds ware out of v:
My cunning was not woꝛth fo much as that it ſhould procure 5
The wꝛath of God. J fele by pꝛoufe far better had it bene:
If that the chaunce of things to come 3 neuer had foꝛeſcne.
Foꝛ now my natiue ſhape withdꝛawes. Ve thinkes J haue delight
Lo ferde on grale and fling in fleldes: J feele my ſelte fo light.
J am tranſtoꝛmed to a Mare like other ot my kinne. g
But wherfoꝛe ſhould this bꝛutiſh ſhape all ouer wholy winne;
Conſidering that although both hoꝛſe and man my father ber:
Pet is his better part a man as plainly is to fiz...
The latter ende of this complaint was fumbled in ſuch wife,
As what the meant the ſtanders by could ſcarcely well deuiſe.
Anon the neyther ſemde to ſpeake noꝛ fully foꝛ to ne,
Wut like ta one that counterfeites in ſpoꝛt the Mare to play.
Mlithin a while the nepes platne, and dotune hir armes were pight,
Upon the ground all clad with haire, and bare hir bodio tight.
Hir fingers ioyned all in one, at ende whereof did grow
In ſtede of naples a round tough hole of welked hoꝛne bylold.
Hir head and necke ſhot foꝛth in length, hir kirtle trayne became
A faire long taile. ir daring hatre was made a hanging Pane.
And as hir native ſhape and voyce mol monffroully did pale,
Do by the vncoth name ol Mare the after termed was.
The Centaure Chy ron wept hereat: and piteoully diſmaſde
Did call on ther although in vaine) thou Delphian God foꝛ apde.
ez neyther lay it in thy bande to bꝛeake Ioues mighty bef,


Onids Metamorphoſis.
And though it had, pet in thy ate as then thou did not reit.
In Elis did thou then abide and in Meſſene lande.

It was the time when vonder ſhape of ſhepehierde with a wande
DE Olpue and a pipe ol redes thou kept Admetus ſhepe.
holy in this time that laue of Loue) thou toke none other beepe,
And madſte the merrie with thy pipe, the gliſfring Maias ſonne


By chaunce abꝛode the fields of Pyle ſpide certaine cattle runne


Mithout a hierde, the which he tole and clofelp did them hide
Among the woods. This pꝛetle light no earthly creature ſpide,
Saue one old churle that Battus hight. This Battus had the charge
Ok welthie Neleus feditig groundes, and all his paffures large,
And kept a race of godly ares. Of him he was afraide. *
And leak by him his pꝛiuie theft ſhould chaunce to be bewꝛaide,
Me twke a bꝛibe to Top his mouth, and thus vnto him ſaide.
My friend J pꝛap thee tf perchaunce that any man enquire
This cattell fap thou ſaw them not. And take thou foꝛ thy hire
This faire pong Bullocke. Cother tobe the Bullocke at his hand,
And ſhewing him a certaine one that lap vpon the lande
Sapd, go thy way: Alone this tone thy doings ſhall bewꝛay.
As J ſhall doe. So Mercuric did ſæme to go his way.
Annon he commes me backe againe, and altred both in ſpeche
And outward ſhape, ſaide Countrieman Ich heartely beseche,
And tf thou zaweſt any wie come ropling through this grounde,
D2 dꝛiuen awap, tell what he was and where they map be bownde.
And J chill gether boꝛ thy paine an Heclar an hir match.
The Carle percepuing dauble gaine, and grerdy for to catch,
Sapyde: vnder vonlame hill they were, and vnder ponſame hill
Cham sure they are, and with his hand he poynted therebntill.
At that Mercurius laughing ſaide: falſe knaue: and doſte bewꝛay
Me to mp-felfe 2 doſte thou bewꝛay me to my ſelle J ſap: :
And with that woꝛd ſtrayt to a one be turnde his double heart,
In which the llaunder pet remaines without the ſtones deſart.
The Wearer of the charmed Nod the ſuttle Mercurie


This done aroſe with wauing wings and from that place did file.


And as he houered in the Ayꝛe he vie wde the ſieldes bylow

Ol Atticke and the towne it felfe with all the trers that grow .

In Lycey where the learned Clarkes did wholſome pꝛeceptes how.
f Ei.


2


By


— — — reer


*


The ſecond booke of
By chaunte the verte felfefame day the birgins of the towne.
Ok olde and auncient cuſtome bare in baſtzets on their crowne
Beſet with garlands freſh and gap and rowde ſutth flowzes werte
To Pallas toꝛe ſuch facrifice as was of cufteme mete,
The winged Cod beholding them returning in a troupe
Continued not dtrealy foꝛth, but gan me dowue to oupe.
And fetch a wyndlaſſe round about. And as the hungrp kite
Beholding vnto ſacr iſice a Bullocke redie dight,
Doth fore about his wiſhed pꝛay delirous foꝛ to ſnatche
But that he dareth not for ſuch as and about and watch:
So Mercurie with nimble wings both krepe a lower gate
About Mineruas loftie towꝛes in round and wherling rate.
As far as doth the oꝛning ſrarre in cleare and ſtreaming light
Excell all other ſfarres in heauen: as far alſo as bꝛight
Dame Phebe dimmes the Moꝛning Harte, ſo far did Herſes face
Staine all the Ladies of hir troupe: ſhe was the veric grace
And beautie of that ſolemne pompe, and all that traine fo fapre.
Toues ſonne was rauiſht with the ſight, and hanging in the apꝛe
Began to ſwelt within himſelte, in cafe as when the poulder
Math dꝛiuen the Pellet from the Gunne, the Pellet ginnes to ſmoulder
And in his flying ware moze hote. In ſmoking bꝛeſt he ſhꝛowdes
Dis flames not bꝛought frõ heaven aboue but caught beneath the clouds
He leaues his ioꝛney toward heauen and takes another race
Not minding any lenger time to hide his prefent cafe,
So great a truſt and confidence his beautie to him gaue
Which though it feemed of tt felfe ſufficient force to haue. 5
Pet was he curious foꝛ to make himlelfe moze fine and bꝛaue.
He kembd his head and ſtrokt his beard and pꝛied on every five
To fee that in his furniture no wꝛinkle might be ſpide.
And foꝛbicauſe his Cloke was fringde and garded bꝛode with golde,
He caſt it on his ſhoulder vp moſt ſermelpy to beholde.
He takes in hand his charmed rod that bꝛingeth things allepe
And wakes them when he liſt againe. And laſfly taketh kerpe
Chat on his faire welfoꝛmed fete his golden ſhoes fit clerne,
And that all other things thereto well coꝛreſpondent bene. g
In Cecrops Court were Chambers thꝛæ ſet far from all reſoꝛt
Mith puoꝛie beddes all furniſhed in far moſt royall ſoꝛt.


*
*


== =


Onids Metamorphoſis.


Ok which Aglauros had the left and Pandroſe had the right,
And Herſe had the middlemolk. She that Aglauros hight
Firſt markt the comming of the God, and altzing him his name
Demaunded him for what entent and cauſe be thither tame.
Pleiones Mephelu Maias ſonne did make hir auntwere thus.
J am mp fathers meflenger his pleaſure to diſcuſle
Co moꝛtall folke and belli} fiendes as liſt him to commaund.
My father is the mightie Ioue. To that thou doſte demaund
2 will not fepne a falſe excuſe. afke no moze but graunt
To keepe thy ſiſters counſell cloſe, and fo to be the Aunt
Ok (uch the illue as on hir my chaunce ſhalbe to get.
Thy fitter Herſe is the cauſe that hath me hither fet. é
4 pꝛap the beare thou with my loue that is ſo firmely fet,
Aglauros caff on Mercurie hir (coznfull eyes aſide,
WHith which agaih® Mineruas twill hir ſecretes late ſhe ſpide,
Demaunding him in recompence a mighty malle of Golde:
And would not let him enter in vntil the ſame were tolde.
The warlike Goddeſle calk on hir a ſterne and cruell loke,
And fetched luch a cutting ſigh that forcibly it ſhoke
Both bꝛeſt and bꝛeſtplate, wherewithall it came vnto hir thought
Hoh that Aglauros late ago againſt hir will had wrought
In lobing on the Lemman childe contrarie to hir othe,
The whiche he take hir in the cheſt. foꝛ which the waxed wꝛothe.
Againe He law hir cancred heart malicioully repine
Againſt hir ſiſter and the God. And furthermoꝛe in ſine
Mobi that the golde which Mercurie had giuen hir foꝛ hir mæde,
Mould make hir both in welth and pꝛide all others to exceede.
She goes me ſtraight to Enules houle, a foule and irkſome caue
Veplete with blacke and lothly filth and ſtinking like a graue.
It ſfandeth in a hollow dale where neyther light of Sunne
Noꝛ blaſt of any winde oꝛ Ayre may foꝛ the derpeneſſe come.
d dꝛepꝛie fad and dolefull den ay full of ſlouthfull colde
As which ap dimd with ſmoldꝛing ſmoke doth neuer fire beholde,
Men Pallas that fame manly aide appꝛoched nere this plot,
Ohe ſtaide without, loꝛ to the boule in enter might the not.
And with hir Jauelin point did gine a puſh againſt the doe.
The doe Aue open by and by and fell me in the floꝛe. i
N ö E. itj. There


The fecond booke of


Chere faly the Cuuie ſit within lat gnawing on the fleſh
Ok Snakes and Todes the filthie fode that kerpes hir vices tre},
It lothde hir to beholde the ſight. Anon the Elke arofe
And left the gnawed Adders lleſh, and llouthkully He goes
GU ith lumpich leylure like a Snaple, and when the falw the face
Ok Pallas and hir faire attire adournde with heauenlp grace,
Ohe gaue a ſigha ſoꝛie ſigh from bottome of hir heart.
Mir lippes were pale, hir cherkes were wan, and all hir face was lwart;
Hir bodie leane as any Rake. She looked eke a ſkew.
Mir terth were furde with filth and dꝛolle, hir gums were warpiſh blety,
The working of hir feſtered gall had made hir ſkomacke grerne.
And all bevenimde was hir tongue. No llerpe hir eyes had ſæne.
Cont inuall Carke and cankred care did kœrpe hir waking ſtill:
Ok laughter(laue at others harmes the Helhound can no (hill.
It is againſt hir will that men haue any god ſucceſſe.
And it they haue, (he frettes and fumes within hir minde no leſſe
Than if hir ſelfe had taken harme. In ſeeking to annop:
And woꝛke diſtreſle to other folke, hir ſelfe ſhe doth deſtroy.
Thus is the toꝛment to hir ſelle. Though Pallas did hir hate,
Het ſpake the bꝛielly theſe ew woꝛdes to hir without hir gate.
Infect thou with thy benim one of Cecrops daughters thee,
It is Aglauros whome J meane, ſoꝛ ſo it needes mull be, ö
This ſaid, ſhe pight hir ſpeare in ground, and tanke hir rife thereon,
And winding from that wicked wight did take hir Aight anon. 5
Che Caltife caſt hir eye aſide, and ſceing Pallas gon,
Began to mumb le with hir felfe the Diuels Paternoſfer.
And fretting at hir god ſuccelle, began to blow and bluſter.
She takes a craked faffe in hand bewꝛeathde with knubbed pꝛickes,
And couered with a coly cloude, where euer that the ſtickes a
Mir filthie ferte, ſhe tramples downe and ſeares both graſſe and coꝛne!
That all the frech and fragrant fieldes ſerme beterlp foꝛlozne.
And with hir ſtatte he tippeth of the higheſt poppie heades.
Such poylon alfo euerp where vngracioully the ſheades,
That euery Cottage where he comes and euery Cowne and Citle
Doe take infection at hir bꝛeath. At length(the moze is pitie⸗
She found the faire Athenian towne that tlowed frechly then
In keaſttull peace and ioplull welch and learned wilts of men.


= -- =~ — =


=


— LS ee —


* :

Ouids Metamorphoſis. 28
And foꝛbicauſe the nothing fatw that might pꝛouoke to ape,

It was a coꝛſie to hir heart hir hatefull teares to kerpe.

No when ſhe came within the Court, ſhe went without delay,
Direalpto the lodgings where ing Cecrops daughters lay,

There did (ye as Minerua bad. He laide hir ſcuruie ſiſt

beſmerde with venim and with filth vpan Aglauros bziſt,

The whiche the fillde with hoked thoꝛnes: and bꝛeathing on hir face


Did ſhead the popfon in hir bones: which ſpꝛed it ſelfe apace,


As blacke as euer virgin pitch thꝛough Lungs and Lights and all.

And to thintent that cauſe of griele abundantly ſhould fall,

She placed ay befoze hir eyes hir fitters happie chaunce

In being wedded to the God, and made the God to glaunce

Continually in heauenly ſhape befoze hir wounded thought.

And all theſe things He painted out. which in concluſion wꝛought
Such coꝛſies in Aglauros bꝛeſt that ſighing day and night

She gnawde and fretted in hir felfe foz very cancred ſpight.

And like a wꝛetche the waſtes hir ſelle with reſtleſle care and pine

Like as the ple whereon the Sunne with glimering light doth Hine,
Hir ſiſter Herſes god ſucceſle doth make hir heart to perne.

In cafe as when that fire is put to grænefeld wod oꝛ fearne

Vhych giueth neyther light noꝛ heate, but ſmulders quite away:
Hometime the minded to hir Sire hir ſiſter to beloꝛap. 8
TU howell He knew) would yll abide fo lewde a part to play.

And oft ſhe thought with wilfull bande to bꝛuſt hir fatall thzede,
Bteauſe He woulde not fee the thing that made hir heart to blade.

At lak the late hir in the doꝛe and leaned to a port.

To let the God from entring in. To whome now hauing lott

Much talke and gentle woꝛdes in bapne, che laid: Sir leaue J pꝛay

Fo2 hence 3 will not be pou ſure)onleſſe pou go away.

I take thee at thy woꝛd quoth he) and there withall he puſht

His rod againſt the barred doꝛe, and bwide it open ruſht.

Dhe making profter for to riſe, did fœle fo great a waight

Chꝛough all hir limmes, that foꝛ hir life he could not ſtretch hir ſtraight.
She ſtroue to (et hirſelt opright : but ſtriuing boted not. f
Hir hamſtkrings and hir knees were Hike, a chilling colde had got


In at hir naples, thꝛough all hir limmes. and eke hir veynes began


Foꝛ want ol blond and lively heate, to ware both pale and wan.
E. tly. And


5 oS See — Nt te nt **


The ſecond booke of


And as the kreting Fiſtula loꝛgrowne and paf all cure
Kunnes in the ileth front place to place, and makes the found and pure
As bad oꝛ woꝛſer than the reff, euen fo the cold of death,
Stranke to hir heart, and clolde hir beines, and laſtly opt hir bꝛeath:
Dhe made no pꝛoler foꝛ to ſpeake, and though the had done fo
It had bene batne. F 02 wap was none foꝛ language foꝛth to go.
Hir thꝛote congealed into ſtone: hir mouth became hard fone,
And like an image fate fhe fill, hir bloud was clearelp gone.
The which the benim ok hir heart fo kowly did infect,
That euer after all the fone with freckled {pots was fpect.

Wi hen Mercurie had puniſht thus Aglauros ſpightfull tung

And cancred heart immediatly from Pallas tofone he dung,
And flying bp with fifttering wings did pierce to heauen aboue,
His father calde him ſkraight aſide but chewing not his loue)
Said: lonne, my truffie melſenger and woꝛker of my will
Make no delay but out of hand flie downe in haſt oneill
The land that on the left foe lokes vpon thy mothers light.
Ponſame where ſtandeth on the coaſt the towne that Sidon hight.
Che King bath there a heirde ol Peate that on the Pountaines fade,
Go take and dꝛiue them to the {ca with all tonuentent ſperde. f
He had no foner ſaid the woꝛd but that the heirde begun
Dꝛiuen from the mountaine to the ſhoꝛe appointed foꝛ to run.
Whereas the daughter of the King was wonted to reſoꝛt
Al ith other Ladies of the Court there fo: to plap and ſpoꝛt.
Betwerne the fate ol aieſtie and loue is {et (uch oddes,
As that they can not dwell in one. The Sire and King of Goddes
Mhoſe hand is armd with triplefire, who only with bis frowne
Makes Sea and Land and Heauen to quake, doth lay his ſcepter downe
ith all the graue and fatelp port belonging therebnto:
And putting on the ſhape ol Bull as other cattell dos
Goes lowing gently bp and downe among them in the field
The laireſt beaſt to loke vpon that euer man beheld.
For why ? his colour was as white as any winters Mow N
Beloꝛe that epther trampling fete oꝛ Southerne winde it thow.
His necke was bꝛawnd with rolles of lleſh, and from his cheſt beloꝛe,
A dangling dewlap hung me downe gad halle a fote and moze.
Bis hoꝛnes were ſmall, but pet fo fine as that pe would haue won


rr


=


—


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 29
hep bad bene made by cunning hand oꝛ Out of Ware bene wꝛongbt.
Moꝛe cleare they were a hundꝛeth fold than is the Chꝛiſtall fone
In all his koꝛehead fearfull frowne o2 wꝛinkle there was none.

No fierce, no grim, noꝛ grielly loke as other cattle haue.

But altogether ſo demure as friendſhip ſcemde to craue.

Agenors daughter marueld much fo tame a beaſt to ſœ,

But pet to touche him at the firf tw bolde the durſt not ber.

Annon the reaches to his mouth hir hand with herbes and flowꝛes.
The louing beaſt was glad thereof and neither frownes noꝛ lowes,
But till the hoped ioy might come with glad and fauning cheare


Me lickes hir hands and ſcarce ah ſcarce the reſdue he foꝛbeare.


Sometime he kriſkes and ſtzippes about and ſhoboes hir ſpoꝛt —
Annon be lapes his (nolwie ſide againſt the golden ſand.

So feare by little dꝛiuen awap, he offren eft his bꝛeſt

To ſtroke and cop, and eft his hoꝛnes with flowers to be dꝛeſt.

At laſt Europa knowing not foꝛ fo the aide was calde)

On whome ſhe venturde foꝛ to ride, was nerawhit appalde


To fet hir elfe vpon his backe. Then by and by the God


From maine date land to maine mopſt Sea gan leyſurlp to plod,
At firſt he did but dip his kerte within the outmoſt waue,

And backe againe, then further in another plunge he gaue.

And fo Hill further till at the laſt he had his wiſhed pꝛay

Amid the dæpe where was no meanes to (cape with life away.

abe Ladie quaking all foꝛ feare with rafull countnance calf,

Ap toward ſhoꝛe from whence ſhe came, held with hir righthand kalt
One ok his hoꝛnes: and with the left did Hap bpon his backe.

The weather flafke and whiſtzed vp hir garments being llacke.


Finis fecundi Libri.
e 2
8 8 888
b oo a


—— “The


THE THIRD BOOKE 30
of | Ouds Metamorphoſis.


He Cod now haulng laide alide his boꝛrowed ſhape ol Bull,

Had in his likeneſle ſhewde himſelt: And with his pꝛetie trull
Cane landing in the Jle of Crete. Mhen in that while hir Stre

Mot knowing where ſhe was become, ſent after to enquire

Hir bꝛother Cadmus, charging him his filter home to bing,

Oꝛ neuer fo2 to come againe: wherein he did a thing,

Foz which he might both ſuſtly kinde and cruell called be,

Ahern Cadmus ouer all the woꝛld had fought,(fo2 who is her. 8

That can detec the thefts of Ioue:) and no where could hir ſer.

Then as an outlaw to auoyde his fathers wꝛongkfull pre)

He went to Phebus Oꝛacle moſt humbly to defire

Wis heauenly counſell, where he would alligne him place to dwell.

An Weefar all alone in field quoth Phebus) marke hir well,

which neuer bare the pinching poke, noꝛ dꝛelw the plough as pit,

Shall meete ther. follow after hir, and where thou ſerſt hir fit,


There builde a towne, and let thereof Beotia be the name.


Downe from Parnaſus ſfately top ſcarce fully Cadmus came,
Vlhen ropling foftlp in the bale beloꝛe the herde alone
He ſaw an Hecfar on whole necke ol ſeruage print was none.


He followde after leyſurly as hir that was his guide,


And thanked Phebus in his heart that did ſo well pꝛouide.
Now had he pat’ Cephiſus foꝛde, and eke the pleaſant groundes,
About the Citie Panope conteinde within thoſe boundes.


The Wecfar ſtaide, and lifting vp hir foꝛehead to the ſkie 8
Full ſeemely foꝛ to loke pon with hoꝛnes like bꝛaunches hie 8
Did with hir lowing fill the Ayꝛe: and caſting backe hir eie bes


Upon the reſt that came alofe,as foftlp as ſhe could
Linelde downe and laide hir hatrie fine againſt the graſſie mould.


Then Cadmus gaue Apollo thankes, and falling flat bylow


Did kiſle the ground and haile the fields which pet he did not broly,
He was about to facrifice to loue the Heauenly Bing,


And bad his ſeruants goe and fetch him water of the ſpꝛing.


An olde foꝛgrobone bnkelled wod ſtede neare at hand thereby,
And in the middes a queachie plot with Sedge and Oyũers er :
Mhere


. A See 3 * La” = F Sys aye tee ee


The thirde booke of


Wibere courbde about with peble fone in likeneſſe ol a bow
here was a ſpꝛing with ſiluer ſtreames that forth thereof did floty,
Mere lurked in his lowꝛing den God Mars his grielly Snake
M ith golden ſcales and firie eyes belwolne with poyſon blake.
Thre ſpirting tongues, thꝛe rowes of teeth within his head did ſicke.
No ſonner had the Tirian folke fet fote within this thicke
And queachie plot, and deped dolone their bucket in the well,
But that to buſcle in his den began this Serpent fell.
And perring with a marble head right hoꝛribly to bitte.
The Tirians let their pitchers lip foꝛ ſodaine leare of this.
And waxing pale as any clap, like folke amade and flaight,
Stade trembling like an Alpen leale. Che ſpecled ſerpent ſtraight
Commes trailing out in wauing linkes, and knottie rolles of ſcales,
And bending into bunchie boughts his bodie foꝛth he bales.
And lifting bp aboue the watt himſeile vnto the Skie,
He ouerloketh all the wod, as huge and big welnie
As is the Snake that in the Heauen about the Poꝛdzen Pole
Deuides the Beares. He makes no fap but deales his dꝛeadfull dole
Among the Tirians. Mhether they did take them to their toles,
Oꝛ to their heeles, oꝛ that their feare did make them Mand like fales,
And helpe themlelues by none ol both, he ſnapt vp ſome aliue,
And ſwept in others with his taile, and ſome he did depꝛiue
Olk life with rankeneſſe of his bꝛeath, and other ſome againe
He ſtings and popfons vnto death till all at laſt were ſlaine.
Pow when the Sunne was at his heigth and chadowes wared Hort,
And Cadmus faty his companie make tarience in that ſoꝛt,

He marueld what ſhould be their let, and went to ſerke them out.

His har neſſe was a Lions ſkin that wꝛapped him about.

His weapons were a long ſtrong ſpeare with head of prom tride,

And eke a light and piercing Dart. And therevnto beüde
M oꝛth all the weapons in the woꝛld a ſtout and valtant hart.

Wathen Cadmus came within the wo and fat about that part
His men lie ſlaine vpon the ground, and eke their cruell fo
Ok bodie huge ſtand ouer them, and licking with his blo
And blafing tongue their loꝛie woundes, well truſtte friendes(queth he)
J epther of pour pitcous deathes will ſtreight reuenger be,

Oꝛ elſe will die my ſelke therefoꝛe. Mith that he raughting falt 1


mighty


..... r * se


Ouids Metamorphoſis. oe
A mightle Pilſtone, at the Snake with all his might it caf. —
Che fone with luch exceding force and violence forth was dꝛiuen,
As of a foꝛt the bulwarkes ſtrong and walles it would haue riuen.
And pet it did the Snake no harme: his ſcales as hard and tough 8


As ik they had bene plates of maple did fence him well inough.

So that the fone rebounded backe againtt bis freckled llough.

But pet his hardneſle ſaude him not againſk the piercing dart,

Joꝛ hitting right betwene the ſcales that peelded in that part

U hereas the ſoynts doe knit the backe, it thirled thꝛough the ſkin,
And pierced to his filthy mawe and grerdy guts within. a

He fierce with wrath wꝛings backe his head, and louking on the tripe
The Jaueling Keale that Ticked out, betwene his teeth doth grippe.
The which with wꝛeſfing to and fro at length he forth did winde,

Saue that he left the head thereof among his bones behinde.

When of his courage thꝛough the wound moꝛe kindled was the ire,
Mis thꝛoteboll ſwelde with puffed veines, his eyes gan ſparkle fire.
There ſtode about his ſmeared chaps a lothly foming froth, by tes
His ſkaled beef ploughes bp the ground, the inking bꝛeath that goth
Out from his blacke and helliſh mouth infectes the herbes full folole.
Sometime he windes hinifelfc in knots as round as any Bowle.
Sometime he ſtretcheih out in length as raight as any beame.

Anon againe with violent bꝛunt he rucheth like a ſtreume

Encreaſt by rage of latefal ne raine, and with his mightie way
Beares downe the wad before his bꝛeaſt that ſfandeth in his way.
Agenors ſonne retiring backe doth with his Lions ſpoyle

Defend him from his fierce aſlaults, and makes him to recople

Ape holding at the weapons point. The Serpent waxing wood

Doth craſhe the ſterle betwene his terth, and bites it till the blod

Dꝛopt mirt with popfon from his mouth, did die the greene gralle blacke
But pet the wound was berte light bicauſe he wꝛithed backe

And puld his head Hill from the ſtroke: and made the ſtripe to die

By giuing wap, vntill that Cadmus following trefullp :
Che ſtroke, with all his powꝛe and might did thꝛough p thꝛote him rine,
And naploe him to an Oke behind the which he eke did cliue.
Che Serpents waight did make the tree to bend. It grieude the tree
Mis bodie ol the Serpents taille thus ſcourged fo2 to ber. een

£


A


—
. Deren eee * ——


The thirde booke of
Mhile Cadmus wondꝛed at the hugeneſle of the vanquicht for
Upon the ſodaine came a voyce: from whence he could not knoty,
But ſure he was he heard the bopre.Wa hich laid, Agenors ſonne
Mhat gazeſt thus vpon this Snake z the time will one dap come
That thou thy ſelte ſhalt be a Snake. He pale and wan foꝛ feare,
Had lott his ſpeach: and ruffled bp ſtiſte ſtaring ſtod his heare.
Behold mans helper at his neede) Dame Pallas gliding through
The vacant Apꝛe was ſtraight at hand, and bade him take a plough
And caſt the Serpents teeth in ground, as of the which ſhould ſpꝛing
Another people out of hand. He did in euery thing
As Pallas bade, he take a plough, and earde a foꝛrow lo
And lowde the Serpents teeth whereok the loꝛeſaid folke Mould grow.
Anon(a wondꝛous thing to tel) the clods began to moue,
And from the foꝛrow firſt of all the pikes appearde aboue,
Pext roſe vp helmes with fethered creſts, and then the Poldzens buht,
Succeſliueip the Curets whole, and all the armoꝛ right.
Chus grew vp men like coꝛne in field in rankes ol battle ray
WAH ith ſhields and weapons in their hands to keight the field that day.
Cuen ſo when ages are attirde againſt fome ſolemne game,
UU ith clothes of Arras goꝛgeoullp, in dꝛawing vp the fame
The faces of the pages doe firſt ofall them Howe,
And then by percemeale all the roſt in oꝛder ſermes to grow, 3
Unt ill at laſt they and out full vpon their fete bylow.
Akrighted at this new found foes gan Cadmus foꝛ to take
Him to his weapons by and by reſiſtance foꝛ to make.
Stap, ſtay thy ſelfe( cride one of them that late befoꝛe were bꝛed
Out of the ground) and meddle not with ciuill warres. This feo,
One of the brothers of that bewd with launcing ſwoꝛde he line.
Another ſent a dart at him, the which him ouerthꝛue. .
Che third did ſtraight as much foꝛ him and made him peeloe the breath,
The which he had receyude but now) by ſtroke of foꝛced death.
A kewiſe outraged all the reſt vntill that one by one
By mutuall ſtroke of ciuill warre diſpatched euerpchone,
This bꝛode of bꝛothers all behewen and weltred in their blod,
Lap ſpꝛawling on their mothers womb. the ground where erlt they Had,
Saue only ſiue that did remaine. Ol whom Echion led
y Pallas counſell, th ety away the helmet from his bead, aw


FAA „


—


=


==


—


r


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 32
And with his bꝛothers gan to treat attonement fo2 to make.
Che bohich at length (bp Pallas helpe)ſo god fuccelle did take,
Chat faithkull friendthip was confirmd and hand in hand was 9


= ai


Whele afterward did well alliſt the noble Tyꝛian knight.

In building of the famous tolone that Phebus had behight.
Now Thebes Kode in god effate, now Cadmus might thou fap
Chat when thy father baniſht thee it was a luckle dap.

To {apie aliance both with Mars and Venus was thy chaunce,

M hoſe daughter thou bao® tane to wife, who did thee much aduaunce,

Not only though hir high renowne, but thꝛough a noble race

Ot ſonnes and daughters that he bare: whole childꝛen in like cafe

It was thy fortune foꝛ to (ee all men and women growne. i

But ay the ende of euery thing muſt marked be and knowne.

Soꝛ none the name of bleſſedneſte deferucth fo2 to haue

Onlelle the tenoꝛ of his life laſt bleſled to his graue.

Among fo manp pꝛoſpꝛous happes that flowde with god ſucceſſe,

Thine eldeſt Nephew was a cauſe of care and ſoꝛe diſtreſſe.

Wibole head was armde with palmed hoꝛnes, whole own hoũds inp war

Did pull their maſter to the ground and fill them with his blond.

But if you ſift the matter well, ye Mhall not finde deſart

But cruell foꝛtune to haue bene the cauſe of this his ſmart.


J oꝛ who could doe with ouerſight great laughter had bene made


Ol ſundꝛie fortes of ſauage beaſfes one moꝛning: and the ſhade
Oft things was waxed verie ſhoꝛt. It was the time ol day


That mid betwerne the Cal and Meſt the Sunne doth feme to fap.


hen as the Thebane Fripiing thus beſpake his compante,,

Still raunging in the wayleſſe wads ſome further game to ſpie.

Our weapons and our toples are moiſt and ſtaind with bloud of Deare:
his dap hath done inough as by our quarrie may appeare,

Aone as with hir ſcarlet whales next moꝛning bꝛingeth light,

Me will about our woꝛze againe. But now Hiperion bꝛight

Is in the middes of Heauen, and fearcs the ficldes with firie rapes,


Take vp pour toples, and ceaſe pour woꝛke, and let vs go dur wapes.


They did euen ſo, and ceaſt their woꝛke. Chere was a valley thicke
With Pinaple and Cipꝛeſle trees that armed be with pꝛicke.
Gargaphie hight this thadte plot, it was a ſacred place

Co chaſt Diana and the Nymphes that wapted on hir grace, cates


ore
. ES eee in — —


The thirde booke of
l ithin the kurtheſt end thereof there was a pleaſant Bowꝛe
So baulted with the leaule trers the Sunne had there no powze:
ot made by hand noꝛ mans deuiſe: and per no man aliue,
A trimmer piece of woꝛke than that could koꝛ his like contriue.
With flint and Pommp was it wallde by nature balfe about,
And on the right fide ol the fame full freſhly flo wed out
A liuely ſpꝛing with Chꝛiſtall ſtreame: thereof the bpper beim
Mas grone with graſle and matted herbes that ſmelled verie trim.
Mhen Phebe felt hir ſelfe ware faint, ol following of hir game,
It was hir cuſtome for to tome and bath hir in the fame.
That dap ſhe hauing timelp left hir hunting in the chace,
Mas entred with hir troupe of Pymphes within this plealant place,
She toke hir quiuer and hir bow the which the had onbent,,
And eke hir Jauelin to a Pymph that ſerued that intent.
Another Pymph to take hir clothes among hir traine He chole,
Two loſde hir buſkins from hir legges and pulled of hir hole.
Che Thebane Ladie Crocale moze cunning than the reſt
Did true hir treſles handlomly which hung behind vndꝛelt.
And pet hir owne hung wauing fill. Then Niphe nete and clene
Mith Hiale gliſtring like the grach in beautie kreſh and Hene,
And Rhanis clearer of hir ſkin than are the rainie dꝛops,
And little bibling Phyale, and Pſeke that pꝛetie Mops,
Powꝛde water into beffels large to waſhe their Iadic with.
Now while the herpes this wont, behold, by wandꝛing in the krith
He Wik not whither ( hauing ſtaid his paſtime till the mozrol)
Comes Cadmus Mephew to this thicke: and entring in with ſoꝛrow
(Such was his curled cruell fate ſaw Phebe where ſhe walht.
The Damlels at the ſight of man quite out of countnance dalht,
(Wicauſe they euerichone were bare and naked to the quicke
Did beate their handes againtt their bꝛeaſts, and caf out ſuch a ſheicke,
That all the wa did ring thereof: and clinging to their dame
Did all they could to hide both hir and eke themſelues fro ſhame.
But Phebe was of perſonage fo comlp and fo tall,
Chat by the middle or hir necke fhe ouerpeerd them all.
Such colour as appeares in Beauen by Phebus bꝛoken rapes
Diredlp ſhining on the Clondes oꝛ ſuch as is alwayes .
The colour oł the Momung Cloudes before the Sunne doth ſholo, aud


' _  Otiids Metamorphofis, 33

Such languine colour in the face of Phoebe gan to glowe
Chere Landing naked in his ſight. Mho though he had hir gard
Ok Pymphes about hir: pet the turnde hir bodie from him ward.
And caſting back an angrie loke, like as fhe would haue lent
An arrow at him had the had hir bow there readie bent.

1 So raught the water in hir hande and foꝛ to wꝛeake the ſpight

ty Beſpꝛinckled all the heade and face of this vnluckie night,

And thus koꝛeſpake the beanie lot that ſhoulde vpon him light.
Hob make thy vaunt among thy Mates, thon (atofte Diana bare.
Tell ik thou can: J giue the leaue: tell heardly: doe not ſpare.
This done che makes no further thꝛeates, but by and by doth ſpꝛead
* A papꝛe of linelp olde Warts hoꝛnes vpon his ſpꝛinckled head.
She ſharpes his eares, he makes his necke both lender, long and lanke,
She turnes bis fingers into fete, his armes to ſpindle thanke.

ö She wꝛappes him in a hairie hyde beſet with ſpeckled ſpottes,

And planteth in him fearefulnette, And ſo away he trottes.
Full greatly wondꝛing to him felfe what made him in that cace

To be fo Wight and fwift of tote. Wut when he law his face

And hoꝛned temples in the bꝛoke, he would haue crpde alas,

But as fo2 then no kinde of {peach out of his lippes could patle.

He fight and bꝛayde: fo2 that was then the ſpeach that did remaine,
And downe the eyes that were not his, his bitter teares did raine. 5
Hos part remapned (laue his minde ol that he earſt had bene,

MMhat ſhould he doe: turne home againe to Cadmus and the Nucne :

| D2 hyde himſelle among the Mods 7 MF this he was afrayd,

And ot the tother ill achamde. M hile doubting thus he ſtapd.

| ls houndes eſpyde him where he was, and Blacklote firſt of all

And Stalker ſpeciall god of ſent began aloud to call.

This latter was a hounde of Crete, the other was of Spart.

Then all che kenell fell in round, and euerie fo2 his part,

Dypd follow frechly in the chafe moze ſwifter than the winde.

Spy, Cateal, Scalecliffe, thꝛe god houndes comme all of Arcas kinde.
Strong Bilbucke, curriſh Sauage, Spring, and Hunter frech of fmell,
And Lightfote who to lead a chaſe did beare awap the bell.

Fierce Woodman hurte not long ago in hunting of a Boꝛe,

And Shepeheird wont to follow ſherpe and neate to fielde afore,

And Laund a fell and eger bitch that had a Molle to Syꝛe:

en 9 Ff. j. Another


a


The thirde booke of


Another beach callde Grerdigut with two hir Puppies by her.

And Ladon gant as any Grerwnd a hownd in Sycion bzed,

Wlab, I lerte md, Patch whole flecked Chin 65 lundzie ſpots was ſpꝛed:
Wight, Wowman, Nopfter, beautie faire and white as winters hop,
And Tawnie full of duſtie halres that ouer all did grow,

Mith luſtie Nutkler paling all the reldue there in ſrength.

And Cempelt beſt of kotemanſhipe in holding out at length.

Aud Cole and Swiſt, and little Molle, as wight as anp other.
Accompanide with a Ciprian hound that was his natiue bꝛother,
And Snatch amid whole forehead fade a ſtarre as white as ſnowe,
Che refouc being all as blacke and Micke as any Crowe.

And ſhaggie Rugge with other twalne that had a Spre of Crete,
And Dam ok Sparta: Lone of them callde Jollybop, à great

And large fictod hound: the tother Choꝛle loha euer gnoꝛring went,
And Ring wad with a ſhyꝛle loude mouth the which he freely (pent,
With diuers mo whofe names to tell it were but lolſe ol tyme.

Chis fellowes ouer hill and dale in hope of pray doe clpme,
Thꝛough thicke and thin and craggie clitles where was no way to go,
He llpes thꝛough groundes where oftentymes he chaled had ere tha.
Euen from his owne folke is he faine (alas) to flee way.

Pe ſtraynedoktentymes to ſpeake, and was about to fap.

J am Acteon: know pour Loꝛde and Payſter firs J pap. f

But bſe of woꝛdes and {peach did want to vtter foꝛth his minde.
Their crie did ring thꝛough all the Mod redoubled with the winde,
Fir Slo did pinch him by the haunch, and next came Bildeerre in,
And Hylbꝛed faſtnod on his ſhoulder, bote him thꝛough the ſtzinne.
Chele came forth later than the reit, but coaſting thwart a hill,

They did gainecope him as he came, and helde their Paſter fill
Untill that all the reſt came in, and faſtned on him to.

No part of him was free from wound. He could none other do

But figh.and in the ſhape of Hart with bopce as Hartes are wont,
(Jfo2 voyce of man was none now left to helpe him at the bꝛunt)
By bꝛaping ſhew his leeret grief among the Pountaynes hie,

And knerling ladly on his bres with dꝛerrie teares in eye,

As one by bumbling of himſelte that mercy ſeemde to craue.

With piteous loke in ead of handes his head about to waue.

Pot knowing that it was their Loꝛd, the huntlmen chere their a


SE SPs NE a ST TIS


t Ouids Metamorphofis. 34


Mlith wonted noyſe and for Acteon lobe about the grounds.
hep hallow who could lo wdeit crie ill calling him by name, >
As though be were not there, and much his ablence they do blame 5
In that he came not to the fall, but flackt to fe the game.
As often as they named him he ſadly (hake his head,
And faine he would haue beene away thence in ſome other ſtead.
But there he was. And well he could haue found in heart to fee
Mis dogges fell deedes, ſo that to kerle in place he had not ber.
They hem him in on euerie five, and in the Hape of Stagge,
Mith grerdie teeth and griping pawes their Loꝛd in perces dꝛaͤgge.
So fierce was cruell Phoebes wꝛath, it could not be alapde,
Till of his fault by bitter death the raunſome he had papde.
Much muttring was vpö this fact. Some thought there was erteden
A great deale moꝛe extremitie than neded. Some commended
Dianas doing: ſaping that it was but woꝛthely
225 ſafegarde of hir womanhod. Eche partie did applie
Gd reaſqns to defende their cafe. Alone the wife of Ioue,
Ok lpking o2 milliking it not all fo greatly ſtroue,

As ſecretly reioyſt in heart that ſuch a plague was light
On Cadmus linage: turning all the malice and the ſpight

Concepued earſt againſt the wench that Ioue had fet fro Tyre,

Upon the kinred of the wench, and fo2 to fierce hir ire,

„ Another thing cleane ouerthwart there commeth in the nicke:

The Ladie Semell great with childe by loue as then was quicke.

Hereat the gan to feat and fume, and foꝛ to eaſe hir heart,

5 Mhich elfe would burſl, ſhe fell in hande with ſcolding out hir pare.
1 And what a godpeare haue J won by ſcolding erſt! che fed)
: It is that arrant queane hir ſelfe, againſt whole wicked hed

J mutt aay to giue aſlault: and if (as men me call) 9 985
0 J be that Iuno who in heauen beare greateſt (wing of all!.

Ik in my hande J woꝛthie be to holde the ropall Mare, 870
And it J be the Queene of heauen and ſoneratgne of this place,
Oz wile and ſiſter bute Ioue, (his fifter well J know: 4 OT

Wut as fo: wife that name is bapne, J ſerue but fo2 a hotv, ©

To couer other priate faapes) J will confound that MA hoze.

No (with a miſchiete) is the bagd and beareth out before, —
| bir open chame to all the woꝛld⸗ and ſhoꝛtiy hopes ta bee MOL EE
J. i. The


E P= ae


r


AKA


The thirde booke of


The mother of a ſonne by Ioue, the which bath hapt to me,
Mot palling once in all my time, fo foze the doth pꝛelume
Upon hir beautte. But trowe hir hope Hall (one conſume.
Joꝛ neuer let me counted be foꝛ Saturns daughter moꝛe,
Ik by hir owne deare darling Ioue on whome the truſtes fo ſoꝛe,
J ſende hir not to Styxes ſtreame. This ended bp the roſe
And couered in golden cloud to Semelles Houle He goes.
And ere the fent away the cloud, ſhe takes an olde wyues ſhape
Mith hoarie hatte and rineled fhinne, with How and craked gate,
As though the had the Palley had hir feeble limmes did hake,
And eke che koltred in the mouth as often as the ſpake.
She feembde olde Beldame Beroe of Epidaure tu br,
This Ladie Semelles ourſe as right as though it had bene Hee,
So when that after mickle talke of purpofe miniſtred
Joues name was vpyned: by and by fhe gaue a ſigh and ſed,
J wiſh with all my heart that loue bee cauſe to the of this.
But daughter deare i dꝛeade the work, J feare it be amiſſe.
Foz manie Warlets vnder name of Gods to ſerue their lult,
ane into vndeſiled beddes themſelues full often thꝛult.
And though it bene the mightie Ioue pet doth not that ſullize,
Onlelle he alſo make the fame apparant to our eves.
And tf it be euen verte her, fay it doth behoue,
He pꝛoue it by ſome open ligne and token ol his loue.
And thereloꝛe pap him foꝛ to graunt that loke in what degre, —
WM hat oꝛder, fachion, fort and ſtate he bie to compante
Mith mightie Iuno, in the fame in euerie poynt and cace,
To all intents and purpoſes he ther like wiſe embzace,
And that he alfo bꝛing with him his bꝛight theafozked Pace:
Mith ſuch inſtruaions Iuno had enfoꝛmed Cadmus Pace:
And the poe ſtelie ſimple ſoule immediately on this
Requefted Ioue to graunt a bone the which the did not name.
Atze what chan wilt ſwerte heart (quoth he) thou (halt not mille the ſame,
And foꝛ to make ther ſure hereol, the grifelp Stygian Lake,
Wich is the feare and God af Gods beare witneſſe foꝛ thy ſake.
She oping in hir owne miſchaunce, nat hauing any powꝛe
Co rule hir ſelke, but making {pede to hak hir tatall botwze,
In which the thꝛough hir Louers helpe chould wozke hir owne aii


*


— r is


| Ouids Metamorphoſis. 35
Sayd: Such as Iuno findeth pou when pou and the dor play,
The games of Venus, ſuch J pꝛay thee ſhelw thy ſelfe to mee
In euer ie caſe. he Gad would fatue haue ſtopt hir mouth. Wut the
1 Had made ſuch halk that out it was Mhich made him ſigh full ſoꝛe,
Joꝛ neyther He could then vnwiſh the thing the witht befoze,
Hoꝛ he reuoke his ſolemne oth. Mhereloze with ſozie heart
And heauie countiance by and by to Heauen he doth de part.
e And makes to fallow after him with loke full grim and ſtoure
Che flakie clouds all griſiy blacke,as when they theeat a fhoure.
Lo which he added mixt with winde a fierce and dathing flame,
Ul ith dꝛie and dzeadfull thunderelaps and lightning to the fame
Pk deadly vnauoyded dynt. And yet as much as may
He goes about his vehement force and ñerceneſſe to allap.
He doth nat arme him with the fire with which be did remaue
Che Glant with the hundꝛeth handes Typhoẽus from aboue: G
It was tw cruell and to fore to dle againſt his Laue. f
The Cyclops made an other kinde of lightning karre moze light,
| Wherein they put much lelle of ũre, leſte fierreneſſe, leſſer might.
It bight in Heauen the ſeconde ace. Ioue armes himſelle with this
And enters into Cadmus houſe where Semelles chamber is.
She being moꝛtall was to weake and feeble to withſtande f :
Such troublous tumultes of the Heauens: and therefore out of hande
Was burned in hir Louers armes. But pet he take away
Bis in tant from the mothers wombe vnperlfen as it lap,
And lit a man map credit it) did in his thigh it ſowe,
Mhere byding out the mothers tyme it did to ripeneſſe growe.
And when the time ol birth was come his Aunt the Ladie Ine
| Did nourſe him fo2 a while by ſtealth and kept him trym and fine.
The Pymphes ol Ny ſa afterwarde did in their boiuzes him hide,
And brought him vp with Pike till tyme he might abꝛade be ſpyde.
Now while theſe chings were done on earth, and that by fatal dome
i The twice boꝛne Bacchus had a tyme to mannes eſtate to came,
Chey fap that Ioue diſpoſde to myꝛth as he and Iuno late
A dꝛinking Necdar after meate in ſpoꝛt and plealant rate,
Did fall a ieaſting with his wife, and ſaide: a greater pleaſure
In Venus games pe women haue than men beponde all meaſure.
2 iy. Ohe
5


— —


*


The thirde booke of


dhe anſwerde no. To trie the truth, they both of them agree

The wife Tyrefias in this caſe indifferent Judge to ber,

Nho both the man and womans topes by tryall vnderſtod.

Fo2 finding once two mightie Snakes engendꝛing in a Mod,

He ſtrake them ouerthwart the backs, by meanes whercol beholde

(As ſtraunge a thing to be of truth as euer pet was tolde)

He being made a woman ſtraight, ſeuen winter liued ſo.

The eight he finding them ag aine did fap buto them tho:

And ik to ſtrite pe haue ſuch powꝛe as foz to turns their ſhape

That are the giuers of the ſtripe, befoze yon hence eſcape,

One ripe now will J lende pou moꝛe. He ſtrake them as befoꝛne

And ſtraight returnd his foꝛmer ſhape in which be firff was bozne.

Tyreſias therefoꝛe being tane to iudge this leſting ſrife,

Gaue fentence on the fide of Ioue. Che which the Queene his wife

Did take a great deale moꝛe to heart than nerded, and in ſpight

To wꝛeahke hir tene vpon hir Judge, bereft him ol his ſight.

But Ioue (fo2 to the Gods it is vnlertull to vnde

Che things which other of the Gods by any meanes haue doe)

Did give him fight in things to come foꝛ toffe of ſight ol eye,

And fo his grieuous puniſhment with honour did ſupplie.

By meanes whereok within a while in Citte, fielde, and tolone

Chꝛough all the coaſt of Aony was bꝛuted his renowne.

And folke to haue their foꝛtunes read that daply did reſozte

Mere aunſwerde fo as none of them could giue him miſrepoꝛte.
Che firtk that of his ſothtaſt woꝛdes had pꝛoufe in all the Realme
Mas freckled Lyriop, whom ſometime ſurpꝛiſed in his ſtreame,

Che floud Cephifus did enforce. This Lady bare à ſonne

Mhole beautie at his verie birth might tuſtly loue haue wonne.

Narciſſus did fhe call his name. DF wheme the Pꝛophet lage

Demaunded tf the childe ſhould line to many peares ok age.

Made aunſwere, pra full long, ſo that him ſelte he doe not know.

The Sothlapers woꝛdes ſcemde long but vaine, vntill the end did ſhob

His ſaping to be true in derde by ſtraungenelle of the rage,

And ſtraungenelle of the kinde ol death that did abꝛidge his age.

Foz when peares thee times fiue and ane he fully lyued had,


r


0
1


224 . a ,
Ouids Metamorphofis. 36

So that he ſermde to ſtande beet wene the ſtate of man and Lad,
The hearts ofopuers trim pong men his beautie gan to moue
And m ny a Ladie freſh and fatre was taken in his lone. ou
Eut in that grace of Patures gift {uch palling pride did raigne,
That to be toucht of man oꝛ Mapde he tobolp did dildaine.
A babling Nymph that Echo hight: who hearing others talke, .
By no meanes can reſtraine hir tongue but that it needes muſt walke,
Noꝛ of hir felfe bath powꝛe to ginne to ſpeake to any wight,
Elpyde him dꝛyuing into toyles the fearefull ſtagges of fligbt.


This Echo was a body then and not an onelp vopte.


Bet of hir (peach the had that time no moze than now the choytce.
That is to fap of many woꝛdes the latter to repeate.

Che cauſe thereof was Iunos wath. oꝛ when that with the feate
She might haue often taken Ioue in daliance with his Dames,


And that by ſtealth and vnbewares in middes of all his games.


his elle would with hir tatling talke dete ine hir by the way,

Unt ill that loue had wꝛought his will and they were fled away.

The which when Iuno did percepue,the ſaid with wꝛathlull mod,

This tongue that hath deluded me ſhall doe ther little god,

Foz of thy (peach but ſimple ble hereafter ſhalt thou haue.

Che derde it lelle did ſtraight conũrme the thꝛeatnings that he gaue.

Pet Echo of the foꝛmer talke doth double oft the ende

And backe againe with tuft repoꝛt the woꝛdes earſt ſpoken fende.
Now when (he fawe Narciſts ſfray about the Foꝛreſt wyde,
She wared warme and ſtep fo2 ep fall after him ſhe hyde.

Che moze He followed after him and nerrer that the came,

Che whoter euer did he ware as nerrer to hir flame.

Lypke as the liuely Bꝛimſtone doch which dipt about a match,

And put but foftlp to the fire, the flame doth lightly catch.

O Loꝛd how often woulde {he faine(if nature would haue let)


Entreated him with gentle woꝛdes ſome fausur ſoꝛ to get 2


?


1


Wut nature would not ſuffer hir noꝛ giue hir leaue to ginne.

Pet ſo karre koꝛth as the by graunt at natures hande could winne)

Ay readio with attentiue care the harkens fo2 ſome ſounde,

Mhereto he might replie hir woꝛdes, from which the is not bounde.
wees ike F.ily. By


The thirde booke of
By chaunte the tripling being ſtrayde from all his compante,
Saͤpde: is there any body nie:; ſtraight Echo anſwerde: J.
Ama de he caſtes his eye alde, and loketh round about,
And come (that all the Foꝛreſt rong)aloud he calleth out.
And come (layth the :) he loketh backe, and ſeeing no man followe,
Why flute, he erpeth once againe: and the the fame doth hallowe,
He Mill perliſtes and wondzing much what kinde of thing it was
From which that anſwering vopce by turne fo duely ſæmde to palle,
Said: let vs ioyne. She (bp hir will deũrous to bane ſaid,
In fapth with none moze willingiy at any time oꝛ fead)
Said: let vs iopne. And Landing ſomewhat in hir otone concett,
Upon theſe woꝛdes the left the Mad, and forth the peedeth ſtreit,
To coll the louely necke foꝛ tobich Ge longed had fo much,
He runnes his way and will not be imbꝛaced of no ſuch.
And ſayth: J fir will die ere thou ſhalt take of me thy pleaſure.
She aunſwerde nothing elle thereto, but take of me thy plealure.
ow when ſhe faw hir ſelfe thus mockt, ſhe gate hir to the Mos,
And hid hir head fo2 verie ſhame among the leaues and buddes.

5 And euer fence the lyues alone in dennes and hollow Caues.
Pet ſfacke hir lone Mill to hir heart, thꝛough which he daplp raues
Che moze for ſoꝛrowe of repulſe. Thꝛough reſtleſle carke and care
Mir bodie pynes to ſkinne and bone, and wareth wonderous bare.
The bloud doth van ich into apꝛe froin out of all hir veynes,
And nought is left but vopce and bones: the bopce pet Hill remaynes
Hir bones they fap were turnde to ſtones. From thence the lurking Mil
In Mods, will neuer ſhewe hir head tn field noꝛ pet on hill.
Pet is ſhe heard ol euerp man : it is hir onely found,
And nothing elſe that such remapne aliue aboue the ground.
Chus had he mockt this wꝛetched Nymph and manp mo befide,
That in the waters, Mods and groues, oꝛ Pountapnes did abpde
Chus had he mocked many men. Ol which one miſcontent
To fe bimfelfe deluded ſo, his handes to Heauen vp bent,
And ſapd: J pꝛay to God he map once fle fierce Cupids five
As J doe now, and pet not iop the things he doth deſire.
The Goddelle Ramnuſeſwho doth wꝛeake on wicked people take)

Allented to his tuk requeſt foꝛ ruth and pities fake, Then


K S88 eee ee


—


Quids Metamorphoſis.


There was a {pring withonten mudde as ſtluer cleare and Mill,
Vlhich nepther ſherpeheirds, noꝛ the Goates that fed vpon the hill,


Popꝛ other cattell troubled had, noꝛ ſauage beaſt had ſtyꝛd,


Po bꝛaunch no? ſticke, noꝛ leate of træ, noꝛ any foule noꝛ byzd.
Che moyſture fed and kept ape freſh the graſſe that grew about,
And with their leaues the trees did keepe the heate of Phoebus out.


The Tripling wearie with the heate and hunting in the chace,


And much delighted with the (pring and cwlenele of the place,
Did lap him downe vpon the bꝛim: and as he wped lowe


Co ſtaunche his thurtk, another thurſt of woꝛſe effect did grotve,


Foꝛ as he dꝛanke, he chaunſt to (pie the Image of his face,


The which he did immedlately with feruent loue embzace.


He Fxdes a hope without caule why. oꝛ like a fwliſhe noddie

Me thinkes the ſhadow that he ſers, to be a liuely boddie.
Aſtraughted like an pmage made ol Marble fone he lyes,
There gazing on his ſhadowe till with fired faring eyes.
Stretcht all along vpon the ground, it doth him gad to ler

His ardant eyes which like two ſtarres full bꝛight and ſhyning bir.
And eke his fingars, fingars ſuch as Bacchus might befeme,
And haire that one might woꝛthely Apollos hatre it deeme.

His beardleſſe chinne and puoꝛie necke, and eke the perfect grace
Ok white and red indifterently bepainted in his face.

All theſe he wondꝛeth to beholde, for which as J doe gather)
Pimſelfe was to be wondꝛed at, oꝛ to be pitied rather.

Be is enamoꝛed of himſelfe foꝛ want of taking hde.

And where he lykes another thing, he lykes himſelle in derde.

He is the partic mhome he woes, and ſuter that doth woe,

He is the flame that ſettes on fire, and thing that burneth toe.
O Loꝛd how often did be kite that kalle deceitful thing?

How often did he thꝛuſt his armes midway into the ſpꝛing⸗

Lo haue embꝛzaſte the necke he ſaw and could not catch bimlelfe 2
Be knowes not what it was he ſawe. And pet the folith elfe


Doth burne in ardent loue thereof. Che verſe felfe fame thing


Chat doth bewitch and blinde his eyes, encrealeth all his Ming.
Chou fondling thou, why doeſt thou raught the fickle image for
The thing thou ſerkelt is not there. And if a ide thou go: rhe


„ 3 0 e ca te © hg: ee tat eee Te ee N


The thirde booke of


The thing thou loueſt straight is gone. It is none other matter
Chat thou dock fer, than of thy ſelle the ſhadow in the water.
The thing is nothing ok it ſelke: with ther it doth abide,

WU ith thee it would departe ik thou withdꝛew thy ſelle aſide.

Mo care of meate could dꝛaw him thence, noꝛ pet deſire ok reſt.
But lying flat againſt the ground, and leaning on his bꝛeſt,

With grerdte eyes he gazeth Mill vppon the falced face,

And thꝛough his ſight is wꝛought his bane. Pet foꝛ a little {pace

He turnes and ſettes himſelke vpright, and holding vp his hands

Mith piteous boyce vnto the wodd that round abont him ands,

Crpes out and ſes: alas pe Nds, and was there euer anp:

That loude lo cruelly as : pou know: foꝛ vnto many

A place of harbꝛough haue pou bene, and foꝛt of refuge ſtrong.

Can you remember anꝝ one in all pour tyme fo long

That bath fo pinde away as J: J fe and am full faine,

Mobbbeit chat J like and {ee J can not pet attaine: 5

So great a blindneſle in my heart thꝛough doting lone doth raigne.

And toꝛ to ſpight me moze withall, it is no iourney farre,

Po dꝛenching Sea, no Pountame hie, no wall, no locke, no barre,

It is but euen a little dꝛoppe that keepes vs two a funder.

He would be had. Foꝛ lobe how oft 4 kiſſe the water vnder,

Do oft againe with vpwarde mouth he riſeth towarde mee.

A man would thinke to touch at leaſt 3 chould pet able be.

It is & trifle in reſpect that lettes vs of our loue.

Mhat wight ſoeuer that thon art come hither vp aboue.

O pterlefle piece, hp do thou mee thy louer thus delude⸗

D2 twhither fliſte thou of thy friende thus earneſtly purfude 2

Iwis J nepther am fo fotwle noꝛ pet fo growne in peares

That in this toile thou ſhouldſt me Hon. Co haue me to their Ferres,

The Nymphes themfclues haue ſude ere this and yet as ſhould appate)

Thon dok pꝛetende ſome kinde of hope of friendſhip by thy chere.

oz when J ſkretch mine armes to the, thou ſtretcheſt thine likelwiſc

And (FF ſmile thon ſmileſt to: And when that from mine eyes

The teares doe dꝛop, 3 well perceyue the water ſtands in thine.

Ake geſture alſo doſt thou make to euerie becke of mine.

And as by mouing of thy ſwoete and louely lippes J wene,


Thou


pe a


Thou ſpeakeſt woꝛds althongh mine eares concetue not what they bene
It is mp ſelke J well perceyue, it is mine Image ſure,
Chat in this fort deluding me, this furie doth procure.
3 am inamoꝛed of mp ſeile, I doe both fet on fire, f
1 And am the fame that lwelteth to, thzough impotent deüre.
What hall J doe; be wode oz wo? whome hall J wo therefore?
ts The thing J ſerke is in my ſelte, my plentie makes me page.
ht O would to God J foꝛ a while might from my bodie part.
1 Chis wi is ſtraunge to heare a L ouer wꝛapped all in ſmart, 5
Lo wich away the thing the which be loueth as his heart.
* My ſoꝛrowe takes awap my ſtrength. J haue not long to liue,
But in che floure ol youth muſt die. Co die it doth not grieue.
Feaꝛ that by death ſhall come the ende ok all my griefe and palne
J would this pongling whome J loue might lenger life obtaine: 7
Foz in one ſoule ſhall now decap we ſkedfaſt Louers twaine.
This (aide in rage he turnes againe vnto the foꝛſaide hade, N
1 And roꝛes the water with the teares and ſloubꝛing that he made, > 5
That thꝛough bis troubling of the Mell his ymage gan to fade.
li Which when he lawe to vaniſh fo, Oh whither otk thou fife 2
Abide 3 pꝛap the heartelp,aloudbe gan to crie. a
Feonꝛſake me not ſo cruelly that loueth the fo dere,
But giue me leane a little while my daz led eyes to cherre
lith ſight of that which fo2 to touch is vtterlp denide,
Chereby to fede my wꝛetched rage and furte koꝛ a tide.
As in this wile he made his mone, he ſtripped off his cote.
And with his if outragtoully his naked ſtamacke fmote.
| ruddie colour where he ſmote roſe on his fomacke chere,
Lpke Apples which doe partly white and friped red appære.
1 £2 as the cluſters cre the grapes to ripeneffe fully come:
ai An Oꝛient purple here and there beginnes to grow on ſome.
5 Mhich things allone as in the ſpꝛing he did beholde againe,
5 Ve could no longer beare it out. But fainting ſtraight fo2 paine,
As lith and ſupple ware doth melt againſt the burning flame,
Oz moꝛning de we againſt the Sunne that glareth on the fame?
Euen ſo by piecemale being {pent and walked thꝛaugh defire,
Vu he confume and melt away with Cupids ſecret fire,


| Hie


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 38


. n = —


The thirde booke of

is liuely hue of white and red his cherrefulneſſe and ſkrength
And all the things that lyked him did wanze away at length.
So that in fine remapned not the bodie which ol late
The wꝛetched Echo loued ſo. Mho when the ſawe his Fate,
Although in heart ſhe angrie were, and mindefull of his pꝛide,
Pet ruing his vnhappie caſe; as often as he eride
Alas, he cride alas lihe wiſe with ſhirle redoubled ſound.
And when he beate bis bꝛeaſt, oz ſtrake his fete againſt the ground,
She made like noyſe of clapping to. Cheſe are the won des that laſt
Out of his lippes beholding Mil his wanted ymage pat.
Alas ſwærte boy beloude in vaine, farewell. And by and by
With ſighing found the lelfe fame woꝛdes the Echo did reply.
With that he lapde his wearie head againſt the graſſie place
And death did clase his gazing eyes that wondzed at the grace 5
And beautte which did late adoꝛne their Paſters heauenly face,
And afterward when into Pell receyued was his ſpaight
He goes me to the Mell of Styx, and there both day and night
Standes toting on his ſhadow Hill as fondelp as before N
The water Hymphes his Eers wept and wayled foꝛ him faze 5
And on his bodie ſtrowde thetr haire clipt off and ſhoꝛne therekoꝛe.
Che Modnymphes alfo did lament, And Echo did rebound
To euerp ſoꝛrowłull noyſe of theirs with like lamenting ſound.
The fire was made to burne the coꝛſe, and waren Tapers light.
A Werce to lap the bodie on with ſolemne pompe was dight.
But as foꝛ bodie nane remaind: In ſtead thereof they faund
d yellow floure with milke white leaues new ſpꝛong vpon the ground

This matter all Achaia through did ſpꝛeade the Peophets fame:

That euery where of uf vefert renowmed was his name.

But Penthey olde Echions ſonne( ho pꝛoudely did diſdarne
Woth God and man) did laughe to ſcoꝛne the Pꝛophets wards as vaine,
Vpbꝛading him moſt fpitefully with loſing of his ſighe,

And with the fact foꝛ which he loſt kruition of this light.

Che god olde kather ( foꝛ thefe woꝛdes his pactence much did mous)
Said: O how happie ſhouldel thou be and blelled fram aboue,
Ak thou wert blinde as well as J, ſo that thou might not fe

The ſacred rptesof Bacchus band: Foz ſure the time will ber,


— —— = Cs ESF SSE = BT eB


ee ee =


And that full ſhoꝛtely (as J geſſe) that hither ſhall reſoꝛt
Another Bacchus Semelles ſonne, whome it thou not ſuppoꝛt
With pompe and honour like a God, thy carcaſſe ſhall be tattred,
And in a thouſand places eke about the Mods be ſcattred. s
And koꝛ to reade the what they are that ſhall perfourme the derde.
I˖t is thy mother and thine Auntes that thus thall make ther blerde.
1 J know it ſhall fo come to paſſe, foʒ why thou ſhalt diſdaine,
To honour Bacchus às à God: and then thou ſhalt with paine
Fele how that blinded as J am J ſawe foꝛ thee to much. 5
As olde Tireſias did pronounce theſe woꝛdes and other fach,
Echions ſonne did trouble him. Mis woꝛdes prone true in derde,
Joꝛ as the Pꝛophet did foꝛeſpeake fo fell it out with pene.
Anon this newelound Bacchus commes: the woods and fieldes rebound,
Vllith noyſe ol ſhouts and hawling out, and ſuch confuted found.


a


Che noble men and raſcall ſoꝛte ran gadding alſo thither.

Che Oꝛgles of this vnknowne God full fondely to performe,

The which when Penthey did percepue, he gan to rage and frome.
And fapde vnto them. O pe ympes of Mars his {nate by kinde


Mhat ayleth you: what fiend of hell doth thus enrage your minde?
Path tinking found of pottes and pannes⸗ bath noyſe of croked bogie an


Baue fende tilufions ſuch a force z that them whome heretoloꝛne
No arming ſwoꝛde : no bloudie trumpe: no men in battail rap
Coulde cauſe to ſhꝛinke : no ſherpiſh ſhꝛiekes ol ſimple women frap 2.

And dꝛonken wodnelle wꝛought by wine e ¢ roughts of filthie freakes 2.

And ſound of roping timpanes danntes : ¢ quite the ir courage bꝛeakes:;
Shall J at pou pc aͤunclent men which from the towne of Tyre?

Lo being pour houſholde Gods by Sea, in ſafetie did aſppꝛe⸗

And ſetled them within this place the which pe nowe doe perlde
In bondage quite without all foꝛce and fighting in the fieloe 2

D2 wonder at pou ponger forte appꝛoching bnto me

Moꝛe neare in courage and in peares: whome mecte it were to fee


Miith ſpeare and not with thirſe in bande: with glittring helme on bed;


And not with leaues 2 Nobo call to minde of whome pe all are beers
And take the ſtomackes of that Snake, which being one alone,
Right ſtoutly in his otune defence confounded many one.

Me loꝛ his harbꝛough and his ſpꝛing his lyle did nobly ſpend. :
2 8


C — —


Ouids Metamorphofis. 39


Che folke runne flocking out by heapes, men, Payds and wines togither


The thirde booke of 7


Doe vou no moze but take a heart pour Countie to dekende.

He put to death right valeant Unightes. Pour battaile is with ſuch

As are but Meicocks in etkea: and pet pe doe fo much

In conquering them, that by the derde the olde renowne pe ſaue,

Mhich from pour fathers by diſcent this pꝛeſent time pe haue.

If fatall deſtnies doe foꝛbid that Thebæ long ſhall ſtande,

Would Gad that men with Canon (Hor might raze it out of hande.

Would God the noyſe of fire and ſwoꝛde did in our hearing ſound.

Soꝛ then in this our wꝛetchedneſſe there could no fault be found,

Chen might we luſtly waile our cafe that all the woꝛld might fe

Wie ould not nerde of Heading teares alhamed foz to be,

But now our towne is taken by a naked beardeleſſe bop,

Who doth not in the feates of armes noꝛ hoꝛſe noꝛ armour ſop.

But fo2 to moyſt his hatre with Pirrhe, and put on garlands gap,

And in foft Purple ike and golde his bodie to arap. f

But put to yon pour helping hand and ſtratght without delay

J will compell him poynt by poynt his lewdnelle to bewꝛap,

Both in bſurping Ioues high name in making him his ſonne

And forging of theſe Ceremonies lately now begonne.

Hath King Atrifius heart inough this fondling foꝛ to bate 2

Chat makes himſelfe to be a God? and fo2 to ſhit the gate

Ok Argus at his comming there 2 and thall this roner make

ing Penthey and the noble towne of Thebx thus to quake:

Go q̃uicklp Girs(thefe woꝛdes he ſpake vnto his ſeruaunts) go

And being the Captaine hither bound with ſperde, why ſtay ye lo?
His Grandſire Cadmus, Athamas and others of his kinne
Repꝛoued him by gentle meanes but nothing could they winne:

Che moze intreatance that they made the fiercer was he Hill;

Che moze his friendes did go about to bꝛeake him ol his will.

The moze thep did pꝛouoke his wꝛath, and fet his rage on fire:

hep made him woꝛſe in that they fought to betole his deſire.

So haue J lene a bꝛoke ere this, where nothing let the freame,

Runne ſmoth with little nopſe oꝛ none, but where as any beame

D2 cragged ſtones did let his courſe, and make him fo; to fap:

It went moze fiercelp from the ſtoppe with fomie wꝛoth awap.

Beholde all blondie come his men, and ſtraight be them demaunded

Wi bere Bacchus was, and why they had nut done as he commaunded > ;


: Ouids Metamorphofis.
Sir (aunſwerde they) we ſaw him not, but this fame fellow bere
4 A chiefe companion in his traine and woꝛker in this gere,

Wie toke by foꝛee: And therebolthall pꝛelented to their Low ;
le A certaine man of Tirrhene lande, his handes fatt bound with coꝛd,
. Mhome thep, frequenting Bacchus rites had found but late befoze.

A grim and cruell loke which pre did make to ſæme moze ſoꝛe,

Did Penthey caſt vpon the man. And though he ſcarcely ſtayd

From putting him to toꝛmentes fratt. O wꝛetched man (he ſayde)
NMho by thy woꝛthie death halt be a fample onto other,

Derlare to me the names of thee, thy father and thy mother.
And in what Countrie thou wert boꝛne, and what hath canted thé,

Ol theſe ſtraunge rites and ſacritice, a follower ſoꝛ to bee.

He voyd of feare made aunſwere thus. Acetis is my name:
Ol Parentes but of lowe degree in Lidy land J came.

Ho ground loꝛ painfull Dre to till, no ſhæpe to beare me woll
My father left me: no noꝛ hoꝛſe, noꝛ Affe, noꝛ Cow noꝛ Boll.
| God wore he was but poze himſelle, With line and bapted hoke
Che fritking fithes in the poles vpon his Rede he toke

His handes did ferue in Heade of landes, his ſubſtanee was his craft.
Nowe haue made pou true accompt of all that he me latt,

As well of ryches as of trades, in which J was his heire
And ſucceſſour. Foꝛ when that death bereft him ble of ave,
, Sane water he me nothing lelt. It is the thing alone

Mhich for my lawfull heritage 3 clapme, and other none.

Sone after J ( bicauſe that loth 3 was to ay abide
1 In that poze fate oid learne a hip bp cunning bande to guide,

And fo2 to know the raynie ſigne, that bight th Olenien Gote
Nlhich with hir milke did nouriſh Ioue. And alſo J did note
Che Plciads and the Hiads mopſt, and cke the fielp Plough
| With all the dwellings of the winds that make the Seas fo rough.
And eke ſuch Wanens as are mete to harbꝛough vellels in:

Mich euerie ſfarre and hesuenly figne that guides to ſhipmen bin.
obo as by chaunce 3 late ago did toward Dilos faple,

A came on coat of Scios ale, and ſeeing day tofaple,

| Lake harbꝛough there and went a lande. Allwne as that the night
Was ſpent, and moznung can to pere with ruddie glaring light,

I tole and bad mp companie frech water fetch abw20,


8


And


The thirde booke of
And pointing them the way that led direalp to the fazde,
J went me to a little hill, and viewed round about
To fe what weather we were lyke to haue ereletting out.
Mhich done, J cald my watermen and all my Pates togither,
And willde chem all to go a bow my ſelle firſt going thither.
Loe here we are Opheltes fapd) (be was the Mayſters Mate
And (as he thought) a bootie found in deſert fields a late,
He dꝛagd a boy vpon his hande that faz his beautie Hene,
A mapden rather than a bop appeared foꝛ to bene.
Chis childe, as one foꝛelade with wine, and dꝛeint with dꝛouſie llape
Did rerle, as though be lcarcely coulde bimfelfe from falling keepe.
4 markt his countnance, werde and pace, no inckling could J fe,
By which J might contecure him a moztall wight to ber.
I thought, and to my fellotves ſayd: what God J can not tell
But in this bodie that we fee ſome Godhead ſure doth dwell.
Mlhat God fo euer that thou art, thy fauour to bs ſhowe,
And in our labours vs aſiſt, and pardone theſe alſo.
Paap foꝛ thy ſelfe and not foꝛ vs quoth Dictys by and by.
A nimbler fellow for to climbe vpon the Pak on hie
And by the Cable downe to llide, there was nut in our kerle.
Swart Melanth patrone of the ſhippe did like his ſaping wale,
So alfo did Alcimedon: and ſo did Libys to,
And blacke Epopeus eke whole charge it did belong vnto 3
To fe the Rowers at their tymes their dueties duclp do.
And fo did all the reff of them: fo ſoꝛe mennes eyes were blinded
Mhere couetouſenelle of filthte gaine is moze than reaſon minded.
Mell firs (quoth J) but by pour leaue pe ſhall not haue it ſo,
J will not ſuſfer ſacriledge within this ſhippe to go.
J oz J haue here the moſt to doe. And with that woꝛde J Tept
Uppon the Hatches, all the reſt from entrance to haue kept.
The rankeſt Rutfian of the rout that Ly cab had to name,
(Who fo2 a murder being late dꝛinen out of Tuſcane came
To me foꝛ ſuccoꝛ) waxeb wode, and with his ſturdie it
Did gine me ſuch a churliſh blow bycaule J did rel,
That ouer boꝛd he had me ſent, but that with much ado
I caught the tackling in my hand and helde me faſt thereto:
The wicked Uarlets had a ſpoꝛt to fee me handled fo,


=


Then


A ae 1 ar 1 R


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 41
Chen Bacchus ſfoꝛ it Bacchus was) as though he had but tho,
Bene waked with their noyſe from llerpe, and that his dꝛouſie beaine
Diſcharged of the wine, begon to gather fence agatne)
Sald: what a doe? what noyſe is this; how came 3 here J pꝛay :


Sirs tell me whether pou doe meane to carie me away.


Freare not my boylthe Patrone ſayd) no moze but tell me where


Chou doek defire to go a lande, and we will fer thee there.


To Naxus ward quoth Bacchus tho) ſet ſhip bpon the fome.
There would J haue harbꝛough take, foꝛ Naxus is my home.


Aike perfurde Caitifs by the Sea and all the Gods thereof,


Thep falllp (ware it ſhould be ſo, and therewithall in ſcoffe

Chey bade me hoyſe vp ſaile and go. Upon the righter hand 3
J caſt about to fetch the winde,foz fo did Naxus ſfand.

M hat meant 2 art mad! Opheltes cride, and therewithall begun

A feare of loſing of their pꝛay thꝛough eucrp man to run.

The greater part with head and hand a ſigne did to me make,

And lome did whiſper in mine eare the left hand wap to take.

A was amasde and ſaid take charge henceloꝛth who will loꝛ me:


Foꝛ ot pour craft and wickedneſſe J will no further be.


rr


1


28


Chen kell they to reuiling me, and all the rout gan grudge:


Ot which Ethalion ſaid in ſcoꝛne: by like in pou Sir {nudge .


Conſiſtes the ſauegard of vs all. and wyth that woꝛd he takes
My roume, and leauing Naxus quite to other countries makes.
The God then dalying with thele mates, as though he had at lak
Begon to ſmell their luttle craft, out of the foꝛedecke caſt
His eye bpon the Sea: and then as though he ſeemde to werpe,
Sayd : firs to being me on this coaſt pe doe not pꝛomiſe beepe.
J fe that this is not the land the which J did requeſt.
o What occaſton in this (ort deſerue J to be dꝛeſt⸗
hat commendation can pou win, oꝛ pꝛaiſe thereby recepue 2
It men a Lad, (f many one pe compaſſe to decepue 2
J wept and ſobbed all this while, the wicked billaines laught,
And rowed foꝛth with might E maine, as though they had bene ſtraught.
Now euen by him foꝛ fare than be in all the woꝛlde fo wide a
There is no God moꝛe neare at hand at euery time and tide.)
A lweare vnto pou that the things the which J (hall declare,
1 9 750 as they (ame incredible, euen lo mof true they are.
G. j. The


The thirde booke of
Lhe Hip Fade ſtill amid the Sea as in a duſfie docke.
They wondꝛing at this miracle, and making but a mocke,
Perſilk in beating with their Oꝛes, and on with all their layles.
To make their Galley to remoue, no Art 102 labo: faples.
But Juice troubled ſo their Oꝛes that forth they could not roty ;
And both with Beries and with leaues their lalles did duergrow.
And he himlelke with cluſtred grapes about his temples round,
Did hake a Jaueling in his hand that round about was bound
With leaues of Uines: and at his fete there famed fo2 to couch
OF Tygers, L pur, and Panthers ſhapes moſſ ougly foꝛ to touch.
cannot tell you whether feare oꝛ wodnelle were the cauſe,
But every perfon leapth bp and from his laboꝛ dꝛawes.
And there one Medon firſt of all began to waren blacke,
And hauing loſt his foꝛmer ſhape did take a courbed backe.
hat Monſter ſhall we haue of therlguoth Licab) and with that
This Licabs chappes did waren wide, his nolethꝛils waxed flat,
His (sin wart tough, and ſcales thereon began anon to grow.
And Libis as he went about the Ozes d way to thꝛobb,
Perceiued how his hands did ſhꝛinke and were become fo hort,
That now fo2 finnes and not foꝛ hands he might them well report.
Another as he would haue claſpt his arme about the coꝛde:
Pad nere an arme, and fo bema imd in bodie, over boꝛd
He leapeth downe among the waues, and forked is his taple
As are the hoꝛnes of Phebes face tohen halle hir light doth fayle.
They leape about and ſpꝛinkle vp much water on the ſhip,
One while they fiwim aboue, and downe againe anon they ftp,
They ketch their kriſtes as in a daunce, and wantonly they wꝛithe
Pow here now there among the wanes their bodies bane and lithe,
And with their wide and hollow noſe the water in they ſnuſte,
And by their noſes out againe as faſt they doe it puſte.
Ok twentie perſons (loꝛ our ſhip fo many men did beare)
J only did remaine nigh fraught and trembling fill foꝛ feare.
Che God could ſrarce recomfoꝛt me, and pet he ſaid go tw,
Feare not but ſaite to Dia ward. Nis will 3 gladly doe.
And fo alſwne as J came there with right deuout intent,
His Chaplaine 3 became And thus his Dagies à frequent.

Chou maile a pꝛoceſle verie long quoth Penthey)to thintent att


cc


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 42
0 Chat (choler being colde by time mine anger might relent.
2 But Sirs (he ſpake it to his men) go take him by and by,

h With cruell toꝛments out of hand goe cauſe him foz to die.

Amme diatly they led away Acetes ont of fight, —
And put him into pꝛilon rong from which there was no flight.
GVut tobfle the cruell inſtruments ol death as ſwoꝛd and fire

Mere in pꝛeparing wherewithall Caccomplity Pentheys pre,
At ts repoꝛted that the doꝛes did of their owne accoꝛde
Ii Burk open and his chaines fall off. And pet this cruell Loꝛde
| Perkiecth fiercer than befoze not bidding others go
But goes bimfelfe vnto the hill Cytheron, which as tho
To Bacchus being conſetrate did ring of chaunted fongs,
And other loud eonkuſed founds of Bacchus dꝛunken thongs.
lie And euen as when the bloudie Trumpe doth to the battell found,
Che luſtie hoꝛſe ſtreight neying out bettirres him on the ground,
And taketh courage therebpon t allaile his emnie pꝛoud:
Euen fo when Penthey heard a farre the noyſe and bowling loud
K Chat Bacchus franticke folke did make, it fer his heart on fire,
And kindled fiercer than befoze the (parks of ſettled ire.
1 There is a gadſy plaine about the middle of the hill,
Enutrond in with Mods, where men may view eche way at will.
Here loking on thele holie rites with lewde pꝛophaned eyes
Hing Pentheys mother firi of all hir foꝛeſaid ſonne eſpies,
And like a Bedlem firit of all ſhe doth vpon him runne,
And with hir Jaueling furiouliy the fir doth wound hir ſonne.
Come hither fitters come the cries, here is that mighty Wore,
Here is the Boꝛe that ropes our fieldes, him will J trike therefore,
Mith that tbey fall bpon him all as though they had bene mad,
And cluſtring all vpon a heape faſt after him they gad. i
He quakes and ſhakes: his woꝛds are now become moꝛe merke and colde:
He nom tondemnes his owne default and ſayes he was to bolde.
| And wounded as he was he cries helpe Aunt Autonoé, ö
Now foꝛ Acteons bleſſed foule ſome mercie How to me.
She wiſt not who Aceon was, but rent without delay
His right hand oll: and Ino tare his tuther hand away.

To lift onto his mother tho the wꝛetch had nere an arme:

But chewing hir his maimed cozle, and woundes pet blerding warme,
5 G. g. O mother


*


The thirde booke of


O mother (ee he ſayes: with that Agauẽ holwleth out:

And wꝛithed with hir necke awꝛie, and Hoke hir haire about,

And holding from his bodie toꝛne his head in bloudie hands,

She cries: O fellolves in this derde our noble conqueſt fands,
No ſwner could the winde haue blowen the rotten leaues fro tres,
Mhen Minters kroſt bath bitten them, then did the hands of thele
Molt wicked women Pentheys limmes from one another teare.
The Thebanes being now by this example bꝛought in feare,
Frequent this nebofound facrifice, and with werte frankinſence
God Bacchus Altars lode with gifts in euerp place doe cenſe.


Finis tertij Libri.


8 8 8 8
FFF
88 ——(— . . — EAS


¢qTHE FOVRTH BOOK E
of Ouids M etamorphofts.


9
Et would not Hout Alcithoẽ uke Mineus daughter bow
Lhe Dates of this newlound God in confctenceto allow
But Hill He ſtiffly doth dente that Bacchus is the ſonne
Ok loue: and in this hereſte hir fiers with hir runne.
The Pꝛieſt had bidden holiday, and that as well the aide
As Piltkreſſeſfoꝛ the time alive all other buũnelle lapde)
In Bucklkin cotes, with trees laſe, and garlondes on their heare,
Should in their hands the leauie ſpeares (lurnamed Thyriis) beare.
Foretelling them that ik they did the Goddes commaundement bꝛeake,
He would with foze and gricnous plagues his wrath vpon them wꝛeabe.
The women Kraight both pong and olde doe therevnta obay.
Their parne, their baſtzets, and their lay vnſponne aſtde they lay.
And burne to Bacchus frankinſente. Luhome ſolemly they call
By all the names and titles high that map to hum befall,


— = — = —_— — — —


Onids Metamorphofis. 43
As Bromius, ànd Lyeus eke, begotten of the flame, =
Cwite borne, the fole and only childe that of two mothers came.
Unthoꝛne Thyoney, Niſeus, Leneus, and the fetter ö
Ol Unes, whole plealant liquoz makes all tables fare the better.
Nyctileus and th Elelean Sire, Iacchus, Euan ele, 5
Mich diuers other gloꝛious names that thꝛough the land of Greke
To thee O Liber wonted are to attributed ber. ce
Chy pouthfull peares can neuer wall: there dwelleth ap in ther 7
A childhod tender, kreſh and faire: In Heauen we doe ther fe
Surmounting euery other thing in beautie and in grace 555
And when thou fkandite without thy hoꝛnes thou balk a Maidens face.
To the obepeth all the Caſt as far as Ganges goes, . .
WUAbich doth the ſcoꝛched land of Inde with tawnie folke encloſe.
Lycurgus with his twibill ſharpe, and Penthey who of pꝛide
Thy Godhead and thy mightie power rebelliouliy denide,
Chou right redowted didit confounde: Chou into Sea didſt fend a
Che Tyꝛrhene ſhipmen. Thou with bittes the ſturdy neckes doſte bendz
Ok ſpotted Lynxes: Chꝛongs of Frowes and datyres on the tend/
And that olde Hag that with a afte his ſtaggering limmes doth fap
Scarce able on his Alle to fit foꝛ reeling euery way. e
1 Chou commeſl not in any place but that is hearde the nopſe
Ol gagling womens tatling tongues and chowting out of boyes.
Ml ith found of Timbzels, Taboꝛs, Pipes, and Bꝛazen pannes and pots
Conkuſedly among the rout that in thine Oꝛgies trots. N
Che Chebane women foꝛ thy grace and kauour humbly fue,
Andes the Pꝛieſt did bid frequent thy rites with reuerence due.
Alonly Mineus daughters bent of wilfulneſſe, with woꝛking
QAurtte out ot time to bꝛeake the feait, are in their houſes lurking:
And there doe fall to (pinning parne, oꝛ weauing in the frame,
And kepe their maidens to their woꝛke. Ok which one pleafant dame
As ſhe with nimble hand did dꝛaww hir ſlender thꝛerde and fine,
Said: whyle that others idelly doe ſerue the Cod of wine,
Let vs that ſerue a better Satna Minerua, finde ſome talke
Co cafe our laboꝛ while our handes about our pꝛofite walke.
And foꝛ to make the time ſerme ſhoꝛte, let eche olf bs recite,
5 As euerp bodies turne Mall come) ſome tale that may delight.
| Bir ſaping likte the ret fo well that all conſent therein,
G. ig. And


ra


—


I Rn nt ͤ—ʃ—.


Thefourthbookeof _ |:


And therebpon they pꝛay that firſt the eldeſt would begin.

She had ſuch fore and choyee of tales the wiſt not which to tell.

She doubted tf che might declare the foꝛtune that befell

Co Dircetes of Babilon whome now with ſcaly hide

In altred chape the Philiſtine beleueth to abide

In watrie Poles: oꝛ rather how hir daughter taking wings

In ſhape of Doue on toppes of towꝛes in age now ladly fings;

2 how a certaine water NRymph by twitcherafe and by charmes

Conuerted into fithes dumbe, of pongmen many ſwarmes,

Untill that of the felfe fame ſauce hir Celfe did taſt at laſt:

Oꝛ bow the tra that vide to beare kruite White in ages paſt,

Doth now beare kruſte in maner blacke, by ſpꝛincling vp of blood.

Chis tale (bicauſe it was not fale noꝛ common) ſæmed god

Lo hir to tell: and therevpon the in this wile begun

Vir buſie hand Mill dꝛawing out the flaxen thꝛerde the ſpun.
Vlchin the towne (of whole huge walles fo monſtrous high x thicke
Che fame is giuen Semyramis foꝛ making them of bꝛicke)

Divelt hard together ttvo pong falke in boufes oynde lo nere

That vnder all one rofe well nie both tiwalne conueped were.

The name of him was Pyramus, and Tlufbe calde was the.

So faire a man in all the Gatt was none aliue as he,

Moꝛ nere a woman matde noꝛ wile in beautie like to hir. 5

This neighbꝛod bꝛed acguaintance firſt, this nepghbꝛod firſt did ſtirre

The ſecret ſparkes, this neighbꝛod firſt an entrance in did Howe,

Joꝛ loue to come to that to which it afterward did growe.

And ik that right had taken place they had bene man and wife,

ut Hill their Parents went about to let tobich (foꝛ their life)

They could not let. Foꝛ both their heartes with cquall flame did burne,

Mo man was petute to their thoughts. And fo2 to ſerue their turne

In ſteade of talke they bien ſignes. the cloſelier they ſuppꝛeſt

Che fire of loue, the fiercer ſtill it raged in their bꝛeſt.

The wall that parted houle from houſe had riuen therein a crany

Ga hich ſhꝛonke at making of the wall. this fault not markt ofanp

OF many hundꝛed peares befoze(twbat doth not lone efpte.)

hele louers firk of all found out, and made a wap whereby

To talke togither ſecretly, and thꝛough the fame did gee

Their louing whilpꝛengs berie light and ſalely to and fro.


—


1


2 Ea


a 2 FE


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 44
Pow as a tonefide Pyramus and Thifbe on the tother ;
Stove often dꝛawing one of them the pleafant breath from other
O thou enuious wall (they ſayd why letſt thou louers thus z
M hat matter were it ik that thou permitted both ol vs
In armes eche other to embzace 2 Oꝛ i thou thinke that this
Mere ouermuch, pet mightelt thou at leaſt make roume to bite.
And pet thou hale not finde bs churles: we thinke our felues in det
Foꝛ this fame piece of courtefte, in vouching ſale te let
Our lapings to our friendly eares thus freelp come and gee,
Thus hauing where they ſtode in vaine complayned ol their woe,
Mhen night dꝛeb nere, they bade adew and eche gaue kiſſes (werte
Unto the parget on their ſide, the which did neuer mete, *
Mert morning with hir cherekull light had detuen the Marves alide
And Phebus with his burning beames the dewie graſle had dꝛide.
Chee louers at their wonted place by fozcappointment met.
N here after much complaint and mone they couenantes to get
Away from (uch as watched them, and in the Euening late
To ſteale out of their fathers houſe and eke the Citie gate. ö
And to thentent that in the feldes they ſtrapde not vp and done
They did agree at Ninus Lumb to mete without the towne,
And tarie vnderneath a tree that by the fame did grow
Nhich was a face high Pulberie with fruite as white as fi nobo,
Mard by a cole and trickling ſpꝛing This bargaine pleaſde them both
And lo daylight (which to their thought alway but ſlowly goth)
Did in the Ocean lall to reſt and night from thence doth rife.
Aone as darkenelle once was come, ſtraight I hiſbe did deuiſe
A chirt to wind hir out of doꝛes, that none that were within
Perceyued hir: And muckling hir with clothes about hir chin,
That no man might diſcerne hir face, to Ninus Tumb the came
Unto the tre, and fat hir do wne there vnderneath the lame.
Loue made hir bold. But fe the chaũce, there comes belmerde with blab,
About the chappes a L ioneſſe all fomring from the wad
From llaughter lately made ol Kine to ſtaunch hir bloudie thurſt
WW ith water of the foꝛeſald (pring. Nhome Thifbe ſpying fuck
A farre bp mwnelight, therevpon with fearfull ſteppes gan flic,
And in a darke and yꝛkelome taue did hide hirſelke thereby.


And as ſhe fled away foꝛ hall the let hir mantle fall.
25 : . G. iiij. Che


——ĩů ů˙̃3ͤ—²⁵i ?ò́ r —


*


The fourth booke of


The whpch foꝛ feare ſhe left behind not loking backe at all.
Now hen the cruell Lioneſſe hir thurſt had ſtanched well,

In going to the Mod he found the llender werde that fell

From Thiſbe, which with blondie teeth in pieces the did teare

The night was ſomewhat further ſpent ere Pyramus came there
Mho ſeeing in the ſuttle lande the pꝛint of Lions paw,

Ml apt pale foꝛ feare. But when alſo the bloudie cloke he fate

All rent and toꝛne, one night(be ſayd) hall louers two conkounde,
OF bohich long life deſerued ſhe of all that liue on ground.

My ſoule deſerues of this mifchaunce the perill foꝛ to beare.

W ꝛetch haue bene the death of ther, which to this place of feare
Odd cauſe ther in the night to come, and came not here befoꝛe.

My wicked limmes and wꝛetched guttes with cruell teeth therfore.
Deuour pe O pe Lions all that in this rocke doe dwell. .

But Cowardes bfe to with foꝛ death. The llender werde that fell
From Thiſbe bp he takes, and freight doth beare it to the tre;

l hich was appointed erſt the place of meeting foꝛ to bee.

And when he had bewept and kit the garment which he knew,
Receyue thou my bloud to ( quoth be. and therewithall he dꝛew

His ſwoꝛde, the which among his guttes be thꝛuſt, and by and by
Did dꝛaw it from the blæding wound beginning fo2 to die, 5
And caſt himſelle vpon his backe, the blond did ſpin on hie mt
As when a Condutte pipe is crackt, the water buriling out

Doth Hote it felfe a great way ok and pierce the Ayꝛe about.

The leaues that were vpon the tre beſpꝛincled with his blod -
Were died blacke. The rote alſo beſtained as it ode,

d depe darke purple colour ſtraight vpon the Berries caſt.
Anon ſcarce ridded of hir feare with which he was agaſt, 7
Foz doubt of diſapointing him commes Thiſbe foꝛth in haſt,

And foꝛ hir louer lobes about, reioyeing forte tell

Haln hardly he had {cape that night the daunger that befell.

And as he knew right well the place and facion of the tre

(As whych the ſaw fo late befoꝛe): euen fo when fhe did fe

The colour of the Berries turnde, the was vncertaine whither

It were the tre at which they both agrerd to merte togither.

While in this doubtfull Fonnde ſhe lde, (he caſt hir eye alide


And there beweltred in his bloud hir louer e efpide 11


> eS —-—


a


vr


Ouids Metamorphofis. 45
AL fe fpzatuling with his dying limmes: at which the ffavted backe,
And loked pale as any Bor, a ſhuddzing thꝛough bir firacke,
Euen like the Sea which ſodenly with whilling noyſe doth mou,
Mhen with a little blaſt of winde it is but toucht aboue.
But when appꝛoching nearer him che knebo it was hir loue.
She beate hir bꝛelt, he ſhꝛicked out, che tare hir golden heares⸗
And taking him betwerne hir armes did wal his wounds with teares,


She meynt hir weeping w


(Which now became as colde as ple the cride in wokull caſe
Alas what chaunce my Pyramus bath parted the and mer; 2


Make aunſwere O my Py


Mhome thou doſte loue moſt heartely that ſpeaketh vnto the.
Giue care and rayſe thy beaute heade He hearing Thiſbes name,
Lift bp his dying eyes and hauing feene hir clofoe the ſame.
But when the knew hir mantle there and abo his ſcabberd lie


Ul ithout the ſwoꝛde: Un


Chy loue(the laid) hath made thee lea thy ſelle. This hand of mine
Is ſtrong inough to doe the like My loue no leffe than thine


Dhall giue me force to wo


And wꝛetched woman as Jam, it Hall of me be ſed

That like as of thy death J was the only cauſe and blame,

So am thy companion eke and partner in the fame, i
Foz death which only coulde alas a ſunder part bs twaine


Dhalt neuer fo diſleuer vs


And pou the Parentes of vs both, moſt wretched folke alyue,
Let this requeſt that J Hall make in both our names byliue


Entreate vou to permit th
And whome euen death ha


In one graue be together layd. And thou vnhappie tre


Mhich ſhꝛondeſt now the
Shꝛoude two, ol this fame


Blacke be the colour of thy kruite and mourninglike alivay,
Such as the murder of vs twaine map euermoꝛe beꝛay -.
This (aid, (he toke the ſwoꝛd pet warme with ſlaughter of hir loue
Arnd letting it beneath hir
Hir pꝛayer with the Gods and with their Parentes tobe elekt.
Foz when the krute is thꝛoughlp ripe the Berrie is beſpen


— SS a Te — . .


ith bis bloud, and kitting all his face


ramus? It is thy Thiſb, euen he


happy man thy loue bath made the die:


ake my wound. J will purſue the dead.


but we will merte agalne.


at we whome chaffe and ſtedlaſt lone
th ioynde in one, map as it doth beboue


corte of one, and ſhalt anon thꝛough mes
laughter holde the ſicker ſignes foz ax 2


bꝛeſt, did to hir heart it ſhoue.


: dung


a


The fourth booke of


With colour tending to a blacke, And that which alter fire
Kemained, reſfed in one Cumbe as T hiſbe did defire,
This tale thus tolde a litt le (pace of patufing was betwilt,
And then began Leucothoé thus, hir filters being whit.
This Sunne that with his ſtreaming light al woꝛldiy things doth cheat
las tane in louc. of Phebus loues nob liſt and pou Mall beare,
It is reported that this Cod did firſt of all eſpie,
Foz euerie thing in Heauen and Earth is open to his eie)
How Venus with the warlike Mars aduoutrie did commit.
It gricucd him to ler the fact and fo diſcouered it,
He ſhewed hir hulband Iunos ſonne thaduoutrie and the place
In which this pꝛiuie ſcape was done. NMho was in (uch a cate
That heart and hand and all did faile in woꝛking fo2 a (pace,
Anon he featlp ſoꝛgde a net of Mire fo fine and fight, 5
That nepther knot noꝛ nose theret n Apparant was to fight.
This piece of woꝛke was much moze fine than any hand warpe oke
Oꝛ that whereby the Spider hanges in lliding from the rofe,
And furthermoꝛe the ſuttleneſſe and flight thereof was ſuch.
It followed euerp little pull and cloſde with euerp touch,
And fo he fet it handfomlp about the haunted couch.
Now when that Venus and hir mate were met in bed togtther
Hir hulband by his newfound mare beloꝛe conuaped thither
Did (narle them both togither falt in middes of all theyꝛ play 5
And letting ope the Zuoꝛie does, callde all the Gods freight wap, 8
To fe them: they with ſhame inough fait lockt togither lap,
A certaine God among the reſt diſpoled fo2 to ſpoꝛt
Did Wilh that he himſelle alſo were tamed in that ſoꝛt.
The reſdue laught and ſo in heauen there was no talke a while,
But of this Pageant. how the Smiththe louers did begulle.
Dame Venus highly ſtomacking this great difpleature thought
To be reuenged on the part by whome the ſpight was wꝛought.
And like as he hir ſecret loues and meet ings had bewꝛayd.
Do the with wound of raging loue his guerdon to him payd.
Mhat now auayles Hyperions ſonne)thy foꝛme and beautie bꝛight⸗
What now auaple thy glittring eyes with cleare and piercing ſight⸗
F092 thou that with thy gleames art wont all countries foꝛ to burne,
Art burnt thy felfe with other gleames that lerue not loꝛ by turne. dan


2


— — — —


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 46
And thou that oughtik thy cherefull lobe on all things foꝛ to ſheioͤn
Alonly on Leucochoé doſte no the fame beſtolu. 15
Chou faſtneſt on that Waive alone the eyes that thou doſfe oe
To all the woꝛlde. Sometime moze rathe thou riſeſt in the Calf,
Sometime againe thou make it late before thou fall to reaſt.


And koꝛ deſire to lobe on hir, thou often doſte prolong
Dur winter nightes. And in thy light thou kapleſt eke among.


Che fancie of thy kaultie minde intectes thy feeble fight,

And fo thou makife mens hearts afrayde by daunting of thy light.
Chou lorte not pale bycauſe the globe of Phebe is betwerne

The Garth and ther: but loue doth caule this colour to be lene,
Thou loueſt this Leucothoé fo far aboue all other,

Chat neyther now for Clymene, foz Rhodos, no the mother

Ol Circe, noꝛ foꝛ Clytis who at that pꝛeſent tyde ;
Relected from thy compante did fo2 thy loue abide


Poſt grieuous toꝛments in hir heart: thou ſermelſt fo2 to care.


Thou mindeſt hir fo much that all the reſt loꝛgotten are.

lr mother was Eurynome of all the fragrant clime

Ok Arabic eſtæmde the flowꝛe of beautie in hir time.

But when hir daughter came to age the daugher pak the mother
As far in beautie, as befoze the mother paſt all other.

Mir father was king Orchamus and rulde the publike weale

Ol Perfey counted by defeent the. vt from auncient Bele.


Far vnderneath the Meſterne clyme of Heſperus doe runne


The pattures of the fir ie ſterdes that dratv the golden Sunne.
There are they fed with Ambꝛoſte in ſtead of graſſe all night
M hich doth rekreſh their werie limmes and keepeth them in plight


To beare their daille laboꝛ out: now whlle the Medes there take


Cheir heauenly fode and night by turne his timely courſe doth make,


e


Che God dilgulſed in the ſhape of Quedne Eurynome


Doth preale within the chamber doe of fatre Leucothoc
His louer, whome amid. rij Maldes he found by candlelight


Pet (pinning on hir little Nocke, and went me to hir right.


r


And killing hir as mothers ble to kille their daughters deare,


Salde Maydes withdꝛalw pour lelues a while and lit not likning bere,
J haue a ſecret thing to talke. The aides auopde eche one.
Khe God then being with his loue in chamber all alone, a

N i 55 pos


The fourth booke of
Sald: Jam he that metes the peare, that all things doe beholde,
By whome the Earth doth all things fe, the Eye of all the woꝛlde,
Leuk me J am in loue with ther. The L adie was fo nipt .
Mith fodatne feare that from hir hands both rocke and ſpindle lüpe
Mir feare became hir wondzous well. he made no mo delayes, 5
But turned to his pooper ſhape and tobe bps gliſtring rapes.
The damlell being ſoꝛe abacht at this fo ſtraunge a fight,
And overcome with ſodaine feare to fee the God ſo bꝛight,
Did make no outcrie noꝛ no nopſe, but helde hir pacience fill,
And fuffren him by forced pole his pleaſure to fulfill.
Mereat did Clytie ſoꝛe repine.oꝛ the beyond all meaſure
Vllas then enamoured of the Sunne: & Tung with this diſpleaſure
That he another Weman had, foꝛ berie (pight and pe
She plapes the blab, and doth defame Leucothoẽ to hir Spre.
He cruell and vnmercifull would no excuſe accept,
But holding vp hir handes to heauen when tenderly the wept,
And ſaid it was the Sunne that did the derde againſt hir will:
Pet like a ſauage beat full bent his daughter foꝛ to ſpill,
He put hir derpe in delued ground, and on hir bodie laide
A huge great heape of heauie ſand. Lhe Sunne full vll appaide
Did wich his beames diſperſe the ſand and made an open way
Co bꝛing thy buried late to light, but ſuch a weight there lay
Upon ther, that thou couldit not raiſe thine hand aloft againe,
And fo a coꝛſe both voide of bloud and life thou didit remaine.
There neuer chaunſt fince Phactons fire n thing that grieude fo fo7e
Che ruler of the winged ſlerdes as this did. And therloꝛe
He did attempt tf by the force and vertue of his ray
He might againe to liueiy heate hir frozen limmes conuap.
But foꝛaſmuch as deftente fo great attempts denics,
He ſpꝛincles both the coꝛſe it ſelfe and place where it lyes
With fragrant Nectar. And there with bewayling much his chaunte
apd: pet aboue the ſtfarrie ſnie thou ſhalt thy ſeile aduaunce.
Anon the body in this heauenly liquoꝛ ffeped well f
Did melt, and moiſled all the earth with (wate and plealant ſmell.
And by and by fic taking rote among the cloddes within
By little and by little did with growing top begin
A pꝛetie ſpirke of Frankinſence aboue the Tumbe to win. dupa
. thoug


—— ꝶU— —


22 AX — m3 c —


Ouids Metamorphofis.
Although that Clytie might ercufe hir ſoꝛrow by hir loue
And feme that ſo to play the blab hir ſoꝛrow did hir moue,


Vet would the Authoꝛ ofthe light reſoꝛt to hir no moze


But did withholde the pleaſant ſpoztes of Venus blde befoꝛe.
Che Mpmph not able of hir lelke the franticke fume to ay,
Mith reſtleſſe care and penſiuenelle did pine hir ſelle away.
Waͤreheaded on the bare cold ground with flaring batre vnkempt
She late abꝛode both night and day: and clearly did exempt


Hirſelfe bp ſpace of thꝛiſe thee dapes from luſtnance and repalt


Saue only debe and ſaue hir teares with which He bꝛake hir faſt.

And in that while the neuer roſe but ffared on the Sunne

And euer turnde hir face to his as he his cose did runne.

Hir limmes ſtacke faſt within the ground, and all hir vpper part

Did to a pale aſhcolourd herbe cleane voyde of bloud conuart.

The floure whereol part red part white beſhadowed with a blelo

Mott like a Uiolet in the ſhape hir countnance ouergrew.

And now(though faſtned with a rote) ſhe turnes hir to the Sunne

And kerpes (in ſhape of herbe / the loue with which the iri begunne.
She made an ende: and at hir tale all wondꝛed: ſame dende
Hir ſaping to be poſſible: and other ſome replide

That ſuch as are in Dede true Gods may all things woꝛke at will;

But Bacchus is not any ſuch. Chys arguing once made ſtill.

Co tell hir tale as others had Alcichoes turne was come.

Mho with hir ſhettle Hating thꝛough hir web within the Lome,

Sald: Dé the ſhepeheird Daplynis loue of Ida whom erewhile

A lealouſe Nymphe bicauſe he did with Lemans hir beguile)

Fo2 anger turned to a ſtone ſuch furie loue doth ſende:

J will not ſpeake: it is to knowe: ne pet J doe entende

To tell how Scython bariably digreſſing from his kinde,

Mas ſometime woman, ſometime man, as liked beſt his minde.

And Celmus allo wyll J paſſe, who ſoꝛ bicauſe he ciang

Molt faithfully to lupiter when Jupiter was pong,

4s now become an Adamant. So will J palle this hole

Co ſhew you hotw the Curets were engendꝛed of a ſhowꝛe:

D2 hoh that Crocus and his loue faire Smylar turned were


To little flawꝛes. with pleaſant newes pour mindes now will J chere: pee ae 4


8 Tube


3 The fourth booke of

hy with his waters ouerſtrong tt weakeneth men fo fore
That whoſo bathes him there commes thence a perfec man no moze,
The operation of this Nell is knowne to euery wight, ..
But few can tell the cauſe thereof, the which J will recite,

The waternymphes did nurce a fonne of Mercuries in Ide

Begot on Venus, in whoſe face ſuch beautie did abide,
As well therein his father both and mother might be knowne,
Ok whome he alſo tube his name. Allwne as he was growne
Co fiftene peares of age, he left the Countrie where be dwelt
And Ida that had foſtered him. Che pleaſure that he felt
Lo trauell Countries, and to fe ſtraunge riuers with the fate
Df foꝛren landes, all paintulneſſe of trauell did abate.
Me trauelde thꝛough the lande ol Lycie to Carie that doth bound
Pext bnto Lycia. Chere he ſabo a Pole which to the ground
Mas Chꝛiſtall cleare. No fennic ſedge, no barren recke, no ræde
Noꝛ ruſh with pꝛicking poynt was there, noꝛ other morilh werde.
Che water was fo pure and ſhere a man might well haue {ene
And numbꝛed all the grauell ſtones that in the bottome bene.
Che vtmolt boꝛders from the bꝛim enuirond were with clowꝛes
Beclad with herbes ay freſh and greene and plealant ſmelling flofwzes.
A Nymph did haunt this godly Pole: but ſuch a Pymph as neyther
To hunt, to run, noꝛ pet to ſhote, had any kinde of pleaſure.
Ok all the Wraterfatries ſhe alonly was vnknowne
To ſwift Diana. As the bꝛute of fame abꝛode bath blofone,
Hir ſiſters oftentimes would ſay: take lightſome Dart oꝛ bobo,
And in ſome patnefull exerciſe thine pole time beitow,
But neuer could they hir perfuade to runne to Hote oꝛ hunt,
Oꝛ anp other exerciſe as Phebes knightes are wont.
Sometime hir faire welfoꝛmed limbes the batheth in hir (pring:
Sometime ſhe downe hir golden batre with Boren combe doth bꝛing.
And at the water as a glaſſe he taketh countell ay
How euerp thing becommeth hir. Erebohile tn fine aray
On ſolt ſwerte hearbes oꝛ ſolt grerne leaues hir ſelfe Gye nicely layes:
Erewhlile againe a gathering flowzes from place to place the ſtrayes,
And (as it chauntt) the ſelle fame time the was a ſoꝛting gapes.
To make a Poiſie, when the firk the pongman did efpie,
And in beboloing him defirde to haue his compante.


2 a


nus. Fe”


= FTF ˙ ˙ ü eae


— . ss bene 1 2 fhe . N
— oe TS Pe 7


Ouids Metamorphofis, af


Put though the thought fhe flode on thoꝛnes vntill he went ko him:


Pet went the not beloꝛe (he had bedect hir neat and trim,

And pride and perd vpon hir clothes that nothing fat awꝛie.

And kramde hir countnance as might ſeeme mo amrous to the eie.
M hich done fhe thus begon: O childe moſt woꝛthie fo2 to ber
Eſtemde and taken foꝛ a God, ik (as thou ſeemſte to mee)

Thou be a God, to Cupids name thy beautie doth agrer.

Oꝛ ik thou be a moꝛtall wight, right happie folke are they,

By whome thou camſte into this woꝛlde, right happy is (J fap)

Chy mother and thy ſiſter tudfany be: ) god hap

That woman had that was thy Nurce and gaue thy mouth hir pap.

But karre aboue all other, far moze bliſt than theſe is he

Mhome thou vouchſaleſt for thy wife and bedfellow fo2 to ber.

Mobb tf thou haue alredy one, let me bp ſtelth obtaine

That which hall pleaſure both of vs. Oz tf thou doe remaine

A Paiden fre from wedlocke bonde, let me then be thy ſpouſe,

And let vs in the bꝛidelie bed our ſelues togither rouſe.

Chis led, the Pymph did hold hir peace, and there withall the boy
Mart red: he wtf not what loue was: and ſure it was a ioy

Co fe it how exceding well his bluſhing him became. |

Foz in his face the colour freſh appeared like the fame

That ts in Apples which doe hang vpon the Sunnie fide :


- D2 Juoꝛie ſhadowed with a red: 02 ſuch as is eſpide


Ok white and ſcarlet colours mixt appearing in the Porte

hen kolke in vaine with founding baile would cafe onto hir done.
When at the laſt che Pymph deſtrde moſt inſtantly but this,

As to his ſiſter bꝛotherly to giue hir there a kiſſe.

And therewithall was claſping him about the Juoꝛie necke:


Leaue of (quoth he)oꝛ I am gone and leaue the at a becke


Mlith all thy trickes. Then Salmacis began to be akraide,

And to pour pleaſure leaue J free this place my friend the ſayde.
Myth that he turnes hir backe as though the would haue gone hir way:
But euermoꝛe the loketh backe, and (clofelp as the may)
She hides hir in a buſhie queach, where kneeling on hir kn

She alwayes hath hir eye on him. He as a childe and free,

And thinking not that any wight had watched what be did
Momes bp and downe the plealant Pede: and by and by amid 45
ak e


The fourth booke of
The llattring waues he dippes his fate, no moze but fir the ſole
And to the ancles after ward both fete he plungeth whole.
And foꝛ to make the matter ſhoꝛt, he toke fo great delight
In colenelſe of the pleaſant ſpꝛing, that ſtreight he ſtripped quight
His garments from his tender Chin, GA bert Salmacis behilde
‘Mis naked beautie, ſuch ſtrong pangs fo ardently hir hilde,
What vtterly the was aſtraught. And euen as Phebus beames
Againſt a mpꝛrour pure and clere rebound with bꝛoken gleameg:
Euen lo hir eps did ſparcle fire. Scarce could He tarience make:
Scarce could the any time delay hir pleaſure for to take:
She wolde haue run, and in hir armes embꝛaced him freight way:
She was fo far beũde hir ſelfe, that ſcarſly could the fap,
che clapping with his hollow hands againſt his naked foes,
Into the water lithe and baine with armes diſplayde glydes.
And rowing with his hands and legges ſwimmes in the water cleare:
Chꝛough which his bodie faire and white doth gliſtringly appesre,
As ik a man an Juoꝛie Image oꝛ a Lillie white
Should ouerlay oꝛ cloſe with glaſle that were moſt pure and bight,
The pꝛice is won (cride Salmacis aloud)be is mine obne.
And therewithall in all poſt haſt the hauing lightly thꝛowne
Hir garments off, few to the Pole and caſt hir thereinto
And caught him fal betwene hir armes, foꝛ ought that he could doe:
Mea maugre all his wꝛelkling and his ſtruggling to and fro,
She held him ſtill, and killed him a hundꝛed times and mo.
And willde he nillde he with hir handes the toucht his naked beck:
And now on this fide now on that foꝛ all he did refit
And ſtriue to well him from hir gripes ſhe clung bute him lat;
And wound abont him like a Snake which ſnatched bp in halt,
And being by the Pꝛince ol Birdes boꝛne lightly vp alolt,
Doth wꝛithe hir ſelfe about his necke and griping talants olt:
And cal hir taile abont his wings diſplayed in the winde:
Oꝛ like as Jute runnes on trees about the vtter rinde:
Onꝛ as the Crabfiſh hauing caught his enmp in the Seas,
Doth claſpe him in on euery fide with all his craked cleas.
But Atlas epheb (ill perſiſtes, and beterlp denies
The ymph to haue hir hoped ſpozt: the vrges him like wiſe.
And pꝛeſling him with all hir weight, falt cleauing to him Mill, eit
. ’


2 ™ R


4 Ouids Metamorphofis. 14%
Strtiue, Fraggle, weetk and wꝛithe the ſaidy thou froward boy thy fill!
| Doe bat thou canſt thou ſhalt not ſcape. e Oodvdes of Heauen agree
ty Chat this fame twilfull boy and J may neuer parted ber. |
Lhe Gods were pliant to hir bone. Che bodies of them twaine
Mere mixt and ioyned both in one. To both them did remame
One countnance: like as if a man ould in one barke beholde
* Cwo tbolgges both growing into one and ſtill togither holde.
Euen fo when thꝛough hir bugging and hir graſping of the tother
* Che members ol them mingled were and faſtned both togither,
They were not any lenger two: but as it were) a top 1
8 Ok double chape. Pe could not ſay it was a perfec boy,
Noꝛ perfect wench: it ſæmed both and none of both to bane
Nom when Hermaphroditus ſaw how in the water herne
To which he entred in a man, his limmes were weakened ſo
Chat ont fro thence but halfe a man be was compeloe to go.
He likteth vp his hands and ſaid but not with manly rere)
O noble father Mercurie, and Venus mother dere. 1
This one petition graunt pour ſon which both pour names doth beare, -
That whoſo commes within this Mell may fo be weakened there,
That ofa man but halle a man he may fro thence retire.
Both Parentes moued with the chaunce did ſtabliſh this defire
The which their doubleſhaped ſonne had made: and therevpon
Inkected with an vnknowne ſtrength the facred ſpꝛing anon. N
Their tales did ende and Mineus daughters Mill their bufinette plie
In ſpight of Bacchus whole high feat they bꝛeake contemptuoulip.
Aber on the fodaine(fetng nought) they heard about them round
1 Ok tubbilh Cimbꝛels perfectly a hoarſe and farring ſound. N
0 Mith chꝛaming ſhalmes and gingling belles. and furthermoꝛe they felt
A cent of Satkron and of Pyꝛrhe that verie hotlyſmelt. 8
And (which a man would ill beleue the web they had begun 2
Immedtatly wart freth and greenc, the dare the which they ſpun *
Did flouriſh full or Jute leaues. And part thereof did run .
Abꝛode in Hines. The thꝛerde it ſelle in bꝛagnches loꝛth did ſpꝛing. 7 J
Pong burgeous full of cluſtred grapes their Diffaurs foꝛth did being. 5
And as the web they wrought was dide a deepe darke purple hew,
Euen lo vpon the pamted grapes the ſelle fame colour ae.
The day was ſpent, and now was come the time which nepther night
| gf a J, y Noz


E.


- — —


The fourth booke of


Noꝛ day, but euen the bound of both a man may kerme ok righe.

The houſe at ſodaine ſermde to Hake, and all about it Hine

Mith burning lampes, and glittering fires to fiath beloꝛe their eyen.

And likeneffes of ougly be altes with gaſffull nsyſes peld.

Fo feare whereof in ſmokie holes the ſiſters were compeld

CTo hide their heades, one here and there another, foꝛ to ſhun

The gliſtring light. And while they thus in coꝛners blindly run,

Upon their little pꝛetie limmes a fine criſpe filme there goes,

And ſlender finnes in ead ol handes their ſhoꝛtned armes encloſe.

But hob they tof their former ſhape of certaintie to know

Che darkneſſe would not (utter them. No feathers on them grow,

And pet with ſhere and velume wings they houer from the ground

And when they goe about to ſpeake they make but little ſound,

Accoꝛding as their bodies giue, bewapling their deſpighe

By chirping ſhirlly to themſelues. In houſes they delight

And not in wods: deteſting dap they fitter towards night:

Mherethꝛough they of the Euening late in Latin take their name,

And we in Englich language Backes oꝛ Neermice call the fame,
Chen Bacchus name was reuerenced thꝛough all the Theban coal,
And Ino of hir ephewes poloꝛe made euery where great boat.

Ok Cadmus daughters the alone no ſoꝛowes talked had,

Saue only that hir üſters haps perchaunce had made hir lad.

Pol Iuno noting how fhe waxt both proud and full of ſcozne,

As well by reafon of the lonnes and daughters He had boꝛne,

As alſo that he was aduannſt by mariage in that towne

Co Achamas Ring Aeolus ſonne a Pꝛince of great renowne,

But chfeflp that hir fitters fore who nourced was by hir

Mas then exalted forza God: began thereat to Fir,

And freating at it in hirſelfe ſaid: eoulde this harlots burd

Tranttoꝛme the Lydian water men, and dꝛowne the in the foꝛd?

And make the mother teare the guttes in pieces ol hir ſonne?

And Mineus al thee daughters clad with wings, bicauſe they (pone?

Wibiles others bowling vp and down like krantick folke did LONE:

And can 3 luno nothing elle ſaue ſundꝛie waes bewaile⸗

Is that ſufticient 2 can my powꝛe no moze than fo auatie ?

He teaches me what wap to woꝛke A man max take J fee)

Example at his enmies hand the wiler foz.to ber.


— — P — —— rr *


Ouids Metamorphofis, 50
He Hewes inough and ouermuch the force of furfous wꝛath >
By Pentheys death: why Mould not Ine be taught to tread the path 7
Che twbich hir Alters heretoloꝛe and kinred troden bathe .

b here is a ſtæpe and irkſome way obſcure with ſhadob fell

1 Ok balefull pewgh, all fad and Mill, that leadeth dowone to hell.

by Che foggte Styx doth bꝛeath vp miſtes: and downe this way doe wang

The ghoſtes of perſons lately dead and buried tn the graue.

hd Continuall colde and gaſtly feare poſleſſe this queachie plot

hi On epther lide : the Kelp Ghoſt new parted knoweth not

F The wap that doth direaly leade him to the Stygian Citie

On where blacke Pluto kꝰ pes his Cqurt that neuer fhetveth pitte.

A thouſand wapes, a thouland gates that alwapes open ſtand,

Chis Citic hath: and as the Sea the ſkreames of all the lande

Doth (wallow in his gredie gulfe, and pet is neuer full:

Cnet ſo that place deuoureth ſtill and hideth in his gull is

Che loules and ghoſtes of all the woꝛld: and though that nere fo many

Come thither, pet the place is bopd as if there were not any.

Che ghottes without flech, blond, oꝛ bones, there wander to and fro.

Ok w ieh ſome haunt the iudgement place: and other come and ga
To Plutos Court: and ſome frequent the former trades and Artes
Che which they bien in their lite: and fome abide the lmartes 2

And toꝛments foz their wickednelle and other pil deſartes. :

Oo cruell hate and fpightfull wꝛath did bople in Iunos beeff,

6 Chat in the high and noble Court of Wcanen the coulde not reſtꝛ
But that the nedes mut hither tome: whole fete no foner toucht

6 Che thaeſholde, but it gan to quake. And Cerberus crf coucht
Start ſfernely vp with chee fell heades which barked all togither.

She callde the daughters ol the night the cruell furies thither:
They fate a kembing foule blacke Snakes from of their filthte heare
Weloꝛe the dungeon doe, the place where Caitiues puniſht were,

The which was made of Adamant. when in the darke in part

They knew Nucene Iuno, by and by vpon their fete they ſtart.

0 There Titius ſtretched out at leaſt) nine acres full in length, .

Did both with his bowels fede a Grype that tare them out by frength.

The water Acd from Tantalus that touche his neather lip,
ae 775 hanging 78 him did ener from him flip:

There allo laboꝛed Sifyphus that dꝛaue againſt the hill

))))


— 2


”


The fourth booke of


A rolling fone that from the top came tumbling done ward fill,
Ixion on his reſtleſte whæle to which his limmes were bound
Did flic and follow both at once in turning euer round.

And Danaus daughters foꝛbicauſe the did their couſins hill,
Dꝛew water into running tubbes which euermoꝛe did ſpill.

Muhen luno with a ſouring loke had vewde them all theoughout,

And on Loon ſpecially before the other rout, 2
She turnes from him to diſyphus, and with an angry chere
Sapes: toherefore ſhould this man endure continuall penance here 2
And Athamas his brother reigne in weich and pleaſure fre + 0
M ho thꝛough his pꝛide hath ap diſdainde my hulſband Ioue and mer.
And there withall He poured out thoccafion of hir hate,

And why the came and what the would. She would that Cadmus ſfate
Should with the rume of his houſe be bꝛought to fwyft decay. 8
And that to mifchiefe Athamas the Fiendes ſhould force ſome wap.
She biddes, the pꝛapes, he pꝛomiſes, and all is with a beth: e
And moues the kuries earneſtly: and as theſe things ſhe feth,
Che hatekull Hag Tifiphone with hoꝛie ruffled heare, .
Ne moulng from hir face the Snakes that loſely dangled there,
Sapd thus: Madame there is no nerde long circumſtance to maße,
Suppoſe pout will already done. This lothfome plate fozfake,
And to the holſome Apze ol heauen pour ſelfe agayne retire.
Queene luno went right glad away with graunt ol hir deſire
And as ſhe woulde haue entred heauen, the Ladie Iris came

And purged hir with ſtreaming dꝛops. Anon vpon the fame

The furious iende Tifiphone dath cloth hir out of hand

In garment ſtreaming goꝛie bloud, and taketh in hir hand

A burning Creſtet ſtæpte in bloud, and girdeth hir about

with wꝛeathed Snakes and fo goes foꝛth. And at hir going out,
Feare,terroz,qriefe and peur neſſe for compante ſhe tobe, .
And alfo madneſſe with his laight, and gaſtly ſtaring lake.

Mithin the houſe of Athamas no ſwner fate fhe ſet,

But that the poſtes began to quake and does lobe blacke as Jet,
The ſonne withdꝛew him, Athamas and eke his wife were gal
With ougly ſightes in ſuch a feare that out of doꝛes agaſt 5
They would hauc fled. There woe the Fiend, and ſfopt then pallage eu,
And ſplaping toꝛth hir filthie armes beni with Snakes about, pe


— = SS —— — 2 ee ee
* =: =
te


5


a


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 51
Did toſſe and waue hir hatefull head. The warme of lcaled fakes
Did make an irkſome noyſe to heare as fhe hir treſſes thakes;
About hir ſhoulders ſome did craule: ſome trapling downe hir bꝛeit
Did hiſſe and {pit out poyſon greene, and ſpirt with tongues inkeſt.

N Then krom ampd hir halre two {rakes lwith venymd hand He dꝛelb

Pk which the one at Athamas and one at Ino thꝛew. f
The tnakes did craule about their bꝛeaſts, inſpiring in their heart
me Polk grieuous motions.of the minde: the bodie had no fare
bu Ok any wound: it was the minde that felt the cruell ſtings.

0 A poplon made in Syꝛup wile, the alfo with bir beings.

The lilthie tame of Cerberus, the caſt ing of the Snake
N Echidna, bꝛed among the Fennes abont the Stygian Lake:

Defirde of gadding fozth abꝛoad: loꝛgetfulneſſe of minde:
Delight in miſchiete: wodnelſe: teares: and purpoſe whole inclinde 15
To cruell murther: all the which He did together grinde:
And mingling them with net ſhed bloud had boyled them in baatie,
6 And ſrird them with a Hemblock falbe, Now twhple that Athamas
And Ino fod and quakte fo2 feare, this poyſon ranke and fell
Sher tourned into both their bꝛeattes and made their heartes to ſwell.
Then twhitking often round about hir head hir balelull bꝛand,
Sher made tt fone by gathering winde to kindle in hir hand.
Thus as it were in triumph wile accomplithing hir heit,
To Duluſe Plutos emptie Realme thee gettes hir home to telt,
And putteth of the ſnarled Snakes that girded in hir back.
AIJimmediatly Ring Aeolus ſonne fark madde comes crping out,
Chꝛough all the court what meane po Sirs⸗ why go pe not about
Co pitch our topics within this chach. I ſawe euen nobe here ran
A K yon with hir tue pong whelpes. And there withall he gan
To chaſe his wyfe as if in derde (he had a pon bene :
And lyke a Bedlem boyſtouſlie he ſnatcheth from betwene ü 5
Che mothers armes his little babe Locarchus ſmpling on him

And reaching koꝛth his peeatie armes æ flong him fercelp from him ae
A twice oꝛ thrice as from a llyng: and daft his tender head 1

Againtt a hard and ragged fone vntul he ſawe him dead.
The wꝛetched mother ( whither griefe did mone hir there vnto
1 Oꝛ that the poylon ſpꝛed within did foꝛce hir foto doe)

j ould out and frantibtp with ſcattered ein about hir eares

Be. At. f


And


The fourthbooke of


And with hir little Belicert whome hackelp he heares
In naked armes the crycth out hoe Bacchus. At the name
Ot Bacchus Iuno gan to laugh and ſcoꝛning fapde in game,
This guerden loc thy folker child reguiteth for the lame.
There hangs a rocke about the Sea the fote tobereof is cate
So hollow with the ſaltich waues which on the fame doe beate.
Chat like a houle it kepeth oll the moyſting ſhowers of rapne
The toppe is rough and Hotes his front amiddes the open mapne.
Dame Ino (madneſle made hir ſtrong ) did climb this cliſte anon
And healong downel without regarde of hurt that bong thereon)
Did thꝛawe hir burden and hir felfe, the water where the daihe
In ſpꝛincling vpwarde gliſterd red. But Venus foze abaſht
At this hir Meeces great miſchaunce without offence oz fault,
Mir Uncle gently thus beſpake. O ruler ofthe hault
And lwelling Seas, O noble Neptune whole dominion large
Extendeth to the eauen, whereok the mightie Ioue bath charge,
The thing ts great fo2 which J ſelw. But ſhewe thou fo2 mp fake
Some metele on my Wretched friends whome in thine endleſle lake
Chon ſcxeſt tolled to and fro. Admit thou them among
hy Goddes, Ok right euen here to me ſome fanour both belong
At leaſt wiſe if amid the Sea engendꝛed erſt J were
OF Froth, as of the which pet Hill my pleaſaunt name à beare.
Neptunus graunted hir requeſt, and bp and by berelt them
Okall that cuer moꝛtall was. In ted wherol he left them
A hault and ſtately maieſtfie: and altring them in hew
With ſhape and names mol mete loꝛ Goddes he did them both endew,
Leucotho was the mothers name, Palemon was the ſonne.

he Thebane Ladies following hir as falt as they could runne,

Did of hir fete perceiue the pꝛint vpon the vtter fone,
And taking it foꝛ certaine ſigne that both were dead and gone,
In making mone foz Cadmus houſe, they wꝛang their hands and tare
Their haire, and rent their clothes, aid rallde on Inno out of (quarts
As nothing (uff, but moze outragious karre than did behoue
In ſo reuenging ot his (elf spor hir hulbands loue.
The Goddeſſe Iuno could not beare their railing. And in fateh.
You alfa will J make to be as wirnelles ( fhe ſapth)
Ot my outragious crueltie. And lo Hadid in dende.


Ouids Metamorphofis. $2


Foz Shee that toned Ino beſt was following hir with ſperde
Inta the Sea. But as he would hir ſelfe haue do lone ward call.
She could not irre, but to the rock as nailed ficken falt.
The ſecond as (hee knockt hir bꝛeat, did fle hir armes war fiffe,
Another as the Tretched out hir bands bpon the clitte,
Mas made a fone, and there ove ill ay ſfretching forth hir hands
Into the water as before. And as an other andes
A tearing of hir rutkled lockes, hir fingers hardened were
And kaſkned to hir krilled toppe Mill fearing of hir heare,
And loke tbat geſture eche ol them was taken in that tide,
Enen in the lame tranſtoꝛmde to ſtones, they faſtned did abide.
And ſome were altered into birds which Cadmies called bee
And in that golle with flittering wings till to and fro doe fie,
Haeught knoweth Cadmus that his daughter and hir little childe
Adinitted were among the Goddes that rule the furges wilde.
Compellde with griefe and great mil happes that had enſt wd tegither,
And ſkraunge foꝛetokens often ſeœne ſince firſt his comming thither,
He veterlp foꝛſakes his towne the which he butloed bad,
As though the fortune of the place fo hardly him beſlad,
And not his owne. And dering long like pilgrims, at the laſt
Upon the coat of Illirie his wle and he were caſl. i
Where ny toꝛpind with cares and peares, while of the chaunces paſt
Upon their houſe, and ol their toples and fo:mer tranatls tane
They fadlp talkt betwæne themfelues, was my ſprare head the bane
Ok that fame ougly Snake of Mars (yp Cadmus ) when J fled
From Sidon: o2 did J his teeth in ploughed paſture ſpꝛed⸗
Ik foꝛ the death of him the Goddeg fa cracil vengeaunce take,
Dꝛawen out in length vpon my wombe then traile 3 like a ſnake.
He had no ſwner lade the woꝛde but that he gan to glide.
Upon his belly like a Snake. And on his hardened fine
he felt the ſcales new budding out, the which was wholy fret
# With ſpeccled dꝛoppes of blacke and gray as thicke as could be ſet.
he falleth groneling on his bꝛeaſt, and both his ſhankes doe growe
In one round ſpindle Bodkinwiſe with ſharpned point below.
His armes as pet remapned Mill: his armes that did remapne,
He ſtretched out, and fapte with teares that plentuoully did raine
à downe his face, which pet did keꝛpe the nat iue fachion felony,
: H. litj. f Come


S 5 - —


— a — re — : =
z —————


The fourth booke of


Come hither wyke, come hither wight molt wꝛetched on the ground,
And whyle that ought of mer remapnes vouchlale to touche the fame,
Come take me by the hand as long as hand max haue his name,
Bekoꝛe this ſnakiſh ſhape doe whole my body ouer runne. ;
Me would haue ſpoken moze when fodainelp his tongue begunne
To ſplit in two and ſpeache did faples and as he did attempt
To make his mone, he hill: foꝛ nature now had cleane exempt
All other ſpeach. His wꝛetched wyfe hir naked ſtomack berte:
And cryde, what meaneth this 2 deare Cadmus where are now thy fate:
here are thy ſhoulders and thy bandes ? thy hew and manly face?
With all the other things that did thy pꝛincelp perſon grace:
Mhich nowe J ouerpaſfe. But why er Goddes doe you delay?
My bodie into lyke milſhape of Serpent to cannap?
Then this was ſpoken, Cadmus lickt his wyfe about the lippes:
And as a place with which he was acquapnted well) he lippes
Into hir bwſome, louingly embꝛacing hir, and caſt Bree
Himſelle about hir necke, as oft he had in tyme foꝛe pal. :
Such as were thereltheir kolke were there) were flaighted at the ſight,
Joꝛ by and by they ſawe their neckes did gliſter llicke and bright,
And on their (nabity heades grel creſts? and finally they both
l ere into verie Dꝛegons tournd, and forth together goth
Tone trapling by the tothers fide, vntill they gapnd a od,
The which direct againſt the place where as they were then Food,
And now remembꝛing what they were themſelues in tymes foꝛepaff,
They neyther ſhonne noꝛ hurten men with ſtinging noꝛ with blaſt.
But pet acomfozt to them both in this their altred hew
‘Became. that noble impe of theirs that Indie did fubdelv,
hom al Achaia woꝛſhipped with temples builded new.
All only Acrife Abas ſonne ( though of the felfe fame ſrocke)
Remaind, who out of Argos walles vnkindly did him locke.
And moued wilkull warre againſt his Godhead: thinking that
There was not any race of Goddes foz he beleued not
Chat Perley was the ſonne of Ioue: oꝛ that he was conceyued
By Danae of golden ſhower thzough which {hee was deceived.
But pet ere long (luch pꝛelent force hath truth) he doth repent
As well his great impietie againſt God Bacchus meant,
As allo that he did dildiane his Pephew loꝛ to knobwe.


i — =
—


by Ouids Metamorphoſis. 53
ay But Bacchus not full glozioully himſelfe in Heauen doth ſho wwe.
10 And Perſey bearing in his hand the monſter Gorgons head,

That famous ſpoyle which here and there with Mmakith haire was ſpꝛead,

ly Doth beat the apre with wauyng wings. And as he ouertlew 5

8 Che Ly bicke ſandes, the dꝛoppes ofbloud that from the head did leib

Ok Gorgon being new cut off, vpon the ground did fal. 13
8 M hich taking them (and as it were concepuing therwithall,)
Engendꝛed ſundꝛie Snakes and woꝛmes: by meanes wherot that clyme
Did ſwarme with Serpents euer ſince, euen to this pꝛeſent tyme.
From thence he lpke a watrie cloud was carted with the weather,
Tͤybyꝛough all the heauen, now here, now there as light as any feather.

And from aloft he iewes the earth that vnderneath doth lie,
And lwiftly ouer all the woꝛlde doth in conclusion flie, ;

Ihe times the chilling beares, thꝛe times 5̊ crabbes fel cleas he fav:

SOlt times to Meal, oftimes to Caſt did dꝛiue him manp a flaw.
Pow at ſuch time as vnto reſt the ſonne began to dꝛawe,

Bicauſe he did not thinke it god to be abꝛoad all night,

a Ulithin king Atlas weltern Realme he ceaſed trom his ght,

ii Nequeſking that a little (pace of reſt enioy he might,

Untill ſuch tyme as Lucifer ſhould bꝛing the moꝛning grap, =

And moꝛning being the lightſome Sunne that guines the cherefull dax.
This Atlas Iapets ephewe, was a man that did excel!

In ſłature euerie other wight that in che woꝛlde did dwell.
The be molt᷑ coaſt ofall the earth and all that Sea wherein

2 Che tyꝛed ſledes and wearied Mayne of Phorbus diued bin, .
Mere in fubicaton to this Ring. A thoulande flockes of ſherepe,

A thouland heirdes of Rother beattes he in his fields did kepe:

0 And not a neighboꝛ did anoy his ground by dwelling nie.

Co hin the wandꝛing Perſey thus his language did applie.

It high renotwne of royall race thy noble heart may moue,

Jam the ſonne of loue himſelfe: oꝛ if thou moze appꝛoue
The baliant derdes and hault erploptes, thou ſhalt perceiue in mer
Such doings as deſerue with pꝛayſe extolled foꝛ to ber.

A pꝛap thee of thy courteſie reteiue me as thy guet,

And ket m& oniy for this night within thy palace reff,

Bing Atlas called ſtraight to minde an aunclent pꝛopheſte
Made by Parnaſſian Themys, which this ſentence did implie.


tar


The


SS ͤ—ôůwñ x


The fourth booke of
Che time ſhall one day Atlas come in which thy golden tre
Shall of hir fayꝛe and pꝛecious fruite diſpopld and robbed ber.
And he Hall be the ſonne ok Ioue that Hall entoy the pꝛap.
Foz feare hereok he did enclole his Oꝛcbard euerie wap.
With mightie hilles, and put an ougly Dꝛagon in the fame
Co hepe it. Further he koꝛbad that any ſtraunger came
Within his Realme, and to this knight he fapoe pꝛeſumtuoullte:
Auopd my land, onleſle thou wilt by vtter perill trie 8
That all thy gloꝛious actes whereof thou doelt fo loudly lie
And lowe thy father be to farre to helpe the at thy nerds.

Co theſe his woꝛdes he added loꝛce, add went about in derde
To dꝛiue him out by ſtrength ol hand. Co ſpeake was lolle of winde
Fo2 neyther could intreating fatre noz ſtoutneſſe tourne his minde.
Mell then (cp Perfey ) fith thou doci mine honour fet fo light,

Hake here a pꝛeſent: and with that he turnes away his fight,

And from his left ſide dꝛewe iner out Medufas lothly head.

As huge and big as Atlas was he tourned in that ſtead

Into a mountaine: Into trees his beard and locks did paſſe:

Bis hands and ſhoulders made the ridge: that part which lately was
His head, became the higheſt top of all the hill: bis bones
Mere turnd to ſkones: and therewithall he grew mer all at ones
Wepand all meaſure vp in heigth ( Foꝛ ſo Cod thought it bell

Sd karre that Heauen with all the ſtarres did on his choulders ret,

In endleſſe pꝛiſon by that time had Ac olus lockt the wind
And now the charelp moꝛning ſlarre that putteth lolke in mind

Co rife about their daplie woꝛke ſhone bꝛightly in the thie,

Then Perſey vnto both his ferte did ſtrelght his feathers tie

And girt his M Enike to his ſide and from the earth did ſtie.“
And leauing nations nomberleſſe beneath him euerie wap

At laſt vpon lng Cephey es fields in Acthiop did he Hap.

Mhere cleane againif all right and law by Ioues commaundement
Andromad foꝛ hir mothers tongue did ſuſter puniſment.
Mhome to a rocke by both the armes when fattned her had lerne,
He would haue thought of Marble ſtone He had fome image berne,
But that hir trees to and fro the whilking winde did blowe,

And trickling teares warme from hir eyes a downe bir checks did foto
Unwares hereat gan ſecret ſparkes within his bꝛealt to glow. bs


{


— — —


b Ouids Metamorphoſis. 54
His wits were fraught at fight thereok and rauicht in ſueh wiſe,
That hob to houer with his wings he ſcarlly could deuiſe.


5


—


Alone as he had ſfayd himſelte, O L adie faire (g her) 1
Sat wonthle of tuch bands as thele, but (uch wherewith ive le 5
Logither, knit in lawfull bed the carne louers bee

J bꝛap the tell mer what thy ſelte and what this lande is named

And wherefore thou dott weare thefe Chains : the Ladie ill achamed

Mas at the ſodame ſkriken domb: and lyke a learfull mato

She durſt not fpeake onto a man. Nad not hir handes beene ſtald
Dhe would haue hid hir bathfull face, Holwbeit as he might
li With great abundance of hir teares he ſtopped bp hir fight.

But when that Perfey oftentimes was earneſtly in hand :
To learne the matter, fo2 bicauſe the woulde not fame to tand 8 8
In ſfubboꝛne filence of hir faultes, thee tolde him what the land

And what the hight: and bow hir mother foꝛ hir beauties lake

Thꝛough pꝛide did vnaduiſedly tw much vpon hir take. ö
And ere Hee full had made an ende, the water gan to roꝛe:

* An ougly montter from the dæpe was making to the ſhoꝛe 8
Mhlich bare the Sea before his bꝛeaſt. The Uirgin chꝛieked ont.
Hir father and hir mother both fod mourning thereabont,

1 In wꝛetched eaſe both twalne, but not ſo wꝛetched as the maid

0 Who wꝛongly foꝛ hir mothers fault the bitter ràunſome paid.

They bꝛought not with them any help: but as the time and cace :
Aegutrd) they wept and wꝛang their hands, and ſtreightly did embꝛace
Hir bodie faſfened to the rock. Then Perſey them beſpake, i

And ſayde: the time may ſerue to long this ſoꝛrow foꝛ to make? 5
But time of helpe muſt ether nolo o2 neuer elſe be take
Hob tf J Perley ſonne of hir whome in hir fathers tore

The mightie Ioue begat with childe in ſhape of golden hotnze,

Mho cut off ougly Gorgons head beſpꝛed with ſnakiſh heare,

And in the ayꝛe durſt truſt theſe winges my body fo2 to beare, ö

Perchaunce ſhould laue pour dau ghters life, J think pe ſhould as than
Accept me ſoꝛ pour fonne in latwe before all other men. |
To thele great thewes (by the help of God) q purpoſe foʒ to adde
} A tuk deſert in helping hir that is ſo hard beſtadde.

A couenaunt with yon by my force and manhod fo2 to fane hir.

) Conditionly that to my wife in recompence 3 haue hir.


Bir


— SS —ů ů ůů ů ů ů — 0


The fourth booke of


Derr parents twhe his offer Freight + kor wha would fiche thereat

And pꝛaid him katre and pꝛomilde him that fez perfoꝛming that

hep would endow him with the rygbt ol al their Realme behing,

Like as a Gally with hir noſe doth cut the waters wide,

Enkoꝛced by the ſweating armes of Rowers boyth the tide

Euen fo the moniter with his bees did beare the waues afive,

And was now come as nére the rocke as well a man mygbt fling

Amid the pure and pacantaire a pellet from a ling.

Mhen on the ſodaine Perſey puſht his fote againſt the ground,

And tied bpward to the clouds his ſhadow did rebound

Upon the fea : the beatt van fierce vpon the palling thane.

And as an Egle when he lers a Dꝛagon in a glade f

Lie beaking of his blewilh backe aga inſt the ſunnte rapes;

Moth ceale vpon him vnbeware, and with his talants lapes

Sure holde vpon his ſcalie necke leaſt wetthing back his head

His cruell terth might doe him harme: So Perſey in that ſtead

Dilcending dobone the ayze a maine with all his fozce and might

Did teale vpon the monſters backe: and vnderneath the right

Finne hard vnto the verte hilt his hooked lwoꝛde did might.

The montter being wounded fore did ſometime leape aloft,

And ſometime vnder water diue, beſtirring him full oft

As doth a chaufed I8oare beſet with barking Dogges about.

But Perſey with his ligbtſome wings fill kreping him without

Che monſters reach, with baked lwoꝛd doth ſometime hew his back

Mhere as the hollow ſcales giue way: and ſometime he doth hacke

Che ribbes on both his maled ſides: and ſometime he doth wound

Bis ipindle taple where into fiſh it growes molt ſmal and round.

The Mhale at Perley from his mouth ſuch wanes ok water cat,

Bemixed with the purple bloud, that all bedꝛe int at laſt

His feathers verle heute were: and dsubting aur mie |

To truſt his wings now waxing wet, be ſkraight began to loꝛe

Up to a rocke which in the calme aboue the water fad:

But in the tempeſt euermoꝛe was hidden with the flwd.

And leaning there vnto and with his left hand holding tuff

Che top thereof a dozen times his weapon he did thꝛuſt

Among his guttes. The topfuil nopfeand clapping ok their hands

Che which were made fo? lofening of Andromad from hir bands, 1 ae


—— — — 8 oe


1 Ouids Metamorphoſis.
FJullde all the coaſt and heauen it felfe. The parents of the ade 3
bh Caſſiope ano Cepheus were glad and well appaydee 1
And calling him their ſonne in law conlelled hum to be 2
The helpe and lauegarde of their houle.Andromade the fe 3 3
* And cauſe of Perſeys enterpꝛiſe from bondes now beyng fræe,
th He walhed his victoꝛious hands And leaſk the Suabie heade
All ith lying on the grauell hard ſhould catch lome harme, be ſpꝛed
Soft leaues and certaine tender twigs that in the water grew.
And lad Medufas head thereon: the twigs pet being new ö
And quicke and full of micie pith full lightiy to them deem
The nature of this monſtrous head. for both the leafe and bough .
Full ſtraungelp at the touch thereof became both hard and tough.
The Seanpmphes tride this wondꝛous fac in diuers other roddes
And were full glad to fe the chaunge, bicaule there was no oddes 7
Pet leaues oꝛ twigs oꝛ of the fades new Haken from the coddes . ee
Paäsꝛ ſtill like nature euer fince is in our Coꝛall foundes 2
That loke how fone it toucheth Ayꝛe it wareth hard and ſounde
And that which vnder water was a ficke, aboue is one,
| hee altars to as many Gods he makes of Turfe anon} se.
Apon che left hand Mercuries; Mineruas on the right?
And in the middle Iupiters: to Pallas he did digt
| ACotw a Calfe to Mereurie: a Bull to ropall Iouwje.
a Forthwith he twke Andromade the price fox which he Irons
Endowed with hir fathers Kealme. oz nom the God ol Loune
ih And Hymen vnto martage his minde in halt did mone, e.
1 Great fires were made ol werte perfumes; and eurious garlandes hung
About the houſe, which euery where of mirthkull mucke rung
4 Che gladlome ligne of merie mindes The Pallace gates were tet
1 Vlide open. none from comming in were by the Poꝛters let.
All Poblemen and Gentlemen that were of any poꝛt BS
To this fame great and ropall feaſt of Cepliey did reſoꝛt.
AQllhen hauing taken their repaſt as well of meate as wine ö
Their hearts began to pleafant mirth by lepſure to enclme,
Che valiant Perſey of the folke and lacious ol the lan n
Began to be inguſitiue One Lincide out ot hand bh 7 1
The rites and m mers ok the folke did doe him t underlland.
M hich dane he fapd ; O woꝛthie knight J pap the tell vs vy
F tii. Qibag


1


8


The fourth booke of
Mhat force oʒ wile thou gotſt the head with hatres ol Adders le.
Then Perſey tolde how vnderneath colde Atlas lap a plaine ö
So lenced in on euerp Ade with mountaines bigh, that datne
Mere any force to win the fame, In entrance of the which
wo daughters of Ling Phorcis dwelt whole chaunce and bap bas (uch
That one eye ſerued both their turnes: whereol by wille flight
And ſtealth in putting forth his hand he did berene them quight,
As they fram tone to tother were deliuering ok the ſame.
From twhence by long blind croked wapes vnhandſomly he came
Thꝛough gaſtly groues by ragged clifkes vnto the dꝛerie plate
Mhereas the Gorgons dwelt: and there be ſaw(a wꝛetched calt)
Che tapes as well of men as beaſts lie ſcattered euerie where
In open fields and common wapes, the which tranſfoꝛmed were
From lining things to ſtones at fight of foule Medufas heare
But pet that he thꝛough bꝛightneſle af his monſtrous bꝛazen ſhield
The which he in his left hand bare, Meduſas face beheld.
And while that in a found dead ſleꝛpe were all hir Snakes and Khe,
He foftlp pared ot hir head: and how that be did ſer
Swilkt Pegaſus the winged hoꝛſe and eke his bꝛothor grow
Out ol their mothers new Hen blond. Poꝛeouer he did ſyoo
A long diſcourſe of all his happes and not fo long as trew:
As namely of what Seas and landes the coaſts be ouerficty,
And eke what ſkarres with ſtying wings he in the while did bebe.
But pet his tale was at an ende ere any lobe therefoze,
Upon occaſton by and by of woꝛdes reherſt beloꝛe
Chere was a certaine noble man demaunded him therefore
Sher only of the filters the haire mixt with Adders boze.
Sir (aunſwerde Perley) Ath pou altze a matter woꝛth repost
J graunt to tell pow your demaunde. fhe both in comly poꝛt
and beautie, euery other wight ſurmounted in ſuch fort,
Chat many ſuters onto hir did earneſtiy reſoꝛt. .
And though that whole from top to toe mot betwtifull the were,
3 all hir bodie was no part moꝛe godly than hir heare.
J know ſome parties pet aliue, that fap thep did hir ſck.
It is tepoꝛted how fhe ſhould abuſde by Neptune bee
In Pallas Church: Exõ which fowle face loues daughter turnde hir ert
And with hir Carget hid hir face from luch a villanie. am


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 56


And lealt le Honlo vnpunicht be che turnde bir femelp bears —
To lothly Snakes: the which ( the moze to put hir foes in feave) 7 f
Beloꝛe hir bꝛeſt continually the in hir chield doth beare, 5
ü Finis quarti Libri, FOES
PESESHIEIESHS VISES BARS
= 4 5 * a 4 4
0 8 e
iy : a a
1 | | aise
b THE Fre Boo


of Ouids Metamorphofis. =


K Ob bhile that Danaes noble forme was telling or thele things
5 Amid a thꝛong of Cepheys Loꝛdes, thꝛough al the Pallace rings
1 A noyſe of people nothing like the found of ſuch as fing

7 8 At wedding kealtes but like the rope of ſuch as tidings being
Ok cruell warre. This ſodaine chaunge from feaſking vnta Frap

Might well be likened to the Sea: whych ſtanding at a fap. f

The wodneſſe of the windes makes rough by rath ng ol the waue.
dking Cepheys bother Phyney was the man that raſhly gaue

Che fit occafion of this frap. M ho ſhaking in hys hand

d Dart of ach with head of Fele,fapd loe: loc here J ſtand

To chalenge ther that wꝛongfully my rauiſht fpoule doſte holde.

Thy wings noꝛ pet thy foꝛged Dad in ſhape of feyned golde 60127

Shall now not ſaue ther from my hands. as with that woꝛd be bent

ls arme aloft, the foꝛeſaid Dart at Perſey to haue ſent 171% ag?
hat doſfe thou bother Cephey eride what madneſle moues thy minde

To doe fo foule a dede zis this the kriendſhip he chall unde

} Among vs for his god delerts 2 And wilt thau neces regulte

*


2


The fifte booke of


Che laulng ot thy Pertes Life with ſuch a fouledelpighe « and ane
Nthome Perſey hath not from ther tane: butlik thou be aduiſde)
But Neptunes heauie wꝛath bicauſe his Seanymphes were delpilde
But hoꝛned Hammon but the beatt which from the Sea arriued
On mp deare bowels fo2 to feede, Chat time wert thou depꝛiued

Ol thy betrothed, when hir life vpon the loling fede :

Onleſſe perchaunce to tee hir loft it woulde haue done ther god,

And ealde thy heart to fee me ſad. And may it not ſuficte

Chat thou dive (e hir to the rocke laſt bound before thine eyes

And didſt not helpe hir beyng both hir hulband and hir Came ⸗
Onleſle chou grudge that any man ſhould come within my Realme
To ſaue hir life? and ferke to rob him of his iuſt rewarde:; peek
Mhich ik thou thinke to be fo great, thou ſhouldſt haue had regarde
Befoꝛe, to fetch it from the rocke to which thou ſaboffe it bound,

J pꝛay the bꝛother fering that by him the meanes is found

Chat in mine age without mp childe J go not to the grounde,
Permit him to enigp the price foꝛ which we did compounde,

And which he bath by due deſert of purchace vately bought.

Foꝛ bꝛother let it neuer ſinke noꝛ enter in thy thought

That à fet moze by him than ther: but this map well be ſed

4 rather had to giue hir him than ſer my daughter dead.

abo gaus him not a woꝛde agame: But lobed eft on him,

And eft on Perley trefully with countnance ſloure and grim, 5
Hol knowing which were beit to hit: And after little ſta ß

He ſhwtze his Dart, and flung it forth with all the potuze and (way
That Anger gaue at Perfeys hend. But harme it did him none,

It ſticked in che Wedſteddes head that Perſey fate vpon.

Then Perey ſternely farting vp and pull ing dut the Dart
Did thꝛob it at his foe agapne, and therewithall his hart

Had cliuen a fander, had he not behinde an Altar Hart. ö

The altar moꝛe the pitie was) did ſaue the wicked wightet. 5
Pet thew he not the Part in vame: it hit our Rhetus right
Amd the fozehende: who there with fante done and when the fale
las plucked out, he Ipꝛatblde about and ſpurned with his bale,
And all berayd the boꝛde with blond. Then all the other ront
As fierce as fitd lang Dartes: and tome there were that cried out
Chat Cephey with his ſonne in lawe was woꝛthy koz to die.


Ouids Metamorphofis. 57
But he had wound him out of oozes pꝛoteſting folemlp 7557
As he was (ni and faithfull Pꝛince, and wearing eke by all
Che Gods of Hoſpitalitie, that thatſame bzople did fall
Full ſoꝛe againſt his will. At hand was warlie Pallas freight =
And ſhadowed Perley with hir ſhielde, and gaue him heart in feighe.
There was one Atys boꝛne in Inde, (of faire Lymniace
The Riuer Ganges daughter thought the illue foz to be,)
Ok palling beautie which with rich aray he did augment.
He ware that day a ſcarlet Cloke, about the which there went
A garde of golde: a cheyne of golde he ware about his necke:
And eke his haire perfumbde with Myrrhe a coffly crofne did decke.
Full ſirtene peares he was of age: ſuch cunning hill he coulde
In darting, as to hit his marke karre diſtant when he would.
yet how to handle Bow and thaftes much better did he knolo.
No as he was about that time to bende his hoꝛned Bowe,
A firebꝛand Perſey raught that did vpon the Aultar fmoke, 5


E OT


2 F272 *


And daſht him ouertbwhart the face with {ach a violent ſkroke,
That all bebattred was his head the bones a ſunder bꝛoke.

When Lycabas of Aſſur lande his moſfe aſſured friend
And deare companion being no dillembler ok his miend
Mhich moſt entierly did him loue, behelde him on the ground

He weltring with diffigurde face, and thꝛough that grienous wound
Vowgaſping out his parting ghoſt, his death he did lament,
And taking battlp vp the Wow that Atys erſt had bent,
10 Encounter thou with meche fatde)thon ſhalt not long enioy
ma Thy triumphing in bꝛauerie thus,foz killing of this boy,
PWy which thou get moze ſpight than pꝛaiſe. All this was ſcarlly ſedt

But that the arrow from the firing went ſkreyned to the head.
ft. Howbeit Perfey(as it hapt) ſo warely did it hanne, st
As that it in bis coteplights hung. then to him did he runne

Miith Harpe in his hand beſfaind with grim Meduſas blod,
And thꝛuſt him thꝛough the bꝛeſt therwith. he quothing as he fwd
Did loke about where Atys lap with dim and dazeling eyes,

Now wauing vnder endleſſe night: and downe by him he lies,

And fo2 to comfoze him withall togither with him dies.
Boehold thꝛough gredie halte to feight one Phorbas Methions fon
As vveulte: and of Lybie lande one callde Amphimedon a


ae we


—
2


The fift booke of


Wy fortune lliding in the blood with which the ground was wet,
Fell downe: and as they woulde haue role, Perſeus fauchon met
ith bath of them. Amphimedon ppon the ribbes he ſmote,
And with the like celeritte he cut me Phorbas thꝛote.
But Onto Erich Actors ſonne that in his hand did holde
A bꝛode bꝛowne Bill, with his ſhoꝛt ſwoꝛd he durſt not be te bolde
Lo make appꝛoch. Mith both his handes a great and malie cup
Emboſt with cunning poꝛtrayture aloft he taketh vp,
And ſendes it at him. He ſpewes vp red bloud: and falling done
Upon his backe, againſt the ground doth knocke his dying crowne.
Chen do wne he Polydemon thꝛowes extrac of ropall race
And Abaris the Scithian, and Clytus in like cafe,
And Elice with his vnſhoꝛne lockes, and alſo Phlegias,
And Lycct olde Spercheſies ſonne, with diuers other mo,
That on the heapes of coꝛſes Maine he treades as he doth go.

And Phyney daring not pꝛeſume ta merte his foe at hand,

Did caſt a Dart: which hapt to light on Idas who did ſtand
Alofe as neuter (though in vame ) not medling with the Fray.
Ml ho caſting backe a krowning loke at Phyney, thus did lay.
Sith whether that J will oꝛ no compeld J am perforce f
Ta take a part, haue Phyney here him whome thon volte enforce
Lo be thy loe, and with this wound mp wꝛongkull wound requite.
But as he from his body pullde the Dart, with all his might
To thꝛobo it at his for againe, his limmes ſo fœbled were
Mith toile of blond, that downe he fell and could not after ſleare.
There allo lap Odites ſlaine the chlefe in all the land
Next to ing Cephey, put to death bp foꝛce of Clymens hand.
Protenor twas bp Hypfey killde, and Lyncide did as much
Foꝛ Hypſey. In the thꝛang there was an aunclent man and fach
d one as loued righteouſneſle and greatly feared God:
Emat hion called was his name: whome ſith his peares foꝛbod
To put on armes, he feights with tongue, inueping earneſtly
Ag ainſt that wicked war the which he banned bitteriy..
As on the Altar he himſelle with guiuering handes did Kays.
One Cromis tipped of his head: his head cut oſt ſtreight way
Upon the Altar fell, and there his tongue not fully dead,
Did bable Hill the banning wozdes the which it exit had ſed.


And


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 58

And breathed forth his fatnting ghoſt among the burning bꝛandes.
Then Brote x Hammon bꝛothers, twins, ſtout chãpions of their bates
In welling Pierlede if fo be that wꝛeſtling could ſuſtaine

‘Whe furtous force of dſeing lwoꝛdes) were both by Phyney ſlaine.


Se


And fo was Alphit Ceres Pꝛieſt that ware vpon his crowne

A ſtately iter faire and white with Tables hanging towne.

Chou alfo lapets fore foꝛ (uch affatres as theſe bnmerte
But meꝛte to tune thine inſtrument with bopce and Ditie werte
W Che woꝛke of peace, wert thither callde thalſemblie to reioyce


And koꝛ to fet the mariage foꝛth with pleafant ſing ing boyce.

As with his Uiall in his hand he ſtode a god wap off,

There commeth to him Petalus and ſayes in wap of ſcofle:
Ho fing the reldue to the ghoſtes about the Stygian Lake,
And in the left fide ol his heade his dagger poynt he ſtrake.

He ſanke downe deade with fingers ſtill pet warbling on the Fring

And fo miſchaunte knit vp with wo the ſong that he did fing,

But fierce Lycormas could not beare to ſæ him murdꝛed ſſ x
Uitthout reuengement. Ap he caught a mightie Leauer tho es
That wonted was to barre the doze a right five of the boule

And therewithall to Petalus he lendeth ſuch a ſouſe

Full in the noddle of the necke, that like a ſnetched Dre eit
Streight tabling downe, againſt the ground his groueling face he knor.

And Pelates à Garamant attempted to haue caught f

he left doꝛe barre: but as thereat with ſkretched hand he raught,

One Coryt ſonne of Marmarus did with a Jauelin ſtricke

Him thꝛough the hand, that to the toad fal napled did it icke.

As Pelates ſtode faſfned thus, one Abas goard bis five:
Pe could not fall, but hanging ſtill vpon the poſte there dide
Faſt napled by the hand. And there was ouerthꝛowne a Unight

Ok Perſeyes hand callde Melaney, and one that Dorill hight
| Aman okgreateſt landes in all the Nealme of Nafamone,

That occupide fo large a grounde as Dorill was there none,

Poꝛ none that had ſuch ſkoꝛe of coꝛne. there came a Dart a lkelo

And lighted in his Coddes the place where pꝛeſent death doth ſew.
MMhen Alcion of Barcey he that gaue this deadly wound
Beheld him pelking foꝛth his ghol and falling to the ground
Mith watrie eyes the white turnde bp: content thy (elfe he lald
¥ 222 I. WH (th


.


The fixt booke of


Mith that fame litle plot of grounde whereon thy toꝛſe is lapde,

In ſteade of all the large fat fieldes which late thou dink poſſeſle.

And with that woꝛd he left him dead. Perſeus to redꝛeſſe

Chis laughter and this {pightfull taunt, ſtreight Matched out the Dart
That Kicked in the kreſh warme wound, and with an angrie hart
Did fend it at the thꝛowers head: the Dart did (plit his note

Euen in the middes, and at his necke againe the head out goes:

So that it pœred both the wayes. Mhiles fortune doth ſuppozt

And further Perfey thus, he killes Hut pet in ſundꝛie ſoꝛt)

Two bꝛothers by the mother: tone callde Clytie tother Dane.

Foz on a Dart though both his thighes did Clytie take bis bane:
And Danus with another Dart was ſtriken in the mouth.

There died alſo Celadon a Gypſie of the South:

And fo did baſfard Aſtrey to, whoſe mother was a gew:

And ſage Ethion well fozeſcne in things that ſhould enſew,

But vtterly beguilde as then by Birdes that aukly fle w.

King Cepheyes harnelſlebearer callde T hoactes loft his life,

And Agyrt whom foꝛ murdꝛing late his father with a knife

Che woꝛlde ſpake ſhame off. Natheleſſe much moze remainde behinde
Than was difpatchen of of hand: foꝛ all were full in minde

To murder one. the wicked thꝛong had ſwoꝛne to ſpend their blod
Agalnſt the right, and ſuch a man as had deſerued god. 5
A totherſtde although in vaine or mere aftedion ſtod

The Father and the Potherinlaw, and eke the heaute bꝛide,

Who filled with their piteous playnt the Court on euerte fide.

But now the clattring of the ſwoꝛdes and harnelle at that tide
lich grieuous grones and ſighes of ſuch as wounded were oꝛ dide,
Did raiſe bp ſuch a cruell roꝛe that nothing could be heard.

Fos fierce Bellona ſu renede the battell afterward,

That all the houſe did ſwim in blod. Duke Phy ney with a rout

Ok moe than a thouſand men enutrond round about

Che valiant Perfey all alone. Lhe Dartes of Phyneys bande

Came thicker than the Winters haple doth fall vpon the lande,

By both his fides his eyes and eares. He warely there vpon
Withdꝛawes, and leanes his backe againſt a huge great arche of forte:
And being lale behind, he lettes his face againſt his foe
Mlithſtanding all che ir ferce allaultes. There did aſſaile him thoe Upm


we


Oude ese phsgs is. 59


Upon the left foe Molpheus a Pꝛuste of Choanic,

And on the right Ethemon boꝛne hard by in Ar die. 1
Like asthe Lyger when he heaves the lowing out of Peate

In ſundꝛie Pedes, enloꝛced ſoꝛe thꝛough abſtinence from meate,
Mould faine be doing with them both, and can not tell at which
Mere beſt to giue aduenture firſt: So Perſey pho did ich


To be at hoſt with both ol them and doubtlul? whether fide -


Co turne him on, the right oz let vpon adnantage ſpide a
Did wound me Molphey on the leg, ano teom him quight him draue.
be was contented with his flight: fo: luhy Ethemon gane
Mo reſpite to him to purſue: but lite a frantiche man
Chꝛough egernelle to wounde his necke, without cegaebing zan
Oꝛ how to trike foꝛ haſte he buck his beittle two; be in wanne
Againk the Arche: the poynt whereskrenounding backe againe,
Did hit himſelle vpon the thꝛote Hor or that fame wound
Mas v nlutficten t g e lende Ethemon to the ground.
He trembled holding by his handes foꝛ mercie, but in valne.
Soꝛ Perley thꝛuſt him though the heart with Hermes hwked ſtzaine.
But when he lau chat valiantnelle no lenger could auaple,
By reaſon of the multitude that did him ſtill aſtayle,
Sith pou pour lelues me foꝛce to call mine enmie to mine aͤpde,
J will do ſo: if any friend ok mine be here che fay). .
Sirs turne pour kaces all away: and therewithall he dꝛew
Out Gorgons head. One Thelſſalus ireight raging to him llew,
And fapd: go ſerke ſome other man whome thou mapſt make abaht
With thele thy kwlilh juggling toyes And as he would haue dacht
His Jaueling in him with that woe to bill him out of hand,
With geſture thꝛolving forth his Dart all Marble did he ſtand.
His (wade thꝛaugh Lyncids noble heart had Am phix thought to ſhoue:
His hand was lone, and neyther one noꝛ other way could inoue:
But Niley who did vaunt harrſolfe to be the Muers ſonne b
That thꝛough the boundes ol Aegy pt land in channels bij doth runne,
And in his chielde had grauen part ol luer, part ol golde ‘
Che laid. vij. channels of the Nile, ſayd: Nerſey here beholde
From whence we fetch our piodegrer: it map reioyce 9 part
Co die of fuch a noble hand as mine. The latter part


of Febete his woꝛds could fcarce be heard: the dint therof was dꝛo onde: 8


J. itj. e


The fift booke of


Pe would haue thought him [peaking Mit with open month:bue tawny
Did none forth pale : there was loꝛ ſpeache no pa@age to be found 5
Rebusing themertes Eryx; Sirs it is not Gorgons face

It is pour olwne faint heartes that make pon ſtonie in this cate,
Come let bs on this fellow run and to the ground him beare

That leightes by wi e as with that his fete loꝛth ſtepping were
They ſtacke Fill faſtened ko the floꝛe: he could not mouc a fine,
An armed image alt of ſfone he ſpeachleſſe did abide.

All theſe were tullly puniſhed. Bu one there was a knight

Ok Perſeys hand, in whole defence as Acont fone to feight,

He twared ouergrowie with fone at vgly Gorgons fight.

EA home till as pet Aſtyages ſuppoſing loꝛ to line,

Did with a long tharpe arming ſwoꝛde a waching blow him gine, 5
The lwoꝛd did chinke againſt the Hane an out the ſparcles dur. )
While all amazde Aſty ages aoe wonding at the thing,

ihe ſelfe fame nature on himſelle the Gorgons hend did being.

And in his viſage which was ſtone a countnance did remaine

Ok wondꝛing kill. A wearie woꝛke it were to tell pou plame

Che names of all the conmmon ſoꝛt. Two hundꝛed from that frap

Did ſcape vnſlaine: but none of them did go aliue sway.

The whole two hundꝛed euerp one at fight of Gorgons heare

Mere turned into ſtockes of ſtone. Then at the length foꝛ feare

Did Phyney of his wꝛongkull war foꝛthinke himſelfe full foze,

But now (alas) what remedie: he ſaw there Tana befoze

His face, his men like Jmages in ſundꝛie ſhapes all Tone.

He knew them well, and by their names did call them euerpchone:
Deſiring them to ſuccoꝛ him: and truſting not his fight

He feeles the bodies that were nert, and all were Parble quight,

Me turnes himſelle from Perfey ward and humblꝑ as he ſtandes

ibe wꝛies his armes behind his backe: and holding vp his handes,

O noble Perfey thou haſt got the bpper hand he feo.

Put vp that monſtruous ſhield of thine: put vp that Gorgons hend
That into ſtones tranſfoꝛmeth men: put vp A the defire.

Not hatred, noꝛ bicauſe to reigne as Ring J did alpire,

Haue moued me to make this frap. The anly force of loue

In febing mp betrothed ſpouſe, did herevnto me moue,

The better title ſæmeth chine bicauſe ol thy deſert:


i
1


S


"= SE =
=


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 60
And mine by foꝛmer pꝛomiſe made. It irkes me at the heart HS! BG:
In that 3 did not giue the place. pone other thing J craue
O woꝛthie knight, but that thou graunt this life of mine to ſaue.
Let all things elle beſide be thine. As he thus humbly ſpake
ot daring loke at him to whome he did entreatance make,
The thing (quoch Perley which to graunt both J can finde in heart,
And is no little courteſte to ſhewe without defert ‘
Upon a Coward, 3 will graunt O fearfull Duke to ther.


Set keare a ſide: thou ſhalt not hurt with any weapon ber.


J will moꝛeouer fo pꝛouide as that thou ſhalt remaine


An euerlaſting monument of this dapes topleand patne.


Che pallace of my Fathꝛinlab ſhall henceforth be thy ſhaine


here thou ſhalt fand continually before my ſpouſes eyen.


Chat of hir huſband hauing ay the Image in hir light,
She map krom time to time receyue fome comfort and delight.


He had no ſoner fapd theſe woꝛdes but that he turnde his chielde
With Gorgons heave to that fame part where Phyney with a mielde


And fearfull countnance fet his face. Chen alſo as he wꝛide


Dis eyes awap, his necke wart ſritte his teares to ſtone were dꝛide.


A tountnance in the ſtonie ſtocke of feare did Mill apprare

Mith humble loke and peelding handes and gaſtly ruthfall cheare.
lith conqueſt and a noble wife doth Perſey home repaire
And in reuengement of the right againſt the wrongful heyꝛe,

As in his Graundſtres iuſt delence be kalles in hand with Prete

ho like no bꝛother but a foe did late before deleate 8

Bing Acriſe of his townes by warre and of his ropall ſeate.

But neyther could his men of warre noꝛ foꝛtreſle won by wong

Defend him from the grielly loke of grim Meduſa long. f

And pet thee folith Polydect of little Seriph ning,

Such ro ted rancoꝛ inwardly continnallp did fing, :

That nepther Perſeys pꝛowelle tride in ſuch a ſoꝛt of bꝛoples


Poꝛ pet the perils he endurde, noꝛ all his troublous toples


Could cauſe thy ſtomacke to relent. M ithin thy Fonte bꝛeit

M oꝛkes ſuch a kinde of felfred hate as cannot be repꝛeſt.

Thy wꝛongtull malice hath none ende oꝛeouer thou of ſpite

Mepining at his woꝛthy praile, his doings dole backbite:

Apholding that Meduſas death was but a fozged lie: 2
ee, | J. tig. 29


se ——— —— — ͤ —


The fiftbooke of

So long till Perley fo2 to The we the truth apparantily :
Deſtring ſuch as were his friendes ta turne away thrir eye,
Dꝛue out Meduſas ougly head. At fight: whereof anon Ay
The batcfull Lan Polydet> was turned ta a ſfone.

The Goddeſſe Pallas all this while did kerpe continually

iy hꝛother Perfey tompanieʒ till now that ſhe did fie
From Seriph in a hollomeloud and leguing an the right tt
he z les of Scy re and Gyaros, he made from thente hir dight
Directly ouer that ſame Sea as neare as epe caald ame
Lo T hebe and Mount Helicon and whem the thither tame,
She ſayde hir lelle, and thus befpabe the learned ſiſters nine.
A rumoꝛ of an buenutl Gitte. aid pierte thele cares of mins fe 4004
The which the winged ſtede ſhould make byſtamping with bis hte,
This is the caule of my repaire: would fo certain pa
We glad to fee the wondꝛous thing. Foꝛ pꝛeſent there 3 Tove.
And fate the felfe ſame Pegaſus ſyꝛing al his mathers blmd.
Dame Vranie did entertaine and aunſwers Pallas thus.
What cauſe ſo euer manes pour: grate tacame and bffit vs, f
Molt heartely peu melcome are: and certaine is the fame
Ok this our Spꝛing, that Pegaſus was canſer dt the amt.
And with that woꝛde fhe led hir foꝛth to ler —̃ :
WaAbe mufing greatly with hir felfeat ſtraungenelſe of the thing,
Suruepde the Wiimdes and groues abont of auncient Fatelp poꝛt. —
And when the fate the Bowes to tubich the Rules did refogt, 5 F
And pleaſant fields beclad with herbes ol ſundzie hew and fet,
She laid that foz their indies fake they were in happie cace
And alſo that to ſerue their turne they had ſo trim a place.
Then one of them replied thus O noble Ladie who
But that pour vertue greater woꝛkes than thele are calles pou to)
Should elle haue bene al this aur traupe your ſaying is full true.
To this our trade ot᷑ life and place is commendation dus.
And Cure we haue a luckte lot and il the woꝛld were ſuch
As that we might in ſafetie liue. but lewdnelle reignes ſo much
Chat all things make vs aides afraide. Me thinkes J pet do ler é


The wicked Cyꝛan Pyren ſtill: my heart is pet farce fre
Irom that fame feare with which tt hapt bs flighted for tober.
Chis cruell Pyren was of Thrace and with his men af war


Che


Se —


Ouids Metamiorphofis. 6


The land of Phocis had ſubdude, and from this place not far


Mithin the Citte Davvlis reignde by foꝛce ot᷑ wꝛongfull hand, od 82 5
One day to Phebus Temples warde that on Parnaſus ſtand 5


As we were going, in our way he met vs caurteoully,


And by the name al Goddeſles ſaluting reuerently

Sad: O pe Dames af Meonie(foz why he knew vs well

J pꝛap pou fap and take my houſe vntill this ſtoꝛme (there felt

That time a tempeſt and a ſhowꝛe)be paſt: the Cods aloft 0

Haue entred ſmaller ſheddes than mine full many a time and oft.
The rainie weather and hys woꝛdes ſo moued vs, that wer


To go into an outer hong of his did all agrer.


As fone as that the ſhawꝛe was pa and heauen fas bopded clear
Ok all the Cloudes which late hefoꝛe did cuery where appeare,
Until that Boreas had ſubdude the rainte Southerne wind
Me woulde haue by and by bene gone. He ſhet the dares in minde
To rauiſh vs: but we with wings eſcaped from his hands.
He purpoſing to follow vo, bpana Turret ſtands,


And ſayth he nerdes will after vs the fame ay we did fie.


2


And with that woꝛde kull krantickly he leapeth downe from hie, oe


And pitching euelong on his face the bones a funder cralht;

And dylug, all abꝛode the ground his wieked bloud bedacht. .
Mo as the Mules was telling this, they heard a noyſe —
And from the leauie boughes aloft a ſound of grating rings. Cine

Minerua loking vp thereat demaunded whente the laune

Of tongues that fo dittinaty fpake did came fo plaine and raundee

She thought ſome woman oe ſome man had grærted hir that .

It was a flight of Birdes. Pyne Pies bewatling their mifchaunce.

In counterfetting euerie thing from bough to bough did daun ee.

As Pallas wondꝛed at the fight, the Muſe ſpake thus in ſumme.

Theſe allo being late ago in chalenge ouercome,


Made one kinde moze of Birdes than was ol auncient time leben.


In Macedone they were about the Citte Pella boꝛne 5
Of Pierus a great riche Chuffe and Euip, who by ae


Ok rong Lucina trauelling ninetimes, nine —— was lade


Ok daughters in hir childbed lale. Chis fond and foltth ront
Ol doltiſh ſiſters taking pꝛide and waxing verie ſtout,


wl they were: n number nine came flocking all rogtther:
Chꝛough


— 3 — —


15 The fiſt booke of ae
Chꝛough all the townes of Theſſalie and all Achaia hither,

And bs with thefe oꝛ ſuch line woꝛdes to combate did pꝛauoke.
Ceale off pe Theſpian Goddeſles to mocke the ſumple folke

With fondnelle of pour Melodie. And ik pe thinke in derde

Pe can doe ought, contend with vs and ſer how pou Hall ſpæde.

J Warrant pou pe paſſe vs not in cunning noꝛ in vopce.

Pe are here nine, and lo are we. Me put pou to the chopee,

That eyther we will vanquiſh vou and fer pou quight beũde

Pour fountaine made by Pegaſus which is pout chiefeſt pride,

And Aganippe to: oꝝ elſe confounde pou vs, and we

Okt all the wods ol Macedone will diſpoſſeſſed be

As karre as ſnobie Peonie: and let the Nymphes be Judges.
Pob in god loth it was a ſhame to cope with ſuchie Dꝛudges,
But pet moze ſhame it was to peeld. The choſen Pymphes did ſweare
y Styx, and fate them downe on ſeates of fone that growed there.
Then ſtreight without commiſlion oꝛ election of the reff,

Che loꝛmoſt of them pꝛeaſing forth ondecently, pꝛolelt

Che chalenge to perfozme : and ſong the battels of the Goddes.
he gaue the Giants all the pratfe, the honoꝛ and the oddes,
Abaling fore the woꝛthie derdes ol all the Gods. She telles

ow Typhon iſluing from the earth and from the derpeſt helles,
Made all the Gods aboue akraide, ſo greatly that they fled

And neuer aide till Aegypt land and Nile whoſe ſfreame is ſhed
In channels ſeuen receiued them foꝛwearied all togither:
And how the Helhound Typhon did purſue them alſo thither.

By meanes Ioherof the Gods eche one were faine themſelues to hide
In forged ſhapes. She ſaide that Ioue the Pꝛince of Gods was wꝛide
In ſhape of Ram: which is the cauſe that at this pꝛeſent ride

Toues pmage which the Lybian folke by name of Ham mon ſerue,
Is made with croked welked hoꝛnes that inward Hill doe terue:
Chat Phebus in a Kauen lurkt, and Bacchus in à Geate,

And Phebus ſiſfer in a Cat, and Iuno ina Qeate,

And Venus in the ſhape of Fifh,and how that laff ofall
Mercurius hid him in a Bird which Ibis men doe call. 3
This was the ſumme of all the tale which ſhe with rolling tung
And pelling thꝛoteball ta hir barpe befoze vs rudelp ſung.

Our turne is allo come to ſpeake, but that perchaunce pour ie


i ee |
5 Ouids Metamorphoſis. 62
To giue the hearing to our long hath moty no time noꝛ ſpace.
Ves pes quath Pallas)tell on fosth in oꝛder all your tale:
And downe the late among the trees which gane a plealant ſwale.
The Mule made aunſwere thus: Co one Calliope here by name
This chalenge we committted haue and oꝛdꝛing ol the ſame.
Then role vp faire Calliope with godlip buſh of heare
Trim wꝛeathed vp with pute leaues, and wich hir thumbe gan deare
The quiuering ſtrings, to trie them ił they were in tune oꝛ no.
Du hich done, che plapde vpon hir Lute and ſong hir Ditie fo.
Dame Ceres firſt to bꝛeake the Earth with plough the maner found,
fy he five made come and ſtouer ſoft to grow bpon the ground,
5 She firſt made lawes. foꝛ all theſe things we are to Ceres baund.
10 Ok hir muff J as nolu intreate: would God J could reſound
ts Hir woꝛthle laude: ſhe doubtleſle is a Goddeſſe woꝛthie pꝛaiſe.
Bicauſe the Giant Typhon gaue pꝛeſumptuouſſy aſſapes
To conquer Heauen, the howgie Ile of Trinacris is lapd
Upon his lummes, by weight whereof perfoꝛce he downe is weyde.
* He ſtriues and ſtrug les foꝛ to rife full many a time and oft,
But on his right hand toward Rome Pelorus ſfandes aloft
Pachynnus ſfandes bpon his left : his legs with Lilybie
Are pꝛeſted downe: his monſtrous head doth vnder Aetna lle.
From thence he lping bolt vpꝛight with wꝛathfull mouth doth ſpit
Dur llames of fire. be wꝛeſtleth oft and walloweth foz to wit
And ik he can remoue the weight of all that mightte land
Oz tumble downe the townes and hilles that on his bodie Fann,
By meanes whereokt it commes to pale that oft the Earth doth hake:
And euen the king of Ghoſtes hünſelfe koꝛ verie feare doth quake,
Päildoubting leaſt the Earth ſhould citue fo wide that light of day
WMWðight by the fame pierce downe to Hell and there the Ghoſtes affrap
Foꝛecaſting this, the Pꝛince of Fiendes foꝛſoke his darkſome hole,
And in a Chariot dꝛawen with Sterdes as blacke as any cole.
The whole foundation of the Ile of Sicill warely bewwne..
Nlhen thꝛoughly he had ſercht eche place that harme had none enſelode,
As careleffelp he raungde abꝛode, he chaunced to be ſeene
5 Ok Venus fitting on hir hill: who taking ſtreight betwene
bir armes hir winged Cupid, faid:my ſonne, mine only fay,
if ed band — might, go take without delay ee


The fiſt booke of


TChole tales which all wightes do lubdur, and frike them in the hart
Ol that fame God that of che woꝛld en ioyes the lo welt part.
Che Gods of Heauen, and Ioue himſelke, the powꝛe of Sea t Land )
And he that rules che powꝛes on Ear th obey thy mightie hand: .
And whereloꝛe then ſhould only Hell till vnſubdued fand 3°
Chy mothers Cmptreans thine own why doſte thou not aduaunce;
Che third part of al the woꝛld now hangs in doubtful chaunte. 4
And pet in heauen to now, their derdes thou ſeeſt mie faine to beare,
We are delpilde: the Hrength ol loue with me away doth weare.
Sette not the Darter Diane and dame Pallas haue already
Grempted them from my beheſtes z and now of late ſo her dy
Js Ceras daughter tw, that if we let hir haue hir will,
Ohe will continue all hir life a Paid vnwedded skill. |
Foz that is all hir hope and marke whereat fhe mindes to Hots,
But thou ik ought this gracious turne our honoꝛ may promote,
2 ought our Empire beautiſie which toyntly we doe holde,
Chis Damſell to hir vncle ioyne. No ſoner had ſhe tolde
Chelſe woꝛdes, but Cupid opening freight bis quiuer chole there
One arrow (as his mother bade) among a thouland mo. Chad
But luch a one it was, as none moze harper was than it,
Noꝛ none went freighter from the Bow the amed marke to hit.
He (ct his kner againſt his Wow and bent it out of hande,
And made his foꝛked arrowes ſteale in Plutos heart to ſfande.
eare Enna walles there ſtandes a Lake Perguſa is the name.
Cayſter heareth not mo ſongs of Swannes than doth the ſame.
A wood enulrons euerie fide the water round about, 1
And with his leaues us with a veple doth kæpe the Sunne heate out.
Che boughes doe pcelde a cole Frew Ayꝛe: the mopſtnelſe of the grounde
Peeldes lundꝛie flowzes: continuall ſpꝛing as all the ycare there founds,
M hile in chis garden Proſerpine was tating hir paſlime, t
In gathering eyther Colors blow,o2 Lillics white as Lime,
And while of ardenly dere rſhe fillde hir Paund and Lap,
Undeuoꝛing to ourgather her compantons thrre. By hap
Dis ſpide hir: loude hir: caught hir vp: and all at once well mere,
So haſtie, hote, and wilt a thing is Lone as map appeare.
Che Ladte with a Walling voyte arright did often tall N
Hir Mother and hir Waiting Pades but Mother moſkol all. ain


The mighty Coddeffe, now the pines and wales hirielfe into.


-


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 64.
And as (he from the bpper part hir garment would haue rent,
By chaunce the let hir lap ſlip downe, and out hir flowzes went.
And ſuch a ſillie ſimpleneſſe hir chiloith age pet beares,

That euen the verte loſle of them did moue hir moze to teares.
The Catcher dꝛiues his Chariot foꝛth, and calling euery hozſe
By name, to make awap apace he doth them fill enfoꝛce:


And ſhakes about their neckes and Danes their ruſtie bꝛidle reynes


And thꝛough the derpeſt of the Lake perfoꝛce he them conſtreynes.


And thꝛough the Palik poles. the which from bꝛoken ground doe bople


And Cell of Bꝛimſtone verie ranke: and alſo by the ſoyle
WU bere as the Bacchies folke of Corinth with the double Seas,
Betwerne vnequall Wauons twaine did rere a towne far eaſe.

Betwerne the fountaines of Cyane and Arethuſe of Piſe

An arme of Sea that metes encloſde with narrow hoꝛnes there lies.
Ol this the Pole callde Cyane which beareth greateſt fame
Among the Pymphes of Sicilie did Algates take the name.
M ho vauncing hir vnto the wate amid hir Pole did know
Dame Proſerpine, and ſaid to Dis: ye ſhall no further go
Vou cannot Ceres ſonneinlawe be, will he ſo oꝛ no.
on (ould haue fought hir courteoully and not enfoꝛt hir fo,
And ik ¥ map with great eſtates my ſimple things compare,
Anapus was in loue with me: but pet he did not fare
As pou doe now with Proſerpine. He was content to ww
And J vnkoꝛſt and vnconſtreind conſented him vntw.
This fatd ſhe ſpꝛeaded foꝛth hir armes and ffopt him of his wap.
His hafkie wath Saturnus ſonne no lenger then could fap.
But chearing bp his dꝛeadfull Stedes did (might his ropall mace
Mlith violence in the bottome of the Poole in that fame place.
Che ground ſtreight perlded to his Croke and made him wap to Pell,
And dobue the open gap both hoꝛſe and Chariot headlong fell.
Dame Cyan taking ſoꝛe to heart as well the raulchment
Ok Proſerpine agatntt hir will, as alfo the contempt
Againt hir fountatnes pꝛiuiledge, did ſhzowde in ſecret hart
An in ward coꝛſie comfoꝛtleſſe, which neuer did depart 8
Untill He melting into teares conſumde away with fart.”
Che ſelle fame waters of the which the was but late ago


e


„ —— . . ——.


The fift booke of


He might haue Lene, hir limmes wer lithe,pe might haue bent hte bones
Hir naples. Wert ſolt: and fick of all did melt the ſmalleſt ones: 8
As aire and ſing ars, legges and fete : fo2 theſe fame ſlender parts
Doe quickly into water turne. and afterward conuerts
To water, ſhoulder, backe, bꝛeſt, ſide: and finallp in ead
Ok liuelp blond, within hir veynes coꝛrupted there was {pred
Thinne water: fo that nothing new remained wherevpon
Be might cake holde, to water all conſumed was anon.
The carefull mother in the while did feke hir daughter deare
Thꝛough all the woꝛld both Sea ¢ Lend, and pet was nere the nary,
The Morning with hir dea boy haire hir Gugging neuer found,’
§p02 pet the Euening Far that bꝛings the night vpon the ground.
Cwo ſeaſoned Ppnetres at the mount of Actna did ſhe light
And bare them reſtleſle in hir handes thꝛough all the dankith night.
Againe as fone as chierfull dap did dim the ſfarres, ſhe ſought
Mir daughter Till kram Catt to Meſt. and being ouerwzaughe
She caught a therſt: no liquoꝛ pet had come within hir thꝛote.
Wp chaunce the ſpiẽd nere at hand a pelting thatched Cote
Myth peruiſh oozes : he knockt thereat, and out there commes a trot,
The Goddeſſe aſtzed hir ſome dꝛinke and ſhe denide it not:
But out he bꝛought hir by and by a dꝛaught of merrie go downe
And the rewithall a Hotchpotch made of Fepcd Barlie bꝛowne
And. Flare and Coꝛiander fede and other fimples moze
The which the in an Carthen pot together [od before.
Mhile Ceres was a eating this, befoꝛe hir gaz ing fad
A hard faaſte bop a ſhꝛelwde pert wag that could no maners god:
He laughed at hir and in ſcoꝛne did call hir grerdie gut.
The Goddeſſe being wꝛoth therewith, did on the Hotchpotch put
The liquoꝛ ere that all was eate, and in his face it thꝛew.
IAmmediatly the ſkinne thereof became of ſpeckled hel.
And into legs his armes did turne: and in his altred hide
A wrigling tayle Freight to his limmes was added moze belive.
And to th intent he ſhould not haue much powze to woꝛken (cathe,
Mis bodie in a little roume togither knit ſhe hathe.
F02 as with pꝛetie Lucerts he in facion doth agree:
So than the Lucert ſomewhat leſle in euery paynt is he.
The poze old woman was amazde: and bitterly the wept:


— . AAA SS


—. ö


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 64


hy She burt not tonche the vntouth woꝛme who into coꝛners crept.

And of the llecked ſpottes like ſtarres that on his hide are fee

A name agreing there vnto in Latine doth he get. 8

At is our Svvift whole (kine with grap and pellow fpecks is fret,

Mhat Lands ¢ Seas the Goddeſſe ſought it were to log to ſaine.
The woꝛlde did want. And fo fhe went to Sicill backe again,
And as in going euerp where the ſerched bulilp, nahh
th She alſo came to Cyane: who would aſfuredly i

aue tolde hir all things, had the not tranſfoꝛmed bene bee
1 But mouth and tongue loꝛ Ortrauce now would ſerue hir = nomczke.

Howbeit a token manifeſt᷑ he gaue hir foꝛ to know
Re Mhat was became of Proſerpine. Wir girdle He did ſholo ie
1. Still houering on hir holle pole, whieh lughtly from hir eil!

As the that wap did pale: and that hir mother knew tw well
FJoꝛ when (he lalu it, by and by as though the had but than

Bene new aduertilde of hir chaunce; the piteoully began
Toa rend hir ruffled hatre, and beate hir handes againt hir brett.
| Ms pet the knew not where the was But pet with rage oppꝛeſt.

She curſt all landes, and fato they were vnthankfull euerpchone

Bea and vnwoꝛthy of the fruites belfowed them vpon.

Wut bitterly aboue the reſt che banned Sicilie,
In which the mention of hir loſſe ſhe plainely did eſpie.

And therefore there with eruell hand the earing ploughes ſhe bꝛake,

And man and beaſt that tilde the grounde to death in anger ſtrake.

She marrde the fede, and eke forbade the fieldes to peelde their frute.

The plentcoulnelle of that fame Fle of which there went luche bꝛute

Though all the woꝛld, lay dead: the coꝛne was killed in the blade:

i Low to much drought, now to much wet did make it for to fade.

Che ſtarres and blaſting windes did hurt, the hungry fonles did eate
Che coꝛne in ground: the Wines and Bꝛiars did ouergow the Aheate.
And other wicked werdes the coꝛne continually annop,.

Mhich neyther tylth noꝛ cople of man was able to deſtroy. iii
Then Arethuſe fond Alpheys loue lifts from hir Elean waucs
Hir head, and ſhedding to hir eares hir dealby halre that waues

About hir foꝛeheade ſayde : O thou that art the mother deare

Both of the Maiden fought thꝛough all the woꝛld both far and neare,

And eke of all: the earthly kruites, ſoꝛbeare thine endlelle tople,.


—


And


a


: The fixtbooke of
And be not wꝛoth without a cauſe with this thy laithfull loyle,
Che Lande deferues no puniſhment. vnwillingly Cod wote
She opened to the Nauiſher that violently hir (mote.

It is not ſure my natiue ſople for which A thus entreate.

J am but here a ſoiourner, my natiue ſoyle and ſeate

Is Piſa and from Ely towne J feteh my firſt diſcent.

J dwell but as a ſfraunger here. but ſure to my intent

This Countrie likes me better karre than any other land.

Here now J Arethuſa dwell: here am ſetled: and

J humblip you beſeche extend pour fauour to the fame.

A time will one day come when pou to mirth may better frame,

And haue pour heart moze fre from care, which better ſerue memay

Co tell pou why 4 from mp place fo great a {pace doe fray,

And vnto Ortygie am bought thꝛough fo great Seas and waues.

Che ground doth giue me paſlage free, and by the loweſt caues

Ol all the Earth A make my wap, and here J raiſe mp heade,

And loke vpon the ſtarres agapne neare out of knowledge fled.

Pow while 3 vnderneath the Earth the Lake of Styx did palle,

J ſaw pour daughter Proſerpine with theſe fame eyes. She was

Pot merrie, nepther rid of feare as famed by hir chere.

But yet a Queene, but pet of great God Dis the ſfately Fete:

But pet of that fame dꝛoupie Nealme the chiefe and foucreigne Pare,
Hir mother Hove as ſtarke as fone, when the theſe newes did heart,
And long the was like one that in another woꝛlde had bene,

But when hir great amasednelle by greatnelle of hir terne

Mas put aſide, ſhe gettes hir to hir Chariot by and by |

And vp to heauen in all poſt hatte immediatly doth the.

And there beſlalobꝛed all hir face: hir haire about hir eares,

To ropall Ioue in wap of plaint this ſpightfull tale the beares.

As well fo2 thy bloud as loꝛ mine a ſuter vnto the

4 hither come. ir no regard map ok the mother bee

Pet let the childe hir father moue, and haue not leſſer care

Ok hire J pꝛap) bicauſe that I hir in my bodie bare.

Behold our daughter whome 4 ſought fo long is found at lal:

Af finding pou it terme, when ofrecoucric meanes is paſt.

Oꝛ ik pou finding do it call to haue a knowledge where

She is become ir rauiſhment we might conſent to beare,


*


— —


9 eee is.


So reſtitution might be made. And though there were to me
Hs intereit in hir at all, pet loꝛaſmuche as he ö
Is pours, it is bnmexte the be beſtowde vpon a theele.

Ioue àunſwerde thus. Py daughter is a Jewell deare and leefe:
d collup of mine olone fleſh cut as well as out of thine. f


But il we in our heartes can finde things vightly to define, 2
Chis is not ſpight but loue . And pet Padame in faith 3 ler =e


Po caule of ſuch a ſonne in law alhamed fo2 to be,

So pou contented were therewith. Foꝛ put the cafe that her
Mere deſtitute ofall things elle, how greate a matter .
Joues bꝛother foꝛ to be⸗ but fare in him is nothing mit.

Spor he interioꝛ is to me ſaue only that by lot

Che Heauens to me, the Belles to him the deifnies did allot.
But if vou haue ſo ſoꝛe deſtre pour daughter to diuozee, N
hough the againe to Heauen repayꝛe 3 doe not greatly force.


But pet conditionly that the haue taſted there no kode: 8


Foz ſo the deſtnies haue decreꝛd. He ceaſte: and Ceres ode
Full bent to fetch hir daughter out: but deſknies hir withſtode,
Wicaule the aide had bꝛoke hir faſt. oz as ſhe hapt one day
In Plutos Oꝛtyard rechleſlely from place to place to tray,
She gathering from a bowing trea ripe Pownegarnet, tone
Seuen kernels out and fucked them. None chaunt hereon to loke,
Saue onely one Afcalaphus home Orphne erſta Dame
Among the other Clues of Hell not of the baleſt fame
Bare to hir huſbande Acheron within hir duſkie den.
Me ſawe it, and by blabbing it vngracioulſlp as then,
Did let hir from returning thence. A grieuous ſigh the Mune
Ok ell did fetch, and of that ight that had a witneſſe bene
Againſt hir made a curfed Birde. Upon his face He ſhead
Che water of the Phlegeton: and by and by his head
Mas nothing elſe but Beake and Dobone, and mightie glaring eyes.
Night altred from bimlelfe betweene two pellow wings he flies.
He groweth chiefly into head and hoked talants long
And much a doe he hath to flaſke his laste wings among.
Che meflenger of Moꝛning was he made, a filthie fowle,
A figne of miſchtete vnto men, the lluggiſh ſkreching Owle.

This perſon fog bis lauas tongue and telling tales are fame.

K. j.


Co


The fift booke of


To haue deſcrued puniſhment. But what Hould men ettéene
To be the verie cauſe why pou Acheloes daughters weare t
Both fete and feathers like to Birdes, conſidering that pou beate
The bpper partes ol Paidens Hill 2 and tommes it fo to patte »
Bicauſe when Ladie Proſerpine a gathering flowers was,
Pe Peremaldes kept hir compante : whome after pou had fought
Though all the Earth in valne, anon ok purpole that pour thought
Might alſo to the Seas be knowen, ye wilhed that pe might
Upon the waues with houering wings at pleaſure rule pour flight,
And had the Goddes to pour requeſt fo pliant, that ye found
Mith pellow feathers out of hand pour bodies clothed round:
Pet leak that pleaſant tune of pours ogdepned to delight
The hearing, and lo high a gift ol uſicke perich might
Ioꝛ Want of vttrance, humaine vopce to vtter things at tilt
And countnanee of virginitie remained to pou ſtill.
But meane betwerne his bꝛother and his heauie fiffer goth
God Ioue, and parteth equally the peare bet warne them both.
And now the Goddelle Proferpine indifkerently doth reigne
Aboue and vnderneath the Earth. and ſo doth the remaine
One halle peare with hir mother and the refoue with hir Fare
Immediatlp the altred is as well in outwarde chere :
As inwarde minde. foz where hir lobe might late before appare
Sad euen to Dis, hir countnance now is full of mirth and grace
Euen like as Phebus hauing put the watrie cloudes to thate,
Doth ſhew himſelle a Conqueroꝛ with bꝛight and Wining fate.
Then fruitfull Ceres boide of care in that the did recouer
Hir daughter, pꝛayde thee Arechuſe the ſtoꝛie to diſcouer
hat cauſed the to flete ſo farre and wherefore thou became
A ſacred ſpꝛing 2 the waters whiff. Che Coddelſe of the fame
Did from the bottome of the Well hir godly head bp reare.
And hauing dꝛiẽd with hir hand hir faire greene hanging heare,
The Riuer Alpheys auncient loues the thus began to tell.
IJ was(quoth ſhe)a Pymph of them that in Achaia dwell.
There was not one that earneſter the Lawndes and fozetts fought
Oꝛ pitcht hir toyles moze handlomly. And though that of my thought
It was no part, to {eke the fame of beautie: though 4 were
All courage: pet the pꝛicke and pꝛile of beautie 4 did beare gp


Ouids Metamorphoſis. . 66


y ouermuch commended face iwas vnto me a ſpight.

Chis gilt of bodie in the which another would delight,

J rudelbpe was aſhamed oft: me thought is was a crime

Co be belikte. J beare it well in minde that on a time

In comming wearie from the chaſe of Stymphalus, the heat
Mas keruent, and my trauelling had made it tloice as great.

J founde a water neyther derpe noꝛ ſhallow which did glide
Without all noyſe, ſo calme that ſcarce the mouing might be ſpide.


And thꝛoughly to the very ground it was fo criſpe and cleare,


Chat euery little one therein did plaine aloft appeare.

Che hoꝛie Sallowes and the Poplars growing on the bain

Unſet, vpon the ſhoꝛing bankes did caſt a (ado trim.

Jentred in, and firſt oF all J derped but my fete:

And after to my bres, And not content to wade fo fete,

J put oft all my clothes, and hung them on a Sallow by

And thꝛew my felfe amid the freame, which as J dallyingly

Did beate and dꝛaw, and with my ſelfe a thouſand maiſtries trie,

In catting of mine armes abꝛode and ſiwimming wantonly:

A telt a bubling in the ſtreame J wiſt not how noꝛ what,

And on the Kiuers neareſt beim J ſtept foꝛ feare. with that

O Arethuſa whither runt 2 and whither can thou cride ae
Floud Alphey from bis waues againe with hollow voyce. J hide 5 0
Awap bnclothed as J was. Foꝛ on the further fide a
My clothes hung ill. fo much moze hote and eger then was he,


And for J naked was, J ſeemde the readier fo2 to be.


My running and his fierce purſuite was like as when pe fe
The ſillie Doues with quiuering wings before the Gollehauke fie,
The Golſehauke fweping after them as laſt as he can flie.


Co Orchomen, and Pfophy land, and Cyllen 3 did holde


Out well, and thence to Menalus and Erymanth the colde,

And ſo to Ely. all this way no ground of me he wonne.

But being not fo ſtrong as he, this reſtleſte race to runne

I could not long endure, and he could hold it out at length.

Het ouer plaines and woddie hilles as long as laſfed ſtrength) ö
And ffones,and rockes, and deſert groundes J Mill maintaind mp race.


The Sunne was full bpon my backe. J ſaw befoze my face


Alazie ſhadow: were it not that feare did make me fete,
1 K. U. But


The fift booke of


Wut certenly be feared me with trampling of his lte:

And of his mouth the boyſtous bꝛeath vpon my hairlace blew,

Foꝛwearied with the toyle of light: elpe Diane, I thy true

And truſtie Squire (q ſaid) who oft haue caried after the

Thy bow and arrowes, now am like attached fo2 to bee.

The Goddelle moued, tobe a cloude of ſuch as ſcattred were

And caſt vpon me. Hidden thus in miſtie darkeneſle there

The Winer poard vpon me Kill and hunted round about

The hollow cloude, ſoꝛ feare perchaunce J ſhould haue ſcaped out.

And twice not knowing what to doe he fralkt about the cloude

here Diane had me hid, and twice he called out a loude

Moe Arethuſe, hoe Arethuſe. hat heart had J poze wꝛetch then

Euen fuch as bath the fillie Lambe that dares not Mitre noz quetch thin
He heares the howling ofthe Molfe about oꝛ neare the folves.

On ſuch as bath the {quatred Mare that in hit fogme beholdes

The hunting houndes on euerp fide, and dares not mone a whit,

5 would not thence, foꝛ why he ſaw no footing out as pit.

And therefore watcht he narrobolp the cloud and eke the place.
Achill colde ſweat my fieged limmes oppꝛeſt, and downe a pace
From all my bodie feaming dꝛops did fall of watrie hew.

M hich way fo ere J Kird my fote the place was like a fet.
The deaw ran trickling from mp halre. In halle the while 3 then
Was turnde to water, that J now haue tolde the tale agen.
is loued waters Alphey knew, and putting of the hape
Ok man the which he toke before bicauſe J chould not ſcape,
Returned to his pꝛoper ſhape of water by and by
Ok purpoſe fo2 to ioyne with me and haue my companie.
But Delia bꝛake the ground, at which 3 ſinking into blinde
Bytoꝛners, vp againe my felfe at Ortigie doe winde,
Right deare to me bicaule it doth Dianas ſurname beare,
And fo2 bicauſe to light againe 3 fit was rapſed there.
Chus far did Arethuſa ſpeake: and then the fruitfull Dame
Two Dꝛagons to hir Chariot put, and reyning hard the fame,
Pldwap bewerne the Heauen and Earth he in the Ayer went,
And vnto Pꝛince Triptolemus hir lightſome Chariot ſent
To Pallas Citie love with coꝛne, commaunding him to ſowe .
Some part thereof in graund new bꝛoken vp. and ſome thereol to wi


-_ = =


But as they were about to pꝛate, and bent their fittes to ſmight


FJ oꝛ as they would haue clapt their handes their wings did vp the heaue,


—


‘O40 Metamorphofi 18.


In ground long tillde befoze. Anon the pong man vp did fie

And flying ouer Europe and the Realme of Aſias hie,

Alighted in the Scithian land. There reyned in that coaſt

A Hing callde Lyncus, to ſuhoſe houſe he entred fo2 to hoff.

And being there demaunded how and lohy he thither came,

And alſo of his natiue ſoyle and of his proper name,

J bight(quoth he) Triptolemus and boꝛne was in the towne :

Ol Athens in the land of Orece, that place of high renowne

J nepther came by Sea noꝛ Lande, but thꝛough the open Aire

J bring with me Dame Ceres giftes which being ſowne in faire

And fertile fields may fruitfull arueſts peelde and finer fare.

Che ſauage Ring had ſpight. and to thintent that of fo rare

And gractous gifts himſelle might ſerme firſt founder foꝛ to be,

He entertainde him in his houſe, and when a ſlerpe was he,

He came vpon him with a woꝛd. but as he would haue killde him,

Dame Ceres turnde him to a Lynx, and waking tother willde him

His ſacred Tœme ware thꝛough the Apze to dꝛiue abꝛode agen.

Che chiefe of vs had ended this hir learned ſong. and then

Che Pymphes with one conſent did fudge that we the Goddeſſes

Mf Helicon had wonne the dap, But when J ſawe that theſe

Unnurtred Damſels ouercome began to fall a ſcolding,

J ſayd: fo little ith to bs vou thinke your ſelues beholding,

Foꝛ bearing with pour malapertnefte in making chalenge, that

Beſtdes pour foꝛmer fault, ye eke doe fall to rapling flat,

Abuſing thus our gentleneffe : we will from hence pꝛocerde

The puniſhment, and of our wꝛath the rightfull humo; fede.

Euippyes daughters grind and ferde and fet our thꝛeatnings light.


Thepꝛ wicked handes with hideous nople, they ſaw the ſtumps ol quilles
ew budding at their naples, and bow their armes lolt feather hilles.
Eche fay how others mouth did purfe and harden into Bill,

And fo becomming vncouth Wirdes to haunt the wads at Will.


And hanging in the Ape the ſcoldes of wods Did Pies them leaue.
Now alſo being turnde to Birdes they are as eloquent
* ere cher were, as chattring! fill, ag th 10 babli ing bent.


Finis quinti Libri.
K. iij. The


— ... , 5


THE SIXT BOOKE
of Ouids eM etamorphojis.


aia Ritonia bnto all theſe woꝛdes attentiue hearing bendes,

and both the Puſes learned ſong and rightfull math cömendeg

And therevpon within hir felfe this fancte did arife, g
It is no matter foꝛ to pꝛayſe: but let our ſelte deuiſe
Some thing to be commended fo2 : and let vs not permit
Our Paieſtie to be delpiſde without reuenging it.

And therewithall the purpoſed to put the Lydian Palde

Arachne to hir neckeberfe who as had to hir bene faide)

Pꝛeſumed to prefer hir ſelle befoze hir noble grace

In making cloth. This Damſell was not famous foꝛ the place

In which the dwelt, noꝛ foꝛ hir ſtocke, but foꝛ hir Arte. ir Sier
Mas Idmon one of Colophon a peiting Purple Dier.

Hir mather was deceaſt: but (he was of the baler ſozt,

And egall to hir Pake in birth, in liuing, and in port,

But though this Paide were meanly boꝛne, and dwelt but in a ther
At little Hypep: pet hir trade hir fame abꝛode did ſpꝛed

Euen all the Lydian Cities though. Co fee hir wondꝛous woꝛke
The ymphes that vnderneath the Mines ol ſhadie T molus lurke
Their Uinepards oftentimes foꝛſoke. So did the Nymphes allo
About Pactolus oftentimes their golden ſfreames foꝛgo.

And euer moꝛe it did them god not only foꝛ to fe

Mir clothes already made, but while they eke a making br 5
Such grace was in hir woꝛkmanſhip. oz were it ſo that He
The newohoꝛne fleeces from the ſherpe in bundels deftly makes,

D2 atterward doth kemb the fame, and dꝛawes it out in flakes
Along like cloudes, oꝛ on the Rocke doth ſpinne the handwarpe woe,
Oz elſe embꝛopdꝛeth, certenly pe might perceiue by pꝛofe
She was of Pallas bꝛinging bp. which thing the nathelelle
Denpeth, and dildaining ſuch a Piſtrelle to conkeſle,

Let hir contend with me ſhe ſaide: and il (he me amend

J will refafe no puniſhment the which ſhe ſhall ertend.
Minerua toe an olde wiues ſhape aud made hir hatte ſeme gray,
And with a atte hir febled limmes pꝛetended foꝛ to fap.

Luhich done, he thus began to ſpeake. Pot all that age doth being wr


= es


7 is
Ouids Metamorphofis, 4
vt


le ought to Houne. Experience dorht tong continuance ſpꝛing.
Melpile not mine admoniſhment. Serke lame and chiefe repoꝛt
Foz making cloth, and Arras woꝛke, among the moꝛtall ſozt.
But humbly giue the Goddeſſe place: and pardon of hir craue
Foz theſe thine vnaduiſed woꝛdes. J warrant thon ſhalt haue
Soꝛgiueneſſe, it thou aſke it hir. Arachne bent hir bꝛewes
And lowꝛing on hir, lefe hir woꝛke: and hardly the efchewes
From llying in the Ladies face. Hir countnance did bewzay
Pir moodle minde: which burſting forth in woꝛds the thus did fay.
Thou commeſf like a doting fole : thy wit is (pent with peares:
Chy life hath lated ouer long as by thy talke appeares.
And it thou any daughter haue, oꝛ any daughtrinlawwe,
J would the heard theſe woꝛdes of mine: J am not (uch a Daw,
But that without thy teaching J can well ynough aduiſe
My ſelle. And leaſt thou ſhouldeſt thinke thy woꝛds in any wife
Auatle, the ſelfe fame minde J kerpe with which J firit begonne.
Mhp commes che not hirſelfe J ſap: this matche why doth he chonne?
Chen laid the Goddeſle: here ſhe is. And there withall the caſt
Hir oldewiues riueled ſhape abap, and ſhewde hir ſelfe at laſt
Minerua like. The Pymphes did ſtreight adoze hir Paieſtie.
So did the pong newmaried wiues that were ol Migdonie.
The Maiden only bnabaſht woulde nought at all relent.
But pet the bluſht and ſodenly a ruddyneſle beſpꝛent
Hir chokes which wanzd away againe, euen like as doth the Skie
Hoke fanguine at the bꝛeake ol day, and turneth by and by
To white at vifing of the Sunne. As hote as any fire
She Kickech to hir tackling ſtill. And thꝛough a fond defire
Ok gloꝛie, to hir owne decay all headlong foꝛth He runnes. 4
F 02 Pallas now no lenger Warnes, ne now no lenger ſhunnes 4
Me lækes the chalenge to delay. Immediatly they came |
And take their places feuerallp, and in a ſeuerall frame
Eche ſtreynde a web, the warpe whereof was ſine. The web was tide
Wpon a Beame. Betwene the warpe a lap of rede did ſlide. ;
The woe on tharpened pinnes was put betwixt the warp, and wꝛought
Mith fingars. And as oft as they had thꝛough the warpe it bꝛought,
They ſtrake it with a Woren combe. Both twapne of them made haft:
And girding clofe koꝛ handſom nelle their garments to their waſt

0 Bly. Beltird


The fixt booke of


Weltirde their cunning handes space. Their earneſkneſle was ty
As made them neuer thinke ol paine. They wraued verie much
Fine Purple that was dide in Tyre, and colours fet fo trim
That eche in ſhadowing other ſeemde the very fame with him.
Euen like as after ſhowꝛes ok raine when Phebus bꝛoken beames
Doe ſkrike vpon the Cloudes, appeares a compat bow of gleames
Vl hich bendeth ouer all the Heauen: wherein although there thing
A thoufand ſundꝛp colours, vet the ſhado wing is ſo fine,
That loke men nere fo wiſtly, pet begulleth it their eyes:
So like and euen the felf fame thing eche colour ſeemes to rife
UAhereas they meete, bohich further off doe differ moze and more,
Of glittring golde with ſilken thꝛerde was weaued there god Boy,’
And fortes put in poꝛtrapture of things-done long afoꝛe.
Minerua painted Athens towne and Marſis rocke therein,
And all the ſtrife betwerne hirſelfe and Neptune, ho ſhould win
The honoꝛ foꝛ to gine the name to that fame noble towne.
In loftie thꝛones on eyther ſide of Ioue were ſettled done
Six Peres of Heauen with countnance graue and full of Paieſtie,
And euerp of them by his face dilcerned well might be.
Che Image of the mightie louc was Ringlize She had made
Neptunus ſfanding ſtriking with his long thꝛe tyned blade
Upon the ragged Rocke: and from the middle ol the clit
She poꝛtrayd illuing out a hoꝛſe, which was the noble gift
Ioꝛ which be chalengde to himlelfe the naming ol the towne.
She picurde our hirlelle with ſhielde and Moꝛion on hir crowne
With Curet on hir bꝛeſt, and Speare in hand with ſharpened ende.
She makes the Earth the which hir Speare doth feeme to ſtrite )to ſende
An Dipl tree with kruite thereon; and that the Gods thereat
Did wonder: and with vicoꝛie he ſiniſht vp that plat.
Pet to thintent examples olde might make it to be knowne
Co hir that foꝛ deſire of pꝛaiſe fo ſtoutly helde hir owne,
M hat guerdon He ſhoulde hope to haue fo2 hir attempt fo madde,
Toure lite contentions in the foure laſt coꝛners ſhe did adde. 5
The CThꝛacians eme and Rodope the foꝛmoſt coꝛner hadde:
ho being ſometune moꝛtall folke vſurpt to them the name
Ol loue and Juno, and were turnde to mountaines foꝛ the fame.
A Pigmie womans piteous chaunce the ſecond coꝛner ſhewde, Tuben


=a =


ee


PS ee Pree


Gon Metamorphoſis.
WMhome une turned to a Crane (bie aule the was ſo leude
As for to ſtand at ſtrife with hir for beautle charging hir —

Againſt hir nattue countricfolke continuall war to tir.
The thirde had pꝛoude Antigone who duck ol pꝛide tontende
In beautie with the wile of Ioue: by whome the in the ende
Mas turned to a Stoꝛke, no whit auatled hir the towne
Ol Troy, oꝛ that Laomedon hir father ware a cromne,
But that he clad in feathers white hir lazie wings mull fla?
And with a bobbed ul bewayle the cauſe of hir miſeha p. |
The laſt had chyldeleſſe Cinyras: who being turnde to frones 026 oT ö il


Upon hir women, and to feare the water ſpꝛinkling bie,

And ſhꝛinking vp hir kearlull fete, She poꝛtrayd allo there hy
Afterteeffruggling with an Erne ybich did away hir bearee.
And ouer Leda ſhehad made a Swan his wings to ſpla x.
She added allo how by Ioue in ſhape of Satyr gage Sine)
Lhe faire Antiope with a paire of childꝛen was beſped:

And how be twke Amphitrios{hape when in Alemenas bed

He gate the woꝛthie Hercules: and hol he alſo came

To Danae like a ſhoure of golde, to Aegine like a flame,

A ſherpeherd to Mnemoſyne, and like a Serpent y

To Proſerpine. She alſu made Neptunus leaping by

Upon a Matdeof Acolus race in likeneſſe of a Bull,

And in the ſtreame Enipeus ſhape begetting on a trull

The Glants Othoand Hphiait aio émebelbjape of Kam


- — — —— — ĩ— — — — 5

— — rene Sa 0
3 N 5 ‘ a ; 7 0 ah 0 7 0

. , Ws fa ay Ula ar Nhe @ 5 , ey 1 2 in,


? And


oe —-„— X = 5 — — — — — —


The fixt booke of

And in a luſtie Stalions ſhape the made him houering there
Dame Ceres with the pellow lockes, and hir whole golden heare
Mas turnde to cratoling Snakes: on whome he gate the winged bank
Dhe made him in a Dolphins ſhape Melantho to enfoꝛce. :
Ok all theſe things ſhe milled not their proper ſhapes, noꝛ pit
Che full and iuſt reſemblance of their places fo? to hit.
In likenelle of a Countrie clopne was Phebus picturde there,
And how he now ware Goſlehaukes wings, and now a Wions beare,
And how he in a ſhepeherdes thape was pꝛactiſing a wile i
The daughter of one Macarie dame Ifla to begulle.
And how the faire Erygone by chaunce did ſuffer rape
p Bacchus who decepued hir in likeneſle ol a grape.
And how that Saturne in the ſhape ol Genet did beget
Che double Chiron. Round about the btmoſt Uerdge lwas fet 5
A narrow Lratle of pꝛetie floures with leaues of Jute fret.

Hot Pallas, no noꝛ ſpight it Celfe could any quarrel picke

Ho this hir woꝛke: and that did touch Minerua to the quicke,
Who cherebpon did rende the cloth in pieces euery whit,
Bicaule the lewoneſſe of the Gods was blaſed ſo in it.
And with an Arras weauers combe of Box ſhe fiercelx tne
Arachne on the foꝛchead full a doſen times and moze.
The aide impacient in hir heart, did ſtomacke this ſo ſoꝛe,
Chat by and by che hung hirfelfe.powbeit as He hing,
Dame Pallas pitping hir eſtate, did Tay hir in the Fring n
From death, and ſaid lewoe Callet line: but hang thou fill fo mex...
And leat hereafter from this curſe that time may fet the fre,
J will that this fame punilhment enacted tirmelp ber,
As well on thy poſteritie foz euer as on the.
And after when the ſhould depart, with tnice of Hecats floboꝛe
She ſpꝛinkled hir: and by and by the poylon had (uch poze,
Chat with the touch thereof hir halre, hir eaves, and noſe did fade:
And verie ſmall it both hir heade and all hir bodie made.
In ſteade of legs, to both hir Goes Micke fingars long and fine:
The rell is bellie. rom the which He nerethelelle doth twine
A llender thꝛeꝛde, and pꝛactileth in hape ol Spider Mil
The Spinners and the Wlebtkers cralts of whichthe erſt had full.

All Lydia did repine hereat; and of this derde the fame pis ooh


rr.


Ouids Metamorphofis. 70
Through Phrygie ran, t thꝛongh the woꝛld was talking of the fame,

Wefoze hir mariage Niobe had knowen hir verie well, .
hen pet a Palde in xMeonie and Sipyle the did dwell.
And pet Arachnes puniſhment at home betoꝛe hir eyes,
To ble diſcreter kinde of talke it could hir not aduiſe, f 8
Hoꝛ (as behoueth to the Gods to peride in humble wille.
Jor many things did make hir pꝛoud. But neyther did the tone
The which hir hul band builocd had, noꝛ houſes of reno lune
Ol which they both deſcended were, noꝛ pet the puiſtance :
Ol that great Realme wherein they reigndo fo much hir minde enbatice
Although the liking of them all did greatly hir delight) bit
As did the offſpꝛing of hir ſelfe. And certenly ſhe might
Baue bene of mothers counted well moſt happie had the not
Ho thought hir ſelfe. Foz the whome ſage Tyrefias had begot N
The Pꝛophet Manto through inſtinct of heauenly powꝛe, did fay:
hele kinde of woꝛdes in open ſtrete. Ve Chebanes ga pour wax
Apace, and vnto Laton and to Latons childꝛen pray, ,
And offer godly Frankinſente, and wꝛeath pour haire with Bay.
Latona bp the mouth of me commaundes vou ſo ta da.
The Thebane women by and by obeying therevntoz⸗
Deckt all their heades with Laurell leaues as Manto did require.
And pꝛaping with deuout intent thet ineenſe in the ür.

Beholde out commeth Niobe enuironde with a garde i

Ok ſeruaunts and a ſolemne traine that followed aftertuard:
Ohe was hirſelle in raiment made of colfly cloth of golde
Ol Phrygia facion berie bꝛaue and gorgeous to beholde.
And ok hir ſelfe the was right faire and beautifull of face, |
But that hir wꝛathfull ſtomake then did ſomewhat ſtaine hir grace.
She mouing with hir poꝛtiy heade hir haire the which as then
Did hang on both hir ſhoulders lodſe, did patole a ſuhile. and when
Myth loftie loke hir Lately eyes the rolled had about,

hat madneſle is tt(quoth ſhe)to prefer the heauen y rout

Ok whome pe doe but heare, to ſuch as dallyare in üght?
Oꝛ why ſhould Laton honoꝛed be with Altars? Neuer lige
Lo my moſt facred ꝙaieſtie did offer center Nit 7
My Father was that Tantalus whome only as moſt ſilt .$
The Gods among them at their bozdes admitted lz ta it.


Theifixt bookeof ß
A Liffer ofthe Pleyades is nh mother. fittally © eS ene
My Graundſire on the mothers five is that fame Atlas hie


T'hat on his ſhoulders beareth vp the heauenly Axeltrer.


Againe my other Graundlather is loue, and (as pou fee):

Me allo is my Fathrinlawe / wherin J glogie map.

Che Realme of Phrygia here at hand doth vnto me obay.

In Cadmus pallace i thereof the Wadte doe remaine Fim ge
And toyntly with my hulbande J as perrleſle Pꝛinceſſe reigne
Both ouer this ſame towne whofe walles my hulbands harpe did frame,
And alſo ouer all the folke and people in the fame.

In what ſoeuer cozner of my hoyle J caſt mine eye,

A woꝛlde of riches and ol gods J eurpwhere eſpie.

Poꝛeouer fo2 the beautie, hape, and fauoꝛ growen in me,

Right well J know J oe deſerue a Goddeſle fo2 to be. ö
Beſides all this, ſeuen ſonnes J haue and daughters ſeuen liketutle,
By whome thall ſhoꝛtly ſonneinlawes and daughtrinlawes ariſe.
Judge pou now il that J haue cauſe ot᷑ ſtatelpneſſe oꝛ nos.

How dare ye then pꝛelet to me Latona that ſame fre

Che Titan Ceus ympe, to whome then readie dobone to lie

Che howgie Earth a little plot to childe on did dente;

From Heauen, from Earth, ¢ from the Sea pour Goddeſle baniſht wat,
And as an outcaſt thꝛough the woꝛld from place to place did palle,
Untill that Delos pitying hir, lapde thou dotte fete on land

And 3 on Sea, and therobpon did lende hir out of hand

A place vnſtable De two twinnes there bꝛought a bed was ſhe:

And this is but the ſeuenth part of the iſlue boꝛne by me.

Right happie am J. who can this dente: and (yall fo till

Continue: who doth doubt of that abundante hath and will
Pꝛelerue me. g am greater than that krowarde foꝛtune may
Empeachs ine. o although che ſhoulde pull many things away,
Pet ſhould ſhe leaue me many moʒe. My Hate is out ot fearce.
Df thys wp howge and populous race lurmiſe pou that it were
Potible ſome of them Houtd mille: pet can J neuer be 5

Do ſpoyled that no mo than rwo chu tar ie fol! wich me.
Leaue quickly thys lewdk farin v, and put me ot this Buy
That on pour headed wreattzed thus Phep laide it freight aws?
And let their holle rns vndone, and eloſely as they nag dul


8 Ouids Metamorphoſis.
Mith ſecret whiſpꝛing to themlelues to Laton they dyd pꝛay !
How much from beter barrenneſle the Goddelle was: fo my
Dildeind the moꝛe: and in the top oF Gynthus framed uch
Complaint as this to both hir twinnes. 10 3 pout mother deare,
ho in my bodie once pon twalne with painefull tranell beare⸗
Loe J whole courage is ſo ſlout as foꝛ to pelde ene, f
Pk all the other Goddetkes evcept lowes wife Menes *
Am lately doubted whether 3 a Goddeſſe be o2 no. l
And ir pou helpe not chilbsert wulne, he cate nets Kundert fe ban f. 2
Chat A the honoꝛ muſt from hence of Altars quight forgo.’ bei
But this is not mine only griefe. Beſides hir wicked fat 58
Molt ratling woꝛds hath Niobe to my delaeing rackt. eee
She ourl pꝛeler hir Barnes to you And as lor me, che lande :
1 Me barren in vefpedt of hir and was nd whit achaamde
To ſhewe hir fathers wicked tongue lohich ſhe by bitty bet tale
Chis fain s Latona was about entreatance foi to make.
Ceaſe oft quoth Phebus)long complaint is nothing but deny
Df punichment. and the felfe lame hordes did Phebe alf ſay. den i
And by and by they though the Apze both gliding Twitty name, =
On Cadmus pallate hid in cloudes did light in Thebetowne.
1 A ſielde was vnderneath the wall both leuell, large and wide,
VpBetrampled euery day with hose that men therein bibtive, =
Mere ſtoꝛe of Carres and Hoꝛſes bones the cloddes to dat bao trode =
couple of Amphions formes on lnftie rourfers code
In this fame place. Cheir hoꝛſes faire Coperiſons did weate
Ok ſcarlet: and their bꝛidles bꝛaue with golde bedecked were.
Ol whome as Niobs eldeſf ſonne Iſmenos hapt to bzing ust
His hoꝛſe about, and reynde him in to make him kepe the ang. eee eat | i
He cride alas: and in his bꝛeſt with that an arrow ache == i ik
And by and by bps dying hand did let the bzidle llacke. e N
And on the right ſide of the hozle he liipped to the ground. 5 . aig te
The ſecond bother Sipylus did chaunce to heare the fond ° n eget 3
Ok Quivers clattring in the Ayꝛe, and gining ſkreight the terne
And four togither to his hoꝛſe, began to lie amapne: 0 9
As doth the maler of a hip: who when he lers a ſhoure 2 a
ff Approching, by forme miftie cloud that ginnes to een and toute ae
Dath clap on all his faples a no winde could faye him by
/ cha


« ot . 9
42727277 1


Fie ny


+ hank


The fixebooke of tit
Though nerefofmall.bowbeltashe turned for to lle,
Be was nat able fox ta (cape the Arrow tohich diviiricke:
Him thꝛough the necke. The nocke thereof did ſhaking vpward Liche,
The head appeared at his thꝛote. And as he foꝛward gaue ;
Himſelle in flying: ſo to ground he groueling alſo dꝛaue,
And toppled by the hosles mane and fete amid his race,
And with his warme newſhedded bloud berayẽd all the place.
But Phedimus,and Tantalus the beier of the name
Mf Tantalus his Graundfather, who cuffomably came
Froin other datlieerercile to wꝛeſtling, had begun
To cloſe, and eache at other now with bꝛeſt to bꝛeſt to run,
When Phebus Arrom being ſent with koꝛce from ſtreyned fring
Did firike thꝛough both of them as they did faſt togither cling,
And fo they ſighed both at once, and both at once foꝛ paine
Fell downe to ground, and both ok them at once their eyes did reine
To ſæ their lateſt light, and both at once their ghoſtes did perlde.
Alphenor this miſchaunce of thefts with heauie heart behelde,
And ſcratcht and beate his wofull bꝛeſt: and there with flying out
Co take them vp betwerne his armes, was as he went about
his woꝛke ol kindly pltie, killde. oꝛ Phebus with a Dart
of deadly dint did riue him thꝛough the Bulke and bꝛake his hart.
And when the ſteale was plucked out, a percell of his liner
Did hang vpon the boked heade: and ſo he did delluer
His life and blend into the Apze departing both togither.
But Damaficthon(on whoſe heade came neuer ſizzer) felt
Mo woundes than one. It was his chaunce to haue a grieuous pelt
Vpon the berie place at which the leg is firſt begun 127
And where the hamſtrings by the ioynt wich ſupplc ſinewes run
And while to dꝛaw this arrow out be with his hand allaide,
Another thꝛough his wezant went, and at the feathers ſtaide.
Che bloud did dꝛiue out this againe, and (pinning high did {pout
A great way off, and pierſt the Ayꝛe with ſpꝛinkling all about.
Che laſt of all Ilionie with ſtreched handes and ſpeche
Moſt humble (but in vaine ) did ſay, O Gods F pou beſeche
Okt mercie all in generall. e wiſt not what he ſa ide
Pe hol that vnto all ot them he ought not to haue pꝛaſde.
The God that helde the Wow in hande was maued hut as then


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 7¹¹
Che Arrolo was alredie gone ſo farrs, that baekeagen
He could not call it. Percebelete the wound was berie mal
Dl which he dide, for why his heart it did but lightlp gall.

The rumoꝛ of the miſchlele ſelle, and mone of people, and

The werping of hir ſeruants gaue the mother t undertſkand
Che ſodaine Hroke of this milchaunee. She wondꝛed berle mee
And ſtoꝛmed alſo that the Gods were able to dos ſuch
A dehde, oꝛ durſt attempt it, pea ſhe thought it more than igbt
Chat any ol them ouer hir ſhould haue fa mickle might.
Amphion had foꝛdone himſelfe alreadie with a knife,
And ended all his ſoꝛrowes quite togither with his life.
Alas, alas how greatly doth this Niobe differ here
From tother Niobe who a late diſdaining anp Pere
Did from Latonas Altars dꝛiue hir folke, and thꝛough the tuns
ith haultie loke and ſtately gate went pꝛanking bp and dotone,
Then ſpighted at among hir owne, but pitcons now to thofee
Chat heretofore foꝛ hir delerts had bene hir greatelt es-. f
She lalleth on the tozſes colde, and taking no regard.
Welkotwde hir kylles on hir ſonnes as whom Hye po Na
Did know the neuer moze Houlve kiſſe. rom — thos
Hir blew and bꝛoſed armes to heauen ſayd: O thou cruell foe
Latona fede, yea ferde thy ſelte 3 fap dpon my woe Weiß
And ouergoꝛge thy ſkomacke, pea and glut thy crnell hart ae
UWA ith theſe my pꝛeſent painefull pangs of bitter griping tm, 16 250
In coꝛſes ſeuen I ſeuen times deade am caried tomy graue.
Retopce thou foe and triumph now in that thou femike: tobarie
The bpper hande. Mhat z bpper band 2 no no it is not fo,
As iuzetched as my cafe doth ſerme, pet haue J left me mo
Than thou foꝛ all thy happineſſe cant of thine stone account
Euen after all thefe coꝛſes pet J Hill doe thee ſurmount.
Upon the ende ol theſe fame woꝛdes the twanging orcbenemg
In letting of the Arrow Hie was clearly heard: which thing
Made euery one ſaue Niobe afratoe, Mir heart was ſo 55
Mith ſozrowe hardned, that ſhe grew moze bolde. Hir daubhtuvche
Mere ſtanding all with mourning werde and hang ing hatre beldze
Their bꝛothers coffins. One of them in pulling trom the ſoꝛe
An Arratw Kicking en his heart, late dolwne öpon hir dyother oo


With mouth to moythana (9. did perde hir fleting ghock Another.»
Zn comfosting the togetched cafe ane fozxatnt hir mother \ ¢
Upon the fongine helde hir peace. She ſkricken was within:
With double wound: which cauſed hir hir talking lo to biin
And hut hir mouth: But firs hir gholt was gone. One all in vatne
Attempting oz to ſcape by flight was in hir flying Gane.
Another on hir liters coꝛſe doth tumble dolone Marke dead.
Chis quakes and trembles piteoully, and He doth hide hir head.
And when that fixe with lundꝛye woundes dilpatched were and gone,
At laſt as pet remained one: and toꝛ to ſaue that one, „
Hir mother with hir bodie whole did cling about hir kalt,
And wꝛping hir did ouer hir hir garments wholy caſtt
And cried out: O leaue me one: this little one pet ſaue:
Of many but this onip one the leaſt ok all A cra ue.
But bohlle fhe pꝛapd, ko whome the pꝛayd was bilp. Then votorr the fat
Berelt of all hir childꝛen quite, and dzawing to hir fate,
Among hir daughters and hir ſonnes and hulband nelly dead,
Hir cheekes wart hard, the Apꝛe could irre no halre vpon hir head.
The colour ol hir face was dim and clearly volde ol blood,
And fanlp vnder open lids hir eyes vnmoued ſto d.
In all hir badie was no life. Foz euen hir verie tung
And palat of hir mouth was hard and eche to other clung.
- Iptr Pulles ceased foꝛ to beate, hir necke did ceaſe to bo-
Bir armes ta fir, hir fete to go, all powze ſoꝛwent as no,
And into ſtone hir verie wombe and bowels alſo bind.
But pet che wept: and being hoyſt by force of whirling wind
Mas caried into Phrygie. Thexe vpon a mountaines top
Dhe toepeth Killin one. from ſtone the dꝛerie teares da dꝛop.
Chen all both men and women fearde Latonaas open ice
And far with greater ſumptuouſneſle and earneſter deſire
Did woꝛſhip the great mateſt ie of this their Goddelle was
Did beare at once both Phebus and his ſiſter Phebe to
And though occalion ot this chaunce, as men are wont to da
In caſes lite) the people fell to telling things ol old
DF whomea man among the relk chis tale enſuing told. ot
The auncient folke that in the feldes of kruitfull Lyaa dwelt


+


Due penance alia faz their ſpigbt ta this tame Goddelle felt. 90


eae


2


= —


2


g fat able foꝛ to trauell well by reafon of bis age,


.


Ouids Metamofp hofis.
Che baleneſſe of the parties makes the thing it felfe obſcure.
Pet is the matter wonderfull, Dp ſelle J you allure
Did pꝛeſently beholde the Pond, and ſaw the very place
In which this wondꝛous thing was done. My father then in cale,


To fetch home certaine Dren thence made me to be his page,
Appointing me a countrpman of Lycia to my guide.
Mlith whome as J went plodding in the paſture groundes, J ſpide
Amids a certaine Pond an olde ſquare Aultar colourd blacke
Mith cinder ok the facrifice that ſtill vpon it facke,
About it round grew wauering Rerdes. Py guide anon did ay:
And ſoltly, O be god to me, he in himſelle did fap. N
And J with like ſoft whiſpering did fap be god to me.
And then J alkt him whether that the Altar wer did e?
Belonged to the Maternymphes, oꝛ Faunes oꝛ other God
Peculiar to the place it ſelte vpon the which we pod.
He made me aunlwere thus. My gueſt no God of countrie race
Js in this Altar woꝛſhipped. That Goddeſle claymes this place.
From whome the wife of mightie loue did all the woꝛld foꝛfend:
Mhen wandꝛing reſtleſſe here and there full hardly in the end
Unſetled Delos did receyue then floting on the waue,
As tide and weather to and fro the lwimming Jland dꝛaue.
Chere maugre Iuno( who with might and main agatni hir ſtraue
Latona ſfaying by a Date and Olyt tree that ten
In trauell, ot a paire of twinnes was fafelp bꝛought a bed.
And alter hir deliurance folke repoꝛt that ſhe fo2 feare
Ol Iunos wꝛath did flie from hence, and in hir armes did beare ;
Hir babes which alterwarde became two Gods. In which hir trauell
In Sommer when the ſcoꝛching Sunne is wont to burne the grauell
Ok Lycie tountrie where the fell Chymera hath his place,
The Goddeſſe wearie with the long continuance of hir race,
Mart thirſtie by the meanes of dꝛought with going in the Sunne.
Hir babes had alfo ſuckt hir bꝛeſtes as long as milke wold runne.
By chaunce the (pide this little Pond of water here bylow.
And coũtrle Carles were gathering there theſe Oyſpyer twigs that grow
Oo thicke vpon a ſhꝛubbie ſfalke: and o theſe ruſhes grene:
And flags that in theſe moꝛiſh plots fo vife of growing berne.


The fixt booke of :


She comming hither kneeled ootwne the water vp to take

To cole hir thirſt. Lhe churliſh clopnes foꝛfended hir the Lake.
Then gently fain the Goddeſſe: Sirs why doe you me kozlend
The water? Nature doth to all in common water fend,

Jo neither Sunne, noꝛ Apꝛe, noꝛ pet the Mater pꝛiuate be

J feeke but that which natures gift bath made to all things fre,
And pet 3 humbly craue of pou to graunt it vnto me,

¥ did not go about to wath my werie limmes and ſkin,

J would but only quench my thirſt. My thꝛote is ſcalt within

Joꝛ want of moyſture: and my chappes and lippes are parching opie;
And (carilp is there way foꝛ woꝛdes to iſſue out thereby.

d dꝛaught of water will to me be heauenly Nectar nolo.

And ſure 3 will confelle J haue receiued life of pou.

Bea in pour giuing of a dꝛop of water vnto me,

Che cale fo ſtandeth as pou ſhall pꝛeſerue the liues of thre.

Alas let theſe fame ſillie ſoules that in my boſome ſtreteh

Cher little armes by chaunce hir babes their pꝛetie dolles did reteh)
Co pitte moue pou. Mhat is he fo hard that would not yeld

Co this the gentle Goddeſles entreatance merke and meeld⸗

Het they for all the humble woꝛdes fhe could deuiſe to fap,
Continued in their willfull mode of churliſh faping nay,

And thꝛeatned fo2 to ſende hir thence onlelle the went awap⸗
Neuiling hir moſt ſpightfully. And not contented fo.

Mith handes and kerte the ſlanding Pole they troubled to and fro,
Until with trampling bp and downe malicloullp, the foft

And fltmte mud that lay beneath was raiſed vp aloft.

Mich that the Goddeſle was fo oth that thirſt was quight forgot.
And vnto ſuch vnwoꝛthie Carles hirſelfe the humbleth not:

Pe ſpeaketh meaner woꝛdes than might belceme a Goddelle well.
Wut holding vp hir handes to heauen: foꝛ euer mought pou diel}
In this fame Pond, the faid : hir wiſh did cake effec with (pene.
Foꝛ vnderneath the water they delight to be in Dede.

Nou diue they to the bottome downe, now vp their heades they pops
Another while with ſpꝛawling legs they lwim vpon the top.

And oftentimes vpon the bankes they haue a minde to ſtond,

And oftentimes from thence agatie to leape into the Pond.

And there they now doe practife Mill their filthy tongues to fcold, 5


Ouids Metamorphofis.


And Hhameleelp(though bnderneath the water) they doe hold i
Cheir foꝛiner wont of bꝛawling Hill amid the water cold.
Cheir voices Hil are hoarſe and harſh, their thꝛotes haue puffed goaloles,
Cheir chappes with bꝛawling widened are, their hůmer headed Joawles
Are iopned to their ſhoulders iuſt, the neckes of them doe ſerme f
cut off, the ridgebone of their backe ſrickes bp ofcolour græne.
heir paunch which is the greateſt part of all their trunch is gray,
And ſo they vp and downe the Pond made newly Frogges doe play.
When one of Lyce(F wote not who) had ſpoken in this ſozt,
Another of a Satyr ſfreight began to make repoꝛt,
Mhome Phebus ouercommi ng on a pipe (made late ago


Ey Pallas put to puniſhment. Mh fleabſt thon me fo,
Alas he cride it irketh me. Alas a ſoꝛie pipe


Deſerueth not fo cruelly my Chin from me to ſkripe.
Foꝛ all his crying oꝛe his cares quight pulled was his (hin.
Nought elſe he was than one whole wounde. Che grielly bloud did ſpin
From euerp part, the ſinewes lap diſcouered to the eye,
The quiuering bepnes without a ſkin lap beating nakedly.
Che panting bowels in his bulke pe might haue numbꝛed well,
And in his bꝛeſt the Here {mall Frings a man might eaflp tell.
Che Countrie Faunes, the Gods of Mods, the Satyrs of his kin,
Che Pount Olympus whoſe renowne did ere that time begin,
And all the Pymphes, and all that in thoſe mountaines kept their Hepes
D2 grased cattell thereabouts, did fo2 this Satyr wærpe.
Che fruitfull earth ware moyſt therewith, and moyſted did recepus
heir teares, and in hir bowels deepe did of the fame conceyue.
And when that he had turned them to water, by and bzꝛ
She lent them forth againe aloft to fe the open Skie.
The Riuer that doch rife thereof beginning there his race,
In berie deepe and ſhoꝛing bankes to Seaward runnes a pace
Thꝛough Phrygie, and accoꝛding as the Satyr, fo the ſtreame
Is called Marfias, of the bꝛokes the cleareſt in that Nealme.
Mith ſuch examples as theſe fame the common folke returnde
To pꝛeſent things, and euerp man thꝛough all the Citic monde
Foꝛ that Amphion was deſfroyde with all his iſſue fo.
But all the fault and blame was laide vpon the mother tho.
Foz hir alonip Pelops mournde(as men kept and be 5
4. ij. n


The fixt booke of


In opening ok his clothes did ſhewe that euerie man might fe

His ſhoulder on the left fide bare of Juoꝛie foꝛ to ber.

This ſhoulder at his birth was like his tother both in hue

And fleſh, vntill his fathers handes moſt wickedly him flue,

And that the Gods when they his limmes againe togither dꝛue,

To iopne them in their pꝛoper place and foꝛme by nature due,

Did finde out all the other partes, ſaue only that which grue

Betwene the thꝛoteboll and the arme. which when they could not get

This other made of Juoꝛie white in place thereof they ſet

And by that meanes was Pelops made againe both whole and ſound

he neyghboꝛ Pꝛinces thither came, and all the Cities round
About beſought their Rings to go and comfoꝛt I hebe: as Arge

And Sparta, and Mycene which was vnder Pelops charge.

And Calydon vnhated ofthe frown ing Phebe pit,

Che welthie towne Orchomenos, and Corinth which in it

Had famous men foꝛ woꝛkmanſhip in mettals: and the ſtout

Meſſene which full twentie peares did hold beſtegers out.

And Patre, and the lowly towne Cleona, Nelies Pyle,

And Troyzen not ſurnamed pet Pittheia foꝛ a while.

And all the other Boꝛough cotones and Cities which doe ſtand

Mithin the narrom balke at which tivo Seas doe merte at hand, 5

D2 which do bound vpon the balke without in maine firme land.

Alonly Athens who would thinke :) did neither come noꝛ ſend.

Marre barred them from courteſie the which they did entend.

The Ring of Pontus with an hoſt of ſauage people lay

In ſiege before their famous walles and curſtly did them fray.
Untill that Tcreus Ring of Thrace àppꝛoching to their apde,

Did vanquich him, and with renowne was foꝛ his laboꝛ papde.

And ith be was fo puiſſant in men and ready copne,

And came of mightie Marfis race, Pandion fought to iopne

Aliance with him by and by, and gaue him to his Fare

His daughter Progne. At this match as after will appeate)

Mas nepther Iuno, Pꝛeſident of martage wont to ber,

Poꝛ Hymen, no noꝛ any one of all the graces the.

The Furies {natching Lapers vp that on ſome Herte did ſtande

Did light them, and before the Bꝛide did beare them in their hande.

Che Furies made the Bꝛidegromes bed. And on the houſe did . ia


Ouids Metamorphofis.


Acurfed Oble the mellenger of pll fuccefle and lucke.

And all the night time while that they were lying in their beds,
She fate bpon the bedſteds top right oucr both their heds.

Such handſell Progne bad the day that Tereus did hir wed.
Such handſell had they when that the was bꝛought of childe a bed.
All Thracia did retopee at them and thankt their Gods, and wild
That both the day of Prognes match with Tereus ſhould be hild
#02 feaſtfull, and the dap likewiſe that Itys firſt was boꝛne:
So little know we what behoues. The Sunne had now outwoꝛne
Fiue Harueſts, and by courſe flue times had run his pearlp race,
When Progne flattring Tereus ſaide: It any loue oꝛ grace
Betwerne vs be, ſend epther me my ſiſter foꝛ to fe,

Oꝛ finde the meanes that hither che map come to vilit mer.
Pou map aſſure pour Fathꝛinlaw the tall againe returne
Mithin a while. Pe doe to me the higheſt great god turne
That can be, tf pou being to pale may my ſiſter ſccr.
Immediatly the King commaundes his ſhippes a flote to bee.
And thoztly after, what with ſayle and what with force of Dzes,
In Athens hauen he arriues and landes at Pyrey ſhoꝛes.
Alone as of his fathꝛinlaw the pꝛeſence he obtainde,

And had of him bene courteoudly and friendly entertainde,
Unhappie handſell entred with their talking fir togither.

The errandes of his wife the cauſe of his then comming thither
He had but new begon to tell, and pꝛomiſed that when

She had hir fitter ſerne, ſhe Mould with ſperde be ſent agen:
When (fe the chaunce) came Philomele in raiment very rich,
And pet in beautie farre moze rich, euen like the Fatries which
Reported are the pleafant wods and water ſpꝛings to haunt,
So that the like apparell and attite to them pou graunt.

ning Tereus at the fight of hir did burne in his defire,

Asif a man ſhould chaunce to fet a gulfe of coꝛne on fire,

Oꝛ burne a ftacke of bap. Hir face in deede deſerued loue.

But as foꝛ him, to flechly luſt euen nature did him mone.

$02 of thofe countries commonly the people are aboue

All mealure pꝛone to lecherie. And therefore both bp kinde

ibis flame encreaſt, and by his owne default of vicious minde
He purpolde fully to coꝛrupt hir ſeruants with reward:

tes A. ii. %


The fixt booke of


Oꝛ fog to bꝛibe hir Nuree; that the ſhould lienderly regarde

Hir dutie to hir miſtreſleward. And rather than to faple,

The Ladie euen hirſelfe with gifts he minded to alſaple,

And all his kingdome foꝛ to (pend. oꝛ elle by force of hand

To take hir, and in maintenance thereof by ſwoꝛd to ſtand.

There was nat birder heauen the thing but that he durſt it prove,
So far vnable was he now ta fay his lawleſſe loue. a

Delap was deadiy. Backe againe with grerdie minde he tame

Mi Prognes errands faz to talke: and vndernesth ge fame

He woꝛkes his owne bngractoufnelle. Loue gaue him power to frame d
His talke at will. As oft as he demaunded out of ſquare, f
Upon his wines impoꝛtunate deſtre himſelfe he bare.

He alſo wept: as though his wife had willed that lckewiſe. f

O God, what blindnellſe doth the heartes ol moꝛtall men difyuttes
By working miſchiefe Jereus gets him credit fo2 to feme 8
A louing man, and winneth pꝛaiſe by wickednelle extreme.

ea and the folith Philomele the (clfe fame thing deſires.

M ho hanging on hir fathers necke with lat triug armes, requires
Agalntt hir life and foꝛ hir life his licence fo2 to go 25551
Co lee hir fitter, ereus beholdes hir wiſtiy tho, 6

And in beholding handles hir with heart. oz when he law

Hir bitte hir father, and about his necke hir armes to dꝛaw,

They all were ſpurres to pꝛicke him loꝛth, and wod to fede his fire,
And fode of forcing nouriſhment to further his dere. f

As oft as ſhe hir father did betwerne hir armes embꝛace,

Do often wiſhed be himſelle hir father in that cafe.
oꝛ nought at all chould that in him haue Wrought the greater grate.)
Mir father could not fap them nay they lay at him fo fore.

Right glad thereol was Philomele and thanked him therefore.

And wꝛetched wench He thinkes ſhe had obtained ſuch a thing.

As both to Progne ana hir ſelle ſhould ioy and comfoꝛt bing,
hen both of them in verie deede ſhould after ward it reo. 5
To endward of his daily race and trauell Phebus dꝛew,

And on the ſhoꝛing five of Heauen his hoꝛſes do wneward fletw..

A princelp ſupper was pꝛepaarde, and wine in golde was ſet:
And after meate to take their reff the Pꝛintes did them get. f
But thaugh the King of Thrace that while were ablent from hir e 5


— — .. S i Se


Ouids Metamorphoſis. | 76


Pet ſwelted he: and in his minde reuoluing all the night
ace, hir geſture, and hir hands, imaginde all the reit

(Che which as pet he had not ſerne) as likte his fancte belt.
He. des his flames hunſelle. No winke could come within his eyes,
Foz: i ap on hir. Aſſone as day was in the thies,
Pandion holding in his hand the hand of Tereus pꝛeſt
Co go his wap, and ſheading teares betwbe him thus his guet.
Meare ſonneinlaw 4 giue thee here (ſith godly cauſe conſtraines)
This Damſell. Bythe faith that in thy Pꝛincely heart remaines,
And fo2 our late aliance ſake, and bp the Gods aboue,
¥ humbly ther beſeche that as a Father thou doe loue
And maintaine hir. and that as fone as map bel all delay ;
Mill vnto me feme ouer long) thou let hir come away 7
The comfozt of my carefull age on whome my life doth fay. :
And thou my daughter Philomelelit is inough pluis
That from hir father fet fo farre thy ker Progne is)
Ik any ſparke of nature doe within thy heart remayne,
Mith all the baal and (peede thou canſt returne to me againe. 7
In giuing charge he killed hir: and downe his chekes did raine >
The tender teares. and as a pledge of faith he toke the right
andes of them both, and ioyning them did eche to other plight.
Deüũring them to beare in minde bis commendations to
His daughter and hir little ſonne. And then with much a doe
oz ſobbing, at the laf he bad adew as one diſmaid.
The foꝛemilgiuing ol his minde did make him (oze afraid.

Alone as Tereus and the Maide togither were a boꝛd,

And that their Hip kram land with Des was haled on the foꝛd,
Che ſielde is ours he cride aloude, J haue the thing J fought 8
And vp he lkipt, fo barbꝛous and fo beaſtly was his thought, 5


That ſcarce euen there be could foꝛbeare his pleaſure to haue wꝛought


His eye went neuer off of hir: as when the ſcarefull Erne 8
Tl ith baked talants truſting vp a Hare among the Ferne,

Math laid hir in his neil, from whence the pꝛiſoner can not ſcape,

Che rauening fowle with greꝛdte eyes bpon his pray doth gape.

Nobo was their iourney come to ende: now were they gone a land


In Thracia, when chat Tereus toke the Ladie by the hand, 7
And led hir to a pelting graunge that peakiſhly did Gand
é . 4. litj. n


ö
F
- 4
i
|
15


FP AA ³˙ A I me
8 ee er a eyes,


The fixt booke of


In wods foꝛgrowen. There waring pale and trembling fore foꝛ feare
And dꝛeading all things, and with teares demaunding ladlp where :
Mir ſiſter was, he thet hir vp: and thercwithall bewꝛaide
Mis wicked luſt and fo by force bicauſe ſhe was & aide
And all alone he vanquiſht hir, It bored nought at all
That He on ſiſter, oꝛ on Sire, 02 on the Gods did call.
She quaketh like the wounded Lamde which frõ the WMolues hore tath
Me Haken thinkes hir felfe not fafe : 02 as the Doue that ſerth
ir fethers with hir owne bloud ſtaynde, who ſhuddꝛing Hl doth feare
The gredte Hauke that did hir late with griping talants teare.

Anon when that this mazedneſle was ſomewhat ouerpaſt,

She rent hir hatre. and beate hir bꝛeſt, and vp to heauenward cat
Hir hands in mourning wie, and ſald. O cankerd Carle, O fell
And cruell Tyꝛant, nepther could the godlp teares that fell
dA downe my fathers cherkes when he did giue ther charge of me,
Ne of my ſiſter that regarde that ought to be in the,
Noꝛ pet my chaaſt virginitie, noꝛ conſcience of the lawe
Ok wedlocke, from this billante thy barbꝛous heart withdꝛaw⸗
Behold thou halk confounded all. My ſiſter thoꝛdugh me
Is made à Cucqueane: and thy ſelfe thꝛough this offence of the
Art made a huſband to bs both, and vnto me a foe
A tuff deſerued puniſhment foꝛ lewolp doing fo.
But to thintent O perinrde wretch no miſchlete map remaine
Unwꝛought bp ther, why doef thou from murdꝛing me refraine ¢
Mould God thou had it done beloꝛe this wicked rape. From hence
Chen ſhould my ſoule moſt bleſledly haue gone without offcuce,
But if the Gods doe fe this deꝛde, and if the Gods J fay
Be ought, and in this wicked woꝛlde beare any kinde of finap


And il with me all other things decay not, ſure the day


Mill come that foꝛ this wickedneſſe full dearly thou ſhalt pay.
ea J my lelfe reieaing ſhame thy doings will bewzay.
And if J map haue power to come abꝛode, them blaſe 3 will 5
In open face of all the woꝛld. oꝛ if thou keepe me fill
As pꝛiſoner in theſe wods, my bopce the berie wods thal fill, d
And make the ſtones to vnderſtand. Let Heauen to this gine care
And all the Gods and powers therein ik any Cod be there,
Che cruell tyꝛant being chaalt and alſo put in feare


wl


a


Ouids Metamorphoſis.


Mith thefe and other ſuch hir woꝛdes, both cauſes ſo him ftung,
That dꝛawing out his naked ſwoꝛde that at his girdle bung,
He take hir rudely by the halre, and wꝛung hir hands behind hir,
Compelling hir to holde them there while he himſelle did bind hir.
hen Philomela ſawe the ſwoꝛde, ſhe hoapt the ſhould haue dide,
And fo2 the lame hir naked thꝛote ſhe gladly did pꝛoulide.
But as ſhe pirnde and called ay vpon hir fathers name,
And ſtriued to haue ſpoken ſtill, the cruell tyꝛant came
And with a paire of pinſons faſt did catch hir by the tung, 00
And with his ſwoꝛd did cut it off. Che ſtumpe whereon it hung
Did patter Mill, Che tip fell downe and quiuering on the ground
As though that it had murmured it made a certaine found,
And as an Adders taple cut off doth (ip a while: euen fo i 2


The tip of Philomelaas tongue did mꝛiggle to and fro,


And nearer to hir miſtreſleward in dying Mill did go.

And after this moſt cruell ad,fo2 certaine men repoꝛt

Chat he ( ſcarcely dare beleue) did oftentimes reſoꝛt

Co maymed Philomela and abuſde hir at his will:

Pet after all this wickednelle be keeping countnance fill,

Durſt onto Progne home repatre. And the immedtatiy
Demaunded where hir filler was. e ſighing feynedly

Mid tell hir faly ſhe was dead: and with his ſuttle teares

He maketh all his tale to ſerme of credit in hir caves.

Hir garments glittring all with golde he from hir choulders teares
Gnd puts on blacke, and ſetteth vp an emptie Perce, and kepes

A ſolemne obite fo2 hir foule, and piteoullp the werpes

And walleth foꝛ hir fitters fate who was not in ſuch wife

As that was, foꝛ to be bewailde. Che Sunne had in the Skies

Palk thꝛough the twelue celeſtiall ſignes, and finiſht full a peare,
But what Gould Philomela doe 2 She watched was fo neare

That tart ſhe could not foꝛ hir life. the walles of that fame graunge
Mere made lo high of maine hard ſtone, that out the could not raunge.
Againe hir tungleſle mouth did want the vtterance of the fac.
Great is the wit of penſiueneſle, and when the head is rac
Mlth hard miſfoꝛtune, ſharpe loꝛecaſt of pꝛatiſe entereth in.
A warpe of white vpon a frame of T hracia ſhe did pin, ö
And weaued purple letters in betwerne it, which beluzalde


The fixt booke of


The wicked derde ol Tereus. And hauing done, the pꝛaide
A certaine woman by hir ſtgnes to beare them to hir miſtreite.
She bare them and deliuered them not knowing neretheleſle
Vlhat was in them. The Tyꝛants wife vn folded all the clout,
And of hir wꝛetched foꝛtune red the pꝛoceſſe whole throughout.
She held hir peace la wondꝛous thing it is the ſhould fo doe)
But ſoꝛr om tide hir tongue and woꝛdes agræable vnto
Mir great diſpleaſure were not at commaundment at that ſtound.
And werpe the could not. Nyght and wꝛong the reckeneth ta confound,
And on reuengement of the deꝛde bir heart doth wholy ground. f
It was the time that wines of Thrace were wont to celebꝛate
The thee peare rites of Bacchus which were done a nighttimes late
A nighttimes loundeth Rhodope of tincling pannes and pots:
A nighttimes giuing vp hir boule abꝛode Duane Progne trots
Dilguiſde like Bacchus other froes and armed to the prwfe
WU ith all the frenticke furniture that ſerues foꝛ that bebofe,
Hir head was couered with a vine. About hir loſe was tuckt
A Kedderes (hin, a lightſome Launce vpon hir ſhoulder ruckt.
In poaſt gaddes terrible Progne thꝛough the wods, and at hir hales
A locke of froes. and where the ſting of ſoꝛrow which ſhe feles
Enkoꝛceth hir to furioulneſle, ſhe keynes it to pꝛocede
Ok Bacchus motion. At the length the finding out in debe
The outlet Graunge howloe dut, and cride now well, and open bake
The gates, and ikreight hir Alter thence by foꝛce of hand did take,
And bepling hir in like attive ol Bacchus, hid hir head
Ml ith Jute leaues, and home to Court hir ſoꝛe amazed led.
Afone as Philomela wit the let hir fore within
That curſed houſe, the wretched foule to ſhudther did begin.
And all hir face waxt pale. Anon hir ſiſter getting place
Did pull of€ Bacchus inad attire, and making bare hir face
Embꝛaced hir betwene hir armes. But he conſidering that
Quæne Progne was a Cucqueane made by meanes of bir, durſt nat
Once raiſe hir eyes: but on the ground fatt fired helde the fame.
And where the woulde haue taken God to witneſſe that the ſhame
And villanie was wꝛought to hir by violence, ſhe was fayne
Co vle hir hand in tea of ſpeache. Then Progne chaalt a maine.
And was not able in hir ſelte hir choler to reſtraine.


— a Be"


-— =


= =


And fiping to hir necke : cuen iwbere the bꝛeſt and fide doe bounde,


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 78
Wut blaming Philomela foꝛ hir werping, fatd theſe iwoꝛdes.
Thou mull not deale in this behalte with werping, but with Moores:
Oz with ſome thing of greater force than wozds. Foʒ my part, X
Am readle, yea and fullp bent all miſchiele loꝛ to tri
Chis pallace will J epther ſet on fire, and in the ſame
Weſtob the curſed T ereus the woꝛker of our ſhame:
Oꝛ pull awap his tongue: oꝛ put out both his eyes: oꝛ cut
Away thole members which haue the to {uch diſhonoꝛ put: *
D2 with a thouſand woundes expulſe that finfull ſoule of his. i
Che thing that 4 doe purpoſe on ts great, what ere it is. 5
3 know not what it map be pet. NUhile Progne herevnta
Did fet hir minde, came Itys in, who taught hir what to doe
She faring on him cruollx, ſaid. Ah, haw like thou ar? L
Thy bolcked father, and without moe woꝛdes a ſoꝛo full part 85 a
he purpoled, ſuch inward ire was boyling in hir heart..
But notwithſtanding when hir ſonne appꝛoched to hir neare.
And louingly had grerted hir by name ol mother dere.
And with his pꝛetie armes about the necke had hugde hir fat,
And flattring woꝛdes with chili tepes in killing toꝛth had cate,
The mothers heart of hirs was then conſtreyned to relent..
Atwaged wholp was the rage to which ſhe erſt was bent.
And from hir eyes againſt hir will the teares enforced went.
But when He ſaw how pitie did compell hir heart to pecloe,


She turned to hir fitters fare from Itys, and bhehelu se

Hob tone, now tother earneſtly and laid wohn tattles e
And the ſittes dumbe bereft ol tongue: as well why calles not e
Me ſiſter, as this bop doth call me mother Serſt thou not Pai one
Chou daughter of Pandion what abufvand than halk got

Thon groweſt wholy out of kinde. To ſuth a huſband as

Is Tereus, pitie is à finite, Mo moze delay there was.

Sbhe dꝛagged Itys after hir, as when it happes in Inde

A Cyger gets a little Calle that ſuckes vpon a Hynde

And dꝛags him thꝛough the ſhadie wwds. And when that they had founs
A place wolthin the boule far of and far aboue the ground,

Chen Progne ſtrake him with a ſwoꝛd now plainlp ſeeing whother

He ſhould, and holding vp his handes, and crying mother, mother,


a


- Thefixtbookeof


And neuer turnde away hir face q nough had bene that wound
Alone to being him to his ende. The tother After Git

Bis thꝛote. And while ſome life and fonle was in his members pit,
In gobbits they them rent: whereof were fome in Pipkins bopld,
And other fome on hilling (pits againſt the fre were bꝛoyld,
And with the gellied bloud of him was all the chamber foyld.

To this fame banket Progne bade hir pufband knowing nought

Noꝛ nought miſtruſting ol the harme and lewdnelle the had wzough.
And leyning a ſolen aitie accoꝛding to the guiſe
Ok Athens, at the which there might be none in any wile
Beſides hir huſband and hir ſelfe, fhe baniſht from the fame
Hir houſeholde folke and ſolourners, and ſuch as guefttwile came.
King Tereus fitting in the thꝛone of bis foꝛefathers, fed a
And ſwallowed dotwne the ſelle fame lech that of his bo wels bꝛed. 5
And he(ſo blinded was his heart) fetch Itys hither, fed.
Po lenger hir moſt ernell ioy diffemble could the Quckne.
But of hir murther coueting the meflenger to bene,
She fatd : the thing thou aſkeſt loꝛ, thou haſt within. About
Me loked round, and aſted wheres Co put him out of dout,
As he was pet demaunding where, and calling foꝛ him: out
Lept Philomele with ſcattred haire aflaight like one that fled
Had from ſome fray there daughter was, and thꝛew the bloudy head
Ok Itys in his fathers face. And neuer moze was he N
Deſirous to haue had hir ſprache, that able ſhe might be :
Bir inward ioy with woꝛthie moꝛdes to witneſle franke and fre.
The tpꝛant tach a hidedus noyſe away the table ſhoues:
And reves p fiends from Hell. One while with pauntng mouth he pꝛoues
To perbꝛake vp his meate againe, and caſt his bowels out. f
Another while with wꝛinging bandes he warping goes about.
And of his fonne he termes himſelfe the wꝛetched graue. Anon
With naked ſwoꝛd and furious tearthe follotwerh fierce vonn
Pandions daughters de that had bene pꝛeſent would bane deems
Chetr bodies to haue houered vp with fethers. As they ſermde:
Do houered they with wings in deede. Of whome the one away
Co wodward flies, the other Mill about the houſe both fap.
And of their murther from their bꝛeſtes not pet the token goth,
Foꝛ euen Mill pet are ſtainde with bloud the fetbers of them both.


— —— — — — aa
= = e = 7 — — — — -
8 ar —


Ouids Metamorphoſis.
And he thꝛongh ſoꝛrow and defire ol vengeance waxing wight, 8


‘Became a Bird vpon whole top a tuft of feathers light
In likenelle of a Helmets creſt doch trimly and vpꝛight.
In ſtead of his long ſwoꝛd his bill hates out a paſling ſpace:
A Lapwing named is this Bird all armed ſermes his face.
Che loꝛrow of this great miſchaunce did Lop Pandions bꝛeath
Beloꝛe his time, and long ere age determinde had his death.
Erecthey reigning after him the gouernment did take:
A Pꝛince of ſuch q woꝛthinelle as no man well can make 2
Neſolution, ił he moze in armes oꝛ iuſtice did excell.
Foure ſonnes, and daughters foure he had. Ol whith a conple well
Did eche in beautie other match. The one of thele whole name
Mas Procris vnto Cephalus Bing Aeolus ſonne became
Ahappie wife. Che Thꝛaclans and king Jereus were a let
To Boreas? fo that long it was before the God could get
His dearbeloued Orithya, while trifling he did and
Mith faire entreatance rather than did ble the foꝛce of hand.
But when he ſaw he no reliefe by gentle meanes could finde,
Chen turning vnto boyſlous wꝛath ( which vnto that ſame winde
Is to familiar and to much accuſtomed by Kinde)
He ſaid J ſerued am but well: foꝛ why laid J apart 7
My pꝛoper weapons, fierceneſle, foꝛce, and ire, and cruell hart:
And fell to fauning like a fle, which did me but dilgrace; —
Foꝛ me is blolence mete. Chꝛough this the peſtred cloudes J chace.
Though this J tolle the Seas. Lhzough this J turne vp knattie Okes,
And harden Snow, and beate the ground in baple with ſkurdie ſtrokes.
Uhen ¥ my bꝛothers chaunce to get in open Ayꝛe and Skie.
(Foꝛ that is my fielde in the which my maiſterles J doe trie)
4 charge vpon them with ſuch bꝛunt, that of our mating {mart
The Heauen betwerne bs ſoundes r from the hollow Cloudes doth Fart
Enforced fire. And when J come in holes of hollow graund,
And fierfly in thole emptie caues dor roule my backe vp round,


J trouble euen the ghoſkẽs and make the derte woꝛld to quake.


his helpe in wwing of my wile to perde) ſhould haue take. »-
Erecthey ſhould not haue bene pꝛayde my Fatherinlaw to be:
He ſhould haue bene compelde thereto by Hout ertremitie. 3

art | *


The fixt booke oF


In ſpeaking thele oꝛ other woꝛdes as ſfurdie, Boreas gan
To flatke his wings. Mith wauing ol the which he rayſed than
So great a gale, that all the earth was blaſted therelwithall,
And troubled was the maine bꝛode Sea. And as he traylde hig pall
Beduſted ouer higheſt tops of things, he {wept the ground.
And hauing now in ſmokie cloudes bimfelfe enclofed round,
Betwerne his duſkie wings he caught Orithya ſtraught foꝛ feare,
And like a louer, verie ſoft and eally did hir beare.
And as be flew, the flames of loue enkindled moze and moze
By meanes of ſtirring. either did he Tap his flight beloꝛe
He came within the land and towne ol Cicons with bis pray.
And there fone after being made his wile the hapt to lay
Hir belly, and a paire of boyes the at a burthen bꝛings,
l ho elſe in all reſembled full their mother, ſaue in wings
The which they of their father toke. Howbeit (by repoꝛt)
hep were not boꝛne with wings vpon their bodies in this ſoꝛt.
Wi hile Calais and Zetes had no beard vpon their chin,
bey both were callow. But aſſone as haire did once begin
In likenetfe of a pellow Dotwne vpon their cheekes to ſpꝛout, 5


Chonteuen as comes to paſle in Birdes)the feathers budded out
CLogither on their pinpons tw, and ſpꝛeaded round about

On both their ſides. And finallp when childhod once was (pent
And pouth come on, togither they with other Minyes went

Co Colchos in the Galley that was firſt deuilde in Greece,
Upon a fea as then vnknowen, to fetch the golden fleece.


Finis ſexti Libri.


Be
285 D


S ININISS,

FS CHO CHOC:

ESESESUSeS

PIP SHsS SE SES SSESSHSS SH


5


——— — — —— —— ee
* a at = = 7 : * —


<THE SEVENTH BOOK E 80
of Ouids A etamorphofis.
Nd nowy in Hip of Pagaſa the Mynies ent the feas.


and leading onder endlefe night bis age in great diſeaſe
DF ſcarcitie was Phiney féene, and Boreas fonnes had chaſte


| Awap the Maidenkaced foules that did bis dicels walte.


And alter ſufkring manp things in noble Iaſons band,

In muddle Phaſis guſhing freame at laff they went a land.

There while they going to the king demaund the golden ſlerce
Bꝛought thither certaine peares befoge by Phryxusout ot Greece,


And of their dꝛeadfull laboꝛs wait an anſwere to recetue:


Acétas daughter in hir heart doth mightie flames concepue,
And after ſtrugling verie long, when realon could not win
Che vpper hand of rage: the thus did in hir lelfe begin.
Ju baine Medea doffe thou ſtriue.ſome Cod what ere he is
Againſt the bendes his fo2rce.foz what a wondꝛous ng is this?
Is any thing like this which men doe terme by name of Love?
Foꝛ why ſhould 3 my fathers heſtes eſtme fo hard aboue
All mealure : lure in very deꝛde they are to hard and foze.
Mhy feare J leaſt yon ſtraunger whome J neuer lato before
Should pertlh 2 what ſhould be the cauſe of this my feare fo great:
Unhappie wench and it thou canſt) ſuppꝛeſle this vncouth beat
That burneth in thy tender bꝛelt. and it ſo be J coulde/,
A happie turne it were, and moze at eaſe then be 4 ſhoulde.
But now an vncouth maladie perfozce againſt my will
Doth hale me. Loue perfuades me one, another thing my (hill, 8
Che belk J {ee and like : the woꝛſt J follow headlong Hill.


Mhhy being of the royall bloud fo fondly doſte thou raue,


Upon a ſtraunger thus to dote, deſiring fo2 to haue
An hulband of another woꝛld? at home thou mightelt finde
A louer mæxte loꝛ thine eſtate on whome to fet thy minde.


And pet it is but euen a chaunce ik he Tall line oꝛ no:


God graunt him foꝛ to line. J map without offence pꝛap fo,
Although J londe him not: foꝛ what bath Iaſon treſpaſt me⸗


Mho woulde not pitie laſons youth onleſle they cruell be?
Mhat creature is there but his birth and pꝛowelle might him maue ai


— — se eee eer ————


The feuenth booke of
And ſetting all the reſt alpde, who woulde not be in lone
WHith Iaſons godlie perſonage? my heart alluredix
Is toucht therewith. But it that J pꝛouide not remedie,
Mith burning bꝛeath of blaſting Bulles nerdes findged mutt he b.
Ok ſerdes that he himſelle mutt ſo w a harueſt thail he fe a
Ok armed men in battell ray vpon the ground bp grow
Againſt the which it houeth him his manhode foꝛ to (how.
And as a pꝛay he mult be fet againſt the Dꝛagon fell,
Il à thele things let come to pale, map confelle right well
Chat ot a Tyger J was bꝛed: and that within my bꝛeſt
A heart moze harde than any iteele oꝛ ſtonie rocke doth reff.
My rather doe 3 not his death with wꝛathfull eyes beholde⸗
And top with others feing him to beter perill folde z ts
Why doe 3 not enforce the Bulles againſt him why A ſay
Exhoꝛt J not the eruell men which thall in battell ray
Arile againſt him from the ground 2 and that fame Dꝛagon to
Mithin whofe eyes came neuer lepe 2 God ſhield J fo ſhould do.
But pꝛayer ſmally botes, except J put to helping hand.
And hall J like a Captife then betrap my fathers land:
Shall 4 a ſtraunger fane whome we noꝛ none ofours doth know
That he by me pꝛeſerued may without me homeward row⸗
And take another to his wile, and leaue me wꝛetched wight
Co torments 2 It J witk that he coulde woꝛke me ſuch a ſpight,
D2 could in any others loue than only mine delight,
The Churle ſhould die for me. But ſure he beareth not the face
Like one that wold doe fo. His birth, his courage, and his grace
Doe put me clearly out of doubt he will not me decepue,
No no2 foꝛget the great god turnes he Hall by me recepue.
Met (hall he to me firſt his faith for moze allurance plight
And ſolemly he ſhall be lwoꝛne to kerpe the couenant right.
Why kearſte thou now without a cauſe : ſkep to it out ot hand:
And doe not any lenger time thus lingring fondly ſtand.
Joꝛ ay ſhall Iaſon thinke himſelle beholding vnto ther:
And ſhall ther marrie ſolemly: pea honoꝛed ſhalt thou be 5
Or all the Mothers greate and mall thꝛoughout the townes of Grerce
Soꝛ ſauing of their fonnes that come to fetch the golden fizece.
And Mall J then leaue bꝛother, ſilter, father, bith and kin?


a


Ouids Metamorphoſis.


And houfehold Gods, and natiue fople, and all that is therein


—


And fatle know not whither with a ſtraunger? yeas tp mute uF


My father ſurely ernell is my Countrie rude God wot:

My bother pet a berie babe: my ſiſter 3 dare ſay 5
Contented is with all hir heart that J ſhonld go away:

The greateſt God is in wp ſelfe: the things 3 doe fozſake

Are trilles in tompariſon of thoſe that 3 ſhali tage
Foꝛ ſauing of the Greekich chip renoumed Hall A bee. ö
A better place 3 ſhall eniop with Cities riche and fre,
Muhole fame doth floꝛiſh freſh enen here, and people that excell
In ctuill liſe and alli god Artes: and whome J would not fell
Foz all the gods within the woꝛlde Duke Aeſons noble ſonne.
Mhome had J to my lawfull rere aſſuredly once wonne,
Moſt happie pea and bleſt of God J might my ſelfe account,


And with my head aboue the ares to heauen 4 chould ſurmount.


Wut men repoꝛt that certaine rockes (q know not what) doe mete


Amid the waues, and monſtruoully againe a ſunder flæte:

And how Charybdis btter foe to (hips that patle thereby

Now ſowpeth in now ſpeweth out the Sea inceſſantly:

And rauen ing Scylla being hemde with cruell dogs abot;
Amids the guife of Sicilie noth make a barking out.

What (hilleth chat ? As long as J eniop the thing J loue,

And hang about mp Iaſons necke, it Hall no whit me moue

To ſaile the daungerous Seas: as long as him 3 may embꝛace
J cannot ſurelp be atraide in anp kinde ol cafe.

Oꝛ il I chaunce to be atraide, my feare ſhall only tende
But foꝛ my huſband . Callſte thou him thy hulband ?: doſte pꝛetende
Gap titles to thy foule offence Medea: nap not ſo:

But rather loke about how great a lewdneſſe thou doſte g.
And Hun the miſchiele while thou mayſt. She had no foner ſald


hele woꝛdes, but right and godlineſle and ſhamelaſtneſſe were aun’


Wefore hir epes and frantick loue did fife alwap diſmaid.
She went me to an Altar that was dedicate of olde 6
To Perfeys daughter Hecate(of whome the witches holde
As of their Goddelle) ſtanding in a thicke and ſecrete wd


So cloſe it coulde not well be ſpide: and now the raging mod
Ol furious loue was well alaide and clearely put to flight
0 P.. Mhen


The fenenth booke of

pen ſpying Aeſons ſonne, theflame that famed quencher auth
Did kindle out of hand againe. ir chekes began to glowe,

And fluſhing ouer all hir face the ſcarlet blond did flolwe.
And euen as when a litele parte that was in athes hid,

Uncouered with the wohiſtzng windes is from the aches rid,
Cfrlones it taketh nouriſhment and kindleth in ſuch wiſe,

That to his foꝛmer ſtrength againe and fla ming it doch riſe:

Cucn ſo hir quailed loue whith late ye would haue thought had auighe
Bene vaniſht out ol minde, as fone as Iaſon came in ũght

Did kindle to his former force in vewing of the grace

Vll ith which he did auaunce himſelle then comming there in place,
And las it chaunced) farre moze faire and beautifull of face

She thought him then than euer erſt. but ſure it doch behoue

Mir iudgement chould be boꝛne withall bicaule the was in lone.

She gapte and galed in his face with fired ſtaring eyen

As though the neuer had him ſerne befoze that inſtant time.

So farre the was belive hir ſelle he thought it ſhould not be

The face of any woꝛldly wight the which ſhe then did fx,
She was not able foꝛ hir life to turne hir eyes away. vi
Wut when be toke hir bp the hand and (peaking gan to pꝛzag
Hir ſoft ly foꝛ to ſuttoꝛ him, and pꝛomiſde fatthfullx/ J
To take hir to his wedded lolle, he falling by and by
Awerping, ſaid. Sir, what J doe J fee apparantly.

Hot want of knowledge of the truth but koue ſhall me detelue.

Son ſhalbe laued by my meanes And now J mutt receiue

A fatthfull pꝛomile at pour hand foꝛ ſauing of pour like.

He made a folemne vow, and ſware to take hir to his wife,

By triple Hecates holie rites, and by what other power

So euer elfe had reſtdence within that ſecret bower.

And by the Sire or hum that ſhould his Fathꝛinlab become

Mho all things doth behold, and as he hopte to ouertome

Che dꝛeadkull daungers which he had fone alter to allay.

Duke lafon being credited recetude ol hir ſtreight way

Enchaunted herbes: and hauing learnde the vlage of the fame,
Departed thence with merrie heart, and to his lodging came. fect

ert Poꝛne bad chalte p reaming tars : folkie by heapes di
To Machis farcen fleld, and there Reade thꝛonging in a ſhoche,


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 82
Co ſe the ſtraunge paſtimes. Che king mot ſkately to beholde
Mith puoꝛie Pace aboue them all did fit in thꝛone ol golde.
Anon the bꝛazenhoned Balles from ſtonie noſethꝛils cake
Dut flakes of fire: their ſcalding bꝛeath the growing grate did blaf.
And loke what noiſe a chimney full of burning feweil makes,
D2 Flint in ſoftning in the nell when fire the five it tages
By ſpꝛineling water therevpon: {ach noyſe their boyling bꝛeils .
Curmopling with the firte flames enclofed in their cheſts,
Huch noiſe their ſcoꝛched thꝛotebolles make. pet ſtoutly Iaſon went
Co mete them. They their dꝛeadlull eyes againſt him grimly bent,
And eke their hoꝛnes with pron tipt: and ſtrake the duſt about
An ſtamping both their clauen clees: and with their belo wing out
Set all the ſielde vpon a ſmoke. The Myneis ſcing that
Were pak their wits with ſodaine feare. but Iaſon frled nat
So much as anp breath of theirs: ſuch frength bath ſoꝛcerie.
Their dangling Dewlaps with his hand he copd vnfearfully.
And putting pokes vpon their neckes he forced them to dꝛaw


Che heauie bur then ofthe plough which erſt they neuer fav,


And loꝛ to bꝛeake the ſielde which erſt had neuer felt the ſhare.

Che men of Colchos ſceing this, like men amazed fare. N

Che Mynies with their ſhouting out their mazedneſſe augment.

And vnto Iaſon therewithall giue moze encouragement.
Then in a ſouldiers cap of ſtcele a Wipers teth he takes,

And ſowes them in the nely plowde fielve. the ground thé ſaking makes
Che (ede foꝛeſtepte in poyſon ſtrong, both ſupple lithe and ſolt,
And of thele terth a right ſtraunge graine there growes anon aloft.’

Joꝛ euen as in the mothers wombe an intant doch begin

To take the liuely ſhape ol man, and foꝛmed is within N

To due pꝛopoꝛtion piece by piece in euer lumme, and when

Full ripe he is, he takes the bie of Aire with other men:

So when that ok the Wipers teeth the perfect ſhape ol man

Wlithin the bowels of the earth was foꝛmed, they began

To rife togither oꝛderly vpon the fruitetull fielde: f a
And ( which a greater wonder is) immedlatly they wielde 8
Their weapons growilig vp with them. who when the Grerket behilded
Pꝛeparing for to puch their Pites which ſharply headed were)

In laſons face, dolone went their heades, their heartes did faint fo2 1


j.


5 ————


n * 8 * et 2 *

5. G. Sei FRG IR ARO TO 8
PN ae, ee oN PN eee ne a 1 ’

VW . ra hoa Gre ©
A FE ay at


.


.
et
i
1S
a
Le
2
sv
‘
—
—
7
f
¥


ro:
PN ee
4 * 19


ig


SY Ne


5
* i’


2
2


ye


2 2 5.


“4


**
*


| The feuenthbooke of
And alfo the that made him lale began abacht to ba.
Joꝛ when againſt one naked man ſa huge an armie the
Weheld ol armed enmies bent, hir colour did abate
And fadainly both vayd of blond and liue lle heate the late. |
And leak the chaunted werdes the which fhe had him giuen betoze


Should falle at nerde, a helping charme the tobifpeed onermoꝛe,


And pꝛacilde other lecret Artes the which the kept in faze,
He calling Freight a mightie Hone amid his thickeſt foes, :
Doth voyde the battell krom him felfe and turnes it vnta thole.
Chele earthbꝛed bꝛothers by and by did one another wound
And neuer ceaſed till that alt lay dead bpon the ground.


The Gréckes were glas, in their armes din cialp their Champion tn,


And clinging to him earneſtly embgaced him about. f
And thou O fond Medea tw touldit meli haue found in hart
Che Champion fo2 to haue embꝛaſfe, but that withheld thou wart
By ſhamelaſt nelle. and pet thou have embꝛaced him i dꝛead
Ot ſtapning of thine honoꝛ had not ſtaid the in that ſlead.
But pet as far forth as thou matt, thou doſte in heart vetopes,
And fecretlyp (although without expꝛelling it in voyce
Doſte thanke thy charmes and eke the Gods as Authors al the ame.
Now was remaining as the lait conclulion ofthis game,
By foꝛce of chaunted herbes to make the watchfull Dꝛagon llerpr
Mithin whole eyes came neuer winke: who had in charge tokepe
The godly tre vpon the which the golden ficees hung. 6
Mith creſted head, and hooked pawes, and triple ſpirt ing tung.
Right oug iy was he to beholde. Mhen laſon had beſpꝛent
Him with the iuice ol certatne herbes from Lethey Miner font,
And thꝛice had mumbled certaine woꝛdes which are al force to caſt
Do found a fiepe on things that euen as dead a time they taf,
Which make the raging lurges calme and ſiowing Rivers faye
The dzeadfall Dꝛagon by and byl whole eyes beloꝛe that day
Mit neuer erſt what feping ment) did fall o laft a ſla pe
That Iaſon ſafely toe the fiece of golde that he did keꝛpe.
Ol which his botie being pꝛond, he led with him away
The Authoꝛ of his god ſucceſle another fairer pꝛax:
And lo with conquelk and a wife he lolde from Colchos rand.
And in Lariſſa hauen Cafe did go againe a lond.


— —


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 83


The auncient men of Theflalic togither with their wiues

Co Church with offrings gone for lauing of their chudꝛens lites,
Great heapes of fuming frankincenſe were tryed in the flame
And bowed Bulles to facrifice with hoꝛnes faire gilded came.
But from this great ſolemnitie Duke Aeſon was awap, f
Spo at deathes doe and ſpent with yeares. Then Iaſon thus gan lay.
O wife ta wohome J doe confelle J owe my life in Dede,
hough al things thou to me halk giuen, and thy delerts ercerde
Beleife: pet if enchauntment can, ( ſoꝛ what ſo hard appeares
Mhich ſkrong enchauntment can not doe?) abate thou from my yeates,
And adde them to mp fathers life. As he thele woꝛdes did ſpeake,
Che teares were ſtanding in his eyes. is godly ſute did bꝛeake
Medeas heart: who therewithall bethought hir of hir Sire
In leauing whome the had erpꝛeſt a far vnlike defire. ae
But pet betwzaping not hir thoughts, the laid: O Hulband fie,
M hat wickedneſle hath ſcapt pour mouth 2 ſuppoſe pou then that 3
Am able of pour life the terme where J will to beſtow⸗
Let Hecat neuer {after that. our ſute (as well pou know)
Againſt all right and realon is. But J will put in pꝛofe
A greater gift than pou require and moꝛe fo2 pour behole.
J will allay pour fathers life by canning to prolong,
And not with pour peares foꝛ to make him pong againe and — —
So our thꝛerfoꝛmed Goddeſle graunt with pzefent helpe to and:


A further of the great attempt the which J take in hand.


Before the Bone ſhould circlewiſe clole both hir hoꝛnes in one
Three nightes were pet as then to come. Alone as that the (hore
Mok full of light, and did behold the earth with fulſome face,


Medea with hir hatre not truſt fo much as in à lace,


But flaring on hir ſhoulders twaine, and barefote, with hir gowne
Ungirded gate hir out ol does and wandꝛed vp and downe
Alone the dead time of the night. both Man, and Beat, and Bird
Mere falk a llæpe: the Serpents lie in trayling foꝛ ward ſtird

So ſoftly as pe would haue thought they frill a ſlæepe had bene.

Che moyſting Ayꝛe was whiſ. no leafe pe could haue mouing ſene.
Che ſtarres alonly faire and bꝛight did in the welkin ſhine

To which he lifting vp hir handes did thꝛiſe hirfelfe encune:

And thrice with water ot the bꝛoke hir haire beſpꝛincled Khe:


*
=
*


P. ih. And


The feuenth booke of


And gaping thꝛile he opte hir mouth: and bowing dotone hir une;
Upon the bare hard ground, ſhe laid: O truſtie time ol night
Pol fatthfull vnto pꝛiuities, O golden ſtarres whole light ine
Doth totntlp with the Wane fuccede the beames that blaze by day
And thou thꝛe headed Hecate who knoweſt beſt the way 5
Co compaſle this our great attempt and art our chiefeſt ſtay: 5
Ye Charmes ¢ NMitchcrakts, x thou Earth which both with herbe Ftp:
OF mightic woꝛking kurniſheſt the Mlzardes at their nerde?:

Pe Apres and windes: pe Clucs of Hilles, of Bꝛwkes, of dias bn,
DE ſtanding Lakes, and ol the sight approche pe cuerpchone.
Thꝛough helpe ot whom the croked bankes much wondꝛing at the th tig)

J haue compelled ſtreames to run cleane backward to their ſpꝛing.

By charmes 3 mabe the caime Seas rough make p rough Seas plaine,
And couer all the Skie with Cloudes and chale them thence e
By charmes J raiſe and lay the windes, and burſt the Gipers iaw.
And from the bowels ol the Earth both ſtones and trees dae daly, |
hole words and Foꝛeſfes q vemone: J make the Pountaincs gab,
And even the Earthit ſelle ta grone and fearkullp to qqua be.
I call bp dead inen from their graues: and ther O lightlone Mane
J darken oft, though beaten bꝛalſe abate thy perill fone.
Our Soꝛcerſe dimmes the Morning faire, and darkes p Sun at None,
The flaming bꝛeath of firie Bulles pe quenched fo2 my fake
And cauſed their vnwieldie neckes the bended poke to take.
Among the Carthbꝛed bꝛothers pou a moꝛtall war did fee
And brought a llerpe the Dꝛagon fell whoſe eyes were neuer fet...
By meanes whereol deceiuing him that had the golden flace
In charge to krepe, vou ſent it thence by Iafon into Greece.
ob haue J neve ok herbes that can by bertuc of their tutce
To flo wꝛing pꝛime ol luſtie pouth old withꝛed age reduce.
J am alurde pe will it graunt. oꝛ not in vaine haue Hone
Cheſe twincling ſtarres, ne pet in baine this Chariot all alone
By dꝛaught ol Dꝛagons hither comes. With that was fro the Skin
A Chariot fofely glaunted downe, and ſtayed hard thereby.

Allone as ihe had gotten vp, and with hir hand had cops:

The Dꝛagons reined neckes, and with their bzidles lomewhat toyd,
They mounted with hir in the Ayꝛe, whence loking downe the fav


The plealant Temp of Theſſalie, and made hir Dꝛagons dealv 4


— —


LSS Ä


=


Ouids Metamorphofis, x 84


Co places further from reſoꝛt: and there the twke the biet
Vlhat herbes on high mount Pelion, and what on Oſſa grew.
And what on monntaine Othris and on Pyndus growing were,
And tohat Olympus greater than mount Pyndus far) did beare.
Such herbes ol them as liked hir he pullde bp rote and rinde
Oꝛ cropt them with a bobed knife. and many ſhe did finde ‘
Upon the bankes of A pidane agreeing to hir minde:
And many at Amphiriſus fods: and thou Enipeus eke
Didk peelde hir many pꝛetie werdes ol which he well did like.
Peneus and Sperchius ffreames contributarie were,
And fo lvere Bocbes ruſhie bankes of ſuch as growed there,
About Anthedon which againſt the gle Euboea ffandes,
A certaine kind of liuely grate the gatherd with hir handes,
Che name thereof was ſcarly knowen e2 what the herbe could doe
Unttll that Glaucus afterward was chaunged thereinto.
Hine daves with winged Dꝛagons dꝛawen, nine nights in Chariot ſlollt
She learching euerie field and krith from place to place did ſhift.
She was uo ſoner home returnde but that the Dꝛagons fell
Which lighely of hir gathered herbes had taken but the ſmell,
Did caf their ſloughes and with their floughes their riueled age forge,
She would none other houle than heauen fo hide hir bead as tho:
Wut kept hir Hill without the does: and as foꝛ man was none
That once might touch hir. Altars twayne of Turle ſhe builded: one
Upon hir lefthand onto P outh, another on the right ogg
Co Hecat. Both the which attane as the had dight i
Mith Ueruin and with other ſhꝛubbes that on the fielves doe riſe,
Not karre from thence He digde two pits: and making facttfice
Did cut a couple of blacke Rams thꝛotes and filled with the ir blod
Che open pits, on which the pourde of warme milke pure and god
A boll full, and another boll ol honie clarifide: g t
And babling to hir ſelfe therewith full bitterly ſhe cride
On Pluto and his rauiſht wife the ſouereig ne fates of ell,
And all the Clucs and Gods that on oꝛ in the Garth doe dwell,
To ſpare olde Aeſons life à while, and not in hall depꝛiue
His limmes ot that ume aged fonle which kept them pet aliu.
WU home when he ld ſufticiently with mumbling long beſought,
Sbe bade that Aeſons feeblen coꝛſe ſhould out of doꝛeg be bꝛenght
) P. tity, Wefore


The feuenth booke of


Beloꝛe the Altars. Then with charmes che calt him in fo de


A flumber, that vpon the herbes he lap fo2 dead a ſlerpe.
Which done He willed Iaſon thence a great wap off to go
And like wiſe all the Piniſters that ſerued hir as tho:
And not pꝛeſume thole fecretes with vnhallowed epes to fee,
They did as (he commaunded them. L ber all were bopded, the
With ſcattred haire about hir eares like one of Bacchus froes
Deudutly by and by about the burning Altars goes:
And dipping in the pits of bloud a fozt of clifted bꝛaͤndes
Upon the Altars kindled them that were on both hir handes.
And thꝛile with bꝛimſtone, thꝛiſe with fire, and thꝛile with water pure
She purged Acfons aged coꝛſe that llept and ſlumbꝛed ſure.

Che medicine ſething all the while a wallop in a pan

Di bꝛaſle, to ſpirt and leape a loft and gather froth began.
There bopled the the rotes, ſerdes, llowꝛes, leaues, ſtalkes € nice togicher
Mhich from the fieldes of Theſſalie the late had gathered thither.
he cat in allo pꝛecious tones fetcht from the furthell Caſt
And which the ebbing Ocean wacht fine grauell from the Molt.
dhe put thereto the deaw that fell bpon a Monday night:
And fleſh and feathers ol a Mitch a curſed odidus wight
M hich in the likenelle of an Owle abꝛode a nightes did file,
And Infants in their cradels chaunge oꝛ ſucke them that they die.


A rare The ſingles alſo of a x Wolfe which when he lif could take


wolfe.


The ſhape of man, and when he liſt the fame againe fozſake.

And from the Kiuer Cyniphis which is in Lybie lande

She had the fine ſherre ſtaled filmes of water ſnayles at hand.

And of an endleſleliued heart the liuer had the got.

To which the added ol a Crowe that then had liucd not

So little as nine hundꝛed peares the head and Will alfo.
Hob when Medea had with theſe and with a thonſand mo
Duch other kinde of nameleſle things beſtead hir purpole though

Foꝛ lengthning ofthe old mans life, che tobe a withered bough

Cut lately from an Olpt tree, and tumbling all togither

Did raiſe the bottome to the bꝛim: and as the firred hither

And thither with the withered Micke,bebolo it wared grerne.

Anon the leaues came budding out: and ſodenly were leene 5

As many berries dangling downe as well the bough could oe


ee — i¹Vꝛ ·˙— 8


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 85
And here the fire had from the pan the ſcumming cat, oꝛ where 2 ;
Che lcalding drops did fall, the ground did ſpꝛingitke floꝛich there, >
And llowꝛes with fodder fine and fofe immediatly aroſe. ;
Which when Medea did behold, with naked knile He goes
1 And cuttes the olde mans thꝛote: and letting all his old bloud gs
. Supplies it with the boyled inice : the which when Aeſon tho
N Had at his mouth oz at his wounde recepucd in, his heare f
As well of head as beard from grap to coleblacke turned were.
His leane, pale, hoꝛe, and withered toꝛſe grew fulſome, kalre and kreſh:
Wis furrowed wꝛincles were kulfilde with pong and luſtte Heth.
His limmes wart krolicke, baine and lithe: at which be wondzing much,
Remembꝛed that at foꝛtie peares he was the lame oꝛ ſuch. :
And as krom dull vnwieldſome age to pouth be backward dꝛew:
Euen fo a liuelp pouthfull ſpꝛight did in his heart renew.
The wonder of this monſkruous act had Bacchus ſœne from hie.
And finding that to youthlull peares his Nurſes might therebsß
Ueltoꝛed bee, did at hir hand recefue it as a gift.
it And leatk deceitfull guile ſhould ceafe, Medea found a thite
. To feyne that Iaſon and hir ſelfe were falne at oddes in wꝛoth:
And therevpon in humble wiſe to Pelias Court the goth.
Mhere foꝛbicauſe the king himſelle was febled foze with age,
Dis daughters entertainde hir whome Medea being lage,
Mithin a while thꝛough falle pretence of fepned kriendſhip bought
To take hir batte. oz as ſhe tolde what pleaſures ſhe had wrought
Foz Iaſon, and amang the reſt as greateſt fadlp tolde : 18
Hob ſhe had made his facher pong that withꝛed was and olde,
And taried long vpon that polnt: they hoped glad and faine
That their olve father might likewile his youthful peares regalne.
And this they crauing inſtantly did proffer loꝛ hir patne
' What recompence the would defire. She helde hir peace a while
He As though the doubted what to doe: and with hir luttle guile
Pt counterfetted'qrauttie moze eger did them make. ois . 7
4 Aone as the had pꝛomilde them to doe it foꝛ their fabe, i
Fe moꝛe alturance of my graunt, pour ſelues(quoth che) ſhall fe
The oldeſt Ram in all pour flocke a Lambe freight made to ber
1 By force of my confections rong. Ammediatly a Ram
Da olde that no man thereabouts remembzed him a Lam,


a — 2. a


==


The feuenth booke of


Mas thither by his warped hoꝛnes which turned in ward to
To bis hollow Temples, pate’: whole withꝛed thꝛote the Mit in tlg
And when the cleane had dꝛayned out that little bloud that was
Upon the fire with herbes of ſtrength He fet a pan ol bꝛalle,

And caſt his carcaſſe thereinto. Che Medcine did abate
The largeneffe of his limmes and ſeard his dollers from his pate,

And with his hoꝛnes abꝛidgde his peares. Anon was plainly heard

The bleating of a new peand Lambe from mid the Ketleward.

And as they wondꝛed foꝛ ta heare the bleating, freight the Lam
Weapt out, and kriſting ran to ſceke the vdder of ſome Dam.

King Pelias daughters were amazde. and when they did beholde

Hir pꝛomiſe come to ſuch effect, they were a thouland folde

Moze earneſt at hir than beloꝛe. Thꝛiſe Phocbus hauing pluckt

The Collars from his hoꝛſes neckes, in Iber had them duckt.

And note in Heauen the ſtreaming ſtarres the fourth night ſhined clear
When falfe Medea on the fire had banged water ſhere.

Mlth herbes that had no poloꝛe at all. The Ring and all his garde

M hich had the charge that night about his perſon fo2 to warde

Mere thꝛough hir nightſpels and hir charmes in deadly fleepe all caff,
And Pelias daughters with the Witch which eggde them foꝛward, pat
Into his chamber by the watch, and compaft in his bed. :
Then: wherefore Hand ye doubting thus like foles Medéa fev,

On: dꝛam pour ſwoꝛdes: and let pe out his old blond, that J may
Fill vp his emptie veynes againe with pouthtull blond freight way.
Pour fathers life is in pour handes: it lieth now in yon

To haue him olde and withꝛed Mill oꝛ pong and luſtie. NPolu

Ik anp nature in pe be, and that pe doe not fede

A krutteleſle hope, your dutie to pour father doe with ſprde.
Crpulle his age by ſwoꝛd, and let the filthy matter out.

hough thele perſuaſions which ol them lo euer went about

To ſhewe hirſelte moſt naturall, became the firſt that wꝛought
Againſt all nature: and fo2 feare ſhe ſhould be wicked thought,

She erecutes the wickednelſe which mot to han the ſought.

Vet was not any one of them ſo bolde that durſt ablde

Co lobe vpon their father when the ſtrake, but wꝛide aſide

ir eyes: and fo their cruel handes not marking there they bit
With faces turnde another way at all auenture ſmit.


ee


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 86


Be ali beweltred in his bloud awaked with the ſmart, ait
And maimde and mangled as he was did giue a ſodeyne fart
Endeuoꝛing to haue riſen vp. but when he did beholde Said Fay
Bimſelfe among ſo many ſwoꝛdes, he lifting vp bis olde 1
Pale warpich armes, laid: daughters mine what doe ye? who hath put
Thele wicked weapons in pour hands your fathers thꝛote to cue? :
Wlth that their heartes and handes did faint, And as he talked pet,
Medea bꝛeaking of his woꝛdes, his windpipe quickly nit, DORK .
And in the ſcalding liquoꝛ toꝛne did dꝛowne him by and bz.
Wut had He not with winged woꝛmes ſtreight mounted in the te
She had not ſcaped puniſhment. but ping vp on hie “>
She ouer ſhadie Pelion flew where Chyron erſt did dwell,
And ouer Othrys and the grounds renowmde loꝛ that befell
To auncient Ceramb: who ſuch time as old Deucalions fd
Apon the face of all the Earth like one maine water ſtod, |
By belpe of Nymphes with lethered wings was in the Aper lift,
And fo eſcaped from the llond vndꝛowned by the chift. 15
She left Acolian Pytanie bpon hir left hand: and f


The Serpent that became a fone vpon the Leſbian land. a


And Ida wods where Bacchus hid a Bullocke (as is ſapd)

In ſhape ol Stag the which his ſonne had therwuchty conuapddee
And where the Stre ol Corytus lles buried in the duſt. —
Che ficloes which Meras ( when he firſt did into barking bꝛuſt
Affraide with ſtraungenelle of the noyſe. And eke Eurypils towne

In which the wiues of Cos had hoꝛnes like Dron on their crowone
Such time as Hercles with his hoſte departed from the Ile.

And Rhodes to Phoebus conſecrate: and Ialyſe where ere while

Che Telchines with their noyſome fight did euery thing bewitch.

At which their haindus wickednelle Ioue taking vightfall pꝛitch,

Did dꝛowne them in his bꝛothers waues: Moꝛeduer ſhe did palle.

By Ceos and olde Carthey walles where Str Alcidamas

Did wonder hob his daughter ſhoulb be turned to a Doue:

The Swaunte Temp and Hyries Pole the biewed from aboue, 7
Che bohlch a ſodeine Swan did haunt. oꝛ Phyllie there foꝛ loue
Ok Hyries fi onne did at his bidding Birdes and Wions tame;
And being willde to bzeake a Bull perfoꝛmed freight the ſame:
Tilt wꝛothtull that his loue ſa oft fo ſtreightly ſhould him vle. ich


1
em : 8 — ä ——— — —— 7
SS p . — n = Al
~ $2 O().. tod ok rr . . TO Lg . eee
4 4 . , ** . 7% at 1 1 e * „ 2 n * „ * 4 * 7 2 * ‘ * i N 1 „ *


The feuenth booke of


hen for his lad reward he alkt the Bull, he did refule 10 ;
Ho gine it him. The bop dilplealde, Cato ; well: thou wilt anen
Kepent chou gaue it not: and leapt downe headlong krom a ſtone.

SC hep all ſuppoſde he had bene falne : but being made a Swan
With inowie feathers in the Apze to flacker he began.

His mother Hyrie knowing not he was pꝛeſerued lo,

Relolued into melting teares loꝛ penſiueneſle and wo⸗

And made the Pole that beares hir name. Pot far from hence doth fan
The Citie Brauron, where ſometime by mounting krom the land
With waning pinions Ophyes pmpe dame Combe did eſchue

Hir childꝛen which with naked ſwoꝛdes to flea hir did purſue.

Anon the Bend Calaurie fleldes which did ſometime pertaine

Co chat Diana where a Bing and eke his wife both twaine

Were turnde to Birdes. Cyllene hill vpon hir right hand ſtod,

In which Menephron like a beaſf of wilde and ſauage mode

To force his mother did attempt. Far thence the (pide where fad
Cephifus mourned foꝛ his Pece tohome Phebus turned had
Co vgly ſhape of ſwelling Seale; and Eumelles pallace fare
Lamenting fo2 his ſonnes iniſchaunce with whewling in the Aire.

At Corinth with hir winged Snakes at length ſhe did arriue.

Mere men ſo auncient fathers ſaid that were as then aliuc) ö
Did bꝛerde of deawie Puſhrommes. But after that hir terne 8


Mith burning ol hir hulbads bꝛide by witehcraft wꝛeakt had bene
And that King Creons pallace the on blaſing fire had fene, N
And in hir owne deare chtlozens bloud had bathde hir wicked knife |.
ot like a mother but a beaſt bereuing them of life: 5
Il catt Iaſon ſhould haue puniſht hir ſhe tobe hir winged Snakes,
And flying thence againe in halle to Pallas Citie makes, .
Which law the auncient Periphas and rightuous Phiney to
Togither flying, and the space ol Poly pemon who :
Mas kaſtened to a paire of wings as well as tother two.

Aegeus enterteinde hir wherein be was to blame

Although he had no further gone but Haid Spon the fame,
He thought it not to be inough to vle hir as his guel
Onlelle he tobe hir to his wife. And now was Theſey pꝛeſt,
Untznowne vnto his father pet, who by his knightly force oh
Bad fet from robbers cleare the balke that makes the Mreight pie


—


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 87
Betlocne the ſeas Ionian and Aegean, To haue kile
Chis worthte knight, Medea had a Goblet readis fille
Mith iuice of Flintwuꝛt venemous the which he long ago
Had out of Scythie with hir bꝛaught. The common bzute is ſo
Chat of the teeth of Cerberus this Flintwoꝛt fir did grow, )
There is a caue that gapeth wide with darkſome entriclow, f
Chere goes a way flope dolone by which with triple cheyne made nel
Ol ſkrong and ſturdie Adamant the vallant Herele deem
Che curriſh Pelhounde Cerberus: who dꝛagging arſward ſeſtt
And wꝛithing backe his ſcowling eyes bieauſe he had no FRILL
To fe the Sunne and open day, foꝛ verie modie woech
he barkings pelted out at once, and (pit his ſlauering froth
Upon the greeniſh grafte This froth (as men ſuppoſe)tuke rate
And thꝛiuing in the batling ſoyle in burgeous forth did Mote,
To bane and miſchiefe men withall: and fozbicauſe the fame
Did grow vpon the bare hard Flints, falke gaue the fozelaid name
Ok Flinttomet therevnto The Ling by egging ol his Queene
Did reach his ſonne this bane as tf he had his enmie bene,
And Theſey of this trealon wzought not knowing ought had tane
Che Goblet at his fathers hand which helde his deadly bane:
When lodenly by the Juoꝛie hilts that were bpow his fivozd
Aegeus knew he was his ſonne: and riſing from the boꝛds
Did ſtrike the miſchiele from his mouth. Medea with a charme
Did caſt a miſt and fo ſcapte death deſerued foꝛ the harme
Entended. ow albeit that Aegeus were right glad
Chat in the lauing of his ſonne fo happy chaunce he had.
Pet grieued it his heart full foze that ſuch a wicked wight
With treaſon wꝛought againſt his ſonne ſhould ſcape fo cleave € quight.
Then fell he vnto kindling fire on Altars euerie where
And glutted all the Gods with gifts. The thicke neckt Oren were
With garlands wꝛeathd about their hoꝛnes knockt downe koz lacriñce.
d day of moze ſolemnitie than this did neuer riſe
Beloꝛe on Athens (by repost.) Lhe auncients of the Tolone
Made feaſfes: fo did the meaner ſoꝛt, and euerꝝ common clowne.
And as the wine did ſharpe their wits, they ſung this long. O knight
Ok peer leſte prowetle: T hefeus, thy manhod and thy might
Chꝛough all the coal of Marathon with woꝛthte honszfoundes, 1
i or


The ſeuenth booke of
Foꝛ killing of the Cretiy Bull that walked thole fame groundes
The folke of Creniyon thinke themſelues beholden brite ther.
For that without diſguletting their feldes map tilled be.
By the the land of Epidaure behelde the clubbith ſonne
Ok Vulcane dead. By the likewiſe the countrie that doth runne
Along Cephifus bankes behelde the fell Proeruſtes ſlaine.
Che dwelling place of Ceres dur Eleuſis glad and faine
Beheld the death of Cercyon. Chat oꝛpid Sinis who f
Abuſde his ſkrength in bending trees and tying folke thereto,
heir limmes a lunder foꝛ to teare when lofened from the tops
Che trees onto their proper place did trice their ſtreyned tops⸗
Mas killde by thee. Chou made the way that leadeth to the tobone
Alcathoe in Beotia cleate by putting Scyron done.
To this fame outlawes ſcattred bones the land denied reit,
And like wiſe did the Sea refule to harbꝛough fucha gueſt:
Till after floting to and fro long while as men doe fap
At length they hardened into frones : and at this pꝛeſent dap
The llones are called Scyrons cliffes. Nom tf we ſhauld account
Th derdes togither with thy peares, thy derdes would far furmount
Thy peares: I oꝛ thee moſt valiant Pꝛinee thele publike vowes we bape
Fo2 the withcherefull heartes we quatte theſe bolles of wine fo nape,
The Pallace allo of the nopſe and chouting did reſounde
Che which the people made foꝛ iop. There was not to be founde
In all the Citie any plate of ſadneſſe. Patheleſle
(So hard it is of perfect iop to find fo great ercefle,
But that ſome ſoꝛrow therewithall is medled moze 02 lelle,
Aegeus had not in his ſonnes retouerie ſuch delight,
But that there followed in the necke a piece of foꝛtunes ſpight.
Aing Minos was preparing war. who though he had great fore
Ol Hips and ſouldiers pet the wrath the which he had before
Concepued in his fathers bꝛeſt for murthꝛing of his ſonne
Androgeus made him farre moꝛe ſtrong and fiercer foz to ronne
To rightfull battell to reuenge the great diſpleaſure donne.
otwbeit he thought it beit ere he his warfare did begin 2
Co finde the meanes of loꝛreine aides ſome friendthip foz to loin.
And therevpon with flying flerte where pallage did permit
He went to vit all the Ales that in thoſe ſeas doe lit.


R Dee ow Re Pe — * * .
oO BS 6. BF SRS SANE SRN, A a
N 20. 7 ~~ < EN Pe ee oe a * 1
K . “A 2 he Ort


Rot —
ed :
3
8


.
ue


Anon


.


ely N ’ 4
1 855 * . 5


i


xz =a >


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 88

Anon the Jles Aſtypaley and Anaphey both twaine
Che firſt conſtreynde ſoꝛ feare of war the lat in hope ol gane
Cohe part with him. Lom Myconey did alſo with him hold 5
So did the chalkie Cymoley, ànd Syphney which ol olde 8
Mas verie riche with beynes ol golde, and Scyros full or bolde
And bal lant men, and Scryphey the ſmoth oz rather fell.
And Parey which foꝛ Marbleſtone doth beare away the bell.
And Sythney which a wicked wench callde Arne did betrag
Foz monp: who vpon receit thereot without delag
Was turned to a birde which pet of golde is gripple Mill,
And is as blacke as any cole, both fethers, fete and bill.
A Cadowe is the name of hir. But pet Olyarey, 1192 oh
And Didymey, and Andrey eke, and Tene, and Gyarey,
And Pepareth where Oliue tres moſt plenteoullp doe grow,
In no tile would agree their helpe on Minos to beſtow.

Chen Minos turning letthandwiſe did ſaple to Oenope f

WM here reignde that time ing Aeacus. This Ile had called be
Ok old by name of Oenope: but Aecacus turnde the name
And after of his mothers name Aegina callde the fame.
The common folke ran out by heapes deſirous fo2 to le
A man of ſuch renowne as Minos bꝛuted was to ber.
The Kings thee fonnes Duke Telamon Duke Peley, and the pong
Duke Phocus went to mete with him. Old Acacus alfa clang
Mith age, came after leyſurely, and aſked him the cauſe
Ok his repatre. The ruler of the hundꝛed Shires gan pauſe:
And muſing on the inward griefe that nipt him at the hart,
Did ſhape him aunſwere thus. D Pꝛinte vouchſafe to take my part
In this fame godly warre of mine: aſliſt me in the tuk
Reuengement of my murthꝛed ſonne that Mlecpeth in the dull.
I craue pour comfozt foꝛ his death. Aeginas ſonne replide:
Chy ſuite is vaine: and of my Kealme perforce muſt be dende.
Foꝛ vnto Athens is no lande moꝛe ſure than this al idee:
Such leagues betwerne bs are which ſhall inkringde foz me abide.
Away went Minos ſad: and ſaid: full dearly ſhalt thou bie
bp leagues. We thought it foꝛ to be a better pollicie
To thꝛeaten war than war to make, and there to ſpend his Toe


And ſtrength which in his other needes might much W |


AT
Ox


cS
VN.


a
PA
e,.
1
-
> wt
4

85
0
5
=
Ss
DAS
2
Le
2
3
wen
8

NE

*

2

PS


‘\
8


nee oe * 2
J. 80 e e de e
7d i OO OO OG
8 7 Tuy 7 her 1 7
n =a * r „ i


=


The feuenth booke of


As pet might from Ocnopia wales the Cretich féte he hend.

Mhen thitherward wich putted faples and wind at will did tend
A chip from Athens, which anon arrtuing at the ſtrand
Set Cephal wich Ambaſlade from his Countrimen a land.
Che Rings thꝛe ſonnes though long it were ſince lal they had him lam
Yet knew they him. And alter olde acquaintance eft had bene ,
Renewde by thaking hands, to Court they did him freight conuap
Chis Pzince which did allure the eyes ok all men by the wap,
As in whole ſlately perfor Hill vematned to be (ene
The markes of beautte which in Hotere of foꝛmer peares had bene
Ment holding out an Olite bꝛaunch that grew in Atticke lande
And foꝛ the reuerence of his age there went on epther hand
A Hobleman of ponger peares. Sir Clytus on the right
And Butes on the left, the ſonnes ol one that Pallas hight.
Ehen grerting frik had palt betwerne thele Nobles and the King,
Chen Cephal letting freight a bꝛoche the meflage he did being,
Delired ade: and ſhewde what leagues ſtode then in foꝛte betwene
ts countrie and the Aeginites, and allo what had herne
Decredd betwirt their aunceters concluding in the ende
Chat vnder colour of this war which Minos did pꝛetende 5
Co only Athens, he in deꝛde the conqueſt did intende 1
St all Achaia Vhen he thus by helpe ol learned {hill 1
Mis countrie meflage furthꝛed had, Aing Acacus leaning fell:
His left hand on his fcepter, ſaide. My Loꝛdes, J would not haue
Pour Mate of Athens feme fo ſtraunge as ſuccoꝛ here to craue.
7 pꝛay commaund. Foꝛ be ve ſure that what this z le can male
Is pours. Vea all that ere J haue chall hazard foꝛ pour ſake. f
J want no ſtrength . J haue ſueh ſtoꝛe of ſouldiers, that J may
Both ver my koes and allo kerpe my Kealme in quiet fap.
And now z thinke me bleſt ol God that time doth ſerue to fholve.
Without excule the great god will that J to Athens ole.
God holde it fic (ꝙ Ceplialus God malte the number grom
Ol people in this towne of pours: it did me god d late
NUhen ſuch a godly fozt of youth ol all one age and rate
Did meete me in the Hrette. hut pet me thinkes that many mille


Wat hich at my lo mer being here 3 haue bekeld ere this.


Olf Quids Metamorphoſis. 89
I At that the Ring did figh, and thus with plainttull voice did fap,
A lad beginning afterward in better lucke did ſtap.
3 would J plainly could the ſame beloꝛe pour faces lay.
N  Botwbeit 2 will diſoꝛderlꝑ repeate it as 3 may.
And leaſt J feeme to wearie pou with ouerlong delay,


The men that pou fo mindotully enquire foꝛ lie in ground 2
And nought of them ſaue bones and ut re mapneth to be found.
But as it hapt what loſſe thereby did vnto me redound?
A cruell plague thꝛough Iunos wath Who drcadfullp did hate
Chis Land that of hir huſbands Loue did take the name a late,
Upon my people fell: as long as that the maladie
one other ſermde than ſuch as haunts mans nature bfuallp,
And of fo great moꝛtalitie the hurtfull cauſe was hid,
Ale ſtroue by Phiſicke of the fame the Pacients foz to rid.
The miſchiet ouermaiſtred Art: pea Phiſick was to (eke
To doe it ſelle ged. Firk the Aire wich koggie ſkinking rerke
Did dailp oucrdzepe the earth: and clole culme Clouds did make
The wether faint : and while the Mane foure times hir light did take
And filloe hir emptie hoꝛnes there with, and did as often flake :
The warme South windes with deadly heate continually did blow.
Infected were the Springs , and Ponds, and ſtreames that ebbe ¢ flow.
And lwarmes of Serpents crawld about the ſteldes that lay vntillde
Mhich with their poilon euen the bꝛwkes and running waters füllde.
In ſodaine dropping downe ol Dogs, of Hoꝛſes, Shepe and Bine,
Ot Birds ¢ Beaſts both wild ¢ tame as Dren, Wolues, : Swine,
Che miſchiefe of this ſecret ſoʒe firſt outwardly apperes.
Che wretched Plowman was amazde to le his ſturdie Sterres
Amid the fe:rotv finking downe ere halfe his woꝛke was donne.
M hole flocks of ſhæpe did faintly bleate, and therewithall begonne
i Cheir fleeces foz to fall away and leaue the naked ſkin,
And all their bodies with the rot attainted were within.
Che luſtie Hore that erſt was fierce in field renowne to win
Againſt his kinde grew cowardly: and now forgetting quight
Che auncient hons2 which he pꝛeaſt ſo oft to get in fight,
Stode fighing ladlp at the Nacke as wapting fo2 to pele
Pois wearte life without renotwne of combat in the fielde.
The Koare to chatfe,the inde to runne, the cruell Weare to fall
b N. j. Upon


3 a


*


— rere — in


The feuenth booké of


Upon the herdes of Rother bealfes had now no loft at all,
Alanguiching was kalne on all. In wapes, in Weds, in plaines,
The lilthie carions lap, whole ſtinche, the Ayre it ſe lle diſtaines.
(A wondꝛous thing to tel!) nat Dogges, not rauening Foules, no pſt
Mozecoted Molucs uould once attempt to taſt of them a bit. ?
Le where they fell, there rotted they: and with their ſauoꝛ been
Poꝛe harme, and further kill abꝛode the foule infectton ſpꝛed.

WA ith lolle that touched pet moze nere, on Huſbandmen it crept

And ragingly within the walles ok this great Citie ftept. ;
It toke men fir with lwelting heate that ſcalt their guts within:
The ſignes whereor were ſteaming bꝛeath and firte colourde thin
Che tongue was harſh e lwolne, the mouth thꝛough dꝛought of burning |
Lap gaping vp to hale in bꝛeath, and as the pacient ſtreines, (beings
To dꝛabo it in, he ſuckes there with corrupted Aire beſide.
No bed, no clothes though nere fo thinne the pacients could abide.
But laide their hardened ſtomackes flat againtt the bare colde ground
Pet ns abatement of the heate therein their bodies found:
But het the earth, and as koꝛ Leache was none that helpe could bight
Che Surgians and Phiſitions to were in the lelke ſame plight,
Their cureleſle tunning hurt themſt lues The nerer any man
Appꝛocheth his diſeaſed lriend, and doth the beſt he can
Co ſuccoꝛ hum moſt faithfullp,the foner did he catch : N
His bane. All hope of health was gone. re cafment noz diſpatch
Dé ehts diſeaſe except in death and buriall did they finde. 0
Lwke whert vnto that eche mans minde and kancie was enclinde,
That followed he. he neuer paſt what was fo2 his behwle. f
Foz whp 2 tyat nought could doe them god was felt to much by prote
In euerie place without reſpect of ſhame oꝛ honeſtte N.
At Mels, at bꝛokes, at ponds, at pits, by ſwarmes they thꝛonging lic i
Wut foner might they quench their life than ſtaũch their thir thereby⸗
And therewithall fo heauie and vnwieldie they become,
Chat wanting power to rife againe, they died there. Pet ſome
The belle fame waters guzled fill without regard of ſeare,
So wearp of their lothlome beds the etched people were,
That out thep lept: oꝛ it to ſtand their feeble force denide,
They wallowed downe and out of does immedlatly them hide:
It was a death to euerx man bis owne haule to abide,


—— —— — — — — — . —


of Ouids Metamorphofis. 5


And foꝛ they did not know the tauſe whereokthe ſickneſſe came,
Che place (bicaule they did it know) was blamed fo2 the fame.
Pe ſhould haue ſeꝛne ſome halle foꝛdead go plundꝛing here and there
By highways fides while that their legges were able them to beare.
And ſome lie werping on the ground oꝛ rolling pite oully
heir wearie eyes which afterwards thould neuer fee the Skies
D2 ſtretching out their limmes to Heauen that ouerhangs on hie,
Some here, ſome there, and ponder ſome, in what fo euer coffe
Death finding them enforced them to perlde their Fainting hoffe.
M hat heart had J ſuppoſe pou then, oꝛ ought 3 then to haue; .
In faith J might haue lothde my life, and witht me in my graue
As other of my people were. J could not caſt mine eie


Jn anp place, but that dead folke there ſkrowed J did ſpie


Euen like as from a ſhaken twig when rotten Apples dꝛop,
D2 Pal from Beches, Holmes oꝛ Okes whẽ Poales doe (care their top.
Von ately Church with grerces long againſt our Court pou fe:
It is the ſhꝛine ol lupiter. What Might was he oz the
That on thoſe Altars burned not their frankincenſe in vaine e
Mob oft, vea euen with Frankincenſe that partly did remaine
Still vnconſumed in their hands, did die both man and wife 2
As ech of them with mutuall care did pꝛay foꝛ others life 2
How often dide the mother there in ſelwing foꝛ hir ſonne,
Unheard vpon the Altarſtone, hir prayer ſcarce begonne⸗!
Hol often at the Temple doꝛe euen while the Pꝛielt did bid
is Beades, and poure pure wine betwene their hoꝛnes, at ſodaine iid
Lhe Oren downe without ſfroke giuci Vea once when J had thought
My ſelle by ofkring facrifice Ioues fauoꝛ to haue fought, :
Foꝛ me, mp Nealme, and theſe thee ymps, the Dre with grieuous grone
pon the ſodaine funke me downe: and little bloud oꝛ none
Did iſſue ſcarte to ſfaine the knife with which they Ait his thꝛote.
The fickty inwardes eke had lott the ſignes whereby we note
Ulhat things the Gods loꝛ certaintie would warne vs of befoze:
Foz euen the verie bowels were attainted with the fore.
Wefoze the holie Temple doꝛes, and (that the death might ber
Che moze oifpitefull) euen betoꝛe the Altars did J fe
The ſtinking coꝛſes ſcattred. Some with haltars ſtopt tkeir winde,
By death etpulling feare ol death: and ol a wilfull minde 1
N N. g. Did


The feuenth booke of


Did hate their ende, which of it ſelle was coming on a pace.
The bodies whech the plague had llaine were D mot wꝛetched tale
Not carted kaꝛth to puriatl now. oꝛ whp ſuch ſloꝛe there was ö
That ſcarce the gates were wyde though koꝛ Coltins forth to paſe.
So eyther lothly on the ground vnburied did they lie, ‘
D2 elle without folemnitie were burnt in bonüres hie 0
Po reuerence (102 regard was had. Men fell togither by
The eares for firing. In the fire that was pꝛepared foꝛ one
Another ſkraungers coꝛſe was burnt. And loͤſt ly few 02 none
lere lefe to mourne. Che fillte foules of Mothers with their ſmall
And tender babes, and age with pouth as Foꝛtune did befall ö
Ment wandꝛing gaſtly vp and downe vnmourned foꝛ at all.
In fine fo farre outrageoully this helpeleſle Burren raues,
There was not wd inough foꝛ flre, no: ground inough fo2 graues,
Aſknoled at the ſtourenelſſe of fo out a ſtoꝛme of ills
J {aid O father Iupiter Whole mightie power fulfills
Woth Weauen and Earth, il lying kame report ther not amiſſe
In bouching that thou didſt embꝛace in way of Loue ere this
The Rluer Aſops daughter faire Aegina euen by name, 3
And that to take me loꝛ thy ſonne thou count it not a ſhame:
Relſtoꝛe thou me my folke againe,s? hill thou me like wiſe.
He gaue a ſigne by lodaine Hath of lightning front the Skies,
And double peale of Thundercracks. J take this fame (ꝙ 3)
And as ⁊ take it fora true and certaine figne whereby
Chou doell conſirme me fo2 thy ſonne: la alſo let it be
A hanlell of ſome happie lucke thou mindeſt unte me.
Hard by vs as it hapt that time, there was an Dken trer
Vlith ſpꝛeaded armes as bare of boughes as lightly one ſhall ſek.
This tre (as all the ref of Obes) was ſacred vnto Ioue
And ſpꝛouted sf an Acoꝛne which was fet from Dodon graue.
Here markt we how the pꝛetie Ants the gatherers vp of grate
One following other all along in oꝛder of a train,
Great burthens in their littie mouthes did patnfullp ſuſtaine:
And nimbly vp the rugged barke their beaten path maintaine.
As wondꝛing at the warme 3 ode, ſaid, O father bare
As many people giue thou me, as Ants are creeping here.
And fill mine empty walles againe. Anon the Ohe did quake, gine


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 91


And bnconſtreynde of any blaſt, his loftie bꝛaunches (hake,

Che which did peeld a certaine ſound. Mith that foꝛ dꝛeadkull feare

A chuddꝛing thꝛough my bodie frake and vp fede ſtifle my heare.
But pet J kiſled reuerentiy the ground and eke the tree.


1 Mowbeit J durſt not be fo bolde or hope acknowne to ber.


Pet hoped J: and in my heart did ſhꝛoude my ſecret hope.

Anon came night: and llerpe vpon my carefull earcaſſe crope.

Me thought J Catv the ſelfe fame Oke with all his boughes and twigs,
And all the Piimeres crerping Fill vpon his tawnts and ſpꝛigs.
Mhich trembling with a ſodaine bꝛayd theſe Harueſt folke of thꝛew
And (hed them on the ground about, who on the ſodaine grew

In big neſſe moze and moꝛe. and from the earth themſelues did lift:
And ſtode bpzight againſt the træ: and therewithall did ſhift 5
Their meygerneſſe, and coleblacke hue, and number of their fete:
And clad their limmes with ſhape of man. Away my ſler pe did flerte.
And when J wake, milliking of my dꝛeame J made my mone


That in the Gods J did perceiue but ſlender helpe oꝛ none.


But ſfraight much trampling vp and do bone and ſhuffling did J heare
And ( which to me that pꝛeſent time did verie ſtraunge appeare ) 8
Ok people talking in my boule me thought 4 heard the reare.

ow while J muſing on the the fame ſuppoſde it to haue been

Some lancie of the folith dꝛeame which lately 3 had fen,

Behold, in comes me Telamon in haſt, and thzuſfing ope =

y Chamber dwze, ſald: Sir, a fight of things ſurmounting hope

And credit Hall pou haue: come fozth forth came a by and b


And euen fuck men foꝛ all the wozld there fanding did 3 {pte


As in my ſlerpe I dꝛeamed of, and knew them foꝛ the ſame.

Chey comming to me greeted me their ſouereigne Loꝛd by name.
And ( my vowes to Ioue perfoꝛmde) my Citie did deulde

Among my new inhabiters: and gaue them land befide

l hich by deceaſe ol ſuch as were late owners of the ſame

Lap walt. And in remembꝛance of the race whereof they came,
Che name of Emets J them gaue. Cheir perſons you haue fan:
Cheir diſpoſition is the fame that erſt in them bath bern.

Chey are a {paving kinde of folke, on laboꝛ wholy fee,

A gatherer, and an hoꝛder bp of ſuch as they doe get. :
Thele fellowes being like in peares and courage ol the minde/

| Ply, Shall


The feuenth booke of


Shall ga a warfare wy allwne as that the Calferne winde
WAbich bꝛought pou hither luckelp, (the Gafferne winde was it
That bꝛought them thither) turning, to the Southerne coat doe tlie,
Mith this and other luch like talke they bꝛought the day to ende
The Cuen in feaſting, and the night in Meeping they did ſpende. ;
The Sunne next Poꝛrob in the heauen with golden beames did burne
And fill che Gatterne winde did blow and hold them krom returne, 6
Dir Pallas ſonnes to Cephal came (fo2 he their elder was
And he and they to Aeacus Court togither foꝛth did pale.
The Bing as pet was fall a llerpe. Duke Phocus at the gate
Did meete them, and recepucd them accoꝛding to theix ſtate.
Foz Telamon and Peleus alreadie fo2th were gone,
To muſter Souldiers foꝛ the warres. S Phocus all alone
Did leade them to an inner roume, where godly Parlours were, |
And cauſed them to fie them downe. As be was alſo there |
Nobo fitting with them, he beheld a Dart in Cephals hand
With golden head, the ſkeale whercof he woll might vnderſtand
Mlas of ſome ſkraũge and vnknowne tra. when certaine talke had pat
A wohne ok other matters there, J am (quoth be) at laff:
N man that bath delight in wods and loues to follow game
And pet J am not able ſure by anp meanes to ame
What wod pour Jaueling ſteale is ot. Ok Ach it can not be.
Soꝛ then the colour chould be bꝛowne. and ik ot Coꝛnell tree,
It would be full or knubbed knots. A know not what it is:
But ſure mine eies did neuer fea fairer Dart than this.
The one of thoſe fame bꝛethꝛen twaine replying to him ſald :
Pap then the ſpectall pꝛopertie will make you moze diſmaid,
Than doth the beautie ok this Dart. It hitteth whatſoeuer
He thꝛowes it at. The froke thereof by Chaunte is ruled neuer.
For haumg done his feate, it fites all bloudie backe agen
Without the helpe of any hand. The Pꝛince was earneſt then
Co knabo the truth of all: as whence fo riche a pꝛeſent came,
L ho gaue it him, and wherevpon the partie gaue the fame.
Duke Cephal anſwerde his demaund in all pointe one except)
The which (eas knowne apparantly) foꝛ ſhame he ouerlept:
His bed utie namelp, foꝛ the which be did receiue the Dart.
And for ehe lolſe ol his deare wile right penliue at che hart, oy


——— eee = — — 5 — — * N
— e = —— = * = “ 5 B


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 92
1 ie thus began with werping cies. This Dart O Goddeſſe ſonne 8
De ill would thinke it) makes me pirne, & long Wall make me donne,
0 Ik long the Gods doe glue me life. This weapon hath vndonne
* My deare beloued wife and me. O would to God this ſame
fe Had neuer vnto me bene giuen. There was a noble Dame
hh Chat Procris hight (but pou perchannce haue oftner heard the name
M MF great Orythia whofe renowne was bꝛuted fo by fame,

Chat bluſtring Boreas rauiſht hir.) To this Orythia he

Was ſiſter. It a bodie ſhould compare in ech degres
he face and natures of them both, he could none other deme
But Procris woꝛthier of the twaine ok rauiſhment chould fame.

Mir father and our mutuall loue did make vs man and wile.

Men laid J had (and fo J had in deede) a happie life.

Howbeit Gods will was otherwiſe. foꝛ had it pleaſed him

Ok all this while, and euen Mill pet in pleaſure Mould J ſwim.

Che ſecond Month that He and J by band of lawfull bed
Had iopnde togither bene, as J mp mafking Loples did ſpꝛed,
Lo ouerthꝛow the hoꝛned Stags, the early Poꝛning grap
Chen newly hauing chaſed night and gun to beeake the day,
From Pount Hymettus higheſt tops that freſhly flouriſch ap,
Eſpide me, and againſt my will connepde me quight away.
3 truſt the Goddeſſe will not be offended that J fap
: The troth of hir. Although it would delight one to beholde
a Wir ruddie cherkes: although of day and night the bounds He holde:
Although on iuice of Ambꝛoſte continually He keede:
Pet Procris was the only Might that J did loue in deede.
i On Procris only was my heart: none other woꝛd had 3

But Procris only in my mouth: fell Procris did J crie.
i vpned what a holy thing was wedlocke: and how late

It was ago ſince fhe and J were coupled in that fate.

Mhich band (and ſpeciallp fo ſone)it were a Thame to bꝛeake.
ft The Goddelle being moued at the woꝛds that J did ſpeake,
Sad: ceaſe thy plaint thou Carle, and keæpe thy Procris Hill koʒ me.

W.eut (ik my minde deceyue me not) the time will ſhoꝛtly be 5
6 Chat With thou wilt thou had hir not. And fo in anger he
To Procris ſent me backe againe. in going home ward as
Aßpon the Condefie fapings with my lelke J muking was,

M. li. J gan


—


The feuenth booke of


J gan to dꝛeade bad meaſures leaſt my wife had made fome ſcape.
Wir pouthkull peares begarniſhed with beautie, grate and ſhape,
In maner made me to beleue the derde already done.

Againe hir maners did koꝛbid miſtruſting oner fone,

But 3 had bene away: but even the lame from whom I came

A chꝛelode example gaue how lightly wiues doe run in blame:
But we pore Lovers are afraide oł all things. Berevpon

A thought to pꝛactiſe feates: which thing repented me anon:
And ſhall repent me while J liue. The purpole of my deifts
Was for talault hir honeſtie with great rewards and gifts,
The Moꝛning koding this my feare, to further my denice,

My ſhape (which thing me thought J felt) had altered witha trice,
By meanes whereor anon vnknowne to Pallas towne ¥ came,
And entred fo my houle: the Houle was clearely voide of blame:
And ſhewed ſignes of chaſtitie in mourning euer fith
Their maiſter had bene rapt away. A thouland meanes wherewith
To come to Procris {peach had J deuilde: and ſcarte at lak
Obteinde F it. Alone as J mine eie vpon hir calf,

My twits were rauiſht in luch toile that nigh J had forgot

The purpolde triall of hir troth. right much a doe God wot. 5
J had to holde mine owne that J the truth bewꝛayed not.

To kerpe my ſelle krom killing hir full much a doe J had

As realon was J ſhould haue done. Dhe looked berte lad.

And pet as ſadly as ſhe lokte, no Might aliue can ſholo

A better countenance than did che. ir heart did inward gloty
In longing for hir abſent ſpouſe. How beautifull a face

Chinke pou Sir Phocus was in hir whome ſoꝛrow fo did grace:
M hat hould J make repoꝛt how oft hir chat behauiour ſtraue
And ouercame moſt coutkantlp the great aTaults J gaue 2

Oꝛ tell hob oft He het me bp with thefe fame woꝛds 2 To one
(Where ere he is) J beepe my ſelle, and none but he alone

hall fure enioy the ble of me. N hat creature haung his

Wits perfec would not be content with ſuch a pꝛofe as this

Ot hir moſt ſledlaſk chaſtitie: I could not be content:

Wut fill to purchaſe to my felfe moꝛe wo J further went.

At laſt by profering endleſſe welth, and heaping gilts on gifts,
In ouerlading hir wich woꝛdes J dꝛaue hir ta hir Hilts,


—— ee — — — . —


te * 0 = — . . PS ee
mee a — 2 e * aS ee aad


Ouids Metamorphofis. oF =
Chen cride J out: Thine euill heart my ſelfe J tardie take, Tae
Mhere of a ſtraunge aduouterer the countenance 3 did make,

J am in derde thy huſband. O bufatthfull woman thon,

Euen 3 mp (elfe can teſtiſie thy lewde behauioꝛ now.

She made none anlwere to mp woꝛds, but being ſtricken dum

And with the fozrow of hir heart alonly ouercum,

Foꝛſaketh hir entangling houſe, and naughtie huſband quight:
And hating all the fort ot men by reaſon of the ſpight

Chat J had wꝛought hir, ſtraide abꝛode among the Pountaines hie,
And exercilde Dianas feates. Then kindled by and by

d fiercer fire within my bones than euer was bekoꝛe,

When the had thus foꝛſaken me by whome ¥ fet ſuch ſfoꝛe.

J pꝛapde hir the woulde pardon me, and did confeſle my fault.
Affirming that my telfe likewiſe with ſuch a great aſſault

Ok richelle might right well haue bene enfoz to perlde to blame.
Che rather tf performance had enſewed of the fame. |
hen J had this fubmiflion made, and the ſufficiently

Reuengde hir wronged chattitie,he then immediatly

Mas reconcilde: and afterward we liued many a peare


In iop and neuer any farre betwerne bs did appeare.


Wefides all this (as though hir loue had bene to mall a gift)

She gaue me eke a godly Grewnd which was of fote fo lwift,

Chat when Diana gaue him hir, the (ald he ſhould out go,

All others and with this lame Gretwnd the gaue this Dart alſo

The which pou fee J hold in hand. Perchaunce ye faine would know
hat foꝛtune to the Eretwnd befell. J will vnto pou how

A wondꝛous cafe, Che Traungeneffe of the matter will pou moue.

Che krinkes of certaine Pꝛopheñes ſurmounting karre aboue

The reach of aunctent wits to read, the Bꝛokenymphes did expoũd :
And mindleſſe ol hir owne darke Doubts Dame Themis being %


«Was as a recheleſſo Pꝛophetiſſe thꝛowne flat againſt the ground.


Joꝛ which pꝛeſumptudus derde of theirs ſhe tobe tuft puniſhment.

To Thebes in Bæotia ſtreight a cruell beaſt te ſent,

hich wꝛought the bane of many a Might. The coũtryfolk did fea:
Him with their cattell and themſelues, vntili (as was agreed)
Chat all we pouthfall Gentlemen that dwelled there about
Allembling pitcht our coꝛded toplés the champion fields thꝛoughout.
Wut:


The feuenth booke of


But Met ne tople was none fo hie that could his wightnelle op,

He mounted ouer at his cafe the higheſt of the top.

Chen euerie man let lip their Grewnds, but he them all outſtript

And euen as mmbly as a birde in daliance from them wͤhipt.

Chen all the field deired me to let my Lælaps go:

(The Gretond that Procris vnto me did giue was named fo)

Mho ſtrugling fo2 to wꝛeſt his necke already from the band

Mid ttretch his collar. Scarſiy had we let him ol of hand

But that where Lælaps was become we could not vnderſtand.

Che print remained of his fete vpon the parched ſand,

But he was clearly out of fight. Mas neuer Dart 3 trow,

Noꝛ Pellet from enfoꝛted Sling, noꝛ Hatt from Cretiſh bow, ö

That flew moze ſwilt than he did runne. There was not karre feo thence

About the middle al the Laund a riſing ground, from whence

A man might ouerlohe the ſieldes. J gate me to the knap

Okt this fame hill, and there beheld of this ſtraunge courſe the bap

In which the beatt ſrmes one while caught, and ere a man would think,

Doth quickly giue the Grewnd the llip, and from his bighting Heink:

And like a wilie Fore he runnes not forth directly out,

Noz makes a windlaſſe ouer all the champion fieldes about,

But doubling and indenting fill auopdes his enmies lips,

And turning ſhoꝛt, as (wife about as (pinning wherle he whips,

To diſapoint the ſnatch. The Grewnd purluing at an inch

Doth cote him, neuer lofing ground: but likely Hill to pinch

Is at the ſoda ine thifted of. continually he ſnatches

In vaine: for nothing in his mouth ſaue only Aire he latches.

Chen thought J for to trie what helpe my Dart at nerde could how.

T hich as J charged in my hand by leuell aime to thꝛow,

And fet my fingars to the thongs, J lifting from bylow .

Mine eies, did lwke right forth againe, and ſtraight amids the field

(A wondꝛous thing) two Images of Marble J beheld ;

Ot which pe would haue thought the tone had fled on Mill a pace

And that with open barking mouth the tother did him chaſe.

In faith it was the will of God (at leaſt if any Condes

Had care of them) that in their pace there ſhould be found none oddes

Chus farce: and then he held his peace. But tell vs ere we part 5

(Quoth Phocus) what offence oꝛ fault committed hath pout Dat 9 6


*


— =


Ouids Metamorphofis.


His Darts offence he thus declarde. Py Loꝛde the ground of all

My griefe was top. thole iopes ot mine remember firſt A chall.

It doth me gad euen pet to thinke vpon that bliſlfull time

I meane the freſh and luſtie peares of pleaſant pouthfull Pꝛime)
Muhen Ja happie man eniopde fo faire and gwd a wife,

And he with ſuch a louing Make did lead a happie life.

The care was like of both of vs, the mutuall loue all one.

She would not to haue line with loue my pꝛeſence haue forgone.

Pe was there any Wight that could of me haue wonne the loue,
Po though Dame Venus had hir ſelfe deſcended from aboue.

The glowing bꝛands of loue did burne in both our bꝛeſts alike.

Such time as firſt with craſed beames the Sunne ts wont to trike
The tops of Towꝛes and mountaines high, accoꝛding to the wont
Of pouthfull men, in wodie Parkes I went abꝛode to hunt.

But neither hoꝛſe noꝛ Bounds to make purſuit bpon the ſent.

Noz Seruingman, noꝛ knott ie tople befoze oz after went.

Foz J was ſafe with this fame Dart. when wearte wart mine arme
With ſtriking Deere, and that the day did make me fometvhat warme,
Mthdꝛawing koꝛ to cole my (clfe ſought among the Hades

Foz Aire that from the ballepes colde came bꝛeathing in at glades.
The moze exceſliue was my heate the move loꝛ Aire J fought. :
J walted foz the gentle Aire: the Aire was that that bought: 8
Refrething to my wearie limmes. And (well J beart in thought) >
Come Aire J wonted was to fing, come eaſe the paine of me

Mithin my boſom lodge thy ſelfe moſt welcome brute me.

And as thou heretofoꝛe art wont abate my burning heate.

By chaunce (ſuch was my deſkinie) pꝛoceæding to repeate.

Mo words of daliance like to theſe, vſed foꝛ to fap,

Great pleaſure doe J take in chee : foꝛ thou from day to day

Dolle both refreth and nour iſh me. Thou make me delight

In wods and ſolitarie grounds. Polv would to Cod J might


Neceiue continuall at my mouth this pleaſant bꝛeath of thine.


Some man (3 wete not who) did heare theſe doubtkull woꝛds ol mine,
And taking them amifle (uppofoe that this fame name of Aire
The which J callde fo oft vpon, had bene ſome Ladie faire:


He thought that J had lwude ſome ymph. And therevpon freight way
This


He runnes me like a Harebzainde blab to Procris, te betwzap.


The feuenth booke of


Chls fault as he ſurmiſed it: and there with lauas tung.
Uepoꝛted all the wanton woꝛds that he had heard me ſung.
A thing of light beliefe is loue. She (as J ſince haue harde
Jo fadeine ſoꝛrow founded downe: and when long alterwarde
|


She came againe vnts bir. felfe, the ſaid He was accurſt
And boꝛne to cruell deſtinie: and me the blamed wurſt

Foꝛ bꝛeaking faith: and freating at a vaine ſurmiſed ſhame

She dꝛeaded that which nothing was: (he fearde a headleſle name,

Dhe writ not what to fap oꝛ thinke. The wꝛetch did greatly feare

Deceit: pet could the not beleue the tales that talked were.

Onlelle the ſaw hir hulbands fault apparant to hir eie,

She thought He would not him condemne ol any villanie. N

Next dap as ſone as Poꝛning lighe had dꝛiuen the night away,

J went abꝛode to hunt againe: and ſperding, as 4 tap

Upon the gralle, 3 (aid come Aire and eaſe my painfull heats,

Andon the fovaine as J ſpake there feemied fo? to beate

A certaine ſighing in mine cares of what J could not gelle.

But ceaſing not foꝛ that J Milt proceeded nathelelle:

And laid O come moſt pleaſant Aire. totth that J heard a ſound

Ok rullling foftlp in the leaues that lap vpon the ground.

And thinking it had bene Come bealk J thꝛew my flying Dart.

It was my wife. who being now ſoꝛe wounded at the hart,

Cride out alas. Aſlone as J percepued by the ſhꝛieke

It was my faithfull ſpauſe, q ran me to the voiceward lieke

A madman that had lof his wits. There found J hir halle dead

Mir (catered garments ſtaining in the bloud that He had bled,

And ( wꝛetched creature as J am) pet drawing from the wound

Che gift that the hir ſelfe had giuen Then ſoftly from the ground

J lifted bp that bodie of hirs of which J was moze chare

Than of mine owne. and fram hir belt hir clothes in halk J tare.

And binding vp hir eruell wound J ſkriued foꝛ to Tap

The bloud, and pꝛayd fhe would not thus by palling fo away

Foꝛſake me as a murtherer: che waxing weake at length
And dꝛawing to hir death a pace, enfoꝛced all hir ſtrength

To vtter theſe fem woꝛdes at laſt. 4 pꝛay ther humbly by

Our bond of wedlocke, by the Gods as well aboue the Skie
As thole to whome 3 now mul paſle, as euer haue ought


Deler,


— “ — —


of Ouids Metamorphoſis. 95


DPeſerued well by ther, and by Loue which hauing bꝛought
e to mp death doth euen in death vnfaded Mill remaine
I o neitle in thy bed and mine let neuer Aire obtaine.
This (ed, fhe held hir peace, and J recepued the fame
And tolde hir alſo how he was beguiled in the name.
But what auapled telling then 2 (he quoathde: and with hir blond
Hir little ſtrength did fade. Howbeit as long as that the coud
He ought, che ſtared in my face and gaſping ſtill on me
Cuen in my mouth che bꝛeathed foꝛth hir wꝛerched ghoſt. But the
Did ſeeme with better cheare to die foꝛ that hir conſcience was
Diſcharged quight and cleare of doubtes. Noto in concluſion as
Duke Cephal weeping told this tale to Phocus and the reſt
W hole eyes were alſo moyſt with teares to heare the pitious geil,
Behold Ring Acacus and with him his eldeſt ſonnes both twaine
Did enter in and after them there followed in a traine
Ok well appointed men of warre new leuied: which the king
i ease bute Cephalus ta Athens totone to bing.


2


Finis feptimi Libri,


«THE EIGHT BOOKE
“of Ouids <M ctamorphofis.


EME We dap ffarre now beginning to difclofe the Morning baighe, /

And fo2 to clenſe the dꝛoupie Skie from darkenelle of the night.
Che Calerne wind went dolvne & fakes of foggie Clouds gay

And Fram the South a merrie gale on Cephals faples did blow. hald,

The which did hold ſo freſh and large, that he and all his men

Before that he was loked foꝛ arriued fafe agen

In wiſhed Hauen. In that while hing Minos with his flare

Did wal the coſt of Megara. And firſt be thought it mete

Co make a triall of the foꝛce and courage of his men

Againſt the towne Alcathoe where Niſus reigned then.

Among whoſe honozable hatre that was ofcolour gray,

One Carlet haire did grow vpon his crowne, whereon the fay

Pl all his Bingdome did depende. Sixe times did Phoebe fill!

Hir hoꝛnes with boꝛrowed light, and pet the warre hung wanering Hil

In fickle foꝛtunes doubtfull ſcoales: and long with lating wings.

Betwene them both flew bicozte. A Turret of the kings

Stod hard adioyning to the Mall which being touched rings

Joꝛ Phoebus (fo men fay) did lay his golden Gall there,

And fo the ones the found thereof did euer after beare.

King Niſus daughter oftentimes reſoꝛted to this Wall

And ſtrake it with a little fone to raiſe the Cound withall,

In time of peace. And in the warre the many a time and oft

Wehelde the ſturdie ſtoꝛmes of Mars from that fame place aloft.

And by continuance ofthe ſiege the Captaines names fhe knew

Cheir armes, hoꝛſe, armoꝛ and ara in euerie band and crew.

But ſpecially aboue the reſt he noted Minos face.

She knew inough and moze than was inough as Fave the tale.

Soꝛ were it that he hid his head in Helme with lethered crelt,

Ho hir opinton in his Helme he ſlayned all the rell.

2 were it that he twke in hand of ele his target bꝛight,

Sbe thought in werlding of his ſhielde he was a comly Unight.

D2 were it that he railde his arme to thꝛow the piercing Dart,

Che Ladie did commend his force and manhode fopnde with Art

D2 dzew he with his arrow nockt his bended Bol in hand bh


of Ouids Metamorphofis. 96
She lware that fo in all reſpectes was Phocbus wont to ann,
But when he ſhewde his bilage bare his Helmet laid aioe,
And on a Pilke white Stede bꝛaue trapt, in Purple Kobe did ride,
1 . ſcarce was Miſtreſle of hir lelfe hir wits were almoſt ſtraught.
Ahappie Dart ſhe thought it was that he in fingars caught, .
1 And happle called the thole reynes that he in hand had raught
i And ik the might haue had hir will che could haue founde in hart,
Among the enmies to haue gone. che could haue found in hart,
Ferom dobne the highelt Turret there hir bodie to haue thꝛowne,
Among the thicket of the ents of Gnoſſus to haue flowne.
D2 foꝛ to ope the bꝛazen gates and let the enmie in,
Oz whatſoeuer elſe He thought might Minos fauoꝛ win.
And as the fate beholding Mill the King of Candies tent,
She ſaid: J doubt me whether that J rather may lament
9 Oꝛ of this wofull warre be glad. It grieues me at the hart
Chat thou O Minos vnto me thy Louer enmie art. f
. But had not ibis fame warfare bene, J neuer had him knooune.
Pet might he leaue this cruell warre, and take me as his ow ne.
A wife, a fœre, a pledge fo2 peace he might rece(ue of me. 2
O lobe of beautie, O thou Pꝛince moff pearleſſe: it that ſhe
That bare thee in hir wombe were like in beautie vnto the,
Ariqht god cauſe had Ioue on hir enamoꝛed forte bee.
Oh bappte were J if with wings J through the Aire might glide
And fafelp to Ring Minos Lent krom tts fame Turret ſlide.
Then would J teter who J am, and how the irie flame 1 23Ggsee


POklcupid burned in my bꝛeſt, deſring him to name 2
a GU hat dowꝛie he would afke with ine in lodn ol his loue, i
| Saue only of np Fathers Reale no queſtion he ſhould moue.
Foz rather than by traitrous meanes my purpoſe ſhould take place;
Adue deſtre of hoped Loue. Vet oltentimes ſuch grace 8


Math from the gentle Conqueroꝛ pꝛoceeded erſt, that they f
Which toke the foyle haue found the fame their pꝛoũt and their fay.
Alluredly the warre is tui that Minos takes in hand,
As in reuengement of his lonne late murthered in this land.
And as his quarrell icemethj luſt, euen ſo it cannot fale, :
But rightiall warre against the wong muſt ( belene) pꝛeualle.
. ik this Citic in the ende mull needes be taken, why

Dhould


ze
*


Ihe eight booke of
Should his owne ſwoꝛde and not my Lone be meanes to win it bps
It were pet better he chould {pede by gentle meanes without
The laughter of bis people, pea and (as it may fall out)
Nl ith ſpending of his owne bloud tw. Foꝛ lure J haue a care
O Minos lea ſome Soulier wound ther ere he be awars.
oz whe is he in all the woꝛld that hath fo hard a hart
That wittingly again thy head would aime his cruell Darts
J like well this deuiſe. and on this purpoſe will J fand:
To peeloe my ſelle endowed with this Citie to the hand
Ot Minos: and in doing fo to bꝛing this warre to ende.
But ſmallp it aualleth me the matter to intende. 5
Che gates and plues of this towne are kept with watch and warde,
And of the Reyes continuallp my Sather bach the garde.
My Father only is the man ol whome F and in dꝛerde,
My Father only hindꝛeth me of my delired [peede.
ould Gov that J were Fatherlelſe. Luh euerie Might may bee
A God as in their atone behalfe, and il their hearts be free
From fearetulneſle. Foz fortune woꝛks againſt the fond defire
Df ſuch as thꝛough faint heartedneſſe attempt not to aſpire. 5
Some other feling in hir heart ſuch llames ol Cupids fire.
Already would haue put in pole ſome pꝛaciiſe to deſfroy
Vlhat thing fo euer of hir Loue the furtherance might anoy
And why ſhould any womau haue a bolder heart than 3:
Thꝛow fire and ſwoꝛd 4 boldly durſt aduenture fo; to flie.
And pet in this bebalfeat all there nerdes no ſwoꝛd no? fire,
here nedeth but my fathers haire to accomplity mp deſtre.
Chat Purple hatre of his to me moze pꝛecious were than golde:
Chat Purple haire of his would make me bles a thouſand folde:
Chat haire would compaſſe m deſtre and fet my heart at reſt.
ight (chiefeit purce of thoughts to ſuch as are with care oppielt)
Appꝛoched while che ſpake theſe woꝛds, and darknelle did encreale
Hir boldnelle. At ſuch time as folke are wont to finde releaſe
Ok cares that all the dap befoze were woꝛking in their heds,
By leepe which falleth ürſt of all bpon them in their beds,
Hir fathers chamber ſecretly the entered: where (alalle
Chat euer Paiden ſhould fo karre the bounds of Nature palle
dhe robde hir Father ol the haire vpon the which the late Dope


—


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 97
Depended both of life and death and of his ropall fate. 105
And ioping in hir wicked pꝛay, He beares it with hir fo

As tf it were ſome lawofull ſpoyle acquired of the fo.

And palling thꝛough a poſterne gate the marched thꝛough the mid


i Ok all bir enmies (ſuch a truſt the had in that fhe did


Untill ſhe came beloꝛe the hing. whom troubled with the fight
She thus beſpake. Enfoꝛſt O Ring by loue againſt all right
4 Scylla Niſus daughter doe pꝛeſent vnto ther here


My nat iue ſople, my houſehold Gods, and all that elſe is dere


Foꝛ this my gift none other thing in recompence J craue

Chan of thy perſon which J loue, fruit ion fo2 to haue.

And in aſſurance of my lone receyue thou here of mee

Op fathers Purple haive : and thinke J gine not vnto these

A haire but euen my fathers head. And as theſe woꝛds the ſpake.

The curled gift with wicked hand the prefered him to take.

Wut Minos did abbogre hir gift: and troubled in his minde

Mlith ſtraungenelle of the heynous act fo ſoꝛe againſt hir kinde,

He aunſwerde. O thou ſlaunder of our age the Gods expell

Che out of all this woꝛld ol theirs and let the no where dwell.

Let ref on neither Sea noꝛ Land be graunted vnto ther.

Allure thy felfe that as oz me J neuer will agree

Chat Candie Ioues obne foſfer place (as long as J there raigne)

Shall onto ſuch a monſtruons Might a Harbꝛow place remaine.
This ſaid he like a righteaus Judge among his vanquicht foes
Set oꝛder vnder paine of death. Uhich done he willed thoſe


That ſerued him to go a boꝛde and Anchoꝛs bp to wey.


When Scy lla ſaw the Candian flecte a flote to go awap,

And that the Captaine pelded not fo god reward as he

Had foꝛ hir lewodneſle loked foꝛ: and when in fine the fe

That no entreatance could pꝛeualle, then burſting out in ire
With ſkretched hands and ſcattred haire, as furious as the fire
She ſhꝛaming crped out aloud. And whither doſte thou fife
Keieding me the only meanes that thou batt conquerde by

O cankerde Churle preferde beloꝛe my natiue ſople, pꝛelerd
Beloꝛe my father, whither flyſte O Carle of heart mo hard:

M hole conqueſt as it is my ſinne, ſo doth it well deſerue


Reward ol ther, loꝛ that my fault fo well thy turne did ſerue.


O. J. Doth


The eight booke of


Doth neither the the gift J gaue, noꝛ pet my Faithfull lone,

Noꝛ pet that all my hope on the alonly reſted, moue:?

Foꝛ whither Hall J now reſoꝛt fuꝛſaken thus of the 2

To Megara the wretched feple of my natiuitie?

Behold it lieth vanquiſhed and troden vnder forte.

But put the cafe tt fourifht ill: pet could it nothing bote.

J haue foꝛeclolde it ta my ſelfe thꝛough treaſon when 3 gaue

My fathers head to thee. hereby my countriekolke J dꝛaue

Co hate me iuſtly for my erime. And all the Kealmes about

My le we example doe abhoꝛre. L hus haue J Met me out

Okall the world that only Crete might take me in which il
Thou like a Churte dente, and caſt me vp without reliek,

Che Ladie Europ ſurelp was not mother vnto ther:

Wut one ok Affricke Sirts where none but Serpents kollred be,
But even ſome cruell Tiger bꝛed in Armen oꝛ in Inde,

Oꝛ elle the Gulfe Charybdis raiſde with rage of Southerne winde.
Chou wert not got by loue ne yet thy mother was beguilde 5


In chape of Bulk: of this thy birth the tale is falfe tompilde.

But rather fome vnwieldie Bull enen altogither Wilde

That neuer lowed after Cow was out of doubt thy Sire.

O father Niſus put thou me to penante foꝛ my bire.

Meloyce thou in my puniſhment thou totone by me bettayd.

3 haue deſerued (J conteſle) moſt iuſbly to be pad
M ith death, But let ſome one of the that though my lewdneſſe imat
Deſtroy me, Why dolte thou that by my crime a gainer art,
Commit like crime thy felfe ⸗Admit this wicked aa of me

As to mp land and Fatherward in dæde molt hainous be.

Pet oughteſt thou to take it as a friendſhip vnto thee,

But ſhe was merte to be thy wife, that im a Cow of tre

Could play the Harlot with a Bull, and in hir wombe could beare
A Barne, in whome the fhapes ol man and beats confounded were.
How fap thou Carle: cõpell not theſe my woꝛds thine eares to glow:
Di doe the yinees that deine thy ſhyps, in vaine my fapings blawe
In faith it is no wonder though thy wife Pafiphaé
Pꝛeferrde a Bull ta the for thou moze cruell wert than he.
Hob wo is me. To make moze hall it ffandeth me in hand.
The water ſounds wich Ozes, and bales from me and (om


mp land.
an


Co te ———


Ouids Metamorphofis. 98
In battte thou ſtriueſt O thou Churle forgerfull quight of my ö
Deſertes: foꝛ euen in ſpight of the purſue thee ſtill will J.

Upon thy courbed hele will J take holde: and hanging fe
Be dꝛawen along the Sea with ther where euer thou do go.

he ſcarce had laid theſe woꝛds, but that the leaped on the waue
And getting tos the {hips by loꝛce of ſtrength that Loue bir 5
Upon the thing of Candies Rele in ſpight of him the claue.
Mhome tohen hir father ſpide fo2 now he houered in the aire,

And being made a Hobby Hauke did ſoare betwerne a paire i

Ol nimble wings of pon Paple) he fouled downe a maine

Co fease vpon hir as fhe hung, and would haue toꝛne hir faine

Mich bowing Weake. But (he fo2 feare did let the Caricke go:
And as He was about to fall, the lightſome Aire did fo 3 7
uphold hir that the could not touch the Sea as ſermed tho. =
Anon all kethers the became, and forth away did flie

CTranſtoꝛmed to a pꝛetie Bird that ſtieth to the Skie.

And fo2 bicauſe lie clipped hatre hir head doth beare a marke,

Che Grerkes it Cyris call, and we doe name the fame a Larke.
Allwne as Minos came a land in Crete, he by and by

Perlo:mde his vowes to lupiter in cauſing fo2 to die
A hundꝛed Bulles for ſacrifice. And then he did ado: :

1 His Pallace with the enmies ſpoyles by conqueſt wonne beloꝛne.
The llaunder of bis houſe encreaſt: and now appeared moze
The mothers filthie whoꝛedome by the monſter that the boze

5 Ok double ſhape, an vgly thing. This ſhamefull inkamie,

This monſter boꝛne him by his wile he mindes by pollicie
To put awap, and in a houſe witch many nokes and krinks
From all mens ſights and {peach of folke to ſhet it vp he thinks.
Immediatly one Dædalus renowwmed in that lande

70 Foꝛ fine deuiſe and woꝛkmanſhip in building, went in hand

ai Co make it. He confounds his woꝛke with ſodaine Mops and tapes,
And with the great vncertaintie of lundꝛie winding wapes

Leades in and cut, and to and fro, at diuers doꝛes aſtrap.

105 And as with trickling ſkreame the Bꝛoke Mæander f{eemes to plap
In Phrygia, and with doubtfull race runnes counter to and fro,

And ineting with himſelke doth loke tf all his ſtreame oꝛ no

Come alter, and retiring eft cleane backward to his ſpꝛing

if 5 : O. g. a And


Theeight booke of


And marching elt to open Sta as freight as any fring,
Indenteth with reuerled frreame : tuen fo of winding wapes
Unnumerable Dædalus within his woꝛke conuayes.

Pea ſcarce himſelfe could find the meanes to winde binfelfe well out;
Do bufie and lo intricate the boule was all about. :
Within this Maze did Minos {het the Monſter that did beare
The ſhape or man and Bull. And when he twiſe had feo him there

With bloud of Articke Pꝛinces ſonnes that giuen koꝛ tribute were

The third time at the ninth peares end the lot did chaunce to light i

On Thefeus wing Aegrus fonne: who like a baliant Unght

Did onercome the Minotaur: and by the pollicte
DE Minos elgeſk daughter (who had taught him fo2 to tie é
A clety of V innen at the doꝛe to quite himifelfe therebp)

As buſie as the turnings were, his way he out did finde, a
Which neuer man had done bekoꝛe. And freight he hauing winde,
Mith Minos daughter failee away to Dia: where (onkinde
And cruell creature that he was) he left hir poſt alone
Upon the ſhoꝛe. Thus deſolate and making dolefull mone
God Bacchus did both comfort hir and take hir to his bed.

And with an euerlaſking ſtarre the moze hir kame to ſpꝛed,

He twke the Chaplet from hir head, and vp to eauen it threw,

The Chaplet thir led thꝛough the Aire: and as it gliding few,

Che precious ſtones were turnd to ſtarres which blaſed cleare ¢ huge,

And take their place (continuing lite a Chaplet ill to fight)

Amid betwerne the knerler downe and him that gripes the Snake.
Mobi in this while gan Daedalus à wear inelle to take ’
ME liuing like a baniſht man and pꝛiſoner luch a time

In Crete, and longed in his heart to ſer his natiue Clime.
ut Seas encloled him as ik he had in pꝛilon be. ’

Then thought he: though both Sea and Land Ring Minos Hop fro ms

Mam aurde he cannot ſtop the Aive and open Skie.

Co make my pallage that wap then my cunning will J trie.

Although that Minos like a L oꝛd held all the woꝛld beſide:

Pet doth the Aire krom Minos poke foꝛ all men free abide,

This ſed: to vncoth Arts he bent the force of all his twits,

To alter natures courſe by craft. And ozverly he knits

& rotwe of kethers one by one heginning with the ſhoꝛt⸗


2 saa


Ouids e . 99


And duermatching Hill eche quill with one ok longer fort,
hat on the ſhoꝛing of a hill a man would thinke them grobo.
Euen ſo the countrie Oꝛganpipes of Oten redes in rol

Ech higher than another riſe. Then kaſtned be with Flax

The middle quilles, and topned in the lo weit fort with Max.
And when he thus had ſünicht them, a little he them bent

In compaſlſe, that the verie Birdes they full might repꝛeſent.
Chere woe me by him Icarus bis ſonne a pꝛetie Lad.

Mho knowing not that he in handes his owe deſtruct ion had.
M ith ſmil ing mouth did one while blow the fethers to and fro
WA hich in the Aire on wings of Eirds did flaſk not long ago:


And with his thumbes another while he chafes the pelow Mar


And lets bis fathers wondꝛous woꝛke with childiſt topes and bar.
Allone as that the woꝛke was done, the woꝛkman by and by
Did peyſe his bodie on his wings, and in the Aire on hie 8
Hung wauering: and did teach his ſonne how he ſhould alſo fife,
J warne the (quoth he) Icarus a middle race to kp e.
Foz if thou hold to low a gate, the dankeneſſe of the deepe
Mill ouerlade thy wings with wet. And ik thou mount to hie,

The Sunne will ündge them. Therloꝛe ſer betwerne thẽ both thou fie.
J bid the not behold the Starre Bootes in the Skie.
Poz lake bpon the bigger Weare to make thy courte thereby,
Noꝛ pet on Orions naked ſwoꝛd. But euer haue an eie =
Co kerpe the race that J doe kerpe, and 3 will quide the right.
In giuing caunſell to his ſonne to oꝛder well his flight,


He faſtned to his ſhoulders twaine a patre of vncoth wings.


And as he was in doing it and warning him of things,

His aged chekes were wet, his hands did quake, in ſine he gaue

Wis ſonne a bile the laſt that he aliue ould euer haue.

And then he mounting vp aloft befoꝛe him toke his wap

Night fearfull foꝛ his followers ſake: as is the Bird the day

Chat firſt He tollech from hir neſt among the bꝛaunches hie

ir tender yong ones in the Aire to teach them foꝛ to llie.

So heartens he his little ſonne to follow teaching him

A hurtkull Art. His owne two wings he waueth verie trim,

And loketh backward till vpon his ſonnes. The fiſhermen

Chen Handing angling by the Sca,and ee leaning then 5
O. ij. n


oR
y
*
a
8
ig
a
*
|


| The eight booke of

On cherpehwkes, and the Ploughmen on the handles of their Ptougs,

Beholding them, amazed were: and thought that they that through ?

Che Aire could Ate were Gods. And nob did on thet lett ſide Fany

Che les of Paros ànd ot᷑ Dele and Samos Iunos land: *

And on their right Lebinthos and the faire Calydna fraught

Mith ore or honꝛe: when the Boy a frolicke courage caught

Co Ale at randon. In here vpon foꝛſaking quight his guide,

Of fond deſire to ſue to Heauen, aboue his boundes he five,

And there the neveneffe of the Sunne which burnd moꝛe hate aloft,

Did make the Max (with which his wings were glewed) Hehe and (of,

Allone as that the Mar was molt, his naked armes be lhakes, *

And wanting wherewithall to waue no helpe of Aire he takes.

But calling on his kather loud he dꝛowned in the waue:

And by this chaunee of his thoſe Seas his name foꝛ euer haue.

Bis wꝛetched Father (but as then no father cride in feare

O Icarus O Icarus where art thou: tell me where

That q map finde thee Icarus. He fat the fethers ſwim

Upon the waues, and curt his Art that ſo had ſpighted him.

At laſt he coke his badie vp and laid it in a graue,

And to the Ile the name ol him then buried in it gaue. a
And as he of his wꝛetched ſonne the coꝛſe in ground did hide,
Che cackling Partrich from a thicke and leaute thoꝛne him ſpide.

And clapping with his wings fo iay aloud to call began.

There was of that ſame kinde ol Eirde no mo but he as than.

In times foꝛepaſt had none bene ſeene Zt was but late anew 5

Since he was made a bird: and that thou Dædalus maptt tev; 0

J oꝛ Whple the woꝛld doth laſt thy ſhame ſhall therevpon enfelv,

#02 lohy thy fitter ignoꝛant of that which after hapt,

Ddd put him to the ta be taught full twelue veares old and apt:

To take tnffructon.ie did marke the middle bone that goes

CThꝛough liches, and according tu the paterne tane of thale

Me filed teeth vpan a piece of pron one by one

And ſo denꝛſed frſt the Saw where erſt was neuer nane.

Moꝛeouer he two pꝛan ſhankes fo ioynde in ane round head, g

That opening an indifferent ſpace, the one point dobone Mall treads.

And tother dꝛawa circle round. Che finding of thefe things.

The fptqghtfull heart of Dædalus with (uch a malice ſtings. 1


ellie —


*


| Ouids Metamorphofis. 100
Chat headlong from the holp tolbꝛe of Pallas dolvne he thꝛue

His ephew keyning him to fall by chaunce. which was not true.

But Pallas who doth fausur wits) did fap him in his fall

And chaunging him into a Bird did clad him ouer all

Mith fethers loft amid the Aire. The quickneſſe of his wit


(Mhich erſt was ſwilt) did ſhed it felfe among his wings and fete.


And as he Partrich hight befoꝛe, ſo hights he Partrich (ill,
Pet mounteth not this Bird aloft ne ſermes to haue a will
To build hir nek in tops of tres among the boughes on hie


Vut flecketh nere the ground and layes hir egges in hedges dite.


1 z=
wee


„„


*


*


*


1 9
N 9


And koꝛbicauſe hir foꝛmer fall fhe ap in minde doth beare.
Phe euer ſince all loftp things doth warely ſhun koꝛ keare.


Mithin the which the burning hilles of firfe Aetna ſfand.

To ſaue whole life king Cocalus did weapon take in hand,

Foz which men thought him merciful. and now with high renowne
Mad Theſeus ceaſt the wofull pay of tribute in the towne

Ok Athens. Temples decked were with garlands euery where,


And now fozwearied Dædalus alighted in the land 8


And ſupplications made to loue and warlicke Pallas were.


And all the other Gods. Co whome moze honoꝛ for to How, -
Gilts, blud ol beaſts, and frankincenſe the people did beſtow
As in performace of their vowes. The right redoubted name


Olk Thefeus thꝛongh the lande of Greece was ſpꝛed by flying fame.


And nob the folke that in the land of rich Achaia divelt, es)
Pꝛaid him of fuccoz in the harmes and perils that they felt.
Although the land ol Calydon had then Meleager:

Pet was it laine in humble wiſe to Theſeus to prefer

A ſupplication foꝛ the aide of him. The cauſe wherfoze 5


They made luch humble ſuit ta him was this. There was a Boze
The which Diana foꝛ to oꝛeake hir wꝛath concepude beloze *


Pad thither as hir fernant ſent the countrie fo2 to waalt.
Foz men report that Oenie when he had in ſtoꝛehoule plaak


The full encreaſe of foꝛmer peare, to Ceres did aſligne
Tohe firſtlings of his come and kruits: to Bacchus, of the Uine:
And vnto Pallas Olife ople. This honoꝛing ofthe Gods
Ok graine and fruits who put their help to topling in the clods,
Ambitiaulip to all, euen thoſe that dwell in heauen did clime.


O. tty. Dianaas


N
ig
ik
N
+
2
i.
4 eS
&

i


* Caffor
— Pollux.


The eight booke of


Dianaas Altars (as it hapt/ alonly at that time
Mithout reward ok Frankincenſe were oncribipe (they fap)
Euen Gods are ſubiect bute wꝛath. He ſhall not ſcape away
Unpunicht. Though vnwoꝛſhipped he palſed me wyth ſpight:
He (hall not make his vaunt he (capt me bnrenenged quight,
MNuoth Phoebe. And anon the ſent a Boꝛe to Oenies ground
OF luch a hugeneſſe as no Bull could euer pet be found,
In Epyre: But in Sicilie are Wulles much leſſe than be
Bis eies did gliſter blud and fire: right dꝛeadkull was to fe: N
His bꝛaloned necke, right dꝛedfull was his haire which grebo as thicke
Mith pricking points as one of them cauld well by other ſticke.
And like a kront ol armed Pikes ſet cloſe in battell ray
Che Turdie bꝛiſtles on his back Tove Faring vp alwap.
The ſcalding fame with quathing boarſe which he did cal allde,
Upon his large and bꝛawned ſhield did white as Curdes abide.
Among the greateſt Oliphants in all the land of Inde, ;
A greater tuch than had this Boare, xe Mall not lightly finde,
Such lightning lathes from his chappes,as feared vp the graſle.
ow trampled he the ſpindling cozne to ground where he did pale
Now ramping vp their riped hope he made the Plowmen wape.
And chanke the kernell in the rare. In vaine their floꝛes ep
In baine their Barnes for Harueſt long, the likely ſloꝛe they keepe.
The ſpꝛeaded Uines with cluſtred Crapes to ground he rudelp lent,
And full ot Berries loden boughes from O lite trees he rent.
On cattell alſo did he rage. Che ſhepeherd noꝛ his dog,
Poꝛ pet the Bulles could ſaue the herdes from outrage of this Hog.
The folke themfelucs were fatne te lle. And pet they thought rhe not
In fafetie when they had themlelues within the Citie got.
Ent ill their Pance Meleager, and with their Pꝛince a knot
O' Loꝛds and luſtie gentlemen of hand and courage ſtout,
CU ith.chofen fellowes faz the nonce of all the Lands about,
Juflamed were to win renowne. The chiele that thither came
Mere both the twinnes ol Tyndarus of great renotone and fame,
The one in all adiuitie of manhode, ſtrength and force,
The other foꝛ his cunning (hill in handling ofa hole,
And laſon he that firſt of all the Gallie did inuent:
And T hefeus with Pirithous betwene which two there went


Eset Se


* We


==


2 rn ooo — 2


: Ouids Metamorphoſis.
A happie leage of amitie: And two of I heſties race:
And Lynce the ſonne of Apharie and Idas ſwift of pace.


And fierce Leucyppus and the bꝛaue Acaſtus with his Dart


In handling of the which he had the perfect Mull and Art.


And Cæny who by birth a wench, the ſhape of man had wonne


And Drias and Hippothous: and Phoenix eke the ſonne
Ol olde Amyntor : and v a paire of Actors ympes: and Phyle


AA ho came from Elis, Telamon was alſo there that while:


And lo was allo Peleus the great Achilles Sire:
And xPherets fonne : and Iöla y the Thebane who with fire
Belpt Hercules the monſtruous heades of Hy dra ot to ſeare.


101


f > *Plexippus


Toxcus.


X Eur ytuus


E Cteatus.


* Adimctus.


Che liuely Lad Eurytion and Echion who did beare 8


Che pꝛicke and pꝛiſe foꝛ fwtemanſhip, were pꝛeſent alſo there.
And Lelex of Narytium to. And Panopie beſide:
And Hyle: and cruell Hippafus: and Næſtor Who that tide


as in the Pꝛime ol luſtie youth: Moꝛeouer thither went


Chꝛæ childꝛen of Hippocoén from old Amicle ſent.

And f he that of Penelope the fathzinlaw became.

And eke the forme of Parrhafus Ancæus cain by name,
There was + the ſonne of Ampycus of great foꝛecaſting wit:
And t Oeclies ſonne who of his wife was onbetraped pit.


And from the Citie Tegea there tame the Paragone


Ok Lycey foꝛreſt, Atalant, à godlp Ladie, one
Ol Schœnyes daughters, then a aide. Lhe garment he did weare


A bꝛayded button faſtned at hir goꝛget. All hir heare


Untrimmed in one only knot was truffeo, From hir lefe
Ode hanging on hir ſhoulder was an Juoꝛie quiuer defe :
Mhich being full of arrowes, made a clattring as (he went.


And in hir right hand ſhe did beare a Bow already bent.


Pir furniture was ſuch as this. ir countnante and hir grace
Alas ſuch as in a Boy might well be tald a Tenches lace,
And in a Wench be tald a Boyes. The Paince of Caly don


rn


Po ſoner caſt his eie on hir, but being caught anon
In loue, he wiſht hir to his wife. but vnto this deſire


God Cupid gaue not his conſent. Che ſecret flames of fire n
Be baling inward ill did ſay: D happy man is he i
hom this fame Ladie Hall vouchſaue hir Hulband foꝛ to be:


Eneſiimiis,
Alcon, &
Dexip pus.

T Laèrtes.

* Mopſdts.
TA mpbi oa
AV AUS ».


2 3 x = — = ee —_ — _ :
— a > = — 5 — — ——— — — —
— . —— rere


1
i i >
1 7
a
8
ia re
-
g


The eight booke of
Che ſhoꝛtnelle of the time and ſhame would gine him leaue to lay
Ho moꝛe: a woꝛke of greater weight did dan him then away. 5
A wod thick growen with trees which ade bufelled to that day
Beginning from a plate, had thence a large pꝛoſpect thꝛoughout
Che falling grounds that euery wap did muſter round about.
Affone as that the men came there, ſome pitched vp the toples,
Some toke the couples from the Dogs, and ſome purſude the foples

In places where the S wine had tract: deſtring fo2 to (pte
heir owne deſtruction. Pow there was a hollow bottom by,

Lo which the waterchots of raine from all the high grounds dꝛew.
Mithin the compatle of this pond great froze of Opſpers grew:
And Sallowes lithe, and flackring Flags, and moꝛiſh Kuches eke.
And laste Neꝛdes on little ſhankes, and other baggage like. N
From hence the Wore was rowzed out, and fierlly forth he flies
Among the thickeſt of his foes like thunder from the Skies,
Mhen Clouds in mert ing force the fire to burſt by violence out.
He beares the trers beloꝛe him downe, and all the ted about
Doth found of craching. All the youth with hideous nople and (haut
Againſt him bend their Boarſpeare points with hand ¢ courage font,
He ruſhes foꝛth among the Dogs that held him at a bay,

And not on this fide now on that, as any come in wap,

Me rippes their ſkinnes and ſplitteth them, and chaſeth the away.
Echion firſt of all the rout a Dart at him did thzow,

Mulch mit and in a Paple tree did giue a little blow
Che nert (ik he that thꝛew the fame had ved leſſer might,

The backe at which he aimed it was likely fo2 to ſmight.

It ouerllew him. Iaſon was the man that caſt the Mart.

With that the lone ol Ampycus ſayd: Phocbus (if with hart

J haue and fill doe woꝛſhip thee) now graunt me fo? to hit

The thing that J doe leuell at. Apollo graunts him it

As much as lay in him to graunt. be hit the Swine in bade.

But nepther entred he his hide noz canted him to bleede.

Joꝛ why Diana (as the Dart was flying) twke atvay
The head of it: and fo the Dart could headleſle beare no ſwap.

‘Wut pet the modie beaſt thereby was fet the moze on fire

And chafing like the lightning lwit he vttreth forth his ire.
The fre did ſparkle from his epes and kram his bopling bel bi


nA — —


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 102
He bꝛeathed flaming flakes of fire concepued in his chet, :
And lobe with what a violent bꝛunt a mightie Bullet goes
From engines bent againſf a wall, oꝛ bulwarks full of foes:
Qiulth even fuch violence rutht the Stine among the Hunts à mapne.
And ouerthꝛew Eupalamon and Pelagon both twaine a
That in the right wing placed were. Their fellowes ſkepping ts
And dꝛawing them awap, did ſaue their liues with much a do. a
But as fo2 poꝛe Enefimus Hippocoonsfonne had not
Che lucke to (cape the deadly dint. e would away haue got,
And trembling turnde his backe foꝛ feare. The Swine him ouertwke,
And cut his hamſtrings, ſo that ſtreight his going him fozſwke.
And Nſtor to haue lott his life was like by foꝛtune ere
Che ſiege of Iroie, but that he toke his rit bpon his ſpeare:
And leaping quickly vp vpon a tre that ede hard by, 8
Did ſalely from the place behold his foe whome he did file. 8 :
The Boare then whetting Harpe his tufkes againt the Oken wood
To miſchiele did prepare huntelfe with fierce and cruell mod.
And truſting to his weapons which he ſharpened had a new,
In great Orithyas thigh a wound with hoked gropne he dꝛebo.
The valtant bꝛothers thoſe ſame twinnes of Tyndarus (not pet. Caftor
Celeſtiall fignes) did both of them on courſers ſit C Pollux,
As white as now: and ech of them had ſhaking in his HE i
A lghtlome Dart with head of Mele ta thzotw it where he lyſf. 8
And foz to wound the bꝛiſtled Boze they furel b had not miſt
But that he Mill recouered fo the couerts of the Wood,
Chat neyther hoꝛſe could follow him, noꝛ Dart doe anp god.
Still after followed Telamon, whom taking to his fete
No here at alt foꝛ egernetle,a Maple rote did meres.
Nlhich tripped vp his heles, and flat againſt the ground him laid
And while his bꝛother Peleus relteued him, the Maid
«DF Tegea take an arroſo ſwilt, and hot it from hir bolb.
The arrow lighting vndorneath the hauers eare bylow,
And ſomewhat rafing of the ſkin, did make the blond to ſhow.
Che Para. hirfelfe not gladder was to ſer that luckie blow,.
Than was the Pꝛince Meleager. He was the firſf that ſaw,
And lirſt that ſhewed to his ates the blind that the did dꝛaw⸗
And ſatd fog this thy valiant aa due honez halt thou haue.


The


The eight booke of


Che men did bluch, and chearing bp ech other courage gaue.
With chonting, and diſoꝛderly their Darts by heaps they thyelu.
The number of them hindzed them, not lullring to enſew

Chat any lighted on the marke at which they all did ame.
Wehold, enragde againtt his ende the hardie knight that came
From Arcadie, ruſht raſhly with a Pollar in his it

And laid pou vonglings learne of me what difference is betwilt
A wenches weapons and a mans: and all of pou give place

To my redoubted force. Foz though Diana in this chaſe
Should with hir owne ſhield him defend pet Hould this hand of ming
Euen maugre Tame Dianaas heart confound this oꝛped Swine.


Such boating woꝛds as theſe thꝛough pꝛide pꝛeſumptuoullp he crakes⸗


And ſtreyning out himſelle vpon his tipt oes freight he takes

His Pollar vp with both his hands. But as this bꝛagger ment

To fetch his blow, the cruell beat his malice did pꝛeuent:

And in his coddes (the ſperding place of death) his tuſſhes puts,

And rippeth vp his paunche. Downs falles Ancæus and his guts

Come tumbling out beſmearde with bloud, and fopled all the plot.

Pirithous Ixions ſonne at that abaſhed not:

Wut ſhaking in his valiant hand his hunting fafte did gos
Still ſtoutly foꝛward face to face Pencounter with his toe

To whome Duke I heſeus cride a farre. O dearer vnto me

Chan is my ſelfe, my ſoule J fap, fap : lawſull we it fee

F 02 valiant men to kepe alofe. Che ouer hardie hart

In raſh aduentring of him felfe bath made Ancæus (matt.

This ſed, he thꝛew a weightie Dart of Coꝛnell with a head

Ok bꝛaſſe: which being leueld well was likely to haue fped,

But that a bough of Cheſtnut tree thick leaued by the way

Did latch it, and by meanes therof the dine or it did ſtay.

Another Dart that Jafon thzew, by fortune milf the Borer,

And light betwene a Mathifes chaps, and though his guts did gaze

And naild him to the earth. The hand of Pꝛince Meleager

Plaid hittymiſlie. Of two Darts his irk did flie to far,

And lighted in the ground: the nert amid his backe ſtickt fat.

And while the Boꝛe did play the fiend and turned round agaſt,

And grunting fang his fome about togither mixt mith bloo


Che giuer of the wound (the moze to Hite bis enmies meds) ext


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 10


0 SOSteept in, and vnderneath the ſhield did thzuſk his Boarſpeare thꝛough.
Chen all the Hunters ſhouting out demeaned foy inough.
And glad was he that fir might come te take him by the hand.
About the vgly beaſt they all with gladneſſe gazing and
And wondꝛing what a field of ground his carcafle did poſſeſſe,
Chere durſt not any be ſs bolde to touch him. Perethelelle,
Chep euerp of them with his bloud their hunting ſtaues made red.
Chen ſtepped forth Meleager, and treading on his bed ö
Said thus: O Ladie Atalant, receiue thou here my fer,
And ok my gloꝛie vouch thou ſafe partaker foꝛ to bee.
Immedlatly the balp head with both the tuſſhes bꝛaue
And eke the ſuin with bꝛiſtles fur right grielly, he hir gaue.
The Ladle foꝛ the giuers ſake, was in hir heart as glad
As foꝛ the git. The reſt repinde that he ſuch honoꝛ had.
Chꝛough all the rout was murmuring, Of whom with roꝛing reare
And armes dilplayd that all the ſteld might eally fe and heare, 8
Che Theſties cried Dame come of and lap vs downe this geare.
And thou a woman offer not vs men ſo great a ſhame,
As we to toyle and thou to take the honoꝛ of our game.
Ne let that faire (meth face of chine beguile ther, leaſt that hee
| bat being doted in thy lone did giue ther this our fer,
Be ouer karre to reſcow the. And with that woꝛd they twke
The gift from hir, and right ol gift from him. He could not bꝛoke
This wꝛong: but gnathing with his terth fo2 anger that did bople
Nlithin, ſato flerſip: learne ye pou that other folkes diſpople
Ok honoꝛ giuen, what diffretice is betwerne pour threats, and dedes.
And therewithall Plexippus bzeſt (who no ſuch matter dꝛerdes)
With wicked weapon he did pierce Ag Toxey doubting fan
UW bat wap to take, deũiring both Paduenge his brothers blod,
And fearing to be murthered as his bꝛother was beloꝛe,
Mleleager (to diſpatch all doubts of mufing any mozey
Did heate his ſwoꝛd foꝛ compante in bloud of him againe,
Beloꝛe Plexippus bloud was cold that did thereon remaine,
1 Althæa going toward Church with prefents fo2 to pila
Due thankes and woꝛchip to the Gods that foꝛ hir fone had hile
| 7 Che Boare, beheld hir bꝛothers bꝛought home dead: and by and by
4 She beate hir bꝛeſt, and Hilde the towne with ſhleking pitcoully,
pi


asses 7


And


«


VANE N —


SOLO Ga


oe
A St
“te


7 4
.
My


One while hir lobe reſembled one that thꝛeatned cruelneſſe:


The eight booke of


And ſhilting all hir rich aray. did put on mourning werde

But when (he vnderſtode what man was doer of the dade, 7
She left all mourning,and from teares ts vengeante did pꝛocckde
here was a certaine firebꝛand which ohen Ocnics wile did lie

In childebed of Meleager, the chaunced to eſpie f

he Deſtnies putting in the fire : and in the putting in,

She heard them ſpeake thele woꝛds, as they his fatall thꝛerde did ſpin
O latelp bozne, like time we giue to ther and to this bꝛand.

And when they fo had ſpoken, they departed out of hand.
Immediatly the mother caught the blazing Lough away,

And quenched it. This bough the kept full charely many a dap:
And in the keeping of the fame the kept hir ſonne aliue.

But now intending of his life him clearly to depꝛiue,

She brought it koꝛth, and caufing all the coales and chiuers to

Be lapẽd by, ſhe like a foe did kindle fire thereto,

Folw2e times fhe was about to caſt the firebꝛand in the flame:
robbe times ſhe pulled backe hir hand from doing of the fame,

As mother and as ſiſter both (he ſtroue what way to go: |
The diuers names dꝛew diuerſip hir ſkomacke to and fro.

Mir face wart often pale fo2 feare of miſchiele to enſue: |
And often red about the eies thaough Heate of ire the grelo.


Another while pe would haue thought he minded pitiouſneſſe.
And though the cruell burning of hir heart did dete hir teares,
Pet burſt out ſome. And as a Boate which tide contrarie besres
Againſt the winde, lerles double foꝛce, and is compeld to perlde
To both. So T heſties daughter now vnable fo2 to werlde

Hir doubtfull paſſions, diuerſip is caried of and on,

And chaungeably the wares calme, and ſfoꝛmes againe anon.
Wut better ſiſfer ginneth the than mother foꝛ to be.

And to thintent hir bꝛothers ghoſtes with bloud to honoꝛ, ſhe
In meaning to be one way kinde, doth woꝛke another way
Againſt kinde Mhen the plagie fire wart ſtrong he thus did fay
Let this lame fire my bowels burne. And as in curſed hands
The fatall wo ſhe holding at the Belli Altar ſtands:
he ſaid ye triple Goddelles of wꝛeske, pe Pelhounds ther


Wehen ye all this furious fac and ſacriſice of ina. + fete


— I —


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 10
IJboꝛeabe, and do againg all right: with death mutt death be payde:


On miſchiele miſchiefe muſt be heapt: on coꝛſe mulk cozfe be laide.


Confounded let this wicked houſe with heaped ſoꝛrowes be
Shall Oenie top his happy ſonne in honoꝛ fo2 to fe

And Theſtie mourne bereft ofbis 2 ay: better pet it were,

Chat eche with ather compante in mourning pou ſhould beare.
He bꝛothers Ghoſtes and ſoules new dead J with no moꝛe, but pow
Co fecle the ſolemne obſequies which J prepare as now:

And that mine ofkring pou accept, which dearlp J haue bought
Lhe pllue of mp wꝛetched wombe. Alas, alas what thought

J foꝛ to doe : O brothers J beſech pon beare with me.


2 am his mother: fo ta doe my hands vnable be


Vis treſpaſſe J confeſſe deſerues the ſtopping of his bꝛeath:
But pet J doe not like that 3 be Authoꝛ or his death.

And Hall he then with life and limme, and honoꝛ to, {cape fre 2.
And vaunting in his gad fuccefe the king of Calidon bee

And pou deare ſoules lie raked vp but in alittle salt »

J will not ſurelp ſuſter it. But let the villaine ten

That he Hall die, and dꝛaw with him to renne and decay

is kingdome, Countrie and his Sire that doth bpon him fap,
My where ts now the mothers heart and pitie that ſhould raigne
In Parents z and the ten onthes patnes that once did ſuſtaine⸗
O would to God thou burned had a babie in this bꝛand,

And that J had not tane it out and quencht it with my hand.

Chat all this while thou lined halt, my godneſſfe is the cauſe.

And now mol iuſtly bute death thine owne deſert thee dꝛalbes.
Recetue the guerdon of thy derde: and render thou agen

Chy twice giuen life, by bearing frſt, and ſecondarly when

I caught this firebꝛand from the flame: oꝛ elle come drale with me
ds with my biothers, and with them let me entumbed be, N
J would, and cannot. Mhat then hall 3 tand to in this cafe e
One while my bꝛothers toꝛſes ſæme to pꝛeaſe before mp face
With liuelp Image of their deat s. Another while my minde
Doth peelde to pitie, and the name of mother bath me blinde
No v wo ts me. To let pou haue the vpper hand is ſinne:

But neretheleſfe the vpper hand O bꝛothers doe you win.
Condicionly that when that 3 to comfozt pon withall


Hane


| The eight booke of
Waue wꝛought this feate, my ele to you reſozt in perfon thall,
Chis led he turnde away hir face, and with a trembling hand
Did caſt the deathkull bꝛand amid the burning fire. Che bꝛand
Did epther figh,oz feme to figh in burning in the fame,
M hich ſoꝛie and vn willing was to laſten on the fame.
Meleager being abſent ànd not knowing ought at all
Mas burned with this flame: and felt bis bowels to appall
Mith ſecret fire, Be bare out lang the paine with courage tout,
But yet it grieued him to die fo cowardly without
Che ſhedding of his bloud. He thought Anceus foꝛ to be
A happie man that dive of wound. with fighing called he
Upon his aged father, and his ſiſters, and his bꝛother,
And lattly on his wife to, and by chauncs bpon his mother.
Mis paine encreaſed with the fire, and kell therewith againe:
And at the felfe fame inſtant quight ertinguiſht were both twalne.
And as the aſhes foft and hoꝛe by leyſure ouergrew :
The glowing coales : fo leplurlp bis ſpirit from him deeto.
Chen dꝛouped ſtately Calydon. Both yong and olde did mourne
Che Loꝛds and Commons did lament. and maried wines with tonne
And tattred haire did crie alas. is father did beray
Wis hoꝛie head and face with duft, and on the earth flat lap,
Lamenting that he lined had to fe that wofull dap 5
Joꝛ now his mothers giltie hand had foꝛ that curſed crime
Done execution on hir ſelle by ſwoꝛd befoze hir time.
It God to me a hundꝛed mouthes with founding tongues lheuld ent,
And reaſon able to conceyue, and therevnto ſhould lend
e all the grace of eloquence that ere the Mules bad,
J could not ſhew the wo wherewith his ſiſlers were beſtad.
Mnminodfull of their high eſtate, their naked bꝛeſts they ſmit,
Antill they made them blacke and blew. And while his bodie pit
Nemalned, they did cherilh it, and cherith it againe.
They kiſt his bodie: pea they bulk the chiſt that did containe
His coꝛſe. And after that the coꝛſe was burnt to aſhes, they
Did pꝛelle his aſhes wich their bꝛeſts: and downe along they lay
Upon his tumb, and there embzaſte his name vpon the ffone,
And filive the letters of the fame with teares that from them gone.


At length Diana ſatiſfide with daughter bꝛought bpon gk


— — — — K — — — —


Ouids Metamorphofis. 105
Che houleof Oenie, lifts them vp with fethers euerſchone,
(Saue Gorgee and the daughtrinlaw of noble Alemene) and
Makes wings to ſtretch along their fides, and hoꝛned nebs to ſfand.
Upon their mouthes. And ſtnally the altring quight their faire
And natiue ſhape, in ſhape of Birds doch ſend them thꝛeugh the Aire.
Che noble T hefeus in this while with others hauing donne
His part in killing of the Boare, to Athens ward begonne
Ca take his wap. But Acheloy then being wolne wich rains
Did Kap him of his iourney, and from paſlage him reſtraine.
Ok Athens valiant knight (quoth he) come vnderneath my role,
And for to paſſe my raging ſtreame as pet attempt no pꝛofe.

This bꝛoke is wont whole trees to beare and euelong ones to carry
Mith hideous roꝛing volwn his ſtreame. J oft haue ſeene him harry
Mhole Shepeores ſtanding nere his banks, with flocks of ſherpe therim
Hought boted buls their ſtregth:nought ſterdes by ſwiltnes there could
ea many luſtie men this bꝛoke hath ſwallowed, when p now (win.
From mountaines molten, cauſed him his banks tw ouerflow.

Che belt is foꝛ pou fo2 to reſt vntill the Niuer fall

Mithin his boundes: and runne ageine within his chanell {niall

Content (quoth Theſeus): Acheloy, J will not ſure refuſe

Chy counſell noꝛ thy houſe. And fo he both of them did ble,

Ok Pom my hollowed diuerlly and ragged Pebble fone

The walles were made Lhe floꝛe with Molle was foft to tread vpon.

Che rote thereof was checker wiſe with ſhelles ol Purple wrought

And Perle. Che Sunne then full two parts of day to end had bꝛought,

And Theſeus dotone to table fate with ſuch as late befoꝛe

Had friendly boꝛne him companie at killing of the Boze.

‘G tone fide fate Ixions ſonne, and on the other fate

Che Pꝛince of Troyzen Lelex with a thin hearde hoꝛie pate,

And then ſuch other as the bꝛoke of Acarnania did

Uoncbfafe the honoꝛ to his boꝛd and table fo to bid,

Mho was right glad or ſuch a gueſt. Immediatly there came

Barefored Nymphes who bꝛought in meate. And when that of the ſame

Che Loꝛds had taken their repaſt, the meate away they toke,

And fet downe we in pꝛeclous ones, Then T heſeus tubo did loke

Upon the Sea that vnderneath did lie within their fight,

Said: tell vs what is pondame place, (and with his fingar right
a


Fo:
. be


The eight booke of


He poynted therebnto) A pꝛay, and what that Jland bight,
Although it femeth mo than one. The Kluer anſwerd thus,

It is not one mayne land alone that kenned is of vs.

Chere are vppon a kyue of them. Che diſtaunce of the place,

Doth hinder tw diſcerne betwene eche Ile the perfect (pace,

And that the leſle yer wonder may at Phocbees act a late,

To ſuch as had negleaed her vppon contempt oz hate, *
Theis les were lumtyme Maternimphes: who haulng killed Meare
Cwyte fyue, and called tes thep2 fealt the Country Gods to eate, g
Foꝛgetting mer kept krolicke chere. At that gan J to lwell,

And ran moꝛe large than euer er, and being ouer fell ;
Zultomacke and in rea me, 4 rent the wod from wod, and feld
Fra feld, ⁊ with the ground the Pymphes as then with ſtamacks mal
Remembꝛing mer, J tumbled to the Ses. Che waues ol mer

And ot the fea tye ground that erſt all whole was wont tw ber

Did rend a ſunder into all the Jles you vonder fer,

And made a wap faz waters now to pafle betwerne them fre,

They now of Vrchins haue theyꝛ name. But ok theis Jlands, ane
A great way of (behold pee) frands a great way of alone, |
As pou map fe. The Mariners do call tt Perimell.

With her (her was as then a Pymph) fo farre in loue J fell,

That of her mapdenhod J her lpoyld: which thing diſpleald ſo ſoꝛe
Mer father Sir Hippodamas, that from the craggy Hore
He thew her headlong downe to dꝛowne her in the fea. But J

Did latch her ſtreight, and bearing her a llote did lo wd thus crie.

O Neptune with thy thꝛtynde Pate who ha by lot the charge

Ok all the waters wylde that bound vppon the earth at large, f
To lohom wer holy ſtreames do runne, in whome tere take our end,
Dꝛaw nere, and gently to mp bone ekecually attend.

bis Ladie whome J beare a flote mplelfe hath hurt. Ber mike

And vpright. It Hippodamas perchatince were fatherleke, —
_ Dr if that he ertremitie thꝛough outrage did not fake,
He oughted te haue piticd her and for tw beare with mer.


Nuo help vs Neptune J the pꝛay, and condeſcend that ſher


Tabom from the land her fathers koꝛath and cruelneſſe doth chace
Uo thꝛough her fathers crucinetfe is dꝛowond: may find the grace ¢
To haue a place: oꝛ rather let hirſelle became a place. 00


Ouids Metamorphofis. 106

And J will Fill embꝛace the fame. The Ring of Seas did moue i

Mis head, and as a token that he did my lute appꝛoue,

He made his (urges all to ſhake, The Nymph was fore afrayd.

Bowbert hee ſwam, and as He finan, my hand J ſoftiꝑ lapd

Upon her bꝛeſt which quiuered ſtill. And whple toucht the ae

J ſenſtbly did fele boty all her body hard became:

And hol the earth did ouergrow her bulk. And as J ſpake, N
0 pew earth enclofoe hir ſwimming limbes, which by and by did take
Another tape, and grew into a mighty Zle. Mith that
The River eeaſt and all men there did wonder much thereat.

Pirithous being ouer hault of mynde and ſuch a one
Ads did defpple bathe God and man, did laugh them euerychone

Co ſcoꝛne loꝛ giuing credit, and fapd thus. Che woꝛds thou ſpaahſt
Are lepned fanctes Acheloy and ouerſtrong thou maakt
Che Gods: to fay that they can gine and take way ſhapes. Chis ratte
Did make che bierers all amade, foꝛ none did like thereol.

And Lelex of them all the man molt rype in perres and wit,
Sapd thus. Unmeaſurable ts the potuze of heauen and it
Can haue none end. And lobe what God doth mynd to bring about,
Muff tase eftect. And in this caſe tw put pee out of dour,
[ Upon the hilles of Phrygie nere a Teple there ſtands a tree
ii DEDke encloſed with a wall. Pyſell the place did fe.

Foz Pithey vnto Pelops felds did fend mer where his father
Do ſumtpme retgne. not farre fro thence there is a pole which rather
Had bene Dep ground inhabited. But nob it is a meare
1 And oꝛecocks, Cotes, and Coꝛmoꝛants do bꝛerde and neſtle there.

Che mightte loue and Mercurie his ſonne in ſhape of men
it Reloꝛted thither on a tyme. A thouſand honfes when

Foꝛ rome to lodge in they had fought, a thouland houſes bard
6 Thepꝛ doꝛes againſt them. eretheleſle one Cotage afterward

Recepued them, and that was but a pelting one in derde.

The rofe therof was thatched all with frat and fenniſh rerde.
oivbert two honeſt aunctent folke, ol whom ſher Baucis bight
And he Philemon) in that Cote thepꝛ fapth in pouth had plight:
And in that Cote had ſpont theyꝛ age. And foꝛ they paciently
Did beare theyꝛ ſimple pouertie, they made it light thereby,
oe it no thing to be repyned at atall.
V. .. at


= =


r 8 —— re = a Sa SS Se SG


The eight booke of


It ſtzilles not whether there for Hyndes oꝛ Maiſter pon do tall.
Foꝛ all the houſhold were but two: and both of them abeyde,
And both commaunded. ca hen the Cods at this fame Cotage ffald,
and ducking downe their heads, within the low made Wicket came
Philemon bꝛinging ech a ſtole, bade reſt vpon the fame f
Their limmes: and buſie Baucis bꝛought them quilbons homely gare.
Which done, the embers on the harth He gan abꝛode to ſterre,
And laid the coales togither that were raakt bp ouer night,
And with the bꝛands and dꝛied leaues did make them gather might,
And with the blowing of hir mouth did make them kindle bꝛight.
Chen krom an inner heule the fetcht ſeare flicks and cltfted bꝛands,
And put themchzoken vnderncath a Skillet with hir hands.
Hir Huſband krönt their Gardenplot fetche Colewoꝛts. Of the which
She lhyꝛeaded fmall che leaues, and with a Foꝛke toe downe a fitch
Ot reſtie Bacon from the Walke made blacke with lmoke, and cut
A peece thereok, and in the pan to bopling did it put.
And while this meate a fething was, the time in talke they ſpent,
By meanes whereof away without much tedouſneſſe it went.
There hung a Boawle of Boche vpon a fpirget by a ring.
The fame with warmed water fill the two old folke did bing
Co bathe their gueſte foule feete therein. Amid the houſe there fad
A Couch whole bottom ſides and fete were all ol Sallow Had,
And on the fame a Wat of Sedge. Chey caſf vpon this bed
A coucring which was neuer wont vpon it to be ſpꝛed
Ercept it were at lolemne keaſtes: and pet the fame was olde
And ot the courſeſt, with a bed of ſallow merte to holde.
Che Cods late downe. The aged wife right chare and buſie as
A Wer, let out a table. of the which the thirde fte was
A little ſtoꝛter than the reſt. a tylecherd made it euen
And tobe awap the (hozingnefle : and when they had it dꝛiuen
To ikand vp leuell, wich greene Pintes they by and by it wipte.
. Then fet they on it Pallas fruite with double colour fripte,
And Coꝛnels kept in pickle moylk, and Endiue, and a rote
Ok Kadich, and a iolly lump of Butter frelh and ſwte,
And Egges reare roſted. All thele Cates in earihen diſhes came.
Then let they downe a grauen cup made alſo of the ſame
Selle kunde ol Plate, and Pazers made of Berch whole inner ſyde aus


= 2 a =
Nn r
. * ee ve :


Ouids Metamorphofis. 107
Mas rubd wich pellow wax. And when they pawſed had a tpde, 5
Wa hote meate came ppping from the fre. And ſhoꝛtly therebpart
A cup of greene hedg wyne was brought. This tane awap, anon
Came in the latter courſe, which was of Ruts, Dates, dꝛyed ligges


Swerte ſmelling Apples in a Pawnd made flat of Oyſper tiwiggess


And Pꝛunes and Plums and Purple grapes cut newly from the 2
And in the middes a honnycomb new taken from the Ber.
Weſydes all this there did enſew god countnance ouermoꝛe,
Mlth will not poꝛe noꝛ nigardly. pow all the whyle befoze,
As ofen as Philemon and Dame Baucis did percepue

he emptie Cup to fill alone, and wyne tw Hill recepue,

mazed at the ſkraungenelle of the thing, they gan treyght way
Milith fearfull harts and hands hilld vp to frame themlelues to pꝛay.
Deſpꝛiug loꝛ theyꝛ llender cheere and fare tw pardoncd ber. N
Chey had but one pore Gole which kept theyꝛ little Tennantre,


And this tw offer tm the Gods theyꝛ gueſtes they did intend.


The Gander wyght of wing did make che flowy old folke to ſpend
Chepꝛ pavnes in vayne, and moke them long. At length he ſeemd to Ape
Soꝛ ſuccoꝛ to the Gods themſelues, who bade he ſhould not dye.


Noz wer ber Gods (quoth they) and all this wicked toboneſhip hall


Abye their gylt. On pou alone this mifcheef Hall not fall.

No moze but give pou vp pour houſe, and follow vp this hill

Cogither, and dpon the top thereof abyde sur will.

Chep bothe obeyd. And as the Gods did lead the way beloꝛe, ö a

They lagged ſlolwolp after with thep2 Taues,and laboꝛed ſoꝛe 5

Ageint the ryſing of the hill. They were not mickle moze

Chan full a flyghiſhot from the top, when look ing backe they ſaw

Hob all the totune was dꝛoboned ſaue their lyttle ſhed ol raw.

And as they wondꝛed at the thing and did bewayle the caſe

Okt thole that had theyꝛ neyghbours berne, the old poꝛe Cote fo baſe

Wi hereof they had bene otuvers erſt, became a Church. The pꝛoppes

Mere turned into pillars howge. The raw vppon the toppes

Mas vellow,fo that all the rot did ſerme or burnicht gold:

The floꝛe with Marble paucd was. The does on eyther fold

Mere grauen. at the ight hereof Philemon and his make

3 to pray in leare. Then Ioue thus gently them beſpake.

38 thou rpghtuoldſe man, and thou 8 woman mecte to haue
l.


Theeight booke of


A ryghtuowſe howlband what per would moff cherliy tuith oꝛ crane,
Philemon taking conference a little with his wyfe,
Declared bothe theyꝛ mænings thus. Ne couet during lyfe,
Pour Chaplepnes foz to bee to keepe pour Temple. And bpcauſe
Our peeres in concord wer haue ſpent, J pꝛay when death nere dalwez
Let bothe of vs togither leaue our liues: that neyther J - ‘
Behold mp wpues deceace, nog He fe myne when J do dye.
Chepꝛ with had ſequele ta theyꝛ will. As long as lyfe did laſt,
They kept the Church. And being {pent with age of peares lozepalt,
By chaunce as ſfanding on a tyme without the Temple nore f
They told the fortune of the place, Philemon old and poze 1220
Sab Baucis floiſh greene with leaues , ¢ Baucis law like wyſe a
Philemon bꝛaunching out in boughes and twigs befoze hir epes.
And as the Bark did ouergrow the heades ol bothe, eche ſpake
Co other whyle they myght. at laſt they eche of them did take
Theyꝛ leaue of other bothe at once, and therewithall the bark
Did hyde theyꝛ faces both at once. Che Phrygians in that park
Do at this pꝛeſent dap Mill Hel the trers that ſhaped were
Ok thepꝛ twa bodies, growing pit togither ioyntly there.
Theis things did auncient men repoꝛt of credit verie god.
Joꝛ why there was no cauſe why they ſhould lye. As J there fod
% faw the garlands hang ing on the boughes, and adding new
J ſayd let them whom God doth lone be Gods. and honoꝛ dew
Ber giuen to fuch as honoꝛ him with feare and reuerence trew.
He hilld his peoce, and bothe the thing and he that did it tell
Did moue them all, but Theſeus moſt. Whom being mynded well
To here of wandꝛous things, the bꝛoke of Calydon thus befpake,
There are D valtant knyght ium foike that had the powse 6 take
Straunge ſhape foꝛ once, and all their lyues continewed in the ſame.
And otherſum to ſundꝛie ſhapes haue power themſelues to frame
As thou O Protevv dwelling in the fea that clepes the land.
$02 now apanker,nowa boare, anon a K yon, and .
Streyght way thou didſt become a Snake, and by and by a Bull
That people were alrayd of ther to fee thy hoꝛned ſhull.
And oktentymes thou ſeꝛmde a ſtane, and note and then atre,.
And counterfetting water Mere thou feementf oft ta ber
Auer: and another whyle cantrarie therebuta.


“


~~ Quids Metamorphofis. 108
Tou wart a fyꝛe. o leſſer power than allo thus to dw 8
Had Eriſicthons daughter whom Avvtolychus toke to wyfe.

Her father was a perſon that deſpyſed all his lyfe
The pobꝛe ot Gods, and neuer did bouchfauf them facrifple.
Pe allo is repoꝛted to haue heawen in wicked wyſe

Che groue ot Ceres, and to fell her holy woods which ay

Pad vndiminicht and vnhacke continewed to that day
There ſlod in it a warrie Oke which was a wod alone.
VUppon it round hung fillets, crownes, and tables, many one,
The vowes of (uch as had obteynd theyꝛ hearts deſpꝛe. Full ort

The Mod nymphes vnderneath this tre did fetch theyꝛ frifks alolt
And oftentymes with hand in hand they daunced in a round
About the Trunk, whoſe bignelle was of timber god and found
Full fiftene fadom. All the tres within the wad beſpde,
Were vnto this, as werdes to them : fo farre it did them hyde.
Vit could not this moue Triops ſonne his axe therefro to hold,
But bade his ſeruants cut it downe. And when he did behold

Chem ſkunting at his heſt, he ſnatcht an axe with kurious mod

From one of them, and wickedly ſayd thus. Although thys wan

Pot only were the derling of the Goddeſſe, but alſo a

The Goddeſſe euen herſelf: pet would J make it ere J go 5

Co hile the clowers with her top that pranks with bꝛaunches fe,
This ſpoken, as he ſweakt his axe aſyde to fetch his blow,

Che manaſt Dke did quake and ſygh, the Acoꝛnes that did grow

Chereon togither with the leaues tw wer full pale began,

And thanking in for feare the boughes and bꝛaunches looked wan.

Affone as that his curfed hand had wounded once the tree,

Che blod came ſpinning from the cart, as kreſhly as pee fee

It (fue from a Bullocks necke whoſe thꝛote is newly cut

Wefore the Altar, when bis fleth to ſacrilpſe is put.

Chey were amazed euerpchone. And one among them all

Co let the wicked act, durſt from the tree his hatchet call.

Che lewd Theilalian facing him ſayd: Take thou here to the

Che guerdon of thy godlynelle. and turning from the tree,

We chopped of the fellowes head. LAhich done, he went agen

And heawed on the Oke. ſtreight from amid the tree as then

Where ilucd (uch a ſound as this. KA ithin py tre divell J

fig, 4


3


4


Bee
N
*


Hi


i
4
(fk
8

1 2

1

Hy *


——


291 The eight booke of
A Hymph to Ceres very dere, who now before J dye

In comfort ofmp death do glue ther warning thou thale bye

Chy doing vere within a whyle. he goeth wilkully

Still thoꝛrough with his wickedneſle, vntill at length the Oke
Pulld partly by the fozce of ropes, and ent with axis ſtroke,
Did kall, and with his weyght bare downe of vnder Weed great fore,
The Modnymphes with the loſſes of the wods and thepes ryght lz

Amazed, gathered on a knot, and all in mourning werde 4

Ment (ad ter Ceres, praying her to wꝛcake that wicked derde

Of Eriſicthons. Ceres Was content it ſhould bee ſo.

And with the mouing ol her head in nodding to and fro,


Sheer hake the feeldes which laden were with frutefull Daruet tho: teal


And thevewithalia puniſhment mol piteous he pꝛocædes

Tao put in pꝛacſe: were it not that his moſt heynous derdes,

Mo pitte did deſerue to haue at any bodies hand.

With helpeleſle hungar hum tw pyne, in purpoſe He did ſfand.

And foꝛeſmuch as hee herſeltand kamin myght not mete,

(Fo2 fate foꝛbiddeth kamin to abyde within the lerte

here pleatic is) He thus beſpalke a fapꝛie of the hill.

here lyeth in the otro hounds of Tartarie the chill

A Dꝛerrie place, a wretched fople, a barreine plot; no grayne,

No krute, nu tre, is growing there: but there doth ay remayne
Unwrldlome cold, with trembling feare, and paleneſſe tobite as clotot,
And fodleſſe famin. Mill thou her immediatlp withobot 6
Delay to Hep herſelk inte the llomacke ol the wꝛetch,

And let no plentie ſtaunch her koꝛce but let her wozklng ſtretch
Aboue the pole of mæ. And lead the longneſte of the way

Map make the wearie, take thou herre my charpot stake J fap

My dꝛaggons foz ta bearethe though the atre. In ſaping ſo .
She cave hir them. The Pymph mounts vp, and Aping thence as the:
Alyghts in Scythy land, and vp the cragged top ol hre 2
Mount Caucafus didcauſe hir Snakes with much a do to ſtye. 5


DN here febing long foo famin, he the gaptothd elle did ſyye

Amid a barre ine ſtony feld a ramping vp the graſſfſe

WLith ouglynayles and chanking it. Ber face pale colourd wat.

Wir heare was harch and ſhirle, her eyes were ſunken in her head.

Mer lyppes were hoꝛe with lilth, her tærth were furd and ruſty 1


—


S r SS | =<


= =>


=


as 2S oe 2 29 4 2 SS SS OS SS SOS ae OS as lS SS SS SS SS


1
ö
|


—
4


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 109

Het fhinne was ffarched, and fo Here a man myght well eſpre
Che berie bowels in her bulk how euery one dia lye. lana
And eke aboue her courbed loynes her withered hippes were fene,
In lead ol belly was a ſpace where bell ſhould haue bene. 5 ee
Her bꝛeſt did hang ſo fagging downe as that a man would werne
That ſcarcely to her ridgebone had hir ribbes bene fattened well.
Her leanneſſe made her iaynts bolne big, and knerpannes foꝛ to Kell:
And with erceding. mighty knubs her heeles behynd boynd out.
How when the Pymph behild this elke a karre, (che was in dont
Co come to nere her:) Ke declarde her Ladies meſlage And
In that fame little whple although the Pymph aloof did fan,

And though he were but newly come, pit ſermed Ihe ta feele
The force of famin. Wt hervppon ſh turning backe her wherle
Did reyne her dꝛagons vp aloft: who ſtreyght with courage fre
Conueyd her into Thellaly. Although that kamin ber 8
Ay contrarye to Ceres wok, pit did (he then agrer 3
To do her will. and glyding thꝛough the Apze ſuppoꝛted by
Che topnd, the found thappoynted houfe : and entring by and by
Che captifs chamber where he llept (it was in tyme of nyght) e
She bugged him betwerne her armes there ſnoꝛting bolt vpꝛyght. ö
And bꝛeathing her into him, blew vppon his face and bꝛeſt,
Chat hungar in his emptie veynes myght wonꝛko ashe did reff,
And when the had accompliſhed her charge, hee then foꝛſcke
The frutefull Clymates of the woꝛld, and home ageine betwke
Herlelf onto her fruteleſſe feldes and foꝛmer dwelling place,
Che gentle llerpe did all this whyle with feebers ſott embꝛace
The wꝛetched Eri ſicthons coꝛſe. V ho dꝛeaming freight of meate
Did ſtirre his hungry iawes in vapne as though be had tw eate
And chanking tor on toth a pace he gryndes them in his head,
And occupies his emptie thꝛute with ſwallowing, and in ſtead
Ok fos deuoures the lither apꝛe. But when that llerpe with nyght
Was Haken of, immediatly a furious appetite.
Ok fering. gan to rage in him, which in his gredy gummes 5
And in his meatleſſe maw doth reigne vnſtauncht. Anon there cumines:
Bekoꝛe him whatſoeuer lines on ſeà, in aire oꝛ land:
And pit he er eth till for moꝛe. And though the platters ſtand
Beloꝛe his face full furniſhed, pit doth he dill complapne


Arr.... —..


Le Ae N 9
8 mG .
2 ? A


x “fas Or


The eight booke of
Ok hungar,crauing meate at meale. Whe fod that would ſuſkeine
M hole houſcholdes, Lotonelhips, Shyꝛes and Kealmes ſutkyce not him
Che moze his pampꝛed pa ich conſumes p moze it maketh mone (alg
And as the fea receyues the bꝛokes of all the woꝛloly Kealmes, 1
And pit is neuer fatiffpde foꝛ all the loꝛreine ſtreames.

And as the fell and rauening foꝛe refuleth neuer wod,

But burneth faggots numberleſſe, and wich a furious mod

The moze it hath, the moꝛe it Mill deſpꝛeth euermoꝛe,

Entreacing in deuouring thꝛough encreaſement of the ſtoꝛe:

So wicked Eri ſicthons mouth in ſwallowing of his meate

Mas euer hungry moze and moze, and longed ap to eate.

Meate tolld in meate: and as he ate the place was emptp ſtilI.
The hungar of his bꝛinkleſle Maly the guif that nowght might il
Mad bought his fathers gods tw nowght. But pit continewed ay:
His curſed hungar vnappeald: and nothing could alay

The flaming of his ſtarued thꝛote. At length when all was ſpent,

And into his vnfilled Paw bothe gods and lands were ſent, |
An only daughter did remapne vn woꝛthy tw haue had i
So lewd a father. Hir he fold, fo hard be was bead.
Wut ſher of gentle courage could no bondage well abyde.
And therfore ſtretching out her hands to ſea ward there beſpde,
Now faue mee quoch {he from the poke of bondage J ther pray,
O thou that my birginitte eniopeſt as a pꝛap.

Neptunus had it. Tu ho to this her pꝛaper did conſent.

And though her maiſter loking backe (foꝛ after him thee went)
Mad newly fene her: pit he turnd hir ſhape and made hir man,
And gaue her loke of fiiherman. er maptter loking than
Upon her, ſayd. Good fellow thou that on the ſhoꝛe doit fand
With angling rod and bapted hwke and hanging lyne in hand,
J pꝛay the as thou dott deſyꝛe the Sea ay calme to the,

And fitbes loꝛ to byght thy bapt, and friken Till to ber,
Cell where the krtzzletopped wench in tourſe and lluttiſh gare
That ſtode right now oppor this ſhoꝛe (loꝛ well J wote that here
J law her ſtanding) is become. Foz further than this place
Po foteftep is apperring. She perceyuing by the cace sis
That Neptunes gift made well with her, and beeing glad tw fee’
Herſell engupꝛd fog of herſelt, ſayd thus: tobe ere pou be


3 pee


r —— — —


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 110
J pꝛay pou for to pàrdon m. turned not myne eye
A toneſpde ne a tother from this place, but did apply
Py laboꝛ hard. and that pou map the leſler ſtand in dolot,
So Neptune further fill the Art and craft J go abowt,
As now a whyle no liuing Myght vppon this leuell ſand
(Mplelfercepted) nepther man noꝛ woman bere did ſtand.
er maiſter did beleeue her woꝛds: and turning backward went
1 His wap beguyld: and ſtreight tw her her natiue ſhape was lent,
But when her father did percepue his daughter fo2 to haue
A bodpe fo tranſfoꝛmable, he oftentymes her gaue
Foz monny, but the damzell Hill eſcaped now a Mare N
a And now a Cow,and now a Bird, a Hart, a Hynd, oꝛ Hare, é
1 And euer led her hungry Spꝛe with vndeſerued fare.
But after that the maladie had waſted all the meates
it As well of fore as that twhich.e had purchaſt by her feates::
Mott curſed keptife as he was with bighting be did rend 1 oy
His fleſh, and by diminithing his bodpe did intend 5
Co fede his bodpe till that death did (pede his fatall end.
But what mene J to buſpe me in foꝛreine matters thus? —
Zw alter ſhapes within pꝛecind is lawkull euen to vs f
Mp Loꝛds. oꝛ ſumtime J am ſuch as you dw now mer ſee 5


as.


Sumtyme J wynd me ina Snake: and oft J ſeme to bes

A Capteine of the herd with hoꝛnes. Foz taking hoꝛnes on me

J loſt a tyne which heeretwloꝛe did arme mx as the print
Doth playnly ſhew. with that fame woꝛd he ſyghed and did Hinks.


Finis octaui Labris


THE NINTH BOOKE
of Ouids MA etamorphofis.


Bat apleth the (quoth Thefeus ) to ſygh fo fore 2 and holy

% Wekell it the tw get this mayme that is vppon thy booty

Che noble ſfreame of Calydon made anſwer, who did werte

A Garland made ol rerdes and lags vpon his feogie heare.
A greeueus pennance pou enioyne. fo2 who would gladly choln
Che combats in the which hunſelk did take the ouerthꝛow⸗
Pit will J make a tuk repoꝛt in oꝛder of the ſame. :
Foꝛdohy : to haue the wozſer hand was not fo great a ſhame,
As was the Hore: fuch a match to under take. And much
It comfoꝛts me that he who did mer ouercome, was ſuch
A baliant champion. It perchaunce pou erſt haue heard the name
Mf Deyanyre the fayꝛeit Mayd that euer Cod did frame
Sher was in myne opinion. And the hope to win her loue
Did mickle enup and debate among hir wers moue.
With whome J entring tw the houſe of him that chould haue be
My fathetlatw,Parthaons ſonne ( fapd) accept thou mer
Thy Sonnplab. And Hercules in felf fame ſoꝛt did ww.
And all the other ſuters ſtreight gaue place onto vs tw.
Me baunted of his father Ioue, and of his famous derdes,
And how agent his ſtepdames ſppght his pꝛowelle ſtill pꝛocades.
And ageine a tother (poe ſayd thus. It is a ſhame
That God ſhould peeld to man. (this ſtryfe was long ere he became - -
G God). Thou ſeiſt me a Loꝛd of waters in thy Realme
Where Fin wyde and wynding banks dw beare nip flowing ſtreame.
No ſtraunger hale thou haue of mer Cent farre from foꝛreine land:
But one of houſehold, oꝛ at leaſt a neyghbour here at hand.
Alonlp let it be to me no hindꝛance that the wyle f
Ok loue abhoꝛres mee not, ne that vpon the paine ol lyfe
Sher lets me not tw taſk. oʒ where thou bolteſt thee to ber
Alcmenas ſonne, Ioue eyther is not father vnto thee:
On il he bee it is by ſin. In making Ioue thy father,
Thon maaktE thy mother but a whore. now chole shee whither rather
Chou had tw graunt this tale of loue ſurmiſed foꝛ to be,
Oꝛ elle thy ſelle begot in Mame and boꝛne in ballarder. 90


—— — 2uʃa2] —y. — . — = K —


0 Ouids Metamorphoſis. III


At that be grimly bendes his bꝛowes, and much ada he hath
Co hold his hands. fo ſoꝛe his hart inflamed is with wꝛath.
Pe ſaid no moze but thus Py hand doth ſerue mer better than
| My tong. Content Jam (fo J in feighting banquif} can)
That thou Halt oucrcome in woꝛdes. And therewithall he gan
Me ferrcelp to allaile. Pæ thought it was a ſhame foꝛ me
That had euen now fo ſtoutly talkt, in doings faint to be,
Acaſting of mp greꝛniſh cloke thꝛuſt ſfifly out at length ;
Pine armes and ſtreynd my pawing armes tw hold him out by frigth,
And framed euery limme to cope Mith both bis hollow hands
5 He caught vp duſt and ſpꝛincked mer: and J like wiſe with ſands.
ade him all pelow to. One tobple he at my necke dath ſnatch
Another whyle my clerre criſp legges he ſtriueth foꝛ to catch, 8
Os trwpes at mex: and euerpwhere the bauntage he doth watch.
My weightinelle defended mer, and cleer ly did diſfeate
His Toute aſſaults as when a waue with hideous nopſe doth beate
Againſt a Rocke, the Rocke doth ſtill both fauf and found abyde
4 DP reaſon of bis maflinefle. Mer dꝛew a whyle a ſyde. .
And then incountring kreſh ageine, wer kept our places ſtolot
Full minded not to peld an inch, but forte hold it olot.
How were wer ſtonding fore to fte. And J with all my bꝛeſt
Mas leaning foꝛward, and with head ageinſt his head did reſt,
And with my gryping füngars J ageint his ſingars thꝛuſt.
So haue J {ene two myghtie Bulles togither freely iuſt
In ſeking as their pꝛyle to haue the fapꝛeſt Cow in all g
The feeld tw bee their make, and ali the herd bothe greate and finalt
Stand gazing on them fearfully not knowing vntw which
The conquett of fo greate a gayne hall fall. Lhe tymes a twich
Gaue Hercules and could not wꝛinch my leaning beef him fro
But at the fourth he (hake mer of and made ma to let go
My hold: and with a puſh J will telltruthe) be had a knacke
Co turne me ok, and heauily he hung vpon my backe.
And if J map beleued be (as ſure J mene not J
Xo vaunt my felfe vayngloꝛiuſip bp telling of alpe,)
Me thought a mountaine whelmed me. But pit with much a do
A bꝛeſted in my ſweating armes, and hardly did vnde
His griping hands. Be following Mill his vauntage, ſutkred not


= = FF


=


Spe


The ninth booke of


Apes once to bꝛeath 02 gather ſtrength. but by and by he got

Mee by the necke. Then was J fapne to ſinke with kner tw ground,

And kille the duff. Pow when in ſtrength to weake myſelk 3 feund,
J toke mer to my lligbts, and llipt in chape ol Snakeaway

DE wandꝛous length. And when that J ol purpoſe him to fray

Did bend mpfelf in ſwelling rolles, and made a hideous nayſe

Ok hilling with my koꝛked tong, he ſmyling at my topes,

And laughing them to ſcoꝛne lapd thus. It is my Cradle game

To vanquich Snakes O Acheloy. Admit thou ouercame

All other Snakes, yet what art thou compared to the Snake

Ok Lerna, who by cutting oł did till encreaſement take 2

#02 of a hundꝛed heades not one fo fone was paarde away, gies

Wut that vppon the ſtump therof there budded other twap.

Chis ſpꝛouting Snake whoſe bꝛaunching beads by laughter did renine

And grow by cropping, J ſubdewd, and made it could not thepue.

And thinkeſt thou (who being none wouldſt ſerme a Snake) to ſcape e

l ho bok with foꝛged weapons fepght and vnder boꝛowed ſhape⸗ 5
This ſayd, his ſingars of my necke he kaltned in the nape

Wee thought he graand my thꝛote as though he did with pinfons nip

J ſtruggled from his churlich thumbes my pinched chappes to ſlip

Wut do the beſt and woꝛſt J could he ouercame me fa. ö 6


——


—


2 ==


a


en ee


Then thirdly did remapne the ſhape ol Bull. and quickly the
J turning ta the ſhape of Bull rebelld ageinſt my fo.
Me ſtepping to my left (poe cloce, did fold his armes about
My wattled necke, and following mer then running mapnely out
Did dꝛag me backe, and made mer pitch my hoꝛnes againſt the ground,
And in the derpeſt of the land he ouerthꝛew mer round.
And pit not fo content, ſuch hold his cruell hand did take
Uppon mp welked hoꝛne, that he a ſunder quight it bake,
And pullo it from mp maymed bꝛew. The waterkapꝛies came
And filling tt with frute and flowꝛes did confecrate the ſame,
And fo my hoꝛne the Treſoꝛp of plenteouſneſſe became,
Aſſone as Acheloy had told this tale a wayting ayd
With faring heare that lap on both hir ſhoulders and arayd
Alke one ol Dame Dianas pmphes with ſolemne grace foꝛth came
And brought that rich and pꝛecious hoꝛne, and heaped in the fame
All kynd ol frutes that Harueſt ſendes, and ſpeclally ſuch rute 4


== = ace -


Ouids Metamorphofis. on


As ferues foz lat eat
Aone 5 da ter courfe at meales of euery ſoꝛt and fate.
Did ſhyne b plight came ageine, and that the Sunny rapes
FFF
ud were altogither fal
And that the Riner in his banks ra 1 i
; TUDO n low ageine an
— —
i hoꝛne. And though be did ab
In all parts elſe bothe fauf an i vde
8 5 d ſound, vit this defoꝛmi
Did cut his comb: and foꝛ tw hyde tt . ; seen
He hydes his hurt with Sall eee eae
ow
But of the ſelfſame Dayo t leaues, oz elfe with ſedge and rede,
QE ben perting fio pd the lone killd thee feerce Neſſe in dde, $
Inas Tous 1 1 8 ve an arrow made the blede.
1 was on ward on his wap: 5
1 n going to his countryward, enloꝛit he was 5
At ſwift Euenus bank sto fap
In s bank,bpeaute the ſfreame was riſen
. agen otal ot he belesen ofgullestbe cha bt ee
gulles the channe N
* erm 8 ene . 15 aot kynd place of sre ted
i Zhts Neſſus ta foꝛ bis wyle be there did ſtand,
me vnto him (who was trong of f
Enein well the fordes,) and lapd ble ong ol bodypand
In ſwimming. 3 will fynd eee ooe te ee
nes this
ois 20 te 0 e bank. Do Hercules W e
to Neſſus. Shee fo2 feare of hi e tie
A ogkte pale. Her hulban mand. of the bake
: Das he had his quiuct by hi
Okarrowes full, and o eee
3 n his backe his heauy Lyons hy
Foꝛ tw the further bank h f up Lyons hyde.
i fF his club and b
Said. ſith J haue be 85 nd botv had cat)
gonne, this bꝛoke b ait ;
| 1 5 3 further doubts, noꝛ eee
thꝛough the roughelt of the ſtreame he cu :
How as he on the furtherſyd bbe cute bis var a pare.’
was taking dp hi
And eryde to Neſſe (tho tb ing out, and did bir calling know:
ae t about to deale bnif
mmi wit bichergen napthkullx
is charge away) Hoawe wht
Thou Nopſter thou, by ner ba ton Sp"
pon a vaine hope bp ſwif =
My bands ⸗ J fay gine oa p fiwiftielte tw eſcape
And medd 5 eare thon Neſſe fo2 albthy double ſhape,
; le nat with that thats nepne, Though no rega 1


—


— ==


Might:


The ninth booke of


Hight moue the tw refrapne from rape, thy father pit might be
A warning, who foz offring thame to luno now dwth fale
Continuall toꝛment in bis lunbes by turning on a wherle.
Foz all that thou haſt hoꝛſes fœte which do fo bolde the make,
Pit ſhalt thou not eſcape my hands. J will the ouertake 7
Mith wound and not with fete. He did accoꝛding as he ſpake.
Soꝛ with an arraw as he fied he ſtrake bim thꝛough the backe,
And out before his bꝛiſt agcine the hoked iron ſtacke.
And when the fame was pulled out, the blood a mayne enſewd
At both the holes with poyſon foule of Lerna Snake embꝛewd:
This blod did Neſſus take, and ſaid within himſelfe: well: ſith
4 needes muff dye, pet will J not dye vnreuendgd. And with ra
The ſame he fapnd a ſhirt, and gaue it vnto Dyanyre,
Alluring hir it had the pe e to kindle Cupids fpꝛe.

A greate whyle after when the derdes of woꝛthy Hercules

Mere ſuch as filled all the woꝛld, and alſo did appeaſe
Che hatred of his ſtepmother, As he vppon a day
Nl ith conqueſt from Oechalia tame, and was abobt to pay
His vowes to Ioue bppon the Pount of Cenye, tatling fame
Who in repoꝛting things of truth delyghts to ſauce the fame
Mith tales, and of a thing of noboght doth euer greater grow
Though falle and newly forged lyes that thee hirlelt doth fol)
Told Dyanyre that Hercules did taſt a liking to
A Ladte called Jölee. And Dyanyra (who
Mas tealous ouer Hercules, gaue credit to the fame.
And when that of a Leman firſt the tidings to hir came,
She being ikriken tw the hart, did fall tw teares alone,
And in a lamentable wiſe did make moſt wofull mone.

Anon the ſaid: what mene theis teares thus guſhing fro myne tpen⸗

My bufbands Leman will reiopce at theis fame trarts of myns.
Pap, ſith the is tw come, the bef it were to ſhonne delay,
And foꝛ to woꝛk ſum new deuyce and pꝛactpſe whyle J map, 7
Weefore that in my bed her lumbes the filthy ſtrumpet la.
And Hall 3 then complapne : 02 Hall 3 hold my tong with (hill?
Shall J returne to Calydon : oꝛ ſhall J tarrp Mill?
Oz Mhall J get me out ol does, and let them haue their will:


—


Fe ̃ ——— . — .——


—


uit


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 1


Tlhat if that J (Meleazer) remembꝛing me to bee
Chy ſuſter, to attempt ſum act notoꝛious did agree 2 5
And in a harlots death did ſhew (that all the woꝛld myght fee)
Mhat greef can tauſe the womankynd to enterpꝛyle among ?
And ſpecially when therebite they foꝛced are by wꝛong. :
Mith wauering thoughts ryght violẽtly her mynd was tolled lög.
At laſt thee did pꝛeferre before all others, foꝛ to fend
Che Hirt beſtayned with the blod of Neſſus tw the end
Co quicken vp the quayling loue. And ſo not knowing what
She gane, ſhe gaue her owne remoꝛſe and greef tw Lychas that
Did knob as little as herſelt᷑: and wꝛetched woman, cher
eben him gently to her Koꝛd pꝛeſented it to fe, a
he noble Pꝛince receyuing it without miſtruſt therein, ;


SF EF #S”- =


=
=


Did weare the poyſon of the Snake of Lerna next his fein.

To offer incenſe and to pꝛay to Ioue he did begin,

And on the Marble Altar he full boawles of wyne did (Hed,
Mhen as the poyſon with the heate reſoluing, largely ſpꝛed
Chꝛough all the limbes of Hercules ꝗs long as ere he could,

Che ſtoutneſſe of his hart was ſuch, that ſygh no whit he would.
But when the mifcheef grew fo great all pacience to ſur mount,
He thꝛuſt the altar from him ſtreight, and filled all the mount

Ok Oeta with his roꝛing out. He went about to teare

Che deathfull garment from his backe, but where be pulled, there
He pulld away the (kin: and (which is lothſum tw repoꝛt

It eyther cleaued to his limbes and members in ſuch ſoꝛt

As that he could not pull it o, oꝛ elſe it tare awaꝝ

The lech, that bare his myghiy bones and grilly finetwes lay.
Che lcalding venim boyling in his blod, did make it hile,

As when a gad of ſterle red whot in water quenched is.

There was no meaſure of his paine. The frying benim hent
His inwards, and a purple ſwet from all his body went.

His ſindged ſinewes ſhꝛinking crakt, and with a ſecret ſtrength
Che poplon euen within his bones the Parc melts at length.
And holding vp his hands tw heauen he ſayd with hideous reere.
ip O Saturnes daughter fede thy felte on my diſtreſles bere.

Bea ferde. and cruell wyght this plage behold thou from aboue
And glut thy lauage hart there with. Oꝛ if thy lo map moue
ö NJ, Ther


.


2


The ninth booke f


Che dntw pitte, (forte the J am an vtter ſoꝰ


Weréene mer of my hatekull foule diſtreſk with belplede wo,


And boꝛne to endlelle tople. oꝛ death ſhall vnto mer ber werte,
And for a cruell ſrepmother is death a gift mol mete, f

And is it 3 that did deſtroy Buſiris who did fople.
His temple Aezes with lkraungers bind? At 4 that did diſpoyle


Antæus of his mothers help: Iſt J that could not be i


Abathed at the Span yard who in one had bodies thee 2

Poꝛ at the trypleheaded ſhape O Cerberus of th?

Are you the hands that by the hoꝛnes the Wull of Candie dꝛew >
Did pou king Augies fable clenze whom afterward pee lle we


Are pou the fame by bohom the folules were ſcaard from Stymphaly an
Caught vou the Stag in Paydenwod which did not runne but fips.


Che golden belt of Thermodon Did you conuep away


Are pou the hands whole puillance recepucd for your pap .
The Apples from the Dagon fell that waked nyght and day? 5


Ageinſt the force of mer, delence the Centaures could not make, 4 7


Poꝛ pit the Boare of Arcadie: noꝛ pit the ougly Snake:

Df Lerna, who by lofe did grow and doble foꝛce fill take.

M hat : is it I that did behold the pampꝛed Jades ol Thrace
Dith Paungers full of lleſh of men on which they fed a pace?
lt i that downe at ſyght thereof theyꝛ greazy Paungers theewy,.


And bothe the fatted Jades themſelues and che their mayer lle?


The Nemean I pon by theis armes lyes dead vppon the ground.
Theis armes the monſtruous Giant Cake by Tyber did confound,
Uppon theis ſhoulders haue 3 boꝛne the weyght of all the (hte,
Ioues cruell wyfe is werrye of tommaunding mk. Nit J
Unwerrie am ol dwing ſkill. But now on me is lyght,
An vncoth plage, which neyther foꝛce of hand, noꝛ vertues myght.
Noz Arte is able tw refi A the waſting fyꝛe it ſpꝛerdes
Among mypne inwards, and thꝛough out on all my body lerdes.
But all this whyle Euryſthye liues in health. And ſum men may
Berleue there bee ſum Goddes in derde. Thus much did Hercule fap,
And wounded ouer Oeta hygh, he ſtalking gan too Trap,
As when a Bull in mapmed bulk a deadly Dart doth beare,
And that the dwer of the deede is ſhꝛunke alpde fo: feare.
Olt ſyghing myght pou him haue lene, oft trembling, olt about 5


—
—s


= = (


= 0 5 . E
Ouids Metamorphoſis. 14
Cao teare the garment with his hands from top to to thꝛoughor t.
And thꝛowing downe the myghtye trers, and chanfing with the hules,
|. Drcatting vp his handes to heauen where Ioue his father dwelles.
Wehold as Lychas trembling in a hollow rock did lurk,
he ſpyed him. And as his grert did all in furie wok,
Pe ſapd. art thou ſyꝛ Lychas he that bꝛoughteſt vnto m
Chis plagpe pꝛeſent 2 of my death muſt thou the wozker bee?
Be quaakt and ſhaakt, and loked pale, and fearfully gan make
Erxcuſe. But as with humbled hands her knerling to him ſpake⸗
The furious Hercule caught him vp, and ſwindging him about
Weis head a halfe a dozen tymes oꝛ moꝛe, he long him out
ennto th Euboyan fea with fogce ſurmounting any fing.
He hardened inte peble one as in the ayꝛe he hing.
And euen as rapne conieald by wynd ts (apd to turne to ſnolve,
And of the {now round rolled vp a thicker malle tw growe, i
Mhich falleth downe in heyle: fo men in auncient tyme report,
That Lychas being ſwindgd about by violence in that ſozt,
(his blond then being dꝛayned ont, and hauing left at all
Ho mopſture,) into peble fone was turned in his fall.
Now alſo in th Euboyan fea appæres a hygh ſhoꝛt rocke :
In ſhape of man ageinif the which the ſhipmen hun to knocke,
As though it could them ferle. and they do call it by the name
Ok Lychas fill. But thou Ioues imp of great renowme and kame, 5
Didit fell the trees of Oeta high, and making of the fame
Apple, didſt giue to Pceans ſonne thy quiner and thy bow,
And arrowes which ſhould help agein Troy towne to oucrthzolw.
He put to fpze, and as the fame was kindling in the pple,
Chy ſx er didit ſpꝛed thy Lyons ſain vpon the wmd the whyle⸗
And leaning with thy head ageinſt thy Club, thou laydſt thee do tone
àas cherrkullp, as if with ſlowꝛes and garlonds on thy crowne
Chou hadſt bene ſet a banquetting among full cups of wyne.
Anon on cuerp ſyde about thoſe careleſle limbes of thyne
Che fpre began to gather ſtrength, and crackling noyſe did make,
Affapling him whole noble hart fo2 daliance did it take.
Che Goddes fo2 this defender of the earth were ſoꝛe alrayd
T .o whom boith cherefull countnance Ioue percepuing it thus ſayd.
This keare of pours is my delyght, and sien euen with all ne
1 : i J. 5 23


xPhiloctetes


PER
Oe ey


ieee
wy €. ” 7
Ol


The ninth booke of
My hart J do reiopce O Gods that moztall folk mer call
Cheir king and father, thinking mer ap mpnodfall of their weale,
And that myne ollpꝛing ſhould do well pour ſelues bo ſhow luch sale,
Fo2 though that pou do attribute pour fauoꝛ to deſert,
Confidzing his moſt wendꝛous aas: pit J to foꝛ my part
Am bound bnew pou. Perethelefle, foꝛ that J would not haue
Pour fapthfull harts without tl caufe in fearfull paſſions waue,
J would not haue pou of the flames in Oeta make account.
oz as he hath all other things, ſo Hall he them ſurmount.
Saue only on that part that he bath taken of his mother,
Che fpꝛe all haue no power at ali: Eternall is the tother,
he which he takes of mer, and cannot dye, ne peld to fyꝛe. oe
G€Lhen this is rw from earthlp dꝛolle, then will J lift it hygher,
And take it into heauen: and J beleeue this dede al myne
TU iil gladſame bee tw all the Gods. If any do repyne,
Il anp dw repyne J fap that Hercule ſhould become
A God, repyne he fill foꝛ mer, and lobe he fotwze and glum.
But let hun know that Hercules deſerueth this reward,
And that he Hall ageinſt his will alow it afterward. 5
Che Gods aſlented euerychone. And Iuno femd tw make f
Mo euill ceuntnance to the reff, vntill hir huſband ſpake
She laff, fo2 then ber loke was ſuch as well they might perteyue,
She did her arena nating her in euill part conceyue.
M hyle loue was talking with tie Sede as much as fpꝛe could wall
Do much had fyꝛe canſumde. And now O Hercules thou haſte
Po carkeſſe ſoꝛ to know ther by. Chat part is gupght bereft
UA hich of thy mother thou Biot take. Alonly now is left
Che likenelte that thou tokſk of Ioue. And as the Serpent Ape
In calling of his withered llough, renewes his perres thereby,
And wereth luſkyer than before, and loketh criſp and bzyght
With ſcaured ſcales: ſo Hercules às fone as that his ſpꝛygbt
Mad lefchis moꝛtall limbes; gan in his better part to thꝛpue,
And fez tm ſeme a greater thing than when he was alyue,
And with a ſtately maieſtie rpght reuerend tw appere.
ls myghty father toke him dp aboue the cloudy ſpherre⸗
And in a charpot placed him among the ſkreaming klares.


a f ; ing this diſbarres
Bawge Atlas felt the weyght thereof. But nothing tb Furpſſhye


j


Ouids M etamorphofi C
Turyſthyes malice. Cruelly he pꝛoſecutes the hate —
MVUyppon the olſpꝛing, which he bare agoinſt the father late.
A But pit ta make her mone vnto and waple her miſerie
And tell her ſonnes great worꝛkes, which all the woꝛld could une,
Old Alcmen had Dame Lölee By Hercules laſt will!
5 In wedlocke and in hartie loue (ee ioyned was tw Hill, : 3
By whoinethe then was big with chyld: when thus Alcmena ſayd.
The Gods at leaſt ber merctfuil and fend ther then theyꝛ apd,
And ſhoꝛt thy laboꝛ, when the frute the which thou goſte withall
Pow being rype enloꝛceth ther wyth kearkull bo pee to call
Uppon llithya pꝛeũdent ot chyldbirthes, whom the ire
60 Sl luno at mp trauelling made deal to my deſire.
Foz when the Sun thꝛough twyte kyue fignes his courte had fully run,
And that the paynfull day of birth appꝛoched of my ſonne,
My burthen ſtrapned out my wombe, and that that J did beare
Became fo greate, that ef fo howge a maſſe pee well myzht (weave
That Louc was father. Peyther was J able to endure.
The trauell any lenger tyme. CEuen now J you allure 8
An telling it a ſhuddzing cold thꝛough all my linbes doth ffrike,
And partip it renewes my peynes to thinke vppon the like.
14 being in moſt cruell thꝛowes nyghts ſeuen and dayes eke ſeuen,
And tpꝛed with continuall pangs, did lift my hands tw heauen,
And crying aut aloud did call Lucina to myne apo,
Co loſe the burthen from my wombe. Sher came as J had pꝛayd:
Gut ſo coꝛrupted long befoze by Iuno mp mof fo,
That foꝛ tw martir me to death with peyne he purpoſde „
Foz when (he heard my piteous plaints and gronings, downe He. late
On pon ſame altar which pou fe there ſtanding at my gate.
A pon her lefe knee ſher had piteht her right ham, and beſyde
She ſtapd the birth with fingars one within another tyde
. In lattiſwyſe. And ſecretly he whiſperde witching ſpells
M hich hindꝛed my deliuerante moze than all her doings ells,
J laboꝛd Mill: and fork by payne and toꝛments of mp fitts,
J rapld on loue (although in vayne) as one beſyde her witts.
And ay J wilhed for to dye. The words that J did ſpeake,
Ml ere ſuch as euen the hardeſt fones of very flint myght beeake.


The wpues ol Thebce being there, foꝛ taut belincrance pꝛayd
Q. ii. And


Gq


|
*
a
|


The ninth booke of
And giuing cherrkull woꝛds, did bid J ſhould not bee dilmapd.
Among the other women there that to mp laboz came,
There was an honest peomans topte, Galantis was her name.
Her heare was yellow as the gold, che was a iolly Dame,
And foutly ferued mee, and J did loue her foꝛ the ſame.
This wpke (J know not how) did ſmell ſome packing gone about
On lunos part. And as the oft was palling in and out,
Shee fppde Lucina fet oppor the altar holding falt
Mer armes togither on her knees and with her fingars call
Multhin ech other on a knot, and ſayd brite her thus:
% pꝛay pou who fo ere pou bee,vetopee pou now with ba,
My Wady Alcmen Hath her wih, and ſauf is bzought a bed.
Lucina leaped vp amaʒde at that that ſhee had fed. |
And let her hands a funder llip. And J immediatly
With lofening of the knot, had fauf deliuerance by and by.
They fap that in decevuing Dame Lucina Galant làught.


oe


And therfore by the pellow locks the Goddelle wꝛoth hir caught, 12


And dꝛagged ber · And as he would haue riſen from the ground,
She kept her downe, and into legges her armes he did contound.
Her former ſtoutneſle Hill remapnes: her backe doth kerpe the heb
That erk was in her heare: her ſhape ts only altered new.
And foꝛ with lying mouth he helpt a woman laboꝛing, fhe. 4
Dwth kindle allo at her mouth. And now He haunteth tre: 5
Our honſes as the did beloꝛe, a UWicalle as wee ler.
M ich that (hee ſyghes to think vppon her ſeruants hap, and then
Her daughtrinlaw immediatly replied thus agen. 8
But mother, thee whole altred ſhape doth moue pour hart ſo ſoze,
Mas neyther bith noꝛ kin to pou. Nhat will pou fap thereloze,
Ik ot myne owne deere (after J the wondꝛous fortune ſhow⸗
Although mp ſozrow and the teares that krom myne eyes do flood, 5
Do hinder mer, and flop my fpeeche. er mother vou muſt brow.
My father by another wyke had mee) bare neuer mo
ut this ſame adie Dryopee, the fayzeſt L adye tho
In all the land ef Oechalye. M hoi beeing then no maps


. Apolli. ( $02 why the God of Delos and ol Delphos had her krayd)


Andræmon taketh to bps wyfe, and thinkes him well apapd:
Chere is a certaine leaning Lake whole bowing banks dan Hato


|


{
4
}
1
ö


—
B ——— ä —


i


—


=
=


2 32 3 &


= r


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 116


A likenelle ot the falt fea ſhoꝛe. Appon the bꝛim da grow

All round about it Mirtletres. p ſuſter thither goes
Unwares what was her deſtinie, and (which you may ſuppole
Mas more to be diſdeyned at the cauſe of comming there


as to the fapꝛies of the Lake freſh garlonds foꝛ to beare.


And in her armes a babye her ſwerte burthen he did hold.

Mho fucking on her bꝛeſt was pit not full a tweluemonth old.

Hot farre fram this fame pond did grow a Lote tre floꝛiſht gay
Mith purple flowzes and ber ies ſwerte, and leaues as greneas Bap.
Or theis Came flowꝛes tw pleaſe her boy my ſuſter gathered ſum,
And J had thought tw do fo to, foꝛ J was thither cum.

3 ſaw hom from the ſliuered flowꝛes red dꝛops of bind did fall,
And ho lu that chuddꝛing hoꝛribly the bꝛaunches quaake withall,
‘ou muſt perceyue that (as to late the Countryfolk declare)

A ymph cald Lotos flying from fowle Pryaps filthy ware,

Mas turned into this fame tre reſeruing Mill her name.

My ſuſter did not know fo much. who when the backward came
Afrayd at that that ſher had ſeene, and hauing ſadly pꝛayd

Che Pymphes of pardon, to haue gone her way agen allayd:

Her karte were faſtned downe with rotes. Sher ſtryued all He myght
To plucke them vp. but they fo ſure within the earth were pyght,
Chat nothing ſaue her vpper partes thee could that pꝛeſent moue.

A tender barke growes from beneath vp lepfurlp aboue,


And foftlp ouerſpꝛeddes her loynes. which when the ſaw, ſher went


About te teare her heare, and full of leaues her hand the bent.
Her head was ouergrowen with leaues. And little Amphiſe ((o
Bad Eury tus his Graundſyꝛe naamd her ſonne not long age )
Din fele his mothers dugges wer hard. And as he Hill them dꝛelu
In ſucking not a whit of milke noz moyſture did enſew.

J ſtanding by ther did behold thy cruell chaunce: but nought

I could releue the ſuſter myne. pit to my powꝛe q wꝛought

Ta fay the growing of thy trunk and of thy bꝛaunches by
Embꝛacing ther. Pea J pꝛoteſt 3 would ryght willingly id
Wane in the felfe ſame barke with ther bene clofed vp. Behold,


Her hulband god Andræmon and her wꝛetched father old


Sir Eurytus came thither and enguyꝛd foꝛ Dryopee.
And as they alkt fox Dryopee, à ſhewd them Lote the tre.
Qty. Chey


The ninth booke of


They kilt the tomd which pit was warme, and falling done bplow,
Did hug the rotes of that their trer. Py fuller not could hu
No part which was not wod except her face. A deawe of tearees
Did rand vppon the wꝛetched leaues late formed of her heares.

And whyle the might, and tobple her mouth did giue het way to tpeake,
With luch complaynt as this, her mynd He laſt of all did bꝛeakke. 5
Ikcredit may ber gluen to {uch as are in wꝛetched nelle,


— —


I


I ſweare by God 3 neuer pit deſerued this diſtreſſe.
J fuffer peyne without defert. My lpfe hath guiltleſle bene, 0
And tf J lve, J would theis boughes of mine which now are grene,
Myght withered ber, and J heawen downe and burned in the lyꝛe.
This inkant krom his mothers wombe remoue pou J deſpꝛe: 1
And put him forth to nurte, and caufe him vnderneath my tree 2
Ott tymes tw ſucke, and oktentymes tw play. And when that her 1
Is able foꝛ to ſpeake J pꝛay pou let him grote mecbere, ti
— And ſadly lay in this fame trunk is hid my mother derre. 00
ze Wut lerne him for tw (hun all ponds and pulling flowꝛes from tra,
And let him in his heart beleeue that all the ſhꝛubs he fas, - n a
Are bodpes of the Goddelles. Adel derre hulband nod, 8 2 ]
Adety deve father, and ade w derre ſuſter. And in potw oe ||
If any loue of mee remapne, defend my boughes F pap iu
From wound of cutting hoke and ar, and bit of beaſt fo: ap: th
And foꝛ J cannot ope te vou, rapſe pou pourſelues to mæ, mm ||
And come and kiſſe me wiple J may pit touche and killed bee. {
And life mit vp my little boy. J can no lengertalke, : y
402 now about my liliye necke as if it were a falke : if
The tender rynd begitines torcréepe,and ouergrowes mp top. ly
Remoue pour fingats from my face. the ſpꝛeading barke doth ffop: . |
My dying eyes without pour help. Sher had no foner de ist.z b hh
Her talking, but her lyfe therewith togither was bereft, : ——
But vit a godiohyle after that her nat iue ſhape did fade, a |
Her newmade boughes continewed warme. Pow whyle that Iöle made
Report of this ſame wondzous tale, and whyle Alcmena (tubo: 1
Did werpe) was dꝛying vp the teares of Iöle weping tu, .
By putting to her thomb: there hapt a ſodeine thing fo ſtraunge, i


Chat vnto mirth from heauineffe theyꝛ harts it freight did chaunge. i
Foz at the deze in maner euen a very boy as then ee 5


Ouids Metamorphofis. "7,
I Mith Hort foft Downe about his chin, reuoked backe agen
To pouthfull peares, ſtod Tolay with countnance ſmoth and trim.
Dame Hebce lunos daughter had beſtowde this gift on him,
Entreated at his earneſt ſute. Whom mynding fully there
Che giutng ol like gift ageine tm any tw foꝛſweare/, pact im
Dame Themis would not fuffer. F02 (quoth. cher) this pꝛeſent — :
4s cruell warre in Thebee towne, and none but lowe hath poze ©
Co vanquiſh ately Canapey. Che brothers ſhall a lief
Mound eyther other. And alyue a Pꝛophet Hall go ſæke
His owne quicke ghotte among the dead, the earth him ſwallowing in.
The fonne by taking vengeance foꝛ his fathere death hall win
he name ol kynd and wicked man, in one and felf fame cace. 2
i ö And flapght with miſcherfes, front his wits and from his natiue place : ;
i


The furies and his mothers ghoſte ſhall reſtleſleip him chace,
Untill his wyle demaund of him the fatall gold foꝛ mæde,
And that his couũn Phegies ſmwꝛd dw make his ſydes t bleve,
‘ Chen ſhall the kayꝛe Callirrhoee Achelous daughter pap
Che mpghtp loue in humble wyſe tw graunt her chuldꝛen may
Retpre ageine to pouthkull pres, and that he will not te
Che death of him that did reuenge vnvenged foꝛ to ber.
Toue moued at her ſute hall cauſe his daughtrinlaw te gius
Alke gilt, and backe from age to pouth Callirrhoës childꝛen dꝛiue. g
Muhen Themis thzough foꝛeſyght had {poke theis towzvs of pꝛopheſfe;
The Gods began among themiclues bapne talke to eee
They mayld why others myght not giue like gift as well as h.
Fire Pallants daughter grudged that her huſband old ſhould be.
The gentle Ceres murmurde that her Iaſions heave was hoꝛe.
And Vulcane would haue calld ageine the peeves long n before
By Ericthonius. And the nyce Dame Venus hauing care a
Ot tyme to come, the making pong of old Anchiſes ſware. N 5 i
Do euery God had one tw whom he ſpectall fauoꝛ bare. N
And thꝛough this partiall loue of theyꝛs ſeditiouſiy increaſt
4 A hurlpburlp, till the time that Ioue among them pꝛeaſt,
And ſayd. So ſmally dw pou ſtand in awe ol mee this howꝛe,
1 As thus to rage 2 Thinkes any of pou himſelk to a inch potuees,
4 As fo2 to alter deſtinpe : J tell pou Iõla /
Necouered hath by deltinpe his peeves er palt atuap, 5
6 Callirthods.


The ninth booke of


Callirrhoss childzen muſt returne to pouth bp deltiny,
And not by force of armes, oꝛ ſute ſuſteynd ambitionfip.
And tw th entent with melder myndes pee map this matter beare,
Euen J myſelk by deſtinyes am rulde. which il A were
Ok power to alter, thinke pou that our Acacus ſhould ope
By reaſon ot bis feeble age? 02 Radamanth ſhould dꝛope:?
Oꝛ Minos, who by reaſon of his age is now diſdeynd,
And liues not in fo ſure a tate as heretwoꝛe he repgnd:
Che 0208 of Ioue fo movd the Gods that none of them complaynd,
Dith Radamanth and Aeacus were both with age conſtreynd:
And Minos allo: who (as long as luſty pouth did laſt,)
Did euen with terroꝛ ok his name make myghty Realmes agalt.
But then was Minos weakened ſoze, and greatly fod in feare
Ol Milet one of Deyons race: who pꝛoudly did him beare
Uppon his father Phocbus and the ſfoutnelle ok his pouth.
And though he feard he would rebell: pit durſt he not bis mouth
Once open for to baniſh him his Realme: vntill at laſt
Departing of his owne accoꝛd, Miletus ſwiktly pat
Che Cotelea and did build a towne vppon the Aſian ground,
Which Hill reteynes the name ol him that firit the fame did found.
And there the daughter of the bꝛoke Mæander which doth go
So often backward, Cyane a Pymph of body fo
Crceding comly as the lyke was ſeldome heard ol, as
Shee by her fathers wynding bankes foꝛ pleature walking was, ;
Mas knowen by Milet: vnto whom a papze of twinnes the bought,
And of the twinnes the names were Caune and Byblis,Byblis ought
Co ber a mirroꝛ vntm Papdes in latwfull topfe tw toue.
Ibis Byblis cast a mynd to Caune. but nat as did behoue
A ſuſter to her bꝛotherward. M hen firſt of all the fyꝛe
Did kindle, cher perceyvd it not. She thought in her deſpꝛe
Ol killing him lo oltentymes no ſin, ne pit no harme
In cleping him about the necke ſo olten with her arme.
Che glittering gloſle ol godlynelle beguyld her long. Her loue
Wegan from euill pute wonſe by little to remoue.
Shee commes too fee her bꝛother deckt in bꝛaue and trim attyꝛe,
And for tw ſerme ercerding fapze it was her whole delyze,
And ir that any fapꝛer were in all the focke than the,


|
f
}
if
J
1
i
i
1
9
ri
it
it
N
i)
hi
i
it
il
My
9
N
hy
i
hy
ht
it
i
I
1
i
9
0
{
U
U


—
rr


2 mw


Ouids Metamorphoſis. | | 118


It ſpyghts her. In what cafe the was as pit thee did not ſck.


Her heate erceeded not ſo farre as for to dow: and pit

Sher lufkred in her troubled bꝛiſt full many a burning fit,

ow calleth he him mayer, now thee beter hateth all

The names of kin. Sher rather had he ſhould her Byblis tall

Chan luſter. pit no filthy hope He durſt permit to crepe

Within her mynd awake. But as ſher lay in quiet leepe,

Sher oft behild her loue: and oft he thought her bother came

And lay with her, and (though a llerpe) he bluſhed at the fame,

Mhen lleepe was gone, che long lay dumb ſtill muũng on the ſyght, 3
And laid with wauering mynd. Pow wo is mee moſt wꝛetched wehe.


© MUbat meenes the image of this dꝛeame that J haue fene this nyght⸗


3 would not wich it ould bee trew. M hy dꝛeamed J then fo ¢
Sure her is fayꝛe although bee chould ber tudged by his fo.


Her likes mer well. and were he not my brother, J myght ſet 5


My loue on him, and he were mer ryght woꝛthy fo2 to get,

But vnto this fame match the name of kinred is a let.
Mell. So that J wake dw (til mer ondefpled kerpe,

Let come as often as they will (uch dꝛeamings in my ſlerpe.

In Aépe there is no witneſle by. In llærpe pit may J take

As greate a pleaſure (in a ſoꝛt) as it J were awake.

Oh Venus and thy tender ſonne Sir Cupid, what delyght,
Hob pꝛeſent feeling. of pour ſpoꝛt bath touched mee this nyght e
Hob lap J as it were reſolvd both marte, eſh, and bone⸗

How gladdes it mz to thinke thereon Alas to fone was gone
That pleaſure, and tw haſtye and deſpyghtkull was the nyght


In bꝛeaking of my ioyes. O Loꝛd ik name ol kinred myght


O Caune that of thy father J the daughtrinlaw ſhould bee 2

How fitly myght my father haue a ſonneinlaw of ther⸗

Mould God that all ſaue aunceſters were common to vs twayne

J would thou were of nobler ſtocke than J. Jcannot lapne

O perle of beautie what ſher is whom thou halt make a mother.

Alas how ill befalles it me that J could haue none other

Than thole fame parents which arethyne:! So only ſtikl my bother
And not my hulband mayk thou ber. Lhe thing that hurts vs bothe

Js one, and that betwerne vs ay inſeparablp gothe. See

0 hat


Betwerne vs tww remoued mer, how well it would agrer 2


Theninthbookeof' ~~

what mene my dꝛeames th?-twhat effect haue dꝛeames r may there hé
Elea in dꝛeames: The Gods are farre in better caſe than we. J |
oz why 2 the Gods haue matched with theyꝛ ſuſkers as wer ſ.
So Saturne did alie with Ops the nerreſt or his blod. 5
So Tethys with Oceanus: So Ioue did think it god r te
C take his ſuſter Iuno to his wyle M hat then 2 the Goddes |

|

ih

i


Haue lawes and charters by themſelues. And ſich there is (uch oddeg
Bet wenne the ſtate of vs and them, why ſhould J ſample take,
Our worldly matters equall with the beauentp things to make⸗
This wicked loue (ait eyther from my hart be dꝛiuen away;


Oz ik it can not ber expulſt, God graunt 3 periſh max. 1
And that my bꝛother kiſle me layd on Herce tw go to graue. oe oh
Wut mp defpre the full conſent of bath of bs doth crane. 0
Admit the matter liketh me. He will fog fin it take. iy
But pit the lonnes of Aeolus no ſcrupulouſneſſe did mae i
In going tw theyꝛ ſuſters beds. And how come J to know
The feates of them? To what intent theis ſamples dw J ſhow⸗-
Ab whither am J headlong dꝛiuen⸗ auaunt foule filthy frz e?
And let mee not in otherwyſe than ſuſterlyke deſpꝛe 5 ih
My brothers loue. Vit ik that he were firſt in loue with me, ih
His fondnelle tw inclyne bute perchaunce J could agree. ö *
Shall J therefore who would not haue reieced him if herr
Had ſude to mer go ſue tm him? and canſt thou ſpeake in de des?
And canſt thou vtter foꝛth thy mynd ? and tell him of thy nerde⸗; it
My lone will make me ſpeake. J can. Oꝛ if that ſhame do tap ty


My tong, a ſealed letter Hall mp ſecret loue bewaax.
Chis likes her belt. vppon this poynt now reſtes her doubtful uuns


So rapſing vp herſelt vppon her leftfpoe (he enclynd. hy
And leaning on her elbotw ſayd. Let him aduyle him what 0
To do, for J my franticke laue will beter playne and flat. *
Alas to what vngraciouſneſſe intend J foꝛ tw fall? ‘
What furte raging in my hart my lenſes doth appallsCEe ty
In thinking fo, with trembling hand the framed ber to wꝛyght ly
Che matter that her troubled mynd in muſing did indyght. hy
Mer ryght hand holdes the pen, her left doth hold the empty wax. 0


Sher ginnes. Sher dontes, cher wꝛyghtes: thee in the tables ündcth * a
Shee notes, che blurres, dilukes, and likes: and chaungeth this [07 on x


Ouids Metamorphofis. 19

She tapes away the boke, and takes it dp. Sher wotes not what
She would herſelf. Mhat ener thing he myndeth fo2 to do
Militketh her. A ſhamelallneſle with boldeneſle mixt theretw
Was in her countnance.Shæ had once weit Sutter: Out agen
Che name of Suſter foꝛ to raze (hee thought it beſt. And then
Sher ſnatcht the tables vp, and did theis following woꝛds ingraue.

Che health which if thou gine her not (he is not like tw haue

Thy loner witheth bntw ther. J dare not ah fo2 ſhame
J dare not tell ther who J am, noꝛ let the heare my name.
And i thou do demaund of mer what thing J dw delpꝛe,
NMlould God that nameleſle J myght pleade the matter 3 requpze,
And that J were vnknowen to the by name of Byblis, till
Allurance of my ſute were wꝛought accoꝛding to my will.
As tokens of my wounded hart myght theis to thee appere:
Pp colour pale, my body leane, my heaup mirthlette cherre,
Py watrpy eyes, my ſighes without apparant cauſes toby,
py oft embꝛacing of thee: and ſuch kiſles (if perdye
Thou marked them) as very well thou might haue felt and found
Not for to haue bene Suſterlike. But though with grœuous wound
Athen were friken ta the hart. although the raging dame f


Did burne within: pit take J God tw Witnelle of the ſame,
4 did as much as lap in me this outrage fo2 to tame.
And long J ſkryued (wꝛetched wench) tw ſcape the biolent Dart
Ok Cupid. Poze 3 haue endurde of hardnelle z ol mart,
Chan any wench (a man would think) were able tw abyde.
Foꝛce ſoꝛceth mer to ſhew mp caſe which faine J fill would hyde,
And merey at thy gentle hand in fearfull wyſe to crane.
Chou only mapſt the tpfe of mee thy loner ſpill oꝛ ſaue. f
Choſe which chow wilt. No enim craues this thing: but ſuch a one
As though ſher be alyde fo ſure as ſurer can be none,
Plt couets he moze ſurely pit alyed foꝛ to be,
And with a nerer kynd of band tw link her ſelle tw the,
1 Let aged folkes haue Chill in law: to age it doth belong
Co keepe the rigoꝛ of the lawes and ſearch out ryght from wong.
y Such pouthfull pres as ours are pit raſh folly donth bela me.
Mee know not what ts lawfull pit. and therefoꝛe wer map deme:
i That all is lawfull that wer liſt: enſe wing in the fame


40


3


< See
“CO
Oe 30
ty


n

5. 8.8 i

ge On te ORS SOs
a} whe fh»


*
8


N
ow POL


And made a trapne tw trye him tf purſue oꝛ no he durſt.


| The ninth booke of


Che dwings ofthe myghtye Goddes. Pot dꝛead of woꝛldly ſhame
Poꝛ pit our fathers roughneſle, no noꝛ kearkulneſle ſhould let
Dur purpofe. Only let all feare afpde be wholp ſet. 5
Wc vnderneath the name of kin our pleafant {capes map hyde.
Thou knowelk J haue libertie to talke with the a ſyde. 9
And openly wer kyſle and cull. And what is all the reſt
Chat wants Baue merep on me now, who plapnly haue erpꝛeſt |
My caſe: which thing J had not done, but that the btter rage
Ot loue conſtreynes mer therewnta the which J cannot wage.
Deſerue not on my tumb thy name fubfcribed fo2 tm haue,
Chat thou art he whole cruelnelle did bꝛing mer to my graue.
Thus much He wꝛate in vapne, and war did want her to indyght, ⸗ “
And in the margent ſhe was layne the latter verſe tw wꝛyght.
Immediatly to feale her ſhame ſh takes a pꝛecious ſtone,
The which thee moyſtes with teares: frõ tung the moyſture quight was
Shee calld a feruant ſhamekaſtly, and after certaine fapze one
And gentle wwꝛds, my truly man J pray thee beare this papꝛe
Ok tables (quoth he) to my fand a great fobple alterward 19 5
Dher added) bꝛother. Pow theough chaunce oꝛ want of good regard
The table lipped dolone tw ground in reaching to him ward N
The handſell troubled ſoꝛe her mynd. But pit her ſent them. And
Her ſeruant ſpying tyme did put them into Caunyes hand.
Meanders nephew ſodeinly in anger flong awap
Che tables ere he half had ved,((carce able fo2 tw ſtap 5
His filtocke from the ſeruants face tubo quaakt) and thus did fay.
Auaunt thou baudye ribawd whyle thou mayſt. Foꝛ were it not
Fo2 ſhame 3 chould haue killed ther. Awap afrapbd he got,
And told his miſtreſle of the forte and cruell anſwer made
By Caunye. By and by the hel of Byblis gan to fade,
And all her body was benumd with Icie colde foꝛ keare
Co here of this repulſe. Allone as that her ſenſes were
Returnd ageine, her furious flames returned with her wilts.
And thus thee ſayd fo oft that ſcarce hir fang the aper bitts
And woꝛthelp. Foꝛ why was 3 fo raſh as to diſcouer
By haſty wꝛyght ing this my wound which molt J ought to toner
J chould with dowtkull glauncing words haus felt his humoꝛ furll,


—


\
!


Ouids Metamorphofis. 120
3 ſhould haue vewed firſt the rcoaſt, to fer the weather clkrre.
And then J myght haue launched laul and boldly fromthe pre.
But note J hop vp all my ſaples before I tryde the wynd:
And therfore am J dꝛiuen bppon the rockes ageinſt my mynd, 8
And all the fea doth ouerwhelme mer. Neyther map FZ fpnd
The meanes to get tw harbꝛough, o2 from daunger tw retyꝛe.
Mhy did not open tokens Warne tw bꝛidle my deſpꝛe,
Chen when the tables falling in deliuering them declaard
My hope was vaine⸗ And ought not J then epther to haue ſpaard
From ſending them as that day 2 02 haue chaunged whole my mynd? 7
ap rather ſhiſted of the day Foz had not bene blynd N


0 Euen God himſell by ſothkaſt ſignes the fequele femd to hit.


1


ea rather than to weyghting thus mp ſecrets to commit
I ſhould haue gone and (poke myſelt, and pꝛeſently haue ſholode
My feruent lone. He ſhould haue ſene how teares had from mer llolode.
ibe ſhould haue ſerne my piteous lobe ryght louerlike. 4 could
Haue ſpoken moze than into thoſe my tables enter would.
About his necke againſt his will, myne armes J myght haue wound
And had he ſhaakt me ol, J myght haue ſermed foꝛ to ſwound. 5
J humbly myght haue bt his lerte, and knerling on the ground
Beſought him foꝛ to ſaue my lyle. All theis J myght haue pꝛoued,
Mherof although no one alone his ſtomacke could haue moued.
Pit all tg ither myght haue made his hardened hart relent.
Perchaunce there was fome fault in him that was of meſlage ſent.
He Kept butw him bluntly (J beleene) and did not watch
Conuenient tyme, in merrie kew at leyſure him to catch.


Theis are the things that hindꝛed me. Foꝛ certeinly J knowe


Po ſturdy fone noꝛ maſſp ſtele doth in his fomacke grow.
He is not made of Adamant, He is no Tygers whelp.

He neuer fucked Lyoneſle. He myght with little help

Ber banquiſht. Let vs giue kreſh charge vppon him. Mhyle ¥ lius
Mithout obteyning victoꝛie J will not ouer giue.

Foz firſtly (if it lay in me my dwings to reuoke)

I chould not haue begonne at all. But ſcing that the ſkroke
Is giuen, the ſecond poynt is now to gine the puſh to win.
Foz neyther he (although that J myne enterpꝛyle ould bliny:
Can euer whyle he liues forget my derde. And fith A ſheink,


The ninth booke of
My loue was lpaht,o7 elle J meant to trap him he Hall chink.
Oz at the leaſt he may ſuppoſe that this my rage of lone
M hich beopleth fo within my bꝛeſt, pꝛoctedes not from aboue
Wy Cupids ffroke, but of fome foule and filthy tuft. In fyne
J cannot but to wickedneſle now moze and moze incipne.
By wꝛyghting is my fate comment : my morning doth apperre:
And though J ceaſe: vit can J not accounted be foꝛ clere.
How that that doth remayne behynd is much as in tefpect |
My fond delpꝛe to fatilfy : and little in effect
To aggrauate my fault withall. Thus much Hee ſayd. And le 0
Unconſtant was her wauering mynd fill doting tw and fro, N
Chat though it irkt her foꝛ tw haue attempted, pit poceedes Bee tt 1
f


Shee in the (elf lame purpole attempting, and erceedes
All meaſure. and vnhapy wench thee takes from day tw day
Kepulſe vpon repulſe, and pit (hee hath not grace tw ſtay.

Sone after when her bꝛother ſaw there was with her no end,

He fled his countrie loꝛbycauſe he would not fo offend,
And in a foꝛreine land did buyld a Citie. hen men fay]
Chat Byblis thꝛough deſpayꝛe and thought all wholy did diſmay.
Sher tare her garments from her bꝛeſt, and furioully hee wrong,
Mer hands, and berte her armes, and like a bedlem with ber tong
Confeled her vnlawfull loue. But beeing of the fame
Ditpopnted, fhe fozfette her land and hatefull boule foꝛ ſhame,
And followed after fiping Caune. And as the Frocs of Thrace
In doing of the thee peere rites of Bacchus: in lyke cace
Che marped wpues of Bubaſie fay Byblis howling out
Chꝛough all theyꝛ champion feldes The which ſher leauing, ran cba
In Caria t the Lelegs whe are men in battell ſteut,
And fo to Lycia. Sher had pal Crag, Limyre, and the bꝛoke
Ol Xanthus, and the countrie where Chymæra that fame poke
Math Goatiſh body, Lions head and bꝛiſt, and Dꝛagons taple,
When wads did want: and By blis now beginning faz taquayle
Through werrynelſe in following Caune, fank dolvn and lapd ber hed
Ageint the ground, and kiff the leaues that wynd from trevs had fed
Che Pymphes of Caria went about in tender armes tw take
Wer often vp. Chey oftentymes perlwaded her to; ſlake
Her lone. And wm: ds ol comfozt te her deafe card mynd they ſpake ‘ape


— ee


—


=— =.


=


—


——


Ouids Metamorphofis. ee 121


Sher fill lay dumbe: and with her naples the grerniſh herbes hee hild,
And mopitcd with a ſtreame of teares the grafle bpon the felo,

Me waternymphes (fo folk repozt) put vnder her a ſpꝛing,

M hych neuer myght be dꝛyde: and could they giue a greater thing


Immedilatly even like as when pe wound a pitchtrer rynd, 5


Che gum doth ine out in dꝛoppes: 02 as the weſterne wynd
Mith gentle blaſt togither with the warmth ol Sunne, vnbynd
Che pce: 02 as the clammy kynd of cement which they call


Bitumen iſſueth from the ground full fraughted therewithall:


So Phoebus nece Dame Byblis then conſuming with her teares,
Was turnd to a fountaine, which in thoſe fame vallpes beares


Che tytle of the founder ſtill, and guſheth freſhly out


From vnderneath a Sugarchelt as if it were a ſpolot.
Che fame of this fame wondꝛous thing perhappes had filled all
Che hundꝛed Townes ol Candye had a greater not befall
Moze never home by Iphys meanes tranſloꝛmed late befoꝛe.
Foz in the Hpze of Pheſtos hard bp Gnoſſus dwelt of poze
A peoman of the meaner loꝛt that Lyctus had tw name.
Wis ſtocke was fimple, and his welth accozding tw the fame. 5
Howbet his lyfe fo bpꝛyght was, as noman could it blame.
Be came onto his topfe then big and ready downe to lye, a
And ſayd: two things J wiſh the. Cone, that when thou out tale crpe,
Thou map diſpatch with little papne: the other that thou haue
A Boa. oꝛ Gyꝛles to bing them vp a greater coſt dw craue.
And J haue no abilitie. And therefoze if thou bꝛing
A wench (it goes ageinſt my heart to thinke vppon the thing)
Although agetn my will, J charge it ſtreyght detfroped ber.
Che bond of nature nodes mull beare in this behalf with me,


This fed, both wept erceedingly, as well the bulband who


Did giue coammaundement, as the wpfe that was commaunded to,
Pit Telethufa carneffly at Lyct her huſband lay,
Although in vayne) tw haue god hope, and ok himſelfe moze fap.
But he was full determined. Mit hin a whyle, the day
Appꝛoched that the frute was rype, and (he did loke to lay
Her belly euery mynute: when at midnyght in her relt
Stad by her (oꝛ did ſerme to and) the Goddelſe Ifis, dꝛeſt
And trapned with the ſolemne pomp of all her rytes. Two hoꝛnes
N.. Uppan


: ‘22s 7 *
r 28
1 2 2 a8 er 5 85 *
} . a
‘ 0


8

ee
NZ,
*
ee
N
ng
2
Fat
yA

co >
*


2
7.
xs


TY od


: The ninthbooke f

Uppon her forehead lyke the maine, with cares ol rypened coꝛnes

Stod gliſtring as the burnicht gold. Moꝛeouer He did weare

A rich and lately diaderne Attendant on her were

The barking bug Anubis, and the faint of Bubaſt, and |

The ppdecote Apis, and the God that giues to vnderſfand q

By fing ar holden to his lippes that men ſhould Glencekepe, |

And Lybian woꝛmes whoſe Finging bath enkozce continual lepe,

And thou Ofyris whom the folk of Aegypt euer ſeeke,

And neuer can haue fought inough, and Kittlerattles eke. g

Chen euen as though that Telethuſe had fully beene awake, {

And fene theis things with open eyes, thus Lis to her ſpake. j

My feruant Telethuſa, ceaſe this care, and bꝛeake the charge 4

Ok Ly&, And when Lucina ſhall haue let thy rute at large, |

Bꝛing bp the ſame what ere it ber J am a Goddeſſe who 1

Delyghts in helping folke at nerde. J hither come to do 8 1

Ihe gad. thou Hate not haue a cauſe hereafter to complapne if

Ok ſeruing of q Goddeſſe that is thanklelle foꝛ thy payne. ¢

WMhen Iſis had this comfort ginen, fhe went her way agapne, - .
A topfull wyght roſe Telethuſe, and lifting te the bp nth
Her hardened hands did pꝛay hir dꝛeame myght tomebe effectually, 1}


|
|


Her thꝛowes increaſt and ferth alone anon the burthen came, q
A wench was boꝛne to Ly aus inhe knew nothing of the ſame. 50
The mother making him beleeue it was a baay, did bzing * a
It hp, and none but ſher and nurce were pꝛiule to the thing. i
Che father thanking God did glue the chyld the Craundiyꝛes name, fi
The which was [phys.gopfult was the mother of the fame, 0
Bycauſe the name did ſerue alike tw man and woman bathe, 0
And fo the lye thꝛough godly gulle forth vnperrex ued gothe. iy
The garments of it were a boayes. The face of it was ſuch U
As rycher in a beap o2 gyꝛle of beawtie vttered much. i
When Iphys twas of thirteene perres, her father did inſure i
Che bꝛowne lanther bute her, a wench of loke demure, My
Commended for her kauoꝛ and her perfor moze than all i


Khe Mapdes of Pheſtos: Teleſt, men her fathers name did call.

He dwelt in Dy Ais, Lhep were borhe ol age and fauoꝛ leke,

And vnder both one ſchwlemayſter they did koꝛ nurture febe,.

And herevpon the hartes ol bath, the dart of Koue dia tree, g


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 122

And wounded both of them alerke. But vnlike was theyꝛ hope.

Both longed fog the wedding day tagither for to cope.

Foz whom lanthee thinkes tw her a man, ſher hopes to [e

Her hulband. [phys loues whereot thee thinkes He may not be

Partaker, and the elfe ſame thing augmenteth ill her flame.

Herſelf a Papden with a Mapd (ryght ſkraunge / in lone became.
Sher ſcarce could flap her teares. M hat end remapnes loꝛ mee ( ꝙ he)
How ſkraunge a loue: hoo bucath ? holw prodigious reygnes in mer:

Ik that the Gods did fauoꝛ mer, they ſhould deſtroy ma quyght.

D2 ik they would not mer deſtrop, at leaũ wyſe pit they myght

aue giuen mer ſuch a maladie as myght with nature ſtond,

Oꝛ nature were acquainted with. A Cow is neuer fond 0

Uppon a Cow, noꝛ Pare on Mare. The Ram delyghts the Cae,

The Stag the Hynde, the Cocke the Hen. But neuer man could ſhew,

Chat female pit was tane in loue with kemale kynd. O would

To God J neuer had berne boꝛne. Pit leaſt that Candy ſhould :

5 bring koꝛth all that monſtruous were, the daughter ol the Sonne
id loue a Bull. Howbert there was a Pale to dote vppon.

My loue is furiouſer than hers, it truthe confeſled ber. 1 8

FNaooꝛ Tye was fond of ſuch a luk as myght ber compalt. Sheen

Was lerued by a Bull beguyld by Art in Coßw of tre.

And one there was fo2 her with whom aduobtrie to commit.

Alk all the conning in the woꝛlde and liyghts of ſuttle wit

Mu ere heere, oꝛ ik that Dædalus himſelfe with vncowth wing

Ok Mar Hould hither fly againe, what comfoze ould he bzing?

Could he with all his conning crafts now make a boay of me?

Oꝛ could he O Ianthee chaunge the nat iue ſhape of thee ?

Pap rather Iphys ſettle thou thy mynd and call thy witts

Abowt thee : chake thou of theis flames that folichly by fitts
Mith out all reaſon reigne. Chou lal what Nature bathe ther made

Onlelle thot wilt deceyue thy felfe.) So farre forth wyſely wade,

Ads ryght andreafon map ſuppoꝛt, and loue as women ought

Hope is the thing that bꝛeedes deſyꝛe, hope feedes the amoꝛous thought.

4


Chis hope thy fer denieth ther. Pot watching doth reſtreyne :
he from embꝛacing of the thing wherok thou art ſo fayne.
Noz pit the Hulbands iealowſte, no rotwghnelle of her ze,
Noꝛ pit the coyneſſe of the Mench dwth binder thy deſpze.


R.). And


COR
— a i


‘ya
* 2


fe
*


9 ä
& .
* me 5


& * 8


Tax


> 30:


5
‘ 7


XZ


8
"ie
‘a
—
28
. >
4
aa
4
> >
a 7
oT
ö
*
—
2
—
8
7
>’.
7.9
2
ai
7 *
1
=


The ninth booke of


And pit thou tanſt not her entop. Po thongh that Cod and man
Should laboꝛ to their vttermoſt and do the beſt they can
In thy behalle, they could not make a happy wyght of the.
J cannot wilh the thing but that J haus it. Frank and free : |
The Goddes haue giuen med what they could. As 3 will, ſo will her g
That muſt become mp fathinlaw. fo willes my father to, f
Wut nature fronger than them ali conſenteth not thererc.
Chis hindꝛeth mer, and nothing elle. Behold the bliffult tyme, |
The day of Pariage is at hand. linthee Halbe mpne,
And pit 3 Chall not her enioy. Amid the water tue g
Shall thirſt. O Iuno pꝛeſident of mariage, why with thee f
Comes Hy men to this wedding where no beydegrome pou ſhall ſe, , .
But bothe are Bꝛydes that muff that day togither coupled ber; : a
his ſpoken, ſher did hold hir peate. And now the twcher mapd 9
Did burne as whote in loue as ſher. And earneſtly thee pꝛapd 1
Che bꝛydale day myght come with ſpeede. Che thing foꝛ which cher long?
Dame Telethuſa fearing ſoze, from day to dap pꝛolongd
Che tyme, oft fepning ſikneſle, oft pretending the had lerne
Ill tskens of ſucceſſe. at length all Gifts conſumed bene,
The wedding day fo oft delayd was now at hand. The day
Betoꝛe it, taking from her head the kercheef quyght away.
And from her daughters head like wyſe, with ſcattred heare the lapd
Per handes vpon the Altar, and with humble voyce thus pꝛapd.
O Iſis who dot haunt the towne of Paretonie, ànd
Che feeloes by Maræotis lake, and Pharos which noth ſtand
Wp Alexandria, and the Nyle diuided into ſeuen
Great channels, comfoꝛt thou my feare, and fend mee help from heauen,
Thylelk O Goddelle, euen thyſelk, and theis thy relikes J
Did once behold and knew them all: as well thy companp 5
As eke thy ſounding rattles, and thy crellets burning by,
And myndlully J marked what commaundement thou didſt glue.
That J eſcape vnpuniſhed, that this fame wench bath liue,
Chy counſell and thy bef it is. aue mercp now on twapne, ;
And help bs. Ul itt that woꝛd the teares ran Downe her chackes amar
Che Goddelſe ſermed fo2 tw moue ber Altar: and in derde
She moued it. Che temple des did tremble like a rede.
And hoꝛnes in likenele to the Pone about the Church did Hpue. ai


Ouids Metamorphofis. | Es 123


And Rattles made a raughtich noyſe. At this fame luckée figne,
Although not wholy careleſle, vit ryght glad the went away.

And Iphys followed alter her with larger pace than ay

Sher was accuſtomd. and her face continued not fo whyght.

Wer ſtrength encreaſed, and her loke moze ſharper was to ſyght. 5
er heare grew ſhoꝛter, and the had a much moze liuely ſpꝛyght,


= =
— — — —


Than when he was a wench. Foꝛ thou D Iphys who ryght now
A modther wert, art now a boay. With otkrings both of pow
Ho Church retyꝛe, and there reioyce with fayth vnfearkull. They


—


Mith offrings went to Church ageine , and there theyꝛ vowes did pay.
: Cbey alto tet a table bp, which this beef meter had.


17 The vovves that Iphys vovvd a vvench he hath performd a Lad.

Pert moꝛrob ouer all the woꝛld did ſhine with lightfome flame,

Mhen Iuno, and Dame Venus, and Sir Hy men ioyntly came

05 Co Iphys mariage, who as then tranſfoꝛmed tw a boay 7

a Did take Ianthec to his topfe, and fo her loue entop
-

1


*


Finis noni Libri.


Pi

J Neo cSlercdles noes
A ee gee
$ „„
J 9 W te


TIE TENTH BOOKE
of Ouids <M etamorphofis.


Rom thence in ſalkron colourd robe fle w Hy men through ß aye,
65 And into Ihracia being called by Orphy did repapꝛe. a
Wer he came in derde at Orphyes call: but neyther did he fing


5
2


The weaves of that ſolemmitie, noꝛ merry countnance being,
Noꝛ any handſell of god lucke. His toꝛch with dztzling (moke
Mas dim: the lame to burne out clœre, no ſtirrring could provoke,
The end was woꝛſer than the ſigne. Foꝛ as the Eꝛyde did rome
Abꝛode accompanyde with a trayne of Pymphes to bꝛing her home,
A ſerpent lurking in the graffe did ſting her in the ancle: 1
M hereok Chee dyde incontinent, ſo wilt the bane did rancle.
D hom when the Thracian Poet had bewayld ſufficiently
On earth, the Gholfes departed hence he minding koꝛ to trie,
Downe at the gate of Tenarus did go to Limbo lake.
And thence by gaſtly folk and foules late buried he did take
His tourncp to Perſephonee and to the king of Ghoſts
Chat like a Loꝛdly tyꝛan reignes in thoſe vnpleaſant coats.
And playing on his tuned harp he thus began to ſound.
O pou the Souereines of the woꝛld fet vnderneath the ground,
To whome wee all (what euer thing is made of moztali kynd)
Repapꝛe, it by pour leaue I nom map freely ſpeake my mynb,
J come not hither as a (ppe the Hoop hell to fer :
$202 pet the foule thace headed Curre whole heares all Adders ber
Ca tye in cheynes. The cauſe af this my vyage is my wyle
Whole fate a Uiper ſtinging did abꝛidge her poulhtull ipfe,
J would haue boꝛne it pactentty : and fo tw do 2 ftraue.
But Loue ſurmounted powꝛe. Chis God is knowen great fogce to haut
Abou on earth. and Whether he reigne herre oꝛ no J vote.
But 4 belene be reignes here tw. Al lame that flies abowt
Ol koꝛmer rape repoꝛt not wꝛong, A one coupled alſo pow.
By theie ſame places full of ſeare: by this howge Chaos now,
And by the ſtilueſſe of this watte and emptye King dome,
Welech pee of Eury dicee nile the deſti pe
# hat was fo ſwiftl reeled vp All things to pou belong.


And though we lingring fo2 a whyle dur pageants bo pꝛolong, wi


Ouids Metamorphoſis. f 123.


Pit fore oꝛ late wær all tw one abpding place do rome:
Mee haſte vs hither all: this place becomes our lateſt home:
And pou da suet humaine kynd reigne longeſt tyme. Now when
Chis woman Hall haue lined full her tyne, he hall agen
Become pour awne. Che bie of her but fo: a whyle J craue.
And ik the Deſknyes fo2 mp topfe denye mee fo2 to haue
Releace, J fully am reſolbd foꝛ euer here to dwell.
Reioyce pou in the death of both. As he this tale did tell,
And played on his iuſttument, the blodleſſe ghoſtes ſhed teares:
Lo tyꝛe on Titius growing hart the gredp Grppe loꝛbeares:
Che ſhunning water Tantalus endeuereth not to dein:


ae Danaus daughters ceaſt tw fill thep2 tubbes that haue no beink,


xions whcle ſtend fill: and downe fate Siſy phus bppon


Bis ralling ſtone. Then ire of all ſo fame for truth bath gone)


The Furies being riken there with pitie at his ſong


Did wochpe. And nevther Pluto no2 his Ladie were fo rong


And hard of ſtomacke to withhold his {aff petition long.

Chep called foꝛth Eurydicee who was as pit among

Che neweome Ghoſts. and limped of her wound. ber huſband toke
Per with condicion that he ſhould not backe vppon her lo ke,
Untill the tyme that hee were paſt the bounds of Limbo quyght:
D2 elſe to loſe his gpft. They toke a path that fepe vpꝛyght


| Bole darke and full of foggye miit. And now they were within


Akenning of the vpper earth, lohen Orphye did begin
Co dowt him leaſt he followed not, and thꝛough an eager loue
Deſpꝛous fo2 to fer her he his eyes did backward moue.
Immediatly Hee llipped backe. He retching out his hands,
Delſpꝛous tw be caught and foꝛ to ketch her graſping ſtands.
But nothing ſaue the ſlippꝛy aire (vnhappy man) he caught.
She dying now the ſecond tyme complaynd of Orphye naught.
Soꝛ why what had (he to complayne, onleſſe it were of loue?
Mhich made her hulband backe agen his eyes vppon her moue 2
Her laſt farewell ſher ſpake fo oft, that foarce he heard the found,
And then reuolted to the place in which be had her found.

This double dying of his topfe fet Orphye tra found,

o leffe than him who at the ſyght of Plutos dꝛeadfull Hound


That an the middle necke of sheer Doth beare an iron cheyne.
f N. tiff. i Was


The tenth booke of


CU as Kriken in a ſodein feare and could it nat reſkrepne,
until the tyme his loꝛmer ſhape and nature boring gone,
His body quyght was ouergrowne, and turned into fone. |
Oꝛ than the koliſh Olenus, who on himſelk did take |
Anothers kault, and giltleſſe ueedes himſelk would giltie make, a f
Cogither with his wretched wyle Lethæa, foꝛ whole pꝛyde b
They both becomming ones, de land cuen pit on watry Ide.
He would haue gone to Hell ageine, and carneff (ute did make:
But Charon would not ſuffer him to paſſe the Sty gian lake,
Seuen dapes he fate foꝛloꝛne vppon the bank and neuer eate
A bit of bꝛead. Care, teares, and thought, and ſoꝛrow were his meate
And crying out vppon the Gods of Hell as cruell, he 4
A ithdꝛe w tw lofty Rhodopee and Heme which beaten ber 4
With Poꝛthern wynds. Chace tymes the Sunne had paſled thzough the
And watry ſigne of Piſces and had finiſht full the pere. (chere
And Orphye (were it that his ill ſucceſſe hee Mill did re,
Oꝛ that he vowed ſo to do did vtterly eſchew
Che womankynd. Vit many a one deſpꝛous were to match
M ith him, but he them with repulfe did all alike diſpatch.
He alfo taught the Thracian folke a ſtewes of Dales to make
And of the flowzing pꝛyme of boapes the pleafure fo2 to take.

here was a hyll, and on the hyll a verie leuell plot.

Fapre greene with graſſe. But as foꝛ ſhade oꝛ couert was there not.
Aſtne as that this Poet boꝛne of Goddes, in that fame place
Sate downe and touche his tuned ſtrings, s ſhadow came a pace.
There wanted nepther Chaons tre, noꝛ pit the tres to which
Sreſh Phaetons ſuſfers turned were, noꝛ Berche, noꝛ Holme, noꝛ Wid
Noꝛ gentle aſp, noꝛ wyueleſſe Bap, noꝛ lofty Cheſtnuttrer.
Noꝛ Hazle ſpalt, noꝛ Aly wherof the ſhafts of ſpeares made ber.
Noꝛ knstleſſe irre, noꝛ cherfull Plane, noꝛ Paple flecked grayne.
Noz Kote, noꝛ Sallow which delights by waters tw remapne.
Noꝛ ſlender twigged Lemarifis, noꝛ Box ay greene of belv.
Noꝛ Fig trees loben with theyꝛ frute of colours bꝛowne and blew.
Noz double colourd Mpꝛtletrœes. Poꝛeoner thither came
he toapthing Jupe, and the Gpne that runnes vppon a frame. N
Elmes clad with Uynes, and aches wyld, and Pitchtreꝛs blacke as cole,
And full of tres with goodly frute red ſlryped, Oztyards whole.


SK . 2 ee ee ee


S eS


SS = 25 SS


SS a i


7
8

—
1
FN
No

2 .
1
Yar
5
a)
ve
4


> 2
==


La
SS ee


— —


Ouids Metamorphofis. 125
And Palmetres lythe which in reward of conqueſt men do beare,
And Ppnapple with tufted top and harſh and pꝛickling heare,
Che tree to Cybele mother of the Goddes moſt deere. oꝛ why ⸗
Mer minion Atys putting of the ſhape ot man, did dye,
And hardened into this lame trer. Among this commpanee
Mas pꝛeſent with a pyked top the Cypꝛeſſe, now a tre,
Sumtime a boap beloued of the God that with a fring
Doth arme his bow, and with a firing in tune his Niall bꝛing.
Fos, hallowed to the ymphes that in the feldes of Carthye were
There was a godly myghty Stag whole hoꝛnes ſuch bꝛedth did beare,
As that they ſhadowed all his head. His hoznes of gold did ſhyne,
And dobwne his beet hung krom his necke, a chepne with iewels fpne,.
Amid his frunt with pꝛettie ſtrings a tablet beeing tyde, 5
Did waucr as he went: and from his cares on eyther ſyde
Mung perles of all one growth about his hollow temples bꝛyght.
This godly Spitter bering voyd of dꝛead, as hauing quyght
Foꝛgot his natiue fearefulneſſe, did haunt mens houſes, and
Mould ſuffer falk (yea though bnknowen) tw cop him with theyꝛ hand.
But moze than vnto all folke elſe he deerer was to thee a a
O Cyparifle the fayꝛeſt Wpght that euer man did fee 4
In Cœa. Chou to paſfures, thou to water ſpꝛings him led, .
Chou wꝛeathedſt lundꝛy flowꝛes betwerne his hoꝛnes vppon his hed.
Sumtpme a hoꝛſman thou his backe foꝛ pleaſure didſt beſkryde,
And haltring hun with ſilken bit from place tw place didſt ryde.
In ſummer tyme about hygh none when Titan with his heate
Did make the hollow crabbed cleas of Cancer foꝛ to ſweate,
1 Unwerting Cy pariſſus with a Dart did ſfrike this Hart
MNMauyght thꝛaugh. And when that of the wound he fat he muſt depart,
He purpold foꝛ to die himſelf. Nhat woꝛds of comfort ſpake s
F


Not Phoebus to him: willing him the matter lyght tw take
And not moze ſoꝛrow fo it than was requiſite tw make.
But ill the Lad did ſygh and fob, and as his laf requeſt
j Delpꝛed God he myght thenceforth from moꝛning neuer reff.

Anon thꝛough weeping ouermuch bis blod was dꝛayned guyght:

His limbes wert greene : his heare which hung vpõ his kozchead whyghe

0 Began to be a bꝛiſtled buch: and taking by and by Gist: i
A dlickneſle, with a ſharpened tap did face the ſtarrie {ape 5

bis e


—
—
.

.
1


een
8 5 &: a


V


es
“> 2


»


S


ra? ve or x
Pye * 2


2


The tenth booke of


Che God did figh, and ſadly ſayd. ylelfe chall moꝛne foꝛ the,
And thou fo2 others: and ap one in moꝛning thou ſhalt ber.
Such wad as this had Orphye dzawen about him as among
The herdes of beats, and flocks ol Birds he fate amyds the throng, |
And when his thumbe (uffictentlp had tryed euerp fring,
And found that though they ſeuerally in ſundꝛy founds did ring,
Vit made they all one Harmonie. He thus began to fing. ö
O Mufe my mother frame my ſong of Ioue. foꝛ euerp thing | |
Is ſubiett bnew ropall Ioue. OF louc the beauenlp Ring !
J oft haue ſhewed the gloꝛious power. J erſt in graner verſe f
Che Gpants lapne in Phlægra feeldes with thunder, did reherle. ö
Wut now J nerde a meelder ſtyle to tell ot᷑ pꝛettie bopes oh
That were the derlings of the Gods: and of bulatyfull fopes ie |
Chat burned in the bꝛeſts of Girles, who fo2 theyꝛ wicked luſt 0
Accozding as they did deſerue, receyued penance iuſt. N
The ling of Coddes did burne erewhyle in loue of Ganymed g
Che Phrygian and the thing was found which Iupiter that ſted
Mad rather bee than that he was. Vit could he not betame 4
The ſhape of any other Bird than Aegle foz tw ſerme 0
And fo he ſoꝛing in the apze with boꝛrowed wings traf bp |


Che Troiane boay who Mill in heauen euen pit ooth beare his cup, g
And bꝛings him Nectar though againſt Dame lunos will it be, a
And thou Amyelys ſonne (had not thy heauy deſtinee N


Abꝛidged ther befoꝛe thy tyme) hadſt allo placed beene 0
Bp Phoebus in the firmament. How bee it (as is fene)
Chou art eternall fo farre forth as may ber. oꝛ as oft
As watrie Piſcis giueth place to Aries that the ſoft : \
And gentle ſpꝛingtyde doth fucceede the winter Harp and ſlobꝛe:
So often thou reneweſt thplelf, and on the layꝛe greene clowꝛe
Dok Hote out flowꝛes. y father bare a ſpeciall loue tw the 5
Aboue all others. So that whyle the God went oft to fe "
Eurotas and vnwalled Spart, he let his noble towne t
DE Delphos (which a mid the woꝛld is ſituate in renowne) 4
WU fthont a ſouereigne Peyther Warp noꝛ Lotv regarded were. ö
Unmpnofull of his Godhead he refuſed not to beare \
Che nets, noꝛ foꝛ to hold the hounds, noꝛ as a pepnfull mate 5
To trauell over cragged hilles, thꝛongh which continuall gate wy |


Ouids Metamorphofis. | 125


His flames augmented moze and moze. And not the ſunne did ſtand
Mell nerve midway betwane the nyghts laff paſt and next at hand.
Chey ſtript themſelues and noynted them with oyle of Olpfe fat.
And fell to thꝛowing of a Sledge that was ryght hologe and flat.


FJyyꝛſt Phoebus pepſing it did thꝛow it from him with ſuch ſkrength,


As that the weyght dꝛaue do bone the clouds in flying. And at length
It kell vpon ſubſtantiall ground, where plainly it did ſhow

As well the cunning as the force of him that did it thꝛow.
Immediatly vpon defpee himſelk the ſpoꝛt to trie,

The Spartane lad made haſte tw take bp vnaduiſedly

Che Sledge befoze it Mill did lye. But as he was in hand

Co catch it, it rebounding bp ageinſt the hardened land,


Did hit him full vpon the face. Lhe Cod himſelle did lake


As pale as did the lad, and bp his wounding body tobe. :
footw culles he him, now wypes he from the wound the blood atvap,
Anotherwhyle his fading lyfe he ſtryues with herbes to ay.
Pought boted Lecheraft. Helpleſſe was the wound. And lie as one
ꝛold violet ſtalkes 02 Poppie ſtalkes 02 Lillies growing on


Browne ſpindles, freight they withering dꝛope with heaup heads r are


ot able foꝛ tm hold them vp, but with their tops dw fare

Uppon the ground. So Hyacinth in pœlding of his bꝛeath

Chopt downe his head. His necke bereft of ſtrength by meanes of death
Mas euen a burthen to itſelf, and downe did looſely wꝛythe

On both his ſhoulders, now a tone and now a tother the.

Chou faadſt away my Hyacinth defrauded of the pꝛyme

Of pouth(quoth Phoebus) and J ſe thy wound my hepnous eryme.
Chou art my ſoꝛrow and my fault: this hand o myne bath wꝛought


Thy death: J like a murtherer haue to thy graue the bꝛought.
But what haue J offended thow z onlelfe that tw haue playd,


Oꝛ ik that tu haue loued, an offence it map be ſapd.

Mould Goo z render myght mp lyle with and in fread of the.

To which ſyth fatall xine denyeth to agre,

Both in my mynd and in iy mouth thou euermoꝛe Halt bee.

My Uiall ſkriken with my hand, my ſongs hall found of the,

And in a newmade flowꝛe thou ſhalt with letters repꝛelent

Our ſyghings. And the tyme ſhall come ere many pores ber ſpent,

Chat in chp lone a valeant Bꝛince ſhall ioyne himilell wich che, oe
= md:


The tenth booke of


And leaue his name vppon the leaues fo2 men to rede and fer,
WMhyle Phocbus thus did pꝛopheſte, behold the blod of him
Which dyde the gralle, ceaſt blood to ber, and vp there ſpꝛang a trim
And godly flowze, moe oꝛient than the Purple cloth ingrapne,
In chape a Lillpe, were it not that Lillpes do remayne
Okt lyluer colour, whereas theis of purple hew are fene,
Although that Phocbus had the cauſe of this greate honoꝛ bene,
Pit thought he not the ſame ynough. And therfoze did he wꝛpght
His ſyghes vppon the leaues thereof: and fe in colour bꝛyght
The flowee hath « wꝛit theron, which letters are of greef.
Do ſmall the Spartanes thought the birth of Hyacinth repꝛæt


Unto them, that they woꝛſhip him from that day onto this. .


And as their fathers did befoze, ſo they doe neuer miſſe
M ith ſolemne pomp tw celebꝛate his fraſt from peere to pere.

Vut if perchaunce that Amathus the rich in mettals, werre

Demaunded if it would haue bꝛed the Propets it would ſweare,

ea euen as gladlp as the folke whole bꝛewes fumtpme did beare,
A papꝛe of welked hoꝛnes: whereol they Ceraſtes named are.
Weloꝛe theyꝛ doze an Altar ſfod ol loue that takes the care.
Ol alpents and of trauellers, which lothſome was to fe,
Foz lewdneſſe wrought theron. If one that had a ſtraunger ber
Had lobe thereon, he would haue thought there had on it berne killd
Sum ſucking calues oꝛ lambes. Che bl of ſfraũgers there was fille
Dame Venus ſoꝛe offended at this wicked ſacrifyſe,
Co leaue her Cities and the land of Cyprus did deuyſe.
But then bethinking her, ſher ſapd. N hat bath my pleafant ground
Mhat haue my Cities treſpaſſed 2 what fault in them is found?
Map rather let this wicked race by exyle punniſht bene,
Oꝛ death, oz by ſum other thing that is a meane betwene
Woth death and exyle. what is that! ſaue only foꝛ tw chaunge
Chepꝛ ſhape. In muſing with herſelt what figure were mol Hraunge,
Shed caſt her eye vppon a hoꝛne. And therewithall thee thought
The fame to bee a ſhape ryght mete vppon them to bee bꝛought:
And fo thee from theyꝛ myghty limbes theyꝛ natiue figure tobe,
And turnd them intw bopſtous Bulles with grim and cruell loke
Pit durſt the filthy Propets fand in Cifte opinion that
Dame Venus was no Goddelle till hee beeing wꝛoth thereat, 0


ee IS a.


Ouids Metamorphofis. 127


Ca make theyꝛ bodies common firſt compelld them euerychone
And after chaungd theyꝛ foꝛmer kynd. Foꝛ when that ſhame was gone,
And that they wexed bꝛazen faaſt, hee turned them to one,
In which betwerne their former ſhape was diffrence ſmall o2 none.
Il hom foꝛbpcauſe Pygmalion ſam to leade thepꝛ lyfe in fin
Ollended with the bice whereol greate ſtoꝛe is packt within
The nature of the womankynd, he led a ſingle lyfe.
And long it was ere he could fynd in hart tw take a wyle.
Hob in the whyle by wondꝛous Art an image he did graue 3
Ok ſuch pꝛopoꝛtion, hape, and grace as nature neuer gaue
Poꝛ can to any woman giue. In this his woꝛke he toke
I certaine loue. Che loke of it was ryght a Mapdens loke,
And ſuch a one as that pe would belene had lpfe, and that
Mould moued be, it womanhod and reuerence letted nat:
So artifictall was the woꝛk. He wondꝛeth at his Art
And of his counterfetted coꝛſe concepueth love in hart.
He often toucht it, feling ik the woꝛk that he had made
Were verie fleſh oꝛ Juoꝛpe Mil. wie could he not perſwade
Himſelk to think it Juorp. Foz he oftentymes it kiſt
And thought it kiſſed him ageine. He hild it by the fiſt,
And talked to it. He beleeued his fingars made a dint
Uppon her fleſh, and feared leaſt ſum blacke oꝛ bewfed point
Should come by touching ouer hard. Sumtyme with pleafant boꝛds
And wanton topes he dalyingly doth caſt fo2th amoꝛous woꝛds.
Sumtime (the giftes wherein pong aydes are wonted tw delyght)
he bꝛought her owehes, fyne round stones, and Lillyes fapꝛe € tohpghss
And pꝛetie ſinging birds, and floboꝛes of thouſand ſoꝛts and bel,
And pepnted balles, and Amber from the tree diſkilled new.
In gorgeous garments kurthermoꝛe he did her alſo decke,
And on her fingars put me rings, and cheynes about her necke.
Riche perles were hanging at her eares, and tablets at her bꝛeſt.
All kynd of things became her well. And when the was bndzelt,
her lx med not leſle beawtilnll. be layd her in a bed
Che which with ſcarlet dyde in Tyre was richly ouerſpꝛed, 5
And terming her his bedfellow, he couched downe hir head
Uppon a pillow ſokt as though ibe could haue felt the fame,
The feak of Venus hallawed chꝛough the Ile of Cyprus, came Be


Thetenth booke of


7


/


And Bullocks Whpght with gilden homes were flapne kor tacvityty |


And vp to heauen of frankincence the lmoky fume did rpfe,

Mhen as Pygmalion hauing tone his dutye that fame dap,

Beekoꝛe the altar ſtanding, thus with fearefull hart did fap, 5

Ik that pou Goddes can all things giue, then let my wife (J pꝛay)

( He durſt not fap ber ponfame wench of Juoꝛp, but) ber lecke

hy wench of Juoꝛy. Venus (who was nought at all to feeke

Mhat ſuch a wich as that did mene then pꝛeſent at her feat,

Soꝛ handſell of her kræꝛndly helpe did caule thae tymes at leaſt

Che kyꝛe to kindle and to ſpyꝛe thꝛyſe bpward in the ayꝛe.

Aone as he came home, ſtreyght way Pygmalion did repapꝛe

Unto the Image ot his wench, and leaning on the bed,

Did bitte hir. In her body Mrepght a warmenelle ſeomd to ſpꝛed.

He put his mouth againe to hers, and on her bee did lay

Wis hand. Che Juoꝛp wered ſort: and putting quyght away

All hardnelle, peelded bnderneathe his fingars, as wer le

A pcce of wax made foft ageinſt the Sunne, oꝛ dꝛawen to ber

In diuers ſhapes by chauling it betwerne ones handes, and fo

To ſerue to bles. He amaʒde fread wauering tw and fro

wene toy, and fears to ber berguyld, ageine he burnt in loue,

Ageine with feeling he began his wilched hope to pꝛoue.

Me felt it berrpe lleſh in bade. By laying on his thumb,

Me felt her pulſes beating. Then he Tod no longer dumb

But thanked Venus with his hart. and at the length he layd

His mouth to bers who was as then become a perled mapd.

Dhee felt the kille, and bluſht therat: and lifting kearefully

Mir epelinds vp, hir Louer and the light at once did (ppe.

Che mariage that her ſelle had made the Goddelle bleſled fo,

Chat when the Mone with fullum lyght nyne tymes her courte had go,

This Ladye was deliuered of a Sun that Paphus hyght,

Ok whom the land takes that name. OF him was boꝛne a knyght

Calld Cinyras who (had he had none illue) ſurely myght

Ok all men vnderneathe the ſun bene thought the happyeſt wyght.
Ot wicked and met curſed things ta ſpeake J now commience,
Be daughters and pee parents all go get pe farre from hence.

Oꝛ ik ye mynded bee to here my tale, belæue mer nought

In this berhalfe: ne think that fach a thing was euer bought. 97


Ouids Metamorphofis. u


Oꝛ it ver bolll berlerue the derde, belerue the bengeance to

Mhich lyghted on the partpe that the wicked act did do.

But it᷑ that it be poſlible that any wyght fo much

From nature ſhould degenerate, as fo. to fall to ſuch

à hepnous cryme as this is, I am glad foz Thracia, J

Am glad fo2 this fame world of ours, yea glad exceedingly

am loꝛ this mp nattue fople,foz that there is ſuch ſpace

Betwene it and the land that bꝛed a chyld ſo voyd of grace,

Z woudd the land Panchaya ſhould of Amomie be rich,

And Cinnamom, and Coffus ſwerte, and Incence alſo which
Doth tue largely out of tres, and other flowers ſtraunge,

Ls long as that it beareth Pyꝛtrhe: not worth tt was the chaunge,

ewe trees to haue of ſuch a pꝛyce. The God of loue denpes


His weapons to haue hurted ther, O My rrha, and he tryes
Himſelfe vngiltie by thy fault. One of the Furies thee


Mith poyſonde Snakes and helliſh bꝛands hath rather blaſted the
To hate ones father is a cryme as heynous as map bee.

But pit moze wicked is this loue of thine than any hats.

The ponthfall Loꝛdes of all the Call and Paces ol chert etate
Deſpꝛe to haue ther to their wyke and earnest {ute do make.
Pk all (ercepting onely one) thy choyce O Myrrha take.

She keles her filthye loue, and ſkryues ag einſt it, and wuthin
HhHerlelk ſapd. whither ronnes my mynd? what thinke J ta begin z
Pk Gods (J pꝛap) and godlyneſſe, pee holy rites and awe N
Of parents, from this heynous cryme my bicious mynd withdꝛawe,

And dilappoynt mp wickedneſle. At leaſt wyſe ik it ber
A2 wickednelle that J intend. As farre as J can (ee,
This loue inkrindgeth not the bondes of godlyneſle a whit.


Fe euerp other lining wyght dame nature doth permit


Toa match without offence of fin. The Hecfer thinkes no ſhame
CTs beare her father on her backe: Lhe Moꝛſe beeifrpoes the fame-
Pet whom he is the ſpꝛe: The Cote doth bucke the lid that her
HBuimlſelt begate: and birdes do tread the (elf ſame birdes wer fee.
Pk whom they batched were before. In happpe cace they are
That map do fo without offence. But mans malicious care
Path made a bꝛydle fos it ſell, and ſpyghtfull lawes reſtrepne ei
The things that nature ſetteth rx, pit ave their Mealmes (men ser
: | a


*
Ls


O20


4 Sa ~~
87


‘
«>
*


WA
» >

©

+f
S .

ot ;
27.

2 ¢

y
5


n
rn
“ at Wy . 5


oy


phe Bes oy “aS BD
* eee


The tenth booke of


In which the mother with the ſonne, and daughter with the father
Do match, where through of godlyneſle the bond augments the rather
With doubled loue. Pow wo is mee it had not berne my lot
In that fame countrie to be boꝛne. And that this luckleſſe plot
Should binder me. aa bp thinke J thus 2 Auaunt vnlawfull lone,
4 ought to loue him J confelle : but ſo as doth beboue
His daughter: were not Cinyras my father then, J wis
I myght obtaine ta lye with him. But now bycauſe be is
Myne owne, he cannot bee myne owne. The nerreneſſe of our kin
Doth hurt me. Mere J further of perchauuce J moze myght win.
And it F tik that J therby this wickedneſſe myght ſhunne,
4 would foꝛſake my natiue ſople and farre from Cyprus runne.
Chis euill heate doth hold mer backe, that being pꝛeſent Hill
% may but talke with Cinyras and lobe on him my fill,
And touch, and kille hum, ik no moze may further graunted bee,
UA by wicked wench ? and cans thou hope fo further; dot not ſa
Pom by thy fault chon dof confound the ryghts ofname and bine
And wilt thou make thy mother bee a Cacqueane by thy fin ¢
Milt thou thy fathers leman bee 2 wilt thou ber both the mother
And ſuſter of thy chyld⸗ ſhall he bee both thy fonne and bꝛother⸗
And ſlandſt thou not in feare at all of thoſe ſame fatters thre
M hole heads with crawling {rakes in ſread of heare bematted be?
Which puching with they? cruell bꝛonds folks eyes and mouthes, do {te
Chepꝛ fintull bares 2 but thou now whyle thy body pit ts fre,
Vet neuer ſuch a wickedneſſe once enter in thy mynd.
Delple not myghtye natures hel by luſt ageinſt thy kynd.
M hat though thy will were fully bent z pit euen the very thing
Is ſuch as will not ſutler thee the fame to end to bꝛing.
Foz why he beeing well diſpolde and godly, myndeth ap
So much his dewipe that from ryght and truth he will not fray. 5
M ould God lyke furte were in him as is in me this day.

Chis ſapd, her father Cinyras who dowted what to do

By reaſon of the woꝛthy ſloze of ſuters which did wo
Mis daughter, being ing all theyꝛ names did will her fo2 to tho
On which of them ſher had berfelf mott fancie to beſtow.
At firſt cher hilo her peace a whyle, and loking wit ly on we


}
i
1


S — — — — —


3


— — —— — — —


— —— —


—


Sr ~~ = =


Ouids Metamorphofis. ; 129


Her fathers face, did boyle within: and ſcalding teares anon

Ran downe her vilage. Cyniras, (who thought them to pocede
Ok tender harted ſhamelaſtneſle) did fap there was no nerde

Ok teares, and dꝛped her cheekes, and kiſt her. Myrrha toe of it
Exceeding pleaſure in her ſelfe: and when that he did wit

M hat huſband the did with tw haue, ſher ſayd: one like tw yow.
Me bnderſtanding not hir thought, did well her woꝛdes allow.
And ſayd: in this thy godly mynd continew. at the name

MF godlyneſſe, he caſt me doume her loke foꝛ very ſhame. 5
Soꝛ why her giltie hart did knowe (hex well deſerued blame.

Hygh mydnight came, and ſlepe bothe care and carkeſles oppꝛelt.

„Wut Myrrha lying bꝛode awake could nepther fleepe noꝛ reſt.
Shee kryes in Cupids flames, and woꝛkes continewally vppon
Her furious loue. One while he ſinkes in deꝛpe deſpayꝛe. Anon
She fully myndes to giue attempt, but ſhame doth hold her in.
Sher wiſches and (hee wotes not what to do, noꝛ how tw gin.
And like as when a mightye tree with ares heawed rownd,

ob reedpe with a ſtrype oꝛ twaine to lye bppon the grotond,
Uncerteine is which way to fall and tottreth euery way:;


Euen (6 her mynd with dowttull wound effeebled then did trap


How here now there vncerteinelp, and toke ol bothe encreace.

No mealure of her loue was found no rell, noꝛ pit releace,

Saue onelp death. death likes her beſt. Sher ryſeth, full in mynd

To hang herſelf. About a pot her girdle the doth bynd.

And fapd farewell deve Cinyras, and vnderſfand the cauſe

Ok this my death. And with that woꝛd about her necke ſher dꝛawes

The nose. Her truſtpe nurce that in another Chamber lay

By foꝛtune heard the whiſpꝛing found ol theis her woꝛdes (folk fap.)

The aged woman ryſing bp vnboltes the doze. And whan

Sheer law her in that plyght ok death, cher ſhꝛeeking out began é

Ta ſmyght her ſell, and ſcratcht her bꝛeſt, and quickly to her ran

And rent the girdle krom ber necke. Then weeping bitterly

And holding her bet werne her armes, the alkt the queſtion tobp 5

Shee went about to hang ber ſelf ſo vnaduiſedly.

The Lady hilld her peace as dumb, and loking on the ground

Unmouablp, was ſoꝛpe in her hart fo: being found

Beloʒe he had diſpatcht herſelk. Hern 255 till at her lap, a :
J. 1 nd


> N 0
1 e


1


e


The tenth booke of


And chewing her her emptie dugges and naked head all grap,

$efoughe her for the papnes Me toe with her both night and day

In rocking and in keding her, (hee would vouchlafe to fap

What ere it were that gueucd her. The Lade turnd away

Diſplealde and fetcht.a ſygh. Che nurce was fully bent in mynd

To bolblt the matter out: for which nat one ly He did bynd ö

Her kayth, in ſerret things to kerpe: but alfo ſapd. put mer |

In truſt tw fpndaremedye. J am not thou ſhalt ler) |

Pit altogither dulld by age. FF fur iauleneſſe tt be, |

J haue bothe charmes and chaunted herbes to help. If any oyghe f

Bewitcheth ther by witcheraft J will purge and Cet the quyght.
it it ber the wꝛath ol Cod, we hall with facrifple.

Appeaſe the wrath of Cod right well. Wai hat may I moze furmpfe

Ho therues haue broken in vppon this houſe and ſpoyld the welth.

Thy mother and thy father bothe ore lining and in helth.

hen Myrrha heard ber kather naamd, a gretuous ſygh the fet

Euen front the bottom ol her hart. How bert the nurce as pet

Mildermd not any wickedneſſe. Rut nerethelelle ſhee gett |

There was ſome loue: and ſtanding in one purpole made requeſt

To bꝛeake her mynd vnto her, And the fet her tenderly

Uppon her lappe. Lhe Ladpe wept and ſobbed bitterlp. 5

Then calling her in feeble armes, Hee ſayd J well efppe

Chou art in loue. y diligence in this behalt J Cweare

Shall ſeruiſable to the bee. Thou ſhalt not neede to feare

Chat ere thy father ſhall it knowe. At that fame woꝛd the lept

From nurtes lappe like one that had beene pak her witts, and ſtept

Vith furp to her bed. at Which He lean ing downe hit late

Sapd, hence J pray the: force mee not to ſhe we my ſhame kull cace.

And when the nurce did vꝛge her Mill, her anlwered eyther get

Che hence, oꝛ ceace tw aſke me why mylelt thus to kret.

Che thing that thou de ſyꝛſte to knowe is wiekedneſle. The old

Paꝛe nurce gan quake, and trembling both koꝛ age and feare did bold

Her handes to her. And knerling downe right humbly at her erte,

One whyle thee fapꝛe intreated her with gentle wandes and (inet?

Another Whyple onleſle thee made her pꝛiuie of her ſoꝛrow)


*
s
=


= Ss SS" — SSS Ses ew


—


—


S oS Ss SS


> te — ee — — ˖ — —


See thꝛeatned her, and put her in a feare he would nert moꝛruw
Bebꝛap her how (yee went about to hang berielf, But ik bye


Cates hols: 2 gone


» She told her, ſher did plyght her fayth 10 help tw her relcef.
Shee lifted vp her head, and then with teares kaſt guſching out
Weelmbered all her nurces bꝛeſt: and going oft about
0 Lo ſpeake, he often ſtayd: and with her garments hid her kace
Fo2 ſhame, and laſtly fayd : O happye is my mothers cace
That luch a huſband hath. with that agrecuous ſygh the gaue, i
And hilld her peace. Theis woꝛdes of hers a trembling ehllnelle dꝛaue
In nurcis limbes, which perf her bones: (for now he vnderſſod
Che cace) and all her hoꝛpe heare vp ſtitlly faring too
And many things the talbe to put away her curſed loue,
It that it had bene pollible the madneſſe to remoue.
Che Mapd herielf ta be Fall trew the councell doth eſpye:
Pit (fee may not haue her loue he fully myndes to dpe.
Hive (ill (cy nurce) thou (hale obteine (cher durſt not fay thy father,
But ſtapd at that.) And foꝛbycauſe that Myrrha ſhould the rather
Belckue her, fhe conſirmd her woꝛdes by othe. The perrelp feaſt
Ok gentle Ceres came, in which the wyues bothe moſte and leaſt
Appareld all in whyght are wont the firtlings ol the ſeeld
Fyne garlonds made of cares of coꝛne tw Ceres foꝛ to yœld.
And fo2 the ſpace of thꝛyce thꝛeꝛ nyghts they counted it a fin
Co haue the vſe of any man, oꝛ once tw towche bis ſ iin.
Among theis women did the MQ ueene frequent the ſecret rites.
ob whyle that of his laworull wyfe his bed was voyd a ninbtes, 55
The nurce was doble diligent: and fynding Ciny ras .
Mell wacht with wyne, Hee did ſurmyſe there was a pꝛetye latle
In loue with him. And hyghly her her beawty ſerteth out.
And beeing afked of her peres,the ſayd the was about
Che age ok Myrrha, well (q he) then being her to my bed.
Returning home (he ſayd: be glad my nurcechilde: we haue ſped.
Pot all ſo wholly in her hart was wꝛetched Myrrha glad,
But that her foꝛe milgtuing mynd did alſo make her ſad.
Howberte he alſo did reiopce as in a certaine kynd,
Such diſcoꝛd of affections was within her combꝛed mynd.
It was the tyme that all things reit. And now Bostes bꝛyght
The dꝛiuer of the Oxen ſeuen about the noꝛthpole pygbt.
Had ſumwhat turnd his wapne aſyde, when wicked Myrrha ſped 5


pace ber bu Mette, Out of heauen the golden Phocbee Ged,
: D. i. Ulleh


ogre
—


—
ae ——


— ==)


—


GO wo Une
/ 5


oe * ff


: The tenth booke of


ith clotods moze black than any pitch the Harres did hyde their hed.
The nyght beecommeth vtter voyd ol all her wanted lyght. f
And birſt before all other hid their faces out of ſyght

God Icar aud Erigonee his daughter, who for loue

Spot vertuous to her katherward, was take vp aboue
And made a ſtarre in heauen. Thꝛe tymes had Myrrha warning giuen
By fumbling, to retpꝛe. Three tymes the deathfull Owle that æuen
With dolefull noyſe pagnofticates vnhappie lucke. Pet came

Sher foꝛward ſrill: the dark nelle of the nyght abated hame, -

Wer left hand held her nurce, her right the darke blynd way did grope.
Anon the tm the chamber came: anon the doꝛe was ope:

Anon he entred in. with that her koltring hammes did quake:

Her colour dyde: her blod and hart did cleerly her foꝛſake.

The neerer the àppꝛoched to her wickedneſle, the moꝛe

Sher trembled: Ok her enterpꝛyle it irked her full fore : bi k
And fapn (hee would He might pnknowe haue turned back. Purce led
Her pawling forward by the hand: and putting her to bed, 5
Beere rake this Damzell Cinyras,fhee ts thine owne ſher ſed. a
And fo the layd them beck to bꝛeſt. Che wicked father takes i
Bis bowelles into filthy bed, and there with woꝛdes alflakes 4
Che mapdens feare,and cherres her vp. And leatk this cryme of thepzes
Myght want the ryghtlull termes, by chaunce as in reſpect of yeæres 5
Me daughter did hir call, and ſhee him father. Bering ſped 0
With curſed (ede in wicked womb cher teft her fathers bed⸗ "
Ol which fone after thee became greate bagged with ber ſhame. ¥
Mert night the lebodneſte doubled. And no end was of the fame, N
Untill at length chat Cinyras deſyꝛous fo2 to knowe ö
Apts louer that fo many nyghts vppon him did beltowe, ; t
Did fetch a light: by which be fatve his owne mot bepnous cryme⸗ i
And erke his daughter. natheleſle, his ſozrob at that time 8
Nepꝛeſt his ſpeeche. Then hanging by he drew a Napier bꝛyghe. ‘
Away ran Myrrha, and by meanes of darknelle of the nyght N
Shee was delivered from the death: and raping in the bꝛoade :
Datebearing felves of Arabye, ſher theough Panchaya pode, :
And twanndzing full nyne monethes at length thee refted being tyꝛde ‘
In Saba land. And when the tyme was nekre at hand exppꝛde, f
And that bneath the burthen of her womb cher well could beare, aut


|
|
i
|
f
|


=


—


9


A > FS


—


Ouids Metamorphofis. 131
Hot knowing what che might delpꝛe, diſtreſt hetwerne the keare N
Ok death, and tediouſnelle of lpfe, this pꝛayer Mee did make.
O Goddes, il ol repentant folk pou any merepe tale,


Sharpe vengeance J confelle 3 haue deſerued, and content
4 am to take it paciently. Pow be it tw thentent


Chat nepther with my lyfe the qulck, noꝛ with mp death the dead
Anoped ber, from both of them erempe mer this fame fico.

And altring mer, denp to mee both lyfe and death. we {ee

Co luch as dw confelle theyꝛ faules ſum merty Hed to be.

The Geddes did graunt her this requoſt, the lalt that the Hoult make.
The ground did ouergrob hir fete, and ancles as ſher ſpake.


And from her burſten toes went rotes, which wꝛything bere and there


Did kaſten lo the trunk within the ground ſher could not feare.
Her bones did into timber turne, whereok the marie was

The pith, and into watriſh ſappe the blood of her did pafle.

Her armes were turnd tw greater boughes, her fingars into twig,
Her ſkin was hardned into bark. And now her belly big


The eatching tree had ouergrowen, and ouertane her belt,


And batted foꝛ to win her neck, and hyde it with the reit.

Sher made no tarpence noꝛ delay, but met the comming tree,

And ſhꝛonk her face within the barke therof. Although that the

Cogither with her koꝛmer ſhape her ſenſes all did leofe,

Pit weepeth (re, and from her tree warme dꝛoppes do ſoktly woſe.

The which her teares are had in pꝛyce and honour. And the Pyꝛrhe

That iſlueth from her gummp bark doth beare the name ol her,
And hall do whyle the world doth laſt. The miſbegotten chyld
Crew Kill within the tree, and from his mothers womb defplo

Sought meanes to bee delpuered. Her burthened womb did fell

Amd the trer, and ſtretcht her out. But woꝛdes wher with to tell


And vtter loꝛth her gref did want, She bad no ble of ſperch
lith which Lucina in her thꝛowes fhe might of help befeech.


Pit like a woman labꝛing was the tre, and bowwing downe

Gane ofté ſighes, x ſhed forth trares as though the there ſhould dꝛowne.
Lucina to this wofull tr came gently downe, and layd

er hand theron, and {peaking woꝛdes of eale the midwife playd.

Che tre did cranye, and the barke deuiding made awap,


: And peelded out the chyld alyue, which cryde and wayld ſtreyght ap. §
be


D. li.


| The tenth booke of


The lwaternymphes vppon the foft lwerte hearbes the chyld did lay,
And bathde him with his mothers teares. Bis face was ſuch as ſpyght
Mull nedes haue pꝛayſd. Foz ſuch he was in all conditions right.
As are the naked Cupids that in tables picurde be, .
Wut tw thentent be map with them in euerp poynt agrer,
Let eyther him ber furniſſhed wih wings and quiuer light,
Oꝛ from the Cupids take theyꝛ wings and bomes and arrowes quight.
Away Aippes Acting tyme vnſpyde and mocks vs to our face,
And nothing may compare with peares in lwiktneſle of theyz pace.
That wꝛetched imp whom wickedly his graundkather begate,


k


SS. (STS —————


SS
=


And whom his curſed fuſter bare, who hidden was alate 1
Mithin the trer, and latelp boꝛne, became immediatiy 0
Che beawtpfullyſt babe on whom man euer fet his eye. 0
Anon a firipling her became, and by and by a man, Wie nine 10
And euery dap moze beawtilull than other he beam. *
That in che end Dame Venus kell in loue with him: wberby |
He did reuenge the outrage ol his mothers billanpe.. A nn hh


Soꝛ as the armed Cupid kiſt Dame Venus, vnbeware

An arrow ſkicking out did raze hir bꝛeſt vppon the bare. hat Lig
The Coddeſſe being wounded, thꝛuſt away her fonne. The wound
Appeered not to bee ſo derpe as afterward was found. n ai
It did decepac her at the frſt. The beaw ty of the lad

Inflaamd her. Lo Cythera Ale na mynd at all thee had. ith UE
$202 brite Paphos where the ſra beats round abont the hoꝛe, 92
Noꝛ fiſlhy Gnyde, noꝛ Amathusthat hath of metalls Toe, 5 3
ea euen krom heauen the did abſteyne. Sher lobd Adonis moze
Than heauen. Le him (he clinged ap, and bare him companpe. „
And in the ſhadowe want (he war to reit continuallp.

And foꝛ tw fet her beatwepe out moſt famelp to the eye 8
Wp trimlp decking of her {eli Thꝛough bulhy grounds and groues,
And auer Hills and Dales, and Lawnds and ſtonp rocks He roues⸗
Bare knerd with garment tucked bp according to the wont

Ok Phebe, and thee chera the hounds with hallowing lie a hunt,
Purſewing game ol hurtleſle ſoꝛt as Pareos made lotwe beſoze.

Oꝛ ſkagges with loftye heades, oꝛ bucks, But with the Hurdp Woare
And rauening walk and Bearewhelpes armd with balp pabes, and be
Che cruell Lyons which delpght in blond, and Laughter ſake⸗ ahi


OQuids Metamorphoſis. 132


She meddled not. And of theils ſame the warned alſo ther


Adoniz foz to Hanne them, if thou woldſt haue warned ber.


Bee bold on cowards (Venus fapd) foꝛ whoſo path aduaunce
Himſelfe againſt the bold, may bap to merte with fern miſchaunce.
Mherloꝛe I pꝛay thee my ſwerte hop foꝛbeare to bold to ber.

Foꝛ feare thy raſhneſſe hurt thy ſelk and woꝛt the wo of mer


Encounter not the kynd ot beaſtes whom nature armed bath,
Feoꝛ dolot thou buy thy pꝛayſe to dere procuring ther ſum ſcath.
Chy tender youth, thy beawty bꝛyght, thy countnance layꝛe and bꝛaut


Although they had the force to win the hart of Venus, haue
No pode ageinſt tye Lyons, noꝛ ageinſt the baled twyne.
The epes and harts of ſauage beats bo nought to theis inclyne.
The cruell Boares beare thunder in theyꝛ hoked tuſhes, and


Erccrding force and fœrceneſſe is in Lyons to withFand.


er


n


And fare 3 hate them at my hart. Co him demaunding why:


A Amonfrous chaunce (q Vers) J will tell ther by and by,


Chat hapned for a fault. But now vnwonted tople hath mans
Mer weerpe: and beholde. in tyme this Poplar with his hade
Allureth, and the ground ſoꝛ cowch doth ſerue to reſt bppon,
J peep thee let vs reſt hre. They fate them downe anon.

And lying vpward with her head vppon his lappe along,


Sheer thus began: and in her tale Hee buſled him among.


Perchaunce thou hak oꝛ thts tyme hard ok one that oucreame
The lwifteſt men in foremanthippe.no fable was that fame.


She overcame them out ol dolot. And hard tt is to tell


Cher whither the did in kotemanchippe oꝛ beawty moze excell,
Vppon a ſeaſon as fhe alist of Phebus, what he was
That ſhould her huſband ber, he ſayd. Foꝛ huſband do not paſle


O Atalacita, thou at all of huſband heit no nerde


Dhonne huſbanding. But pit thou cant not ſhonne it J ther rede.
Alyue thou ſhalt not be thy ſell. Sher being ſoꝛe alrayd


Okthis Apollos Daacle, did kepe herſeif a mapd,


And liued in the ſhady wodes. hen wers ta her tame, ö


And were ok her impoꝛtunate, {ye dꝛaue away the fame


With bopſtous wozdes, and with Core condition of the game.
Jam not to be had (ꝙ hex) onleſle pe able bee
N In a foz to vanquiſh mer ver muſt contend with mer


tit. In


J


The tenth booke of


In foreman hippe. And who fo winnes the wager, J agree
To be his wife. But if that he bee found to lowe, then ha
Spall loſe his head. Lhis of pour game the verrpe law ſhatl bee.
Sher was in deve vnmercikull. But ſuch is beawties powꝛe,
Chat though the ſayd condition were extreme and ouer ſowze,
Pit many ſuters were fo rath to vndertake the lame.
Hippomenes as a loker on of this vncurtedus game,
Sate by, and ſapd. Js any man fo mad to (abe a topfe
Nlith ſuch apparant perill and the hazard of his lple:?
And vtterly he did tondemne the pongmens loue. But when
He law her face and bodye bare, (loꝛ why the Lady then
Dip ſkrippe her to her naked ſkin the which was like tw mpne,
Oꝛ rather (if that thou wert made a woman like to thyne:
Be was amazde. And holding vp his hands to heauen, he ſapth:
Foꝛgiue mee pou with whom J found ſuch fault euen now: In faythz
J did not know the wager that ver ran for. As tee pꝛapſeth


The beawty ol her, in him felfe the fyꝛe ol loue he rayſetg. b
And though an enup fearing leat fhe ſheuld away be wann,
He wicht that nere a one of them fo lwift as He might ranne. i
And wherfore (y her) put not I myſe lt in pꝛeace to trpe eee i
Che fortuite of this wager 2 Cod himſelk continnally iM
Darth help the bold and hardye loꝛt. now whyle Hippomenes a
Debares theis things within himfelfe and other like to hefe it
ye Damzell ronnes as her ferte were wings. And though that ſher 4
Dio dy as fwift as arrow froma Lurbye bowe: pit her 9
Moe wondꝛed at her beawtye than at ſwiftneſſe of her pace i
Her ronning greatly did augment her beawtpe and her grace. it

be wynd ap thrtsing from her fete the tabells of her focks x
Uppon her back as whyght as Mowe did tolle her golden locks, 4
And eke thembꝛopdꝛed garters that were tpLe beneathe her ham. 4
A rednelle mire wh whyght vppon her tender bodye cam, i
As when a ſcarlet curtaine ſtreynd ageinſt a plapfired wall 0
Doth caſt like ſhadowe, making it ſæme ruddye therwithall. y
ob tubple the ſtraunger noted this the race was kullp ronne, i


And Atalanc (as (hee that had the wager clerrely wonne) 0
Mas crowned with a garlond bꝛaue. Che vanquicht ſighing fore» \
Did lofe theyꝛ lyues accogting tw agreament made bekoze. *

: — Poobelt


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 133


Polwdait nought at all diſmayd with theis mennes lucklelle cace
He ſtepped foꝛth, and loking full bppon the mapoens face,
Sayd: wherkoꝛe Daft thou ſceke renowne in vanquiſſhing of ſuch
As were but daſtards? cope with mer. If fortune be fo much
My krænd to giue mee victoꝛie, thou nerdeſt not hold ſcoꝛne
Co peeld to ſuch a noble man as J am. J am boꝛne
The fonne of noble Megaree Oncheſtyes ſonne, and he
Was ſonne to Neptune, Chus am J great graundchyld by degree
In ryght deſcent, or him that rules the waters. Neyther do
J out of kynd degenerate from vertue mierte therto,
Oꝛ if my loꝛtune bee fo hard as vanquiſht for to ber,
Chou ſhalt obte ine a famous name by duercomming mee.
In ſaping thus, Atlanta caſt a gentle luke on him N
And dowting whither tha rather had to loſe the day oꝛ win,
Sayd thus. Nhat God an enmy to the beawtyfull, is bent
Ta bring this perſon te his end, and therfore hath him ſent


To ſcke a topic with hazard of his tyfe 2 It J ſhould ber
Mplelfe the tudge in this behalfe, there is not ſure in mer


That doth deſerue lo derrely tw be earned. neyther doth

His beawty moue mp hart at all. pit is it ſuch in ſath

As well might mwue mer. But bycauſe as pita chyld he is,

His perfon moses ine not fo much as doth his age wis.
Berlydes that manhod is in him, and mynd vnkrapd of death:
Weelpoes that of the watrye race from Neptune as he ſeth

He is the fowꝛth: beſydes that he oath loue me, and eee
Do great accompt to win mer to his wyſe, that ſoꝛ my ſaue

He is contented fo; tw dye, if fortune ber ſo faze. ttt Hl
Ageinſt him to denpe him mee. Thou ſtraunger hence Wertes,
Away 3 fay now whyle thou mapſt, and ſhonne my! blany bed.
My inariage cruell is, and craues the lofing of thy hed. f
Chere is no wench but that would ſuch a hulband gladiy catch.
And thee that wyſe were myght Belpre to inerte with fuch a ard
But why now alter heading of fo many, do J care

F0} thee 2 Loke thou tw that. oꝛ ſith fo many men as are
Alreadye put to llawghter can not warne ther to ber ware.


But that thou wilt bee weerpe of thy lyke, dye: do nat ſpare.
And Hall he perrilh then bytaule he fought relive wh mer


“Thetenthbooke of


And foꝛ his love vnwwꝛthely with death rewarded ber?
All men of ſuch a victoꝛy will ſpeake to foule a ſhame.
Wut all the woꝛld can teſtifye that J am not to blame.

Mould God thon wouldſt deliſt. Oꝛ elſe bycauſe thou are ſo mad,

J would to God a litle moze thy fete of ſwiltneſſe had. ies

Ab what a maydens countenance is in this chploith face?

Ah folih boy Hippomenes hot twzetchea is thy cace 2

J would thou neuer hadſt mer lerne. Chou woꝛthy art of lpfe.

And tf fo be J happp were, and that ta bee a wyfe f N

The cruell deſtnyes had not mer foꝛbidden, ſure thou art

The onely wyght with whom J would ber matcht with all my hart. 5

Chis (poker: Khe pit rawe, and but nebo ſtrinen with the dart
Ok Cupid, beeing ig noꝛant, did lowe and knew it nat af

Anon her Cather. and the folk allembled, willed that

They ſhould begin theyꝛ wanted race. Then Neptunes (flue prayd

Mith carefull hart and vopce to mer, and thus deuoutly ſayd.

O Venus, faudur myne attempt, and ſend me downe thyne apd

To compaſle my delpred loue which thou halt on mer lad.

His prayer mobd me (J confelle,) and long 3 not delayd
wWefoꝛe J helpt him Nob there tsa certame fecld the which
Che Cyprian folk call Damaſene, moſt fertile and moſt rich
Ok all the Cyprian feelds: the ſame was conſecrate to me:
In aunclent tyme, and ol my Church the glebland want to be. 5
Amid this feld, with golden leaues there growes a gadip tree
Che crackling boughes whereok are all of pellew gold. J came ;
And gathered golden Apples thee: and bearing thence the fame tt
Mithin my hand, immediatly to Hippomen J gat i 1
Inuiſible to all wyghts elle ſaue him and taught him what i N
To do with them. Lhe Trumpets blew: and girding fortvard,both
Set foꝛth, and on the houering duſt with nimble terte eche goth. a
A man would think they able were bppon the Sea t go 4
And neuer wet thepz fete, and on the ayles ol coꝛne alſo |
Chat Hillis growing in the feld and neuer downe themtread. N
Che man take courage at the ſhowt and woꝛdes ol them that ſedd
Pow nol is tyme Flippomenes tm ply it, hye a pacggcge:
Entoꝛce thplelt with all thy ſtrength: lag not in any tate: N
Chou ſhalt obteine. It is à thing ryght dowtlull tebsber her Be ‘


|
,
|
f


ES OWS OSs ——


2


=
—


=


a3 SS


A Hot karre from this fame temple was with little light aden |


Ouids Metamorphofis. 34
At theis well willing woꝛdes of theyꝛs reioyſed moꝛe, oꝛ ſhck. 2
O Loꝛd how often when hee might outHrippe him did he fap, —


And gazed long vppon his fate, right loth to go her way⸗


A tweer'pe breath pꝛocerded from theyꝛ parched lippes, and farre
They had to ronne. Then Neptunes imp her lwiltneſle to diſbarre,
Crolld downe a toneſide of the wap an Apple of the thee,

Amasde therat, and couetous of the godly Apple, hea:

Did ſlep afyde and ſnatched vp the rolling frute of gold.

With that Hippomenes eoted her. The folke that did bebold,
Made nopſe with clapping of eheyꝛ hands. She recompenſt her llothe
And loſle of tyme with fotemanthippe ; and freight ageine ee.
Hippomenes, leaning him behind. and being ſtayd agen
With taking vp the fecond, the him ouertwke. And when

The race was almoſt at an end: He ſayd: O Goddeſſe, thon

That art the authoꝛ of this gift, alliſt mee kreendly now,

And therwithall, of purpoſe that he might the longer bee

In comming, her with all his might did bobble the laſf of na

A ſtzew a toneſide ot the felde. The Lady ſeemde tw males:

d dom in taking of it vp. J foꝛced her tw take f

It vp, and to the Apple 4 did put a heauy weyght, a

And made it of luch mallineſte thee could not lift it freight.


And leaſt that 3 in telling of my tale map longer ber, 3 a


Than they in ronning ot their race,curfripped quight was thee. 112

And he that wan her, marping her enioyd ber loꝛ his fee.
Thinkſt thou J was not wanthy thanks, Adonis thiuks ben
J earned not that he tw mee ſhould frankincence allow

But he foꝛgetkull neyther thanks noꝛ frankincenee did giue.

y meanes wherok to ſoden wꝛath he iuſt ly did me dꝛiue.

Foz being greeued with the ſpyght, bycauſe J would nat ber

Delpyld ol ſuch as were tw come, I thought it beit foꝛ me

Za take ſuch bengeance of them both as others might take bade

By ther, And ſo ageinſt them both in anger J proceedes


Atemple of the mother of the Geddes that vowwed was
And buplded by Echion in a darkſome graue, they paſſe


There thꝛough my might Hippomenes was toucht and arredle,
That nevdes he would to Menerie though ont of featan go. 2


ant ith:


— — — — — . 2 2 2 CW ales a Oe NN
rr ⅛ oe. .. 7 7... 7.


Thetenth booke of


‘eh pommpe vawlted naturally, long conſecrate ere then
Foꝛ old religion, not vnlike a caue: wher pꝛieſts of poze
Beſtowed had al Images ol weden Goddes gwd Kaze,
Hippomenes entring herinto dekyld the holp place.
Mich his bulatofall luſt: from which the Idolls turnd thep2 face,
And Cybell with the tolwꝛed toppes diſdeyning, dolwoted whither
Dhee in the lake of Styx might dꝛowne the wicked folk togither.
Che pennance ſæmed ouer lyght. and therefoꝛe thee did cawſe
Chine pellow manes to growe vppon theyꝛ necks: and baked patves
In ſtead of ſingars tw ſuecerde. Thepꝛ ſhoulders were the ſame
They were beloꝛe: with wondꝛous fozce derpe bꝛeſted they became,
Cheyꝛ loke became ferce, cruell grim, and ſoloꝛe: a tufted taple
Stretcht out in length karre alter them vpon the ground doth traple.
In ſtead of ſpech they roꝛe: in ffead of bed they haunt the wod:
And dꝛeadlull onto others they foꝛ all theyꝛ cruell mode
MLith tamed teeth chan’ Cybells bitts in Hape of Lyons. Dhonne
Chels beaſtes deere hart: and not from theis alonely (ee thou ronne,
But allo from eche other beaſt that turnes not backe to flight
Bat oftreth with his bopſtolws bꝛeſt to try the chaunce of fyght:
Leak that thyne ouerhardinelſe bee hurtfull to vs both.
Chis warning giuen, Ww poked lwannes away though aire He goth.
But manhod by admoniſhment reſtreyned could not ber.
Wp chaunce his Hounds in following of the tracke,a Boare did fer,
And rotyfed him. And as the Cwyne was comning from the wad,
Adonis hithim with a dart a ſnew, and dꝛew the blood. 5
Che Boare ſtreygbt with his baked groyne d hunt ingſtatle out dꝛelw
Weſtayned with his blod, and on Adonis did purſew 5
Who trembling and retyꝛing back, tw place of refuge dꝛeln.
And hyding in his codds his tufkes as farre as he could thꝛuſt
He lapd him all along foꝛ dead vppon the pellow duff.
Dame Venus in her chariot dꝛawen with lwannes was ſcarce arrined
At Cyprus, when ſher knew a karre the ſygh ol him bepapucd
Ol lyfe. Sher turnd her Cygnets backe. and when ſher from the ſbye
Benhilid him dead, and in his blo beweltred foꝛ to lye:
Sher leaped dewne, and tare at once hir garments from her bef,
And rent her heare, and beate vppon her ſtomack with her fit,


2


—~— FF FTF TF


S


=
*


—


—
pee


qs


>


Ouids Metamorphofis.


And blaming ſoꝛe the deſtnyes, ſapd. Pit a they not obteine


1357


Cheir will in all things. Of mp greele remembꝛance ſhall remayne.


(Adonis) whyle the woꝛld doth laff. From pere to pere ſhall growe
d thing that of my heaninelle and ok thy death ſhall ſhode


Che liuelp likenefle. In a flowꝛe thy blod 4 will beſtowe.
Wank thou the powꝛe Perſephonee rank fented Mints to make
Ot womens limbes ? and map not J lpke pobwꝛe vpon me take
Mlithout oifoetne and ſpyght, ta turne Adonis to a flowe:


5


This ſed, thee ſpꝛinckled edar on the blod, which though the polbꝛe


Therot did ſweli like bubbles ſherre that ryſe in weather clave —
On water. And before that full an holvꝛe exppꝛed weere,

Ok all one colour with the blod a flowꝛe ſhe there did fpnd

Euen like the flo wꝛe of that fame tree whoſe frute in tender rynde
Wane pleaſant graynes inclofoe. Hotobect the vſe ot them is ſhoꝛt.
SFoꝛ whp the leaues dw hang fo loce thꝛough lightneffe in ſuch ſoꝛt,
As that the windes that all things perce, with euerp little blaſt
Da ſhake them of and ſhed them ſo as that they cannot lav.


Finis decimi Libri.


«THE. XI. BOOKE OF
Oude eMetamorphofis.


25 Dip whple the Thracian Poet with this ſong delpghts b mpnng
A Dé fauage beaſtes, ⁊ dꝛawes both ſtones and tres ageynſt their

Behold the wyues of Cicomie W redderrſzinnes about Guynds,

Cheir furious bꝛiſts as in the feld they gadded on a rout,

Eſppde him from a hillocks toppe fill ſinging tw his harß.

Ok whom one fhoke her head at him, and thus began to carp.

Wehold (fapes Che) behold ponfame is be that doth diſdeine

Us women. And with that fame wand ſher ſent her lawonce amapne


At Orphyes finging mouth. Che Latonce armd round about Wieaues, aw!


Did bit hem, and without a wound a marke behynd it leaues.
Another thꝛew a fone at him, which vanquicht wich his [werte

And mot melodtus harmonye, fell humbly at his fecte

As ſoꝛpe foꝛ the furious ac it purpoſed. But rath

And beady ryot out of frame all reaſon nob did oath,
And krantik outrage reigned. Pit had the ſwerteneſſe of his ſong
Appeaſd all weapons, ſauing that the noyſe now growing ſkrong

M ith blowing thalmes,and beating dummes, bedlem howling out,
And clapping hands on euery ſyde by Bacchus dꝛunken rout,

Did dꝛowne the lownd of Orphyes harp. Then firtt of all ſtones were
Made ruddy with the prophets blod, and could not giue him eare.

And firſt the flocke of Bacchus froes by bfolence bake the ring

Ok Serpents, birds, and ſauage beaffes that foꝛ to herre him ſing
Sate gazing round about him there. And then with bluddy hands
Chey ran vppon the pꝛophet who among them ſinging ſtands.

hey flockt about him like as when a ſoꝛt of birds haue found,

An Oule a day tymes in a tod: and hem him in fall round,

As when a Stag by hungrye hownds is in a moꝛning found,

Che which lozeſtall him round about and pull him to the ground.
Euen fo the pꝛophet they allayle, and thꝛowe their Thyꝛſes greene

At him, which foz another ble than that inuented berne.

Sum caſt me clods, ſum boughes of trees, ¢ ſum thꝛew ſfones. And leat
Chat weapon wherwithall to wzeake theyꝛ wodneſle which increaſt
Should want, it chaunſt that Oren by were filling of the ground
And labꝛing men with bꝛawned armes not farre fro thence were ies


r


wv


3° FF


— — 42 — FF


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 36


Avigging of the hardned earth, and earning of thepzfad,

With lweating bꝛowes. They feeing this fame rout, no longer fon,
But ran atwap and left theyꝛ toles behynd them. Cuerp where
Chꝛough all the fœld theyꝛ mat tocks, rakes, and ſhouells feattred wert.
Vhich when the cruell fends had caught, and had a funder rent
The hoꝛned Oxen, backe ageine to Orphy ward they went, ö
And (wicked wights) they murthꝛed him, who neuer till that howꝛe
Did btter woꝛdes in vaine, noꝛ frig without effectuall powꝛe.

And though that mouth of his oh loꝛd) which euen the ones had heard,
And vnto which the witlelle beaſtes had often giuen regard, ¥
His ghofk then bꝛeathing into aire, departed. Euen the fowles

Mere fad for Orphye, and the beaſt with ſoꝛpe ſyghing howles:

Che rugged Tones did moꝛne loꝛ him the wods which many a tyme
Had followed him tm bere him ſing, bewayled this fame cryme.

Pea euen the tres lamenting him did ca theyꝛ leauy heare

Che riuers alſo with theyꝛ teares (men (ap) enercaſed were.

Pea and the Pymphes of bakes d wads bppon theyꝛ ſtreames did faple
Mith ſcattred heare about theyꝛ cares, in boats with fable ſayle.

His members lay in ſundꝛie Keds, His head and harp both cam

To Hebrus. and (a iwwndzous thing) as dotwne the ſtreame they (vam,
Bis Harp did peld a maꝛning found: his liueleſſe tong did mae

A certeine lamentable noyſe as though it Hill pit ſpake, =
And bothe the banks in mazntng wyſe made anfwer to the lame.

At length a downe theyꝛ country ſtreame t open fea they tame ⸗


And lyghted on Methymnye ſhoꝛe in Lesbos land. There


Po loner on the foꝛreine coaſt now caſt a land they were,

But that a cruell naturde Snake did ſfreyght vppon them fly.

And licking on his ruffled heare the which was dꝛopping dꝛpe,

Did gape tw tyꝛe vppon thoſe lippes that had bene wont to ung

Molt heauenly hymnes. But Phebus ſtreyght pꝛeuenting v ſame thing.

Diſpoynts the Serpent of his bit and turnes him into ſtone

With gaping chappes Already was the Ghoſt of Orphye gone i

Ho Plutos realme, and there he all tho places elt beebilla bay

Che which he heretofore had lerne. And as he fought the feld

Df fayze Elyſion (inhere the foules of godly folk de wanne, )

He found his twpfe Eurydicec,to whambe ſtreyght did runne 5
5 4 pees LENT 8 nd.


The. xj. booke of


And hilld her in imbꝛacing armes. Chere notw be one while walks
Cogither with hir cheeke bp cherke: another while be ſtalks
Beke her.and another whyle be followeth her. And now
Without all kinde of foꝛfeyture he faufly myght auotw
His loking bakward at bis {wpfe. But Bacchus greeued at
Che murther of the Chapleine of his Oꝛgies, fuffred not
The milchef vnreuengd tw ber. Foꝛ by and by he bound, fa
The Thracian women bp the fete with wꝛithen rote in ground, 5
As many as conſenting to this wicked act were found.
And loke how much that eche of them the pꝛophet did purſew,
So much be ſharpening of their toes, within the ground them dꝛebo.
And as the bird that fpnds her leg belnarled in the net N
The which the fowlers ſuttlelye hathe clocelp foꝛ her fet,
And fieles ha cannot get awap, ſtands flickering with her wings,
And with her fearefull leaping vp dꝛawes clocer fill the ſtrings:
So eche of theis when in the ground they fatkned were, alſayd
Allayghted fo2 to fly away. But euery one was ffapd: |
Mith winding rote which hilld ber downe. her kriſking could not bate,
And whyle the lokte what was become of To, of naple, and fote,
Shee fatve her leggs growe round in one, and turning into wade,
And as her thyghes with violent hand he ſadly ſtr iking ſtode,
hee Felt them tree : her bꝛeſt was tree ber ſhoulders eke were trees
Wer armes long boughes pe myght haue thought, and not deceyued bee,
But Bacchus was not ſo content: he quygbt foꝛſwke their land:
And with a better companpe remoued out of hand
Unto the Upneyarde of his owne mount IT molus, and the riuer
Pactolus though as pit no ſtreames of gold it did deliuer,
He ſpyghted was foꝛ pꝛecious ſands. is olde accuſtomd rout
Ot wodwards and ol franticke froes enupꝛond him about.
But old Silenus was away. The Phrygian ploughmen kound
Mum reeling bothe loꝛ dꝛwnkennelſe and age, and bꝛought him bound
Mith garlands, onto Midas king ol Phrygia, vnto whom
Che Thracian Oꝛphye and the pꝛerſt Eumolphus comming from
The towne of Athens erſt had taught the Oꝛgies. IMhen he knew
Mis fellowe and compamon of the felfe fame badge and crew.
Uppon the comming of this gue, he kept a feaſt the fpace


Ok twyce kyue dayes and twyce fpue nyghts twgither in that plate *


. 2m


— —


Ouids Metamorphoſis. N


And now thelenenth tyme Lucifer had muſtred in the ſky

Che heauenly hoſt, when Midas commes tw Lydia iocundly
And paloes the old Silenus to his foſterchyld. Be glad

Chat he his tollerfather had eftfones recouered, bad R

Ring Midas aſt him what he would. Right glad of that was her,
But not a whit at latter end the better ſhould he ber.

He minding tw mifole bis giftes, layd: graunt that all and ſome
Che which my body towebeth bare may pellow gold become.
God Bacchus gtaunting his requeſt, his hurtfull gift perfoꝛmd,
And that he had not better wicht he in his ſlomacke ſtoꝛmd.

Reioycing in his harine awap full merpe goes the king:

And for to try his promis true he tolvchech euery thing.
Scarce gtuing credit to himſelt, he pulled pong gree twiggs
From of an Holmetree : by and by all golden were the ſpꝛiggs
He take a flintſtone from the ground, the fone like wyſe became
Pure gold. He towched next a clod of earth, and ſtreight the ſame
By force of towching did become a wedge of pellow gold.

He gathered eares of rypened coꝛne: immediatly beholde

Che coꝛne was gold. An Apple then he pulled from a trex:

Pe would haue thought the Heſperids had giuen it him. It her

On Pillars high his fingars lapd, they gliſtred like the ſonne.

Che water where be waſht his hands did from his hands fo ronne,

As Danae might haue bæne therwith beguyld. Be ſcarce could hold

is palling topes within his hart, foꝛ making all things gold.

Mhyle he thus iopd, his officers did ſpꝛed the boꝛd anon,

And let downe ſundꝛp forts of meate and mancheate thervppon.

Chen whither his hand did toweh the bꝛead, the bꝛead was mally gold:


Dr whither he chawde with hungry teeth his meste,pe might behold


Che perce ot meate betwerne his iawes a plat of gold to bee.

In dzinking wene and water mirt, ye myght diſcerne and fee

Che liquid gold ronne downe his thꝛote. Amazed at the ſtraunge
Milchaunce, and being both a wꝛetch and rich, he wicht to chaunge
Bis riches foꝛ bis foꝛmer ate, and now he did abhoꝛre

Che thing which euen but late befoꝛe he cherlly longed fo2.

Po meate his hunger lakes : his thꝛote is ſhꝛunken vp with thurſt:
And iuſtly doth his batefull gold toꝛment him as accurſt.

Chen lifting vp his forp armes and handes to heauen, he erx de:
x.y.


#4


22 ee — 8 .
a OS A


O father Bacchus pardon mer. Py ſinne F will not hyde.

aue merey beſerch the and vouchſauk to rid me quyght

From this fame harme that feemes fo god and glozious vnto ſpght.
The gentle Bacchus ſtreight vppon confeflion of his cryme :
Relloren Midas to the fate hee had in foꝛmer tyme.

And hauing made perkoꝛmance of his pꝛomis, he bereft him

Che gift that he had graunted him. And leak he Mould haue left him
Bærdawbed with the vꝛegges of that fame gold which wickedly

Mer wilched had, he willed him to get him by and by :

Ta that great ryuer which doth ronne bp Sardis tobone, and there
Along the chanell vp the ſtreame his open armes to beare

Untill he commeth to the (pring: and then his head to put

Full vnderneathe the foming ſpobot where greateſt was the gut,
And fo in waſſhing of his limbes to wath away his eryme.

Che king (as was commaunded him) age int the ſtreame did clyme,
And Frepabe the powꝛe of making gold departing quyght from him,


The. xj. booke of


N
0


— WS SSS SS


SS


4
— SS SSS Se


Anfeas the ryuer, making it with golden ſtreame to fim, Mh
Che force whereof the bankes about fo ſoked in theyꝛ beynes, it
That euen as pit the pelle gold vppon the cloddes remapnes. it


Then Midas hating riches haunts the paſturegrounds andgrones, —™
And bp r dotwn with Pan among the Lawnds ¢mountainesrones,
Wut ſtill a head moze fat than wyſe, and doltiſh wit he hath, 1
The which as erif,pit once againe mutt work theyꝛ mayſter (cath. ar x


The mountapne I mole from lottye toppe to ſeaward loketh downe .,
And lpꝛeading farre his bee ly ſydes, extendeth to the totone ty
Ol Sardis with the tonefpde and to Hypep with the tather. iy
There Pan among the fapzye elues that dawnced round togither at


In letting of his conning out fo2 ünging and fo: play ay
Uppon his pype of reedes and war, pꝛeſuming loꝛ tw fay a
Apollos muſick was not like to his, did take in hand : 0
A farre vnequall match, wheref the Tmole foꝛ indge ſhould fand. N
Che auncient tudge ſitts downe vppon his bill, and ridds his cares Ni
From tres, and oiely on his head an Oken garlond wrares, ith
M hero the Acoznes dangled downe about his hollow bꝛow. i
And Inking on the Cod of neate be ſayd: pe nerde not now N
To tarry longer foꝛ pour iudge. Then Pan blew lotwd and ſtrong & U


Dis country pype af redes, and with his rude and Lomelp ſong |
8 sit 3 N Delighted


Ouids Metamorphofis. , 138


Pelighted Midas eares, foz be by chaunce was in the thꝛong.
Weather Pan had done, the facred Tmoleta Phebus turnd his lake,
And with the turning of bis bead bis bulſhye heare be hake.
A ben Phebus with a crowne of ay bppon his golden heare
Du ſwerpe the ground with ſcarlet robe. In left hand he did beare
th dis vlall made of pꝛecious ſtones and Juoꝛpe tntermirt.
And in his right hand fo2 to ſtrike, his bowe was rerdy fit.
He was the berrpe paͤterne ofa god uſtcian ryght f
Anon he gan with conning hand the tuned Frings to ſmypght. 5
Che lwertenelle of the which did lo the iudge of them delyght,
_ Xhat Pan was willed foz to put his Reedepppe in his cace,
if and not to fiddle noꝛ to fing where bialls were in place.
Che tudgement of the holy hill was lyked well of all, ö
My Saue Midas, who found fault therwith and wꝛongfull did it call.
„ Apollo could not {after well his foliſh ares to k pe .
They: humaine ſhape, but dꝛew them wyde, z made them long ¢ derpe.
And fillo them full of whytiſh heares, and made them downe to fag.
And thꝛough to much vnſtableneſſe continuallp to wag.
His body heping in the ret his manly figure fit,
Mas ponnicht in the part that did offend fo2 want of ſkill.
And fo a howe paaſte Alles cares his heade did after beare.
This hame endeuereth he to hyde. And therefore he did weare
A purple npghtcappe euer ſince. But pit his Barber who
Mas wont to notte him ſpyt᷑d it: and beeing eager to
Mifclofe it, when he neyther durſt te vtter it, noꝛ could
1 It heepe in ſecret ſtill, hee went and digged vp the mowld,
And whiſpꝛing ſoktly in the pit, declaard what eares her ſpyde
His mapffer haue, and turning downe the clowꝛe ageine, did hyde
Bis blabbed woꝛdes within the ground, and cloling vp the pit
Departed thence and neuer made mo woꝛdes at all ok it.
Sone after, there begat a tuft of quiuering rerdes to growe
Which being rype bewꝛayd theyꝛ ſerde and him that did them ſowe. 5
Peoꝛ when the gentle ſowtherne wynd did lyghtly on them blowe,
They veered fozth the woꝛdes that had beene buried in the ground
al And ſa repꝛoude the Alles eares of Midas with theyz found.
Vf Apollo after this reuenge from Tmolustobe his liyght:
/ And ſwæping though the apres did on the lelllame lyde alyghe 5
1 L 5


a=


i The. xj. booke of
Ok Helleſpontus, in the Realme of king Laomedon.
There Move vppon the right ſyde of Sigæum, and vppon
Che leit of Rhetye cliffe that tyme, an Altar buplt of old
To loue that hereth all mennes woꝛdes. Herre Phebus did behold
Che loꝛeſayd king Laomedon beginning foꝛ to lap
Foundation of the walles of Troy: which work from dap tw dap
Tal ent hard and ſlowly forward, and regupꝛd no little charge,
Chen he togither with the God that rules the lurges large,
Did put them elues in ſhape of men, and bargaynd with the king
Mf Phrygia foz a ſumme of gold his work to end to bing.
Now when the woꝛk was done, the king theyꝛ wages them denaypd,
And falilp faaſte them downe with othes it was not as they ſayd.
Chou Hale not mock vs vnreuendgd ( Neptune.) And anon
He cauſed all the ſurges of the fea to ruth vppon
Che Hore of couetous Troy, and made the countrpe lite the derpe.
The godes of all che huſbandmen away he quight did lwepe,
And duerwhelmd theyꝛ freldes with waues. And thinking this to fall
A pennance foꝛ the falfebod,be demaunded theriviball ae
His daughter fora monſter of the Sea. whom being bound. '
Witte a rocke, dout Hercules deliuering faufe and found, 5
Requyꝛd his Needs which were the hyꝛe koꝛ which he did compound.
And when that of fo great deſert the king denyde the hyꝛe,
Che twyce foꝛlwoꝛne falle tswnt of Troy he ſacked in his ire.
And Telamon in honour of vis ſeruice did enioy
Che Lady Hefion daughter of the couctous king of Troy.
#02 Peleus had already got a Soddeſſe to his wie,
And hued tite both theyꝛ fopes a right renowmed lpfe.
And lure he was not prowrer of his graundſpꝛe, than of ther
That wert become his fathꝛinlaw. Foz many mo than be 5
Haue had the bap of mighty loue the nephewes foꝛ to ber.
Wut neuer was it herretwfoꝛe the chaunce ok anp one
To haue a Goddeſſe tw his wyfe, ſaue only his alone.
For bm watry Thetis thus old Protevv did fozetell.
Go marry: thou ſyalt beare a ſonne whole dings thal ercell
His fathers farrt in feates ol arines, and greater he ſhall bee:
In honour, hugh renowme and kame, than euer cri was hee. A
This called loud the watry bed ol I hetis to fosbeate, though


a


} Ouids Metamorphofis. 39
Although his hart were moze than warme wolth loue of her foꝛ fesre
Che woꝛld ſum other greater thing than Ioue himſelt ſhould bꝛerde,
And willd the ſonne of Aeacus this Peleus to ſuccede. ome
In that which be bimfelf would fatne haue done, and fo2 to take
Che Lady of the (ea in armes a mother her to make. 5
| Chere is a bay of Theflaly that bendeth lyke a boawe.
Che ſydes Hote loꝛth, where if the fea ol any depth did howe
It were a hauen. Scarcely doth the water hyde the ſand.


aS


4 It hath a ſhoꝛe fo firme, that it a man theron dm ſtand,
Ho print of fote remapnes behynd it hindꝛeth not ones pace
1 Pe couered is with houering rerke. Adioyning to this place,


7 There is a groue of Ppꝛtletres with frute of dowle colour,
And in the midds thereok a Caue. J can not tell pou whither
Chat nature oꝛ the art of man were maker of the ſame. :
It emed rather made by arte. Oft Thetis hither came |
Starke naked, ryding bzauelp on a bꝛydled Dolphins backe.
10 There Peleus as hee lay a ſlpe bppon her often bꝛacke.
And foꝛbycauſe that at ber handes entreatance nothing winnes,
He folding her about the necke with both his armes, beginnes
Tia ofter force. And ſurely if (he had not falne to wyles
And ſhifted oktentymes her ſhape, he had obteind erewhyles.
But the became ſumtpmes a bird: He hilld her like a bird.
Anon ſher was a maſſpe log: but Peleus neuer ira
Atwhit fo2 that. Then thirdly He ol ſpeckled Cyger twke
The vgly ſhape: foꝛ feare of whoſe moſt feerce and cruell lake,
Bis armes he from her body twicht. And at his going thence,
In honour of the watry Geddes he burned frankincence,
And potuzed wyne vppon the fea, with fat of neate and ſherpe:
Gntill the pꝛophet that doth dwell within Carpathian derpe,
Sayd thus. Thou ſonne of Acicus, thy with thou ſure ſhalt haue
Alonely when thee lyes a llerpe within her pleafant Cane,
Caf grinnes to trappe her vnbewares: hold faſt with Marling knot?
And though the fayne a hundꝛeth ſhapes, deceyue ther let her not.
But ſkicke vntot what ere it ber, vntill the tyme that he
Returneth to the natiue ſhape (he erſt was wont to ber.
Muhen Protevv thus had feo; within the ſea he duckt his head,
And ſulkred on his latter woꝛdes the water foꝛ to ſpꝛed. 3) 5
g ö L. ii. The


7


The. xj. booke of

he lyghelum Titan downeward dꝛew, and with declyning chayꝛe
Approched to the weſterne ſea, when Neryes daughter faye
Neturning from the fea, reſoꝛts tes her accuſtomd cotwch,
And Peleus fearcelp had begon hir naked limbes to towch,
But that (hee chaungd from ſhape to Hape, vntill at length the found
Werielf ſurpꝛyld. Chen ſkretehing out her armes with ſighes pꝛolound,
Dher layd: Chou ouercommeſt inet, and not without the spy
Ok God: and then (he Thetis like, spperd in ſhape of mapd.
Che noble price imbꝛacing her obteynd her at his will,
Co both theyꝛ toyes, and with the great Achylles did her fill.

A happye wyght was Peleus in his wyfe: A happy woyght

Mas Peleus allo in his ſonne. And if pec him acquight
Ok murthꝛing Phocus, happy him in all things count per myght.
But giltpe of his bꝛothers blod, and ban nicht forthe ſame 5
From bothe his fathers boule and Realme, to Trachin fad he came.
The lonne of lyghtlum Lucifer king Ceyx (tubs in face 705
Expꝛeſt the liuely beatutpe of his fathers heauenly grace.
Without all violent rigoꝛ and ſharpe erecutions reignd
In Trachin he right fad that tyme vnlike himſelt, remand
Pit mœꝛning for his bꝛothers chaunce tranſfoꝛmed late befoze. y °~
hen Peleus thither came, with care and trauaple tyꝛed fore, é
He left his cattell and his ſherpe ( whereol he bꝛought great ſtoꝛe
Behynd him in a ſhady vale not farre from Trachin towne,
And with a little companpe himlelf went thither downe.
Affone as leaue to come to Court was graunted him, be bare
A bꝛaunche of Olyk in his hand, and humbly did declare
Mis name and lynage. Onelp of his crime no woꝛd her ſpake,
But of his light another caule pꝛetenſedly did make:
Delyꝛing leaue within his rolwne oꝛ countrpe to àbyde.
The king ol Trachin gentip thus to him ageine replyde.
Our bowntp to the meanelt fort ¶ O Peleus)doth extend:
Me are not wont the deſolate our countrpe to fogfend,
And though J bee of nature moſt inclyned gad tw do: b
Thynt owne renowme, thy graundlyꝛe loue are fozerments therebntw.
Miſtpend no longer tyme in lute. Z gladly do agree 5
To graunt ther what thou toile deſpꝛe. Cheis things that thou volt fee 5
J would thou ſhould account them as thyne olune, ſuch as they ber


| Ouids Metamorphofis. 14.0
i q would they better were. Alith that he werped. Peleus and
his trends delyꝛed of his greek the cauſe to bnderlland.

He anſwerd thus. Perchaunce pee think this bird that lines by pray
| And putts all other birds infeare had wings and fetbers ay.
he was a man. And as he was right fierce in feats ot armes,

And ſtout and readye bothe to wꝛeake and al(o offer harmes:
So was he of a conſtant mynd. Dædalion men him byght. i
Pur lather was that noble ſtarre that bangs the mozuung bipabts
And in the welkin laſt of all giues place to Phebus lyght.
10 My ſtudy was to mapnteine peace, in peace was my delyght,
dAand forte kepe me true to her to whom my fayth is pipght.
A spp brother had felieite in warre and blady ſygbt.
His pꝛowelle and his force which now doth chaſe in cruel fyght
| Che Douesof Thiſbye ſince his ſhape was altred thus a new,
ll. vght pupſtant Pꝛinces and theyꝛ Realmes did heretofore lubdew.
he had a chyld calld Chyone, whom nature did endew
Mith beawtye fo, that when to age of fowꝛeterne pares (he grew
Athouſand Pꝛinees liking her did fo2 hir kauour ſew.
FPy loꝛtune as bꝛyght Phebus and the fonne of Kady May
Came tone from Delphos, tuther from mount Cyllen, by the way
They law her bothe at once, and bothe at once where kane in lone,
Apollo till the tyme of nyght ditferd his fute to moue.
BVut Hermes could not beare delay. He ſfroked on the face
Che mapden with his charmed rod which hath the poloꝛe to chace
And being in lleꝛpe: the touch whereof did caſt her in fo dead
Alcdcrpe, that Hermes by and by his purpoſe of her ſped.
| Atore as nyght with twinckling farres the welkin had beeſpzent, 5 :


Apollo in an old wyues ſhape to Chyon clocely went,
And tone the plealure which the ſonne of Maya had fozehent.
Noob when the full ber tyme had gon, cher bare by Mercurye
A ſonne that hyght Avvtolychus who pꝛobde a wyly pye,
And ſuch a fellow as in thelt and filching had no peere. i
He was his kathers owne ſonne right he could mennes eyes fo bare.
As ſoꝛ to make p black things whyght, wyyght things black appcere.
And by Apollo (foꝛ thee bare a papze) was boꝛne his bꝛother
P Philammon, who in muſick arte ercelled farre all other,
Asa well in ſinging as in play. But what auapled it :


The. xj. booke f


fo beare (uch twinnes, and of two Coddes in faudur to baue ſit.
And that ſher to her father had a ſtolot and valeant knight, 2
D2 that her graundſpyꝛe was the ſonne of louc that God of might f
Doth gloꝛie hurt tw anp folk? It furclp hurted her. ö }
Fo; ſtanding in her owne concept he did herſelf prefer ong
Befoꝛe Diana, and oifpzapld her face. who there with all {
Inflaamd with wath, ſayd: well, with derdes we better pleaſe ber chalt {
Immedlatly he bent her bowe, and let an arrow go, 1
M hich ſtrake her through the tong whole ſpight deſerued wounding fo; 4
Her tong wert dumb, her fpxch gan kayle that erſt was ouer rpfe, J
And as (he ſtryued foꝛ to ſpeake, awap went blod and lyfe. 0
How wꝛetched was 4 then O God:; how ſtrake it to my hart +) WI
M hat woꝛdes of comfoꝛt did J ſpeake to eaſe my bꝛothers ſmart :
To which he gaue his eare as much as doth the ſtonnp rocke i 0
Co hideous roping of the waues that dw againſt it knocke. U
There was no meaſure noꝛ none ende in making of his mone, U
oz in be wapling comloꝛtleſſe his daughter that was gone. |!
But when he (awe her bodye burne,fotwze tymes with all his e q
He ruſched forth to thꝛuſt himſelf amid the fyꝛe in ſyght. 5 iy
Fowe tymes be being thencerepulit, did put bimfelf tw flyght. i
And ran mee wheras was no wap, as doth a Gullocke when oa oo
A hoꝛnet ings him in the necke. Pee thought hee was as then i
Moꝛe wyghter karre than any man. Ser would haue thought his fette
Had had fam wings. So fed he quyght from all, and being flate \
Chꝛough eagernefle to dye, he gat to mount Parnafosknappe - =
And there Apollo pitying him and rewing his miflebappe, ö 0
M hen as Dedalion from the clifte himſcit had headlong flong, 5 N


Tran ſtoꝛmd him to a bird, and an the ſodaine as her hung lh
Did 85 him wings, and bolwwwing beake, and hoked talants bine, 4
And eke a courage full as fierce as euer it had bene. q
And kurthermoꝛe a greater ſtrengtb be lent him therwithall, ; \


Chan one would thinke conueyd myght bee within a rome fo mall.

And notw in ſhape of Collehawke her to none indifferent is,

But wzeakes his teene an all birds. And bytauſe him ſelfe ere this 0

Did kerle the force of ſoꝛrowes Ting withm his wounded hart, N \

Her maketh others oftentymes tw loꝛrow and two ſmart. el 0
as Cæyx af bis bporbers chaunce this wondzous ſcoꝛy ſeth, hese


Ouids Metamorphofis BMAD


Commes ronning thither all in halle and almoſt out of bzeth At Sie
Anætor the Phocayan who was Pelyes herdman. pe at
Hapd': Pelye Pelye ¥ do bꝛing fad tydings vntw ther. 1
Declare it man ( ꝙ Peleus) what euer that it b. 1
king Ceyx at his fearetull woꝛdes did and in dotvtfull frowie. ak
Chtz nonetpde(p the herdman) Iche did dꝛiue pour cattell dotpne
Co zea, and zum a them did zit vppon the pellow sand tk
And loked on the large mapne ple of water nere at hand.

Zum roapled zoftly bp and dolvne, and zum a them did zwim

And bare their tollp hoꝛned hrades abwue the water trim. K e
A Church ſkondes nere the sea not deckt with gold noꝛ marble dung;

But made of wad, and hid with trees that dꝛerping hang theron. ae
Avifherman that sat and dꝛyde hts netts bppo the zhoꝛe ; a
Did cells that Nereus and his Pymphes did haunt the place of pore, - cai
And how that thap bene Goddes a sea. There butts a plot popes :
With zallow trees vppon the same, the bohich is ouerblowne
With tydes, and is a marly. Grom thence a wolk an oꝛped wyght

With hideous noyle of ruffling made the groundes nerre hand alryghe.
Anon he commes me buſkling out besmeared all his chappes

With blod daubaken and with vome as veerce as thunder clappes.
His epen did glaſter red as vpꝛe, and though he raged 2e 55
Uo? bamin and voꝛ madneſſe bothe, pit raged he much moze

In madneſſe. Wor hee cared not his hunger voz to zlake,

Oꝛ i the death of oren two oꝛ thee an end to make.

But wounded all the herd and made a hauocke ok them alk,

And zum of vs to, in devence did happen voz to vall,

In daunger of his deadly chappes, and loft our lyues. The zhoꝛe

And zea is ſtapnd with bid, and all the ven is on a roꝛe.

Delap bꝛeedes lofle. The cace denyes now dolting voꝛ tm fond,

TAbple otught remapnes let all ot vs take weapon in our hond.


Lets arme our zelues, and let dz altogither on him vall.


The herdman hilld his peace. Che lolle movde Peleus not at all.
But calling his offence to mynde, he thought that Neryes daughter
Che chyldleſte Ladye Pſamathe determynd with that daughter.
To kæpe an Obit to her ſonne whom her before had killd.
Immediatly vppon this newes the king of Trachin willd
is men tw arme them, and ten take their weapans in theyꝛ band, =


RESIS ||
4 .


The. xj. booke of


And he addꝛeſt himſelt tw bee the leader of the band.

His topfe Alcyone by the nopſe admoniſht of the fame,

In dꝛelling of her head, before ſher had it brought in frame,

Calf downe her heare, and ronning foꝛth caught Ceyx faſt about

The necke, deſpꝛing him with teares to fend his folk without 5
Mimſelt, and in the lyfe of him tw ſaue the lyues of twapne. i
O Prtncelle,ceafe pour gedlp feare (q Peleus then sgayne.)

sir offer doth delerue great thanks. J mynd not warre to mae


|
J


Ageinſt ſtraunge monſfers. Jas nol another way muſt take. f |
Che ſeagods muſt bee pacifyde. There was aCattlebpe, > 1
And in the fame a loftp toboꝛe luhoſe toppe doth face the ſkye, 5
A iopfull mark foꝛ maryners to guyde thepʒ beffcils by. H


To this lame Lurret vp they went, and there with ſyghes behilld A

Che Oxen lying euery where fark dead vppon the lerlde 1

And erke the cruell fropged with his bluddy mouth and heare. fi

Chen Peleus ſfretching koꝛth his handes to Seaward, pꝛayd in feare

To watriſh Plamath that the would her ſoꝛe diſpleaſure fap,

And help him. She no whit relents to that that he did pap,

row But Thetis oz hir huſband made ſuch earneſt tute, that he

al Obteynd his pardon. Foꝛ anon the wolfe (who would not bee

Reuoked from the laughter loꝛ the ſwertenelle of the biwd)

Perſiſted ſharpe and eager fill, vntill that as he Tod

Faſt byghting on a Bullocks necke, He turnd him into Tone

As well in ſubſtance as in pelo, the name of wolf alone

Keſerued. Fo2 although in ſhape her feemed Mill pit one,

The berrp colour of the ſtone beewꝛapd him to bee none,

And that he was not tw be feard. Bow be it froward fate in

Permitts not Peleus in that land tw haue a ſetled Fate. Mt

Be wandꝛeth like an outlaw tw the Magnets. There at lal be i"

Acaſtus the Theſſalien purgd him ol his murther paſf. i
In this meane tyme the Trachine king ſoꝛe bered in his thought ; hy
WU th Agnes 5 both before & ſince his bothers death were weought,

Foz counſell at the ſacret Spelles (which are but topes to lode Wy

Fond farcpes,and not counſellers in peril! to do gode) ig


A .


Did make him rerdy to the God of Claros fo2 ta go.
Foz heathenich Phorbas and the folk of Phlegia had as the 5 N
The teap to Delphos ſtopt, that none could tranell to 03 fro. }


Bat


Ouids Metamorphofis. 142
Vut ere he on his tourney went, he made his faptbfull make N
Alcyone preape tw the thing. Immedlatlp they; ſtratze
9 ꝗchineſſe to her berrp bones, and pale was all her face
*|  qike bor and downe her heaup cheekes the teares did gulh a pace.
"| hae times about to ſpeake, thꝛæ times the waſht her face with teares,
And ſkinting oft koith fobbes, tha thus complayned in his eares. 1
1 Mhat fault of myne O huſband deere hath turnd thy hart fro mer⸗
0 M here is that care of mee that erſt was wenn to ber in thee⸗ 5
And canſt thou hauing left thy dere Alcyone merrye b? Ure
To lournepes tong delyght the now? doth now myne abſence pleaſe
Cher better then my pꝛeſence doth 2 Think J that thou at eaſe ;
Shalt go by land’ Shall J haue cauſe but onely for to magne?
And not tw bie afvapd 2 And (hall my care of thy returne
Bc boyd of feare e o no. The fea mex foze afrayd doth make.
Co think vppon the fea doth caule my Acth foꝛ feare to quake.
4 ſawe the bꝛoken ribbes ol ſhippes a late bppon the ſhoꝛe.
And oft on Tumbes J reade theyꝛ names whole bodyes long befoꝛe
Che ſea had lwallowed. Let not fond vayne hope leduce thy mynd,
That Acclus is thy fathꝛinlaw who holdes the bopſtous wynd
Jn pꝛiſon, and can calme the ſeas at pleaſure. Mhen the wynds
Are once let lace vppon the fea, no oꝛder then them bynds. 8


Then neyther land bathe pꝛiuiledge, noꝛ (ea eremption fynds.

Vea euen the clowdes ol heauen they ver, and with theyꝛ meting Rout
Enfoꝛte the fore with hideous noyſe to bꝛuſt in flaſſhes out.
Che more that J do know them, (fo; ryght well J now theyꝛ pole,

And lab them oft alittle wench within my fathers bowze)

Do much the moze J think them to ber feard. But il thy will

By no intreatance map bee turnd at home to tarrp Mill,

Blut that thou nevdes wilt go: then mar dere hulband with the take.
Ho ſhall the fea vs equally togither toffe and Hake, |
So woꝛſer than J fle J Mhall bee certeine not to feare.

Ho thall wer whatſocuer happes togither topntty beare.
So ſhall wer on the bread mayne (ca tmgither ioyntly ſayle.

Theis wo des and teares where with the imp of Acdlus did allaple
Her hucbond boꝛne ol heauenly race, did make his hart relent. 2


ae


(For he lobd her no tele than ſher iobd him.) But fully bent


Bel emed, neyther fog to leaue the lourner which he ment 5


The. xj. bookeof.

Com take by ſea, noꝛ pit tw giue Alcyone leave asthe
Companion of his perlous courſe by water fo2 to go.
He manp wandes of comfoꝛt (patie her feare away to chace.
But nought her could perſwade therein to make her like the cace,
Chis laſt alwagement of her greet he added in the end,
NN hich was the onely thing that made her louing hart to bend.
All taryance will aſſuredly fame ouer lang to me.
And by my fathers blafing beames make my vow tw ther
Chat at the furtheſt ere the tyme (il God therto agree
Che mone do fill her circle twyce, ageine J will here ber.
M hen in ſum hope of his returne this pꝛomis had her fet,
He willd a ſhippe immediatly from harbꝛough tw ber fer,
And throughly rigged fo} to ber, that neyther maaſt, noꝛ ſaple,
MPoꝛ tackling, no noꝛ other thing ſhould apperteyning faple.
M hich when Alcyone did behold, as one whole hart mifgaue
The happes at hand, (he quaakt ageine, and teares out guſſhing dꝛaue.
And ſfreyning Ceyx in her arines with pale and piteous loke,
Poe wꝛetehed ſoule, her lak farewell at length thee ſadly twke,
And ſwounded flat vppon the ground. Anon the watermen
(As Ceyx fought delapes and was in dowt tw turne agen) f
Set hand to Does, of which there were tw rowes on eyther ſyde,
And all at once with equall ſtroke the {welling (ea deuyde.
Shee lifting vp her watrye eyes behilld her huſband ſtand
Uppon the batches making ſig nes by becken ing with his hand: 5
And the made fignes to him ageine. And after that the land
Mas farre remoued from the ſhippe, and that the ight began
Co be vnable to diſcerne the face of any man,
As long as ere he could ſhe lot bppon the rowing kerle.
And when (he could no longer tyme foꝛ diſtance ken it werle,
Sher loked ill vppon the layles that flaſked with the wynd 1
Appon the maaſt. And when he could the fapics no longer tynd,
She gate her to her emptp bed with ſad and ſoꝛ pe hart,
And lapd her downe. The chamber did renew a kreſh her ſmart, 5
And ol her bed did bꝛing to mynd the bere Departed part.

From harbꝛough new they quyght were gone: ¢ now a plaſant gale

Did blowe. Che mapſter made his men theyꝛ Oꝛes aſyde to hale,
And hoyſed op the toppe laple on the hygheſt of the maaſt,


And


Ouids Metamorphoſis. : 143


and clapt on all his other faples bycauſe no wind ſhould waalt.

Scarce full tone halt, (oꝛ (ure not much aboue) the ſhippe had ronne

Uppon the ſea and euery way the land did farre them ſhonne,

When toward night the wallowing waues began to waren whyght,

And eke the heady eaſterne wynd did blow with greater myght,

non the Papfter crped ſtrike the toppefaple, let the mayne

Hheate liye and fardle it to the pard. Thus (pake he, hut in vapne.

Foꝛ why fo hideous was the ſtoꝛme vppon the ſeodeine bꝛapd,

That not a man was able there to here what other ſapd.

And lolod the fea with merting waues crtreemelp raging roꝛes.

Pit fell they tw it of them ſelues. Sum haalde alyde the Ozes:

Sum fenſed in the Gallyes ſydes, ſum dolone the ſapleclothes rend:

Hum pump the water out, and ſea to fea ageine do fend, a

Another bales the faplepards downe. And whyle they did eche thing

Diſoꝛderlp, the ſtoꝛme increaſt, and from eche quarter fling

Che wyndes with deadly fode, and bolwnce the raging waues togither.

Che Pilot being ſoꝛe diſmapd fapth playne, he knowes not tobither

To wend himſelk, noꝛ what tw do oꝛ bid, noꝛ in what fate

Chings Tod. So ho loge the miſcherf was, and did fo ouermate

All arte. Foꝛ why of ratling ropes, of crying men and bopes,

Ok llullhing waues and thundzing apꝛe, confuled was the nopſe.

Che (urges mounting vp aloft did ſeeme to mate the ſkye,

And with theyꝛ ſpꝛinckling fo2 to wet the clotudes that hang on hye.

One whple the lea, when from the bꝛink it rayſd the pelloty ſand,

Vas like in colour to the faine. Another whyle did ſtand

A colour on it blacker than the Lake of Styx. Anon

Itlycth playne and lame th whyght with ſerthing froth thereon.

And with the ſea the Trachin ſhippe ay alteration tuke.

One whple as from a mountapnes toppe it ſermed downe ta loke

Co vallyes and the depth of hell. another whyle beſet

With ſwelling ſurges round about which neere.aboue it met,

It loked from the bottom ol the whoꝛle pole vp aloft

As ik it were from hell to heauen. A hideous lulſhing oft .

The waues did make in beating futl agai the Gailpes ſyde.

Che Gallye being frikew gaue as great a ſownd that tyde

As did lumtyme the Battellramb of dle, oꝛ now the Gonne

In making battrpe toa towꝛe. And as feerce L pons ronne alt
Tu


The. xj. booke of


Full bꝛiſt with all theyꝛ force ageint the armed men that and
In oder bent to keepe them of with weapons in theyꝛ hand,
Guen ſo as often as the wanes bp foꝛce of wynd did raue:
So oft vppon the netting of the ſhippe they mapnelp dꝛaue,
And mounted farre aboue the fame. Anon of fell the hopes:
And hauing wacht the pitch away, the fea made open lopes :
Co let the deadly water in. Behold the clowdes did mele,
And cho wers large came poring downe. Che leamen that them felt
Myght thinke that alt the heauen had falne vppon them that lame tyme,
And that the well ing ſea like wyle aboue the heauen would clyme.
The ſaples were thꝛoughly wet W ſhowers. and with the heauenlp rane
Mas mixt the waters of the ſea. no lyghts at all remayne
Ok ſunne, oꝛ mone, oꝛ farres in heauen. Che varknelle of the nyght
Augmented with the dꝛeadfull ſtoꝛme, takes dowble pole and myght.
Motobert the flaſching lyghtnings oft do put the fame to flyght,
And with theyꝛ glauncing now and then dw giue a ſodeine lyght.
The lightnings letts the waues on kyꝛe. Aboue the netting ſkippe
The waues, and with a violent foꝛce do lyght within the ſhippe.
And as a ſouldper ſtowter than the reſt of all his band
“a That oft aſlayles a citie walles defended well by band,
At length atteines his hope, and loꝛ to purchace pꝛapſe withall
Alone among a thouſand men getts vp vppon the wall:
So when the loftpe waues had long the Eallpes ſydes aſlayd,
At length the tenth waus ryſing vp wu hotwger koꝛce and bapa,
Did neuer ceaſe allaulting of the weerp ſhippe, till that
Vppon the batches lyke a ko bictoꝛisulſp it gat.
a part thereot did ſtill as pit aſſault the ſhippe without,
And part had gotten in. The men all trembling ran about,
Gs in a Citie commes to palle, when ofthe enmpes ſum
Dig downe the walles without, and ſum already in are tome.
All arte and coming was to febe. Cheyꝛ harts and ftomacks faple:
And loke how many furges came theyꝛ veſlell to alſaple,
So many deathes did feeme to charge and bꝛeake bppon them all.
One werpes: another ſtands amazde: the third them bit donth call
hom burpall doth remayne. Lo Cod another makes his bow,
And holding vp his handes to heauen the which her fers not now,
Doth pꝛaꝝ in apne fo2 help. The thought of this man is vppon


eee


——


=


i


—
———


S


i — a — a


=


2 ESE z= a


I 2S OSS


Ouids Metamorphofis. , 144


is bꝛother and his parents whom he cleerely hath forgone,

Another calles his houſe and wpfe and childꝛen bute mynd,

And euerp man in generall the things he left behynd.

Alcyone moueth Ceyx hart. In Ceyx mouth is none

But onely one Alcy one. And though the were alone

Che wyght that he deſyꝛed moſt, vit was he verry glad

Dher was not there. Tw Trachinward to loke deſpꝛe he had,

And homeward fapne be would haue turnd his eyes which neuer moze
Should fe the land. But when he knew not which way was the there,
Noz where he was. The raging fea did rowle about fo faſt:

And all the heauen with clowds as black as pitch was ouer caf,


5 That neuer nyght was halle fo dark. Chere came a flam at lal,


Chat with his violence bꝛake the malte, and ſtrake the ſterne away.

A blllowe pꝛoudly pꝛanking bp as vaunting of his pꝛay

Byeonqueſt gotten, walloweth hole and bꝛeaketh not a funder,

Beholding with a lofty loke the waters working onder.

And loke as if a man ſhould from the places where they growe

Rend downe the mountapnes Athe ¢ Pind, and whole them ouerthꝛolbe

Into the open ſea: ſo ſoft the Billowe tumbling downe,

With weyght and violent ſtroke did fink and in the bottom done

The Gallye. And the moſte of them that were within the ſame

Went downe therwith and neuer vp to open aler came,

But oped ſtrangled in the gulf. Another ſoꝛt againe

Caught pæces of the bꝛaken ſhippe. The king himſelt was fayne

A ſhiuer of the ſunken ſhippe in that fame hand to hold,

In which her erſt a ropall mace had hilld of pellow gold.

His father and his fathꝛinlawe he calles bppon (alas f

In bapne.) But cherlly in his mouth his wife Alcyone was.

In hart was hee: in tong was Hee: He wiſſhed that his coꝛſe

Co land where He myght take it vp the ſurges myght enforce >:

And that by her moſt louing handes he might be layd in graue.

In lwunming ſkill (as often as the lurges leaue him gaue

To ope his lippes) he harped ill vpon Aleyones name,

And when he dꝛowned in the wanes be muttred Gill the ſame.

Behold, euen full vppon the waue a flake of water blacke

Did bꝛeake, and vnderneathe the fea the head of Ceyx ſkracke.

That nyght the lygytſum Luciter loꝛ loꝛrowe was ſo dim, 9
5 &


The houſe


of fleepe.


Lo weare at his homecomming which (he vapnelp did lurmple.


The. xj. booke of


As ſcarcely tould a man diſcerne oꝛ thinke it to bee him.

And fozatmuch as cat of heauen he might not ſteppe alpde,

With thick and darkſum cloves that nyght his countnance he did hyde.
Alcyone of ſo great miſchaunce not knowing aught as pit,
Did kerpe a reckening of the nyghts that in the whple did flit,

And hailed garments both foꝛ him and foz herſelk lißewyſe,


|


— . ͤ — a


—
=


Co all the Goddes deuoutly the did offer frankincence: fi
Wut moff aboue them all the Church of Iuno thee did fence. fl
And foꝛ ber huſband (who as then was none) he knerld befoze (
Che Altar, withing health and fone arrinall at the ſhoꝛe, 9
And that none other woman mygbt befoze her be pꝛeferd. A }
Ol all her pꝛapers this one pace effedualiy was heard. “fh


$02 Iuno could not fond in hart intreated foꝛ to bee i
Foz him that was already dead. But tw thentent that thee 5
From dame Alcyones deadly hands might keepe her Altars free, >


She fapd. Wolk favthfull meflenger of my commaundments,D =f
Chou Naynebowe, to the llugguich houfe of Stomber ftoiftlp go. Wy
And bid him fend a Dꝛeame in ſhape of Ceyx to bis topfe 1
Alcyone, foꝛ to thew her playne the loſing ok his lyfe. iy
Dame Iris takes ber pall wherein a thouſand colours were it
And bowing lpke a ſtringed bow vpon the clowdy (phere, I
Immediatly delcended tw the dꝛowzye houſe of Slepe ; i
T hole Court the clowdes continually do clocelp ouerdꝛeepe. ly


Among the darke Cimmenans is a hollow mountaine found 1
And in the hill a Caue that farre doth ronne within the ground, i
Che Chamber ¢ the dwelling place where louthfull feepe doth cewth.
Che lyght of Phebus golden beames this place tan neuer towch. y
A foggpe mift with dimnete mixt ſtreames vpwarde krom the ground,
And glimmering twylyght euer moꝛe loithin the fame ts found. "


fo watchfull bird with barbed bill, and combed crotne doth call 0
Che moꝛning foꝛth with crowing out. There is no noyſe at all i
Ol waking dogge, noꝛ gagling gfe moze waker than the hound 10


Co hinder ſlepe. Df beat ne wyld ne tame there is no ſound.
Na bowghes are ſlird with blaſtes of wynd. no noyſe ok tatling tong b
Ol man 02 woman euer pit within that bower rang

Dumb quiet dwelleth there. Vit from the Roches fore do th go aie


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 145


Che ryuer of foꝛgetfulneſle. which ronneth trickling fo

Appon the little pebble ſtones which in the channell lpe,

Chat vnto ſlepe a great deale moze it doth pronoke thereby.

Beloꝛe the entry of the Caue, there growes of Popppe ſtoze.

Mith {ceded heades, and other werdes innumerable moze,

Out of the milkye ie wee of which the night dwth gather llepes.

And ouer all the chado med earth with dankiſh deawe them dꝛerpes.

Bycauſe the craking hindges of the doe no noyſe ſhould make,

Chere is no daze in all the houſe, noꝛ poꝛter at the gate.

Amid the Caue, of Ebonye a bedſſed ſtandeth bye,

And on the fame a bed of downe with keruerings blacke both lye:

In bohicb the dꝛowz ye God of ſlerpe his lither limbes Doth reff.

About him, forging ſundzye ſhapes as many dꝛeames lye pꝛeſt,

As eares of coꝛne do Hand in feldes in harueſt tyme, oꝛ leaues

Do grob on tres, o fea to ſhoꝛe of ſandye cinder heaues.

Afone as Iris came within this houſe, and with her hand

ad put aſpde the dazeling dꝛeames that in her way did ſfand,

Che bꝛightnelle of her robe thꝛough all the ſacred houſe did thine,

Che God of llepe ſcarce able fo2 tw rapſe his heauy eyen,

A thꝛæ 0; foluze tymes at the leaſt did fall ageine to reff,

And with his nodding head did knocke his chinne ag einſt his beef,

At length he ſhaking of himſelle, vppon his elbowe leande.

And though be knew for what he came: he alkt her tobat (ee meand.

O flepe (ꝙ cher, the reff ol things, O gentleſt of the Goddes,

Sivete ſler pe, the peace of mynd, with whom crake care ts ape at oddes:

Mhich cherriſheſt mennes werry limbes appalld with toyling ſoze,

And makel them as fret to wank and luſlye as before,

Commaund a dꝛeame that in theyꝛ kyndes can euery thing expꝛeſſe,

Co Trachine Hercles totune bimfelf this inſtant to addꝛelſe.

And let him line ly counterfet to Quæne Alcyonea

Che image of ber hulband who is dꝛowned in the fea

y ſhipwzecke. Iuno willeth fo. Her mefage beeing told,

Dame Iris went her way. the could her eyes no longer hold

From lierpe. But when ther felt it come thee lied that inſtant tyme,

And by the boawe that bought her dotwne to heaue agcine did clyme.
Among a thoufand ſonnes and mo that father llamber had
Be calld vp Morph the feyner or mannes thape a craftpe lad. 8

J Gone


The. xj. booke of


Hore other could fo conningly expꝛeſle mans bertpe face,

Wis geſture and his found of voyce, and manner of his pace,
Togither with his wanted werde, and wanted phꝛaſe of tal.

But this ſame Morphye onelp in the ſhape of man doth walk.

Chere is another who the chapes of beaſt oꝛ bird doth take,

Oz elle appereth vnto men in likeneſle of a ſnake.

The Goddes do cali him Icilos, and moꝛtall fotke him name
Phobetor. There is alſo pit a third who irom theis fame

Wakes diuerſip, and Phantaſos he highteth. Intw ſtreames f
This turnes himſelt, and into Hones, and earth, and timber beames,
And intm euerp other thing that wanteth life. Theis thee, (ft
Great kings and Capteines in the night ate wanted loʒ to ſe. 5

Che meaner and inleriour fort of others haunted bee.
Sir Slomber ouerpaſt the ref, and of the brothers all ee
To do dame Iris melage he did only Morphye tall. a
M hich done he Waring iufkith, ſtreyght layd downe his dꝛobozy hend .
And foftlp ſhꝛconk his lapzye limbes within his lluggiſh bed. 5 |


Away fev Morphye through b aire: no Gickring made his wings; i

And came anon to Trachine There his fe thers ol he dings, © = it
And in the Hape of Ceyx ſfandes before Alcyones bed, 9
Pale, wan, fark naakt, and like a man that was but latelp deade. 3
His berde leemd wet, and of his head the heare was dꝛopping dere.
And leaning on her bed, with teares he feemed thus to crp. 1
Pow wꝛetehed woman knoweſt thou thy loving Cey x notw 1
D2 is my face by death dilfoꝛmd⸗ behold mer well, and thow —
Shale knoto mee, Foz thy huſband, thou thy hulbandes Chol chalt ſer. a
Ho gad thy pꝛapers and thy vowes haue done at all to me. ih
Io Fy am dead. In vapne of my returne no reckning make. ail
The clowdy ſowth amid the fea our ſhippe did tardy take, 5 ty
And toting it with violent blattes afunder did it Hake. a |
And faves haue filip my mouth which calld in vapne vppon thy name. ly
No perfone whom thou mapſt mildeeme bꝛings tydings of the fame i 0
Thou heaved not thereof by lalle report of flying fame. N


Wut I mpfelf: J pꝛeſently my ſhipwꝛecke to ther MHotve.
Arpfe therefore and wokull teares vppon thy fpeute beſto we.
Put mœꝛniug rapment on, and let me not to Limbo go
Unmozned fo2, In ſhewing ol chis Hipwwzecke Morphye ſo


— =
i =3
—


. a es


Ouids Metamorphofis. 14.6
tio keyne the bopce of Ceyx, that (hee could none other deeme,
Mut that it ould ber his in derde. Poꝛeouer he did fame
Lo wepe in earneſt: and his handes the berrp geſture had
Ol Ceyx. Nuene Alcyone did grone, and being fad
Ddd ſtirre her armes, and thꝛuſt them forth his body tw embzace,
In ſtead whereol he caught but ayꝛe. Che teares ran downe her face.
her cryed, tarry: whither Apite 2 togither let vs go.
And all this whyle ſhe was a llerpe. Both with her crying fo,
And flayghted with the image of her huſbands gaſtly ſpꝛyght,
i Se farted vp: and ſought about il fynd him there fhe myght.
| i (Fo: why ber Grwmes awaking with the Heke had brought a light.)
"|


And when (he no where could him kynd, He gan her face to ſmyght,
and tare her nyghtelothes from her bꝛeſt, and ſtrake it ferrcelp, and -
Hot paling to vnty her heare He rent it with her hand. é 1
And when her nurce of this her greek deſyꝛde to vnderſtand
Che cauſe: Alcyone ts vndone, vndone and caf away N —
Mith Ceyx her deare ſpouſe (ee ſapd.) Leaue comforting J pꝛap. *
By chtpwꝛecke he is perricht: J haue feene him: and J knew
His handes. Ihen in departing J tw hold him did purſew.
I taught a Choſt: but ſuch a Choſt as well dficerne J myght
To ber my bulbands. Matheleſſe he had not to my ſyght
Pes wonted countenance, neyther did his bifage ſhyne fo bꝛyght,
As heretofore it had beene wont. J ſaw him wretched wyght
Starke naked, pale, and with his heare ſtill wet: euen verry bere
J dab him ſtand. with that the lobes if any print appkre
Okkwting where as he did ſfand vppon the floꝛe behynd.
This this is it that J did feare in farre foꝛecaſting mpnd, 5 .
Mhen lying mee 3 thee deſyꝛde thou ſhouldſk not truſt the wynd.
| But lyth thou wenteſt to thy death, J wauld that J had gone
Mmith thee. ah merte, it merte had bene thou Moulds not go alone
mi Without mer. So it ould haue come tw paſſe that nepther J
Bad auerliued the, noꝛ pit bæne fazced twice tw dye.
Already, abſent in the wauos now tolled haue J ber. .


Already haue J perriſhed. And pit the fea hath thee

Mithout mee. But the cruelnelle were greater karre of me
Than of the (ca, if after thy deceale J Mtl would ſtriue

In ſoꝛrob and in angniſh fill to pyne away aliue.


=
—

a

1

*

4

*

2

.

2


BO,
rea


&


5
«fs


GOB
e


—
a
2


SU.
'


The. xj. booke of


But nepther will J ſertue in care too lengthen Mill my pte,
Poꝛ (wretched wyght) abandon the: but like a fapthfull topfe


At leaſtwyle now will come as thy companion. And the herſe
ſhall ioyne vs, though not in the lelflame coftin: pit in berfe,
Although in tumb the bones of vs togither may not couch,
Pit in à grauen Epitaph my name thy name fall touch.
Her loꝛrow would not luſker her to btter any moze.
She labd and ſyght at cuerp woꝛd, vntill her hart was feze.
Che moꝛning came, and out (he went ryght pen&f to the Hore
Wo that fame place in which Chee tobe her leaue of him before.
Mhyke there thee musing od,and fapd,be killed me euen here,
Herre weped her his Anchozs vp, here lofo he from the pere,
And whple thee calld to mynd the things there marked with her eyes:
In loking on the open ſea, a great way of ſher ſpyes
A certeine thing much like a coꝛſe come houering on the wane.
At firſt che dowted what it was. As tyde it nerer dꝛaue,
Although it were a god wap ol, pit did it plainelp ſhowe
Ca bee à coꝛce. And though that whole it was thee did not knowe,
Pit foꝛbycauſe it {emda e hart therat did ryſe:


g


et


And as it had ſum ſtraunger beng, with water in her eyes

Shee ſapd, alas pare wretch whore thou art, alas fo2 her

Chat is thy wyfe, if any ber. And as the waues did irre,

Che body floted nerrer land: the which the moze that the

Bchilld, the leſſe began in her bf Faped wit tw ber.

Anon it did arriue on (hore, Then plainelp ſher did fee

And know tt, that it was her fore. Sher ſhꝛerked it is hee.

And therewithall her face, her heare, and garments {her did teare,

And vntw Ceyx ſtretching out het trembling handes with feare,

Sayd: cumſt thou home in ſuch a plyght to mer O hulband dare⸗

Return in ſuch a wꝛetched plyght : There was a certeine pare

Chat buylded was by hand, of waues the firſt allaults to bꝛeake,

And at the hauons mouth to caule the tyde tw enter weake.

See tepe heron. (A wonder fare it was (he could do ſo)

Sher lle w, and with her newgrowen winges did brate the apze as tho. :

And on the waues a wꝛetched bird (her whilked to and fro.

And with her crocking neb then gro wen to lender bill and round,

like one that wapld and moꝛned Mill thee made a meaning found.
Potwbet


}
0


ä ———  —


Sv SS SS


= SS SS


= OS se SS SE =
Bass DSS SS —— ST


= +
SES


ae — ee


SSS ——


Ouids Metamorphofis. I


Howbert as fone as ſhe did touch his dumb and bloodlette lech,

And had embꝛaat his loued limbes with winges made new and freſh,
And with ber hardened neb had kiſt him coldly, though in bape,
Folk dowt of Cey x feeling it to repfe his head did frapne,

Oꝛ whither that the waues dio life it vp. But farelp he
It felt: and thꝛough compalllon of the Goddes both her and hee
| Were turnd to birdes. Lhe loue of them eke fubiect to their fate,

_ Continued after: neyther did the fapthfull bond abate 5
Ok wedlocke in them being birdes: but andes in ſked aſt fate,


In winter time vppon her neſt (which on the water flitts cer.
A fever ght. During all which tyme the fea is calme and fill,


Fo Acdlus fo2 his ofſpꝛings fake the windes at home dath kepe,
And will not let them go abꝛoade foꝛ troubling of the derpe.
An auncient father ſering them about the bꝛode ſea fly,
Did praple theyꝛ lone foz latting to the end fo itenfaftly,
His nepghbour oꝛ the ſelllame man made anſwer (uch is chau tice)
Euen this fo wle alfo whom thou felt vppon the ſurges glaunce
Mich ſpindle ſhanks, (he poynted tw the wydegdawld Cozmoꝛant)
Befoꝛe that he became a bird, ot ropall race might baunt.
And ik thou couet lineally his pedegreꝛ to ſeke,
his Auncetoꝛs were Ilus, and Aſſaracus, and eke
Fayre Ganymed who Jupiter did rauiſh as his toy,
Laomedon and Priamus the laff that reygnd in Troy.
Stout Hectors brother was this man. And had he not in pꝛyme
Oklulty youth bene tane away, his derdes perchannee in tyme
Had purchaatk him as great a name as Hector, though that be
Ok Dymants daughter Hecuba had foꝛtune boꝛne to ber.
_ ¥02 Actacus repoꝛted is begotten to haue bene
By ſcape, in chady Ida on a mayden fapꝛe and ſhene
Whole name was Alyxothoe, a pore mans daughter that
| With ſpade and mattocke fo2 himſelfe and his a liuing gat.
9 Chis Aeſacus the Citie hates, and goꝛgious Court doth ſhonne,
And in the vnambicions feldes and wods alone Doth wonne.
He ſeldom haunts the towne of Troy, pit hauing not a rude 2
And blacks kult, noz luch a hart as could nor be lubdewd 7
A. itz. By


Dre . —— . — — —


Chey treade, and lap, and being foꝛth pang and now the x Alcyon ſitts * Thekings


Gnd euery man may te and fro ſayle faudlp at his twill. Fg


The. xj. booke of


Wy lone, he lpyde Eperie (whom oft he bad purſewd

Trough all the wades) then fitting on her father Cebrius bꝛim

A dꝛping ok her heare ageinſt the ſonne, which banged trim 5
Uppon her back. Alone as that the Nymph was ware of hum,

She lied as when the griſild wolk seth ſcare the fearefull hynd

D2 when the Fatwcon karre from bꝛokes a Pallard happes to fynd.
The Troiane knyght ronnes after her, and being (wilt through lene,
Purſeweth her whom feare doth force apace her keete to moue. '
Behold an Adder lurking in the gralle there as tha lied,

Did byght her fore with hoked toth, and in her bodye ſpꝛed 5
Mis benim. She did ceale her liyght and foodein fell downe dead.
Mer lover being paſt his witts her carkelle did embꝛace,

And cryde, alas it irketh mer, it irkes mee of this chace.

But this 4 feard not. neyther was the gatne of that J willd 8
Worth halle fo much. Pow two of bs the (wꝛetched foule) haue killd.
The wound was giuen ther by the lnake, the cauſe was giuen by me,
The wickedder of both am J: who koz to comfoꝛt the

Tl ill make chee ſatiſfaction with my death. With that at laſt 4
Done from a rocke (the which the wanes had vndermynde) he cat
Mimſell into the fea. owbeet dame Tethys pitping him, 1
Neceyud him loft ly, and as he bppan the wanes did lwim,
Sher couered him with kethers. And though kayne he would haue dyde,
She would not let him. N roth was he that death was him denpde, 5
And that his foule compelld ſhould ber ageinſt his will to byde

Mithin his tweetched body Mill, from which tt would depart,

And that he was conſtreynd to line perforce ageinſt his hart.

And as he on his ſhoulders now had newly taken wings,

He maunted vp, and downe vppon the fea his boddye dings.

His fethers would not let him ſinke. In rage he dyneth downe.

And delpꝛatly he ſtriues himſelf continuallp to dꝛolone. 8
ls loue did make him leane, long leggs: long neck dooth ill remapne.
Vis head is from his ſhoulders farre: ol Des he is moſt lapne.
And fo2 he vnderneath the wanes deiyghteth for to dꝛiue

A name accoꝛding therevnto the Latins dw him giue.


N
ty


Finis vndecimi Libri.


— ——


THE. XII. BOOKE OF ug
Ouds Metamorphofis.


|


.
i
|


Did line in ſhape ol bird, did inane: and at a tumb twheroit
His name was twaitten, Hector and his bꝛother ſolemly
Did kepe an Obit. Paris was not at this obſegqupe.
Mithin a whyle with rauiſht wyfe he bꝛought a laſting warre
Home onto Troy. Chere followed hun a thowland thippes not farre
Conſpyꝛd togither, with the ayde that all the Greekes could kynd:
And vengeance had bene tane forthwith but that the cruell wynd
Did make the feas vnſaplable, fo that theyꝛ ſhippes were fapne
At rode at filbpe Avvlys in Bæotia tm remapne.
Herre as the Gree kes accoꝛding to theyꝛ wont made ſacrifyſe
x! Ca loue, and on the Altar old the flame aloft did ryſe,
Chey ſppde a ſpeckled Snake crætpe vp vppon a planetrœ bye
"| Wppon the toppe whereof there was among the bꝛaunches bye
A neff, and in the nef eyght birdes, all which and eke theyꝛ dam
1 Chat flickering flew about her lolle, the hungry {rake did cram
Within his mawe. The ſtanders by were all amaz de therat.
But Calchas Theſtors ſonne who knew what mening was in that,
Dapd. wer ſhall win. Motopce ye Greekes by vs ſhall perith Troy
But long the tyme will bee before wer may our will enioy.
b And then he told them how the birds nyne peres did fignifie
Mhich they beloꝛe the towne of Troy not taking it ſhould lye.
Che Serpent as he wound about the boughes and bꝛaunches greene,
Became a ſtone, and Mill in Fone his ſnakiſh ſhape is ſcene.
Che ſeas continewed verrp rough and ſuttred not theyꝛ hoffe
Imbarked foꝛ to paſle from thence to take the further coaſt.
Sum thought that Neptune fauoꝛed Troy bycauſe himſelt᷑ did buyld
Che walles therof. But Calchas (Who both knew, and neuer pills
his peace in tyme) declared that the Goddelle Phebe mult
Appeaſed ber with virgins blwd fo2 wrath conceyued ing,
Alone as pitie pclded had to cace of puplicke weale,
And realon got the upper hand of fathers lout g seale,
So that the Ladpe Iphigen before the altar faa
Among the weeping miniſters, to giue her mapdens hlod:
G tig, The


2 Ing Priam beeing ignoꝛant that Aeſacus his ſonne


The. xij. booke of 3


Che Gondelle taking pitte, caſt a miſt befoze theyꝛ eyes,

And as they pꝛayd and ffird about to make che facrifpfe, 5
Conucpes her quight away, and with a Hynd her rome ſupplyes
Thus with a laughter meete for her Diana boring pleaſd,


The raging lurges with her wꝛath togither were appeaſd, {
Che thouland Ghippes had wynd at pope, And when they had above 5
Much trouble, at the length all fafe they gat the Phrygian rode. N

Am d the world terne heauen, and earth, and lea, there is a place,

Set krom the bounds ol eche of them inditterently in ſpace, a |
From Whence is Kee what euer thing is pꝛactiſd any where, i;
Although the Nealme bee neve fo karre, and roundlp to the eare é it
Commes whatſoeuer ſpoken is. Fame hath his dwelling there, 4
Who in the toppe of all the houſe is lodged in a towꝛe. “t
A thonfand entrpes,glades,and holes are framed in this bowꝛe. tl


Where are no doꝛes to thet. The doꝛes and open nyght and day, i
The boule is all of founding bꝛalle, and roꝛeth euery wap, 5
Meporting dowble euery woꝛd it heareth people fap.

There is no reſt within, there fs na Hience any where. 5
zolt is there not a pelling out: but humming, as it were i
The found of lurges beeing heard favre of, ave like the found 9
That at the end of thunderclappes long after doth redound, it
Mhen Ioue doth make the clowdes to crack. within the courts is pꝛeace i
Ok common people, which to come and go do neuer ceace. 1


And nulltons both of trothes and lyes ronne gadding enerp where, ‘
And woꝛdes confulely Ape in heapes. OF which, ſum fill the earee
That heard not of them erſt, and ſum Colcarpers part do play 9
Co ſpꝛead abꝛode the things they heard. And euer by the way a |
Che thing that was inuented growes much greater than befoze,. U
And euerpone that getts it by the end addes ſumwhat moze. U
Lyght eredit dwelleth there. There dwells raſh erroꝛ: There doth dwelk
Mapne top: There dwelleth hartlelle keare, and Bzute that loues to tell
Uncertayne newes vppon report, whereof he doth not knowe 8
Che author, and edition who fret rumoꝛs loues tw lowe. \
hts Fame beholdeth what is dare in heauen, on ſea, and land, 9
And what is wꝛought in all the woꝛld he lapes to vnderſtand. 8 i

He gaue the Troyans warning that the Grerkes with baleant mer


And chippes appꝛoched, that vnwares they could not take them a 4


— — oe


Ouids Metamorphoſis. : 159


Foꝛ Hector and the Troian folk woll armed were at hand

Co kerpe the coat and bid them bace befoze they came a land.
Protefilay by fatalt dome was firſt that dyde in feld ä
OF Hectors ſpeare: and after him great numbers mo were killd

Ol valeant men. Chat battell did the Greeks full deerly colt.

And Hector with his Phrygian folk of blod no little loſt,

an trping what the Greckes could dw. The ſhoꝛe was red with blov,
And note king Cygnet Neptunes ſonne had killed where he fou

A thoufand Greekes And now the out Achilles tauſd to fap

pis Charpot: and his labonce did fea whole bandes of men that day
And faking Cy gnet thꝛough the feeld oꝛ Hector, he did ſtrap.

At laſt with Cygnet he did meete. Foꝛ Hector had delay

Untill the tenth peare afterward. Then hating foꝛth his hoꝛſes
With flaren manes, ageinſt his fo his Chariot be enfoꝛces.

And bꝛandiſching his aking dart, he ſayd: O noble wyght

A comloꝛt let it bee to thee that ſuch a valeant knyght

As is Achilles killethj the. In ſaping fo he thee

Ampghtp dart, which though it hit the mark at which it flew,

Pit perſt it not the ſkinne at all. Now when this blunted blowe

Had hit on Cygnets bꝛelt, and did no pꝛint of hitting Howe, é
Thou Goddeſle ſonne ( Cygnet) foꝛ by fame we do the knowe)
Mhy wondꝛeſt at mer foꝛ tw ſe I can not wounded be
(Achilles wondzed much thereat.) This helmet which pee fe

Bedect with hoꝛſes pellow manes, this ſheeld that J do beare,
Defend mer not. Foꝛ oznaments alonly 3 them weare. i

Foz this fame cauſe armes Mars himſelf likewyſe. J will diſarme
Pyſelt, and pit vnrazed will J pale without all harme.

It is to ſum etlect, not boꝛne to ber of Neryes race,

Do that a man be boꝛne of him that with thꝛerloꝛked mace

Rules Nereus and his daughters to, and all the fea beſyde.

This ſapd, he at Achilles tent a dart that ſhould abyde

Uppon his held, It perced thꝛough the Fele and thꝛough nyne fold:
Ok Oren hydes, and apd vppon the tenth, Achilles bold

Did Welk it out, and foꝛcybly did thꝛowe the fame agayne.

His bodye being hit ageine, bnwounded did remapne, ü
And clerre from any paint ol wound. The third went eke in vapne.
And pitdid Cygnet to the fame giue full his naked bzitt,


Achilles


The. xij. booke of


Achilles thafed like a Bull that in the open litt

Cd ith dꝛeadfull hoꝛnes doth puch ageind the ſcarlet clothes that there
Are hanged vp tw make him ferce, and when he would them teare
Doth kynd his wounds deluded. Then Achilles lokt bppon

Wis Jauelings ſocket, if the head thereok were loce o2 gone.

Che head kacke falt. Mp hand byleeke is weakened then (ꝙ har).

And all the force it had befoze is [pent on one J fee.

02 ſure J am it was of ſtrength, both when A fir downe theety
Lyrneſſus walles, and when J did Ile Tenedos ſubdew,

And eke Axétions Thebe with ber pꝛoper blod embzew.

And when lo many of the folke ol Lev vthranie J flew,

That with theyꝛ blood Caycus ſtreame became of purple hew.

And when the noble T clephus did of my Dart ol fele

The dowble foꝛce, ot wounding and of healing allo fele.

ea euen the heapes of men ſlayne here by mer, that on this Frond
Are lping Till to loke vppon, do giue tw vnderſtond

That this ſame hand of myne both had and Mil hath ſtrength. This fed,


As though he had diſtruſted all his doings ere that ſted.


He thꝛew a Dart ageinſt a man of Lycia land that hyght

Menetes, though whoſe Curets and his bꝛeſt he ſtrake him quyght.
And when he law with dying limbes him ſpꝛawling on the ground,
Me Fepped to him ſtreyght, and pulld the Jaueling from the wound,
Ind layd alowd: This is the hand, this is the (elf lame dart

Mith which my hand did ſtrike euen now Menetes tw the bart.
Ageinſt my tother Copemate will J fe the ſame: J pray

Co God it map haue like ſucceſſe. This fed, without delay 5
Me ſent it toward Cygnet, and the weapon did not fray,

Noz was not ſhunned. Inſomuch it lighted full bppon

His ſhoulder: and it gaue a rappe as it vppon ſum ſton

It lyghted had, rebownding backe. Howberit where it hit,

Achilles ſawe it blabpe, and was vapnly glad of it.

Jo why there was no wound. It was Menctes blod. Then lept

Me hattip from his Charpot downe, and like a madman kept ;
Zo careleſſe Cygnet with his ſwoꝛd. e ſawe bis ſwoꝛd did pate
His Target and his mozion bothe. But when it couche the bare,
Mis bodye was fo hard, it did the edge thereof abate. 8

He could no lengar luſter him to tryumph in that rate,


-


—


=


—— —
S SS VS SS


a= =>


= =
SS SS


Ouids Metamorphofis. 150

But with the pommell of his ſweoꝛd did thump him on the pate,
And bobd him well about the bꝛewes a dozen tymes and moze,
And pꝛeaeing on him as be fill gaue backe amaazd him ſoꝛe,
And troubled him with butfetting, not reſpetting a whit.
Chen Cygnet gan to ber afrapd, and miſtes bergan to flit
Beloꝛe his eyes, and dimd his lyght. And as he ſtill did peeld,
zn giuing back, by chaunce he met a fone amid the ferld,
Agetnt the which Achilles thuſt him back with all his myght,
And thꝛowing him age inſt the ground, did caſt him bolt vpꝛyght.
Chen bearing bofowlelp with both his knees ageinſt his cheit,
And leaning with his elbowes and his target on his beit,
He thet his headperce cloce and iuſt, and vnderneathe his chin
So hard it ſtraynd, that way foꝛ bꝛeath was neyther out noꝛ in.
And clofed vp the vent of Ipfe. And hauung gotten fo
Che bopper hand, be went about tw ſpople his banqui{ht fo.
But nought he in his armour found. Foꝛ Neptune had as tho
Tranſfoꝛmd him to the kowle whole name he bare but late ago.
This labour, this encounter bꝛought the reſt ol many dapes,
And eyther partye in theyꝛ ſtrength a whyle from battell ſtapes.

Pow twhple the Phrygians watch € ward vppon the walles of Troy,

And Greekes likewyſe within thep2 trench, there came a dap of ioy.
In which Achilles foꝛ his luck in Cygnets ouerthaow,
A Cob in wap of facrifpfe on Pallas did beitowe. ate
Mhoſe inwards lohen be had vppon the burning altar caf! oo
And that the acceptable kume had theough the aper pal
Lo God ward, and the holy rytes had had theyꝛ dewes, the reſt
Mas fet on bwꝛds foꝛ men to eate in dilches kynelp dꝛeſt.
The pꝛinces ſitting downe, did fete vppon the roſted lech,
And both theyꝛ thirſt and pꝛeſent cares with wyne they did refreſh.
Hot Harpes, noꝛ ſongs, noꝛ hollowe flutes to bere did them delyght.
They talked till they nye had ſpent the greateſt part af nyght.
And all theyꝛ communication was ol feates of armes in fyght
That had berite done by them o2 by theyꝛ foes. And euery wyght
Delyghts to vppen oftentymes by turne as tame about
Che perills and the narrow bꝛunts himleit had chifted out.
Joꝛ what thing chould ber talkt beefoze Achilles rather? Dz
bat kynd of things than (uch as theis could le moze meter fhe

: Chnliles


~The xij. booke of


Achilles to bee talking of 2 But in theyꝛ talk moſt bꝛæme
Mas then Achilles victoꝛp of Cygnet, It did feme
A wonder that the lech of him Mould ber fo hard and tough
As that no weapon myght haue powꝛe to rase oꝛ perce it though,
ut that it did abate the edge of ſtærle: It was a thing
That both Achilles and the Greekes in wondrous mage did being,
Chen Neſtor ſayd: This Cygnet is the perſon now alone
Ok pour tyme that defped ſterle, and could ber perſt of none.
Wut J haue ſerne now long ago one Cene of Perrhebye,
J ſatve one Cene ef Perrhebye a thouſand woundes defpe
With vnatteynted bodye. In mount Othris he did dwell:
And was renowmed fo2 his derdes: (and which in him ryght well
A greater wonder did apperre) he was a woman boꝛne.
This vncouth made them all much moze amazed than befoꝛne,
And euery man deſpꝛed him to tell it. And among
Che reſt, Achilles fapd. Declare J pꝛay ther (fo2 We long
To heare it euerp one of vs) O eloquent old man
Che wiſedome of our age: what was that Cene and how he wan
Another than his nattue ſhape, and in what rode, oz in i5 9
M hat fyght oꝛ ſkirmiſh, twerne pou firſt acquaintance did begin,
And who in fyne did banquiſh him ik any vanquithe him.
Chen Neſtor. Though p length of tyme haue made my ſenſes dim,
And dyuers things erſt feene in pouth now out of myne be gone:
Mit beare J Mill mo things in mynd: and of them all is none
Among fo many both of peace and warre, that pit bath take
Wore eofalk rote in memoꝛpye. And ik that tyme may make
d man great ſtoꝛe of things thꝛough long continuance foꝛ to fe,
Cwo hundꝛed peeres already of my lyfe full paſſed be,
And now 3 go vppon the third. This foꝛeſapd Ceny was
The daughter ot one Elatey. In beawty Hee did pale
Che mapdens all of Theſlaly. From all the Cities bye
And from thy Cities alſo O Achilles came (fo2 why
She Was thy countrpwoman) ſkoꝛe of wwers who in vayne
In hope to win her loue did take great trauell fate and payne.
Thy father allo had perchaunce attempted here to matcht
But that thy mothers marpage was alreadye then dilpatcht,


P i 0 4 | One, 2 5
Oꝛ Wer at leaſt aſtyanced. But Cery matcht with none, Powjbel


S


eS SS


=== B


Che God of lea bad giuen conſent. He graunted him beſyde


— ä . = — — -—


Ouids Metamorphofis. | 151


Hobobckit as (he on the Hore was walking alt alone,

Che God of fea did rauiſh her. (fo fame doth make repoꝛt)

And Neptune foꝛ the great delight be tad in Venus ſpoꝛt,

Sapo: Ceny,atke mee what thou wilt, and J will giue it the,
(This alſo bzuted is by tame.) The wꝛong here done tw mee
ꝙ Ceny makes mer wiſh great things. And therfore to thentent
3 may no moze confrepned bee tw ſuch a thing, conſent

3 map no moꝛe a woman bee. And if thou grannt thereto,

It is euen all that J deſpꝛe, oꝛ with thee fo2 tm dw. 5

In bacer tune theis latter woꝛdes were bttred, and her bopce
Did feme a mannes bopce as it was in derde. Foꝛ tw her choyce


Chat free from wounding and from hurt he ſhould from thence abyde, 5
And that he ſhould not dye of ele, Right glad of this fame graunt fe


Away went Ceny, and the faldes of Theflaly did haunt, AS
And in the feates of Cheualrpe from that tyme {pent bis lyfe. —
The ouer bold x Ixions ſonne had taken tw bis wyfe * Dirittowe


Hippodame, And keuering bazdes in bowes of boughes of tres
bis Clowdbꝛed bꝛothers one by one he placed in degrees.
Chere were the Loꝛdes of Theflaly, 3 alfa was among
Che reſt, a cherretull nopfe of feaſt thꝛough all the Pallace rang. é
dum made the altars ſmoke, and ſum the bꝛydale carrolls fang.

Anon commes in the mapden bꝛyde a godly wench oc face,

With wpnes and mapdens following her with comly gate and grace.
Mee ſapd that fir Pirithous was happy in his wyfe: 2
Wibich handſell had decepued vs wellnere thꝛough ſodeine frpfe.
Foꝛ of the cruell Centavvres thou moſt cruell Evvryt, tho

Like as thy ſtomacke was with wyne farre oucr charged: fe
Aone as thou behilldſt the bꝛyde, thy hart began tw frapne,

And doubled with thy dꝛonkennelle thy raging luſt did reigne.
Che feaſt was troubled by and by with tables ouerthꝛowen.

Che bꝛyde was hapled by the head, ſo karre was furpe growen.
Farce Evvryt caught Hippodame, and euer of the ref

Caught ſuch as tommed next to band, oꝛ ſuch as likte him bell.

It was the liuely image ok a Citte tane by fees.

The houſe did ring of womens chꝛerkes. wee all vp quickly roſe.
And ürſt ſayd Theſeus thus. M hat aplſt 2 art mad O Evvrytus ¢


that


SO SN BF SD


The. xij. bookeof


Chat dareſt ſcing mer aliue) miſ oſe Pirithöus?

Not knowing that in one thou dol abvſe bs bothe ⸗ And leak

He myght haue ſermd to ſpeake in vayne, he thꝛuſtway ſuch as peak
About the bꝛyde, and toke her from them krrating ſoꝛe thereat, =”
No anſwere made him Evvrytus: (foꝛ ſuch a debe as that f
Delended could not ber with woꝛdes) but with his ſaweye it

He flew at gentle Thefeus face, and bebo him on the beit.

By chaunte hard by, an auncient cuppe of (mage wobꝛk did ſtand.

M hich being howge himſelt moze homge fir Thefeus tobe in hand,
And thꝛewt at Evvryts head. He ſpewd as well at mouth as wound
Mire cloddes of blod, and bꝛayne and wyne, and on the ſoylcd ground


Lap ſpꝛawling bolt vpꝛyght. The death ol him did ſet the rek *


Mis dowolelimbed bꝛothers fo on fyꝛe, that all the quett :
Mlith one voyte crpẽd out kill kill. The wyne had giuen them hart.


Whey? ſirſt encounter was with cuppes ¢ Cannes thꝛowen ouerthwart,


And battle tankerds, and with boawles, pannes, diches, potts, x trapes,
Cyings ſeruing late foꝛ meate and dꝛintze, and then foz bluddy krapes.
ivf Amycus Ophions ſonne with out remozſe began


Ca reæuue and rob the bꝛydehouſe of his furniture. He ran


Alolt like one that with an Ax doth fetch his blowe too ſlit

An Oris necke in lacrikyſe, He on the foꝛehead hit

A Lapith named Celadon, and cruſthed fo his bones

Chat none could know him by the face : both eyes flelo out at ones.
Mis nole was beaten backe and te his pallat battred flat, N
One Pelates à Macedone erceeding woth therat,

Pulld out a maple treffles fte, and napt him in the necks,

That bobbing with his chin age inſt his bꝛeſt to ground he becks.
And as he (pitted out his tech with blackith blood, he lent

Another blowe to Amycus which ſtreyght to hell him ſent.
Gryne ſtanding by and lowing with a fell grim viſage at

The ſmoking Altars, ſapd: why ble we not theis ſame: with that
He caught a myghty altar vp with burning fyꝛe thercon,

And it among the thickeſt of the Lapithes thact anon.

And two he oner whelmd therewith calld Brote and Orion.

Chis Orions mother Mycale is knowne of certeintxe 2
Eye Mone reũiſting to haue dꝛawne by witchcraft from the ſixe.


And pulled downe a L ampbeame full of lyghtes, and lifting it 5 j


Full


— —
— ̃ ——


——


B ee ee


— —


—


OuidsMetamorphofis, J52
Full dearely ſhalt thou by it (ꝙ Exadius) map gor
A weapon: and with that in Mead of weapon, he did ſet
his hand vppon a vowd harts hoꝛne that on a Pynetrer bye
Mas nayld, and with two tynes therok he ſratze out eyther eye
Ok Gryne: thereof ſum acke vppon the hoꝛne, and ſum did fips
Gppon his beard, and there with blond like telly mixt did lye.
Allaaming fyꝛebꝛand from amids an Altar Rhætus ſnatcht.
With which vppon the leltſpde ol his head Charaxus latcht
A blow that crackt his (hull, The blaze among his yellow heave
Ran ſindging bp, as if dꝛy coꝛne with lightning blaſted were.
And in his wound the feared blood did make a græuous found, |


As when a pæte of ele red whot tane vp with tongs is dꝛownd


In water by the ſmith, it ſpirts and hilleth in the trowgh.

Charaxus from his curled heare did Hake the fyꝛe . and though
He wounded were, yit caught be bp bppon his choulders twayne

N fone the Jatome of eyther doze that well would loade a wapne.
Che male therof was ſuch as that it would not let him hit
His fo. It lighted ſhoꝛt: and with the falling downe of it 5


Amate of his that Comet hyghty it all in perces ſmit. ii fe
Then Khæte reſtreyning not his ſop, ſayd thus: J would the robot


Ok all thy mates myght in the lelfſame maner pꝛoue them ſlowt.
And with his halleburnt bꝛond the wound he ſearched newagavne,
Not cealing foꝛ to lay on loade bppon his pate amapne, 1282

Untill his head was eruſht, and of his ſcalp the bones did lum
Among his bꝛapnes. In lolly ruſte he paſled ſtreyght fram him :


To Coryt, and Euagrus, and to Dryant on arowe. 0


Ok whom when Coryt(on whole cherkes ywng molly dobone gan gtoty)
Was lapne, what pꝛayſe oꝛ honour (ꝙ Euagrus)haſt thou got

By killing of a boy; mo woꝛdes him Rhetus ſuffred nat a
Lo ſpeake, but in his open mouth did thꝛuſt his burning bꝛand,

And downe his thꝛoteboll to his cheſt. Chen whiſking in his hand

Bis fyꝛebꝛand round about his head he feercelp did allaple 13

Che valpant Dryant. but with him he could not fo pꝛeuaple.

F02 as he triumpht in his lucke, pꝛoccding foꝛ tw make


Continuall laughter ol hie does, ir Dryant with a ſtake


hole poynt was hardned in the fore) did caf at him afore
And thzulk him theough the place in lohlch the neck and ſhoulders he
e


The. xij. booke of
He groand and from bis cannell bone could ſcareelp pull the flake.
And beeing fopled with his blond to flyght he did him take.
Arnæus alſo ran awap, and Lycidas like wyſe.
And Medon (whoſe rpgbt ſhoulderplate was allo wounded) flyes.
So did Piſenor, ſo did Cavvne and fo did Mermeros
M ho late outronning euery man, now wounded llower goes:
And ſo did Phole, and Menelas, and Abas who was wont
Co make a ſpople among wylde Boares as oft as he did hunt:
And erke the wyzarde Aſtylos who countelled his mates
Co leaue that fray : but he to them in vapne of leauing pꝛates.
We ceke tw Neſſus ( ho foꝛ feare of wounding ſeemed ſhpe)
Sapd, ap not thou ſhalt ſcape this fray of Hercles bowe tw dpe.
But Lycid and Evvrinomos,and Imbreus, and Are
Eſcapte not death. Sir Dryants hand did all alike them ſpare.
Cayneius alfa (though that he in flying were not flacke,
= it was he wounded on the face: Foz as he lobed backe,
ey, A weapons poynt did hit him full midway betweene the eyes,
. a UU beras the noze and forehead meete, Foꝛ all this deane, pit lpes
3 Aphipnas ſnozting falt a feepe not mynding foꝛ to wake,
- Wrapt in a cloke of Wearlbinnes which in Olla mount were take.
And in his lither hand he hilld a potte of wyne. Thom when
Chat Phorbas ſal although in vapne) not medling with them, then
He (et his fingars to the thong: and ſaying, thou ſhalt dꝛink
Chy wyne with water taken from the Stygian fountapnes bꝛink,
He thꝛew his dart at him. Che dart (as he that tyme by chaunce
Lap bolt vpꝛight vppon his backe) did thꝛough bis thꝛoteboll glaunce.
Me dyde and felt no payne at all. The blacke ſwart blood guſht out,
And on the bed and in the potte fell Authing 'pke a ſpout.
I ſam Petreius go about to pull out of the ground
An Oken tre. But as he had his armes about it round,
And ſhaakt it tw and fro to make it loce, Pirithous caſt
A Dart which nayled to the tree his wꝛything ſtomacke faff.
Thꝛough prowelle of Pirichous (men fap) was Lycus flapne.
Chꝛougb pꝛowelle ofPirithous dyde Crome. But they both warne
Lelle honour to theyꝛ conquerour were, than Dyctis was, oꝛ than
Was Helops. Helops with à dart was ſtriken which thꝛough ran
Vis head, and entring at the rygbt care to the lett cate went.


SS OS


—=> S


= SS


—
PS SS —


SS —
— =S >=


== =>


i —
> - =


=a — i — =


.
«s 2 * yo)
——s
=


—


*
228i.
. <>

2S BS =


z=-
—


> gas Yate! ae MPs
BP LBS Aas
1 1


= = eS


—
2
2
=S 2a =


r ͤ K — . —


Ouids Metamorphofis. 153
And Dyctis from a llippꝛye knappe downe llyding, as he ment
Co ſhonne Perithdus pꝛeacing on, fell headlong downe, and with
his holvgeneſle brake the greateſt A that was in all the frith,
And goard his gutts vppon p ſfump. To wꝛeake his death comes Phare:
And krom the mount a mighty rocke with bothe his handes he tare:
Nuhich as he was about tw thꝛowe, Duke Thefeus did pꝛeuent,
And with an Oken plant vppon his mighty elbowe lent
Him fuch a blowe, as that he bꝛake the bones, and paſt no further.
Foz leplure would not ſerue him then his maymed coꝛce to murther.
He lept on hygh Bianors backe, who none was wont tw beare
Beſydes himſelf. Ageinſt his ſydes his kners falk nipping were, 5
And with his left hand taking hold vppon his loꝛetoppe heare
He cult him with his knubbed plant about the froboning face,
And made his wattled bꝛowes to bꝛeake. And with his Oken mace
he ouerthꝛew Nedimnus: and Lyceſpes with his dart,
And Hippaſus whoſe beard did hyde bis brett the greater part:
And Riphey tallar than the trs, and Therey who was wont
1. Among the hilles of Theflaly foꝛ cruell Beares to hunt,
And beare them angry home alyue. It did Demoleon ſpyght
Hl Chat Theſeus had fo god ſucceſſe and foꝛtune in bis fyght. 5
An old long Pynetree roted faſt be ſtraue with all his myght
Co pluck vp whole bathe trunk € rote. which when he could not being
To paſſe, be bake it of, and at his emnpe did it lung.
But Theſeus by admoniſhment of heauenly Pallas (fo
He would haue folke beleue it were) Hart backe a great way fro
The weapon as it came. Pit fell it not without ſome harme.
It cut from Crantors left ſpde bulke, his ſhoulder, bꝛeſt, und arme.
This Crantor was thy fathers Squpze (Achilles) and was giuen
Hin by Amyntor ruler of the Dolops, who was dꝛiuen
By battell foꝛ to giue him as an hoſtage foꝛ the peace
Co ber obſerued laythlully. Mhen Peleus in the pꝛeace
A great wap of behilld him thus falne dead of this fame wound,
O Crautor deereſt man tw mee of all aboue the ground,
Hold here an obiegite he ſapd: and both with force of hart
And hand, at out Demoleons head be thꝛelo an aſchen dart,
Which bake the watling ok his ribbes, and ſticking in the bone,
Did chake. He pulled out the ſteale wich much a do alone. 5
i f A.). he


The. xij. booke of


Che head therof ſracke fll behynd among bis lungs and lygbts
Eno ꝛſt to courage with his payne, he ryſeth ſtreight vpꝛights, 5 a
And pawing at his emny with his hoꝛſich ferte, he ſmyghts

Uppon him. Peleus bare his ſtrokes vppon his burganet,

And fenſt his ſhoulders with his ſherld, and euermoꝛe did {et

iis weapon vpward with the popnt, which by his ſhoulders perif
Thꝛough both his bꝛeſtes at one full blowe. Howbert pour father eri
Mad killed Hyle and Phlegrye, and Hiphinéus alof

And Danes who boldly durſt at hand his manhod put in prof,

Ta thets was added Dory las, ho ware bypon his head

A cap of wolues fhinne. And the hoꝛnes of Dren oped red

Mith bins were then his weapon J (lo then my courage gaue
Mer ſtrength ſayd:ſee how much thy hoꝛnes leſle koꝛce than Fron haue 5
And therewithall with manly might a dart at him J dꝛaue.
Which when he could not ſhonne, he clapt his right hand flat vppon
Mis foꝛehead where the wound ſhould ber. Foꝛ why his hand anon
Mas napled to his fozehead fal. Se reared out amapne,

And as he fod amazed and began tw faynt foꝛ payne,

Pour father Peleus (foꝛ he Fon hard by him) ſtrake him vnder

The middle bellp with his lwoꝛd, and ript his womb afunder,
Out girdes mer Dorill ſtreyght, and trayles his guttes vppon 5 ground
And trampling vnderneath his fate did bꝛeake them, and they wound
About his leggs fo ſnarling, that he could no further go,

Wut fell downe dead with empty womb, Pought bated Cyllar tho

His beatutpe in that frentick fray, (at lcaſtwyſe if wer graunt

That anp myght in that ſtraunge ſhape, of natures beawtye baunt.)
His beard began but then to bud: his beard was like the gold:

So alſo were his pellowe lokes, which godly tw behold

Midway beneath his ſhoulders hung. There refed in his face

A ſharpe and liuely cheerkulneſſe with werte and pleafant grace.

Mis necke, bꝛeſt, ſhoulders, armes, and hands, as farre ss he was man,
Mere ſuch as neuer caruers work pit ſtayne them could oꝛ can.

Wis neather part likewyſe (which was a hoꝛſe) was euer whit

Full equall with his vpper part, oz little woꝛſe than it.

$02 had per given him hoꝛles necke, and head, he was a beat

Foꝛ Caſtor to haue ridden on. So boui ly was his bꝛeſt:


Do handſome was his backe to beare a ſaddle; and his heare 5
45


— yrds ll


ee ——


Ouids Metamorphofis. | 15


Mas blacke as teate, but that his taple and fete milk whyghtich were.
Full many Ffemaics of bis race did wiſh him to theyꝛ make,
But only dame Hylonome fa louer he did take.
Ot all the halfbzutes in the wõwdes there did not any dwell
Moꝛe comly than Hylonome. She vſde herſelk fo well
In dalpance, and in loning, and in vttring of her loue,
Chat he alone hilld Cyllarus. As much as did behaue 5
In ſuchye limbes, fhe trimmed them as mot the eye might moue.
With combing ſmothe hee made her heare: thee wallowed her full ot
In Roles and in Roſemarpe, oꝛ Violets werte and ſoft: 5 ö
Sumtyme the carped Lillyes whygbt: and twyce a dap fhe walht
Her viſage in the ſpꝛing that from the toppe of Pagaſe pat ;
And in the ſtreame (je tloyce a day did bath her limbes: and on
her lektſpde oꝛ her ſhoulders came the comlyeſt things, And none
But fpneſt (kinnes of chopceſt beaſts. Alike eche loued other:
Cogither they among the hilles roamd vp and downe: togither
They went to couert: and that tyme togither thep did enter
Che Lapithes houſe, and there the fray togither did aduenter.
A dart on Cyllars left ſpde came, ( know not who it ſent) ;
Wihich ſumwhat onderneathe bis necke his bꝛeſt a ſunder ſplent. ’
As lyghtly as his hart was raaʒd, no foner was the dart :
Pluckt out, but all his bodye wert Fark cold and dyẽd ſwart.
Immediatly Hylonome his dying limbes vp ſfayd,
And put her hand vppon the wound to ſfoppe the blod, and layd
Her mouth to his, and laboꝛed ſoꝛe tw fap his palling ſpꝛyght. 5
But when the ſawe him thꝛoughly dead, then ſpeaking woꝛzdes which
Not to my hearing come foꝛ nopſe, he ſtikt herſelf vppon (might
The weapon that had goꝛed him, and dyde with him anon
Embꝛacing him bert werne her armes. There allo od befoꝛe i
Mpne eyes the grim Pheöõcomes both man and hoꝛſe who woꝛe é
AL pons fkinne vppon his backe falf knit with knotts afoze.
He lnatching vp a timber log (which lcarcely tww gad teme
Ok Oren could haue fird) did thꝛowe the fame with force extreme
At. Phonolenyes ſonne. Che logge hun all in fitters firake,
And ok his head the bꝛapnepan ina thouſand perces bꝛake,
Chat at his mouth, his eares, and eyes, and at his noſethzills to,
His cruſched beapne came roping out as creame is wont to do
. ij. : From


The. x1]. booke of


From ſiues oꝛ riddles made of wod, oꝛ as a Cullace out

From ſtreyner oꝛ from Colender. But as he went about

To ſtrippe him from his harnelle as he lap vppon the ground,

(Bour father knowech this full well) my ſwoꝛd his gutts did wound,
Teleboas and Cthonius bothe, were alfo ſlaine by mer. 5

Sir Cthonius fo2 his weapon had a foꝛked bough of tre. 5

The twther had a dart. Nis dart did wound. mer pou map fre

Che ſcarre therofremapning vit. Then was the tyme that ¥

Should ſent haue bene to conquer Troy. Chen was the tyme that y
Myght though mp force and pꝛowelle, if not vanquiſh Hector tone,
Mit at the leaſt haue hilld him wag, Z put pou aut of Dout.

But then was Hector no body: oz but a babe. And now


Am à foꝛſpent and woꝛne with peres, What Hould J tell von hom


Piretus dyde by Periphas 7 D2 wherefore ſhould J make

Long pꝛoceſſe faz tw tell pou of ſir Ampycus that ſfrake

The kowꝛefote Occle on the face with dart of Coꝛnell tree.
Che which had neyther head noꝛ poynt! D2 bolw that Macaree

Ol Beuntatne Pelithronye with a leauer lent a blowe

Co Erigdupus on the bꝛeſt which did him ouerthꝛowe⸗

Full well J de remember that Cymelius threw a dart

WM hich lpghted full in Neſleyes flank about his pꝛiuie part.

And think not pou that Mops the ſonne ol Ampycus could do

Po gad but onelp pꝛopheſye. This ſfout Odites wha ‘

Had bothe the ſhapes of man and hoꝛſe, by Mopſis dart was flapne,
And labouring fo2 to ſpeake his laff he did but ſfriue in bapne.
#02 Moplis dart togither nayld his tong and heather chappe,
And percing thꝛough bis thꝛote did make a wyde and deadly gappe.
Spue men had Cene already ſlayne: theyꝛ wounds J cannot ſap:
The names and nomber of them all ryght well J beare away.

Che names of them were Stiphelus, and Brome, and Helimus,
Pyracmon with his fozett bill, and ſtout Antimachus.

Mur ſkeppes the biggeſt Centavvre there howge Latreus armed in
Aleſus of Aemathias ſpoyle ſlayne late befoꝛe by him.


Pis peres were mid twerne pouth and age, his courage fill was pong


And on his abꝛun head hoꝛe heares peerd here and there among
His furniture was then a lwoꝛd, a target and a lawnce 7
Acmathian like. To bothe the parts he did his face aduaunce,


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 1575
And bꝛandiſhing his weapon bꝛaue, in eirclewyſe did pratwnce }
About, and ſtoutly ſpake theis woꝛdes. And mut 3 beare with pote
Dame Cenye ? fo2 none other than a mother (J auow)
Jo better than a mother will J count the whyle J Itue.
Remembꝛeſk not what ſhape by birth dame nature did the giue
Foꝛgettſt thou how thou purchaſedſk this counterfetted ſhape
Ok man Conſpdereſt what thou art by birth? and how foꝛ rape
Chou art become the thing thou art? Co take thy diſtaſte, and
Chy ſpindle, and in ſpinning yarne go exercyſe thy hand.
Let men alone with keates of armes. As Latreus made this ftout,
And ſcoꝛnefull taunting in a ring Hill turning him about,
This Cenye both a dart did hit him full vppon the ſyde .
Mhere as the hoꝛſe and man were fopndtwgitherinabpde.  - é
Che ſkrype made Latreus mad: and with his lawnce in rage be dracke
Uppon fir Cenyes naked ribbes. The lawnce rebounded backe
Like hayleſtones from a tyled houſe, 07 as a man ſhould pat
Small ſtones vppon a dꝛomſlets head. Me came moze nere with that,
And in his bꝛawned ſyde did ſtryue to thꝛuſt his ſwwꝛd. There was
Ho wap loꝛ ſwoꝛd tw enter in. Pit Halt thou not fo palſe
My handes (ſayd he.) Tell ſith the poynt is blunted thou Malt dye
Uppon the edge: and with that woꝛd he fetcht his blow awꝛpe,
And (poling with a ſwerping ſtroke along his belly ſmit.
The ſtrype did glue a clinke as if it had on marble hit. .
And therewithall the ftumzd did bꝛeake, and on his necke did lpaht.
hen Ceny had ſufficiently giuen Latreus leaue to ſmyght
His fie which was vnmaymeable. Mell now q he) lets fee,
I mp lwoꝛd able ber oꝛ no to byght the fleſh of ther.
In ſaping fo, his dꝛeadfull {tymad as farre as it would go
he vnderneathe his ſhoulder thzuſt, and wꝛinching tw and fro
Among his gutts, made wound in wound Behold with hpdeous crpe
Lhe dowblemembꝛed Centavvres ſoꝛe abaſht bppon him ſlye,
And thꝛowe theyꝛ weapons all at him. Theyꝛ weapons downe did fall
As i they had rebated bene, and Cenye foꝛ them all
Abpdes vnſkriken thꝛough. Vea none was able tlod tw dꝛawe.
The ſtraungenelle of the cace made all amazed that it ſawe.
Fp, ly for ſhame (ꝙ Monychus) that ſuch arable can
Not ouercome one wyght alone, who ſcarcely is a man.

A. ii. Although


The. xij. booke of


Althongh (to fap the berp truthe)he is the man, and we

Chꝛonigh kapntneſſe that that he was boꝛne by nature foꝛ to be,

Muhat profits theis huge limbes of ours: what helpes our dolwble forces
D2 what auaples our dowble ape of man as well as hozſe

By puiſſant nature ioynd in one? I can not thinke that we

Ok louereigne Goddeſſe Iuno were begot, oꝛ that wer ber

Ixions faites, who was fo ſtout of courage and fs hault,

As that he durſt on Iunos lone attempt to giue affaule.


Che emny that doth vanquiſh vs is ſcarcely half a man. pan: |


WUbheluic blocks, & ſtones, & mountapnes whole bppon his bard bꝛapne
And pꝛeſle px out his liuclp ghoſte with trees, Let timber chonee
Eu chappee, let weyght enforce his death in ead of wounding froke,


his ſayd: by chaunce he gets a tre blowne downe by bluſtring blaits. -


Ok Southerne wynds, and on his fo with all his myght it caſts,
And gave erample to the reſt to do the like. Mithin ;
A whyle the ſhadowes which did hyde mount Pelion fared thins
And not a tree was left vppon mount Ochris ere they went.

Sir Cenye bnderneathe this greate howge pple of timber pent,
Did chauf and on his ſhoulders hard the beaup logges did beare.
But when aboue his face and head the trees vp ſtacked were,

So that he had no venting place to dꝛawe his bꝛeth: One wohple
Me fapnted: and anotherwhyle he heaued at the pple,

To tumble downe the loggs that lap fo heaup on his backe,

And foꝛ tw winne the open apꝛe ageine aboue the ſtacke:

As if the mountapne Ida (lo) which ponder we dw fee

Do hygh/ by earth quabe at a tyme ſhould chaunce to ſhaken ber.
Men dot what did become of him. Sum hold opinion that

Che burthen of the wodes had dꝛiuen his foule to Limbo flat.
But Mopſus ſayd it was not fo. Foꝛ he did fee a beotune

Bird dping from amid the ſfacke and towꝛing bp and done.

It was the fürſt tyme and the laſt that euer I behild a
That fowle. tether Mopſus ſoftly fatw him ſoꝛing in the feeld,
He loked wilkly after him, and erped out on bpe,

Haple pœrleſſe perle of Lapith race, haple Ceny,lateago

A valeant knyght, and nowa bird of whom there is no mo. 5
Che authoꝛ cauſed men belécue the matter to ber ſo.


Our loꝛrow fet vs in a rage. It was to vs aà grief BS


=—
—


‘


—
—


—


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 156


Chat by fo many foes one knyght was killd without relat.
Chen ceaſt w not tw wꝛeake our tœne till moſt was laine in fyght,
and that the reff diſcamũted were fled away by nygbt.
As Neſtor all the pꝛoceſſe of this battell did reherce
Wetwerne the valeant Lapithes and miſthapen Centavvres ferce, 5
Tlepolemus diſpleaſed ſoꝛe that Hercules was pat 1 5
u ith ſilence, could not hold his peace, but out theis tumades did cal.
gp Loꝛd, ¥ muſe you ſhould foꝛget my fathers pꝛapſe fo quyght.
Foꝛ often vnto me himſelt was wonted tw recite, 5
hHolu that the clowdbꝛed folk by him were cherlly put to flyght.
Nyght ſadly Neſtor anſwerd thus. Tibp ſhauld pou mer conſtreyne
Co call to mynd foꝛgotten qrefs 2 and foꝛ to rœre ageine
Che ſoꝛrowes nolw out woꝛne by tyme ? oꝛ foꝛte me to declare 4
Che hatred and diſpleaſure which J tw pour father bare: .


In loth his dings greater were than myght bee well belceued.


He filo the wozld with high renowme which nobly he atcherued.

Wibich thing J would J could denye. Foz neyther let wer out

Deiphobus, Poly damas, noꝛ Hector that moſt ſfout

And valeant knyght the ſtrength of Troy. Foꝛ who will pꝛapſe his fo:

Your father ouerthꝛew the walles of Meſſen long ago, ¢

And razed Pyle, and Ely totunes bniveszthpe feruing fo. |

And ferceageint my fathers boule her bfoe bothe ftww2d and fpze,

And (not to ſpeake of others whom he killed in his tre)

Cwyce fir wer were the ſonnes of Nele all luſty gentlemen,

Cwyce tir of vs lexcepting me) by him were murthꝛed then.

The death of all the reſt myght ſerme a matter not ſo ſtraunge⸗

But ſtraunge was Perielymens death who had the powre to chaunge

And leaue and take what hape he liſt (by Neptune tw him giuen,

Che founder of the houle ol Nele.) Foꝛ when he had beene diuen

To try all chapes, and none could help: he laſt ot all became

The kowle that in his hoked fate doth beare the flalſching flame

Sent downe krom heauen by Iupiter. He pꝛaaiſing thoſe birds,

With dapping wings, and bowwing beake, and hoked talants girds

At Hercle, and berſcratcht his face. To certeine (J map fap)

Thy father amde his ſhalt at him. Foꝛ as her towꝛing lay

Among the clowwdes, he hit him vndernoath the wing The ſtroke

Nas ſmall: owbæt bycauſe therwith the ſinewes being bꝛake, 9
| fy, r


The. xij, booke of |


‘He wanted Frength tm mapnteine fivgbt,be fell me tw the ground,


Thꝛough weakenelle of his wing. The Mhatt that Kicked in the wound
By realon of the burthen of his bodpe perſt his ſyde, ent
And at the leftſyde of his necke all blodye foꝛth did glyde.

ob tell mee O thou beatotpfull Loꝛd Amirall of the flere

Ok Rhodes, tf mx to ſpeake the pꝛayſe of Hercle it bee mete,

But leak that of my bothers teathes men think J do delpꝛe

d kurther bendge than filence of the pꝛowelle of thy ſpꝛe,

J lone the euen with all my hart, and take ther foꝛ mp freend.
Mhen Neſtor of his pleaſant tales had made this frendlp end,

bey called foꝛ a boll of wyne, and from the table went,


And all the reſdew of the nyght in llrping foundlp ſpent.


Wut neptune like a father toke the matter ſoꝛe tw hart
That Cygnet th a Swan he was conſtrepned tw conuert.

And hating leerce Achülles, he did wzeake his cruell rene
Uppon him moze vncourteouſlp than had beſeeming bene.
Joꝛ when the warres well nere fall twyce fyue peeres had lated, He.
Unchoꝛne Apollo thus beſpake. O neuew vnto me 4 it
Moſt vere of all mp brothers impes, who helpedſt me to lap:
Foundation of the walles af Troy foz which we had no pap,
And canſt thou ſyghes foꝛbeare to ſe the Alan Emppꝛe fall?
And doth it not lament thy hart when thou to mynd dot call
So many thouſand people ſlapne in keeping Ilion wall?
Oꝛ (to thentent particlerly 3 do not ſpeake of all)
Nemembꝛeſt thou not Hectors Ghoſt who harrped was about
His tolune of Troy: Where neretheleſſe Achilles that fame ſtout
And farre in kyght moze butcherlp, who ikryues with all his myght
Co ſtrop the wooꝛke of mer and the, lines Fill in healthfull plpght⸗
It euer hee dw come within my daunger he Hall fle
M hat foꝛce is in iny trpple mace. But ſith with wood of Tele.
map not mete him as my lo, J pꝛap the vnberware
Go kill him with a ſodeine ſhalt and rid mer of my care.
Apollo did conſent: as well his vncle for to pleaſe,
As alſo foꝛ a pꝛyuate grudge himſelt᷑ had foꝛ to eale. .
And in a clolvd he do wne among the hoſt of Troy did iyde,
WaAbere Paris dꝛibbling out his ſhaftes among the Grekes her ſpyde?


And telling him what Cod he was, ſapd wherfore dot n


| 1 a 2
Ouids Metamorphoſis. 157
Chyne arrowes on the ſimple ſoꝛt It any care thou hatte
Ot thole that are thy kreendes, go turne ageinſt Achilles bead,
And like a man reuendge on him thy brothers that are dead.
In ſaying this, he bꝛought him where Achilles with his bꝛond
Mas beating downe the Trolane folk, and leueld ſo his hond
As that Achilles tumbled downe ſfarke dead vppon the lond.
Chis was the onelp thing wherok the old king Priam myght 5


A


Cake comfoꝛt after Hectors death. Chat ſtout and baleant knyght

Achilles wh had ouerthꝛowen fo many men in fyght,
las by that coward carpet knyght berrerued ol his lyfe.
Wiha like a captif fale away the Spartane pꝛinces wyfe.
But i of weapon womanilh he had foꝛeknowen it had
His deſtnye berne too loſe his lyle, he would haue beene moze glad
That Queene Pentheſileas bill had Aaine him out of hand.

Po was the feare of Phapgian folk, the onely gloꝛp, and
Delence of Grekes, that pœreleſſe pꝛince in armes, Achilles turnd
Co aſſhes. That fame God that had him armd, him alſo burnd.
ow is he duſt: and of that great Achilles bydeth ſtill.
A thing or nought, that ſcarcely can a little coffin fill.
Holobert his woꝛthy fame doth lyue, and ſpꝛeadeth ouer all
Che woꝛld, a meaſure mette ſoꝛ ſuch a perſone to berkall.
Chis matcheth thee Achilles full. And this can neuer dye.
his target allo (tw thentent that men myght plapnly ſpye
Mhat wyghts it was) did mone debate, and foꝛ his armour burt
Out deadlp fode. Not Diomed, noz Aiax Oylye durſt
Paß clapme oꝛ chalendge to the ſame, noꝛ Atreus ponger ſonne,
Poꝛ pit bis elder, though in armes much honour they had wonne.
Alone the ſonnes of Telamon and Laert did aſſap ö
Mhich of them twa of that great pꝛyſe ſhould beare the bell afvay,
But Agamemnon from himſelt the burthen putts, and clerres
bis bandes ok enuye, cauting all the Capteines and the Peres
Ol Greece tw meete amid the camp togither in a place,
Co whom he put the bering and the iudgement of the cace


Finis duodecimi Libri.


— - -—


_qTHE. XIII. BOOKE OF
Ouids <M etamorphofis.


He Wordes and Capteynes being let togither with the Ring,
5 5 And all the fouldicrs fanding round about them in a ring,
The owner of the feuenfold Helo, to theis did Aiax ryſe.
And (as he could not bꝛydle wꝛath) be catk his frolvning eyes 5
Nppon the ſhoꝛe and on the flete that there at Anchoꝛ lyes
And thꝛowing vp his handes, O God and mut wer plead ( her)
Our caſe before our ſhippes: and muff VIyſles Mand with me ¢
But like a wꝛetch he ran his way when Hector came with fyꝛe,
Which J defending from theis ſhippes did force him tw retpꝛe.
It eaſper is therefore with wonꝛdes in pꝛint to maynteine ſtryfe,
Chan koꝛ to fyght it out with fits. But nepther J am rpfe
In woꝛdes, noꝛ hee in deedes. Foꝛ loke hol farre J bim excell
In battell and in feates of armes: fo farre beares bee the bell
Fromme in talking. Peyther think J requifite to tell
My actes among pou, You pour ſelues haue ſerne them berry well.
But let Viyfles tell pou his dene all in hudther mudther, f
And whervnto the only nyght is pxup and none other.


The pꝛyſe ts great (à do confelle.) Foꝛ which we ftrpue, But pit. *


It is dichonour vntw mer, foꝛ that in clapming it

So bace a perſone ſfandeth in contention foꝛ the ſame.

Co think it myne already, ought to counted ber no ſhame

Noꝛ pꝛyde in me : although the thing ol ryght great valew bee
Ot which Vly les ſtandes in hope. Foꝛ now alreadye her
Math wonne the honour of this pape, in that when be hall Re
Welpdes the quithon,be may bꝛag be frauc with mer fo3 tt.
And though 4 wanted valiantnelle, pit ſhould nobilitee
Make with mer. J of Telamon am knowne the ſonne to ber

M ho bönder baleant Hercules the walles of Troy did ſcale,
And in the ſhippe of Pagaſa to Colchos land did ſaplmeegG.
Mis father was that Aeacus tubo executeth ryght


Among the ghoſtes where Siſy phus heaues vp with ali his myghe


Che maſſpe fone ay tumbling downe. Che hygbeſt Ic ue of all
Acknowledgeth this Accus, and doth his ſonne him call.
Thus am J Aiax the third from Ioue. Pit let this Petegre }


Ouids Metamorphofis. 158


@ Achyues in this cafe of myne abaptable not bee,

Onlelſle 3 prone it fully with Achylles to agra 9

he was mp bꝛother, and J clayme that was my bꝛothers. WMhy
Hhouldt thou that art of Siſyphs blood, and foꝛ to filch and lye
Expꝛeſleſt him in euery popnt, by forged pedegrer

Aly ther tw the Acacyds, as though we did not fe é

Cher to the houſe ol Acacus,a ſtraunger fo2 tm bez

And is it reaſon that pow ſhould this armonr mer denye

Bytauſe 3 foꝛmer was in armes, and needed not a ſpye

Co fetch mer foꝛth! Oꝛ think pou him moze lwwꝛthpe it to haue,
That came to warrefare hindermoſt, and feynd bimlelktw raue,
Bycauſe he would haue Hund the warre 2 vntill a ſuttler head

And moꝛe vnpꝛofitable foꝛ himſelf, fir Palamed i
Eſcrpde the craftp fetches of his fearefull hart, and dꝛelw

him foꝛth a warfare which be ſought fo cowardiy to eſchew⸗
Mutt he now nodes entop the beſt and richeſt armour? who
Mould none at all haue woꝛne onteſſe he koꝛced were therto⸗;
And 3 with ſhame be put beſyde my coufin germanes gifts
Bypycaule to ſhun the kozmeſt bꝛunt of warres J fought no ſhikts⸗
Mould God this milchef mayſter had in berrpe deærde berne mad,
D> elle belceucd fo to bee: and that wer neuer had

Brought ſuch a parton puto Troy. Chen ſhould not Pæans ſonne
In Lemnos like an autlawe t the ſhame of all vs wonne.

Who lurking now (as men repoꝛt) in waves and caues, both moue
Che verry flints with ſyghes and grones, and pꝛayers to God aboue
Co fend VIyſſes his deſert. UMhich prayer lik there bee

A God) muſt one day take effect. And now berhold hold her 5
By othe a Souldier ol our Camp, pea and as well as we

A Capteine to, alas, (who was by Hercules àſſignde ;
Lo haue the keping of his ſhafts, with payne and hungar pynde,
Is clad and led with fotvles, and dꝛibs his arrowes bp and downe
At birds, which were by deſkinye pꝛeparde to ſtrop Troy towne.
Pit liueth her bpcauſe her is not ſkill in companie

With liy Viyiles, Palamed that wzetched knyght perdie,

Mould ceke he had abandond bene, Foꝛ then ſhould Mill the ſame
Hane bene alpue: oꝛ at the leaſt haue dyde without our ſhame.
But this companion bearing (ab) te well in wicked mynd


The. xiij. booke of

His madneſſe which ſir Palamed by wiſdome out did fynd,
Appeached him of treafon that be pꝛactyſde to betray
Che Greebith holke. And foꝛ tw vouch the fact,be Hhetod Frepght wa
A malle of gold that be himſelf had hidden in his tent,

And forged Letters which he leynd from Priam to bee ſent. 5
Thus eyther by his murthꝛing men oꝛ elſe by baniſhment
Abateth her the Grerkiſh frength. This is VIy ſſes fyght.

Chis is the feare he puttes men in. But though he had moze might
Than Neſtor hath, in eloquence he ſhal not compaſſe me

Co think his leawd abandoning of Neftor foꝛ to be

No fault: who beeing caſt behynd by wounding of his hoꝛſe,
And lowe with age, with calling on Vlyſſes waxing hoarce,
Mas neretheleſſe betrapd by him. Sir Diomed knowes this cryme
Is vnſurmyſde. Foꝛ he himſelfe did at that pꝛeſent tyme

Webuke him oktentymes by name, and fercelp him vpbꝛapd

Al ith flping from his fellowe lo who Tod.in nerde of apd. 8
Wlith ryghtkull eyes doth Ged behold the derdes of moꝛtall men.
Lo, he that helped not bis frernd wants help himſelk agen.

And as he did foꝛſake his freend in tyme ol nerde: ſo hee

Did in the ſelklame perrill fail foꝛſaken foꝛ to be.

Me made a rod te beat himſelf. He calld and cryed out

Uppon bis fellowes. Streight J came: and there J fat the lout
Bothe quake and habe fo2 feare of death, and loke as pale as clout,
3 fet mp Held betwene him and his foes, and him beſtrid:

And ſavde the daſtards lyfe. finall pꝛayſe redoundes of that J did.
But il thou wilt contend with mer, lets to the ſelle fame place
Agein: be wounded as thou wart: and in the foꝛe ſayd caſe

Ok feare, beſet about with foes : co weh vnderneath my ſherld:
And then contend thou with mer there amid the open feld.

ID whet, J had no ſoner rid this champion of his foes, l
But where fo: woundes he ſcarce befoze could totter on his toes,
He ran away apace, as though he nought at all did apie.

Anon commes Hector to the feld and bꝛingeth at his taple

The Condes. Pot only thy hart there (Vlyſſes) did the faple,

But euen the ſtowteſt tourages and ſtomacks gan tw quayle.

So great a terrour bꝛought he in. Pit in the midds of all

His blody ruffe, 3 coapt with him, and wlth a fopling fall


A


Did


a a


——
—


SS OSS


==


K — a


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 159


Did ouerthꝛowe him to the ground. Another tyme, when her
Did mate a chalendge, vou my Loꝛdes by lot did chwſe out me,
And J did match him hand to hand. Pour wiſches were not vayne.
Fo; if pou altze me what ſucceſſe our combate did obteine,
I tame away vnvanquiſhed. Behold the men ol Troy

‘| Brought fyꝛe and ſwoꝛd, and all the fendes our naupe to deſfrop.
And where was pe Vlyſles then with all his talk fo ſmoth⸗
This bꝛeſt of myne was fapne to fence pour thouſand ſhippes foꝛſoth
Che hope of pour returning home. Foꝛ ſauing that fame dap
Ho manip ſhippes, this armour giue. But (if that J Hall fap é
Che truth)tbe greater honour now this armour beares awap.
And our renownes togither link. Foꝛ (as of reaſon ought)
An Aiax fo2 this armour, not an armour now is ſought
Fo2 Aiax, Let Dulychius match with theis, the hoꝛſes whyght
Ok Rheſus, daſfard Dolon, and the coward carpetknyght 5
king Priams Helen, andthe felth of Palladye by nyght.
Ok all theis things was nothing done by dap noꝛ nothing wꝛought
Without the helpe of Diomed. And therefoze tf pe thought
Co glue them tw fo ſmall deſerts, deuyde the lame, and let
Dir Diomed haue the greater part. But what ſhould Ithacus get
And ik he had them 2 M ho doth all his matters in the dark,
Mho neuer weareth armour, who Hotes ay at his obne mark
Ta trappe his fo by ſtelth vnwares 2 The very headperce map
With bꝛightneſle of the gliſtring gold his pꝛiuie feates bewꝛay
And ſhew him lurking. Neyther well of foꝛce Dulychius were
The weyght of great Achilles helme vppon his pate to weare
It cannot but a burthen ber (and that ryght great) to beare 22
(With whoſe fame ſhꝛimpiſh armes of his) Achilles myghtp ſpearr.
Agen his target grauen with the whole howge woꝛld theron
Agrees not with a fearefull hand, and cheefly ſuch a one
As taketh filching euen by kynd. Thou Lozell thon doſk (eke |
Agilt that will but weaken ther. which ik the folk of Grebe
Shall give ther through theyꝛ ouerſyght, it will bee vnto the
Occafion,of thyne emnyes ſpoyld not feared foꝛ to bes
And liyght wherin thou coward, thon all others mapſt outbꝛag
Vlill hindꝛed bee when after thee ſuch malies thou ſhalt dꝛag.
Pozeouer this thy ſherld that feles {a ſerld the iozee of fpsbe


ee a ee a SSS ES a Le


The. xiij. booke of


Is found. Wut myne is gacht and hakt and ſtricken tharrongh quyghe -


A thoufand tymes, with bearing blowes. And therfore myne muſt walk
And put another in his ſtead. But what nerdes all this talk 2

Wets now ber ſæne anothertobpte what eche of vs can dw.

The thicket of our armed foes this armour thꝛowe intw,

And bid bs fetch the fame fro thence. And which of bs doth fetch
The ſame away, reward ye him therewith. Thus farre did ſkretch
The woꝛdes of Aiax, At the ende tobereof there did enſew

A muttring of the ſouldiers, till Laertis ſonne the pꝛew

Stod vp, and rapſed ſoberly his eyliddes from the ground

(On which he had a little wohyle them pitched in a found)

And loking on the noblemen who longd his woꝛdes to harre

He thus began with comly grace and ſober pleafant chere.


Mp Loꝛdes, i my deſyꝛe and pours myght erſt haue taken place,


It ſhould not at this pꝛeſent tyme haue berne a detotfull cace,
M hat perſon bath moſt ryght to this great pꝛyſe foꝛ which wer Lirpue,
Achilles ſhouid his armour haue, and we fill him alpue.
M hom ſith that cruell deſtinie to both of vs denpes,
(Wich that fame woꝛd as though he wept, he wypte his watry eyes)
GU hat wyght of reaſon rather ought to ber Achilles heyꝛe,
Chan he thꝛough whom to this pour camp Achilles did repapze 2
Alonly let it not auaple ſir Aiax here, that be
Is ſuch a dolt and groſſehead, as he ſhewes himſelk to ber :
Ne let my wit which ap hath done pou god O Greckes)hurt mex,
But fuffer this mine eloquence (ſuch as it is) which now
Doth foꝛ his maytter ſpeake, and oft ere this hath (poke foꝛ yo w,
Ber vndildeynd. Let none refule his owne god gifts be beings,
Joꝛ as foꝛ ſtocke and auncetoꝛs, and other fuch like things
WA herof sur ſelues no folwnders are, 3 fcarcelp dare them graunt
To ber our owne. But foꝛaſmuch as Aiax makes his baunt
To be the fowath from Ioue: euen Ioue the founder is aifo


Skt my boule: and than fowꝛe deſcents J am from him no ino.


Laértes is my father, and Arceſius his, and be
Begotten was of Iupiter. And in this pedegre
Is nepther any damned {cule noꝛ outlaw as pe fee.


Moꝛeouer by my mothers ſyde J come of Mercurec,


Another bonogto my boule, Thus both by fathers (pos


— —


—  — —_


SSS OSS SOS SSS


t
— oe SOO


— — a a


— <4


Ouids Metamorphoſis.


And mothers (as yon map percepue) ¥ am tw Goddes alyde.
But neyther fo2 bycauſe q am a better gentleman: i
Chan Aiax by the mothers lyde, noꝛ that my father can
Auouch himſelt vngiltye of his brothers blond, do ¥
Chis armour clayme. wep pou the cafe by merits vpꝛightly.
Pꝛaupded no pꝛerogatyue of birthꝛyght Aiax beare,
F03 that his father Telamon, and Peleus brothers were.
Let only pꝛoweſſe in this pꝛyſe the bonour beare away.
Oꝛ if the cafe on kinrid oꝛ on birthꝛyght ſerme tw ſtay,
his father Peleus is aliue, and Pyrrhus cke his ſonne.
What tytle then can Aiax make. This gere of ryght ſhould wone
To Phthya, oꝛ to Scy ros Ile. And Tevvcer is as well
Achilles vncle as is bee. Mit Doth not Tevvcer mell.
And il he did, ſhould bee obteyne:? well feb the cace wth reit
On trpall which ol vs can prone his dwings to be beit,
Indes mutt ſay mp deꝛdes are mo than well J can expꝛeſſe:
Pit will J ſhew them oꝛderly as neve as J can geſſe. f
Foꝛeknowing that her ſonne ſhould dye, The Lady Thetis hid
Achilles in a mapdes attyꝛe. By which fyne lyght he did
All men decepue, and Aiax to. This armour in a packe
With other womens tryllyng toyes J carped on my backe,
A bapte ta treyne a manip bart. Appareld like a mapd

Achilles toke the ſpeare and (helo in hand, and with them plapd.
Then ſapd J: O thou Goddeſle ſonne, why ſhouldik thou ber afrapd
To raze great Troy, whale ouerthꝛowe fo2 the is onelp ſlayd⸗
And laying hand vppon him J did ſend him (as pou fe).
Lo valeant doings merte foꝛ ſuch a baleant man as heb.
And therfore all the Deedes of him are my derdes. J did wound oe
Bing Teleph with his ſpeare, and when he lay vppon the ground, é
AJ was intreated with the ſpeare to heale him fafe and found.
Chat Thebe lyeth ouerthꝛowne, is my derde pou muſt think
J made the folk of Tenedos and Lefbos foz to ſhꝛink.
Both Chryſe and Cillas Phebus totuntes and Scyros J did take.
And my ryght hand Lyrneſſus walles tw ground did leuell make.
Agaue pou him that ould confound (befpdes a number mo)
The valeant Hector. Hector that our moſt reno tumed fo -
48 lapne by mer. Chis armour here 3 ſem agein to haue


NE ST OW SE De CS IE SE OE Tr oO I OY oP Re Ca a Oe


The. xiij. booke of

(his armour by the which J found Achilles. I it gaue

Achilles whyle he was aliue: and now that he is gone

J clapme it as myne obne ageln. Nhat tyme the greefe of one
Had perſt the harts ol all the Orekes, and that our thouland ſayle
At Avvlis by Evvboya ſfayd, bycaufe the wyndes did faple,
Continewing eyther none at all oz clene ageinſt bs long,

And that our Agamemnon was by deſtnyes ouerſtrong
Commaunded fo2 to facrifple his giltleſſe daughter to

Diana, which her father then refuting fo2 to do

as angry with the Goods themſelues, and though he were a king i


= >


————
Ss S =


—


=


Continued allo katherlpke: bp reafon, 3 did boing il
His gentle nature to relent foz publike profits fake. il
4 muff conteſle ( whereat his grace ſhall no diſpleaſure take) U
Wefore a parciall iudge vndertoke a ryght hard cace. 8 iy
Wotvbectt foꝛ his brothers fake, and fez the royall mace
Committed, and his peoples weale, at length he was content ih
Co purchace pꝛapſe wyth blod. Then was J ta the mother fent, |
Who not perfwaded was to ber, but compat with ſum guple. hi
pad Aiax on this errand gone, our ſhippes had all this whyle 1
Lyne fill there pit foꝛ want of wynd. Moꝛeouer J was ſent 1
Co Ilion às àmbaſladour. J boldly thither went, 1
And entred and behilld the Court, wherin there was as then * 1
Great ſtoꝛe df pꝛinces, Dukes, Loꝛds, knyghts, and other valeant men.
And pit J boldly neretheleſle my melſage did at large i
Che which the whole eſtate ol Greece had giuen mice erſt in charge. 10
I made complaint of Paris, and accuſte him to his head. 1
Demaunding reſkitution of Querne Helen that fame fea 1
And of the botye with ber tare. Both Priamus the king 0
And ecke Antenor his alpe the woꝛdes of iner did Hing. 5
And Paris and his bꝛathers, and the reſdew of his trapne n


Chat onder him had made the ſpople, could hard and ſcarce refrayne
There wicked hands. You Menelay do know 5 do not leyne.

And that day was the firſt in which wer ioyntly gan ſuſl eyne

A taſt of perrills,ſtoꝛe whereok did then behind remapne.

It would ber ouerlong to tell eche pꝛofitable thing

That during this long laſt ing warre J well to palle did bzing⸗

By loꝛce as well as pollycie.Foꝛ after that the furſt e


ore rot - — —— — : OO — —


Quids Metamorphoſis. | 16%


Encounter once was ouerpaſt, our emnyes neuer dure

Glue battell in the open Feld, but huld themſelnes within

Chepꝛ walles and bulwarks till the tyme the tenth pere did begin,

How what didſt thou of all that whyle, that canſt dw nought but trekes

Oꝛ tw what purpoſe ſeruedſt thou? Foꝛ tf thou my derdes (eke,

J pꝛaqyſd ſundꝛp pollycies to trappe our foes vnwware:

4 foꝛtikyde our Camp with trench which heretwloꝛe lay bare:

J hartned our companions with a quiet mynd to beare

Che longneſſe of the werry warre: J taught vs how we were

Bothe to ber fed and furniſhed: and to and fro J went

To places where the Counſell thought moſt mærte J Mould ber ſent.

Behold the king decepued in his dꝛeame by falſe pꝛetence

Ol Ioues commaunde ment, bade bs rayſe our ſcoge and get vs hence. 5

Che authoꝛ of his doing fo map well ber his defence.

ow Aiax ſhould haue letted this, and calld them backe ageine

Co ſacke the towne or Troy. he ſhould haue fought with myght ¢ maine.

Mbp did he not reſtreyne them when they ready were to go ?

Wibp twbe he not bis ſwoꝛd in hand⸗ wh gaue he not as tho

Bum counſell ſoꝛ the flæting folk tw follow at the bꝛunt⸗

In lapth it had a trylle bene to him that ay is wont.

Such vaunting in his mouth to haue. But he himſelk did fly

As well as others. J did ſer, and was aſhamed 4

To ſck thee when thou edi, and didit pꝛepare fo towardly

Co faple away, And therbppon J thus aloud did cry.

What mene pee firs 2 what madneſſe Doth pou moue to go to ſhippe:

And fuffer Troy as god as tane, thus out of hand to ſlippe⸗

Mhat elſe this tenth pere beare ye home than ſhame! W (uch like wood

And other, which the eloquence of ſoꝛrowe did avoꝛd,)

J bꝛought them from thepꝛ flying ſhippes. Then Agamemnon calld

Logither all the capteines who with feare were pit appalld.

But Aiax durſt not then once creake. Pit durſt Therſites bee

So bold as rayle bppon the kings, and he was papd by mer

Foꝛ plaping ſo the ſawepe Jacke. Then wd J on mp toes 1

And to my fearefull countrymen gane hart sgeinſt thepꝛ foes. 5

And ſhed new courage in theyꝛ mynds thzough talk that fro mer goes.

From that tyme koꝛth what euer thing hath valeantly steheeued ;

Bp this gud fellow bene, is mpnz,twhe him krom fipght repzeued. i
PJ. ig)


Well dwings tw delace: ſo that he chalendge not the ryght


The. xiij. booke of
And nob to touche ther: which of all the Grekes commendeth thas >
Oꝛ ſeeketh ther : Wut Diomed communicates with me N
His doings, and alloweth mer, and thinkes him well apayd
Lo haue Viyfles euer as companion at the bꝛayd.
And lumwhat woꝛth pow will it graunt ( trow) alone ſoʒ me
Out of fo many thouſand Greekes by Diomed pike to be.
No lot tompelled ma to goʒ and pit ¥ ſetting lyght.
As well the perrill of mp foes as daunger of the npgbt, f
Allld Dolon who about the felf fame feate that nyght did ſfray,
That wer went out for. But J firſt compelld him tw bewꝛay
All things concerning faythleſſe Troy, and what it went about.
Mhen all was learnd, and nothing lefe behynd to harken ont,
3 myght haue then come home bwith pꝛayſe. J was not fo content. ö


_ Proceding fruther to the Camp of Rheſus ſfreyght J went,


And killed bothe himfclf and all his men about his tent.

And taking bathe his chariot and his hozſes which were Whyght,
Returned home in trpumph like a conquerour from fpgbt. :
Denpe pou mee the armour of the man whofe tenes the lj
Requy2ed fo: his playing ofthe fppeanpgbt,andfo ss
Map Aiax bee moze kynd to me than pou axe. what ſhould
Declare vnto pou how my ſwoꝛd did waſte ryght baleantly
Sarpedons hoſfe of Lycia: J by foꝛce did ouerthzowe

Alaſtor, Crome and Ceranos, and Haly ona rowe.

Alcander, and Noémon to, and Prytanis beſpde,

And Thodn and Theridamas, and Charops alſo dyde

By met, and ſo did Evvnomos enfoꝛſt by cruell fate.

And many mo in ſyght of Troy 3 llew of bacer fate.

here allo are (O couatryinen) about mer waundings, which

Che place of them make beaturpfull. Ser here (his hand did twich

iis Hirt alyde) and credit not vayne woꝛdes. Lo here the bꝛiſt

That alwapes to be one in pour affayꝛes bath neuer miſt.

And pit ofall this whyle no dꝛoppe ol blood bath Aiax fpent


Uppon his fellaives, Wi oundletfe is his body and vnrent.


Wut what fhills that, as long as he is able fo to bannt
He fought againſt bothe Troy and Ioue tw ſaue our fete 2 3 graunt


*


He did fo. 02 J am not of {uch nature as of ſpyght |


S H c ee ee


— =


— ——


= S&S =] SS SS


—


ee ee ee


Ouids Metamorphoſis.


Ob all men to himſelk alone, and that he peeld tw me

Sum ſhare, who of the honour loke a partener foꝛ to bee.
Patroclus alfo hauing on Achilles armour, ſent

Che Trolans and theyꝛ leader bence, to burne our naupe bent.
And pit thinks bee that none durſt mæte with Hector fauing her.
Forgetting bothe the king, and erke his bꝛother, pea and me.

M here be himſelt was but the nyneth, appoynted by the hing,
And by the loꝛtune of his lot peferd to dw the thing. f
But now foꝛ all pour baleantneſſe, what I ſſue had J pꝛap
Vour combate 2 all Z tell ſoꝛſwthe, that Hector went his way
And had no harme. Now wo is mer how grerueth it my hart

Zo think vppon that ſeaſon when the bulwark of our part
Achilles dyde; Mhen nepther teares, noꝛ greet, noꝛ feare could make
Me fo2 to fap, but that vppon theis ſhoulders J did take,

J fap vppon theis ſhoulders J Achilles body tote,
And this fame armour claſpt theron, which now to weare J loke.
Huffictent ſtrength J haue tw beare as great a weyght as this,
And erke a hart wherein regard of honour roted is. 5

Chink pou that Thetis foꝛ her ſonne fo inſtantly beſought

Hir Vulcane this fame beauenlp gift to giue her, which is wꝛonght
Mlth ſuch excerding cunning, tw thentent a ſouldier that

Path neyther wit noꝛ knowledge Mould it weareꝛ Re knowes not wbat |
Che things ingrauen on the theeld do mene. Ol Ocean fe, 5
Ol land, of heauen, and ol the ſtarres no ſkill at all bath he.

The Weare that neuer dyues in ſea he doth not vnderſtand,

he Pleyads, noꝛ the Hyads, noꝛ the Cities that do ſfand 5

Appon the earth, noꝛ pit the lwwꝛd that Orion holdes in hand.

Be ſerkes to haue an armour of the which be bath no Chill.

And pit. in kynding fault with mee bycauſe J had no will

To follow this fame paynfull warre and fought tw ſhonne the fame,
And made it ſumwhat longer tpmne before J thither came, 8
He fees not how her ſpeakes repꝛoch to ſtout Achilles naue.

Foz it to haue diſſembled in this cafe, pee count a crpme,

Mer both offenders ber. Oz ik pꝛotracting of the tyme

Ber count blame lwoꝛthye, pit was I the tymelyer of vs twapne.
Achilles louing mother him, my wyke did mer detepne. ö

The loꝛmer tyme was giuen to them, the reſt was gluen ta polo 1


oe


The. xiij. booke of


And therefore do J little pale although J could not nowy
Defend my fault, ſith ſuch a man of prowelle, birth and fame

As was Achilles, was with mee offender in the fame,
But pit was he efpyed bp Viyfles wit, but nat

Viyfles by ür Aiax wit. And leat pe wonder at

Che rapling of this foliſh dole at mer, he doch obiedt

Repꝛoche to pou. Foꝛ tf that J offended tw detec

Sir Palamed of foꝛged fault, could pou without pour ſhame
Arreyne him, and condemne him erke to fatter foꝛ the fame z

But neyther could fir Palamed excuſe him of the cryme

Do heynous and fo manileſt: and pen pour ſelues that tyme
Hot onelp his indytement hard, but alſo did behold

His ded avoivched to his face by bꝛinging in the gold.

And as foꝛ Philoctetes, that he is in Lemnos, 1
Delerue not to bx toucht therwith. Delend pour eryme: foz why 5
Vou all conſented therbnto. Vit dw J not denpe,

But that J gaue the counſell to conuey hin out of way

From tople of warre and trauell that by reſt he myght .
Xo cale the greatnefe of his pepnes. He did thereto obey

And by fo doing is alyue. Hot only fapthfull was

This counſell that 3 gaue the man, but alſo happpe, as

Che god lurcelſe hath ſhewed fince. Mhom Lith the deſtnyes da
Nequpꝛe in ouerthꝛowing Troy, Appoynt not mee ther to:

But let fir Aiax rather go. Foꝛ he with eloquence

D2 by ſome ſuttle pollyeſe, chall bꝛing the man fro thence

And pacpfic him raging though diſeaſe, and wꝛathfull ire.


— —


V Pap. ürſt the riuer Simois (hall to his ſpꝛing retyꝛe,
+


Nan mountaine Ida (ha! theron haue ſtonding neuer a træ,
SY & wea and the faythleſle tone of Troy by Greckes Hall reſtzewd ber,
N Beloꝛe that Alax blockiſh wit ſhall aught at all auaple,
Muhen my attempts and pacpfes in pour affepꝛes do faple.

‘DY 302 though thou Philoctetes with the bing offented ber,

N And with thy fellowes euerychone, and moſt of all with mer,
I Although thou curffe and ban nie to the helliſh pit fo2 ap,
i And wiles in thy payne that J by chaunce myght croſſe thy way,
S Okpurpole fo2 tw bꝛaww mp blood : pit will I gie aday
a ketch thee hither once agcine, And ik that foꝛtuñe ſa yx


1 | 8


Amen,)


== = — se


= =


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 163
Amen) J will as well haue the and cele thyne arrowes, as
I haue the Troiane pꝛophet wh by mer ſurpꝛyſrd was,
Oꝛ as J did the Ozacles and Lroiane fates dilcloſe,
©; as 2 from her chappell though the thickeſt or her fors
Che hꝛygian Pallads image letcht: And pit doth Aiax fill
Compare humſelt with mer. Ver knowe it was the deſfnyes will 5
Chat Troy ſhould neuer taken ber by any force, vntill
Chis Image firſt were got. and where was then our valeant knight
Hir Aiax? where the ſtately wonꝛdes of fuch a hardy wyght⸗
Mhy feareth her? why dares V lyiles ventring through the watch
Commit his perſone to the nygbt his buyſnelle to dilpateh⸗ —
And though the pykes not only foꝛ to palle the garded wall x⁰
But allo fo2 to enter to the ſtrongeſt towꝛe or alls?Eę?Eũ md
And foz te take the Idoll from her Chappell and her ſhꝛyne⸗
i And beare her thence amid bis foes 2 Foꝛ had this derde of myne
Berne left vndwne, in vapne his Held of Oren hydes fenen fold
Should pit the Sonne of Lelamon haue in his left hand hold.
That nyght ſubdewed J Troy towne. that nyght did J it win.
And opened it fo2 pou likewyſe with eafe tw enter in.
Ceaſe to vpbꝛayd mee by theis lwkes and mumbling woꝛdes of thyne
With Diomed : his pꝛapſe is in this fad as well as myne. 1
And than thy felfe when foꝛ our ſhippes thon divdett in reſkew ſtand,
MWuart not alone: the multitude were helping ther at hand.
J had but only one with mer. N ho (if he had not thought 5
A wyſeman better than a ſtrong, and that pꝛeferment ought 5
Hot alway followe force of hand) would now himſelt haue fought
This Armour. So would tather Aiax better ſtaped dw,
And feerce Evvrypy le, and the ſonne of hault Andremon ta.
Po leſle myght cele Idominey, and cke Meriones
His countryman, and Menelay. Ioꝛ cuery one of theſe
Are valeant men of hand, and not int̃c rioꝛ vnto the
In martiall feates. And pic they are contented rulte to ber
Ey myne adupce. Thou batt a hand that ſerueth well in fyght.
Chou haſt a wit that Fands in nerde of my direction rygbt.
Thy force is witleſſe. 3 haue care of that that may enſew.
Thou well canſt koght: the king doth chafe the tymes fo2 kegbting driv
By myne adupce. Thou only with thy body cant auaple.
Y. ih. i Eut


| The. xiij. booke of

But J with bodye and with mynd teo-profite do not fayle,
And loke how much the mapſter dath excell the gallp ſlaue,
Oꝛ loke how much pꝛeheminence the Capteine ought to haue
Aboue his ſouldyer: euen ſo much excell J alſo ther.

A wit farce palling ſtrength of hand incloſed is in mee.

In wit reſts cheflp all my foꝛce. Wp Loꝛdes J pꝛap beſtoſwe
This gift on him who ay hath bene pour watehman as per knowe;
And fo2 my tenne ycres cark and care endured foꝛ pour fake
Full recompence koꝛ my deſerts with this fame honour make,
Our labour dꝛaweth to an end, all lets are now by mee
Dit ed. And by bainging Troy in cace to tahen ber

Ahaus already taken it. How bp the hope that per 5
Concepue, within a whyle of Troy the ruine foꝛ to ſck,

And by the Goddes of whom a late our emnpes J bereft,

And as by wiſedome tw ber done pit any thing is left,

Ik any bold auentrous derde, oꝛ any per lous thing .
That aſtketh hazard bath of lyle and limb to pale to bꝛing, 4
Ou it pe think of Croiane fates there vit bach ought remayn ,

Remember ine, 02 if from me this armour pou reſtrapne,
Beſtowe it on this fame, N ith that be ſhewed with his hand
Mineruas fatall image, which hard by in lyght did ſfand.

The Lows were moued with his woꝛdes, ¢ then appered playne


The foꝛce that is in elaquence. Che lerned man did gapne 5


The armour of the baleant. Ge that did ſo oft ſuſfeine

Alone both kyꝛe, and ſwoꝛd, and Ioue, and Hector could not byde
One bꝛunt of wath; And whom no foꝛce could vanquiſh ere that tyde,
Poww only anguiſh ouercommes. Me dꝛawes his lwoꝛd and ſayes:
Well: this is myne pit. Unto this no clapme Viyfles layes.
This muſt 3 ble ageinſt myſelf: this blade that beretmfoze

{sath bathed bane in Croiane blod, muff nolw his mayſter goꝛe
That none map Aiax ouercome ſaue Alax. Mith that wood.

Into his bꝛeſt (not wonnded erf) he thuſt his deathfull woꝛd.

His hand to pull it out ageine vnable was. The bluod

Did ſpout it out. Anon the ground beffapned where he ſlod,

Did bꝛerde the pꝛetye purple lloloꝛe bppon a clowꝛe of græne,

M hich of the wound ol Hyacinth had erſt engendꝛed bene.

Che ſelllame letters ake that fog the chyld were bitten than,


ä SS — —


SS =


== SE Ee


n a —— a ak


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 164
Mere now againe amid the flowꝛe new wꝛitten for the mau.
Che foꝛmer tyme complaynt, the laſt a name did repꝛeſent.
Viy fles hauing wanne the pꝛyle, within a whyle was fent
Co Thoants and Hypſiphiles realme the land defamde of old
For murthering all the men therin by women ouer bold.
At length attapning land and lucke according to his mynd,
Co carry Hercles arrowes backe he ſet his ſayles to wynd.
Mhich when he with the loꝛd of them among the Grakes had bought,
And ol the cruell warre at length the vtmoſt feate had wrought,
At onte both Troy and Priam fell, And Priams wꝛetched wie
Loft (after all) her womans ſhape, and barked all her lyle
In fozreine countrpe. In the place that bꝛingeth to a Freight a
Che long ſpꝛed ſea of Hellefpont, did Ilion burne in height.
Che kindled fyꝛe with blazing flame continewed vnalapd,
And Priam with his aged blad loues Altar had berayd.
And Phebus pꝛerſteſſe caſting bp her handes te heauen on bye,
Mas dꝛagd and haled by the heare. The Grayes mol ſpygytfully é
As eche of them bad pꝛiſoners tane in merde of victoꝛpe)
id datwe the Trolane wynes awap, wha lingring whyle they mought
Among the burning kemples ok theyꝛ Coddes, did hang about
Cheyꝛ facved Haynes and images. Aſtyanax detone was caſt
From tha: fame turret from the lo ich his mother in tyme pak
GHBad ſhewes him his father and oft fyghting tw defend
Him ſolk and that fame famous res ime of Troy that did deſcend
Fram manp noble auncetoꝛs And now the noꝛtherne wynd es
Mich pꝛoſperous blaſts, to get them thence did put p Grerkes in mynd.
The ſhipmen went abwꝛd, and hoyſt vp ſayles, and made fro thonce.
Adew deere Trop (the women crpoe) wer haled are from hence.
And therwithall they kick the ground, and left pit ſmoking fill
Cheyꝛ natiue houſes. L aſt of all take ſhippe ageinſt her will
Muéne Hecub: who (a pitedus tace to fer) was found amid
The tumbes in which her lonnes were layd. And there as Hecub did
Embꝛace theyꝛ chiſts and kiſſe theyꝛ bones, Viy {les voyd of care
Di pull her thence. Vit raught ſher vp, and in her bolom bare
Away a crum of Hectors duſt, and left on Hectors graue
Ber hoꝛy hearos and teares, which for poze effrings Me him gaue.
Ageinſt the place where Llion was, there is another land
5 Y. liij. Manured


— 5 — — — —


| The. xiij. booke of
Manured by the Biſton men. In this fame Realme did and
Ring Polemneſtors palace riche, to whom king Priam ſent
His little infant Polydore to folfer, ta thentent 5
Me might be out of daunger from the warres: wherin he ment
Ryght wylelp, had he not with him great riches (ent, a bape
Zo firre a wicked couetous mynd to treaſon and deceyt.
Foz when the ate of Troy decayd, the wicked king of Thrace
Did eut his nurcechylds weazant, and las though the ſinkull cace
Cogither with the body could haue quyght bene put away) 5
He thꝛew hum alfo in the fea. It happened by the way, 5
That Agamemnon twas compeld with all his flerte to fap
Wppon the coat of Thrace, vntill the fea were wexen calme,


And till the hideous formes did ceaſe, and furious wynds were falne.
Herre rpſing gaſfly from the ground which karre about him brake, ö ;


Achilles with a thꝛeatning lobe did like reſemblance make,

As when at Agamemnon he bis wong full fwoꝛd did habe,
And ſapd: Unmyndkull part pee hence of nee O Crekes 2 and muſt
spy merits thankleffe thus with mee be burped in the duſt?
Pap, doo not lo. But to thentent my death dew honour haue,
Let Poly xene in ſacrifyſe bee Mayne vppon mp graue.

Thus much be fapd: and ſhoꝛtly his companions ding as

By viſion of his cruell ghoſt commaundment giuen them was,

Did leteh her from her mothers lappe, whom at that tyme, well nere,
In that molt great aduerſitie alonly He did chere.

The hanltpe and vnhappye mapd, and rather to ber thought

A man than woman, to the tumb with cruell hands was bꝛought,
Ho make a curſed ſacriſyſe. Miho mynding conſtantiy

Ber honour, when he Landing at the Altar pꝛeſt to dye,
Perceynd the lauage ceremonies in making readp, and

The cruell Neõptolemus with naked ſwoꝛd in hand,

Stand faring with vngentle eyes bppon ber gentle face,


Sh ſayd. ow vſe thou when thou wilt my gentle blod. The cace


Uequyzes no moze delap. below thy weapon in my chef,
Oꝛ in my thꝛote: (in faving fo thee pꝛole red bare her bꝛeſt,
And eeke her thꝛote.) Allute pour ſelues it neuer ſhalber feene,
That any wyght tall (bp mp will) haue ſlaue of Poly xeene.
Howbtet with luch a lacrifpfens Cod pt can delyght.


= = — 1 8 a
SS 2 BS = SS ee, as ESOS SS SS aS Ss: SS SSC Se


—— ——-„V


=


P


Ouids Metamorphofis.


J would deſpꝛe no moze but that my tweetched mother myght
Ber ignoꝛant of this my death. My mother hindꝛeth mer,
And makes the pleaſure of my death much leffer foꝛ to ber.
Howberit not the death of mer ſhould iuſtly greene her hart:
Wut ber owne lyfe. Mow to thentent 2 freely map depart
Co Limbo, ffand pee men alot: and fith J aſke but ryght
Foꝛbeare ta touch mee. So my blad vnſteyned in his ſyght
Shall farre moze acceptable bee what euer wyght he be
A hom pou pꝛepare to pacifpe by ſacrifpſing me.
Pit (ik that theſe lak woꝛdes of myne map purchace anp grace, )
4 daughter of king Priam erſt, and now in pzſoners cace,
Berſeeche pou all vnraunſomed to render to my mother
My bodye: and fo2 bartall of the ſame to take none other
Reward than teares : foꝛ tobple (hee could He did rederme with gold.
Chis ſapd: the teares that (hee fozbare the people could not hold.
And euen the berrp pelt himſelk full fore ageinſt his will
And weeping thꝛuſt her thꝛough the bꝛeſt which thee hild ſtoutly ſtill.
Sher finking ſoltly to the ground with fapnting legges, did beare
Euen to the berry latter gaſp a countnance vopd of feare.
And when the lell, her had a care ſuch parts ok her to hyde,
As womanhod and chaſtitie foꝛbiddeth to ba ſpyde.
Lhe Crafane women twke her vp, and moꝛning reckened
ing Priams chilozen, and t hat blod that boule alone had ſhed.
Chey ſyght for fayer Poly xeene: thep ſyghed ake fo2 ther
Uh late wart Priams wyfe, who late wart counted foꝛ tw be
Che flowꝛe of Aſia in his flowꝛe, and Q ucœne of mothers all:
But now the bantpe of the fo as euill lot did fall,
And luch a botye as the lip Viyfles did not paſſe
Uppon her, ſauing that erewhyle {hee Hectors mother was.
Do hardly foꝛ his mother could a mayſter Hector fynd.
Embꝛacing in her aged armes the bodye of the mynd
That was fo ſfeut, he powꝛd theron with fobbing ſyghes vnſolt
The teares that foꝛ her huſband and her childꝛen had fo oft
And koꝛ her countrye ſheaded beene. Sher werped in her wound
And kiſt her pꝛetye mouth, and made her bꝛiſt with ſtrekes to found,
According tw her wonted guyle, and in the iellyed blood
Berrapẽd all her griũld heare, and in a ſoꝛrowfull mod


Sapp


The. xu}. booke of

Sapd theis and many other woꝛdes with beetf belcratcht and rent.

O daughter myne, the laſt for whom thy mother may lamene,

(Foꝛ what remaynes:⸗) O daughter thou art dead and gone. Ale
Thy wound which at the verry hart Krikes mee as well as ther.
And leaſt that anp one of myne vnwounded ſhould depart,
Chou alſo gotten halt a wound. Howbert bycauſe thou ware
A woman, 3 belcuedthe from weapon to ber fre.
Wut notwithſtanding that thou art a woman, 3 do fe
Chee llapne by lw oꝛd. Cuen he that kild thy bꝛothers killeth ther,
Achilles the decay of Troy and maker bare of me,
Mat tyime that be of Paris ſhaft by Phebus meanes was dayne,
I ſapd of feerce Achilles not no feare doth moze remapne.
But then, even then he moſt of all was feared foꝛ to be,
Che aſches of him rageth Till ageinſt our race 4 fe.
De frele an emny of him dead and burped in his graue
Co fede Achilles furie, ¥ a frutefuil (fae gaue.
Great Troy lyes vnder fate, and with a ryght great greenous fall
The miſcherues of the common weale are falip ended all.
Wut though to others Troy be gone, pit ands it Hillto me:
My ſoꝛrowes ronne as freſh a race as euer and as free.
late a go a ſouereine fate, aduaunced with ſuch foze
Ok daughters, ſonnes, and ſonneinlawes, and huſbandouer mare 5
And daughtrinlawes, am carped like an outlawe bare and poze,
By foꝛce and violence haled from my childzens tumbes, to ber
Pꝛeſented ta Penelope à gift, who ſhewing me 5
In (pinning my appopnted talke, Hall fap : this ſame is ſheꝛ
Chat was ſumtyme king Priams lwpfe, this was the famous mother
Ok Hector. And now after loſſe of ſuch a fore of other,
Chou (who alonly in my grerte my comĩoꝛt didſt remapne,)
Co pacifpe aur emnyes wꝛath vppon his tumb art ſlapne.
Thus bare J deathgylts fo2 my foes. To what intent am 7
Mok wꝛetched wyght remapning filly why dw J tinger: why
Dath hurtkull age pꝛeſerue me ſtill aliue? to what intent
c cruell Goddes reſerue p m that hath already {peut
Ta manpe peres 7 onleſſe it be new buryalls ſoꝛ to les
And who would think that Priamus myght happy counted be
Sith Troy is razed e Happy man is bee in being dead. bus


—


r —


=


„„ oa ——B . ———— 0 —


. —-̃ — ae


Ouids Metamorphofis. 166
his lyle and kingdome he foꝛwent togither : and this frean Ee
He fies not the his daughter llaine. Wut peraduenture thou
Shall like the Daughter of a king haue ſumptuous buryall now,

And bolth thy noble auncetozs thy bodye layd ſhall ber.

Our linage bath not fo god lucke. the mot that ſhall tw the

Ber perl ded are thy mothers teares, and in this foꝛreine land

Co hyde thy murthered coꝛce withall a little heape of ſand.

Foz all is lof. Map pit remaynes (oz whome 4 well can fpnd

In hart to liue a little whyle) an imp vnto my mynd

Molt dere, now only left alone, ſumtyme of many mo

Che pœngeſt, little Polydore, deliuered late ago ö
To Polemneſtor king of Thrace whe dwelles within theis bounds
But wherfoze dw J Tay fo long in walkhing of her wounds,

And face berapd with goꝛy blod ? in ſaying thus, her went


To ſeaward with an aged pace and how heare berrent. ä


And (wꝛetched woman / as thee ralld foꝛ pitchers foꝛ tw dꝛawe

Up water, ſher of Polydore on ſhoꝛe the carkeſſe ſawe,

And cke ß myghty wounds at which the Cyꝛants ſwoꝛd went thurrow.
Che Lrofane L adpes ſhꝛœked out. But thee was dumb foz ſoꝛrow.

The anguiſh of her hart foꝛclolde as well her ſperch as eke

Her teares deuowꝛing them within. Sher Tod affonyed keke

As tf hee had bene Tone; One whyle the ground the llaard bppon.
Another whyle a gaſtly lake (hee keſt to heauen. Anon

Shee loked on the face of him that lay beloꝛe her killd.

Sumtpmes his woundes, his woundes J lay) thee ſpectally behilld.

And therwithall ſhe army her felfe and furnithe her with ire: 5
Mherethꝛough as fone as that her hart was fullp fet on fyꝛe, ö
As though thee tilt had. bene a Quckne, to bengeance he her bent
Enkoꝛeing all her witts tw fynd ſome kynd of ponnichmeut.

And as a Lyon robbed of her whelpes becommeth tod, .

And taking on the footing of her emnye where her mod,

Purſeweth him though out of lyght: euen fo Queene Hecubee

ow haning meynt her teares with wꝛath foꝛgetting quyght that ler
Mas old, but not her pꝛincely hard, to Polemneftor went

The curſed murtherer, and deſpꝛde his pꝛeſente tw thentent


To ſhew tw him a malle of gold (o made the her pretence)


Wibich toꝛ her lyttle Polydore was hid not karre from thence. a
e


8 — — Cra = 0 Ow — — — —
Dr


The. xiij. booke off

The Thꝛacian king beleeuing her, as eager of the pꝛap,
Mint with her to a lecret place. And as thep there did fap, 5
With flattring and deceptkull tong he thus tw her did fap.
Make (pede J pꝛeꝝ thee Hecuba, and gtue thy ſonne this gold.
J ſweare by God it Hall ber his, as well that J do hold
Already, as that thou Halt gine. Uppon him (peaking fo,
And ſwearing and foꝛſwearing to, the lobed ſternelp tho,
And beeing fore inllaamd with wath, caught hold vppon him, and
Strepght calling out foꝛ ſuccoꝛ to the wyues of Troy at hand
Did in the traptoꝛs face beſtowe her naples, and ſcratched out
Mis epes, her anger gaue her hart and made her ſtrong and Tout,
She thꝛuſt her fingars in as farce as could ber, and did boꝛe
Not now his eyes (fo2 why his eyes were pulled out Lefoze)
Vut bothe the places of the eyes berapd wich wicked blood.

The Thꝛacians at theyꝛ Cyꝛannes harme foꝛ anger tering won,

Began to {care the Lroiane wyues with darts and ones, Anon
Queene Hecub ronning at a ſfone, with gnarring ſeazd theron,
And wirryed it bertwerne her teeth. And as ſher opte her chappe


Co ſpeake, in ſtead of (peeche thie barkt. the place ot this miſlehappe
Memapneth ſtill, and of the thing there done beares prt the nne.


Wong myndkull of her fozmer illes, ſhœ ſadly ſoꝛ the lame

Ment howling in the keeldes of Thrace. Her foꝛtune moued not

Her Crotans only, but the Orekes her foes to ruthe: Her lot

Did moue euen all the Coddes to ruthe: and fe effectually,

That Hecub to deſerue ſuch end euen Iuno did denpe.
Although the moꝛning of the lelklame warres had fauczer bene:
Sher had no leyſure to lament the fortune of the Qucene,

Noꝛ on the llaughters and the fall of Ilion fo2 to think.

A houſehold care moꝛe neerer home did in her Fomacke fink,

Foꝛ Memnon her beloued ſonne, whom dping Me behild

Uppon the ferce Achilles ſpeare amid the Phapgtan fe ld.

Sher ſaw it, and her ruddy hew with which he wanted was

Co dye the bꝛeaking of the day, did into pale nelle pafic :

And all the ſuye was hid with clowdes. But when his coꝛce Was gone

C burning ward, cher could not fpnd in hart to loke theron:

But with ber heare about her eares cher knerled downe beloꝛe

Che mygbtye loue, and tbus gan ſpeake vnto him weeping fore.


= SS 82 SiS ee OU SU ESO SOC SS SO SB


= —
— —


= 2S 2 2S Za aZe Aa


= see — 2


Ok al that haue theyꝛ dwelling place dppon the golden ſuye
The lo weft (for though all the woꝛld the feaweſt Haynes haue J
But pita Goddeſſe, J dw come, not that thou ſhouldſt deere
Chat Altars, ſhꝛynes, and holpdapes bee made to honour me, 8
sit it thou marke how much that J a woman dw foꝛ ther,
In keeping npght within her boundes, by bꝛinging in ther light,
Chou well mayſt thinke mer woꝛthy ſum reward ta clayme of ryght.
But neyther now is that the thing the moꝛning cares to haue,
He pit her Mate is ſuch as now dew honour foꝛ tw craue.
Berelt of my vere Memnon who in kyghting baleantip
Lo help his vncle, (fo it was pour will O Goddes) did dye
Ol ſtout Achilles ſrurdye ſpeare euen in his ſlowꝛing pꝛyme,
J ſew to thee O king of Coddes to do him at this tyme
Hum honour as a comfoꝛt of his death, and eaſe this hart
Ol myne which greatly greened is with wound of percing ſmart.
No foner Ioue had graunted dame Aurora her deſyꝛe
But that the flame ol Memnons coꝛce that burned in the fyꝛe
Did fall: and flaky rolles of ſmoke did dark the day, as when
A foggy miſt ſfeames vpward from a Kiuer oꝛ a fen,
And ſuſtreth not the Sonne to ſhyne within it. Blacke as cole
Che cinder role: and into one round lump alſembling whole


Grew grolle, and toke bothe ſhape and hew. Che ſyꝛe did lyſe it fend,


Che lyghtnelle of the ſubſfance felf did wings bute it lend.

And at the fire it flittred like a bird: and by and by

It flew a fethered bird in derde. And with that one gan Alp
Innumerable me of ſelfſame bꝛod: wha once oꝛ twyce

Did ſoꝛe about the fyꝛe, and made a piteous ſhꝛeking thꝛyce.

Che foloꝛthtyme in thepꝛ flying round, themſelues they all withdꝛe w
In battells twapne, and farcelp forth of epther ſyde one flew

To fyght a combate. With theyꝛ billes and hwked talants kene
And with theyꝛ wings couragieuſly they wꝛeakt theyꝛ wꝛathkull terne.
And myndkull of the valeant man of whom they iſſued bene,

They neuer cealed tobbing eche vppon the others beit,

Untill they falling both dolune dead with ſpahting ouerpzett,

Bad offred vp thep2 bodyes as a woꝛthy facrifpfe

Gnto thepꝛ couſin Memnon who tm Aſſhes bur ned lyes.

Cheis lde ine birds were named ol the founder of theyz ſtecke:


E


r rr e.


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 167


5


The. xiij. booke of


Foꝛ men dw tall them Memnons birds. And euerp pere a flocke —
Repapꝛe to Memnons tumb, where two do in the koꝛeſayd wyſe
In manner ofa pœrempnd flea themſelues in facrifpfe,

hus where as others did lament that Dymants daughter barke,
Auroras obone græt buſped her, that fmallp thee it markt


dalhich thing fhe tw this pꝛeſent tyme with piteous teares doth ſhewbe:?


Foz thꝛough the vniuerſall woꝛld ſher ſheadeth moyſting deawe.
lt fuffred not the deſtinyes all hope to perriſh qupght


Togither with the tolvne of Troy. Chat god and godly knyghe


The ſonne of Venus bare alway by nyght vppon his backe

His aged father and his Goddes an honoꝛable packe.

Ok all the riches of the towne that only pray he choſe,

So godlp was his mynd: and like a banniſht man he goes

p water with bis owne pong ſonne Aſcamus from the Ile

Antandros, and be ſhonnes the ſhoꝛe of Thracia which ere whyle 5

The wicked Lprants treaſon did with Polydores blod defple.

And hauing wynd and tyde at will, he laully wyth his trapne

Arrpued at Apollos tone where Anius then did reigne.

Who being both Apollos pret and ofthat place the king,

Did entertepne him in his houſe and btw church him bzing,

And ſhewd him bothe the Citie and the temples knowen of old,

And erke the facred trees by which Latona once toke hold

M hen the of chyldbirth trauelled Aſſwne as ſacrikpſe

Mas done with Oxens inwards burnt accoꝛding to the gupſe,

And caſting incence in the fyꝛe, and ſheading wyne thereon,

They iopfull to the court returnd, and there they teke anon

Kepatte of meate and dꝛink. Then ſayd the god Anchyſes this

O Phebus ſouereine pꝛæſt, onleſſe J take my markes amiſſe,

(as J remember) when A fir of all this towne did fe, J

Folvze daughters and a ſonne of thyne thou haddeſt here with the.
Bing Anius ſhoke his head wheron he ware a myter whyght,


And anſwerd thus. O noble prince, in fapth thou geſleſt ryght.


Ok childꝛen fpne a father then, thou diddeſt me behold,

M ha note (with (uch vnconſtancie are moztall matters rolld)
Am in a manner chyldleſſe quyght. Foꝛ what auaples my ſonne
M bw in the 3 le of Anderland a great wap hence doth wonne?
Mich counerp takes dis name of him, and in the lelklapd place,


Ouids Metamorphofis. 168


In ead of father, like a king he holdes the royall mace,

Apollo gaue his lot te him: And Bacchus fo? to ſhowe

His loue, a greater gift vppon his ſuſters did beſtowe,

Chan could ber tithe oꝛ credited. Foz whatſoeuer they

Did towche, was turned into coꝛne, and wyne and oyle ſfrepghtway.
And ſo theyꝛ was riche vſe in them. Aone as that the fame 5
Hereot to Agamemnons cares the ſquoꝛge ot Croians came, é
Leaſt pou myght talk pour fozmes alone and wer not féele the fanie
In part, an hotte he hither fent, and whither J would oz no

Did take them from mer, foꝛcing them among the Orékes to go

Co fede the Grerkilh army with theyꝛ beauenly gilt. But they
Eſcaped whither they could by flpght. A couple toke theyꝛ way

Lo Ile Evvboya: tother tww tw Anderland did ſiy


Thepꝛ bꝛothers Realme. An hott of men purſewd them by and by, ;


And thꝛeatened warre onleſſe they were deliuered. Foꝛce of feare

Bubdewing nature, did conſtreyne the bꝛother (men mut beare

Mith fearfalnete) tw render vp his ſuſters to thep2 fo.

Joꝛ neyther was Acnzas there, no2 baleant Hector (who

Did make pour warre laſt ten peeves long) the countrye to defend.

ow when they ſhould like pꝛiſoners haue bene lettred, in the end

Chey caſting vp theyꝛ handes (which pit were free) to heauen, did cry

Co Bacchus foꝛ to ſuccour them, who helpt them by and by.

At leaſtlwyſe ir it map bee termd a help, in wondꝛous wyſe

Co alter folke. A oꝛ neuer could 3 lerne ne tan ſurmpſe

Che manner how they lott theyꝛ thape. The thing it lelle is knowen.

Mith fethered wings as whyght as ſnow they qupght away are flowen

Tranſfoꝛmed into dwuchouſe doues thy wyfe dame Venus burdes.

Nullen that the time of meate was {pent w thets a ſuch like woꝛdes,

The table was remoued ſrreyght, and then they went to lege.

ext moꝛrow ryſing vp allone as dap began to pepe,

They went to Phebus Ozacle, which willed them tw go

Unto theyꝛ mother countrep and the coaſtes theyꝛ locke came kro.

ing Anius bare them tompanie. And when away they thald,

Be gaue them gifts. Anchiſes had a ſcepter all of gold.

Aſcanius had a qufuer and a Cloke right bꝛaue and trim. t

Aenæas had a fanding Cup pꝛeſented brite him. ee

The Thebane Therfes whabad bene king Anius guelicreivbyle ge
1 eee! 05

N


Le}


The. xiij. booke of


Did fend it ont of Theſſaly: but Alcon one of Myle
Did make the cuppe. And her theron a ſtoꝛy poꝛtrapd out.
It was a Citie with ſeuen gates in circuit round about,
Uhich men myght eally all diſcerne. Che gates did repꝛeſent
The Cities name, and ſhewed playne what towne thereby was ment.
N ithout the towne were funeralls a dwing fo2 the dead, é
With herces, tapers, fyꝛes, and tumbes. The wyues with ruffled bean}
And ſtomacks bare pꝛetẽded greet. Lhe nymphes ſermd teares te ſhead,
And waple the dꝛping of theyꝛ welles. Lhe leaueleſſe træs did feare,
And licking on the parched ones Coats romed here and there.
Wehold amid this Thebane towne was lyuely poꝛtrapd out
Echions daughters twayne, ot which the one with courage font
Did profer bothe her naked thꝛote and fomacke to the knple:
And tother with a manly hart did alſo (pend her lyfe,
Soꝛ faufgard of her countrpfolk : And how that therbvppon
They both were carped ſolemly on berces, and anon
Mere burned in the cheefeſt place of all the Thebane tone.
Then (leatk thep2 linage ſhould decay who dyde with ſuch renawne⸗)
Out ok the Athes ol the mapdes there illued two pong men, is
And they bute theyꝛ mothers dult did obſeguies agen.
Chus much was graued curioullpy in auncient pꝛecious bꝛatle,
And on the bꝛim a traple of Lowes of bearbzich gilded was.
Che Lrofans alſo gaue tw him as coſtly giftes agen.
ytaule he was Apollos pret they gaue tw him as then
A Chit to keepe in frankincence. They gaue him furthermoꝛe
A Crotone of gold tuberin were fet of precious ſkones great foe,
Then calling to remembzantee that the Trotans iſſued were
Ok Tevvcers blod, they fapld tw Crete. But long they could not thers
Abyde th infection of the aire: and fo they did ſoꝛſake
The hundꝛed Cities, and with ſperde to Itay le ward did make.
Che winter wered hard and rough and tof them berry fore.
And when thepz chippes arriued were vppon the perlous ſhoꝛe
Among the Strophad Iles, the bird A Ello did them feare.
Che coſtes of Dulich, Ithaca, and Same thep palled were,
And ecke the Court of Neritus where wyſe Viyfles reignd⸗
and came tos Ambrace fog the which the Gods Nrong firpfe mapnte ind.
Shere lawe they turned into fone the mage whale image pit a


—


.


=
=


SS


At Actium in Appollos Church in figne therof doth ilt.

Chey vewed alſo Dodon graue where Okes ſpake: and the coal
Ol Chan where the ſonnes of king Moloſſus ſcapt a moſt
Ungracious fyꝛe by taking wings. From thence they coaſted by
Che countrpe of the Pheaks fraught with krute abundantly.
Chen toke they land in Epyre, and to Buthrotos they went
Wiberas the Lrofane prophet dwelt, whole reigne did repꝛeſent
an image of thep: aunctent Troy. Chere being certifyde

Ol things tw come by Helen (who whyle there they did abyde é
Inloꝛmed them ryght fapthlully of all that fhouio be tpde)

Chey paſled into Sicilie. MA ith corners thre this land

Hhotes out inte the Sea: of which Pachinnus front doth ſfand.
Ageinſt the ſouthcoaſt: Lilibye doch face the gentle welt,

And Pelore vntw Charlſis wayne dath noꝛthward beare his beef,
Che Troianes onder Pelore gate with oꝛes and pꝛoſpꝛous tydes
And in the euen by Zanclye haze theyꝛ flæte at anchoꝛ rydes.
Uppon the leftſyde reſtleſſely Charybdis ap doth beate them.


And ſwalloweth (hippes e ſpewes them vp as faſt as it doth eate them.


And Scylla beateth on they ryght: which from the nauell downe
Is patched bp with cruell curres: and vpward tw the crowne
Dath kerpe the countnance ofa mapd, Andi that all bee trew


Chat Poets f pne) (he was ſumtyme a mayd ryght fapꝛe ot hew.


Co her made manp wers ſute: all which he did eſchew.


And going ta the falt Sea nymphes (to whom the was ryght dere)


She vaunted, to how many men he gaue the llippe that pere.
Lo whom the Lady Galate in kembing of her heare


Sapd thus with ſyghes. But they that fought to ther O Lady) were


Porte other than ol humane kynd, to whom without all feare
Ok harme, thou myghteſt (as thou dot) giue nay. But as foʒ me
Althongh that J of Nereus and gray Doris daughter be,

And of my lulkers haue with me continually a gard,

I could not ſcaps the Cyclops lone, but to my gret᷑ full hard.


Mith that her teares did ſtoppe her ſperche.) Aſſwne as that the mayd


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 8 16 9


5


Had dꝛyde them with her marble thomb, € moande the nymph, ſhe lad.


Deere Goddetle tell me all pour gro, and hyde tt not krom me:

Foꝛ truſt mee 3 will vntw pou bathe true and fecret ber.

Chen brite Cratyes daughter thus the nymph her playnt did frame.
| . Aa, oie


Ok


The. xiij. booke of
Ot Fatone and nymph Simethis boꝛne was Acis, he became
A toy to bothe his parents, but tw mer the greater top,
Foz being but a firteene pares of age, this fapze ſwerte boy
Did take mer to his loue, what tpme about his chyldich chin
The tender heare like molly downe to lpꝛowt did frſt begin.
J loucd him hepond all Soddes koꝛbod, and likebopſe mes
The Ciant Cyclops. nepther lit demaunded it Gould ber)
3 well were able fo2 to tell you whither that the loue
Ok Acis, 02 the Cyclops hate did moze my ſiomacke moue.


Chere was no oddes berwerne them. Oh dere Coddelle Venus, whar


A powꝛe bate thous Behold holb euen this ologly Otant that
Ho ſpartze of makenelle in him bath, whe is a terrour to

Che berrye waves, whom neuer guell noꝛ ſtraunger came vnto
Mithont diſpleaſure, who the heauens and all the Goddes deſpyleth, N
Doth fele what thing is loue. Che loue of nie him fo ſurpꝛyſeth,
Chat Polypheme regarding not his ſherpe and hollowe Caue,
And hauing care to pleaſe vwth go about to make him bꝛaue.


His ſturre Mitte heave he kembeth nowe with ſtrong and ſturdy rakes,


And with a ſythe bath marcullotte his bꝛiſtled bord: and takes
Delyght tw loke vppon himſelk in waters, and to frame

His countnanre. Ok his murtherous hart the wyldnelle wexreth tame.
His bnaſtaunched thyꝛſt of blod is quenched: chippes may pate
And repalle ſauliy. In the whyle that he in lone thus was,
One Telemus Exvrymeds ſonne a man of paſſing till

In birdllyght, taking land that tyme in Sicill, went vntill
Che oꝛped Gpant Polypheme, and ſapd: his one round exe
Chat now amid thy koꝛehead fands ſhall one day ere thou dye
By Ap Vlyſſes blinded ber. The Gvant laught therat,

And fapd D folith ſothlapꝛs thou decepued art in that.

302 why another (euen a wench) already bathe it blynded.


Thus lkoꝛzning him that told him truthe bycauſe he was hygb mynded, ;


He epther made the ground to (haket walking on the ſhoꝛe,
Oꝛ rowꝛd him in his ſhadye Caue. Mith wedged popnt befoꝛe
There ſhwts a hill intw the Sea: whercok the fea doth beate
On eyther lyde. Che one eyd fand came vp and made bis ſeate
Cheron, and alter tame his theepe vndziuen. Alone as her


— K —— — ——


pn


— =


ee — eee ee a a


Ouids Metamorphofis. 170

Had at his fore layd done his ſlalle whlch was a whole Pyne tre
Mell able foꝛ tw bee a maaſt ta any ſhippe, he takes
His pppe compact of tpyueſcoꝛe redes, and ther withall he makes
Ho loud a nopſe that all the hilles and waters therabout
Mygbt cally berre the Hhirlnelie of the ſhepeherds whittling aut,
J lping vnderneathe the rocke, and leaning in the lappe
Ol Acis markt thels woꝛdes of his which karre J heard by happe.

Moꝛe lohyght thou art then Pꝛimroſe leaf my Lady Galatee.

More kreſh than meade, moꝛe tall and ſtreyght than lofty Aldertrer.
More bꝛight than glate, moze wanton than the tender kid fozſath.
Chan Cockleſhelles continualip with water wozne, moze ſmathe.
More cheerefull than the winters Sun, oꝛ Sommers ſhadowe cold,
Hore (emelp and moze comly than the Planetree tos behold. 8
Ot valew moze than Apples bee although they were of gold.
Pore cleere than frozen peg, moꝛe fiveete than Grape thꝛough rype plvis,
More (oft than butter newly made, oꝛ done of Cygnet is.
And much moze kapꝛe and beawtyfull than gardein to myne eye,
But that thou from my companpe continually dof fipe.
And thou the ſelflame Galate art moze tettiſh foꝛ tw frame
Chan Dren of the wildernelſe whom neuer wyght did tame.
Poꝛe fleeting than the waues, moze hard than warryed Oke to twyne,
Poꝛe tough tha willow twiggs, moꝛe lyth tha is the wyld whyght vyne.
Sore than this rocke bnmonable, moze violent than a ſtreame.
Pare protwd than Peacocke praplo, moze ferte tha fee ¢ moze extrme.
Pare rough than Beers, moze cruell than the new delivered Weare,
Pore mercileſle than troden ſnake, than fea moze deale of eave,
And which (and if it lap in me J cherlly would reffrapne)
Not only ſwirter paced than the ag in chace on playne,
But allo ſwifter than the wynd and flyghtkull apze. But ik
Chou knew me well, it would the irke to flye and be a gret
To tarrpe from mer. Mea thon wouldſt endeuour all thy potuze
La kepe me wholly to thy ſelf. The Quarry is my bowꝛe
Heawen out of whole mapne fone. Mo Sun in ſommer there can ſwelt.
Ho nipping cold in wintertpme within the fame ts keit.
Gay Apples weying downe the boughes haue J, and Grapes like gold,
And purple Grapes on ſpꝛeaded Upties as many as can hold.
Bothe which J da reſerue foz thee, Thyſell “wo with thy hand

Be :


n a a j 5


Free — 2 2 Py CPAs ws


Leth


The. xiij. booke of
Che foft (teete ſtrawbꝛyes gather, which in woddy ſhado de ane,


The Coꝛnell berrpes alſo from the tre thy elf Galt pull:
And pleaſant plommes, ſum pellotw lyke new wax, ſum blem, ſum full


Ok ruddy iewee. Of Cheſtnutts erke (it my twopfe thou wilt ber


Thou (halt haue ſtoꝛe: and frutes all ſoꝛtes: All trees ſhall ſerue fo tha.
Chis Cattell here is all myne owne. And many mo beſpde .
Do eprber in the bottoms fede, oꝛ in the Waves them hyde, 8

And many ſtanding at theyz ſtalles do in my Caue abyde.

The number of them ik a man Could afk) J cannot ſhowe.

Cuch beggars of theyꝛ Cattell vie the number fo; to knowe.

And for the godneſſe of the lame, no whit belaue thou mer.

Wut come thyſelk (and it thou wilt) the truth therof to fe,

Se hold thepꝛ boders full do make them ſtraddle. Leſſer ware
Shet vp at home in cloce warme prends, are Lambes. Chere alſo are
In other pinkolds Eidds of ſelfſame peaningtyme. Thus haue
Jalwapes mylke as whpte as ſnow. wherof J ſum do ſaue

Co dꝛink, and of the reſt is made god cherſe And furthermoꝛe

Not only fale and cemmon gifts and pleaſures wherof foze

Is to be had at eche mannes hand, (as Leuerets, Ridds, and Does,
A papꝛe of pigeons, oꝛ a neſt of birds new found, oꝛ Kees,)

Shall onto the pꝛeſented ber. J found this tother day

A papꝛe of Bearewhelpes, eche lo lyke the other as they lap

Uppon a hill, that ſcarce pee eche diſcerne from other map.


And when that z did fynd them J did take them bp, and fap


Theis will 3 fo2 my Lady keepe foꝛ her ther with tw play.

Pow put thou vp thy fapze bꝛygbt head gad Galat ¥ the prap
Aboue the græniſh waues: now come my Galat, come àwap.
And of my pꝛeſent take no ſcoꝛne. J know my felfe to be :
A iollye fellow. Foꝛ euen now J did behold and fe

Myne image in the water Mere, and fure mee thought 3 take
Delpght to Ke my gedly ſhape, and fauoz in the broke.

Wehold how big J am not love in heauen (ſoꝛ fo pou men
Report one louc ta reigne, ot whom J pale not foꝛ to ken)

As howger than this doughty cozce ol myne. A bulk of heare
eth ouerdꝛeꝛpe my bilage grim, and ſhadowes as it were

A groue vppon my ſhoulders twapne. and think it not to ber 7


& thame fog that with bziſtled heare my body rough pee fee. 4


SSS SSS SSeS ee —


SS —


'


Ouids Metamorphoſis. mie
Afotwle ilfauoꝛed ſyght it is to ſ a leaueleſte tree :
A lothelp thing it is, a hoꝛſe without a mane to keepes ?
2s fethers do become the birdes, and wall becommeth theepe,
Euen ſo a beard and bꝛiſtled ſuin becommeth alfo men.
J haus but one epe, which death and amid mp frunt. what then;
Chis one round eye of myne is lyke a myghty target. Nuhy⸗
Uewes nat the Sun all things from heauen? Pit but one only eye
ath he. moꝛeouer in pour Seas my father beares the lway.
Bim will J make thy fathzinlaw. Haue merey z the pꝛap,
And harken to myne humble ſute. Noꝛ only ontw the
Peld J. Euen J of whom bothe heauen and Ioue deſpyſed ber
And eke the percing thunderbolt, do ſkand in gwe and keare
Pk thee D Nerye. Thyne ill will is græeusuſer to beare
ö Than is the deadly Thunderclappe. Vit could better fynd
In hart to fluffer this contempt of thyne with pacient mynd
Ak thou didſt ſhonne all other folk as well as mer. But why
Mefecing Cyclops daoiſt thou loue dwark Acisz why lay 3
Pꝛeterſt thou Acis bnto me: well let him liked ber
Both ot himlelt, and alſo (which J would be lothe) of ther.
And if I catch him he hall fele that in my body is
Che loꝛce that ſhould bee. ¥ ſhall paunch him quicke. Chole limbes of his
J will in perces teare, and Trew them in the feldes, and in
Thy waters, if he do ther haunt. Foꝛ 4 do ſwelt within.
And being chaafte the fame doth burne moꝛe farce tw my burel®,
Per thinks mount Aetna with his koꝛce is cloſed in my bꝛeſt.
And pit it nothing moueth ther. Allone as he had talkt
Chus much in vapne, (J ſawe well all) he roſe: and fuming ſkalkt
Among his wodes and wonted Latondes, as doth a Bulchin, when
Che Cob is from him tane. He could him no where ref as then.
Anon the fend eſpped me and Acis where we lay,
Beloꝛe wer wilt oꝛ feared it: and crying out gan ſay
I ſe pe. andconfounded myght ¥ bee with endlefle ame,
But ik J make this day the lal agreament of your game. ;
Theis woꝛdes were (poke with ſuch a rere as verry well became
An angry Giant. Aetna hake with lowdneſſe of the lame.
I (card therwith dopt vnderneathe the water, and the knyght
Simethus turning ſtrepght his backe, did giue himſelk tw llyght, .


ot AREA OLS OAS ti hl AS te hh BL ONT lO hm ,


The. xiij. booke of


And cryẽd help mer Galate, help parents J pou pꝛap, 8
And in pour kingdome mee recepue who perriſh muff ſkrepghtwap.
The rounvepd deutil made purſewt: and rending vp a fleece
DF Actna Nocke, thꝛew after him: ok which a little perce
Did Acis ouertake. and pit as little as is was,
It duerwhelmed Acis whole. J wꝛetched wyght (alas)
Did that which deſtnpes would permit. Fozrthwith J bꝛought to palſe
Chat Acis ſhould receyue the foꝛce his father had befoze.
His ſcarlet blod did tue from the lump, and moze and moe
Mithin a whyle the redneſſe gan to vanniſh: and the hew
Kelembled at the firſt a bꝛwke with rapne diſtroubled new,
Mich wereth clerre by length of tyme. Anon the lump did clpue,
And from the hollow clifte therol hygh rerdes (pang bp alpue,
And at the hollow illue of the ſtone the bubling water
Came trickling out. And by and by (which is a wondzous matter)
Che ſtripling with a wreath of rede about his hoꝛned head
Auaunſt his boop tw the waffe. Mho (ſaue he was that ead.
uch biggar than he erſt had bene, and altogither grap)
Nas Acis Hill, and being turnd to water, at this day 5
In ſhape ok riuer Mill he beares his foꝛmer name awap.
The Lady Galat ccaſt her talt and ſtreygbt the campanpe bꝛaͤke.
And Neryes daughters parting thence, lwam in the gentle lake.
Dame Scylla home ageine returnd. (Sher durſt not her betake
Co open ſea) and epther roamd vppan the ſandy ſhoꝛe
Stark naakt, oꝛ when foꝛ werrineſle ſher could not walk no moze,
Shee then withdrew her out of ſyght and gate her to a pole,
And in the water of the ſame, her heated lunbes did cole.
Behold the koꝛtune. Glaucus (who then being late beloꝛe
Tranlfoꝛmed in Evvboya Ile vppon Anthedon ſhoꝛe,
Nlas new becomne a dweller in the fea) as he did ſwim
Along the coaſt was tane in loue at ſyght of Scy lla trim,
And ſpake ſueh woꝛdes as he did thinz myght make her tarry dik,
Pit fled (hee ſtill, and wilt fo2 keare (hee gate her to a hill
That butted on the Hea. ryght ſlerpe and vpward ſharp did ſhote
A loftye toppe with trees, beneathe was hollowe at the fete,
Herre Scy lla ſtapd and being fanf by ſtrong nelle of the place,
Not knowing il he monic were, oꝛ God, that did her chace,)


r c —— . 2 we


Ouids Metamorphofis. 172
| Sher lobed backe. And wondꝛing at his colour and his heare
With which his ſhoulders and his backe all whollp coucred were,
Sher lato his neather parts were like a fith with taple wapthde round
M ho leaning to the nerreſt Nocke, ſayd thus with lowa crerre found,
Fapꝛe mapd, J neyther monſter am noꝛ cruell ſauage beaſt:
| But of the fea a God, twhate powꝛe and fanour is not leaſt.
N Foz neyther Protevv in the fea noꝛ Triton haue moze myght
Poꝛ pit the ſonne ol Athamas that now Palæ mon hyght.
Pit once J was a moztall man. But pou muſt know that 3
Mas giuen to ſeawoꝛkes, and in them ma onlp did apply.
Soꝛ ſumtyme 3 did dꝛaw the drag in which the fiſhes were,
And ſumtyme fitting on the cliffes J angled here and there.
There butteth on a fayꝛe greene mede a bank wherok tone hall
Is cloald with fea, the reſt is clad with herbes which neuer calf,
0 Noꝛ hoꝛned Or, noꝛ ſœlp ſhæpe, noꝛ ſhakheard Goate did fade.
Che buſye Ber did neuer there of flowꝛes werte ſmelling ſperde.
Ho gladſum garlonds euer there were gathered for the head.
No hand thoſe flowers euer pit with bobed ſythe did ſhꝛed.
J was the firſt that euer fet my fote vppon that plot. .
owas J dꝛyde my dꝛopping netts, and lapd abꝛode my lotte,
Co tell how manp fiſhes had bychaunce to net beene ſent,
D2 through theyꝛ owne to lyght beeleefe on bapted hwke bene hent:
(The matter ſermeth like a lye, but what auaples to lye -)
Allone as that my pꝛap had totucht the graſle, it by and by
Began to moue, and flat thep2 finnes, and fyi vppon the dꝛye,
As in the Sea. And as 3 pabold and wondꝛzed at the ſygbt,


= —— —


Py draught of fiſhes euerpchene to ſeaward toke they flyght.
And leaping from the ſhoꝛe, foꝛſwke theyꝛ newlound mayſter qupght.
J was ainased at the thing: and fanding long in dowt,
J fought the cauſe it any God had bꝛought this fame abotvt,
Oꝛ elſe ſum iewee of herb. And as J fo did muſing and,
| =: What herb (ꝙ J) bath ſuch a powze⸗ and gathering with my hand
The graſle, J bote it with my tothe. y thꝛote had ſcarcelp pit,
| Well ſwallowed downe the vncouth iewee, when like an agew fit
3 felt myne inwards ſodeinly to ſhake, and with the fame,
A loue of other nature in my bꝛeſt with violence came.
And long J could it not ree ; but ſayd derre land aderw.
Ad. ii. Foz


The. xiij. booke of

Foz neuer hall J haunt thee moze. And with that woꝛd J thꝛeld
My bodye in the fea. The Goddes thereof receyuing mex,
Wouchfaned in theyꝛ oꝛder mer inſtalled loꝛ to ber.
Deſpꝛing old Oceanus and Thetis foz they: ſake,
Ehe reſt of my moꝛtalitie away from mer to take.
Cheyhallawed mer, and hauing ſayd nyne tymes the haly ryme
That purgeth all pꝛophanednoſſe, they charged me that tyme
Co put my bꝛeſtbulk vnderneathe a hundzed ſtreames. Anon
The bꝛwkes from ſundꝛy coaſtes and all the Seas did ryde vppon
My head. rom whence as (one as J returned, by and by
J felt my felf farre otherwyſe though all my limbes, than J
Mad bene befoꝛe. and in my mynd J was another man.
Chus karre of all that mee befell make tuft repoꝛt 3 can.
Thus farre 3 beare in mynd. The reſt my mynd perceyued not.
Chen fick of all this hoꝛp greene grap grifild beard J got,
And this ſame buch of heare which all along the (eas J (weepe,
And theis lame myghty ſhoulders, and thets grayiſh armes, and fete
Confounded into finned ih, But what auapleth mer
This godly ſhape, and of the Goddes of ſea to loued bee ? é
D2 fo2 to be à God my lelfz if they delyght not the z

As he was ſpeaking this, and Mtl about to btter moze,

Dame Scylla him foꝛſoke: wherat he wexing angry ſoꝛe.
And being quickened with repulle, in rage he tebe his way
To Circes Titans daughters Court which full of monſters lap.


Finis Libri decimi tertij.


2


K


See „ K


THE. xIIIIL BOOKE OF 1;
Ouids eM etamorphofis.


ß Ov had th Evvboyan fiſherman (who latelp {vas becomme
V A God of fea to dwell in fea foꝛ ay, ) alreadye ſwomme


Pat Actna which vppon the face ol Giant Typho lyes,
Cogither with the paſture of the Cyclops which vefpes A
Both Plough and harrowe, and by termes of Dren ſets no froze:
An Zancle, and crackt Rhegion which ſtands a tother ſhoꝛe:

And erke the rough and ſhipwꝛecke {ca which being hemmed in
M ith two mapne landes on eyther ſyde, is as a bound betwin
Che frutefull Neal mes of Italy and Sicill. From that place
He cutting thꝛough the Tyrrhene fea with both his armes a pace,
Arryued at the graſſpe hilles and at the Palace bye
Ot Circe Phoebus imp which full of ſundꝛy beaſtes did lye.
Mhen Glaucus in her pretence came, and had her græted, and
RMeetepued frerndly welcomming and grorting at her hand,
he ſapd. O Coddelle pitie mee a God the delpze.
Thou only (if at leaſt thou think mer woꝛthy fo great hyꝛe
Cant eaſe this loue of myne. No wyght doth better know than J
The potvze of herbes, wh late ago tranſfoꝛmed was therbp.
And now tw open bnte the of this my greef the ground,
| Gppon th Italyan ſhoze ageinſt Meflene walls J found
“Fayre Scylla. Shame it is to tell hom ſcoꝛntuil he did take
Che gentle woꝛdes and pꝛomiſes and (ute that J did make.
But ik that anp polwze at all conſiſt in charmes, then let
That ſacret mouth of thyne caſt charmes: os ił moze force be fet
In herbes tm compatle things withall, then ble the herbes that haue
Moſt ſtrength in woꝛking. pepther think, J hither come to craue
A medcine fo2 tw heale mpfelf and cure my wounded hart:
I foꝛce no end. 3 would haue her bee partener of my ſmart.
But Circe (foꝛ no natures are moze Ipghtlp ſet on tyre
Than {uch as Che is) (whither that the cauſe of this deſyꝛe
} Were onlp in herſelf, oz that Dame Venus bearing ap
In mynd her fathers derde in once difclofing of her play,
Dod ſlirre her here vnte) fapd thus. It were a better way
Jop the to fancye luch a one whole will and whole delpꝛe


The. xiiij. booke of


Is bent to thine, and Whe is ſindgd with ſelklame kyndok fpre.
Thou woꝛthpe art of ſute to ther. and (credit mez) thou houlo#

Wer wode in dere, ik any hope of ſperding giue thou wouldſt.

And therefore dowt not. Only of thy beawtpe Ipking haue.

Lo, 3 who am a Goddeſle and the imp of Phocbus bꝛaue,

Nh can fo much by charmes, whw can fo much by herbes, do bob
My ſelk to ther. It 3 dildeine, diſdeine me alſo thow.

And it 3 peeld, ycld thou like wle: and in one only cade

Auenge thy lelk ol twapne. Lo ber intreating thus to ſpede,

Fire trees (hall grow (ꝙ Glaucus) in the ſea, and recke ſhall thꝛpue
Dn toppes of hilles, ere J (as long as Scy lla is alyue)

Do chaunge mp loue. The Goddeſſe wert ryght wꝛoth: ¢ fith He could
ot hurt bis perſone bering falne in loue with him, ne would:
Dhee (ppghted her that was preferd before her. And vppon
Diſpleaſure tane of this repulſe, He went her way anon.


And wicked werdes of griflp iewee togither Hee did bꝛap,


And in the baaping, witching charmes (ha ouer them did fap.

And putting on a ruſtet cloke, fhe palled though the rowt

Ot ſauage beattes that in her court came kawning round abotot,

And going onto Rhegion cliffe which andes ageinſt the ſhoꝛe

Ok Zancle, entred by and by the waters that do roꝛe

l ith violent tydes, vppon the which he rod as on firme land,

And ran and neuer wet her fete awhit. There was at hand

A little plach that bowwed like a bowe that ſtandeth bent,

Where Scylla wonted was ta reſt herſelt, and thither went

From rage of fea and apꝛe, what tyme the forme amid the fkpe

Is whotelt making ſhadowes ſhoꝛt by mounting vp on hye.

This plaſh did Circe then infect ageinſt that Scylla came,

And with her poyſons which had powꝛe moſt möſtrous ſhapes to frame
Dekyled it. Sher ſpꝛincled there the iewee of venymd werde.

And thꝛyce nyne tymes W twitching mouth the foftlp mumbling, redes
Acharme ryght darke of vncouth woꝛdes. No foner Scylla came
Mithin this plach, and to the wiaal had waded in the fame,

Wut that ee lawe her hinderloynes with barking buggs atteint.

And at the firſt, not thinking with her body they were meynt

As parts therof, (hee ſtarted back, and rated them. And ſoꝛe


Shed was alrapd the eager curves ſhould byght her. But the moze abe


The leawdnelle of the Cercops, and theyꝛ wilkull periurpe, :


Ouids Metamorphofis. 174


Shee ſhonned them, the ſurer fill he was t haue them there.
In ſcking where her loynes, and thyghes, and fete and ancles were,


Chappes like the chappes of Cerberus in ſtead of them he found.
Pought elſe was there than cruell curres from belly downe to ground.
So vnderneathe millhapen lopnes and womb remapning found,
Her manniſh maſtyes backes were ap within the water dꝛolond.

Mer lover Glaucus wept therat, and Circes bed reluſde

Chat had fo palling cruellp her herbes on Scylla bfoe,
But Scylla in that place abode. And foꝛ the hate thee boꝛe
Co Circeward, (aſſone as mete occaũon ſerude therfoze)
Dher ſpoyld Vlyſſes of his mates. And ſhoꝛtly after, the
Had allo dꝛobond the Lrotane flete, but that (as pit wer ſer)
Sher was tranſtoꝛmd to rock of fone, which ſhipmen warely ſhonne.
Mhen from this Nocke the Trotane flerte by force ol Des had wonne,
And from Charybdis greevpe gulf, and were in maner readye
Co haue arryude in Italy, the wynd did ryſe fo heady,
As that it dꝛaue them backe vppon the coaſt of Affricke. There
Che Tyꝛian Queene (who afterward vnpaciently ſhould brare
The going of this Troiane price awap) did enterteine
Aenæas in her houſe, and was ryght glad of him and kayne.
Upport a Pyle made vnderneathe pretence of facrifple
Sher goard herfelf vpon a Mowsd, and in moſt wokull wyſe
As the herſelk had bene beguyld: fo ſher begupled all.
Ektſone Aenæas fiping krom the nelulp reercd wall
Ol Carthage in that ſandy land, retyzed backe agen
Co Sicill, where his faythfull frend Aceſtes reignd. And when


He there had done his ſacrikyſe, and kept an Obit at
Bis fathers tumb, he out of hand did mend his Gallpes that


Dame Iris Iunos meflenger had burned vp alinoff.

And lapling thence he kept his courſe alot along the coat

Ok Acdlye and of Vulcanes Iles the which of bꝛimſton ſmoke.
And palling by the Meremapds rocks, Mis Pilot by a ſtroke


Pk tempeſt being dꝛolund in fea) he faplo by Prochite,and


Inarime, and (whleh vppon a barreine hill doth Mand)
Che land of Apez le, which doth take that name ot people lye 5
There divelling. Foz the Spꝛe of Goddes abhoꝛring vtterly 5


The. xii. booke of

And ccke they? guplekull dealing did tranſfoꝛme them euerpchone
Into an euillfauoꝛed kynd of beaſt: that being none i
Che myght pit Kill relemble men. He knit in leller {pace
Thepꝛ members, and he beate mee flat theyꝛ noles tw theyꝛ lace,
Ie which he filled furrowlike with wꝛinckles cuerp where.
ie clad theyꝛ bodyes ouer all with fallow coulourd heare, 5
And put them into this fame Ile to dwell fo2 euer there.
ut fr he did berckue them ok the ble of ſpeeche and tong,
N hich they to curſed periurpe did vſe bothe old and pong.
Co chatter hoarcelp, and to ſhꝛeeke, to iabber, and to ſqueake,
He hath them left, and foꝛ to moppe and mowe, but not to ſpeake.

Aenæas hauing paſt this Ile, and on his ryght hand left

Che towne of Naples, and the tumb of My fen on his left,
Togither with the kenny grounds: at Cumye landed, and
Ment btw longlyvde Cy bills houſe, with whom he went in hand
Chat he to le his fathers ghoſte myght go by Auerne derpe.
She long vppon the earth in ſtolond her eyes did fired kerpe.
And at the length alone as that the ſpꝛyght of pꝛopheſpe
N as entred her, ſhe rapling them did thus ageine reply.
O moſt renowmed woyght, of whom the godlynelle by fyꝛe
And valeantnelle is tryde by ſwoꝛd, great things thou dof requypze.
Wut feare net Troiane. for thou ſhalt ber loꝛd of thy deſpꝛe.
To fee the reuerend image of thy deereberloued (pre,
Among the fayꝛe Elyſian feldes where godly folke abyde,
And all the lo well kingdomes of the woꝛld J will ther guyde.
No wap to bertue is reſtreynd. This ſpoken, ſher did ſhowe
G golden bowgh that in the towd of Proferpine did growe,
And willed him to pull it from the tre. Be dioobep:
And lawe the powꝛe of dzeadfull hell, and where his graundſpꝛes lap
And eke the aged Choſt of ſtowt Anchifes, Furthermoꝛe
He lernd the cuffomes of the land arrypd at late before,
And what aduentures ſhould by warre betpde him in that place.
From thence retyꝛing vp age me a ſlow and werp pace,
He did aſſwage the tediouſneſle by talking with bis guyde.
oꝛ as he in the twylyght dim this dꝛeadlull wap did ryde,
He ſaptd: Whither pꝛelent thou thplelfa Goddeſle ber.


Oꝛ ſuch a one as Cod doth loue mot deerly, J will ther 502


=


—


a
— — — —


Eo SS S ZS BS Ss SaaS"


oa OS ea


OuidsMetamorphofis. 175


Foꝛ ener as a Goddeſſe take, and will acknotwlcdge mez

Chy ſeruant, ſoꝛ ſaufguyding mer the place ofoeathtmfe,
And foz thou krom the place ol death hate bꝛought mer (auf and tra
Foꝛ which delert, what tyme J (hall atteyne tw open ayꝛe,

Iwill a temple to ther buyld ryght ſumptuoue, large, and lapze,
And honour the with frankincence. The pꝛophetiſle did caſt

Her eye vppon Aenzas backe, and ſyghing ſayd at laff,

J am no Goddeſle. Neyther think thou canſt with conſcience rygbt,

With holy incence honour giue to anp moꝛtall wyght.

But to thentent thꝛough ignoꝛance thou erre not, J had bene
Eternal and ot woꝛldly lyfe 3 ſhould none end haue fene,

Ik that J would my mapdenhod on Phebus haue beſtowde.
Howberit whyle he Hod in hope tw haue the fame, and trowde

Co oucrceme mee with his gifts, thou mayd of Cumes (—p he)

A) Chote what thon wilt, and of thy with the owner thon ſhalt ber.
A Staking full my hand of duff, and ſhewing it him there,

Delpꝛed like a fle to line as many peeres as were
Small grapnes of cinder in that heape. J quight forgot tw craue
Ammediatelp, the race of all thoſe pres in pouth to haue.

Pit did he graunt me alſo that, vppon condicion 3
b) «© Would let him haue my mapdenhod, which thing 4 did denpe.
And ſo reieaing Phebus gift a ſingle Ipfe 4 led.
But now the blellefull tyme of pouth ts altwgtther Aled, 5
And irklome age with trembling pace ts folie vppon my head.
Mhich long J mull endure. Foꝛ now already as pou fee

Seuen hundꝛed peares are come and gone and that the number bee

Full matched of the granes of duſt, thꝛhundꝛed harueſtes mo
J mull thee hundzed bintages ſer moze befoze J go.

The day will come that length of tyme ſhall make my body ſmall,
And little of my withered limbes ſhall leaue oꝛ naught at all.

And none Hall think that euer God was tane in loue with mer
Cuen out of Phebus knowledge then perchaunce 3 growen tall ber.
Oz at the leaſt that euer he met lobde he (hall dene.

So ſoꝛe 3 hall be altered. And then Hall no mannes eye
Diſcerne me. Only by my vopce 3 Gall bee knomen. $02 why
The fates ſhall leaue me fili my voyce foꝛ folk to kno lu mer bp.
As sy bill in the vaulted wap ſuch talk as this did frame,


The. xiiij. booke of |


Che Crotane knyght Aenzas bp at Cumes fro Limbo tante. 0
And hauing dane the facrifple accuſtomd foz the lame,
He toke his iournep to the coat tubich had not pit the name ö


Recepucd ok his nurce. In this fame place he found a mate p
Ol wyſe Viyfles Macare of Neritus wh late |!
Weloꝛe, had after all his long and tediouſe toples, there Kapa. b
He ſpying Achemenides (whom late ago atrayd ee


Chep had among mount Actnas Cliff's abandond wohen they fler


:

From Polypheme:)and Wondzing fo2 too fe he was not dead, f
Sapo thus. O Achemenides, what chaunce, o2 rather what ö
Gav Cod hathe fabde the lyle of thee 2 M hat is the reaſon that >,
A barbꝛous ſhippe beares thee a Grecke : og whither lapleſt thou D
Co hum thus, Achemenides his owne man krerly now (
And not foꝛgrowen as one loꝛloꝛne, nog clad in bꝛiſtled hyde, i
Made anſwer. Pit ageine 3 wauld 4 Gould in perrill byde i
Ol Polypheme, and that J myght thole chappes of his behold i
Weelineared with the blood of men, but il that J do hold It
This ſhippe moze deere than all the Realme of wyle VIyſſes, o
It letter of Acnxas J dw make account than fo2 : i
My father. nepther (though 3 did as much as done myght ber,) i
I could pnough ber thankfull foꝛ bis godneſſe towards mee, i
Chat q Mill ſpeake and breathe : Chat 3 the Sun and heauen do les 90
Is his gift, Can 3 thankleſle then oꝛ myndlelle of him bee if
That downe the round eyed gyants thꝛote this foule ol myne went note i
And that from bencefw2th when tw dye it euer be my lot i
A map bee lapd in graue, oꝛ ſure not in the Gyants matve 2 th
V hat hart had J that tyme at leaſt it feare did not withdꝛawe 5 i
Both hart and ſence) when left behynd, pou taking hippe J fave? i
A would haue called after pou but that J was afcapd i
By making outcrpe to my fo mpfelfto bane betwzapd. N
Foz even the noyle that you did make did put Viyfles ſhippe a,
In daunger. 3 did le him from a cragged mountaine Hrippe 9
A myghty rocke, and into fea it thyowe midway and moꝛe. it
Ageine J ſawo his gtante pawe thꝛowe howge big Hones great ore \
As ik it were a fling, And Coze J feared leaſt your chippe y
Should dꝛowned bp the water ber that from the Tones. vidthippe, 0


Oz bp the Tones themlelues, as if my ſell had biene therin. But


Ouids Metamorphofis. 176

But when that Apght had ſaued pou from death, he did begin

On Aetna ſyghing vp and downe to walle: and with his paves

Ment groping of the tres among the wodes. And foꝛbycauſe

He could not fe,be knockt his Hhinnes ageinſt the rocks eche where.

And ſtretching out his grilly armes (ohich all bægrymed ivere

Mith baken blood) to ſea ward, he the Grerkiſh nation band,

And ſayd. O it that fam god chaunce mpght being vnta my hand

VIy ſles o ſum mate of his, on whom tw wꝛeake myne ire.

Uppon whole botwells Lolth my terth J like a Hawke myght tyꝛe:

Mhole liuing members myght with theis my talants teared berne.

WA hole blod myght bubble dolon my thꝛote: whoſe Heth myght pant be⸗

My tawes: how lyght oz none at all this loſing of myne eye (twerne

Would ſeeme : Theis woꝛdes and many mo the cruell leend did erp.

A chuddꝛing hoꝛroꝛ perced mee to ſer his ſmudged face,

And cruell handes, and in his krunt the fowle round epyeleſte place,

And monſkruous members, and his beard beſlowbered with the blood

Ol man. Bekoꝛe myne eyes then death the ſmalleſt ſoꝛrow wp.

3 loked euerp minute to be ſeaſed in his pale.

4 lmked euer when be ſhauld haue tramd me in his matve, é

And in my mynd J of that tyme mer thought the mage fatve

When hauing dingd a dozen of our fellowes tw the grolond

And lying lyke a Lpon ferce 02 hunger ſterued howna

Uppon them, berp eagerly he dolune his gredy gut a

hep; bowwels and they? limbes pit moze than halt᷑ aliue did put,

And with they: lleſh togither tracht the bones and mare whyght.

Itrembling like an alpen leaf fod fad and blodleſle gupght.

And in beholding dow he fed and belked vp againe

is blody vittells at his mouth, and vttred aut amapne

The clottred gobbets mixt with wyne, z thus lurmplde: like lot

Pangs oner my head now, andy muti alſo go to pot.

And hyding mer for many dayes, and quaking hoꝛribly 8

At euerp nayle, and dꝛeading death, and willhing fo2 tm dpe,

Appeaſing hunger with the leaues of treꝛs, and herbes and mal,

Alone, and poze, and fteleſte, and to death and pennance caſt, 5

A long tyme after ¥ eſppde this Hippe a karre at lat,

And ronning dotwnetvard to the fea by figues did ſuccour feke.

Where fynding grace, this Croianechtppe recepued mie a Grerke. 5
ae NOV UG HO Kd! rue


The. xiiij. booke of


Wut nolo J peep the gentle frend declare thou vnto mer
Thy Capteines and thy fellowes lucke that tobe the fea with the,
He told him how that Acdlus the fonne of Hippot, hea
That keepes the wyndes in pꝛyſon cloce did reigne in Cuſkane les
And how Vlyſſes hauing at his hand a noble gift
Che wynd enclolde in leather bagges, did ſapyle with pꝛoſperous dꝛilt
nyne dapes togither: inſomuch they came within the lyght a
Ol home: but on the tenth day when the moꝛning gan glue lyght,
Wis fellowes being ſomewhat touche with couetoulenelle and ſpyght.
Suppoling that it had beene gold, did let the wyndes out quyght.
Che which returning whence they came, did bine them backe a mapng
Chat in the Realme of Acõlus thep went a land agapne.
From thence (ꝙ he) we came btw the auncient Lamyes towne.
Ok which the feerce Antiphates that ſeaſon ware the crowne.
A cowple of mp mates and 3 were ſent vnto him: and
A mate of mpne and 3̃ could ſcarce by flpght eſcape his hand.
Che third of vs did with his blod embze w the wicked face
Ot leawd Antiphate, who with fwd bs Aping thence did chace,
And following after with a rowt thꝛew (ones and loggs which dꝛobom
Both men and ſhippes. Hotobeeit one by chaunce eſcaped found, |
WU hich bare Vly {les and my felf. So hauing lott moſt part
Df all our deare companions, we with fad and ſoꝛp hart
And much complapning, did arrpue at ponder coaſt which ow
Map ken farre hence. A great wap hence J fap) we fee it now é
But truſt me truly over neere J ſaw it once. And thow
Aenæas Goddeſſe Venus ſonne the iuſteſt knight of all
The Trolane race (toꝛ ſith the warre is done, J can not call
thee fo) J warne ther get thee karre from Circes dwelling place.
Foz then our ſhippes arrpued there, remembꝛing eft the cace
Mf cruell king Antiphates, and of that helliſh wyght
The round eyed gyant Polypheme, wer had fo ſmall delyght
To viſtt vncowth places, that wer fapd wer would not go.
Chen caſt we lotts. The lot fell out vppon myſelf as tho,
And Polyte, and Eurylocus, and on Elpenor who
Delyghted totwmuch in wyne, and epghtene other mo.
Al wee did go tw Circes houſe. Aone as w came thither,
And in the poꝛtall of the Ball had fet our fete twgitber,


SYS OS r ee


Quicds Metamorphofis. 177
A thouſand Lyons wolues and beares did put vs in a ſeare
By meting vs. But none of them was tw bee feared there.
Foꝛ none of them could dw vs harme: but with a gentle loke .
And following vs with kawning lerte theyꝛ wanton taples they Gabe.
Anon did Damzells welcome bs and led bs thꝛough the hall 7
(The which was made of marble Hane, fix ꝛe, arches, rot, and wall)
To Circe. Shee late vnderneathe a trauerſe in a chapꝛe
Aloft ryght rich and ſtate lp. in a chamber large and lapꝛe.
I She ware a gwolp longtreynd gone: and all her reit attyꝛe
Mas euery whit of goldimtthes wok. There fate mee allo by her
The Seanymphes and her Ladpes whole lyne fingers neuer knew
What tozing woll did mene, noꝛ thꝛæde from whcaled ſpindle dꝛew.
Cbey forced her bes, and picking out the flowers that were mixt,
Did put them into mabonds, and with indukerent (pace betwixt,
Ddd lay the leaues and ſtalks on heapes accopping to they hew.
And (he herſelk the wok of them did aucrice and vebo. i 5
The vertue and the ble of them rpght perkealy he knew, '
And in what leat it lap, and which in mixeure would agre, 2


And fo peruſing euerp herb by god adupſement, he
Did wep them out. Alſone as (yee bs entting in did fe,
And greeting had bothe ginen and tane, ſher loked cheærekullp,
And graunt ing all that wer deſpꝛde, commaunded by and by
Acerteine potion to be made ofbarlp parched dye Ln
| And wpne and honp mixt with chele. and with the lame thee llye
Had meynt the tewee or certeine herbes which bnefppde did lye
By rraſon of the ſwærteneſle of the dꝛink. Mer toke the cup
Delivered by her wicked hand, and quatt it cleerely bp
With thirkpe thꝛotes. Mhich done, and that the curfed witch had ſmit
Our higheſt heare tippes with her wand, (it is a ſhame, but pit
J will declare the truth) J wert all rough with beiſtled heare,
And could not make complaint with woꝛdes. In ead of ſpœch J there 5
Did make a ratoghtiſh grunting, and with groucling face gan beare
Mp biſage downeward to the ground. J felt a bakes groyne
To weren hard vppon my month, and bꝛawned neck to iopne
Mp head and ſhoulders. And the handes with which z late ago
Had taken bp the charmed cup, were turnd to ferte as tho, 5
Such force there is in Soꝛcerie. In ſyne wyth other mo
aS Bb. j. ff That


6 . S


r me eee rere


The. xiuj. booke of
Chat taſted of the ſelfſame fatuce, they ſhet me in a Stye.
From this miſlehappe Furilochus alonly ſcapte. Foꝛ whp:
He only would not tatfe the cup. which had he not ficd fro,
He chould haue bene a betitled beaſt as well as we. And fo
Should none haue boꝛne Viyfles worde of our miſchaunce, noꝛ be
Male cõme to Circe tw reuenge our harmes and fet vs free.
The peacepꝛocurer Mercurie had gluen tw him a tobpghe
Fayre flo loꝛe lohoſe rete is black, and ot the Goddes it Moly hygbt
Aſſurde by this and heauenly heſtes, be entred Circes botnze,
And being bidden for te dink the cup of balefull powze,
Ag Circe was about to ſtroke her wand vppon bis heare,
He thꝛuſt her backe, and put her with his naked ſwoꝛd in feare,
Then fell they ta agreement ſtreyght, and fapth in baud was plyght.
And beeing made her bedfellowe, he claymed as in ryght 5
Ok doiwrpe, loꝛ to haue his men ageine in perfect plyght. „
Hhee lpꝛincled vs with better ie wee of vncowth herbes, and ſlrake
The awh end of her charmed rod vppon our heades, and ſpake
Modes to the ſoꝛmer contrarie. The moze He charmd, the moze:
Aroſe wer vpward from the ground on which wr daarde beloꝛe.
Our bꝛiſtles fell awap, the clift our clouen cles foꝛſwke.
Our ſhoulders did returne agein : and next our eibowes take
Our armes and handes theyꝛ koꝛmer place. Then wærping wer enbꝛate
Our Word, and hing abouthis necke who allo wept apace,
And not avo wer rather ſpake than ſuch as myght appere
rom harts mot thanklull to pꝛoctede. Mt taryed theyꝛ a pare
A in that whyle fawe many things, and manp things did here.

J marked allo this one thing with Moze of other gere
M hich one of Circes fotze chert mapdes (whole office was alway
Uppon ſuch hallo wes te attend) did ſetretly bewzay N
Co mee. I oꝛ in the whyle mp Loꝛd with Circe kept alone,
This mapd apongmannes image ſheawd of fapze whyght marble ficne
Mithin a Chauncell. On the headtherof were garlonds froze
And ake a wodlpecke. And as J demaunded her wherloꝛe
And whe it was they honoꝛd fein holy Church, and why
Me bare that bird bppon his head: Sher anſwerring by and by
Sayd: lerne hereby fir Macare tw vnderſtand the powꝛe .
Spy Lap bathe, ano marke thou well what A Wall fap this cna =


1


Ouids Metamorphofis. 178
Chere reignd erewhyle in Italy one Picus Saturnes ſonne ;
Mh loucd warlike hezle and had delyght tw {ee them ronne.
He was of feature as per fee. And by this image bere
Che berrp beawtpe of the man doth lpuelely appeere.
iis courage matcht his perſonage. Andicarcelp had he well
Scene twentpe peeres, Bis countnance did allure the nymphes 5 diwell
Among the Latian hilles. The nymphes of fountaines and of bꝛokes,
As thoſe that haunted x Albula were rauiſht with his lokes Now cal
And fo were they that Numicke beares, and Anio to, and Alme dedTyber.
Chat ronneth ſhoꝛt, and beadp Nar, and Farfar cole and calme,
And all the nymphes that vlde to haunt Dianas ſhadye pole,
Oꝛ any lakes oꝛ meres nere hand, oꝛ other waters cole,
But he diſdepning all the reit did fee his loue vppon
A lady whom Venilia bare (ſo fame repozteth) on
Che ſtately mountayne Palatine bp Ianus that doth beare
Che dowble face. Allone as that her peeves foꝛ maryage were
Chought able, thee pꝛelerring him befoze all other men,
Mas wedded tw this Picus who was king of Lavvrents then.
Sher was in beatwtpe excellent. but pit in ſinging, much
Poꝛe excellent: and therbppon they naamd her Singer. Such
Che ſwertenelle ol her muſtcke was, that He ther with delpghts
Che ſauage beaſtes, and cauſed birdes tw ceaſe theyꝛ wandꝛing Apgbts,
And moued ſtones and trees, and made the running ſtreames to fap.
Now lvhyle that He in Womans tune recoꝛdes her pleaſant lay
At home, her huſband rode abꝛode bppon a luſtye hoꝛſe f
Co hunt the Boare, and bare in hand two hunting Maues of foꝛce.
Bis cloke was crymzen butned with a golden button fall.
Into the ſelflame foꝛeſt eke was Phebus daughter paſt
From thoſe fame feeldes that of herfelf the name of Circe beare,
Ta gather vncowth herbes among the frutefull hillocks there.
Atone as lurking in the ſhꝛubbes ſher did the king efppe,
Hhe was alfrawght. Downe fell her herbes te ground. And by and by 5
Thꝛough all her bones the flame of lone the mare gan to frpe, :
And when (hee from this forced heate had cald her witts agen,
She purpolde tw bewꝛay her mpnd. Fut ontw him as then 5
Sher could not come fo2 ſwiltneſle of his hoꝛſe and fo2 his men
That garded him on euery ſyde. Wit Halt thou not (lhe)
Bb. ij. 5a


Cia hans Wet ha eerie = —— yess — — —. "
wh haum ee A ohn en fe Beh 6s ee hs Deh he eo Oha ec — mutant he ENO 0


The. xiiij. booke of
Ss thift ther fro my handes although the wynd ſhauld carrpe thee,
It 3 do kn we myſelt, ir all the ſtrength of herbes layle not,
Oꝛ it 3 haue not quyght and clene my charmes and ſpelles fozgotte,
In ſaping theis fame woꝛzdes, fhe made the likeneſle ol a Boare
Mithout a body, cauſing it to ſwilftly paſle before 58
Bing Picus epes, and fo2 to ſeeme to get him to the wade,
A here foꝛ the thickeneſſe of the tres a hoꝛſe myght do no gad.
Immedlatly the king vnwares a whote purſute did make
Uppon the ſhadowe of his pray, and quiklp did foꝛſake


Hts foming bogies ſweating backe: and following vapne wan hope, ae


Did runne a fote among the wodes, and through the buſhes crope,
Then Circe fell a mumbling ſpelles, and pꝛaping like a witch


Did honour ſtraunge e vncoloth Goddes W vncowtt charmes, by which .


Sher lde to make the mone lobe dark, and wꝛappe her fathers bead
In watry clowdes. And then like wyle the heauen was ouerſpꝛed .
Elith darkneſfe, and a foggpe miſt ſteamd vpward rom the ground.
And neare a man about the king tw gard him could ber found.
But euerp man in blynd by wapes ran ſcattring in the chace,


Thꝛough her inchauntments. At the length Hee getting tymie ¢ plare,
Sayd. By thoſe lyghtſum epes of thyne which late haue rauicht myne, s 1


And by that godly perſonage and louelp face of thyne,

The which compelleth mer that am a Coddeſle to enclyne

Co make this humble ſute to thee that art a moztall wyght,
Allwage my flame, and make this ſonne who bp his heauenly fpgbt
Fore/fes all thiugs) thy kathzinlawe: and hardly hold not ſcoꝛne
DF Circe hd by long diſcent of Titans ſtocke am boꝛne.

Thus much lapd Circe. He ryght ſcerte retecing her requell,

And her, ſayd: hate ere thou art go fet thy hart at reff.

3 am not thyne, noꝛ will not bee, Another holdes my hart:

And long God graunt (he map it hold, that J map neuer ſtart

Th leabodneſte of a foꝛreine luſt from bond ok lawfull bed,

As long as Ianus daughter my werte finger is not dead.

Dame Circe hauing oft renewd her fute in vayne before,
Sapd: dearely ſhalt thou by thy ſcoꝛne. Koꝛ neuer ſhalt thou moze
Returne to Singer. Chou Halt lerne by prot what one can do
That is pꝛouoked, and in loue, pea and a woman tw.


But Circe is bothe ſtird to wꝛath, and allo tane in laue, wea


Ouids Metamorphofis. 179
Pea anda woman. Cwyte her face to wellwward He did moue,
And tboyce to Calward. Lh2pce He lapd her rod vppon his head.
And therwithall thee charmes (he caſt. away king Picus filed.
And wondꝛing that he led moze ſwift than carl he had bene wont,
He ſaw the fethers on his (kin, and at the ſodein bꝛunt

Became a bird that haunts the towmddes. toberat he taking ſpyght,
Vl ith angrye bill did iob vppon hard Obes with all his myght,

And in his mode made hollowe holes vppon theyꝛ boughes. The hel
Ok Crimzen which was in his cloke, vppon his fetbers grew.

The gold that was a claſp and did his cloke togither hold,


Js kethers, and about his necke goes circlewyſe like gold.


his ſeruants luring in that whyle oft ouer all the ground

In vapne, and kynding no where of theyꝛ kyng no incung, found.
Dame Circe, (oz by that tyme (hee had made the aper here,

And ſufkred both the lonne and wyndes the miſtye ſteames to clerre)
And charging her with matter trey, demaunded foꝛ theyꝛ kyng,
And otkring force, began thep2 darts and Jauelings foꝛ to ding.


Hee ſpꝛineling noyſom venim ſtreyght and iewee of poyſoning myght,
Did call togither Eribus and Chaos, and the nyght,


And all the feendes ol darkneſſe, and with howling ont along

Made pꝛapers onto Hecate, Scarce ended was her ſong,

But that a wondzous thing tw tell) the wodes lept from thep2 place
The gronnd did grone: the trers neere hand lokt pale in all the chace:
Che grade beſpꝛent with dꝛoppes of blod lokt red: the ſtones did ſeem
Ca roare and bellow hoarce : and doggs to howle and raze extræme:
And all the ground to crawle v fnakes blacke ſcaald: ¢ gaſl ly ſpꝛygbts
Fly whlcking bp and downe. The folke were flapghted at theis ſyghts.
And as they wondꝛing fod amaazd, (hee ſtrokte her twitching wand
Uppon thep2 faces. At the touche wherok, there out of hand

Came wondꝛous Haves of ſauage beafes bppon them all. Mot one
Ketepned Till his natiue ſhape. The letting ſonne was gone

Wepond the vtmoſt ceatk of Spaine, and Singer longd in vayne

Co (ee her huſband. Wothe her folke and people ran agapne


Thꝛough all the wodes. And euer as they went, they ſent theyz eyes


Beloꝛe them for to lynd him out, but no man him eſppes.
Chen Singer thought it not ynough tm werpe and teare her heare,


And beat herſelk all which Hee did.) Sher gate abꝛode, and there


Bb. iu. Kaundgd


The. xiiij. booke of


xanndad ouer all the bꝛoade wyld ferlds like one beſyds her witts.


Sir nyghts and full as many dapes (as fortune led by fitts)
She ſtrayd mer ouer hilles and dales, and neuer talled reſt,
Noꝛ meate, noꝛ dꝛink of all the whple. The ſeuenth day, ſoꝛe oppꝛeſt
And tyꝛed bothe with trauell and with ſoꝛrotwe, downe Her late
Uppon colo Tybers bank, and there with teares in mening rate
Sher warbling on her greꝛt in tune not ſhirle nog ouer hye,
Did make her moane, as doth the wan: who ready foꝛ to dye
Doth fing his burtall ſong befoze. Her maree molt at lak
Vulith mozning, and (he pynde away: and finally hee pak
eo lither ayꝛe. But pit her fame remapned in the place.
Joꝛ why the auncient hulbandmen actoꝛding to the cace,
Did name it Singer of the nymph that oped in the lame.
Ol luch as theſe are, many things that pere by loꝛtune came
Wothe to my heering and my fight. Mer wering rely then
And duggs by diſcontinuance, were commaunded pit agen
Co goa bod and hoyſe vp ſaples. And Circe told vs all
That long and dowefull paſſage and rotogh feas ſhould vs befall.
A promis ther thole wwꝛdes of bers me thꝛoughly made afrayd:
And therfore hither J me gate, and bere J haue mer ffayd.
Chis was the end ol Macars tale. And ere long tyme was gone,
Aenzas Qutce was buryed in a tumb of marble fone,
And this choꝛt verſe was let theron. In this lame verrp place
Mp Nurcechyld whom the woꝛld dant) know to be à chyld of grace
Delinering mer Caleta quicke from burning by the Grayes,
Mathe burnt mer dead with ſuch a fyze as iullly winnes him pꝛayſe.
hep; Cables from the graſſpe frond were lozde, and by and by
From Circes ſlaunderaus houſe and from her treaſons farre they fly.


And making to the thickgrowen groues where thꝛough the yellow out :


The Hadp Ty ber into fea his guilbing ſtreame doth thauff,
Aenæas got the Realme of king Latinus Favvnus ſonne

And ceke his daughter, whom in feyght by foꝛce of armes he wonne.
He enterpꝛyled ware ageinſt a Pation farce and ſtrong.

And Turne was wrothe foꝛ holding of his wyfe away by wong. 5
Ageint the Shyꝛe of Latium met all Tyrrhene, and long

With bulpe care hawlt victozie by force of armes was fought.


Eche partie to augment thepe farce by foyretne luctcur waught 40


——


SS SS


oe ee Ss BS" -:


Ouids Metamorphofis. 180
And Manx ſent the Rutills help, and many came to ad
Che Troianes: nepther was the god Aenzas ill apayd
Ok going to Euanders tawne. But Venulus in vayne
Ta outcaſt Diomeds citie went his ſuccour to obteine.
This Diomed vnder Davvnus king of Calabrye did found ;
A mpabtpe towne, and with bis wyfe in dowꝛpe hild the ground.
Now when from Turnus, Venulus his meſlage had declaard,
Deſpꝛing help: Ch Actolian knyght apd none could well ber ſpaard.
And in ercuce, he told him hobo he neyther durſt be bold
Co pꝛeſt his fathers folk to warre of whom he had no hold,
oz any of his countrymen had left as then alyue
To arme. And leak pee think (ꝙ her) J do a ſhilt contrpue, 5
Although by vppening of the thing my bitter greef reupue
J will abpde to make a new reherſall. After that
The Grerkes had burned Troy and on the ground had lapd it flat,
And that the Pꝛince of Narix by his rauiſhing the mayd
In Pallas temple, on vs all the pennance had diſplapd
M hich he himſelk deſerud alone: Then ſcattred herre and there
And harryed over all the (eas, wer Grerkes were fayne te beare
Kyght, thunder, tempeſt, wꝛath of heauen and ſea, and laſt of all
Sore ſhipwꝛecke at mount Capharey tw mend our harmes withall.
And leaſt that me toa make to long a pꝛoceſſe pee myght dme
In ſetting forth our heauy happes, the Grerkes myght that tyne fame
Ryghe rewwfull euen to Priamus. Wotvbéet Minerua hee
Chat weareth armour toke mee from the waues and faucd mee.
But from my fathers Realme ageine by violence J was dzluen.
Foz Venus bearing fill in mynd the wound J had her giuen
Long tyme bekoꝛe, did wok reuendge. By meanes wherol luch tople
Did tolle mee on the ſea, and on the land J found ſuch bꝛoyle
Wy warres, that in my hart J thought them bliſt ol Cod whom ert
Che violence of the raging feaand hideous wynds had perf,
And whom the wꝛathfull Capharcy by ſhipwꝛecke did confound:
Oft withing alſo J had there among the reſt berne dꝛolond.
My company now hauing felt the wast that fea oꝛ warre :
Could woꝛke, did faynt, and witht an end of raping out fo karre.
But Agmon whot of nature and to fœrce thꝛough llaughters made
Hapyd, hat remayneth ürs thꝛough which our pacience cannot ware?
* N Bb. ih. Mhat


a MYA CPLR:


K S2 Lah — Bh hats
222 NDR


The. xiii. booke voor


Wut when the woll is pat of things, then feare ts vnder
Although thee here mer, and do hate vs all which thing ts


And dérelp it ſhould ſtand vs on to purchale hygb eſtate.


The greateſt poꝛtion of his fate was turned into toes.


Rethenor, Nyct, and Abas all fed wondꝛing by his ſyde.
And as they wondꝛed, they receyvd the felffame ſhape an
And ſinally the greater part of all my band bp flew,


And with alittle remnant of my people dw obteyne


In Calabry. Lhus much the ſonne of Oenye fapd. Anon
Dir Venulus returning from the king of Calydon,


Poſfeſſed it: but hertofoꝛe it was the fap2 pes boloꝛe.


But alter ward recouering hart and hardyneſte thep durſt
Delppſe him when he chaced them, and with theyꝛ nimble


M hat further ſpyght bath Venus pit to wok ageinſt bs moꝛe⸗
M hen woꝛſe miſfoꝛtunes map bee feard than haue bene felt before,
Chen pꝛaper map aduauntadge men, and vowwing map them bote.


fte.


And when that bale is hygheſt grote, then bote mut next enſew.


trew)


Chat ſerue here vnder Diomed : Pit ſet wer lyght her hate.


Mlith (uch lowt woꝛdes did Agmon ſfirre dame Venus bnta ire
And raplo ageine her ſettied grudge. Pot manp had deſpꝛe

Co here him talk thus out of ſquare. the moſte of bs that are

Mis frendes rebukte him foꝛ his waꝛdes. And as he did pꝛepare 8
Eo anſwere, bothe his vopce and thꝛote by which his voyce ſhould go,
Mere ſmall: his heare tos feathers turnd: his necke was clad as tho
With feathers: fo was ba and backe. The greater fethers ſtacke
Appon his armes: and into wings his elbowes bowwed backe.


A hardened bill ot hoꝛne did growe vppon his month and noze,
And ſharpened at the neather end. Bis fellowes Lydus, Ide,


d bein.


And clapping with theyꝛ newmade wings, about the oꝛes did gird.
And il pe do demaund the hape of this fame dowtlull bird,

Euen as they be not verry Swannes: fo dꝛawe they verry nare
The ſhape of Cygnets whyght. With much a do J ſettled here,


Che dꝛygrobonds of my fathꝛinſaw king Davvnus tobe did reigne
Foꝛſwke the coaſt sf Puteoll and the feldes of Meſſapie,

zn which her ſaw a darkſome denne foꝛgrowne with bullbes hye,

And watred with a little ſpꝛing. The halfegoate Pan that howꝛe


A chepeherd ol Appulia from that countrye ſcaard them furt.


fte


Continetoed


TE SS


OuidsMetamorphofis. 181


Continewed on thep2 dawncing Hill in tyme and meaſure mete


The ſhepeherd ko wund me fault with them:and with bis kowtlike leapes 5 as


Did counterfette theyꝛ minpon dabonte, and rapped out by heapes
A rabble of bnſauerp taunts euen like a country cloyne,
Co which, moſt leawd and filthy termes of purpoſe he did ſopne.
And alter he had once begon, he could not hold his tong,
Until that in the timber of a tree his thꝛote was clang,
F oꝛ now he is a tre, and by his te wee diſcerne pee may
His manners. Foꝛ the Olpk wyld cath fenfiblp bewꝛap
By berrpes full ot bitterneſle his rapling tong. Foꝛ ap
The barlhnelle of his bitter woꝛdes the berryes beare away.
Now when the kings Ambaſladour returned home without
Che ſuccour of th Aetolian prince, the Rutills being tout


Pade luckeleMe warre without theyꝛ help: and much on eyther {poe


Mas theo of blod. Behold bing Turne made burning bꝛonds to glyde
Uppon thepꝛ ſhippes, and they that had eſcaped water, ſtode

In feare of fpꝛe. The flame had ſindgd the pitch, the war, and wood,

And other things that nouriſh lpꝛe, and ronning vp the maſte


Caught hold vppon the faples, and all the takling gan to waſfe,
The Rowers ſeates did allo ſmoke: when calling tw her mynd
That theis ſame ſhippes were pynetrers erſt and ſhalen with the wynd
On Ida monnt, the mother of the Coddes dame Cy bel flld
Che apꝛe with found ol belles, and nople of ſhalmes. And as He hilld


Sapd thus. O Turnus all in bayne theis wicked hands of the
Do ca this fyꝛe. for by mylcl: diſpoynted it Hall be,

J wilnot let the Wwatting fore tonſume theis ſy i ppes which are

A parcell of my foꝛeſt Ide of which am moſt chare.

It thundꝛed as the Goddelle ſpake, and with the thunder came
A ſtoꝛme of rapne and (Ripping hayle. and ſodepne with the fame.
Che ſonnes of Aſtrey meeting feerce and feyghting berrp ſoꝛe,
Did trouble bothe the fea and apꝛe and ſet them on a roꝛe.

Dame Cy bel bing one of them tow lerue her turne that tyde,

Did bꝛeake the Cables at the which the Troiane ſhippes did ryde,
And bare them pꝛone, and vnderneathe the water did them dꝛyue
Che Timber of them foftning turnd to bodyes ſtreyght alpue.


Che reprtes that rulde the Lyons tame which dꝛew her charpot, Sher 5


1 ſtemmes were turnd to heades, the oꝛes to lwimming ferte ¢ toes,


The


Thheyꝛ hew is duſkye as befoze, and now in ſhape of mapd


The. xiiij. booke of
Che fpdes tw ribbes, the kerle that though the middle gally goes
Became the ridgebone of the backe, the faples and tackling, heare:
And in tw armes on eyther ſyde the faplepards turned were. :
hep play among the waues of which enen now they were afrayd.
And being Seanymphes, wheras they were bred in mountapnes hard,
Chey haunt foꝛ ay the water ſoft, and neuer afterward 5
Had mynd to le theyꝛ natyue ſople. But pit forgetting not


How manp perills they had felt on fea by lucklelle lot,
They often put theyꝛ helping hand tw ſhippes diſtreſt by wynd, 2


Onleſle that any carped Grerkes. Foz bearing Mill in mynd f
Che burning of the towne of Troy, they hate the Grerkes by kynd.
And therfore of VIyſles Hippes ryght glad they were to fee i
Che ſhiuers. and as glad they were as any glad myghe be,

To fe Alcinous ſhippes wex hard and turned into Fone,


Theis ſhippes thus hauing gotten lyle and bering turnd eche one


To nymphes, a body would haue thought the miracle fo greate
Should into Turnus wicked hart ſum godly feare haue beate,
And made him ceaſe his wilfull warre. But he did ſtill perſiſt.

And epther partpe had theyꝛ Goddes theyꝛ quarrell to alliſt,
And courage alſo: which as god as Goddes myght well be thought.
In kyne they neyther fo2 the Kealme noꝛ fo2 the ſcepter fought,
Noꝛ foꝛ the Lady Lauine: but foz conqueſf. And fo2 ſhame
To femme to ſhꝛinke in leauing warre, they Mill pꝛolongd the fame.
At length dame Venus lawe her ſonne obteyne the vpper hand
Ring Turnus fell, and erke the towne of Ardea Which did fand
Ryght ſtrong in hygh eſtate as long as Turnus lived. But
Allone as that Acnzas ſwond tw death had Turnus put,
Che towne was (et on fyꝛe: and krom amid the embers flew
A kowle which till that pꝛeſent tyme no perſone euer knew,
And beete the athes frercely vp with flapping of his wing.
Che leanenefle, palenelle, doletull found, and euery other thing
Chat map expꝛeſſe a Citie ſakt, pea and the Cities name
Nemapned Hill rite the bird. And now the berrpe fame 5
Mith Herneſewes fethers doth bewayle the towne twherof it came,
And now Aenæas pꝛo welle had compelled all the Coddes
And uno alſo (wha with hum was mot ok all at odes)


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 182
Zo ceaſe theyꝛ old diſpleaſure quyght. And now he hauing layd
Gd ground wheron the growing welth of luly myght be Fapd,
las rype for heauen. And Venus had great ſute already made
Co all the Goddes. and clerping Ioue did thus with him perſwade.
iP Deere father who haſt neuer bene vncurtuous vnto me, 5
Nobo ſhewe the greateſt courteſie (J pꝛap the) that may be. 5 :
And on my ſonne Aenæas (who a graundchyld bnto the
Math got of my bled) if thou wilt vouchlale him aloght at all)
Wouchfafe ſum Godhead to beſtowe, although it bee but ſmall.
It is pnough that once he bathe alreadye ſerne the Nealme
Ol Pluto vtter pleaſureleſſe, and palſed Sty xis ſfreame.
Che Goddes allented: neyther did Querne luno then appere
In countnance ſtraunge, but did confent with glad and merry chere.
Then loue. Aenæas worthy is a ſapna in heauen tw be.
b Chy wilh for whom thou dot it wilh J graunt the frank and fr.
This graunt of his made Venus glad. Sher thanke him loꝛ the fame,
4 And glyding thꝛough the aire vppon her poked doues he came
Co Lavvrent ſhoꝛe, where clad with rede the riuer Numicke derpe
L ſeaward (which is nere at hand) with ſrealing pace doth creepe.
Sher bade this riuer wath away what euer moꝛtall were
In god Aenæas bobpe, and them vnder fea to beare.
The hoꝛned broke fulfillo her heit, and with his water Here:
Did purge andclenze Aenæas from his moꝛtall body cleere.
The better poꝛcion of him did remapne bur him ſownd.
His mother hauing hallo ved him did noynt his bodye rotund
UU ith beanenly odours, and did touch his month with Ambzofte
Che which was mixt with Nectar werte, and made him by and bps
GY Gad to whom the Romanes give the name of Indiges,
Endeuering with theyꝛ temples and theyꝛ altars him to pleaſe.
Aſcanius with the dowble name from thence began to reigne,
In whom the rule of Alba and ot Latium did remapne.
Pert him luccckded Silums, whofe ſonne Latinus hild .
The aunclent name and ſeepter which his graunvlpze erſt did weeld,
The famous Epit after this Latinus dio ſuccæde.
Chen Capys and king Capetus. But Capys was inderde
Che foꝛmeſt of the two. From this the ſcepter of the Realme
Deſcended btw Ty berine, whe dag wning in the Ureame


Ot


Box Tt may be
iE} interpreted
1 1 pplebee.


Turner.


The. xiiij. booke of

Ol Tyber left that name theretw. This Tyberine begat
Feerce Remulus and Acrota. By chaunce it hapned that
The elder bꝛother Remulus fo2 counterfetting oft
Che thunder, with a thunderbolt was killed from alokt.
From Acrota whoſe ſfayẽ dneſſe did patie his bothers fill,
Che crowne did cõme tw Auentine, wha in the ſelflame hill
In which he reygned burped lyes, and left therto his name.
Che rule ok nation Palatine at length to Proca came.

In this Kings reigne x Pomona libd. There was not to be found

Among the wodnymphes anx one in all the Latian ground
Chat was fo conning koꝛ to kæpe an Oꝛtpard as was ſhee,
Poꝛ none fo papnekull to pꝛeſerue the frute of euery tre,
And ther vppon he had her name. Shee pak not foꝛ the wodes
Hoz viuers, but the billages.and boughes that bare bothe buddes
And plentuous frute. In Med o dart a ſhꝛedding bake he bare,
Tal ith which the ouerluſty boughes hee eft away did pare
Chat ſpꝛeaded out to fat re, and eft did make therwith a rift
To greſte another imp vppon the Tocke within the clilt.
And leat her trees Mould die thzough drought, with water of the ſpꝛings
Sher mopfteth of tbeyꝛ fucking rots the little crumpled ſtrings.
This was her loue and whole delyght. And as foz Venus deꝛdes,
Sher had no mynd at all of them. And foꝛbycauſe (hee dꝛerdes
Entoꝛcement bp the countrye folke, he walld her pards about,
Not lullring any men at all to enter in oꝛ out.
l hat haue not thoſe fame nimble laddes fo apt to fil and daunce
The Satyrs done? oꝛ what the Pannes that wantonly do pꝛaunce,
Il ith hoꝛned foꝛheads: and the old Silenus wh is ap
Moꝛe pouthfull than his pres? and &ke the fend that ſcares away
The thæues and robbers with bis hwke, oꝛ with bis pꝛiup part:
Co winne her loner But pit than theis a farre moze conſtant hart
Had fp x Vertumnus, though he ſped no better than the ref.
O Loo, how often being in a moawers garment dꝛelk,


Bare he in bundells cheaues of coꝛne⸗ and when he fo was dpght,


ibe was the berrp patterne of a harueſt moawer ryght.
Okt bynding newmade hay about his temples he mpgbt fame
A hapmaker. Oft tymes in hand made hard with wok extreme


ibe bare a goade, that men would {were he had but newly then
Unpoak


Ouids Metamorphofis. 183
Nnpoakt bis werrpe Oren. Had he tane in hand agen
A ſhꝛedding hoke, yer would haue thought be had a gardener bene,
Oꝛ pꝛopner of ſum bynes, D2 had pou him with ladder fene .
Uppon his necke, a gatherer of frute pe would him deme,
Ul ich lwoꝛd a ſouldier, with his rod an Angler he did (eeme,
And finallp in many ſhapes be ſought to kynd acceſle
Co top the beawty but by ſyght, that did his hart oppꝛeſle.
Moꝛzeouer, putting on his head a womans wimple gay,
i And faping by a ſtafte, grape heares he forth to ſyght did lap
Vppon his foꝛehcad, and did feyne a beldame fo2 to beck.
By mcanes whereof he came within her godly oꝛtpards free.
And wondꝛing at the frute, ſayd. Puch moze ſkill haf thou 4 fe
Than all the Pymphes of Albula. Haple Lady myne, the flowze
Unſpotted of pure maydenhod in all the woꝛld this ho we.
And with that woꝛd he kiſted her a little: but his biffe
Tas ſuch as trew old women would haue neuer giuen pt is.
Chen fitting downe vppon a bank, he loked vpward at
The bꝛaunches bent with harueſts wepght. Ageinſt him where be fat
A godly Elme with gliſtring grapes did growe: which after her
Had pꝛayſed, and the vyne, likewyſe that ran vppon the tre,
1 Bat ff ꝙ hee) this Cline without the byne did fingle ſtand,
It ſhould haue nothing (ſauing leaues) to bee deſyꝛed: and
Ageine it that the vyne which ronnes vppon the Eime had nat
The trer to leane vnto, it ſhould oppon the ground lp flat.
9 Pit art not thou admoniſht by example of this tre
Co take a huſband, nepther doſt thou palle to marped ber.
But would to Cod thou wouldeſt. Sure Quene Helen neuer had
th o ſuters, noꝛ the Lady that did cauſe the battell mad
Betpwene the halfbꝛute Centavvres and the Lapy thes, noz the wyle
Ok bold Vlyſſes who was erke ay fearefull of his lpfe,
0 Than thou Houlot haue. Foz thoulands nowleuẽ now moſt cherlly whe
Chou ſæmeſt ſuters tw abhoꝛre) deſpꝛe thee, both ol men,
And Goddes and halkgoddes, pea and all the fapꝛpes that do pivell
In Albane hilles. But if theu wilt be wyſe, and myndeſt well
Ta match thy elf, and wilt giue eare to this old woman here,
(Zo whom thou moze than to them all art (truſt mer) lef and deere,
And moze than thou thyſelk beler vit) the common matches fler,


And


The. xiiij. booke of
And chofe Vertumnus tw thy make. And take thou mer to be
Bis pledge. Foꝛ moze he to himſelk not knowen is, than tw mex,
He roues not like a ronneagate though all the woꝛlo abꝛode,
Chis countrpe herabout (the which is large) is his above.
Ie doth not (ike a nomber of theis tommon woers) call
His lone to euery one he fees. Chou art the firſt and laſt
That euer he fet mynd vppon. Alonly onto ther
Mer bowes himſolk as long as lpfe bath laſt. Moꝛeouer hee
Js pouthfull, and with beawtye chene endewd by natures gift,
And aptly into ang ſhape his perſone he can ſhift. :
Chou cant not bid him be the thing though al things p Hoult name)
But that he fitly and with cafe will ſtreyght becomme the ſame.
Welpdes all this, in all one thing bothe twapne ol pou delyght, i
And of the frutes that pou loue belt the firſtlings are his ryght: t
And gladly he receyues thy gifts. But neyther conets her i


Thy Apples, Plommes, noꝛ other frutes new gathered from the tre,


fro: pit the herbes of pleafant ſent that in thy gardynes ber:
202 any other kynd ol thing in all the woꝛld, but ther.
Haue mercy on his keruent loue, and think himſelk to crave
Meere pꝛeſent by the mouth of mer, the thing that he would haue.
And feare the God that map reuenge: as Venus wha doth hate
Hard harted folkes, and Rhamnuſe wha doth eyther fone oꝛ late
Erxpꝛelle her wꝛath with myndkull wꝛeake. And to thentent thou may
Che moꝛe beware, ok many things which tyme by long delay
Hathe taught me, I will ſhewe ther one which ouer all the land
Ol Cyprus blazed is abꝛode, which being ryghtly ſkand
May eally bow thy hardned hart and make it fo2 to pild.

Pne Iphis bogne of lowe degree by foꝛtune had behild

The Ladpe Anaxarete deſcended of the race

Ok Tevvcer, and in vewwing her the fyꝛe of loue a pace
Did ſpꝛed it ſelf thꝛough all his bones. With which he ſkryuing long,
Mhen reafon could not conquer rage bycauſe it was to ſtrong⸗
Came humbly to the Ladyes houſe: and one whyle lay ing ope
His wꝛetched loue before her nurce, beſought her by the hope
Ok Lady Anaxarete her nurcechplos god ſucceſle,


Sher would nat ber ageinſt him in that cace of his diltreſle.


Another whyls entreating fayre ſum frend ol bers, he pꝛe yd


— ee — 2 . ees . —ß́—I— ee —— —


Bim


—_— =


ei rrr oe — — — — PS


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 184


Him earneſtly with carefull voyce, ot furthiance and of apd,
Oftymes be did pꝛeferre his Cute by gentle letters fent.

Okt garlonds mopfted with the deawe of teares that from him went
Me hanged on her poſtes. Oft tymes his tender ſydes he lapd
Ageinſt the thꝛeſhold hard, and oft in ſadneſle did vpbꝛayd

The locke with much vngentlenelle. The Lady crueller

Chan are the ryſing narrowe ſeas, oꝛ falling kiddes, and farre
Moꝛe hard than ſfeele ol Noricum, and than the ſtonnp roche
That in the quarrpe bath his rote, did him deſppyſe and mocke.
Beſpde her doings mercyleſle, of fatelpneile and ſpyght

Hbhex adding pꝛowd ¢ ſnoꝛnefull woꝛdes, defrauds the wꝛetched wyght
Ol derrp hope. But Iphis now vnable any moze

To beare the toꝛment of his gref, Fill ſtanding there befoꝛe
Her gate, ſpake theis his lateſt wwzdes. well Anaxarete,

Chou halk the bpper hand. Henceloꝛth thou ſhalt not nerde te ber
Agreeued any moze with me. Go trpumph hardelp:

Go baunt thy (elf with ioy: go fing the ſong of bigoꝛpe:

Oo put acrowne of glittring bay vppon thy cruel! head.

Foꝛ why thou halk the bpper hand and J am gladlip dead.

Mell ſtœly harted well: refopce, Compeld pit Halt thou bee

Ok lumwhat in mer fo2 to haue a lyking. Thou halt fee

d poynt wherein thou mayſt mee derme moſt thankfall vnto the,
And in the end thou thalt conkelle the great oefert of mer.

But pit remember that as long as lyſe in m& death lak, i
The care of the {hall neuer from this hart ol myne be call.
Foz bothe the lyfe that 3 do line in hope of the, and tother
Wibich nature giucth, hall haue end and pale away togither.
The tydings nepther of mp death (hall come tw ther bee fame.
Mpſelk (J do aſſure the) will bee bꝛinger of the fame.

Mylelk (J fap) will pꝛeſent be that thoſe fame truell eyen

Oft thyne may fede themſelues vppon this liueleſſe coꝛce of myne.
But vie O Goddes (if you behold mennes deꝛdes) remember me,


1 (y tong will ſerue to pray no moꝛe) and cauſe that J map be.


Longtyme herratter ſpoken of; and length the lpfe by kame

The which yer haue abꝛidgd in pares. In ſaping of this fame

He liften bp his watrpe eyes and armes that wered wan é

oa thoſe fame ſtulpes which oft he had with garlondes deckt ere oe
and


The. xtiij. booke of


And kaſtning on the toppe therofa halter thus did lay.
A hou cruell and vngodly wyght, theis are the wꝛeathes that map
Moſt pleature the. And with that word he thzulking in his head,
Euen then did turne him towards her as ged as being dead,

And wꝛetchedly did totter on the poſte with Hrangled thꝛote.

The wicket which his kerrelull fete in ſpꝛawling mapnely ſmote,
Mio make a noyſe: and flying ope bewꝛayd his doing playne.

The ſeruants ſhꝛerkt, and lifting vp his bodye, but in bapne, é
Conuepa him to his mothers boule, his father erſt was layne.

His mother layd him in her lappe, and cleeping in her armes

Her ſonnes cold bodpe, akter that cher had bewayld her harmes
With woꝛdes and doings motherlpke, the coꝛce with mazning cherre
Zo burpall ſadly thꝛough the towne was boꝛne vppon a bere,
The houſe ol Anaxarete bp chaunce was nate the way N

By which this piteons pomp did paffe. and of the dwlefull lay

The found came ta the eares of her, whom God alreadye gan

E ſtrike. Pit let bs ler ſq her) the burpall ol this man. 5
And vp the hygh wyde windowde boule in faping fo, {hee ran.
Scarce had thee well on Iphis lokt that on the bere did lpe,

But chat her eyes wert lark: and from her limbes the blob gan fipe.
In fead therof came paleneffe in. And as he backe ward was

In mynd to go, her fete ſtacke faſt and could not ſtirre. And as
Sher would haue cat her countnance backe, ſher could not do tt. And
The ſtonnp hardnelle which a late did in her ffomacke ſtand,
Mithin a whyle did ouergrow her whole from ſole to crowne.
And leat pou think this gere ſurmylde, cuen pit in Salamin t otpne
Pf Lady Anaxarete the image ſfandeth plapne.

Che temple allo in the which the image dath re mapne,

Js vnto Venus conſecrate by name of lober out.

And therfore weying well theis things, J pꝛey ther lobe about

Cod Lady, and away with pꝛyde: and be content to frame

Chy ſelk co him that loucth ther and tannot quench bis fame.

Do neyther map the Lentons cold thy budding frutt trers kill!
Poꝛ pit the ſharp and bopifeus wyndes thy flowaing Cardpnes ſpill.
Che God that can vypon him take what kynd of (ape be he

ow hauing ſayd thus much in vapne, omitted fo perſiſt
In beldames ſhape, and ſgewde himlelk a luſty gentleman,


Apparing


2


Ouids Metamorphofis. 185


Appearing to her cherefullp, even like as Phebus whan
Her hauing ouercomme the clowdes that did withſtand his myght,
Doth blaze his bꝛightſum beames agein with fuller heate and lyght.
Me offred foꝛce. but now no force was nedfull in the cace,
Foꝛ why He beeing caught in loue with beawty of his face, é
Mas wounded then as well as her, and gan to peeld apace.
Pert Proca reignd Amulius in Avvſonye by wꝛong.
Till Numitor the rpgbtfull heyꝛe depoſed berrp long,
Ullas by his daughters ſonnes reſtoꝛde. And on the feattfall day
Ok Pale, foundation of the walles of Rome they gan to lay.
Sone after Tacye, and the Loꝛdes of Sabine ſtird debate:
And Tarpey fo2 her traptrous derde in opening of the gate
Ok Tarpey tobe was pꝛeſt to death accozding to deſert N
Mith armour heapt vppon her head. Then feerce and ſtolwt of hart
Che Sabines like tw tongleſſe twuolues without all noyſe of talke
Allayld the Nomanes in thep2 ſlerpe, and to the gates gan ſtalke
UA hich Ilias ſonne had cloſed faſt wich lockes and barres. But pit
Dame luno had fet open one, and as ſhe opened it
Had made no nople of craking with the hindges, fo that none
Percepud the opening of the gate but Venus allalone.
And ſher had thet it vp, but that it is not latwfull to
| One God to vnd any thing another Cod hath do.
Che waternymphes of Av vſonie hild all the groundes about
Che Church of lanus where was ſtoꝛe of ſpꝛings frech owing out.
Dame Venus pꝛapd theis nymphes of help. And they conſidering that
1 Che Goddeſſe did requeſt no moze but ryght, denyde it nat. 3
hep opened all theyꝛ fountapne veynes and made them flobbe apace.
Polubert the pallage was not pit to Ianus open face f
Foꝛcloſed: neyther had as pit the water ſtopt the way. 5
They put rank bꝛimſtone vnderneathe the flowing ſpꝛing that day. 5 N
And erke with ſmokpe rozen ſet theyꝛ beynes on lyꝛe loꝛ ap.
Chꝛough fozce of theis and other things, the vapour perted lowe
Euen done vnto the verrp rotes on which the ſpꝛings did grobe.
So that the waters which a late in coldneſſe myght compare
Euen with the frozen Alpes, now whot as burning furnace are.
* Che two gate poſts with ſpꝛinkling ol the fyꝛy water ſmoakt.
Mherby the gate berehyghted to the Sabines quyght was choakt


8
8 Se Oe eS Se a —
. rere ne P Ea NE fn Soe


The. xiiij. booke of


With ryling of this kountaine fraunge, vntul that Marſis knyght
Mad armed him. Then Romulus did boldly offer fyght. i
Che Romane ground with Sabines ¢ with Romanes bothe were bed, f


And with the blod of fathzinlawes which wicked ſwoꝛd had ſhed y
Flotwoe neirt the blood of ſonneinlawes Ho wbert it femed be yi
Co bothe the partpes at the length from battell fo2 to reff, i
And not tw fyght to bttrance: And that Taeye ſhould become 1
Copartner with king Romulus of fouereintpe in Roome. a i
Wlithin a whyle king Tacye dyde: And bothe the Sabines and 1
Che RNomanes vnder Romulus in eqnall ryght did iano, i
Cbe God of battell putting of his glittring helmet then, it
With ſuch like woꝛdes as theis beſpake the ſyꝛe of Coddes and men. i

The tyme O fathet in as much as now the Momane face ‘a

Is wexen rong vppon the god foridation lapd alates. hn
Depending on the fap of one) is comme fo2 thee to make vt
Thy promis gad which thou of mer and of thy graundchyld ſpake. 1
WU bich was to take him from the earth and in the heauen him ſfay. „ |b
Chou once (J markt thy graelous woꝛzdes and bare them well away) S I!
Beloꝛe a great ait mblp of the Goddes vid to mer ax. *


How let thy ſaying take este ct. Ioue graunting by and by
The ape was hid with darkſom clowdes, and thunder forth did lip,
And lyghtning made the world agall. TU hich Mars perteyrung to i
Ber luckye tokens for bimlelf his enterpꝛyſe to dw. 8 2

Did take his rit vppon his ſpeare and boldly lept into

Wis blodye charpot. And helene his hoꝛſes with his lohlppe

d pirking lach, and thꝛough the ayꝛe full imothely downe did lippe.
And Taping on the wody toppe of mountapne Palatine,

He tke away king Romulus the there did then delpne

Che pꝛpuate caces of his folk vnſeemly fora King. ii

And as a leaden pellet bꝛoade ctifosced from a Ring

As wont to dye amid the ſkye: euen fo his moꝛtall fleh

Sank from him downe the luttle apꝛe. In ſted wherof a ſrelh

And godly ſhape moze ffately and moze mete foz ſacred Mapes.
Succeeded, like our Quirin that in ately robe doth ſhyne.
Herſilia foꝛ her fete às lol, of moʒning made none end,
Untill Qucene Iuno did commaund dame Iris to diſcend


There Halbee one whom thou Halt rayſe aboue the Parrp fhpe, ö 9


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 186


VUuppon the Naynebowe downe, and thus her methage foz to do,
P ok the Katian country and the Sabine nacion t
Thou perrleſle perle of womanhod, moſt woꝛthy forte be
The wyle of ſuch a noble pꝛince as heertofoze las bee,
And Hill to bee the wpe of him canonized by name, :
Mf Quirin : ceaſe thy teares. And if thou haue deſyꝛe the ſame
Chy holy huſband foꝛ to fe, enſe m mee tw the queache g
hat groweth greene on Quirins hill, whofe ſhadowes ouerreache
Che temple of the Romane Ring. Dame Iris did obey.
And llyding by her papnted bowe, in foꝛmer woꝛdes did lay
Her errand to Herſilia. She ſcarce lifting vp her eyes,
Mich ſober countnance anſwero. O thou Goddeſle (fo2 ſurmyſe
J cannot who thou art, but pit J well may vnderſtand
Chou art a Goddeſſe) leede mee O deere GCoddeſſe lede mex, and
y huſband ta me ſhewe. Mhom if the fatail ſuſters thꝛæ :
Mul of chepz gracious godnefle graunt me leaue but once to fee, 5
I ſhall account m into heauen receyued foꝛ tw bee. .
Immediatly with Thavvmants imp to Quirins hill the went. 1
Chere glyding from the ſky a farre frepght downe tw groũd was fent,
Che ſparkes of whole bꝛyght blaz ing beames did burne Herfilias heare.
| And with the ſtarre the ayze did vher heare to heauenward beare.
Che buylder of the towne of Roome receyuing ſtreyght the fame
| Betwerne his old acquapnted handes, did alter both ber name


And eke her bodye, calling ber dame Ora. And by this
Sher loyntly with her hulband fo: a Goddelle worſhipt 16.


Finis Libri decimi quarti.


qTHE. XV. BOOKE OF


““Ouids MM etamorphofis.

2 4 1 a
3 . 8 4
Perſone in the whyle was fought (ufticient to ſulfeine ff
he burthen of fo great a charge, and woꝛthy loꝛ tw reigne 0
A In ſtead of ſuch a mighty pꝛince. Che noble Nume by fame A
TU hes harped then bppon the truthe before too palle it came) i
Appoynted tw the Empyꝛe was. This Numa thought it not i i
Inough that he the knowledge of the Sabine rites had got. fil
Che oeepeneffe of the noble wit tw greater things was bent, iy
Co ſerch of things the natures out. Che care of this intent 5 it
Did cauſe that he from Curie and his natiue Countrye went th
WU ith pepnfull trauell, to the towne where Hercules did hoffe: Mf
And alking who it was ef Greece that in th Italian coat ; 1
Wad baple that towne, an aged man well fene in ſoꝛyes old, 1
Ca ſatiſfe his mynd therin the pꝛocelſſe thus him told. é {|
As Hercules enriched with the Spannich kyne did hald? {
His bopage from the Ocean fea, men ſay with lucky ct
He came a land on Lacine coat. And whyle he there did t
His beace to grazing, he himſelk in Crotons houſe did reſt 1 ae
Che grrateſt man in all thofe parts and onto ſtraungers belt: e
And that he there refreſht him ol his tedious trauell, and 00


That when he chould vepart he ſayd where now thp honte beth fand, — 9


Shall in thy childers childꝛens tyme a Citie buylded be. 9
Mhich woꝛdes vr his haue pꝛoued trew as playnly now wr r.
F02 why there was one Myſcelus a Greeke, Alemons ſonne, 4


A perſone moze in fauour of the Goddes than any one
„ Horcyles: In thoſe dayes was. Lhe Cod that beares the bopſtous club did fay
i Uppon him being fala feepe, and layd: ga feebe ſfreyght way

The ſlonny ſtreame of Acferie, hy natiue ſoyle ſoꝛ ay

SFozſake. And foze he thꝛeatned him onleſle he did obey. |
The God and lleepe departed both togither. Up did ryſe
Alemons ſonne, and in himſelt did fecretlp deuyſe ; : ;
Uppon this difion. Long his mynd ſkroue oolvtiull ta and fro. i|
Che God bad go. His tountry lawes did lay he Hould not go, 5
And death was made the penaltie loꝛ him that would do fo.
Cleeve Titan in the Ocean ſea had hid his lyghtſomme head,


bis houſehold from his natpue lend to foꝛreine tm conuep.


Lhe giltpe. That tpme alſo fo the heauy ſentence paff.


This Citte in th Italian toaſt ts ſapd to haue by fame.


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 187
And dulkye nyght had put bp bers moſt thick with Karres belpꝛed.
Che ſelkſame Cod by Myſcelus did ſerme to and eftfone,
Commaunding him the felffame thing that he befoze had done,
And thꝛeatning mo and greater plages onleſle he did obey.
Chen being tricken ſoꝛe in feare he went about ſtreyghtway


A rumoꝛ herevppon did ryſe though all the towne of Arge
And diſobedience of the lawe was layed te his charge.

Affone as that the cace had firſt berne pleaded and the derde
Apparantly percepued, fo that witneſſe did not nerde,
Arrepned and foꝛloꝛne tm heauen he calf his handes and eyes,
And ſayd: O God whoſe labours twelue haue purchatte thee the ſkyes,
Alliſt mee J the pꝛay. Foꝛ thou art authoꝛ of my cryme.

Mhen fubgement ſhould ber giuen it was the guyſe in auncient tyme
WAith wbyght Tones to acquit the cleere, and eke with blacke tw taſt


The Fones were caſt vnmercikull all blacke into the pot. 8
But toben the Fores were polwꝛed out to number, there was not
A blacke among them. All were whpght. And fo thꝛough Hercles poze
A gentle iudgement did pꝛocerde, and he was quit that howze.
Then gaue he thankes to Hercules, and hauing pꝛolpꝛous blak,
Cut over the Iman fea, and fo by Tarent paſt 25
Mhich Spartanes buplt, and Cy baris, and Nexth ſalentine,
And Thurine bap, and Emeſe, and eke the paffures fpne

Ok Calabrye. And hauing ſcarce well fought the coaſtes that ipe
Uppoun the lea, be found the mouth of fatall Aeſerye.

Hot karre from thence, he alſo found the tumb in which the ground
Did kiuer Crotons holy bones, and in that place did found

The Citie that was tilled him, and gaue thereto the name

Ok him that there lay burped. Such oꝛiginall as this fame 5


Herre dwelt a man ol Samos Fle, who foꝛ the hate he had
To Woꝛdlyneſſe and Tpꝛannp, though vnconſtreynd was glad
Lo make himſelk a bannicht man. And though this perſone were
Farre diſfant from the Goddes by ſite of heauen: pit came he neere ‘
Xo them in mynd. And he by ſyght of foule and reafon clerre
Behild the things which nature dwth too lleſhly eyes denpe.
Cc.iij. And


—
=


The. xv. booke of
And when with care moſt vigilant behadatluredly 2 a af
Impꝛinted all things in bis hart, be ſet them openly

Abꝛoade foꝛ other folk to lerne. He taught his ũlent ſoꝛt

(WUbich wondzed at the heauenly woꝛdes theyꝛ mapſter did report)
The firſt fanndation of the woꝛld: the cauſe of euerp thing:

Mhat nature was: ¢ what was Cod: whence ſnow ¢ lyghtning ſpꝛing:
And whither Ioue oꝛ elfe the wynds in bꝛeaking clowdes do thunder
What ſhakes p earth: what law p ſfarres do kerpe theyꝛ courſes vnder:
And what focuer other thing is hid from common fence, ö J
Be alſo is the fir that did iniopne an abſtinence N
Co ferde of any ipuing thing. Be allo fir ſt of all
Spake thus: although ryght lernedly, pit to effect but ſmall. ‘


—


2 * 4
tome 2 5 8 od 5
— cr emeeereee anne “Senator eee ea


“oS =s =a


ee moztall men forbeare tw frank pour fleſh with wicked fode. 1
Be haue both coꝛne ¢ frutes of trees and grapes & herbes right god. 1
And though that (am bee harſh and hard: pit ſyꝛe may make them well 1
Both ſoft and werte. Ve may haue milk, and honny which doch fmeil q
Df flo wꝛes of tyme. The lauas earth doth pelo pou plentiouſly f
Mok gentle fode, and riches to content bothe mynd and eve, 5 U
There nedes no ſlaughter noꝛ no blod te; get pour liuing bp, 5
Che beaſtes do bꝛeake they fa with ficth: E it not all beattes neyther.
Foz hoꝛſes, Hhepe, and Notherbeaſtes to live by graſſe had leuer. 9
Che nature of the beaſt that doth delpght in blody fade,, q
Is cruell and bimercifull. As Lpons ferce ol mode, U
Armenian Tigers, Beates, and Wolues. Oh what a wickedneſle f
It is tw evan the mawe with mawe, and frank bp del with fieſh, U
And foꝛ one liuing thing to liue by killing of another: 9
As who Mould fay, that of fe great abundance which our mother J
The earth doth pels moſt boun tuoullp, none other myght delyght zi
TCT cruell terthe to cbawe bppon, than grilly woundes that myght ee
Expꝛeſſe the Cyclops qupfe : oꝛ elſe as if thou could not fatonche — |
The hunger ol thy grerdye gut and euill mannerd pawuche, 1
Onleſle thou ſtropd ſum other wyght. But that fame aunctent age t


Mhich wer haue naamd the golden two2ld,clane. voyd of all {uch rage,
ivd bleſledly by frute of trees and herbes that grow on ground, 5 4
And Fapned not their mouthes to blood. Zhen birds might ſale r bung

ly where they liſted in the ayꝛe. Lhe bare vnſcaard of hound
Went pricking ouer all the feldes. Ho angling hoke with bape


But what haue pou pare ſhepe miſdone a cattell meeke and melo,


Ouids Metamorphofis. 188


Did hang the {ely ſiſh that bote miſtruſting no deceyt.

All things were voyd of guylekulneſſe: no treaſon was in truſt:
But all was frændihippe lone and peace. But after that the in
Ok one (what God fo ere he was) diſdepning former fare,

Co cram that cruell croppe of his with fleſhmeate did not ſpare,
He made a wap foꝛ wickedneſſe. And firſt of all the knyle

Mas ſtapnd with blond of lauage beaſtes in ridding them of lple.
And that had nothing bene amiffe, ik there had beene the fap.
Foz why wer graunt, without the bꝛeach of godlyneſle wer map
By death confound the things that feke to take our lpnes awap.
Fut as to kill them reaſon was: euen fo agein theyꝛ was
So reaſon why tw eate theyꝛ fleſh. This leawdneſſe thence did palle
On further Pill, MAheras there was no ſacrifpſe befoꝛne,

The Swyne (bycauſe with hoked gropne he wꝛoted vp the coꝛne,
And did decepue the tillmen of theyꝛ hope next peere thereby
Mas dermed woꝛthp by deſert in lacrifyſe to dpe.

Che Goate for byghting vynes was ſlayne at Bacchus altar who
M reakes ſuch milderdes. Cheyꝛ owne offence was hurtful to theis tua,


Created foꝛ to maynteine man, whole fulſomme duggs do pela
Hiwete Nectar, who doth clothe vs with pour woll in (oft arap⸗;
N hole lyfe doth moze vs benefite than doth pour death farrewap;
hat treſpaſle haue the Dren done : a beaſt without all guple
Oz cralt, ouburtfull,fimple, boꝛne to labour euerp whplez

In fapth he is bnmpndfull and vnwoꝛthy ol increace

Ok coꝛne, that in his hart can tynd his tilman to releace

From plowgh, tw cut his thꝛote: that in his hart can kynde (J fay)
Thole neckes with hatchets of to ſtrike, whoſe fhinne is woꝛne away
With labzing ap fo2 him: wha turnd fo oft his land moſt tough,
Who bꝛought fo manp harueſtes home. pit is it not pnough


Chat ſuch a great outrageouſeneſſe committed is. They father


Cheyꝛ wickedneſle vppon the Goddes. And falliy they do gather

What in the death of pepnfull Ox the hygheſt doth delyght.

A lacrifpfe bnblemiſhed and fayꝛeſt vnto ſyght, ö

Foꝛ beatutpe woꝛketh them thep2 bane) adoꝛnd with garlonds, and

Mith glittring gold, is cyted at the altar foꝛ to ſtand.

Chere heres he wages (be wotes not what) ß which p perlt sath Paap}
nd


OC, iY,


4 ~45 ~~ US 1 — SSS Se Se ̃ ̃ —öP p
r fa — 728 N . . SO


N P 2 OF Se CW eS 2A oe MAD Lor
SOE a CWA Oe ON mn woe


The. xv. booke of

And on his forehead ſulkereth him betweene his hoꝛnes to lay >
Che cares of coꝛne that he himſelt bath wꝛought foꝛ in the clay,
And ſtapneth with his blod the knyfe that he himſelk perchaunce
Mathe in the water chere ere then behild by ſodein glaunce.
IAmmediatly they baling out his hartſtrings ill aliue,
And poꝛing on them, ſerke therein Goddes lecrets to retrpue.

M hence commes fo greedy appetyte in men, ol wicked meate 2
And dare pee D per moꝛtall men aduenture thus tweate⸗

Map dw not (4 beſckche per) ſo. But gine god eare and herde

To that that 3 hall warne pow of, and truſt it as pour cræde,
Chat whenſoeuer pou do eate pour Dren, vou deuowꝛe

our huſdand men. And fozafmuch as God this infant howze 5
Doth moue mp tong ta ſpeake, 3 will obey his beanentp powꝛe.
My Cod Apollos temple 4 will fet pou open, and


Dilcloſe the wondꝛous heauens themſelues, and make pou vnderſfand


The Oꝛacles and ſecrets of the Godly maiettpe.

Greate things, and ſuch as wit ol man could neuer pit efppe,

And luch as haue beene hidden long, J purpoſe to defcrpe,

I mynd to leaue the earth, and bp among the ſlarres to ſtye.

I mynd to leaue this groſter place, and in the clowdes tw fipe,

And on owe Atlas ſhoulders ſtrong to re mp ſelk on hye,

And loking downe from heauen on men that wander herre and there

In dꝛeadkull feare of death as though they voyd of reaſon were,

Co gtue them exhoꝛtation thus: and playnely to vnwynd

The whole otfcourle ot deſtinie as nature hath allignd.

O men amaazd with dꝛead of death, why feare pee Limbo Styx,

And other names of vanitie, which are but Poets tricks z

And perrills of another woꝛld all falſe ſurmyſed gere 2

Foz whither fyꝛe oꝛ length of tyme conſume the bodyes here,

Meer well map thinke that further harmes they cannot ſuller moze,

Fo2 ſoules are free from death. Bolwbert, they liluing euermoꝛe

Thepꝛ former dwellings are recepud and liue age ine in new.

J oꝛ I mypfelf (ryght well in mynd J beare it tw be trew

Ul as in the tyme of Lrofan warre Euphorbus Panthevves ſonne

Quyght thꝛongh whole hart the 8 ſpeare of Menelay did ronne.

J late age in Iunos Church at Argos did behold
nd


uids Metamorphoſis.
And knew the target which in my left hand there did hold.
Al things do chaüge. But nothing ſure doth perrith. This fame ſpꝛight


Doth flerte, and fiſking herre and there doth ſwiltly take his fipgbt 5 a


From one place tw another place, and entreth euerp wyght,
Remouing out of man tw beaſt, and out of beaſt to man.

But pit it neuer perriſheth noꝛ neuer perriſh can.

And euen as ſupple war with cafe recepueth fygures fraunge,

And kerpes not ay one ſhape, ne bydes alſured ay from chaunge,

And pit continueth alwapes war in ſubſfaunce: So J fap

The ſoule is ay the ſelfſame thing it was and pit aſtray

It flerteth into ſundꝛy ſhapes. Therfoꝛe leaſt Godlyneſle

Ber vanquiſht by outragious luſt of belly beaſflyneſſe,

Foꝛbeare (I ſpeake by pꝛophelſie) pour kinſfoltzes ghoſtes to chace

By daughter : neyther nouriſh bled with blod in any cace. 5
And fith on open fea the wynds dw blow my faples apace,

In all the woꝛld there is not that that ſtandeth at a ap.

Things eb and flow: and eucrp ſhape is made to palle awap.

The tyme itfelf continually ts fleting like a bawke.

Foꝛ neyther broke noꝛ lyghtſomme tyme can tarrpe fill. But loke

As euerp waue dꝛpues other foꝛth, and that that commes bebpnd

Bothe thꝛuſteth and is thꝛuſt itſelt: Euen fo the tymes by kynd

Do fly and follow bothe at once, and euermoꝛe renew.

Foz that that was before is left, and ſfreyght there sath enſelv
Another that was neuer erſt. Eche twinclung of an eye
Dorh chaunge. Mer le that after day commes nygbt and darks the fer,
And after nyght che lyghtlum Sunne ſueteedeth orderly.
Like colour is not in the heauen when all things wary lye
At midnyght found a llæpe, as when the dayſtatre clere and bꝛyght
Commes foꝛth vppon his milkwhyght ſterde. Ageine in other plyght
Che moꝛning Pallants daughter fapze the meſlenger of lyght
Deliuereth into Phebus handes the woꝛld of cleerer hew.
The cirele alſo ot᷑ the ſonne what tyme it ryleth ne w

And when it letteth, loketh red. but when it mounts moſt bye,
Then lokes it whyght, bycanfe that there the nature of the ſkye 5
zs botter, and from fil type dꝛolſe of earth owth lurther Alpe
The image allo of the Bane that ſhyneth ay by nyght,
Js neuer of one quanittie, Foz that that giuet) lyght “
1 00


5 wg ———————— ————— 5 = — >
F „ =a == So 8
n Ac 0 5 Cat ka.,


OE Aone ash hh Bahan ore A Ne ha he Ne A he


189


The. xv. booke of


Co dap, is leſler than the next that kolloweth, till the full.

And then contrarpwple eche dap her lyght away doth pull.

Mhat : ſeſt thou not hob that the pere as repꝛeſenting playne

The age of man, departes itſelk in quarters ſowꝛe: firſt bayne

And tender in the ſpꝛing it is, euen like a fucking babe.

Chen greene, and bopod of ſtrength, and luſh, and foggye, is the blade,
And cheres the bufbandman with hope. Then all things floꝛich gay.
The earth with flo wꝛes of ſundzy hew then feemeth loꝛ to play,

And vertue {mail oꝛ none to herbes there doth as pit belong.

The pere from ſpꝛingtyde palling foꝛth tw ſommer, wereth trong;
ecommeth lyke a luſty youth. Foz in our lyfe though out

There is no tyme moze plentifull, moze luſty whote and out.

Then lolloweth Harueſt when the heate of youth growes ſumwwhat cold,
Lippe, meld, diſpoſed meane bet wirt a pongman and an old,

And ſumwhat ſpꝛent with grapiſh heare. Then vgly winter lak

Like age ſteales on with trembling feppes, all bald, oꝛ ouercaſt᷑

GU ith ſhirle thinne heare as wohyght as ſnowe. Our bodies alſo ay
Do alter Mill front tyme to tyme, and neuer ſtand at fay, 5
Me hall not bee the ſame wer were to day 02 piſterdap.

Che day hath bene wer were but ſerde and only hope of men,

And in our mothers womb wer had our dwelling place as then,
Dame Nature put to conning hand and ſufkred not that we

Mithin our mothers ſtreyned womb ſhould ap diſtrellod ber, 5

But bꝛought vs out to aire, and from our pꝛiſon ſet vs fr.

Che chyld newboꝛne lyes vopd of ſtrength. Mithin a ſeaſon tho

We wering folwcrfeted lernes like ſauage beaſtes to go.

Chen ſumwhat foltring, and as pit not firme of fote, he andes

By getting ſumwhat foz to helpe his ſinewes in his handes.

From that tyme growing ſkrong and wife, he palleth foꝛth the ſpace
Ok pouth: and alſo wearing out his middle age a pace, é
Chꝛough doping ages ſtæppe path be ronneth out his race

his age both vndermpne the ſtrength of koꝛmer peares and thꝛowes
It downe. which thing old Milo by example plapnely Howes.

Soꝛ when he ſawe thoſe armes of his (which herretwloze had berne

As ſtrong as euer Hercules in woꝛking deadly terne 8
Ot biggeit beaffes) hang flapping downe, and nought but empty ſin,
He wept, And Helen when dhe law her aged wzincles mm 3


. ee ee ee


“as


Ouids Metamorphofis. 190

A glaſſe wept alſo: mufing in berfelf what menbadfene, ~~ 2

Chat by tw noble princes fonnes (he twyce had rauiſht bene, 5

Thou tyme the eater vp of things, and age ol ſpyghtlull tæne.

Deltrop all things. And when that long continuance bath them bit,

Pon lepſurely by lingring death conſume them euerp bohit.

And theis that toe call Clements do neuer ſtand at Fay,

Che enterchaunging courle of them 3 will before pe lay. é

Giue herde thertw. This endleſle world conteynes therin 3 fap

Foboꝛe ſubſtances of which all things are gendꝛed. Ok theis fower

The Earth and A ater foꝛ theyꝛ malle and weyght are ſunken lower.

Che other cowple Aire, and Fyꝛe the purer of the twayne

Mount vp, æ nought can kœpe the downe. And though there do remapne

A ſpace betwerne eche one of them: pit euery thing is made

Ol themlame fowꝛe, and into them at length ageine do fade.

Che earth reſoluing leyſurely doth melt tw water here.

Che water fyned turnes to aire. The aire eke purged clare

From grolleneſle, ſpyꝛeth bp aloft, and there becommeth tyꝛe.

From thence in oꝛder contrary they backe ageine retyꝛe.

Fyre thickening paſſeth into Aire, and Ayer wexing groſle,

Keturnes to water: Mater cke congealing into dꝛolle,

Becommeth earth. No kind of thing kerpes ay his ſhape and hew.

Foz nature louing euer chaunge repapꝛes one ſhape a nel

Gppon another. neyther doth there perriſh aught (truſt me)

In all the woꝛld, but akring takes new ſhape. Foz that which wer 5

Do terme by name of being boꝛne, is foꝛ to gin tw ber

Another thing than that it was: And liketwife fo2 to dye,

To ceale to bee the thing it was. And though that varpably

Things pale perchaunce from place to place: pit all from whence they

Returning, do bnperriſched continew Hil the ſame. (came

But as fo2 in one ſhape, be ſure that nothing long can laſt.

Euen fo the ages of the world from gold to Jron paft..

Euen fo haue places oftentymes exchaunged theyꝛ eſtate. ;

Foꝛ J haue (cone it fea which was ſubſtanciall ground alate,

Ageine where (ca was, haue ſæne the fame become dꝛy lond, 8

And ſhelles and ſcales ol Seaſich farre haue lyen from any ſtrond. ;

And in the toppes of mountapnes hygh old Anchoꝛs haue bene ſound.

Deepe ballepes haue by waterthotte bene made of leuell ground, ee
N


eee Lee he On he oa AO eo Ae)


— a
oor


The. xv. booke of
And hilles by koꝛte of gulling oft haue into fea biene woꝛne.

Hard grauell ground is ſumtyme (cene where marris was befoꝛne,
And that that erik did (uffer dꝛowght, becommeth Fanding lakes.
ere nature ſendeth new ſpꝛings out, and there the old in takes.
Fullmany riuers in the woꝛld thꝛough earthquakes beretwfoze

Hane eyther chaundgd thep2 former courſe, oꝛ depde and ronnie no moze,
So Lycus bæœing ſwallowed bp by gaping ef the ground, A
A greatwap of fro thence is in another channell found,

Enen fo the riuer Eraſine among the feeldes of Arges :
Sinkes onewhyle, and another whyle ronnes greate ageine at large,
Caycus alfo of the land of Myſia (as men fap)

Milliking of his foꝛmer head, ronnes now another way.

In Sicill alſo Amafene ronnes ſumtpme full and bye, :

And fumtpme opping vp bis ſpꝛing, he makes his chanell dꝛye.

Men dꝛank the waters of the bꝛoke Anigrus heretofore,

M hich now is ſuch that men abhoꝛre to to wehe them anp moze,
Which commes tw palle, (onleMe wer will diſcredit Poets quyght)
Bycauſe the Centaures banquiſched by Hercules in fpghe

Did wach theyꝛ woundes in that tame bꝛwke. But doth not Hypanis
That ſpꝛingeth in the Seythlan hilles, which at his fountaine is
Uyght pleaſant, afterward becomme of bꝛackiſh bitter taſfe:
Antiſſa, and Phenycian Tyre, and Pharos in tyme paſt

Mere compatt all about with waues: but none of all theils thee
Is now an Ile. Ageine the towne of Levvcas once was free

From ſea, and in the auncient tyme was ſoyned to the land.

But now enutrond round about with water it doth and.

Men fay that Sicill alfo hath beene topnd to Italy

Untill the fea confumbde the bounds bertwerne, and did ſupply
Che rome with water. Af pee go to feeke foz Helicee

And Burye which were Cities of Achaia, you Mall fe

Them hidden vnder water, and the ſhipmen pit do ſhowe

Che walles and ſlerples of the to wnes dꝛownd vnder as they robbe.
Pot farre from Pitthey Troyzen is à certeine high ground found
All vopd of trees, which heretofeze was plapne and leuell ground,
But now a mountayne. foꝛ the wyndes a (wondꝛous thing to fay)
Incloſed in the hollow caues of ground, and ſæking way

Co pale therefro, in Truggling long tw get the open ſupe


2 — 2 2
a


An


—


— —


— ee


— = — W W — —


se


@eus. tae a es eS SS SO eS SE


— —— =


c c ccc OE


Foꝛ who ſo o2inkes to much cherof, he reeleth hare and there


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 19


In bapne, (bycauſe in all the caue there was no bent wherby *
Co (fue out,) did ſkretch the ground and make it ſwell on bye, 5
As doth a bladder that is blowen by mouth, oꝛ as the (hinne

Ol hoꝛned Goate in bottlewyſe when wynd is gotten in.

Che ſwelling of the foꝛeſayd place remapnes at this day ſfill,
And by continuance waxing hard is growen a pꝛetpe hill. 8
Ol manp things that come to mynd by herrſap, and by (hill

Ol god experience, ¥ a fewe will beter to pou mo.

Mhat 2 doth not water in his ſhapes chaunge ſtraungelp to and fro:
Che well of hoꝛned Hammon is at nonetyde palling cold.

At moꝛne and euen it wexeth warme. At midnygbt none can hold

His hand therin foꝛ palling heate. The well ol Athamane,

Is (apd to kindle wode what tyme the mone is in the wane,

Che Cicons haue a certeine ſtreame which being dꝛonk doth being
Mennes bowwelles into Marble hard: and whatſoeuer thing

Is towcht therivith, it turnes to Fone. And by pour bounds behold
Che riuers Crathe and Sybaris make pellow heare like gold

And Amber. Chere are allo ſpꝛings (which thing is farre moze ſfraunge)
Mhich not the bodye only, but the mynd dw alſo chaunge.

Mho bath not hard of Salmacis that fowle and filthye unk;

Oꝛ of the lake of Aethyop, which if a man do dzink,

He epther ronneth mad, oꝛ elſe with wondꝛous dꝛowzinelle

Foꝛgoeth quyght his memoꝛie. M ha euer doth repꝛelle

His thirſt with dꝛawght of Clitor well, hates wyne, and doth delyght
In only water eyther foꝛ bpcauſe there is a myght

Contrarp dito warming wyne by nature in the well,

Oꝛ elſe bycauſe (foꝛ ſo the folk of Arcadye do tell)

Melampus Amythaöns ſonne (when he deliuered had

Aing Prætus daughters by his charmes and herbes from being mad, )
Cat into that fame water all the baggage where withall

He purdgd the madneſſe ol theyꝛ mynds. And fo it did befall,

That lothſomneſſe of wyne did in thoſe waters ay remapne.

Ageine in Lynceſt contrarie eſtea to this doth reigne.


As il by quafting wyne no whpt alayd he dzonken were.
Chere is a Lake in Arcadye which Pheney men did name 3
An auncient tpnicstwyole dalotfulnetle delerueth iullly blame. s


The. xv. booke of


A npght tymes take thou herde of it, foz tf thou tate thefame > _
A nyghttpmes, it will hurt. but if thou dꝛink it in the day


It hurteth not. Thus lakes and ſkreames (as well percepue pee may) f |


Paue diuers potvzes and dinerflp. Cuen fo the tyme bathe bene
Chat Delos which fands ſtedlaſt now, on waues tuas floting ſœns.
And Gal pes haue bene ſoꝛe atrayd of fruſching by the Jles
Symplegads which togither dalht vppon the fea crewhyles,

But now do ſfand vnmouable ageinſt bothe wynde and tyde.
Mount Actna with his burning Douens of bꝛimſtone Hall not bent
Ap fpꝛpe: neyther was it ſo fo2 euer erſt. Foꝛ whither

The earth a liuing creature ber, and that to bꝛeathe out hither

And thither flame, great ſtoꝛe of vents it haue in lundꝛy places,

And that it haue the powꝛe to ſhilft hole bents in diuers cace s,
Now damming theis, now opening thole, in monuing to and fro:
D2 that the whiltzing wynds reſtreynd within the earth bylowe,
Do beate the tones ageinſt the ſtones, and other kynd of Tufte

Ok fyꝛpe nature, which dw fall on fpze with euery puffe:


Affone as thole fame wynos de ceale, the caues Mall treight be cold. : :


D2 it it bee a Rosen mobuold that fone of fyꝛe takes hold,

Oz bꝛimſtone mixt with clayiſh fople on fyꝛe doch lyghtlp fall:
Undolwredlp aſſone as that fame ſople conſumed Hall. 0
No longer peela the fatty fode to fede the fyꝛe withall,

And rauening nature ſhall foꝛgo her wonted nouriſhment,
Then being able to abyde no longer famiſhment,

Joꝛ want of ſuſtenance it ſhall ceale his burning. J do kynd

Ey fame, that vnder Charlſis wayne in Pallene are à kund
Ok people which by dyuing thꝛyte thꝛer tymes in Triton lake
Becomme all fethꝛed, and the ſhape ol birdes vppon them take.
Che Scythian witches allo are repozteb fo2 10 do rf
Che lelkſame thing but hardly J giue credit thervnto)

By ſmearing popfon ouer all thepz bodpes. But (and il

A man to matters trpde by prof may fanfly giue belt,)

Mex fee how flelh bp lying ill a whyle and ketching heate
Doth turne to little lining beaſtes. And pit a further feate,

Go kill an Ox and burpe him, (che thing by pꝛol man e )
And of his rotten fick will bꝛerde the flower gathering Wes,
Mhich as theyz father did beloze, loue reelbes exceedingly, |


=
=—>


Ouids Metamorphofis. 192


And dnto wow ꝛkᷣ in hope of gayne theyꝛ buſpe limbes apply.
Che Hoꝛnet is engendꝛed of a luſtye burped Stde.
So pull away the cleas from Crabbes that in the fea do bꝛäkde,
And burpe all the reſt in motwld, and of the fame will ſpꝛing
A Scoꝛpion which with wꝛithen taple will thꝛeaten foꝛ to fing,
The Caterpillers of the fœlde the which are wont to weaue
Hore fiimes vppon the leaues ot tres, theyꝛ foꝛmer nature leaue,
(Ud dich thing is knowen tw hufbandmen) and turne to Butterflpes.
Che mud hath in it certeine fede wherof grerne frolthes ryſe.
And firſt it bꝛings them fotelelle foꝛth. Then after; it both frame
Legges apt to ſwim: and kurthermoꝛe of purpoſe that the ſame
Map ſerue them foꝛ to leape a farre, theyꝛ binder part is mych
Pore longer than thep2 foꝛepart is. Che Bearwhelp allo which
Che Weare hath newly littred, is no whelp immediatly.


But like an euſii fauoꝛed lump of lleſh alyue doch Ipe.
The dam bp licking ſhapeth out his members oꝛderly
Ok ſuch a ſyle, as ſuch a perce is able to conceyue.
Oꝛ marke pee not the Wees of whom our bony wee receyue,
Hob that they pong ones which do lye within the firtquare war
Are limbleffe bodpes at the firſt, and alter as thoy wer
In pꝛoteſſe take bothe fete and wings: Nhat man would think kt trew
That Ladpe Venus ſimple birdes the Dwues of filuer bev,
Oꝛ Iunos bird that in his taple beares ſtarres, oꝛ Ioues ffotut knpght
Che Carne, and euerp other fowle of whatſocuer llyght,
Could all bee hatched out of egges, onleſle he did it knowe?⸗
Sum folk vo hold opinton when the backe bone which smth growe
In man, is rotten in the graue, the pith becommes a Make.
Powherte of other things all theis theyꝛ firk beg nning take.
One bird there is that doth renew ttfelf and as it were
Beget it ſelf eontinually. Che Syꝛians name it there
A Phœnix. eyther coꝛne noꝛ herbes this Phoenix liueth bp,
But bp the ietuee of frankincence and gum of Amomye.
And when that of his Ipfe well fall fyuehundꝛed perres are paͤſt,
Uppert a Holmetræ og bppon a Date tre at the lak .
He makes him with his talants and his hardened bill a neff.
Wich when that he with Catia ſwerte and Pardus ſoft hathe dꝛell, 5
And arowedit both Cennamom and Pertha ol the be 8
d ct


——— eer ee oe — — = es — — — —
RR LEVER SE S oho NOL NOL NEL Ne e
PP eee


The. xv. bookeof


He rucketh downe vppon the ſame, and in the ſpyces dyes.
Sone alter, ot the fathers coꝛce men fap there bath arple
Another little Phoenix which as many peeres mutt line

As did his father. He (allone as age doth ſkrength him gine

To beare the burthen) from the tree the weyghty nett bath lift,
And godlylp his cradle thence and fathers herce doth ſhilt.
And lying thꝛough the luttle aire he gettes to Phebus towne,
And there beloꝛe the temple doze doth lay his burtben downe.
Wut ik that any noueltye worth wondꝛing be in theis,

Much rather may we wonder at the Hyen ik we pleaſe.

To ſe how interchaungeably it one whyle doth remapne

A female, and another whple becommeth male againe.

The creature alſo which doth liue by only aire and wynd,

All colours that it leaneth to doth counterfet by kynd.

Che Grapegod Bacchus, when he had ſubdewd the land of Inde,
Did fynd a (potted beaſt cald Lynx, whofe vꝛine (by repoꝛt)
My tobhing of the open aire congealeth in ſuch ſoꝛt,

As that it doth becomme a fone. So Cozall (which as long

As water hydes it is a ſhꝛub and foft) becommeth ſtrong

And hard alone as it doth towch the ayꝛe. The day would end,
And Phebus panting ſkerdes ſhould in the Ocean derpe delcend,
Wekoꝛe all alterations J in woꝛdes could compꝛehend.


So fe Wer all things chaungeable. One nation gathereth ſtrength:


Another wexeth weake: and bothe do make erchaunge at length.


Do Troy which once was great and ſtrong as well in welth as men,


And able tenne peeres (pace to {pare ſuch ſtoꝛe of blod as then,
Now beeing bace hath nothing left ofall her welth to ſhowe,


Saue ruines of the auncient woꝛkes which graſle sath ouergrowe,


And tumbes toberin theyꝛ auncetours lye burped on a robbe.


Once Sparta was a famous towne: Creat Mycene floꝛiſht trim:


Bothe Athens and Amphions towzes in honoꝛ once did ſwim.
A pelting plot ts Sparta now: great Mycene lyes on ground.


Ol Theab the towne of Ocdipus what haue we moze than ſound e
Ot Athens king Pandions towne what reffeth moze than name 2


Hob allo of the race of Troy isiryſing (ſo fapth fame)
The Citie Roome, which at the bank of Tyber that doth ronne
Downe from the hill ol Appennyne) already Hath begonne


F - 2 — >—— —


S —B —


—
—


|


ö
ö
i


(=
|


)
1


i


Ouids Metamorphofis. 193
Mith great adupſement fo2 to lay foundation of her fate.
This towne then chaungeth by increaſe the forme it had alate,
And of the vniuerſall woꝛld in tyme to comme ſhall hold
Che ſouereintpe ſo pꝛopheſtes and lotts (men fay) haue told.
And as (A do remember mer) what tyme that Troy vecapd,
Che pꝛophet Helen Priams ſonne theis woꝛdes enlewing ſayd
Wefoze Aenæas dotwting of his lyfe in wæping plyght:
O Goddelle ſonne, belerue mer (if thou think J haue foꝛeſyght
Ok things to comme) Troy ſhal not quyght decay whyle thou dwf liue.
Bothe fyꝛe and wood ſhall vnt ther thy pallage frerly giue.
Thou muſt from hence: and Troy with thee conuey away in halte,
Untill that bothe thyſelf and Troy in foꝛreine land ber plaaſt
Wave freendly than thy natiue fople. Moꝛedouer 3 foꝛeſc,
A Citie by the ofſpꝛing ol the Trolans buylt tall ber,
So great as neuer in the woꝛld the lyke was fence before
Hon is this pꝛeſent, nepther ſhall be feene foꝛ euermoze. é
A number of moſt noble peeres fo2 manpe pres afoze
Shall make tt ſtrong and puyſlant: But her that ſhall it make
The ſouereine Ladye of the world, by ryght deſcent ſhall take
His firſt beginning from thy ſonne the little Jule. And when
The earth hathe had her tyme ol him, the (kp and welkin then
Shall haue him bp foꝛ euermoꝛe, and heauen ſhall bee his end.
Thus karre J (well remember me) did Helens woꝛdes extend
Co god Aenæas. And it is à pleaſure vntw mee
The Citie of my countrymen increaſing thus tw fee:
And that the Grecians bictoꝛie becommes the Lrofans wweale.
But leaſt foꝛgetting quyght themſelues our bozfes happe to ſfeale
Bepond the mark: the heauen and all that vnder heauen is found,
Doth alter ſhape. So doth the ground and all that is in ground.
And tow that ol the woꝛld are part (canſidꝛing how wer ber
Not only fleſh, but alfo ſowles, which map with paſſage free
Remone them into euery kynd of beaſt both tame and wyld)

Let liue in ſaufty honeſtly with laughter vndekpld,
The bodpes which perchaunte may haue the ſpꝛits of our bꝛothers,
Our fiers, oꝛ our parents, oꝛ the ſpirits of ſum others
Alped to bs eyther by fam freendſhippe oꝛ ſum kin,
Oꝛ at the leaſt the ſoules of men 9 within.

f d..


. — —
fn Fn 2


aA. f eh . r.. De


The. xv. booke of


And let vs not Thy ẽſteslyke thus furniſh vp our bozdes
With blodye botwells. Oh how leawd example he aumaves 2
How wickedly pꝛepareth he himſelf to murther man!
Chat with a cruell knyfe oth cut the thꝛote of Calf, and can é
Unmouablyp gtue heering to the lowing of the dam!
On ſticke the kid that wapleth lyke the little babe? oꝛ eate
The fobole that he himſelt befoze had often fed with meate ? 5
Ga bat wants of vtter wickedneſle in woꝛking ſuch a feate 2
M hat map he after paſſe to do:? well eyther let pour teres
Weare out themſelunes with work, oꝛ elſe impute theyꝛ death to pres.
Ageintſ the wynd and weather cold let Wiethers peld pe cotes,
And vdders full ol batling milk recepue pee of the Goates,
Away auth ſpꝛindges, {nares, and grinnes, away with Niſp and neg,
Awap with guplefull feates : foꝛ fowles no lymetwiggs fee pe fet,
No keared fethers pitche pee vp to keepe the Redderre tn,
Me with deceptfull bapted hoke fecke fifhes fo2 tw win.
If aboght do harme, deſtroy tt. but deſtropt and do no moze,
Foꝛbeare the fleſh: and feede pour mouthes with fitter fode therfoꝛe⸗

Men fap that Numa furniſched with ſuch philoſophye

As this and like, returned to his natiue ſoyle, and by 5
Entreatance was content of Roome tw take the fouereintye,
Kyght happy in his wyle which was a nymph, ryght happy in
His gupdes which were the Puſes nyne, this Numa did begin
To teach Keligion. by the meanes whereol her ſhoꝛtly dꝛew
That people vnto peace who erſt of nought but battell knew.
And when thꝛough age he ended had his reigne and erke his lpfe,.
hough Latium he was moꝛned fo of man and chyld and woyle
As well ol hygh as lom degrer. His wyke foꝛſaking quyght
The Citie, in bale Aricine did hyde her out of ſyght,
Among the thickeſt groues and there with ſyghes and plapnts did let
The ſaer ikyſe of Diane whom Oreſtes erſt had fet 8


From Taurica in Cherſoneſe, and in that place had fet:


Hoh oft ah did the wodnymphes and the waternymphes perſwade
Egeria foꝛ to ceaſe her mone: what meanes of comfoꝛt made
Chey : Ah betw often. Theſeus ſonne her weeping thus beſpake⸗
D Nymph, thy morning moderate: thy fograw ſumwhat ſlaͤke:
Pot only thou bal cauſe to hart thy foztune loꝛ to take.


Behold |


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 194
Behold like happes of other folkes, and this miſchaunte of thyne

Shall greene ther leſſe. would God examples (fo they were not myne)
Myght comfoꝛt the, But myne perchaunce map comloꝛt ther. If thou
In talk by bap bate heard or one Hippolytus ere now,

Chat thꝛough bis fathers lyght belæle, and ſtepda mes craft was ſlayne,
It will a wonder ſerme to the, and J chall haue much payne

Co make thee to belene the thing But J am very he,

Che daughter of Paſyphae in bapne oft tempting mee

My fathers chamber to defple,furmpide me to haue fought

The thing that ſher with al her hart would fapre 3 ſhould haue wꝛought.
And whither it were foꝛ feare J Hould her wickedneſſe be way,

D2 elſe loꝛ ſpyght bycauſe 3 had fo often ſayd her nap,

Sher chardgd mer with hir owne offence. My father by and by
Condemning mee, did bani mee his Realme without caule whye.

And at mp going like a fo did ban me bitterly.

Co Pitthey Troyzen outlawelike my chariot freight toke 4

My way lay hard vppon the ſhoꝛe of Corinth, Sodeinly

Che fea did ryſe, and like a mount the waue did lwell on hype,


And famed holger foꝛ to growe in dꝛawing euer npe,


And roꝛing elyued in the toppe. Up Karts tnunedtatly

A hoꝛned bullocke from amid the bꝛoken waue, and by

Che bꝛeſt did rayſe him in the ape, And at his noſethꝛuls and

His platter mouth did puffe out part of fea vppon the land.

My ſeruants harts were ſoꝛe afrapd. But my hart muſing ap

Uppon mp wꝛongfull baniſhment, did nought at all diſmay.

Mp holes ſetting vp theyꝛ eares and ſnoꝛting wexed hye,

And being greatly flayghted with the monſter in theyꝛ eye,

Turnd downe ta ſea: and on the rockes my wagon dꝛew. In vapns

A ſtrpuing foꝛ to hold them backe, lapd hand vppon the reyne

All whyght with fome, and baling backe lap almoſk bolt vpꝛyght.

And ſure the feercenelle of the ſterdes had peelved to my might,

But that the wherle that ronneth ap about the Crtree round,

Did bꝛeake bp dalhing on a ub, and ouerthꝛew tw ground.

Then from the Charpot J was lnatcht the bꝛydles ba ing cal

About my limbes. 9a myght haue ſeene my ſine wes ſticking fat

Uppon the ſtub: my gutts dꝛawen out slpue: my members, part

Still left vppon the Hump, and part foꝛth harryed with the cart:
Dd. ij. The


0% ſeſlainc.
Tyce man.


The. xv. booke of
The craſching of my bꝛoken bones: and with what palling peyne
J breathed out my werry gholte. There did not whole remapne
One pere of all my coꝛce by which per myght dilcerne as tho
M hat lump oꝛ part it was. Foꝛ all was wound from toppe to to.
Now cant thou npinph, o2 dareſt thou compare thy harmes with myne⸗
Mozeouer J the lightleMe Nealme behild with theis fame eyne
And bathde my tattred bodye in the riner Phlegeton. :
And had not bꝛight Apollos ſonne his cunning ſhewde bppon 8
y bodpe byhis ſurgery, my lpfe had qupght be gone.
M hich after 4 by foꝛce of herbes and lerchecralt had ageine
Veceyud by Aeſculapius mant e, theugh Pluto did diſdeine,
Chen Cynthia (leak this gift of bers myght woꝛke mer greater ſpyght)
Chicke clowds did round about ine call. And to thentent J myght
Bee Caufe mplelf, and harmeleſſely appare to others ſyght:
Shee made mee old. And loꝛ my face, Me left it in ſuch plyght.
Chat none can knowe me by my lake. And long he dowted whither
Lo giue me Dele oꝛ Crete. At length refuling bothe twgither,
Sher plaaſt mer bere. And therwithall He bade me give vp quyght
The name that of my hoꝛſes in remembꝛance put mer myght.
For whereas erſt x Hippolytus hath bane thy name ( ꝙ the)
J will that x Virbie afterward thy name fo2 euer bee.
From that tyme forth within this tod J kerpe mp reſidence,
As of the meaner Goddes, a God of ſmall magnificence
And here J hyde mee vndernesthe my ſouereine Ladpes wing
Obeying humbly to her heſt in euery kynd ok thing.
But pit the harmes of other falk could nothing help noꝛ bote
Aegerias ſoꝛrowes to aſĩwage. Done at a mauntaines fte
Sher lying melted inte teares, till Phebus ſiſfer Gene
F032 pitie of her greate diſtrelle in which thee had her fene,
Ddd turne her tw a ſountaine clœre, and melted quyght awap
Mer members into water thinne that neuer Mould decay.
Che ſtraungenelle of the thing did make the nymphes allonyed; and
The Ladpe of Amazons ſonne amaazd therat did and,
As when the Tyrrhene Cilman ſawe in earing ot his land
he fatall clod ſirſt ſtirre alone without the help of hand,
And by and by koꝛgoing quyght the earthly ſhape of clod,
Co take the ſeemelp ſhape ol man, and ſhoꝛtip like a Cod 5
*


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 195
Co tell ot things as then to comme. The Tyrrhenes did him call =
By name ot Tages. He did teach the Tulkanes firſt of all 8 l
Co gelle by ſearching bulks of beattes what after ſhould befall,
Pn like as did king Romulus when ſodeinly he found
g Mis lawnce on mountapne Palatine fal roted in the ground,
And bearing leaues, no longer now a weapon but a tre,
Which ſhadowed fuch as wondꝛingly came thither fo2 te fe.
Oꝛ elſe as Cippus when he in the ronning bꝛoke had ſerne
His hoꝛnes. oꝛ why he ſaw them, and ſuppoſing there had bane
Yo credit to ber giuen vnte the glau cing image, he
Put oft his fingers tw his head, and felt it fo to be,
My And blaming now no moze bis eyes, incomming krom the chafe ©
Vith congueſt of his foes, be apd, And lifting vp his face
And with his face, his hoꝛnes tw heauen, be ſayd: what euer thing
Js by this wonder meant O Goddes, Ff topfuil newes it being
; J pꝛay pee let it iopfull to my folk and countrye bee:
But ik it thꝛeaten euill, let the euill light on mer.
In ſaping fo, an altar greene of clowwers he did frame,
And offred fuming frankincence in fyꝛe vppon the fame,
And powꝛed boawles of wyne theron, and ſearched therwithall
The quluering inwards of a Hepe to know what Mould bekatl.
A Tyrrhene wizard hauing fought the bowelles, ſaw therin
Great chaunges and attempts ok things then readye to begin,
M hich were not playnly manifeſt. But when that he at lal
His eyes from inwards of the beaſt on Cippus hoꝛnes had catt,
Maple king (be ſayd.) Foꝛ bute thee O Cippus, onto the,
And to thy hoꝛnes thall this fame place and Roome obedyent ber.
Abzidge delay: and make thou haſte tw enter at the gates
M hich tarrye open foꝛ ther. So commaund the ſothlaſt fates.
Chou ſhalt be king alone as thou hak entred once the totvne,
And thou and thyne foꝛ euermoꝛe ſhalt weare the ropall crowne.
i) Mith that he ſtepping back his fote, did turne his krowning face 5
From Roomeward, faping. Farre,D farre, h Goddes (uch handſel chace,
Moꝛe ryght it were J all my lyfe a banniſht man ſhould ber, i
Than that the holy Capitoll me reigning there ſhould fe
Thus much he layd: and by and by togither he did call!
Che people and the Senatozs, But pit he firſt of all 8
) 3 Dd. itz. Did


WS


The. xv. booke ß


Did hyde his hoꝛnes with Lalwzell leaues: and then without the wall


He ſtanding on a mount the which his men had made of ſoddes,
And hauing after aunctent guyle made prayer to the Goddes
Sapd: here is one that hall onleſſe y banniſh him pour towne
Immediatly) be king of Roome and weare a ropall erowne.
hat man it is, J will bp ſigne, but not by name bewzay.
Me hath vppon his brow two hoznes. The wizard here doth ſap,
Chat it he enter Roome, vou ſhall lyke feruants him obey,
He mygbt haue entred at pour gates which open koꝛ him lap,
Wut did Fay him thence. And pit there is not onto mer
A neerer frend in all the world. owbert foꝛbid him yer
O Romanes that he comme not ouce within pour walles. Oz it
He haue delerued, bynd him faſt in fetters like a thee.
Oꝛ in this fatall Cyꝛants death, of feare diſpatch pour mynd.
Such noyſe as Pynetræs make what tyme the heady eaſterne wynde
Doth whiz among them, oꝛ as from the fea doth karre rebound:
Enen luch among the folk of Roome that pꝛeſent was the ſound.
Hobobert in that conkuſed roare of fearefull folk, did fal!
Out one vopee aſting, who is her? And faring therewithall
Gppon theyꝛ foꝛeheads, they did eke the foꝛeſayd hoꝛnes. Agen
( ꝙ Cippus) lo, pee haue the man ſoꝛ whom pee ſcke. And then
Me pulld (ageinſt his peoples wil!) his garlond from his head,
And ſhewed them the two fayꝛe hoꝛnes that on his bꝛowes were (pred,
At that the people dallbeth downe theyꝛ lokes and ſyghing, is
Nyght ſoꝛye (who would think it trew :) to fee that head of his
Mott famous fo2 bis god deſerts. Pit did they not foꝛget
Che honour of his perſonage, but willingly did fet
The Lawꝛell garlond on his head ageme. And by and by
Lhe Senate ſapd. Mell Cippus, ſith vntill the tyme thou dye
Thou mapſt not come within theis walles, we gine the as much gros
In honour ofthe, as a temeof ſteeres can plough the round,
Wetwerne the dawning of the day, and ſhetting in ol nyght.
Pozeoucr on the bꝛazen gate at which this Cippus myght
Maue entred Roome, a papꝛe of hoꝛnes were grande to repꝛeſent
is wondzous ſhape, as of his dæde an endleſſe monument.
Scr Puſes who to Poets are the pꝛeſent ſpꝛings of grace, 85
Nod ſhewe for pon knole, neyther are pou dulld by tyme 915 5
0


= "


i


ne ͤ a SS BO eee SS SSS SS


|
|


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 196
ot Aeſculapius in the Ile that is in Tyber derpe ss
Among the ſacred fapnets of Roome had foztunte fo2 to cræpe.

& cruell plage did hertwfoꝛe infect the Latian aire,
And peoples bodyes pyning pale the murreine did appapꝛe.
M hen tyꝛed with the buriall of theyꝛ frends, they did perceyue
Chemſelues no helpe at mannes hand noꝛ by Phiſicke to recepue.
Chen ſerking help from heauen, they ſent to Delphos (which doth fand
Amid the woꝛld) foz counſell to bee had at Phebus hand. :
Beſcching him with helthkull apd to ſuccour theyꝛ diſtreſle,
And of the myghtye Citie Roome the miſchert᷑ tw redzefle.
Che quiuers which Apollo baygbt himſelk was wont tw beare,
Che Baptrers, and the place itſelt togither Haken were.
And by and by the table from the kurtheſt part of all
Lhe Chaticell ſpake theis woꝛds, which did theyꝛ harts with feare said
Che thing pee Nomanes ſcke for here, xc ſhould haue fought moze ny
Pour countrye. ea and neërer home go feke it now. Pot ¥
Apollo, but Apollos ſonne is he that muſt redꝛelle
Pour ſoꝛrowes. Cake pour iourney with gud handſell ok ſucceſſe,

And fetch my ſonne among you. Wl ben Apollos heſt was told
Among the pꝛudent Senators; they ſercht what towne did hold
His ſonne, and vntw Epidavvre a Gallpe fo him ſent.
Allone as that th’ Ambaſladour arrpued there they went


Co haue the God the pꝛeſent plages of Romanes foꝛ to Tap,


Unt the countell and the Loꝛdes of Grerkland: whom they pꝛay 5


And loꝛ themſelues the Oꝛacle of Phebus forth they lap.


Che Counſell were of ſundꝛy mynds and could not well agree,’
Sum thought that ſuccour in fuch nerde denped ſhould not ber.
And diuers did perſwade tw keepe theyꝛ helpe, E not to fend
Cheyꝛ Goddes away ſith they themſelues myght nerde them in the end.
Vhyle dobotkully they ol and on debate this curious cace, 5
The euening twylyght btterly the day away did chace,
And on the woꝛld the ſhadowe of the earth had darknelle bꝛought.
That nyght the Loꝛd Amballadour as fleepe vppon him wrought, 5
Did dꝛeame he ſaw before him ſtand the God whoſe help he fought,
In ſhape as in his chappell he was wanted foꝛ tw and,
UH th ryght hand ſtroking downe his berd, and afte in tother hand,
And merkel laying: feare not, J will comme and leaue my ſhꝛyne.

= Dod lith. Chi


„„ LO CAR hee


2 2 ea = —- 2 —
See r 7 WA : NO NL eS Ne


The. xv. booke f
This ſerpent which doth wreath with knottes about this Katte or mine
Mark well, and take ged herde therof: that when thou Malt it fe,
Thou mapfſt it knowe. Koꝛ into it tranſſoꝛmed will J bee, :
But bigger J wilt ber. foꝛ J will femme of ſuch a fple,
As map celeſtiall bodpes well to turne into ſufliſe.


Strepght with the voyce, the Cod: and with the voyte and God, away


Ment leepe: and after ſipe was gone eniewed cherrfull dap,
ert moꝛning hauing cleerely put the fpave ſtarres to flpghe,.
Che Lozdes not knowing what to do, allembled all foꝛthzyght
Mithin the ſumptuous temple of the God that was reguyꝛed,
And of his mynd by heauenly ſigne lum knowledge they deſyzed.


They ſcarce had done theyꝛ peapers, when the God in ſhape of (nake 5


lith laftye creſt of gold, began a hilling foꝛ tw make,

Which was a warning giuen. And with his pꝛelence he did ſhake
Che Altar, ſhꝛyne, doꝛes, marble fle, and rofe all lapd with gold,
And bauncing vp his brett be apd ryght ſfately to behold 5
Amid the Church, and round about his fyꝛpe eyes he rold.

Che ſyght did fray the people. But the wyue leſſe pꝛeꝛſf( whole heare
Mas truſled in a fapꝛe whyght Call) did know the Cod was there.
And ſayd, beheld tts God, tts Cod. As many as be bere

Pꝛay both with mouth and mynd. O than our gloꝛious Cod, appere:
Ta cur bebofe, and betpe thy kolke that kerpe thy hallo wes ryght.
Che people pꝛeſent woꝛchipped his Codhead there in ſpght. :
Repeating dowble that the pꝛerſt did fap. the Momapnes eke:
Deuoutlp did with Godly voyte and hart his fauour (eke.

Che God by nodding did conſent, and gaue allured ſigne

By ſhaking of his golden creſt that on his head did ſhyne,

And hiſled twee with ſpirting tong. Then trayld he downe the fone
And gliſtring greces of bis church. And turning backe his eyen,

Me loked to his altar ward and tw his former ſhzyne

And temple, as to take his leaue and bid them all fare well.


From thence ryght howge vppon the ground which ſwerte of lio bes did


That people frrewed in his wap.) he palled Fatelp downe, (smell
And bending ints bowghts went thꝛough the hart of all the towne,
Vntill that her the bowwing wharf belyde the hauen take.
here Taping, when he had (as feemd) dilmiſt with gentle lone
His trayne ol Chaplepnes and the folke that wayted on him thither, be


1
Q
4
b
2
{
j
f
|


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 197
Hx layd him in the Romane Hippe tw ſayle away tmgither.
Che ſhippe did lle the burthen of his Godhed to the full,
And foꝛ the heaupe weyght of him did after palle moze dull.
Che Romanes being glad of him, and hauing billd a ſtere
Uppon the ſhoꝛe, vntyde theyꝛ rapes and cables from the pers.
Che lyghtſum wynd did dꝛyue the hippe. The Cod ausuncing hye,
And leaning with his necke vppon the Gallpes ſyde, did lye
And loke vppon the greeniſh waues, and cutting eaflp thꝛough
Th Ionian fea with little gales of weſferne pnd not rough,
The ſirt day moꝛning came vppon the coal of Italy.
And palling foꝛth by lunos Church that muſtreth tw the eye
Nppon the head of Lacine he was caryed alſo by
Che rocke of Scylley. then he left the land of Calabrye
And rowing foftly by the rocke Zephyrion, he did dꝛaw
Co Celen cliffs the which vppon the ryghtſyde haue a llalbe.
By Romeche and by Cavvlon, and by Narice thence he paſf,
And from the ſkreyghtes of Sicily gate quyght and clere at laff,
Then ran he by th Acõlian Zles and by the metall myne
Ok Tempſa, and by Levvcoſye, and tempꝛate Pelt where ſyne
And pleaſant Roles flop ap. rom thence by Capreas
And Atheney the headlond of Minerua he did paſle
La Surrent, where with gentle vynes the hilles bee ouerclad,
And by che towne of Hercules and Stabye ul beſfad 5
And Naples bogie to Idleneſſe, and Cumes where Sybell had
Hir temples, and the ſcalding bathes, and Linterne where growes ſfoꝛe
Ok maſticke tres, and Vulturne which beares ſand apace from ſhoze,
And Sinuefle where as Adders are as wohyght as any ſnowe,
And Minturne of infected apꝛe bycauſe it Hands ſo lowe, 5
And Caiete where Aeneas did his nurce in tumbe beſtowe,
And Formy where Antiphates the Leſtrigon did kerpe,


And Trache enupꝛond with a fen, and Circes mountapne ffepe +


Lo Ancon with the boyſtous Gare. Alcne as that the ſhippe
Arrpued here, / foꝛ new the fea was rongh,) the God let ſlippe

Mis circles, and in bending bowghts and wallowing waues did glyde
Into bis fathers temple which was buylded there beſyde

Uppon the ſhoꝛe. and when the {ea was calme and pacilpde,

Tho loꝛeſapd Cod of Epidavvre, his fathers Church fozloke,


Ihe. xv. booke of
(The lodging of his nereſt frend which foꝛ a tyme her toke,)
And with his crackling ſcales did in the ſand a furrowe cut,
And taking hold vppon the ſterne did in the Walp put
his head, and reſted till he came paſt Camp and Lauine ſands,
And entred Tybers mouth at which the Citie Oſtia ands,
The folke of Roome came hither all by heapes bothe men and wyues
And eke the Nunnes that kepe the fpꝛe ol Veſta as theyꝛ lyues,
Lo mete the God, and welcomd him with fopfull noyſe. And as
The Gally rowed vp the ſtreame, greate ſfoꝛe of incence was
On altars burnt on bothe the banks, fo that on eyther ſyde
The fuming ok the frankincence the very atre did hyde, é
And allo Maine in Cacrifpfe full many tattell dyde.
Anon he came to Roome the head of all the woꝛld: and there
The ferpent lifting vp himſelk, began his head to beare
Nyght bp along the maaſt, vppon the toppe whereof on hye
He looked round about, a mete abyding place to ſpye
The Tyber doth deuyde itſelk in twaine, and doth embzaee a
A little pꝛetpe Jland (fo the people terme the place) 5
From epther ſyde whereotk the bankes are diſtant equall fpace. >
Apollos Snake deſcending from the maaſt conueyd him thither,
And taking eft his heauen ly ſhape, as one repapꝛing hither
Co bring our Citie healthkul nelle, did end our ſoꝛrowes quyght.

Although ta ber a God with vs admitted were this wyght.
Pit was he boꝛnt a foꝛreiner. Wut Cæſar hathe obteynd.

Mis Godhead in his natiue fople and Citie where he reignd.


hom perrelelſle both in peace and warre, not moze his warres bp knit


With triumph, noꝛ his great erplopts atcheeued by his wit,
Noꝛ pit the great renowme that he obtepnd fo ſperdelp,
aue turned to a blazing ſtarre, than did his pꝛogenie.

Soꝛ of the actes of Cæſar, none is greater than that be

Lelt ſuch a ſonne behynd him as Auguſtus is, to be

His heyꝛe. Foꝛ are they things moze hard tw ouercomme thy Nealme
Ol Bꝛitaine ſtfanding in the ſea: oꝛ bp the feuenfold ſrreame

Ok Nyle that beareth Paperreꝛde bictoꝛious ſhippes to rotwe ¢

Oꝛ to rebelliouſe Numidye to giue an snerthzowwe ?

Oꝛ Iuba king of Moores, and Pons (which pꝛoudelp did it beare vs


. all
— sade


—


eee Se K e r 2


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 198


Uppon the name ol My thridate) to fozce by uod and ſpeare

Co peld them ſubiects bntw Roome ? o2 by his tuk deſert

To merit many truumphes, and of ſum to haue his part⸗

Chan fuch an heyꝛe to leaue bæhynd, in whom the Goddes do Howe

Excerding lauour vntw men fo2 that they do beſtowe

Ho grrat a pꝛince vppon the woꝛld ? Pow tw thentent that her
Should not ber boꝛne of moꝛtall ſœde, the other was to ber 5
Canonpzed foꝛ a God. Wi hich thing when golden Venus fee,

(Sher alfo ſawe holb dꝛeadfull death was fo2 the biſchop then
Pꝛepaard, and how conſpiracye was wrought by wicked men)
Sher loked pale. And as the Goddes came any in her wap,

ht ſayd vntw them one by one. Wehold and fee Jpꝛap,

M ith bow erceding eagerneſle they (abe mer to betrap,

And with what wondꝛous craft they ſtryue tw take my Ipfe abap,
I mene the thing that only now remapneth bnte mer

Ok lule the Troians race, Puſt J then only euer be

Chus vert with vndeſerned cares 2 How ſæmeth now the papne
Ol Diomeds ſpeare of Calydon to wound my hand agepne 2

Hot (ees it me that Troy ageine is lok thzough ill defence 2
Bow feemes my fonne Aenzas like a banniſht man, from thence
Lo wander farre ageine, and on the fea tw tolled be,

And warre with Turnus foꝛ to make: oꝛ rather (truth to fap)
Mith uno? what meene J about harmes palled many a dap
Ageinſt myne olſpꝛing, thus to ſtand? Chis pꝛeſent feare and wo
Permit me not to think on things now paſt ſo long ago.

Per fee hob wicked ſwonꝛdes agetnt my head are wherted. 3
Beſeeche per keepe them from my thꝛote, and fet the traptoꝛs by
They pur poſe. neytꝭ er ſuller pou dame Veſtaas fyꝛe to dye

By murthering ot her biſſhop. Thus went Venus wofully
Complayning over all the heauen, and movoe the Eoddes therby.
And foꝛ they could not bꝛeake the rong decrers ol deſtinye,

hep ſhewed fignes moſt manifett of ſoꝛrowe tw enſew.

Fox battells fepghting in the clowdes with cralſhing armour fletv.
And dꝛeadfull trumpets ſownded in the alre, and boznes eke blew,
As warning men before hand of the miſchert that did back,

And Phebus allo lobing dim did calt a dzawzy lygbt,

Uppon


a —— — ——


aes


eee ma — — — 8 —
2 > 22 aL 5 in 4 2 — — ows ro re — =
ELA LE TAO. . ˙ ¹iwupwͥUͥmm᷑̃ͤü BN Le EOE ¾— r —


een 1 . 1X oy
| Ihe. xv. booke of

Uppon the earth, which ſeemd lyke wyſe to ber in ſoꝛxe plyght.

From vnderneathe amid the ſtarres bands oft ſeemd burning bꝛyght $
It often rayned dꝛoppes of blod. The moꝛning Farre lokt blew,
And was beſpotted here and there with ſpecks of ruſty hew.

Che mone had alſo ſpottes of blod. The Screcche owle (ent from hell
Dio with her tune vnkoꝛtunate in euery coꝛner pell. 8 5

Alt teares from Juoꝛy images in ſundꝛy places fell. 5

And ithe Chappells of the Goddes was finging heard, and wozdes
Ol thꝛeatning. Not a ſacrifpſe one ſigne of god auoꝛdes.

But greate turmople to be at hand theyꝛ hartſtrings do declare.
And when the beak is ripped vp the inwards headlelle are.

About the Court, and enerp houſe, and Churches in the nyhgts

The doggs did howle, and euerp where apperred gaitlp ſpꝛyghts.
And with an earthquake ſhaken was the towne. Pit could not all
Cheis v arnings of the Goddes diſpoynt the treaſon that ſhould fall,
$202 ouercomme tbe deſkinies. The naked ſwoꝛdes were bꝛought
Into the temple. Foz no place in all the towne was thought

Do mete to woꝛk the miſchert in, oꝛ for them to commit

Che hepnous murder, as the Court in which they vlde tw fit 5

In countell. Venus then with both her hands her ſkomacke ſmit,
And was about tw hyde him with the clowd in which he hid

Aenæas, when the from the ſwoꝛd of Diomed did him rid.

2 Paris, when from Menelay he did him ſaufe conuey.

But loue her father ſtapying her did thus onto hir fay.

Vhy daughter myne, wilt thou alone ber ſtryuing to pꝛeuent
Unuanqnuiſchable deſtinie⸗ In layth and ik thou went

Chy ſelt into the houſe in which the fatall ſuſters thꝛer

Do dwell, thou ſhouldeſt there of bꝛalſe and Tele ſubſtanttall fe 5
The regiſters of things fo ſtrong and mallye made to be,

That fanf and cuerlaſking, they do neyther ſtand in feare
Okthunder, noꝛ ok lyghtning, noz of any ruine there.

Che deſknyes of thyne offpring thou ſhalt there fynd grauen derpe
In Adamant. J red them: and in mynd 4 do them kerpe.

And foꝛbycauſe thou Hale not beꝛquyght ignoꝛant of all,

J will declare what things J markt herafter to befall.

The man fog whom thou makett ſute, hath lined full his tyme


Ouids Metamorphoſis. 199

And hauing ronne his race on earth muſt now to heauen bp clpme,

A here thou ſhalt mabe a God ok him ay honoꝛd fo2 to ber

i Mith temples and with Altars on the earth. Poꝛeduer her

That is his heyꝛe and beares his name, ſhall allalone ſuſfeyne

The barthen layd vppon his backe, and thall our help obtepne

| is fathers murther to reuenge. The towne of Mutinye.

Beſerdged by his powꝛe, chall pelo. The leelds of Pharſaly

Shall fele him, and Philippos in the Realme of Macedonne

Shall once ageine be ſtaynd with blod. The greate Pompeius ſonne

Shall vanguiſht be by him vppon the fea of Sicilye. Ge

Che Romane Captepnes twpfe the Nuene of Aegypt thꝛoughher bye

Pꝛeſumption truſting to her match to much, hall thꝛeate in bapne

To make ber Canop ouer our hygh Capitoll to reigne.

Mhat Hould J tell ther of the wyld and barbꝛous nacions that

At bothe the Oceans dwelling bev The bntuerſall plat

POP ekall the carth inhabited, ſhall all be his. The fea

Shall onto him obedient ber likewyſe. And when that he
athe ſtablicht peace in all the world, then ſhall he fet his mynd 5


7
3


Se =


| Coaciuill matters, vpꝛyght lawes by iuſfice for to fpnd,
And bp example of himſelk all others he ſhall bynd.
Then hauing care of tyme tw comme, and of poſteritpe,
 ‘Abolp tupfe thall beare to him a ſonne that may ſupply
His caretull charge and beare his name. And laſtly in the end
14 ‘Be ſhall to heauen among the ffarres his auncetoꝛs aſcend, é
Fut not before bis lyfe by length tw dewping age do tend.

d therfoze from the murthꝛed coꝛce of Iulius Cæſar take
Is ſowle with ſperde, and of the ſame a burning erelled make,
That from our heauenly pallace he may euermoꝛe lake downe

Upon eur ropall Capitoll and Court within Roome towne.

a He ſcarcely ended had theis wmzdes, but Venus ont of hand

Amid the Senate houſe of Roome inuiſible did and,
And from her Cxſars bodye robe his new expulſed ſpꝛyght
1) be which he not permitting to reſolue to aper quyght,

Dod place it in the ſkye among the ſtarres that gliſter bapght

And as the bare it, her did fle it gather heauenly mpght,
And do to weren ſpzpe. Sher no ſaner let it Ape,


= PED mn oy = > — — — — — = ñm4—————
— he, fo 2 A 2 A er. ‘Cre 4 an + Pa
LAREN BA LRE te AL ht LE OS OO . LD EY 2)


ioe = 0


ae XV. oe of.


i that a godly ſhyning tarre it vp a lolt did fe re Ee
And dꝛew a greate way after it bꝛyght beames like burning eee 8
Uh loking on his ſonnes god derdes conkelled that they were
Faͤrre greater than his owone, and glad be was tw fee that her
Excelled him. Although his ſonne in no ple would agree

Lo haue his derdes pꝛeferd before his fathers : pit dior) fame,

(Who ap is free, and bound to no commaund) withſtand the ſame
And ſtryuing in that one behalf age inſt his het and will
Pꝛoccdeth to preferre his deedes before bis fathers still.
Cuen fo tw Agamemnons great renowne giues Atreus place

Euen ſo Achilles derdes, the derdes of Peleus do abate.

Cueit fa beyond Ace-elisfarre dolh Thefeyes pꝛowelſe go.
And (that J map examples ble full matehing thets) euen lo

Is Saturne leſſe in kame than Ioue. Ioue rules the beaneul p ſpheres,

And all the tryple ſhaped world. And dur Auguſtus beares

Dominion ouer all the earth. They bothe are elathers: : They

Are rulers both. Pe Condes tw whom both kyꝛe and flowed gane tray,

UA hat tyme pee with Acnzas came from Troy: p Goddos that were

Ot moꝛtall men canonpzed: Thou Quitin eho dint rere ©

Che walles of Roome: and Mars wha wart the baleant Quizins ſyʒe

And Veſta of the houſehold Goddes of Cæſar loch thy fyꝛe

Moſt holy: and thou Phebus tubo with Velta alſo art

Ok houlehold: and thou Iupiter wh in the hygbelk part 9

Ok mountapne Tarpey halfe thy Church: and all pe Coddes that may

WU ith conlcience faut by Potts bee appealed to: 4 pray ;

Let that fame day ber Lowe tw comme and after Jam dend, f

In which Auguftus (w hw as noh of all the woꝛld is head)
Quygbt gluing bp the care therok aſcend to heauen foz ay
The e (abient hence) to fauour ſuch as vnto him ſhall prap. *

e J ought a ww ek tw end which neither loues farce wiath,

fiom p20, nos Fpze,noz fearing age with all the fosce it hath ae
toa’ bol th gupght. Let comme that fatall holbꝛe
wing or this battle telh bath eure mer no pote,
$ plesſure make an end of myne bncerteyne pm.
e better part af ince allured bie tlen e
ad karre ſkye. And all ae We aan neuer orto”


n INOS SOS IT I LOOT WL ON os - ee
8 S te St wet Saw SS OO We .. eA vote Se or sy


— —


.


Gali is Metamorphofis,. 8.


q 1
The Romane Emppꝛe by the ryght of conquelt Hall extend, ep
Gu farre (all all folke reade this wok. And tyme without all end
(Il Poets as by pꝛopheſte about the truth map ame)
br Ipfe ſhall euerlaſtingiy bee lengthened Mill by fame,


Finis. Libri decimi quinti.


Laus & honor ſoli Deo.


88
soe


+t 0 IMPR 5 NED AT LO N
dauon hy Willan Seres dwelling at the weft


end of Paules church, at the
ſigne ot the Hedgehogge.