Antiquity of Man as Deduced from the Discovery of a Human Skeleton (Richard Owen, 1884)
=======================================================================================
Owen's 1884 verdict on the Tilbury Thames skeleton — the great comparative anatomist's late assessment of human antiquity. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive (b28121478)


:.’...uuViv'

' WMt.  aittUn


•"•  v.ri.-.


Med

K3718


ANTIQUITY  OF  MAN


AS  DEDUCED  FROM  THE


DISCOVERY  OF  A HUMAN  SKELETON


DURING  THE

EXCAVATIONS  OF  THE  EAST  AND  WEST
INDIA  DOCK-EXTENSIONS

AT


TILBURY,  NORTH  BANK  OF  THE  THAMES.


BY

Sir  RICHARD  OWEN,  K.C.B.,  F.R.S.,  etc.,

FOREIGN  ASSOCIATE  OF  THE  INSTITUTE  OF  FRANCE.


LONDON:

JOHN  VAN  YOORST,  PATERNOSTER  ROW.

MDCCCLXXXIV.


PRINTED  BY  TAYLOR  AND  FRANCIS,
RED  LION  COURT,  FLEET  STREET.


WELLCOME  INSTITUTE

LIBRARY

Coll.

welMOmec

Call

No.

-P  Co


(to  face  p.3 .)

SECTION  OF  STRATA  overlying  A HUMAN  SKELETON  .


Trinity  Hip  k Water  Mark .


K


8

9


CLAY


MUD


MUD  & PEAT


PEAT


MUD


PEAT


MUD


MUD&PEAT


SAND  & DECAYED  WOOD
SAND


9’


SAND


10


BALLAST  GRAVEL


Marsh  Level


~7S~


I

£


i

i

*-


£


t

i

T-


co

Co


--- 1

J

00


jS

A


--f-


Leve  Lai  yfoyhjre. Lemmns  were,  found, .


M


MANNING&BAYNES .

Hvgvmers,

9,1  II,  FEN  CHURCH  A VENUi
LONDON,  E.C.h


ANTIQUITY  OF  MAN.


On  the  1st  October,  1883,  I was  favoured  with  a letter
from  my  friend  Colonel  Du  Plat  Taylor,  informing  me  that
“in  the  course  of  the  extensive  excavations  at  the  Dock-
works  at  Tilbury,  north  bank  of  the  Thames,  portions  of  a
Human  Skeleton  had  been  found  at  34  feet  below  the
surface  in  a bed  of  sand ; above  this  was  a bed  of  clay,
then  a bed  of  peat  5 feet  thick,  and  between  this  peat
and  the  surface  was  another  bed  of  clay.”

The  Colonel  was  so  good  as  to  put  me  in  communication
with  Mr.  Donald  Baynes,  the  Engineer  superintending  the
excavation  at  the  time  of  the  discovery,  and  that  gentleman,
bringing  the  remains  in  question  for  my  examination,
favoured  me  with  the  annexed  diagram  [facing  this  page],
in  m oi e detail,  of  the  strata  down  to  and  including  the  one
in  which  the  skeleton  was  found.  In  a “ Note  ” which
accompanied  the  “ diagram  ” Mr.  Baynes  states  : — “ The
sand  (‘Section,’  no.  9),  at  the  part  in  which  the  human
remains  were  found,  is  34  feet  below  the  present  surface.”
In  the  work  of  excavation  some  disturbance  of  the
skeleton  had  taken  place  before  the  Superintendent’s

b 2


4


ANTIQUITY  OF  MAN.


attention  was  called  to  it ; but,  through  Mr.  Baynes’s  care,
the  following  parts  were  recovered  and  transmitted  to

m0  *

Frontal  bone,  with  adherent  portions  of  the  parietals  and
the  base  of  the  nasals.

Parts  of  the  parietals  confluent  together,  but  showing  a

trace  of  the  sagittal  suture.

Portion  of  the  occipital  bone.

Left  mandibular  ramus,  with  coalesced  symphysial  por-
tion of  the  right  ramus,  lower  jaw.

Portions  of  ribs.

Portions  of  pelvis.

Shaft  of  right  humerus.

Shaft  of  left  radius.

Portion  of  left  ulna.


Shaft  of  right  femur,  with  detached  head  of  the  same


Shaft  of  right  tibia.

Shaft  of  left  tibia.

Left  astragalus.

Portion  of  calcaneum.

A few  phalanges  of  hand  and  foot.


Three  teeth  from  the  fore  part  of  the  lower  jaw.


bone.


Shaft  of  left  femur,  with  portion  of  condyle.


remains  the  instructive  and  characteristic  parts
ium  form  the  subjects  of  Plates  I.,  II.,  and  III.


ANTIQUITY  OF  MAN.


5


the  sinuses,  again  strongly  convex,  to  the  root  of  the  nasals,
which  have  coalesced  with  each  other  and  become  anchy-
losed  to  the  frontal  bone.

The  frontal  sinuses  are  prominent,  each  in  length  1 inch,
in  breadth  near  their  lower  mesial  ends  half  an  inch,  with
an  interval  of  8 millim. ; the  prominences  curve  upward
and  outward ; their  surface  is  roughened  by  small  irregular
depressions ; their  broad,  smooth,  convex,  mesial  ends
enter  into  the  formation  of  the  superorbital  border,  which
is  here  not  produced.  The  ordinary  ridge-like  upper
border  begins,  and  more  abruptly  on  the  left  side,  14
millim.  from  the  fronto-maxillary  suture,  the  ridge  ex-
panding to  a broader  convex  outer  termination  of  the
superorbital  border.  In  the  right  orbit  the  ridge,
beginning  at  the  same  distance  from  the  suture,  also
broadens  to  the  upper  and  outer  angle  of  that  border ; but
there  is  seen  an  irregular  indent,  as  if  from  some  blow
received  during  life.  Between  the  two  portions  of  the
ridge  is  a shallow  superorbital  notch,  double  on  the  left
side ; there  is  no  foramen.  The  transverse  diameter  of
the  orbit  is  inch.  One  inch  extent  of  the  orbital  roof
is  preserved  on  the  left  side,  about  half  that  extent  on
the  right.

The  least  external  breadth  of  the  frontal  bone  behind
the  orbits  is  3^  inches.  The  lehgtli  of  the  frontal  from
the  end  of  the  sagittal  suture  to  the  nasals,  following  the
curve,  is  5 inches.  There  are  no  partial  prominences  of
the  frontal  answering  to  those  specified  anthropotomically
as  “ eminences  ” in  modern  European  skulls.  The  greatest
breadth  of  the  frontals  at  the  outer  ends  of  the  coronal
suture  is  4^  inches.  A well-marked  “ temporal  ridge  ”


6


ANTIQUITY  OF  MAN.


extends  from  the  external  angular  process,  arching  back-
ward, to  the  parietal.

On  the  inner  surface  of  the  frontal  the  “ sulcus  longi-
tudinalis  ” is  feebly  and  irregularly  indicated  where  the
inner  table  begins  to  project  before  being  continued  into  a
strongly  developed  “ frontal  crest,”  which  terminates  at  its
forward  subsidence  in  a small  “ foramen  caecum.”

The  eminences  and  depressions  indicative  of  cerebral
convolutions  are  few  and  feebly  indicated.  Ramifications
of  the  middle  meningeal  arteries  are  well  impressed  on  the
fore  part  of  the  inner  table  of  the  parietal.  The  portion  of
the  occipital  bone  includes  much  of  the  right  half  of  the
lambdoidal  suture  with  a strip  of  the  so-connected  parietal.

The  “ crista  occipitalis,”  with  both  the  superior  and
inferior  curved  lines  or  ridges,  and  the  intervening  spaces
for  the  “complexi”  and  “rectus  capitis  postici  ” muscles,
are  strongly  marked  (Plate  III.  fig.  3),  as  is  the  bifurcation
of  the  “ inferior  curved  line,”  denoting  the  space  for  the
“ obliquus  superior  capitis  ” and  the  “rectus  capitis  posti-
cus major  ” muscles.  On  the  inner  surface  of  the  occipital
bone  the  fossae  for  the  hind  lobe  of  the  cerebrum  and
that  for  the  cerebellum  are  well  marked ; but  there  is
no  depression  answering  to  that  noted  as  the  “ torcular
Herophili  ” in  modern  European  skulls.

The  contraction  and  slope  of  the  forehead  and  the
prominence  of  the  frontal  sinuses  are  matched  by  low
Australian  and  Andamanese  skulls ; but  I have  not  found
in  these  so  definite  a channel  between  the  prominences.
The  depression  between  the  frontal  and  nasal  bones  is
nearly  the  same;  but  the  nasals  are  narrower  in  the
Australian  skulls  compared.


ANTIQUITY  OF  MAN.


7


With  the  parts  of  the  cranium  was  rescued  the  lower
jaw,  represented  by  the  left  ramus  and  the  portion  of  the
right  ramus  coalescing  at  the  symphysis  (Plates  II.  & III.
fig.  2).  This  bone  indicates,  by  the  loss  of  masticating
teeth,  that  the  individual  to  whom  it  belonged  had  at-
tained old  age.  Not  only  were  the  molars  wanting,  but
their  sockets  had  been  absorbed  and  the  tract  of  jaw
which  they  had  occupied  was  reduced  to  the  diminished
vertical  diameter  characteristic  of  the  close  of  active
life.  More  or  less  of  the  sockets  of  the  two  premolars,
the  canine,  and  the  two  incisors  of  the  left  ramus  remained,
indicative  of  such  teeth  not  having  been  shed.

It  exemplifies  the  pains  taken  to  discover  whatever  parts
of  the  skeleton  had  been  dispersed  in  the  excavation  of
their  bed,  that  three  teeth  were  found  fitting  the  sockets
at  the  fore  part  of  the  mandible  (ib.  i,  c,  p).

One  of  these  teeth  was  an  incisor,  the  second  a canine,
the  third  a premolar.  Each  tooth  showed  the  extra  work
in  mastication  to  which  it  had  been  put  after  the  loss,
during  life,  of  the  true  grinders.

Of  the  incisor,  i,  one  third  of  the  crown  had  been
ground  down  flat  and  polished  : in  Plate  III.,  i,  is  shown
a circular  cavity  at  the  base  of  the  enamel  on  one  side  of
the  tooth,  which  I attribute  to  commencing  decay.  The
fang,  or  root  of  the  tooth,  contracts  to  an  obtuse  end,
which  is  closed.

The  canine,  c,  shows  a greater  proportion  of  the  crown
worn  down  to  a polished,  slightly  concave,  flattened  surface
(c,  Plate  II.) ; the  fang  is  similarly  terminated  and  closed


* All  the  figures  were  drawn  on  the  stones  without  reversing.


8


ANTIQUITY  OF  MAN.


by  the  ossified  remnant  of  pulp  and  capsule.  On  one  side
of  the  crown  (Plate  III.,  c ) a cavity  has  invaded  tfie  base
of  tlie  enamel,  in  size  and  shape  resembling  that  in  the
incisor.  The  crown  of  the  premolar,  jp,  has  been  still
more  worn ; little  of  it  is  left  above  the  fang ; the  worn
surface  is  flat  and  polished,  very  feebly  concave,  becoming
convex  at  the  back  border.  The  fang  is  solidified,  as  in
the  other  two  teeth.

In  size  these  teeth,  or  what  is  left  of  them,  equal  the
corresponding  parts  of  the  same  teeth  in  the  Australian
(‘  Odontography,’  plate  cxix.  fig.  2),  and  exceed  that  of

the  European  figured  in  the  same  plate  (fig.  3).

The  condyle  and  tip  of  the  coronoid  process  are  broken
off  the  portion  of  lower  jaw  (Plates  II.  &III-  %.  2).  Ihe
angle  of  the  jaw  is  rounded  off,  as  usually  seen  in  the
edentulous  jaw  of  aged  individuals.  The  ridge  on  the
inner  surface  beneath  the  place  of  the  molar-sockets
(Plate  III.  fig-  2)  is  well  marked.  The  symphysis,  s,  does
not  project  beyond  the  incisor-sockets.  The  prominences
at  the  back  part  of  the  symphysis,  for  the  attachment  of
the  “ genio-hyoglossus,”  the  “ genio-hyoideus,”  and  the
- digastricus  ” muscles,  are  distinct  and  well  marked.  The
first  form  a pair,  subcompressed,  vertically  extended,  with
an  interval  scooped  out,  as  it  were,  between  them.  The
subjacent  pair  of  genio-hyoidean  processes,  of  equal  vertical
extent,  are  narrower  and  closer  together.  Erom  the  more
obtuse  digastric  rising  extends  a broad  and  shallow  fossa ;
the  rising  itself  supports  a pair  of  ridges,  smaller  and  more
apart  than  those  above.  Behind  the  alveolar  tract  the
rising  portion  of  the  mandible,  to  which  some  anthropoto-
mists  restrict  the  term  “ ramus,”  as  contradistinguished


ANTIQUITY  OP  MAN.


9


from  the  horizontal  portion  or  “ body  ” of  the  bone,  shows
also,  by  the  degree  of  obliquity  of  its  axis  to  that  of  the
“ body,”  the  senile  character  of  the  bone.  On  its  inner
surface  (Plate  III.  fig.  2)  the  notch  in  the  margin  of  the
aperture  of  the  mandibular  canal,  m,  leads,  as  usual,  to  a
groove,  n,  extending  obliquely  downward  and  forward  ; but
the  groove  is  here  bridged  over  by  a tract  of  bone,  8 millim.
in  extent,  beneath  a second  aperture  of  a canal,  n,  from  which
the  mylo-hyoidean  nerve  and  vessel  emerged,  impressing  a
second  groove,  or  continuation  of  that  which  is  lost  in  the
submandibular  fossa.  The  wide  smooth  depression  for  the
sublingual  gland  is  feebly  marked.  The  mylo-hyoidean
ridge  extending  forward  therefrom  is  strongly  developed
beneath  the  absorbed  remnants  of  the  last  two  molar
alveoli.  The  “ mental  foramen  ” (Plate  II.  fig.  2),  for  the
exit  of  the  nerve  and  artery  so-called,  is  of  the  usual  size
and  in  the  usual  position  below  the  second  premolar.
Below  the  incisors  the  origin  of  the  “ levator  menti  ”
muscle  is  neatly  defined  by  a low  and  narrow  ridge.  Prom
the  above  details  it  may  be  inferred  that  the  individual,
though  aged,  was  robust,  and  worked  the  jaw  strongly  in
mastication.

In  the  cranial  part  of  the  skeleton  the  indications  of
strong  muscular  characters  (Plate  III.  fig.  3)  contrast
with  the  low  cerebral  ones  (ib.  fig.  1),  and  like  indications
of  brute  force  are  given  by  the  rest  of  the  skeleton.

In  the  best-preserved  humerus  the  ridge  from  the  ecto-
tuberosity  subsides  upon  the  middle  third  of  the  shaft ; a
ridge  separating  the  outer  (radial)  from  the  hinder  (anconal)
surface  begins  to  rise  about  the  lower  third  of  the  shaft,
and  is  continued  with  augmenting  extent  and  sharpness  to


10


ANTIQUITY  OF  MAN.


the  entepiconclyle  (“  internal  condyle”  of  Antliropotomy)  ;
the  oblique  depression  noted  as  the  “ musculo-spiral
groove”  is  here  smooth,  broad,  and  shallow.  The  ulnar
(“internal”)  side  or  surface  of  the  shaft  begins  to  be
marked  by  a narrow  ridge  where  the  medullary  artery
enters  its  canal ; this  ridge  gradually  expands  into  a smooth
convex  border  as  it  approaches  the  entepicondyle.  The
olecranal  and  coronoid  depressions  are  separated  by  a
strong  plate  of  bone ; the  former  is  wide  and  deep,  a small
plate  of  bone  rises  from  its  bottom.

In  the  metacarpal  bone,  second  of  the  left  hand,  the
ridges  for  the  anconal  interosseous  muscles  are  strongly
marked ; in  the  phalanx,  first  of  the  second  finger,  the
ridges  bounding  the  palmar  surface  are  similarly  developed.

Femora. — The  shaft  of  the  left  thigh-bone  (Plate  IY.
fig.  1)  * shows  a strongly  developed  “ lesser  trochanter,”  a ,
below  which  is  a rough  oblique  prominence,  b,  for  insertion
of  the  “ iliacus  interims  ” muscle.  A more  remarkable
character  is  shown  by  the  part  receiving  the  insertion  of
the  “ gluteus  maximus  ” muscle.  The  proximal  (upper)
portion  of  the  gluteal  ridge  (fig.  1,  c)  merits  by  its  size  and
prominence  the  name  of  “third  trochanter  t>  answering
almost  in  proportion  to  the  process  so-called  in  most
perissodactyle  quadrupeds.  Prom  this  prominence  the
usual  ridge  is  continued  down  answering  to  that  termed
“ external  lip  of  the  linea  aspera  ” in  Antliropotomy,  but
stronger;  here  it  forms  the  inner  boundary  of  a rough

* The  figures  were  drawn  on  stone  without  reversing.

f A similar  process  has  been  noticed  in  a human  femur  fiom  a
Belgian  bone-cave.  See  Dollo,  ‘ Extrait  du  Bulletin  du  Musee  Koj  al
d’Histoire  Naturello  de  Belgique,’  tome  ii.  1S83.


ANTIQUITY  OF  MAN.


11


channel  extending  to  where  the  “ external  ” unites  with
the  “ internal  lip,”  which  is  continued  down  from  the  well-
defined,  low,  elongate  process,  b,  forming  the  beginning  of
such  so-called  “ internal  lip  ” of  the  “ linea  aspera.”  This
rough  ridge  is  here  by  no  means  a low  linear  rising,  but  a
thick  outstanding  one,  d,  which  bifurcates  at  the  lower
fifth  part  of  the  shaft,  d1 : the  outer  division  extends,
narrower  or  sharper,  to  the  back  and  outer  border  of  the
ectocondyle ; the  inner  branch,  going  to  the  entocondyle,
is  less  produced,  but  sufficiently  so  to  define  a flattened
surface  of  the  intervening  triangular  “popliteal  space.”
The  inner  (tibial)  surface  of  the  proximal  half  of  the  shaft
is  divided  into  two  facets  by  a low  obtuse  longitudinal
prominence  of  the  femoral  wall.  The  shaft  of  the  thigh-
bone (fig.  2)  is  relatively  thicker  and  stronger  than  is  that
of  the  average  of  modern  male  femora  (figs.  3 & 4).  The
length  of  the  preserved  portion  of  the  left  femur  is
1 foot  9 lines ; the  total  length  of  the  bone,  with  the
extremities  restored,  as  indicated  in  Plate  IV.,  would  be
1 foot  inches.  The  circumference  of  the  middle  of  the
shaft  is  3 inches  9 lines.  The  depression  on  the  outer  side
of  the  outer  condyle,  here  preserved, — usually  described  as
the  “popliteal  groove,”  as  affording  origin  to  the  “popli-
teus,” — is  longer  and  broader  than  in  recent  femora,  and
indicates  a thicker  tendon  and  a more  powerful  muscle.
Of  the  “ head  of  the  femur  ” belonging  to  the  right  limb,
I have  only  to  remark  that  the  depression  for  attachment
of  the  “ round  ligament  ” is  longer  or  more  elliptic  in  shape
and  deeper  than  usual.

The  muscles  known  as  “ gluteus  maximus  ” in  man
are  those  that  mainly  move  or  work  the  trunk  upon  the


12


ANTIQUITY  OF  MAN.


legs,  and,  reciprocally,  tlie  legs  upon  the  trunk.  The
unusual  addition  of  insertional  leverage  to  these  muscles
in  the  skeleton  under  description  bespeaks  a power  and
frequency  of  locomotion,  and  especially  of  actions  of  trunk
and  of  upper  limbs,  requiring  an  adequate  support  and
fulcrum  in  the  lower  limbs.

The  pelvis  is  but  fragmentarily  represented  : its  very
size  and  weight,  far  from  favouring  its  preseivation,
hastened  its  destruction.  The  pick  of  the  excavator
smashed  it ; and  the  pieces  were  scattered  by  the  shoveller
among  the  superincumbent  deposits  in  course  of  removal.
The  rescued  portions  are  strictly  human,  indicate  male
proportions,  and  support  an  inference  of  the  strength  of  the
individual  derived  from  better  preserved  bones.

I find  nothing  worthy  of  note  in  the  portions  of  the
foot-bones  above  specified.

All  the  bones  and  fragments  of  this  Human  skeleton
were  of  a dark  colour,  derived  apparently  from  the  darker-
coloured  powdery  sand  in  which  they  were  brought  to
light.  I applied  to  them  the  usual  preliminary  test  in  such
finds  of  possible  fossils,  viz.  the  application  of  the  tongue.
In  every  instance  it  adhered,  as  when  in  long  couise  of
time  the  gelatine  of  the  recent  bone  had  oozed  away,
leaving  the  absorbent  calcareo-phosphatic  earth  in  excess.
I thereupon  called  in  the  aid  of  my  colleague,  the  expe-
rienced and  accomplished  Chemist  of  the  Department  of
Mineralogy — aid  which  he  had  readily  and  ably  afforded  in
relation  to  bones  of  lower  Mammalian  (extinct)  kinds*.
Corresponding  bones  of  a recent  human  skeleton  accom-

* See  my  ‘Researches  on  the  Fossil  Remains  of  the  Extinct
Mammals  of  Australia  ( Diprotodon  australis ),’  p.  242,  vol.  i.,  4to,  1877.


ANTIQUITY  OP  MAN.


13


panied  the  exhumed  remains.  The  following  is  Dr.  Flight’s
“ Report  ” : —

“The  bone  is  considerably  altered  in  appearance  and
character ; it  is  of  a fine  dark  brown  colour,  and  is  readily
reduced  to  a powder  in  an  iron  mortar.  When  heated,
water  and  only  oily  matter  are  evolved,  and  it  turns  black
or  nearly  so  ; treated  with  soda-lime,  a large  quantity  of
ammonia  is  given  off.  The  density  of  the  bone  is  2T38,
that  of  the  recent  tibia  was  found  to  be  R985.  Treated
for  twenty-two  hours  in  the  cold  with  the  requisite  amount
of  hydrochloric  acid,  of  specific  gravity  1*04,  it  was  found
that : —

There  was  dissolved 86 ’98

Insoluble  organic  matter,  “ Schewere’s

Kestrin  osseine  ” 11*63

Insoluble  mineral  matter,  silica,  &c.  . . F39


100-00

“ The  part  dissolved  consists  of  lime-phosphate  &c.  The
insoluble  portion,  removed  by  heating,  11-63  per  cent.,
comes  next  that  found  by  Fremy  in  fossil  ox-bones  from
the  Oreston  Caves.  He  found  in  the  external  part  of  a
metatarsal  1F0  per  cent.  Fremy  also  found  in  rhinoceros-
ribs  from  Fansan,  Gers,  of  silica  and  fluoride  1*4  per
cent.  I send  you  some  of  the  powdered  bone  ; and

“ I remain,  &c.,

Walter  Flight,  D.Sc.,  F.R.S.”

“ The  Laboratory,

British  Museum,  Natural  History,

Cromwell  Road,  S.  Kensington,  S.W.

6th  November,  1883.”


14


ANTIQUITY  OF  MAN.


Among  the  earlier  acquisitions  of  Human  remains  from
other  than  cave-localities,  the  lower  jaw  from  the  gravel-beds
of  Moulin- Quignon,  investigated  at  Paris  by  joint  French
and  English  naturalists,  may  here  be  mentioned.  It  is
sometimes  referred  to  as  a “ fossil  • ” but  the  chemical
composition,  showing  the  proportion  of  original  gelatine
which  it  had  lost  and  the  kind  and  amount  of  extraneous
mineral  matter  added  to  or  replacing  the  phosphate  of  lime,
has  not,  that  I can  find,  been  anywhere  recorded.

The  corpse  of  the  individual  whose  osteological  cha-
racters have  been  above  noted  found  its  grave  about
3 feet  below  the  surface  of  sand  on  which  he  trod — such
surface  having  since  subsided  to  a depth  of  30  feet  below
the  marsh-level  forming  the  present  banks  of  the  Thames
at  that  locality,  and  has  there  received  successive  deposits
of  the  vertical  extent  severally  noted  in  the  “ Section  of
Strata,”  facing  p.  3.  Portions  of  decayed  blackened  w7ood
were  found  in  the  uppermost  part  of  the  sandy  stratum,  9 ;
and  this  stratum  has  been  excavated  to  a depth  of  10  feet
since  the  discovery  of  the  skeleton,  and  been  found  to  rest
upon  the  gravel  known  as  “ballast  ” (“  Section,”  no.  10).

The  oldest  known  tool  fashioned  by  human  hands — the
unpolished  adze  of  flint — is,  so  far  as  I can  learn,  the  sole
evidence  of  a British  palaeolithic  riverside  man  which  has
yet  been  recorded,  at  least  on  the  Thames’  banks,  including
the  Tilbury  locality  whence  the  subject  of  the  present
tract  was  exhumed.

Bones  which  have  similarly  parted  with  a proportion  of
their  original  gelatine,  and  have  received  mineral  additions
to  the  bone-earth  they  retained,  gaining  for  them  the  term
“ fossil,”  have  been  found  on  the  North  Bank  associated


ANTIQUITY  OF  MAN.


15


with  the  oldest  forms  of  stone  tools  ; but  such  bones  have
hitherto  been  of  the  extinct  kinds  of  Carnivores,  Rumi-
nants, Proboscidians,  and  Pachyderms,  which  also  roamed
over  the  land  subsequently  insulated  as  “ Britain,”  and
which  were  the  chief  source  of  food  to  the  savages  who
made  and  wielded  those  palaeolithic  implements.

But  the  evidence  of  the  great  share  taken  by  the  teeth
of  my  present  subject  in  comminuting  his  food  and  fitting
it  for  deglutition  begets  speculation  as  to  the  kinds  of
nutriment  necessitating  this  exercise  of  the  natural  prepa-
ratory instruments  of  digestion.  The  best  of  these,  the
true  molars,  with  their  multiplied  roots,  massive  crowns,
and  ridged  square  triturating  surfaces,  have  been  worn  out,
giound  down  to  the  stumps,  and  finally,  with  their  sockets,
removed  by  absorption.  The  smooth  unbroken  surface  of
the  molar  tract  tells  plainly  that  the  aged  palaeolithic
individual  went  on  labouring  for  his  subsistence  long  after
the  loss  of  his  grinders,  and  putting  such  few  teeth  as
lemained  to  their  utmost  powers  of  trituration.

The  tools  he  manufactured  enabled  him  most  probably
to  slay,  under  favourable  circumstances,  the  big  beast  known
as  Mammoth,  ’ which  came  to  the  margin  of  the  river  to
quench  its  thirst.  He  may  have  obtained  his  share  of  the
EiepJm  primigenius  taken  in  an  artificial  pitfall,  such  as
the  lowest  tribe  of  negroes  with  whom  Livingstone  tarried
awhile  on  the  banks  of  the  Zambesi  river  prepared  to
entrap  the  African  Elephant,  which  they  then  attacked  and
slew  with  weapons  not  greatly,  if  at  all,  superior  to  the
palaeolithic  ones  in  reference  to  such  lethal  work*.


f Ietf thG  m°St  treaSUred  °f  the  few  natural  curiosities  of  a
P a o co  ection,  the  spiral  tusk  of  one  of  these  Elephants,  which  was


16


ANTIQUITY  OF  MAN.


Smaller  Mammals,  such  as  rhinoceros,  horse,  bison,
megaceros-deer,  primigenial  ox,  lion,  bear,  hysena,  wolf
remains  of  all  which  I have  received  from  formations  on
the  banks  of  the  Thames,  corresponding  with,  or  analogous
to,  those  at  Tilbury— were  objects  of  exciting  chase  or  trap-
capture,  doubtless  attended  with  frequent  combat.

The  palaeontological  coincides  with  the  geological  evi-
dences in  the  conclusion  that  mankind  existed  on  what  is
now  Great  Britain  at  a period  antecedent  to  its  severance
by  a “ German  Ocean”  and  an  “English  Channel  fiom
the  great  Europseo-Asiatic  continent.

The  rudely  cooked  flesh  of  such  would  be  gnawed  down
cleanly  to  the  bone  by  the  hungry  hunters.  Vegetable
food  would  be  obtained  from  wild  uncultivated  plants.
Some  fruits,  such  as  the  crab-apple,  the  sloe,  the  hips  and
haws,  would  be  the  dainties  during  short  and  special
seasons  : those  could  not  be  long  stored,  uncooked.  The
hazel-nuts,  beech-mast,  and  acorns  might  be  collected  m
quantities  and  kept  for  a longer  period,  combining  a vege-
table with  the  animal  diet  of  our  primitive  predecessors.
And  here  1 cannot  refrain  from  speculating  on  the  stiffness
of  advancing  years  affecting  the  energies,  the  keen  vision,
the  rapid  strong  stroke,  which  brought  more  abundantly
animal  food  to  the  youthful  wielder  of  his  paleolithic
weapon.  The  preparation  for  swallowing  raw  and  hard
fruits  polished  off  the  crowns  of  the  few  remaining  teeth  of
the  ancient,  probably  primitive,  dweller  of  the  Thames


v alley .

presented  to  the  Traveller  by  the  Chief  of  the  Tribe,  rvhose  hospitality
Livingstone  enjoyed  during  a brief  period  of  rest  in  the  course  of  h.s
journey  in  1850-55  across  the  African  continent.


ANTIQUITY  OF  MAN.


17


The  existence  of  Mankind  in  what  now  is  insular  Britain,
at  a period  which  Geology  teaches  to  have  keen  piioi  to  its
severance  from  the  great  Europaeo-Asiatic  continent  by  the
“English”  and  “German”  channels  or  seas,  when  our  present

O .

Thames  bore  a larger  stream  of  water  probably  to  join
some  greater  continental  river,  has  been  evidenced  by  the
discovery  of  stone  implements  and  weapons  of  the  rude
manufacture  which  has  suggested  the  term  “ palaeolithic
for  such  tools  and  the  men  who  fashioned  them.

The  most  abundant  evidence  in  support  of  the  foregoing
proposition  has  been  given  by  an  esteemed  colleague,
Worthington  G.  Smith,  Esq.,  E.L.S.,  in  the  £ Transactions
of  the  Essex  Eield-Club

This  evidence  has  been  mainly  derived  from  formations
on  the  west  bank  of  the  Lea  valley,  north  side  of  the
Thames ; but  besides  the  “ Lea  ” tributary,  the  author  adds
the  localities  of  Barking,  East  Ham,  Ilford,  Grays-Thurrock,
Tilbury,  Mucking,  Orsett,  and  Southend.  At  all  these
places  Mr.  Smith  has  “ found  the  stone  tools  in  situ  ; and
he  gives  valuable  and  instructive  evidence  of  the  respective
formations  in  “ Cuts  of  the  Sections  ” where  they  occur,
especially  in  the  Lea  valley  (figs.  2-8).  But  no  bodily
evidence  of  the  fabricators  of  the  Palaeolithic  tools  rewarded
this  persevering  series  of  researches.

“ Human  bones  and  teeth  I have  never  been  able  to
light  on.  The  reasons  why  human  bones  are  not  found
amongst  the  fossils  of  mammoth,  horse,  bison,  and  rein-
deer are  many.  LIuman  bones  are  very  liable  to  decay ;

* “ Primaeval  Man  in  the  Valley  of  the  Lea,”  8vo,  1883,  p.  102.

t Loc.  cit.  p.  111.

C


18


ANTIQUITY  OF  MAN.


few  bones  so  small  as  human  bones  are  ever  lound.  Pri-
maeval men  may  have  buried  their  dead,  but  if  the  bodies
were  left  unburied  hyaenas  and  other  animals  would  eat
every  scrap.  Still  the  human  pelvic  bones  are  large  and
heavy  enough  for  preservation  ; and  no  doubt  the  time  will
some  day  arrive  when  human  bones  will  be  found,  and  we
shall  be  able  to  build  up  human  skeletons  of  Palaeolithic
age”  (p.  114).

The  endeavour  to  fulfil  the  tool-describer’s  prevision  has
been  a chief  pleasure  and  encouragement  of  foregoing
osteological  descriptions  and  comparisons.  “ The  day  will
come,”  Mr.  Smith  repeats,  “ when  we  shall  know  much
more  of  Palaeolithic  men  than  we  now  know.  At  present
we  only  know  that  such  men  once  existed,  and  made
weapons  and  tools  of  stone  during  long  periods  of  time.”

“ Up  to  the  present  time  there  has  not  been  a fragment  of
man’s  bony  fabric  that  can  with  positive  certainty  be  re-
ferred to  a man  of  the  River-Drift  (p.  142).  It  must
be  understood  that  I clo  not  refer  to  men  of  the  Caves,  but
to  the  far  older  tribes  who  lived  on  the  river-margins  and
others  who  lived  before  the  present  rivers  flowed.”

To  requests  from  non-geological  friends  for  grounds  of
inference  as  to  the  period  of  time  indicated  by  the  succes-
sive strata  overlying  the  human  skeleton  above  described,

1 have  replied  by  remarks — superfluous  to  experts  much
in  the  following  terms  : —

In  the  diagram  exhibited  at  the  Meeting  of  the  Royal
Society,  December  6,  1888,  the  stratum  marked  “Sand”
(Table  of  Strata,  no.  9,  facing  p.  3),  in  which  the  remains
were  found,  differs  from  what  we  understand  as  “ sea-shore
sand  ” ; it  is  of  a dark  colour  and  of  more  powdery  con-


ANTIQUITY  OF  MAN.


19


sistence.  But,  whatever  its  physical  composition,  we  may
regard  the  stratum  as  being  that  on  which  the  man  moved
who  therein  left  his  bones.  As  man  he  must  have  breathed
an  aerial  atmosphere — in  other  words,  have  trod  the  then
surface  of  the  earth.  To  receive  the  overlying  bed  the
supporting  one  subsided  ; the  level  of  the  ground  there  to
that  extent  has  consequently  changed.  Both  strata  are
now  very  far  down.

Here  we  may  pause  to  consider  for  how  long  a period
the  surface  of  the  banks  of  the  Thames  has  remained  at  its
present  level.  During  what  lapse  of  time,  it  may  be  asked,
has  the  river  continued  to  flow,  in  course  and  size  and
relation  to  shores,  as  now  it  does  ?

Our  evidence  on  this  head  does  not  go  back  beyond
2000  years,  if  so  far.  The  Roman  invasion  of  Britain
before  our  Era  (b.c.  53)  extended  to  the  Thames.  The
river  was  crossed  by  Julius  Caesar  in  his  Second  Invasion,
b.c.  52,  against  obstacles  set  in  the  North  Bank*  by  the
ancient  Britons  1938  years  ago.  But  every  inference  from
the  available  records  of  Caesar’s  and  subsequent  Roman
invasions  indicates  the  Thames  and  its  banks  to  have  been
much  the  same  then  as  now,  geologically  speaking.  No
new  stratum,  at  least  at  “Coway-Stakes,”  Oatlands,  has
been  deposited  on  that  which  was  trod  by  the  then  Natives
and  their  Invaders.

But  this  is  far  from  being  the  case  with  my  present
subject,  the  more  ancient  British  Aboriginal.  His  ground

* At  the  locality  still  known  as  “Coway-Stakes,”  according  to
Camden  and  other  reliable  authorities.  Here  Caesar  “passed  the
Thames  in  face  of  the  enemy.”  See  Hume’s  ‘ History  of  England,’

p.  2.


C 2


20


ANTIQUITY  OF  MAN.


has  subsided — has  given  way  to  a new  and  different  soil,
which  continued  to  receive  accessions  of  different  and  de-
finable characters  (see  “ Section”)  until  a vertical  thickness
of  30  feet  was  superimposed.  The  geological  operations
on  which  depended  the  formation  of  the  new  deposits  and
the  subsidence  of  the  old  ones  give,  however,  no  indication
of  a violent  or  sudden  dealing  with  the  then  earth’s  surface
at  the  locality  in  question.

The  constructors  and  indwellers  of  the  localities  Am-
bersbury  ” and  “ Louglrton  Camps,”*  the  defensive  earth-
works of  which  have  recently  been  exposed  in  Epping
Forest,  were  armed  with  flint  weapons  of  Palaeolithic  cha-
racter f.  Our  most  experienced  Antiquaries  are  “ at  one
in  the  conclusion  that  these  rudely  fortified  structures  were
« pre-Roman  ” ; but  the  period  of  the  antecedent  existence
of  such  ancient  Britons,  who  have  left  evidences  in  their
entrenchments  of  cooking-fires  as  well  as  tools,  remains
conjectural.  It  can  hardly  give  them  better  claim  to  a
Palaeolithic  date  than  may  be  attached  to  the  Tilbury
skeleton.

Should  the  scrutiny  of  experienced  Students  of  Surface-
modifications  be  rewarded  by  an  indication  or  proof  of  any
change  in  the  geological  characters  of  the  north  bank  of
the  Thames  since  Julius  Caesar’s  or  Vespasian  s time,  it
must  be  insignificant  compared  with  that  period  during
which  occurred  a subsidence  of  the  soil,  rendering  that
bank  uninhabitable  by  the  man  of  the  black-sand  epoch.


P


* ‘ Transactions  of  the  Essex  Field-Club,’  vol.  in.  lbS4,  P-^212.

-i-  lb  p 226,  fig.  3,  “Celt  found  in  Loughton  Camp.”  big.  1
224,  and  fig.  2,  p.  225,  “ Conjoined  Flakes,  found  in  Loughton  Camp.'


5


ANTIQUITY  OF  MAN.


21


His  progeny  or  kind  may  have  survived  such  change,  have
migrated  landward ; there  is  no  ground  for  inferring  the
ancient  race  to  have  been  swept  away  by  a “ flood.”  The
tranquil  or  non-cataclysmal  movements  and  operations
resulting  in  a new  surface  or  stratum  went  on,  but  with
an  accessory  evidence  of  the  progress  of  time.

Our  earth  received,  as  of  yore,  its  solar,  lunar,  and
atmospheric  influences ; but  its  surface  at  the  locality  in
question  continued  slowly  to  subside — so  gradually,  indeed,
as  to  admit,  at  successive  periods,  of  the  growth  of  trees
and  of  generations  of  those  low  organized  plants  the  debris
of  which  constitute  “peat.”

It  would  seem  at  least  that,  for  a time,  the  surface  of
the  sandy  soil  (Table  of  Strata,  no.  9)  admitted  of  the
growth  thereon  of  trees,  as  testified  by  portions  of  their
ligneous  trunks  and  branches,  now  blackened  and  decayed
(ib.  9').  Their  destruction  was  inevitable  when  the  surface
sank  and  became  overflowed,  receiving  then  deposits  of
mud  (ib.  8).  But  there  were  intervals  of  time,  in  which  a
Sphagnum  or  Hypericum  * could  root  itself  in  such  parts
of  the  mud-deposit  as  might  be  exposed  to  sun  and  air ;
for  in  this  stratum  peat  occurs  associated  with  the  argil-
laceous matter ; and  this  combination  has  a vertical  extent
of  nearly  four  feet.  The  general  movement  of  subsidence
being  resumed,  no.  8 is  overflowed  by  waters  which  leave
upon  it  nearly  two  feet  of  pure  mud,  no.  7.  Then  a re-
treat of  the  overflowing  waters  with  exposure  of  the  surface
allows  of  successive  growths  and  decadence  of  the  plants
constituting  peat,  of  which  the  stratum  no.  6,  nearly  four


* Hypericum  elocles.


22


ANTIQUITY  OF  MAN.


feet  thick,  exclusively  consists.  I need  hardly  remark
that  the  species  of  Sphagnum,  a genus  which  contri-
butes most  to  bog-formations,  are  mosses  that  grow  in
air;  they  send  their  roots  most  abundantly  in  swampy,
clayey  soils.  Here  the  plant  testifies,  as  does  the  man
three  strata  below,  to  the  nature  of  the  atmosphere  in  which
they  lived  and  breathed.

After  3' 58  feet  vertical  thickness  had  been  thus  attained
the  ground  again  subsided,  again  became  overflowed,  and
again  received  deposits  of  mud  to  nearly  four  feet  of  vertical
thickness  (no.  5).  Then,  again,  the  water  recedes  or  the
land  rises,  and  exposes  to  the  atmosphere  a surface  over-
grown by  air-breathing  plants.  But  the  thickness  of  the
stratum,  4,  testifies  to  a briefer  period  of  dry  or  boggy
land  at  this  locality ; for,  before  two  feet  of  pure  peat  had
been  formed,  a stratum  of  mixed  mud  and  peat,  nearly
two  feet  thick  (no.  3),  is  overlaid.  This  then  subsides  to
receive  ten  vertical  feet  thickness  of  unmixed  mud  (no.  2).
In  the  course  of  subsidence  changes  in  the  land-surfaces
wasted  by  the  then  fluvial  current  lead  to  a final  deposit
of  six  feet  thickness  of  clay  (no.  1),  which  now  supports
the  marshy  level  at  which  the  Dock-excavations  commenced.
They  have  extended,  since  the  discovery  of  the  skeleton,  to
the  bottom  of  the  black-sand  deposits,  which  rest  upon  the
gravel-bed  known  as  “ ballast,”  in  which  flint  implements
are  more  commonly  found.

Let  any  equal  mind,  receptive  of  evidence  to  be  judged
on  its  own,  exclusive,  merits,  without  prepossessing  bias,
attempt  to  conceive  the  difference  between  the  recorded
lapse  of  time  since  the  actual  surface  was  first  trod  by  a
Homan  soldier  and  the  lapse  of  unrecorded  time  since  the


ANTIQUITY  OF  MAN.


23


sandy  soil,  eight  strata  and  thirty  feet  lower  down,  was
trod  by  the  man  whose  osteological  characters  are  given
above.

It  may  be  that  since  the  sand,  no.  9,  lies  upon  the
“ballast,”  no.  10,  it  indicates  a geological  date  more
recent  than  that  of  the  gravel-beds  at  St.  Acheul  and
Moulin-Quignon,  which  revealed  to  Boucher  de  Perthes  in
1863  the  tools  of  a Palaeolithic  French  race,  of  which  the
osteal  characters  are  yet  unknown.  Those  gravels  are
alluded  to  by  the  experienced  anthropologist  De  Quatrefages
as  “ alluvial  ” ; and  by  Prestwich  as  nearer  our  time  than
the  Pliocene  tertiaries.

In  the  careful  summary  of  all  the  evidences  bearing
on  the  subject  of  the  ‘ Work,’*  for  a copy  of  which  I am
indebted  to  the  distinguished  author,  he  remarks,  on  the
Fuhlrott  discovery  of  a human  skull-cap  in  the  grotto  of
Neanderthal,  that  “ Les  conditions  dans  lesquelles  il  a
ete  trouve  ne  paraissent  pas  permettre  d’en  preciser  l’age
geologique  avec  certitude  ” (p.  30).

Of  any  anatomical  claim  to  antiquity,  or  inferiority,
which  this  portion  of  skull  supports,  I concur  with  the
experienced  craniologist  Barnard  Davis  in  the  conclusions
he  has  recorded  in  his  ‘ Essay  ’ on  this  special  subjectf .
Amongst  the  skulls  of  modern  educated  gentlemen  show-
ing the  alleged  low  and,  so-called,  “simial  form”  of
cranium  $,  is  that  of  the  prelate  Mansuy,  “Eveque  de

* ‘Hommes  fossiles  et  Hommes  sauvages,’  8vo,  1884,  par  A.  de
Quatrefages.

t The  Neanderthal  Skull , its  peculiar  Conformation  explained
Anatomically.’  By  Joseph  Barnard  Davis,  M.D.  8vo,  London,  1864.

1 Huxley,  ‘ Han’s  Place  in  Nature.’


24


ANTIQUITY  OF  MAN.


Toul,”  given  by  Prof,  de  Guatrefages  in  the  previously  cited
work,  fig.  36,  p.  62.

The  skull  which  Dr.  Davis  figures,  p.  10,  op.  cit.,  was  a
recent  specimen  obtained  from  the  phrenological  collection
of  M.  Deville.  “ There  is  no  reason  for  thinking  that  it
is  any  more  than  a calvarium  of  a modern  Englishman  ”
(ib.  p.  4).  M.  de  Guatrefages  concurs  with  Dr.  Davis
and  repeats  the  figure  in  the  same  page  of  the  work  in
which  the  Bishop’s  skull  is  represented.

These  are  exceptions  to  the  cranial  outline  in  the
educated  humanity  of  the  actual  or  recent  period,  whilst
the  “Tilbury  skull”  may  accord  with  the  rule  in  the
Palaeolithic  range  of  time.  But  the  biinanal  characters  of
the  skeleton  are  distinct  from  quadrumanal  ones  in  the
earliest,  as  in  the  latest  and  highest,  races  of  mankind.

The  sections  of  the  strata  on  the  west  bank  of  the
Thames-tributary  from  the  Lea  valley,  and  on  the  north
banks  of  the  Thames  itself,  down  to  and  beyond  Tilbury,
from  which  strata  flint  implements  of  the  ruder  kinds  have
been  derived,  lead  me  to  conclude  that  the  man  whose
bones  have  been  discovered  in  the  ninth  well-defined
stratum  beneath  the  actual  surface  of  the  present  Thames
bank  may  have  availed  himself  of  like  tools  for  combat,
defence,  and  slaughter  of  the  animals  affording  the  chief
supply  of  his  sustenance,  and  may  have  belonged  to  one
of  the  older  tribes  who  lived  on  the  river-margins  and  left
the  evidences  of  their  abodes  on  the  north,  now  Essex,  side
above  cited.

The  only  evidence  of  a resort  to  flint  for  a tool  or  weapon,
discovered  in  the  course  of  the  Dock-excavations,  is  a nodule
showing  fractures  at  portions  broken  oft  by  some  violence.


ANTIQUITY  OF  MAN.


25


now  in  the  Engineer’s  Office,  East  and  West  India  Dock-
Extension,  Tilbury.

There  is  no  question  that  the  present  river  bore,  in
Caesar’s  time,  the  name  it  now  retains.  The  “Thamesis  ”
of  the  ‘ Commentaries  ’ is  the  Latin  form  of  “ Thames.”
Tacitus  writes  “ Tamesa.”  In  a.d.  40,  Vespasian,  in  con-
flict with  the  Britons  under  Caractacus,  drew  back  toward
the  mouth  of  the  Thames.  If  the  river  were  fordable  at
Coway-Stakes,  it  does  not  seem  probable  that  its  subsequent
course  and  banks  differed  materially  from  their  present
conditions.  The  body  of  water  increased  as  it  approached
the  sea ; the  tidal  Thames  at  Tilburv  is  now  half  a mile  in

V

breadth.  The  latest  evidence  of  subsidence,  in  some  con-
tiguity with  the  river’s  mouth,  seems  to  be  the  legend  of
such  loss  of  the  lands  of  the  Saxon  Earl  Godwin.  If  such
cultivated  surface  did  sink  so  recently  it  has  received  a
deposit  of  sea-sand,  which  is  left  dry  at  low-water.

London  probably  originated  in  the  convenience  of  its
contiguity  to  the  tidal  Thames  for  transit  by  water  of  men
arid  merchandise.  In  the  time  of  Diocletian,  a.d.  290,  we
lead  that  “ After  the  defeat  of  Alectus  his  followers,  taking
flight  to  London  and  purposing  to  pillage  that  City  and
escape  by  sea,  are  met  by  another  part  of  the  Roman
aimy.  Whence  it  may  be  inferred  that  a commercial
city  on  the  Thames  bank,  on  which  now  stands  the
“ Tower,”  had,  in  course  of  time,  grown  to  be  a wealthy
place.  It  seems  reasonable  to  associate  its  foundation,  like
the  fordable  state  of  the  Thames  at  Oatlands,  with  a con-
dition of  the  river  and  its  banks  hardly,  if  at  all,  different
from  the  present.  Again,  in  the  reign  of  Constantius,  we
read  that  Lupicinus,  with  a force  of  light-armed  soldiers.


26


ANTIQUITY  OF  MAN.


disembarking  at  Rutupiae  (south  coast  of  Britain,  opposite
to  the  present  Boulogne),  “ marched  to  London  to  consult
there  about  the  war.”  Thus  we  get  evidence  of  the  City  s
metropolitan  character  at  that  date.  Shortly  after,  -Theo-
dosius, in  the  reign  of  the  Emperor  Julian,  “enters  London
victoriously.”  At  which  period,  a.d.  368,  it  was  proposed
to  change  the  name  ol  the  City  to  that  of  Augusta.

It  is  true  that  remains  of  Roman  magnificence  are
occasionally  brought  to  light  some  ten  feet  or  more  beneath
the  present  level  of  a city  which  has  been  successively
sacked  and  more  or  less  ruined  by  Saxon  and  Danish
invaders,  and  has  been  a prey  to  subsequent  conflagrations.
The  actual  level  of  London  streets  is  due  to  superposition
of  such  accumulated  ruins  and  debris,  with  repeated  pavings,
not  to  subsidence  of  the  bank  of  the  Thames  which  received
the  Roman  and,  probably,  British  beginnings  of  our  metro-
polis. The  Roman  remains  are  found  above  the  present

level  of  the  Thames  at  high  water ^

What  is  testified  of  tfie  geological  relations  of  the  river

and  its  banks  in  two  localities  pretty  far  apart  (Coway-
Stakes  and  the  Tower)  near  two  thousand  years  ago  may
not  improbably  apply  to  one  of  its  banks  about  twenty-five

miles  below  London  Bridge.


* The  following  are  amongst  the  localities Leadenhall  Street,
Lime  Street,  Lombard  Street,  Ludgate  Hill  (base  of),  Queen ^ Victoria
Street,  Strand  Lane,  and  Walbrook.  The  hanks  of  the  TV  all  Brook,
a tributary  to  the  Thames,  seem  to  have  been  a favourite  localitj  or
Bom  an  villas.  The  Tower  of  London  stands  on  the  ground  which
supported  the  Boman  citadel.  Antiquarian  evidences  of  the  above
sites  of  earliest  civilized  Londoners  are  preserved  in  the  Museum  an
Library  of  the  Guildhall.


ANTIQUITY  OF  MAN.


27


Prior  to  the  “ marsh-level  ” (Section  of  Strata,  facing  p.  3)
there  occurred  geological  changes — successive  sinkings  and
risings  of  the  earth’s  surface — in  the  locality  in  question,  at
intervals  admitting  of  growths  and  decays  of  trees  and
bog-plants,  from  which  an  inference  may  be  reasonably
drawn  of  a period  of  past  time  which,  from  evidences
above  submitted,  may  be  regarded  as  cc  Palaeolithic.”

Evidence  of  the  “Antiquity  of  Man,”  deduced  from  the
discovery  of  his  bones  in  caves,  was  submitted  to  the  Royal
Society  on  the  9th  June,  1864,  and  published  in  the
‘Philosophical  Transactions’  for  the  year  1869.  In  the
cave  at  Bruniquel,  on  the  bank  of  the  Aveyron,  parts  of  a
human  skeleton,  including  the  skull,  were  exposed  in  a
stalagmitic  breccia,  4 feet  below  the  horizontal  floor  of
, stalagmite,  of  which  breccia  a mass,  of  the  density  of
building-stone,  including  the  skull,  was  detached,  under
my  supervision,  in  1863,  and  is  now  in  the  Palaeontological
Gallery  of  the  British  Museum  of  Natural  History,  Crom-
well Road.  In  a recess  of  the,  of  old,  inhabited  cave,  at  a
depth  of  5 feet  2 inches  from  the  upper  surface  of  the
stalagmite,  and  in  a block  of  stalagmitic  breccia  of  stony
haidness,  a second  human  skull,  mutilated  in  the  labour  of
detachment  of  the  matrix,  was  discovered  with  other  parts
of  a human  skeleton".  At  every  foot  of  depth  of  the
breccia  of  the  cavern  were  found  scattered  implements  of
flint  and  bone — the  latter  chiefly  supplied  by  antlers  of
reindeer  (Cervus  tarandus).  Evidences  of  fires  blackened
the  breccia  more  or  less  to  the  depth  of  6 feet.  The
mammals  which  had  been  cooked  for  food,  every  bone  of


* Phil.  Trans,  ut  supra,  pp.  520-531.


28


ANTIQUITY  OF  MAN.


which,  containing  marrow,  had  such  medullary  cavities  <
exposed,  included  those  of  reindeer,  bouquetm,  chamois,
primigenial  ox,  wild  horse,  besides  birds  and  river-fish,
those  of  the  reindeer  being  by  far  the  most  abundant.
The  great  proportion  of  the  latter  indicated  a climate  more
nearly  arctic  or  glacial  than  now  prevails  in  that  latitude,
and  suggest  geographical  changes,  such  as  have  induced  a
“ gulf-stream  ” for  example,  operating  to  bring  about  the
climatal  conditions  of  the  present  “ south  of  France.”

In  my  ‘ Letter  ’ to  the  £ Principal  Librarian  of  the  British
Museum,’  of  date  January  24,  1864*,  I stated,  among  the
facts  in  favour  of  the  purchase  of  the  “ Brumquel  Collec-
tion,” that  “ Two  implements  exhibit  an  outline  of  an
animal’s  head  finely  cut;”  and  I added  that  “they  are  the
earliest  known  works  of  graphic  art  representing  a species

now  extinct  in  temperate  Europe  f .

The  care  and  pains  subsequently  applied  to  researches

in  ossiferous  caves  on  the  Continent  and  in  England  have
satisfied  the  geologist  of  the  prehistoric  antiquity  of  our
species  • but  I have  been  the  recipient  of  doubts  fingering
in  the  minds  of  accomplished  non-geological  visitors  as  to
the  unquestionable  value  or  trustworthiness  of  cave-

^^Show  us,”  they  have  said,  “ the  remains  of  man’s  body
fossilized  in  any  degree,  that  have  been  discovered  m
stratified  deposits,  at  a depth,  and  beneath  successive
formations,  the  interpretation  of  which  supports  a lefeience
to  the  Palaeolithic  era  of  post-Pliocene  time.

+ Scc  ! woodcuts  ’ figs.  7-9,  pp.  553-555,  of  Equmes ; fig.  6,  p.  o3-,
ot  Reindeer  and  Bouquetin  (Philos.  Trans.,  1889).


ANTIQUITY  OP  MAN.


29


Any  such  demonstration  would  be  received  with  com-
placent indifference  by  the  school  of  “ Conjectural  Biology.”
It  records  a “ Homo  alalus  ” (Dumb-man)  of  Miocene  age,
and  a “ Homo  pithecanthropus”  (Ape-man),  existing  as  far
back  as  the  Eocene  period*.  There  is  no  labourer  at  the
true  and  firm  foundations  of  zoology  who  would  more
honestly  welcome  unquestionable  evidences  of  such  tran-
sitional forms  revealed  by  those  Tertiary  formations  than
myself.

The  testimony  of  the  Abbe  Bourgeois  was  but  coolly
received  by  those  who  might  have  been  expected  most
warmly  to  welcome  it,  when  he  pronounced  a formation  in
which  flint  tools  had  been  found  as  of  Miocene  age.  Such
evidence  was  superfluous  to  the  Transmutationist  f.

The  deposits  at  Saint-Prest  were,  however,  referred  by
more  competent  geologists  to  an  early  post-Tertiary  period
— “ au  quaternaire  inferieure.”

The  nodules  of  flint  stated  to  be  found  in  the  “ Middle
Miocene”  at  “Thenay,  dans  la  Beauce  (Loir-et-Cher),”
and  submitted  to  the  Anthropological  Congress  at  Paris  by
the  AbbeJ,  were  not  received  by  experts  as  satisfactory
proofs  of  man’s  work.

Incised  markings  on  cetaceous  bones  (. Balanotus ),  from
a formation  in  Italy  held  to  be  of  Pliocene  age,  are  inter-

* Hackel,  ‘ Natiirliche  Schopfungsgeschichte,’  8vo,  1868.

t Boujou,  “ Transformiste  convaingu,  je  n’ai  pas  attendu  la  decou-
verte  des  silex  miocenes  pour  admettre  l’existence  de  Phomme  tertiaire.”
Bulletins  de  la  Societe  d’Anthropologie  de  Paris,  t.  viii.  p.  675.

t Bourgeois,  “Etude  sur  les  silex  travaillcs  trouves  dans  les  depots
tertiaires  de  la  Commune  de  Thenay.”  Congres  Internationale  d’An-
thropologie, &c.,  1868,  p.  67.


30


ANTIQUITY  OP  MAN.


preted  by  Professor  Capellini  as  evidence  of  contemporary

human  operations  with  a cutting-tool.

The  Baron  de  Baye  has  summed  up  the  recorded
evidences,  from  tools  and  other  handiworks,  of  the
existence  of  mankind,  satisfactorily  so  determined,  in  his
work  entitled  ‘ L’Archeologie  prehistorique  ’ (1880),  in
which  lie  concludes  by  expressing  serious  doubts  as  to
the  alleged  evidence  of  Tertiary  men  of  either  Miocene


or  Pliocene  age.  . ,

The  value  and  character  of  this  work  may  be  judged  by

the  fact  that  the  experienced  anthropologist,  Professor  de
Quatrefages,  who  had  previously  visited  the  Chateau  de
Baye  and  studied  the  rich  series  there  preserved  of  archaeo-
logical evidences,  the  results  of  which  are  given  in  Ins  work
before  cited  (pp.  79,  96, 101),  issued  in  1 884,  therein  states
that  he  wrote  to  M.  de  Baye  asking  for  his  convictions,  after
the  alleged  evidences  of  Tertiary  man  adduced  since  the
year  1880,  and  in  reference  to  the  suggested  stages  o
transformation  from  the  quadrumanal  to  the  bimanal  types
during  Tertiary  epochs.  The  following  was  the  reply
“Tout  en  respectant  l’opinion  des  Archeologues  qui  vont
plus  loin  que  moi,  je  ne  trouve  pas  encore  les  faits  acquis
d’une  affirmation  motivee,  et  f attend,  pret  a reconnaitre  et

de  suivre  les  progres  de  la  Science.

The  prehistoric  existence  of  Mankind,  geneneally  and
specifically  identical  with  those  now  living  lias  been  con-
firmed byhis  remains  found  in  caves  and  by  Ins  tools  of

flint  and  bone  found  there  and  elsewhere.

The  want  which  the  able  collector  and  descnber  of
Palaeolithic  weapons  in  Pleistocene  deposits  now  forming
[he  north  bank  of  the  Thames  has  so  earnestly  expressed


ANTIQUITY  OF  MAN.


31


{ante,  p.  18)  I believe  to  have  been  fulfilled  by  the  dis-
covery briefly  recorded  in  the  ‘ Proceedings  of  the  Royal
Society/  vol.  xxxvi.  p.  136  (December  6,  1883),  and
more  fully  in  the  exposition  of  the  characters  of  the
skeleton  and  of  the  geological  conditions  of  its  grave
set  forth  and  illustrated  in  the  present  work.


32


antiquity  of  man.


EXPLANATION  OF  THE  PLATES.

Plate  I.  •

Fig.  1.  Calvarium  or  skull-cap,  outer  view.

2.  Fore  border  of  the  same,  showing  frontal  sinuses  and
portions  of  the  orbital  and  nasal  cavities.

Plate  II.

Fig.  1.  Left  side  view  of  calvarium.

2.  Left  ramus  of  lower  jaw;  with  outside  view  and  grinding
surface  of  the  incisor,  i}  canine,  c,  and  premolar,  p.


Plate  III.

Fig.  1.  Right  side  view  of  calvarium.

2.  Left  ramus  of  lower  jaw ; with  inside  views  of  the  incisor,

i,  canine,  c,  and  premolar,  p.

3.  Portion  of  occiput,  outer  view.

Plate  IV.

Fig.  1.  Femur,  back  view,  with  ends  restored  in  outline.

2.  Portion  of  shaft,  side  view.

3.  Femur  of  recent  male  individual,  back  view.

4.  Portion  of  shaft,  side  view.

(All  the  figures  are  drawn,  of  the  natural  size,  on  the  stones

without  reversing.)


Printed  by  Taylor  and  Francis,  Bed  Lion  Court,  Fleet  Street.


Prom  nab , on  Stone,lyJ  Erxleben.  Hsnkrt  imp


»°i.uu*.ouJtone,ly  J Erxlaien.  Hantart  imp


c ms.


From  nai,  on  Stone  ,hy  J.Erxleben.


From  ml,  on  Slone,  ky  J. Eraleibi


Works  by  SIR  RICHARD  OWEN,  C.B.,

published  by  MR.  VAN  VOORST.


HISTORY  OF  BRITISH  FOSSIL  MAMMALS  AND  BIRDS.

This  volume  is  designed  as  a companion  to  that  by  Professor  Bell  on  the
Recent  Mammalia,  ‘British  Quadrupeds  and  Cetacea.’  8vo,  with  237
Illustrations,  £1  11s.  6d.

MEMOIRS  ON  THE  EXTINCT  WINGLESS  BIRDS  OF

NEW  ZEALAND.  With  an  Appendix  on  those  of  England,  Australia,
Newfoundland,  Mauritius,  and  Rodriguez.  2 Vols.  (Vol.  I.  text,  Vol.  II,
plates),  royal  4to,  boards,  £6  6s.

ON  PARTHENOGENESIS;  or,  the  Successive  Production  of
Procreating  Individuals  from  a Single  Ovum.  A Discourse  delivered  at
the  Royal  College  of  Surgeons  of  England.  8vo,  5s.


Other  works  published  bp  Me.  Van  VOOEST.
THESAURUS  SILURICUS.  The  Flora  and  Fauna  of  the  Silurian

Period,  with  Addenda  (from  recent  acquisitions).  By  John  J.  Bigsby,
M.D.,  F.G.S.,  &c.  4to,  boards,  18s.

By  the  same  Author  : —

THESAURUS  DEVONICO-CARBONIFERUS.  The  Flora  and

Fauna  of  the  Devonian  and  Carboniferous  Periods.  The  Genera  and  Species
arranged  in  Tabular  Form,  showing  their  Horizons,  Recurrences,  Localities,
and  other  facts ; with  large  Addenda  from  recent  acquisitions.  4to,  boards


THE  YORKSHIRE  LIAS.  By  R.  Tate,  A.L.S.,  F.G.S.,  and  J.  F.
Blake,  M.A  F.G.S.  Illustrated  by  Woodcuts,  19  Lithographed  Plates
of  Tossils,  and  a large  Geologically  Coloured  Map.  8vo,  £1  8s.

A ^o^06?A,P?,0F  ™E  BRITISH  FOSSIL  CEPHALO-

fyDir  F;  B™,  M-A,  P.G.S.  Part  I.,  containing  Introduction

and  Silurian  Species.  4to,  with  31  Lithographic  Plates.  £1  11s.  6rf.

GEOLOGY.  By  Professor  John  Morris,  F.G.S.  &c.,  and  Professor  T
Rupehx  Jones,  F.G.S.  &c.  First  Series.  Heads  of  Lectures  on  Geology
and  Mineralogy  in  several  Courses.  Fcp.  8vo,  2s.  6d.

MAa  VAV  MINERALOGY  OF  GREAT  BRITAIN

to.  8.!  ' Robtot  Philips  Gbbo,  F.G.S.,  .ndW.tua  G.

.lettsom.  8 vo,  with  numerous  Woodcuts,  15s.


JOHN  VAN  VOORST,  1 PATERNOSTER  ROW.


**•••  ft'-  .,-


11  |*  Mi
Mr,-  f « < .
■ M>  '■


•*  * •


<*\u  .V

■*  •an4*sVv*

V,M


'•  • ‘ \v *.‘?M  - ' ^-v‘- 1 \»  ».i , kN ‘ *

^,...>4*  Nii  v'\nv«\>u.  v

on* vi ..  * * > \ . . vv»s4VkXsv,j m V'v, \

■S'vO,‘\  • \.  v

^ •>AV*  * •

M*! ' > ' ■ V'-YvVi?.!’  M-Xi  *V>«4,

.'JV‘ ' .v->, ,.  - . .....  -


\iK»;  >X*Vk',  i.\«-  * v 4: % ’ ; 'm

’•  *•  ■»iri'!\KsA\\iv*.-  «il‘‘  »>>#»,
