On the Archetype and Homologies of the Vertebrate Skeleton (Richard Owen, 1848)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: Internet Archive (Wellcome) scan of the 1848 first edition (https://archive.org/details/b21307830). Richard Owen (1804-1892) - the archetype theory: homology before Darwin.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

l(o.  cX*  lO 


^ 79 1 


U'  v^’ ■■ 

■ ' '.V/. 


■ 

• /"! 

• »'*■  / 


« 


f 


t 


. V ■ 


• 


f 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2015 


https://archive.org/details/b21307830 


THE  ARCHETYPE  AND  HOMOLOGIES 


OF 


THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


BY 

RICHARD  OWEN,  F.R.S. 


LONDON: 

PRINTED  FOR  THE  AUTHOR, 

BY  RICHARD  AND  JOHN  E.  TAYLOR, 


RKD  MON  COURT,  FLEKT  STREET. 


TO 

WILLIAM  JOHN  BRODERIP,  ESQ., 

F.R.S.,  F.G.S.,  F.L.S.,  &c. 


My  dear  Erode  rip, 

The  interest  which  you  have  taken  in  the  progress  of 
the  researches  that  are  embodied  in  the  present  Treatise  on  the  Vertebrate 
Archetype  induces  me  to  dedicate  it  to  you : and  I am  happy  in  having 
this  opportunity  of  gratefully  acknowledging  your  excellent  guidance  by 
which  my  early  studies  in  Zoology  were  facilitated,  and  of  expressing  the 
affection  and  esteem  with  which  I am. 

Your  sincere  Friend, 


RICHARD  OWEN. 


*5  ‘1 

* ^ w )i  - 1 i 

^•  - ' 4 ;^r  1 


wyiinxj  VMrjimrm  «ui  ,j«»a  sorwdlol  jriJ  )o  1 >3tt/iT«^  i" 


/I  3*nfvml  lotif  4ml<#  unril 

■%)o  - ‘XofoiVv  sd)  ,^rtmiaixA  d 


to  Wrtod  01'^^  1>U» 

idwar*)  IbliOfrtrai  4ifj  ni&fr  ,«rnrqin#:  ^Jin^^aV  stit  V 
Q6(iiMi«aorK^  « tKrmlo4»  ot  »i‘i!|94-.  HoibinMv  %hl^#  n«of^  hi 

lr>liiaix,TUm##»i<j  hml  I ria»dw  oJ^erro|au(!>a^  ijf 

(¥ut'  -I  h9/Try»^  -dl  -«m  u.  <fi  ,»\lli/t^;^ 
j^*xb  * • 'MftOrrti*  a^j  Hi*JK^  tfc  mWr/'mdi^<^tt  bicu 


['•  , faiH/)v*>^ji}it  liaj,  I f^f  tot  i'<|  ii«i'iyinijU-\3fir^ 


I xrU«r>a*j  m(i  Uf  fPi^f•ff1r 

u>  !rr  II frorii,  iiA  9tlf  <.*f  /ki(Jm<oo«9A  nU  xtl 

L fttiK  K|/l9fl'>tA  uii  f)t  ‘-  4'jly  Vtn  Ut  ' ‘1  )ll^»^ 

Ui  ^raotoi^l: 

Ut'u^ok  I gjk«u>t  * v ii<  .:C'tl»»t;>«K%i 

‘.(fc*-  V ,.,  !_h4^  ' I tt 


■>  i'.i*  ‘ 'V  - *•  ' 

4|#  .r, 


#Vff’  • • • 


niiK 


it?  •« 


. ^ i3  ^ 

^ • - ■'■  ” dM( 


^■f  ■*&i 


iL 


A D V E R T I S E M E N T. 


Q'he  subject  of  the  following  Essay  has  occupied  a portion  of 
imy  attention  from  the  period  when,  after  having  made  a 
.certain  progress  in  Comparative  Anatomy,  the  evidences  of 
a greater  conformity  to  type,  especially  in  the  bones  of  the 
:head  of  the  Vertebrate  animals,  than  the  immortal  Cuvier 
had  been  willing  to  admit,  began  to  enforce  a reconsideration 
of  his  conclusions,  to  which  I had  previously  yielded  implicit 
.assent.  The  results*,  in  so  far  as  they  seemed  to  be  fairly 
-sustained  by  observation  of  facts,  have  been  successively 
communicated  to  the  Royal  College  of  Surgeons  of  England 
in  my  Hunterian  Lectures  for  1844  and  subsequent  years; 
and  in  1846  I availed  myself  of  the  peculiar  advantages 
afforded  by  the  ‘ British  Association  for  the  Advancement  of 
'Science’  to  bring  my  general  views  on  the  Archetype  and 
I Homologies  of  the  Vertebrate  Skeleton  before  the  British 
and  Foreign  Anatomists  assembled  at  the  meeting  of  the 
Association  at  Southampton,  in  order  to  submit  them  to 
the  test  of  a discussion  which  could  not  have  been  so  fully 
carried  out  under  any  other  circumstances  in  this  country, 
where  Homological  Anatomy  had  previously  excited  little 

* those  illustrated  by  the  skeleton  of  fishes  arc  given  in  the  ‘ Lectures  on 
the  Comparative  Anatomy  and  Physiologv  of  the  Vertebrate  Animals,’  Part  1. 
1S4E. 


VI 


ADVERTISEMENT. 


attention,  and  had  remained  almost  in  the  state  in  which  it 
was  left  by  Cuvier  and  Geoffroy  St.  Hilaire. 

The  interest  which  has  since  been  expressed  on  the  sub- 
ject of  those  communications,  published  as  a ‘ Report  ’ in 
the  Transactions  of  the  British  Association  for  1846,  and  the 
wish  to  make  the  matter  of  that  ‘ Report  ’ more  accessible 
and  intelligible  to  students  of  anatomy,  have  induced  me  to 
reprint  it  in  a separate  form,  with  some  additional  facts  and 
illustrations. 

I beg  to  express  my  obligations  to  the  President  and 
Council  of  the  British  Association  for  the  permission  to 
reprint  the  substance  of  my  Report,  and  for  the  liberal  use 
of  the  woodcuts  with  which  it  was  illustrated.  And  I am 
glad  here  to  have  the  opportunity  to  acknowledge  the  valu- 
able aid  which  I derived  from  the  skill  and  care  and  patience 
of  Mr.  Frederick  Gyde,  the  wood-engraver,  in  rendering 
accurately  the  numerous  details  and  references  in  the  figures, 
and  to  express  similar  acknowledgements  to  Mr.  TufFen  West, 
the  lithographer  of  the  plates. 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  I.  SPECIAL  HOMOLOGY.  Page 

, Introduction  1 

. Terms  explained  9 

Moot  points  discussed  : — 

Alisphenoid 19 

Petrosal  24 

Mastoid  29 

Orbitosphenoid  43 

Prefrontal  46 

Malar  59 

Squamosal  60 

Opercular  bones  63 

Hyoid  bones  68 

CHAPTER  II.  GENERAL  HOMOLOGY. 

. Historical  Introduction 72 

Oken  (1807)  73 

Dumeril  (1808)  76 

Spix  (1815)  77 

De  Blainville  (1816,  1839)  77,  79 

Cuvier  (1817,  1837)  78,  141 

Bojanus  (1818)  77,  117 

Gothe  (1820)  78 

Geoffroy  St.  Hilaire  (1822,  1824)  79,  83 

Cams  (1828)  79 

Grant  (1835)  85 

Owen  (1838)  80 

Agassiz  (1843)  153 

. The  Typical  Vertebra  80 

. Development  of  Vertebrae 86 

. General  characters  of  Vertebrae  of  the  Trunk 89 

. Summary  of  modifications  of  ditto 96 

Centram 96 

Neurapophyses  97 

Neural  spine  98 

Parapophyses 98 

Pleurapophyses  98 

Haemapophyses  99 

Haemal  spine  101 

Diverging  appendaiges 101 

The  question  ‘ What  is  a Bone  ? ’ considered  103 

Teleologically  compound  bones 104 

Homologically  compound  bones  105 

Simple  bones  106 


Vlll 


CONTEXTS. 


Pa 


6.  Vertebrae  of  the  Skull  K 

In  Fishes K 

In  Reptiles J 

In  Birds  1‘. 

In  Mammals  11 

In  Man  i; 

7.  Classification  of  the  Bones  of  the  Head i; 

In  Zootomy  (Ouvier,  1837)  H 

In  Anthropotomy  (passim)  li: 

In  Ichthyotomy  (Agassiz,  1843)  If, 

According  to  the  Natural  System,  in  Fishes  11 

in  Man  

8.  Objections  to  the  Cranial  Vertebrae  considered 14 

9.  Vertebrae  of  the  Trunk  in  Man If 

Composition  of  the  Sacrum  in  Birds  15 

General  Homology  of  the  Pelvic  Arch  and  appendages 15 


CHAPTER  III.  SERIAL  HOMOLOGY. 


Vicq  d’Azyr  (1774) 
Barclay  (1824)  .... 
Cruvelhier  (1830)  , 

Cuvier  (1836) 

Flourens  (1838)  .... 
Oken  (1809-1843) 
Carus  (1828)  


I6i 

le 

le 

16. 

16; 

16; 

16 


Spix  (1815) 171 

Concluding  Remarks  17? 

Explanation  of  Plate  1 17? 

Plate  II 17' 

Ideal  Pattern  or  Archetype  of  the  Vertebrate  Endoskeleton  17' 

Typical  Skeleton  of  the  Fish 17'" 

Ditto  Reptile 18'- 

Ditto  Bird 18' 

Ditto  Mammal 18'^ 

Ditto  Man 1 9;i 

Illustrations  from  Nature  of  the  Typical  Occipital  Vertebra 19! 

Ditto  Ditto  Pelvic  Vertebra 20( 

Homologies  of  the  Bones  of  the  extremities  189,  20! 


Table  I.  Synonyms  of  the  Bones  of  the  Head  according  to  their  Special  Homo- 
logies. 

Table  II.  Synonyms  of  the  Elements  of  the  Typical  Vertebra. 

Table  III.  Synonyms  of  the  Bones  of  the  Head  according  to  their  General 
Homologies. 


ON 


>! 

'i  THE  ARCHETYPE  AND  HOMOLOGIES 

1) 

OF 

1 ’HE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


Chapter  1. — Special  Homology. 


Introduction. 

\s  lEN  the  structure  of  organized  beings  began  to  be  investigated,  the 
,rrts,  as  they  were  observed,  were  described  under  names  or  phrases  suggested 
■ their  forms,  proportions,  relative  position,  or  likeness  to  some  I'amiliar  ob- 
:ct.  Much  of  the  nomenclature  of  human  anatomy  has  thus  arisen,  espe- 
iilly  t lat  of  the  osseous  system,  which,  with  the  rest  of  man’s  frame,  was 
: -idied  originally  from  an  insulated  point  of  view,  and  irrespective  of  any 
J aer  animal  structure  or  any  common  type. 

' 'So  when  the  exigences  of  the  veterinary  surgeon,  or  the  desire  of  the 
' rturalist  to  penetrate  beneath  the  superficial  characters  of  his  favourite 
- ass,  led  them  to  anatomise  the  lower  animals,  they,  in  like  manner,  seldom 

• unced  beyond  their  immediate  subject,  and  often  gave  arbitrary  names 
•]  :the  parts  which  they  detected.  Thus  the  dissector  of  the  horse,  whose 
. r^ention  was  more  especially  called  to  the  leg  as  the  most  common  seat 
, idisease  in  that  animal,  specified  its  ‘cannon-bone,’  its  ‘great’  and  ‘small’ 
. sStern-bones,  its  ‘ coffin-bone,’  and  its  ‘ nut-bone  ’ or  ‘ coronet  ’ : some 

, lanial  bones  were  also  named  agreeably  with  their  shape,  as  the  ‘ os  qua- 
iatum,’  for  example.  The  ornithotomist  described,  in  the  same  irrelative 

• L.mner,  the  ‘ossa  homoidea,’  ‘ossa  communicantia ’ or  ‘ interarticularia,’ 
' i ‘ columella  ’ and  ‘ os  furcatorium.’  Petit  * had  his  ‘ os  grele ' and  ‘ os 

massue;’  Herissantf  his  ‘os  carre’;  which,  however,  is  by  no  means  the 
ne  bone  with  the  ‘os  carre’  or  ‘os  quadratum’  of  the  hippotomist.  The 
/estigator  of  reptilian  osteology  described  ‘hatchet-bones’  and  chevron- 
nes,  an  ‘os  annulare’  or  ‘os  en  ceinture,’  and  an  ‘os  transversum he 
ewise  defined  a ‘columella’;  but  this  was  a bone  quite  distinct  from  that 
called  in  the  bird.  The  ichthyotomist  had  also  an  ‘os  transversum,’  which 
ain  was  distinct  from  that  in  reptiles,  and  he  demonstrated  his  ‘os  discoi- 
uin,’  ‘os  ccenosteon,’  ‘os  mystaceum,’  ‘ossa  symplectica  prinia,’  ‘secunda,’ 
■rtia,’  ‘suprema,’  ‘postrema,’  &c.  Similar  examples  of  arbitrary  names  might 
lily  be  multiplied  ; many  distinct  ones  signifying  the  same  part  in  difi'erent 
imals,  whilst  essentially  distinct  parts  often  received  the  same  name  from 

' Observation,?  Anatorniqiiea  sur  Ics  muiivcmcns  dii  bcc  tics  Oiseaux,  Mcmoircs  tie  I'Acntl. 
Saences,  1748,  p.  .34.5. 

NUm.  de  I' Acad,  dc?  Sciences,  177  I,  p.  4!)7. 


n 


2 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


different  anatomical  authors,  occupied  exclusively  by  particular  specie 
Each,  at  the  beginning,  viewed  his  subject  independently  ; and  finding,  then 
fore,  new  organs,  created  a new  nomenclature  for  them;  just  as  the  anthrc 
potomist  had  done,  of  necessity,  when,  with  a view  to  the  cure  or  relief  c 
disease  and  injury,  he  entered  upon  the  vast  domain  of  anatomical  science  b 
the  structure  of  Man,  or  of  the  mammals  most  resembling  Man. 

It  may  well  be  conceived  with  what  a formidable  load  of  names  the  m( 
mory  must  have  been  burthened,  if  any  could  have  been  found  equal  to  i 
had  the  anatomy  of  animals  continued  and  made  progress  under  its  primitiv' 
condition  of  an  assemblage  of  arbitrarily  described  and  uncompared  facts. 

Happily  the  natural  tendency  of  the  human  mind  to  sort  and  generalize  ii 
ideas  could  not  long  permit  such  a state  of  the  science,  if  science  it  could  b 
called,  to  remain.  A large  and  valuable  portion  of  the  labours  of  the  con 
parative  anatomists  who  have  honoured  the  present  century,  has  been  devote- 
to  the  determination  of  those  bones  in  the  lower  animals  which  correspon 
with  bones  in  the  human  skeleton ; the  results  being  usually  expressed  b 
applying  to  the  parts  so  determined  the  same  names,  as  far  as  the  nomer.’ 
clature  of  anthropotomy  allowed.  Few,  however,  of  the  parts  of  the  huma 
body  have  received  single  substantive  names;  they  are  for  the  most  part  in 
dicated  by  shorter  or  longer  descriptive  phrases,  like  the  species  and  parts  c 
plants  before  Linnaeus  reformed  botanical  nomenclature. 

The  temptation  to  devise  a systematic  Nomenclature  of  Anatomy,  generall 
applicable  to  all  animals,  increases  with  the  advance  of  the  science,  and  froi 
the  analogy  of  what  has  taken  place  in  other  sciences  it  may  one  day  h 
yielded  to  and  exercise  the  ingenuity  of  some  ardent  reformer.  But  the  sami 
analogy,  especially  that  afforded  by  chemical  science  since  the  time  of  Lavo 
sier,  would  rather  lead  the  true  friend  of  anatomy  to  deprecate  the  attemf 
to  impose  an  entirely  new  nomenclature  of  parts,  however  closely  expressiv 
of  the  nature  and  results  of  the  science  at  the  period  when  it  might  be  devisei 
For  there  is  no  stability  in  such  descriptive  or  enunciative  nomenclature ; : 
changes,  and  must  change  witli  the  progress  of  the  science,  and  thus  become 
a heavy  tax  upon  such  progress. 

If  the  arbitrary  terra  ‘ calomel,’  which,  like  ‘ house’  and  ‘dog,’  signifies  th 
thing  in  its  totality,  without  forcing  any  particular  quality  of  its  subjee 
prominently  upon  the  mind,  be  preferable,  on  that  account  as  well  as  it 
brevity,  to  the  descriptive  phrases  ‘submuriate  of  mercury,’  ‘chloride  c 
mercury,’  or  ‘ proto-chloride  of  mercury,’  in  enunciating  propositions  respeci 
iug  the  substance  to  which  it  is  applied  ; and  if  it  possesses  the  additional  ad 
vantage  of  fixity,  of  a steady  meaning  not  liable  to  be  affected,  like  a descrip 
tive  name  or  phrase,  by  every  additional  knowledge  of  the  properties  of  tlr 
substance;  the  anatomist,  zealous  for  the  best  interests  of  his  science,  will  fe( 
strongly  the  desirableness  of  retaining  and  securing  for  the  subjects  of  hi 
propositions  similar  single,  arbitrary  terras,  especially  if  they  are  also  capabl 
of  being  inflected  and  used  as  noun  adjectives. 

The  practice  of  anatomists  of  the  soundest  judgement  has  usually  beei 
to  transfer  the  anthropotomical  term  or  phrase  to  the  answerable  part  whe 
detected  in  other  animals.  The  objection  that  the  original  descriptive  o 
otherwise  allusive  meaning  of  the  term  seldom  applies  to  the  part  with  equt 
force  in  other  animals,  and  sometimes  not  at  all,  is  one  of  really  little  moment 
for  the  term  borrowed  from  anthropotomy  is  soon  understood  in  an  arbitral' 
sense,  and  without  regard  to  its  applicability  to  the  modified  form  whic 
the  namesake  of  the  human  bone  commonly  assumes  to  suit  the  ends  require- 
in  the  lower  species.  No  anatomist,  for  example,  troubles  himself  with  th 
question  of  the  amount  of  resemblance  to  a crow’s  or  other  bird’s  beak  in  th 
‘coracoid’  bone  of  a reptile,  or  with  the  want  of  likeness  of  the  kangaroo 


INTRODUCTION. 


3 


;occyx'  to  the  beak  of  a cuckoo;  or  of  the  whale’s  ‘vomer’  to  a plougli- 
lare;  or  ever  associates  the  idea  of  tlie  original  mystic  allusion  in  the  ana- 
inical  term  ‘sacrum’  with  his  description  of  that  bone  in  the  megatherium 
• other  monster.  Common  sense  gratefully  accepts  such  names  when  they 
j jcoiue  as  arbitrary  as  cat  or  calomel,  and  when  such  concretes  or  adjectives 
‘coccvgeal,’  ‘vomerine’  and  ‘sacral’  can  be  employed  to  teach  the  pro- 
;rties  or  accidents  of  their  subjects. 

: To  substitute  names  for  phrases  is  not  only  allowable,  but  I believe  it  to  be 
. dispensable  to  the  right  progress  of  anatomy  ; but  such  names  must  be  arbi- 
ary,  or,  at  least,  should  have  no  other  signification  than  the  homological  one, 

: anatomy,  as  the  science  of  the  structure  of  all  animals,  is  to  enjoy  the  inesti- 
. able  benefit  of  a steady  and  universal  nomenclature.  I am  far  from  being  in- 
nsible  to  the  advantages  which  other  sciences  have  derived  from  revolutions 
their  technical  language;  but  experience  has  also  demonstrated  attendant 
'ils ; and  these,  it  is  to  be  feared,  would  preponderate  in  the  case  of  anatomy, 

. I account  of  the  peculiar  character  of  its  origin,  and  the  fact  of  its  cultivators 
;ing  for  the  most  part  introduced  to  the  science  through  the  portal  of  anthro- 
atomy.  So  long,  likewise,  as  due  deference  continues  to  be  paid  to  the  deep 
- ; td  vital  importance  of  the  practical  applications  of  the  parent  science  in 
medicine  and  surgery,  it  will  be  in  vain  for  any  man  to  expect  that  his  sole 
: ithority  would  suffice  for  the  general  reception  of  an  entirely  new  nomen- 
iature,  however  philosophically  devised  or  clearly  enunciative  of  the  highest 
:id  most  comprehensive  truths  of  the  science  at  the  time  of  its  formation. 

)(  After  maturely  considering  this  subject  in  its  various  relations,  I have  ar- 
; .ved  at  the  conviction  that  the  best  interests  of  anatomical  science  will  be 
} msulted  by  basing  the  nomenclature  applicable  to  the  vertebrate  subking- 
- im  upon  the  terms  and  phrases  in  which  the  great  anthropotomists  of  the 
: 3th,  17th  and  18th  centuries  have  communicated  to  us  the  fruits  of  their 
■:  .amortal  labours.  For  it  is  only  on  this  firm  foundation  that  we  may  hope 
avoid  that  ceaseless  change  of  terms  which  follows  the  device  of  a syste- 
> -atic  nomenclature  significant  of  a given  progress  and  result  of  scientific 
-^arch.  But  the  names  of  the  parts  of  the  vertebrate  animals  so  based  on 
• ■ deduced  from  the  language  of  anthropotomy  must  divest  themselves  of 
. -.eir  original  descriptive  signification,  and  must  stand  simply  and  arbitra- 
! ly  as  the  signs  of  such  parts,  or  at  least  with  the  sole  additional  meaning 
' indicating  the  relation  of  the  part  in  the  lower  animal  to  its  namesake  or 
^ imologue  in  Man.  It  is  an  old  maxim  accepted  by  the  best  logicians,  that 
i ) name  is  so  good  as  that  which  signifies  the  total  idea  or  whole  subject, 
. athout  calling  prominently  to  mind  any  one  particular  qualitj^,  which  is 
■I  -ereby  apt  to  be  deemed,  undeservedly,  more  essential  than  the  rest. 

The  chief  improvement  which  the  language  of  anatomy,  based  upon  that 
^ ’anthropotomy,  must  receive  in  order  to  do  its  requisite  duty,  is  the  substi- 
j ’.tion  of ‘names’  for  ‘phrases’  and  ‘definitions’;  and  this  is  less  a change 
nomenclature  than  the  giving  to  anatomy  what  it  did  not  before  possess, 
. Jt  which  is  absolutely  requisite  to  express  briefly  and  clearly,  and  without 
iriphrasis,  propositions  respecting  the  parts  of  animal  bodies.  Such  names 
lould  be  derived  from  a universal  or  dead  language,  and  when  anglicized, 

■ ■ translated  into  other  modern  equivalents,  ought  to  be  capable  of  being 
fleeted  adjectively. 

A few  examples  will  suffice  to  show  how  greatly  the  advantage  of  such 
imes  preponderates  over  the  trouble  of  substituting  them  in  the  memory 
r the  definitions  which  previously  signified  the  ideas. 

In  the  classical  Anthropotomy  of  Soemmerring,  a well-defined  part  of  the 
.nil,  which  is  a distinct  bone  in  the  human  embryo,  and  permanently  so  in 
J cold-blooded  Vertebrata,  is  called  “pars  occipitalis  stricte  sic  dicta  partis 

B '2 


4 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


occipitalis  ossis  spheno-occipitalis*.”  Monro,  in  his  justly-esteemed  treatis- 
‘ On  the  Human  Bonesf,’  defines  the  same  bone  as  “all  the  part  of  the  (oc 
cipital)  bone  above  the  great  foramen.”  In  the  ‘ Elements  of  Anatomy,’  b; 
Dr.  Quainl,  a work  of  repute  for  its  clearness  and  minuteness  of  detail,  tin. 
part  in  question  is  neither  named  nor  described.  The  term  supra-occijntah 
~L?sX..{supra-occipital,Y.wg..,sur-occipital,  Fr.),  is  obviously  a gain  to  anatomicA 
science  in  all  propositions  respecting  this  part  in  the  vertebrate  series. 

Certain  parts  of  a vertebra,  distinct  bones  at  an  early  period  in  man,  ano 
throughout  life  in  most  reptiles,  are  defined  by  Soemmerring  as  ‘radices  ar 
cus  posterioris  vertebrae,’  or  ‘ arcus  posterior  vertebrae  ’ collectively  §.  Monn 
describes  the  same  parts  separately,  as  “ a broad  oblique  bony  plate  extendet 
backwards,”  and  together,  as  “ a bony  arch  produced  backwards” : he  names' 
defines  and  minutely  describes  the  processes,  &c.  of  these  bony  plates,  whicl 
in  the  series  of  Vertebrata  are  soon  found  to  be  non-essential  characters ; bu. 
for  the  plates  themselves,  which  are  the  most  constant  and  essential  const! 
tuents  of  a vertebra,  he  has  no  name.  Dr.  Quain  defines  the  same  parts  as  “ twc 
plates  of  bone,  the  lamellae  or  arches,  which  complete  the  central  foramen  ||.’. 
They  are  sometimes  more  briefly  but  vaguely  spoken  of  in  English  worki 
of  Comparative  Anatomy  as  “ the  vertebral  lamellae  ” or  “ vertebral  laminae,' 
or  “ perivertebral  elements.”  The  term  ‘ neur apophysis,'  Lat.  and  Eng.  (‘  neur- 
apophyse,'  Fr.),  applicable  to  each  element  individually,  under  which  all  itf 
properties  may  be  predicated  of  by  the  adjective  ‘ neurapophysial,’  withou:. 
periphrasis,  seems  by  its  adoption  in  the  classical  works  of  MM.  Agassii 
and  Stannius,  to  be  as  acceptable  as  the  term  ‘ sur-occipital  ’ substituted  bj 
Cuvier  for  the  definitions  in  anthropotomy  above  cited. 

Similar  instances  of  the  absence  of  determinate  names,  capable  of  in-; 
flection,  for  parts  of  the  human  frame,  will  be  seen  in  the  last  column  ot 
Table  I.,  and  others  will  occur  to  the  anatomist,  even  in  regard  to  most 
important  parts,  as  the  primary  natural  divisions  of  the  neural  axis,  foi 
example,  to  the  great  hindrance  of  brief,  clear  and  intelligible  descriptions- 
So  long  as  the  phrases  ‘marrow  of  the  spine,’  ‘chord  of  the  spine,’  continut 
to  usurp  the  place  of  a proper  name,  all  propositions  concerning  their  sub-> 
ject  must  continue  to  be  periphrastic,  and  often  also  dubious.  Thus  if  the 
pathologist,  speaking  of  diseases  of  the  spinal  marrow,  desires  to  abbreviate 
his  proposition  by  speaking  of  ‘ spinal  disease,’  he  is  liable  to  be  misunder- 
stood as  referring  to  disease  of  the  spinal  or  vertebral  column.  The  vague, 
but  often-used  phrase  ‘chorda  dorsalis’  for  the  embryonic  fibro-gelatinous 
basis  of  the  spine,  adds. another  source  of  confusion  likely  to  arise  from  the 
use  of  the  term  ‘ spinal  chord,’  as  applied  to  that  most  important  part  of  thei 
neural  axis  which  I have  proposed  to  call  ‘ Myelon  ^,’  a term  which,  if  adopted, 
would  be  attended  by  this  advantage,  that  no  ambiguity  could  arise  in  speak- 
ing of  ‘ myelonal  functions,’  ‘ myelonal  affections,’  or  other  properties  of  this 
part  of  the  central  axis  of  the  nervous  system. 

Anthropotomy,  in  respect  to  its  nomenclature,  or  rather  the  want  of  one, 
is,  as  I have  already  remarked,  not  unlike  ^^hat  botany  was  before  the  time  ol 
Linnaeus,  and  we  may  anticipate  the  happiest  effects  from  a judiciously  re- 
formed technical  language  in  the  advancenrjent  of  the  true  and  philosophic 
knowledge  of  the  human  structure,  from  the  rapid  progress  of  botany  when 
the  opposition  raised  by  sloth  or  envy  to  the  Linnaean  reforms  was  overcome. 
For  a good  general  anatomical  nomenclature,  based  and  regulated  upon  the 

* De  Corporis  Humani  Fabrica,  1794,  t.  i.  p.  162.  f Kirby’s  edition,  8vo,  1820,  p.  76. 

t Elements  of  Descriptive  and  Practical  Anatomy,  8vo,  1828,  p.  50. 

§ De  Corporis  Humani  Fabrica,  1794,  t.  i.  pp.  235,  236. 

II  Elements  of  Descriptive  and  Practical  Anatomy,  8vo,  1828,  p.  121. 

If  Hunterian  Lectures,  vol.  ii.  ‘ Vertebrata,’  part  i.  p.  1 72. 


INTUOnUCTION. 


rinciples  above  defined,  uuist  reflect  its  benefits  upon  antliropotoinj%  1 dare 
ot  flatter  myself  that  the  names  adopted  or  proposed  for  the  Osseous  System 
f the  Vertebrata  in  my'IIuuterianLectures’and  in  tlie  first  column  of  lablel. 
ill  meet  at  once  with  acceptance,  but  the  attempt  to  establish  such  a nomen- 
ature  will  be  felt  to  have  been  an  indispensable  step  in  undertaking  a general 
irvey  of  the  homological  relations  of  the  vertebrate  skeleton. 

In  proposing  a definite  name  for  each  distinct  bone,  declaratory  of  its 
)ecial  homology  throughout  the  vertebrate  kingdom,  I have  sought  earnestly 
reduce  the  amount  of  reform  to  the  minimum  allowed  by  the  exigences 
the  case.  Agreeably  with  Aphorism  III.  of  the  ‘ Philosophy  of  the  In- 
active Sciences  ’ (p.  Ixvii.),  the  nomenclature  of  anthropotomy  forms  the 
isis,  and  all  the  names  given  to  parts  by  one  or  other  of  the  great  French 
latomists  have  been  accepted,  with  the  modifications  ot  a Latin  or  an  En- 
-ish  termination,  wherever  such  names  had  not  been  applied,  as  is  the  case 
ith  some  proposed  by  GeofiFroy  St.  Hilaire,  to  two  different  parts.  In  sub- 
ituting  names  for  phrases,  I have  endeavoured,  conformably  with  another 
‘Dr.  Whewell’s  canons  (Aph.  XVII.  op.  cit.  p.  cxvii.),  to  approximate  the 
.und  of  the  name  as  nearly  as  possible  to  those  of  the  leading  terms  of  the 
'finition  or  phrase,  as  e.  g.  alisphenoid  for  ‘ ala  media,  <Src.  sphenoidalis  ’ and 
r ‘ grande  aile  du  spheno’ide  ’ ; orbitosphenoid  for  ‘ ala  superior  seu  orbi- 
lis,  &c.  sphenoidalis,’  and  for  ‘aile  orbitaire  du  spheno'ide*.’ 

The  corresponding  parts  in  different  animals  being  thus  made  namesakes, 
e called  technically  ‘ homologues.’  The  term  is  used  by  logicians  as  syno- 
•mous  with  ‘ homonyms,’  and  by  geometricians  as  signifying  ‘ the  sides  of 
milar  figures  which  are  opposite  to  equal  and  corresponding  angles,’  or  to 
•rts  having  the  same  proportions  f : it  appears  to  have  been  first  applied  in 
.atomy  by  the  philosophical  cultivators  of  that  science  in  Germany.  Geof- 
oy  St.  Hilaire  says,  “ Les  organes  des  sens  sont  homologues,  comme  s’ex- 
Imerait  la  philosophie  Allemande ; e’est-a-dire  qu’ils  sont  analogues  dans 
-jr  mode  de  developpement,  s’il  existe  veritablement  en  eux  un  meme  prin- 
ce de  formation,  une  tendance  uniforme  a se  repeter,  a se  reproduire  de  la 
eme  fa^onL”  The  French  anatomist,  however,  seems  not  rightly  to 
::fiDe  the  sense  in  which  the  German  philosophers  have  used  the  term : 
ere  is  a looseness  in  the  expression  ‘analogous  in  their  mode  of  develop- 
3nt,’  which  may  mean  either  identical  or  similar,  and  also  different  kinds  of 
nilaritj'.  Parts  are  homologous  in  the  sense  in  which  the  term  is  used  in 
is  Work,  which  are  not  always  similarly  developed : thus  the  ‘ pars  occi- 
.xalis  stricte  sic  dicta,’  &c.  of  Soemmerring  is  the  special  homologue  of  the 
praoccipital  bone  of  the  cod,  although  it  is  developed  out  of  pre-existing 
Ttilage  in  the  fish  and  out  of  aponeurotic  membrane  in  the  human  subject. 

I ilso  regard  the  supraoccipital  as  the  serial  homologue  of  the  parietal  and 
5 midfrontal,  although  these  are  developed  out  of  the  epicranial  membrane 
the  fish,  and  not  out  of  pre-existing  cartilage,  like  the  supraoccipital. 
le  femur  of  the  cow  is  not  the  less  homologous  with  the  femur  of  the  cro- 
dile,  because  in  the  one  it  is  developed  from  four  separate  ossific  centres,  and 
i other  from  only  one  such  centre.  In  like  manner  the  compound  mandi- 
lar  ramus  of  the  fish  is  the  homologue  of  the  simple  mandibular  ramus  of 

The  happy  facility  of  combination  which  the  German  language  enjoys  has  long  enabled 
erainent  anatomists  of  that  intellectual  part  of  Europe  to  condense  the  definitions  of 
■hropotomy  into  single  words;  but  these  cannot  become  cosmopolitan;  such  terms  as 
interhauptbeinkbrper,’  ‘ Schlafbeinschiippcn.’and  ‘Zwischenkiemendcckelstiick,’ure  likely 
be  rMtricted  to  the  anatomists  of  the  country  where  the  vocal  powers  have  been  trained 
m infancy  to  their  utterance. 

y This  is  the  sense  in  which  the  term  is  defined  in  the  French  Dictiouarv  aud  in  our 
inson  s Dictionary. 

t Annales  des  Sciences  Naturelles,  tom.  vi.  182i,  p.  341. 


6 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


the  mammal,  as  the  compound  tympanic  pedicle  of  the  fish  is  homologoui 
with  the  simple  tympanic  pedicle  of  the  bird,  the  differences  expressed  b; 
the  terms  ‘ simple  ’ and  ‘ compound  ’ depending  entirely  on  a difference  o 
development. 

Without  knowing  the  precise  sense  in  which  Geoffroy  St.  Hilaire  under 
stood  ‘analogous  development,’  one  cannot  determine  how  much  or  how  littl 
it  is  applicable  to  the  determination  of  homologies  or  to  the  definition  o 
homologous  parts.  Dr,  Reichert  seems  to  have  been  unduly  influenced  by  th 
idea  of  ‘ analogy  or  similarity  of  development  in  the  determination  of  home 
logous  parts  ’ when  he  rejected  the  parietal  and  frontal  bones  from  the  syster 
of  the  endo-skeleton,  because  they  were  not  developed  from  a pre-existin 
cartilaginous  basis*,  or,  because  they  could  be  easily  detached  from  subja 
cent  persistent  cartilage  in  certain  fishes ; the  essential  distinction  betwee 
these  and  the  supra- occipital  in  regard  to  development  being,  that  wherea 
the  cartilaginous  stage  intervened  in  the  latter  between  the  membranous  an 
the  osseous  stages,  in  the  other,  usually  more  expanded,  cranial  spines,  th 
osseous  change  appears  to  be  immediately  superinduced  upon  the  primitiv 
aponeurotic  histological  condition. 

M.  Agassiz  seems,  in  like  manner,  to  give  undue  importance  to  similarit: 
of  development  in  the  determination  of  homologies,  where  he  repudiates  th 
general  homology  of  the  basi-sphenoid  with  the  vertebral  centrum,  and  coti 
sequently  its  serial  homology  with  the  basi-occipital,  because  the  pointed  en 
of  the  chorda  dorsalis  has  not  been  traced  further  forwards  along  the  basi 
of  the  cranium  in  the  embryo  osseous  fish  than  the  basi-occipital  f.  But  th 
development  of  the  centrum  of  every  vertebra  begins,  not  in  the  gelatinou 
chord,  but  in  its  aponeurotic  capsule,  and  it  is  in  the  expanded  aponeurosi 
directly  continued  from  the  ‘chorda’  along  the  ‘basis  cranii’  that  the  thi 
stratum  of  cartilage  cells  is  formed  from  which  the  ossification  of  the  bas> 
sphenoid,  presphenoid  and  vomer  proceeds. 

There  exists  doubtless  a close  general  resemblance  in  the  mode  of  dev< 
lopment  of  homologous  parts  ; but  this  is  subject  to  modification,  like  th 
forms,  proportions,  functions  and  very  substance  of  such  parts,  without  thei 
essential  homological  relationships  being  thereby  obliterated.  These  rek 
tionships  are  mainly,  if  not  wholly,  determined  by  the  relative  position  an 
connection  of  the  parts,  and  may  exist  independently  of  form,  proportior 
substance,  function  and  similarity  of  development.  But  the  connection 
must  be  sought  for  at  every  period  of  development,  and  the  changes  of  rela 
tive  position,  if  any,  during  growth,  must  be  compared  with  the  connection 
which  the  part  presents  in  the  classes  where  vegetative  repetition  is  greatei 
and  adaptive  modification  least. 

Relations  of  homology  are  often  not  only  confounded  with  those  of  analogy 
but  in  some  recent  and  highly  estimable  works  on  comparative  anatomy  th 
terms  ‘ analogy  ’ and  ‘ analogue  ’ continue  to  be  used  to  express  the  ideas  c 
homology  and  homologue,  or  are  so  used  as  to  leave  in  doubt  the  meaning  c 
the  author.  Thus  when  we  read  in  the  latest  edition  of  the  ‘ Lemons  d’Ant 
tomie  Coinparee’  of  Cuvier,  “ Les  branchies  sont  les  poumons  des  animau 
absolument  aquatiques,”  t.  vii.  p.  164;  and  with  regard  to  the  cartilaginoi 
or  osseous  supports  of  the  gills,  “ elles  sont,  a notre  avis,  aux  branchies  d( 
poissons,  ce  que  les  cerceaux  cartilagineux  ou  osseux  des  voies  aeriennes  sor 
aux  poumons  des  trois  classes  superieures,”  Ihid.  p.  177,  we  are  left  in  doul 
whether  it  is  meant  that  the  gills  and  their  mechanical  supports  merely  perfon 

* Vergleichende  Entwickelungsgeschichte  des  Kopfes  der  nackten  Reptilien,  4to,  183: 

pp.  212,  218. 

t Recherches  sur  les  Poissons  Fossiles,  4to,  1843,  i.  p.  127. 


INTRODUCTION. 


7 


V le  same  function  in  fishes  which  the  lungs  and  windpipe  do  in  mammals,  or 
- hether  they  are  not  also  actually  the  same  parts  differently  modified  in  re- 
gion to  the  different  respiratory  media  in  the  two  classes  of  animals.  The 
eeper-thinking  Geotfroy  leaves  no  doubt  as  to  his  meaning  where  he  argues 

(.  I the  ‘ Philosophie  Anatomique’  (8vo,  1818, 4-ieme  memoire,  p.  205),  that  the 
; ' rauchial  arches  of  fishes  are  the  modified  tracheal  rings  of  the  air-breathing 
jrtebrates : we  perceive  at  once  that  he  is  enunciating  a relation  of  homology. 
I have  elsewhere*  discussed  the  relations,  both  homological  and  analogical, 

V f the  respiratory  organs  of  the  air-breathing  and  water-breathing  vertebrate 
liuials,  and  have  here  adverted  to  them  merely  to  illustrate  the  essential 

. istinction  of  those  relations.  In  the  ‘ Glossary  ’ appended  to  the  first  volume 
j.  "my  ‘ Hunterian  Lectures,’  the  terms  in  question  are  defined  as  follows  : — 
“ Analogue.” — A part  or  organ  in  one  animal  which  has  the  same  func- 
I on  as  another  part  or  organ  in  a different  animal. 

“ Homologue.” — The  same  organ  in  different  animals  under  every  variety 

■ 'form  and  functionf.” 

I The  little  ‘ Draco  volans  ’ offers  a good  illustration  of  both  relations.  Its 
-re-limbs  being  composed  of  essentially  the  same  parts  as  the  wings  of  a bird 
. re  homologous  with  them ; but  the  parachute  being  composed  of  different 

■ arts,  yet  performing  the  same  function  as  the  wings  of  a bird,  is  analogous 
I them.  Homologous  parts  are  always,  indeed,  analogous  parts  in  one  sense, 

lasmuch  as,  being  repetitions  of  the  same  parts  of  the  body,  they  bear  in 
^ ;j!at  respect  the  same  relation  to  different  animals.  But  homologous  parts 
I'.ay  be,  and  often  are,  also  analogous  parts  in  a fuller  sense,  viz.  as  perform- 
“ ;g  the  same  functions;  thus  the  fin  or  pectoral  limb  of  a Porpoise  is  homo- 
cgoQS  with  that  of  a Fish,  inasmuch  as  it  is  composed  of  the  same  or  answerable 

■ arts : and  they  are  the  analogues  of  each  other,  inasmuch  as  they  have  the 
' .^me  relation  of  subserviency  to  swimming.  So,  likewise,  the  pectoral  fin  of 

■ -e  flying-fish  is  analogous  to  the  wing  of  the  Bird,  but,  unlike  the  wing  of 
. e Dragon,  it  is  also  homologous  with  it. 

i Relations  of  homology  are  of  three  kinds : the  first  is  that  above  defined, 

' :z.  the  correspondency  of  a part  or  organ,  determined  by  its  relative  position 
" . id  connections,  with  a part  or  organ  in  a different  animal ; the  determination 
' 'which  homology  indicates  that  such  animals  are  constructed  on  a common 
■'  pe:  when,  for  example,  the  correspondence  of  the  basilar  process  of  the 
; -uman  occipital  bone  with  the  distinct  bone  called  ‘ basi-occipital  ’ in  a fish 
■ ' ' crocodile  is  shown,  the  special  homology  of  that  process  is  determined. 

' A higher  relation  of  homology  is  that  in  which  a part  or  series  of  parts 
' :ands  to  the  fundamental  or  general  type,  and  its  enunciation  involves 
’;id  mplies  a knowledge  of  the  type  on  which  a natural  group  of  animals, 

_ -.e  vertebrate  for  example,  is  constructed.  Thus  when  the  basilar  process  of 

• '.e  human  occipital  bone  is  determined  to  be  the  ‘ centrum  ’ or  ‘ body  of  the 

■ St  cranial  vertebra,’  its  general  homology  is  enunciated. 

If  it  be  admitted  that  the  general  type  of  the  vertebrate  endo-skeleton  is 
-ghtly  represented  by  the  idea  of  a series  of  essentially  similar  segments 
' icceeding  each  other  longitudinally  from  one  end  of  the  body  to  the  other, 
ich  segments  being  for  the  most  part  composed  of  pieces  similar  in  number 
' id  arrangement,  and  though  sometimes  extremely  modified  for  special  func- 

■ ons,  yet  never  so  as  to  wholly  mask  their  typical  character, — then  any 
'ven  part  of  one  segment  may  be  repeated  in  the  rest  of  the  series,  just  as 

^ le  bone  may  be  reproduced  in  the  skeletons  of  different  species,  and  this 
* hectares  on  Vertebrata,  1846,  p.  279. 

' H Invertebrate  Animals,  8vo,  1843.  Glossary,  pp.  374,  379.  My  ingenious 

I learned  friend  Mr.  Huf^h  Strickland  has  made  a strong  and  able  appeal  to  the  good 

nse  of  comparative  anatomists  in  favour  of  the  restriction  of  these  terms  to  the  senses  in 
inch  they  are  here  defined.— Phil.  Mag.  1846,  pp.  358,  362. 


8 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


kind  of  repetition  or  representative  relation  in  the  segments  of  the  san^ 
skeleton  I call  ‘ serial  homology.’  As,  however,  the  parts  can  be  namesak  | 
only  in  a general  sense,  as  centrums,  neurapophyses,  ribs,  &c.;  and  sini  i 
they  must  be  distinguished  by  different  special  names  according  to  their  pa,: 
ticular  modifications  in  the  same  skeleton,  as  e.  g.  mandible,  coracoid,  pub 
&c.,  I call  such  serially  related  or  repeated  parts  ‘ homotypes.’  The  bas- 
occipital  is  the  homotype  of  the  basi-sphenoid ; or  in  other  words,  when  tl 
basi-occipital  is  said  to  repeat  in  its  vertebra  or  natural  segment  of  the  sk- 
leton  the  basi-sphenoid  or  body  of  the  parietal  vertebra,  or  the  bodies  of  tl 
atlas  and  succeeding  vertebrae,  its  serial  homology  is  indicated.  The  stui 
of  this  kind  of  homologies  was  commenced  by  Vicq  d’Azyr,  in  his  ingenioiij 
memoir  ‘ On  the  Parallelism  of  the  Fore  and  Hind  Limbs.’  If  we  excc 
the  complex  and  extremely  diversified  and  modified  parts  of  the  radiatt^ 
appendages  of  the  vertebral  segments,  to  which  Vicq  d’Azyr  restricted  h 
comparisons,  the  serial  homologies  of  the  skeleton  are  necessarily  demo 
strated  when  the  general  and  special  homologies  have  been  determined. 

In  the  present  section  I propose  to  consider  some  of  those  examples  of  sp 
cial  homology  which  are  least  satisfactorily  determined  and  respecting  whit 
different  opinions  still  sway  different  anatomists.  Such  instances  are  forti 
nately  few,  thanks  to  the  persevering  and  successful  labours  of  the  great  com 
parative  anatomists  of  the  last  half-century : pre-eminent  amongst  whom  w 
ever  stand  the  name  of  Cuvier,  in  whose  classical  works,  ‘ Ossemens  Fossiler 
‘Histoire  des Poissons,’  ‘ Lemons  d’AnatomieComparee’  (posthumous  edition 
and  ‘ Regne  Animal,’  1828,  will  be  found  the  richest  illustrations  of  the  spec! 
homological  relations  of  the  bones  in  the  four  classes  of  vertebrate  animals.- 
■ Second  only  to  Cuvier  must  be  named  Geoffroy  St.  Hilaire,  who? 
memoir  on  theBonesofthe  Skull  in  Birds  as  compared  with  those  in  Mammali 
in  the  ‘ Annales  du  Museum,  t.x.  (1807),  forms  an  early  and  brilliant  exampli 
of  the  quest  of  special  homologies,  which  could  not  fail,  with  other  and  simih 
investigations  of  the  same  ingenious  author,  to  impart  a stimulus  to  thi 
philosophical  department  of  anatomical  inquiry*.  In  regard  to  the  osteoiog. 
of  the  crocodile,  we  find  Cuvier  and  Geoffroy  engaged  in  a long  parallel  seriu 
of  rival  researches,  the  results  of  which  have  had  the  happiest  effects  in  dei 
termining  some  of  the  most  difficult  questions  of  special  homology. 

Nor  was  the  co-operation  of  zealous  cultivators  of  comparative  anatom 
wanting  in  the  eminent  schools  and  universities  of  Germany.  Goethe,  ii 
deed,  had  taken  the  lead  in  inquiries  of  this  nature  in  his  determination,  in  1 78", 
of  the  special  homology  of  that  anterior  part  of  the  human  upper  maxillar 
bone  which  is  separated  by  a more  or  less  extensive  suture  from  the  rest  c 
the  bone  in  the  foetus ; and  the  philosophical  principles  propounded  in  th 
great  poet’s  famous  anatomical  essaj's  called  forth  the  valuable  labours  of  th 
kindred  spirits,  Oken,  Bojanus,  Meckel,  Carus,  and  other  eminent  cultr 
vators  of  anatomical  philosophy  in  Germany.  | 

It  is  not  requisite  for  the  purpose  I have  in  view,  to  trace  step  by  step  th ; 
progress  of  the  special  homological  department  of  anatomy.  Its  presen 
state,  as  regards  the  skull  of  the  Vertebrata,  will  be  best  exposed  by  the  vie\ : 
of  the  fruits  of  the  latest  inquiries  embodied  in  Table  I.  appended  to  tint 
Work. 

That  table  gives  at  one  view  the  general  results  of  the  researches  int’ 
the  conformity  of  structure  of  the  skull  throughout  the  vertebrate  series; 

* Oken’s  famous  “Programm,  Uber  die  Bedeutung  der  Schadelknoclien”  was  publishe  i 
in  the  same  year  (1807)  as  Geoffroy’s  Memoir  on  the  Bird’s  skull ; but  it  is  devoted  less  t ( 
the  determination  of  ‘ special  ’ than  of  ‘ general  homologies  ’ : it  has,  in  fact,  a much  higheJ 
aim  than  the  contemporary  publication  of  the  French  anatomist,  in  which  we  seek  in  vai:' 
for  any  glimpse  of  those  higher  relations  of  the  l)ones  of  the  skull,  the  discoveni-  of  whiclj 
has  conferred  immortality  on  the  name  of  Oken. 


SPKCIAL  HOMOI.OOY. 


TKIIMS. 


9 


by  the  two  great  Treiicli  anatomists  who  have  most  advanced  this  part  of 
03teolo"icaI  science ; by  the  autliors  of  two  chussical  German  works  on 
Comparative  Anatomy ; and  by  their  countryman  Dr.  Hidlmann,  who  has 
detailed  in  an  elaborate  treatise  his  especial  investigations  of  some  of  the  most 
ditficult  parts  of  this  ditticult  intpiiry.  I have  added  the  synonyms  ot  the 
bones  of  the  head  of  fishes  from  the  great  work  of  the  celebrated  Swiss  na- 
turalist, who  has,  so  happily  For  ichthyology,  devoted  himself  to  the  advance- 
ment of  that  interesting  branch  of  Natural  History  ; and  also,  the  anthropo- 
tomical  terms  for  the  corresponding  parts  in  the  human  skeleton.  These, 
after  much  comparison  and  deliberation,  I have  chosen  from  the  justly-cele- 
brated work  of  SoEMMERKiNG,  the  high  reputation  of  which  has  been  sanc- 
tioned by  the  new  edition  to  which  some  of  the  most  eminent  of  the  German 
professors  of  anthropotomy  and  physiology  have  recently  devoted  their  com- 
bined labours.  The  English  teacher  of  these  sciences  will  find  some  of  the 
descriptive  designations  of  the  parts  by  Soemmerring  not  agreeing  with 
those  which  he  may  be  in  the  habit  of  nsing,  and  which  are  current  in  the 
later  Manuals  of  Anthropotomy  published  in  this  country  ; the  ‘ ossa  la- 
teralia  lingualia’  are  more  commonly  called,  with  us,  the  ‘ cornua  majora 
ossis  hyoidei’ ; the  ‘os  spheno-occipitale’  is  generally  described  as  two  di- 
stinct bones,  the  ‘os  occipitis’  and  ‘os  sphenoide’;  the  ‘pars  occipitalis 
stricte  sic  dicta,’  &c.  is  sometimes  called  ‘ squama  occipitalis,’  or  occipital 
plate ; and  other  synonyms  might  easily  be  multiplied  from  the  osteolo- 
gical  treatises  of  Monro  and  later  authors  of  repute.  The  fact  of  such  a 
conflicting  and  unsettled  synonymy  still  pervading  the  monographs  relating 
to  the  human  structure,  should  stimulate  the  well-wisher  to  the  right  progress 
of  anatomy  to  lend  an  earnest  aid  to  the  establishment  of  a fixed  and  deter- 
minate nomenclature.  A little  present  labour  and  the  example  of  adoption, 
where  the  reasonableness  and  necessity  of  the  reform  are  plain  and  undeni- 
able, will  much  accelerate  the  future  progress  of  anatomical  science ; and  I 
would  respectfully  appeal  to  the  Professors  and  Demonstrators  of  Human 
Anatomy  for  an  unbiassed  consideration  of  the  advantages  of  the  terms  pro- 
posed in  the  first  column  in  Table  I.  It  is  designed  to  express  the  results  of 
a long  series  of  investigations  into  the  speeial  homologies  of  the  bones  of  the 
head,  in  simple  and  definite  terms,  capable  of  every  requisite  inflection  to 
express  the  properties  of  the  parts,  and  applicable  to  the  same  bones  from 
the  highest  to  the  lowest  of  the  vertebrate  series. 

Apology  for  Terms. — The  degree  and  extent  of  the  diversity  of  my  deter- 
minations from  those  of  other  anatomists  are  shown  in  the  succeeding  co- 
lumns, headed  by  their  names  ; and  I proceed  now  to  give  the  reasons  which 
have  compelled  me,  in  such  instances,  to  dissent  from  the  high  authority  of 
Cuvier,  Geoffroy,  Meckel,  Hallmann  and  Agassiz  : these  reasons  will  exone- 
rate me,  I trust,  from  the  reproach  of  underrating  their  justly-esteemed  opi- 
nions, which  have  been  abandoned  only  where  nature  seemed  clearly  to  refuse 
her  sanction  to  them.  The  instances  of  such  dissent  are  much  fewer  than  they 
appear  to  be  at  first  sight.  In  most  cases,  where  the  names  differ,  the  deter- 
^ minations  are  the  same.  For  ‘ basilaire,’  which  Cuvier  exclusively  applies  to 

i the  ‘ pars  basilaris’  of  the  occiput,  and  which  Geoffroy  as  exclusively  applies 

(in  birds)  to  the  ‘pars  basilaris’  of  the  sphenoid,  I have  substituted  the  term 
■I  ‘basioccipital’  {hasi-occipitale,V,^\..') \ a term  which,  as  it  is  more  descriptive  of 
the  bone  in  question  (i  figs.  1 to  25),  will,  perhaps,  be  the  more  acceptable  to 
j those  who  prefer  a determinate  to  a variable  nomenclature,  since  Cuvier  him- 
self has  almost  as  freqiiently  applied  to  that  bone  the  term  ‘occipital  inferienr’ 
as  the  term  ‘ basilaire.’  For  the  descriptive  phrase  ‘ occij)ital  lateral,’  the 
f term  ‘exoccipital’  (exoccipUale,  Cat.),  proposed  by  Geoffroy,  is  preferable  for 


10 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


tlie  bones  2,2,  figs.  1 to  25;  especially  since  the  paroccipital  is  the  most  ‘ lateral’ 
of  tlie  elements  of  the  occipital  bone,  in  the  definite  sense  in  which  the  term 
‘ lateral’  is  used  in  the  precise  and  excellent  anatomical  nomenclature  of 
Dr.  Barclay.  For  the  numerous  syno- 
nyms borne  by  the  element  a of  the  oc- 
cipital segment  of  the  skull,  the  term 
‘ supraoccipital  ’ {swpra-occipitale,  Lat.) 
seemed  to  best  agree  with  the  truest  de- 
scriptive phrase  of  the  part,  viz.  ‘ occipital 
superieur.’  The  interparietal  is  no  con- 
stant cranial  element,  nor  is  it  a dismem- 
berment of  one  and  the  same  bone  of  the 
skull.  It  is  at  best  only  the  largest  and 
most  common  of  the  accidentally  interca- 
lated ‘ ossa  wormiana.’  Sometimes,  for 
example,  in  the  Cebus  monkey,  it  is  a 
dismemberment  of  the  backwardly-pro- 
duced  frontal  bone : more  frequently  it  is 
the  detached  upper  angle  of  the  supra- 
occipital. But  by  this  term  ‘ supraoccipi- 
tal,’ I signify  the  totality  of  the  bone  3 (in 
figs.  1,5,  18,  22,  23,  24-,  25),  confining 
the  term  interparietal  to  its  superior  and  ^'?‘‘'^'‘=“'‘‘‘®<^«p®"“P*>»''corneur-occipitaiarcb, 
anterior  apex  when  detached,  or  to  the  * 

superior  and  posterior  apex  of  the  frontal,  when  it  is  in  like  manner  detached 
and  wedged  between  the  parietal  bones.  The  inapplicability  of  the  term  ‘ in- 
terparietal’ to  the  whole  of  the  supraoccipital  is  strongly  manifested  in  those 
fishes,  e.ff.  the  carp  and  tench,  in  which  the  supraoccipital  is  withdrawn  from 
between  the  parietals  to  the  back  part  of  the  skull,  leaving  those  bones  to  come 
into  contact  and  unite  by  the  normal  sagittal  suture  on  the  mesial  line  of 
the  vertex.  Geoffrey’s  error  is  of  the  same  kind,  and  scarcely  greater  than 
Cuvier’s,  where  he  applies  the  term  ‘ interparietal’  to  the  whole  of  the  parietal 
bones  in  Birds*.  The  supraoccipital  thus  defined  can  never  be  mistaken  for 
the  ‘ sur-occipital’  of  Geoffroy,  who  by  this  term  signifies  the  elements  called 
‘ occipitaux  externes’  by  Cuvier.  At  the  same  time  the  term  ‘ sur-occipital’  is 
too  near  in  sound  to  ‘supraoccipital,’  and  too  significant  of  the  highest  part  of 
the  occipital  segment  to  be  retained  for  elements,  which,  like  the  ‘paroccipi- 
tals’(fig.  1,4,4),  are  usually  inferior  in  position  to  the  supraoccipital.  Geoffroy, 
moreover,  is  not  consistent  in  his  application  of  the  term  ‘sur-occipital.’  In 
his  memoir  on  the  skull  of  the  crocodile  in  the  ‘ Annales  des  Sciences’  for 
1824,  he  applies  that  term  to  a part  of  the  bonefi  the  whole  of  which  he  calls 
‘exoccipital  ’ in  his  later  memoir,  on  the  skull  of  the  crocodile,  of  1833;};; 
whilst  in  the  memoir  illustrated  by  the  skull  of  the  Sea-perch  (Serranus 
gigas)  in  the  ‘ Annales  des  Sciences’  for  1825,  the  term  ‘ suroccipital’  is  ap- 
plied to  the  whole  of  the  bones  described  as  ‘ occipitaux  externes’  by  Cuvier. 
I trust,  therefore,  to  have  shown  the  necessity  for  the  definite  name  of 
‘ paroccipital’  (paroccipitale,  Lat.)  which  is  here  proposed  for  the  elements,  4, 
of  the  occipital  segment  of  the  cranium  (figs.  1 and  5).  The  name  has  re- 
ference to  the  general  homology  of  the  bones  in  question,  as  ‘ parapophyses’ 
or  transverse  processes  of  the  occipital  vertebra.  And  if  the  purists  who  are 
distressed  by  such  harmless  hybrids  as  ‘mineralogy,’  ‘terminology’  and  ‘mam- 

* Annales  du  Museum,  x.  p.  363,  pi.  27. 

■f  PI-  16-  fig-  5z-|-R.  “ Plur-oeeipital  forme  du  sur-occipital  et  de  I’ex-occipital.” 

J Memoires  de  I’Acad.  Royale  des  Sciences,  t.  xii.  Atlas,  p.  43. 


SPECIAL  HOMOLOGY.  TERMS. 


11 


nialogy,’  should  protest  against  the  combination  of  the  Greek  prefix  to  the 
Latin  noun,  I can  only  plead  that  servility  to  a particular  source  of  the  tluc- 
tuating  sounds  of  vocal  language  is  a matter  of  taste  ; and  that  it  seems  no 
unreasonable  privilege  to  use  such  elements  as  the  servants  of  thought ; 
and,  in  the  interests  of  science,  to  combine  them,  even  though  they  come  from 
different  countries,  where  the  required  duty  is  best  and  most  expeditiously 
performed  by  such  association. 

For  the  same  motive  that  suggested  the  term  basi-occipital,  viz.  because 
the  anthropotomist  has  been 
long  accustomed  to  hear 
that  and  the  corresponding 
element  of  the  sjihenoid 
bone  described  as  ‘ basilar 
processes,’  I propose  to  sub- 
stitute the  term  ‘ basisphe- 
noid’  {basisphenoideumX-'di.) 
for  the  three  different  de- 
scriptive phrases  applied  to 
the  part  (5,  figs.  2, 5, 1 9,  & c. ) 
by  Cuvier,  for  the  two  ad- 
ditional synonyms  of  Geof- 
froy,  and  for  the  ‘sphenoi- 
deum  basilare’  of  Kallmann. 

‘ Alisphenoid  ’ (alisphenoi- 
dettm,  Lat.,  6,  e,  figs.  2.5, 19, 

&c.)  seemed  to  retain  most  of 
the  old  anthropotomical  term 
of ‘alae  majores,’  or  wings  ‘ par  excellence’  of  the  os  sphenoideum  ; as  ‘ orbito- 
sphenoid’  (prbito- sphenoideum,  10,  lo,  figs.  3 and  20)  best  recalls  or  expresses 
the  idea  conveyed  by  the  descriptive  phrase  ‘ alae  orbitales,’ or  ‘ailesorbi- 
taires,’  often  applied  to  the  homologous  bones,  regarded  as  processes  of  the 
sphenoid  in  human  anatomy.  Here,  however,  in  reference  to  the  alisphenoid, 
we  find  the  first  marked  discrepancy  in  the  conclusions  of  the  anatomists 
who  have  particularly  studied  its  special  homologies.  The  bone  which  ap- 
pears as  the  ‘grande  aile  du  sphenoide’  to  Cuvier  and  Agassiz  in  fishes,  is 
the  ‘petrosum’  to  Kallmann  and  Wagner;  it  is  also  ‘rocher’  (petrosal)  to 
Cuvier  himself  in  reptiles,  and  is  again  ‘ grande  aile  du  sphenoide’  in  birds 
and  mammals.  The  reasons  which  have  led  me  to  the  conclusion  that  the 
bones  so  denominated,  as  well  as  the  ‘ ptereal’  and  ‘prerupeal’  of  Geoffrey, 
are  homologously  one  and  the  same,  are  so  intimately  linked  with  the  con- 
sideration of  the  true  petrosal  and  of  other  elements  of  the  anthropotomist’s 
‘ temporal  bone,’  that  I reserve  the  discussion  of  these  questions  until  I have 
completed  the  apology  for  the  names  proposed  in  the  first  column  of  Table  I. 

The  ‘parietal’ (y?arieta/e,Lat.,7,7,figs.  2, 5,  19,&c.)and  ‘ mastoid’ (iwa.vfof- 
deum,  Lat.,  s,  s,  figs.  2,  5,  19,  &c.)  are  amongst  the  few  bones  that  have  had 
the  good  fortune  to  receive,  originally,  definite  names,  applicable  to  them 
throughout  the  vertebrate  series ; although  the  mastoid,  being  like  the  par- 
occipital,  essentially  a parapophysis,  loses  its  individuality  sooner  than  do 
other  bones  of  its  segment,  and  becomes,  therefore,  a ‘ processus  mastoideus 
ossis  temporis,’  in  the  language  of  anthropotomy.  The  homology  of  the 
‘parietal’  has  fortunately  been,  with  a single  exception,  universally  recog- 
nised throughout  the  vertebrate  subkingdom  ; the  exception  being  furnished 
by  the  eccentric  homologist  Geoffroy,  who  is,  as  usual,  inconsistent  with 
himself,  even  on  this  plainest  and  least  mistakeablc  point. 


Disarticulated  mesencephalic  or  neuro-parietal  arch,  viewed 
from  behind : Cod-fish. 


12 


ON  THE  VERTEBHATE  SKELETON. 


The  term  ‘ presphenoid  ’ {presphenoideum,  Lat.o,  figs.  3, 5, 20, 24',  25, &c.)  is  pro- 
posed forthe'sphenoi'de  anterieur,’on  the  principleof  substituting,  as  the  better 
instrument  of  thought,  a definite  name  for  a descriptive  phrase.  For  the  same 
reason  ‘postfrontal’  {posffron- 

tale,  Lat.,  12, 12,  figs.  3, 5, 20,  &c.)  ^ 'S* 

is  substituted  for  Cuvier’s  ‘ fron- 
tal posterieur’  and  its  sjmonyms. 

The  ‘frontal’  {frontale,  Lat.  ii, 
figs.  3,  5,  20,  &c.)  and  ‘ vomer’ 

{vomer,  Lat.,  13,  figs. 4,  5,  20,  25), 
are  among  the  few  bones  which 
have  had  their  special  homolo- 
gies recognised  unanimously 
throughout  the  vertebrate  sub- 
kingdom ; in  the  one  case  even 
without  departure  from  the 
original  anthropotomical  name, 
and  in  the  other,  with  but  a 
single  deviation  from  the  esta- 
blished nomenclature.  But  when 
Geoffrey  was  induced  to  reject 
the  term  ‘ vomer’  as  being  ap- 
plicable only  to  the  peculiar 
form  of  the  bone  in  a small 
proportion  of  the  vertebrata,  he 
appears  not  to  have  considered 
that  the  old  term,  in  its  wider 
application,  would  be  used  with- 
out reference  to  its  primary 
allusion  to  the  ploughshare,  and 
that  becoming,  as  it  has,  a purely  arbitrary  term,  it  is  superior  and  prefer- 
able to  any  partially  descriptive  one.  ‘ Rhinosphenal,’  it  is  true,  recalls  the 
idea  of  the  vomer  forming  the  continuation  in  the  nasal  segment  of  the  skull 
of  the  basi-  and  pre-sphenoidal  series  of  bones  in  other  segments ; but  ‘ vomer,’ 
used  arbitrarily,  summons  equally  every  idea  derived  to  form  the  complex 
whole  from  the  general  study  of  the  bone  throughout  the  vertebrate  series. 
‘Prefrontal’  {prefrontale,  Lat.,  14,  i4, 
figs.  4,  5,  21,  &c.)  claims  the  same  pre- 
ference over  anterior  frontal,  and  its 
foreign  equivalents,  as  does  postfrontal 
over  its  synonymous  phrases.  There  is 
also  another  reason  for  proposing  the 
term  ; viz.  because  it  is  applied  to  bones 
in  the  vertebrate  series  generally,  accord- 
ing to  conclusions  as  to  their  homologi- 
cal relations,  which  differ  from  those  to 
which  Cuvier  and  Geoffroy  had  arrived. 

The  discussion  of  the  discordant  deno- 
minations at  present  applied  to  this  im- 
portant element  of  the  skull  will  be  fully 
carried  out  in  the  sequel.  ‘Nasal’ 

{nasale,  is,  figs.  4,  5,  21,  &c.)  is  another 
of  the  few  instances  in  which  it  is  possible  to  retain  and  generally  apply  an 
old  and  received  anthropotomical  term.  No  one,  it  is  presumed,  will  con- 


Diaarticulated 


prosencepl 
from  Di 


halic  or  neuro-frontal  arch,  viewed 
ehind:  Cod-fish. 


Fig.  4. 


Disarticulated  rhinencephalic,  or  neuro-nasal  arch, 
\iewed  from  behind ; Cod-fish. 


SPECIAL  HOMOLOGY.  TEUMS. 


13 


tend  for  the  perpetual  expression  or  insertion  of  the  understood  generic  word 
‘bone’  or  ‘os'  in  this  case  any  more  than  iti  the  parietal,  frontal,  &c.,  whicli, 
from  being  originally  specific  adjectives,  have  been  properly  and  conveni- 
ently converted  into  definite  nouns. 

In  conformity  with  this  mode  of  acquiring  an  improved  as  well  as  brief 
and  precise  expression  of  anatomical  facts,  I have  substituteil  for  ‘pars  petrosa’ 
or  ‘ os  petrosum’  the  substantive  term  ‘petrosal’  (Lat.^je/ro5M;«,[figs.  5,25, 16). 
The  necessity  for  some  such  designation  for  an  essentially  and  often  physically 
distinct  bone  in  the  vertebrate  skull  has  been  felt  by  both  Cuvier  and 
Geoffrey,  when  they  respectively  proposed  the  names  ‘rocher’  and  ‘ rupeal’ 
for  the  element  in  question.  ‘ Petrosal’  has  appeared  to  me  to  be  the  best 
English  equivalent  of  Cuvier’s  ‘ rocher’ ; as  containing  the  most  character- 
istic vocable  of  the  old  anthropotomical  descriptive  phrase  ‘ pars  petrosa 
ossis  temporis,’  &c.  ‘ Rupeal’  unfortunately  has  no  determinate  meaning  ; it 
is  applied  by  its  author  with  certain  prefixes  to  several  distinct  bones,  which 
already  had  their  proper  names.  ‘ Sclerotal’  (sclerotale,  Lat.,  figs.  5,  22,  23, 17) 
for  ‘ ossicula  seu  laminae  osseae  membranae  scleroticae,’  is  proposed  on  the  same 
grounds  as  exoccipital,  postfrontal,  <Src.,  viz.  the  substitution  of  a name  for  a 
phrase.  The  sclerotals  have  not  been  usually  included  amongst  the  bones  of 
the  head,  though  they  have  precisely  the  same  claims  to  that  rank  as  the  pe- 
trosals, or  other  bony  capsules  of  the  organs  of  special  sense.  Retaining  the 
old  anthropotomical  term  ‘ ethmoid,’  I restrict  its  application  to  the  very  irre- 
gular and  inconstant  developments  of  bone  in  the  cartilage  or  membrane 
which  is  applied  to  the  anterior  outlet  of  the  cranium  proper,  for  the  support 
or  defence  of  the  cranial  part  of  the  organ  of  smell.  The  ‘ ossa  turbinata  supe- 
1 riora,’  and  the  ‘ cellulae  sethmoidese’  are  parts  of  the  capsule  of  that  sense,  ex- 
I tensively  developed  in  the  mammalia,  to  which  the  term  ethmoid  maj^  properly 
apply ; but  they  must  always  be  distinguished  from  the  modified  though  con- 

• slant  neurapophyses  of  the  nasal  vertebra,  called  ‘ prefrontals,’  with  which  the 
. above  developments  of  the  olfactory  capsule  usually  coalesce  in  birds  and  mam- 
mals. ‘Turbinal’  (t?<r5jVia/e,Lat.,figs.5,25, 19),  like  petrosal,  is  a substitute  for 
the  phrase  ‘os  turbinatum  inferius,’ and  its  synonym  ‘os  spongiosum  inferius.’ 

‘ Palatine’  (palatinum,  Lat.,  ib.  20)  is  another  of  the  few  fortunate  instances 
of  the  general  recognition  of  the  homologous  bone  throughout  the  vertebrate 
kingdom,  with  the  further  advantage  of  a steady  retention  of  a good  old  name. 

‘ -Maxillary’  {maxilla,  Lat.,  ib.  21)  is  a similar  instance  ; but  Geoffrey,  as 
usual,  makes  himself  singular  by  adding  an  uncalled-for  synonym.  If 
Soemmerring’s  term  ‘mandibula’  for  the  lower  jaw  were  universally  adopted 
and  constantly  understood  to  signify  the  totality  of  that  part  of  the  tympano- 
: mandibular  arch  throughout  the  vertebrate  series,  it  would  be  unnecessary 

• to  encumber  ‘ maxilla’  with  the  distinctive  epithet  ‘superior,’  which,  indeed, 
expresses  a character  peculiar  only  to  Man  and  a few  mammalia : in  the  ver- 

• tebrate  series  the  ‘ maxilla’  is  more  commonly  anterior  than  superior  to  the 
‘ mandibula.’ 

I have  adopted  the  term  ‘premaxillary’  {premaxillare,  Lat.  ib.  22),  as  used 
I by  M.  de  Blainville  and  some  other  distinguished  continental  osteologists,  in 
I preference  to  ‘ intermaxillary ;’  because  that  term  lias  already  been  applied 
I (by  .Schneider)  to  another  bone  of  the  skull  (the  tympanic  in  birds),  of  which 
I It  is  more  accurately  descriptive,  than  it  is  of  a bone  which  is  more  com- 
monly before  than  between  the  maxillary  bones.  ‘ Entopterygoid  ’ {entoptcry- 
fjoukurn,  Lat.)  claims  preference  to  the  phrases  ‘pterygoTde  interne’  of  Cuvier 
and  Agassiz,  on  the  same  logical  grounds  as  have  already  been  urged  in  favour 
of  ‘ exoccipital,’  ‘ prefrontal,’  &c.  But  I have  also  another  reason  for  pro- 
posing a definite  term  for  the  bone  23,  fig.  .5,  which  I regard  as  a peculiarly 


14 


ON  THE  VERTEBUATE  SKELETON. 


ichthyic  development.  Cuvier  has  applied  the  term  ‘ pt^rygoide  interne’ 
to  another  part  of  the  diverging  appendage  of  the  palato-maxillary  arch, 
which  part,  I concur  with  Dr.  Kdstlin  in  regarding  as  homologically  distinct 
from  the  ‘ entopterygoid’  of  fishes.  For  the  part  in  question,  viz.  the  ‘os 
transverse’  of  Cuvier  in  the  skull  of  fishes  (24,  fig.  5),  and  its  homologue  in 
reptiles,  wliich  lie  calls  ‘ pterygoidien  interne’  (24,  fig.  22),  I retain  the  terra 
‘pterygoid’  { pteri/goideum,  Lat.),  meaning  pterygoid  proper:  and  to  the 
bone  which  Cuvier  calls  ‘transverse’  in  reptiles  (24',  fig.  22),  I apply  the 
term  ‘ ectopterygoid’  {ectopterygoideum,  Lat.)  ; but  this,  as  the  table  demon- 
strates, does  not  signify  Cuvier’s  ‘os  transverse’  in  the  skull  of  fishes.  En- 
topterygoid, pterygoid  and  ectopterygoid,  have,  therefore,  both  the  advantages 
of  substantive  terms,  and  of  being  applied  steadily  each  to  a distinct  bony 
element.  The  ‘ hfirisseal’  of  Geoffroy,  like  the  ‘ pterygoide  interne’  of  Cuvier, 
means  one  thing  in  a fish  and  another  in  a crocodile  ; Geoffroy  has  also  en- 
cumbered the  latter  bone  with  a third  synonym.  ‘ Malar’  (pialare  or  os  malce, 
Lat.)  is  preferable  to  ‘jugal,’  because  Cuvier  applies  that  name  to  one  bone 
in  a fish,  to  another  in  a mammal,  and  to  two  essentially  distinct  though 
coalesced  bones  in  a bird.  Malar  is  also  the  name  most  commonly  applied 
by  English  anthropotomists  to  the  bone,  to  the  true  homologue  of  which  I 
would  restrict  its  application  throughout  the  vertebrate  series. 

With  regard  to  the  ‘squamosal’  (sgffwraosM??*,  Lat.  pars  squamosa,  &c.,  figs. 
22-25,27),  it  may  be  asked  why  the  term  ‘ temporal’  might  not  have  been  re- 
tained for  this  bone.  I reply,  because  that  term  has  long  been,  and  is  now  uni- 
versally, understood  in  human  anatomy  to  signify  a peculiarly  anthropotomical 
coalesced  congeries  of  bones  which  includes  the  ‘squamosal’  together  with  the 
‘ petrosal,’  the  ‘tympanic,’  the  ‘mastoid,’  and  the  ‘stylohyal.’  It  seems  prefer- 
able, therefore,  to  restrict  the  signification  of  the  term  ‘ temporal’  to  the  whole 
(in  Man)  of  which  the  ‘ squamosal’  is  a part.  To  this  part  Cuvier  has  unfor- 
tunately applied  the  term  ‘temporal’  in  one  class  and  ‘jugal’  in  another  : and 
he  has  also  transferred  the  term  ‘ temporal’  to  a third  equally  distinct  bone  in 
fishes;  whilst  to  increase  the  confusion,  M.  Agassiz  has  shifted  the  name  to  a 
fourth  different  bone  in  the  skull  of  fishes.  Whatever,  therefore,  may  be  the 
value  assigned  to  the  arguments  which  will  be  presently  set  forth,  as  to  the  spe- 
cial homologies  of  the  ‘ pars  squamosa  ossis  temporis,’  I have  felt  compelled  to 
express  the  conclusion  by  a definite  term,  and,  in  the  present  instance,  have 
selected  that  which  recalls  best  the  accepted  anthropotomical  designation  of  the 
part,  although  ‘squamosal’  must  be  understood  and  applied  in  an  arbitrary 
sense,  and  not  as  descriptive  of  a scale-like  form,  which,  in  reference  to  the  bone 
so  called,  is  rather  its  exceptional  than  normal  figure  in  the  vertebrate  series. 

The  term  ‘ tympanic’  (tympaniewn,  Lat.)  appears  to  have  received  the  most 
general  acceptance  as  applied  to  that  bone  which  the  early  ornithotomists  have 
called  ‘os  quadratum’  and  ‘ os  intermaxillare,’  (fig. 23, 2s)  and  which  as  a pro- 
cess of  the  human  temporal,  sometimes  called  ‘external  auditory,’  supports  the 
tympanic  membrane  (fig.  25, 2s).  ‘Caisse’  is  the  French  and  ‘pauke’  the  Ger- 
man equivalent ; but  Cuvier  more  commonly  uses  the  phrase  ‘ os  tympanique.’ 
The  chief  point,  in  reference  to  that  term,  as  applied  by  Cuvier,  from  which 
I find  myself  compelled  to  dissent  from  the  great  and  ever- to-be-revered 
anatomist,  relates  to  the  view  which  he  has  taken  of  the  large  and  long  pe- 
dicle which  supports  the  mandible  in  fishes,  and  which,  in  that  class,  is  sub- 
divided into  sometimes  two,  sometimes  three,  and  commonly  into  four  pieces. 
I regard  this  subdivision  of  the  elongated  supporting  pedicle  as  explicable 
chiefly,  if  not  solely,  by  reference  to  a final  purpose,  viz.  to  combine  strength 
with  a certain  elastic  yielding  and  power  of  recovery,  in  the  constant  and 
powerful  movements  to  which  it  is  subject  in  the  transmission  of  the  respi- 


SPECIAL  HOMOLOGY.  TERMS. 


15 


ratorv  currents,  and  in  the  prehension  and  deglutition  of  the  food.  Cuvier 
himself  regards  in  the  same  light  the  analogous  subdivision  of  the  mandibular 
or  lower  half  of  the  arch,  and  both  Conybeare*  and  Bucklandt  have  well 
illustrated  the  final  purpose  which  the  subdivision  of  the  lower  jaw  ot  the 
Crocodile  into  overlapping  pieces,  subserves.  Cuvier  has  given  distinct  and 
convenient  names  to  these  several  pieces  of  the  mandible,  but  he  views  them 
collectively  as  answering  to  the  simple  mandible  of  the  mammal  and  the  bird. 
I,  in  like  manner,  regard  the  subdivided  pedicle  supporting  the  mandible  in 
fishes  as  answering  to  the  undivided  pedicle  supporting  the  mandible  in  ophi- 
dians, lizards  and  birds.  There  is  the  same  necessity  or  convenience  for  a 
distinct  name  to  each  distinct  part  of  the  tympanic  pedicle,  or  upper  part  of  the 
tympano- mandibular  arch,  as  for  the  divisions  of  the  mandible  or  lower  part  of 
that  arch.  But  Cuvier  unfortunately  persuaded  himself  that  the  subdivisions 
of  the  tympanic  pedicle  in  fishes  represented  other  bones  in  higher  vertebrates 
besides  the  tympanic,  and  applied  to  them  the  names  of  such  bones.  I have 
been  compelled,  therefore,  in  dissenting  from  this  view  to  propose  new  names 
for  the  peculiar  ichthyic  subdivisions  of  the  tympanic,  and  in  doing  so  I have 
been  careful  to  retain  the  dominant  term,  and  to  distinguish  the  parts  by 
prefixes  indicative  of  their  relative  position.  Time  and  the  judgement  of 
succeeding  homologists  will  determine  the  accuracy  or  otherwise  of  this 
view ; and,  should  it  be  ultimately  adopted,  I feel  great  confidence  that  the 
terms  ‘epitympanic’  (epitympanicum,  Lat.,  fig.  5,  2sa),  mesotympanic  {ineso- 
tympanicum,  isb),  pretympanic  (^pretympanicum,  asc)  and  hypotympanic 
(hypotympanicum,  2sc?),  will  be  preferred  to  the  names  proposed  by  Geoffroy 
St.  Hilaire  for  the  same  parts.  With  regard  to  the  subdivisions  of  the  man- 
dible in  cold-blooded  vertebrates,  I adopt  most  of  those  proposed  by  Cuvier. 
As,  however,  ‘ operculaire  ’ had  been  applied  by  the  great  anatomist  to  a 
distinct  bone  in  fishes,  it  was  necessary,  in  order  to  avoid  its  use  in  a double 
sense,  to  substitute  a distinct  name  for  the  part  of  the  jaw  in  question,  and  as 
it  is  always  applied,  like  a surgeon’s  splint  or  plaster  to  the  inner  side  of  most 
of  the  other  pieces,  that  of  ‘spleniaT  {splenium,  Lat.,  figs.  22,23,  si)  suggested 
itself  to  me  as  the  most  appropriate  name.  For  an  obvious  reason  I have 
restored  the  term  ‘ coronoid’  (coronoideum,  si')  in  place  of  ‘ complementary,’ 
for  the  piece  into  which  the  crotaphite  muscle  is  always  more  or  less  inserted 
in  the  mandible  of  reptiles.  There  is  no  ground  for  disturbing  the  appropriate 
names  given  by  Cuvier  to  the  parts  of  the  diverging  appendage  of  the  tym- 
pano-mandibular  arch  in  fishes;  and  the  same  principle  which  he  has  adopted 
in  distinguishing  the  different  opercular  bones  (fig.  5,  si-sr),  has  guided  me 
in  naming  the  different  parts  of  the  bony  pedicle  which  supports  them. 

I have  gladly  adopted  as  many  of  the  well-devised  terms  which  Geoffroy 
proposed  for  the  elements  of  the  hyoid  arch,  as  his  unsteadiness  in  their  ap- 
plication would  permit  to  be  retained.  They  are  obviously  preferable  to  the 
descriptive  phrases  by  which  Cuvier  designates  the  homologous  parts. 

The  substantive  terms  applied  to  the  corresponding  divisions  of  the  bran- 
chial arches  have  been  modelled  on  those  of  the  hyoid  system  ; but  I have 
deviated  in  one  instance  from  the  rule  which  has  governed  throughout  my 
nomenclature  of  the  bones,  in  proposing  a second  name  for  a modified  homo- 
logue  in  the  air-breathing  animals,  of  a part  of  the  branchial  apparatus  in 
fishes,  viz.  that  part  which  is  retained  even  in  the  human  hyoid,  and  which 
is  known  in  anthropotomy  as  the  ‘ os  laterale  linguale,’  or  ‘ cornu  majus  ossis 
hyoidei for  this  part  I have  proposed  the  name  ‘ tliyrohyal,’  for  the  reasons 
assigned  in  the  note  (2)  to  Table  I. 

I he  names  assigned  to  the  bones  of  the  scapular  arch  (figs.  5, 22, 23,  24,  25, 
* Geol.  Trans.,  vol.  v,  p.  HOH.  f BriHgewater  Treatise,  vol.  i.  p.  17fi. 


16 


ON  THE  VERTEBHATE  SKELETON. 


23,  30-52)  and  its  appendages  (ib.  sa-ss)  agree  so  closely  with  those  which  a. 
they  have  always  borne  as  to  require  no  explanation  here.  The  chiefS 
surprise  of  the  anthropotomist  will  be  occasioned  by  their  being  included 
amongst  the  bones  of  the  head.  That  the  upper  or  pectoral  extremity  B 
and  its  supporting  arch  form  actually  parts  of  the  integral  occipital  seg-  B 
ment  of  the  skull,  will  be  proved  in  the  memoir  on  the  general  homologies  tB. 
of  the  bones  of  the  head.  I may,  here,  however,  in  reference  to  the  terms  iB 
‘ ulna’  and  ‘ radius,’  request  the  anatomist  to  compare  the  skeletons  of  the  A 
perch  or  cod  with  that  of  the  porpoise.  The  pectoral  extremity  is  in  the  A 
form  of  a fin,  and  in  both  fish  and  marine  mammal  it  is  applied,  in  a state  of  A 
rest,  prone  to  the  side  of  the  trunk ; in  this  position  it  will  be  seen  in  the  A 
Delphinus,  that  the  radius  is  downward,  and  the  ulna  with  its  projecting  w 
olecranon  upwards.  I take  this  as  the  guide  to  the  homology  of  the  two  bones  5 
that  support  the  carpal  series  of  the  pectoral  fin  in  fishes.  Cuvier,  however, 
gives  the  name  of  ‘ cubital,’  perhaps  on  account  of  its  angular  olecranoid 
prolongation,  to  the  lower  bone,  and  ‘radial’  to  the  upper  bone:  and  in 
these  determinations  he  is  followed  by  M.  Agassiz.  Both  bones  coalesce 
with  the  supporting  arch  in  the  lophius  and  some  other  fishes;  and  since,  in 
the  lophius,  two  of  the  carpal  bones  are  unusually  elongated,  Geotfroy  mistook 
these  for  homologues  of  the  radius  and  ulna.  The  condition  of  the  pelvic 
member  or  ventral  fin  is,  in  fact,  here  repeated  in  the  pectoral ; there  being 
no  homologous  segment  of  thigh  or  leg  interposed  in  any  ventrals  between 
the  supporting  (pelvic)  arch  and  the  fin-rays  representing  the  tarso-me- 
tatarse  and  phalanges.  The  earlier  stages  in  the  development  of  all  loco- 
I motive  extremities  are  permanently  retained  or  represented  in  the  paired  fins 
of  fishes.  First  the  essential  part  of  the  member,  the  hand  or  foot,  appears : 
then  the  fore-arm  or  leg ; both  much  shortened,  fiattened  and  expanded,  as 
, in  all  fins  and  all  embryonic  rudiments  of  limbs:  finally  comes  the  humeral 
and  femoral  segments ; but  this  stage  I have  not  found  attained  in  any  fish. 

It  is  with  considerable  doubt  that  I place,  qualified  by  a note  of  interroga- 
tion, Cuvier’s  “ troisieme  os  qui  porte  la  nagoire  pectorale”  as  the  homologue 
or  rudimental  representative  of  a ‘ humerus.’  Normally,  I believe  this  proxi- 
' mal  member  of  the  radiated  appendage  of  the  scapular  arch  not  to  be  di- 
stinctly eliminated  from  that  arch  in  the  class  of  fishes.  The  Siluroids  are 
examples  of  a similar  confluence  of  the  first  segment  (preoperculum)  of  the 
diverging  appendage  of ■ the  tympanic  arch  with  that  arch.  With  regard  to 
the  lower,  distal  or  apical  element  of  the  scapulo-coracoid  arch,  always  the 
largest  bone  of  the  arch  in  fishes,  Cuvier’s  idea  that  it  is  the  ‘ humerus,’  far 
less  accords  with  the  law  of  the  development,  the  connections,  and  the  essen- 
tial nature  of  that  bone,  than  the  more  prevalent  view,  that  it  represents  the 
clavicle:  a view  entertained  by  Spix,  Meckel,  and  Agassiz,  by  Wagner, 
who  calls  it  ‘ vordere  Schliisselbein,’  and  by  Geotfroy,  who  calls  it  ‘ furculaire.’ 

I have,  however,  been  induced  to  regard  the  lower  element  of  the  scapular 
arch,  in  fishes  (fig.  5,  52),  as  homologous  with  that  bone,  the  ‘ coracoid,’  which 
I progressively  acquires  a more  constant  and  larger  development  in  descending 
from  mammals  to  fishes,  and  which  is  manifestly  a more  essential  part  of  the 
. arch  than  the  clavicle,  since  it  is  more  constant  in  its  existence,  and  always 
more  completely  developed  in  birds  and  reptiles ; and  especially  since  it  con- 
tributes  more  or  less  of  the  surface  of  attachment  for  the  radiated  appendage, 
^'which  the  clavicle  never  does.  With  reference,  also,  to  the  Cuvierian  deter- 
mination of  the  haemapophysial  portion  of  the  occipital  inverted  arch  in  fishes, 
this  is  unquestionably  as  essential  an  element  of  the  arch  as  is  the  ‘ coracoide’  I 
in  other  vertebrates  ; and  it  is  the  most  important  part  in  the  piscine  class,  in  I 

no  member  of  which  does  it  present  the  slightest  approach  to  the  character  of  j 


Dbarticulatcd  bones  of  the  neural  arches  (N  I to  IV)  and  sense-capsules;  the  hiemal  arches  (II  I to  IV)  and  appendages  in  diagrammatic  outline.  Cod  {Morrhua  vulgaris). 


» . 


tl 


» 


\ ^ -w  “ l“i  ' ■ ' i.^T!  • .n  . 


: 


v'  -;  •%' 


- • in*  , 


-I**. 


«l 


' / vr  > 


/ 'vVj*  . t.^l 

' — f»» 

:;  ■ <-^ 


SPECIAL  HOMOLOGY. 


19 


adiver^^ing  appendage,  sucli  as  the  humerus  essentially  is,  whenever  it  has  an 
independent  existence.  By  some  ichthyotomists,  tlie  bone  which  I call  cora- 
coid (si)  has  received  the  special  name  ot  ‘ ccenostcon.’ 

Cuvier’s  usual  judgement  anil  acumen  seem  to  have  been  in  abeyance, 
when,  having  determined  the  rays  of  the  pectoral  fin  to  represent  the  bones 
af  the  hand,  and  the  two  bones  which  support  them  in  fishes  to  be  those  of 
;he  fore-arm,  he  concluded  that,  therefore,  the  great  bone  which  completed 
;he  scapular  arch  “repondra  done  necessairement  ii  riuimerus.” — Hist,  cles 
Poissons,  -1-to.  i.  p.  ffT-f.  The  great  anatomist  assigns  no  other  reason  : but 
he  arch  supporting  the  ventral  fin  does  not  necessarily  answer  to  the  tibia 
)r  the  femur,  because  neither  of  these  segments  are  interposed  between  the 
irch  and  its  appendage — the  modified  foot.  The  scapula  of  many  reptiles, 
-specially  of  the  batrachia,  is  manifestly,  he  proceeds  to  state,  eomposed  of 
wo  bones.  But  in  those  reptiles  the  arch  is  completed  below  by  a third 
)one,  which  neither  Cuvier  nor  any  other  anatomist  has  ealled  ‘ humerus.’ 
vNow  Cuvier’s  ‘humerale’  in  fishes  preeisely  answers  to  that  third  bone  in 
eptiles  which  he  rightly  calls  the  ‘coracoid’  in  that  class. 

The  coracoid  of  fishes  being  thus  determined,  it  necessarily  follows  that 
hat  inconstant  bone,  or  pair  of  bones  (53)  posterior  to  it  on  each  side,  cannot 
•e,  as  Cuvier,  Geofifoy,  Meckel  and  Agassiz  have  supposed,  the  representa- 
ive  of  the  ‘os  coracoi'dien’  of  the  reptile  and  bird.  It  holds,  indeed,  as  they 
iave  said,  the  same  relative  position  to  the  bone  52,  here  called  coracoid, 
^hich  the  coracoid  in  the  lizard  and  bird  holds  to  the  clavicle  in  those  ani- 
■jals.  But  is  no  account  to  be  taken  of  the  remarkably  though  normally  ad- 
vanced position  of  the  scapulo-coracoid  arch  in  fishes?  Granting,  as  I shall 
ive  evidence  to  prove  in  treating  of  the  general  homologies  of  the  bones, 
lat  the  bone  (ss)  called  by  Cuvier  ‘coracoi'dien’  in  fishes  appertains  to  a 
I ertebral  segment  posterior  to  the  occipital  one,  yet  in  the  extraordinary  back- 
;ard  displacement  which  the  true  scapulo-coracoid  arch  undergoes  in  the 
•ir-breathing  vertebrates,  may  not  the  relative  position  of  ss  to  that  arch 
i€Come  reversed,  and  the  part  which  is  behind  in  fishes  become  before  in 
i.-irds  ? I entertain  no  unmeet  confidence  in  the  correctness  of  my  view  of  the 
•jecial  homology  of  Cuvier’s  ‘os  coraco'idien  ’ in  fishes  with  the  furculum  or 
; clavicle’  (fig.  25,  52')  of  air-breathing  vertebrates:  the  argument  against  such 
view,  from  its  posterior  position  in  fishes,  has  not,  however,  the  same  w'eight 
nth  me  as  it  appears  to  have  had  with  Cuvier  and  his  followers  ; and,  leaving 
lis  as  one  of  the  undecided  points  in  special  homology,  wnth  the  proposition 
f the  provisional  name  of  ‘ epicoracoid  ’ (epicoracoideum,  Lat.)  for  the  piscine 
one  in  question,  I proceed  to  consider  other  unsettled  points  of  special  homo- 
.'gy,  for  the  determination  of  which  there  are  better  and  surer  grounds. 

Moot  Cases  of  Special  Homology. — The  first  discrepancy,  demanding  par- 
cular  consideration,  which  meets  the  eye  in  the  Table  I.  is  that  which 
.dates  to  the  determination  of  no.  0.  The  German  authorities  regard  what 
believe  to  be  the  homologue  of  the  human  ‘ala  major  sphenoidalis’  in 
le  cold-blooded  Vertebrata,  to  be  the  homologue  of  the  ‘ pars  petrosa  ossis 
) mporis.’  Cuvier  rightly  recognises  the  ‘ grande  aile  du  spheno'ide’  in 
j lammals,  birds  and  fishes,  but  regards  my  ‘ alisphenoid’  in  reptiles  as  the 
rocher’ or  ‘ pars  petrosa.’  Geoffroy  concurs  with  Cuvier  and  the  German 
latorriists  so  far  a.s  to  view  my  ‘alisphenoid’  in  the  Crocodile  as  a dis- 
emberment  of  the  petrosal,  calling  it  ‘ prcrupcal ;’  but  he  recognises,  like 
gassiz  and  Cuvier,  the  true  ali.sphenoid  in  fishes,  and  with  them  dilfers  in 
at  respect  from  the  German  homologists.  It  docs  not  appear  that  the 
isphenoid  has  been  mistaken  for  any  other  bone  than  the  petrosal,  and 
e question  to  be  determined,  therefore,  i.s.  What  arc  the  essential  cha- 

c 2 


20 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


racters  respectively  of  tlie  ‘alisphenoid’  and  the  ‘petrosal’  in  the  vertebr- 
series  ? 

Those  of  the  alifsphenoid  appear  to  me  to  be  the  following: — 1st,  its  c 
nection  below  with  the  basisphenoid  and  behind  with  the  petrosal,  wherr; 
forms  the  forepart  of  the  ‘otocrane’  or  cavity  for  the  reception  of  that  ossei 
or  cartilaginous  immediate  capsule  of  the  labyrinth  or  internal  organ  of  he*,  i 
ing:  the  alisphenoid  is  also  commonly,  but  not  constantly,  joined  bef 
with  the  orbitosphenoid,  and  above  with  the  parietal : it  has  other  less  c<f 
stant  connections  with  the  squamosal,  the  exoccipital,  the  supraoccipital  z. 
the  basioccipital : 2ndly,  with  regard  to  its  essential  functions,  the  alisphen 
protects  more  or  less  of  the  side  of  the  mesencephalon,  or  (in  .mammals) 
the  middle  lobe  of  the  cerebral  hemisphere  : it  gives  exit,  by  notches  or  fo 
mina,  to  the  third,  and  usually,  also,  to  the  second  divisions  of  the  trigemi 
or  fifth  pair  of  nerves. 

The  essential  character  of  the  petrosal  is  to  envelope  immediately  1 
whole  of  the  vascular  and  nervous  tunics  of  the  labyrinth  or  internal  orgr 
of  hearing,  either  in  a membranous,  a cartilaginous  or  an  osseous  sta 
its  histological  condition  being  much  less  constant  than  that  of  the  alispl 
noid. 

On  viewing  the  alisphenoid  on  the  interior  surface  of  the  human  sk^ 
(fig.  6,  e),  it  seems  to  be  the  least  significant  and  important  part  of  the  late 


Fig.  6. 


walls  of  the  cranial  cavity  : it  forms  their  smallest  portion  : it  is  much  su 
passed  in  extent  by  the  squamosal  {ib.  27)  and  the  supra-occipital  (ib.  3 
and  still  more  so  by  the  enormously  expanded  parietal  (7)  and  frontal  (n 
Nevertheless  we  find  it  connected,  anchylosed  indeed,  below  to  the  basispli 
noid  (5),  bounding  anteriorly  the  space  into  which  the  petrosal  (le) 
wedged;  connected  in  front  with  the  orbito-sphenoid  (10),  and  usuall 
articulating  by  its  superior  apex  with  the  parietal : I purposely  omit  th 
mention  of  other  connections  of  the  alisphenoid  in  Man  which  are  le; 
constant  in  the  vertebrate  series.  But  it  is  important  to  observe,  notwitl 
standing  the  displacement  which  the  alisphenoid  has  undergone  through  th 
intercalation  of  the  extraordinarily  developed  squamosal  into  the  lateral  walli^ 


SPECIAL  HOMOLOGY.  ALISPUENOI  D. 


21 


r the  craniuiu,  tliat  it  is  still  perforated  by  the  third  {ib.  tr)  and  second 
ivisions  of  the  fifth  or  trigeminal  nerve. 

Ill  tracing  the  alisphenoid  downwards  througii  the  mammalian  series,  we  can- 
ot  but  be  impressed  with  the  conviction  of  its  true  character  and  importance 
sail  essential  part  of  the  cranium,  from  its  constancy  in  the  formation  of  its 
•alls, and  by  observing  that,  whilst  the  share  which  the  squamosal  takes  in  them 
rogressively  decreases, — until  in  the  sheep,  for  example,  it  is  quite  excluded 


Fig.  7. 


\ erdcal  longitudinal  section  of  the  cranium  of  a sheep  {Ovis 


nni  the  cranial  cavity, — that  of  the  alisphenoid  (fig.  7,  o)  increases  as  the 
vity  itself  diminishes  in  size;  and,  further,  that  this  increase  is  not  accom- 
inied  with  any  material  change  in  the  relative  size  of  the  alisphenoid  to  the 
ffsisphenoid.  The  share  which  the  alisphenoid  takes  in  forming  the  ante- 
or  bonndary  of  the  otocrane  increases;  as  does  also  the  extent  of  its  supe- 
'ir  connections,  especially  of  that  with  the  parietal  (7).  It  is  important, 
: tracing  these  modifications,  to  note,  also,  the  change  in  the  relative  position 
the  foramen  ovale  in  the  mammalian  series.  In  Man  the  foramen  ovale 
:g.  6,  <r)  is  close  to  the  hinder  border  of  the  alisphenoid ; and  in  some 
jadrumanes  the  third  division  of  the  fifth  escapes  through  a notch  in  the 
me  border.  This  position  of  the  foramen  ovale  relates  to  the  alisphenoid 
ing  pushed  forward  by  the  intrusion  not  only  of  a large  ossified  petrosal 
^),  but  of  a still  larger  squamosal  (27).  In  the  sheep,  however,  the  fora- 
^ m ovale  is  no  longer  at  the  posterior  margin  ; but,  the  alisphenoid,  having 
itrograded  by  the  recession  of  the  squamosal  towards  its  more  normal  ex- 
vrior  position  in  the  vertebrate  series,  the  third  division  of  the  trigeminal 
ow  perforates  its  middle  part  (fig.  7,  ^r).  It  may  be  observed  that,  con- 
unitantly  with  this  retrogradation  of  the  alisphenoid,  the  orbito-sphenoid 
>.  10)  acquires  larger  proportional  dimensions  than  in  Man  (fig.  6,  10). 
i In  the  bird  the  alisphenoid  (fig.  8,  g)  is  recognizable  by  the  repetition  of 
J connections  which  it  presented  in  the  sheep;  the  squamosal  being  quite 
eluded  from  the  cranial  parietes,  and,  indeed,  never  again  presenting  itself 
the  capacity  of  a cranial  bone  in  any  of  the  oviparous  vertebrates.  The 
sphenoid  (fig.  23,  n)  is  in  contact  posteriorly  with  the  petrosal  (ib.  10), 
•ich  soon  becomes  anchylosed  with  it,  as  well  as  with  the  exoceijiital  (-2), 
istoid  (s),  and  other  bones  forming  the  cavity  for  the  reception  of  the  ear- 
^ule,  in  all  birds.  I he  alisphenoid  further  manifests  its  true  homology  in 
2 bird  by  its  other  constant  character  of  transmitting  the  third  and  also  the 
Jond  or  maxillarj-  division  of  the  trigeminal  nerve  ; which  divisions,  in  the 


young  ostrich,  I found  distinctly  perforating  the  middle  of  its  lower  borf 
(fig.  8,  0,  tr).  The  alisphenoid  is  deeply  impressed  by  the  chief  ganglions  of  i. 
mesencephalon,  viz.  the  optic  lobes.  The  prosencephalon  or  hemispheres 
still  defended  principally  by  expanded  parietals  {ib.7)  and  frontals  (ib.  11  n 
In  the  crocodile  these  spines  of  cranial  vertebrae  are  much  I’estrictedi 
their  development,  and  a larger  proportion  of  the  hemispheres  is  defenu 
by  the  orbitosphenoid  (fig.  9, 10),  which  here  surpasses  the  alisphenoid  (ib;- 
in  size.  This,  however,, still  performs  its  essential  and  characteristic  fuij 


Fig.  9. 


I 

Vertical  longitudinal  section  of  the  cranium  of  a crocodile  {Crocodilus  aculus). 


tions  of  protecting  the  sides  of  the  mesencephalon,  and  giving  issue  to  tl' 
chief  part  of  the  trigeminal  nerve.  Owing  to  the  diminution  in  size  of  tl 

* The  right  frontal  has  been  removed  to  show  better  the  extent  and  connections  of  tU 
orbitosphenoid  (10)  and  the  prefi'ontal  (n). 


SPECIAL  HOMOLOGY.  A LISPIl  EXOII). 


2.3 


etrosal  (lo),  and  the  retention  by  a great  proportion  of  tliis  capsule  of  tlie 
coustic  labyrinth  of  its  primitive  cartilaginous  state,  it  occupies  a smaller 
iter'val  between  the  alisphenoid  (t>)  and  exoccipital  (-2).  It  no  longer  i>ro- 
•udes  its  a large  bony  wedge  (as  in  figs.  6 ami  7,  m)  into  the  cranial  cavity, 
ut  permits  the  alisphenoid  to  come  into  connection  with  the  exoccipital. 
'he  result  of  this  further  retrogradation  of  the  alisphenoid,  in  regard  to  the 
dative  position  of  the  outlet  of  the  third  division  of  the  fifth,  is  analogous 
) that  which  occui-s  in  the  sheep.  We  saw  in  that  mammal,  through  the 
jcession  of  the  squamosal,  the  foramen  ovale  advanced  from  the  posterior  to 
le  middle  part  of  the  alisphenoid ; in  the  crocodile,  through  the  further  re- 
loval  from  the  cranial  cavity  of  the  interposed  petrosal,  the  foramen  ovale  is 
Ivanced  to  the  anterior  border  of  the  alisphenoid ; which  border,  in  fact,  it 
stches,  the  nerve  escaping  by  a common  foramen  or  ‘ trou  du  conjugaison’ 
Btween  the  alisphenoid  and  the  orbitosphenoid,  the  hole,  however,  being 
■incipally  formed  by  the  alisphenoid  (fig.  9,  tr).  This  position  of  the  ‘ fora- 
en  ovale’  loses  all  its  value  as  an  argument  in  favour  of  the  petrosal  cha- 
.cter  of  no.  o,  by  analogy  with  the  position  of  the  foramen  ovale  in  man 

• the  ape,  when  we  take  into  consideration  the  necessary  consequences  of 
e successive  withdrawal  of  the  squamosal  and  true  petrosal  from  the  inner 
rface  of  the  cranium  in  descending  to  the  reptiles.  The  orbitosphenoid 

jg.  9,  10),  notwithstanding  its  great  relative  size,  retains  all  its  essential  cha- 
cters:  it  is  perforated  or  notched  for  the  exit  of  the  optic  nerves  (op)  and 
-•st  division  of  the  fifth  pair  (s);  it  rests  upon  the  presphenoid  (9)  below, 
id  likewise,  through  its  backward  development,  partly  upon  the  basisphe- 
lid,  and  it  articulates  with  the  frontal  (11)  above,  and  also  through  the 
: me  backward  extension  with  the  parietal  (7) ; it  constitutes  the  anterior 
order  of  the  lateral  bony  parietes  of  the  cranium,  which  are  interrupted 
' the  orbits,  and  separated  by  their  interposition  in  saurians  and  fishes 
om  the  rhinencephalic  part  of  the  cranial  cavity  (at  14,  fig.  9).  The  cha- 
cters,  in  fact,  of  the  orbitosphenoid  are  so  clearly  manifested  in  the  cro- 
>dile,  that  Cuvier,  having  been  led  by  the  increased  share,  as  compared 
ith  mammals,  which  the  crocodile’s  alisphenoid  (fig.  9,  0)  takes  in  the  form- 
ion  of  the  otocrane,  to  regard  it  as  the  petrosal,  and  yet  perceiving  the 
-sential  characters  of  the  orbitosphenoid  in  the  bone  {ib.  10)  anterior  to  it, 
■as  driven  to  the  conclusion  that  that  bone  represented  both  orbitosphe- 
)id  (‘aile  orbitaire  du  sphenoi'de’)  and  alisphenoid  (aile  temporale  du  sphe- 
iTde).  The  cold-blooded  crocodile,  however,  is  not  exactly  the  animal  in 
hich  we  should  expect  to  find  so  unusual  an  instance  of  obliteration  of 
■ tures,  as  that  between  the  alisphenoid  and  orbitosphenoid*.  The  actual 
id  most  characteristic  modification  of  the  orbitosphenoid  in  the  crocodile’s 
ull,  is  its  retrogradation  together  with  the  alisphenoid,  or  rather  the  main- 
nance  of  its  normal  connection  therewith  by  increased  antero-posterior 
ivelopment,  whereby  it  comes  into  communication  above  with  the  parietal 
) and  below  with  the  basisphenoid  (5) ; whilst  the  alisphenoid,  in  like 
anner,  gains  a connection  with  the  supra-occipital  (3)  above  and  the  basi- 
icipital  (1)  below ; although  it  still  retains  its  more  normal  relations  with  the 
irietal,  and  rests  in  great  part  on  the  basisphenoid  (5),  as  the  orbitosphe- 
)id  rests  in  great  part  upon  the  pre-sphenoid  (9.)  The  superior  connec- 

* No  one  better  appreciated  the  characteristic  persistence  of  the  sutures  in  the  crocodile 
an  Cuvier,  when  his  attention  was  not  diverted  from  it  hy  a favourite  hypothesis.  “ Le 
ocodileacela  d'avantageux  a I’etudc  de  son  osteologic,  que  scs  sutures  ne  s’eflacent  point, 
t moins  n’en  a-t-il  dispani  aucunc  dans  nos  plus  vicillcs  tftes,”  is  the  remark  with  which 
: commences  his  article  on  the  determination  of  the  hones  of  the  head  of  that  reptile 
•ss^ens  Possiles,  tto.  v.  pt.  ii.  p.  €>'.)):  hut  .at  p.  70,  a suture  is  assumed  to  he  effaced, 
aich  is  present  in  most  mammals  and  all  cold-blooded  vertebrates,  where  a wider  space 
•es  not  intervene  between  the  alisphenoid  and  orbitosphenoid. 


24 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


tions  of  the  orbitosphenoicl  and  alisphenoid  are  always  less  constant  ' n 
their  inferior  ones.  By  these  latter  characters,  and  still  better  by  their  ne  »ii 
outlets  and  their  relations  to  the  primary  divisions  of  the  encephalon,  !■ 
they  rightly  and  truly  determinable.  The  German  authors  who  have  i- 
lowcd  Cuvier  in  his  views  of  the  special  homology  of  the  alisphenoid  in  ^ 
tiles,  are  more  consistent  than  the  great  French  anatomist  in  regard  to  -jf 
alisphenoid  of  fishes.  Dr.  Hallmann,  accepting  Cuvier’s  characters  of  thc'^  f 
trosal,  taken  from  its  internal  position  and  lodgement  of  the  whole  or  it  ' 
of  the  labyrinth*,  naturally  applies  them  to  the  alisphenoid  in  fishes,  (i  ; 
adds  to  the  grounds  for  regarding  that  bone  as  the  ‘ petrosal,’  that  it  i j • 
some  fishes  perforated  by  the  opercular  branch  of  the  great  trigeminal  ner\  «’ 
But,  admitting  the  homology  of  the  opercular  nerve  with  the  facial  nerv  ^ 
mammals,  yet  its  wider  homology  and  essential  character  as  a motor  divi;:|j 
of  the  great  trigeminal  nerve  must  not  be  lost  sight  of:  its  origin  in  c ■ 
contiguity  with  the  great  sensory  portions  of  the  trigeminal  in  fishes  accc'il 
better  with  the  character  of  that  neiwe  as  the  great  spinal  nerve  of  the  br:  H 
than  it  usually  presents  in  higher  classes ; and  it  is  surely  no  important  ■ 
parture  of  the  alisphenoid  from  its  normal  character,  that  it  should  give  ( 
to  both  motory  and  sensory  divisions  of  the  great  nerve  with  which  it  is 
intimately  associated  from  man  down  to  the  fish.  Indeed,  the  progress 
withdrawal  of  the  bony  petrosal  from  the  interior  of  the  skull  and  the  c 
comitant  backward  extension  or  retrogradation  of  the  alisphenoid,  ought 
prepare  us  to  expect  that  nerves  which  traverse  the  petrosal  in  mamir; 
should  perforate  the  alisphenoid  in  reptiles  and  fishes.  And  so  we  ft 
in  the  carp  that  the  glosso-pharyngeal  even  perforates  the  posterior  bor< 
of  the  alisphenoid  ; but  its  origin  close  to  the  acoustic  and  facial  nei" 
in  fishes  diminishes  the  force  of  the  argument  which  might  be  drawn  fr< 
this  exceptional  perforation  in  favour  of  the  petrosal  character  of  the  < 
sphenoid.  I concur  entirely  with  Cuvier  and  M.  Agassiz  in  their  deteri 
nation  of  the  alisphenoid  in  fishes;  but,  if  the  great  share  which  that  bo 
in  reptiles  (figs.  9 and  10,  o)  contributes  to  the  formation  of  the  otocrai 
if  the  anterior  position  of  the  foramen  ovale,  and  the  su])erior  connection 
the  bone  with  the  supra-occipital,  are  proofs  (as  Cuvier  believed)  of  its  lion ; 
logy  with  the  petrosal  in  the  class  Jieptilia,  they  ought  also,  as  Hallmann  a. 
Wagner  contend,  to  establish  the  same  special  homology  of  the  bone  (fig.  5, 
in  the  class  Pisces.  But  none  of  these  are  essential  characters  of  the  petros- 
The  petrosal  is  a contentum  and  not  a juries,  or  any  part  of  the  parietes  of  t 
otocrane  or  cranial  chamber  lodging  the  organ  of  hearing  : it  is  the  outermc 
tunic,  membranous,  gristly,  or  bony,  of  the  labyrinth  or  essential  ])art  of  t 
acoustic  organ.  Had  the  above-cited  anatomists  clearly  appreciated  ti 
general  homology  of  the  petrosal,  they  could  scarcely  have  failed  to  dete 
its  special  homologies  in  the  vertebrate  series.  Cuvier  was  evidently  guidi 
to  the  true  determination  of  the  alisphenoid  in  fishes,  less  by  its  own  esse 
tial  characters,  than  by  observing  in  certain  fishes,  the  perch  and  cod  for  e 
ample,  a j)artial  ossification  of  the  acoustic  capsule,  to  which,  therefore,  1 
assigned  the  name  ‘rocher.’  And,  having  thus  satisfied  himself  of  thee; 
istence  of  the  homologue  of  the  ‘ pars  petrosa,’  &c.,  he  could  not  but  assig 
to  the  bone  which  rested  below  upon  the  basisphenoid,  which  protected  lati 
rally  the  optic  lobes  and  gave  exit  to  the  third  division  of  the  trigeminal  nerv. 
the  name  of  ‘ grande  aile  du  sphenoi'de.’  But  all  these  characters  equall' 
coexist  in  the  bone  which  Cuvier  calls  ‘ rocher’  (petrosal)  in  the  crocodile  an. 
other  reptilia.  He  was  not  aware,  liowever,  that  in  both  gavials  and  ere  I 
codiles  a distinct  ossicle,  the  veritable  liomologue  of  the  intra-cranial  pyri  j 

* Ossemeiis  Fossiles,  4to,  f.  v.  pt.  i.  p.  81. 

)■  Der  verglcichende  Osteologie  des  Schliifeiibeins,  p.  64. 


SPECIAL  HOMOLOGY.  PETROSAL. 


' uiidal-sliaped  petrosal  of  niaimnals  ami  birds,  makes  its  appearance  between 
^ the  alisphenoid,  exoccipital  ami  basioccipital,  as  at  is,  tig.  9.  Here,  how  ever, 
> it  is  necessary  to  otter  a few  observations  on  the  sense  in  wliicli  1 use  the 
term  ‘petrosal’  as  applied  to  that  ossicle. 

The  petrosal,  properly  so  calleil,  considered  in  its  totality,  as  the  immediately 
investing  capsule  of  the  labyrinth  or  internal  organ  of  hearing,  is  wholly  carti- 
' la^inous  in  many  fishes  and  saurians,  and  in  all  batrachians,  ophidians  and 
chelouians,  and  is  contained  in  a cavity  or  orbit  (otocrane)  which  most,  or  all 
of  the  elements  of  the  occipital  and  parietal  vertebrae  concur  in  forming.  A 
part  of  the  ear-capsule  remains  cartilaginous  in  the  crocodile;  but  several 

■ portions  become  ossified  arouml  the  semicircular  canals  and  rudimental 
" cochlea,  which  ossifications  contract  slender  adhesions  to  the  smooth  oto- 

cranial  surfaces  of  the  supraoccipital,  exoccipital  and  alisphenoid ; and  to 
tl  one  of  these  portions  (on  the  principle  on  which  Cuvier  applies  the  term 
‘rocher’  in  fishes)  the  name  petrosal  might  more  particularly  be  given,  as  it 
< -is  more  distinct  and  moveable  than  the  other  partial  ossifications  of  the  cap- 
• sule, and  contributes  to  form  the  ‘ meatus  interims’  towards  the  cranial  cavity, 
•:  - surrounds  nearly  the  whole  of  the  ‘ fenestra  rotunda’,  and  one-half  of  the  ‘ fe- 
^ ■ nestra  ovalis’  towards  the  tympanic  cavity.  Looking  upon  the  inner  surface 

■ . of  the  lateral  walls  of  the  cranium  (as  at  fig.  9),  one  sees  at  the  bottom  of 
[ the  T-shaped  suture*  uniting  the  otocranial  laminae  of  the  exoccipital,  ali- 

■ - sphenoid,  and  supraoccipital  bones,  a fourth  osseous  element  (lo),  presenting 
I a convex  extremity  towards  the  cranial  cavity,  and  completing,  with  the  exocci- 

: rpital,  the  lower  half  of  the  foramen  for  the  nervus  vagus.  If  this  little  bone 
(be  pressed  upon  with  a needle  or  probe,  it  yields  and  moves,  being  divided 

■ by  smooth  harmoni®  from  both  the  exoccipital  (2)  and  alisphenoid  (0). 

The  protuberance  in  question,  which  thus  projects  into  the  cranial  ca\  ity, 

: -is  the  rounded  angle  of  the  border  of  the  inferior  plate  of  the  petrosal,  n hich 
joins  the  exoccipital.  This  lower  horizontal  plate  of  the  petrosal  forms  the 
upper  wall  of  the  ‘ fissura  lacera  posterior,’  and  the  lower  wall  of  the  ‘ fenestra 
;iCOchle®’:  the  fore-part  of  the  horizontal  plate  bends  upwards,  twisting 
. ;and  expanding  into  a vertical  oval  plate,  articulated  by  its  anterior  surface  to 
L ia  corresponding  sutural  surface  of  the  alisphenoid.  The  lower  margin  of 
L [.this  plate  forms  the  upper  boundary  of  tlie  ‘ fenestra  cochle®,’  and  is  con- 
. : tinned  into  a thin  plate  of  bone  which  divides  the  ‘ fenestra  cochle®’  from  the 
: ‘fenestra  vestibuli’  above.  This  thin  plate  of  the  petrosal  joins  and  is  usually 
■■  anchylosed  to  the  exoccipital:  it  is  the  only  part  of  the  true  petrosal  noticed 
by  Cuvier,  who  describes  it  as  a slender  filament  of  bone  which  separates 

■ the  two  fenestrmf.  Seen  edgewise,  looking  into  the  tympanie  cavity,  the 
plate  appears  like  a filament ; and  this  plate  forms  the  sole  connection,  when 
any  exists,  between  the  petrosal  and  the  exoccipital.  I have  always  found 

■ the  sutures  persistent  between  the  petrosal  and  the  alisphenoid.  The  upper 
border  of  the  ‘fenestra  vestibuli’  is  formed  by  a petrosal,  or  rather  otocra- 

i nial,  process  of  the  alisphenoid. 

The  part  (fig.  9,  ic)  entering  into  the  formation  of  the  lateral  walls  of  the 
brain-case,  and  which  is  here  specially  indicated  by  the  name  of  ‘ petrosal,’ 
seems  to  have  been  overlooked  : it  is,  however,  relatively  to  the  alisphenoid 
or  exoccipital,  as  large  as  is  the  petrosal  (Cuvier’s  rochcr)  in  the  perch  : it 
has  a true  osseous  texture,  and  is  quite  distinct  from  the  lenticular  mass  of 
calcareous  matter  in  the  adjacent  cochlear  chamber  wdiich  Cuvier  compares 
to  starch  (‘amidon  durci’). 

I*  Suture  a trois  branches,  Cuvier,  1.  c.  p.  105. 

I)u  cote  (le  la  caisse  la  paroi  cst  pcrcee  de  deux  feiictrcs  tiaiisvcrbaleincnt  oldongiic:,  cl 
! se'parees  par  un  filet  mince.”  /.  c.  p.  82. 


2G 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


Neitlier  the  figure  of  the  interior  surface  of  the  cranium  of  the  crocodile, 
which  Spix  gives  as  tliat  of  the  Nilotic  species  in  his  great  ‘Cephalogenesis,’ 
tab.  ii.  fig.  6;  nor  the  figure  given  by  Geoffroy  of  the  skull  of  his  Crocodilus 
snchus  in  the  ‘ Annales  cles  Sciences,’  tom.  iii.  pi.  16,  fig.  2;  nor  that  of  the 
Crocodilus  hiporcatus,  which  illustrates  the  later  memoir  by  the  same  author 
in  the  ‘Memoires  de  I’Academie  Royale  des  Sciences,’  t.  xii.  (183.S),  pi.  1, 
fig.  2.;  nor  that  (if  it  be  an  original  figure)  published  by  Dr.  Hallmann  in 
his  ‘Comparative  Anatomy  of  the  Temporal  Rone’  (taf.  iii.  fig.  49)>  give  any 
indication  of  this,  in  the  determination  of  the  homology  of  the  alisphenoid 
and  petrosal,  most  significant  and  important  ossicle.  Tlie  proof  of  its  normal 
character  will  be  afforded  by  comparisons  of  the  description  and  figure  of 
the  part  here  given  with  a section  of  the  cranium  of  any  true  Crocodilus, 
Alligator  or  Gavial.  In  the  latter,  the  otocranial  plates  of  the  alisphenoid, 
exoccipital  and  supra-occipital,  project  considerably  into  the  cranial  cavity. 
Any  one  of  these  plates  might  be  called  ‘petrosal,’  for  such  reasons  as  have 
induced  Cuvier  to  apply  that  name  to  the  alisphenoid  in  the  crocodile  and 
other  reptiles*.  We  find,  indeed,  that  Geoffroy  has  applied  the  equivalent 
term,  by  turns,  to  each.  But  the  true  idea  of  the  petrosal  should  include  all 
those  gristly  and  bony  parts  of  the  immediately  investing  capsule  of  the  la- 
byrinth which  occupy  the  otocranial  excavations  of  the  exoccipital,  supraoc- 
cipital  and  alisphenoid  ; and  as  the  ossified  portions  of  the  true  petrosal,  in  the 
crocodile,  usually  contract  a bony  union  with  the  parietes  of  the  otocrane, 
all  these  bony  portions  of  the  immediate  capsule  of  the  labyrinth  might  be 
called  ‘petrosal  processes’  of  the  bones  to  which  they  respectively  adhere. 
That  portion  which  unites  to  the  exoccipital  is  attached  by  two  lamellae ; it 
forms  a great  part  of  the  coclilear  cavity,  the  lower  half  of  the  posterior  semi- 
circular canal  and  the  hinder  half  of  the  external  or  upper  semicircular  canals: 
that  plate  which  belongs  to  the  supra-occipital  is  attached  to  its  otocranial 
surface  by  three  points,  and  forms  the  upper  third  part  of  the  anterior  semi- 
circular canal  and  the  crus  of  the  posterior  canal  which  communicates  there- 
with : that  part  which  adheres  to  the  alisphenoid  forms  the  anterior  crus  of  the 
anterior  (in  Man  superior)  semicircular  canal  and  the  anterior  beginningof  the 
external  canal.  The  proper  and  usually  distinct  bony  portion  of  the  petrosal 
(fig.  9,  in),  which  articulates  with  both  alisphenoid  and  exoccipital,  forms 
part  of  the  ‘ meatus  internus,’  nearly  the  whole  of  the  ‘ fenestra  cochleae,’  and 
half  of  the  ‘ fenestra  vestibuli  ’ : it  can  only  be  regarded  a ‘ petrosal  process’ 
of  the  exoccipital  by  virtue  of  the  very  limited  anchylosis  occasionally  con- 
tracted by  the  thin  plate  dividing  the  two  ‘ fenestrae,’  along  with  the  true 
petrosal  process  of  the  exoccipital  above  described. 

If  we  compare  with 
the  inner  wall  of  the  cro- 
codile’s  cranium  that  of 
an  ophidian,  the  python 
for  example  (fig.  1 0),  we 
shall  find  the  walls  of  the  ^ 

‘ otocrane  ’ or  chamber 
of  the  labyrinth  to  be 
contributed  by  the  ex- 
occipital, (2)  supra-oc- 
cipital(3)andalisphenoid 
(n)  in  nearly  equal  pro- 
portions ; the  basioccipi- 

tal  (l)j  also,  being  ac-  cranium  of  a python  partially  bisected.  Natural  size. 

* Ossemens  Fossiles,  4to.  1824,  v.  ii.  pp.  81,  180,  258. 


SPECIAL  HOMOLOOY.  PETROSAL, 


•essory  to  the  formation  of  the  tloor  of  tlie  car-cliamber : the  tliree  principal 
jones  are  nnited,  as  in  the  crocodile,  by  a triradiate  suture.  The  petrosal, 
.vhich,  like  the  squamosal,  was  gradually  more  and  more  withdrawn  and 
)hut  out  from  the  cranial  cavity,  as  wedecended  from  mammals,  now  entirely 
Jisappears  from  view : and  it  retains  its  primitive  cartilaginous  state  in  ser- 
3ents  as  it  does  in  chelonians,  lizards  and  batrachians.  The  essential  cha- 
•actei-s  of  the  exoccipital  (2)  are  manifested  by  its  relative  position  and  con- 
lections;  by  its  affording  exit  for  the  vagal  (v)  and  hypoglossal  (he/)  nerves, 
uid  bv  its  protecting  the  sides  of  the  epencephalon.  The  alisphenoid  («)  is 
lot  less  clearly  indicated  by  its  constant  and  essential  characters  ; it  rests  below 
ipon  the  basisphenoiil  (5),  it  articulates  above  with  the  parietal  (7),  and 
Dehind  with  the  caiTilaginous  petrosal ; but  the  otocranial  plate  being,  as  in 
.he  crocodile,  unusually  extended  backwards,  unites  with  the  basioccipital 
'i),  exoccipital  (2)  and  supraoccipital  (3),  in  almost  equal  proportions,  and 
jecomes  directly  perforated  by  the  acoustic  nerve  (ac).  Its  chief  foramen 
Vr),  however,  is,  as  usual,  that  which  answers  to  the  foramen  ovale  in  the 
iuman  alisphenoid,  and  which  gives  passage,  as  in  fishes,  to  the  great  third 
Jivision  of  the  fifth,  and  to  the  branch  which  is  homologous  with  the 
Dontribution  by  the  fifth  to  the  ‘nervus  lateralis’  in  many  fishes,  and  at 
.he  same  time  with  the  nerve  called  ‘ chorda  tympani  ’ in  anthropotomy. 

In  the  frog  I have  given  an  external  view  of  the  alisphenoid  («)  and  the 
•cartilaginous  petrosal  (le)  in  their  undisturbed  connections,  in  fig.  13,  with 
;he  surrounding  bones.  The  alisphenoid  is  here  perforated,  as  in  Man,  by 
•Doth  a foramen  ovale  and  foramen  rotundum  (tr.) : it  forms  posteriorly  the 
ore-part  of  the  chamber  for  the  cartilaginous  petrosal,  and  usually  coalesces 
•vith  the  mastoid  (s),  which  overarches  the  petrosal : the  back  wall  of  the 
otocrane  is  eontributed,  as  usual,  by  the  exoccipital  (2) ; the  floor  by  the 
jomologue  of  the  coalesced  basisphenoid  and  basioccipital.  Had  the  outer 
Dart  of  the  petrosal  (10)  been  the  seat  of  a partial  ossification,  a bone  would 
Dave  resulted  corresponding  precisely  with  Cuvier’s  ‘rocher’  in  the  cod  and 
oerch  : but  the  immediate  capsule  of  the  labyrinth  retains  the  same  histolo- 
;jical  condition  in  the  batrachia  as  it  does  in  the  carp  and  pike,  and  as  in  the 
*aIamandroid  polypterus  and  lepidosteus:  in  the  latter  fish,  at  most,  the  only 
ossified  part  of  the  petrosal  forms  a small  bony  cup  covering  the  posterior 
;e.xtremity  of  the  outer  semicircular  canal*. 

The  attention  of  the  justly  celebrated  ichthyotomist  of  Neuchatel  appears 
;UD  have  been  too  exclusively  occupied  with  the  persistent  embryonic  condi- 
•;ion  of  the  ‘ petrosal  ’ in  these  highly  organized  fishes,  to  gain  that  true  and 
clear  idea  of  the  essential  nature  of  the  petrosal  of  which  its  partial  ossifica- 
tion in  the  perch  and  cod  is  indicative.  Adopting  the  opinion  of  Cuvier,  in 
preference  to  that  of  Meckel  and  Hallmann,  toucliing  the  special  homology 
of  the  alisphenoid,  M.  Agassiz  originally  diverged  into  the  opposite  extreme 
of  repudiating  altogether  the  existence  of  a petrosal  in  the  class  of  fishes. 
Thu.s,  he  says,  “ II  devrait  suffire  ce  me  semble  de  voir  I’organe  de  I’oui'e 
presenter  des  modifications  graduees  dans  toute  la  serie  des  vertebres,  pour 
se  convaincre  que  le  rocher  n’existe  pas  du  tout  chez  les  poissons,  par  plus 
que  les  osselets  de  la  cavite  du  tympan.  S’il  y avait  un  rocher  chez  les 
poissons,  ce  devrait  etre  un  os  qui  entourerait  le  labyrinthe  et  les  canaux 
3eniicirculaire.s;  mais  nous  avons  vu  que  ces  parties  de  I’oreille  interne  se 
trouvent  dans  la  cavite  du  crane  .sans  enveloppe  o.sseuse  particuliere,  et  pro- 
tegees seuleinerit  par  les  parois  de.s  os  qui  entourent  le  rocher,  la  ou  il  cxistef .” 

* This  conflltion  answers  to  that  in  the  Imman  embryo  of  about  the  fourth  month,  in  which 
a light  porous  bony  mist  begins  to  he  formed  upon  the  cochlea  and  semicircular  cauals 
commencing  with  the  outer  and  upper  ones,  the  rest  of  the  petrosal  being  cartilaginous. 

T Recherches  sur  les  Poissons  Fossiles,  torn.  v.  p.  00. 


28 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


M.  Agassiz  is  perfectly  accurate  in  his  character  of  tlie  petrosal,  according.;^^, 
to  its  relative  position,  as  completely  investing  the  entire  labyrinth  (of  which, » 
by  the  way,  the  semicircular  canals  are  an  integrant  part  in  all  vertebratesiB/, 
and  the  largest  part  in  fishes) ; but  he  takes  a narrow  view  of  its  histo-^.. 
logical  characters.  The  sclerotic  is  not  less  essentially  a sclerotic  in  the  shark, , 
where  it  is  cartilaginous,  than  it  is  in  the  cod,  where  it  is  osseous  ; neither  is  ity J 
less  the  eye-capsule  and  homotype  of  the  petrosal  in  the  mammal  because  itl^; 
retains  the  earliest  histological  condition  of  the  skeleton,  viz.  that  of  a fibrous 
membrane.  And,  in  point  of  fact,  in  those  fishes  where  the  essential  parts  of 
the  internal  organ  of  hearing  appear  to  be  protected  solely  by  the  parietes  of® 
the  bones,  which,  in  the  animals  where  the  petrosal  is  ossified,  or,  as  1)1.  Agassiz 
expresses  the  fact,  ‘exists,’  surround  such  petrosal,  the  vascular  and  nervous®! 
parts  of  the  labyrinth  are  actually  in  such  fishes  more  immediately  enveloped 
by  the  petrosal  in  its  membranous  or  cartilaginous  states.  What  is  peculiar  ® 
to  the  petrosal  in  fishes  is,  that  it  is  never  entirely  ossified  ; and,  furthermore,  ®' 
that  whenever  it  is  partially  ossified,  the  bony  part  is  external  and  appears  on  K 
the  outside  of  the  skull,  instead  of  the  inside  as  in  crocodiles  and  birds.  P 
In  chelonians  a larger  proportion  of  the  petrosal  intervenes  between  the  ® 
alisphenoid  and  exoccipital  upon  the  inner  wall  of  the  cranial  cavity  than  in  ® 
crocodiles  ; but  it  is  wholly  cartilaginous.  In  birds,  on  the  contrary,  the  whole  B*' 
petrosal  capsule  of  the  organ  of  hearing  soon  ossifies  and  becomes  firmly  » ' 
anchylosed  to  the  parts  of  the  exoccipital,  mastoid,  alisphenoid  and  basi- 
sphenoid  that  form  its  primitive  chamber  or  otocrane : owing,  however,  to  ® 
the  larger  relative  size  of  the  ossified  part  of  the  proper  capsule  (petrosal 
proper)  which  penetrates  the  cranial  cavity,  none  of  the  surrounding  bones  ® 
which  contribute  accessory  protection,  have  received  the  name  of  ‘ rocher,’  B' 
or  pars  petrosa.  It  was  chiefly  through  not  recognizing  or  appreciating  the  B' 
general  nature  or  homology  of  the  ‘ petrosal  ’ that  Cuvier  failed  to  perceive  its  B 
special  homology  in  rej)tiles.  Speaking  of  the  skull  of  the  crocodile,  he  says 
that  the  petrosal,  or  ‘ rocher,’  is  not  less  recognizable  than  the  ‘ tympanic  ’ 
and  other  so-called  dismemberments  of  the  temporal  by  its  internal  posi- 
tion, by  its  lodging  a great  part  of  the  labyrinth,  and  by  its  contributing 
essentially  to  the  formation  of  one  of  the  fenestrae  (/.  c.  p.  81).  But  the 
part  in  the  crocodile  which  I regard  as  homologous  Avith  Cuvier’s  ‘rocher’ 
in  the  perch,  is  more  completely  internal  in  position  than  is  Cuvier’s  so- 
called  ‘rocher’  in  the  crocodile;  it  contributes  a greater  share  to  the  forma- 
tion of  the  ‘ fenestra  vestibuli,’  and  it  forms  almost  the  whole  of  the  ‘ fe- 
nestra cochleae.’  1 have  never  found  the  alisphenoid  (Cuvier’s  ‘rocher’)  in 
the  crocodile,  lodging  a great  proportion  of  the  labyrinth*:  the  otocranial 
or  petrosal  process  of  the  alisphenoid  lodges  a part  only  of  the  anterior 
semicircular  canal,  and  no  part  at  all  of  the  other  semicircular  canals.  The 
exoccipital  is  that  tributary  of  the  otocrane  which  lodges  the  major  part 
of  the  labyrinth  ; it  contains,  for  example,  parts  of  two  semicircular  canals, 
and  the  rudimental  cochlea:  and,  when  the  middle,  usually  distinct  part 
of  the  petrosal  is  joined  to  it,  the  exoccipital  may  be  said  to  form  the 
whole  ‘ fenestra  cochleae  ’ and  a greater  part  of  the  ‘ fenestra  vestibuli.’  We 
see,  then,  that  the  characters  by  which  Cuvier  deems  his  ‘rocher’  to  be  so 
easily  recognizable,  are  more  prominent  in  the  exoccipital  than  in  the  ali- 
sphenoid : and  the  choice  of  the  latter  by  Cuvier  as  the  representative  of 
the  ‘ rocher,’  seems  chiefly  to  have  been  influenced  by  the  more  obvious  and 
unmistakeable  essential  (neurapophysial)  characters  of  the  ‘ occipital  lateral  ’ 
(fig.  9,  2),  whilst  the  accessory  character  which  this  bone  derives  from  its 
lodging  and  becoming  confluent  with  part  of  the  true  petrosal,  was  not  allowed 

I 

* “ II  loge  en  grande  partie  le  lahyrinlhe,”  1.  c.  p.  81. 


SPECIAL  HOMOLOGY,  MASTOID. 


29 


) prevail,  as  in  the  case  of  the  alisphenoiil,  in  the  determination  of  its  special 
omologv. 

The  siipraoccipital,  by  virtue  of  its  internal  position  and  lodgment  ot  part 
f the  labyrinth,  has  equal  claims  to  the  name  of  ‘ rocher,’  according  to  the 
'uvierian  characters  of  that  bone,  and  GeottVoy  St.  Hilaire  did  not  make  a 
^s  arbitrary  choice  in  singling  out  this  element  as  ‘le  seul  rupeal*,’  than 
.'uvier  did  in  choosing  the  alisphenoid,  or,  as  any  other  anatomist  would  do 
1 preferring  any  other  element  of  a cranial  vertebra  in  the  crocodile  to 
^present  the  ossified  ear-capsule  of  the  fish  or  mammal,  because  portions  of 
lat  ossified  capsule  are  protected  by,  or  have  coalesced  with,  such  vertebral 
enients.  Had  Cuvier  looked  beyond  the  special  homology  of  the  bones  of 
le  head  of  the  crocodile,  and  permitted  himself  to  appreciate  their  higher  and 
lore  general  relations,  he  could  scarcely  have  failed  to  perceive  the  corre- 
oondence  of  his  so-called  ‘ rocher’  in  batrachians,  ophidians,  chelonians  and 
lurians,  to  the  bone  which  he  so  well  recognizes  as  ‘ the  great  wing  of  the 
jhenoid’  in  the  perch  and  cod-fish. 

The  Mastoid. — In  the  human  embryo  of  the  fifth  month  a centre  of  ossi- 
cation  is  established  on  the  outer  surface  of  the  mass  of  cartilage  occu- 
ying  the  interspace  between  the  basioccipital  (fig.  11,  i)  and  exoccipital 
•)  below,  the  tympanic  (ss)  and  squamosal  (27)  in  front,  the  siipraoccipital 
i)  behind,  and  the  parietal  (7)  above:  this  mass  of  cartilage  incloses  the 
lembranous  labyrinth,  about  which  a light  osseous  crust  has  begun  to  be 
armed ; and,  from  the  centre  (s)  established  near  the  outer  border  of  the 
osterior  semicircular  canal,  ossification  radiates  to  complete  that  part  of  the 
ranial  parietes,  which,  in  the  adult  skull,  is  impressed  on  its  inner  surface  by 
le  great  venous  channel  called  ‘ fossa  sigmoidea,’  and  developes  from  its 
,uter  surface  the  ‘ processus  mastoi- 
eus.’  The  primitive  independence 
f the  base  of  this  process,  which 
lerkringius  so  clearly  and  aceurately 
. elineates  in  his  tah.  xxw.Jiff.  iii.  as 
ae  posterior  of  his  ‘ tria  petrosi  ossis 
• istincta  ossiculaf ,’  is  a fact  of  much 
lore  significance  than  its  brief  and 
wansitory  manifestation  would  lead 
ae  anthropotomist  to  divine.  The 
oalescence  of  the  primitively  distinct 
lastoid  with  the  ossifying  capsule  of 
he  labyrinth  is  very  speedy,  being 
snally  complete  before  the  foetus  has 
massed  its  fifth  month,  and  a com- 
•osite  ‘ petro-mastoid’  bone  is  thus 
ormed,  which,  retaining  its  indivi- 
-uality  in  monotremes,  marsupials, 
uminants  and  many  rodents,  pro- 
eeds  to  coalesce  with  the  additional 
lements  of  the  ‘ temporal  ’ bone  in  man,  and  with  other  surrounding  cranial 
•ones  in  birds.  In  the  cold-blooded  vertebrata,  the  mastoid  retains,  with  a few 
xceptions,  its  primary  embryonic  distinctness,  as  an  independent  element  of 
he  skull.  In  tracing  the  modifications  of  this  element  downwards  from  man, 
re  find  the  external  process  from  which  its  anthropotomical  name  originated. 


Fig.  11. 


Skull  of  tlie  human  embryo  ; fifth  month. 
Natural  size. 


* Annales  de3  Sciences  Naturelles,  tom.  iii.  182-t,  p.  271,  pi.  10. 
t Spicilegium  Anatomicuni,  Uo.  1070,  Oslcogenia  Faduuni,  p.  209. 


30 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


Partially  disarticulated  cranium  of  the  Echidna  setosa.  Natural  size,  I 

It  is  ini)3ortant  to  keep  these  essential  characters  steadily  in  view, and  toavoid 
giving  undue  importance  to  the  apophysial  character  of  the  mastoid,  which  has . 
led  to  so  common  a transference  of  its  name,  in  the  great  osteological  works  of 
Cuvier  and  De  Blainville,  to  a quite  distinct  element  (paroccipital)  of  the  I 
cranial  wallsf.  It  is  necessary,  also,  to  be  prepared  for  that  change  of  the 

* The  continuators  of  Cuvier  make  mention  of  an  example  of  this  kind  and  propose  the  name 
of  ‘ paramastoid  ’ for  the  proeess  (Le9ons  d’Anat.  Corap.  ii.  (1837)  p.  312).  I have  observed 
it  in  the  skull  of  a New  Zealander  and  in  that  of  an  Irishman,  preserved  in  the  Museum  of 
Anatomy  in  Richmond  Street,  Dublin.  Believing  it  to  be  the  homologue  of  the  ‘ paroccipital  ’ 
(4),  which  is  developed  independently  in  chelonia  and  most  fishes,  I retain  that  name  for  it : 
it  must  not  be  confounded  with  that  angle  of  the  occipital  which  projects  into  the  ‘ foramen 
jugularc  ’ in  the  human  skull,  and  which  has  received  the  name  of  ‘ processus  jugularis,’  in 
some  systems  of  anthropotomy. 

t How  essential  a correct  view  of  special  homology  becomes  to  the  appreciation  of  the 


inconstant,  its  functions  being  transferred  in  many  mammals  to  another  pre 
cess,  sometimes  udder-shaped,  sometimes  of  great  length  (tig.  24“,  4),  bu 
which  is  developed  from  the  exoccipital,  and  is  represented  in  the  human  sku  ,| 
by  the  ‘ eminentia  aspera,’  &c.  of  Soemmerring  (Table  I.  4),  and  by  the  “sce: 
brous  ridge  extended  from  the  middle  of  the  condyle  towards  the  root  of  th 
mastoid  process”  of  Munro  {op.  oil.  p.  72) ; but  sometimes  also  here  deve 
loped,  as  a rare  anomaly,  on  one  or  both  sides,  into  a process  like  a seconc 
but  smaller  posterior  mastoid*.  The  more  constant  and  essential  character' 
of  the  mastoid  are  its  contribution  to  the  walls  of  the  acoustic  chamber 
carried  to  anchylosis  with  the  petrosal  in  birds  and  mammals,  and  its  sutura] 
connection  in  the  latter  with  the  exoccipital,  parietal,  and  squamosal  (tin 
squamo-mastoid  suture  becoming  obliterated  in  many  species,  e.  g.  the  hog. 
fig.  24,  8,  27) : it  is  also  grooved,  notched  or  perforated  by  a greater  or  lesJ 
proportion  of  the  lateral  venous  sinus,  whether  this  is  continued  to  the  ‘fora 
men  jugulare,’  as  in  man,  or  sends  a large  division  to  escape  by  the  ‘ meatu:  | 
temporalis  ’ which  forms  the  lai’ge  orifice  between  the  mastoid  and  squamosai 
above  the  meatus  auditorius  in  the  horse  and  ruminants,  and  which  directlj' 
perforates  the  mastoid  in  the  echidna  (fig.  12,  ni). 


W 


Fig.  12. 


SPECIxVL  HOMOLOGY.  MASTOID. 


31 


^ unections  of  the  mastoid,  which  results  from  tlie  gradual  witlidrawal,  in  the 
immaliau  class,  of  the  squamosal  from  the  proper  cranial  walls.  With  much 
“i  constancy  of  relative  size  in  the  mastoid,  of  which  the  dugong  and  the  walrus 

• er  two  extremes,  we  discern  upon  the  whole  a progressive  increase  in  de- 
juding  through  the  mammalian  class;  in  the  walrus,  for  example,  the  mastoid, 

't  petromastoid,  forms  as  large  a proportion  of  the  outer  lateral  walls  of  the 
■ miiim  as  does  the  squamosal ; and,  in  the  sheep,  the  removal  of  the  squamosal 

• poses  the  connection  of  the  petromastoid  with  the  alisplienoid, — a return  to  a 
‘ ..ation  common  in  the  oviparous  vertebrata:  it  is  shown  from  the  inner  side 
“ the  cranium  in  the  sheep,  in  fig.  7,  lo  and  o.  The  mastoid  of  the  echidna 

,g.  12,  s)  presents  a most  interesting  and  instructive  combination  of  both  the 
? )dification  of  expansion  and  of  that  of  direct  union  with  the  alisplienoid  (o), 
3!  tich  is  here  effected  by  the  mastoid  plate  independently  of  the  petrosal  (lo). 

tig.  12  these  characters  are  well  exposed  by  the  removal  of  the  squamosal 
« and  tympanic  2s,  which  retain  their  primitive  independence  throughout 
»i ; j in  the  echidna.  If  now  we  compare  the  bone  s and  lo  with  the  carti- 
■r  : ;inous  and  osseous  mass  s and  lo  in  the  skull  of  the  human  embryo  (fig.  1 1 ), 
,d  allow  for  the  change  produced  in  the  position  of  the  alisplienoid  (o)  by 
•gradual  withdrawal  of  the  squamosal  (27),  traceable  in  the  intervening 
'•ms  of  mammalia,  the  special  homology  of  the  petromastoids  at  the  two  ex- 
ames  ofthe  mammalian  class  will  be  obvious  and  unmistakeable.  The  bone 
".nd  16  in  the  echidna,  fig.  12,  is  connected  below  and  behind  with  the  basi- 
cipital  and  exoccipital  (2),  behind  and  above  with  the  supraoccipital  (3)  and 
■rietal  (7),  in  front  with  the  tympanic,  the  squamosal,  and  also,  as  a conse- 
•.ence  of  the  modified  position  of  the  latter  and  of  its  own  increased  deve- 
iment,  with  the  alisphenoid  (g).  All  the  connections,  save  that  with  the 
•sphenoid,  are  identical  with  those  of  s and  le  in  the  human  embryo ; and 
:!  supervening  alisphenoidal  connection  in  the  echidna  affords  an  additional 
;Jit  to  the  determination  of  the  bone  in  the  lower  vertebrata,  since  it  is  a 
ansequence  of  the  progressive  advance  to  a lower  (oviparous)  type,  in  the 
•scent  through  the  mammalian  scale.  In  regard  to  the  essential  functions 
: the  petromastoid,  we  find  the  petrosal  portion  inclosing  the  membranous 
lyrinth,  and  the  mastoidal  portion  giving  exit  to  the  blood  from  the  great 
-eral  venous  sinus  and  supporting  the  tympanic*.  It  will  be  unnecessary 
dwell  further  on  the  broad  and  obvious  characters  by  which  the  homology 
: the  bones  and  10  in  the  echidna  is  established  with  the  equally  independent 
■ tromastoid  in  the  sheep  and  walrus,  and  with  the  petromastoid  portion  of 
-i  human  ‘ temporal  bone.’ 

'The  continuators  of  the  ‘ Le9ons  d’Anatomie  Comparee,’  influenced  by  the 
:ge  proportional  size  of  the  petromastoid  in  the  echidna  and  the  share 
lich  it  consequently  takes  in  the  formation  of  the  cranial  parietes,  supposed 
to  be  the  squamosal: — “le  veritable  temporal,  qui  n’aurait  pour  toute 
ophyse  zygomatique  qu’un  tres  petit  tubercule  pres  de  la  facette  glenoide,” 

■fier  law  of  general  homology  may  be  learnt  from  the  application  by  Cuvier  of  his  idea  of 
: mammalian  mastoid  to  the  refutation  of  the  vertebral  theory  of  the  skull.  “ On  a aussi 
uve  quelqoe  rapport  entre  I’apophyse  mastoide  qui,  dans  la  plupart  des  animaux,  appar- 
nt  a I’occipital,  et  I’apophyse  transverse  de  I’atlas  et  des  autres  vertubres ; sur  quoi  il  faut 
narqiier  que  ces  rapports  sent  moindres  dans  I’liomme  a certains  egards  que  dans  les  qua- 
ip^es,  puisqne  I’atlas  n’y  a ordinairement  qii’une  echancrure  pour  le  passage  de  I’artere, 
que  I’apophyse  mastoide  y appartient  entiere  au  rocher.’’ — Resume  sur  le  question — ‘ Le 
oe  est-il  une  vertehre  ou  un  compose  do  trois  ou  quatre  vertehres.’’  Lemons  d’Auatomie 
mparee,  t.  ii.  (1837)  p.  711. 

* In  the  article  ‘ .Monotreinata,’  Cyclopicdia  of  Anatomy  and  Physiology,  1811,  I described 
: petromastoid  as  the  petrous  bone,  misled  by  the  absence  of  the  external  character  of  tlie 
Kess. 


.32 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


op.  oil,  t.  ii.  (1837)  p.  377.  This  tubercle  is  the  rudiment  of  the  niasto  A 
process,  which  is  so  largely  developed  in  birds,  and  which,  in  the  echidnK- 
overhangs  the  tympanic  cavity.  There  is  no  glenoid  articular  surface  upc  i 
the  bone  s and  10.  We  find,  on  the  other  hand,  the  squamosal  under  its  prop  i 
mammalian  form  and  connections,  with  a long  and  slender  zygomatic  proces  ^ 
and  performing  the  function,  peculiar  to  the  class  Mammalia,  of  supportir  ^ 
the  mandible  by  the  true  glenoid  articular  surface  in  the  echidna  (fig.  12,  n)  • , 

Dr.  Kdstlin,  whose  painstaking  and  minutely  accurate  description  of  tl  i 
osteology  of  the  vertebrate  skull  renders  his  conclusions  as  to  their  hoim.  i. 
logics  worthy  of  respectful  consideration,  concurs  with  me  in  regard  to  tl 
squamosal  (27)  of  the  monotremes,  but  regards  the  bone  ^-10  in  tl: 
echidna  as  a dismemberment  of  the  alisphenoid.  In  no  mammal,  howev© 
do  we  find  the  alisphenoid  concerned  in  immediately  protecting  the  semici 
cular  canals — this  is  the  function  of  the  petrosal : in  neither  mammal  m 
bird  does  the  alisphenoid  extend  its  connections  so  far  back  as  to  the  bas-  • 
ex-  and  supra-occipitals.  In  the  echidna,  as  in  every  other  mammal  and  bii  ( .|i 
the  alisphenoid  (0)  exists,  exclusively  exercising  its  essential  function  of  tram.  ; 
mitting  the  third  division  of  the  fifth  pair  by  the  large  vacuity  (/r)  and  wit' 
its  normal  connections  modified  only,  as  in  the  sheep  and  some  other  inferic 
mammalia,  through  the  recession  of  the  squamosal,  by  joining  the  mastoic 
in  addition  to  those  which  it  unites  with  in  man.  I confess  that  I can  perceiv 
no  other  gain  to  anatomy  by  Dr.  Kdstlin’s  new  determination  of  s and  10  i 
the  echidna  as  ‘hintere  Abtheilung  des  Schlafenfliigels  ’ or  ‘hintern  Schla 
fenfliigel*’  (posterior  alisphenoid),  than  an  additional  phrase  to  the  synonym 
of  the  mastoid. 

The  discussion  of  the  homologies  of  this  bone  under  its  modifications  i 
the  mammalia,  and  especially  in  the  monotremata,  will  not  be  deemed  super 
fluous  or  too  detailed,  when  it  is  remembered  how  valuable  a key  the  eranis 
organization  of  the  implacental  monotremes  with  their  bird-like  heads  become 
to  the  comprehension  of  the  modifications  of  the  cranial  structure  in  bird 
themselves.  If  we  pass  from  the  comparison  of  the  echidna’s  skull,  as  re 
presented  in  fig.  12,  to  that  of  the  ostrich  (fig.  8),  we  shall  find  thei-e  a bon 
(s)  articulated  in  front  to  the  alisphenoid  (0),  behind  to  the  exoccipital  (2) 
below  to  the  basi-occipital  and  basi-sphenoid,  above  to  the  parietal  7,  am 
coalescing  by  its  inner  surface  with  the  petrosal.  The  sole  modification  o 
note  in  regard  to  connective  characters,  as  compared  with  the  mammaliai 
petromastoid,  is  the  loss  of  the  connection  with  the  squamosal,  for  which  wi 
have  been  progressively  prepared  by  the  conditions  of  that  bone  in  rodents,  ru  ^ 
minants  and  monotremes.  In  the  bird  this  least  constant  element  of  the  crania  ^ 
walls  (fig.  21,27)  has  undergone  a further  degradation,  is  now  dismissed  enjfc 
tirely  from  any  share  in  the  formation  of  even  the  outer  surface  of  the  crauiaji 
parietes,  and  is  reduced  to  its  mere  zygomatic  form  and  function,  servinjjB 
exclusively  to  connect  the  jugal  (fig.  21,  2c)  with  the  tympanic  (2s);  whiclft 
function  it  performs  in  the  echidna  and  in  man,  besides  other  superaddec* 
offices  arising  out  of  its  peculiarly  mammalian  expansion  into  a scale-liktii 
lamina,  or  as  compensatory  of  the  reduction  of  the  tympanic  bolle.  Dr  ft 
Hallmann,  however,  in  his  elaborate  monograph  on  the  temporal  bone,  con-ili 
siders  the  bone  s (fig.  8)  to  be  the  squamous  or  zygomatic  element,  and  citesft 
the  following  characters  of  the  bone,  in  the  young  cassowary  f,  as  establishing, 
its  homology  with  the  squamosal: — “its  junction  above  with  the  parietal,  iin 
front  with  the  alisphenoid  and  post-frontal  and  behind  with  the  occipital ; also 
its  formation  of  the  upper  border  of  the  meatus  auditorius  externus,  and  itsi 

* Op.  cit.  pp.  29,  126.  ' 

f Die  vergleichenfle  Osteologie  des  Schlafenbeiiis,  p.  8.  pi.  1.  fig.  5. 


SPECIAL  HOMOLOGY.  MASTOID. 


.33 


ntribution  of  the  articular  surface  for  the  tympanic  bone,"  which  surface 
* regards  as  homologous  with  the  glenoid  cavity  ot  tlie  squamosal  for  tlie 
' verjaw  in  mammals. 

' Cuvier,  whose  homology  of  no.  s he  thus  adopts,  describes  it  in  the  bird 
being  on  the  outer  side  of  the  parietal,  advancing  also  to  beneath  the 
■ntals,  occupying  the  region  of  the  temporal  fossa  and  giving  origin  to  tlie 
uporal  muscle,  and  as  forming  the  superior  border  of  the  tympanic  cavity. 
The  temporal  fossa,”  adds  Cuvier,  “ is  in  great  part  excavated  in  the  tem- 
ral  bone,  and  is  bounded  behind  by  a special  process  which  miglit  be  re- 
•rded  as  the  analogue  of  the  zygomatic  did  it  not  remain  far  removed  from 
(jugal  bone*.”  The  annotators  add,  “ that  there  are  some  species  of  bird 
which,  nevertheless,  such  zygomatic  process  does  approach  very  close  to 
jugal  f.” 

First,  then,  with  regard  to  the  character  which  appears  to  have  most 
jghed  with  Cuvier,  from  his  twice  citing  it  in  the  above  brief  definition 

00.  8, — the  marks  of  the  origin  of  the  temporal  muscle.  To  conclude  that 
bone  impressed  by  the  so-called  ‘ temporal  fossa’  in  the  skull  of  the  bird, 

therefore  the  temporal  bone,  because  such  fossa  impresses  a bone  called 
rmporal  ’ in  the  mammal,  is  an  example  of  that  fallacy  which  logicians  call 
’tiling  in  a circle.  The  two  propositions  by  no  means  reciprocally  prove 
hh  other.  Suppose,  for  example,  that  the  bone  no.  s in  the  bird  had  been 

1, ‘ermined,  by  way  of  ascensive  comparison  from  the  fish  (fig.  5)  and  cro- 

ile  (fig.  16),  to  be  the  homologue  of  the  bone  no.  s in  those  animals,  which 
!will  assume  to  have  been  rightly  called  ‘ mastoid  ’ by  Cuvier,  and  that  he 
. arrived  at  the  determination  of  no.  s in  the  bird  by  this  surer  method, 
CQ  by  the  descent  from  placental  mammals ; and  supposing  that,  having  thus 
rognized  no.  s as  the  mastoid,  the  fossa  and  muscle  with  which  it  is  im- 
Bsed  in  the  bird  had  been  called  ‘ mastoidal  ’ instead  of  ‘ temporal  then, 
‘ending  to  the  mammalian  cranium,  Cuvier  might  with  equal  reason  have 
1 that  the  bone  27,  figs.  1 1 and  22,  was  the  ‘ mastoid,’  because  it  occupied  the 
con  of  the  mastoidal  fossa  and  gave  origin  to  the  mastoidal  muscle.  The 
iipns  of  muscles  are  not,  however,  sufficiently  constant  to  be  included  amongst 
ccharacters  of  connection  or  function  determinative  of  special  homologies. 

‘ : transference  of  the  ‘ stern o-raastoideus  ’ from  the  true  mastoid  process 
lan,  carnivores  and  rodents)  to  the  angle  of  the  mandible  (horse),  and  to 
thb  part  and  the  second  cervical  vertebra  (ruminants),  shows  that  the 
' chments  of  a muscle  must  be  determined  after  the  recognition  of  the  bone, 

• not  the  homology  of  the  bone  by  muscular  attachments.  With  the  verj’- 
: in  question  the  uncertainty  of  the  character  is  illustrated : in  the  skull 
he  ostrich,  for  example  (fig.  8),  the  temporal  fossa  is  chiefly  formed  by  the 
joined  portions  of  the  parietal  (7)  and  alisphenoid(6),  which  intervene  be- 
3n  the  mastoid  (s)  and  the  postfrontal,  the  mastoid  forming  not  more  of 
‘posterior  part  of  the  fossa  than  the  postfrontal  does  of  the  anterior  part. 

' Hallmann  probably  appreciated  the  unsoundness  of  the  argument  from 
muscular  impression,  since  he  does  not  cite  it ; he  repeats,  however,  the 
racter  adduced  by  Cuvier,  from  the  relation  of  no.  s to  the  tympanic 
ty,  or  as  Hallmann  expresses  it,  the  meatus  auditorius  (iiussern  Gehdr 
nng),  the  value  of  which  therefore  I next  proceed  to  consider. 

1 the  skull  of  the  ostrich,  with  the  tympanic  bone  and  ear-drum  in  place, 
upper  border  of  the  meatus,  as  defined  by  the  periphery  of  the  membrana 
pan i,  is  formed,  not  by  no.  s,  but  by  the  tympanic  anteriorly,  and  by  the 
mcipital  process  (.i)  posteriorly.  When  the  tympanic  bone  and  mcm- 
le  are  removed,  then  the  descending  process  of  no.  s overarches  the 
• I.e?on»  d’Anat.  Comp.  ii.  (1837),  p.  580.  t /*.  p.  581. 

n 


34 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


I 


upper  and  forepart  of  the  tympanic  cavity  so  exposed.  So  much  for  ; h 
facts  of  the  argument*.  • 

We  may  next  ask,  Is  the  formation  of  the  upper  boundary  of  the  mei^ 
externus  an  essential  character  of  the  squamosal  in  mammals ; or  is  it  ■ 
rather  a secondary  consequence  of  the  expansion  and  application  of  that  bj  . 
to  the  side  of  the  cranium  in  this  particular  class?  If  we  were  desirou.t 
obtaining  a homological  character  by  comparison  of  the  contour  of  , 
meatus  externus  or  the  tympanic  cavity  in  mammals  and  birds,  ought  , 
not  rather  to  select  the  lowest  and  most  ornithoid  of  mammals,  as  best  f 
culated  to  throw  light  upon  the  real  nature  of  the  modifications  of  this  jZ 
of  the  skull  in  the  respective  classes?  In  the  echidna,  then,  we  find  1 1 
the  squamosal  does  not  form  the  whole  of  the  superior  border  of  the  shal* 
tympanic  cavity,  but  that  the  mastoid  forms  the  posterior  half  of  that  borri 
and  sends  a short  obtuse  process  downwards  (at  lo,  fig.  12),  which  overhai# 
the  cavity  and  gives  attachment  to  the  tympanic  (as).  Behind  the  mastl 
is  the  exoccipital.  Now  in  birds  the  antero-posterior  extent  of  the  cranijL 
between  the  exoccipital  and  postfrontal  bones  is  much  shortened  as  compa  in 
with  mammals,  and  this  modification  I interpret  as  the  result,  in  a great  Jk 
gree,  of  the  entire  removal  of  the  squamosal  from  the  cranial  parietes.  c 
the  homology  of  no.  4 as  a part  of  the  exoccipital  there  has  been  no  questirfi 
although  its  development,  and  the  share  it  takes  in  the  lateral  parietes  of  ||> 
head,  is  increased,  as  compared  with  most  mammals,  rather  than  diminisli.|A' 
The  exoccipital  constantly  unites  anteriorly  with  the  mastoid  in  mamm  ^ 
from  man  down  to  the  echidna;  but  the  extension  of  the  squamosal  baijt 
wards  to  articulate  with  the  exoccipital  is  far  from  being  a constant  cliarac|. 
in  mammals.  We  ought  on  tliat  ground  therefore  to  conclude  that  the  bon 
which  articulates  with  the  fore-part  of  the  exoccipital  in  the  bird,  is 
‘ mastoid,’  rather  than  that  it  is  the  ‘ squamosal.’  It  overhangs  the  tympa  i 
cavity  by  a longer  or  shorter  process;  but  being  more  advanced  in  positi«t 
partly  by  tlie  development  of  the  exoccipital  behind,  and  the  non-interposit  <i 
of  a squamosal  between  it  and  the  alisphenoid  in  front,  it  overarches  lA 
middle  of  the  upper  instead  of  the  posterior  part  of  the  upper  border  of  ) 
tympanic  cavity  in  the  bird;  but  it  is  still  in  great  part  posterior  to  the  ty<' 
panic  pedicle,  a relative  position  which  is  foreign  to  the  squamosal.  'I 
process  of  no.  s resembles  the  mastoid  process  in  mammalia,  inasmuch  i; 
it  terminates  freely  in  most  birds  ; and  in  those,  the  parrot  for  example  (pi ). 
fig.  ],  8),  in  which  it  joins  another  process  to  form  a zygoma  or  bridge  o p-. 
the  temporal  fossa,  that  process  answers  to  the  postfrontal,  the  very  bos  f 
which  the  mastoid  similarly  joins  in  the  crocodile,  and  does  not  answer  to  lilt 
malar  bone,  which  the  squamosal  joins  in  both  mammals  and  crocodiles. 

The  mastoid  always  coalesces  with  the  petrosal,  rarely  with  the  sqn  ' 
niosal,  in  the  mammalia;  such  coalescence  is  therefore  a more  constant  clJi 
racter  of  the  mastoid  than  of  the  squamosal,  and  the  argument  becono? 
cumulative  in  favour  of  the  mastoid  or  petromastoid  character  of  no.  s in  li 
bird.  When  we  remove  the  squamosal  in  the  sheep  we  bring  away  the  mo|  > 
dible  which  articulates  with  it,  but  we  leave  the  distinct  and  independent  ty  ii 
panic  closely  articulated  to  the  petromastoid.  Precisely  the  same  thi[  ^ 
happens  in  the  rodentia,  in  the  marsupialia,  and  especiallj'  in  the  echid  iit 
in  which  the  tympanic  has  the  slightest  connection  with  the  squamosal.  T'.i 
articulation  of  the  tympanic  therefore  with  the  petromastoid  is  a more  cc  ^ 
stant  character  than  its  articulation  with  the  squamosal;  therefore  the  aii^ 
culation  of  the  unquestioned  tympanic  bone  in  birds  with  the  bone  no.  s ii|.- 

* The  same  formation  of  tlie  upper  boundary  of  the  meatus  externus  is  shown  by  Geoff  f 
in  the  young  fowl. — Annales  du  Museum,  x.  pi.  27.  fig.  2.  V.  Q.  ■ 


SPECIAL  HOMOLOGY.  MASTOID. 


35 


' onger  proof  of  no.  s being  the  petroniastoid  than  of  its  being  tlie  squamosal  : 
J for  the  same  reasons  that  the  articulation  of  no.  s with  the  exoccipital,  and 
' coalescence  with  the  petrosal,  are  more  essential  characters  of  the  petro- 
. stoicl  than  they  are  of  the  squamosal,  so  I regard  the  articular  surface 
nished  by  no.  s to  the  tympanic  bone  to  be  homologous  with  the  articular 
“ face  of  the  petromastoid  for  the  tympanic  in  the  ruminants,  rodents 
1 other  mammals,  ami  am  compelled  to  dissent  from  Dr.  Hallmann’s  idea 
‘ its  answering  to  the  articular  surface  furnished  by  the  squamosal  to  the 
udible  in  mammals.  In  the  ostrich  a part  of  the  articular  cavity  for  the 
ipanic  is  e.xcavated  in  the  exoccipital,  and  w'ould  afford  as  good  an  argu- 
ut  to  prove  that  bone  to  be  the  squamosal  as  the  one  which  Dr.  Hallmann 
' deduced  from  the  same  character  in  favour  of  the  petromastoid  in  the 
• 1 being  the  squamosal.  Dr.  Hallmann  cites  the  junction  of  no.  s (his  t, 
i.  fig.  5,  op.  cit.)  with  the  postfrontal  in  a young  cassowary  as  evidence 
: ts  squamous  character.  I have  not  met  with  this  union  in  the  young 

■ -ich  nor  in  the  young  emeu,  in  which  latter  bird  there  is  a distinct  post- 
■■  atal : the  anterior  inferior  angle  of  the  parietal  descends  and  meets  the 

■ ■ phenoid  in  both  these  StnithionidcB,  at  the  part  where  the  post-frontal  is 
••ked  (at  f")  in  Dr.  Hallmann’s  figure  above  cited.  The  extremity  of  the 

■ mtoid  process  does,  however,  arch  over  the  temporal  fossa  to  join  the  post- 
;ital  process  in  certain  birds,  as  above  mentioned  ; but  this  junction,  when 

- lascend  in  our  pursuit  of  the  homologies  of  the  elements  of  the  composite 

- i poral  bone  of  mammals,  as  it  is  safest  to  do,  from  fishes  to  reptiles, 

from  these  to  birds,  forms  a repetition  of  a very  characteristic  feature 
. he  mastoid  in  the  cold-blooded  classes,  and  one  that  is  quite  intelligible 

- ‘cn  we  rise  to  the  appreciation  of  the  higher  relations  of  both  mastoid  and 
' i-t-frontal  as  parapophyses  of  their  respective  vertebr®. 

^ tn  every  mammal  the  squamosal  is  applied  to  the  cranial  parietes,  and  at- 
;-ied  by  a peculiar  suture  called  squamous ; the  outer  surface  of  the  bone 
: seeding  the  inner  surface.  In  no  bird  is  the  mastoid  so  united  to  the  sur- 
' -oding  bones,  but  joins  them  by  harmonise  vertical  to  the  surface,  as  the 
: -er  true  cranial  bones  are  joined  before  they  coalesce;  and  the  outer  very 
^ e,  if  at  all,  surpasses  the  inner  surface,  to  which  the  petrosal  is  confluent. 

1 '!  petromastoid  of  the  mammal  resembles  that  of  the  bird  in  this  respect. 

• 'here  is  no  difficulty  in  the  ascensive  survey  in  appreciating  the  special 

• lology  of  no.  s in  the  bird  (fig.  23)  with  no.  s in  the  crocodile  (fig.  22} 

in  the  fish  (fig.  5);  and  Dr.  Hallmann,  retaining  a firmer  and  more 
‘sistent  view  of  their  common  characters  than  Cuvier,  enunciates  clearly 
homology:  but  having  persuaded  himself  that  the  ‘ mastoid’  of  the  bird 
its  ‘ squamosal,’  he  concludes  that  the  bone  which  Cuvier  had  called  mas- 
in  the  crocodile  and  fish  must  also  be  their  squamosal.  I believe  Cuvier 
^ lave  rightly  determined  the  bone  (no.  s)  in  the  cold-blooded  classes  to  be 
j imastoid  ; but  he  is  not  consistent  with  himself  when  he  adopts  a different 
elusion  with  regard  to  no.  s in  the  bird.  The  greater  development  of 
bird’s  brain,  as  compared  with  the  crocodile’s,  requires  a greater  expan- 
' of  the  cranial  part  of  the  mastoid,  just  as  the  still  greater  development 
: he  brain  in  mammals  calls  forth  a peculiar  expansion  and  application  of 
; cranial  end  of  the  squamosal,  involving  a transference  of  the  mandibular 
1 t to  that  expanded  end. 

luvier,  in  descending  from  mammals  to  the  consideration  of  the  homolo- 
J of  no.  s in  the  birrl,  pa.ssed  too  abruptly  to  the  comparison,  lacking  the 
^ nictive  link  furnished  by  the  monotremes.  It  might  have  sufficed  for 
, pre.sent  report  to  have  demonstrated  the  homology  of  no.  s in  the  bird, 
Jnsively,  with  (.uvier’s  well-determined  mastoids  in  fishes  and  re[)tilcs ; 

u 2 ’ 


I 


1 


3G 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


but  since  both  Cuvier  and  Dr.  Hallmann  have  elucidated  their  views  o a 
homology  by  characters  drawn  from  the  mammalian  class,  I have  endeavoi 
and  I trust  satisfactorily,  to  meet  their  objections  and  to  determine  the 
homology  of  the  bone  by  other  arguments  drawn  from  modifications  of  | 
petromastoid  in  the  same  class. 

Pursuing  therefore  the  comparison  descensively,  I proceed  in  the  next  p 
to  consider  the  characters  of  the  mastoid  in  the  crocodile  (figs.  19  and  2^ 
Cuvier  premises  his  determination  of  the  bone  in  that  reptile  by  citing, 
following  as  its  characters  in  the  mammalia  : — “ La  partie  mastoidienne 
recouvre  le  rocher  en  arriere  de  I’ecailleuse  et  de  la  caisse,  mais  qui  se  st 
de  si  bonne  heure  a ce  rocher  que  Ton  paroient  a peine  a^la  reconn£ 
comme  distincte  dans  les  plus  jeunes  fetus  ou  elle  est  quelquefois  doubl 
The  squamosal  he  defines  as  a bone  “ qui  devient  de  plus  en  plus  etranj 
au  crane  a mesure  qu’on  descend  dans  I’echelle  des  quadrupedes,  en  s: 
que  dans  les  ruminans  elle  est  plutot  collee  dessus  qu’elle  n’entre  dan 
composition  de  ses  paroisf-”  If  we  pause  to  apply  these  characters  to  thei 
termination  of  nos.  s and  27  respectively  in  the  bird,  before  proceeding 
the  crocodile,  we  shall  see  how  far  they  sustain  the  conclusions  I have 
rived  at,  in  opposition  to  the  views  of  Cuvier  and  his  followers,  in  refere 
to  the  true  homologue  of  the  mammalian  squamosal  in  birds.  With  regJ 
to  the  mastoid  in  the  crocodile,  Cuvier  says,  “ Le  mastoidien  des  crocoo 
proprement  dits  et  des  gavials  a cela  de  particulier,  qu’il  s’avance  laten 
ment  jusqu’a  s’unir  au  frontal  posterieur,  et  a entourer  avec  lui  et  le  pj: 
6tal  le  trou  de  la  face  superieure  du  crane  qui  communique  avec  la  f< 
temporale ; dans  quelques  caimans  il  s’uuit  meme  a ces  trois  os  pour  cou 
entierement  cette  fosse  en  dessus,  et  dans  les  tortues  de  mer,  non-seulemi  ( 
ils  font  la  meme  chose,  le  temporale  et  le  jugal  venant  aussi  a s’unir  au  n | 
toidien  et  au  frontal  posterieure,  ils  couvrent  la  fosse  temporale,  meme  t 
dehors.”  j;  L 

Doubtless  the  German  anatomists  who  dissent  from  Cuvier’s  determinat  k 
of  the  bone  a in  the  crocodile  (fig.  22)  have  been  influenced  in  some  deg  t 
by  the  little  conformity  between  the  character  above  assigned  to  the  mast 
in  that  reptile  and  the  character  Cuvier  had  previously  assigned  to  the  nr  i 
toid  in  mammalia.  The  confluence  of  the  mastoid  with  the  petrosal,  t 
example,  is  a modification  peculiar  to  the  warm-blooded  vertebrates,  wh'  ( 
the  relative  position  of  the  mastoid,  above  and  external  to  the  petrosal,  abq  i 
and  behind  the  tympanic,  and  behind  the  squamosal,  when  this  bone  is  p t 
sent,  is  a con.stant  character  in  all  vertebrates;  to  which  must  be  added,  t.  ( 
in  most  mammals  and  all  other  vertebrates  the  mastoid  affords  an  articuj  1 
surface  for  the  tympanic  bone,  and  developes  an  outstanding  (mastoM 
process  for  the  attachment  of  strong  muscles  moving  the  head  upon  the  tru  j • 
With  regard  to  the  relative  position  of  the  mastoid  process  to  the  crar.,5 
walls,  its  origin  ascends  as  the  expansion  and  elevation  of  the  parietal  dii  1 
nishes  with  the  decreasing  size  of  the  cerebrum : in  mammals,  the  procej  { 
when  present,  extends  from  the  lower  border  of  the  postero-lateral  wall  ft 
the  cranium : in  birds  it  projects  from  near  the  middle  of  that  wall,  a 
nearer  the  upper  surface  in  the  flat-headed  Dinornis : in  the  crocodile  it  1 
ascended  to  a level  with  the  upper  surface  of  the  cranium,  and  forms  tt 
posterior  angle  of  that  surface.  The  paroccipital  presents  a similar  prognj 
sive  ascent,  but  later  in  the  series  traced  descensively ; it  does  not  gain  t 
level  of  the  mastoid  until  we  arrive  at  the  class  of  fishes. 

* Op,  cit.  t.  V.  pt.  ii.  p.  81. 

f Ih.  p.  81.  Oken  notices  the  completion  of  the  cranial  cavity,  independently  of  ' 
squamosal,  in  the  sheep  ; in  his  “ Programm”,  &c.  4to.  1807,  p.  5. 

X lb.  p.  84. 


SPECIAL  HOMOLOGY.  MASTOID. 


37 

The  mastoid,  thus  determined  in  the  crocodile,  is  recognized  with  ease 
d certainty  in  chelonia,  lacertia  and  ophidia.  It  is  a distinct  bone  in  all 
• !se  reptiles,  and  preserves  with  singular  constancy  its  normal  relative  jio- 
' ion  anterior  to  the  exoccipital,  superior  to  and  supporting  the  tympanic, 
j anterior  to  the  squamosal  when  this  is  present.  In  lizards  the  mastoid 
’ much  reduced  in  size ; in  serpents  it  attains  a considerable  length.  In  the 

• thou  and  most  serpents  it  forms  no  part  of  the  proper  wall  of  the  cranium, 
I t overlaps  the  contiguous  parts  of  the  parietal,  alisphenoid,  supra-occipital, 

' 1 exoccipital,  projecting  backwards  beyond  the  latter.  It  is  large  in  the 

■ .pentiform  batrachia,  but  presents  in  Ccecilia  (Cuvier,  llegne  Animal,  1817, 

■ 6.  figs.  1 & 2,  g)  its  normal  connections  with  the  occipital  (/),  parietal 
■:  , tympanic  (A),  and  also  with  the  post-frontal,  which  has  coalesced  or  is 

■ mate  with  the  frontal  (at  d,  1.  c.).  Cuvier  does  not  admit  of  this  conflu- 

■ n;e  in  the  caecilia ; and  although  he  assigns  the  character  ‘ point  des  fron- 

- \x  posterieures’  to  the  typical  batrachia*,  gives  the  name  ‘ posterior  frontal  ’ 
■..ha  note  of  doubt,  indeed,  to  g,  and  assigns  to  the  bone  A,  which  suspends 
s mandible,  the  name  of  “masto'idiens  et  calsses  reunisf.”  There  is  no 

ual  necessity  for  assuming  so  rare  a confluence  to  characterize  the  caecilia. 

■ e mastoid  exists  with  all  its  normal  connections,  and  beautifully  manifests 
its  independence  and  large  size  the  affinity  of  the  caecilia  to  the  true 

- i.iidia.  In  the  typical  batrachia,  where  the  cranium  is  remarkably  cha- 

■ [ terized  by  instances  of  confluence  which  seem  borrowed  from  the  warm- 
I'Oded  classes,  the  mastoid  sometimes  loses  its  independence,  and  appears 

■ im  exogenous  process  from  the  external  and  posterior  part  of  the  parietal, 
uiining  however  its  normal  office  of  suspending  the  tympanic  : but  in  a skull 

- khe  Rana  boans  now  before  me,  the  suture  between  the  mastoid  (fig.  13,  s) 
^ 1 parietal  (r)  is  not  obliterated,  and  it  further  articulates  with  the  exocci- 

L J (3)  behind  and  the  alisphenoid  (a)  in  front.  Cuvier,  in  his  description  of 

■ tympanic  of  the  Rana  escidenta\,  says,  that  its  upper  branch  articulates 

- th  the  ‘rocher.’  In  Rana  boans  that  branch  articulates  exclusively  with 
i'  ' truncated  extremity  of  the  broad  outstanding  mastoid,  which  mastoid 
j r;rhangs,  as  in  all  fishes,  the  petrosal,  which  is  chiefly  cartilaginous  in  the 

- boans  (ib.  is).  In  Rana  esculenta  the  mastoid  (Duges,  Recherches 
les  Batrachiens,  fig.  1 , 12)  appears  to  have  coalesced  with  the  alisphenoid 

- figs.  2,  6 & 7,  12);  and  the  compound  bone  has  received  the  name  of 
i cher’  from  Cuvier  and  that  of  ‘ rupeo-ptereal’  from  Duges.  The  fora- 

; ovale  however  marks  the  alisphenoidal  part  (a  distinct  bone  in  my  Rana 
'■  •■ns),  and  the  suspension  of  the  tympanic  marks  the  mastoid,  which,  with 
'•  other  connections,  overhangs  also  in  Rana  viridisthzi  mass  of  cartilage  § 
ich  immediately  invests  the  membranous  labyrinth  and  forms  the  ‘fenestra 
a ilis’  against  which  the  plate  of  the  columelliform  stapes  is  applied. 

; ■'rof.  J.  Muller  has  well  recognized  the  homologue  of  this  sense  capsule  in 
J CtBcilia  htjpocyanea,  in  w'hich  he  describes  it  as  “ petrosum  cum  operculo 

• «3trje  ovalis||.”  It  is  situated  further  back  than  in  Rana,  and  appears  poste- 

• ’to  the  tympanic  (i)  and  the  large  suspending  mastoid  (A),  to  which  Muller 
!J  es  the  name  of  ‘temporale.’  In  the  singularly  modified  cranium  of  the 
; t^ps  the  mastoid  articulates  above  with  the  parietal  and  supraoccipital, 

iind  with  the  exoccipital,  coalesces  in  front  with  the  alisphenoid,  as  in 
'■  le  batrachia,  and  affords  the  usual  articulation  below  to  the  tympanic. 

Ouem.  Fossiles,  v.  pt.  i.  p.  38fi.  f Rigne  Animal,  ed.  1817,  t.  iv.  p.  102. 

Gsscin.  Fossiles  v.  pt.  ii.  p.  390. 

precocioiu  development  of  this  capsule  in  the  larva  of  the  frog  is  well  shown  hv 

• :nert,  • Entwickelungsgeschichte  des  Kopfes,’  4to,  pi.  i.  figs.  13—1.'),  .r : it  resembles 

in  the  m}Txinoids  and  lampreys. 

Beitrage  r.nr  Anatomic  der  Amphihicn ; Tiedemann’s  XcilsehrifI  fiir  I’livsiolnirie, 
IT.  1831.  p.  218,  pi.  IS.  fig.  T.  *.  • 


38  ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON.  I 

How  necessary  it  is  to  retain  a clear  and  consistent  appreciation  of  thesefli  . 
dences  of  the  homology  of  the  mastoid  is  shown  by  the  second  synonym^f  ^ 
petrosum,’  Aviuch  it  has  received  from  the  justly-celebrated  author  of  | 
instructive  memoir  (pi.  20.  figg.  10,  12,  13,  p).  The  actual  capsul| 

the  membranous  labyrinth  is  covered  by  the  mastoid  and  exoccipital,  | 
remains  wholly  cartilaginous,  as  in  other  ophidia ; and  as  it  likewise  doe  •, 
Rhinophis,  where  its  name  ‘ petrosum  ’ is  in  like  manner  transferred  by  li  ' 
Muller  to  the  coalesced  mastoid  and  alisphenoid.  In  Cheirotes  the  co 
of  confluence  proceeds  to  obliterate  not  only  the  suture  between  the  mas 
and  alisphenoid,  but  that  between  the  mastoid  and  parietal ; as  also  of  tl 
between  the  frontal,  parietal  and  supra-occipital ; the  whold  cranium  ' 
senting  almost  the  extent  of  coalescence  which  characterizes  the  hot-bloc' 
bird.  Only  the  immediate  covering  of  the  membranous  labyrinth  rem 
cartilaginous.  ' 

The  sides  of  the  superior  surface  of  the  cranium  of  bony  fishes  usu  t 
extend  outwards  as  a strong  irregular  ridge,  from  which  three  processes  m 
particularly  project,  which  are  supported  by  three  distinct  bones,  sutur- 
united,  and  each  impressed  with  an  articular  glenoid  cavity.  And  hei 
cannot  avoid  remarking  how  beautifully  the  principle  of  vegetative  n 
tition*  is  exemplified  in  the  lowest  class  of  the  Vertebrata,  where  coi' 
quently  the  relations  of  serial  homology  of  the  parapophyses  in  question 
unmistakeable.  The  posterior  process  or  bone  which  sustains  (in  part)  ' 
scapular  arch  is  the  paroccipital  (fig.  5, 4) ; the  anterior  one,  which  sustf 
in  part  the  tyrapano-mandibular  arch,  is  the  post-frontal  (ib.  12)  ; and 
intermediate  and  usually  most  prominent  bone  (t'6.  s),  which  sustains  in  j 
the  epitympanic  (isa),  and  through  that  the  hyoid  arch,  is  the  homologui 
the  bone  whose  essential  characters  have  been  discussed  under  the  name 
‘ mastoid.’  The  paroccipital  having  now  risen  to  a level  with  the  mastr 
this  forms  the  second  strong  transverse  process  at  each  side  of  the  cranii 
The  process  is  developed  from  the  outer  margin  of  the  mastoid ; the  in 
side  of  the  bone  is  expanded,  and  enters  slightly  into  the  formation  of 
walls  of  the  cranial  or  rather  the  otocranial  cavity,  its  inner,  usually  cart’ 
ginous  surface  lodging  the  fibro-cartilaginous  continuation  of  the  petre 
which  immediately  covers  the  external  semicircular  canal.  It  is  wedged  i: 
the  interspace  of  the  ex-  and  par-occipitals,  the  petrosal,  the  alisphenoid, 
parietal  and  post-frontal  bones.  The  projecting  process  lodges  above 
chief  mucous  canal  of  the  head,  and  below  affords  attachment  to  the  e< 
tympanic  or  upper  piece  of  the  bony  pedicle  from  which  the  mandibu;. 
hyoid,  and  opercular  bones  are  suspended  : its  extremity  gives  attachment!  11 
the  strong  tendon  of  the  dorso-lateral  muscles  of  the  trunk.  * 

It  might  have  been  supposed  that  this  contribution  to  the  walls  of 
cranial  cavity,  this  articulation  to  the  occipital  and  tympanic  bones,  alb! 
which  are  constant  characters  of  the  mastoid  in  mammals,  and  but  occasion  1' 
ones  in  the  squamosal — not  to  speak  of  the  apophysial  form  and  functions-  t 
the  bone  in  question  in  the  skull  of  fishes — would  have  made  the  balance  1 
dine  to  the  choice  of  the  ‘ mastoid  ’ rather  than  of  the  ‘squamosal’  elemei 
of  the  human  temporal  in  the  judgement  of  every  unbiassed  investigator 
its  homologies.  The  German  anatomists,  however,  in  falling  with  Cuv 
into  the  mistake  respecting  the  homology  of  the  ‘ mastoid  ’ (no.  s)  in  bin 
Avith  the  squamosal  in  mammals,  adhere  more  consistently  to  their  error  a 
continue  to  apply  the  name  ‘squamosal’  or  its  equivalents  to  the  homologo 
bone  in  reptiles  (fig.  22,  s)  and  fishes  (fig.  5,  s).  ! 

* This  principle  or  lavi'  is  explained  in  the  first  volume  of  my  Hunterian  Lectures  ‘ On  1' 
Invertebrata,’  8a'0.  1843,  in  Avhich  classes  of  animals  it  is  most  strikingly  and  fully  exe  ;j' 
plified.  I 


SPECIAL  HOMOLOGY.  MASTOID. 


3!> 


The  high  repute  which  M.  Agassiz  has  so  justly  earned  in  iciilhyotoniy 
iders  the  accession  of  his  name  in  support  of  Drs.  Ilallmann,  Iteichert, 
I Kdstlin’s  determination  of  tlie  bone  in  question,  one  to  wliich  those  able 
nologists  and  their  followers  will  naturally  attach  great  weight,  and  which 
.eetl  has  caused  me  to  pause  and  retrace  more  tlian  once,  and  with  the 
Qost  pains  and  care,  every  step  in  the  series  of  comparisons  which  have 
Jly  brought  conviction  of  the  accuracy  of  the  Cuvierian  determination  of 
s in  fishes. 

; am  not  aware  that  any  anatomist  has  replied  to  the  objections  to  the 
vierian  view  propounded  by  M.  Agassiz.  Drs.  Ilallmann  and  Kbstlin, 
0 have  published  the  most  elaborate  monographs  on  the  temporal  and 
er  bones  of  the  skull  since  the  time  of  Cuvier,  concur  entirely  with  the 
met!  Swiss  naturalist.  Dr.  Reichert,  in  giving  the  name  of ‘squama  tem- 
alis’  to  no.  s,  and  that  of  ‘processus  temporalis  posterior’  to  its  process, 
flsfers  the  name  ‘ processus  mastoideus’  to  the  paroccipital  (no.  4,  fig.  5)*. 
jecomes  then  necessary  to  consider  the  arguments  of  M.  Agassiz  in  favour 
the  homology  of  no.  s.  in  fishes  with  the  squamosal  no.  sr  in  mammals, 
the  valuable  monograph  on  the  osteology  of  the  pike  (JEsox)  in  the  15th 
. ^vraison’  of  the  ‘ Recherches  sur  les  Poissons  Fossiles,’  the  author  says 
66),  “ Un  os  de  la  tete  place  entre  le  frontal  posterieur,  le  frontal  prin- 
ial,  le  parietal,  la  grand  aile  sphenoidale  et  I’occipital  lateral,  ne  saurait 
ijais  etre  envisage  comme  correspondant  a I’apophyse  mastoidienne  du 
iporal.  D’apres  ses  liaisons,  je  crois  done  qu’il  faut  envisager  le  mastdidien 
V Cuvier  comme  I’analogue  de  V ecaille  du  temporal  ou  comme  le  temporal 
iprement  dit.  C’etait  deja  I’opinion  de  Spix,  qui  est  tombe  juste  sur  ce 
nt”  To  this  I reply  that,  in  regard  to  the  C(  nnections  of  the  mastoid,  those 
-h  the  parietal,  alisphenoid  and  exoccipital,  are  more  constant  than  that 
•h  the  frontal,  which  is  interrupted  in  mammalia  by  the  interposition  of 
< expanded  squamosal,  peculiar  to  that  class ; but  the  mastoid  retains  its 
i cine  connection  with  the  postfrontal  in  many  reptiles  and  some  birds.  On 
! other  hand,  the  union  of  the  squamosal  with  the  frontal  is  by  no  means 
. > onstant  character  in  mammalia : it  is  rarely  found  in  the  orang,  still  moi'e 
vely  in  man,  never  in  the  cetacea  and  monotremes,  nor  in  certain  ruminants, 
r in  the  myrmecophaga,  &c.  The  connection  of  the  mastoid  with  the 
ntal  is  more  common  than  is  the  connection  of  the  squamosal  with  the 
occipital.  It  is  a bold  leap  to  take  from  the  mammal  to  the  fish  in  the  de- 
.mination  of  a variable  bone  like  the  squamosal : nevertheless,  I would  re- 
est  the  unbiassed  reader  to  glance  at  fig.  12,  whilst  he  reads  M.  Agassiz’s 
icig  of  the  character  of  the  squamosal  above  cited,  and  see  how  far  no.  s de- 
ites  from  it,  save  in  regard  to  the  frontal  connection.  Spix,  who  appears 
t to  have  traced  the  beautiful  gradation  of  the  mastoid  in  the  mammalia, 
dwho  was  unacquainted  wdth  the  decisive  step  to  its  normal  condition  in 
? oviparous  vertebrates  made  by  the  monotremes, — and  who  was  influenced, 
'^refore,  by  seeing  that  bone  in  higher  mammals  pushed  back  from  any  con- 
ction  with  the  alisphenoid  and  postfrontal  by  the  interposed  squamosal, 
lich  usurps  these  connections  and  combines  them  with  others,  as  with  the 
rietal  and  tympanic,  which  the  mastoid  (no.  s)  presents  in  fishes, — not  un- 
wonably  concluded  that  no.  s represented  the  squamosal  in  that  class ; and 
IS  probable  that  M.  Agassiz,  who  received  his  anatomical  rudiments  at 
unich,  and  was  early  engaged  in  describing  the  fishes  collected  in  Brazil  by 
e author  of  the  ‘ Cephalogeriesis,’  might  have  derived  a bias  in  favour  of  this 
which  prevented  his  assigning  their  due  value  to  the  connection  of  no.  s 
fishes  with  the  paroccipital,  and  its  contribution  to  the  otocranial  cavity. 

* Oj>.  oil.  tah.  iii.  fig-;.  'J  and  1.3,  p,  t/. 


40 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


In  urging  a reconsideration  of  the  value  and  significancy  of  these  chi  A 
ters,  I may  repeat  that  in  mammals  the  mastoid  constantly  presents  t:l 
whilst  the  squamosal  very  rarely  has  the  first,  and  not  often  the  second  L 
raeter.  It  must  also  be  remembered  that  the  squamosal  loses  its  connecMi 
with  the  frontal  and  progressively  decreases  in  the  mammalian  class  to  less  ■: 
the  dimensions  of  the  mastoid  itself,  as  e.  g.  in  echidna  (fig.  12),  whilst  in  ft 
monotreme  the  mastoid,  s,  besides  its  connections  with  the  parietal  and  extft 
pital,  extends  forwards  to  articulate  with  the  alisphenoid,  e.  If  ossificaft 
were  restricted  in  mammals  to  no.  s,  fig.  11,  in  reference  to  lo,  whichft^ 
mained  cartilaginous,  then  no.  s would  have  the  same  relation  to  the  otocrft 
or  in  other  words,  would  contribute  the  same  protection  to  thq  acoustic  li.^ 
rintli,  which  no.  s,  fig.  5,  performs  in  fishes ; the  external  semiciraji  ■ 
canal  at  least  would  be  protected  by  the  mastoid  in  both  : only  in  maminft 
the  mastoid  would  also  extend  over  the  posterior  canal.  The  petrosal  1 ft 
no  part  of  its  essential  character  as  the  capsule  or  outer  t\inic  of  the  h ft 
rinth  by  becoming  ossified,  nor  is  it  less  recognisable  in  fishes  within  ft 
mastoid,  by  remaining  membranous  or  cartilaginous,  than  is  the  sclerft 
capsule  of  the  eye  in  its  chamber  or  orbit;  which  capsule,  in  like  man  ft 
presents  all  the  corresponding  histological  modifications  in  one  or  other  ]ft 
of  the  vertebrate  series.  The  mask  which  has  concealed  the  true  featureTt- 
resemblance  of  the  human  mastoid  to  that  of  fishes,  is  simply  the  petr< 
ossified  and  cemented  to  it.  But  the  squamosal  presents  no  such  relation: 
the  bony  capsule  of  the  semicircular  canals  in  any  mammal.  Even 
connection  of  the  squamosal  with  the  tympanic  bone  is,  as  we  have  seen,, 
less  constant  and  intimate  in  mammals  than  the  connection  of  the  mast 
with  the  tympanic*. 

In  the  anatomical  description  of  the  existing  ganoid  fishes  which 
Agassiz  has  unfortunately  called  ‘ Sauroidf,’  the  bone  no.  s is  described 

* From  the  remark  in  p.  53,  t.  ii.  pt.  ii.  ‘ Recherches  sur  les  Poiss.  Foss.,’  it  would  st 
that  the  circumstance  of  the  extension  of  the  tympanic  air-cells  into  the  mastoid,  in  cerr 
mammalia,  had  weighed  with  M.  Agassiz  in  determining  its  homological  characters. 

t All  the  characters  by  which  these  highly  organized  fishes  approximate  the  Reptilia  i 
found,  not  in  the  highest,  but  in  the  lowest  order  of  tliat  class,  viz.  in  the  batrachia,  and  her 
more  especially  in  the  salamanders.  The  air-bladder  of  Lepidostem  resembles  the  lung 
the  serpent  in  its  singleness,  and  those  of  the  salamander  in  the  degree  of  its  cellulari' 
some  parts  of  the  structure  being  peculiarly  piscine.  The  bifid  air-bladder  of  Polypte> 
resembles  the  lungs  of  the  salamandroid  menopome  and  proteus,  in  the  want  of  celli 
walls.  The  characteristic  large  bulbus  arteriosus  and  its  numerous  rows  of  valves,  wh 
distinguish  the  ganoids  from  most  other  osseous  fishes,  are  retained  in  the  menopome,  1 
are  not  present  in  any  saurian.  The  anterior  ball  and  posterior  cup  of  the  vertebrae  of . 
pidostem  are  repeated  in  the  salamander  and  pipa,  but  in  no  existing  saurian.  The  lal 
rinthodont  character  of  the  teeth  of  Lepidosteus  was  developed  to  its  maximum  in  the  gr.- 
extinct  reptiles  {Salamandrdides,  Jager),  which,  by  their  double  occipital  condyle,  der, 
gerous  double  vomer,  and  biconcave  vertebrae,  were  essentially  Batrachia,  not  Sauria\  a 
which  combined  characters  now  found  only  in  the  lower  salamandroid  Batrachia,  with  den' 
ones  borrowed  from  fishes,  and  but  feebly  manifested  by  the  most  fish-like  of  sauria 
{Ichthyosaurus).  All  the  so-called  sauroid  fishes  retain  the  characteristic  piscine  articu 
concavity  on  the  basioccipital  for  the  atlas  : it  is,  however,  very  shallow  in  the  pobTitenit 
and  is  also  extended  transversely,  with  the  lateral  borders  or  angles  so  prominent,  that,  : 
M.  Agassiz  well  remarks,  “ it  needs  very  little  to  change  this  transverse  articulation  with 
two  lateral  ridges  into  two  distinct  articular  condyles,”  /.  c.  p.  71.  But  this  would  conve 
pro  tanto,  the  polypterus  into  a hatrachian,  not  into  a saurian.  So  far  as  the  character  oB 
single  convex  occipital  condyle  is  valuable  as  a mark  of  affinity  to  the  Sauria,  it  is  \neses 
in  a fish  of  a different  order  from  the  ganoids,  and  with  much  fewer  approximations  in  oth' 
respects  to  the  reptilian  class,  viz.  in  the  Fistularia  tahaccaria.  There  remains,  therefoi  i 
only  the  character  of  the  enamelled  scales  which  the  polypterus  and  lepidosteus  present 
common  with  all  the  lower  organized  ganoids,  and  which  to  a certain  extent  resemble  tl 
bony  scutes  of  the  crocodilia.  If  the  deposition  of  calcareous  matter  in  and  upon  the  sk 
were  not  essentially  a retention  of  a very  low  type  of  skeleton  ; if  it  were  not  presented  1 < 


SPECIAL  UOMOLOOY.  MASTOIP. 


41 


king  part,  by  its  large  size,  in  the  formation  of  both  the  internal  and  ex- 
riiaf  surfaces  of  the  cranial*  box,  which  size  depends  essentially  on  the 
•gree  of  development  of  the  frontals,  parietals  and  occipitals : it  is  further 
•ged  that  the  suborbitals  (‘apophyse  jugule’)  are  likewise  attached  to  it;  that 
e preopercular(‘apophyse  styloi'de’)  diverges,  and  is  directed  or  abuts  against 
; that,  finally,  the  bone  in  i[uestion  (no.  s,  fig.  5)  is,  with  the  exception  of  the 
•trosal,  the  sole  part  of  tlie  temporal  bone  which  takes  a direct  part  in 
e formation  of  the  cranial  box.  “ D’apres  ces  considerations,”  M.  Agassiz 
.•oceeds,  “il  est  impossible  de  prendre  I’os  No.  12  [no.  s,  in  fig.  5],  que 
uvier  a nomine  mastdidien,  pour  autre  chose  que  pour  la  veritable  ecaille  du 
niporal.  II  prend  part  a la  formation  de  la  boite  cerebrale,  il  donne  inser- 
jii  a I’arcade  zygomatique,  enfin,  il  prete  une  articulation  au  preopercule, 
le  nous  regardons  maintenant  comme  le  veritable  representant  de  I’apo- 
ivse  stylouie  du  temporal,”  1.  c.  p.  63.  Admitting,  for  the  sake  of  the  argu- 
e'nt,  that  the  preopercular  is  the  homologue  of  the  stylohyal,  and  that  it  arti- 
ilates  with  the  so-called  ‘ ecaille  du  temporal,’  which  is  not  the  case  in  the 
ajority  of  fishes,  yet  this  would  prove  more  for  the  ‘mastoid’  than  for  the 
Kjuamosal’  character  of  no.  s,  fig.  5.  The  stylohyal  unquestionably  articu- 
tes  in  many  mammals  with  the  mastoid  or  petromastoid,  between  which 
id  the  tympanic  it  is  anchylosed  in  man,  and  it  rests  with  M.  Agassiz  to 
nnonstrate  the  species  in  which  it  articulates  with  the  true  squamous  part 
•'the  temporal f. 

■ With  regard  to  the  connection  with  the  suborbital  chain  of  ossicles,  which 
I.  Agassiz  regards,  with  Geoftroy,  as  the  jugal  or  zygomatic  arch,  even 
• idmitting  such  connection  to  be  the  rule  and  not  the  exception,  all  its 
^^ce  as  an  argument  in  favour  of  the  squamosal  character  of  no.  s Avill 
spend  on  the  ultimate  decision  of  comparative  anatomists  as  to  the  respect- 
-'e  claims  of  the  upper  and  lower  zygomata  in  the  macaw’s  skull,  for 
ixample  (pi.  1,  fig.  1),  to  a special  homology  with  the  zygomatic  arch  in 
jan  and  other  mammals.  The  orbit  in  the  bird  cited,  as  in  other  Psit- 
•ddcE,  is  circumscribed  below  by  a bony  frame  continued  from  the  lacrymal 
•3)  to  the  postfrontal  (12),  and  thence  to  the  bone  (a)  which  I regard  as 
le  mastoid.  Below  this  frame,  the  slender  bone,  considered  by  Cuvier  as 
■je  jugal,  and  by  me  as  the  coalesced  jugal  (20)  and  squamosal  (27),  extends 
'em  the  maxillary  (21)  backwards  to  the  tympanic  (2s),  and  forms  a second 
*ch  or  zygoma.  According  to  the  Cuvierian  and  generally-received  view  of 
1 i-ie  homology  of  no.  s in  the  bird,  the  bridge  which  it  sends  forward  over  the 
?mporal  fossa  to  join  the  above-described  inferior  boundary  of  the  orbit, 
I the  macaw,  would  be  the  zygomatic  process;  and  that  boundary  would  be 
•hat  M.  Agassiz  calls  its  homologue  in  fishes,  viz.  the  jugal  or  ‘arcade  zygo- 
oatique.’  But  what  then  is  the  parallel  zygomatic  arch  below(2o,  27),  con- 


4iany  fishes  of  different  grades  of  organization,  and  by  some,  as  the  sturgeons  and  siluroids, 
g.  under  a scattered  arrangement,  more  like  that  in  the  crocodiles  than  is  seen  in  the  scale 
mnour  of  the  typical  ganoids,  it  might  have  some  weight  in  proving  the  affinity  of  such 
' anoids  to  the  highest  order  of  reptilia ; but,  viewing  this  character  under  all  its  relations, 
am  not  disposed  to  regard  it  as  establishing  that  affinity  more  directly,  than  it  would  the 
: ffinity  of  the  crocodile  to  the  mammalian  genus  Dasgpus.  It  is  for  the  reasons  above  assigned 
nat  I have  been  accustomed  to  treat,  in  my  Lectures,  of  the  anatomical  characters  of  the 
roup  represented  by  the  Polypterun  and  Lepidosteus,  as  those  of  a Salamandroid,  rather  than 
f a Saurr/id  family  of  fishes;  the  characters  being  carried  out  in  the  direction  of  the  batra- 
hian  order  by  the  remarkable  genera  Prolopterns  and  Lejndoairen. 

* .More  properly  ‘ otocranial,’  in  Icpidostcus  at  least. 

t In  my  notes  on  the  osteology  of  Mammalia,  I find  that  the  stylohyal  sometimes  articu- 
ates  with  the  petrosal,  sometimes  with  the  mastoid,  exclusively,  as  in  most  mammals, 
ometimes  with  the  tympanic,  sometimes  with  the  paroceipitjd  process  ; but  no  instance  is 
ecorded  of  its  articulation  with  the  srjuamous  portion  of  the  temporal. 


42 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


necting  the  maxillary  with  the  tympanic,  and  marked  z*"'  in  fig.  7,  taf.  i.  of  1 
Hallmann’s  monograph  ? If  Cuvier  had  been  correct  in  regarding  no.  8 asi 
squamosal,  the  name  ‘ jugal’  ought  to  have  been  transferred  from  the  loi 
zygoma  to  the  upper  one  (pl.l,  fig.  1,  73)  connected  with  such  squamosal 
the  macaw  : and  with  a like  consistency  the  name  ‘jugal’  ought  to  have  bi> 
retained  for  the  siiborbital  chain  of  dermal  bones  in  fishes  (pi.  1,  fig.  2,  73)! 
which  it  had  been  applied  by  Geoffroy  St.  Hilaire,  and  to  which  it  has  bi> 
restored  by  M.  Agassiz.  But,  in  truth,  there  may  be  clearly  discerned  in 
beautiful  modification  which  has  been  adduced  from  the  PsittacidcB,  a prri 
of  Cuvier’s  erroneous  homology  of  the  bone  no.  8 in  the  class  of  birds,  andj 
the  same  time  of  his  accurate  homology  of  tlie  same  bone  in  tliat  of  fishes 
Is  there  no  significance  in  the  fact  of  the  bone  anterior  to  the  orbit,  whi| 
we  call  lacrymal  in  man  down  to  the  lowest  reptile,  being  constantly  p « 
forated  by  a mucous  duct  ? Can  we  not  recognize  in  this  function  a- 
glandular  relation,  as  in  the  commonly  thin  scale-like  character  of  that  boi  j 
and  its  connections  in  front  of  the  orbit,  the  repetition  of  the  characters- 
the  largest,  most  anterior,  and  most  constant  of  the  suborbitals  in  fishes  (7i.73j| 

If  the  rest  of  that  chain  be  sometimes  wanting,  but  more  commonly  prese 
in  that  class  ; if  it  should  present  the  condition  occasionally  of  a strong  coni 
nuous  bony  inverted  arch,  spanning  the  orbit  below  from  prefrontal  to  posl 
frontal,  as  in  the  right  orbit  of  the  Hip2)oglussus  and  the  left  orbit  of  Rhombh 
ought  we  to  lose  our  grasp  of  the  guiding  thread  of  ‘ connections’  by  beii< 
confronted  with  a repetition  of  that  condition  in  the  skulls  of  certain  hire 
caused  by  a continuous  ossification  from  the  lacrymal  to  the  post-fronttJ 
seeing  that  a diverging  bony  appendage  of  the  maxillary  arch,  unknown  in  til 
class  of  fishes,  has  there  established  a second  and  true  ‘zygoma’  below  til 
suborbital  one  ? The  extension  of  the  ossification  from  the  post-frontal  cni 
of  the  suborbital  arch  to  the  mastoid  is,  in  truth,  a beautiful  repetition  of  ai 
ichthyic  cranial  character,  not  unknown  however  in  the  reptilia ; and  whilil 
it  adds  a proof  of  the  mastoidal  character  of  no.  s in  the  bird,  it  reflecif 
reciprocal  confirmation  of  the  accuracy  of  Cuvier’s  determination  of  tlu 
bone  in  fishes. 

The  true  signification  and  homologies  of  the  bones  in  that  interestinil 
class  could  never  have  been  elicited  from  an  exclusive  study  of  it,  howevel 
extensive,  detailed  or  profound  ; nor  will  the  feeble  rays  reflected  from  am! 
thropotoniical  reminiscences  lend  sufficient  light  in  their  determination  : the-I 
can  be  clearly  discerned  only  by  the  full  illumination  of  the  beams  conceni 
trated  from  all  the  grades  of  organic  structure.  M.  Agassiz,  descending  tc| 
the  determination  of  the  squamosal  in  fishes  from  its  characters  in  man,  conJ 
eludes  that  it  must  be  the  bone  no.  s,  fig.  5,  because  that  bone  takes  part  ill 
the  formation  of  the  inner  as  well  as  the  outer  walls  of  the  cranial  cavity.  Buf 
this  protective  function  is  an  exceptional  one  in  the  squamosal  (fig.  6,  27) *| 
it  is  peculiar  to  that  bone  only  in  one  class,  and,  as  we  have  seen,  is  not  con- 
stant even  there  ; whilst,  on  the  other  hand,  the  mastoid  is  recognizabhl 
from  the  inner  surface  of  the  cranial  walls  of  the  highest  mammal  (in  theJ 
human  cranium  where  it  is  impressed  with  the  fossa  sigmoidea,  fig.  6,  s),  and] 
in  a still  greater  degree  in  that  of  the  lowest  mammal  {Echidna,  fig.  12,  3)  ;| 
whilst  in  almost  every  mammal,  by  its  coalescence  with  the  outer  surface  of  I 
the  petrosal,  it  closely  repeats  the  protective  character  in  relation  to  the  ex- 
ternal semicircular  canal,  which  it  presents  in  fishes, — a function  which  is] 
altogether  foreign  to  the  squamosal  in  every  mammal.  I have  dwelt  thus! 
long,  perhaps  tediously,  and  it  may  be  thought  unnecessarily,  on  the  true; 
characters  and  homologies  of  the  petrosal  and  mastoid,  because  their  determi- ■ 
nation  is  essential  to,  and,  indeed,  involves  that  of  the  squamosal  and  other i 


SPECIAL  HOMOLOGY.  ORIUTOSPIIENOID. 


4.3 


n 

loi 

*5! 

■I). 

i 


■niemberinents  of  the  human  temporal  bone ; anti  we  cannot  climb  to  the 
»her  ofeneralizations  of  anatomical  science,  excej)t  by  tlie  firm  steps  of  true 
tl  assured  special  homologies.  There  are  more  important  subjects  than 
inologies,  no  doubt  ; but  nothing  is  more  important  than  truth,  in  whatever 
th  we  may  be  in  pursuit  of  her. 

Orbitosphenoid. — As  evidence  will  be  given  in  the  section  on  ‘ General 
omology’  that  both  squamosal  and  tympanic  belong  to  a quite  distinct 
tegory  of  bones  from  the  parts  of  the  ‘temporal’  which  have  just  been 
jcussed.  I shall  proceed  ue.xt  to  the  neurapophyses  that  precede  the 


sphenoid. 

'As  the  determination  of  this  bone  (o  in  all  the  figures)  involves  that  of 
? orbitosphenoid  (lo),  which  has  rarely  been  mistaken*  for  any  other  bone 
an  6,  there  remains  little  to  be  added  in  proof  of  its  homology  after 
'■  lat  has  been  advanced  respecting  the  alisphenoid.  The  most  constant 
.aracterof  the  orbitosphenoid  is  its  relation  to  the  optic  nerve,  which  either 
rforates  or  notches  it,  whenever  the  ossification  of  the  primitive  cartilage 
membrane  holding  the  place  of  the  bone  is  sufficiently  advanced  ; which 
not  always  the  case  in  fishes,  especially  those  with  broad  and  depressed 
ads,  and  still  more  rarely  in  lacertine  saurians.  The  recognition  of  the 
' bitosphenoid  is  also  often  obscured  by  another  cause,  viz.  the  tendency  in 
e class  Reptilia,  and  especially  in  ophidians  and  chelonians,  to  an  extension 
ossification  downwards  into  the  primitive  membranous  or  cartilaginous 
mrapophysial  walls  of  the  brain-case,  directly  from  the  parietal  and  frontal 


' ^^tnes. 


'.In  the  fishes  with  ordinary-shaped,  or  with  high  and  compressed  heads, 
'-e  orbitosphenoids  are  usually  well-developed : they  are,  however,  repre- 
nted  by  descending  plates  of  the  frontal  in  the  garpike  ; and  they  are,  like  the 
LHsphenoids,  mere  processes  of  the  basisphenoid  in  the  polypterus,  which  thus 
(fers  so  unexpected  a repetition  of  the  human  character  of  the  correspond- 
pg  parts  t*  In  the  cod  (fig.  5,  lo)  they  are  semielliptic,  raised  above  the  pre- 
>henoid  (g),  suspended,  as  it  were,  between  the  alisphenoid  (e)  and  the 
' ontal  (ii),  and  bounding  the  sides  of  the  interorbital  outlet  of  the  cranium  : 
n-.e  optic  nerves  pierce  the  unossified  cartilage  closing  that  aperture,  imme- 
aately  beneath  the  bone  itself.  In  the  malacopterous  fishes  with  higher 
; id  more  compressed  heads,  the  orbitosphenoids  are  more  developed  ; they  are 
'rectly  pierced  or  deeply  grooved  by  the  optic  nerves,  and  are  pierced  also 
ry  the  ‘ nervi  pathetic!’  in  the  carp.  The  crura  of  the  olfactory  ganglions 
"hinencephala)  pass  out  of  the  interorbital  aperture  of  the  cranium  by  the 
pper  interspace  of  the  orbitosphenoid,  into  the  continuation  of  the  cranial 
iivity  which  grooves  the  under  surface  of  the  frontal,  in  their  course  between 
le  orbits  to  the  prefrontals.  The  orbitosphenoids  protect,  more  or  less,  the 
des  of  the  prosencephalon  ; and  this  function,  their  transmission  of  the  optic 
erves,  their  anterior  position  to  the  alisphenoids,  and  their  articulation 
bove  with  the  frontals,  establish  their  special  homology  from  the  fish  up  to 
lan. 

In  certain  fishes  a distinct  centre  of  ossification  is  set  up  in  the  median 
ne  of  the  fibrous  membrane  or  cartilage,  closing  the  interorbital  aperture 
' f the  cranium,  below  the  orbitosphenoids,  and  extending  forwards  as  the  in- 
srorbital  septum.  The  bone  (represented  in  pi.  1,  fig.  5,  and  in  outline  in 
at  .5,  at  g')  extends  downwards  to  rest  upon  thesjihenoid  (s)  or  presphenoid 


* Geoffrey  in  his  memoir  on  the  skull  of  birds  (Ann.  du  Mas.  x.),  indicates  the  orbitosphe- 
oid  at  F , fig.  2,  pi.  27,  as  the  ‘ rocher’:  and  Cuvier  describes  it  as  part  of  his  ‘ os  cii  cciii 
ore  in  anourous  batrachia. 

t Agassiz,  Recherches  siir  lc»  Poissons  Fossiles,  ii.  p.  .18. 


44 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


noids  in  the  percl^and  c^pTn'ot  in  the°  ^Th  elevated  orbitos 
precisely  those  of  the  part  forming  theon^-  ' delations  of  this  ossicli 

in  mannnals,  and  nsuSircS  tL  ^hTT.'i.  ‘l-e  orbitosphei: 

though  this’is  deveToS  l™  ‘.tfo 

found  It  supported  by  a direct  extension  nf  fhl  l young  whci 

joins  the  baokuardl^  pr2nge?v1?n?r  as  n fisheT  t1°"'  ** 

the  orbitosphenoids  is  peculiar  as  n i " " /-  ^ common  bas 

It  has  been%alled  by  Ganns’,  the  • I '» 

rostrum  sphenoidei’ • by  Geoffmv  ‘pnfn  U'  mmorum  sphenoidei 

anterieure.’  M.Agassiz^ooDosps  thp«  ^ by  Cuvier  ‘le  sphenc' 

founded  on  the  DG':!  ^ 

LcepraLn  i the  n j ’f!  s°'’  i“7'“  ? to  the 

“se  transforme  intfgXrlert  en  os  ” TuT‘‘  T “ ‘"“'P'-tient  bo 

pEs/'Srs 

IS  carried  forwards,  but  is  never  transformed  ^to  a d 

mains  cartilaginous  as  the  nucleus  of  the  muzzle-  or  if  ?id  * 

cation  of  the  muzzle  is  cnmnlpfpd  d-  i ’ mdeed,  the  ossit 

encroachment  of  the  eSr  otita^^^^^^^  P™*''™” 

irniTs)  Vut"'o;r““'  «'-”f ■ iir^y  s^ie-jt 

iigh  a“£i,yVS^^  a1o7ed  t-''  , »f  ‘l-n  f«ervedl 

■ Hunterian  iture,  ot^CebLttdtS^^^^^^  “n  ,t“‘? 

kgue  o'rthe““‘iai  eta3e°'d"'’ p4"““«>=  as^ertiGSteTomo 
logons  with  the  cribVfG.  plate  or  cr^^S^^  If 

chamber  of  the  cranium  of  ZmLZ  wiS  r"the“th,l“"‘"r 
extends  forwards,  from  where  the  orbitosphe’noid,  snslL  the  fronSsTS 

* Oken’s  Isis,  1818,  p.  508. 

"t  Recherclies  sur  les  Poissons  Fossiles,  t.  i.  p.  220. 


45 


SPECIAL  HOMOLOGY.  ORUITOSPIIENOID. 

*'  idiuf',  to  where  the  frontals  anti  the  motlifietl  prefrontals  (ethmoid)  form 
= actual  anterior  boundary  wall  of  the  cranial  cavity  ; the  chief  distinc- 
3j  1 between  the  condition  of  this  boundary  in  the  mammal  and  the  fish, 
4 ng,  that  whereas  it  is  perforated  by  numerous  apertures  in  the  mammal, 
; olfactory  nerves  in  the  fish  escape  each  by  a single  foramen  or  groove 
•l  ;he  homologous  bones.  As  beautiful  as  true  was  that  clear  perception 
ii(  rBojanus  of  the  homology  of  the  simply  perforated  prefrontal  of  the  fish. 
It  h its  sieve- like  homologuein  the  class  in  which  the  olfactory  sense  reaches 
i maximum  of  development  and  activity,  and  modifies  all  around  it.  The 
:i)  k-lesced  bases  of  the  orbitosphenoids,  forming  the  anterior  boundary  of  the 
a.  I of  the  optic  chiasma,  answer  to  the  separate  ossification  called  ‘ eth- 
!■  ide  cranien’  by  Agassiz,  in  fishes : it  has  the  same  relation  with  that  con- 
:zted  area  of  the  cranium  answering  to  the  interorbital  aperture  of  the  cra- 
. m in  fishes,  which  the  so-called  cranial  ethmoid  (entosphenoid)  presents 
fishes;  and  this  same  entosphenoid  (fig.  5,  o')  has  as  little  relation  to  the 
imation  of  the  canals  pierced  by  the  olfactory  nerves  in  fishes,  as  the 
= iitosphenoid  has  in  mammals.  The  olfactory,  rhinencephalic  or  anterior 
; :-ision  of  the  cranial  cavity  in  most  fishes  has  its  lateral  bony  walls  incom- 
; i.te,  and  it  opens  freely,  in  the  dry  skull,  into  the  large  orbital  chambers 
I ow,  which  are  then  said  to  have  no  septum  : we  see  a similar  want  of  de- 
r ation  of  the  cranial  cavity  in  relation  to  the  great  acoustic  chambers  in  most 
, rtPs.  But  in  mammals  the  orbits  are  always  excluded  from  the  rhinence- 
iilic,  or  olfactory  compartment  of  the  cranium*;  and  a like  exclusion 
, *ains  in  some  of  the  highly  organized  ganoid  fishes  and  in  the  plagiostoraes. 
, : the  prosencephalic  parts  of  the  brain  progressively  predominate,  and  the 
[oencephalic  parts  diminish,  in  the  higher  mammals,  the  compartment  of 
. , cranium  appropriated  to  the  latter  loses  its  individuality,  and  becomes 
, ere  and  more  blended  with  the  general  cavity.  In  the  elaborate  ‘ Icono- 
, -’.pby  of  Human  Anatomy’  by  Jules  Cloquet,  for  examplef , the  small  pe- 
■ .iiarities  of  the  ‘trou  borgne’  and  the  ‘apophyse  crista  galli’  are  both  in- 
»ated,  and  very  properly;  but  the  rhinencephalic  or  olfactory  division  of 
cranial  cavity,  though  defined  by  the  suture  between  the  orbitosphe- 
-.ds  and  prefrontals  and  lodging  the  olfactory  ganglia  or  rhinencephala, — 
-important  an  evidence  of  the  unity  of  organization  manifested  in  man’s 
[.me  and  traceable  in  characters,  strengthening  as  we  descend  to  the  lowest 
^eous  fishes — is  wholly  unnoticed.  Thus,  very  minute  scrutiny,  con- 
•3ted  with  great  acuteness  of  perception  of  individual  features,  qualities 
rrhly  characteristic  of  the  anthropotomists  of  the  school  of  Cloquet,  being 
r«cted  from  an  insulated  point  of  view,  prove  inadequate  to  the  apprecia- 
.0  of  sometimes  the  most  constant  and  important  features  of  their  exclusive 
)ject. 

But  to  return  to  the  homology 
■;he  orbitosphenoids.  In  the  me- 
•aome  these  neurapophyses  are 
ngated  parallelograms,  perfo- 
•ed  by  the  optic  nerves,  and  are 
tinct  bones.  In  the  great  bull- 
g {Rana  hoans)  they  present  a 
< lilar  form  (fig.  13,  lo),  but  are 
/ nfluent  with  the  prefrontals  (i-i): 

^ both  batrachians  an  unossified  space  intervenes  between  them  and  the  ali- 

' 11^'*  confounded  with  the  olfactory  chamber  itself,  lodging  the  organ  of 

■■  • Mannel  d’Anatomie  Descriptive,  Ito,  Atlas,  pi.  8,  fig.  2. 


46 


os  THE  VEUTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


i-' 


sphenoid  (o).  In  most  lizards  the  wider  roof  of  the  cranium,  supported  by  t 
long  mastoids,  squamosals,  postfrontals  and  malars,  like  a bony  scaffolding  > 
each  side,  is  independent  of  its  proper  (neurapophysial)  walls  for  support,  ai 
these  retain,  through  the  ceconomy  of  nature,  much  of  their  primitive  sen 
membranous,  semi-cartilaginous  state.  A dismemberment  of  the  alispheno 
(which  may  be  discerned  as  a process  of  that  bone  in  the  piscine  gene 
Xiphias,  Sphyrmna)  props  up  the  parietal  upon  the  pterygoid,  so  like  a pci 
or  pillar,  that  the  name  ‘columella’  may  well  be  retained  for  it.  At  tl 
sides  of  the  membrane  forming  the  orbital  aperture,  rudiments  of  the  or! 
tosphenoids  may  be  seen  in  most  lacertia:  I find  them,  e.g.  in  the  form 
a slender  osseous  filament  on  each  side,  slightly  bent  inwards  and  bifurcai 
above,  in  a large  Australian  lizard  (Cyclodus  gigas).  In  the  crocodile  (fig 
9,  20,  and  22,  lo)  the  orbitosphenoids  attain  their  maximum  of  developmer 
but  retain  all  their  typical  characters : they  bound  the  orbital  aperture  of  tl 
cranium ; are  notched  below,  as  in  many  fishes,  by  the  optic  nerves  {op 
are  perforated  by  the  pathetic  and  other  orbital  nerves  at  the  ‘ foramen  spheii' 
orbitale’  {s) ; they  protect  the  sides  of  the  prosencephalon  ; support  above  tl 
frontals  (and  by  their  backward  development  also  the  parietals) ; and  the 
rest  below  upon  a peculiar  development  of  the  presphenoid  (o),  which  seen 
to  answer  to  the  entosphenoid  in  fishes. 

Some  salient  points  of  resemblance  between  the  cranial  organization  of  fish 
and  birds  have  elicited  remarks  from  more  than  one  compai’ative  anatomis 
Not  to  dwell  upon  the  more  obvious  correspondence  arising  out  of  the  me 
bility  of  the  upper  jaw,  chiefly  through  its  connection  with  the  pedicle  of  thi 
lower  jaw,  I may  indicate  the  overhanging  position  of  the  orbitosphenoi 
(figs.  8,  23,  lo),  raised  high  above  the  presphenoid  (o),  at  the  back  part  of  thi  W 
interorbital  septum  : we  see  exactly  the  same  position  of  the  orbitosphenoi 
in  many  fishes.  Cuvier  accurately  represents  it  in  the  skull  of  the  percli 
This  beautiful  trait  of  unity  of  organization  is  completely  put  out  of  sight  k 
the  false  homology  of  the  orbitosphenoid  in  fishes  with  the  alisphenoid  i 
birds  and  mammals.  The  progressive  recession  of  the  orbitosphenoid  an 
alisphenoid,  as  we  descend  from  mammals  to  fishes,  transfers  indeed  thei  hi 
characteristic  nerve-notches  or  foramina  from  their  posterior  to  their  ante 
rior  margins.  But  the  notch  {op,  fig.  8)  at  the  posterior  margin  of  the  orbito  ® 
sphenoid  in  the  bird  for  the  escape  of  the  optic  nerve  by  a foramen  commo  j) 
to  it  and  the  nerves  of  the  orbit,  is  not  less  significant  of  its  true  homolog.  it 
than  is  the  anterior  notch  in  the  crocodile  or  fish  ; the  osseous  connection' 
with  the  sphenoid  below,  with  the  frontal  above,  and  with  the  alisphenoii  te 
behind,  being  the  same. 

Prefrontals. — If  the  cranium  of  a cod-fish  be  bisected  horizontally  am  iui 
longitudinally,  its  most  contracted  part  will  be  found  at  the  upper  part  o 
the  interorbital  aperture,  bounded  by  the  orbitosphenoids,  which  mark  th 
division  between  the  prosencephalic  and  rhinencephalic  compartments  of  thi 
cavity  : the  latter  extends  as  a triangular  channel  or  groove  on  the  unde' 
part  of  the  frontal,  opening  below  into  the  orbits,  gradually  expanding  as  i 
advances  forwards,  and  dividing  into  two  canals,  which  diverge  to  the  inter  n 
spaces  left  on  each  side  of  the  nasal,  between  it  and  the  bones  (fig.  4,  h),  that 
meeting  behind  the  anterior  expanded  end  of  the  nasal,  bound  the  anterio' 
extremity  of  the  true  and  entire  cranium.  The  diverging  canals  of  the  rhi 
nencephalic  compartment  are  formed  by  the  two  bones  in  question:  the  rhinen 
cephala  or  olfactory  ganglions  are  sometimes  lodged  at  the  extremities  of  thest  ij, 
canals,  and  they  send  out  the  olfactory  nerves  by  the  apertures  formed  be- , 
tween  the  bones  h and  is,  which  then  ramify  upon  the  vascular  olfactory  sacs 
* Histoire  des  Poissons,  pi.  ii.  figg.  i.  vii.  14, 


10! 


ISEi 

h 


e, 


Cof 


■a 

ohi 


Sl'ECIAL  HOMOLOGY.  PREFRONTAL. 


47 


3orted  by  the  bones  u»,  fig.  5.  For  tlie  nrgiuuents  by  wliicli  the  olfactory 
' o-lions  in' the  coil  are  shown  to  be  homologous  with  the  olfactory  ganglions 
ii!  upon  the  cribriform  plate  in  man,  ami  by  which  the  meilullary  cords 
. rura  connecting  them  to  the  rest  of  the  brain  are  shown  to  be  homologous 
’ I the  so-called  ‘ olfactory  nerves’  in  the  human  cranium,  and  for  the  ge- 
d homology  of  both  as  primary  divisions  and  peduncles  of  the  encephalon, 

• reader  is  referred  to  Dr.  Desmoulins,  ‘x\natoune  des  Systemes  nerveux 
Auimaux  li  Vertebres,’  1825,  8vo.  t.  i.  p.  169;  to  Mr.  Solly’s  excellent 

: tise  ‘On  the  Human  Hrain,’  1886,  p.  78;  and  to  my  ‘Lectures  on  the 
: tebrata,’  1836,  p.  18-t.  I there  adopt  the  expressive  name  applied  by 
II.  Vogt  and  Agassiz  to  this  most  anterior  of  the  four  primary  divisions 
:he  brain  of  fishes,  and  apply  to  the  peduncles  of  the  ‘ rhinencephala,’ 
,ch  are  frequently  of  great  length  in  fishes,  the  name  of  ‘ rhinencephalic 
-ra,’  since  they  are  serially  homologous  with  the  prosencephalic  or  cerebral 
-j-a;  and  I call  that  division  of  the  cranial  cavity  which  specially  lodges 
«e  crura  and  their  lobes  the  ‘rhinencephalic’  chamber  or  compartment. 

right  appreciation  of  the  above  essential  characters  of  the  most  anterior 
<sion  of  the  brain  and  brain-case  is  indispensable  to  the  accurate  pur- 
>of  the  homologies  of  the  bones  u,  i4  and  is,  whose  development,  espe- 
V of  the  pair  no.  u,  is  governed  by  that  of  the  rhinencephalon.  In  man 
.all-predominating  cerebrum,  overarching  the  mesencephalon  and  epen- 
nalon  behind,  and  the  rhinencephalon  in  front,  so  modifies  the  surround- 
itjranial  bones  as  to  obliterate  every  part  of  the  rhinencephalic  division, 
M the  terminal  fossa  that  immediately  supports  the  so-called  ‘olfactory 
jglia,’  which  fossa  seems,  as  it  were,  to  be  unnaturally  drawn  in  and 
I'.ded  with  the  great  prosencephalic  chamber,  by  reason  of  the  enormous 
■■welling  development  of  the  proper  spines  or  roof-bones  of  that  chamber, 
•frontals.  Still,  even  here,  through  the  absence  of  any  commissural  band 
meeting  together  the  rhinencephala,  a fibro-membranous  process  of  the 
uaskeleton  extends  between  them,  and  into  this  septum  ossification  extends 
i!i  below,  called  the  ‘crista  galli.’  In  the  cod-fish  the  homologous  parti- 
between  the  rhinencephala  is  cartilaginous,  and  it  extends  some  way  back 
ween  their  crura,  not  being  opposed  by  a coextended  overhanging  cere- 
r.R  with  great  transverse  commissures.  In  many  fishes  (e.g.  Xiphias,  pi.  1, 
.55)  the  outlet  of  the  olfactory  nerves,  which  notches  the  inner  side  of 
14  in  the  cod,  is  converted  into  a foramen  (ib.  ob.)  by  the  extension  of 
riication  around  the  mesial  surface  of  the  nerves.  Where  the  olfactory 
f^es  are  sent  off  from  the  ganglions  in  great  numbers  (e.  g.  Raia),  they 
orate  a membrane  before  reaching  and  ramifying  upon  the  vascular 
itary  sac.  In  man,  the  homologous  membrane,  or  basis  of  the  olfactory 
•?ules,  is  ossified,  and  called  from  its  numerous  apertures  the  cribriform 
re.  The  holes  which  these  cribriform  plates  fill  up  are  homologous  with 
■foramina,  or  grooves  forming  the  outlets  of  the  olfactory  nerves  in  the 
-es  no.  14  in  fishes  (figs.  4 and  5). 

'he  grounds  for  this  homology  are  so  plain  that  we  cannot  be  surprised 
they  should  have  been  early  appreciated,  as  e.  g.  by  the  painstaking  and 

• osophic  Bojanus  in  1818*.  I never  could  comprehend  the  precise  mean- 
of  the  statement  with  which  Cuvier  opposed  his  view  : — “ M Bojanus,  par- 

sans  doute  du  trou  (ju’il  a dans  plusieurs  poissons  pour  le  nerf  olfactif,  en 
une  lame  cribleuse  de  I’ethmoi'de  ; mais  cette  opinion,  qiii  n’a  pas  ce  soutien 
'3  toutes  les  especes,  est  refutee  d’ailleurs  jiar  les  autres  rapports  de  cet  os 
r;  les  os  voisinsf .”  Cuvier  seems  to  have  thought  the  ground  of  Bojanus's 
lion  to  be  cut  away  by  the  fact  that  in  the  cod  and  some  other  fishes  the 
'•  Isis,  heft  iii.  p.  .103.  f Ilistoire  dcs  Poissons,  i.  p.  2.35. 


48 


ox  THE  VERTEHRATE  SKELETON. 


f' 


V*r 


olfactory  nerves  groove  instead  of  perforate  the  bones  no.  h.  But  the  tri 
minal  still  determines  the  alisphenoid,  whether  it  perforates  or  notches  t 
neurapophysis  in  its  escape : the  relation  of  the  alisphenoid  to  the  divis' 
of  the  6th,  including  the  gustatory  nerve,  and  that  of  the  orbitosphenoid 
the  nerve  of  sight,  are  not  more  constant  than  is  the  relation  of  no.  14  to  I 
nerve  of  smell.  The  differences  of  connection  of  no.  i4 — ‘ les  autres  n 
ports’ — are  not  specified  by  Cuvier,  and  I know  none  that  affect  its  essenl 
character. 

No.  14  is  however  the  most  anterior  of  the  neurapophysial  or  late 
bones  of  the  true  cranium,  and  is  in  relation  with  the  anterior  terminal  di 
sion  of  the  encephalon  and  with  the  first  or  anterior  terminal  pair  of  nerv* 
Like  all  extreme  or  peripheral  parts,  it  is  subject,  as  we  should  be  prepari 
to  find  it,  to  a greater  extent  and  variety  of  modifications  than  the  mcx 
central  neurapophyses.  The  difference  between  its  connections  in  the  fi' 
and  that  of  the  cribriform  plates  and  their  sustaining  basis  in  man  m 
therefore  be  expected  to  reach  the  extremes  of  possible  homology.  It  w 
be  interesting  to  inquire  whether  there  are  intermediate  modifications 
which  the  nature  of  that  difference  may  be  appreciated,  and  how  many 
such  links  are  permanently  retained  in  the  intervening  species. 

We  might  anticipate  the  smallest  amount  of  departure  from  the  fut 
damental  vertebrate  type,  as  respects  form,  size  and  connections  of  the  bon 
in  question,  in  that  class  where  the  principle  of  vegetative  repetition  nux 
prevails  and  the  archetypal  plan  is  least  obscured  by  teleological  adaptatioui 
Adopting  the  name  modified  from  the  phrase  applied  to  these  bones  by  Ci'  * 
vier  in  those  vertebrata  in  which  they  present  their  most  typical  character 
we  find  the  ‘ prefrontals’  in  all  bony  fishes  resting  below  upon  the  vomer  (fig 
4 and  5,  u)  and  on  part  of  the  presphenoid  (9),  sustaining  by  their  mesial  an 
upper  surfaces  the  nasal  (15)  and  fore-part  of  the  frontal  (11),  affording  th 
whole  or  part  of  the  surface  of  articulation  for  the  palatine  (20)  or  the  palate  * 
maxillary  arch,  and  giving  attachment  exteriorly  to  the  large  suborbital  c 
lacrymal  bone  (pi.  1,  fig.  2,  73),  when  this  exists.  Besides  their  protectiv 
functions,  in  relation  to  the  olfactory  ganglions  and  nerves,  they  close  the  era 
nial  cavity  and  bound  the  orbits  anteriorly.  The  most  constant  and  charac 
teristic  connections  appear  to  be  with  the  vomer,  nasal,  palatine  and  fronts; 
In  the  murtenoid  fishes,  where  confluence  begins  to  prevail  in  the  cranial  bones 
we  find  that  the  prefrontals  coalesce  with  the  vomer  and  nasal,  not  with  th 
true  frontal.  This  fact,  though  not  of  a class  materially  affecting  relation 
of  homology,  is  not  devoid  of  significancy  in  regard  to  the  real  character  0 
the  bone  usually  described  as  one  of  the  ‘ deux  demerabremens  du  frontal* 

A clew  not  to  be  neglected  in  tracing  the  homologies  of  the  prefrontals  ii 
their  histological  progress,  although  the  value  of  such  embryonic  characters 
has  been  overrated  and  their  application  sometimes  abused.  The  substramen 
of  their  ossification,  like  that  of  the  exoccipitals,  mastoids  and  post-frontals, 
is  a cartilaginous  mass,  a part  of  that  which  M.  Dug6s  has  called  ‘ cartilage 
cranio-faciale,’  and  M.  Vogt  ‘ plaques  protectrices  laterales.’  The  frontal 
and  parietals,  being  ossified  in  supra-cranial  fibrous  membrane  with  so  rapic 
and  transitory  a cartilaginous  change  as  to  have  escaped  general  recognition 
have  been,  on  that  account,  rejected  from  the  vertebral  or  endo-skeletal  system 
of  bones  by  Dr.  Reichert,  and  with  as  little  real  ground  as  the  rejection  of  the 
vomer  and  sphenoid  from  the  same  system,  because  they  are  ossified  in  mem- 
brane extended  from  the  under  and  fore-part  of  the  sheath  of  an  evanescent 
suberanial  ‘ chorda  dorsalis,’  like  the  homologous  basal  ossification  beneath 
the  coalesced  anterior  abdominal  vertebra  of  the  siluroids. 


tu 


* Agassiz,  op.  cit.  i.  p.  123. 


SPECIAL  HOMOLOCY. 


I’llEl'llONTAL, 


49 


[.  Duges,  who  has  accurately  figured  the  ‘ craiiio-faciar  cartilage  of  a 
lid  fish  iu  pi.  ii.  of  his  valuable  Monograph*,  gives  as  accurate  a figure 
le  same  cartilage  in  the  liana  viridis  (]d.  i.  figs.  G,  7,  of  the  same  work), 
of  which  has  been  ossified  a bone  which  transmits  the  olfactory  nerve  to 
;use-eapsule:  this  bone  (is  in  the  figures  cited)  rests  below  upon  the  di- 
; i vomer  and  on  the  end  of  the  presphenoid,  sustains  above  the  nasal  and 
L-part  of  the  frontal,  affords  an  articular  surface  on  its  outer  part  for  the 
; une,  and  only  fails  to  repeat  every  characteristic  connection  of  the  pre- 
^als  in  fishes,  because  (as  likewise  happens  in  certain  of  that  class)  there 
>)  lachrymal  bone  developed  in  the  llatrachia.  The  sole  modification 
iiy  consequence  tending  to  mask  the  homology  is  this ; that  whereas  we 
.in  many  fishes  ossification  extending  into  the  persistent  part  of  the  cra- 
i.cial  cartilage  connecting,  whilst  it  separates,  the  prefrontals,  so  as  to 
mmscribe  the  canals  for  the  transmission  of  the  olfactory  nerves,  such  ossi- 
. on  proceeds  in  the  anourous  batrachia  to  anchylose  the  prefrontals  with 
, other,  and  convert  them  into  a single  bone.  This  difference  however 
eed  with  Cuvier  to  make  of  it  a new  and  peculiar  bone — an  ‘ os  en  cein- 
It  would  have  been  as  reasonable  to  have  given  a new  name  to  the 
uoccipital  in  the  Lepidosleus,  because  it  is  divided  in  the  middle  line  in- 
of  being  single,  or  to  the  frontal  in  the  species  where  it  is  single  instead 
:iing  divided,  or  to  the  vomer  in  the  frog  because  it  is  double  instead  of 
ee,  or  to  the  exoccipitals  in  the  same  reptile,  which  manifest  the  same 
ski  and  annular  confiuence  as  the  prefrontals.  But,  adds  Cuvier,  in  refer- 
:to  the  single  bone  (fig.  13,  14)  resulting  from  this  modification,  “ Je  ne 
jas  trouve  divise,  meme  dans  des  individus  tres-jeunes  qui  avoient  encore 
rrand  espace  membraneux  entreles  os  du  dessus  du  crane.”  Nor  did  the 
anatomist  ever  find  the  rudiments  of  the  radius  and  ulna  distinct  at  any 
•id  of  development  of  the  single  bone  of  the  Batrachia,  which  he  never- 
?S3  rightly  describes  as  representing  both  bones  of  the  fore-arm : nor 
ie  ever  find  a division  of  the  single  parietal  in  the  embryo  crocodile, 
11  he  equally  well  recognized,  nevertheless,  as  the  homologue  of  the  two 
Uals,  which  in  most  fishes  have  been  subject  to  greater  modifications  in 
.connections  and  relative  position  than  the  single  prefrontal  presents  in 
mourous  batrachia.  These  are  not  the  only  instances  where  relations  of 
T-logy  are  by  no  means  obscured,  nor  ought  to  be,  by  reason  of  the  con- 
eee  or  even  connationj  of  essentially  distinct  elements.  The  capsule  of 
■Ifactory  organ,  partly  protected  by  the  anterior  infundibular  expansions 
Bj  connate  prefrontals,  undergoes  no  partial  ossification  homologous  with 
tturbinal  ’ (19,  fig.  5)  of  fishes,  but  remains  cartilaginous,  like  the  scle- 
sand  petrosal. 

ke  prefrontals,  however,  are  not  only  connate  with  each  other  in  the 
:but  coalesce  with  the  contiguous  neurapophyses — the  orbitosphenoids 
lig.  13).  And  this  modification  has  led  Cuvier,  notwithstanding  the 
!-ection  of  the  bone  10  with  the  presphenoid  below,  with  the  frontal 
kJ,  and  with  the  prosencephalon,  optic  nerve  (op)  and  orbit,  to  charac- 
■ the  batrachian  skull  as  having  “ un  seul  sphenoide  sans  ailes  tempo- 
mi  orbitaires the  true  and  distinct  ‘ alisphenoid  ’ (e,  fig.  13),  with  its 
ial  connections  and  nerve-perforations  (tr),  being  described  as  the  j)e- 

i-«heTches  snr  I'Osteologie,  &c.  des  Batraciens,  4to,  1835. 

!^»iseinens  Fossiles,  4U),  t.  v.  jjt.  ii.  p.387.  He  had  before  applied  the  name  of  ‘ ceiiitiire 
.^■e’  to  the  scapolar  arch  in  fishes. — Leyons  d’  Anat.  Comp.  i.  (1800)  i>.  332. 

nse  these  terms  in  the  same  definite  sense  as  the  botanists  ; those  essentially  distinct 
; are  ermnate  which  are  not  physically  distinct  at  any  stage  of  development,  those  united 
I are  crmjtuent  which  were  originally  distinct. 


50 


ON  THE  VERTEBUATE  SKELETON. 


trosal,  ‘rocher*.’  But  the  real  difficulties  which  beset  the  quest  of  gei 
truths  in  comparative  osteology  are  such  that  we  may  well  dispense  with 
over-statements  of  the  amount  of  deviation  from  the  cranial  archetype  m 
much -modified  skulls  like  those  of  the  anourous  batrachia  may  pro 
Fortunately  the  light  which  the  development  of  such  skulls  throws  i 
their  mature  characters,  is  aided  by  the  persistent  larval  stages  manifi 
by  the  perennibranchiate  species. 

In  the  menopome,  for  example,  the  prefrontals  remain  distinct,  both  ^j] 
each  other  and  from  the  orbitosphenoidsf,  their  characteristic  connec  f’,, 
and  functions  being  the  same  as  those  of  their  coalesced  homologues  it 
frog,  except  that  they  are  notched,  instead  of  being  perforated  by  the  o 
tory  nerve,  which  grooves  their  inner  border,  as  in  the  cod  and  some  c 
fishes.  Cuvier  just  hints  at  the  possibility  of  his  ‘os  en  ceinture’  in  the 


representing  “ a la  fois  le  frontal  principal  et  I’ethmoidel;,”  or  as  bavin 


equal  pretence  to  one  or  the  other  name. 

The  suture,  however,  which  marks  the  limits  between  the  frontal  n 
parietal  7 is  persistent  in  the  menopome,  and  indeed  in  all  batrachians 
the  anourans ; and  even  in  the  very  young  larvae  of  these,  Cuvier  ad 
(and  the  observations  of  M.  Duges  warrant  the  admission)  “ que  Ton  se 
une  partie  posterieure  de  forme  ronde  de  I’anterieure  qui  est  allongee”  (j 
p.  387).  The  permanently  distinct  frontals  present  a similarly  elongated  ( 
in  the  urodeles,  and  are  therefore  recognized  by  Cuvier  in  the  salamai 
e.  g.  at  c,  pi.  xxv.  fig.  1 , op,  cit. ; in  the  newt,  pi.  xxvi.  fig.  6 ; in  the  menopc 
fig.  4 ; in  the  axolotl,  pi.  xxvii.  fig.  24  ; in  the  siren,  ib.  fig.  2 ; and  in  the  <| 
phiuma,  ih.  fig.  6.  In  all  these  crania  the  true  frontals  are  indicated  by 
same  letter  c;  in  none  of  them  do  they  close  the  cranial  cavity  or  bound 
orbits  anteriorly,  or  are  perforated  by  the  olfactory  nerves,  or  articulate  a 
the  vomer  below,  or  perform  any  of  the  essential  functions,  or  combine  the  « 
racteristic  connections  of  the  prefrontals  of  fishes,  all  of  which  concur  in 
‘ os  en  ceinture.’  But  the  frontals  do  present  the  chief  connections  and  occ 
the  relative  position  of  the  anterior  half  of  the  bone  (7  and  u,  fig.  13)  wl 
Cuvier  calls  the  parietal  in  the  frog.  The  evident  tendency  to  coalescenci 
essentially  distinct  bones  which  pervades  the  skeleton  in  the  adult  anoui 
greatly  diminishes  the  difficulty,  through  the  loss  of  the  suture  between  1 
parietal  and  frontal,  of  recognizing  the  homology  of  the  latter  bone,  win  f 
with  that  exception,  not  only  repeats  the  characters  of  the  frontals  in  fisl  ^ 
but  of  those  in  most  tailed  batrachians.  |- 

Next,  then,  with  regard  to  the  ethmoid,  the  second  of  the  two  bone."  I 
which  Cuvier  restricts  the  choice  of  the  homologues  of  the  ‘os  en  ceintuW 
no.  14.  No  name  has  been  applied  more  vaguely  or  with  a less  defiig 
meaning  than  this  same  ‘ ethmoide.’  In  the  sense  in  which  Cuvier  wo  Ff 
permit  its  application  in  the  present  instance,  it  is  a bone  which  forms 


It 


* Op.  cit.  p.  386.  . .. 

t Tlie  menopome,  which  represents  a gigantic  tadpole  of  the  tailless  batrachia,  manifilik 
a beautiful  conformity  to  the  general  type,  and  well  illustrates  the  real  nature  of  the  appat^ 
deviations  which  take  place  in  the  course  of  the  remarkable  metamorphoses  of  the  anourty^ 
At  first  sight  the  orbitosphenoids  seem  to  be  barred  out  from  their  normal  connection  w I 
the  frontal  by  the  junction  of  the  parietal  with  the  prefrontal  in  the  menopome,  as  appet'ir 
for  example,  in  the  figure  given  by  Cuvier  in  the  ‘ Ossemens  Fossiles,’  v.  pt.  ii.  pi.  xxvd.  figi? 
where  c h divides  c from  u.  Remove,  however,  the  prefrontal  h from  the  parietal  c'(whi<l 
Inay  be  readily  done,  the  suture,  which  is  not  indicated  in  the  figure  cited,  being  iiersistetll* 
and  the  anterior  and  mesial  half  of  the  orbitosphenoid  («)  is  then  seen  extending  inwaii 
(mesiad),  beneath  the  parietal  and  prefrontal,  to  join  a triangular  surface  formed  by  a 
scending  jjrocess  from  the  middle  of  the  outer  edge  of  the  frontal.  * ' 

% Op.  cit.  p.  388.  ^ 


SPECIAL  UOMOLOCV.  1‘UEl'RONTAL. 


51 


!i.  terior  and  antei-o-lateral  walls  of  the  cranium,  defends  tlie  rhincncepliala 
> d transmits  the  olfactory  nerves,  but  is  altogether  distinct  from  and  pos- 
■ -ior  to  the  capsules  of  the  organs  on  which  those  nerves  are  ramified. 
, the  crocodile  Cuvier  restricts  the  term  ‘ ethmoid  ’ to  the  cartilaginous 
•!  niuce,  capsules,  or  supports  of  the  olfactory  ramifications  after  the  nerves 
ve  left  the  cranium.  In  mammals  the  ethmoid  is  made  to  include  both  the 
DCS  that  close  the  cranium  anteriorly,  support  the  rhinencephala,  give  e.xit 
I the  olfactory  nerves,  and  those  which  defend  and  sustain  the  enormously 
i:  veloped  and  complex  superior  parts  of  the  organ  of  smell*.  Whilst  this 
afusion  is  permitted  to  vitiate  osteology,  it  is  plain  that  no  intelligible 
, mologicEd  or  other  proposition  can  be  predicated  of  the  ‘ ethmoid.’ 

' When  Cuvier,  with  reference  to  the  hypothetical  possibility  of  the  homo- 
■ue  of  the  frontal  forming  part  of  the  bone  7 and  11  in  the  frog,  adverts  to 
; second  mode  of  bringing  the  ‘ os  en  ceinture  ’ into  the  ordinary  category 
.cranial  bones,  by  viewing  it  as  the  ‘ ethmoi'de,’  he  adds,  that  it  would  then 
“ un  ethmoi'de  ossifie,  se  que  sera  une  grande  singularite  ” (ib.  p.  388). 
?re  it  is  obvious  that  the  predominating  idea  of  the  ethmoid  was  that  pre- 
itted  to  his  mind  by  the  capsules  of  the  olfactory  organ  in  the  crocodile  and 
leer  reptiles,  which  he  had  so  called,  and  which  are  wholly  or  in  great  part 
ttilaginous.  But  the  parts  of  Cuvier’s  ethmoid  in  birds  and  mammals,  which 
I in  functional  and  physical  relation  with  the  cranial  cavity,  I'hinencephala 
il  olfactory  nerves,  are  ossified:  the  bone,  also,  to  which  he  gives  the  name 
iihmoid’  in  fishes  (fig.  5,  is),  is  ossified;  and,  what  is  more  to  the  purpose, 
bones  (u)  in  fishes,  ophidians,  chelonians  and  saurians,  which  repeat  the 
esntial  characters  of  the  batrachian  ‘ os  en  ceinture,’  are  likewise  ossified. 
[General  homology  teaches  that  the  bone  or  bones  in  relation  to  the  defence 
’.the  rhineneephala  and  the  transmission  of  their  nerves  belong  to  one  class, 
il  that  the  parts  of  the  skeleton,  whether  membranous,  gristly  or  bony, 
:ich  form  the  capsule  or  sustain  the  olfactory  organ  itself,  belong  to  another 
A very  different  class  of  parts  of  the  skeleton.  But,  not  to  anticipate  what 
ongs  more  properly  to  a subsequent  chapter  of  this  work,  observation 
-ws  the  two  parts  to  be  physically  distinct  in  all  vertebrates  except  mam- 
ils,  and  to  be  distinct  in  the  foetus  of  these.  Whether  we  restrict  the  term 
•Jimoid  ’ to  the  neurapophysis  or  to  the  sense-capsule  (which  in  mammals 
iludes  the  ‘conchae  superiores  ’ and  cells  of  the  ethmoid),  the  term  must 
lapplied  arbitrarily  in  its  extended  or  homological  signification,  since  the 
.irapophysis  dismisses  the  nerve,  not  by  a ‘ sieve-like  ’ plate,  but  by  a single 
lamen  or  groove  in  all  the  vertebrates  below  mammals.  The  multiplied 
*amina  in  the  neurapophysialorcranial  part  of  theanthropotomical  ‘ethmoid,’ 
tence  that  name,  as  well  as  the  special  designation  of  the  part  called  ‘ lamina 
orosa,’  are  modifications  peculiar  to  the  mammalian  class,  but  not  constant 
■'e,  and  they  form  no  essential  homological  character  of  the  bone  in  question, 
ippears  to  me  preferable,  since  we  have  two  essentially  distinct  parts  of  the 
-leton  combined  in  the  mammalian  and  human  ethmoid,  to  restrict  the  term 
moid  to  the  part  which  appertains  to  the  sense-capsule,  i.  e.  w hich  is  directly 
icemed  in  the  support  of  the  membrane  and  cells  of  the  olfactory  organ. 

Objecting  to  Oken’s  idea,  that  the  prefrontal  in  the  crocodile  was  homologous  with  the 
. of  the  ethmoid  called  ‘ os  planum  ’ in  anthropotomy,  Cuvier  says,  “ Or  I’os  planum  ue 
oit  jamais  sur  la  joue ; il  ne  se  montre  plus  dans  I’orbite  a compter  des  makis  si  ce  n’est 
"Oetit  point  dans  les  galeopitheques  et  dans  quelques  chats.  Dans  tous  les  autres  mam- 
ires  I'ethmoide  est  entierement  cnvcloppe  ct  cache  par  le  palatin  ” (note  that  significant 
nection')  “ et  par  le  frontal  et  spdcialement  par  cette  partie  du  frontal  dont  il  est  main- 

fmt  qaestion  et  qui  se  detache  dans  les  ovipares.  Le  veritable  ethmoidc  est  enveloppi 
a metne  maniere  dans  le  crocodile,  quoique  presque  toutes  ces  parties  restent  cartilagi- 
ses.” — Ossein.  Foss.,  v.  pt.  i.  p.  7.3. 


52 


ON  TIIK  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


But  leaving  for  the  present  the  question  of  names,  and  returning  to  thin:| 
let  us  pursue  our  search  and  comparisons  of  the  bones  which  continue  in  t j 
higher  classes  to  repeat  the  essential  characters  of  those  called  ‘prefrontaij 
in  fishes.  Were  it  necessary  to  add  to  the  reasons  above  assigned  for  regard!  J 
no.  14,  fig.  13,  as  the  homologues  of  i4  in  the  fish,  notwithstanding  they  ti 
connate  in  the  batrachian,  I would  cite  the  structure  and  relations  of  thoj 
bones  in  the  sword-fish.  The  whole  of  the  anterior  part  of  the  extensil 
interorbital  space  is  occupied  by  the  prefrontals  (PI.  I.  fig,  5,  n)  which  jcl 
each  other  at  the  median  line  by  an  extensive  vertical  cellular  surface:  thl 
form  the  anterior  border  of  the  orbit,  and  the  posterior  wall  of  tlije  nasal  fossJ 
they  close  the  cranial  cavity  anteriorly,  and  each  transmits  the  olfactoj 
nerve  to  the  capsule  by  a central  foramen.  They  are  almost  covered  by  t{ 
frontals  (n)  above,  which  they  support  by  a broad  flat  surface;  a very  sm  I 
portion  only  appearing  on  the  upper  surface  of  the  skull  at  the  anterior  angf 
of  the  orbital  ridge.  Were  the  frontals  separated,  the  prefrontals  would  th  1 


appear, 


as  in  the  frog, 


at  the  median  line:  were  the  suture  between  the  t\i 


prefrontals  to  be  obliterated  in  Xiphias,  an  ‘os  en  ceinture  ’ would  be  pr'j 
cluced  like  that  of  the  frog.  The  nasal  bone  of  the  sword-fish,  which  Cuvij 
calls  ‘ethmoi'de,’  presents  a cellular  structure  of  its  base  (is,  ns  n)  designu 
to  break  the  force  of  the  concussion  arising  from  the  blow  which  is  deliverr 
by  the  ‘sword,’  But  the  prefrontals  manifest  more  extensively  this  peculil 
cellular  structure,  which  Cuvier  well  says,  “Ton  prendrait  presque  pour  1 
cellules  de  I’ethmoide  d’un  quadrupede*.” 

Cuvier,  not  perceiving  or  not  appreciating  the  grounds  of  the  homology 
the  ‘ os  en  ceinture  ’ with  the  prefrontals,  describes  the  divided  nasal  (is,  fi’l 
13)  in  the  batrachia  as  the  ‘ frontaux  anterieures and  reciprocally,  haviii 
called  the  bones  in  fishes,  homologous  with  the  bone  i4,  (which  he  thougn 
might  represent  the  ethmoid  in  the  frog)  ‘ frontaux  anterieures,’  he  gives  tlf 
name  ‘ethmoi’de’  to  the  bone  is,  fig.  5,  whether  single  or  divided,  in  fishej 
It  is  not  necessary  to  add  anything  to  the  arguments  by  which  M.  AgassJ 
has  sustained  the  conclusion  of  Spix,  that  Cuvier’s  ‘ ethmoid  ’ in  fishes  is  til 
‘nasal.’  And  it  needs,  I think,  only  to  compare  the  connections  of  til 
bones  is,  fig.  13,  with  either  the  single  or  the  divided  nasals  in  fishes,  and  l| 
glance  at  the  obvious  homology  of  the  bones  h in  Cuvier’s  pi.  xxiv.  fig.  1 — (■] 
with  the  bones  g g in  figs.  4 & 6 of  pi.  xxvi.  (‘  Ossemens  Fossiles,’  t.  v.  pt.  21 
to  ensure  the  acceptance  of  the  conclusion,  that  his  ‘frontaux  anterieuresj 
in  the  frog  and  the  other  anourans  are  the  true  nasal  bones. 

The  membranous  and  cartilaginous  basis  of  the  lateral  walls  of  the  craniutr' 
especially  of  its  anterior  compartments  (prosencephalic  and  rhinencephalic; 
are  incompletely  ossified  in  all  lacertian  Sauria.  The  orbitosphenoids  ar 
represented  in  most  by  small  styliform  ossicles  (‘Ossemens  Fossiles,’  t.  4 
pt.  2,  pi.  xvi.  fig.  1,  z)  bounding  the  anterior  and  inferior  part  of  the  prosen 
cephalic  chamber,  and  which  Cuvier,  who  describes  the  true  alisphenoid  a 
the  petrosal  (roclier),  regards  as  the  representative  of  both  alisphenoid  am 
orbitosphenoid.  The  alisphenoid  is,  however,  well  characterized  by  its  con 
iiections  with  the  basisphenoid  and  exoccipital,  with  both  of  which  it  com 
monly  becomes  anchylosed  ; by  the  share  which  it  contributes  to  the  chani 
ber  lodging  the  true  cartilaginous  ‘petrosal’;  and  by  the  notch  on  its  fore- 
part for  the  escape  of  the  third  division  of  the  fifth  nerve. 

The  orbits  and  rhinencephalic  groove  are  bounded  anteriorly  and  divided 
from  the  olfactory  compartments  by  two  transversely  extended  and  antero- 
posteriorly  subcompressed  bony  columns,  resting  upon  the  palatines  bclov'i 


* Hist,  des  Poissons,  t.  viii.  p.  194. 


SPECIAL  HOMOLOGY.  PREFRONTAL. 


53 


^5  d arcliing  upwards  and  backwards,  expanding  as  they  ascend,  and  defining 
' ternally  The  nieinbranous  space  perforated  by  the  olfactory  nerves.  Tliese 
I j the  parts  in  all  lizards  that  repeat  the  essential  characters  of  the  pre- 
I intals  in  batrachians  and  fishes:  they  are,  moreover,  distinct  from  one  an- 
■I  ler,  and  appear  on  the  upper  surface  ot  the  skull  anterior  to  the  frontals, 

! d thus  resume  their  more  typical  character  as  first  displayed  in  fishes.  In 
1 } larse  monitoi-s  (‘Ossemens  Fossiles,’  v.  pt.  ‘2,  j)l.  xvi.  fig.  1,  e)  theTe  can 
I no  mistake  as  to  their  special  homology ; since  they  articulate  with  the 
i ;hr^-mals  (/)  (homologues  of  the  great  anterior  inuco-dermal  suborbital 
1 ne),  and  also,  as  in  the  carp,  with  a supraorbital  ossicle  (h):  but  in  many 
' ler  lizards  and  in  serpents  they  are  confluent  or  connate  with  the  lachry- 
I ds.  In  this  case  the  external  antorbital  position  and  perforation  for  the 
icons  duct  distinguishes  the  lachrymal  portion  of  the  coalesced  bones.  In 
; python  the  broadest  part  of  the  palatine,  formed  by  the  process  directed 
.'vards  and  by  the  opposite  one  sent  outwards  for  the  suspension  of  the 
i-ixillary,  articulates  with  the  undersurface  of  the  prefronto-lachrymal  bone  ; 
;d  the  inner  part  of  the  true  prefrontal  portion  is  notched  by  the  olfactory 
rrve  in  its  passage  to  the  capsule  supported  by  the  ossified  turbinal*. 

IThe  bones,  which  more  resemble  the  anchylosed  prefrontals  in  the  frog,  are 
‘j  frontals  of  the  python ; but  the  resemblance  is  confined  to  one  character 
Iv,  and  that  an  exaggeration  of  a character  common  to  the  frontal  bones  of 
any  birds,  and  of  the  ornithorhynchus  among  mammals,  viz.  a develop- 
,;nt  of  a median  bony  partition  from  the  line  of  the  frontal  suture  into  the 
^Kiian  interspace  of  the  encephalon.  In  the  python  each  frontal  sends 
»wn  at  the  fore-part  of  this  suture  such  a partition,  which  is  therefore  double, 
the  falx  essentially  is  in  man  and  the  mammalia,  in  which  it  retains  its 
r.mitive  histological  condition  of  a fibrous  membrane.  The  ossified  laminae 
the  falx  in  the  python  bend  outwards  and  coalesce  below  with  the  external 
orbitosphenoidal  plates  of  the  frontal,  and  thus  surround  the  lateral  divi- 
ons  of  the  fore-part  of  the  brain  (rhinencephala),  which  are  drawn  back 
tthe  progress  of  the  concentrative  movement  of  the  cerebral  centres,  so  as 
! occupy  the  prosencephalic  segment  of  the  cranium,  the  prosencepha- 
being,  in  like  manner,  protected  chiefly  by  the  mesencephalic  bony  arch. 

; ie  change  is  precisely  analogous  to  that  which  takes  place  at  the  opposite 
(tremity  of  the  neural  axis  in  higher  animals.  In  the  python  every  segment 
sthe  spinal  chord  retains  its  primitive  relation  to  the  segment  of  the  endo- 
rhleton,  through  which  it  transmits  its  pair  of  nerves.  In  the  mammal  the 
ncentrative  movements  of  the  spinal  chord  draw  its  hinder  segments  in 
'vance  of  their  proper  vertebrae,  and  the  primary  relation  is  indicated  by 
;;  nerves  which  these  vertebrae  continue  to  transmit,  and  by  which  alone  we 
' j guided  from  the  segment  of  the  endoskeleton  to  that  of  the  neural  axis 
' lich  originally  governed  its  development. 

'Accordingly,  at  the  anterior  end  of  the  skeleton,  we  trace  the  relation  of 
? osseous  segment,  which  transmits  the  olfactory  nerves  to  their  cap- 
I'ie,  to  its  proper  division  of  the  neural  axis,  by  following  those  nerves  back 
' the  retracted  ganglions  (rhinencephala)  from  which  they  take  their  origin. 
’■  le  connections  of  the  annular  frontals  of  the  python  with  the  parietals  and 
) st-frontals  behind,  with  the  connate  orbitosphenoids,  and  through  them  with 
i e presphenoid  below,  prevent  their  homology  being  mistaken  ; for  they  are 
( • from  completely  representing  or  repeating  the  essential  characters  of  the 
) alesced  annular  prefrontals  of  the  frog. 

I Not  to  lengthen  unnecessarily  this  exposition  of  the  homologues  of  the  pre- 


!,  ' I was  misled  by  the  confliienec  of  tlie  Inie  prefrontals  with  tlic  larhry- 

.1  Is  to  view  the  turliinAls  (*  cornets  inferieures  * of  Cuvier)  the  homologues  of  the  pre- 
I utals  in  the  python. — Report  of  British  Association,  IHlli,  p.  220. 


i 


54 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


frontals  (14,  figs.  4-  and  5)  in  fishes,  I pass  at  once  to  the  highest  of  existing  re  ' 
tiles,  the  crocodile.  Here  we  find,  in  the  dry  skull,  the  condition  of  the  rrani 
cavity  in  the  fish  beautifully  and  closely  repeated : the  prosencephalic  pa 
opens  freely  by  tlie  aperture  bounded  by  the  orbitosphenoids  (fig.  9,  10)  in 
the  common  orbital  cavity  (or),  and  the  rhinencephalic  division  of  the  craniu 
is  prolonged,  as  a groove  upon  the  under  surface  of  the  coalesced  fronta 
(ib.  11)  above  the  orbits,  expanding  as  it  advances,  until  it  is  arrested  by 
boundary  formed  by  two  bones  (ib.  14),  which  rest  below  upon  the  vomt 
and  give  attachment  there  to  an  ascending  process  of  the  palatines  (20),  whic<j 
sustain  by  their  mesial  and  upper  expanded  surfaces  the  nasal  (15)  and  ford 
part  of  the  frontal  (n);  and  articulate  exteriorly  with  the  large  lachryms 
bone  (fig.  22,  13)  perforated  as  in  the  fish  and  lizard  by  a mucous  duct  froi 
the  orbit.  They  are  each  grooved  on  their  inner  or  mesial  surface  (indicate 
by  the  numerals  14,  in  fig.  9)  by  the  olfactory  nerve,  where  it  escapes  froi 
the  cranium  to  spread  upon  the  membranes  sustained  by  the  cartilaginou' 
capsules  anterior  to  the  bones  in  question  ; below  tliese  grooves  the  bone 
(14)  extend  inwards  and  meet  at  the  mesial  line;  but  do  not  coalesce  ther 
as  in  the  frog,  nor  extend  their  mesial  union  upwards,  so  as  to  convert  th 
olfactory  grooves  into  two  complete  canals.  They,  therefore,  retain  or  resume 
much  more  of  their  primitive  piscine  character  than  do  their  homologues  ii 
the  frog,  and  manifest  it  conspicuously  by  developing  a subtriangular  externa 
plate  which  appears  on  the  upper  surface  of  the  cranium  at  the  anterior  angl 
of  the  orbit  between  the  frontal,  the  lachrymal  and  the  nasal  bones.  In  short 
the  homology  of  the  bones  14  in  the  crocodile  (figs.  9,  21,  22)  with  those 
so  numbered  in  the  fish  (figs.  4?  and  5),  was  quite  unmistakeable ; and,  will 
tlie  exception  of  Spix,  all  anatomists  have  concurred  in  this  respect  witi 
Cuvier : only  some  of  them  have  extended  further  and  expressed  differentlj 
the  homologies  of  the  bones  in  question. 

Now,  bearing  in  mind  the  small  brain  of  the  cold-blooded  crocodile,  anc 
the  concomitantly  restricted  development  of  the  spine  or  roof-bone  in  specia 
relation  with  the  cerebrum,  viz.  the  frontal  (11),  which  is  aided  in  its  se- 
condary function  in  relation  to  the  orbit  by  distinct  supraorbital  bones  in  all 
crocodiles,  and  contrasting  the  condition  of  the  part  of  the  brain  which 
cliiefly  governs  the  development  of  the  frontal  bone  with  that  of  the  same 
division  of  the  brain  of  mammalia, — let  us  proceed  to  make  the  comparison 
which  Cuvier  recommends*,  in  order  to  trace  the  homologues  of  the  croco- 
dile’s prefrontals  in  the  mammalian  class. 

We  place  the  skull  of  a ruminant  (the  red  deer,  e.  g.)  by  the  side  of  that 
of  a crocodile,  and  delineate  a suture  which  would  detach  a portion  from  the 
frontal,  having  the  same  superficial  connections  as  the  upper  peripheral  plate 
of  the  prefrontal  has  in  the  crocodile.  It  appears  to  be  far  from  presenting 
the  same  figure ; but  most  assuredly  such  artificially  detached  portion  of 
the  ruminant's  frontal  has  not  the  same  functions  (‘emploi’)  as  the  pre- 
frontal has  in  the  crocodile.  For  if  we  even  include  with  the  part  so 
detached  the  anterior  portion  of  the  descending  orbital  plate  of  the  frontal, 
we  find  it  joining  below  the  orbitosphenoid  without  any  connection  with  the 
vomer,  or  any  attachment  to  the  palatine : it  forms  no  immediate  part  of  the 
supporting  plate  of  the  rhinencephalon,  nor  of  the  foramina  for  the  exit  of 
the  olfactory  nerves.  Such  artificially  detached  portions  of  the  mammaliaffl 
frontal  are  entirely  separated  from  each  other ; whilst  one  of  the  important 

* “ II  suffit  en  efFet  de  placer  une  tete  de  mammifere,  de  ruminant  par  exemple,  a cottf 
d’une  tete  de  crocodile,  pour  s’assurer  qu’il  s’est  fait  ici  (‘  du  frontal  anterieur  ’)  un  demein- 
brement  du  frontal.  On  poun-oit,  sans  rien  ddranger,  dessiner  sur  le  frontal  du  mammifere 
la  suture  qui  existe  dans  le  crocodile,  et  on  dctaclieroit  ainsi  dans  le  premier  un  frontal 
anterieur  qui  auroit  la  meme  position,  presque  la  meme  figure,  et  absolument  le  merae  emploi 
que  dans  le  crocodile.” — Ossem.  Fossiles,  v.  pt.  ii.  p.  73. 


SPECIAL  HOMOLOGY.  I’UEl'RONTAL, 


OJ 


its  of  resemblance  between  tlie  jirefrontals  of  the  crocodile  aiul  those  of 
fish  are  the  mesial  approximation  and  junction  of  their  descending  (neu- 
1 ophysial  or  rhinencephalic)  plates — the  most  constant  aiul  important  parts 
j he  bones  in  question. 

i f the  frontal  of  the  ruminant  or  other  mammal  were  expanded  only  at 
j parts  corresponding  with  the  detached  bones  called  “ Irontaux  ante- 
■ in  the  crocodile,  there  might  then  be  a primd  fade  probability  that 


l)  .res 


connate 


‘D 

parts, 


dismembered  in  the  crocodile’s  skull. 


jj  1 expansions  were 

*1  the  vastly  increased  lateral  as  well  as  anteroposterior  development,  and 


highest 


j more  or  less  vertical  convex  expansion  of  tlie  frontal  in  the 
^ ebrate  class,  naturally  indicate,  in  the  first  place,  an  inquiry  into  the 
^ :;oraitant  modification  of  the  nervous  centres  by  which  the  development 
" hat  bone  is  mainly  governed;  and  if  such  modification  should  then  be 
] id  to  exist,  in  the  cerebrum,  for  example,  which,  from  the  ascertained 
, elative  progress  of  the  frontal  in  other  classes,  ought  to  cause  or  be 
^ dated  with  such  a general  development  of  that  bone  as  characterises  the 
1 in  the  mammalian  class,  it  must  surely  be  superfluous  and  gratuitous 
'.xplain  that  development  by  the  hypothesis  of  a coalescence  of  another 
:ntiallv  distinct  element  of  the  cranial  parietes : especially  if  that  element 
roved,  by  a similar  tracing  of  its  relations  to  the  progressive  development 
he  cerebral  centres,  to  have  as  essential  and  exclusive  a dependence 
1 the  rhinencephalon  as  the  frontal  bone  has  upon  the  prosencephalon, 
he  position  of  the  upper  peripheral  part  of  the  prefrontal  in  the  situation 
. hich  it  is  seen  in  the  crocodile,  is,  in  fact,  the  least  constant  and  import- 
of  the  characters  of  that  bone.  In  the  bull- frog,  for  example,  the  ex- 
-d  part  of  the  prefrontal  is  mesiad  of  the  conjoined  parts  of  the  nasals 
frontals  instead  of  being  lateral ; in  the  sword-fish  the  prefrontals  barely 
jar,  and  in  the  python  they  do  not  appear  at  all,  upon  the  upper  surface 
Lae  skull ; but  they  retain  in  each  their  more  typical  neurapophysial  po- 
Ln,  with  all  their  more  constant  and  essential  characters.  The  enormously 
loped  frontal  of  the  mammal  masks  these  characters,  and  usurps  the 
■constant  and  least  important  one,  viz.  superficial  position,  on  which  alone 
*ier  insists  as  proving  the  prefrontal  of  the  crocodile,  with  its  complex 
j|;:tions  and  connections,  to  be  such  a dismemberment  of  the  true  frontals 
le  ruminant,  as  may  be  marked  oif  with  the  pen  on  the  upper  surface  of 
ifrskull  I 

j he  descending  [rhinencephalic]  plates  of  the  prefrontal  in  the  crocodile 
9,  u)  are  subcompressed  in  the  axis  of  the  skull,  and  expanded  laterally, 
^cially  at  their  upper  part ; where,  in  the  alligator,  I find  them  forming  a 

# 'Ow  cup,  concave  forwards  for  the  lodgment  of  the  cartilaginous  olfactory 

# .ule, — of  that  part,  namely,  which  is  ossified  in  mammalia,  and  there  de- 
f into  the  great  labyrinth  of  the  superior  turbinals  and  ethmoidal  cells. 
4 vertical  plates,  continued  forwards  from  the  prefrontals,  which  extend 
r 'eto  the  nasal  suture  and  descend  into  the  vomerine  groove  below,  to  aid 
1 rraing  the  ‘septum  narium,’  are  cartilaginous  in  the  crocodile;  they  are 
> ? or  less  ossified,  and  form  the  ‘lamina  perpendicularis  ethmoidei’  in 
1 imals.  The  median  plate,  dividing  the  olfactory  nerves  at  their  exit,  and 
' doped  backwards  as  a partial  septum  of  the  rhinencephalic  chamber  of 
i cranium,  and  continued  into  the  simple  interorbital  septum  of  the  croco- 
' also  remains  cartilaginous:  when  ossified  in  mammals,  it  forms  the 

# ■ita  galli.’  Now  not  one  of  these  cartilaginous  representatives  of  the  parts 
he  compound  bone  called  ‘ethmoid’  in  anthropotomy,  is  united  or  con- 
i' ed  with  the  portions  of  the  frontal  in  mammals  which  Cuvier  has  assumed 
1 e the  homologues  of  the  [irefrontals  in  the  crocodile  ; those  bones  being 


56 


ON  THE  VERTEURATE  SKELETON. 


in  that  reptile,  as  the  prefrontals  are  in  fishes,  chiefly  concerned  in  clos 
the  anterior  end  of  the  cranial  cavity,  in  giving  exit  to  the  olfactory  ner' 
in  suspending  the  palatine  arch,  in  connecting  the  vomer  with  the  nasal  i 
tically,  and  the  nasal  with  the  frontal  and  lacrymal  horizontally,  repeating 
the  crocodile  for  the  latter  purpose  the  development  of  the  upper  or  horizoi 
plate  which  had  almost  or  entirely  disappeared  in  some  of  the  interven 
forms  of  reptiles.  In  most  chelonians  this  portion  of  the  prefrontal  coales 
or  is  connate  with  the  short  nasal : but  I have  found  the  instructive  except 
presented  by  the  existing  freshwater  tortoise  {Hydromedusa)  of  the  persist 
suture  between  the  nasals  and  prefrontals,  repeated  in  two  fossil  cheloni 
{Chelone  planiceps  Chelone  jndchriceps)* . 

Proceeding  in  the  ascensive  track  of  the  homologies  of  the  prefront 
I have  selected  from  the  class  of  birds  the  skull  of  the  ostrich  (figs.  8 and 
the  representative  of  an  aberrant  order,  in  which  every  deviation  from 
type  of  the  class  that  li£is  been  supposed  to  tend  towards  the  Mammalia,  te 
equally  or  more  towards  the  Reptilia\,  and  in  which,  conformably  with 
lower  development  of  the  respiratory  system,  the  original  sutures  of 
cranium,  or  in  other  words,  the  signs  of  the  vertebrate  archetype  on  whicj 
is  constructed,  are  longest  retained.  Were  we  to  cut  off  the  corresponding 
terior  angles  of  the  frontals,  no.  ii,  to  those  supposed  to  represent  in  mamn 
tlie  bones  we  are  in  quest  of,  we  should  have  even  fewer  of  their  charact 
tlian  in  the  higher  class  alluded  to,  because  the  descending  orbital  plati 
less  developed,  and  the  frontal,  though  its  general  size  is  much  augment 
retains  more  of  its  oviparous  horizontality  as  an  expanded  spine  or  roof-bi 
of  the  cranium. 

There  is  a large  bone  (fig.  23,73)  bounding  the  anterior  border  of  the  or 
and  from  which,  as  we  have  seen  in  the  parrots,  ossification  sometimes  exte: 
backwards  along  the  inferior  contour  of  the  orbit  to  the  postfrontal.  But  1 
bone,  besides  its  repetition  of  the  connections  of  the  lacrymal  in  the  fish  <§ 
crocodile,  resting  as  in  the  latter  animal  upon  the  true  malar  bone,  is  eitr 
perforated  or  grooved  by  the  lachrymal  duct,  w'hich  it  defends  in  its  couJ 
from  the  eye  to  the  nose,  and  has  none  of  tlie  essential  characteristics  of 
prefrontal.  But  we  see  on  the  exterior  of  the  skull  of  the  ostrich  and  otl 
struthious  birds  J,  a distinct  rhomboidal  plate  of  bone  interposed  between 
frontals  and  nasals,  precisely  in  the  situation  in  which  the  upper  surface 
the  coalesced  prefrontals  appears  in  the  skull  of  the  frog  and  other  anoun 
batrachians.  In  a nearly  full-grown  ostrich’s  skull,  I removed  the  left  fn 
tal,  nasal,  lacrymal  and  tympanic  bones,  and  the  zygomatic  arch,  as  in  figv 
and  found  the  facet  in  question  to  be  the  upper  and  posterior  expand 
surface  of  a large  irregularly  subquadrate  compressed  bone  {ib.  14),  consi 
ing  of  two  vertical  compact  plates  coalesced  at  their  periphery,  and  includi 
a loose  cancellous  texture.  The  upper  and  posterior  expanded  surface  of  I 
bone  extends  a short  way  back  beneath  the  frontals,  descends  and  closes  1 
anterior  aperture  of  the  cranium,  and  sends  out  from  each  side  a plate 
bone  which  arches  over  the  olfactory  nerves  and  forms  the  canals  by  whi 
they  are  conducted  along  the  upper  part  of  tlie  orbits.  The  anterior  and  upf 
surface  of  the  bone  again  expands  (at  14',  figs.  8 and  23),  and  there  sustai 
and  is  covered  by,  the  nasal  bones,  and  again  overarches,  and  is  sometin 


: 


Report  on  British  Fossil  Reptiles,  Trans.  Brit.  Assoc.  1841,  pp.  169, 172. 
t The  urinary  bladder  and  intromittent  organ,  e.  g. : the  modification  of  the  feathers 
the  StruthionidcB  is  a degeneration  of  a peculiarly  ornithic  character  ; hut  not,  therefore, 
approximation  to  the  hairy  covering  of  mammals. 

, X In  the  emeu  {Dromams  atcr)  at  u,  fig.  1.  pi.  39.  Zool.  Trans,  t.  iii. : and  in  the  cas 
wary  at  h,  fig.  3,  taf.  i.  in  llallmann’s  ‘ Vcrgleichende  Osteologic  des  Schlafeubeins.’ 


SPECIAL  HOMOLOGY.  PllEFRON'TAL. 


57 


" foratecl  by  the  olfactory  nerves  (the  course  of  which  along  the  rliineu- 
)halic  continuation  of  the  cranial  cavity,  is  shown  by  tlie  arrows,  ol.  u, 

■ I.  8 and  23)  prior  to  their  final  expansion  on  tlie  olfactory  organ;  the 
3 in  body  of  the  bone  forms  the  fore-part  of  the  interorbital  septum  and 
back  part  of  the  nasal  septum,  a sliglit  outstanding  ridge  or  angle 
: iding  the  two  surfaces;  it  rests  below  upon  the  rostral  prolongation  of 
: presphenoid,  which,  however,  barely  divides  it  from  the  semicylindrical 
.lOved  vomer  (13)  which  sheathes  the  under  part  of  that  process.  The 
iterior  extremities  of  the  j)alatines  develope  broad  horizontal  plates  mesiad 
■i  1 1 upwards  (fig.  23, 20),  which  join  the  lower  border  of  no.  h,  where  it  rests 
jn  the  presphenoid.  The  outer  margins  of  the  anterosuperior  expansion 
;:j  no.  14  come  into  contact  with  the  lacrymals  : the  posterior  border  of  the 
; -tical  or  rhinencephalic  plate  joins  and  soon  coalesces  with  tlie  orbitosphe- 
1 ds  (10).  Thus  we  have  all  the  essential  characters  of  the  prefrontals  in 
^ ! fish,  the  frog  and  the  crocodile,  with  a repetition  of  their  first  important 
li  (idification  in  the  tail-less  batrachians,  viz.  that  of  median  confluence  ; and 
I -s  not  unimportant  to  observe  that  this  is  associated  with  the  obliteration  of 
K itier  cranial  sutures,  by  which  also  those  batrachians  resemble  birds.  The 
!i  4.t  step  in  the  progress  of  this  median  approximation  of  the  prefrontals,  is 
3 ! development  of  the  plates  w hich,  in  certain  fishes,  convert  the  olfactory 
a sroves  into  foramina;  these  mesial  plates  next  come  into  contact  at  the  middle 
i ee,  e.  g.  in  Xiphias  and  Ephippus ; they  proceed  to  coalesce  in  the  frog,  and 
5 ! : prefrontals  are  so  much  further  compressed  in  the  bird  that  the  olfactory 
» >K)ves  open  upon  the  outer  or  lateral  instead  of  the  inner  or  mesial  surfaces  of 
: rhinencephalic  plates : they  are,  however,  very  deep  grooves  in  the  ostrich, 
rii  in  the  apteryx  are  canals  protected  by  a distinct  external  plate.  The 
3 icrruption  of  the  direct  vomerine  connection  by  the  prolonged  presphenoid 
: :::he  chief  secondary  modification  of  the  prefrontals  in  the  bird.  No  other 
I [.oe  in  the  bird’s  skull  repeats  the  more  essential  characters  of  the  prefrontals 
L idshes  and  reptiles,  save  the  bone  no.  14,  figs.  8 and  23.  Cuvier  calls  this  bone 
: ■ ; ‘ ethmoide  ’;  but  blames  the  clear-sighted  and  consistent  German  anato- 
; ;5ts  who  applied  that  name  to  the  prefrontals  in  fishes  and  reptiles  ; yet  the 
a rrt  of  Cuvier’s  ethmoid  in  the  bird  answering  to  the  ‘ lamina  cribrosa’  of  the 
; junmal,  sometimes  gives  passage  to  the  olfactory  nerve  by  a single  foramen, 
i uietimes  by  merely  a groove,  a difference  which  does  not  prevent  him 
■i  ropting  the  homology  here,  though  he  opposes  it  to  the  adoption,  by 
‘ij  janus,  of  the  homology  of  the  same  part  in  the  fish  {ante,  p.  215).  The 
r.  ■jooth  plate  forming,  with  the  orbitosphenoid,  the  interorbital  septum,  is 
‘os  planum,’  or  papyraceous  plate  of  the  bird’s  ethmoid,  with  Cuvier: 
9 1 ! masking  of  this  part  in  most  mammals  by  the  downward  development 
• the  orbital  plates  of  the  frontal,  offered  no  difficulty  to  the  ethmoidal  de- 
: -rmination  of  no.  14  in  the  bird ; and  it  forms  as  little  valid  objection  to 
; :en’s  mode  of  expressing  the  ethmoidal  homology  of  the  prefrontals  in  the 
r Id-blooded  ovipara. 

I.  For  the  reasons  before  assigned,  viz.  that  the  terms  ‘frontal  anterieur’ 
• d been  given  to  the  bone  in  question,  no.  14,  in  those  animals  in  which  it 
;■  viates  least  from  its  general  type,  as  the  nasal  neurapophysis,  I retain  the 
V me  ‘ prefrontal’  for  it  under  all  its  metamorphoses.  Cuvier,  after  balancing 
5 characters  of  the  bones  nos.  15,  22  and  73  (fig.  23)  in  birds,  inclines  to  the 
inion  that  is  is  the  true  nasal,  and  22'  an  essential  part  (nasal  process)  of 
! e prernaxillary : with  regard  to  73,  he  says,  “ les  os  externes  et  plus  voisins 
1 orbite  scraient  presque  comme  on  le  voudrait,  ou  des  frontaux  ante- 
>urs  ou  fifes  lacrymaux.”  In  which  case,  no.  i4  having  been  described  as 
e ‘ethmoid,’ one  or  other  of  the  above-named  bones  would  be  wholly  absent 


58 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


in  birds.  “Ce  que  pourrait  faire  croire  que  c’est  le  frontal  anterieur  ( il' 
manque,  c’est  que  dans  les  oiseaux  il  n’y  a point  de  frontal  posterieur,  et  qZ 
la  paroi  anterieur  de  I’orbite,  a I’endroit  ou  le  frontal  anterieure  se  trouJl 
ordinairement,  est  manifestement  forni6e  en  grande  partie  par  une  laiZ. 
transverse  de  I’ethnioide*.”  But  the  postfrontal  is  not  always  absent  I 
birds  : it  is  present  as  a distinct  bone,  though  small,  in  the  emeu’s  skuJj 
figured  in  the  ‘ Memoir  on  the  Dmomis'  above-cited  ; and  it  is  still  moA 
developed  in  that  remarkable  extinct  (?)  genus  of  wingless  birds.  Besidcl 
to  anticipate  the  subject  of  a subsequent  chapter  of  this  work,  a parapophysE 
always  disappears  from  a typical  segment  of  the  skeleton  sooner  than! 
neurapophysis.  The  rest  of  Cuvier’s  difficulty  in  the  recognitioii  of  the  pr* 
frontal  in  birds  was  more  nominal  than  real. 

The  ethmoid,  in  the  restricted  sense  in  which  Cuvier  applies  the  term  in  tl 
crocodile  and  other  animals  with  divided  prefrontals,  and  in  which  I wou  i 
apply  it  in  those  animals  also  in  which  the  prefrontals  have  coalesced, 
present  but  remains  cartilaginous  in  the  bird.  In  the  mammal  it  beconi 
bony  and  contracts  anchyloses  not  only  with  the  still  more  reduced  debris  ' 
the  coalesced  prefrontals,  but  also, — in  consequence  of  the  change  of  positic  dt 
of  the  prefrontals  through  the  further  progress  of  concentration,  wherel  ; 
they  are  drawn  backwards  closer  to  the  prosencephalic  part  of  the  craniui  : 
and  in  consequence  of  the  concomitant  expansion  of  the  true  frontals, — wil 
the  orbital  plates  of  the  frontals  ; and  accordingly  these  plates  usurp  in  mo 
mammals  the  office  and  the  position  of  the  external  parts  of  the  prefronta  i 
in  the  cold-blooded  vertebrataf.  n 

The  posterior  part  of  the  coalesced  prefrontals  (figs.  24  & 25,  14)  dividoB 
the  anterior  aperture  of  the  cranium  into  two  outlets,  upon  the  inner  circun 
ference  of  which  the  rhinencephala  rest;  each  outlet  being  commonly  close*  . 
by  part  of  the  olfactory  capsules,  which  are  ossified  and  perforated  to  receiv  > 
the  divisions  of  the  olfactory  nerves.  When  the  prefrontals  extend  backwaro  ' 
and  beyond  the  cribriform  plates,  they  form  what  is  termed  the  ‘ crista  galli  : 
this  exists  in  comparatively  few  mammalia ; but  is  as  large  in  the  seal  tribl 
as  in  man.  In  the  tapirs  the  prefrontals  expand  above  and  overarch  the  o | 
factory  capsules,  but  their  upper  horizontal  plates  are  overlapped  by  thllr 
nasals  and  true  frontals.  In  the  DelphmidcB,  where  the  olfactory  capsule 
are  absent,  the  prefrontals  expand  posteriorly,  and  diverge  from  their  media 
coalesced  portions  constituting  the  septum  of  the  nasal  passage,  in  order  t 
form  the  posterior  boundaries  of  those  passages  and  the  anterior  wall  of  th 
cranial  cavity.  They  again  expand  and  form  a thick  irregular  mass  anterio 
to  the  nasal  passages  in  some  Deljihinidce,  and  in  Zipidus  ossification  extend 
along  the  fibrous  continuation  of  the  prefrontals  forwards  to  near  the  end  o 
the  premaxillariesj.  They  are  connate  with  the  orbitosphenoids  behind,  am 
soon  coalesce  with  the  vomer  below ; they  rise  anterior  to  the  frontals  anil 
support  the  stunted  nasals  which  are  wedged  between  the  prefrontals  am  t 
frontals.  The  cetacea  are  the  only  mammalia  in  which  the  prefrontals  appea 
upon  the  exterior  of  the  skull,  and  which  in  this  respect  resemble  the  reptilia 

I 

* Le?ons  d’Anat.  Comp.  1837,  t.  ii.  p.  580. 

f Cuvier  takes  this  ground  in  objecting  to  Oken’s  ethmoidal  homology  of  the  prefronta  1 
in  the  crocodile,  and  says,  “ the  ethmoid  coexists  in  a cartilaginous  state  with,  and  is  enve  ► 
loped  by,  the  prefrontal,  ‘comme  la  partie  anterieure  du  frontal  enveloppe  I’ethmoide  dei  1 
ruininans.’  ” — Hist,  des  Poissons,  v.  p.  235.  The  correspondence  is  exaggerated,  but  i i 
matters  not.  There  are  other  characters  of  the  mammalian  ethmoid,  as  the  closing  of  tin'  : 
cranium  anteriorly,  the  transmitting  the  olfactory  nerves,  &c.,  which  are  nowise  manifestcci  ' 
by  Cuvier’s  cartilaginous  ‘ ethmoide’  in  the  crocodile,  and  are  very  satisfactorily  so  by  tin 
])refrontals  in  that  animal. 

X Ossem.  Foss.  v.  pt.  i.  p.  351. 


SPECIAL  HOMOLOGY,  MALAR. 


59 


I : Cuvier  describes  the  posterior  ami  superior  expanded  and  diverging  plates 
the  prefrontals  as  “ la  lame  cribrcuse  de  1 ethinoide : the  coalesced  part 

' rniiii"  the  septum,  he  ascribes  to  the  vomer*.  Dr,  Kbstlin  j",  also,  who 
i gards  the  ethmoid  as  no  proper  bone  of  the  skull,  but  oidy  an  ossified 
^n  of  sense,  yet  describes,  after  the  anthropotomists,  the  coalesced  pre- 
' lutals  as  the  cribriform  and  azygos  processes  of  the  ethmoid  (‘ Siebplatte 

■ d ‘ Scheidewand  des  Siebbeins,’  pp.  85.  89)  in  cetacea  which  have  no 
■;ian  of  smell.  In  a young  balmnoptera,  in  which  tlie  frontals,  the  vomer 
i d the  nasals  were  ossified,  I find  the  prefrontals  as  two  cartilaginous  plates, 

tending  from  the  nasals  above  to  the  groove  of  the  vomer  below.  In  the 
iiinatee^the  essential  parts  of  the  prefrontals  which  close  the  cranial  cavity 
teriorly,  and  give  exit  to  the  olfactory  nerves,  are  thick  and  unusually 
' 'panded.  But  in  no  mammal  do  these  parts,  with  their  continuation,  the 
•'  i.iiuina  perpendicularis,’  which,  as  the  coalesced  neurapophysial  plates  of 
sfrontals,  brings  the  vomer  below  in  connection  with  the  nasals  above, 

■ i-er  undergo  such  modifications  as  to  obliterate  their  true  and  essential  ho- 
i dogical  characters. 

:In  proceeding  next  to  consider  the  special  homologies  of  the  bones  of  the 
■ ;h  closed  by  the  premaxillaries  (22)  and  constituting  the  ‘ upper  jaw,’  I 
’ raimence  with  the  palatines  (20),  because  they  form,  throughout  the  verte- 
;ate  series,  the  most  constant  medium  of  suspension  of  that  arch  to  the 
^ titerior  cranial  segment  formed  by  the  vomer,  prefrontals  and  nasal.  This 
a hicret  affinity,’  as  Goethe  would  have  termed  it,  before  the  knowledge  of 
; : general  type  had  revealed  its  nature,  is  manifested  by  the  process  of  the 
i Uatine  in  man,  which  creeps  up,  as  it  were,  into  the  orbit  to  effect  its  wonted 

- ion  with  the  prefrontal,  to  that  part  of  the  bone,  viz.  of  which  Cuvier  had 

- ;ijognised  the  homologue  in  his  ‘ ethmoide’ of  the  bird!.  It  is  the  very 
'.nstancy,  indeed,  of  these  and  other  connections  which  has  exempted  the 

I iiatine  from  the  different  determinations  and  denominations  attached  to 

■ -ler  bones,  and  which  renders  further  discussion  of  its  special  homology 
i .necessary  here. 

- IPassing  over,  for  the  same  reason,  the  maxillary  (21)  and  premaxillary  (22), 

i ;d  referring  to  the  excellent  treatise  by  Dr.  Kostlin§  for  the  grounds  of 
= determination  of  the  ‘pterygoid’  (24),  I proceed  to  notice  other  bones 
i.iich,  diverging  from  the  maxillary  arch,  serve  to  give  it  additional  fixation 

■ :d  strength  in  the  air-breathing  vertebrates.  The  first  of  these  is  the  malar 
1:  ne  (fig.  11,  2c),  the  homology  of  which  has  been  traced  without  difference 
J opinion  throughout  the  mammalian  class ; where,  however,  the  inconstancy 
; its  proportions,  number  of  connections,  and  very  existence,  is  sufficient  to 

;dicate  its  comparative  unimportance  as  an  element  of  the  maxillary  arch, 
is  absent  in  many  insectivores  (^Centetes,  Echinops,  Sorex'):  it  has  not 
;; ' en  detected  as  a distinct  bone  in  the  zygomatic  arch  in  the  monotremes,  on 
count  perhaps  of  its  early  coalescence,  as  in  birds,  with  the  maxillary 
i .'g.  12,  21,  2o) ; \n  Myrmecophaga  gigantea  and  Manis,  it  projects  back- 
i trds,  as  a styliform  appendage,  from  the  maxillary,  but  does  not  attain  the 
uamosal;  whilst  in  the  sloths  and  their  extinct  congeners  the  gigantic 
, --gatherioids,  the  malar  presents  its  maximum  of  development  and  complex- 
j ’,!•  In  the  JJelphinidce,  again,  the  malar  is  much  reduced  : its  slightly  ex- 
nded  maxillary  end  forms  part  of  the  orbit  and  joins  the  frontal ; the  rest 
I tending  backwards,  as  a very  slender  style,  beneath  the  orbit  to  the  squa- 

' * Ossem.  Foss.  v.  pt.  i.  pi.  xxvii.  fig.  3,  h. 
t Der  Ban  des  Kndchernen  Kopfes,  p.  11. 

t See  the  passage  above  ipioted  from  the  ‘ Lemons  d’Anat.  Comp.’  ii.  p.  580. 

§ 0]!.  cil.  p.  328.  II  Dcscriiitioii  of  the  Myludon  rohuatus,  Ito,  p.  19. 


60 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


mosal.  The  malar  joins  the  post-orbital  process  of  the  frontal  in  the  MaA 
tus  senegalcnsis,  the  hippopotamus,  the  solipeds,  and  ruminants,  some  car'] 
vores  and  the  lemurs  ; in  the  true  quadrumanes  and  man  it  joins  the  alispl 
noid,  and  sometimes  also  the  parietal.  ' 

The  presence,  form  and  connections  of  the  malar  are  much  more  constf] 
in  the  class  of  birds  ; where,  however,  it  must  be  sought  for  as  an  indepej 
dent  bone  at  an  early  period.  In  the  young  ostrich  (fig.  23,  aa)  it  is  reduc'l 
to  the  form  of  a simple,  straight,  slender  style,  and  coalesces  first  with  t( 
similarly-shaped  squamosal  (27),  and  next  with  the  malar  process  of  tl 
maxillary  (21").  In  the  crocodile  the  malar  bone  (fig.  22,  2c)  becomes  mol 
developed,  and  adds  the  connections  with  the  postfrontal  (12)  and  the  ecti 
pterygoid  (24')  to  the  more  constant  ones  with  the  maxillary  (21)  and  squj 
mosal  (27),  which  alone  sustain  it  in  birds.  In  most  of  the  chelonians  tj[ 
malar  presents  the  same  connections  as  in  the  crocodile,  but  is  transmutcj 
from  a ‘ long’  to  a ‘ flat’  bone.  It  retains  the  expanded  shape  in  the  agam, 
but  in  most  other  lizards  it  resumes  the  styloid  form  ; being  broadest,  ho^l 
ever,  in  those  genera,  e.  g.  Iguana.,  Thorictes,  Tejus,  in  which  it  extends  fro  I 
the  maxillary  to  the  postfrontal  and  squamosal ; in  the  Varani  it  projeol 
freely  backwards,  like  a styliform  appendage  of  the  maxillary,  as  in  tlf 
toothless  mammalian  Bruta,  above-cited. 

There  is  no  malar  bone  in  ophidians  and  batrachians.  The  lower  porticl 
of  the  tympanic  pedicle  in  the  Anoicra  sends  forward  a process  which  joins >[ 
backward  prolongation  of  the  maxillary:  in  all  other  batrachia  the  low(j 
portion  of  the  tympanic  pedicle  is  restricted  to  its  normal  connections  and  ll 
its  function  of  affording  articulation  to  the  lower  jaw.  With  regard,  then] 
fore,  to  the  zygomatic  modification  of  this  portion  of  the  pedicle  in  anouroij 
Batrachia,  some  may  deem  it  the  homologue  of  the  malar;  and,  in  marsil 
pial  quadrupeds,  the  malar  actually  forms  part  of  the  glenoid  cavity  for  tbl 
lower  jaw  : or  it  may  be  regarded  as  the  squamosal,  which  constantly  su[f 
ports  the  lower  jaw  in  mammals  : or  it  may  be  viewed  as  the  coalesced  home] 
logue  of  both  bones : or  finally,  as  a simple  modified  dismemberment  of  thi 
tympanic  pedicle  of  the  higher  reptiles  and  birds ; effecting  a union  witi 
the  maxillary  bone  which  makes  it  analogous  to,  but  not,  therefore,  homoloj 
gous  with,  the  distinct  malar  and  squamosal  in  those  higher  vertebrates.  Thif 
is  a question  of  special  homology  on  which  I am  unwilling  at  present  tJ 
express  a decided  opinion  : but  viewing  the  inconstancy  of  the  squamosal  ill 
reptilia,  and  its  deprivation  of  the  function  of  exclusively  supporting  th  j 
mandible  in  all  ovipara,  I am  disinclined  to  adopt  the  idea  of  its  sudden  restil 
tution  to  that  mammalian  function  in  frogs  and  fishes  ; yet,  if  either  of  tin! 
bones  20  and  27  are  to  be  selected  as  the  homologue  of  the  hypotympanic  (28c/f 
of  batrachians  and  fishes,  I should  regard  the  claims  of  the  squamosal  to  bij 
stronger  than  those  of  the  malar,  which  Cuvier  has  chosen.  The  further  sub  f 
division,  however,  of  the  tympanic  pedicle  in  fishes,  prepares  us,  in  the  as] 
censive  comparison,  for  the  simple  division  of  the  pedicle  in  batrachia,  anej 
for  recognising  in  the  lower  articular  portion  a vegetative  dismemberment  o ' 
28  in  the  crocodile. 

The  characters  and  chief  changes,  in  respect  of  connections  and  functions] 
of  the  squamosal  (27)  in  the  mammalia  have  already  been  noticed  in  the  dis-j 
cussion  of  the  homologies  of  other  elements  of  the  complex  ‘ temporal  bone'l 
in  that  class.  In  birds  the  bone  (fig.  23,  27)  undergoes  the  same  change  oi  l 
form  which  has  been  noticed  in  the  jugal,  viz.  from  the  squamous  to  thel 
styloid.  It  continues,  however,  to  connect  the  malar  with  the  tympanic  asj 
it  does  in  figs.  11  and  12,  but  it  has  no  connections  with  other  bones.  Cu- 
vier having  been  led  to  recognise  the  squamosal  in  the  mastoid  (fig.  23,  s)  of 


SPECIAL  HOMOLOGY.  Slil'AMOSAL. 


G1 


ils,  does  not  distinguish  a?  from 20,  the  true  ‘jugal and  Gcoffroy  viewing 
,s  • ‘portion  ecailleuse’  of  the  temporal  in  that  cranial  bone  of  tlie  bird,  which 
ficrures  under  the  letter  R,  fig.  IT,  pi.  27  (Annales  du  Museum,  x.),  calls 

■ true  squamosal,  the  original  separation  of  which  from  the  malar  lie  had 
, deed  in  the  chick,  ‘jugal  posterieure.’  He  did  not  admit  that  this  division 

the  zygomatic  style  was  constant  or  common  in  the  osteogeny  of  the  skull 
birds : but  I have  always  found  such  division  in  the  embryo,  and  it  con- 
. ues  longer  than  usual  in  those  very  species,  e.  g.  the  duck  and  ostrich 
, j.  2S,  i6,  27),  in  which  Geofl'roy  denies  its  existence  (/.  c.,  p.  361).  Oken 
’ lurately  describes  the  tw'o  constituents  of  the  zygoma  in  the  skull  of  the 
. ose,  in  his  characteristic  and  original  Essay*,  where  he  calls  the  posterior 
ce  (27)  the  humerus,  and  the  anterior  one  (ge)  the  radius  of  the  head, 
janusf,  who  also  recognised  the  fact  of  the  essential  individuality  of  the 
' le  (27)  in  birds,  but  who  saw  the  homologue  of  the  squamosal  rather  in  tlie 
^ ijwnic  (23),  calls  it  ‘ os  zygomaticum  posterius.’  I could  cite  other  testi- 
^ : nies  to  the  primitive  existence  of  the  distinct  bone  in  birds  connecting  the 
' iar  with  the  tympanic;  but  the  fact  which  chiefly  concerns  us  here  is,  that 
’ -he  special  homology  of  no.  s with  the  mastoid,  and  that  of  no.  23  with 

■ tympanic  be  proved,  we  then  have  a bone  presenting  the  most  constant 
' nuections  of  the  squamosal  in  no.  27  : if,  however,  that  name  be  transferred, 

. ,.ias  been  done  by  Cuvier,  BojanusJ  and  Geoffrey,  to  other  bones,  then  a 

■ If  bone  and  a new  name  must  be  introduced  into  vertebrate  craniology, 

• which,  as  I trust  I have  shown,  there  is  no  sufficient  ground. 

Moth  Oken  and  Bojanus  rightly  discern  in  the  permanently  distinct  bone 
^ ; ■ch.  in  the  crocodiles  (fig.  22,  27)  and  chelonians,  connects  the  malar  (20) 

; !.h  the  tympanic  (2s),  the  homologue  of  the  bone  they  call  ‘ cranial  hume- 
; , or  ‘zygomaticum  posterius’  in  the. bird.  Cuvier  is  more  accurate  in  his 
termination  of  this  bone  (fig.  23,  27)  as  the  ‘ squamosal’ in  reptiles  ; but 

■ ,:iin  at  the  expense  of  his  consistency  in  regard  to  the  characters  of  his 

• ramosal  in  the  bird  : for  the  homolog}’’  of  no.  s (Cuvier’s  ‘squamosal’)  in 
: .22  with  no.  s (Cuvier’s  ‘ mastoid’)  in  fig.  23,  is  as  obvious  and  unmistake- 
; l J as  is  that  of  no.  27  (Cuvier’s  ‘ squamosal’)  in  fig.  22  with  no.  27  (his  dis- 

■ uaberment  of  the  jugal)  iu  fig.  23.  The  squamosal  is  relatively  stronger  in 
ccodiles  than  in  birds,  and  in  many  chelonians  resumes  its  flat,  scale-like 

; :ji  ; although,  as  Cuvier  well  observes,  it  answers,  in  function,  only  to  the 
: omatic  part  of  the  mammalian  squamosal : — “ e’est  un  temporal  dont  la 

■ Tie  craniale  a disparu§ .”  In  lizards  the  squamosal  again  resumes  the  zy- 
■'  aatic  or  styloid  shape,  connecting  the  mastoid  and  tympanic  with  the 

itfrontal,  and  usually  also  with  the  malar ; the  posterior  connections  being 
;.  as  in  mammals,  the  more  constant  ones. 

‘ lis  the  squamosal  varies  in  form  with  the  malar,  so  it  likewise  disappears 
ii  it  in  ophidians  ; unle.ss  the  anatomist,  tracing  it  descensively,  prefers  to 
fit  again  in  the  peculiarly  developed  hypotympanic  of  the  anourans.  Ac- 

■ -ding  to  this  view  of  the  sudden  resumption  of  its  mammalian  function  in 

• lard  to  the  lower  jaw  in  batrachia,  the  name  ‘squamosal’  may  be  trans- 

ed  to  the  hypotympanic  in  fishes;  and,  if  we  must  view  the  pedicle 
a — d,  fig.  5)  as  ‘homologically  compound,’  and  not,  like  the  mandibular 
JUS,  ‘ teleologically  compound,’  2srf  seems  to  me  a less  arbitrary  selection 
n the  pieces  of  that  long  and  subdivided  pedicle,  for  the  representative 

' Ueber  die  Redeutungder  Schadelknoclicn,  4to,  1807,  p.  12. 

■'  Testudinis  Europa:®,  fol.  Parergon,  1821,  p.  178,  fig.  196,  i. 

■ Jne  bone  m is  described  in  the  same  work  as  ‘scpiamosum  sive  quadratum,’ 

the  mastoifl  is  rightly  naracd. 

Ossemens  Fossiles,  Uo.  t.  v.  pt.  ii.  p.  85. 


62 


ON  TUB  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


of  the  squamosal,  than  the  proximal  or  uppermost  piece  (?sa)  to  whicli 
vier  has  applied  that  name.  If,  indeed,  Bqjanus  could  have  determine  ) r 
his  own  satisfaction  or  that  of  other  anatomists,  that  the  pedicle  (23,  fig. ' 
articulated  by  one  end  to  the  mastoid,  and  by  the  other  to  the  mandibhj  • 
birds,  w'as  the  ‘squamosum,’  then  there  would  have  been  some  ground  I 
regarding  the  bone  (23a,  fig.  5)  connected  in  fishes,  with  the  mastoid  as 
‘ squamosum.’ 

But  when  Cuvier  had  persuaded  himself  that  the  bone  no.  s,  fig.  22.\ 
birds,  to  which  the  tympanic  pedicle  is  articulated,  was  the  ‘ ecaille  du  t| 
poral,’  we  feel  at  a loss  to  know  on  what  principles  special  homologies 
be  traced,  when  we  find  the  name  transferred  to  the  upper  pa,rt  of  the  tijl 
panic  pedicle  in  fishes  (fig.  5 28  a),  which  is  articulated  to  the  bone  (s)i 
equivocally  answering  to  Cuvier’s  ‘ ecaille  du  temporal’  in  birds.  M.  Agaijl 
is  more  consistent,  and  abandons  with  reason  the  Cuvierian  determinatioif 
the  squamosal  in  fishes:  if,  however,  the  grounds  assigned  are  conclusivil 
to  the  homology  of  no.  s,  figs.  8 & 23  in  birds  with  the  mastoid  of  maran:i 
and  reptiles,  M.  Agassiz  cannot  be  correct  in  regarding  the  bone  no.  8, 

5 in  the  fish,  as  the  ‘ ecaille  du  temporal.’ 

With  reference  to  the  idea  entertained  by  Spix,  Geoffrey  and  Agassiz 
the  homology  of  the  suborbital  muciferous  scale- bones  in  fishes  (pi.  1,  fig  j. 
73)  with  the  malar  bones  of  higher  vertebrates,  I may  refer  to  what  j 
already  been  said  in  regard  to  the  actual  repetition  of  the  osseous  arch  c.!  I 
necting  the  prefrontal  with  the  postfrontal  in  certain  birds  (i6.  fig.  1,  l 
where  that  arch  coexists  with,  and  independently  of,  the  bone  (ib.26)  recr  p 
nised  as  the  ‘malar’  by  both  Spix  and  Geoffroy.  The  connection  of  I 
malar,  even  in  mammals,  with  the  lacrymal  and  post-frontal  is  less  consti  f 
and  characteristic  of  the  bone  than  that  with  the  maxillary  and  squamo  i 1 
And  it  may  further  be  remarked,  that  the  functional  character  of  circuili 
scribing  a mucous  duct,  manifested  by  the  lacrymal  or  anterior  end  of  j|i 
upper  zygomatic  or  suborbital  arch  in  the  parrot,  is  superadded  to  the  c i 
racter  of  connections  in  proof  that  such  arch,  and  not  the  true  zygomai 
arch  below,  is  homologous  with  the  suborbital  chain  of  bones  in  fishes, 
these  discrepancies  as  to  the  jugal  and  squamosal  in  fishes  arise,  in  my  ol 
nion,  out  of  the  circumstance  that  those  bones  are  normally  absent  in  til 
class  ; both  20  and  27,  figs.  1 1 , 22,  23,  24,  25,  being  accessory  parts,  develoff 
only  in  saurians,  chelonians,  birds  and  mammals,  for  additional  fixation  of  t| 
upper  jaw,  or  for  additional  expansion  of  the  cranium,  or  for  both  purpose  [ 

According  to  this  view,  I regard  the  tympanic  (28)  as  essentially  char:! 
terized  in  the  oviparous  vertebrates  (fishes,  reptiles,  birds)  by  its  free  articj 
lation  by  a convex  condyle  with  the  mastoid  above,  and  by  a convex  cond ;| 
with  the  mandible  below ; and  I regard  its  subdivisions  in  the  lowest 
these  vertebrates,  in  the  same  light  as  the  subdivisions  of  the  mandible  itsel 
The  formation  of  the  tympanic  cavity  and  support  of  the  tympanic  membra! 
are  secondary  functions.  The  tympanic  pedicle  is  essentially  a single  cran ' 
element,  and  actually  so  in  all  air-breathing  vertebrates  above  batrachiajl 
We  see  plainly,  even  in  the  frog,  that  the  portion  which  supports  the  ‘me;l 
brana  tympani  ’ is  a mere  exogenous  process  of  the  pedicle  : it  has  still  less  t! 
appearance  of  a distinct  part  or  process  in  the  saurians,  chelonians  and  birdi 
and  when  the  tympanic  is  excluded  by  the  squamosal  in  mammals  from 
normal  office  of  supporting  the  mandible,  it  still  manifests  its  character 

* The  inconstant  ossicle  suspended  to  the  back  part  of  the  free  extremity  of  the  raaxilltj 
in  the  percoid  fishes  would  have  the  best  claim  to  homology  with  the  malar,  if  the  furttii! 
subdivision  of  the  maxillary  in  the  herring  and  lepidosteus  did  not  indicate  it  to  be  a vet^' 
tative  dismemberment  of  that  bone. 


SPECIAL  HOMOLOGY.  SUl’AMOSAL. 


6.3 


itv  whether  it  be  e.xpanded  into  a ‘ bulla  ossea,’  extended  into  a long  tube 
meatus,  or  both,  as  in  tig.  ss,  or  whether,  as  in  fig.  25,  it  be  reduced  to 
mere  rint'  or  hoop  supporting  the  tyinjianic  nieinbrane,  until  it  coalesces 
th  other  parts  of  the  temporal,  to  form  the  tympanic  or  ‘ external  auditory 
mess’  of  that  bone.  In  no  air-breathing  vertebrate  have  I ever  found,  or 
•u  described,  the  separation  of  the  part  of  the  tympanic  forming  the  wall 
the  tympanic  chamber  from  the  part  supporting  the  tpupanic  membrane, 
this  distinct,  save  in  batrachia,  from  the  part  supporting  the  lower  jaw*, 
.e  tympanic  pedicle  is  still  further  subdivided  in  fishes;  but  M.  Agassiz’s 
.ginal  idea  of  the  ‘ epitympanic’  as  a dismemberment  of  the  pedicle,  which 
proposed  to  call  ‘os  carre  superieur’  is,  in  my  o])inion,  much  more  consist- 
; with  nature  than  his  later  determination  of  that  bone  as  the  ‘ mastoid,’ 
■than  Cuvier’s  attempts  to  find  the  homologues  of  both  the  mammalian 
: juamosal’  and  ‘jugal’  in  the  piscine  subdivisions  of  the  same  pedicle, 
ere  is  as  little  ground  for  making  the  zygomatic  process  a distinct  element 
i:ni  the  squamous  portion,  as  for  severing  the  annular  process  from  the  rest 
:the  tympanic.  This  idea  of  the  zygomatic  as  an  independent  piece,  which 
. . Kdstlin  has  also  adopted,  seems  to  rest  only  on  the  mal-determination 
iBojanus  and  Oken  of  the  true  squamosal  in  birds  and  reptiles  as  the 
•i’gomaticum’  or  ‘jugale  posterius’:  and  the  idea  was  perhaps  further 
Eengthened  in  the  mind  of  M.  Agassiz,  by  what  he  deems  to  be  the  essen- 
I and  characteristic  function  of  the  squamosal.  But  its  protective  eere- 
ul  or  cranial  scale  is  a peculiarly  mammalian  development ; much  reduced 
the  ruminants  and  cetacea,  and  totally  disappearing  in  the  oviparous  ver- 
nrates.  The  zygomatic  functions  and  connections  are,  notwithstanding  a 
rr  exceptions,  as  in  the  scaly  matiis  and  a few  lizards,  the  essential  homo- 
deal  characters  of  the  ‘ squamosal.’  The  necessity  for  forming  an  opinion 
:the  essential  nature  and  general  homologies  of  the  parts  blended  together 
!i:he  human  ‘ os  temporis’  by  the  ascensive  or  synthetie  method,  is  strikingly 
*emplified  by  the  results  of  the  application  of  M.  Agassiz’s  idea  of  its  nature 
. ;bis  determination  of  the  bones  in  the  head  of  fishes. 

,'As  the  palato-maxillary  areh  in  most  air-breathing  vertebrates  supports,  ac- 
"jfiing  to  my  views,  eertain  appendages,  e.  g.  the  malar  and  squamosal,  which 
: not  present  in  fishes;  so,  I believe,  with  Cuvier,  that  the  tynqjano-man- 

5 titular  arch  supports  in  fishes,  certain  appendages,  which  are  not  developed 
1 lany  other  elass.  It  is  this  fact,  chiefly,  that  has  led  to  so  much  discrepancy 
3 t the  attempts  to  determine  by  reference  to  bones  in  higher  vertebrates  the 
•;rcular  bones  of  fishes, — the  chief  battle-field  of  homological  controversy. 

the  four  opercu/ar  bones  forming  the  diverging  appendage  of  the  tym- 
wo-mandibular  arch  (fig.  5,  34  to  37)  were  deemed  by  Cuvier  to  be  peculiar 
•.thyic  super-additions  to  the  ordinary  vertebrate  skeleton  ; whilst  by  Spix, 

' offroy,  and  De  Blainville  they  are  held  to  be  modifications  of  parts  which 

il.  Agassiz  applies  the  subjoined  analysis  of  the  ‘ temporal  bone’  to  elucidate  the  homo- 
--es  of  the  skull  of  fishes  : — “ Nousdistinguons  encore  dans  le  temporal  complet  les  parties 
vantes : VecaiUe,  servant  de  complement  a la  paroi  laterale  du  crane  dans  sa  partie  poste- 
•ue;  le  rnastr/idien,  servant  de  rempart  posterieur  a la  cavite  tympanal ; la  caisse,  logeant 
parties  principales  de  la  cavite  tyinpanale;  t’anneau  iympanique,  servant  d’appui  ii  la 
nbrane  du  tympan  ; V aprtphyse  jwjal,  formant  I’appui  posterieur  de  I’arcade  zygomatique  ; 
'ipkyne  »tyUjide,  offrant  une  insertion  a I’os  hyoide,  par  laquelle  ce  dernier  sc  fixe  au  crane ; 
mfin  I’o*  earr^,  formant  la  surface  articulairc  sur  laquelle  la  machoire  inferieure  cxerce 
mouvemens.  I.a  maniere  variee  dont  ces  diffiirentes  pieces  se  soudent  ensemble,  se  separent 
e combinent,  occasionnent  ces  innombrables  variations  auxquellcs  Ic  temporal  est  sujet 
s wn  ensemble.  VecaiUe  du  temporal  est  destinee,  comme  nous  venons  de  le  voir,  a pro- 
tr  les  parties  cerebralcs  (Kisterieures  de  la  tete,  sur  la  face  laterale  du  crane.” — Recherches 
les  Poissons  Possiles,  t.  ii.  pt.  2, 1813,  p.  62. 


fil 


ox  THE  VEUl’EUUATE  SKELETON. 


exist  in  the  ordinary  or  endo-skeleton  of  other  vertebrata.  The  lea 
Professor  of  Comparative  Anatomy  in  King’s  College,  London,  who  reg 
this  as  “the  more  philosophical  mode  of  considering  them*,”  has  brj 
stated  the  homologies  proposed  by  the  supporters  of  this  view,  viz.  thatj 
opercular  bones  are  gigantic  representatives  of  the  ossicles  of  the  ear  (H 
Geoffroy,  Dr.  Grantf ):  or  that  they  are  dismemberments  of  the  lower 
(De  Blainville,  Bojanus), — a view  refuted  by  the  discovery  of  the  con  j 
cated  structure  of  the  lower  jaw  in  certain  fishes,  which  likewise  possess^ 
opercular  bones : he  then  cites  a third  view,  viz.  that  they  are  parts  ofi[ 
dermal  skeleton;  “in  short,  scales  modified  in  subserviency  to  the  breatlj 
function;”  an  opinion  which  Professor  Jones  frankly  states  tjiat  he  den 
from  my  Lectures  on  Comparative  Anatomy,  delivered  at  St.  Bartholom 
Hospital  in  1835,  and  which  he  adopts,  although  its  accordance  with  his 
proposition  is  not  very  clear.  I have  subsequently  seen  reason  to  modify 
view,  though  it  has  received  the  sanction  of  the  greatest  ichthyologist  of  [ 
present  day,  M.  Agassiz;  and,  as  I have  since  found,  had  presented  itsel{ 
early  as  1826,  under  a peculiar  aspect  to  the  pliilosophical  mind  of  Profe;] 
Von  Baer.  In  his  admirable  paper  on  the  endo-  and  exo-skeleton,  M.  Von  Bl 
expresses  his  opinion,  that  the  opercular  bones  are  (dermal)  ribs  or  latl 
portions  of  the  external  cincture  of  the  head  ji.  The  idea  of  the  relations! 
of  the  opercular  flaps  to  locomotive  organs  is  presented  by  Carus,  under 
fanciful  view  of  their  homology  with  the  wing-covers  of  beetles  and  the  vail 
of  a bivalve  shell  §.  In  1836,  M.  Agassiz  propounded  his  idea  of  the  relatl 
of  the  opercular  bones  to  scales  in  a very  precise  and  definite  mannl 
though,  as  1 have  elsewhere  shown  ||,  the  chief  ground  of  his  opinion  is  eij 
neous.  He  says,  “Les  pieces  operculaires  des  poissons  ne  croissent 
comme  les  os  des  vertebres  en  general,  par  irradiation  d'un  ou  de  plusie:| 
points  d’ossification ; ce  sont,  au  contraire,  des  v^ritables  ecailles,  fornuj 
comme  cedes  qui  recouvrent  le  tronc,  de  lames  deposees  successivemi 
les  unes  sous  les  autres,  et  dont  les  bords  sont  sou  vent  meme  dentcl 
comme  ceux  des  Readies  du  corps.  Tels  sont  I’opercule,  le  sub-opercule, 


* Professor  Rymer  Jones,  General  Outline  of  the  Animal  Kingdom,  8vo,  1841,  p.  509.1 
t Lectures,  Lancet,  Jan.  11,  1834,  p.  573;  Outlines  of  Comp.  Auat.  p.  64. 

In  mancher  Beziehung  gehiiren  die  Kiemcndeckel  zu  ihr,  und  ich  halte  sie  um:l 


mehr  fiir  (Haut)  Uippen,  d.  h.  fiir  Seitentheile  der  iiussern  Ringe  des  Kopfes,  da  ich  sie  aa 
in  den  gewohulichen  Knockenfischen  fiir  nichts  anderes  ansehen  kann.  Hat  bei  diesen  a', 
der  oberste  Knocheu  des  Kiemendeckels  wenig  Aehnlichkeit  mit  Rippen,  so  geht  dageyj 
der  unterste  so  unverkennbar  in  die  strahlender  Kiemenhaut  iiber,  das  der  Uebergang 
nicht  zu  verkennen  ist.” — Meckel’s  Archiv,  1826,  3 heft,  p.  369. 

An  analogous  idea  of  the  relation  of  the  opercnlar  bones  to  the  inferior  or  costal  arches  s 
proposed  by  GeoftVoy  St.  Hilaire  (see  Annales  des  Sciences,  t.  iii.  pi.  9,  and  Cuvier,  Hist. 
Poissons,  i.  p.  232),  and  has  been  adopted  by  the  learned  Professor  of  Comparative  Ah 
toniy  in  University  College,  who,  speaking  of  the  occipital  vertebra:,  says,  “ The  two  exter.: 
and  the  two  latcrd  occipitals  form  the  upper  arch,  and  the  two  opercular  and  two  si- 
opercular  bones  constitute  the  lower  arch.”  (Lectures,  Lancet,  1834,  p.  543.)  He  sub 
quently,  however,  adopts  and  illustrates  (p.  573)  the  homology  of  the  opercular  bones  w- 
the  ‘ossicula  auditus’  of  mammalia;  and  in  the  ‘Outlines  of  Corap.  Anat.’  cites  only  t 
Spixian  and  Blainvillian  hypotheses  (pp.  64,  65).  In  ray  Hunterian  Lectures  (vol.  ii.  ISi- 
pp.  113,  130),  I have  adduced  the  grounds  which  have  led  me  to  the  conclusion  that  t 
opercular  boues  are  neither  ribs  of  the  exo-skeleton,  nor  inferior  arches  of  the  endo-skeletc 
but  persistent  radiating  appendages  of  au  inferior  (ha:mal)  arch ; not,  however,  of  the  occipi 
vertebra,  but  of  the  frontal ; just  as  the  branchiostegal  rays  are  the  appendages  of  the  hnent 
arch  of  the  parietal,  and  the  pectoral  fins  of  that  of  the  occipital  vertebra:.  That  jiarts  • 
both  endo-  and  exo-skeleton  may  combine  to  constitute  the  opercular  fin  is  the  more  pr 
bable,  inasmuch  as  we  see  the  same  combination  of  cartilaginous  and  dermal  rays  in  t 
pectoral  fins  of  the  plagiostomes,  and  in  the  median  fins  of  most  fishes. 

§ Urtheilen  des  Knocheu  und  Schaleugeriistes,  fol.  p.  122. 

II  Lectures  on  Vertebrata,  p.  139. 


SPECIAL  HOMOLOGY.  OPEUCULAR  BONES. 


G5 


ter-opercule.  Le  supra-seapulaire  mome  pent  etro  piivisage  commc  la 
iiiiere  ecaille  de  la  ligne  laterale,  dont  le  bord  est  egaleinent  dcntele.  On 
irrait  dire  aiissi  que  le  scapulairo  n’est  qu’une  tres  grande  ecaille  dc  la 
tie  anterienre  des  Hanes*.”  And  he  adds,  “L’opinion  qnc  j’ai  einise  a 
regard  prouve  que  je  suis  loin  d’adinettre  les  rajiports  que  Ion  a cru 
iver  entre  les  pieces  operculaires  et  les  osselets  de  I’oreille  internet-” 
apprehend  that  the  idea  of  the  development  of  the  opercular  bones  by 

■ successive  excretion  or  deposition  of  layers,  one  beneath  the  other,  ac- 
diug  to  the  mode  in  which  M.  Agassiz  supposes  scales  to  be  formed,  was 
ived  merely  from  the  appearance  of  the  concentric  lines  on  the  opercular, 
opercular, "and  interopercular  bones  in  many  fishes.  I have  examined 

development  of  the  opercular  bone  in  young  gold-fish  and  carp,  and  I 
that  it  is  effected  in  precisely  the  same  manner  as  that  of  the  frontal  and 
. etal  bones.  The  cells  which  regulate  the  intussusception  and  deposition 
;he  earthy  particles  make  their  appearance  in  the  primitive  blastema  in 
•oessive  concentric  layers,  according  to  the  same  law  which  presides  over 
•concentric  arrangements  of  the  radiated  cells  around  the  medullary  canals 
ihe  bones  of  the  higher  vertebrata:  and  the  term  ‘successive  deposition,’ 
;he  sense  of  excretion,  is  inapplicable  to  the  formation  of  the  opercular 
tes.  The  argument  in  favour  of  their  dermal  character  drawn  from  the 
nnomena  of  the  development  of  the  opercular  flap,  would  equally  apply  to 
i re  the  bones  (ulna,  radius,  carpus,  &c.)  supporting  the  pectoral  fin,  to  be 
TTnal’  bones  T 

fhe  interopercular  as  well  as  the  preopercular  bones  exist  in  the  Lepi- 
rren  annectens  with  all  the  characters,  even  to  the  green  colour,  of  the  rest 
;ae  ossified  parts  of  the  endo-skeleton  ; the  preopercular,  as  an  appendage 
me  tympanic  arch,  retaining  its  primitive  embryonal  subcylindrical  form, 
.-interopercular  being  partly  attached  to  the  hyoid  arch.  Of  the  supra- 
ijular  there  is  no  trace  in  the  lepidosiren  ; but  in  the  sturgeon  it  plainly 
c-ts  as  part  of  the  cartilaginous  endo-skeleton,  under  the  same  bifurcate 
ui,  and  double  connection  with  the  cartilaginous  skull,  which  it  presents 
1 lost  osseous  fishes.  The  large  triangular  bony  dermal  scale  firmly  adheres 
:-s  broad,  triangular,  flat,  outer  surface.  The  epi-  and  meso-tympanic 
. ilages  in  like  manner  expand  posteriorly,  and  give  a similar  support  to 
•large  opercular  ganoid  scale.  Were  the  supporting  cartilages  of  the 
vcular  and  suprascapular  scales  to  become  ossified  in  the  sturgeon,  they 
mt  become  anchylosed  to  the  dermal  bony  plates,  and  bones,  truly  homo- 
'ius  with  the  opercular  and  suprascapular  in  ordinary  osseous  fishes, 
i'ld  thus  be  composed  of  parts  of  the  endo-  and  exo-skeleton  blended 
^ ther.  I cannot,  therefore,  concur  with  Von  Baer  in  the  opinion  that  the 
"cnlar  bones  are  ribs  of  the  exo-skeleton,  nor  with  Agassiz  that  both  the 
•colar  and  suprascapular  bones  are  merely  modified  scales.  In  explaining 
i dews  of  the  opercular  bones,  I am  compelled,  believing  them  to  have  no 
ial  homologues  in  higher  animals,  to  express  those  views  in  the  terms  of 
rgher  generalization.  The  suprascapular  bone  (fig.  5,  40)  is  the  upper  or 
part  of  the  haemal  arch  of  the  occipital  segment  of  the  skull,  and  corre- 
ids  in  serial  homology  with  the  epi-tympanic  portion  (2s  a)  of  the  mandi- 

■ r arch,  and  with  the  palatine  portion  (20)  of  the  maxillary  arch.  The 
cular  bones  are  the  diverging  appendages  of  the  tympano-mandibular 

R«cheTches  sur  les  Poissons  Fossiles,  livraison  6mc,  1836,  tom.  iv.  p.  69. 
p.  73. 

‘ L’embryologie  nous  prouve,  en  effet,  que  la  formation  dc  I’apparcil  operculairc  n’est 
1 simple  prodiiit  de  la  pcau,  qui  peu-a-pcu  s’etend  par  dessus  les  liranchics,  d'abord 
rement  degagees  dans  rernbr>on.” — Jb.  p.  61. 


F 


66 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


arch,  and  correspond,  in  serial  homology,  witli  the  bran  chi  ostegal  apj)end 
of  the  hyoid  and  the  pectoral  appendages  of  the  scapular  arches,  and 
the  same  title  to  be  regarded  as  cephalic  fins,  and  as  parts  of  the  no 
system  of  the  vertebrate  endo-skeleton ; but  neither  opercular  bones- 
branchiostegal  rays  are  retained  in  the  skeletons  of  higher  vertebrata. 
diverging  appendages  of  vertebral  segments  make  their  first  appearam 
the  vertebrate  series  as  ‘ rays  and  the  opercular  bones  are  actually  re. 
sented  by  cartilaginous  rays,  retaining  their  primitive  form  in  the  ph. 
stomes.  In  the  conger  the  subopercular  still  presents  the  form  of  a long, 
slender  fin-ray. 

The  opercular  and  subopercular,  in  ordinary  osseous  fishes,  piay  frequet! 
coalesce,  like  the  suprascapular,  with  their  representative  scales  of  the  dei 
system ; but  they  are  essentially  something  more  than  peculiarly  devek 
representatives  of  those  scales.  M.  Agassiz,  indeed,  excepts  the  preo 
cular  bone  from  the  category  of  “pieces  cutanees,”  believing  it  to  be. 
homologue  of  the  styloid  process  of  the  temporal  bone  in  anthropotomjj 
the  ‘stylo-hyal’  of  vertebrate  anatomy,  as  the  piece,  viz.  which  completes- 
hyoid  arch  above.  “ C’esten  eflPet,”  he  says,  “ cet  os  ala  face  interne  dut 
I’os  hyoide  des  poissons  est  suspendu,  qui  s’articule  en  haut  avec  le  m 
dien  et  tres  souvent  meme  sur  I’ecaille  du  temporal.”  So  far  as  my  ob 
vation  has  gone,  it  is  a rare  exception  to  find  the  hyoid  arch  suspende. 
the  preoperculum  ; the  rule  in  osseous  fishes  is  to  find  the  upper  stylif* 
piece  of  the  hyoid  arch  (fig.  5,  as)  attached  to  the  epi-tympanic  (28  a)  c 
to  its  junction  with  the  meso-tympanic  bone  (236).  It  is  equally  the  rul 
find  the  preopercular  (34)  articulated  with  the  epi-,  meso-,  and  hypo-t' 
panics ; and  it  is  an  exception,  when  it  rises  so  high  as  to  be  connected  \ 
the  mastoid  (‘  ecaille  du  temporal  ’ of  Agassiz).  If  the  stylo-hyal  be  not 
upper  piece  of  the  hyoid  arch  displaced,  and  if  the  upper  piece  connect 
that  arch  with  the  mastoid  is  to  be  sought  for  in  osseous  fishes,  I sho 
rather  view  it  in  the  posterior  half  of  the  epi-tympanic  (2S«),  which  is  usui. 
bifurcate  below  and  very  commonly  also  above,  when  the  posterior  up 
division  articulates  with  the  mastoid,  and  one  of  the  lower  divisions  with 
hyoid  arch. 

The  normal  position,  form,  and  connections  of  the  preoperculum  clet 
bespeak  it  to  be  the  first  or  proximal  segment  of  the  radiated  appendage 
the  tympano-mandibular  arch : the  opercular,  subopercular,  and  interop 
cular  bones  form  the  distal  segment  of  the  same  appendage. 

M.  Vogt,  in  supporting  M.  Agassiz’s  views  of  the  Ganoid  order,  reitera 
his  original  idea  that  the  preopercular  bone  is  the  proximal  piece  (stylo 
of  an  arch  distinct  from  the  tympano-mandibular  one  ; but  as  the  chief  grou 
of  this  opinion  rests  on  a simple  question  of  fact  easily  determinable,  > 
whether,  as  a rule,  the  hyoid  arch  is  suspended  from  the  preoperculum,  a 
this  from  the  mastoid  in  fishes,  neither  of  which  accord  with  my  observati 
of  their  connections  of  those  parts,  the  verdict  may  be  left  to  the  experier. 
of  other  observers.  From  a remark  of  M.  Vogt’s*,  viz.  that  “ M.  Mill 
attache,  a ce  qu’il  parait,  trop  peu  d’importanee  d ce  fait,  que  toujours-l 
preopercule,  et  cela  aussi  chez  les  Siluroides,  sert  de  point  d’attache  a I’si 
hyo'idien,”  it  would  seem  that,  perhaps,  the  accomplished  physiologist  aj 
ichthyologist  of  Berlin  had  not  found  the  fact;  and,  therefore,  gave  not  mot 
than  its  due  importance  to  the  rare  exceptional  circumstance  of  such  an 
tachment.  The  preopercular  can  be  removed  in  most  fishes,  except  when 
as  in  the  siluroids,  it  coalesces  with  the  tympanic  arch,  without  dislocatii) 


* Annates  des  Sciences,  1845,  p.  56. 


SPECIAL  HOMOLOGY.  Ol’ERCULAIl  HONES.  67 

■ iisturbing  the  connections  of  tlie  true  stylo-hyal  (fig.  3,  ss)  with  the  cpi- 
ipanic  (isrt)  from  which  it  is  normally  suspeiulecl. 

' vl.  Vogt  correctly  observes  that  the  ‘temporal’  fepitympanic,  as  a),  ‘sym- 
ct'iqne'^  (mesotympanic,  as />),  and  ‘ juplaire’ (hyimtympaiiic,  as  r/),  “u 
seuls  torment  dejii  un  arc  snspensoir  complet,  a la  face  posterieure 
|uel  le  preopercule  est  seulement  accole*.”  But  this  only  proves  that  the 
’ operculum  is  an  appendage  to  such  arch,  not  that  it  is  a suspensory  pier 

■ I second  arch. 

' 'he  only  essential  modification  which  the  siluroids  present  is  the  confluence 
( he  preoperculum  with  the  true  tympanic  pedicle,  here  reduced  to  a single 
-^e.  But  this  does  not  disprove  its  character  as  an  appendage  of  the 
'.pano-mandibular  arch,  any  more  than  does  the  confluence  of  the  ulna  and 
,us  with  the  scapular  arch  in  the  sturgeon  disprove  the  character  of  those 
i uents  as  appendages  of  that  arch.  I have  not  been  able  to  trace  in  the 

• -roids  the  primitive  boundaries  of  the  coalesced  preoperculum  to  such  an 
^ 'int  as  to  justify  the  statement,  that  it  is  intercalated  between  the  epitym- 

■ ic  and  hvpotympanic,  replacing  the  mesotympanic  : but,  if  the  preopereular 
,ald  extend  in  any  siluroid  fish  so  far  as  M.  Vogt  describes,  this  excep- 

al  development  would  rather  prove  it  to  belong  essentially  to  the  tym- 
iic  and  not  to  the  hyoidean  arch ; at  least  it  is  only  through  this  abnor- 

■ encroachment  that  the  preopereular  can  detach  the  stylohyal  from  the 
lympanic. 

^ AS  the  otosteals,  or  ‘ ossicula  auditus,’  have  borne  a prominent  share  in  the 

• 'jussions  of  the  special  homologies  of  the  tympanic  pedicle  and  its  append- 
' ■.<,  I may  here  remark  that  the  extension  in  the  embryo  mammal  of  the 
’ ((and  slender  process  of  the  malleus  in  the  direction  of  the  mandible,  and 
' 'ontinuation  or  connection  with  the  cylindrical  cartilage  (hsemal  portion 
' ^be  tympano-mandibular  arch)  from  which  the  lower  jaw  is  subsequently 
^ doped,  is  a circumstance  which  renders  the  idea  of  the  malleus,  at  least, 

‘ sg  a modified  element  of  the  tympano-mandibular  arch  in  batrachians 
^ ’ fishes,  worthy  of  consideration.  The  prolongation  from  the  mesotym- 

c of  the  cylindrical  cartilage,  described  by  Meckel,  and  around  which 
i:mandible  is  ossified  in  fishes,  and  the  characteristic  cylindrical  or  styloid 
1 1 of  the  mesotympanic,  have  induced  M.  Vogt-f-  to  view  that  bone,  the 
juplectique’  of  Cuvier,  as  the  homologue  of  at  least  part  of  the  malleus; 

? lat  the  same  time  of  the  bone  called  ‘ tympano-malleal’  by  Duges  (my 
»otympanic’)  in  the  batrachians.  M.  Vogt  offers  no  other  reasons  for 
- ^determination.  I find  that  the  cartilage  which  in  the  batrachians  forms 
J innedium  of  communication  between  the  semi-ellipsoid  ossiele  (stapes) 

1 ;ng  the  fenestra  ovalis  and  the  tympanic  membrane,  is  repeated  or  repro- 
' :d  in  the  more  malleiform  cartilage  connecting  the  columelliform  stapes 
loe  saurian  reptiles  to  the  membrana  tympani.  In  birds  a portion  of  the 
• lage  attached  to  the  tympanum  becomes  ossified  and  coalesces  with  the 
f^melliform  stapes ; and  at  the  angle  of  union  one  or  two  cartilaginous 
'•esses  exist,  which  some  anatomists  have  compared  with  the  incus.  But 
< natoraisLs  have  concurred  in  recognising  the  homology  of  the  peripheral 

■ -down  portion  of  the  long  columella,  which  adheres  to  the  membrana 
oani,  with  the  part  of  the  malleus  called  ‘manubrium,’  or  handle,  in 
imalia.  The  superadded  modifications  characteristic  of  the  otosteals  in 
class,  have  their  seat  between  the  manubrium  mallei  and  the  stapes,  and 

■fly  result  in  the  development  of  the  new  bone  called  ‘ineus’  and  its  epi- 
ds,  which  has  been  termed  the  ‘os  orbiculare.’  Notwithstanding,  there- 
the  connection  of  the  ‘processus  gracilis  mallei’  with  the  embryonic 
* Annates  des  Sciences,  ISI.'i,  p.  .0.0.  f Loc.  cil.  p.  .08. 


G8 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


hsemal  or  visceral  cartilage  of  the  mandibular  arch  in  mammals,  the  h 
logy  of  the  malleus  is  so  clearly  traceable  down  to  its  first  independent^ 
nifestation  in  coexistence  with  the  tympanic  membrane  of  the  batrachit^  • 
which  it  connects  the  unequivocally  acoustic  ossicle  representing  the'staSr'., 
that  the  reference  of  all  the  additional  ossicular  mechanism  of  the  ear-i«''l 
to  the  same  system  of  the  skeleton  as  the  petrosal  itself,  appears  to  me  tw™ 
most  consonant  with  the  recognised  facts  in  their  development  and  comiBj^ 
tive  anatomy.  »■' 

M.  Agassiz  has  never  countenanced  the  idea  of  the  reproduction  oA'’'" 
mammalian  tympanic  ossicles  in  a magnified  form  in  either  the  tymp#-' 
arch  or  its  opercular  appendages.  Returning  lo  the  consideration  of  tS  T; 
bones  in  the  last  volume  (p.  68)  of  his  admirable  ‘ Recherches,’  he  reafffc’^' 
his  opinion,  that  the  opercular,  subopercular,  and  interopercular  are  ‘ 
lets  particuliers  de  la  peau;’  but  calls  them  ‘ branchiostegal  rays.’  IiSwf 
had  meant  that  they  were  parts  essentially  distinct,  but  comparable  to 
true  branchiostegals,  he  would  have  accurately  enunciated  their  ‘ serial 
mology.’  M.  Agassiz,  however,  expressly  repudiates  this  idea  of  repreitdl 
tative  relation,  and  affirms  them  to  be  part  of  one  and  the  same  serieph 
rays.  “ Mais  en  disant  que  les  pieces  operculaires  sont  des  rayons  branc*^ 
stegues,  je  n’entends  point  faire  une  simple  comparaison,  mais  bien  affirrwl 
que  je  considere  ces  plaques  osseuses  simplement  comme  les  rayons  bi»t 
chiostegues  superieurs*.”  This  idea  is,  in  fact,  a necessary  consequenci*.! 
M.  Vogt’s  conclusion,  that  the  preoperculum  is  the  upper  or  styloid  eleup 
of  the  hyoidean  arch.  The  combination  of  the  opercular  rays  or  bones  vti 
the  branchiostegals  in  the  support  and  movements  of  the  continuous 
cover  and  gill-membrane,  does  not  prove  them  to  be  diverging  appendat 
of  the  same  arch,  any  more  than  the  similar  combination  of  the  rays  of  L> 
pectoral  and  ventral  fins  in  the  sucker  of  the  Cyclopterus  proves  those  r« 
to  be  parts  of  the  same  arch.  And  I may  repeat  that,  admitting  the  humeifc 
to  be,  as  Bakker  surmised,  confluent  in  all  fishes  with  the  bone  52,  fig.f 
and  since  in  the  plagiostomes,  sturgeons  and  lophioids,  the  second  segment  I 
the  rudimental  fore-limb  is  not  liberated  from  the  supporting  arch ; so,  li  f 
wise,  the  proximal  member  of  the  opercular  limb  may  remain,  or  become^ 
some  instances  confluent  with  its  sustaining  arch,  without  that  exceptio.t 
state  invalidating  the  determination  deduced  from  its  more  constant  and  t 
gular  character  as  the  proximal  element  of  the  free  appendage  to  that  arci. 

Hyoid  Hones. — The  third  inverted  arch  of  the  skull  is  suspended  in  fislL 
by  a slender  styliform  bone,  the  ‘ stylohyaT  (flg.  5,  as),  from  the  lower  end* 
the  epitympanic  (as  a)  close  to  the  joint  of  the  styliform  ‘ mesotyrapanm 
(as  b) ; and  it  is  connected,  through  the  medium  of  the  posterior  division  am 
joint  of  the  epitympanic,  with  the  mastoid  (s).  Noav,  either  that  divisit* 
of  the  epitympanic  may  be  viewed,  by  virtue  of  its  proper  articular  condjl 
above,  and  its  connection  with  a distinct  inverted  arch  below,  as  the  proxiinl 
piece  of  that  arch,  coalesced  with  the  proximal  piece  of  the  next  arch  |l 
advance,  which  articulates  with  the  post-frontal ; or,  it  may  be  viewed  as  a1 
excessive  development  of  tlie  proximal  piece  of  the  tympano-mandibular  arcll 
which,  extending  backwards,  has  displaced  the  hyoid  from  the  mastoid,  jusl 
as  the  squamosal,  by  a similar  backward  development,  in  mammals,  displactl 
the  mandibular  arch  from  the  tympanic.  |i 

According  to  the  first  view,  the  bone  no.  as  would  be  a dismembermeni 
of  the  proximal  element  of  the  hyoid  arch  ; according  to  the  second  view,  q 
would  be  the  entire  element  reduced  and  displaced:  in  both  cases  it  woulq 
be  homologous  with  the  proximal  slender  piece  of  the  hyoid  arch  in  ai>* 

* Recherches  sur  les  Poissons  Fossiles,  v.  pt.  ii.  p.  68.  * 


GENERAL  HOMOLOGY.  HYOID  BONES. 


69 


ebrata,  ami  to  wliich  piece  the  term  ‘styloid’  or  ‘stiliform’  has  been 
n from  the  fish  up  to  man  (see  Table  I.).  The  liomology,  indeed,  is  so 
‘ ions,  that  M.  Agassiz,  in  accepting  the  conclusion  of  M.  Vogt,  that  the 
" e (fig.  5.  34).  peculiar  to  osseous  fishes,  which  so  rarely  articulates  di- 
Iv  with  the  mastoid  or  with  the  hyoid  arch,  and  so  constantly  sustains 
distal  segment  of  the  operculum,  was  the  homologue  of  the  ‘processus 
'•  formis  ossis  temporis,’  nevertheless  retains  the  name  ‘styloVde’  for  the 
no.  3S  in  question. 

'he  true  homology  of  no.  34,  already  explained,  removes  the  anomaly  of 
f dng  that  peculiarly  piscine  bone  as  the  liomologue  of  a constant  element 
; he  hyoid  arch  in  all  the  vertebrate  classes,  and  the  greater  anomaly  of 

- introduction  of  a new  element — a styloid  piece  of  the  os  hyoides — in 
tion  to  the  ‘styloid  process  of  the  temporal’  in  fishes.  The  ‘stylohyaT 

• mlates  below  to  the  apex  of  a triangular  piece  (39),  which  is  pretty  con- 
:t  in  fishes,  and  to  which  I give  the  name  of  ‘ epihyal,’  as  being  the  upper 

' Lie  two  principal  parts  of  the  cornu  or  arch  ; the  third  longer  and  stronger 
' . e is  the  ‘ ceratohyal  ’ (?Vi.  40). 

' "he  keystone  or  body  of  the  inverted  hyoid  arch  is  formed  by  two  small 
jcubical  bones  on  each  side,  the  ‘ basihyals  ’ (ib.  41).  These  complete  the 
' cy  arch  in  some  fishes:  in  most  others  there  is  a median  styliform  ossicle, 

' ':nded  forwards  from  the  basi-hyal  symphysis  into  the  substance  of  the 
rjue,  called  the  ‘ glossohyal  ’ (ib.  42),  or  ‘ os  linguale’;  and  another  symme- 
ul,  but  usually  triangular,  flattened  bone,  which  expands  vertically  as  it 

• - nds  backwards,  in  the  middle  line,  from  the  basihyals ; this  is  the  ‘ urohyaT 
443).  It  is  connected  with  the  symphysis  of  the  coracoids,  which  closes  below 

-■  'fourth  of  the  cranial  inverted  arches,  and  it  thus  forms  the  isthmus  which 
i larates  below  the  two  branchial  apertures.  In  the  conger  the  hyoidean 
" 1 1 is  simplified  by  the  persistent  ligamentous  state  of  the  stylohyal,  and 

- [.'he  confluence  of  the  basi-hyals  with  the  ceratohyals  : a long  glossohyal 
!•  rrticulated  to  the  upper  part  of  the  ligamentous  symphysis,  and  a long 

I .pressed  urohyal  to  the  under  part  of  the  same  junction  of  the  hyoid  arch. 

: glossohyal  is  wanting  in  the  MiircBnophis. 

'[■he  appendages  of  the  hyoidean  arch  in  Ashes  retain  the  form  of  simple, 
ijgated,  slender,  slightly  curved  rays,  articulated  to  depressions  in  the  outer 
; posterior  margins  of  the  epi-  and  cerato-hyals : they  are  called  “ bran- 
•4^egals,”  or  gill-cover  rays,  because  they  support  the  membrane  which 
'Cs  externally  the  branchial  chamber.  The  number  of  these  rays  varies, 
their  presence  is  not  constant  even  in  the  bony  fishes ; there  are  but 
*;e  broad  and  flat  rays  in  the  carp ; whilst  the  clupeoid  Elops  has  more 
ii  thirty  rays  in  each  gill-cover:  the  most  common  number  is  seven,  as 
[he  cod  (fig.  30,  44).  They  are  of  enormous  length  in  the  angler,  and 
*'e  to  support  the  membrane  which  is  developed  to  form  a great  receptacle 
"each  side  of  the  head  of  that  singular  fish. 

n the  class  of  fishes,  certain  bony  arches,  which  appertain  to  the  system 
the  visceral  skeleton,  succeed  the  hyoidean  arch,  with  the  keystone  of 
eh  they  are  more  or  less  closely  connected.  Six  of  these  arches  are  pri- 
•ily  developed,  and  five  usually  retained ; the  first  four  of  these  support 
igill-s,  the  fifth  is  beset  with  teeth  and  guards  the  opening  of  the  gullet: 

••  latter  is  termed  the  ‘pharyngeal  arch,’  the  rest  the  ‘ branchial  arches.’ 
The  lower  extremities  of  these  arches  adhere  to  the  sides  of  a median  chain 
■ossicles,  which  is  continued  from  the  posterior  angle  of  tlie  liasiliyal,  or 
m above  the  urohyal,  when  this  is  ossified : the  bones  whicli  form  those 
remities  are  the  ‘ hypobranchials  ’ ; and  they  support  longer  bent  pieces, 
led  ‘ ceratobranchials.’  It  is  with  these  elements  of  the  branchial  arches 


70 


ON  THE  VERTEliRATE  SKELETON. 

in  fishes  and  perennibranchiate  batrachians  that  we  are  cliieflv  conr. 

brateT'"  W M apparatus  in  the  air-breathing 

brates.  With  regard  to  the  branchial  and  pharyngeal  arches,  which 
their  full  development  only  in  the  class  of  fishes,  I regard  them  as  annf 
ing  to  the  system  of  the  splanchno-skcleton,  or  to  that  category  of  To 
which  the  heart-bone  of  the  ruminants  and  the  hard  jaw-like  pfeces  sui 
ing  the  teeth  of  the  stomach  of  the  lobster  belong.  The  branchial  'j 
are  sometimes  cartilaginous  when  the  true  endoskekton  is  ossified  • tht 
never  ossified  n the  perennibranchiate  batrachians,  and  are  the  fi'rsrti 
appeal  in  th^e  larvae  of  the  caducibranchiate  species;  and  both  their 
homT^-^  of  attachment  to  the  skull  demonstrate  that  they  have  no  ess 
homological  relation  to  its  endoskeletal  segments. 

apparatus  retains  most  resemblance  to  that  of  fisl 
the  Siren  laceriina  ; the  basihyal  is  simplified  into  a single  osseous  s- 
a e piece,  with  the  bowl  of  the  spoon  anterior,  and  supporting  a broad 

bf  ^ and  thick  cerTohyal  is  articu 

by  means  of  a small  cartilage  to  the  side  of  the  expanded  part  of  the 
lya , and  a cartilaginous  epihyal  arches  backwards  from  its  upper  end* 
cartilaginous  urohyal  extends  from  the  hind  end  of  the  basihval  and 
h supports  the  membranous  trachea  am' 

T-  P^"’  bony  ‘hypobranchials’  is  articulated  to 
basi-uro-hyal  joint  and  a second  pair  to  the  sides  of  the  urohyal:  and  ti 
upper  and  outm-  ends  of  these  are  attached  four  pairs  of  cartilaginous  ‘ ce 
branchials.'  The  fimbriated  branchim  are  atlached  to  the  three  aSu 
ceratobranchials. 

hJl  the  urohyal  is  absent,  and  it  is  not  again  developed  in  » 

atiachian.  1 he  ong  subcylindrical  basihyal  supports  a subcircular  c li 

irfsPuTo/T  ?*°7byal,  and  at  the  angle  of  union  the  bony  ceratohii 
are  sent  off.  A pair  of  hypobranchials  diverge  from  the  end  of  the  basih  i 
to  which  a second  small  pair  of  basibranchials  are  loosely  connected  bv 
aponeurosis.  These  support  three  ceratobranchials  on  each  side,  which 

of  neither  a glossohyal  nor  urohyal,  or  but  a rudinli 

ot  the  latter,  to  each  side  of  which  are  articulated  two  hypobranchials,  wl  s 
distal  ends  converge  on  each  side  to  support  a single  cartilaginous  gill-k 
udiment  of  a ceratobranchial.  The  special  homologies  of  all  those  partffi 
le  complex  hyoid,  rendered  more  complex  by  the  retention  of  part  of  I 
nrT!  ^ fi-e  clearly  demonstrated  by  pursuing  the  metamorph.| 

flip  f II  in  the  larvae  of  the  anourous  batrachians.  » 

fi  • I tadpole  a short  and  simple  basihyal  supports  laterally  ti 

thick  and  strong  ceratohyals,  and  posteriorly  two  short  and  broad  hyl 
bianchials,  to  which  four  ceratobranchials  are  attached:  all  the  parts  I* 
cartilaginous.  The  type  of  this  stage  is  retained  in  the  siren,  with  the  hisl 
ogica  progress  to  bone  in  the  hyoid  and  hypobranchial  pieces.  The  seco** 
-marked  stage  in  the  tadpole  shows  an  extension  of  the  external  at 
^iigles  of  tile  hypobraiicliials,  with  progressive  absorption  of  tit 
ceratobranchials.  The  growth  and  divergence  of  the  posten* 
^ ® hypobranchials  refer  to  the  development  of  the  larynx,  nd 

desTiSd'af’tr  are  destined  to  support.  That  period  may  n 

and  the  nnef  f ^ which  the  ceratobranchials  have  disappearef 

the  charTipt””/  ^he  hypobranchials  increase  in  length  and  assuii*; 

s alp  H ««  The  last  and  ada 

the°cnalp<!P  fli'  ^he  elongated  angles  of  the  hypobranchialij 

the  coalescence  of  their  cartilaginous  bases  with  the  basihyal,  the  expansio; 


SPECIAL  HOMOLOGY.  HYOIH  HONES. 


71 


lie  biisihyal  and  extt'iisioii  of  its  anterior  and  external  angles  ; in  front  of 
eh  the  now  long  and  slender  ceratoliyals  usually  coalesee  with  the  basi- 
l;  their  opposite  ends  having  shifted  their  attaehiuents  and  retrograded, 
other  lueiual  arehes  of  the  skull,  in  the  course  of  the  inetauiorphosis. 
.he  case  of  the  hyoid  arch  of  the  frog,  the  change  of  place  is  from  the 
>1 . panic  pedicle  backwards  to  the  pereistent  cartilaginous  petrosal : and 
is  a very  suggestive  and  signiticant  change.  All  the  parts  of  the  hyoid 
tain  cartilaginous  except  the  appended  and  persistent  detachments  from 
visceral  system  of  the  branchial  arches:  these  long  ‘ hypobranchials’ 

1 irnes  thyroi’diennes’  of  Cuvier  and  Duges)  diverge  and  include  the  larynx 
uheir  fork.  The  relative  position,  connexions  and  office  in  subserviency 
he  larynx,  to  which  the  retained  parts  of  the  splanchno-branchial  arches 
introduced  in  the  lowest  of  the  air-breathing  vertebrates,  are  preserved  in 
the  higher  classes.  The  ‘hypobranchials’  are  as  constant  in  their  ex- 
ace, therefore,  as  the  upper  larynx  itself,  and  attach  themselves  more 
ccially  to  the  thyroid  element  of  that  larynx.  We  recognise  them  by  this 
Ltion  in  birds  and  man  (ae,  figs.  23  and  25),  where  they  always  much  ex- 
it; 1 the  parts  of  the  true  hyoid  arch  (ccrato-  and  epi-hyals)  in  length  ; and 
K birds,  where  these  elements  (ao,  fig.  23)  are  sometimes  obsolete  and  always 
(■j  lioiental,  the  hypobranchials  have  been  mistaken  by  both  Cuvier  and 
rffroy*  for  the  ceratohyals  or  anterior  cornua. 

or  the  modifications  and  special  homologies  of  the  complex  hyoid  appa- 
? >s  in  lizards,  I refer  to  my  ‘ Lectures  on  the  Vertebrata.’  The  crocodiles 
a well-marked  ordinal  difference  from  those  inferior  sauria  in  this  as 
lost  other  parts  of  their  structure.  The  basihyal  and  thyrohyal.s  have 
esced  to  form  a broad  cartilaginous  plate,  the  anterior  border  rising  like  a 
'6  to  close  the  fauces,  and  the  posterior  angles  extending  beyond  and  sus- 
ing  the  thyroid  and  other  parts  of  the  larynx.  A long  bony  ‘ ceratohyal’ 

. 22,  lo),  and  a commonly  cartilaginous  ‘ epihyal’  (f5.  sd),  are  suspended 
i ligamentous  ‘stylohyal’  to  the  paroccipital  process;  the  whole  arch 
mg,  like  the  mandibular  one,  retrogi’aded  from  the  connection  it  presents 
shes. 


3 .1  birds  as  in  chelonians,  the  ceratohyals  are  much  reduced,  and  the  chief 
; "mua’  of  the  hyoid  are  represented  by  the  hypo-  and  epi-branchials  (thy- 
./aL),  which  here  attain  their  maximum  of  length  and  tenuity.  The  basi- 
1 1 (fig.  23,  4i),  as  in  Chelys,  is  long  and  slender,  but  is  always  a simple 
i ':e;  and,  as  in  lizards,  is  usually  most  expanded  posteriorly,  from  which 
lansion  the  thyrohyals  (lo)  are  sent  off.  Conforming  with  the  long  and 
der  tongue  in  most  birds,  the  basihyal  extends  forwards,  and  is  articu- 
• d with  the  rudimental  ceratohyals  (lo),  when  these  exist,  at  some  distance 
a the  thyrohyals.  A commonly  long  and  slender,  sometimes  spatulate 
>sohyal  (42),  is  articulated  to  the  fore-part  of  the  basihyal ; and  a con- 
itly  long,  slender  and  pointed  urohyal  (43)  is  articulated  with  the  posterior 
of  the  basihyal,  and  extends  backwards  beneath  the  trachea.  The  thyro- 
■U  (46)  diverge  and  include  the  larynx  in  their  fork  ; and  support  at  their 
•emities  a bony  or  gristly  (ceratobranchial)  style  (47).  This  is  never 
ched  by  ligament  to  the  base  of  the  skull,  but  is  suspended  freely,  as  in 
chelonia,  by  the  glossohyoid  and  omohyoid  muscles ; it,  however,  curves 
r the  back  and  upper  part  of  the  cranium  in  the  woodpeckers,  and  the 
•emities  of  both  cerato-branchials  are  inserted,  by  way  of  rare  exception 
hat  bird,  into  the  right  nostril. 

n mammals  the  normal  completion  of  the  hyoidean  arch,  as  it  first  ap- 

Doges  appears  to  have  fir»t  pointed  out  this  error,  hut  without,  liowevcr,  perceiving  (ho 
homology  of  his  ‘ comes  thyroidiennes'  with  the  liypohrancliials  of  fishes. 


72 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 

pears  in  fishes,  is  again  resumed,  and  that  not  by  a ^lender  oaHllo,, 

""hich  we  again  recoenJe  h?' 
thf  t ’ ^ M*'  stylo-  (3s)  hyals  suspending  the  basihyal  (1 

the  tonpe  to  the  base  of  the  skull,  often  to  the  petrosal  sSLv 

ympanic,  or  to  the  mastoid,  or  to  the  exoccipital.  The  ungulates  a I 
true  carnivora  best  display  this  type.  ^ ungulates  a;| 

In  man  (fig.  25)  the  ceratohyals  are  reduced  as  in  hirHa  fr.  J 
cles  of  bone  („),  and  the  extent  of  the  arerb;, ween  them  anZh  J 
hyals,  n.hich  become  anchylosed  to  the  temporal  bones  retains 
ligamentous  condition.  Occasionally,  however  naaifinof  ^ ^ *1 

SSm;  - • E’ 

«tincv  i7t  e f archesimaintains  more 

.tancy  in  its  existence  and  proportions ; but  manifests  its  true  charac 

ee  suspension  below  the  skull,  and  an  articulation  by  short  ligaments  i 
angles  or  horns  of  the  thyroid  cartilage.  ugaments  i 

’ as,  already  made  on  the  special  homologies  of  the  narts  a 

capular  arch  and  its  appendages,  preclude  the  necessity  of  furthe^r  extei 
the  present  chapter  of  this  work.  ^ ‘uriner  extei 

Chapter  II — General  Homology. 

Historical  Introduction. 

^ ^f'ospect  of  the  results  of  the  researches  of  anatomists, 
li  the  cranial  bones,  the  student  of  the  science 

ttle  soever  practised  in  such  inquiries,  cannot  but  be  struck  with  the  ami 
of  concordance  in  those  results.  It  must  surely  appear  rnmst  JemaSi 
circumstance  to  one  acquainted  only  with  the  osteology  of  the  human  fn 

timisT,  77  of  com  ratle 

® down  to  the  lowest  ossf 

fiJi.  This  fact  alone,  so  significant  of  the  unity  of  plan  pervading  the 
tebrate  structure,  has  afforded  me,  at  least,  a largo  groCd  of  hope 

on  w iic77d?ffp7^"*  perseverance  in  the  reconsideiltion  of  those  pc 
?vLf  • f ^ d'fference  of  opinion  has  prevailed  ; and  in  the  re-investigatio 
hclmolog^  constant  and  essential  in  characters  determinative  of  spe 

sarn7mn7V"i®''®7  "^ture,  the  first  labours  are  ne. 

elimfnat7  i7thr  "‘^'7  approximative:  but  if  errors  have  to 
tLk  truths  pi  c successive  applications  of  fresh  minds  to 

sucl^imths  fsS  T^^^  established.  And  I regard  the  bodv 

of  the  homnlo!  ^ 7 7 die  detenninal 

rativ7 7p«  ^ ^ vertebrate  animals,  as  to  im 

coi  dt  forrno77-  consideration  of  the  more  gem 

UDo7t7«  existence  of  relations  of  special  homology  deper 

req^red  dil777"  anatomical  world  is  at  present  divided,  ifckiiig 

anatomy  have  tap:i/'^”’i  majority  of  existing  authors  on  comparat 
anatomy  have  tacitly  abandoned*,  or  with  Cuvier  and  M.  Agassiz,  lie 

S’-'-’"™. ' I.' 

Zoologie,’ 8vo,  1834.  Prof  Rvajui,’  t Milne-Edwards,  ‘ Elemens 

of  Comparative  Anatomy,’ 8vo  1841  d"dine  °f  the  Am^  Man. 

writer  expresses,  are  probaWv  akin  m tho.!  , "'^“='1  this  pleasing  and  instruct 

1 - , are  proDaoi)  akin  to  those  which  have  influenced  the  above-cited  authi 


GENEKAl.  HOMOLOGY.  IIISTOUY.  73 

h t]y  opposed  the  idea  of  ‘ special  homology’  being  included  in  a higher 

] .t  uniformity  of  type. 

('  >t  the  attempt  to  explain,  by  the  Cuvierian  principles,  the  facts  of  special 
5 jlogy  on  the  hypothesis  of  the  subserviency  of  the  parts  so  determined 
^ nilar  ends  in  di’tlerent  animals, — to  say  that  the  same  or  answerable  bones 
r in  them  because  they  have  to  perform  similar  functions — involve  many 

■ ulties,  and  are  opposed  by  numerous  phasnomena.  We  may  admit  that 
lultiplied  points  of  ossification  in  the  skull  of  the  human  foetus  facilitate, 
were  designed  to  facilitate,  childbirth ; yet  something  more  than  such  a 
purpose  lies  beneath  the  fact,  that  most  of  those  osseous  centres  repre- 
.permanently  distinct  bones  in  the  cold-blooded  vertebrates.  The  cra- 
t of  the  bird,  which  is  composed  in  the  adult  of  a single  bone,  is  ossified 

'■  the  same  number  of  points  as  in  the  human  embryo,  without  the  pos- 
: : tv  of  a similar  purpose  being  subserved  thereby,  in  the  extrication  of 

■ rhick  from  the  fractured  egg-shell.  The  composite  structure  is  repeated 
: e minute  and  prematurely-born  embryo  of  the  marsupial  quadrupeds. 

■aover,  in  the  bird  and  marsupial,  as  in  the  human  subject,  tlie  different 
of  ossification  have  the  same  relative  position  and  plan  of  arrange- 
: as  in  the  skull  of  the  young  crocodile,  in  which,  as  in  most  other  rep- 
and  in  most  fishes,  the  bones  so  commencing  maintain  throughout  life 
primitive  distinctness.  These  and  a hundred  such  facts  force  upon  the 
, rmplative  anatomist  the  inadequacy  of  the  teleological  hypothesis  to 
i.unt  for  the  acknowledged  concordances  expressed  in  this  work  by  the 
‘ special  homology.’  If,  therefore,  the  attempt  to  explain  them  as  the 
•ts  of  a similarity  of  the  functions  to  be  performed  by  such  homolo- 
parts  entirely  fails  to  satisfy  the  conditions  of  the  problem ; and  if, 
'Ttheless,  we  are,  with  Cuvier,  to  reject  the  idea  of  their  being  manifes- 
iis  of  some  higher  type  of  organic  conformity  on  which  it  has  pleased 
divine  Architect  to  build  up  certain  of  his  diversified  living  works, 
j then  remains  only  the  alternative  that  special  homologies  are  matters 
nance. 

ibis  conclusion,  I apprehend,  will  be  entertained  by  no  reasonable  mind; 

• reverting,  therefore,  to  the  more  probable  hypothesis  of  the  dependence 
;ie  special  resemblances  upon  a more  general  law  of  conformity,  we 

: next  to  inquire,  what  is  the  vertebrate  archetype  ? The  gifted  and 
•>-thinking  naturalist,  Oken,  obtained  the  first  clew  to  this  discovery  by 

• is  subject.  “ It  is  not  by  any  means  our  intention  to  engage  our  readers  in  discussing 
■le  conflicting  and,  sometimes,  visionary  opinions  entertained  by  different  authors  re- 
^ to  the  exact  homology  of  the  individual  bones  forming  this  part  of  the  skeleton ; and 

»iall,  therefore,  content  ourselves  by  placing  before  them,  divested  as  far  as  possible  of 
' -fluous  ar^mentation,  Cuvier’s  masterly  analysis  of  the  labours  of  the  principal  inquiries 
'"tniing  this  intricate  part  of  anatomy.” — p.  494.  A later  English  author,  who  has  em- 
■d  a most  valuable  amount  of  careful  and  exact  osteological  observation  in  the  article 
^)logy”  of  the  ‘ Encyclopedia  Metropolitana’  (4to,  1845),  seems  scarcely  to  regard  even 
rfctCTmination  of  special  homologies  as  a necessary  object  of  anatomical  research.  Thus, 
tcussing  the  differences  of  opinion  respecting  the  coracoid  (fig.  5,4S).  he  says,  “ Bakker’s 
^ .^however,  if  it  be  absolutely  necessary  to  hunt  up  analogies,  seems  more  correct.” — 

lis  reserve  is,  however,  perhaps  less  obstructive  to  the  philosophical  progress  of  anatomy 
to  the  requisite  resumption  of  original  inquii7  to  that  end,  than  the  mere  reproduction 
le  transcendental  views  of  others  without  criticism  or  attempt  to  explain  or  refute  the 
mons  to  snch  views  which  have  been  promulgated  by  so  great  authorities  as  Cuvier  and 
isiz.  Thus  Bojanns’s  4- vertebral  theory  of  the  cranial  part  of  the  skull  is  adopted  hy 

whilst  Dr.  Grant  (Outlines  of  Comparative  Anatomy, 
183o,  p.  63)  deems  the  composition  of  the  skull,  in  fishes,  to  correspond  nearly  with 
roy  8 theory  of  this  part  of  the  skeleton  being  composed  of  seven  vertebra;,  each  con- 
ng  of  a borly  with  four  elements  above  and  four  elements  below. 


74 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


tlie  idea  of  the  arrangement  of  the  cranial  bones  of  the  skull  into  segmiJt 
like  the  vertebrae  of  the  trunk.  He  informs  us  that  walking  one  day  in  f 
Ilartz  forest,  he  stumbled  upon  the  blanched  skull  of  a deer,  picked  up  ^ 
partially  dislocated  bones,  and  contemplating  them  for  a while,  the  ti 
flashed  across  his  mind,  and  he  exclaimed  “ It  is  a vertebral  column  I*”  0 ' 
afterwards  tested  and  matured  this  happy  inspiration  by  examining  the  sk.  i 
of  a cetacean,  a chelonian,  and  a cod-fish  in  Dr.  Albers’s  museum  at  Brem 
and  on  his  return  to  Jena  in  1807,  he  published  his  beautiful  generalizatioji  > 
a now  very  scarce  Introductory  Lecture,  or  “ Programm  beim  Antritt  der  1 >- 
fessur,”  entitled  ‘ On  the  signification  of  the  bones  of  the  skull’t.  He  il  : 
trates  his  views  by  reference  to  the  skull  of  a ruminant.  “ Take  ” he  s-  C 
“ a young  sheep’s  skull,  separate  from  it  the  bones  of  the  orbit,  also  tbl  y 
cranial  bones  which  take  no  share  in  the  formation  of  the  ‘ basis  cranii  ’ . ifr 
the  frontal,  parietal,  ethmoid  and  temporal,  and  there  will  remain  an  oss&  n 
column  which  any  anatomist,  at  first  glance,  would  recognise  as  three  boc 
of  a kind  of  vertebrae  with  transverse  processes  and  foramina.  Replace  i 
cranial  bones  with  the  exception  of  the  temporals,  for,  without  these,  ! 
cavity  is  still  closed,  and  you  have  a cranial  vertebral  column,  M'hicli  dift 
from  the  true  one  (‘von  der  wahren’)  only  by  its  more  expanded  neui  i 
canal  (lluckenmarkshdhle).  As  the  brain  is  a more  voluminously  develoj'  . 
spinal  chord,  so  is  the  brain-case  a more  voluminous  spinal  column. 
the  cranium  includes,  then,  three  vertebral  bodies,  so  must  it  have  as  ma.  c 
vertebral  arches.  These  are  next  to  be  sought  out  and  determined.  C ; 
sees  the  sphenoid  divided  into  two  vertebrae  ; through  the  foremost  pass  1 idi 
optic  nerves,  through  the  hindmost  the  maxillary  nerves  (par  trigeminur..  n 
I call  one  the  ‘ eye- vertebra’  (Augwirbel),  the  other  the  ‘ jaw-verteb  k- 
(Kieferwirbel).  Upon  this  latter  abuts  the  basilar  process  of  the  occipr  .• 
bone  and  the  petrous  bones:  both  belong  to  one  whole.  As  the  optic  ner  5 
perforates  the  ‘ eye-vertebra,’  and  the  trigeminus  the  ‘jaw-vertebra,’  so  1 1 . 
acoustic  nerve  takes  possession  of  the  hindmost  vertebra.  I call  it,  thei  k, 
fore,  ‘ ear- vertebra’ (Ohrwirbel)  : and  I regard  this  as  the  first  cranial  vi  p. 
tebra ; the  jaw-vertebra  as  the  second,  and  the  eye-vertebra  as  the  third.”-  . 
ib.  p.  6. 

After  entering  upon  the  difficulties  which  beset  him  in  determining  whetli 
the  petrosal  belonged  to  the  first  (Ohrwirbel)  or  the  second  (Kieferwirbei  f 
and  enunciating  his  views  on  the  essential  relations  of  each  cranial  vertel) 
with  a single  special  sense  (excluding,  however,  smell  and  taste,  as  beii 
inferior  in  dignity  to  the  others),  Oken  proceeds,  in  his  characteristic  bo 
metaphorical  language  : — “ Bones  are  the  earthy  hardened  nervous  system 
Nerves  are  the  spiritual  soft  osseous  system — Continens  et  contentuni.” 

“ Between  the  sphenoid  and  occipital,  between  the  sphenoid  and  petross 
between  the  parietal  (the  temporal  being  removed)  and  the  occipital,  tlie- 
runs  a line  which  defines  the  anterior  boundary  of  the  first  vertebra.  In  tl 
line  between  the  two  sphenoids,  or  that  which  in  man  extends  anterior 

* “ Im  August  1806  machte  ich  eine  Reise  iiber  den  Hartz,” — “ ich  rutschte  an  der  Sii 
seite  dur(^  den  Wald  herunter — und  siehe  da  ; es  lag  der  schonste  gebleichte  Scbadel  eiii 
Hirschkuh  vor  meinen  Fiissen.  Aufgeboben,  umgekebrt,  angeseben,  und  es  war  gescbcliefc 
hs  ist  evm  Wirbelsdula  \ fubv  es  inir  wie  ein  Blitz  durch  Mark  und  Bein — und  seit  (Uesi® 
Zeit  1st  der  Scbadel  eine  Wirbelsiiule.” — Isis,  1818,  p.  511.  ■ 

Bedeutung  der  Scbadelknochen,  4to,  1807.  I am  indebted  to  mv  frienl 
Mr.  Tulk,  the  able  translator  of  ‘Wagner’s  Comparative  Anatomy,’  for  tbe  opportunity  iK 
perusing  this  most  suggestive  and  original  essay,  which  does  not  exist  in  either  the  LibraiJ 
of  the  fintish  Museum,  that  of  the  College  of  Surgeons,  or  that  of  the  Medico-Chirurgicift 
Society.  Mr.  Tulk  is  at  present  engaged  in  the  arduous  task  of  translating  the  “ Lehrbiic® 
der  Natur-philosophie  of  Oken  for  the  ‘ Ray  Society.’  I 


OENEUAL  HOMOLOGY. 


HISTOUY. 


75 


iterygoid  processes  laterally  ami  upwards  through  the  fissura  orhitalis 
' rior,  anterior  to  the  great  ala,  and  finally  between  the  frontal  and  the 
‘i  :tal  bones,  we  trace  another  line,  which  divides  the  second  from  the 

vertebra  ” {ib.  p.  7). 

■ v\’ow,”  says  Oken,  “ take  the  ear-vertebra  from  a foetus  of  any  mammal 
'S''  man,  place  near  it  an  immature  dorsal  vertebra,  or  the  third  cervical 
, crocodile,  and  compare  the  pieces  of  which  they  consist,  their  form,  their 
■ents,  and  the  outlets  for  the  nerves. 

>According  to  .Albinos  and  all  anthropotomists,  each  vertebra  of  the 
?s  consists  of  three  distinct  parts — the  body  and  the  two  neurapophyses 
• entheile).  You  have  the  same  in  the  occipital  bone,  but  more  clearly 
■more  distinctly;  the  ‘pars  basilaris’  is  separated  as  the  body  of  the  ver- 
II  from  the  ‘partes  condyloideae,’  which  form  the  lateral  parts:  these 
•still  more  distinct  from  the ‘pars  occipitalis’ which  forms  the  spinous 
ress : even  this  part  is  often  bifid,  like  the  spinous  processes  in  spina 

it 

>8ince  then  the  foramen  magnum  is  the  hinder  or  lower  opening  of  a 
;febral  canal,  the  condyles  true  oblique  vertebral  processes,  the  foramen 
rnim  an  intervertebral  foramen,  and  the  crista  occipitalis  a spinous  pro- 
, proved  to  be  such  by  both  its  position  and  the  muscles  inserted  into  it, — 
cj  lastly  the  whole  occipital  bone  in  relation  to  its  form  as  well  as  its 
ition — inclosing  the  cerebellum  as  a production  of  the  spinal  chord, — is 
;ie  and  in  every'  sense  characteristic  vertebra,  it  is  unnecessary  to  dwell 
ej  diffusely  on  parts,  the  bare  mention  of  which  suffices  to  make  their 
rre  recognizable.” — ib.  p.  7. 

nhis  will  serve  as  an  example  of  the  close  observation  of  facts,  the  philo- 
I .ical  appreciation  of  their  relations  and  analogies,  and,  in  a word,  of  the 
:t  in  which  Oken  determines  the  vertebral  relations  of  the  cranial  bones 
lie  skull : and  I refer  to  Table  II.  for  his  conclusions  as  to  the  parts  of 
wecond  and  third  cranial  vertebrae. 

T-everting  to  the  petrosal,  Oken  thus  beautifully  and  clearly  enunciates 
^essential  nature  and  homology  : — “ You  will  say  I have  forgotten  the 
■-•s  petrosa.’  No  ! It  seems  not  to  belong  to  a vertebra,  as  such  ; but  to 
u ‘sense-organ’  (Sinnorgan),  in  which  the  vertebral-  or  ear-nerve  loses 
ff ; and,  therefore,  is  as  distinct  an  organ  from  a vertebral  element  as  is 

■ other  viscus  (Eingeweide),  or  as  is  the  eyeball  itself.  The  (cause  of) 
ssion  (as  to  the  homology  of  the  petrosal)  lies  in  this,  viz.  that  it  must  be 
Med  agreeably  with  its  nature  (wesen),just  as  the  eye  must  be  crystallized.” 
Mthough  Oken  does  not  in  this  essay  formally  admit  a fourth  vertebra 
"rior  to  the  ‘ eye-vertebra,’  he  recognises  the  vertebral  structure  as  being 
ried  out  rudimentally  or  evanescently,  by  the  vomer,  as  the  prolongation 

he  cranio-vertebral  bodies,  by  the  lacrymal  bones,  as  their  neurapo- 
ses,  and  by  the  nasal  bones,  as  the  spinous  process.  Elis  ideas  of  a 
ebra  have  evidently  at  this  period  not  extended  beyond  the  ordinary 
iropotomical  one  of  centrum  and  neural  arch  with  its  transverse,  oblique, 
spinous  processes.  When  he  indicates  (beautifully  and  truly)  the  general 
lology  of  the  palatine  bones,  as  pleurapophyses,  under  the  name  of  an- 
losed  or  immoveable  ribs  of  the  head,  it  has  reference  to  the  transcen- 
tal idea  of  the  repetition  in  the  head  of  all  the  parts  of  the  body.  Thus 
squamosal  in  mammals  and  the  tympanic  in  birds  represent  the  ‘scapula’ 
;he  head,  and  at  the  same  time,  also,  the  ilium.  The  homologue  of  the 
amosal  (fig.  21,  27^  in  the  bird  is  the  ‘ humerus  capitis’:  the  malar  (20) 
the  maxillary  (21 ) are  the  ‘ oberarm’  (radius  and  ulna  capitis)  ; the  pre- 
<illary  (22)  is  the  ‘manus  capitis.’  The  segments  of  the  hind  limb  arc 


76 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


represented  by  divisions  of  the  compound  lower  jaw  in  the  crocodile 

sHn  ^ Table,  No.  III.).  The  pterygoids  (24),  the  essentiall 

.tinction  of  \yhidi  from  the  sphenoid  Oken  clearly  recognises,  are  his  ‘c 
culm  capitis.  Oken  hints  at,  without  accepting,  the  (serial)  homoloa 
the  hyoid  arch  with  the  pelvis;  but  he  regards  the  stylohyal  (3s)  as^ 

sacrum  capitis  (?b.  p.  16).  ^ ^ 

T3  publication  of  Oken’s  famous  ‘ Introductory  Lecti 

Prof.  Dumeril,  apparently  unacquainted  with  its  existence,  communic- 
to  the  French  Institute  a memoir  entitled  ‘ Considerations  generales 
1 analogic  qui  existe  entre  tous  les  os  et  les  muscles  du  tronc  dans  les 
maux,  the  second  paragraph  of  which  is  headed  “ De  la  fete  considt 
comme  une  vertebre,  de  ses  muscles  et  de  ses  mouvements.”  In  this  p, 
paph,  repeating  the  homological  correspondences,  demonstrated  by  01 
between  the  basioccipital  as  a vertebral  centrum,  the  condyles  as  ‘ obli 
processes,’  and  the  occipital  protuberance  as  a spinous  process,  he  adds  I 
the  mastoid  processes  are  entirely  conformable  to  transverse  processes  \ 
M.  Dumeril  has,  I believe,  here  the  merit  of  having  first  enunciated 
general  homology  of  the  mastoids,  although  he  does  not  aim  at  showing 
which  vertebral  segment  of  the  skull  they  properly  belong.  Nor,  indT 
with  the  exception  of  an  observation  that  “ very  often  the  body  of  the  sp 
noid,  like  the  ‘ apophyse  basilaire’  of  the  occiput,  resembles  the  body  c 
vertebra,  does  he  push  the  transcendental  comparisons  further.  GeofP 
St.  Hilaire  tells  us*,  that  even  the  moderate  and  very  obvious  illu'itratin 
of  the  general  homologies  of  the  cranial  bones,  wliich  M.  Dumeril  dedut 
from  the  anatomy  of  the  occiput,  excited  an  unfavourable  sensation  in 
bosom  of  the  ‘ Academic;’  and  that  the  phrase  ‘ vertebre  pensante,’  whic 
facetious  member  proposed  as  an  equivalent  for  the  word  ‘ skull,’  and  wh 
circulated,  not  without  some  risibility,  along  the  benches  of  the  learr 
during  the  reading  of  the  memoir,  reaching  the  ears  of  the  ingenious  authi 
the  dread  of  ridicule  checked  his  further  progress  in  the  path  to  the  liigl 
generalizations  of  his  science,  and  even  induced  him  to  modify  consideral 
many  of  the  (doubtless  happy)  original  expressions  and  statements  in  1 
printed  report,  so  as  to  adapt  it  more  to  the  conventional  anatomical  idt 
of  his  colleagues. 

As  the  truth  of  Oken’s  generalization  began  to  be  appreciated,  it  was  remei 
bered,  as  is  usually  the  case,  that  something  like  it  had  occurred  before 
others.  Autenrieth  and  Jean-Pierre  Frank  had  alluded,  in  a general  way 
the  analogy  betw  een  the  skull  and  the  vertebral  column  : Ulrich,  reproducir 
formally,  Oken’s  more  matured  opinions  on  the  cranial  vertebrae,  sai 
Kielmeyerum  praeceptorem  pie  venerandum  quamvis  vertebram  tanqua 
caput  integrum  considerari  posse  in  scholis  anatomicis  docentem  audiv 
And  the  essential  idea  was  doubtless  present  to  Kielmeyer’s  mind,  thoui 
he  reversed  M.  Dumgril’s  proposition,  and,  instead  of  calling  the  skull  a vf 
tebra,  he  said  each  vertebra  might  be  called  a skull.  But  these  anticipatio 
detract  nothing  from  the  merit  of  the  first  definite  proposition  of  the  theori 
It  would  rather  be  an  argument  against  its  truth,  if  some  approximative  id( 
had  not  suggested  itself  to  other  observers  of  nature,  w'ho  only  lost  the  mei 
of  developing  it,  from  not  appreciating  its  full  importance.  He,  howeve' 
becomes  the  true  discoverer  who  establishes  the  truth  : and  the  sign  of  tl’ 
proof  IS  the  general  acceptance.  Whoever,  therefore,  resumes  the  investigii 
tion  of  a neglected  or  repudiated  doctrine,  elicits  its  true  demonstration) 
and  discovers  and  explains  the  nature  of  the  errors  that  have  led  to  its  tac 


* Annales  des  Sciences  Naturelles,  t.  iii.  1824,  p.  177. 


if  0 ^ p • i I / 


4 fC,  :V’  ■ 

■ .(^.i.f  < 4s> 

V,  ,.  .. 

' , ' ^//^ 

. ^ *.  = / 

^ ^ ♦IT 

/ X f’'*’  -■  ■ " 

A.  -/'y  <■  z/'ZiP^f-  ■ 

. *4  . . / . t 

'-•■  ■ - -//. 

t A / < . - 

4J  r,V-t>> 

-■  ^74  */ 

/tv 

, V/' 

' .-A  ‘ 

Z -■  / /' 

. /»  - 

*•  .»■  *■ 

V,  -■'I-' 

f t ’•  ■- 

- P' 

,4 

7 > 

■>  ;?■' 
' 'Zf  Z- 

Z' 

• " /* 

^ -•  . A 

**  / '//  ' 

'/  ,V^  / 

‘ '•'  - 

> . .-  , ■ i 

' ■ -V/ 

. „ ■/ . 

■ ’ifi  a J ' '/ . ' 

/ ' 

' ^ - V , 

/ - --  /A 

..A  4 

. •*  r._. 

♦ / /'  • 

'\  i*.‘  4*  ^//^'V 

■ ■/. 
y*A  A 

^ ; • ff  -- 

' / / 

/ 

1 : / A-'  0 

^ e A r 4 4^ 

/ .-,  /... 

4 .#  PrC  = 

4 V /.''/<'♦*  < 

• ' ^Z4Z 

/ ' 
V* 


A^z^yz  ■ 

,4T 

y 

',  //  >'' 

iAZZjy^'  •-'  ■'/'" 

, J ^ , 

.- 

/ 

f0  y,  * 

//./, 

■' 

/ 

,J>5'V‘''  "'■ 

,-■-'  •/  ^ 

^ V/- 

■ 0mZii  ' ' >'-■ 

/ . 

..  . -V- 

IPf  0i  ' ^ 

^ ' 

. - r/A 

• 4 / 

/ . -«r 

' r'// 

4^  * ■'-’  -'•■ 

V 

‘•/ 


/ ■ 

/<>  / 

•/,- 


^ ^ ' •• 

t'.^X  ti-  1./ A /, 

/*»  /- 

■ f *•  "I  /•’'')  •' 

</t  y..!^  AZ' 


Vy^" 


/.  V ^ ^ //z^  4^^  -i.v^ V- ^✓■/^4  * ' 

^ *^^'//  ^‘Z/'A  >zzz/f  a ^ •' 

‘ /ft-zz  ’fit  ^ Az  -4  4Z  ’ 'Z  '/•-,/  ^yz t "* 

z . ' . /**  yAz\  '/^z^ypt  r . ypy 

> V - / yy^  h *..i^ 

» f .c<^'y.  ^ ^ /ZfZ/'- ■ ^* • ♦^'|^■  y 

- ^ *z^*Z/‘/f  Zf^z-//y>i  y v^/^-  -V^ 

; < >/  /A>  *?  %Z/iZZZZ/ff 


-4 

y ^ 'v'-.*'-  ^\-‘  ‘^*Zz‘- 


.zy 


/ 


r'‘Z}A  ''/f  v'*V  t'Z  f/ri 


/ 


'AZ 


jif  Z,s^Zz*'/ZZ:  /t/.y  yzy^fZ/'Z-Z' 


^^^Z  \//-Z» 


■V'  ^ /,  ///  )-  ■///  *-<<*;♦  a<v^*;* 


'>.4Mi.  , i :•  -' 

''  ■"  ^-"  "■ 

^ */fr^  *'’■-  ■’  ^'1'*  ; ¥"■•<'  AA-Zr;  .V4*'.-  A-^r  '^^--.-.y  */  4 « y t^'^ 

^1  ■'/^  ^ f(^z^^y-z  *zz  4 

z$A*4hz  ^'-A  l/  ',/z  */^  zy.ZA  jf  ZA^'Zr-4i‘  ^/V 

4^4'  /H-  *Zf  -1 

#'4>/  -V//^»  ■-  A ^ /Z/PPzjZP^  ^ V*«^.''v'.  f 

flii>  /fc  * V/  ' y V v»*«afr  p / y >=Z\^*tZA% 


h 

y' 

>A*/Z/'>  \ 


. >:  >> 


> - V^ 


‘AA  y/^AXA^/MZf  ^,Aa  ^yZyZ'^A^  y^Z  'A  ^/'v- 

//  <d*'  , ""  $ 

,;^  ‘V -A  Z’ * 4^/  •</4>v/  T^f'AZZ^^A  '4/^^</>-/- A , ^ tf'A^A 

/.  '■  iZz^yJ^A-i  ■•Za-4Z*\ZZ  ^ t^y/yyA  'y*zyyy\z^r.\^*,\^, 

' ^■^•v/  y4t-y»Z,\^aZ-Z  ^ Z’ 

*-r*j-'  ^ 4.Z  4,,-A'^i.^  M.4yy/.Z^%zAz  '^v  J * 4^  ^ ^*aa 

i *//,*^,  ' 4^*'/z  ~>v.  \^  yyyj  'a^^'-’A'AA 

;a  ' /A  yyzyZ‘\-i  J ^/yP<.iM  * U^AJCoi  ^.4'i4/«44 

*y.  i . z /^^.yyi  V/  ' • A '/I  y^/ ^yyAj^z^y^  */  \\a  V v-*  f*v' 

, V>  . / li  Vi  -v'/  >iPZ/A  V/  ^7^ZAAZ4\ArA¥  4^^AA^4PiWz\ 

9Am,  U ,,...V'  -y  ^ 


$ m -z 

' ; > 

4 A'>/« 
^4  «/✓ 


'•y}Z-<r.ZZ4-  V4  t> 

yy  ‘ F 4 ' z-  tiZ.^y.z^  m gA  ^Z.A'AAy-i.  \A  PAAA^ua  yi-ZA 
•^  • " ''  ^ ^ Ayyza.  vr  v y.\%.  trx* 

' />*  'gZyy.%r^ZA:^  tZy\y  >-4  V»^l  />:# 

- < >"7V'A^-i4^  PiJsAyWyA*^ ^ A-^  ^yyiZ*:l*i  -Us;j  ^z* yyii^^ 


Ay 


zyziA  *tJ 


78 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


sens,  le  styloide,  les  branches  de  I’hyoide,  qui  sont  ordinairement  formes 
plus  ou  moms  grand  nombre  de  pieces  placees  bout  a bout.  Quelqu 
ces  appendices  sont  libres  a leur  extremite,  d’autres  fois  ils  se  reunis 
dans  la  ligne  mediane  inferieure  en  entr’elles,  ou  au  moyen  dune  piece 
diane,  qu’on  peut  comparge,  jusqu’a  un  certain  point,  au  corps  des 
tebres;  d’ou  il  resulte  ce  qu’on  nomme  ‘sternum’  dans  les  mammih 
appareil  branchial  des  poissons,  hyoide,  sternum  des  oiseaux,”  etc.  (ib  ] 
p.  1 ] 0).  Reserving  the  consideration  of  some  of  these  propositions  1 
subsequent  chapter  of  the  present  work,  I shall  only  notice,  en  passant- 
complete  concordance  between  these  views  of  the  general  homoloo-y  of 
locomotive  members  with  those  which  Oken  expresses  with  his  usual  ai 
ristic  brevity  “ Freye  Bewegungsorgane  kdrmen  nichts  anderes  als 
gewordene  Rippen  seyn.”  ‘ 

Cuvier  includes  amongst  the  general  characters  of  the  class  Mammalw.  ^ 
arrangement  of  their  cranial  bones  into  three  annular  segments,  corresponc  ' 
essentially  with  those  of  which  Oken  had  demonstrated  the  vertebral  relati  ^ 
“Leur  crane  se  subdivise  comme  en  trois  ceintures  formees;  I’anteriei 
par  les  deux  frontaux  et  I’ethmoide  ; I’intermediaire,  par  les  parietaux  e 
sphenoide ; la  posterieure,  par  I’occipital : entre  I’occipital  les  parietauj  ““ 
le  sphenoide,  sont  intercales  les  temporaux,  dont  une  partie  appartient  nropl* 
meiit  a la  face*.”  ‘ 

W hat  M.  de  Blainville  p816)  pledges  his  efforts  to  demonstrate,  O?  ** 


(Isis,  1817)  was  exulting  in  the  reception  of,  ‘ not  only  in  Germany  but! 
Europe.’  “ Seit  Erscheinung  dieser  Schrift  und  nun  10  Jahre  verflossen: 


1 y-tj iiuli  iw  uttiue  vernossen:  " 

Man  spricht  nun  von  Kopfwirbeln,  Kopfarmen  und  Fiissen,  von  Bedeuti  ^ 
der  einzelnen  Skeletknochen  wie  von  einer  uralten  Sache  ; die  schon  in  ‘ 
Bibel  und  den  Propheten  gestanden,”  p.  1204.  The  chief  differences  ^ 
compared  with  Oken’s  definition,  are,  that  Cuvier,  finding  the  frontal  ai  ' 
to  rest  upon  both  ethmoid  and  presphenoid,  assigns  to  the  former  bone 
completion  of  the  anterior  cranial  cincture  below ; and  completes,  in  1 
manner,  the  parietal  cincture  by  the  sphenoid  in  its  anthropotomical  sen 
making  no  distinction  between  the  anterior  and  the  posterior  divisions  of  l 
bone.  Cuvier  does  not  apply  this  principle  of  arrangement  of  the  cran 
bones  to  the  skull  of  the  lower  classes  of  vertebrata  (in  which,  neverthele 
it  is  more  clearly  manifested  than  in  mammals)  : in  generalising  on  the  cc 
stitution  of  the  vertebrate  skull,  he  classifies  the  bones,  after  the  anthropo' 
mists,  into  ‘those  of  the  cranium  which  encompass  the  brain,  and  those 
the  face,  which  consist  of  the  two  jaws  and  the  receptacles  of  the  organs? 
sense.’t  With  regard  to  the  skull  of  fishes,  in  which  Bojanus  had  found 
clear  an  illustration  and  confirmation  of  the  Okenian  views,  Cuvier  mere 
says,  it  is  almost  always  divisible  into  the  same  number  of  bones  as  th 
of  other  ovipara.  The  frontal  is  composed  of  six  pieces ; the  parietal 
three  ; the  occipital  of  five  ; five  of  the  pieces  of  the  sphenoid  and  turn  of  eat 
of  the  temporals  remain  in  the  composition  of  the  cranium ;f. 

In  his  great  works  the  ‘ Histoire  des  Poissons  ’ and  the  ‘ Lemons  d’Am 
tomie  Comparee,’  posthumous  edition,  Cuvier  expresses  more  decidedly  h 
objections  to  the  views  of  the  segmental  or  vertebral  structure  of  the  skull.. 

Gbthe,  in  a small  fasciculus  of  ‘Essays  of  Comparative  Anatomy,’  wliij 
he  published  in  the  year  1820,  entitles  the  8th,  “ Can  the  bones  of  the  sku 


* Regne  Animal,  8vo,  1817,  t.  i.  p.  62. 
t “ La  tete  est  formee  du  crane,  qui  renferme  le  cen'eau,  et  de  la  face,  qui  se  coniii 

QO  Hail  V rvi  n ah  rvii*ao  a+  1 _1_.  « ••  • 


1 ^ ^ uu  uxaiie,  qui  renierme  le  cen*eau,  et  de  Ja  face,  qui  se  couipoit. 

des  deux  machoires  et  des  receptacles  des  orgaues  des  sens,”— Regne  Animal,  i.  ed, 
p.  62;  ed.  1829,  p.  52.  f 

I L c.  ii..(1817),  p.  107;  (1829),  p.  125. 


GENERAL  HOMOLOGY.  HISTORY. 


79 


duct'd  from  those  of  the  vertebral  column,  and  thence  receive  an  cx- 
tion  of  their  forms  and  functions?”  He  states  that  the  idea  of  the 
•facial  vertebne  occurred  to  him  in  the  year  1790,  prior  to  wliich  time 
,vs  “ die  drei  hintei-sten  erkennt  ich  bald.”  The  idea  is  developed  in  his 
'as  follows: — “The  skull  of  mammalia  is  composed  of  six  vertebrm; 
ifor  the  hinder  division  inclosing  the  cerebral  treasure  ; three  composing 
lire  part  which  opens  in  presence  of  the  exterior  world,  which  it  seizes 
catroduces. 

The  first  three  vertebne  are  admitted  (he  alludes  to  Oken  and  Spix)  : 
lire, — 

The  occipital. 

.’he  posterior  sphenoid. 

"he  anterior  sphenoid. 

The  three  others  are  not  yet  admitted ; they  are, — 

The  palatine  bone. 

The  upper  maxillary. 

The  intermaxillary. 

ff  some  of  the  eminent  men  who  ardently  cultivate  this  subject  should 
[.iterested  by  this  simple  enunciation  of  the  problem,  and  would  illus- 
:it  by  some  "figures  indicating  by  signs  and  ciphers  the  mutual  relations 
tecret  affinities  of  the  bones,  its  publication  would  strongly  draw  the 
ling  mind  in  that  direction,  and  we  may,  perhaps,  one  day,  ourselves 
siome  notes  on  the  mode  of  considering  and  treating  these  questions.” 
jfessor  Carus  of  Dresden  has  best  responded  to  this  appeal  of  his  im- 
ikl  countryman  : but  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  detailed  and  complex 
•lition  of  the  theory  of  the  six  vertebrae  and  intervertebrae,  of  which  the 
ral  results  are  given  in  Table  III.,  have  yielded  to  anatomical  science  a 
: which  is  hardly  equivalent  to  the  zeal  and  pains  manifested  in  the  at- 
u,  or  to  the  artistic  merit  of  the  illustrations,  published  by  the  accom- 
-•d  author  of  the  ‘ Urtheilen  des  Knochen  und  Schalengeriistes  ’ (fol. 
)• 

loffroy  St.  Hilaire  deems  the  skeleton  of  the  head  to  be  composed  of 
1 vertebrae  ; and  he  has  the  merit  of  having  more  steadily  sought  the 
-ilogies  of  the  inferior  arches  of  the  cranial  vertebrae  than  his  predeces- 
rwho  seem  not  to  have  sufficiently  appreciated  the  essential  character  of 
portions  of  the  primary  segments  of  the  vertebrate  endo-skeleton. 
.Ttheless  it  must  be  admitted  that  Cuvier  has  made  good  the  grounds  of 
•/jection  of  Geoffroy’s  theory,  as  one  based  less  on  observation  than  on 
;.y  d priori  views,  according  to  which  the  bones  of  the  skull,  real  or 
inary,  are  arranged  into  seven  vertebrae,  composed  of  nine  pieces  each  *. 
ccraiiio-vertebral  system  of  Geoffrey  is  liable  to  the  further  objection, 
:.ae  has  combined,  as  in  the  case  of  his  typical  vertebra  from  the  tail  of 
• ounder,  parts  of  the  exo-skeleton  {e.g.  the  suborbitals)  with  parts  of 
rndo-skeleton  to  which  alone  the  vertebral  theory  is  applicable. 

i the  fasciculi  of  the  magnificent  ‘ Osteographie  ’ with  which  Professor  de 
I ville  has  enriched  his  science,  the  descriptions  follow  the  plan  of  the 
(.rfication  of  the  bones  of  the  skeleton  propounded  in  the  above-cited  Me- 
H in  the  ‘ Bulletin  des  .Sciences  ’ for  1816  and  1817.  In  the  Prospectus  of 
(Osteographie’,  M.  de  Blainville  briefly  refers  to  the  great  questions  of 
I'larative  anatomy,  which  the  German  organologists  have  comprehended 
!rr  the  name  of  ‘ Signification  of  the  Siteleton,'  in  allusion  only  to  the 
^93  errors  and  opinions  almost  extravagant,  of  some  of  the  persons  who 
I occupied  themselves  with  these  questions whilst  he  reprobates,  on  the 
I * Cuvier,  Histo're  rles  Poi.ssons,  Ho,  t.  i.  p.  230. 


80 


ON  THE  VEETEDRATE  SKELETON. 


4 


Other  hand,  in  equally  general  terms,  “ those  who  have  been  unable  to 
themselves  to  these  kind  of  questions,  partly  on  account  of  the  nature  c 
^ " sufficient  subjects  of  cont^ 

Neither  the  first  step,  the  most  difficult  of  all,  nor  anv  of  the  sure.  . 
steps  in  tlie  acquisition  of  such  views  of  the  ‘Signification  of  Hip  <5L 
as  M.  de  adopt,  are  noticed  t no  objec?ion  STe  ^ rtebral 

of  the  skull  IS  answered  : no  error  that  may  have  opposed  itself  to  a red' 
of  the  doctrine  IS  explained  or  refuted  : of  the  particular  labours  a?  r 
^veries  of  individual  homologists  the  author  of  the  ‘ Osteographie’  is 

“ TTnp^"^!N  of  anthropotomy,  as  a single  bo  i 

Une  vertebre,  consideree  dune  maniere  gen^rale,  et  par  conseouen  It 
son  etat  complet,  est  un  os  court,  median,  symmetrique!  forniant^un  i ^ 
partie  pnncipale  de  la  vertebre,  aux  deux  faces  opposees  de  laquelle,  en  } 
ou  doi^sale,  interne  ou  ventrale,  s’applique  un  arc  plus  ou  nioiiis 
d ou  resultent  deux  canaux,  I’un  au  dos,  I’autre  au  ventre.”  (ib  fai 
Ue  discern  the  influence  of  the  ideas  of  his  ingenious  contemporary 
bt.  Hilaire,  in  the  admission  of  the  ventral  or  inferior,  as  well  as  the  nor. 
superior  arch ; and,  like  Geoffroy,  he  recognises  the  physiological  rela. 
of  the  upper  arch  to  the  protection  of  the  nervous  system,  and  that  o 1 
lower  arch  to  the  protection  of  the  vascular  system  : but,  overlooking  cl 
jecting  the  idea  of  .the  relation  of  the  ribs  a,  the  inferior  iroteSg  afe  f 
the  expanded  central  organ  of  the  vascular  system,  he  considers  Ihe  veS 
(haemal)  arches  as  arriving  at  their  maximum  of  development  in  the  tail  ■ 
dorsal  and  thoracic  vertebrae  are,  accordingly,  characterized  as  those  whic  i 
provided  with  costiform  appendages  diversely  articulated  to  them  - (S 
looking,  I niay  remark,  the  costal  appendages  of  tlie  cervical  vertebrae  ir# 
saurians  and  those  winch  become  anchylosed  to  the  cervical  vertebrf 
birds,  as  do,  frequent  y,  their  serial  homologues  to  the  dorsal  vertebrm  ir  * 
same  class.  M.  de  Blaiiiville  seems,  also,  wholly  ignorant  of  the  fact  that  t 
bent-forward  ends  of  the  long  transverse  processes  of  the  lumbar  vertebr  * 
the  hares,  cavies,  and  many  other  rodents,  are  primarily  developed  as  disl-l 
costal  rudiments  : tlie  same  rudiments  of  lumbar  ribs  are  found  in  the  fc« 
of  the  hog,  and  in  the  first  lumbar  vertebra  of  many  mammalst.  » Les  1 4 

^%"hP  “ «’o»tjplus  de  cotes,  raeme  incompletes.”  4 

Ihe  ribs  not  being  regarded  as  essentially  parts  of  the  inferior  or  Ike  I 
arches  of  vertebraj,  the  sternal  bones  yvhich  complete  these  greativ  expan.  ? 

sternebers.  M.  de  Blainville,  as  we  have  seen,  had  before  (1817)  coiiipa  ri 
..  p'jl  ''ertebral  bodies.  In  the  ‘ Osteographie,’  however,  he  rightly  rega 
the  body  of  the  hyoid  as  their  serial  homologue,  but  does  not  extend  his  cc 
parison  to  the  bones  that  in  like  manner  complete  the  mandibular  and  in,  ? 

bones  of  the  extremities,  under  the  name  £ 
!if  '^P^Pt'ag'  Ids  larger  work,  as  in  his  original  essi. 

ess^tiaUy  the  idea  of  Oken,  that  the  locomotive  members  are  liberated  ribi  ; 

Perfeim.— After  much  additional  research  and  coniparis. 
tPhra  m publication  of  my  ideas  of  the  constitution  of  the  typical  « 
tebra  o^Prmiary  segment  of  the  endoskeletonj,  I have  found  no  rLon  f , 

at  . 
■iginal.  J 


^ora  or  primary  segment  of  the  endoskeletonj,  I have  found  no  reason 
modifying  them,  but  have  derived  additional  evidence  of  their  accur^ 

I therefore  reproduce  the  diagrammatic  figure  with  which  they  wer^oHsi; 


* Osteographie,  Prospectus,  April,  1839,  p.  5. 

I ri«i  ® fur  Physiologic,  1839,  p.  106. 

+ Geological  Transactions,  4to,  1838,  p.  518,  ^ 


GENERAL  HOMOLOGY.  TYPICAL  VEHTEllIIA. 


SI 


rated  (fig.  !+)•  Altliougli  iny  investigations  of  tlie  fundamental  type 
e vertebi'ate'skeleton  were  fii'st  made  uiion  tlie  class  ol'  fishes,  where  vege- 
3 uniformity  or  irrelative  repetition  most  prevails,  and  where,  therefore, 
ype  is  least  obscured  by  the  modification  of  one  part  in  mutual  subser- 
;y  with  another,  I soon  found  that  I should  he  led  astray  by  confining  my 
wations  to  fishes,  and  by  borrowing  illustrations  from  that  class  exclu- 
Comparison  of  the  piscine  skeleton  with  those  of  the  higher  animals 
instrates  that  the  natural  arrangement  of  the  parts  of  the  endoskeleton  is 
-series  of  segments  succeeding  each  other  in  the  axis  of  the  body.  These 
rents  are  not,  indeed,  composed  of  the  same  number  of  bones  in  any  class 
Toughout  any  individual  animal.  But  certain  parts  of  each  segment  do 
[.tain  such  constancy  in  their  existence,  relation,  position,  and  offices,  as 
: force  the  conviction  that  they  are  homologous  parts,  both  in  the  consti- 
series  of  the  same  individual  skeleton,  and  throughout  the  series  of 
bbrate  animals.  For  each  of  these  primary  segments  of  the  skeleton  I 
iithe  term  ‘ vertebra’;  but  with  as  little  reference  to  its  primary  signifi- 
u,  as  a part  specially  adapted  for  rotatory  motion,  as  when  the  compa- 
: anatomist  speaks  of  a sacral  vertebra.  The  word  may,  however,  seem 
!!  anthropotomist  to  be  used  in  a different  or  more  extended  sense  than 
BQ  which  it  is  usually  understood ; yet  he  is  himself,  unconsciously  perhaps, 

I ) habit  of  including  in  certain  vertebne  of  the  human  body,  elements 
It  he  excludes  from  the  idea  in  other  natural  segments  of  the  same  kind, 
cnced  by  differences  of  proportion  and  coalescence,  which  are  the  most 
:ole  characters  of  a bone.  Thus  the  rib  of  a cervical  vertebra  is  the  ‘ pro- 
s 5 transversus  perforatus,’  or  the  ‘ radix  anticus  processus  transversi  verte- 
l olli’*:  whilst  in  the  chest,  it  is  ‘ costa,’ or  ‘ pars  ossea  cost®.’  But  the  ulna 
i 1 an  ulna  in  the  horse,  although  it  be  small  and  anchylosed  to  the  radius, 
ee  osteology  of  man,  therefore,  cannot  be  fully  or  rightly  understood 
(the  type  of  which  it  is  a modification  is  known,  and  the  first  step  to 
knowledge  is  the  determination  of  the  vertebral  segments,  or  natural 
' S of  bones,  of  which  the  myelencephalous  skeleton  consists, 
refine  a vertebra,  as  one  of  those  segments  of  the  endoskeleton  ivhich  con- 
’ the  axis  of  the  body,  and  the , protecting  canals  of  the  nervous  and 
lar  trunks : such  a segment  may  also  support  diverging  appendages. 
-sive  of  these,  it  consists,  in  its  typical  completeness,  of  the  following 
LDts  and  parts  : — 

Fig.  U. 


hleal  typical  vertebra. 

* Soemmerrim;,  Be  Corporis  Illimani  Fabrica,  17!M.  i.  p.  2:11* 

(. 


82 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


The  names  printed  in  roman  type  signify  those  parts  which,  being  usu 
developed  from  distinct  and  independent  centres,  I have  termed  ‘ ante 
nous’  elements.  The  italics  denote  the  parts,  more  properly  called 
cesses,  which  shoot  out  as  continuations  from  some  of  the  preceding  elemeM 
and  are  termed  ‘exogenous’:  e.g.  the  diapophyses  or  upper ‘transw 
processes,’  and  the  zygapophyses,  or  the  ‘oblique  ’ or  ‘articular  processes 
human  anatomy. 

The  autogenous  processes  generally  circumscribe  holes  about  the  centr 
which,  in  the  chain  of  vertebrae,  form  canals.  The  most  constant  and  ex=J 
sive  canal  is  that  (fig.  14,  w)  formed  above  the  centrum,  for  the  lodgmerj 
the  trunk  of  the  nervous  system  (neural  axis)  by  the  parts  'thence  ter 
‘ neurapophyses.’  The  second  canal  (fig.  14,  K),  below  the  centrum,  i. 
its  entire  extent  more  irregular  and  interrupted  ; it  lodges  the  central  oi 
and  large  trunks  of  the  vascular  system  (haemal  axis),  and  is  usually  for 
by  the  laminae,  thence  termed  ‘ haemapophyses.’  At  the  sides  of  the 
trum,  most  commonly  in  the  cervical  region,  a canal  is  circumscribed  by 
pleurapophysis  or  costal  process,  by  the  parapophysis,  or  lower  transv> 
process,  and  by  the  diapophysis,  or  upper  transverse  process,  which  cc 
includes  a vessel,  and  often  also  a nerve. 

Thus  a typical  or  perfect  vertebra,  with  all  its  elements,  presents 
canals  or  perforations  about  a common  centre  ; such  a vertebra  we  finf^ 
the  thorax  of  man  and  most  of  the  higher  classes  of  vertebrates,  alsf} 
the  neck  of  many  birds.  In  the  tails  of  most  reptiles  and  mamnialsJji 
hmmapophj'ses  (as  in  fig.  14)  are  articulated  or  anchylosed  to  the  uiP- 
part  of  the  centrum  ; space  being  needed  there  only  for  the  ca|' 
artery  and  vein.  But  where  the  central  organ  of  circulation  is  toy 
lodged,  an  expansion  of  the  haemal  arch  takes  place,  analogous  to  that  w 
the  neural  arches  of  the  cranial  verte- 
brae present  for  the  lodgment  of  the 
brain.  Accordingly  in  the  thorax,  the 
pleurapophyses  (fig.  15,/)/)  are  much 
elongated,  and  the  haemapophyses  (fig. 

15,  K)  are  removed  from  the  centrum, 
and  are  articulated  to  the  distal  ends 
of  the  pleurapophyses ; the  bony  hoop 
being  completed  by  the  intercalation 
of  the  haemal  spine  (fig.  15,  /)«)  be- 
tween the  ends  of  the  haemapophyses. 

And  this  spine  is  here  sometimes  as 
widely  expanded  (in  the  thorax  of  birds 
and  chelonians,  for  example)  as  is  the 
neural  spine  (parietal  bone  or  bones) 
of  the  middle  cranial  vertebra  in  mam- 
mals. In  both  cases,  also,  it  may  be 
developed  from  two  lateral  halves,  and 
a bony  intermuscular  crest  may  be  ex- 
tended from  the  mid-line,  as  in  the 
skull  of  the  hyaena,  and  the  breast-bone 
of  the  bird  (fig.  15,  /«s).  To  facilitate 
the  comparison  of  the  merits  of  the 
preceding  view  and  nomenclature  of 
the  typical  vertebra  with  those  of  other 
comparative  anatomists,  I have  thrown 
the  results  into  the  form  given  in 
Table  II. 


Fig.  15. 


Natural  typical  vertebra  : thorax  of  a bird. 


GENERAL  HOMOLOGY. 


TYPICAL  VERTEBRA. 


8.3 


•i  j the  question  why  I should  have  invented  new  names  when  Geoffroy  St. 

■■  ire  had  already  proposed  others  for  the  vertebral  elements,  I can  only  re- 
; the  reo-ret  with  which  I found  myself  compelled  to  that  invidious  step, 
havin°  arrived  at  the  conviction,  that  the  learned  Parisian  Professor  had 

■ 'times  'applied  the  same  term  to  two  distinct  elements,  and  sometimes 

■ distinct  names  to  one  and  the  same  element : and  I am  glad  to  be  able  to 
the  authority  of  Cuvier  for  the  propriety  and  advantage  of  such  a step. 

" lA-ords  are  in  reference  to  an  analogous  case,  “ Donnera  tin  mot  connu  un 
i:  nouveau  est  toujours  un  precede  dangereux,  et,  si  Ton  avoit  besoin 
j 'orimer  une  idee  nouvelle,  il  vaudroit  encore  mieux  inventer  un  nouveau 
1 re,  que  d'en  detourner  ainsi  un  aneien  Now  there  is  scarcely  one  term 
^ r e first  column  in  Table  II.  which  is  synonymous  with  its  opposite  in  the 

■ ;ad  column,  or  which  expresses  exactly  the  same  idea ; and  the  discrepancy 
' ( Hies  greater  in  regard  to  the  terms  applied  to  the  vertebral  elements  of  the 
: ,incolumnsl  and  5 of  Tablelll.  The  respective  concordance  of  the  views 
: , e vertebral  archetype  entertained  byGeotfroy  and  myself  with  Nature  will 
■i  fetermined  and  judged  of  by  succeeding  impartial  and  original  observers. 

a . ith  regard  to  the  term  cydeal,  “ de  kOkXos,  cercle,  pour  rappeler  sa 
e annulaire,  permanentes  chez  les  premiers,”  (Articulata,  Dermoverte- 
, , Geoff.)  “et,  au  contraire,  non  perseverante  chez  les  derniers”  (Verte- 
m Hauts-vertebr&,  Geoff.),  it  is  understood  by  its  author  to  apply  to  the 
i.Jar  segment  of  the  crust  of  the  insect,  as  well  as  to  the  ‘ centrum  ’ of  the 
‘ ^skeletal  vertebra.  Geoffrey’s  primary  division  of  the  parts  of  a vertebra 
; I'lo  the  centre  or  nucleus  (noyau)  and  the  lateral  branches.  The  upper 
I]  ,:inches  laterales’  or  ‘periaux’  are  equivalent  to  my  neurapophyses  and 
I t'to  my  neural  spine,  in  fishes  : the  lower  lateral  branches  or  ‘ paraaux  ’ are 
Btimes  free  and  floatingf,  when  they  answer  to  my  ‘ pleurapophyses 
ithey  are  sometimes  so  united  as  to  form  a canal,  when  they  answer 
ny  ‘ parapophyses  ’ in  the  tail  of  fishes  and  to  my  ‘ haemapopliyses  ’ in 
.rail  of  cetaceans.  Geoffroy  supposed,  for  example,  that  the  haemal  canal 
• le  tail  in  all  fishes  was  formed  by  the  ribs,  bent  down  and  anchylosed 
' oth  ends§,  and  that  the  haemal  canal  in  the  tail  of  the  crocodile  and 
eewas  constituted  by  alike  metamorphosis  of  the  same  vertebral  elements, 
lalso,  argued  that,  as  the  small  spinal  chord  of  fishes  did  not  demand 
Teat  a development  in  breadth  of  the  neurapophyses,  they  were  permitted 
•dain  to  unusual  length ; and  that,  coalescing  together,  they  thus  consti- 
.1  not  only  the  neural  arch  but  the  neural  spine,  to  which  latter,  therefore, 
.xtended  the  name  ‘ perial’ ; whilst  to  the  corresponding  part  in  mammals 
;ives  the  name  of  ‘ epial’.  But,  again,  in  fishes,  he  calls  the  dermal 
-es  developed  in  the  embryonic  median  fold  of  integument  which  is  meta- 

iiphosed  into  the  dorsal  fins,  ‘epiaux’ ; and  the  corresponding  dermal  spines 
ae  ventral  fin  ‘ cataaux.’  The  lepidosiren,  however,  manifests  the  neural 
e distinct  from  both  the  neurapophyses  below  and  the  dermo-neural  spine 
/e:  and  such  neural  spine  is  unequivocally  homologous  with  the  anchy- 
d neural  spine  in  osseous  fishes  |(.  It  is  quite  in  harmony  with  the  position 
le  class  of  fishes  at  the  bottom  of  the  vertebrate  scale  that  they  should 
'.ent  a greater  degree  of  calcification  of  the  parts  belonging  to  the  same 
gory  of  the  skeletal  system  as  the  shells  and  crusts  of  the  invertebrates ; 
ce  it  U that  whilst  the  median  dermal  fins  of  the  marine  mammalia  have 

•M^oires  du  Museum,  t.  xx.  p.  12.3. 

As  they  are  illustrated  in  the  abdominal  vertebra  of  the  fish  figured  by  Gcoftroy  in  the 
moires  du  .Museum,’  t.  ix.  ( 1822),  pi.  5,  fig.  4,  polypterus,  o.  J Ih.  fig.  2,  o o. 

This  occurs  as  an  exceptional  condition,  in  the  lepidosteus,  and  perhaps  in  the  lepido- 
'•  II  Linn.  Trans,  vol.  x ii.  p.  23,  fig.  t,  c,  (1. 

r.  2 


84 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


Fig-  16 


3 


their  supporting  skeleton  in  the  primitive  histological 
fibrous  state,  the  corresponding  parts  are  ossified  in  fishes: 
rarely,  however,  are  such  parts  in  answerable  number  to 
the  vertebrae ; and  the  true  spines  of  these  vertebrae, 
when  the  median  fins  and  their  bony  spines  are  removed, 
in  fishes,  show  as  little  indication  of  the  place  or  existence 
of  such  fins,  as  do  the  vertebrae  in  the  porpoise  of  the 
existence  of  its  dermal  fin.  In  proportion  as  ossification 
has  extended  into  the  dermal  system  of  fishes  it  has  been 
arrested  in  the  vertebrae,  which  in  the  trunk  and  tail  of 
fishes  present  their  least  complex  condition.  Two  of  the 
autogenous  elements,  the  ‘ haemapophyses,’  are  absent,  and 
are  commonly  represented,  in  the  tail,  by  the  modified 
‘ parapophyses.’  The  seeming  complexity  of  a fish’s  ver- 
tebra arises  from  the  intercalation  of  bones  appertaining 
to  the  system  of  the  dermo-skeleton  : it  would  have  been  an 
unusual  exception  to  the  general  course  of  development  if 
the  lowest  of  the  vertebrate  classes  should  have  presented 
the  vertebral  skeleton  in  its  highest  state  of  complication  ; 
and  Geoffroy  St.  Hilaire  was  unfortunate  in  taking  a fish’s 
vertebra  with  its  extrinsic  evertebrate  complications,  as  the 
perfect  type  of  that  primary  segment  of  the  myelencepha- 
lous  skeleton  (fig.  16).  He  was  still  more  unlucky  in  having 
for  tlie  subject  of  his  figure*  a specimen  from  uhich  two 
of  the  pieces  had  been  accidentally  lost,  as  Cuvier  after- 
wards pointed  out ; yet  Geoffroy ’s  mutilated  caudal  ver- 
tebra of  the  plaice  continues  to  be  copied  in  some 
compilations  of  comparative  anatomy,  as  the  type  of  a 
vertebra  I To  obtain  the  dermal  spines  (pro-epial  and  pro- 
cataal)  of  the  vertically  extended  caudal  vertebrae  of  fishes, 

Geoffroy  had  recourse  to  a hypothetical  division  length- 
wise of  the  interneural  and  interhaemal  spines  (which  are 
represented  as  being  single  in  his  figure),  and  to  as  gra- 
tuitous a displacement  of  one  of  the  halves  from  the  side 
to  the  summit  of  the  other  t-  Now  the  interneural  and 
interha;mal  spines  are  actually  double  in  relation  to  the 
neural  and  haemal  spines  ; yet  they  coexist  with  a dermo- 
neural  and  dermohasmal  ray,  which  therefore  needs  no 
imaginary  change  of  place  of  either  of  its  supporting 
spines  to  account  for  its  existence.  I subjoin  in  fig. 

16  an  entire  vertebra  answering  to  the  mutilated  one 
figured  by  Geoffroy  ; and  for  the  better  understanding  of 
the  difference  between  his  determinations  of  the  vertebral 
elements  and  those  given  in  the  present  work,  the  names 
respectively  indicating  those  different  determinations  are 
added  to  the  figure.  In  the  description  of  the  plate  in 
the  ‘ Memoires  du  Museum,’  Geoffroy  explains  that  the 
‘ pro-epial’  is  the  left  half  or  ‘epial  gauche^  and  the  en-epial 
the  right  half  or  ‘ epial  droit' : that  the  en-cataal  is  the  right 
half  or  ‘ cataal  droit,'  and  the  pro-cataal  the  left  half  or  ‘ cataal  gauche,'  of! 
imaginarily  divided  epivertebral  and  catavertebral  elements  (/.  c.  p.  115).  ^ 


Endo-  and  cso-skeii 
letal  elementa  of  il 


a Plaice  (Pleuro-i 
necles). 


* Memoires  du  Museum,  t.  ix.  (1822),  pi.  5,  fig.  1. 
t “ L’une  de  ces  pieces  monte  sur  I’autre  ” — “ 1’ 
I’autre  s’elance  en  dehors,”  ib.  p.  97. 


une  se  maintient  en  dedans,  qui 


5. 


general  homology,  typical  vertehua. 


85 


le  trunk  of  fishes,  in  respect  of  its  viscera  and  the  degree  of  development 
e endoskeleton,  answers  to  the  lumbar  and  caudal  regions  of  air-breath- 
•ertebrates,  where  the  vertehrm  usually  lose  some  of  their  elements,  at 
as  bones.  The  heart  and  respiratory  organs  are  placed  in  the  head  of 
:-ish ; and  it  is  only  in  this  region  that  the  vertebral  segments  attain  tp 
, al  completeness  in  that  class.  Geott’roy,  in  studying  the  special  and 
■nil  homologies  of  the  bones  of  the  head  of  fishes,  blends  indiscrimif 
y,  as  in  the  supposed  typical  vertelira  from  tlie  tail,  elements  of  the 
oskeleton  (suborbitals  and  lacrymals,  e.  g.)  with  those  of  the  endo- 
: ton  ; and  also  presses  the  capsules  of  the  special  organs  of  sense  into  the 
>.)Osition  of  the  seven  cranial  vertebrae  of  his  system.  It  needs  only  to 
.jare  the  synonyms  of  the  elements  of  these  vertebrae  in  Table  III.  to 
five  how  impossible  it  would  have  been  to  have  expressed  the  ideas 
:li  I wish  to  expound  and  illustrate  in  the  present  work  by  the  use  of  the 
-s  for  the  vertebral  elements  proposed  by  Geoffroy,  or  of  english  equi- 
,ts.  The  prefrontals,  e.  (no.  14),  which  I regard  as  the  neurapophyses 
•.  e nasal  vertebra,  are,  according  to  Geoffroy,  epials  of  the  2nd  or  labial 
ibra  in  the  class  of  fishes;  but  are  epials  of  the  1st  or  nasal  vertebra  in 
nrocodile,  according  to  the  tables  given  in  the  ‘Annales  des  Sciences,’  t.  iii. 

; and  ‘Atlas,’  p.  4'4;  whilst  they  are  the  perials  of  the  2nd  vertebra  in 
cheme  of  1825,  cited  in  the  fifth  column  of  Table  III. 

:.iave  deemed  it  requisite  to  enter  the  more  fully  into  the  grounds  for 
;doning  the  analysis  and  nomenclature  of  the  typical  vertebra  proposed 
-eoffroy,  because  they  have  received  the  sanction  in  this  country  of  the 
■ed  Professor  of  Comparative  Anatomy  at  University  College.  Dr.  Grant* 
•srts  the  French  names  into  English  equivalent  phrases;  ‘cy do- vertebral 
3nt’  for  cycleal,  ‘perivertebral  element’  for  perial,  &c. ; and  abandons 
i:dvantage  of  a definite  name,  without  remedying  the  disadvantages  of 
■ouble  employment  of  the  same  names  for  two  distinct  elements,  and  of 
-pplication  of  different  phrases  for  the  same  element.  If,  for  example, 

- eural  spine  of  the  reptile  or  mammal  be,  in  nature,  the  homologue  of 
' eural  spine  of  the  fish,  then  the  latter  is  called  an  ‘ epivertebral  element,’ 

• t the  former  is  called  a ‘ perivertebral  element.’  If  the  dermo-neural 
^s  of  the  dorsal  fin  of  a fish  be,  in  nature,  homologous  with  the  fibro- 
:oentous  tissue  supporting  the  dorsal  fin  of  the  dolphin,  then  the  term 
'ertebral  element  ’ is  applied  to  a spine  of  the  exoskeleton  in  the  fish,  and 
ipine  of  the  endoskeleton  in  the  mammal,  which  spine  co-exists  with  such 
;.al  spine  in  the  fish  (see  fig.  16).  If  the  parapophysis  or  inferior  transverse 
■ess  in  the  fish  be  a distinct  element  from  the  diapophysis  or  superior 
verse  process  in  the  mammal,  the  same  phrase,  ‘paravertebral  element,’ 
'filed  to  each.  Dr.  Grant,  moreover,  gives  the  same  name,  ‘catavertebral 
ents,’  to  the  free  vertebral  ribs  in  fig.  28,  B.  p.  58,  op.  ciL,  as  he  applies 
le  heemapophyses  in  the  tail  of  the  reptile  or  cetacean,  in  fig.  28,  C.  g. 
it.-,  whilst  Geoffroy  applies  the  name  ‘ cataaux  ’ to  the  sternal  ribs,  and 
o the  vertebral  ribs:  as  the  caudal  vertebrae  of  the  menopome  (fig.  28) 

' that  it  is  with  the  sternal  ribs  that  the  chevron  bones  in  the  tails  of  rep- 
and  cetaceans  are  homologous,  both  parts  are  ‘ haemapophyses  ’ in  my 
m.  The  transference  of  the  term  ‘ catavertebral  elements  ’ (for  cataaux), 
the  ‘cotes  sternales’  to  the  pair  of  ribs  extended  from  the  ends  of  the 
nophyses  of  the  abdomen  of  fishes,  is  a deviation  from  the  original  ver- 
d system  of  Geoffroy,  which  seems  to  lead  further  away  from  nature.  If 
meant  that  the  outstretchetl  parapophyses  in  the  diagram  of  the  abdominal 
:bra  of  a fish  ("fig.  28,  B.  f.f.  loc.cit.),  and  which  are  there  called  ‘ para- 
* Outliiiesof  Comparative  Anatomy,  ISSft.pp.  57-59. 


86 


0.\  Tllli  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


vertebral  elements,’  are  the  homologues  of  the  ‘ cotes  vertebrales  ’ of  hi 
vertebrates,  to  which  Geoffroy  assigned  the  name  ‘ paraaux,’  this  appeif 
be  another  misapprehension  of  the  relations  in  question.  I 

Development  of  vertcbrce. — Before  applying  the  idea  of  the  arche. 
vertebra,  or  primary  segment  of  the  endo- skeleton,  given  in  figs.  14.  an 
to  the  elucidation  of  the  modifications  of  those  segments  in  the  differen 
tebrate  classes,  I shall  premise  a few  observations  on  the  mode  of  de\ 
ment  of  tlie  vertebrae  in  those  classes. 

The  chief  condition  of  the  development  of  distinct  vertebrae  in  the  i 
is  the  conjunction  of  nerves  with,  or  their  progress  from  the  spinal  cl 
at  least,  tliis  circumstance,  with  the  concomitant  exit  of  blood-vessels- 
the  neural  canal,  seems  to  determine  the  development  of  the  neurapoph 
and  the  vertebral  bodies  are  not  slow  in  coinciding  in  number  with  thos- 
portant  arches;  and  in  determining  with  the  regular  primary  pairs  of  (i 
costal,  lumbar,  &c.)  arteries,  the  inferior  or  haemal  arches.  We  may  learm 
much  the  development  of  the  neurapophyses  and  vertebral  bodies  dep 
in  the  trunk,  upon  the  conjunction  of  nerves  with  the  spinal  chord,  b 
fact  that,  in  the  regenerated  tails  of  lizards,  the  vertebral  axis  remains 
tinuous  and  unjointed,  because  there  is  no  co-extensive  spinal  chord 
off  pairs  of  nerves.  ■ 

An  extremely  delicate  fibrous  band,  with  successively  accumulated  gcfr 
nous  cells,  compacted  in  the  form  of  a cylindrical  column,  and  inclosed  i 
membranous  sheath,  is  the  primitive  basis,  called  ‘notochord’*  (chorda 
Us  seu  gelatinosa,  Lat.,  gallertsdale  und  ruckensaile,  Germ.),  in  and  arr» 
which  are  developed  the  cartilaginous  or  osseous  elements  by  which# 
vertebral  column  is  established  in  every  class  of  Myelencephala.  # 

The  earlier  stages  of  vertebral  development  are  permanently  represeii 
with  individual  peculiarities  superinduced,  in  the  lower  forms  of  the  cla# 
fishesf . In  the  Dermopteri  or  cyclostomous  fishes,  the  neural  and  hs» 
canals  are  formed  by  a separation  of  the  layers  of  the  outer  part  of  the  # 
neurotic  sheath  of  the  gelatinous  chorda : in  the  lancelet  (Amphioxvs)  t» 
is  no  distinction  of  structure  in  the  cranial  part  supporting  the  anterior 
of  the  neural  axis,  with  which  the  trigeminal,  optic  and  olfactory  nerves  < 
inunicate,  and  the  rest  of  the  rudimental  vertebral  column  : a labial  cil 
laginous  arch  supporting  the  tentacula  is,  at  least,  the  only  lineamerf 
development  which  sketches  out  the  skull.  In  the  myxinoids  the  skull 
eludes  a complex  system  of  cartilages,  but  the  vertebral  column  of  the  tri 
has  not  advanced  beyond  the  gelatino-aponeurotic  stage.  In  the  lam]! 
cartilaginous  laminae  are  developed  in  the  outer  layer  of  the  fibrous  she 
and  give  the  first  indication  of  neural  arches  J.  In  the  sturgeons  (.S'/jd 
Polyodon)  the  inner  layer  of  the  fibrous  capsule  of  the  gelatinous  notoci:' 
has  increased  in  thickness,  and  assumed  the  texture  of  tough  hyaline  c£ 
lage.  In  the  outer  layer  are  developed  distinct,  firm,  and  opake  cf^ 
lages,  the  neurapophyses,  which  consist  of  two  superimposed  pieces  on  e! 
side,  the  basal  portion  bounding  the  neural  canal,  the  apical  portion  P 
parallel  canal  filled  by  fibrous  elastic  ligament  and  adipose  tissue;  above  * 
is  the  single  cartilaginous  neural  spine.  The  parapophyses  are  now  ' 
stinctly  developed,  and  joined  together  by  a continuous  expanded  base,  fo: 
ing  an  inverted  arch  beneath  the  notochord  for  the  vascular  trunks,  ever^ 
the  abdomen.  Pleurapophyses  are  articulated  by  ligament  to  the  ends  of 
* NuJros  back,  xopSrj,  string.  We  have  hitherto  had  no  English  equivalent  for  this 
bryonic  keel  or  basis  of  every  vertebrate  animal : ‘ dorsal  chord  ’ or  ‘ chorda  ’ is  liable 
be  misunderstood  for  the  ‘ spinal  chord.’ 
t Hunterian  Lectures  on  Vertebrata,  1846,  pp.  45,  46. 
t Cuvier,  Memoiros  du  Musdum  d’llistoire  Naturelle,  t.  i.  1815,  p.  130. 


OENERAI-  HOMOLOGY.  DEVELOPMENT  OF  VEHTEDR-E,.  8/ 

-i  ally  projecting  parapophyses  in  the  first  twelve  or  twenty  abdominal  ver- 
<5  £.•  in  the  anterior  ones  these  ‘vertebral  ribs  ’ are  conijmsed  of  two  or 
» distinct  cartilages*  : the  posterior  pleurapophyses  are  short  and  simple. 
I*  parapophyses  gradually  bend  down  to  form  haemal  arches  in  the  tail,  at 
Si  .md  of  which  we  find  haemal  cartilaginous  spines  corresponding  to  the 
B!  ;.al  spines  above.  The  tapering  anterior  end  of  the  notochord  is  con- 
;d  forwards  into  the  basal  elements  of  the  cranial  vertebrae.  Vegetative 
tition  of  perivertebral  parts  not  only  manifests  itself  in  the  composite 
t lapophyses  and  pleurapophyses,  but  in  a small  accessory  (interneural)  car- 
:ii  te,  at  the  fore  and  back  part  of  the  base  of  the  neurapophysis;  and  by  a 
1 .ar  (interhfemal)  one  at  the  fore  and  back  part  of  most  of  the  parapo- 
li’  ■ esf. 

• mongst  the  sharks  (Squalidte)  a beautiful  progression  in  the  further 
lopment  of  a vertebra  has  been  traced  out,  chiefly  by  J.  Muller  J.  In 
5 \ianchus  (Sqitalus  cinereus)  the  vertebral  centres  are  feebly  and  vege- 
> r ely  narked  out  by  numerous  slender  rings  of  hard  cartilage  in  the  noto- 
j udd  capsule,  the  number  of  vertebrae  being  more  definitively  indicated  by 
1 [.neurapophyses  and  parapophyses;  but  these  remain  cartilaginous.  In 
r,  h)iked  dog-fish  (Aeanthias)  and  the  spotted  dog-fish  {^Scyllium)  the  ver- 
I il  centres  coincide  in  number  with  the  neural  arches,  and  are  defined  by 
:i  ;n  layer  of  bone,  which  forms  the  conical  articular  cavity  at  each  end: 

: I vhole  exterior  of  the  centrum  is  covered  by  soft  cartilage,  excejit  at  the 
:i  ..ave  ends ; the  two  thin  funnel-shaped  plates  of  osseous  matter  coalesce 
I ;ueir  perforated  apices,  and  form  a basis  of  the  vertebral  body  like  an 
; -f-glass  ; the  series  of  these  centrums  protecting  a continuous  raoniliform 
:aant  of  the  gelatinous  notochord.  In  the  great  basking-shark  (Selache) 
r^ertebral  bodies  are  chiefiy  established  by  the  terminal  bony  cones,  the 
; ; margins  of  which  give  attachment  to  the  elastic  capsules  containing 
rgelatinous  fluid,  which  now  tensely  fills  the  intervertebral  biconical  spaces. 
• sub-compressed  conical  cavities  extend,  two  from  the  bases  of  the 
aapophyses,  and  two  from  those  of  the  parapophyses,  towards  the  centre 
Tie  vertebral  body,  contracting  as  they  penetrate  it.  These  cavities  always 
i.iin  filled  by  a clear  cartilage  : the  central  two-thirds  of  the  rest  of  the 
‘ebral  body  contain  concentric,  progressively  decreasing,  and  minutely 
-orated  rings  or  cylinders  of  bone,  interrupted  by  the  four  depressions : 
-aeripheral  third  of  the  vertebral  body  contains  longitudinal  bony  laminae, 
•ih  radiate,  perpendicularly  to  the  plane  of  the  outermost  cylinder,  to  the 
. iraference ; these  outer  laminae  lie,  therefore,  parallel  with  the  axis  of  the 
3bra,  and  the  intervening  fissures,  like  those  between  the  concentric  cylin- 
’ within,  are  filled  by  clear  cartilage,  which  shrinks,  and  leaves  them  open 
-le  dry  vertebra §. 

I Cestracion  the  intermediate  part  of  the  centrum  between  the  terminal 
'S  is  strengthened  by  longitudinal  radiating  plates  only  ; in  Squatina  by 
lentric  cylinders  only.  In  the  tope  ( Galcus)  all  the  space  between  the 
final  bony  cones  is  ossified,  except  the  four  conical  cavities,  the  bases 
hich  are  closed  by  the  neur-  and  par-apophyses ; so  that  the  whole 
rior  of  the  centrum  appears  formed  by  smooth  compact  bone. 

1 the  osseous  fishes  I find  that  the  centrum  is  usually  ossified  from  six 
■U,  four  of  which  commence,  as  Rathke||  describes,  in  the  bases  of  the 

Brandt  & Ratzebur^,  Medizinische  Zoologie,  4to,  183.'?,  t.  ii,  pi.  iv.  fig.  1. 

Himterian  Lectures  on  Vertebrata,  18  tfi,  p.  53,  fig.  12. 

See  Agassiz,  Rechercbes  sur  les  Poiss.  Foss.  t.  iii.  pp.  301,  3G‘J. 

"“*«rian  Lectures  on  Vertebrata,  1830,  p.  55,  fig.  13. 

Abhandlungen  zur  Bildungs  und  Entwickclungsgeschichte,  Zweiter  Thcil,  1833,  p 41. 


88 


ox  TIIK  VERTEBRATE  8KELETOX. 


two  neurapophyses  and  the  two  parapophyses ; but  the  terminal  concave.*  ' 
of  the  centrum  are  separately  ossified.  They  coalesce  with  the  intern  • 
part  of  the  centrum,  which  is  sometimes  completely  ossified,  but  comm 
communicating  aperture  is  left  between  the  two  terminal  cones; 
many  cases,  the  plates  by  which  calcification  attains  the  periphery  . 
body  leave  interspaces  permanently  occupied  by  cartilage,  formino-  c 
in  the  dried  vertebra,  especially  at  tlieir  under  part,  or  giving  a reti 
surface  to  the  sides  of  the  centrum.  The  expanded  bases  of  the  neu  1 
par-apophyses  usually  soon  become  confluent  with  the  bony  centrum  • i 
times  first  expanding  so  as  wholly  to  inclose  it,  as,  for  example,  in  theil 
where  the  line  of  demarcation  may  always  be  seen  at  the  border  of  th.l 
cular  concavity,  though  it  is  quite  obliterated  at  the  centre,  as  a s 1 
through  that  part  demonstrates.  1 

Muller  correctly  distinguishes  a ‘central’  from  a ‘peripheral’  (corticat|| 
or  seat  of  the  ossification  of  the  vertebral  bodies  of  fishes.  The  peri  * 
ossification  which  takes  its  rise  from  the  outer  layer  of  the  fibrous  she  f!' 
the  notochord  sometimes  extends  into  broad  plates  beneath  the  anterioi 
tebras  of  the  trunk,  and  tends  to  fix  or  anchylose  a certain  number  of  i3 
when  they  are  commonly  represented  by  the  partially  distinct  central  * 
of  the  bodies,  together  with  the  neur-  and  par-  and  pleur-apophyses.  jr 
The  batracliia  follow  closely  the  stages  above-cited  in  fishes ; the  cen  ■ 
being  arrested  at  the  biconical  stage  in  the  perennibranchiates,  but  con^« 
into  ball-and-socket  vertebrae  by  the  ossification  of  the  interposed  gelat* 
ball*  and  its  adhesion,  either  to  the  fore-part  of  the  centrum  {Pipa,  # 
?na?iclra^,  or  the  back  part  ^Ifana,  ]3ufo^.  The  mode  of  ossification 
centrum  varies  somewhat  in  batracliia.  Miillert  describes  annular  .111 
cations  in  the  sheath  of  the  notochord  of  the  Puna  temporaria  and  /?.  OT 
lenta,  which  support,  at  first,  the  neurapophyses.  Duges,  apparentl  if' 
fluenced  by  M.  berres  so-called  ‘ law  of  centripetal  development,’  desoJr 
two  cartilaginous  nuclei,  side  by  side;  but  the  more  obvious  and  bette.^ 
termined  development  of  the  vertebrae  of  fishes  gives  no  countenance  t(|ip 
bilateral  beginning  of  ossification  of  the  centrum  as  a general  law.  Th.  # 
distinct  bony  nucleus  in  the  centrum  observed  by  Duges  w^as  bilobedj. 
afterwards  cubical ; but  excavated  before  and  behind,  as  well  as  bene.# 
The  ossification  of  the  centrum  is  completed  by  an  extension  of  bone 
the  bases  of  the  neurapophyses,  which  effect,  also,  the  coalescence  of  i 
with  the  centrum.  In  Pelobates  fusctis,  and  Pelobafes  cul tripes,  Muller  fW 
the  entire  centrum  ossified  from  this  source,  w'ithout  any  independent  p - *1 
of  ossification.  £ 

Tlie  vertebras  of  the  tail  of  the  larvae  of  the  anourans  are  represente.  | 
stinctly  only  in  the  aponeurotic  stage.  Even  when  the  change  to  cart"* 
takes  place,  the  tendency  to  coalescence  has  begun  to  operate,  and  only  “ 
long  neurapophyses  are  established  on  each  side:  the  ossification  of  t' t' 
plate, s extends  into  the  fibrous  sheath  of  the  remnant  of  the  coccygeal  r j / 
chord,  and  they  coalesce  when  the  perishable  parts  of  the  tadpole-tail  h J 
been  absorbed,  and  the  fore-  and  hind-legs  developed,  constituting  the  1 1 
often  hollow',  and  inferiorly  grooved  coccygeal  bony  style.  " j 

In  saurians,  birds  and  mammals,  the  notochord  is  inclosed  by  carti  ■ ? 
before  ossification  begins;  which  cartilage  is  continuous  with  the  cartil  *: 
nous  neurapophyses  §.  In  birds,  the  tw'o  histological  processes,  chondril 

* Dutrochet,  Memoires  pour  servir  d I’Histoire  Nat.  et  Physiol,  des  Aniraaux,  &c.,  ^ 

p.  302.  1837. 

t Neurologic  der  Myxinoiden,  1840,  p.  69. 

J Recherches  sur  les  Batraciens,  1835,  4to,  p.  106. 

§ Muller,  Vergleicheiide  Auatomie  dcr  Myxinoideii,  Neurologic,  1840,  p.  74. 


general  homology. 


CHARACTERS  OE  VERTEBR.E. 


89 


ti  and  ossification,  do  not  precisely  follow  the  same  route.  In  the  centrums 
ii-  he  dorsal  and  cervical  vertebrae  of  the  chick  chondrification  is  centripetal: 
Sl  e"ins  from  two  points  at  the  sides  and  proceeds  inwards,  the  middle  line 
■-  he  under  surface  of  the  primitive  notochord  resisting  the  change  longest. 

I , when  the  lateral  cartilages  have  here  coalesced,  ossification  begins  at 
middle  line  and  diverges  laterally  ; the  primitive  nuclei  of  the  bony  cetitres 
> earing  as  bilobed  ossicles,  anil  its  direction  is  centrifugal.  The  lobes 
c.  ;nd  to  embrace  the  shrivelled  remnant  of  the  chorda,  like  the  hollow  ver- 
.-al  centres  in  fishes.  Only  in  the  sacral  vertebrae  has  ossification  been 
■,j  I to  begin  from  two  distinct  points  at  the  middle  line.  The  bases  of 
t r separately  ossifying  neurapophyses  extend  over  much  of  the  centrum, 
r soon  coalesce  with  it.  In  reptiles  a greater  proportion  of  the  centrum 
• ssified  from  an  independent  point,  and  the  bases  of  the  neurapophyses 
fl  remain  permanently  distinct  and  united  to  the  centrum  by  suture.  In 
I anmals,  as  in  fishes,  the  centrum  is  ossified  from  an  anterior  and  posterior 

i ttre,  establishing  the  articular  surfaces,  as  well  as  from  an  intermediate 
. iUt.  This  is  considerably  overlapped  by  the  bases  of  the  neurapophyses, 

)ore  they  coalesce  with  the  centrum.  The  three  primitive  parts  of  the 

ii  atrum  remain  longest  distinct  in  the  cetacea.  The  body  of  the  human 
?s  is  sometimes  ossified  from  two,  rarely  from  three,  distinct  centres  placed 

t; : j by  side  *.  From  these  ascertained  diversities  in  the  mode  of  formation 
t;  -he  central  element  of  the  vertebra,  it  will  be  seen  how  little  developmental 
- -racters  can  be  relied  on  as  affecting  the  determination  of  homologous  parts. 

Tieneral  Characters  of  Vertebrce  cf  the  Trunk. — The  ossified  parts  of  the 
•)  lominal  vertebrae  of  osseous  fishes  answer  to  c,  centrum;  n,  neurapo- 
. -'ses;  n s,  neural  spine  ; p,  parapophyses ; pi,  pleurapophyses ; and  a,  ap- 
, idages  (fig.  17). 

. IThe  neurapophyses  com- 
L r nly  coalesce  with  their  re- 
^ ctive  centrums;  except  in 
^ case  of  the  atlas,  where  the 
!iral  arch  is  sometimes  quite 
-Orated  from  the  centrum, 

. 1 wedged  between  those  of 
? occiput  and  second  verte- 
l U I have  found  also  the 
. arapophyses  of  the  two  last 
I idal  vertebrae  unanchylosed 
their  centrums  in  a large 
k-perch  {Centropristis  gigus, 

) in  which  the  five  terminal 
;mal  arches  and  spines  re- 
jined  similarly  distinct,  and 
'.iculated  with  the  centrums 
low.  In  the  carp  and  pike, 
j primitive  independence  of 
th  neurapophyses  and  par- 
ophyses  is  more  general  and 
-iger  maintained.  In  the  le- 
losiren  the  vertebral  bodies  are  not  developed,  the  notochord  being  per- 
tent ; but  the  peripheral  vertebral  elements  are  well-ossified  : the  neiir- 
ophysps  in  this  fish  remain  distinct  from  the  neural  spines;  and  the  litemal 
ines  are  in  like  manner  moveably  articulated  to  the  limmal  arches.  These 

* Meckel,  Archiv  fiir  die  l’lij»iolo"ie,  lid.  i.  (18ir>)  t.  vi.  fig.  I. 


Fig.  17. 


90 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


gradually  bent-down  ribs*  which  are  formed  ; 
preted  hv  by  unusually  elongated  ‘ parapophyses’  (if  they  be  . 

Phy»e,  a^Uc:iaTed‘'te"4  ‘l.e«h  T ^ f ‘ ’ 

Eo'th^l’aT'  r<h‘^  *»' ‘h 

hiah  homology  of  the  caudal  inferior  arch  u 

higher  reptiles  and  mammals.  The  unusual  size  and  leneth  of  the  -iT 

u®  evinces  the  natural  character  of  the  order 

thim,  in  which  they  have  been  grouped  together  by  Professor  Muller- 

EoavZfiT  r"T“'^’,  ’"J'  *'“«  -<*  »'“^er  in  ^^"1.  i 
y hes  the  costal  arch  in  the  abdomen  is  completed  bv  the  anonen 

portions  of  the  mvocominatat,  which  tiLe  rt 

inscriptionitendinecemusc. 

f he  fi  h anthropotomy).  Indeed,  when  we  reflect  that  the  trun  I 

the  fi.h,  by  reason  of  the  advanced  position  of  the  heart  and  breathing  ore] 
answers  to  the  abdominal  and  caudal  regions  of  the  trunk  of  hi<rher  vr 
brates,  we  could  hardly  expect  the  typical  vertebra  to  be  there  carried  oi, 
osseous  tissue ; but  rather  be  prepared  to  find  the  haemapophyses  retaiil 

^bdome. 

thTpL3rfir‘°"d  ° myocommata  immediately  be4 

the  pectoral  fin  ; and  is  obviously  the  ossified  serial  homologue  of  the  hmH 

Hp  ' f ’f succeeding  myocommata.  It  is  usua 
coScofd  Xn  superiorly  to  the  inner  side  of  ! 

tiratl^'ai  d ?n  h i *"  Batrachus,  it  becomes  attacheo. 

tm  m!  . " Argyreiosus  votner  it  meets  and  joins  its  fellow  bel. 

foimiiig  a true  inverted  or  hmmal  arch,  parallel  with,  but  more  slender  tlj 

fiXaDllUk  H-ff  r T’  the  costal  arch  as  an  ossif 

hmmapophysis  differing  from  the  typical  vertebra  (fig.  15)  only  by  the  n. 

development  of  a sternum  or  haamal  spine  ; and  there  appears  to  be  as  lit 

to  S thL costol  o " particular  segment  of  the  eidoskeleton  to  wh.  • 

to  refer  thiscostal  or  inverted  arch ; its  immediate  succession  to  the  corresnoit 

ing  arch  attached  to  the  occiput,  as  well  as  the  occasional  direct  attachme 
indicating  that  segment  to  be  the  atlas  or  first  vertebra  of  the  trunk.  , 
1 fie  best-marked  general  character  of  the  vertebral  column  of  the  trunk 
the  class  P^sres  is  that  which  Professor  J.  Muller  first  pointed  out  ^ t 

l?vn7p!?  7 .P,a*'apopl*yses  ; the  exceptions  being  offered  by  the  gano. 
polj  pterus  and  lepidosteus  and  the  protopterous  lepidosiren.  The  pleuran. 

nhvs7s  aftPr7l“^7“^®’  ordinary  osseous  fishes  from  the  parap  h 

physes  after  the  transmutation  of  these  into  the  hamal  arches.  The  dor, 

* Linn.  Trans,  vol.  xviii.  pi.  23,  fig.  4,  a:  x. 

p.  55?.""“'’'®  i"  Taylor’s  Scientific  Memoirs,  vol  ‘ 


J Lectures  on  Vertebrata,  1846,  p.  163,  fig.  44,  f,p. 


GENERAL  HOMOLOGY. 


Cll.VBACTERS  OF  VEB'J’EnR.'E. 


91 


' IV,  and  salmon  yield  this  striking  refutation  of  the  idea  of  the  formation 
J lose  arches  in  all  fishes,  by  displaced,  curtailed  and  approximated  ribs.  lu 
r -e  fishes,  however  (e.ff.  the  cod),  reduced  pleurapophyses  coalesce  with  the 
' pophyses  to  form  the  hremal  arches  of  the  caudal  vertebrm.  1 he  meno- 
' e,  amongst  the  lowest  or  pcrennibranchiate  reptiles,  yields  a clear  disproof 
^ he  formation  of  the  haemal  arch  in  the  tail  by  the  pleurapophyses  (the 
-s,  viz.  called  by  GeoftVoy  ‘ paraux,’ and  by  Dr.  Grant  ‘ catavertebral  ele- 
■*  ’ ts  ’ in  the  abdomen  of  fishes)*.  The  vertebral  ribs  or  pleurapophyses  in 
menopome  (fig.  2S,  pl)  are  short  and  simple  and  suspended  to  the  extre- 
, es  of  the  diapophyses  (d)  at  the  beginning  of  the  tail,  where  they  coexist 
^ I haemal  arches  (4,  4)  : these  must  be  formed,  therefore,  by  different  ele- 
^ hts,  which,  since  no  trace  of  parapophyses  exists  in  any  part  of  the  spine, 
’’  include  to  be  the  ‘ haemapophyses.’  The  young  crocodile  and  the  adult 
liosaurs  give  the  same  evidence  of  the  nature  of  the  haemal  arches  in  the 
' with  which  the  corresponding  arches  or  chevron-bones,  in  cetacea  and 
ly  other  mammalia,  are  homologous. 

'•  -’hus  the  contracted  haemal  arch  in  the  caudal  region  of  the  body  may  be 
' med  by  different  elements  of  the  typical  vertebra : e.  g.  by  the  parapophyses 
mes  generally)  ; by  the  pleurapophyses  (lepidosiren)  ; by  both  parapophy- 
land  plenrapophyses  (Sudis,Lepidosteus),  and  by  haemapophyses,  shortened 
e directly  articulated  with  the  centrums  (reptiles  and  mammals)f.  The 
' idal  vertebrae  of  some  flat-fishes  (PleuroiiectidcB,  fig.  16),  and  the  mu- 

• lae,  would  seem  to  disprove  the  parapophysial  homology  of  the  haemal  arches 
iuch  fishes,  since  transverse  processes  from  the  sides  of  the  body  coexist 

“ 1 them,  as  they  do  in  the  cetacea.  But,  if  we  trace  the  vertebral  modifi- 
ons  throughout  the  entire  column  in  any  of  these  fishes,  we  shall  find  that 
^ ' haemal  arches  are  actually  parts  of  the  transverse  processes,  not  independ- 

• - elements,  as  in  the  cetacea  ; but  due  to  a progressive  bifurcation  ; this,  in 
^ ''.rana  Helena,  for  example,  begins  at  the  end  of  the  transverse  processes 
^ i xbout  the  twenty-fifth  vertebra,  the  forks  diverging  as  the  fissure  deepens, 

■ il,  at  about  the  seventy-third,  the  lower  fork  descends  at  a right  angle  to 

upper  one  (which  remains  to  represent  the  transverse  process),  and, 
■Eting  its  fellow,  forms  the  haemal  arch,  and  supports  the  antero-posteriorly 
ixanded  haemal  spine.  In  the  plaice  a small  process  is  given  off  from  the 
xanded  base  of  the  descending  parapophysis  of  the  first  caudal  vertebra, 
ich  increases  in  length  in  the  second,  rises  upon  the  side  of  the  body  in 

■ third,  becomes  distinct  from  the  parapophysis  in  the  fourth,  and  gradually 
: linishes  to  the  ninth  or  tenth  caudal  vertebra,  when  it  disappears.  These 

irious  transverse  processes  never  support  ribs. 

The  neurapophyses  are  often  directly  perforated  by  the  nerves  in  fishes, 
t are  sometimes  notched  by  them,  or  the  nerves  issue  at  their  interspaces. 
The  neurapophyses,  which  do  not  advance  beyond  the  cartilaginous  stage  in 
■i  sturgeon,  consist  in  that  fish  of  two  distinct  pieces  of  cartilage;  and  the  an- 
ior  pleurapophyses  also  consist  of  two  or  more  cartilages,  set  end  on  end : and 
3 interesting  compound  condition  is  repeated  in  cases  where  the  pleurapo- 
ysial  element  is  ossified  and  required  to  perform  unusual  functions  in  the 
ny  state  in  other  fishes.  Amongst  the  more  special  or  exceptional  modifi- 
tions  of  the  vertebrte  of  the  trunk  of  fishes,  which  indicate  the  extent  to 
•ich  their  normal  segmental  character  may  be  marked,  I would  cite  those  of 
3 anterior  vertebrm  in  the  pipe-fishes,  in  the  loaches,  and  in  certain  siluroids. 
In  the  Fixlularia  lahaccaria  (Bl.  1,  fig.  6)  the  four  anterior  vcrtebrie  are 
uch  elongated  ; the  second  one  even  to  eight  times  the  length  of  the  or- 
• Outl.nes  of  Comparative  Anatomy,  p.  5H,  fig.  28,  H,  g. 

t By  a muconception  of  the  sense  in  which  I use  the  term  ‘ haimapophyscs,’  M.  Agassiz 
s applied  it  to  the  lamina;  of  the  inferior  or  hicmal  arches  in  fishes.  “ Kecherches  snr  les 
iss.  Foss."  tom.  i.  p.  9.i. 


92 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


timy  irS  “i'-M‘“W=r  of  these  8e 

communication  with  the  prXn'gaTio'n'  or'S'^f  iTe  W™riX» 

In  a large  South  American  siluroid  fish  (ib  fie-s  ‘K  nml  r r a 

tlneC  IVdJoKT''"  ‘™"kapp“en.ly  r"™ed 

s?de  c vh  ^it  a /h,n.,hiT  ' r“  " ‘"“"eolat  plate  outaards  on  . 
e,  giving  It  a rhomboidal  figure,  viewed  from  below:  these  plates  in 

and  inEeIn  breS  P^rapophyses  (p,  5, 4, 3,  a:,  a),  which  asi 

Pinul  f/  ^ they  approach  the  skull,  where  they  join  the  pa 

c p tals  ^o)  a,  they  are,  themselve,.  joined  together  so  as  {^0^  T 
tinuous  broad  oblique  outstanding  piate  of  bone.  Above  these  the  contim  i 
bony  neural  arch  is  perforated  for  the  exit  of  Bvc  pairs  of  Mr’vls  the  do 
Tht  escaping  separately,  as  in  the  sacrum  of  birds  (fig.’s  n x 

suSaoc dpitat  "on  n tL^ov^ha’n  , 

o/the  bS“of  °;.eTe;SbL  ri"?  f i'  T'r7- ‘'‘r"*™'  p 

the  notochord,  distinctly  marked  out,’  and  presc'rving°i'n  thdr  omS” 

Ko  a"  th^ST'd^  8*“"“-  '-“i-  of  Ibrnotoe 

although  the  rest  of  the  circumference  of  such  centrums  were  anchvlo 

to  the  coitical  or  peripheral  parts  developed  from  the  capsule  of  the^nr 

chord,  VIZ.  to  the  contmuous  expanded  plate  of  bone  (c  e)  below,  to  the  pa 

pophyses  laterally,  and  to  the  neurapophyses  above.  The  body  of  the^f 

vertebra,  or  atlas  (ca),  presented  the  exception  of  being  quite  detached  fr 

Its  elevated  parapophyses,  as  well  as  from  its  neural  arfh  At  vvas  ^ 

os^  r.s“tt7„f't ‘Ih”'"  ’'b!,'»>‘'yof‘'>o  -cond  ver’,:“b™aTS 
as  long  as  that  of  the  atlas  : yet  the  apices  of  the  two  deep  terminal  iel 

filled  cones  extended  to  and  met  in  its  centre.  The  bodies  of  the  third  a 
Sp  fi  irr  r ®'°“gated,  but  less  so  than  that  of  the  axis  : the  body 
lomr  n ®)  Singularly  modified;  its  anterior  half  presentin/i 

ong  and  slender  character  of  the  antecedent  vertebrm  ; whilsUhe  poTt! 
half  w^  suddenly  shortened,  but  extended  in  depth  and  breadth  so  as 
t s*>allow  posterior  concavity  to  that  of  the^short  and  broad  body 

iarL"  r ? C’’"  ^ by  otherrof  siSi 

chaiacter.  I have  seen  few  more  remarkable  instances  of  adherence  to  tvi 

ulTravWcf  ^iXT  'r  of  biconeVve'i; 

cular  cavities,  with  the  elastic  capsules  and  contained  fluid,  in  the  centrui 
of  these  five  rigidly  fixed  anterior  vertebra:  of  the  siluroid  fish. 

Unerff  plate  supporting  those  centrums  was  perforat 

[c/f)  vTztv  mode  of  formation  ofahmmal  can 

nAhln'  f ossification  in  and  from  the  lower  part  of  the  outer  lay 

J p notochord  : the  carotid  hmmal  canal  in  tCnecS 

^he  ichthyosaurus  deriv 

additional  strength  and  fixation  from  apparently  detached  development^ 

I Si'phiiipdT  pi  u. 


GENERAL  HOMOLOGY.  CHARACTERS  OF  VERTEBRAE. 


93 


' The  so-called  ‘ body  of  the  atlas’  in  recent  saurians,  birds,  mammals  and 
‘ 1,  is  the  homologue  of  the  first  of  these  snbvertebral  wedge-bones,  and 
' rresents  only  the  inferior  cortical  part  of  such  body.  The  odontoid  pro- 
. i of  the  axis  is  the  central  and  main  part  of  the  body  of  the  atlas.  It 
not  be  the  anterior  articular  epiphysis  of  the  second  vertebra,  since  this 
' 'cpresented  bv  a distinct  centre  of  ossification  between  the  odontoid  process 
! the  body  of  that  vertebra,  according  to  Professor  Muller’s  observation 
' ,i  foetal  foal*,  and  the  odontoid  exists  in  birds  and  reptiles  in  which  the 
lies  of  the  vertebrae  have  no  terminal  epiphyses  as  in  young  mammals. 

The  diverging  appendages  of  the  haemal  arch  in  the  abdominal  vertebrae  of 

* nes  present  the  form  of  long  and  slender  spines  (fig.  17,  a a),  usually  at- 
' rhed  to,  or  near  the  head  of  the  ribs,  and  extending  upwards,  outwards 

■ 1 backwards,  between  the  dorsal  and  lateral  portions  of  the  muscular 
anents,  to  which  they  afford  a firmer  fulcrum  or  basis  of  attachment ; 

'■  :nng,  therefore,  as  so  many  pairs  of  rudimental  and  eoncealed  limbs.  They 
^ I termed  the  ‘ obere  rippe’  by  Meckel,  and  at  the  fore-part  of  the  abdomen 
'the  polypterus  they  are  stronger  than  the  pleurapophyses  themselves. 

■ the  vertebras  approach  the  tail  these  appendages  are  often  transferred 
ddually,  from  the  pleurapophysis  to  the  parapophysis,  or  even  to  the  cen- 

■ and  neural  arch. 

;.n  the  air-breathing  vertebrata,  in  which  the  heart  and  breathing  organs 
transferred  backwards  to  the  trunk,  the  corresponding  osseous  segments 

* • the  skeleton  are  in  most  instances  developed  to  their  typical  complete- 
' ss,  in  order  to  encompass  and  protect  those  organs.  The  thoracic  haemapo- 
' ifses  in  the  crocodiles  are  partially  ossified,  and  in  birds  (fig.  15,  h,  h)  com- 
•'  '(tely  so;  in  which  class  the  haemalspinesof  the  thorax  (As)coalesce  together, 

■•:;ome  much  expanded  laterally,  and  usually  develope  a median  crest  down- 
‘ rrds  to  increase  the  surface  of  attachment  for  the  great  muscles  of  flight. 

' -is  speciality  is  indicated  by  the  name  ‘ sternum’  applied  to  the  confluent 

- rments  in  question.  The  abdominal  hsemapophyses  and  spines  retain  their 
^ ronitive  aponeurotic  condition,  though  still  preserving  their  characteristic 

joansion  f.  In  the  crocodiles  and  enaliosaurs  the  abdominal  hsemapophyses 
iaiso  ossified ; and,  in  the  latter,  they  manifest  the  same  composite  character 
= . ich  has  been  noticed  in  the  pleurapophyses  of  the  sturgeon,  consisting  of 
; ee  or  more  pieces,  which  overlap  each  other  J.  The  abdominal  haemal 
. nes,  in  the  Plesiosaurus  Hawkinsii,  are  transversely  extended,  they  are 

■ '.rked  a,  c in  the  figure  quoted  below  : the  compound  hsemapophyses  them- 
= ' ves  are  marked  5 5 in  the  same  figure. 

■ .The  typical  thoracic  vertebrae  of  birds  support  diverging  appendages  (fig. 

- , a,  a),  either  anchylosed  as  in  most,  or  articulated  as  in  the  penguin  and 

T teryx,  to  the  posterior  border  of  the  pleurapophysis  The  function  of  . 

- ; appendages  in  this  form  of  typical  vertebra  is  to  connect  one  haemal  arch 

* th  the  next  in  succession,  so  as  to  associate  the  turn  in  action,  and  to  give 
mness  and  strength  to  the  whole  thoracic  cage.  (A  portion  of  the  next 
I so  overlapped  is  shown  at  pi,  a,  fig.  15.) 

With  regard  to  the  connections  of  the  pleurapophyses,  we  have  seen  that, 
fishes,  they  may  be  directly  attached  to  the  centrum,  or  to  the  ends  of  the 

Srapophyses  (fig.  17,y?),or  they  may  be  quite  detached  from  their  proper  seg- 
mt,  and  suspended  to  the  haemal  arch  of  another  vertebra,  as  in  the  case  - 
the  clavicle  (fig.  25,  ss').  In  batrachians,  ophidians,  and  lacertians,  the 
Dximal  end  of  the  pleurapophysis  is  simple,  as  in  fishes,  but  is  articulated 

* Vergleichende  Anatomie  der  Myxinoiden.  Abhand.  Akad.  der  Wissenseb.  Berlin, 
p.  105.  -f  .Myology  of  Apteryx,  Zool.  Trans.,  vol.  iii.  pt.  iv.  pi.  35,  g*,  y*. 

♦ Dockland,  Bridgewater  Treatise,  vol.  ii.  pi.  18,  fig.  3. 


94 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


or  f"om  Z T.  r r ® P^^ess  from  the  side  of  the  ceR 

part  Tom  tit  f ‘ ‘liapophysis,’  which  is  a dit  ' 

KrooTl  t ^"togenous  parapophyses  in  fishes.  The  anterior  verti 
of  crocodiles  have  an  exogenous  inferior  transverse  process  from  the  si] 
the  centrum,  answering  to  the  ‘ parapophysis,’  as  welUs  a superior  trans- 
process or  diapophysis’  developed  from  the  base  of  the  neurapophysis  • 
the  proximal  end  of  the  pleurapophysis  bifurcates  and  articulLt  with’  i 
transverse  processes,  circumscribing  with  them  a foramen  at  the  side  o I 
centrum.  A similar  structure  obtains  in  the  cervical  and  anterior  tho 
vertebrae  of  birds  and  mammals:  thus  the  rib  {pi)  in  fig.  15  articulates  wit)' 
parapophysis  p and  the  diapophysis  d.  Very  few,  however,  of  the  tho 
lbs  in  the  cetaceans  offer  this  structure ; the  first  or  second  rib  may  reaclk 
centrum  but  the  rest  are  appended  to  the  ends  of  the  long  diaS™ 
a character  of  affinity  to  the  saurians  is  thus  manifested.  The  cervica 
gmn  IS  distinguished  by  the  shortness  of  the  pleurapophyses  and  the  absH 
of  bony  haemapophyses,  in  saurians,  birds,  and  mammals ; but  in  the  wu 
b ooded  closes  the  short  floating  vertebral  ribs  soon  anchylose  to  the  di 


j , o xiwo  ouuii  cuiuiiyiose  to  tne  di 

pliyses  and  parapophyses,  and  constitute  thereby  the  ‘anterior  roots  of  4 

anthropotomy  * The  cervical  pleur  T 


physes  are  indicated  diagrammatically  at  pi,  in  the’neck  of  the  embryrski 
ton  (bg.  25)  : those  of  the  seventh  cervical  vertebrm  sometimes  attain  in 


1 


human  subject  proportions  which  acquire  for  them  the  name  of  ‘ ribs 
pleurapophyses  retain  their  moveable  articulation  in  the  ninth,  and  someti  | 
the  eighth,  vertebrae  of  the  elongated  peck  of  the  three-toed  sloths +.  f 

I he  thoracic  or  dorsal  vertebrae  of  mammalia  are  characterized  by  the  fret  3 
ticulations  of  the  pleurapophyses  (fig.  25,  pi)  : most  of  these  are  much  el-l 
gated,  and  most,  if  not  all,  support  haemapophyses  (ib,  h)  ; which,  in  a gre;  i 
or  less  number  of  the  anterior  vertebrae,  articulate  with  hmmal  spines  (ib./f 
completing  the  arch  ; these  spines  commonly  remain  distinct,  and  are  cal 


some  ‘sternebers,’  others  ‘manubrium,’  and  ‘xiphoid  appendage,’  and 
gether  they  constitute  the  ‘sternum.’  In  most  mammals  the  thoracic  ha 


P pliyses  are  cartilaginous:  they  become  ossified  in  Dasypus,  Myrmecopha\ 
the  megatlierioids  and  monotremes.  The  hinder  pleurapophyses,  whidi  n 
gressively  dimimsh  in  length,  also,  usually  become  simply  suspended  to 
diapophyses;  all  the  ribs  are  so  attached  in  Balmia  loncjimana,  accord 
to  Kudolphi.  'The  lumbar  vertebrae,  which  in  some  mammals  show,  in  ' 
foetal  state,  distinct  rudiments  of  pleurapophyses  more  minute  than  th 
in  the  neck,  have  them  soon  aiichylosed  to  the  extremities  of  the  diai 
physes,  which  are  thus  elongated  ; and  the  vertebra  is  characterized  in  anth 
jiotomy  as  ‘ having  no  ribs,  but  simple  imperforate  transverse  processes.’  Tl 
hmmapophyses  of  these  segments  of  the  skeleton  are  represented  by  h 
inscriptiones  tendinem’  (fig.  25,  h!')  ; they  do  not  advance  even  to  the  st/ 
of  cartilage,  but  retain  the  primitive  condition  which  they  presented  in  fd 
corresponding  part  of  the  trunk  in  fishes. 

If  a vertebra  succeeding  the  lumbar  or  abdominal  ones  have  its  hmn 
arch  completed,  as  in  the  thorax,  by  pleurapophyses  and  haemapophys- 
with  diverging  appendages,  forming  the  ‘ pelvic  arch  and  hind  or  low 
limbs  (fig.  28,  n,  h,  a),’  it  is  called  a ‘sacrum’.  If  two  or  more  vertebr. 
anchylose  together,  without  such  completion  of  the  typical  character,  tli 
likewise  are  said  to  form  a ‘ sacrum,’  of  which  an  example  may  be  found 


t Prof.  Th.  Bell.  Trans.  Zool.  Society,  i.  p.  H.'j.  pi.  U6.  a,  b. 


general  homology. 


CHARACTERS  OK  VERTEBRAi. 


95 


. wo  or  three  anterior  caudal  vertebrae  of  certain  flat-fislies  {Pleuro- 
4,  la*),  characterized  as  usual  by  the  simple  parapophysiul  haemal  arch, 
ost  air-breathing  vertebrates  the  sacrum  is  characterized  by  both  modifica- 
, which  are  carried  out  to  their  extreme  in  birds ; in  no  other  class  is  so 
a proportion  of  the  vertebral  column  converted  into  a ‘sacrum’  by 
-scence  (e.  seventeen  vertebi'ae  in  Struthio)  : in  none  is  the  diverging 
tj  adage  developed  to  such  enormous  proportions  (e.  y.  Apteryx,  Dinornis). 

: centrums  of  the  middle  sacral  vertebrae  (fig.  27,  c i— i)  are  expanded 

I versely,  but  depressed,  and  converted  into  horizontal  plates  : the  neur- 
Sj.  'hyses  (lA.  n i-j)  are  lofty,  expanded,  and  arch  over  the  dilated  part  of 
v!  leural  canal,  lodging  the  great  sacral  enlargement  of  the  myelon,  with 
mtricle.  In  the  young  ostrich,  before  the  general  anchylosis  is  completed, 
oases  of  these  neurapophyses  are  found  to  cross  the  interspaces  of  the 
^ -unis,  and  to  rest  equally  upon  two  of  those  elements.  This  modifica- 
^ was  retained  throughout  life,  unobliterated  by  anchylosis,  in  the  sacrum 
^ :ae  extinct  dinosaurs  (^Iguanodon,  Meyalosannis,  Hylceosaurus),  and  it 
ms  in  the  dorsal  vertebra  of  the  chelonians.  The  adjoining  portions 
, I je  centrums  and  neurapophysis  extend  outwards  into  a short  parapo- 
( ds,  which  affords  an  articular  surface  of  three  facets  for  the  short  pleur- 
..  hysis.  One  of  these  elements  is  figured  in  situ  a.t  pi,  fig.  27  ; it  expands 
Ss  distal  end,  and  coalesces  there  with  the  contiguous  pleurapophyses  : 
ong  diapophyses  (d,  d)  abut  against  tlie  inner  side,  and  the  ilium  applies 
’to  the  outer  side  of  these  expanded  and  anchylosed  ends  of  the  short 
id  ribs.  The  spinous  processes  of  the  sacral  vertebras  (s,  s)  are  developed 
rro-posteriorly,  and  soon  coalesce  into  a lofty  longitudinal  crest  of  bone. 

■ i:ie  chelonians,  the  dorsal  spines  develope  horizontal  plates  from  their  ex- 
lities,  which  unite  by  suture  to  the  similarly  united  and  expanded  pleur- 
shyses,  forming  with  them  the  ‘ carapace.’  The  ‘ plastron  ’ is  formed  of 

, iflattened  and  expanded  haemal  spines,  which  are  divided  in  the  middle 
; and  have  an  intercalated  bone  (entosternal)  between  the  halves  of  the 
■ ral  pieces.  Professor  Muller  has  noticed  the  sacral  pleurapophyses  in 
' 'human  and  other  mammalian  embiyosf. 

; -X  the  segments  of  the  endo-skeleton  approach  the  end  of  the  tail,  in  the 
oreathing  vertebrates,  they  are  usually  progressively  simplified  ; first  by 
^diminution,  coalescence  and  final  loss  of  the  pleurapophyses  ; next  by  the 

■ ;lar  diminution  and  final  removal  of  the  haemal  and  neural  arches ; and 

• etimes  also  by  the  coalescence  of  the  remaining  central  elements,  either 

a long  osseous  style,  as  in  the  anourous  batrachia,  or  into  a shorter 
■lened  disc  “which  has  the  shape  of  a ploughshare +,”  as  in  many  birds. 
: coalesced  representative  of  the  terminal  vertebral  centrums  is  developed 
icipally  from  the  outer  layer  of  the  fibrous  capsule  of  the  primitive  noto- 
rd.  In  fishes,  however,  the  seat  of  the  terminal  degradation  of  the  verte- 
. column  is  first  and  chiefly  in  the  central  elements,  which,  in  the  homo- 
als§,  are  commonly  blended  together  and  shortened  by  absorption,  whilst 
a neural  and  hsemal  arches  remain,  with  increased  vertical  extent,  and 
.cate  the  number  of  the  metamorphosed  or  obliterated  centrums. 

Jfanterian  I.ectures  on  Vertebrata,  1846,  p.  6f>,  fig.  22. 

“SelMt  am  Kreuzbeine  mehrere  Thiere  giebt  es  noch  abgesonderte  Querfortsatze  oder 

• ^enrndimente.” — Anatomic  der  Myxinoiden,  heft  i.  18.34,  p.  239. 

“ I.a  derniere  de  toutes  (des  vertebrea  de  la  queue),  a laqucllclcs  pennes  sont  attacbces, 

! pus  grande  et  a la  forme  d’un  soe  de  cbarrue,  ou  d’un  disque  comprime  : — dans  Ic  jcune 
.a  ■ ***  Evidemment  composeede  plusieurs  vertebres." — Cuvier,  Lemons  d'Anat.  Comp, 
’‘r  '•  P- 208.  and  “ I..awrence’8  Rlumenbach’s  Comparative  Anatomy,”  ed.  1827,  p.  62. 

• '•  Agassiz'  expressive  name  for  the  fish  with  a symmetrical  hilobed  tail. 


96 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


Su7nmuri/  of  modifications  of  corjjoral  vertebrce  —To  sum  u>.  fli»  L • 

homolofTv  ‘ without  masking  tl.eir 

liomology.we  may  commence  with  the  centrum-,  and  first,  as  to  its  Pvi 

It  ^ wanting,  aa  an  oasified  part,  in  the  atia,  of  the  womh“  Ld  S ' 
wh  ch  It  remains  permanently  cartilaginous  ; in  the  petaurists  kani 
and  potoroos,  ossification  extends  from  the  bases  nf  tho  r,  ' 
this  cartilage,  but  the  neural  arch  or  ring  lon^  rLainsIn^rZ"^ 

fissure  below.  In  man  the  rudimeiital  body  of  the  atlas^ is  somo 
ossified  from  two  or  even  three  distinct  centres  f.  The  centrums  atT' 
site  extremity  of  the  vertebral  column  in  homocerca!  Shts^a^e 
centripetal  shortening  and  bony  confluence  fewer  in  number  tliM^h 
sistent  neural  and  haemal  arches  of  that  na.  t Ti,r.  * ® 
beyond  the  primitive  stage  of  the  noSodio^d  tie  IZ  T-  ^ • "" 
they  retained  the  like  rudimental  state  in  every  fish  whos^rLSsTave' 

^f"vp^t"i  j.fie  permian  aera  in  Geology,  though  the  nt 

of  vertebrm  IS  frequently  indicated  in  Devonian  and  Slurian  iSthyX 
the  fossilized  neur-  and  haem-apophyses  and  their  spines  J.  The  ind'ivid 

ening!  coalesLiice  witZut 

Although  the  normal  form  of  the  centrum  is  cylindrical,  it  mav  be  cu  ■ 
conical,  hour-glass  shaped,  like  a longitudinal  hlr,  like  a tiansveree  bar-d 
a depressed  or  a compressed  plate,  like  a ploughshare,  &c.  The  co  aX 
terminal  surfaces  of  the  centrum  may  be  flat,  slightly  concave  deenlv 
cave,  cupped  or  conical,  concave  vertically  and  conJex  transversel?  ml 
end  and  the  reverse  at  the  other  end§  ; or  the  fore-end  mZ  be  co„cZ‘! 
or  convexll  ; or  the  reverse^  ; or  both  ends  nmy  be  convc 

sures  produced  into  long  pointed  processes  with  intervening  deett 

suies,  so  as  to  interlock  together  by  a deeply  dentated  sutural  surllcet^ 

and^nmnrf[sT“  detached  from  its  neural  arch  (atlas  of  sZ 

and  many  fishes),  and  from  its  hmmal  arch  (atlas  of  most  fishes). 

Ihe  centrum  may  develope  not  only  parapophyses  but  inferior  mo 
exogenous  processes,  either  single,  like  those  of  the  cervical  vertebrrl 

are  cZLd"bvZnZ^"®  scaber  perforate  the  cesopha 

Ld  S Tower  Z?  double  (atlas  of  Sudis 

of  cen  develope  a continuous  plate  of  bone  beneath  two  or  more  ni 

o centi  urns,  formed  by  independent  ossification  in  the  body  of  the  notochei 

tmebZ  P-tially  coherent  to  the  peripheral  or  cZticaTplat. 

vertebial  centium  often  shows  the  principle  of  vegetative  repetition  bv 
paitial  ossification  in  the  form  of  two  or  three  bony  rings,  which  answer"- 
single  neural  arch  (Heptanchus\\\\) or  by  three  osseou^s  discs,  one  for  el 

i f »>■  p- 1 

voLn!  Monograph  by  Agassiz,  Sur  les  Poissons  Fossiles  du  Systeme 

" Existing  saurians  and  ophidians.  ^ 


- O ^ V»^UlUJttU». 

■ rSTf  SZ  existing  Salamandra,  Lepidosieus. 

rvical  of  Emys,  Bojanus,  Anat.  Test.  Europ.,  tab.  xiv.  fig.  51,  4.  1st 


crocodile.  J^ojanus,  Anat.  Test.  Europ.,  tab.  xiv.  fig.  5T,  ’4rTst  cauda 

ft  Cervicals  or  anterior  trunk-vertelirae  of  Fistularia 
graphy.'T  m.'  d’Anat.  Comparee,  ed.  1835,  p.  340,  and  ‘ Odo 

§§  Agassiz  in  Spix,  Pisces  Brasilieiises  4fn  lfl9n  « a n c q 

III!  Muller  and  Agassiz,  in  Recherches  sur  les  Poissons  Fossiles,’  t.  hi.  tab.  40^  fig.  1. 


GENERAL  HOMOLOGY.  NEURAPOIMI YSES.  9/ 

lar  surface,  and  a thicker  iiiteriuediate  piece,  as  in  all  foetal  mammals, 
iroughout  life  in  some  cetaceans. 

'■  th  respect  to  function,  the  centrum  forms  the  axis  of  the  vertebral 
;u,  and  commonly  the  central  bond  of  union  of  the  i)eripheral  elements 
^ . vertebra:  as  a general  rule  it  supports,  either  immediately  or  through 
edium  of  the  approximated  or  conjoined  bases  of  the  neurapophyses, 
" eural  axis  (in  the  trunk  called  myelon,  or  spinal  marrow,  and  its  mem- 
; 5) ; the  terminal  centrums  being  usually  deprived  of  this  function  by 
'■  'ithdrawal  of  that  axis  from  them  in  the  course  of  its  centripetal  or  con- 
itive  movement. 

^ ■ } neurapophyses  are  more  constant  as  osseous  or  cartilaginous  elements 
vertebne  than  the  centrums;  but  they  are  absent,  under  both  histolo- 

• 'Conditions,  at  the  end  of  the  tail  in  most  air-breathing  vertebrates,  where 

• .gnients  are  reduced  to  their  central  elements.  The  neurapophyses  lose 

• primitive  individuality  by  various  kinds  and  degrees  of  confluence;  as 
'■  '.rst,  of  the  bases  of  each  pair  with  their  supporting  centrum  ; secondly, 
j apices  of  each  pair  with  one  another  and  with  the  neural  spine, — the 

■ fisiren  affording  a rare  exception  of  the  persistent  individuality  of  this 

■ : nt  and  of  each  ueurapophysis  throughout  the  trunk ; thirdly,  of  two 
r re  neural  arches  with  one  another,  as  in  the  neck  of  some  fishes,  cetacea, 
armadillos,  and  in  the  sacrum  of  birds  and  mammals;  where  they  also 

coalesce  with  the  pleurapophyses,  as  they  do  in  the  neck  of  most  mam- 
^ i ind  birds.  The  neurapophyses  rarely  depart  from  the  form  of  plates, 
broad  or  high,  or  both  ; sometimes  they  are  straight,  sometimes  arched, 
“ imes  bent ; sometimes  by  the  inward  extension  of  their  bases,  they  form 

■ ler  a bony  ring  above  the  centrum,  excluding  both  that  and  the  spine 
" che  neural  canal.  The  neurapophj'ses  may  develope,  as  exogenous  pro- 
■ . , either  diapoph}’ses  or  zygapophyses,  and  the  latter  are  sometimes 

e from  both  the  anterior  and  posterior  borders  of  the  plates  ; as  e.  g.  in 

- r;rtebraE  of  Mugil,  in  some  serpents,  and  in  the  lumbar  vertebrm  of  some 
.nals.  The  observed  extent  of  variation  of  position  of  the  neurapophyses 

- !.n  the  upper  surface  of  their  own  centrum  to  above  the  next  intervertebral 
^ so  as  to  rest  equally  on  two  centrums ; or  they  may  be  uplifted  bodily 
- 1 their  centrum,  and  wedged  or  suspended  between  the  two  contiguous 
' larches,  as  e.^.  in  the  atlas  of  ephippus  and  other  deep-bodied  fishes. 

■ Slept  in  the  cartilaginous  neurapophyses  of  the  sturgeon,  I am  not  aware 

y instance  of  the  subdivision  of  this  element  into  two  pieces,  placed 
tally  upon  each  other.  Some  plagiostomes  showthe  principleof  vegetative 
ition  in  two  or  three  star-like  centres  of  ossification,  side  by  side,  in  the 
j live  basis  of  the  neurapophysis,  but  the  second  of  the  two  cartilaginous 

('■  on  each  side  of  the  neural  canal,  coextensive  with  the  single  centrum, 
wt  sharks,  which  second  piece  has  the  form  of  a wedge  with  the  small 
lirected  down  over  the  intervertebral  space,  seems  to  answer,  as  Prof, 
i'^r  has  suggested,  to  the  intercalary  or  interneuial  piece  in  bony  fishes. 

I e most  constant  functional  relation  of  the  neurapophysis  is  to  protect 
-j  ainal  nerve  in  its  exit  from  the  spinal  canal,  eitlier  by  a direct  perfora- 
g )f  the  neurapophysis  (many  fishes,  and  some  mammals),  by  a notch  in 
H or  by  the  interspace  between  two  neurapophyses.  This  function 

is  performed,  in  reference  to  the  nervous  system,  at  the  posterior  part 
2 vertebral  column  in  many  animals,  where  the  place  of  the  shortened 
)n  IS  occupied  by  the  lengthened  roots  of  the  nerves ; in  the  rest  of  the 
the  neurapophyses  protect  also  tlie  neural  axis.  The  original  relation 
:h  neurapophysis  to  the  segments  of  that  axis  is  determined  by  the  place 
inection  of  the  perforating  nerve  with  the  shortened  myelon. 

11 


98 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


I 


The  neural  spine  commonly  retains  in  the  trunk  the  form  indioatpr  . 
name  ; but  in  the  atlas  of  the  crocodile,  where  it  is  distinct  from  th 
apophyses,  it  is  a depressed  plate.  In  the  thorax  and  ahdZL  T u 
It  becomes  still  more  expanded  and  flattened,  and  its  borders  unite  by  d^a 
^ture  to  contiguous  spines  and  to  the  similarly  expanded  pleurLo  i 
The  neural  spine  ,s  absent  in  the  thin  annular  cervicals  of  the 
unusually  developed  and  forms  a thick  square  columnar  mL  k a 
carvels  of  the  „p„s,„n,.  I.  f,  double’ in  ^0X1^ 
fishes  . in  the  barbel  one  stands  before  the  other;  in  the  tetrodo“ 

elemenl d per 

of  the  trunk- vertebrae  manifest  their  autogenoH 
acter  in  fishes  alone;  and  in  most  species  the  character  is  soon  list  tl' 
apophysesbecoming  confluent  with  the  centrum  ; and,  in  the  tail,  eith  ',' 
the  pleurapophyses  also,  or  with  each  other  and  the  haemal  spine,  thus  c. 
ting  the  hmnia  canal  (fig.  16).  Amongst  air-breathing  vertebrates  tT 
apophyses  of  the  trunk-segments  are  present  only  in  those  species  in 
the  septum  of  the  hearts  ventricles  is  complete  and  inipertbrate,  an  1 
hey  are  exogenous  and  confined  to  the  cervical  and  anterior  thoracic  verH 
or  to  the  sacrum  (a^  m the  ostrich,  figs.  15  and  27, p).  The  paranonhv<l 
subject  to  a certain  extent  of  variation  as  to  form  : they  are  eithei 
tubercles;  or  simple,  shorter  or  longer,  transverse  processes  ; or  they  maJ 
the  form  of  long  plicated  laminae  (in  the  tails  of  some  pleuronecUdce')  i 
are  longer  and  broader  than  the  pleurapophyses  in  the  cod-tribe  - ai, 
sometimes  much  expanded  in  the  anterior  vertebrm  of  fishes,  where' 
ascend  in  position,  and  in  the  siluroid  species  above  described,  coala' 
form  a broad  outstanding  ridge,  directed  outwards  and  a little  upward- 1 

and  ^rtil-niaT^  function  of  the  parapophyses  is  to  give  attachment  to  mr 
and  articulation  to  ribs,  and,  occasionally,  additional  strength  and  fixati 
aiichylosed  portions  of  the  vertebral  column.  As  a rare  and  exception* 

SbrmlnTri^  ai^  excavated  parapophyses  of  the  second  and 
vertebrm  in  the  genus  CobUts  perform  an  office  closely  analogous  to  c‘ 
those  of  the  mastoid  in  man,  since  they  inclose  air-cells  brought  into  I 
munication  with  the  acoustic  labyrinth  by  a chain  of  small  ossicfes  : and  ■ 
singularly  modified  rudiments  of  the  swim- bladder  seem  to  have  no  other  ' 
tion  in  the  groveling  loaches  than  that  in  connection  with  the  sense  of  heai 
The  pleurapophyses  are  less  constant  elements  than  the  neurapoph  i 
they  exist  as  free  appendages  or  ‘ floating  vertebral  ribs  ’ in  the  rtunkJ 

Chians  (hg.  28,  ^/).  The  atlas  has  its  pleurapophyses  in  most  fishes  but 
are  often  detached  from  their  centrum,  and  sometimes  joined  to  long  j 

8^c*3SrV' f!"  the  Argyreiosus,  and  other  deep-bc, 

of  the  trnrd.  • h®mapophyses  are  not  present  in  any  other  verte 

of  the  trunk  in  fishes.  In  batrachians  the  pleurapopln-ses  of  the  single  p I 

EfcLpTeteT  connected  with  hmmapophyU  and  the  costfl  an 
Ja  3'Tns  } f “enopome,  the  pleurapophysial  element  of  the  saci* 

rtinl  uir-bieath mg  classes.  Here  the  pleurapophyses  have  geiieif 

the  long  and  slender  form  understood  by  the  word  ‘ rib  ;’  but  they  exfand^ 
thorax  of  the  apteryx,  in  the  anterior  thoracfc  vertebi 
whales,  and  more  especially  in  the  carapace  of  chelonians,  where  they 
joined  to  each  other  by  suture,  and  also  to  the  expanded  neural  spines.  Tf 


GENEKAL.  HOMOLOGY.  II.KM  A I'Ol’ J1  V S ES. 


99 


,d  pleurapophyses  are  occasionally  ossified  from  two  centres  in  the  great 
-tortoises  of  India  and  the  tlalapagos  isles.  The  free  extremities  of  the 
t cervical  pleurapophyses  of  crocodiles  and  plesiosaurs  are  expanded  and 
it  luced  forwards  and  backwards,  like  axe-blades,  whence  the  name  of 
'!  chet-bones,’  applied  to  them  prior  to  the  recognition  of  their  true  homo- 

i-  he  pleurapophyses  are  appended  sometimes  simj)ly  to  the  ends  of  par- 
« ohyses;  sometimes  to  the  ends  of  diapophj-ses;  sometimes  by  a head  and 
i-  rcle  to  both  kinds  of  transverse  processes;  sometimes  directly  to  the 
Ji  of  the  centrum;  and  sometimes  they  are  shifted  backwards  over  the  in- 
ertebral  space,  and  are  articulated  equally  to  two  centrums  (human 
lax),  and  sometimes  to  two  centrums,  to  a neurapophysis  and  to  a long 
U ^ophysis,  as  in  the  sacrum  of  the  ostrich  (fig,  27,  pi)-  In  the  atlas  of 
if  ^ fishes  the  pleurapophysis  is  detached  from  its  centrum,  and  is  suspended, 
i its  hsemapophysis,  from  the  antecedent  haemal  arch  (scapiilo-coracoid). 
oonie  sturgeons  the  abdominal  pleurapophyses  are  composed  of  two  or 
I e cartilaginous  pieces.  I have  observed  some  of  the  expanded  pleurapo- 
: kses  in  the  great  Tesludo  elephantopus  ossified  from  two  centres,  and  the 
; Iting  divisions  continuing  distinct  but  united  by  suture.  The  pelvic 
r.  rrapophysis  is  in  two  pieces,  as  a general  rule  (fig.  28,  pV  attached  to 
i-  ; and  the  lower  piece  is  the  seat  of  that  most  common  and  simple  kind 
.1 , lodification,  viz.  increase  of  size  with  change  of  form  from  the  cylindrical 
; - flat  bone  (as  indicated  by  the  dotted  line  in  fig.  27),  whereby  it  comes 
a connection  with  the  pleurapophyses  of  other  vertebrte  besides  the  proxi- 
c piece  of  its  own ; such  pleurapophyses  having  their  development  stunted 
-s  not  to  exceed  in  size  the  proximal  portion  of  the  pelvic  pleurapophysis, 

:•  >cse  expanded  distal  portion  (es)  receives  the  special  name  of  ‘ ilium.’  This 
i; : 2 retains  its  rib-like  shape  however  in  the  chelonians,  as  in  the  batrachians: 
lost  species  it  unites  below  with  two  haeinapopbyses,  called,  on  account 
;;  .heir  modifications  of  form  and  proportions,  ‘ischium  ’ and  ‘pubis.’  The 
j .nrapophyses  defend  the  haemal  or  visceral  cavity  ; they  are  the  fulcra  of 
..moving  powers  which  expand  and  contract  such  cavity  in  respiration, 

[ .'.n  its  walls  admit  of  those  movements  ; they  frequently  support  ‘ diverging 
I ;3ndages,’  and  give  origin  to  muscles  moving  such  appendages,  or  acting 
. ; n the  vertebral  column.  In  some  exceptional  cases  the  pleurapophyses 
I ame,  themselves,  locomotive  organs,  as  in  serpents  and  the  Draco  volans. 
.'he  hremapophyses,  as  osseous  elements  of  a vertebra,  are  less  constant  than 
pleurapophyses ; although  they  sometimes  exist  in  segments,  e.  g.  the 
: -bar  vertebrae  of  certain  saurians,  and  in  the  case  of  the  ischium,  or  second 
■ "ic  baemapophysis,  in  which  the  corresponding  pleurapophyses  are  absent, 
V short,  or  anchylosed  to  the  transverse  processes.  The  only  true  bony 
napophyses  in  the  trunk  of  fishes  appear  to  be  those  of  the  atlas,  forming 
] lower  piece  of  the  epicoracoid  ; and  of  the  last(?)  abdominal  vertebra, 
i ning  the  ischial  or  pubic  inverted  arch  supporting  the  appendages  called 
i ntral  fins.’  It  is  at  least  to  the  last  abdominal  vertebra  solely  that  the 
lologous  arch  and  appendages  are  connected,  by  the  medium  of  the 
irapophyses  (iliac  bones)  in  the  batrachians,  and  it  needs  but  the  removal 
' he  pleurapophysis,  or  of  its  second  complementary  portion  {pV  in  fig. 

, to  reduce  that  vertebral  segment  to  the  condition  which  it  presents  in  an 
orninal  fish.  'I'be  so  liberated  inferior  (haemapophysial)  portion  of  the 
/ic  (last  abdominal  costal)  arch  is  subject,  in  fishes,  to  changes  of  position 
more  extensive  than  liave  been  observed  in  the  neurapophyses  or  pleur- 
physe.s  of  the  trunk-vertebrae,  without  however  preventing  the  recognition 
he  segment  to  which  such  shifted  limmapophyses  acrtually  and  essentially 

It  2 


i 


TOO 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


belong.  Tlie  Iiomologous  haemal  arch  exists  in  the  same  free  and  de(S 
condition  in  cetaceans  and  enaliosaurs  ; but  in  all  other  air-breathinc  I 
brates  it  is  connected  with  the  iliac  bones  and  completes  the  typical  clfaji 
of  tim  proper  sacral  vertebra.  The  bony  haemapophyses  of  the  lumbar  verl 
are  found  suspended  in  the  fleshy  abdominal  walls  of  certain  saurians  • I k 
the  region  of  the  thorax  in  these  and  higher  vertebrates,  the  h^^p'o  | 
(hg  15,  A)  articu  ates  by  one  end  to  the  pleurapophysis  (nl)  and  1 1 
other  to  the  h^mal  spine  (sternal  bone,/i^) ; or  its  lower  end  is  ittachel 
contiguous  haeraapophysis  ; or  it  is  suspended  freely  from  the  pleuraponT 
(as  in  the  floating  ribs  of  man  and  mammals),  or  it  may  be  joined  r 
of  thP  upper  end  free,  as  in  the  seventh*  doisal  ver 

wkh  tlm  nl?"  When  the  upper  end  of  the  haemapophysis  artiei 

1 1 the  pleui apophysis  in  birds,  it  is  usually  by  a distinct  condyloid 
with  smooth  articular  cartilage  and  a synovial  capsule.  ^ 

here  haemapophyses  exist  in  the  tail,  they  articulate  directly  t( 
under  part  of  the  centrum,  or  to  two  centrums  at  the  intervertebral  si 
and  are  either  free  at  the  opposite  end,  as  in  some  caudal  vertebra  o 
pents  and  in  those  of  the  enaliosaurs,  or  they  are  confluent  with  each  . 
at  their  dista  ends ; when  each  pair  of  hamapophyses  forms  the  so-c 
V-shaped  or  chevron-bone.  The  changes  of  position  of  tliat  detached  ‘ r 
arch  or  chevron-bone  ’ which  supports  the  ventral  fins  in  fishes  affoi 
Linnaus  the  characters  of  the  orders  ‘ Abdominales,’  ‘ Thoracici  ’ 
Jugulares  in  the  ‘ Systema  Natura  and  its  immortal  author,  in  giving' 
name  Apodes  to  those  fishes  in  which  the  ventral  fins  ware  absent  ■ 
ciseljMiidicates  his  perception  of  their  relation  to  the  hind-legs  of  batral 
and  the  lower  limbs  of  man.  If,  then,  mere  change  of  rSative  posi  A 
howaver  extensive,  failed  to  conceal  the  special  homology  of  tlie  detached  1 
tion  of  the  pelvic  arch  and  its  appendages  from  the  kVen-sighted  natur; 
still  less  ought  such  a character  to  blind  the  philosophic  anatomist  to 
general  homology  of  such  detached  vertebral  elements,  or  prevent  his  tral 
them,  wherever  he  may  find  them,  to  the  remainder  of  their  proper  segml 
especially  when  its  place  is  so  clearly  and  beautifully  indicated,  as  it  is  byl 
O' .the  pelvic  arch  in  the  perennibranchiate  reptiles  (fig.  28 j 
1 he  function  of  tlie  h^mapophyses  is  to  complete,  with  or  without  a ha  Jj 
pine,  the  hamal  arch  of  the  vertebral  segment ; and,  in  so  far  to  protect! 
haemal  or  visceral  cavities  and  support  their  contents.  They  give  attachni 
to  the  lower  or  ventral  portions  of  the  primary  muscular  segments  ‘nl 
commata  . called  ‘ mtercostals’  in  the  thorax,  and  ‘ recti  abdLiinis’  in  ? 
abdomen  of  the  higher  vertebrata;  and  they  thus  serve  as  fulcra  to  i 
muscles  that  expand  and  contract  the  abdominal  or  thoracic-abdominal  cavfl 
pd  sometimes  more  directly  aid  in  these  movements  by  the  elasticity  resuh^ 
from  an  arrest  m their  histological  development  at  the  cartilaginous  stage, 
in  the  thorax  of  most  mammals.  Ilmmapophyses  may  support  or  aid  in  s* 
porting  diverging  appendages ; and  in  giving  attachment  to  the  muscleii 
those  .appendages.  The  haemapophyses  are  usually  slender,  simple  boiT 
vpying  m length  : they  are  broad,  flat,  and  overlap  each  other  in  the  thoF 
of  monotrpies  : they  become  broader  and  shorter  in  the  expanded  and  fi 
thoramc  abdominal  bony  case  of  chelonians,  and  are  still  broader  where  tl 
c ose  the  pelvic  areh  in  the  plesiosaurs.  In  the  abdominal  region  of  these 
me  purips  and  in  crocodiles,  the  freely  suspended  haemapophyses  are  cc 
pounded  of  two  or  more  overlapping  bony  pLes.  ^ ^ 

1 segments,  usually  confounded  under  the  name  of  the  ‘irr^ 

pp  163--165  *""8:>tudinal  muscles  ’ in  fishes.-IIunterian  Lectures  on  Vertebra^ 


GE.NEUAL  homology.  UIVEUOING  .^IM'ENDAGES. 


101 


' he  kcemal  spine  is  much  less  constant  ns  to  its  existence,  and  is  subject 
much  greater  range  of  variety,  wlien  present,  than  is  its  vertical  homo- 

■ above,  which  completes  the  neural  arch.  Long,  slender,  and  ‘ spinous  ’ 
[ le  tail,  the  haemal  spine  is  reduced  to  a short  and  thick  bone,  often 

' med,  in  the  thorax  of  mammals,  a series  of  thirteen  such  modified  spines 
,ing  the  so-ealled  ‘ sternum  ’ in  the  two-toed  sloth:  the  thoracic  haemal 
^ -?s  are  few  in  number,  and  are  expanded  and  perforated  in  the  whales: 

I lorizontal  extension  of  this  vertebral  element  is  sometimes  accompanied 
median  division,  or  in  other  w'ords,  it  is  ossified  from  two  lateral  centres  ; 

' >s  seen  in  the  development  of  parts  of  the  human  sternum : the  same  vege- 
te  character  is  constant  in  the  broader  thoracic  haemal  spines  of  birds  ; 
cgh,  sometimes,  as  e.  g.  in  the  struthionidae,  ossification  extends  from  the 
■■  : lateral  centre  lengthwise,  i.  e.  forwards  and  backwards,  calcifying  the 
ijate  cartilaginous  homologues  of  halves  of  four  or  five  haemal  spines, 
^ rre  these  finally  coalesce  with  their  fellows  at  the  median  line.  In  some 
rr  birds,  however,  there  are  two  or  more  lateral  centres,  and  usually, 

' a median  one,  from  which  the  ossification  of  the  keel  extends  down- 
ds,  prior  to  its  confluence  with  the  rest  of  the  ‘ sternum.’  In  the  thorax 
^ melonians  four  haemal  spines  are  established,  each  by  two  lateral  centres 
? ssification,  forming  four  pairs  of  sternal  bones  with  a ninth  ‘entosternal’ 

■ i between  the  first  and  second  pairs.  The  ‘ plastron  ’ is  the  result  of 
extreme  development  of  the  haemal  spines  : — the  modified  moieties  of 

^ eb,  remaining  permanently  distinct  and  united  by  suture,  have  received 

I I GeoflProy  St.  Hilaire*  the  convenient  special  names  of  ‘ episternals,’ 
«sternals,’  ‘ hyposternals  ’ and  ‘ xiphisternals,’  respectively,  as  they  suc- 

' each  other  from  before  backwards. 

he  diverging  appendages  3.re,  as  might  be  expected,  of  all  the  elements 
;ae  vertebral  segment,  the  least  constant  in  regard  to  their  existence,  and 

- -subjects  of  the  greatest  amount  and  variety  of  modification.  Simple 
->ler  spines  or  styles  in  fishes  (fig.  17,  a a),  simple  plates  retaining  long 

- • cartilaginous  condition  in  crocodiles,  short  flat  slightly  curved  pieces  in 
' ■ 5 (fig.  15,  a a),  in  some  of  the  lowest  species  of  which,  c.  g.  Aptenodytes, 

become  expanded,  like  their  homologues  in  the  crocodile  ; such,  with 

- exception,  is  the  range  of  the  variety  of  form  to  which  these  parts  are 
• ect  in  the  segments  of  the  trunk.  But  that  exception  is  a remarkable 
: : even  under  its  normal  ichthyic  condition,  as  a simple  style  or  filament, 

: liverging  appendage  of  the  insulated  haemapophysial  portion  of  the  pelvic 

in  theprotopterusf  and  lepidosiren  j:  is  composed  of  many  cartilaginous 
aents,  and  projects  freely  from  the  surface,  carrying  with  it  a smooth 

■ vring  of  integument.  In  other  fishes  similar  filaments  or  jointed  rays  are 
5 *^essively  added  to  the  sustaining  arch,  which  cause  a progressive  expan- 

of  the  common  investing  fold  of  skin,  forming  the  organ  called  the 
Ural  fin,’  which  is  accordingly  described  by  the  ichthyologist  as  having 

■ rays  {Jilennius^,  three  rays  {Zoarces),  up  to  more  than  twenty  rays,  (as 
5 '•nernser  in  the  sturgeons). 

! /hen  we  quit  the  piscine  class  we  find  the  diverging  appendage  of  the  pel- 

j Dn  Sternum  consitleree  dans  les  Oiseaux  et  dans  les  Poissons.  Anatomie  Philoso- 
f-i  *’*■  Geoffroy  contends  that  the  parts  of  the  hyoid  arcli  (39, 

I homologues  of  the  modified  ha;mal  spines  whicli  he  calls  episternals,  hyo- 

aJsand  hyposternals  in  the  plastron  of  the  turtle  : hut  these  natnes  may  well  he  retained, 

1 1?  ad)itrary  sense,  without  reference  to  the  hypothesis 

I h first  suggested  it. 

( n-""/  *’8-  Lectures  on  Verfehrata,  p.  79,  figs.  27,  GO. 

Bischoff,  cit.  pi.  2,  fig.  c.  -1.6. 


102 


ON  THK  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


VC  arch  resuming  Its  primitive  unity,  and  with  fewer  joints  than  in  lepidtf 
but  manifesting  the  principle  of  vegetative  repetition  by  a bifurcation! 
distal  segments.  Such  is  its  form  in  the  Proteus  anguinus  and  in  the  ^ 3 
uma  didactyhim : in  anotlier  species  of  amphiume,  the  radiated  tvne  ir 
frongly  marked  by  the  subdivision  of  tlie  last  segment  into  three^ra  i 
homology  of  which  with  certain  of  the  five  terminal  rays,  called  t » 
digits  in  the  human  foot,  is  signified  by  Cuvier’s  specific  name  ‘tridac  li 
applied  to  this  species ; the  middle  segment  of  the  appendage  is  bifi 
first  one  is  undivided.  In  the  menopome  (fig.  28),  the  proximal  se 

la£  r the  second  segment  (o6,  or)  dible,  aSd  a in  Js  of 

lage  (as)  separates  this  from  the  last  segment  which  branches  into  five  i 
rays  (au).  In  the  frog  two  styliform  bones  are  developed  in  the  posh 
the  cartilage  (as  in  fig.  27),  forming  a fourth  segment  of  the  divisL 
are  replaced  by  more  numerous  and  shorter  bones  in  higher  vertebra 
1 which  It  will  be  unnecessary  to  pursue  the  metamorphoses  of  the  appe 
i|  as  It  IS  adapted  for  swimming,  steering,  balancing  and  anchoring,  for 
I tion,  for  burrowing,  creeping,  walking  and  running,  for  leaping,  sJ 
J climbing  or  sustaining  erect  the  entire  frame  of  the  animal.  Its  parts 
these  endless  and  extreme  modifications  have  necessarily  received  s 
names  : the  first  segment  (os)  is  the  thigh, /mwr;  the  second  is  the  le- 
Its  two  rays  or  bones  are  called  hhia  (oe)  fibula  (07)  : the  segmei' 

IS  called  ank  e or  tarsus,  each  of  its  component  ossicles  having ^its  xfi 
name  ; and  the  last  radiated  segment  (00)  includes  the  metatarsus  an! 
langes:  the  segments  os  and  oo  are  termed  collectively,  the  foot, 

The  primitive  function  of  the  simple  diverging  appendages  (fig.  17, 
of  the  abdominal  vertebrm  in  fishes  is  closely  analogous  to  that  of  the  I 
developed  appendage  of  the  pelvic  vertebra,  viz.  to  aid  in  locomotio' 
fulcra  to  the  muscles  concerned  in  that  act.  In  crocodiles  and  bird®, 
serve  to  connect  one  costal  arch  with  the  next  arch  in  succession,  assocl 
them  in  action  or  giving  fixity  and  strength  to  the  whole  thoracic  cage. 

Any  given  appendage  might,  however,  have  been  the  seat  of  such  dev 
ments  as  convert  that  of  the  pelvic  arch  into  a locomotive  limb  : and  tlu 
insight  into  the  general  homology  of  limbs  leads  us  to  recognise  many  p 
tial  pairs  in  the  typical  endo-skeleton.  The  possible  and  conceivable  r 
fications  of  the  vertebrate  archetype  are  far  from  having  been  exhaust 
the  foims  that  have  hitherto  been  recognised,  from  the  primeval  fish 
tlie  paleozoic  ocean  of  this  planet  up  to  the  present  time. 

he  beneficent  Author  of  all,  who  has  created  other  revolving  orbs, 
relations  to  the  central  source  of  heat  and  light  like  our  own,  may  have  w 
that  these  also  should  be  the  seat  of  sentient  beings,  suited  to  all  the  cr 
tioiis  ot  animal  enjoyment  existing  in  such  planets ; basking,  perhaps,  it 
solar  beams  by  day,  or  disporting  in  the  soft  reflected  light  of  their  ea, 
satellites  by  mght.  The  eyes  of  such  creatures,  the  laws  of  light  beinJ 
same,  \vould  doubtless  be  organized  on  the  same  dioptric  principles  as  0 
and,  if  the  vertebral  column  should  there,  as  here,  have  been  adopted  as 
oasis  of  the  higher  animal  forms,  it  may  be  subject  to  modifications  iss^ 
n toims  such  as  this  planet  has  never  witnessed,  and  which  can  only  be  .3 
has  penetrated  the  mystery  of  the  vertebrate  archetj 
and  recognised  the  kind  and  mode  and  extent  of  its  modifications  here,  j 

hp  uu  essential  to  that  organic  type  that  it  shr^ 

be  teti  apodal  : although  it  best  accords  with  the  force  of  attraction  and  0 *1 

may  be^Teeained^  bv^n!irmni*'!f  wliich  an  early  or  low  form  of  such  segi.] 


GENKUAL  HOMOLOGY.  WHAT  IS  A HONE? 


103 


s;  itions  of  our  globe,  that  not  more  than  two  pairs  of  the  latentlimbs  or 
' nda'^es  of  the  vertebral  segments  should  be  developed  to  reacfras”loco- 
ve  instruments,  upon  its  watei’s,  its  atmosphere  and  its  dry  land. 

V le  views  of  the  essential  relations  of  such  limbs  to  the  vertebrate  type 
h suggest  these  aud  similar  reflections,  may  not  be  accepted  by  all  anato- 

■i  i : some  may  be  disposed  to  regard  the  parts  02  and  oi  in  fig.  28  as  pecu- 
i..uperadditious,  rather  than  a reappearance  of  normal  elements  completing 
■ postal  or  haemal  arch  of  a segment  of  the  endo-skeleton  and  restoring  it 
» , } typical  condition  : and,  in  the  same  spirit,  they  may  deny  the  special 
ii  ology  of  the  radiated  appendage  A,  with  the  hinder  filamentous  fin  of 
• , , epidosiren,  aud  the  ventral  fins  of  other  fishes,  and  consequently,  will  re- 
;::(ate  its  general  homology  as  the  diverging  appendage  of  such  haemal 
5:  , and  its  serial  homology  with  the  simple  diverging  appendages  of  the 
,'!  ,acic-abdominal  vertebrae  of  fishes,  crocodiles  and  birds. 

urn  sensible  how  large  a demand  is  made  on  the  most  philosophic  faith  in 
a ::ral  laws  of  organization,  by  seeking  acquiescence  in  the  view  of  the  parts 
u le  hind-limb,  so  variously  and  definitely  modified  for  special  functions,  as 
s :g  the  homologues  of  segments  and  rays,  which  are  the  result  in  the  first 
r .ince  of  the  common  course  of  vegetative  repetition  of  a single  vertebral 
r;  iient — an  element  under  all  circumstances  compounded  teleologically,  and, 
refore,  essentially  representing  or  equivalent  to  one  bone. 

:=  tut  here  I must  explain  what  I mean  by  ‘ teleological  composition.’  Indi- 
4 al  parts  of  a skeleton, — what  are  commonly  called  ‘ bones,’ — are  fre- 
atly  ‘ compound  ’ or  composed  of  the  coalescence  of  several  primarily 
net  osseous  pieces.  In  human  anatomy  every  single  and  distinct  mass 
. -sseous  matter  entering  into  the  composition  of  the  adult  skeleton  is  called 
^ one’ ; and  Soemmerring,  who  includes  the  thirty-two  teeth  in  his  enumera- 
, reckons  up  from  259  to  264'  such  bones.  He  counts  the  os  spheno- 
- ; pitale  as  a single  bone,  and  also  regards,  with  previous  anthropotomists, 
^ -os  temporis,  the  os  sacrum,  and  the  os  innominatum,  as  individual  bones ; 
r •sternum,  he  says,  may  include  two  or  three  bones,  &c*.  But  in  bii’ds 
, os  occipitale  is  not  only  anchylosed  to  the  sphenoid,  but  they  both  very 

V i coalesce  with  the  parietals  aud  frontals ; and,  in  short,  the  entire  cranium 

- Kjer  consists,  according  to  the  above  definition,  of  a single  bone.  Blu- 
2 ibach,  however,  applying  the  human  standard,  describes  it  as  composed 
.j  he  proper  bones  of  the  cranium  consolidated,  as  it  were,  into  a single 

et-  -A.nd  in  the  same  spirit  most  modern  anthropotomists,  influenced  by 
•comparatively  late  period  at  which  the  sphenoid  becomes  anchylosed  to 

- occipital  in  man,  regard  them  as  two  essentially  distinct  bones.  In  direct- 
, our  survey  downwards  in  the  mammalian  scale,  we  speedily  meet  with 
, mples  of  persistent  divisions  of  bones  which  are  single  in  man.  Thus  it 
, ire  to  find  the  basioccipital  confluent  with  the  basisphenoid  in  mamma- 

quadrupeds  ; and  before  we  quit  that  class  we  meet  with  adults  in  some 
he  marsupial  and  monotrematous  species,  for  example,  in  which  the  supra- 
ipital,  ‘ pars  occipitalis  proprie  sic  dicta,’  of  Soemmerring,  is  distinct  from 
condyloid  parts,  and  these  from  the  basilar  or  cuneiform  process  of  the 
)ccipitis : in  short,  the  single  occipital  bone  in  man  is  four  bones  in  the 

Issum  or  echidna  ; and  just  as  the  human  cranial  bones  lose  their  indivi- 
lity  in  the  bird,  so  do  those  of  the  marsupial  lose  their  individuality  in  the 
inary  mammalian  and  human  skull.  In  many  mammals  we  find  the 
^ Tgoid  processes  of  anthropotomy  permanently  distinct  bones ; even  in 

* De  Corporis  Humani  Fabrica,  t.  i.  p.  C. 
t Manual  of  Comparative  Anatomy,  by  LawTcncc,  cd.  1827,  p. 


104 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


birds,  xvhere  tlie  progress  of  ossific  confluence  is  so  general  and  rar  ^ 

*y“P®"'Cs,  which  are  subordinate  processes  of  other  b 
man,  are  always  independent  bones.  ^ 

In  many  mammals,  the  styloid,  the  auditory,  the  petrous,  and  the  nl 
processes  remain  distinct  from  the  squamous  plate  of  the  temporal  thS 
out  life ; and  some  of  these  claim  the  more  to  be  regarded  as  distinct  3 
since  they  obviously  belong  to  different  natural  groups  of  bones  in  1 e S,  5 

dell:  arch  ^ones  formin^t  ? 

The  artificial  character  of  the  anthropotomical  view  of  the  os  sacr^ 
which  that  more  or  less  confluent  congeries  of  modified  neural  arc 
counted  as  a sing  e component  bone  of  the  skeleton,  is  sufficTenl  o 
The  os  innominatum  is  represented  throughout  life  in  most  reptSbv 
distinct  bones,  answering  to  the  iliac,  ischial,  and  pubic  portiSL  in  a 
potomy.  The  sternum  in  most  quadrupeds  consists  of  on^e  more  bon  I 
he  number  of  pairs  of  ribs  which  join  it ; thus  it  includes  as  many  as  tl 
distinct  bones  in  the  Bradypus  didactyhis  ^ ’ 

The  arbitrary  character  of  the  definition  of  a bone,  as  ‘any  single  ni. 
osseous  matter  entering  into  the  composition  of  the  adult  skeleton^’  the 
plex  nature  of  many  of  such  single  bones,  and  the  essential  individual 
some  of  the  processes  of  bone  in  anthropotomy,  are  taught  by  anatom\ 
perly  so  called,  which  reveals  the  true  natural  groups  o AoneJ  Ld  the 
fications  of  these  which  peculiarly  characterise  the^human  subject.  ' 

It  V ill  occur  to  thosp^who  have  studied  human  osteogeny,  tlmt  the  pa,- 
the  single  bones  of  anthropotomy  which  have  been  adduLd  as  conti  I 
permanently  distinct  in  lower  animals,  are  originally  distinct  in  the  h 
mtus  : the  occipital  bone,  for  example,  is  ossified  from  four  separate  ce  f 
the  pterygoid  processes  have  distinct  centres  of  ossification  ; tl^e  styloid! 
the  mastoid  processes,  and  the  tympanic  ring,  are  separate  parts  in  the  f i 
riie  constituent  vertebrae  of  the  sacrum  remain  longer  distinct  • and  the 
!Ss  W;"'  aiichylosing  together,  to  form  the  ‘ ii 

the^irfreK?  f between  the  points  of  ossificatie 
inferio^aniS  »nd  the  separate  bones  of  the  adult  skeleto 

k^n  J f-  P'-egnant  with  interest,  and  rank  among  the  most  i 

king  illust  ations  of  unity  of  plan  in  the  vertebrate  organization.  * 

sinile  bZi  oi  " b-om  which  the  ossification  of  an  ultinn,! 

single  bone  often  proceeds  has  especially  attracted  the  attention  of  the  n-- 

"atirdd'^r^"'""?  Represent  century  with  reference  to  the  r1g^| 
atural  determination  of  the  number  of  the  constituent  parts  of  the  v. 

^ Geoffroy  St.  Hilaire,  in  his  memoir  on  the  skull  of  bird 

sifieltirf/  d-  compter  autant  d’os  qu’il  y a de  centres  , 

lip.?  r essaye  de  suite  cette  maniere  de  faire,  i’a 

eu  dapprecierla  justesse  de  cette  id6e*.”  Cuvier  adopted  and  rJt^^ 

‘ Lecons^  d’^A^  ? ^ ‘ ® n Commenting  in  the  posthumous  edition  oH 
tions^?rsinHp"b  character  of  some  of  the  de. 

ascerta  n ? ‘ u ^"‘hropotomy,  he,  also,  concludes  that,  in  orde^ 

primitive  of  bones  in  each  species,  we  must  descend  to 

to  tl.  ? ??d?  , 1 1 j manifested  in  the  foetus.  But  accon 

ve  s lould  count  the  humerus  as  three  bones  and  the  femur  as  i« 

* Annales  du  Museum,  t.  x.  p.  344. 

nombre  de:’o\^de’cha?j!.e  espdcT  iTfauT?p?^‘°?  avoir  le  vdrit; 

fju’ils  se  montreiit  dans  Ic  foitus.’’  * vemoiiter  jusqu  aux  premiers  noyaiix  osseux' 


GENERAL  HOMOLOGY.  COMPOUND  HONES. 


105 


> i,  in  the  human  skeleton  ; lor  tlie  ossification  of  the  thigh-bone  begins  at 
distinct  points,  one  for  the  shaft,  one  for  the  head,  one  for  the  great 
anter,  and  one  for  the  distal  condyles  : such  deference,  however,  to  the 
uent  of  the  great  Comparative  Anatomist  has  been  withheld  by  the  most 
•^1  ited  of  his  admirers ; whose  disinclination  to  regard  these  parts  and  pro- 
s as  distinct  bones  is  justified  by  tlie  fact  that  in  birds  and  reptiles  the 
^ r is  developed  from  a single  centre. 

le  rule  laid  down  by  the  French  authorities  above-cited  fails  in  its  appli- 
n to  the  difficult  question  of  the  nature  and  number  of  bones  in  a skeleton, 

'‘1  use  they  did  not  distinguish  between  those  centres  of  ossification  that 
homological  relations,  and  those  that  have  only  teleological  ones  ; i.  e. 

■c  i.een  the  separate  points  of  ossification  of  a human  bone  which  typify 
ibral  elements,  often  permanently  distinct  bones  in  the  lower  animals;  and 
a:  eparate  points  which,  without  such  signification,  facilitate  the  progress 
•!  iUeogeny  and  have  for  their  obvious  final  cause  the  well-being  of  the  grow- 
i-  mimal.  The  young  lamb  or  foal,  for  example,  can  stand  on  its  four  legs  as 
as  it  is  born ; it  uplifts  its  body  from  the  ground  and  soon  begins  to 
^ land  bound  along.  The  shock  to  the  limbs  themselves  is  broken  and 
s rnished  at  this  tender  age,  by  the  divisions  of  the  long  bones,  and  by  the 
L;  '.'position  of  the  cushions  of  cartilage  between  the  diaphyses  and  epiphy- 
!:  And  the  jar  that  might  affect  the  pulpy  and  largely  developed  brain  of 

■:  immature  mammal,  is  further  diffused  and  intercepted  by  the  epiphysial 
mlar  extremities  of  the  bodies  of  the  vertebrae. 

^ '/ethus  readily  discern  a final  purpose  in  the  distinct  centres  of  ossifica- 
of  the  vertebral  bodies  and  the  long  bones  of  the  limbs  of  mammals  ‘ 
;i  eh  would  not  apply  to  the  condition  of  the  crawling  reptiles.  The  dimi- 
; ve  brain  in  these  low  and  slow  cold-blooded  animals  does  not  demand 
L i protection  against  concussion ; neither  does  the  mode  of  locomotion 
•:  ae  quadruped  reptiles  render  such  concussion  likely  : their  limbs  sprawl 
■ ‘ vards  and  push  along  the  body  which  commonly  sweeps  the  ground ; 

: ■ -efore  we  find  no  epiphj'ses  at  the  ends  of  a distinct  shaft  in  the  long 
■es  of  saurians  and  tortoises.  But  when  the  reptile  moves  by  leaps, 

II 1 the  principle  of  ossifying  the  long  bone  by  distinct  centres  again  pre- 
• s,  and  the  extremities  of  the  humeri  and  femora  long  remain  epiphyses 
he  frog. 

1 1 final  purpose  is  no  doubt,  also,  subserved  in  most  of  the  separate  centres 
] -ossification  which  relate  homologically  to  permanently  distinct  bones  in 
< ; general  vertebrate  series  ; it  has  long  been  recognised  in  relation  to  faci- 
I ting  birth  in  the  human  fetus ; but  some  facts  will  occur  to  the  osteo- 
I list,  of  which  the  teleological  explanation  is  by  no  means  obvious. 

One  sees  not,  for  example,  why  the  process  of  the  scapula  which  gives  at- 
hment  to  the  pectoralis  minor,  the  coraco-brachialis,  and  the  short  head  of 
I biceps  should  not  be  developed  by  continuous  ossification  from  the  body 
f the  blade-bone,  like  that  which  forms  the  spinous  process  of  the  same 
I le.  It  is  a well-known  fact,  however,  that  not  only  in  man,  but  in  all  mam- 
I Is,  the  coracoid  process  is  ossified  from  a separate  centre.  In  the  mono- 
I ines  it  is  not  only  autogenous,  but  is  as  large  a bone  as  in  birds  and  reptiles, 
r which  it  continues  a distinct  bone  througliout  life.  Here,  then,  we  have 

I : homological,  without  a teleological  explanation  of  the  separate  centre  for 
P -•  coracoid  process  in  the  ossification  of  the  human  blade-bone. 

' This  distinction  in  the  nature  and  relations  of  such  centres  is  indispen- 

II  >le  in  the  right  application  of  the  facts  of  osteogeny  to  the  determination 

^ \n  essentially  distinct  bones  in  any  given  skeleton. 

j All  thfjse  bones  which  consist  of  a coalescence  of  parts  answering  to  di- 
! net  elements  of  the  typical  vertebra  are  ‘homologically  compound.’ 


106 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


All  those  bones  which  represent  single  vertebral  elements  arp  < 
cally  compound,’  when  developed  from  more  than  one  cen^e  whefh 
centres  subsequently  coalesce,  or  remain  distinct,  or  even  become  the  • 
tic2,‘ offiTesf  nmd.fications,  with  special  joints,  muscles,  &c.  i 

In  the  human  skeleton,  the  clavicles,  the  (thoracic  vertebrah  ribs 
stances  of  simple  and  truly  individual  bones.  The  occinut  snhin  • ^ 
mold,  temporal,  superior  maxilla,  mandible,  hyoid,  scapuk  the 
vertebrae,  the  sacrum  and  coccyx,  the  sternum  and  nta 
‘homologically’  compound  bones.  ’ mnommai 

The  two  parietalsare  essentially  like  the  frontal  and  vomer,  one‘teh 
cally  compound  bone  : so,  likewise,  are  the  two  nasals  S " 

the  homolop  of  the  jointed  filamentary  skeleton  of  the  rudi’raentri  vJ 
fin  of  the  lepidosiren  with  the  simple  divereine  annpndao.p=  r S ’■ 
arches  of  the  abdominal  vertebrae  be  correcf  then  ^is  f ^ ^ 

I raalian  femur  a teleologically  compound  bone,’  but  the  whde^l ellto^ 
hind-hmb  from  the  femur  to  the  distal  phalanges  inclusive  mnsf  hp?  " 
as  represenpg  the  essentially  single  vertebral  element,  here  called  ‘divt^ 
appendage,  subdivided  according  to  the  law  of  veeetative  tpLh  r - 

Which  law  is  progressively  overruled  and  masked  by  the  supertent^rM 
■ tv!  modification  and  adaptation  of  such  vegetative  su 

' "T  niny  aSrallThV  , 

m.1,  ,„.e  of  .„e  par.,  ari’ri.p,,  t' ^ d"e 

be^gTrdr;^ 

To  trace  the  mode  and  kind  and  extent  of  modification  of  tho  - 

mabiTaf^tf  Since  it  has  been  found  that  the  bones  of  the  tr 

‘ thoraT’  ‘ Sac  of  adaptive  modification,  whethe 

stitS^nH  r f .‘sacrum,  an  arrangement  into  segments  in  the  , 

. titution  and  relative  position  of  the  parts  of  which  the  vertebral  tvne  l.as  )- 

S;jreVre„T;r‘‘-'“  ,r  wi.hoLtt^dJl’f'Xi 

whether  such  tvoe  he°f  o(  previous  attempts,  in  the  first  instai 

axis  of  the  endo^ko^  ^ through  the  remaining  anterior  part  of 

acennnf  of  f I which,  like  the  thorax  and  pelvis,  has  received 

lective  ternfof  ‘?kuH  modifications,  the  special  < 

leton  so  fn..  H "’i’nther  nature  has,  in  this  nartof  the  endo-s 

that  we  all  the  rest  is  construct 

tl:fs '■f^arra„gen.e„.s.  demo„“r 
in  kind  as  well  as  degree  from  tlmt^r  modifications  disti. 

trunk  the  constitution  of  such  segmentftnm  veVebra"^^^^^^^  ' 

oxtremitf,  or  Le,  and  wtch  f„-  St  t'rLtSrLr-l'nSr.'’^: 
- Pi^sens  esse  cum  artifex  operatur  et  opus  suuin  proniovet.’'-BACON-. 


general  homology,  cranial  verteur.e. 


107 


■% 


■ 


next  in  advance,  we  have  the  circle,  or  the  base  bone  (i)aud  arch 
4),  represented  in  figure  1,  and  we  also  bring  away,  articulated  therewith, 
ferioror  inverted  arch  with  its  appendages,  represented  in  profile  outline 
•.  5,  JO-57 : the  arrow  indicating  the  course  of’  convergence,  and  its  head 
loiut  of  union,  of  the  two  flanks  or  crura,  forming  the  closing  point  or 


n of  such  inverted  arch. 

• e have  thus  removed  a segment  of  the  skull,  and  with  as  little  or  even 
,’iolence  or  disturbance  to  the  other  bones,  than  must  have  been  used  in 
^ rhing  a similar  segment  from  the  thorax  or  pelvis  of  a land-animal.  If 
ompare  this  cranial  segment  with  the  typical  vertebra  fig.  14,  we  recog- 
in  the  single  median  bone  (1,  fig.  1)  the  centrum,  by  its  relative  position 
its  articular  surface  for  the  atlas,  which  retains,  moreover,  the  concave 
' ■ . characteristic  of  the  vertebrae  in  the  piscine  class  : in  the  pair  of  bones 
■'  ..),  which  articulate  with  the  upper  surface  of  the  centrum,  protect  the 
- i of  the  epencephalon,  and  are  perforated  by  the  ‘ nervi  vagi,’  we  have  the 
^ rapophyses  \ in  the  single  symmetrical  bone  (3)  which  completes  the 
, , and  terminates  in  a crest  for  the  attachment  of  the  uppermost  or  dorsal 
"c  dons  of  the  vertebral  muscles  continued  from  the  trunk,  we  have  the  neural 
and  in  the  pair  of  bones  (4,  4),  wedged  between  this  spine  and  the 
u-apophyses,  which  give  attachment  to  the  inferior  arch  of  the  segment 
■:  5,  H i),  and  terminate  in  a free  crest  or  spine  for  the  attachment  of  the 
3r  and  lateral  portions  of  the  vertebral  muscles,  we  have  the  paropo- 
kies;  for  whose  elevated  position  we  have  been  prepared  by  their  gradual 
•- 1:  nt  in  the  anterior  vertebrae  of  the  trunk.  The  rest  of  this  natural  segment 
^ .undergone  the  same  kind  of  modification  as  the  thoracic  vertebrae  present 
; :Jgher  animals  (fig.  15),  and  which  consists  in  the  great  expansion  of  the 
nal  arch,  the  removal  of  the  hccmapophyses  (fig.  5,  f>i)  from  the  centrum 
= i),and  the  interposition  of  elongated  and  defected pleurapophyses  (50,51); 
■j  lly,  the  great  inverted  arch,  so  formed,  encompasses,  supports  and  protects 
^ heart,  or  centre  of  the  haemal  axis.  The  elements  of  this  arch  are  open 
a ‘wo  interpretations  according  to  the  type  of  figure  15  : either  50  may  be 
. 51,  4 and  52  hs;  or  50  and  51  may  be  a divided  (teleologically  compound) 

: urapophysis,  and  52  an  unusually  developed  haemapopliysis  : and  this  latter 
j elusion  is  more  agreeable  with  the  character  of  the  vertebral  segments  of 
“ trunk  in  fishes,  in  which  the  haemal  spines  are  absent,  the  haemapophyses, 
3n  ossified,  long  and  sometimes  joined  together  at  their  lower  ends,  as  e.  g. 
1 .he  first  trunk- vertebra  of  Argyreiosus  vomer,  and  the  pleurapophyses  some- 
1 -es,  as  e,  g.  in  the  sturgeon,  composed  of  two  or  more  pieces,  set  end  to 
1.  The  condition  of  the  pleurapophysis  of  the  pelvic  arch  in  the  meno- 
■ne  (fig.  28,  62,  ^f),  which  sustains  a radiated  appendage  (i6.  A)  of  the 
mal  arch  of  the  occipital  vertebra,  indicates  the  true  character  of  the 
urajKiphysis : and  the  modifications  of  this  arch  in  the  higher  classes  will 
found  to  establish  the  accuracy  of  the  general  homology  of  the  bone  52, 
-h  the  haemapophysial  element,  since  the  lower  extremities  of  52  are  actu- 
jr  drawn  apart  and  articulated  to  a haemal  spine,  which  completes  the  arch 
low  in  reptiles  and  birds  (fig.  22,  H s). 

Even  should  there  be  error  in  assuming  the  subdivision  of  the  pleurapo- 
yseaand  the  absence  of  the  haemal  spine,  in  the  particular  determination  of 
2 (Kinstituent  elements  of  the  arch  in  question,  yet  the  alternative  is  still 
thin  the  recognised  limits  of  the  vertebral  modifications  of  the  trunk ; and 
* e want  of  unquestionable  proof  of  the  precise  elements  forms  no  valid  ob- 
j ;tion  to  its  general  homology  as  a hiemal  vertebral  arch,  expanded  and  modi- 
j d after  one  or  other  of  the  types  of  those  which,  in  the  thorax  of  the  air- 
i leathing  vertebrates,  encompass  and  protect,  the  more  backwardly  placed 


108 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON, 


foTeMn,°,L‘''r“°“l“''  “"<1  l“"gs);  according  to  t.l,ic 

Viicjjinai  spine;.  And,  further,  since  in  fishes,  as  the  lowest  nC 
the  vegetative  character  of  repetition  of  forms,  proportions  and  conn  . 
...  the  snccessiye  seg.nents  of  tl.e  skeleton  prevails 

se..z;  i.s«i'cii:L'n“Tth  t^^peSp^a^c'^l^l^tc^1. r\ 

As  the  hasmal  arches  in  the  trunk  of  fishes  er.mm/v,vi  ' . ..  . 

appendages,  which  project  freely  outwards  and  backwards^l^'V^^^'^u^T' 
hnried  in  the  mnscnlar  .nasses  to  .vhidiXTgivra^^^  ' 

arch,  also,  commonly  supports  its  divergine  TnnenrW^^^  ® 

in  Gymnothorax  and  some  other  Murcenida  ^Thp  ^ 
the  form  of  a single  multiarticulate  film^  tL  eel^Fr'^'^f 
lepidosirent;  it  is  modified  by  that  Srof  ^ 
results  in  adding  to  the  ..umb/r  of  similar  fllamenl^ 
the  supporting  arch  ; and  is  further  coniDlieateH  Iw  a™culdiri 

,»r;i„“;t'h!r:tc?tiL 

i..  tim  di^g^'o^tre'^fr^^^ 

more  numerous  bones  of  the  orimifivp  fii  * )»  and  the  last  segme' 

Sort.  Sd:Ton7ins^^ 

perh^emYprrlTrf^‘tVri''"i"^‘'’""‘^  development  i 

Tarrons;^^^^^^^^^  "'ith  the  freedom  which  is  the  n i 

have  not  TerSe  th  rr  end  only, 

the  fettering  J restraint  to  growth  which  may  arise  o s 

tebral  ele^nY  "^hich  characterizes  the  more  central  ^ 

rvtn  i*re  ”Jrae';r  “f  ‘"enenral  and  hteralT  ,! 

divisio..  grcaLrin  8™"'“'  O'-  ™g«ative  . 

much  more,  therefore  mipht  it'  h ® neural  and  haemal  spi  i 

andcommo  ilvfrflr  ’ - ^ expected  in  the  less  constant,  diverc^ 

here  the  polarizine- K vertebral  arches.  Althc  i 

the  pattern  of  demlrH^^^  " "i^^  ‘ particle  upon  particle  ;j| 

nitioTof  tlirspeciaTlYr^of  to  retain  firmly  and  with  certitude  our  reel 
hmmal  arch,  through  all  its^mod^ificYt^  diverging  appendage  of  the  occip^ 
ren  to  the  hundrelfo  d T/i! 

dichotomous  bifurcatinne  ®^*ne  elements  with  superadi  ■ 

broad  and  flat  plaeiostnmY“®fi‘r'"^u*  '®  enormous  pectoral  fins  of  ^ 
we  can  retrace,  with  eoual  Y ff  thence  called  ‘ rays  ’par  excellence,  ; 

when  it  is  so  plainly  manifest^  / ®erial  homology  of  this  appenda; 

o plainly  manifested  by  its  simple  form  as  well  as  connections <i 

Linnaean  Transactions,  vol.  vviii  nl  9i  f,ar  i 
t Bischoff,  Lepidosiren  paradoxa,  'uo,  nl .’  2 ^ficr.’  Tc 

an  enan  Lectures  on  Vertebrata,  fig?'.  27,  40,  4 L 42,  43,  1 


GENERAL  HOMOLOGY.  CRANIAL  VERTEHR.E. 


109 


)idosiren,  the  ampliiuina  or  the  apteryx,  witli  tlie  scarcely  more  simi)lo 
V -developed  appendage  of  the  thoracic  abdominal  hminal  arches  (ribs) 
^ Is  and  fishes  (figs.  15  and  17,  a,  a)  ; and  thus  we  are  led  to  determino 
•n  leral  homology,  under  its  manifold  forms  of  fin,  fore-limb,  wing,  or  arm, 
diverging  appendage  of  the  hmmal  arch  of  the  occipital  vertebra, 
iiiaturdl  and  typical  vertebral  segment  above-defined  cannot  bedetached, 
i';  ry  fish,  by  the  mere  disjunction  of  sutures : in  the  lepidosiren,  e.  g.  the 
d part  of  the  centrum  has  coalesced  with  that  of  the  next  segment  in 
^1  ce  and  would  require  to  be  divided  by  the  saw  : the  same  coalescence 
( in  the  human  skull,  and  has  led  to  the  definition  of  the  cranial  bone, 
-f(  ‘os  spheno-occipitale*.’  In  osseous  fishes,  either  by  connation  of  s 
. , fig.  5,  or  by  excessive  development  of  bone  in  the  notochordal  capsule 
le  ling  forwards  from  the  centrum  s,  and  producing  o,  there  results  the  long 
'5,  9)  continuing  the  series  of  vertebral  centrums  forwards,  and  corre- 
^ ing  in  position  with  two  segments  or  arches  above.  On  the  hypothesis 
s represents  the  central  elements  of  both  those  arches,  it  must  be  divided 
ially,  in  order  to  separate  that  segment  of  the  cranium  which  next  suc- 
i i.the  occipital  one.  And,  further,  either  by  a similar  coalescence  of  the 
ti  1 ual  elements  of  two  haemal  arches,  or  by  the  undue  extension  of  such 
it  ,nt  of  one  of  the  arches,  interposing  itself  between  the  next  arch  and 
- St  of  the  vertebra  to  which  that  arch  belongs,  it  happens,  that  unless  the 
! I nal  element  or  elements  in  question  be  artificially  divided,  as  at  i%a,  2sr/, 
1;.  two  haemal  arches  (H  n and  H in)  would  be  brought  away,  with  the 
1 arch  detached  by  the  separation  of  sutures  and  the  division  of  the 
c -5,9.  If  neither  that  bone,  nor  2aa  ^ere  divided,  but  were,  with  the 
in  superior  connection  with  them,  separated  from  the  bones  anteriorly 
■j  .dated  to  them  by  suture,  then  we  should  have  the  group  of  bones,  in- 
1 by  the  curved  lines  marked  N ii,  N iii,  Hii,  H iii  in  fig.  5.  Two 

- oral  segments  are  plainly  indicated  in  this  group  by  the  distinct  haemal 
3 and  their  appendages,  H ii  and  H iii ; but  three  pairs  of  bones,  le,  a 

-),fig.  5,  appear  to  be  in  neurapophysial  relation  with  the  single  and 

- .etrical  median  bone  s,  9.  If,  however,  what  has  been  urged  in  the 
er  on  ‘Special  Homology’  (pp.  188-196)  respecting  the  petrosal  cha- 

■ • of  16  be  a true  interpretation  of  that  bone,  then  we  must  eliminate  it 
, our  present  inquiry,  inasmuch  as  being  a partial  ossification  of  a sense- 

■ -le  (and  nature  herself  removes  them,  as  such,  in  most  fishes),  it  apper- 

- toa  category  of  bones  (splanchno-skeleton),  forming  no  part  of  the  pro- 
I euro- or  endo-skeleton,  in  which  alone  we  seek  forevidence  of  asegmental 
‘ sition  of  parts  corresponding  with  the  segments  of  the  nervous  system. 

e bony  petrosals  (le)  being  removed,  let  us,  then,  with  the  view  of  ex- 
ing  the  composition  of  the  segment  of  the  skull  with  which  the  occipi- 
•ertebra  was  articulated,  saw  across  the  bones  5,  9 and  2sa,  and  separate 
i ones  6,  7,  3 from  their  sutural  connections  with  those  in  front  of  them. 
1 us  obtaining  the  segment  in  question,  the  opponents  to  the  vertebral 
I y of  the  skull  are  entitled  to  assert  that  violence  is  done  to  nature  by 
^ ections  of  the  single  bones  above-cited;  the  validity  of  which  as  an 
B ;tion  to  that  theory  will  be  afterwards  inquired  into. 

I is  not,  however,  absolutely  necessary  to  divide  the  basal  bone  5,  n ; in 
S / osseous  fishes  a symmetrical  bone  (fig.  5,  o')  supports  the  parial  bones 
I id  stands  in  the  relation  of  a centrum  to  them  ; tlie  neural  arch  or  circle 
I lat  segment  would  not,  therefore,  be  broken  by  the  removal  with  the 
'!  nor  segment  of  the  whole  of  the  bone  5,  0.  If  the  corresponding 

* Sec  Table  I.,  Soemmerring. 


no 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


ttbra  centrum  of  the  second  cervi 

^ H (P-  260)  were  removed,  with  that  segment,  ft 

atlas,  the  atlantal  neural  arch  would  still  be  completed  by  the  rudimentr* 

itselT^^  ossification  from  the  succeeding  vertebrae  had  eji 

Whether,  however,  we  divide  or  not  the  bone  5,9,  those  which  re- 
Its  posterior  or  basisphenoidal  part  present,  after  the  removal  of  the  1 
sahs,  when  viewed  from  behind,  and  slightly  disarticulated  from  each,  r 

the  lobe  of  the  third  ventricle  or  the  mesencephalic  se<rn  Jnt  of  the  1 
they  give  exit  to  the  trigeminal  nerves  (tr),  and  thus,  as  wed  as  by  the* 
nections  with  the  other  bones  of  the  arch,  repeat  the  neurapophysial  chaf 
of  the  bones  2,  2 in  the  occipital  segment.  The  bones  s,  s,  by  their  me- 
ternal  position,  by  affording  an  articular  surface  to  the  hmmal  arcl 
H II),  and  their  development  of  a strong  transversely  and  backward)  r 
duced  process  for  muscular  attachments,  obviously  repeat  the 
characters  of  the  bones  4,  4 in  the  occipital  vertebra.  ^ ^ 

The  arch  is  not  completed  above  in  the  cod-fish  j the  bones  7 7 bei 
parated  at  the  mesial  line  by  the  interposition  of  the  produced  spine 
occipital  vertebra  s,  which  joins  with  11.  In  some  ither  fishes^  ho^4 
e.g.  carp  and  pike,  the  bones  7,  7 do  come  in  contact  and  join  each  otll 
a sagittal  suture,  thus  completing  the  neural  arch.  It  will  afterwa.® 
seen,  by  tracing  the  homologues  of  these  bones  in  other  animals  ancj 
homotypes  in  other  segments,  what  value  may  be  assigned  to  the  object 
their  general  homology  as  the  crown  or  haemal  spine  of  the  mesencer 
neural  arch,  founded  upon  the  median  division  and  occasional  divaricat 
the  two  halves  of  no.  7 in  osseous  fishes.  I may  so  far  anticipate  the  d4 
Sion  as  to  remark  that,  even  in  the  present  group  of  vertebrates,  the  sp  “ 
the  occipital  vertebra  (3)  is  divided  by  a median  suture  in  the  lepidosteu 
that  the  condition  of  the  epencephalic  arch  in  that  fish  is  precisely  tl 
the  mesencephalic  arch  in  the  carp,  and  essentially  the  same  as  that  in  ) 
and  in  most  other  osseous  fishes. 

The  remainder  of  the  second  or  parietal  segment  of  the  skull,  H ii,  repea’ 
expanded  modification  of  the  haemal  arch  of  the  occipital  yertebra,  and' 
approaches  nearer  to  the  character  of  the  thoracic  vertebrm  of  the  h 
animals,  by  the  development  of  single  symmetrical  bones  at  the  crown  ol 
mverted  arch.  But  the  principle  of  vegetative  repetition  is  still  more  r* 
tested  in  this  arch  than  in  the  occipital  one.  If  we  regard  the  posteriori 

^ the  proximal  piece  of  the  parieto-haemal  « 
which  has  coalesced  with  the  corresponding  piece  of  the  fronto-hsemal  :g 
then  Vne  pleurapoph/sis  of  the  parieto-haemal  arch  will  consist,  in  bony  fi  ! 
of  two  pieces,  2sa  and  as,  like  the  pleurapophysis  of  the  occipito-haemal  it 
soandsi.  J hebones,  so  and  ^o,v&pvesexitt\\eluemapophi/sis  of  the  parieto-ha’ 
arch.  1 he  two  pairs  of  small  bones  (41 ) with  the  single  median  anterior 
ana  posterior  (43)  appendages,  represent  a still  more  subdivided  spine  or  > 
bone  of  this  inverted  arch. 

Beneath  this  mask  of  multiplication  of  bony  centres,  the  broad  charac’: 
suspended  to  the  parapophyses  of  the  parietal  verte' 
as  the  haemal  complement  of  that  natural  segment  of  the  skull,  stand  bo 
out.  It  encompasses,  sustains  and  protects  the  branchial  organs— the  i' 
next  great  development  of  the  vascular  system  antei 
fhP  subdivision  of  the  piers  of  this  expanded  arch  relate 

I p Pvpm./-^  for  a combination  of  strength,  with  flexibility  and  elasticity 
the  execution  of  the  movements  producing  the  respiratory  currents.  . 


general  homology.  cranial  VERTEDR/E. 


]11 


H 

'J 


■■(Si 

■i 

jll 

1. 

fti 

'm  . 

-'•D 

-t' 

I 

n- 

« 

ta  u* 

ai  t 


le  correspondence  with  the  scapular,  or  occipito-heeinal  arch,  is  furtlier 
id  out  by  the  presence  oi appendages  which  freely  diverge  Ironi  it,  but 
evelopiuent  of  these  appendiiges  has  not  been  observed  to  extend  beyond 
second  phase,  marked  by  vegetative  multiplication  of  the  simple  ray, 
tly  attached  to  the  arch  itself.  The  lepidosiren  offers  the  simplest  con- 
1 of  such  ‘ diverging  appendage  ’ in  the  single  slender  bony  piece  con- 
;d  with  the  element  40*.  Cuvier  and  other  ichthyologists  cite  a series 
ages  of  this  kind  of  development  of  the  hyoidean  appendage  from  a si- 
^imple  beginning  up  to  a 30-fold  repetition  of  the  single  ray  {Flops) ; 
;he  ‘ brauchiostegal  ’ rays  have  been  found  in  much  greater  numbers  in 
in  fossil  fishes.  Like  the  ‘ pectoral  ’ rays,  they  support  a duplicature  of 
brane,  which  plays  freely  backw’ards  and  forwards,  reacting  upon  the 
ent  medium,  and  forming,  in  short,  a cephalic  fin,  but  with  its  powers 
iftAstricted  and  adjusted,  as  to  propel  the  water  through  the  branchial  cham- 
Jii  .of  the  fish,  instead  of  driving  the  fish  through  the  water  ; in  which  latter 
'D  on,  indeed,  the  occipital  appendages  (pectoral  fins) in  most  osseous  fishes 
land  do  perform  but  a very  small  share. 

I we  next  proceed  to  compare  the  frontal  segment,  N iii  and  II  in,  dis- 
vbered  as  above  described  from  the  parietal  vertebra,  and,  by  the  separa- 
of  the  sutures,  from  the  bones  terminating  the  skull  anteriorly,  we  shall 
ra  neural  arch  (fig.  3)  closely  repeating  the  characters  of  that  of  the  oc- 
n.'i.al  vertebra.  The  centrum  is  sometimes  represented  simply  by  the  forward 
flsion  of  ossification  of  the  basisphenoid  (u),  which  I regard  as  the  ho- 
jfpe  of  the  ossification  of  the  capsule  of  the  notochord  beneath  the  cen- 
wsof  the  anterior  trunk- vertebrae  in  the  silurus  ; sometimes,  also,  of  a di- 
;t  superincumbent  symmetrical  ossicle  (o',  fig.  5),  answering  to  the  rudi- 
Ltal  (central  part  of  the)  body  of  the  atlas  supported  by  the  inferior  bony 
inthesilurus.  This  more  complex  condition  of  the  centrum  of  the  frontal 
«4ebra  is  well-seen  in  the  sword-fish.  The  bones  10, 10,  which  directly  rest 
rjiio',  when  it  exists,  which  defend  the  sides  of  the  prosencephalon,  and 
13  ;.jh  are  either  grooved  by  the  optic  nerves,  or  have  those  nerves  perforating 
ifibro-cartilaginous  membrane  close  to  the  margin  of  the  bone  (10)  from 
:;;h  it  is  continued,  are  obviously  the  neurapophyses.  They  are,  however, 
11 ; inasmuch  as  the  segment  of  the  brain  to  which  they  relate  is  of  inferior 
in  bony  fishes  : and  they  are  still  smaller  in  comparison  with  the  spine 
• which  is  enormously  expanded,  in  relation  to  its  accessory  functions  as 
chief  contributor  to  and  protector  of  the  orbits.  The  bones  12,  wedged 
veen  the  neurapophyses  and  spine,  affording  an  articular  surface  to  the 
_ I i.dnial  piece  of  the  haemal  arch,  and  developing  a transverse  process  for 
«ular  attachments,  are  the  parapophyses.  The  bones  (17)  have  as  little 
ntial  connection  with  the  typical  neural  arch  above  demonstrated,  as  the 
■es  18,  la"  had  with  the  corresponding  arch  of  the  parietal  vertebra : and 
r more  peculiar  form  in  relation  to  the  ball  which  they  protect,  and  their 
able  histological  condition  in  the  vertebrate  series,  have  not  only  prevented 
r ever  being  mistaken  for  parts  of  cranial  vertebrae,  but  have  led  to  the 
•osite  extreme  of  excluding  them  altogether  from  the  bones  of  the  skull, 
b which  they  are  as  much  entitled  to  rank  as  the  petrosal  (10)  or  the 
3inal(n);  but  always  in  the  category  of  sense-capsules  or  ‘ splanchno- 
letal  ’ pieces. 

n regard  to  the  inferior  arch  of  the  frontal  segment,  the  subdivision  of  its 
stituent  elements,  in  subserviency  to  its  special  functions,  is  carried  to  as 
i at  an  extent  as  in  that  of  the  parietal  segment.  I regard  the  four  over- 
I ping  and  closely-connected  pieces  from  the  upper  joint  {-mi)  to  the  lower 
* Hunterian  Lectures  on  Vcrtclimla.  p.  79,  fig.  27,  37. 


112 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON, 


^^llPj^urfipophysis:  it  is  not  so  obvious  w 
e 29  32  form  a subdivided  hccmapophysis,  or  whether  the  te 
ma’Tn'*?!  symphysis  with  its  fellow  the  crown  of  the  inverter 

^ mesially  divided  hccmal  spine.  But  the  af 
?|  V inverted  arch  (H  m),  as  the  hmmal  complement  of  th^ 

tal  vertebra  is  unmistakeable,  and  its  serial  homology  with  the  succi 
arches  (H  ii  and  H i)  is  fully  illustrated  in  fishes  by  Supporting  S 
appendages  (34-37).  These,  in  the  series  of  fishes,  manifest  fn  i 
permanent  arrests,  the  chief  phases  of  development  that  the  coi^esno 
appendages  of  the  occ.pito-haemal  arch  have  been  described  to  pLs  thr 
The  diverging  appendage  of  the  fronto-h^mal  arch  is  a singlHnd  1 
bony  sty  e in  the  lepidosiren  ; it  consists  of  three  or  four  simile  ravs’ 
monk-fish  and  some  other  plagiostomes  ; it  has  one  ray  expanded  inS 
proximal  piece  in  the  conger,  which  sustains  a distal  segment  of  the  appeo 
one  member  of  which,  the  ‘ subopercular,’  still  retains  the  long  and^sle 
ay-like  form,  which  is,  also,  clearly  traceable  in  the  broader^ but  lout 
curved  opercular  ; in  the  cod,  as  in  most  osseous  fishes,  the  parts  a 
second  segment  of  the  appendage  (35,  3«,  37,  fig.  5)  are  metamorphosed 
the  proximal  one  (34),  into  broad  and  flat  bones.  The  fin-like  fold  ofi 
gument,  sustained  and  moved  by  means  of  this  diverging  append^ 
muscles  reacts  upon  the  surrounding  water ; but,  ifke  the  hyoiSs 
winch  the  tympanic  or  opercular  fins  are  closely  connected,  they  are  cl 
subservient  to  the  creation  of  the  respiratory  currents  and  their  dire 
hrough  the  gil  -chambers.  The  weight  of  thise  appendages,  aU  tie 
sta.it  movements  in  connection  with  respiration,  as  well  af  those  wliicl 
hmmapophysial  portions  of  the  arch,  modified  in  subserviency  to  nutr 
have  to  perform,  as  jaws,  explain  the  necessity  of  the  subdivisiL  of  the 
porting  pedicle  into  overlapping  pieces  allowing  of  a certain  elastic  viel 
with  recoil,  and  thus  diminishing  the  liability  fo  fractimfwithout  a£ 
except  by  increasing,  the  strength  of  the  arch.  The  trochlear  joint  beh 
the  two  elements  of  this  arch  (at  2sr/  and  29)  with  its  cartilage '^and  sync 
sac,  repeats  the  complex  structure  of  the  articulation  between  the  verte 

?2"srff  of 'tl  the  ribs  in  birds.  To  the  fore-part  of  the  lower  p 

(2srf)  of  the  pleurapophysis  is  usually  articulated  a bone  (24)  conneeth 
with  another  bone  (20)  in  advance  : the  ground  for  regardirm  24  S anne; 
,ng  arch  and  H ,v)  J:  be  eaplaine?  in  tL  dic^u„ 

I .u’  ^ forming  its  anterior  extremity;  and  we  have  to 

quire,  whether  there  can  be  traced  in  this  easily  separable  group  sS  a c 
cordance  m its  formation  with  the  arrangement  of  the  oinstituents  of 

tra^'ni":"  nr-.:"!  - a naSrsx 

he  endoskefot^n  f ''  the  type  on  which  all  the  other  segment, 

bones  o?thi  ‘ r"  ^""  constructed.  Fig.  4 gives  the  same  view  of 

in  ties  1 2 and  ^ J J^ertebral  relation  with  the  rhinencephala  as  the  vii 
segnfents  of  tl  elf  '’^'^tion  to  the  three  lari 

fofming  the  iasis  symmetrical  bone  ( 

immedfatelv  suTinm-f sustaining  the  bones  14,  h,  which  m. 
by  grooves^  or  ganglions  and  transmit  their  nerves,  eit! 

fo^-med  by  the  olfactory  capsules : the  key  of  the  arch 

chiefly  sustained  bl  the^ljon'i'"*’**^'^^*  1^°"®  articulated  to  a 

anteriorlv  so  as  tn  rLf  a-  ^?i  ^ expanded  and  deflect 

canal . tl!e  Immal  canal  beS„‘'S"  ma',?„"«r7'’‘7l'^  obliterate  the  ncu 

g in  iiKe  manner  closed  by  the  approximation 


GENERAL  HOMOLOGY.  CRANIAL  VERTEBR.E. 


113 


iffinial  spine  (22)  to  the  nasal  centrum  (13),  and  by  the  upward  develop- 
of  the  processes  of  22  which  join  the  neural  spine  (is).  Much  modili- 
n was  to  be  expected  in  the  segment  wliich  terminates  the  skeleton 
•iorly ; and  yet  the  typical  characters  of  the  neural  arch  are  more  com- 
Iv  preserved  here  than  at  the  opposite  end  of  the  vertebral  column.  If 
^ I bones  4,  s,  12,  which  I recognise  as  ‘ parapophyses  ’ in  the  cranial 
^ rents  1,  II,  III,  must  be  viewed  as  superadded  intercalations  for  the 
aland  characteristic  expansion  of  the  neural  arches  of  those  segments — 
ial  elements,  indeed,  of  the  typical  vertebra,  but  with  modified  connections 
-janial  functions — then  the  disappearance  of  their  homotypes  in  the  nasal 
* , ent  restores  its  neural  arch  (fig.  -t)  to  the  more  common  condition,  and  we 
ijnise  in  13  the  centrum,  in  ij,  14,  the  neurapophyses,  and  in  i5  the  neural 
of  the  nasal  vertebra. 

i t the  segment  to  be  complete  should  exhibit  a second  arch,  inverted  ; and 
nd  such  arch  closed  or  completed  by  the  symphysis  of  the  bones  22, 
, and  suspended  to  the  sides  of  the  centrum  13  and  to  the  neurapophyses 
, by  the  bones  20,  as  the  piers  or  crura  of  the  arch  ; these  bones  being 
'^cted  to  the  key-bones  22,  by  the  intermediate  bones  21.  Now,  the 
®^rfications  which  these  elements  of  the  inverted  or  hcemal  arch  of  the 
vertebra  have  undergone,  are,  also,  much  less  than  might  have  been 
npated  from  the  extent  to  which  the  segments  are  modified  at  the  oppo- 
extreme  of  the  endoskeleton.  All  the  normal  elements  of  the  haemal 
for  example,  are  retained : 20  is  the  pleur apophysis,  21  the  hcemapo- 
'S,  and  22  the  hcemal  spine,  in  most  fishes  divided  at  the  middle  line,  but 
*f:times  confluent  with  its  fellow  e.g.  Diodon.  The  essential  (pleur- 
aysial)  part  of  20  extends  in  many  fishes  (e.  g.  percoids)  like  a short 
:rht  rib  from  its  articulation  u'itli  13  and  14  to  the  condyle  at  its  opposite 
lO  which  the  haemapophysis  20  is  articulated  ; but  it  usually,  also,  de- 
►es  a process  from  its  hinder  margin  downwards  and  backwards,  which 
: attachment  to  the  diverging  appendage  of  the  arch  H iv.  The  de- 
:ment  of  the  other  bones  of  the  arch,  21  and  22,  outwards,  downwards 
backwards,  is  still  more  marked  in  relation  to  the  protractile  and  retrac- 
^^faovements  of  the  arch  in  most  osseous  fishes  ; and  some  anatomists, 
rmced  by  the  form  and  proportions  rather  than  the  connections  of  those 
!,  have  described  them  as  independent  parallel  arches:  but,  as  such, 
•^must  be  regarded  as  being  suspended  by  their  apices  or  key-stones  to 
ixis  of  the  skull,  and  as  having  their  haunches  hanging  freely  downwards 

* mtwards — a position  the  reverse  of  that  of  the  foregoing  inferior  arches 
< sjpull  and  of  every  typical  haemal  arch.  The  reduction  of  that  di- 
il'rnt  development,  characteristic  of  the  bones  21  and  22  in  fishes,  is  ef- 

i in  a great  degree  within  the  limits  of  the  piscine  class : already  we 
me  of  the  spurious  arches  abrogated  in  the  salmonoid  fishes  by  the  short- 
■ of  22,  and  its  more  direct  continuation  from  21,  which  now  forms  the 
r part  of  the  upper  border  of  the  mouth  and  supports  teeth  ; the  con- 
: maxillaries  and  premaxillaries  send  down  only  a single  divergent 

* ■•ss  from  their  point  of  suspension  to  the  palatine  condyle  in  the  plecto- 
lic  fishes;  and  the  consolidation  of  all  the  elements  of  the  palato-maxillary 
into  its  normal  unity  is  effected  in  the  lepidosiren*.  The  palatines  (20) 

^ 's  form  the  true  bases  or  suspensory  piers  of  the  inverted  hiemal  arch 
2 fir  points  of  attachment  to  the  prefrontals  (u)  ; tlie  premaxillaries,  22, 
j|  itute  the  true  apex  or  crown  at  their  symphysis  or  point  of  confluence, 
■J  ; the  approximation  of  which  to  the  anterior  end  of  the  axis  of  the  skull 
adered  possible,  in  fishes,  by  the  absence  of  any  air-passage  or  nasal 

* Hunterian  Lectures,  Vertebrata,  p.  81,  fig.  29. 


a 


i 


114 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


canal.  The  diverging  appendage,  sometimes  single  and  anchylosed 
arch  (lepidosiren) ; sometimes  single  and  detached  like  a long,  narro\'l 
(some  murasnoids)  ; more  commonly  consists  of  two  bones  (23,  24), 
extend  outwards,  downwards,  and  backwards  from  the  pleurapophysif 
but  the  more  constant  and  better  ossified  bone  of  the  two,  no.  24,  arti( 
posteriorly  with  the  succeeding  pleurapojjhysis  (2s)  and  combines  its 
ments  with  those  of  its  own  arch,  just  as  the  diverging  appendages  < 
thoracic  haemal  arch  in  the  bird  associate  the  movements  of  that  arc 
those  of  the  next  in  succession  (as  in  fig.  15,;?/,  a,pV).  The  haemapo 
here,  as  at  the  opposite  end  of  the  body,  begin  so  far  to  disspciate  then 
from  the  pleurapophyses  as  to  articulate  also  directly  with  the  centra  ^ 
as  well  as  with  the  pleurapophyses.  I regard  this  as  a very  interestii 
proximation  to  that  condition  of  the  typical  vertebra  which  is  illustrati 
the  diagram  (fig.  14),  and  which  is  seen  in  nature  in  the  caudal  vertel 
the  crocodiles,  enaliosaurs  and  menopome  (fig.  28,  H). 

From  the  foregoing  analysis  it  appears,  then,  that  in  osseous  fish 
endoskeletal  bones  of  the  head  are  arranged,  like  those  of  the  trunk,  i 
ments;  that  these  are  four  in  number,  and  that  they  closely  conform 
character  of  the  typical  vertebra. 

Thus  we  have  four  centrutns  and  neural  arches  : viz. 

N I.  Epencephalic  arch  (figs.  1 and  5,  1,  2,  3,  4)  ; 

N n.  Mesencephalic  arch  (figs.  2 and  5,  5,  e,  7,  s)  ; 

N III.  Prosencephalic  arch  (figs.  3 and  5,  9,  lo,  n,  12) ; 

N IV.  Rhinencephalic  arch  (figs.  4 and  5,  13,  i4,  is). 

As  a collective  name  for  the  sum  of  these  immoveably  articulated  i 
would  be  as  convenient  as  the  anatomist  finds  the  names  ‘sacrum  ’ and 
pace,’  applied  to  similarly  consolidated  portions  of  vertebral  segments 
pelvic  and  abdominal  regions  of  certain  air-breathing  vertebrates, 

‘ cranium  ’ may  well  be  retained  for  tlie  neural  arches  of  the  skull  : * 

should  be  understood  to  signify,  in  all  animals,  the  bones  i to  is  inch 
whereas  it  has,  hitherto,  been  applied  variably  in  different  species ; 1 
times  including  sense-capsules  and  facial  bones,  intercalated  to  expanil 
walls  of  the  cavity  for  a large  brain  ; and  more  frequently  excluding! 
cranial  bones,  those  of  the  rhinencephalic  arch,  for  example,  which  encoi 
as  essential  a part  of  the  encephalic  chamber,  as  the  sacral  vertebrm  do  1 
neural  canal  at  the  opposite  end  of  the  vertebral  axis  ; although  in  bot 
stances  the  extremities  of  the  neural  axis  may  have  been  withdrawn,  i i* 
course  of  its  concentrative  change  and  movement,  from  their  original  f 


The  haemal  arches  indicated  by  the  arrows  in  fig.  5,  the  heads  ma  ^ 
the  point  of  junction  or  crown,  are, — 

II  I.  Scapular  arch  (00-52) ; 

H II.  Hyoidean  arch  (38-43) ; 

H III.  Mandibular  arch  (28-32); 

H IV.  Maxillary  arch  (20-22). 

The  diverging  appendages  of  the  haemal  arches  are, — 

1.  The  Pectoral  (54-57); 

2.  The  Branchiostegal  (44)  ; 

3.  The  Opercular  (34-37)  ; 

4.  The  Pterygoid  (23-24). 

The  bones  or  parts  of  the  splanchno-skeleton  which  are  intercalated 
or  attached  to  the  arches  of  the  true  vertebral  segments,  are, — 

1 he  Petrosal  (lo)  or  ear-capsule,  with  the  otolites,  la"; 

The  Sclerotal  (17)  or  eye-capsule  ; 

The  Turbinal  (jo)  or  nose-capsule  ; 
nu..,  1 


■ 

1 


i 


GENERAL  HOMOLOGY.  CRANIAL  VEIirEBR.E. 


115 


¥•1 

-ij 

'Hil; 

■«t  t. 


The  Teeth. 

be  bones  of  the  dernio-skeleton  are, — 

The  Supratemporals ; 

The  Supraorbitals ; 

The  Suborbitals; 

The  Labials. 

ich  appears  to  be  the  natural  classification  of  the  parts  which  constitute 
i'ti  ^joniplex  skull  of  osseous  fishes. 

i the  object  of  the  present  work  relates  chiefly  to  the  endoskeleton,  1 
only  added  the  osseous  parts  of  the  sense-capsules  to  the  cranial  vertebrae 
r.o;  omitting  the  branchial  arches  and  dermal  bones:  the  haemal  arches 
their  appendages  are  given  in  diagrammatic  outline. 
tptiles. — In  proceeding  with  the  inquiry  into  the  natural  arrangement  of 
kull-bones,  I have  selected  from  the  Reptilia  the  crocodile,  as  a typical 
aple  of  that  class,  and  one  most  likely  to  facilitate  the  inquiry  on  account 
<ie  characteristic  persistence  of  the  primitive  cranial  sutures. 

2 lursuing  the  same  mode  of  investigation  as  in  the  case  of  the  fish,  let  us 
•ticulate  the  hindmost  segment  of 

kull  and  so  detach  the  four  bones,  Fig.  18. 

fsented  in  fig.  18.  The  dotted 
e indicates  the  points  at  which 
s bones  are  joined  together,  in 
r to  encompass  the  epencephalon, 
dndmost  segment  of  the  brain. 

I is  the  ; 2,  2 are  the  neur- 

hyses  with  the  coalesced  par- 
sj  -ihyses  (4,  4)  ; and  3 is  the  neural 
e.  This  element  differs  but  little 
nze  and  shape  from  the  similarly 
ched  and  depressed  neural  spine 
he  atlas  of  the  crocodile.  The 
-le  convex  condyle  at  the  back  part 
.I4).  1 makes  that  centrum  resemble 
^posteriorly  convex  bodies  of  the 

».k-vertebrae  in  as  striking  a manner  as  the  repetition  of  the  articular 
j:avity  in  the  basioccipital  of  the  cod  (fig.  1,  1)  marks  its  serial  homo- 
' with  the  succeeding  vertebral  centrums  of  the  same  animal.  In  the 
ending  process  from  the  under  part  of  the  occipital  centrum  of  the 
xodile  (fig.  18,  1),  we  see  a second  character  of  the  cervical  centrums  in 
reptile  repeated,  viz.  their  inferior  exogenous  spine.  The  neurapo- 
■ses  (2, 2),  like  those  of  the  atlas,  meet  above  the  neural  canal : they  give 
■ to  the  vagal  and  hypoglossal  nerves,  and  protect  the  sides  of  the  me- 
a oblongata  and  cerebellum.  The  neural  spine  (3)  protects  the  upper 
ace  of  the  cerebellum:  it  is  also  traversed  by  tympanic  cells,  and  assists, 
1 the  bones  2,  2,  in  the  formation  of  the  chamber  for  the  internal  ear. 
: special  homology  of  the  outstanding  processes  (4,  4)  in  the  crocodile 
• serpent  (fig.  10),  with  the  similarly  situated  but  distinct  ‘ paroccipital’ 
•es  in  the  cod,  is  confirmed  by  their  resuming  their  independency  in  the 
ler  segment  of  the  skull  of  the  cheloriian  reptiles ; and  the  occipital  neural 
I of  the  crocodile  is  reduced  by  their  confluence  with  the  neurapophyses 
he  condition  of  those  of  the  trunk- vertebrae,  as  composed,  viz.  of  four 
ead  of  six  elements. 

(he  epencephalic  arch  offers  the  same  simple  condition  not  only  in  the 
idians  but  in  most  saurians : the  chameleons  however  retain,  like  the 

I 2 


Disarticulated  epencephalic  arch,  viewed  from 
behind : Crocodile. 


116 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


chelonians,  the  ichthyic  independence  of  the  parapophyses  (4,  4).  In  ba. 
chians  the  epencephalic  arch  is  reduced  to  the  two  important  elements, 
neurapophyses  ; which  meet  and  join  each  other  below  as  well  as  above 
foramen  magnum,  and  develope  the  exogenous  zygapophyses,  or  two  occi] 
condyles,  for  articulation  with  the  corresponding  processes  of  the  neural  i 
of  the  atlas.  The  basioccipital,  if  it  exists  in  batrachians,  is  rudimental 
confluent  with  the  basisphenoid,  and  the  supraoccipital  is  in  like  mai 
recognisable  only  as  the  posterior  border  of  the  backwardly  produced  pari ; 
The  parapophyses  are  short  exogenous  processes  of  the  neurapophyses  ofi 
much  simplified  epencephalic  arch  in  all  batrachian  reptiles.  . 

The  chief  modification  that  distinguishes  the  above-described  segmep 
the  crocodile’s  skull  from  its  homologue  in  the  fish,  is  the  absence  ot 
attached  inverted  or  haemal  arch.  We  recognise,  indeed,  the  special  ho 
logues  of  the  piscine  constituents  of  that  arch  in  so,  si  and  52,  fig.  22. 
upper  suprascapular  piece  (so)  is  however  free,  disconnected  from  any  , 
ment,  and  retains,  in  connection  with  the  loss  of  its  proximal  or  era 
articulations,  its  cartilaginous  state  : the  scapula  (si)  is  ossified,  as  is  like 


the  coracoid  (32),  the  lower  end  of  which  is  separated  from  its  fellow  by. 
interposition  of  a median,  symmetrical,  partially  ossified  piece  called  ‘epit 


it 


num  ' (/ts).  The  power  of  recognising  the  special  homologies  of  so,  si, 
32  in  the  crocodile,  with  the  simil.arly  numbered  constituents  of  the  archi 
in  fishes  (fig.  5),  though  masked  not  only  by  modifications  of  form  and  ] 
portion  but  even  of  very  substance,  as  in  the  case  of  so,  depends  upon 
circumstance  of  these  bones  constituting  the  same  essential  element  of 
archetypal  skeleton  : for  although  in  the  present  instance  there  is  superad 
to  the  adaptive  modifications  above-cited  the  rarer  one  of  altered  connect!' 
Cuvier  does  not  hesitate  to  give  the  same  names  (suprascapulaire)  tr 
and  (scapulaire)  to  si,  in  both  fish  and  crocodile  : but  he  did  notperceiv. 
admit  that  the  narrower  relations  of  special  homology  were  a result  of, 
necessarily  Included  in,  the  wider  law  of  general  homology.  According 
the  view  of  this  law  here  taken,  we  discern  in  so  and  si,  fig.  22,  a teleologici 
compound  pleurapophysis,  in  52  a hcemapophysis,  and  in  hs  the  hoei 
spine,  completing  the  haemal  arch. 

The  general  relations  of  the  scapulo-coracoid  arch  to  a haemal  or  cot 
one  have  been  long  recognised,  but  the  vertebral  segment  to  which  it  apj 
tains  seems  not  hitherto  to  have  been  suspected,  and  has  certainly  not  b 
satisfactorily  determined.  Oken,  who  had  observed  the  free  cervical  ribi 
a specimen  of  the  Lacerta  apoda,  Pallas  (Pseudopus),  deemed  them  rej 
sentatives  of  the  scapula,  and  this  bone  to  be,  in  other  animals,  the  coales- 
homologues  of  the  cervical  pleurapophyses*.  In  no  animal  are  the  conditi 
for  testing  this  question  so  favourable  and  obvious  as  in  the  crocodile : 
only  do  cervical  ribs  coexist  with  the  scapulo-coracoid  arch,  but  they  arc 
unusual  length  and  are  developed  from  the  atlas  as  well  as  from  each  s 
ceeding  cervical  vertebra : we  can  also  trace  them  beyond  the  thorax  to  ' 
sacrum,  and  throughout  a great  part  of  the  caudal  region,  as  the  sutures 
the  apparently  long  transverse  processes  of  the  coccygeal  vertebrae  denn 
strate  in  the  young  animal ; the  lumbar  pleurapophyses  being  manifes 
at  the  same  period  as  cartilaginous  appendages  to  the  ends  of  the  long  c 
pophyses. 


* “ Auch  die  Scapula  nicht  ein  Knochen,  sondern  wenigstens  eine  aus  fiinf  Halsrip 
zusammengeflossene  Platte  ist.”— Programm,  &c.,  4to,  1807,  p.  16.  He  reproduces 
same  idea  of  the  general  homology  of  the  scapula  in  the  ‘ Lehrhuch  der  Natur-philosoph 
1843,  p.  331,  ^ 2381.  Cams  also  regards  the  scapulo-coracoid  arch  as  the  reunion  of  sfi 
ral  (at  least  three)  protovertehral  arches  of  the  trunk-segments.  ' Urtheilen  des  Kuoc 
und  Schalen  gerustes,  fol.  nxmi. 


OEXEKAL  UOMOI.OGY. 


CRANIAL  VEUTEISR.K. 


117 


«!u 


k 


'he  scapulo- coracoid  arcli,  both  elements  of  wliich  retain  the  form  of 
ncr  and  thick  vertebral  and  sternal  ribs  in  the  crocodile,  is  applied  in  the 
teton  of  that  animal  over  the  anterior  thoracic  luemal  arches.  Viewed 
more  robust  hiemal  arch,  it  is  obviously  out  of  place  in  reference  to  the 
of  its  vertebral  segment.  If  we  seek  to  determine  that  segment  by  the 
Je  in  which  we  restore  to  tiieir  centrums  the  less  displaced  neural  arches 
he  sacrum  of  the  bird  (tig.  27,  « i-«  ■»),  «'e  proceed  to  examine  the  verte- 

■ before  and  behind  the  displaced  arch  with  the  view  to  discover  the  one 
ch  needs  it  in  order  to  be  made  typically  complete.  Finding  no  centrum  and 
ral  arch  without  its  pleurapophyses  from  the  scapula  to  the  pelvis,  we  give 
oursearch  in  that  direction  ; and  in  the  opposite  direction  we  find  no  verte- 
> without  its  ribs  until  we  reach  the  occiput:  there  we  have  centrum  and 
ral  arch,  with  coalesced  parapophyses — the  elements  answering  to  those 

Luded  in  the  arch  N i,  fig.  5—  but  without  the  arch  II  i ; which  arch 
. only  be  supplied,  without  destroying  the  typical  completeness  of  antece- 
t cranial  segments,  by  a restoration  of  the  bones  50-52,  to  the  place  which 
f naturally  occupy  in  the  skeleton  of  the  fish.  And  since  anatomists 
: generally  agreed  to  regard  the  bones  50-52  in  the  crocodile  (fig.  22) 
specially  homologous  with  those  so  numbered  in  the  fish  (fig.  5),  we 
>Gt  conclude  that  they  are  likewise  homologous  in  a higher  sense  ; that  in 
■5  the  scapulo-coracoid  arch  is  in  its  natural  or  typical  place,  whereas  in 
crocodile  it  has  been  displaced  for  a special  purpose.  Thus,  agreeably 
ii  a general  principle,  we  perceive  that  as  the  lower  vertebrate  animal 
strates  the  closer  adhesion  to  the  archetype  by  the  natural  articulation  of 
sscapulo-coracoid  arch  to  the  occiput,  so  the  higher  vertebrate  manifests 
■^superior  influence  of  the  antagonising  power  of  adaptive  modification  by 
rremoval  of  that  arch  from  its  proper  segment. 

The  scapula  retains  the  more  common  cylindrical  long  and  slender  rib- 
form  of  the  pleurapophysis  in  the  chelonian  reptiles,  where,  from  the 
later  length  of  the  neck,  it  has  retrograded  further  than  in  the  crocodile 
its  proper  centrum,  and  is  placed  not  upon,  but  within,  an  anterior 
racic  hmmal  arch,  the  pleurapophysis  of  which  has,  on  the  other  hand, 
:.n  expanded  like  a scapula. 

if  the  arguments  founded  upon  the  relations  of  the  scapulo-coracoid  arch 
i-he  segments  of  the  skeleton  in  osseous  fishes  and  crococlilians  be  admitted 
sustain  the  conclusion  here  drawn  from  them,  that  arch  must  be  held  to 
the  haemal  complement  of  the  occipital  vertebra  in  all  animals.  Bojanus, 
llnstrating  his  vertebral  theory  of  the  skull  by  the  osteology  of  the  Emys 
rropcea,  thus  defines  the 

“Vertebra  occipitalis,  sive  capitis  prima. 

■ Basis  occipitis,  seu  corpus  hujus  vertebrae, 

■ Pars  lateralis  occipitis,  sive  arcus, 
f Crista  occipitalis,  processus  spinosi  loco, 

'Cornu  majus  hyoidis,  costce  verlebrcB  occipitalis  comparand um 
de  adds  a dotted  outline  of  the  hyoid  arch  to  complete  the  vertebra  oc- 
ilalis,  in  tab.  xii.  fig.  32,  B.  1 of  his  beautiful  Monograph, 
supposing  the  special  homology  of  the  middle  cornua  of  the  hyoid  of  the 
Ionian,  so  represented  and  compared  to  ribs  by  Bojanus,  with  the  stylo-, 
-and  cerato-hyals  of  the  fish  (fig.  5,  as,  30,40)  to  have  been  correct,  which 

metamorphoses  of  the  hyoid  and  branchial  arches  in  the  batrachians  dis- 
■ve,  the  singular  and  highly  interesting  change  of  position  as  well  as  shape 
the  true  ceratohyals,  during  the  same  metamorphosis,  prepares  us  to  expect 
etrogradation  of  the  hyoid  arch  in  respect  to  its  proper  centrum,  in  the 
• Anatonie  Testudinis  Europaca;,  fol.  1819,  p.  'l  l. 


118 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


skulls  of  the  air-breathing  vertebrates.  In  the  young  tadpole  the  thick  : 
tilaginous  hyoidean  arch*  is  suspended, as  in  fishes, from  the  tympanic  pedii 
the  slender  hyoidean  arch  of  the  mature  frog  is  suspended  from  the  petr  f 
capsule  t.  The  mandibular  arch  has,  also,  receded  ; and  the  scapular  £* 
which,  at  its  first  appearance,  was  in  close  connection  with  the  occiput,  fun  g 
retrogrades  in  the  progress  of  the  metamorphosis  to  the  place  where  we  1 
it  in  the  skeleton  of  the  adult  frog.  I 

The  argument,  therefore,  may  be  summed  up  as  follows.  The  positioii 
the  neurapophyses  in  the  dorsal  vertebrm  of  chelonians  and  in  the  sacral  t 
tebrae  of  dinosaurians  and  birds,  shows  that  a change  of  relative  positioi# 
respect  of  other  elements  of  the  same  vertebra  may  be  one  of  the  teleologj 
modifications  to  which  even  the  most  constant  and  important  elements  w 
subject.  Instead  of  viewing  such  shifted  arches  as  independent  individual  pa; 
we  trace  their  relation  to  the  stationary  elements  of  the  vertebral  segment  ’ 
the  centrums.  Thus,  commencing,  for  example,  with  the  anterior  of 
sacral  vertebrae  of  the  ostrich,  A in  fig.  27,  we  observe  that,  besides  s^ 
porting  its  own  neural  arch,  it  bears  a small  portion  of  that  of  the  next  v 
tebra  : the  third  neural  arch  (n  i)  has  encroached  further  upon  the  centn  ' 
of  the  vertebra  in  advance ; and  thus,  in  respect  to  the  neural  arch  (n  2' f 
it  were  viewed  with  the  centrums,  C2  and  c i,  upon  which  it  equally  re| 
apart  from  the  rest  of  the  sacrum,  it  would  appear  to  appertain  equallyl 
either,  and  be  referable  to  the  one  in  preference  to  the  other  quite 
tuitously.  Nevertheless  W2  is  proved,  by  the  intermediate  changes  in  arl 
cedent  neural  arches,  to  belong  actually,  and  in  no  merely  imaginary  or  tral- 
cendental  sense,  to  c 2 altogether,  and  not  to  the  segment  of  which  c i is  6 
centrum ; and  in  tracing  the  modifications  of  those  sacral  vertebrm  whll- 
follow  c 2,  we  find  ti  4 to  have  regained  nearly  the  whole  of  its  centrum, 
and  the  normal  relations  of  the  elements  are  quite  restored  in  the  succeeds 
vertebra. 

Now  let  us  suppose  the  habits  of  the  species  to  have  required  a m 
extensive  displacement  of  the  arch  (w  2)  and  its  appendages : if  its  forr 
characters  as  a neural  arch  were  still  retained  beneath  the  adaptive  devel 
ment  superadded  to  the  adaptive  dislocation,  and  if  the  segments  before  s 
behind  the  centrum  c 2 were  found  complete,  and  that  centrum  alone  wanti 
its  neural  arch;  would  the  mere  degree  of  modification  in  respect  of  relat' 
position  nullify  the  conclusion  that  the  shifted  arch  appertained  to  such  jit 
complete  segment,  and  forbid  that  restoration  to  the  typical  condition,  wh  # 1 
no  anatomist,  it  is  presumed,  will  dispute  in  the  case  of  112,  C2,  fig.  27  ? S 
anthropotomist  hesitates  in  pronouncing  the  exact  vertebra  to  which  it 
sixth  ribs  belong  in  the  human  skeleton.  But,  separate  that  costal  ail 
with  the  two  bodies  and  neural  arches  of  the  vertebrae  with  which  it  articlt 
lates,  and  to  which  of  them  it  belonged  would  be  as  questionable  as  in  t' > 
instance  of  the  displaced  neural  arch  in  the  bird’s  sacrum.  The  head  of  ea 
rib  is  applied  half  to  the  upper  centrum,  half  to  the  lower  one  : the  upp, 
border  of  the  neck  of  the  rib  articulates  with  the  upper  neural  arch,  the  in 
bercle  with  the  diapophysis  of  the  lower  neural  arch.  If  a naturalist,  if 
conversant  with  the  definitions  of  human  anatomy,  were  shown  this  detaclij 
part  of  the  human  skeleton  and  were  pressed  to  determine  the  proper  centn.  ; 
and  neural  arch  of  the  hypothetically  displaced  costal  element,  the  atteini  S 
might  seem  to  him  gratuitous:  and  to  the  question,  to  which  of  su  ; 
centrums  the  rib  exclusively  (as  to  the  pre-existing  pattern)  belonged  ? 

* Cuvier,  Ossem.  Foss.  v.  pt.  ii.  pi.  24,  fig.  23,  a. 

f Ib.  fig.  27,  a: — an  intermediate  stage  is  shown  at  fig.  25.  Duges  and  Reichert  confiii  '' 
and  further  illustrate  this  change  of  position  of  the  hyoidean  arch.  * ' 


GENERAL  HOMOLOGY.  C R AN  1 A L VE HI  E BR.E. 


119 


nt  reply,  to  neither.  And  sucli,  doubtless,  would  be  the  matter-of-fact 
i-er  most  congenial  to  the  character  of  mind  which  would  limit  its  views 
'tiA  le  specialities  of  the  ribs  as  parts  independent  of  any  ideal  archetype,  or 
' i ..nable  or  unwilling  to  push  the  consideration  of  their  connections  beyond 
■ J-l  purposes  apparently  subserved  thereby.  A second  anatomist  might  see 
»e  more  constant  articulation  of  the  costal  tubercle  with  the  transverse 
!css,  a character  which  would  incline  the  balance  in  favour  of  the  vertebra 
hich  the  transverse  process  belonged.  A third  anatomist  might  extend 
■'omparisons  to  other  ribs  and  centrums,  and  finding  the  lower  centrum 
•ining  by  degrees  a greater  proportion  of  the  head  of  the  rib,  until  the 
and  last  ribs  respectively  wholly  articulated  to  the  centrum  answering  to 
lower  one  in  the  case  of  the  hypothetically  detached  sixth  pair,  he  would 
dude  that  such  pair  of  ribs  belonged  essentially  to  the  lower  and  not 
he  upper  supporting  centrum,  and  he  would  count  accordingly  such 
•;r  centrum  with  its  neural  arch,  as  the  sixth  of  those  vertebrae  which  are 
■•acterized  as  supporting  ribs.  The  anthropotomist,  in  fact,  in  so  counting 
defining  the  dorsal  vertebrae  and  ribs,  admits  unconsciously  perhaps,  an 
ortant  principle  in  general  homology,  which  pursued  to  its  legitimate 
sequences  and  further  applied,  demonstrates  that  the  scapula  is  the  modi- 
rib  of  that  centrum  and  neural  arch  which  he  calls  the  ‘occipital  bone,’ 
:that  the  change  of  place  which  chiefly  masks  that  relation  (for  a very 
lentary  acquaintance  with  comparative  anatomy  shows  how  little  mere 
1 and  proportion  afl^ect  the  homological  characters  of  bones)  differs  only 
34iAtent  and  not  in  kind  from  the  modification  which  makes  a minor  amount 
omparative  observation  requisite  in  order  to  determine  the  relation  of  the 
ded  sixth  rib  to  its  proper  centrum. 

ITith  reference,  therefore,  to  the  occipital  vertebra  of  the  crocodile,  if  the 
laparatively  well-developed  and  permanently  distinct  ribs  of  all  the  cervical 
i^ebrse  prove  the  scapular  arch  to  belong  to  none  of  those  segments,  and, 

' be  wanting  to  complete  the  occipital  segment,  Avhich  it  actually  does 
i iplete  in  fishes,  then  the  same  conclusion  must  apply  to  the  same  arch  in 
>er  animals,  and  we  must  regard  the  occipital  vertebra  of  the  tortoise  as 
ipleted  below  by  its  scapulo-coracoid  arch,  and,  not  as  Bojanus  supposed, 
dts  hyoidean  arch  *. 


i 


a : 


l\ith  these  views  of  the  general  homology  of  the  scapulo-coracoid  arch, 
^ embiyologist  will  observe  with  less  surprise  its  constant  appearance  in 
f first  instance  close  to  the  occiput,  and  its  equally  constant  primitive  ver- 
- 1 position ; however  far  back  it  may  be  subsequently  removed,  or  to 
ntever  extent  it  may  be  rotated,  in  the  same  progress  to  maturity,  out  of 
original  parallel  direction  with  the  more  normal  pleurapophyses. 
iiietuming  to  the  study  of  the  crocodile’s  skull  in  reference  to  the  verte- 
■ te  archetype,  if  we  proceed  to  dislocate  the  next  segment  in  advance  of 
occipital,  we  bring  away  in  connection  with  the  long  base-bone,  s and  o, 
.22,  the  bones  connected  by  the  double  lines  N ii,  N in,  and  by  the 


St.  Hilaire  selected  the  opercular  and  subopercular  bones  to  form  the  inverted 
1 of  his  seventh  (occipital)  cranial  vertebra  (Table  III.  and  note  11),  and  took  no  account 
he  instructive  natural  connections  and  relative  position  of  the  hyoidean  and  scapular 
les  fishes.  With  regard  to  the  scapular  arch,  he  alludes  to  its  articulation  with  the 
u in  the  lowest  of  the  vertebrate  classes  as  an  ‘ amalgame  inattenduc  ’ (Anatomic  Philo- 
oiqne,  p.  181);  and  elsewhere  describes  it  as  a “ disposition  veritablemcnt  tres  singuliere, 
me  le  manque  absolu  de  cou  et  une  cornbinaison  des  pieces  du  sternum  avec  celles  de  la 
ponvoient  seules  rendre  possible.”— Annales  du  Museum,  ix.  ji.  30 1.  A due  npiire- 
wm  of  the  law  of  vegetative  uniformity  or  repetition,  and  of  the  ratio  of  its  prevalence 
_^wer  to  the  grade  of  organization  of  the  species,  might  have  enabled  him  to  discern 
true  signihcation  of  the  conneetion  of  the  scapular  arch  in  fishes. 


120 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


curved  arrows  H ii  and  H nr.  The  relations  of  the  superior  series  of  h 
as  neural  arches  to  the  optic  lobes  and  cerebrum  are  even  less  doubtful  1 
in  many  fishes,  by  reason  of  the  much  smaller  degree  of  independent  o 
cation  of  the  proper  capsule  of  the  acoustic  labyrinth.  Taking,  them 
bones  forming  the  arch  N ii,  we  find  them,  viewed  from  behind,  to  prt 
the  general  arrangement  shown  ’ 


in  fig.  19.  The  hinder  (basisphe 
noidal)  portion  of  the  bone  s and 
0 forms  the  centrum,  and  imme- 
diately supports  the  floor  of  the 
mesencephalon,  or  lobe  of  the 
third  ventricle,  being  excavated 
for  the  pituitary  prolongation  of 
that  cavity  : it  also  sends  a pro- 
cess downwards,  repeating,  like 
the  basioccipital,  the  inferior 
exogenous  spine  of  the  centrums 
of  the  cervical  vertebrae.  The 
bones  c,  o protecting  the  sides 
of  the  mesencephalon,  and  notch- 
ed for  the  transmission  of  the 
trigeminal  nerve,  manifest  the 
neurapophysial  characters  of  the 
segment.  As  accessory  func- 


Fig.  19. 


Disarticulated  mesencephalic  arch,  viewed  from  bchl 
Crocodile. 


tions  they  contribute,  like  the  corresponding  bones  in  fishes,  to  the  for 
tion  of  the  ear-chamber.  They  have,  however,  a little  retrograded  in  r 
tion  (see  fig.  9),  resting  below,  in  part,  upon  the  occipital  centrum,  and  f 
porting  more  of  the  spine  of  that  centrum  (3)  than  of  their  own  (7) ; wl 
is,  however,  formed  of  a single  bone,  and  in  so  far  manifests  more  of 
normal  character  of  the  element  completing  the  neural  arch,  as  its  crowt 
key-bone,  than  does  the  homologous  divided  and  often  divaricated  bone 
fishes.  This  and  other  analogous  facts  show  that  although  the  lowest 
tebrate  class  adheres  most,  as  a whole,  to  the  archetype,  yet  that  it  ca.. 
recognised  clearly  and  unequivocally  only  by  patient  study  of  its  modif 
tions  in  all  classes;  for  even  the  lowest  have  special  exigencies  arising 
of  their  sphere  of  existence  calling  for  modifications  of  the  type  which 
not  present  in  other  and  higher  classes.  We  shall  find,  indeed,  that  thee 
nation  of  the  basi-  and  pre-sphenoids  ceases  in  mammals,  and  that  they 
coalesce  in  that  class,  being  primitively  distinct;  so  that  the  second  crai 
centrum  (5)  may  be  removed  with  its  neural  arch,  in  the  foetal  quadru  " 
(fig.  24)  or  human  subject  (25),  without  doing  violence  to  nature  by  the 
of  the  saw.  The  bones  s,  s,  fig.  19,  wedged  between  0 and  7,  here,  also,  1 
nifest  more  of  par  apophysial  character  than  in  fishes,  inasmuch  a.s  t 
are  excluded  from  the  inner  walls  of  the  cranium,  whilst  they  retain  ; 
manifest  broadly  their  characters  as  outstanding  processes  for  muscular 
tachment.  But,  besides  affording  ligamentous  attachment  to  the  hyoid  a; 
(39,  4o),  they  articulate  largely  with  the  proximal  element  (is)  of  the  m ^ 
dibular  arch,  whose  backward  displacement,  in  comparison  with  its  m 
normal  position  in  the  fish’s  skull  (fig.  5),  is  as  clearly  illustrated  in  the  mi 
morphosis  of  the  anourous  batrachia,  as  is  that  of  the  hyoidean  or  scape 
arches. 

then,  to  the  side  view  of  the  cranial  vertebrae  of  the  crococ 
(fig.  22),  we  see  the  haemal  arch  of  the  second  or  parietal  vertebra  in  , 
hyoid  (39,40,  41)  retaining  so  much  of  its  embryonic  dimensions  as  is  requiij 


GENEHAL  HOMOLOGY.  CRANIAL  VERTEUU.E. 


121 


L ts  restricted  functions,  and  having  no  call  for  progressive  growth  in  sub- 


tiency  to  a branchial  respiration.  It  consists  of  a ligamentous  stylohyal, 
!'''  .ileurapophijsis,  retaining  tlie  same  primitive  histological  condition  which 
cruets  the  ordinary  recognition  of  the  same  elements  of  the  lumbar  haemal 
■'=  I les.  The  haemopophyses  and  haemal  spine  are,  however,  here  as  tliere, 
■e  advanced  in  respect  of  their  tissue.  The  hcEtnapophysis  is  ossified  like 
so-called  ‘abdominal  ribs,’ and  usually,  like  them,  consists  of  two  portions, 
ing  the  special  names  of  epihyal  (su)  and  ceratohyal  ( lo) : the  licKmal 
^ le  (41)  retains  its  cartilaginous  state  like  its  homotypes  in  the  abdomen : 
S t.'e  they  get  the  special  name  of  ‘ linea  alba’  or  abdominal  sternum,  here 
; basihyal.’  \\'ith  respect  to  formal  modification,  this  element  is  chiefly 
.tarkable  in  the  crocodile  for  its  broad  expanse ; it  sustains  the  ascending 
/ular  ridge  at  the  base  of  the  tongue,  which,  applying  itself  against  the 
oending  ‘ palatum  molle,’  constitutes  an  effectual  barrier  against  the  entry 
ivater  into  the  glottis  from  the  mouth,  whilst  the  crocodile  is  engaged  in 
rreoming  the  struggles  of  a submerged  and  drowning  prey. 

There  being  no  need  of  diverging  appendages  from  the  hyoidean  arch  in 
.crocodile,  brauchiostegal  rays  are  not  developed.  The  scapular  arch  is 
lalarly  simplified  in  Anguis  and  other  serpentiform  lizards  ; but,  to  those 
recognise  its  true  homology,  its  presence  without  a trace  of  its  appen- 
-es,  the  fore-limbs,  will  create  no  more  surprise,  than  the  presence  of  the 
siidean  arch  without  the  branchiostegal  fins  or  of  themandibular  arch  without 
opercular  fins. 

On  removing  the  neural  arch  of  the  parietal  vertebra,  with  or  without  the 
ir  trion  of  the  connate  centrum  (5),  the  bones  completing,  with  the  part  (9), 
corresponding  arch  of  the  frontal  vertebra  present  the  general  arrange- 
ment shown  in  fig.  20. 
t;  The  compressed  produced 


Fig.  20. 


'j 


!-ae,  9,  shown  in  natural  con- 
ation with  the  bone  10  in 
: 9,  notwithstanding  its  mo- 
■ed  form,  presents  all  the 
eential  characters  of  the  cen- 
m of  the  arch  : although  it 
y have  been  developed  ex- 
sively  from  the  capsule  of 
: notochord,  like  the  coa- 
:e«ed  inferior  parts  of  the  cor- 
al centrums  in  the  silurus  : 

:re  is  no  distinct  ossicle  an- 
ering  to  the  central  part  of 
centrum  of  the  frontal  ver- 
•>ra,  like  9',  fig.  5,  in  certain 
ny fishes.  On  theotherhand, 

■■•find  the  neur apophysial  cha- 
pters of  the  orbito-sphenoids 
, 10)  more  largely  and  typi- 
lly  manifested  in  the  croco- 

e : they  are  smoothly  excavated  within  by  the  sides  of  the  prosencephalon  : 
Jy  dismiss  the  gr^t  special-sense  nerves  of  the  eye  by  the  notch  (fig.  9,  op~), 
d the  motor  nerves  by  the  notch  s : they  show,  however,  the  same  ten- 
ncy  to  change  of  position  as  the  succeeding  neurapophyses ; for  though 
ey  support  a greater  proportion  of  their  proper  spine  (11),  they  also  sup- 
Tt  part  of  the  succeeding  spine  (t),  and  rest  below  in  part  upon  the  pa- 


Diflarticulated  proscncephalic  arch,  viewed  from 
Dchind:  Crocodile. 


122 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON, 


Ik 

rietal  centrum  (5).  The  neural  spine  of  the  frontal  vertebra  (n)  retains  i 
normal  character  as  a single  symmetrical  bone,  like  the  parietal  spine,  wh  | 
It  partly  overlaps.  It  is  much  developed  longitudinally,  but  more  in 
anterior,  and  less  in  the  lateral  direction  than  in  most  fishes.  ^ 

One  cannot  contemplate  the  relative  position  of  the  frontal  to  the  pari, 
and  of  the  parietal  to  the  supraoccipital,  which  is  overlapped  by  the  parii 
and  itself  overlaps  the  flattened  spine  of  the  atlas,  without  a conviction  of 
serial  homology  of  these  single,  median,  imbricated  bones,  all  complett 
arches  above  the  neural  axis,  and  each  permanently  distinct  from  the  pi. 
or  haunches  of  the  arch  of  which  it  forms  the  key-stone.  In  like  man 
the  serial  homology  of  those  piers  or  neurapophyses,  viz.  tlie  laminge: 
the  atlas,  the  exoccipitals,  the  alisphenoids  and  the  orbitosphenoids,  is  equr 
unmistakeable.  Nor  can  we  close  our  eyes  to  the  same  serial  relations 
of  the  postfrontals  (fig.  20,  12,  12)  as  parapophyses  of  their  vertebra,  w 
the  mastoids  (s)  and  the  coalesced  paroccipitals  (4).  The  frontal  para^ 
physis,  12,  is  wedged  between  the  back  part  of  the  spine,  11,  and  the  ne 
apophysis,  10 : its  outward  process  extends  backwards  and  joins  the  n 
parapophysis  (s)  ; but,  notwithstanding  the  retrogradation  of  the  man 
bular  arch,  it  still  receives  a small  part  of  its  own  pleur apophysial  elem. 
(28).  This  element  now  manifests  its  typical  unity  : vegetative  subdivisi 
much  reduced  in  the  batrachian  reptiles,  no  more  prevails  in  the  deveh 
ment  of  the  frontal  pleurapophysis  in  any  higher  vertebrate.  The  serpe 
exhibit  this  element  under  the  common  form  of  a rib ; longer,  indeed,  th 
are  any  of  the  pleurapophyses  in  the  batrachian  order  ; but  it  has  so 
retreated  in  serpents  as  to  be  exclusively  attached  to  the  parietal  paraj 
phj'sis,  which  is  remarkably  elongated  and  produced  backwards,  and  s- 
pends  the  long,  slender,  straight  and  simple  frontal  pleurapophysis  (tympai 
pedicle)  vertically  from  its  posterior  extremity.  In  lacertians  no.  2s  is  v- 
tically  suspended  from  no.  s,  and,  commonly  also,  from  no.  27,  which  is  cf 
tinned  from  the  backwardly  produced  parapophysis  of  the  frontal  vertel 
(12)  to  that  of  the  parietal  vertebra  (s)  in  most  of  this  division  of  the  0 
vierian  order  Sauria.  In  chelonians  and  crocodilians  the  diverging  appe 
dage  of  the  maxillary  arch  (27)  descends  and  applies  itself  to  a large  propi" 
tion  of  no.  23,  down  to  its  lower  articular  end,  and  contributes  to  fix  a 
strengthen  that  bone,  as  well  as  the  modified  costal  arch  from  which  it  1 
verges. 

The  condition  of  the  shortening,  expansion  and  fixation  of  the  fron 
pleurapophysis  in  crocodiles  and  chelonians  is  exemplified  in  the  uses  ' 
which  the  modified  haeinapophyses,  completing  that  costal  arch,  are  pi.^ 
Tortoises  crop  the  grass  by  the  application  of  the  trenchant  horny  plates  [ 
the  under  to  those  of  the  upper  jaw  : turtles  equally  need  a fixed  suspense  | 
joint  of  the  under  jaw  in  the  act  of  biting  and  dividing  the  tough  sea-weed 
Crocodiles  have  the  frontal  haemapophyses  (mandibular  rami)  unusual* 
long ; supporting  numerous  large  laniary  teeth,  and  requiring  a fixed  ai| 
firm  point  of  suspension  in  the  violent  actions  to  which  they  are  put  in  r 
taining,  and  overcoming  the  struggles  of  their  prey. 

The  teleological  complication  of  the  lower  or  distal  elements  of  the  an 
in  question  (29-32,  fig.  22)  is  carried  further  than  in  fishes : there  was  mo 
need,  in  fact,  for  a combination  of  the  greatest  elasticity  and  strength  wi' 
the  least  weight  of  bone*  in  the  frontal  haemapophysis  of  the  crocodile  th£ 
in  the  frontal  pleurapophysis  of  the  fish  (23  a-2s  d,  fig.  5). 

There,  lastly,  remain  then  in  the  skull  of  the  crocodile  the  bones  inte 

* Conybeare,  Geol.  Trans.  1821,  p.  565.  Buckland,  Bridgewater  Treatise,  1836,  vol. 
p.  176.  This  author  well  illustrates  the  final  purpose  of  the  subdivision  of  the  niandibul 


pm  n 


GENERAL  HOMOLOGY.  CRANIAL  VERTEBR/E. 


123 


^ ad  by  the  lines  N iv  and  the  arrow  H iv,  with  those  numbered  20,  27, 
" 73,  and  we  have  to  inquire  whether  through  all  the  modifications  wliicli 
^ r extreme  position  subjects  tliem  to,  we  can  still  trace  any  evidence  oi  their 
ngement  according  to  the  vertebrate  type. 

' long  and  slender  symmetrical  grooved  bone,  like  the  ossified  inferior 
j of  the  capsule  of  a notochord,  is  continued  forwards  from  the  centrum 
;.ie  foregoing  vertebra,  and  stands  in  the  relation  of  a centrum  (13)  to  the 
: ical  plates  of  the  bones  11,  which  expand  as  they  rise  into  the  broad  and 


Figr.  21. 


;k  triangular  plates  with  an  ex- 
,‘d  horizontal  superior  surface, 
arch  of  which  these  form  the 
s,  and  to  the  anterior  rhinen- 
^ ualic  prolongations  traversing 
' rch  arch  they  stand  in  the  re- 
on  of  neurapophyses,  is  com- 
fed  by  the  two  bones(i5) : which 
•'  hoerefore,  regard  as  a divided 
rral  spine.  In  fishes  we  have 
1 1 that  the  corresponding  ele- 
' nt  of  the  parietal  vertebra  was 

■ !;larly  divided,  whilst  the  neural 
^ we  of  the  nasal  vertebra  was 
' : ;le : in  the  crocodile  the  re  • 

■ we  conditions  prevail.  In  a spe- 

of  alligator  I have  observed 
■’  i bone  13  continued  further  for- 
- -d,  expanded,  and  divided  at  the 
'idle  line,  the  two  divisionsforni- 
® la  small  disc  on  the-bony  palate. 

> J centrum  of  the  nasal  vertebra 
invided  longitudinally  at  the  me- 
? an  line  in  batrachians,  ophidians, 
f I most  lacertians ; it  is  single  in 
vlonians,  but  retains  its  carti- 

inous  state  in  some  species  (Emys  expansa,  e.g.').  The  neurapophyses 
14)  transmit  the  olfactory  nerves  in  all  reptiles ; but  the  ganglions  are 
xally  ithdrawn  backwards  into  the  prosencephalic  neural  arch,  leaving 


Disarticulated  rhinencephalic  arch,  with  the  anchylosed 
pterygoids  (24)  viewed  from  behind : Crocodile. 


» 03  in  the  recent  and  extinct  saurians  by  pointing  out  the  similarity  of  the  structure  to 
adopted  in  binding  together  several  parallel  plates  of  elastic  wood,  or  steel,  to  make  a 
»a-bow;  and  also  in  setting  together  thin  plates  of  steel  in  the  springs  of  carriages.  Dr. 
t;kland  adds,  “ Those  who  have  witnessed  the  shock  given  to  the  head  of  a crocodile  by 
4 act  of  snapping  together  its  thin  long  jaws,  must  have  seen  how  liable  to  fracture  the 
r er  jaw  would  be,  were  it  composed  of  one  bone  only  on  each  side.” — lb.  p.  177.  The 
f.e  reasoning  applies  to  the  composite  condition  of  the  long  tympanic  pedicle  in  fishes, 
iach  case  the  splicing  and  bracing  together  of  thin  flat  bones  of  unequal  length  aud  of 
nng  thickness  affords  compensation  for  the  weakness  and  risk  of  fracture  that  would  other- 
B have  attended  the  elongation  of  the  snout.  In  the  abdomen  of  the  crocodile  and  plesi- 
iiir  the  analogous  composition  of  the  htemapophyses  (abdominal  ribs)  allows  of  a slight 
:.nge  of  length  in  the  expansion  and  contraction  of  the  walls  of  that  cavity : and  since 
' phibions  reptiles,  when  on  land,  rest  the  whole  weight  of  the  abdomen  directly  upon  the 
1 nnd,  the  necessity  of  the  modification  for  diminishing  liability  to  fracture  further  appears, 
t what  we  are  here  chiefly  concerned  in  is  the  evidence  that  the  general  homology  of 
mentary  parts  of  a natural  segment  is  not  affected  by  the  modification  of  teleological 
oposition  of  such  parts.  What  happens  to  the  hxmapophysial  or  inferior  elements  of 
: inver^  arch  in  the  abdominal  segments  of  the  crocodile  also  affects  the  same  elements 
t cranial  haemal  arch  ; and  the  subdivision  of  the  pleurapopliyses  of  the  trunk  in  the 
rgeon  is  repeated  in  the  same  elements  of  the  cranial  vertebne  in  osseous  fishes. 


124 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


only  the  nerve-trunks  to  be  protected  by  the  nasal  neurapophyses.  T1 
are,  therefore,  more  approximated,  and  the  anterior  termination  of  the  ne 
canal  is  much  contracted  ; and,  in  the  tailless  batrachia,  the  nasal  n< 
apophyses  coalesce  together. 

We  recognise  in  that  element  (20)  of  the  fourth  or  foremost  inverted 
of  the  crocodile’s  skull,  which  is  in  connection  with  the  body  (vomer,  13) 
descending  plates  of  the  neurapophyses  (prefrontals,  14)  of  the  nasal  verte 
the  proximal  ox pleur apophysial  element  of  such  arch;  and  the  same  n 
tition  of  the  characteristic  connections  of  the  bone,  20,  which  enabled  Cu 
and  Geoffroy  to  recognise  its  special  homology  with  the  palatine  bone  in 
fish,  establishes  its  claim  to  be  equally  regarded  in  the  crocodile  as  the  ph 
apophysis  of  its  vertebral  segment ; although  it  now  affords  but  a partial 
tachment  to  the  bone  21,  which  forms  the  next  element  of  the  inverted  ai 
This  bone,  the  hcBmapophysis,  has  undergone  a striking  change  in  its  proj 
tions  by  development  both  in  length  and  breadth;  it  is  connected  not  only  v> 
no.  20  behind  and  with  no.  22  before,  but  with  the  elongated  spine,  no.  is,  ol^ 
own  vertebra,  and  with  the  lacrymals,  73,  above  ; with  its  fellow  of  the  oppo 
side  below,  and  with  a well-developed  proximal  element,  no.  20,  of  a stn 
diverging  appendage  behind.  The  Immal  spine,  no.  22,  is  divided,  and 
arch  is  completed  by  the  symphysial  junction  of  the  two  halves  at  H iv. 
nasal  aperture  or  entry  to  the  air-passages  forms  the  span  or  area  of 
much-modified  inverted  arch  constituting  the  upper  jaw  of  the  crocoo 
The  two  proximal  elements  of  the  arch,  nos.  20  and  21,  continue  to  st- 
outwards  and  backwards  exogenous  diverging  processes  ; but  they  con 
tute  a smaller  proportion  of  the  bones  than  in  fishes,  and  both  processes- 
rectly  support  distinct  bones  representing  the  diverging  appendage  of 
arch,  and  serving  to  fix  and  attach  it  to  the  succeeding  arch.  The  pleura 
physial  appendage  (pterygoid,  24)  soon  coalesces,  however,  with  its  fell 
and  with  the  centrum  of  its  own  vertebra  (vomer,  13),  and  then  expands 
unite  by  a broad  sutural  surface  with  the  coalesced  centrums  of  the  fror 
and  parietal  vertebrae  (a  and  5).  A second  osseous  piece  (ectopterygci 
24')  diverges  from  the  pleurapophysis  external  to  the  preceding  and  attach 
it  to  the  haemapophysis,  to  the  haemapophysial  appendage,  and  to  the  p: 
apophysis  of  the  frontal  vertebra.  The  strong  diverging  ray  from  the  hast 
apophysis  is  teleologically  subdivided  into  nos.  20  (malar)  and  27  (squamosa 
and  firmly  attaches  the  maxillary  arch  to  the  pleurapophysis  (23)  of  the  m; 
dibular  one. 

In  the  chelonian  reptiles  the  modifications  of  the  nasal  segment  of  1 
skull  adhere  pretty  closely  to  the  type  of  those  in  the  crocodile  ; the  centrr 
is  more  independent  and  better  developed,  but  the  divisions  of  the  neu 
spine  have  coalesced  with  their  neurapophyses ; the  diverging  appendag. 

20  and  27,  are  usually  developed  into  broad  and  flat  bones.  In  many  lizar 
we  find  the  nasal  centrum  divided  but  the  neural  spine  single : the  hajR 
spine  is,  also,  single,  as  a general  rule,  and  sends  upwards  and  backward^ 
process  to  join  the  neural  spine,  divide  the  area  of  the  haemal  canal,  aj 
terminate  the  vertebral  series  anteriorly.  The  haemapophysial  diverging  £| 
pendage  commonly  resumes  its  long  and  slender  ray-like  proportions,  and  joi; 
the  parapophyses  of  both  frontal  and  parietal  vertebrae  as  well  as  the  prc] 
imal  end  of  the  pleurapophysis  of  the  mandibular  arch.  In  serpents  bo! 
divisions  of  this  appendage  are  absent  (indicating  the  inferior  character 
the  bones  20  and  27  in  general  homology),  but  the  two  parts  of  the  pleurapi 
physial  appendage,  24  and  24',  are  retained  and  serve  as  levers  in  the  raovjj 
nients  of  the  maxillary  arch.  The  spine  of  that  haemal  arch  is  single,  ai  1 
commonly  united  only  by  lax  and  elastic  ligaments  with  the  haemapophysi® 


Fig.  22 


GENERAL  HOMOLOGY.  CRANIAL  VERTEUR.E. 


125 


;h  may  be  divaricated  like  the  halves  of  the  mandibular  arch,  so  as  to 
■en  the  mouth  laterally  ; and  this  free  suspension  and  incomplete  closure 
le  principal  costal  arches  of  the  cranium  in  serpents  repeats  in  an  inter- 
jg  manner  the  characteristic  free  and  open  coiuiition  of  all  the  costal  arches 

- .heir  trunk.  In  the  genus  Tythlops  the  diverging  appendage  of  the 
; to-maxillary  arch  is  reduced  to  the  primitive  condition  of  a long  and 
i • der  ray.  In  anourous  batrachians  a long  and  slender  backwardly  pro- 
; tcd  exogenous  process  of  the  htemapophysis  (maxillary)  joins  a sliorter 

ancing  exogenous  process  of  the  distal  division  of  the  next  pleurapo- 
; 'sis  (tympanic) : but  in  the  tailed  species  the  maxillary  arch  is  fixed  only 

- . broad  (pterygoid)  appendage;  and  both  maxillary  and  premaxillary  retain 
■;  • their  essential  connections  as  forming  the  inferior  arch  of  their  segment, 
i hhe  proteus  and  siren  the  pleurapophysis  (maxillary)  is  almost  obsolete. 

- "be  bones  nos.  24,  24',  26  and  27,  being  shown  to  be  the  least  constant 
LQbers  of  the  group  forming  the  nasal  segment,  and  to  form  by  their  posi- 

; and  direction,  the  diverging  appendages  of  the  haemal  arch  H iv,  there 
; jaius  in  the  skull  of  the  crocodile  only  the  bone  73,  which  by  its  position 
; rront  of  the  orbit  and  its  relation  to  the  laerymal  duct,  is  to  be  referred 
1 the  great  anterior  suborbital  mucous  bone  in  fishes  to  the  dermal  skele- 
In  like  manner  the  palpebral  or  supra-orbital  scale-bones  are  to  be  ex- 
: ;Ied  from  the  category  of  the  pieces  of  the  endoskeleton.  The  small  and 
onstant  ossifications  in  the  capsule  of  the  organ  of  smell,  together  with  the 
vcely  ossified  sclerotals  (17),  the  small  petrosal,  lo,  and  the  columelliform 
«es,  is',  are  intercalated  portions  of  sense-capsules  and  appendages  re- 
'.ble  to  the  system  of  the  splanchnoskeleton. 

Thus  the  endoskeletal  system  of  bones  of  the  head  of  the  crocodile  are  natu- 
y arranged  in  four  segments,  each  composed  of  a centrum  with  a neural 
a hsemal  arch.  The  haemal  arches  have  been  subjected,  as  in  the  trunk, 
ijiost  modification;  that  of  the  occipital  vertebra  having  been  displaced; 

1 1 of  the  parietal  vertebra  detached  from  its  segment  and  arrested  in  its 
• elopment ; whilst  that  of  the  frontal  vertebra  is  articulated  in  a very  small 
portion  to  the  parapophysis  of  its  own  segment,  but  chiefly  to  that  of  the 
; ietal  segment,  with  paroccipital  connections  also  ; it  is  immensely  de- 
pped,  the  hsemapophysial  portion  being  the  chief  seat  of  extension.  The 
:mal  arch  of  the  nasal  segment  is  also  very  large,  but  shows  as  much 
’ CSS  of  development  in  breadth  as  that  of  the  frontal  vertebra  in  length. 

8 diverging  appendage  is  more  complex  than  in  fishes : one  piece  indeed, 

! 25,  fig.  5,  is  absent,  but  three  others,  24',  26  and  27,  have  been  superadded. 

8 diverging  appendages  of  the  frontal  and  parietal  vertebrae  cease  to  be 
'eloped  in  every  class  above  that  of  fishes ; but  that  of  the  occipital  hasmal 
'h,  though  it  no  longer  shows  the  luxuriant  profusion  of  rays  that  distin- 
•.shes  it  in  fishes,  begins  to  assume  a more  fixed  and  definite  character  with 
■re  special  powers  and  independent  movements  of  its  constituent  parts, 
e first  segment  (53),  doubtfully  and  obscurely  recognizable  in  any  fish,  is 
iceforth  a constant  and  important  bone,  and  is  ahvays  single : the  next 
ment  con.sists  as  exclusively  of  two  bones,  connate,  indeed,  in  batra- 
ans : the  di.stal  segment  presents  two  jointed  rays  (digits)  in  the  Amphi- 
adidarjylum  -,  three  rays  in  Amph.  tridactylum  and  the  proteus  and  four 
■sm  the  Siren  lacertina-,  it  branched  into  as  many  as  nine  rays  in  theex- 
ct  ichthyosaurs ; but  they  never  exceed  five  in  the  existing  saurians,  which 
m^r  is  presented  by  this  appendage  in  the  crocodile  (57,  fig.  22.) 

Birds. — The  cranium  of  the  bird  offers  the  extrernest  instance  of  a homo- 
pcally  compound  bone,  and  its  development  the  clearest  evidence  of  that 
■nciple  of  unity  of  composition  which  lies  at  the  bottom  of  all  the  modifica- 


126 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


tions  of  the  cephalic  division  of  the  vertebrate  endoskeleton.  Although,  aj 
general  rule,  the  separate  cranial  bones  can  be  discerned  only  at  a very  ea 
period,  yet  in  those  birds  in  which  the  power  of  flight  is  abrogated  the  in  ( 
cations  of  the  primitive  centres  of  ossification  endure  longer,  and  in  i 
species  here  selected  for  the  illustration  of  the  cranial  segments  (fig.  23)  ; 
constituent  bones  of  the  skull,  though  figured  of  their  natural  size,  have,  wi'l 
the  exception  of  the  basioccipital,  i,  and  basisphenoid,  3,  and  the  two  bont  ' 

6 and  8,  which  coalesce  with  the  petrosal,  10,  been  separated  by  maceratu'i 
merely.  I may  remark,  however,  that  in  all  birds,  certain  bones,  wh  ^ 
coalesce  with  others  in  the  cranium  of  most  mammals,  always  retain  tlili] 
primitive  individuality ; the  tympanic  (2s)  and  the  pterygoid  (24)  for  ifi 
ample.  | 

The  hindmost  segment  of  the  cranium  (N  i,  fig.  23)  so  closely  repeats  i|i 
characters  of  the  epencephalic  neural  arch  of  the  crocodile  (fig.  18),  as-’^ 
render  a separate  and  full  view  of  it  unnecessary  for  the  illustration  of  ]f 
vertebral  character.  The  basioccipital  (i)  still  developes  the  major  parti 
the  single  articular  condyle,  and  sends  down  a process,  more  marked  in  il 
struthious  genera,  and  especially  the  dinornis,  than  in  most  other  birds  : :l 
all  respects  this  primitively  distinct  bone  retains  the  character  of  the  centrr^ 
of  its  vertebra.  J 

The  exoccipitals,  12,  contributing  somewhat  more  to  the  occipital  cond  11 
than  in  the  crocodile,  develope,  as  in  that  reptile,  the  paroccipital  (24)  as  | 
outstanding  exogenous  ridge  or  process  : but  it  is  lower  in  position  than  if 
the  crocodile  : the  proper  neurapophysial  characters  of  no.  2 are  fully  ma:i 
tained.  The  supraoccipital  (3)  now  begins  to  manifest  more  strongly  ifl 
flattening  and  development  in  breadth,  by  which  the  spinous  elements  IdR 
the  formal  character  from  which  their  name  originated,  and  are  convert? 
from  long  into  fiat  bones.  We  saw  the  first  step  in  this  most  common  of  t.i 
changes  to  which  one  and  the  same  endoskeletal  element  is  subject,  in  tiij 
detached  neural  spine  of  the  atlas  of  the  crocodile:  that  of  the  occipiif 
vertebra  of  the  same  animal  presented  another  stage  in  the  metamorphos^ 
we  have  a third  degree  in  the  bird,  and  the  extreme  of  expansion  is  attainl 
in  the  human  subject  (fig.  25,  3),  where  the  spine  is  sometimes  developci 
like  that  of  the  parietal  vertebra,  from  two  centres.  But  the  arrested  st6if 
in  this  strange  change  of  form  and  proportion  demonstrate  the  essent| 
nature  of  the  part,  as  the  neural  arch,  whilst  the  constancy  of  the  charactfl 
of  connexion  is  shown  by  this  crown  of  the  arch  of  the  occipital  vertel 
having  the  exoccipitals  as  its  piers  or  haunches  from  the  fish  to  the  hum 
subject.  It  always  protects  the  cerebellum ; is  absent  in  the  frog  where  t) 
organ  is  a mere  rudiment ; and  is  present  in  the  crocodile  in  the  ratio 
the  superior  size  of  the  cerebellum.  The  further  development  of  the  cei 
bellum  is  the  condition  of  the  superior  breadth  of  the  spine  or  crown 
the  epencephalic  arch  in  the  bird. 

The  arguments  that  determined  the  nature  and  displacement  of  the  hserr 
arch  of  the  occipital  vertebra  in  the  crocodile  apply  with  equal  force  to  tli 
in  the  bird.  The  extent  of  the  displacement,  it  is  true,  has  been  greatejl 
not  seven,  but  seven-and-twenty  vertebrae  may  intervene  between  the  plaw 
of  the  scapulo-coracoid  arch  and  the  remainder  of  its  proper  segment  col 
stituting  the  occipital  region  of  the  simple  cranial  box  in  the  bird.  But  til 
difference  of  extent  ought  no  more  to  mask  the  real  relationship  of  su  l 
costal  arch  to  its  centrum,  than  the  degree  of  development  of  the  spine  | 
the  occipital  vertebra  affects  the  general  homology  of  that  element.  j 

In  the  ostrich,  and  other  struthious  birds,  the  haemal  arch  of  the  occipifij 
vertebra  has  retained  much  of  its  embryonic  proportions.  The  pletirapf 


Miv  •*> 


. ».•!  — • - 

, :4f  ’»■-■  ■ 'k 
' ■ « **  *«'  <.!>4  »< 

i«  I *• 

.Uk 

« »•.  1 H 

■ ...  if  • ■ ■ ■*  j “4.» -j 

1*. 

j.%. 

W"  C>' 

} ‘ 

u. 

- ^ % 4 

..  44  • irti*  f 

♦ . .‘•^' .»  •■ 

M -■ 


♦«  «*  ii'2,y0  tV  ! f * f'U  Vi  *<  • '1i*»  »♦  • * » 

*J  -(tVl  -i^b  W-  rtV.J.,  i . 

■ 1)miBi  h „A  1..  H -r  ' w » >t‘ • ^**»  ♦»,.(*  r ** 

.»,  Of.  < I ',»  '»>> -*'«<  -i>  r **»‘f  **.fi»  U..»  <^»r 

4 ,}  .1-^'-  • U«jr  »VAm...  -«4f 

»»l  • ' 'i  ,<»'  ^ it  "S  l>*'«  ^ 

t - — ■■  f k . ‘ tiAA  I*  (.A 


J > ■.*.« 

# • .4  it»i  ’*f*  **’•  I ' W 


I «3* 


' Iiwamm  t '*  ' 


r • k 

! 1 »w  1. . • > «' 

. i . ,.  ■ *<  J 

k- 

: . * 

i*  li*-*- 

’.*  '' 

. • » • 

1 > 

.1^1 

• ' » 

• .t.v-  "*• 

» ..I.U  ..1 

d^'h 

, -/  ' 

Jf  kk 

• . 

ii  4>  * « 

, ... 

. i 

k,  . - 

y 

* r 

4. 

4» 

. 4-  • 

<4%  .' 

^ ^ f; 

. ./-»•  J' 

•••» 

.1  '4<t  • 

I V « 


...  ••> 

-*■  » i i 

. *..-•-  *0t  • . 4 * . . *'  * 

»‘t  Uw  .».'•• 

4 

- f!-.  V-  ’ — 

>\ 

..-4,1 

-4.  .( 

i • • 

f 

«#%<»#  * ^ 1 
■ - lt‘«^  * k -tl*  ' i 

• .«  ,4U 


y- 


kiv  . • ' 

. i ^ ‘ _ 


K • 


rif.v.'* 


?»  , 


GENERAL  HOMOl.OGY.  CRANIAL  VERTEUR.E. 


127 


.«a4part  (si)  has,  also,  retained  its  slender  rib-like  form*  ; it  has  coalesced 
i the  luemupophysis  (a),  and  the  inverted  arch  is  completed,  as  in  the 
:odile,  by  a ha'mal  spine,  as  much  moditied  in  form  by  flattening  and  ex- 
don  as  is  the  neural  spine  representeil  by  the  supraoccipital  (:i).  The 
rging  appendage  of  the  occipito-haimal  arch  also  retains  much  of  its 
litive  simple  character ; a long  and  slender  bone  (53)  supports  two  rays 
55),  and  there  is  an  attempt  at  three  at  57,  of  which  one  is  short,  atrophied 
anchylosed  to  the  rest.  In  the  two  small  bones  (.is,  sb)  interposed  be- 
csn  this  and  the  preceding  segment,  we  recognise  the  special  homologues 
hhe  carpal  series  in  the  crocodile  and  fish  : in  54  we  have  the  ulna,  in  55 
-radius,  in  53  the  humerus,  in  57  the  metacarpus  ; in  d 3 and  d4  the  rudi- 
nts  of  the  digits  so  numbered  in  the  crocodile  (fig.  22)  and  the  mammal 
. . 24-).  The  evidences  of  the  unity  of  plan  in  the  construction  of  the 
oular  limb,  whether  it  be  an  arm  with  the  prehensile  hand,  a hoofed  fore- 
a wing,  or  a fin,  are  admitted  by  all;  the  same  scapula,  humerus,  anti- 
;3hial,  carpal,  metacarpal  and  phalangial  bones  are  readily  recognised  by  the 
’ I in  comparative  osteology  in  the  ape,  the  horse,  the  whale,  the  bird,  the 

■ oise  and  the  crocodile.  The  beautiful  simplicity  of  the  fundamental  basis 
nil  these  adaptations  of  structure  is  descanted  upon  in  all  our  popular 
vological  treatises.  But  the  higher  law  governing  the  existence  of  these 
I'cial  homologies  has  attraeted  little  attention  in  this  country.  Yet  the 
uirj'  into  that  more  general  principle  of  conformity  to  type  according  to 
•ch  it  has  pleased  the  Creator  of  organic  forms  to  restrict  the  manifesta- 
■is  of  the  variety  of  proportion  and  shape  and  substance  and  even  relative 
idtion  of  the  limbs  requisite  for  the  various  tasks  assigned  to  the  vertebrate 
.cies,  is  one  that  by  no  means  transcends  the  scope  of  the  comparative 

■ tomist.  And  the  conclusion  to  which  my  comparisons  have  conducted 
: is,  that  one  and  the  same  element,  viz.  the  diverging  appendage  of  the 
. ipital  vertebra,  forms  in  every  case — to  whatever  adaptive  modifications 
may  be  subjected — the  part  recognized  by  the  general  terra,  ‘anterior  ’ or 
r perior  extremity.’ 

ifhe  second  segment  of  the  skull  has  for  its  central  element  a bone  (fig. 

: 5),  which  in  the  bird,  as  in  other  ovipara,  is  connate  with  that  (9)  which 
ads  in  the  same  relation  to  the  third  cranial  segment ; the  proof  of  the 
ural  distinction  of  these  segments  is  given  by  the  neural,  N ii,  N iii, 

: I hEemal,  H ii,  H iii,  arches.  Probably  the  circumstance  of  the  bodies 
: :hose  vertebrae  being  formed  by  ossifications  of  the  fibrous  capsule  of  the 
•ochord,  representing  the  external  or  cortical  parts  only  of  such  centrums, 
y be  the  condition,  or  a favourable  physical  cause  of  such  connation. 
e neural  arch  of  the  parietal  vertebra  retains  the  same  characters  which 
irst  manifested  in  fishes.  Besides  the  nemxipophyses  (e)  impressed  by  the 

■ sencephalic  ganglia  and  transmitting  the  trigeminal  nerves,  besides  the 
itly  expanded  and  again,  as  in  fishes,  divided  neural  spine  (7),  tlieparapo- 
‘/sis  (s)  is  independently  developed.  It  is  of  large  proportional  size  ; and, 
ing  to  the  raised  dome  of  the  neural  arch,  is  relatively  lower  in  position 
in  in  the  crocodile;  it  sends  downwards  and  outwards  an  unusually  long 
lastoid  ’ process,  and  forms  a large  proportion  of  the  outer  wall  of  the 
amber  of  the  internal  ear  with  the  bony  capsule  of  which  it  speedily  coalesces. 
I he  hmmal  arch  of  the  parietal  vertebra  (II  ii)  is  more  reduced  than  in 
: crocodile,  and  owes  much  of  its  apparently  typical  character  to  the  re- 

II  ition  of  the  thyrohyals  (la,  m)  borrowed  from  the  branchial  arches  of  the 

' The  very  common  modification  of  form  wliich  Uiis  clement  undergoes  in  hecoining  ex- 
ided  into  the  hroarl  scapula  of  man  and  other  mammalia,  appears  to  have  influenced  Oken 
his  idea  of  that  bone  being  the  homologiie  of  a congeries  of  ribs. 


I 


128 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


visceral  system,  which  are  feebly  and  transitorily  manifested  in  the  embr' 
bird.  These  spurious  cornua  project  freely  or  are  freely  suspended,  and  a 
the  subjects  of  singular  and  excessive  development,  as  has  been  exemplifi 
in  the  chapter  on  Special  Homology. 

The  bones  (lo)  of  the  third  neural  arch  protect  a smaller  proportion  of  t- 
prosencephalon  than  in  the  crocodile,  but  maintain  their  neurapophysialre\ 
tion  to  it  and  to  tlie  optic  nerves:  the  cover  a larger  proportir 

of  the  hemispheres,  and,  with  their  homotypes  (7),  exhibit  a marked  increaj 
of  development  in  conformity  with  that  of  the  cerebral  centres  protected  I 
their  respective  arches.  The  parapophysis  of  the  frontal  vertebra  (12) 
relatively  smaller  in  the  bird  than  in  the  cold-blooded  vertebrates,  and 
rarely  ossified  from  an  independent  centre ; but  I have  seen  this  in  the  emei 
and  it  appears  to  have  been  constantly  an  autogenous  element  in  the  dinorn 
The  haemal  arch  of  the  frontal  vertebra  has  been  transferred  backwards 
the  parietal  one ; its  pleur apophysis  (2s),  which  is  simple,  as  in  the  crocodiii 
articulating  exclusively  with  the  parietal  parapophysis  (s),  though  this 
some  birds  unites  with  that  of  the  frontal  vertebra.  In  the  young  ostrin 
and  many  other  birds  traces  of  the  composite  character  of  the  hcemapophys 
are  long  extant ; and  bear  obviously  a homological  relation  to  the  teleolog 
cally  compound  character  of  the  element  in  the  crocodile : for  the  piece 
nos.  29,  29',  39'  and  31  ultimately,  and  in  most  birds  early,  coalesf 
with  each  other  and  with  the  hcemal  spine  (32),  the  halves  of  which  are  co 
fluent  at  the  symphysis. 

The  centrum  (13)  of  the  nasal  vertebra  is  always  single,  and,  when  it  do 
not  remain  distinct,  coalesces  with  the  neurapophyses,  14,  and  pleurapophyse 
20,  of  its  own  segment,  and  sometimes,  also,  with  the  rostral  production  of  tl 
frontal  centrum  (9)  : it  is  elongated  and  pointed  at  its  free  termination,  at 
deeply  grooved  above  where  it  receives  the  above-named  rostrum  ; indicatir 
by  both  its  form  and  position  that  it  owes  its  existence,  as  bone,  to  the  oss 
fication  of  the  outer  capsule  of  the  anterior  end  of  the  notochord.  In  tl 
ostrich  the  long  presphenoidal  rostrum  intervenes  between  the  vomer  (i. 
and  prefrontals  (14).  These  latter  bones  manifest,  however,  as  has  bee 
shown  in  the  paragraph  on  their  special  homology  (p.  214),  all  the  essenti 
neur apophysial  relations  to  the  rhinencephalon  and  olfactory  nerves  : hi 
they  early  coalesce  together,  or  are  connate,  as  in  the  tailless  batrachiani 
The  neural  spine  (is)  is  divided  along  the  middle  line ; but  in  most  birds  tl 
suture  becomes  obliterated  and  the  spine  coalesces  with  its  neurapophyse 
with  the  frontal  spine  and  with  those  parts  of  the  hgeraal  arch  of  the  nas: 
vertebra  with  which  it  comes  in  contact. 

The  pleur  apophyses  (fig.  23,  20)  of  this  inverted  arch  retain  their  typic; 
connections  with  the  nasal  centrum  and  neurapophyses  at  one  end,  and  wit 
the  hsemapophysis  (21)  at  the  other  end,  and  they  also  support  the  constar 
element  of  the  diverging  appendage  of  the  arch,  no.  24.  The  hamapt 
physis  (p.\)  resumes  in  birds  more  of  its  normal  proportions  and  elongate) 
slender  form : but  the  hcemal  spine  (22)  is  largely  developed  though  und 
vided,  and  sends  upwards  and  backwards  from  the  part  corresponding  to  tin 
symphysis  of  the  spine,  when  this  element  is  divided,  a long  pointed  proces' 
(22'),  which  joins  and  usually  coalesces  with  the  neural  spine  (15)  and  divide' 
the  anterior  outlet  of  the  haemal  canal  into  two  apertures  called  the  nostril : 
The  niodification  of  the  inferior  arch  of  the  nasal  vertebra  in  the  lizard  trib 
is  here  repeated.  The  pleurapophysial  appendage,  24,  connects  the  palate 
maxillary  arch  with  2s,  and  in  the  ostrich  and  a few  other  birds,  also  with  s 
the  second  or  haemapophysial  ray  of  the  diverging  appendage  is  devf 
loped  in  all  birds,  as  in  the  squamate  saurians  ; combining  the  movement 


Nn 


GENERAL  HOMOLOGY.  CRANIAL  VERTEDR.-E. 


129 


■e  htemal  arch  of  the  nasal  vertebra  witli  that  of  tlie  frontal  vertebra, 
consisting  of  the  two  styliform  ossicles  (-io  and  27)  whicli  extend  from  the 
apophysis,  21,  21",  to  the  plenrapophysis,2S  : the  essential  relationship  ot 
oinpound  ray,  2a  and  27,  with  the  nasal  vertebra,  is  indicated  by  their 
iming  confluent  with  its  haeinapophysis  (at  22"),  whilst  they  always  main- 
an  arthrodial  articulation  with  the  pleurapophysis  (23)  of  the  succeeding 
“hra. 

le  bones  of  the  splanchno-skeleton  intercalated  with  the  segments  of  the 
-skeleton  in  the  bird’s  skull  are  the  petrosal  (lu),  between  the  neural 
os  of  the  occipital  and  parietal  vertebrae,  early  coalescing  with  the  ele- 
-s  of  those  vertebriB  with  which  it  comes  in  contact;  the  sclerotals  (17), 
I'posed  between  the  frontal  and  nasal  neural  arches : and  the  thyro-hyals 
),  retained  in  connection  with  the  debris  of  the  haemal  arch  of  the  parietal 
bra,  H ii.  The  olfactory  capsule  remains  cartilaginous.  The  dermal 
(73)  is  well-developed  and  constant : a second  supraorbital  dermal  bone 
•■casionally  present.  All  the  endoskeletal  bones  manifest,  under  every 
:oive  modification,  the  segmental  arrangement,  and  it  is  difficult  to  con- 
date  the  disposition  of  the  cranial  bones  in  fig.  23,  as  in  figs.  22  and  5, 
;ad  the  primary  segments  of  the  encephalon  in  the  series  of  arches  closed 
cctively  by  the  bones  N i,  N 11,  N iii,  N iv,  together  with  that  of  the 
ssponding  number  of  arches  closed  below,  at  H iv,  H in,  tl  ii  and  H i, 
i iut  a conviction  that  the  type  illustrated  in  fig.  15  is  that  upon  which 
segments  of  the  skull  have  been  constructed.  This  conclusion  might 
• forced,  in  respect  to  the  occipital  vertebra,  were  its  displaced  haemal  arch 
L.ppendages  to  be  viewed  without  reference  to  their  relative  position  and 
^tions  in  the  lower  vertebrate  classes ; but  it  will  be  confirmed  and 
cQ  to  be  agreeable  to  nature  and  to  the  recognised  kinds  and  grades  of 
racation  to  which  the  elements  of  one  and  the  same  vertebra  are  subject, 
-jserving  in  the  young  bird  the  distinct  pleurapophysial  elements  of  those 

It  cal  vertebrae,  beyond  which  the  corresponding  elements  of  the  occiput 
; retrograded,  in  obedience  to  the  functions  which  the  haemal  arch  of 
vertebra  and  its  appendages  are  destined  to  perform  in  the  feathered 

■ammuls. — If  the  foregoing  views  of  the  general  homology  of  the  bones 
re  skull  be  agreeable  to  their  essential  nature,  we  should  expect  that  the 
iand  additional  modifications,  in  the  mammalian  class,  which  tend  to 
-re  those  relations  would  be  seated  in  the  appendages  and  peripheral 
-ints  of  the  endoskeletal  segments,  or  in  the  capsules  and  appendages  of 
»)ecial  organs  of  sense. 

lave  selected  with  the  view  to  test  such  anticipation  the  skull  of  a young 
'derm*,  and,  after  successively  disarticulating  the  segments  in  the  order 
lich  they  have  been  previou.sly  described,  I have  given  a side  view  of 
(fig.  24)  arranged  in  correspondence  with  the  figures  23,  22,  and  5. 
e neural  arch  of  the  occipital  vertebra,  N i,  agrees  with  that  of  the  bird  and 
dile  in  the  coalescence  of  the  par  apophysis,  4,  with  the  neur apophysis, 
•t  the  process,  4,  now  descends  from  the  lower  part  of  the  arch,  and, 
many  other  mammals,  is  of  great  length.  An  articular  condyle  is  also 
oped  from  each  neurapophysis  which  articulates  witli  the  concave  an- 

Szygapophysis  of  the  atlas,  and  is  the  honiotype  of  the  posterior  zyga- 
•fsis  in  the  trunk-vertebrie.  The  centrum  (i)  is  reduced,  like  that  of 
das,  to  a compressed  plate,  and  its  hinder  articular  surface  is  not  more 

ne  skull  of  the  niminant  is  perhaps  still  hetter  adaiitcd  to  demonstrate  the  vertehrul 
' ns  of  the  cranial  hones  : that  of  the  sheep  is  the  subject  of  the  diagram  for  this  piir- 
the  concluding  volume  of  my  ‘ Ilimterian  Lectures.’ 


130 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


developed  than  is  the  front  one  of  the  centrum  of  the  atlas,  with  which,  | 
deed,  it  is  loosely  connected  by  ligament.  The  expanse  of  the  occipiii 
spine,  3,  has  been  governed,  agreeably  with  a foregoing  remark,  by  the  f 
perior  development  of  the  cerebellum.  j 

The  haemal  arch  of  the  occipital  vertebra  is  represented,  like  those  of  f 
cervical  vertebrae,  by  the  plmr apophysial  elements  only  (si) ; but  theses  j 
most  mammals,  are  developed  into  broad  triangular  plates  with  outstand  I 
processes : that  called  ‘ spine’  and  ‘ acromion’  is  exogenous  ; but  that  call 
‘coracoid’  is  always  developed  from  an  independent  osseous  centre  (a  ruf 
mental  representative  of  the  hmmapophysis,  52),  which  coalesces  with  I- 
pleurapophysis  in  mammalia,  and  only  attains  its  normal  proportions,  cci 
pleting  the  arch  with  the  haemal  spine  (episternum)  in  the  monotremes.  I 
In  many  mammals  the  arch  is  completed  by  bones  (fig.  25,  52'),  appareil 
the  haeraapophyses  of  the  atlas,  which  have  followed  the  occipital  haemal  a I 
in  its  backward  displacement,  but  not  quite  to  the  same  extent  j 

The  diverging  appendage,  though  retaining  the  general  features  of' 
primitive  radiated  form,  has  been  the  seat  of  great  development  and  m ' 
modification  and  adjustment  of  its  different  subdivisions  (ss-sr)  in  relal 
to  the  locomotive  office  it  is  now  called  upon  to  perform. 

With  the  exception  of  this  excess  of  development  of  the  appendage,.  ■ 
defective  development  and  displacement  of  the  haemal  arch,  and  the  coa; 
cence  of  the  parapophyses  in  the  neural  arch,  there  are  few  points  of  resf 
blanee  which  are  not  sufficiently  salient  between  the  segment  N i,  H i in 
mammal,  and  that  so  marked  in  the  fish  (fig.  5).  And,  if  the  interpretan 
of  the  more  normal  condition  of  this  segment  in  the  lower  vertebrate,  !^ 
cording  to  the  archetypal  vertebra,  fig.  15,  be  accepted,  then  the  explal 
tion  here  offered  of  the  nature  of  the  modifications  of  the  special  homolog 
of  the  constituents  of  the  occipital  segment  by  which  that  archetypi 
masked  in  the  mammal,  may  be  confidently  left  to  be  confirmed  by 
judgement  of  the  unbiassed  student  of  homological  anatomy.  1 

In  commencing  his  comparisons  of  the  second  segment  of  the  skull  with! 
typical  vertebra,  he  will  be  unexpectedly  gratified  by  finding,  in  the  imma  l 
mammal,  the  centrum^  5,  naturally  distinct,  and  the  haemal  arch,  H ii,  retail  i 
its  connections  with  the  rest  of  the  segment,  and  by  means  of  a more  c-l 
plete  development  of  the  pleurapophyses  (as)  than  in  any  of  the  inferior  I 
breathing  vertebrates.  He  may  now  separate,  without  artificial  divisioij 
any  compound  bone,  the  entire  parietal  segment,  but  he  brings  away  ■ni'' 
the  petrified  capsule  of  the  acoustic  organ,  and  the  anchylosed  distal  piece 
of  the  maxillary  appendage,  which  more  or  less  encumbers  and  conceals! 
typical  character  of  the  neural  arch  of  the  parietal  vertebra  in  every  mamr 
least  so,  however,  in  the  monotremes  and  ruminants.  The  neurapophyses 
of  the  parietal  vertebra,  like  the  mesencephalic  segment  of  the  brain,  are! 
little  more  developed  in  mammals  than  in  the  cold-blooded  classes:  they! 
notched  in  the  hog  and  perforated  in  the  sheep  by  the  larger  division 
the  trigeminal,  and  they  send  down  an  exogenous  process,  which  articul 
and  sometimes  coalesces  with  the  appendage  (24)  of  the  palato-maxil 
arch.  The  neural  spine  (7),  always  developed  from  two  centres,  often  y« 
expanded,  and  sometimes  complicated  with  a third  intercalary  or  in 
parietal  osseous  piece,  is  occasionally  uplifted  and  removed  from  its  n 
apophyses  by  the  interposed  squamous  expansion  of  the  bone  27 ; but 
which  reminds  one  of  the  occasional  separation  of  the  neural  arch  fronr 
centrum  of  the  atlas  in  fishes,  is  a rare  modification  in  the  mammalian  c 
A still  rarer  one  is  the  separation  of  the  halves  of  the  parieto-neural  s 
from  each  other  by  the  extension  and  mutual  junction  at  the  median 


GENERAL  HOMOLOGY.  CRANIAL  VERTEBR.E. 


131 


::he  occipital  and  frontal  spines.  A specimen  of  tliis,  in  a species  of 
lus,  which  repeats  the  common  modification  of  tlie  parts  in  fislies,  is  pre- 
ed  in  the  museum  of  the  Royal  College  of  Surgeons.  Tlie  paruiwplujsis 
.always  commences  as  an  autogenous  element  by  a distinct  centre  of  ossi- 
u;ion,  as  shown  in  the  human  foetus,  fig.  ll,s;  it  speedily  coalesces  with 
petrosal,  but  otherwise  retains  its  individuality  in  some  of  the  lower  mam- 
■3,  as  e.g.  in  the  echidna  (fig.  12,  s) : or  it  coalesces  with  the  curtailed 
;.tal  pleurapophysis  2s,  or  with  the  maxillary  appendage  27,  or  with  both 
le  and  the  pleurapophysis  of  its  own  vertebra  (as),  when  the  complex 
nporal  bone’  of  anthropotomy  is  the  result.  In  most  mammals  the pleur- 
•okgsis  (as)  retains  its  primitive  independency  and  rib-like  form,  with 
iilly  the  ‘head’  and  ‘tubercle’;  but  by  reason  of  its  arrested  growth  it 
been  called  ‘styloid’  bone  or  process.  Sometimes  it  is  separated  from 
-short  hcEmapophysis,  40,  by  a long  ligamentous  tract,  sometimes  it  is  imme- 
^ely  articulated  with  it,  or  by  an  intervening  piece.  Thehccmal  spine,  41, 
wually  small,  but  thick  and  always  single.  The  rudiments  of  hypobranchial 
: lents  (43)  are  retained  as  diverging  appendages  of  the  parieto-haemal  arch 
.11  mammals,  and  have  received  the  special  names  of  ‘posterior  cornua,’ 
;thyrohyals,’  from  their  subservient  relationship  to  the  larynx. 

;i  the  frontal  segment  the  centrum,  9,  and  neurapopliyses,  10,  very  early 
eesce.  Two  separate  osseous  centres  mark  out  the  body  (fig.  26,  C,  o), 
ceach  neurapophj'sis  has  two  distinct  centres  {ih.  10, 10),  the  optic  foramina 
» being  first  surrounded  by  the  course  of  the  ossification  from  these 
ats.  The  superior  development  of  the  neurapophysial  plates  (fig.  24,  10), 
ompared  with  those  of  the  parietal  vertebra  (0),  in  most  mammals,  har- 
i.izes  with  the  greater  development  of  the  prosencephalon  ; but  the  chief 
i of  this  segment  of  the  brain  is  protected  by  the  expanded  spines  of  the 
-tal  (11)  and  parietal  (7)  vertebrae,  and  by  the  intercalated  squamosals  (27). 
amany  ruminants  the  bifid  element  u developes  two  spinous  processes 
ed  side  by  side  as  in  the  anterior  trunk- vertebrm  of  the  Tetrodon ; but 
■ project  beyond  the  integument  and  are  called  ‘ horns.’  The  appendicular 
ve  (27)  not  only  usurps  some  of  the  functions  of  the  proper  cranial  neurapo- 
«es,  but,  likewise,  the  normal  office  of  the  frontal  pleurapophysis  (2s),  in 
support,  viz.  of  the  distal  elements  of  the  haemal  arch  (20,32),  which  now 
;ulate  directly  with  27,  in  place  of  28  as  in  all  oviparous  vertebrates.  The 
, pleurapophysis  of  the  frontal  vertebra  (2s)  is  almost  restricted  in  the 
mmalian  class  to  functions  in  subserviency  to  the  organ  of  hearing,  is 
etiines  swollen  into  a large  bulla  ossea,  like  the  parapophyses  and  pleurapo- 
•3C8  of  the  cervical  vertebrae  of  Colitis,  PI.  I,  fig.  7,  pi,  x ; it  is  sometimes 
luced  into  a long  auditory  tube,  and  sometimes  reduced  to  the  ring  support- 
the  tympanic  membrane.  Yet,  under  all  these  changes,  since  its  special 
»ology  is  demonstrable  with  28  in  the  bird  (fig. 23)  and  crocodile  (fig.  22)  as 
as  with  the  teleologically  compound  bone,  23  a,  b,  c,  d,  in  the  fish  (fig.  5), 
dkewise  mu.st  its  general  homology,  which  is  so  plainly  manifested  in 
fish,  be  equally  recognised.  The  frontal  licemupophysis  (fig.  24,  29,  an), 
the  corresponding  half  of  the  hcemal  spine  {ib.  32)  are  connate  on  each 
in  all  mammals,  and  become  confluent  at  II  in,  in  most.  The  haemal 
I of  the  frontal  segment  of  the  skull,  as  in  other  air-breathing  vertebrates, 
no  diverging  appendage,  unless  the  tympanic  otosteals  be  so  regarded, 
which  is  not  borne  out  by  their  development, 
he  nasal  segment  (N  iv,  II  iv)  is  chiefly  complicated  by  the  confluence  of 
s of  the  enormously  developed  olfactory  capsules  (is)  in  the  mammalian 
5,  and  its  typical  character  is  masked  by  the  compression  and  mutual  coa- 
ence  of  the  neurap{g>hyses,  1 ».  'I'hc  cenfrum  i.s  u.sually  much  elongated, 
4 13,  and  soon  coalesces  with  both  neurapopliyses  ami  nasal  capsule's 

K 2 


132 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


in  the  hog.  The  neural  spine  (is)  is  usually  divided,  but  is  sometimes  singl  j 
e.  g.  in  Simia.  In  the  rhinoceros  it  supports  a dermal  spine  or  horn.  T, 
pleurapophysis  (in)  or  proximal  element  of  the  hsemal  arch  of  the  nasal  ve  | 
tebra  has  its  real  character  and  import  almost  concealed  by  the  excessi  | 
development  of  the  second  element  of  the  arch  (21),  which  resumes  in  mai.^ 
mals  all  those  extensive  collateral  connections  which  it  presented  in  the  ct  j 
codile  ; and  to  which  are  sometimes  added  attachments  to  the  expanded  spi  | 
of  the  frontal  vertebra,  as  well  as  to  that  of  its  own  segment.  The  pleurapj; 
physis  however,  besides  its  normal  attachment  to  its  centrum,  13,  sends  uj  h 
process  to  the  orbit,  in  order  to  effect  a junction  with  its  neurapophysis  whiil 
sometimes  appears  there,  as  the  ‘ os  planum’  of  anthropotomy.  The  hcBmm 
spine  (22)  is  developed  in  two  moieties,  which  never  coalesce  together,  I 
though,  in  the  higher  apes,  and  at  a very  early  period  in  man,  each  h 
coalesces  with  the  haemapophysis,  and  repeats  the  simple  character  of  t 
corresponding  elements  (rami)  of  tlie  succeeding  (mandibular)  arch. 

The  appendicular  element  (24)  which  diverges  from  the  pleurapophy^ 
(20),  contributes  to  fix  and  strengthen  the  palato-maxillary  arch  by  attachii 
it  to  the  descending  process  of  the  parietal  centrum  (5)  ; with  which,  in  nn 
mammals,  it  ultimately  coalesces.  The  other  elements  of  the  diverging  mei 
her  of  the  arch  correspond  in  number  and  in  the  point  of  their  diverger 
with  those  in  birds,  chelonians  and  crocodiles.  They  are  two  in  number,  sn 
ceeding  each  other,  and  both  become  the  seat  of  that  expansive  deyelopmH 
which  is  followed  by  the  multiplication  of  their  points  of  connection  ; tl 
the  proximal  piece  (‘malar ’20)  articulates  in  the  hog  not  only  with  1 1 
hmmapophysis  (21)  from  which  it  diverges,  but  likewise  with  the  muco-derri 
bone,  73.  The  distal  piece  of  the  appendage  (squamosal,  27)  expands  asu 
diverges,  and  fixes  the  naso-haemal  arch  not  only  to  the  frontal  pleurap 
physis  (2s),  but  also  to  the  frontal,  parietal  and  occipital  neurapophyses  a ' 
spines : it  also  affords,  in  the  hog,  as  in  other  mammals,  an  articular  surf;, 
to  the  frontal  heemapophysis  (29). 

The  development  of  an  osseous  centre  in  the  cartilage  of  the  snout 
the  hog,  and  the  homologous  ‘ prenasal’  ossicle  in  certain  fishes,  the  ca. 
e.  g.,  might  be  regarded  as  rudiments  of  terminal  abortive  segments  m>i 
anterior  than  the  nasal  vertebra.  The  multiplied  points  of  ossification  in  : 
vomer  have  been,  also,  deemed  indications  of  that  bone  being,  like  the  vonn 
ine  coccygeal  bone  in  birds,  a coalescence  of  several  vertebral  bodies, 
course,  d priori,  the  segments  in  the  cranial  region  of  the  endoskelen 
might  as  reasonably  be  expected  to  vary  in  number  in  different  species, 1 
the  segments  in  the  thoracic  or  sacral  regions.  I have  not,  however,  hi 
able  to  determine  clear  and  satisfactory  representatives  of  more  than  f 
vertebrm  in  the  skull  of  any  animal ; and  the  special  ossifications  in  the  nti 
cartilages  appear  to  me  to  belong  to  the  same  category  of  osseous  parte,- 
the  palpebral  bones  in  certain  crocodiles  and  the  otosteals. 

Man. — Arriving,  finally,  in  the  ascensive  survey  and  comparison  of 
archetypal  relations  of  the  bones  of  the  vertebrate  skull,  at  Man,  the  highest  c- 
most  modified  of  all  organic  forms,  in  which  the  dominion  of  the  controll 
and  specially  adapting  force  over  the  lower  tendency  to  type  and  vegetal 
repetition  is  manifested  in  the  strongest  characters,  we,  nevertheless,  find 
vertebrate  pattern  so  obviously  retained,  and  the  mammalian  modification  0 
as  illustrated  in  the  preceding  paragraph  and  diagram,  so  closely  adhered 
as  to  call  for  a brief  notice  only  of  those  developments  of  the  conin  , 
elements  which  impress  upon  the  human  skull  its  characteristic  foini  • 

proportions.  , r 1 1 

The  neural  arch  of  the  occipital  vertebra  differs  from  that  ol  the  nog 
a much  greater  development  of  the  neural  spine  (fig.  25,  3)  and  a much  ■ 


-T? 

.r»l  ■ ' * 

r -4 


• ■ # ^.  " , if- 

l»  “ ► ^r-*  ' • . ' ‘I'  tl  .i,)i,r*M4/ 

^ *-|.M»U***»  I 

^ < ' • r V^Jt^0k  iMf.rtVt' «r^>  • »(<T 

..Jtyf-  • Ml  tf-n) 

UPI  f.  '<4  • ,|4>  Ji«f . ><  yrri  '-<•  Itk  li«i 

• r^ 

t it#*'  •/.  • •’'*  • tv"'  • - » 

..1  . (j4  >■  ii  i «<4  I*  • 

* . , _ ..  • ♦ mI  i 

)•*»■»  I * • < « '•<•  ’i 

. -tuilf 

. 4 


Ik  *1'  --1.^ 

7>-  ,M  -f-  •■  - 


^ • I ^ i^|*i  • Hi  i* 


GENERAL  HOMOLOGY.  CRANIAL  VERTEURAi. 


133 


elopnient  of  the  parapophysis.  This,  as  in  other  mammals,  is  not  only  an 
ut^enous  process  of  the  neurapophysis,  2,  but  is  commonly  reduced  to  a 
^e  “ scabrous  ridge  extended  from  the  middle  of  the  condyle  towards  the 
; of  the  mastoid  process”  (Monro,  l.c.  p.  72) — the  “ eminentia  aspera 
uculum  rectum  lateralem  excipiens  ” of  Soeinmerring  : the  knowledge  of 
.general  homology,  however,  makes  quite  intelligible  and  gives  its  true 
rrest  to  the  occasional  development  of  this  ridge  into  a ‘ paramastoid  ’ 
jaroccipital  process,  which  now,  however,  projects,  like  the  true  ‘ mastoid,’ 
nwards  from  the  basal  aspect  of  the  cranium  {ante,  p.  30). 

'he  occipital  pleurapophpsis,  pi,  51,  shows  the  same  displacement  as  in 
;r  mammals,  but  is  stilt  more  expanded  in  the  direction  of  the  trunk’s 
. , and  its  exogenous  (acromial)  process  is  still  more  developed.  The  hcem- 
uihysis  (52),  originally  distinct,  has  its  development  checked  and  speedily 
ccsces  with  the  pleurapophysis. 

■ ■ the  bone  52'  be  the  special  homologue  of  theTone,  ss,  PI.  I.  fig.  2,  in  the 

and  considering  the  backward  displacement  of  si  and  52,  its  anterior 

ttion  to  them  in  man  is  no  valid  argument  against  the  determination, — 

I L we  may  adopt  the  same  general  homology,  and  regard  the  clavicle,  in 
rt-elations  to  the  vertebrate  archetype,  as  the  displaced  haemapophysial 
laent  of  the  atlas,  to  which  segment  its  true  relative  position  is  shown  in 
isame  low  organized  class  in  which  the  typical  position  of  the  scapular 
1 1 is  likewise  retained. 

bhe  adaptive  developments  of  the  radiated  appendage  of  the  occipital 
lal  arch  reach  their  maximum  in  man,  and  the  distal  segment  of  the  ap- 
iJage  constitutes  in  him  an  organ  which  the  greatest  of  ancient  philoso- 
--S  has  defined  as  the  “fit  instrument  of  the  rational  soul and  which 
•ilustrious  modern  physiologist  has  described  “ as  belonging  exclusively  to 
— as  the  part  to  which  the  whole  frame  must  conform”*.  And  these  ex- 
-sions  give  no  exaggerated  idea  of  the  exquisite  mechanism  and  adjust- 
: t of  its  parts. 

is  no  mere  transcendental  dream,  but  true  knowledge  and  legitimate 
. of  inductive  research,  that  clear  insight  into  the  essential  nature  of  the 
-m,  which  is  acquired  by  tracing  it  step  by  step  from  the  unbranched 
loral  ray  of  the  protopterus  to  the  equally  small  and  slender  but  bifid 
loral  ray  of  the  amphiume,  thence  to  the  similar  but  trifid  ray  of  the 
reus,  and  through  the  progressively  superadded  structures  and  perfec- 
•s  in  higher  reptiles  and  in  mammals.  If  the  special  homology  of  each 
of  the  diverging  appendage  and  its  supporting  arch  are  recognisable 
; i Man  to  the  fish,  shall  we  close  the  mind’s  eye  to  the  evidences  of  that 
•ter  law  of  archetypal  conformity  on  which  the  very  power  of  tracing  the 
nr  and  more  special  correspondences  depend  ? 

intil  the  alleged  facts  (p.  117)  are  disproved,  demonstrating  change  of 
i tion  to  be  one  of  the  modifications  by  which  parts  of  a natural  and  re- 
jisable  endoskeletal  segment  are  adapted  to  special  offices,  and  until 
conclusions  (p.  118)  deduced  from  those  facts  are  shown  to  be  fellaeious,  I 
t retain  the  conviction  that,  in  their  relation  to  the  vertebrate  archetype, 
human  hands  and  arms  are  parts  of  the  head — diverging  appendages  of 
costal  or  haemal  arch  of  the  occipital  segment  of  the  skullf. 

■B«n  (Sir  Charles),  “ The  (land.”  BridgewatcrTrcnti.se,  183.3,  ]>p.  16,  18. 

9V0I/  Kui  ifiipue^wv  yiyverai  T<hv  uWmv  l^wwv  avOpioxos. — Aristotle. 

As  another  example  of  the  new  light  and  interest  which  a knowledge  of  general  hpmo- 
gives  to  the  facts  of  ahnormal  anatomy  in  the  human  species,  I may  cite  the  reinark- 
wse  desenhed  by  Sir  C.  Bell  (op.  cil  p.  i>2),  of  the  hoy  ‘ horn  without  arms,’ — ‘ hut  who 
•lavicles  and  scapulse.’  Mere  development  was  arrested  at  the  point  at  wdiich  it  is  normal 


134 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


The  cenlriim,  5 c,  of  the  parietal  vertebra  gives,  in  the  human  foetus,  tin  I 
same  evidence  of  its  essential  individuality,  by  the  same  absence  of  the  niasl  | 
of  connation  which  somewhat  concealed  it  in  the  oviparous  classes,  a i 
we  have  already  noticed  in  the  lower  mammal  (fig.  24).  The  Tt^urap^ 
physes  (e)  rise  higher  to  reach  their  proper  spine  (7)  in  the  lofty  cranial  domfi 
of  man,  of  which  that  divided  and  enormously  expanded  element  forms  thf 
greatest  part  of  the  roof : but  the  base  of  the  neurapophysis  continues  to  hi 
perforated  by  the  homologous  divisions  of  the  nerve  (tr)  that  notches  it  i 
the  cod-fish  (fig.  5,  e tr).  The  parapophysis  (s)  retains  its  autogenous  c 
independent  character  in  relation  to  its  proper  neural  arch,  the  ‘ additaraenta. 
suture  by  which  it  manifests  its  normal  relations  to  the  neural  spine  (7)  bein 
persistent;  but  it  speedily  coalesces  with  the  acoustic  capsule,  le  (froi 
which  it  is  artificially  separated  in  fig.  25),  and  with  the  modified  pleurapt 
p/iysis,  28,  as  has  been  already  explained  in  the  chapter  on  ‘ Special  Home, 
logy’  (Mastoid,  pp.  29-42). 

The  proper pleur apophysis  (ss)  of  the  parietal  vertebra  ordinarily  becomi  ■ 
confluent  with  contiguous  and  coalesced  portions  of  the  parapophysis,  s,  an 
acoustic  capsule,  16  ; and  the  ossified  portion  of  the  hamapophysis,  4o  h, 
separated  from  it  by  a long  ligamentous  tract,  and  becomes  confluent  wil 
the  hcEtnal spine,  whs.  The  entire  inverted  arch  exhibits  the  usual arreste 
growth  characteristic  of  the  air-breathing  vertebrates,  and  its  appendagi 
are  represented  by  the  still  retained  ‘ hypobranchial’  elements,  46,  of  tl' 
splanchnic  arches,  which  are  so  voluminously  developed  in  the  fish. 

The  centrum  and  neurapophyses  (9,  lo)  of  the  frontal  vertebra  manifest  tl 
same  speedy  coalescence  as  in  other  mammals.  T.  he  spine,  u,  though  develop! 
from  two  lateral  moieties,  regains  its  normal  unity,  as  a general  rule,  in  nm 
by  the  obliteration  of  the  median  suture  : its  transverse  and  vertical  expan 
here  attain  their  maximum.  The  parapophysis  (12)  is  developed,  as  in  tl 
occipital  segment,  as  an  exogenous  process,  called  ‘external  angular  or  ol 
bital’  in  anthropotomy,  but  from  the  neural  spine  instead  of  the  neurap  i 
physis.  This  element  is  perforated  by  its  characteristic  nerve  (op).  The  p/eu 
apophijsis,  28,  is  now  separated  from  its  parapophysis,  12,  by  both  parts,  27  at 
20,  of  the  diverging  appendage  of  the  maxillary  arch  ; but  yet  it  is  intercstii 
to  note  that  it  is  still  connected  through  the  medium  of  these  with  the  san 
element  to  which,  agreeably  with  the  greater  retention  of  the  vertebra 
archetype,  it  directly  articulates  in  the  fish  (fig.  5,  12,  28  a-d).  The  intf 
calated  piece  (27)  further  interposes  itself,  as  in  other  mammals,  betwei 
the  pleurapophysis,  28,  and  haemapophysis,  20,  ol  the  frontal  segment,  direct 
articulating  v'ith  the  latter  and  leaving  the  proximal  element  of  the  arch  (2 
reduced  in  man  to  its  subordinate  function  of  sustaining  the  ear-drum.  T ' 
hcemapophysis,20,  and  hce7)ial  qnne,  32,  are  connate,  and  soon  coalesce  with  the  J 

in  the  Arujuis,  Pseudopm,  and  some  other  limbless  and  snake-like  lizards.  The  iisual  p 
dominating  development  of  the  scapular  appendage  has  bred  so  prevalent  an  idea  of  the  si 
ordinate  character  of  the  supporting  arch,  that  the  existence  of  the  arch  minus  the  apper. 
age,  is  adverted  to  not  without  a note  of  surprise  in  the  above-cited  and  other  excellent  wor  - 
General  homology,  however,  teaches  that  a vertebral  arch  is  a more  constant  and  iinporti 
part  than  its  appendages  ; and,  that,  being  anterior  in  the  order  of  development,  it  may 
expected,  in  cases  where  development  is  arrested,  whether  normally  in  accordance  wi  1 | 
nature  of  the  species  or  abnormally  as  an  individual  defect,  to  be  present  when  the  dive  g ^ 
appendages  are  absent.  Sir  Charles  BeU,  well  recognising  the  primary  function  of  the  roo 
fied  occipital  rib  in  relation  to  breathing,  observes,  in  reference  to  the  above-cited  case, 
would  do  well  to  remember  this  double  office  of  the  scapula  and  its  muscles,  that,  v 11 
the  very  foundation  of  the  bones  of  the  upper  extremity,  and  never  wanting  in.  any  a 1 
that  has  the  most  remote  resemblance  to  an  arm,  it  is  the  centre  and  point  ‘‘  114’***  ° | 
muscles  of  respiration,  and  acts  in  that  capaijity  where  there  arc  no  extremities  a j 
p.  52. 


GENERAL  HOMOLOGY.  CRANIAL  VERTEBRAi. 


135 


losites  at  the  symphysis  inenti ; and  the  wliole  distal  portion  of  the  inverted 
h of  the  frontal  segment  is  then  formed  by  a continuous  bar  of  bone,  modi- 
1 in  its  form  and  articulation,  and  by  its  dental  appendages,  in  subserviency 
mastication  and  other  functions  in  relation  to  the  human  mouth. 

,Ve  recognise  the  centrum  of  the  nasal  vertebra  in  the  human  skull  by  the 
;ition  and  connections  of  the  bone,  13,  notwithstanding  it  has  undergone 
■extreme  a divergence  from  the  ordinary  cylindrical  shape  of  such  elements, 
;ts  homotype  at  the  opposite  extreme  of  the  vertebral  column  in  birds, 
■„ch  Cuvier  compares  to  a ‘ soc-de-charrue’ : it  is,  in  fact,  more  compressed 
. vertically  developed  than  in  the  hog  (fig.  24,  13) ; but  it  is  shorter,  and 
imonly  retains  its  original  individuality.  It  directly  supports  the  similarly 
dified  compressed  and,  also,  coalesced  neurapophijses,  i4,  which,  termi- 
:ing  in  like  manner  the  series  of  their  vertebral  homotypes  anteriorly,  have 
•iergone  the  extremest  modification.  But  the  arguments  proving  the 
lesced  prefrontals  of  the  frog,  the  bird  and  the  mammal  to  be  the  special 
■lologues  of  the  bones  so  called  in  the  fish,  establish,  as  a corollary,  their 
oeral  homology  with  those  bones,  which  retain  in  so  much  greater  a degree, 
unmistakeably,  their  neurapophysial  characters  in  that  lowest  class  of 
1-blooded  vertebrates.  The  nature  of  the  additional  complication  by 
och  those  vertebral  or  archetypal  characters  are  further  masked  in  mani- 
as, has  been  already  explained  in  relation  to  the  nasal  neurapophyses  of 
rhog.  The  olfactoiy  nerves  are  transmitted  in  man,  as  in  that  and  most 
er  inferior  mammals,  by  numerous  foramina,  i4,  ol.  The  nasal  spine,  15,  is 
:ded,  but  much-restricted  in  its  growth,  and  presents  a singular  contrast 
-.hat  respect  to  its  homotypes,  n,  7,  3,  in  the  succeeding  cranial  vertebrae. 

: development  of  the  neural  arch  of  the  nasal  vertebra  is  so  modified  in 
j,  so  contracted  as  well  as  retracted,  that  the  orbits,  instead  of  being 
hed  apart  and  directed  laterally,  have  approximated  by  a kind  of  reci- 
,cal  rotation  towards  the  median  plane,  and  have  thus  gained  a directly 
erior  aspect. 

ieneral  homology  perhaps  best  explains  the  import  of  the  continuation 
..he  small  and  seemingly  insignificant  bones  (20,  pi)  from  the  roof  of  the 
ath  “ up  the  back  part  of  the  nostrils  to  the  orbit,”  where  they  are 
mected  “to  the  ossa  plana  and  cellulce  ethmoidece  by  the  ethmoid  suture.” 
at  the  connection  is  the  best  possible  for  the  functions  of  the  bone  we 
• feel  assured,  without  the  sentiment  being  damped  by  discerning  in  it, 
•ae  same  time,  the  attempt  to  retain  the  type,  and  repeat  those  constant  con- 


tions  of  ihepleurapophysis  in  question,  not  only  with  its  centrum  ( vomer), 
i ako  with  the  modified  neurapophyses  of  its  proper  segment  (prefron- 
with  coalesced  olfactory  capsules  constituting  the  compound  ‘ ethmoid 
• e ’ of  anthropotomy).  The  connections  of  the  pleurapophysis,  20,  with  its 
! napophysis,  21,  in  front,  and  its  diverging  appendage,  24,  behind,  are  also 
ined  in  man  ; and  in  short,  all  those  characters  that,  depending  on  the 
intial  nature  of  the  palatine  bone  as  the  pleurapophysis  of  its  vertebral 
tnent,  have  served  to  indicate  its  special  homology  from  man  to  the  fish, 
30ut  doubt  or  difficulty,  to  all  anatomists  (see  Table  I.). 

-Tie  haemapophysis  (2*)  has  the  usual  mammalian  expansion,  but  is  unu- 
ily  short  in  man,  and  coalesces  unusually  early  with  the  corresponding 
ety  of  the  hcemul  spine  (22).  Besides  the  normal  and  constant  connec- 
ts with  20  and  22,  the  haemapophysis,  21,  articulates  with  its  fellow,  with 
centrum  (13),  neurapophysis  (u,  os  planum),  and  spine  (is),  of  its 
1 vertebra,  with  the  spine  of  the  frontal  vertebra  (11),  with  the  detached 
tion  of  the  olfactory  capsule  (19),  and  with  the  muco-dermal  bone  (7.1). 
also  affords  a large  surface  of  attachment  to  the  proximal  piece  of 


136 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


its  diverging  appendage  (20),  which,  in  addition  to  the  more  constant  com  \ 
nections  witli  21  and  27,  articulates  in  man  with  the  neurapophysis  (lo'i 
and  parapophysis  (12)  of  the  frontal  vertebra.  The  distal  extremity  of  thi  * 
second  bone  (27)  of  the  diverging  appendage  attains  its  maximum  of  expaui  i, 
sion  in  man,  and  besides  its  connection  with  20,  and  the  glenoid  articulatioi 
for  the  haemapophysis,  29,  it  joins  the  parietal  neurapophysis,  0,  and  spine, ; 
and  sometimes  also  (in  the  melanian  race)  the  spine  (11)  of  the  frontal  ver  ' 
tebra : and  it  speedily  coalesces  with  the  reduced  pleurapophysis,  2S,  of  thi 
frontal  vertebra,  and  with  the  parapophysis  (s)  of  the  parietal  vertebra,  to 
gether  with  a portion  of  the  capsule  of  the  acoustic  organ.  _ ' 

In  reviewing  the  general  characters  of  the  human  skull  in  reference  to  thS 
vertebrate  archetype,  we  find  the  occipital  segment  simplified  by  the  atrophi 
and  connation  of  its  parapophyses  and  haemapophyses ; and  modified  chiefli 
by  the  excessive  growth  of  its  neural  spine  and  pleurapophyses,  and  by  thi  “i 
backward  displacement  of  the  latter  element,  as  in  all  other  air-breathim  • 
vertebrates.  The  parietal  segment,  retaining,  like  the  occipital  one,  the  mor 
normal  proportions  of  its  centrum  and  neurapophyses,  is  still  more  remark 
able  for  the  vast  expanse  of  its  permanently  bifid  spine.  As  in  most  cold 
blooded  vertebrates,  the  parapophysis  preserves  its  independence  in  respect  c 
the  neural  arch  of  its  own  segment.  The  haemal  arch  retains  its  almost  fceta  ^ 
proportions,  but  is  less  displaced  than  in  some  of  the  inferior  air-breathin; 
vertebrates.  The  primitive  individuality  of  the  centrum  of  the  parietal  vertebn  »; 
is  a feature  by  whicli  the  human  subject,  together  with  all  other  mamraali  ► 
manifests  a closer  adhesion  to  type  than  is  observable  in  this  part  of  the  skui 
in  any  of  the  oviparous  vertebrates,  and  it  shows  the  necessity  of  extendin' 
coniparisons  over  the  entire  series,  and  not  deducing  the  vertebrate  arclu  » 
type  exclusively  from  those  inferior  forms:  for  although  it  may  be  upon  th 
whole  best  retained  in  them,  yet  the  modifications  superinduced  in  subse* 
viency  to  their  exigences,  and  by  which  they  diverge  to  that  extent  from  th 
common  plan,  and,  as  a series  of  species,  from  tlie  common  vertebrate  sten 
may  affect  a part  which  the  conditions  of  existence  of  higher  forms  do  no 
require  to  be  so  masked.  The  early  ossification  and  large  proportional  siz 
of  the  hyoidean  arch  in  the  human  embryo  is  very  significant  of  its  tru 
nature  and  importance,  in  relation  to  the  archetypal  vertebrate  structur 
i.  e.  as  being  the  haemal  complement  of  a primary  segment  of  the  skull. 

Exogenous  processes  descend,  like  the  pair  from  beneath  the  lower  ce> 
vical  vertebrae  of  some  birds,  from  the  body  of  the  parietal  vertebra;  bi 
the  true  transverse  processes  of  this  vertebra  are  the  mastoids,  which  alway 
articulate  with  a corner  of  the  parietals. 

The  centrum  and  neurapophyses  of  the  frontal  segment  retain  their  ord 
nary  proportions,  and  the  spine  is  again  the  element  which,  by  its  extren^ 
expansion  and  its  modification  in  subserviency  to  the  formation  of  the  orbit 
chiefly  masks  the  typical  features  of  the  neural  arch.  The  parapophysis 
connate  and  reduced  in  size,  and  its  vertebral  relations  with  the^  pleurapc 
physis  of  its  segment  interrupted  by  the  interposition  of  the  diverging  appei 
dage  from  the  antecedent  haemal  arch  : the  unusually  expanded  distal  en 
of  the  same  appendage  also  intervenes  between  the  frontal  pleur-  and  haen 
apophyses  ; the  pleurapophysis  (2s)  being  more  atrophied  in  man  than  1 
most  inferior  mammals.  The  haemapophysis  and  spine  are  on  the  othi 
hand  much  developed  and  modified  as  above  described,  for  the  business  1 
mastication,  though  relatively  shorter  than  in  other  mammals. 

The  compression  and  extension,  both  vertically  and  longitudinally,  or  t 
centrum  (13),  the  compression  and  coalescence  of  the  neurapophyses  (14), bo 
with  each  other  and  the  nasal  capsules  (is),  and  the  corresponding  proportioi 


GENERAL  HOMOLOGY.  CRANIAL  VERTERR.E. 


137 


f the  divided  spine  (is),  mainly  characterize  tlie  neural  arch  (N  iv)  of  the 
rerininal  or  nasal  segment  of  the  human  skull.  '1  he  early  coalescence  of  each 
uaemapophysis(2i)\vith  the  corresponding  halfof  the  divided  haemal  spine  (22), 
nd  the  unusual  expansion  of  the  bones,  especially  the  second  (27),  which 
aiverge  from  the  haemapophysis,  form  the  chief  characteristics  of  the  haemal 
:rch  (H  iv)  of  the  nasal  segment.  The  haemapopliysial  portions  of  both  the 
sasal  and  frontal  vertebrie  are  much  less  elongated  than  in  most  other 
: nimals. 

It  may  serve  to  test  the  accuracy  of  the  general  homologies  here  assigned 

I a the  bones  of  the  human  skull,  if  we  notice  the  degree  to  which  they  have 
icCen  subject  to  modification  in  connection  with  such  determinations. 

According  to  the  general  character  of  the  vertebral  elements  in  the  rest  of 
hie  frame,  we  should  be  prepared  to  expect  that  the  haemal  arches  would  be 
Libject  to  a greater  variety  in  respect  of  development  and  relative  position 
01  their  segments  than  the  neural  arches ; and  that  in  the  latter  the  parts 
tctermined  as  centrums  and  neurapophyses  would  retain  more  of  the  or- 
iinary  proportions  of  such  parts  in  other  segments  or  in  other  animals,  than 
ne  peripherally  situated  spines.  If  new  bones  are  added,  we  should  expect 
1)  find  them  in  the  relative  position  of  appendages  to  the  normal  vertebral 
rrches : or  should  these  be  homologous  with  similar  superadditions  in  the 
iculls  of  lower  animals,  they  will  probably  be  the  seat  of  more  extensive 
haanges  of  form,  proportion  and  connections,  than  the  elements  of  the  verte- 
rral  arches  themselves. 

Now  if  the  reader  will  glance  at  fig.  25  and  compare  the  bones  forming 
:ae  segments  of  the  skull  with  those  in  figs.  24, 23, 22  and  5,  he  cannot  but  be 
:ruck  with  the  remarkable  degree  of  uniformity  in  the  dimensions  of  the 
cones  2,  6 and  10  : no.  14  being  the  terminal  neurapophysis,  has  been  the  seat 
iT  more  variety  ; but  the  general  steadiness  of  this  series  of  bones  in  regard 

I I their  dimensions  and  connections  accords  with  the  characters  assigned  to 
I'lem,  as  neurapophyses,  which  are  always  the  most  constant  and  important 
:'the  ossified  vertebral  elements. 

The  bones  1,  5,  9 and  is  equally  conform  in  the  kind  and  degree  of  their 
codifications  with  their  determination  as  the  bodies  of  the  vertebrae. 

The  increasing  capacity  of  the  neural  canal  of  the  head,  demanded  for  the 
"idgment  of  the  progressively  expanded  encephalon  as  the  vertebral  scale  rises, 

I chiefly  acquired  by  the  expansion  of  the  bones,  3,  7,  ti,  which,  being  deter- 
mined as  ‘neural  spines’  in  the  fish,  might  be  expected  to  be  subject  to  greater 
aviations  from  their  typical  form  and  proportions  than  the  more  central 
;id  essential  parts  of  the  neural  arches.  The  terminal  neural  spine,  15,  is 
'■.bject  to  still  greater  varieties  in  the  range  of  species,  as  might  also  be  ex- 
ected  from  its  position.  In  one  mammal,  e.  ff.  the  porcupine,  it  is  more 
"panded  than  any  of  its  succeeding  hoinotypes  in  the  cranium;  in  man  its 
•oportions  are  so  much  reduced  as  greatly  to  mask  the  homotypal  relation. 

I one  mammal,  e.ff.  the  orang,  the  nasal  spine  is  not  only  diminutive  but 
■ngle : in  another  mammal,  e.g.  the  manatee,  it  is  also  diminutive  but  di- 
' ded,  and  the  halves  completely  separated  by  the  intervention  of  part  of  the 
acceeding  spine. 

The  abnormal  conditions  of  the  human  skull  give  further  illustration  of  the 
•uth  of  these  general  homologies  of  the  cranial  bones,  and  reciprocally  re- 
ave light  from  such  determinations.  In  the  case  of  idiots  from  defective 
•owth  or  development  of  the  brain,  where  the  cavity  of  the  cranium  is  re- 
iced  to  half  or  less  than  half  its  normal  capacity,  os  e.  g.  in  the  skull  described 
id  figured  in  my  ‘ Memoir  on  the  Osteology  of  the  Cliimpanzce*,’  it  might 
* Zoological  Transactions,  vol.  i.  p.  313,  pi.  0/  ami  58. 


1 


138 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


have  been  expected  from  the  anthropotomical  ideas  of  the  cranial  bones, — 
according  to  which  no  one  bone  is  deemed  either  more  or  less  important 
than  another  in  its  essential  nature,  and  where  the  squamosal  is  as  little  re- 
garded in  the  light  of  a superadded  or  intercalary  piece  as  the  alisphenoid, — 
that  all  would  be  reduced  in  the  same  proportion  in  forming  the  parietes  of 
the  contracted  brain-chamber.  But  this  is  by  no  means  the  case.  In  the 
instance  above-cited  the  basioccipital  and  basisphenoid  have  been  developed 
to  their  usual  size,  and  the  distance  from  the  posterior  boundary  of  the  bony 
palate  to  the  anterior  border  of  the  foramen  magnum  is  as  great  as  in  any 
normal  skull.  The  exoccipitals  (condyloid  portions  of  the  occiput),  the 
alisphenoids  and  the  orbitosphenoids  retain  in  like  manner  their  full  dimen- 
sions. The  distance  between  the  frontal  and  temporal  bones  is  as  great  ^ 
in  the  average  of  fully  developed  Caucasian  skulls,  and  is  greater  than  in 
most  of  those  from  the  Melanian  race,  in  which  the  direct  junction  of 
frontal  with  the  temporal,  as  in  the  chimpanzee,  is  by  no  means  rare.  The 
contraction  of  the  capacity  of  the  brain-chamber  is  due  chiefly  to  arrested 
development  of  the  frontals,  parietals,  supraoccipital  and  squamosals.  By 
the  reduction  of  tlie  supraoccipital  and  the  retention  of  the  centrums  of  the 
cranial  vertebrae  of  their  normal  proportions,  the  foramen  magnum  becomes 
situated  nearer  the  back  part  of  the  basis  cranii  than  in  the  normal  skull. 

In  a still  smaller  cranium  of  a female  idiot,  who  reached  the  age  of  twenty- 
one  years,  which  is  preserved  with  the  male  idiot’s  skull  above-mentioned  m 
the  anatomical  museum  of  St.  Bartholomew’s  Hospital,  the  centrist  between 
the  normal  proportions  of  the  basioccipital,  basisphenoid,  exoccipitals,  ah- 
sphenoids  and  orbitosphenoids,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  reduced  dimensions 
of  the  supraoccipital,  parietals,  frontals  and  squamosals  on  the  other,  is  stil 
more  striking  and  significant  of  the  true  nature  of  those  bones.  Ihe  normal 
growth  of  the  centrums,  indeed,  might  be  explained  by  the  concomitant  nearly 
normal  size  of  the  medulla  oblongata,  base  of  third  ventricle  and  optic  chi- 
asma,  in  the  brain  of  the  same  idiot : but  it  is  not  so  obvious  from  the  con-- 
dition  of  the  brain  itself  why  the  alisphenoid  should  not  have  shrunk  in  the; 
same  proportion  as  the  parietals,  frontals  and  squamosals.  To  the  homologist, 
however,  the  recognised  difference  of  subjectivity  to  modification  presented 
by  the  neurapophyses,  spines  and  diverging  appendages  of  the  typical  seg- 
inents,  renders  very  intelligible  the  partial  seats  of  arrested  growth  in  the. 
bones  of  these  idiots’ crania. 

In  reference  to  disease,  also,  one  sees  not  why  the  alisphenoid  should  have: 
a minor  attraction  for  the  morbid  products  deposited,  or  be  less  subject  to 
the  destructive  actions  excited,  during  syphilitic  or  mercurial  disease,  than 
the  parietals,  or  the  orbitosphenoids  than  the  frontals,  or  the  poccipitals 
than  the  supraoccipital:  yet  it  needs  but  to  examine  any  series  of  such; 
morbid  skulls  in  our  museums  of  pathology  to  be  convinced  that  the  variable, 
and  peripheral  elements  of  the  neural  arches,  viz.  their  expanded  spines,  are 
almost  delusively  so  affected:  the  frontal  and  parietal  being  ™ost 
common  seats  of  the  disease  ; the  supraoccipital  a 

tantly  with  its  minor  deviation  from  the  typical  standard  of  tlie  element.  I 
yet  seen  no  example  in  which  either  a cranio-vertebral  centrum  oi  neur- 
Lophysis  was  so  affected  ; but  the  nasal  bones  are  notorious  y attacked. 

^It  would  be  easy  to  multiply  such  instances  of  the  new  light-new  eye  ,■ 
so  to  speak,— with  which  human  anatomy,  normal  and  abnormal,  is  viewe  , 
after  the  essential  nature  or  general  homology  of  the  parts  have  been  appre- 

‘^‘If tiie  bones  4,  s,  12,  fig.  5,  have  been  correctly  determined  as  theparapo- 
physes  of  the  cranial  vertebrae,  they  might  be  expected  to  be  subject  111  the 


t 


. 


GENERAL.  HOMOLOGY.  CRANIAL  VERTEBRAE. 


139 


■ ourse  of  adaptive  modification  to  the  loss  of  their  individuality,  and  from 
utoo-enous  elements  to  be  reduced  to  the  condition  of  exogenous  processes. 
,fow°this  is  exactly  what  we  trace  in  the  series  of  vertebrate  skulls  ; and  we 
rre  further  prepared  to  expect  that  the  simplification  of  the  segment  forming 
! le  anterior  extremity  of  the  vertebral  series  will  be  in  part  effected  by  the 
otal  disappearance  oV  its  least  important  elements,  the  parapophyses.  Tliese 
rre,  in  fact,  absent  in  the  nasal  vertebra  in  all  animals ; they  become  con- 
uent  with  the  occipital  vertebra  in  most  reptiles  and  all  warm-blooded  ani- 
lials  ; and  in  the  latter,  we  find,  with  the  exception  of  a few  birds,  that  the 
■arapophyses  of  the  frontal  vei’tebrae  have  likewise  lost  their  individuaIit}^ 

The  first  endoskeletal  bones  which  plainly  disappear  from  the  skull  in 
■•acin"  its  modifications  upwards  from  fishes  are  those  which,  in  the  present 
certeb°al  theorj-,  have  been  referred  to  the  category  of  diverging  appendages; 
:iz.  the  entopterygoid  (fig.  5, 23),  theoperculars  {ib.  34-37),  and  the  brancliio- 
tegals  (Jb.  44).  The  first  bones  that  we  discover  to  be  plainly  superadded 
))  those  that  remain  after  the  above  subtraction,  in  the  skull  of  the  reptiles, 
;ar  example,  are,  also,  referable,  in  the  present  vertebral  theory,  to  the  same 
lariable  and  inconstant  class  of  elements  : they  are  the  ectopterygoids  (fig. 
;2,  24'),  the  malai-s  (figs.  22  to  25,  20)  and  the  squamosals  (ib.  27) ; and  are, 
II  general  homology,  diverging  appendages  of  the  palato-maxillary  arch. 
They  are  subject  to  more  inconstancy  as  to  their  existence  than  the  more 
regular  and  normal  elements  of  the  skull : some  reptiles,  for  example,  have 
lie  malar  and  squamosal,  whilst  others  want  them  ; most  reptiles  have  the 
ectopterygoid,  but  this,  which  is  not  present  in  fishes,  is  again  taken  away  in 
lie  warm-blooded  vertebrates.  With  reference  to  inconstancy  of  form  and 
connections  no  bone  of  the  cranium  exceeds  the  squamosal,  and  it  is  precisely 
;iis  distal  element  of  the  diverging  appendage,  which,  through  its  inordinate 
development,  most  masks  the  archetypal  character  of  the  human  cranium 
rcompare  27,  fig.  25,  with  27,  fig.  23). 

Classification  of  Skull-bones. — A knowledge  of  the  special  homologies  of 
! ie  bones  of  the  skull  is  essential  to  that  of  theirgeneral  homology,and  a know- 
•idge  of  their  general  homology  is  indispensable  to  their  natural  classification. 

Cuvier  divides  the  bones  of  the  head  in  all  animals  into  bones  of  the  cra- 
\ium  and  bones  of  the  face. 

The  bones  of  the  cranium  are  those  of  the  cavity  containing  the  brain  : 
'1  the  rest  are  bones  of  the  face  and  contribute  to  form  the  cavities  for  the 
rgans  of  sight,  smell  and  taste*.  But  these  primary  divisions  do  not  in- 
lude  the  same  bones  in  all  animals  : the  nasal  (fig.  5,  is)  and  vomer  (ib.  13) 
^'e  cranial  bones  in  fishes,  but  not  in  mammals  : tlie  squamosal  (fig.  25,  27)  is 
Tcranial  bone  in  mammals  and  not  in  birds  or  reptiles,  &c.  And  this  dis- 
■cepancy  in  the  Cuvierian  classification  of  cranial  bones  is  due,  not  only  to  a 
on-appreciation  of  their  essential  nature,  but  partly  to  mistakes  of  special 
'omologies : thus  the  nasal  is  called  ethmoid  in  the  fisli,  and  the  squamosal 

called  jugal  in  the  bird. 

In  all  anthropotomical  classifications  the  bones  of  tlie  cranium  are  reckoned 
tght  in  number:  four  single,  viz. — 

The  frontal  (fig.  25,  11)  ; 

The  ethmoidal  (ii.  n and  is); 

The  sphenoidal  (5,  0,  u,  10  and  21)  ; 

The  occipital  (i,  2 and  3)  : and 
four  in  pairs,  viz. — 

The  two  parietal  (7),  and 

The  two  temporal  (s,  10, 27,  2«  and  33). 

* 1. 090ns  (t'Anat.  Corni).  I.  ii.  (18.')7)  p.  LOO. 


140 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


The  bones  of  the /ace  are  reckoned  as  fourteen  in  number,  viz. — 

The  two  malar  (20) ; 

The  two  maxillary  (ai,  22)  ; 

The  two  palatal  (20) ; 

The  two  nasal  (is)  ; 

The  two  turbinal  (lo)  ; 

The  vomer  (13),  and 
The  mandible  (29-37.). 

The  detached  portion  of  the  hyoid  arch  (40,  41)  and  its  appendages  (47), 
together  with  the  whole  of  the  scapular  arch  and  its  appendages,  are.  excluded 
from  the  category  of  the  bones  of  the  head. 

The  natural  classification  of  the  bones  of  the  human  skull  appears  to  me 
to  be,  first  into  those  of 
The  Endo-skeleton, 

The  Splanchno-skeleton,  and 
The  Exo-skeleton. 

The  primary  division  of  the  bones  of  the  endo-skeleton  is  into  the  four  seg-*. 
ments,  called 

Occipital  vertebra,  N i,  H i ; 

Parietal  vertebra,  N ii,  H ii ; 

Frontal  vertebra,  N ni,  H iii ; 

Nasal  vertebra,  N iv,  FI  iv. 

These  are  subdivided  into  the  neural  arches,  called 
Epencephalic  arch  (1,  2,  3)  ; 

Mesencephalic  arch  (5,  o,  7,  s); 

Prosencephalic  arch  (9,  10,  11  and  12)  ; 

Rhinencephalic  arch  (13,  14,  is) : 
and  into  the  haemal  arches  and  their  appendages,  called 

Maxillary  arch  (20,  21  and  22)  and  appendages  (24,  20,  27)  ; 

Mandibular  arch  (2s,  29-32)  (no  appendage)  ; 

Hyoidean  arch  (ss,  49,  4i)  and  appendages  (49)  ; 

Scapular  arch  (si  and  S2)  and  appendages  (ss-ss). 

The  bones  of  the  splanchno-skeleton,  are 
The  petrosal  (le)  and  otosteals  (10')*  ; 

The  turbinals  (is  and  19)  and  teeth.  (The  sclerotals  retain  their  primitive 
histological  condition  as  fibrous  membrane.) 

The  bones  of  the  exo-skeleton,  are 
The  lacrymals  (73). t 

* These  ossicles  are  described  by  most  antbropotomists  as  parts  of  the  ‘ temporal  bone. 

“ Os  temporura  infantis  magnopere  ab  osse  temporum  adulti  differt ; labyrinthi  et  ossiculonun^ 
auditus  fabrics  absoluta  est,”  says  Soemmerring  in  the  classical  work  before  cited  (t.  1.1 
p.  132).  The  signifieation  of  the  differences  between  the  foetal  and  adult  human  tempomij 
bone,  which  the  great  anthropotomist  truly  regarded  as  so  remarkable,  is  made  plain  by  ■ 
anatomy ; which  shows  the  bone  to  be  an  assemblage  of  several  essentially  distinct  ones,  and  j 
at  the  same  time  exposes  the  character  of  that  singularly  heterogeneous  assemblage  and 
coalescence  of  osseous  elements  to  meet  the  exigences  of  the  peculiarly  developed  jrame  or  J 
man.  What  the  ‘ ossieula  auditus  ’ are,  is  a problem  which  still  awaits  careful  additional^ 
research  in  the  embryonic  development  of  the  haemal  arches  of  the  cranium,  for  its  satis-4 
factory  solution.  The  question  is  not,  of  course,  whether  they  are  dismembennents  of  the  | 
‘ temporal  bone,’  since  this  has  no  real  claim  in  any  animal  to  an  individud  character;  out  1 
whether  the  ossicles  of  the  ear-drum  in  mammals  are  to  be  regarded,  like  the  pedicle  of  the 4 
eye-ball  in  the  plagiostomous  fishes,  as  appendages  to  a sense-organ,  and  thereby  as  develop- 1 
ments  of  the  splanchno-skeleton ; or  whether  they  are,  like  the  tympanic  ring,  modificatiops* 
of  the  tympano-mandibular  arch.  The  reasons  are  adduced  in  the  Chapter  on 
Homology’  (p.  235)  which  have  led  me  to  view  them  as  peculiar  mammalian  productions 
in  relation  to  the  exalted  functions  of  a special  organ  of  sense.  I 

t The  numerals  refer  to  the  bones  so  marked  in  the  figures. 


3ENEBAL  HOMOLOGY.  OBJECTIONS  TO  CRANIAL  VERTEBRAi.  141 


The  course  of  coalescence  reduces  the  epencejdmlic  arcJi  (fig.  25,  N i)  to 
one  bone,  the  scapular  arch  (II  i)  to  one  bone  (the  arch  is  apparentlj’  com- 
pleted by  the  connexion  of  an  element  (52')  not  appertaining  to  the  skull). 
The  centrums  (5,  «)  and  neurapophyses  (o,  10)  of  the  parietal  and  frontal  ver- 
ebrae  coalesce  with  each  other  and  with  the  diverging  appendages  (24)  of  the 
iiaxillary  arch  to  form  one  bone,  the  ‘sphenoid’  of  anthropotomy,  and  this 

■ dtimately  coalesces  with  the  epencephalic  arch  and  constitutes  the ‘os  spheno- 
-pccipitale’  of  Soemmerring.  The  expanded  halves  of  the  parietal  spine  (r) 
vemainiug  usually  distinct  are  reckoned  as  two  bones.  The  expanded  halves 
pf  the  frontal  spine  (11)  usually  coalescing  together  form  a single  bone.  The 
Halves  of  the  nasal  spine  (13)  rarely  coalescing  are  counted  as  two  bones. 
The  mastoid  (s)  coalescing  with  tlie  petrosal  (lo)  and  this  with  the  tympanic 
:2s),  squamosal  (27)  and  stylohyal  (as),  the  whole  is  reckoned  a single  bone, 

1 rhich  thus  combines  a parapophysis  and  pleurapophysis  of  one  vertebra  with 
, . pleurapophysis  of  another  and  a diverging  appendage  of  a third  vertebra, 
'.nd  all  these  parts  of  the  endo-skeleton  with  a sense-capsule  belonging  to  the 
iplanchno-skeleton : such  is  the  heterogeneous  compound  character  of  the 
Temporal  bone  ’ of  anthropotomy.  The  neurapophyses  of  the  nasal  vertebra 
. 14)  coalesce  with  each  other  and  with  a considerable  part  of  another  ossified 
tense- capsule  (is),  to  form  the  single  bone  called  ‘ ethmoid.’  The  maxillary 
►.KPne  includes  the  superior  maxillary  (21)  and  premaxillary  (22)  of  the  lower 
i.nimals.  The  hyoid  bone  includes  the  basihyal  (41),  with  the  ceratohyals  (40) 
;nd  the  thyrohyals  (45).  The  scapula  includes  both  the  pleurapophysis  (51) 
r.nd  the  haemapophysis  (52)  of  the  occipito-haemal  arch.  The  signification  of 
the  separate  points  of  ossification  of  the  human  foetal  skull  is  made  plain  by 
.the  foregoing  applications  of  the  ascertained  general  homologies  of  the  bones 
i f that  part  of  the  skeleton. 

Objections  to  the  Cranial  vertebra  considered. — The  latest  and  most  formal 
tbjection  to  the  fundamental  idea  in  accordance  with  which  I have  attempted 
:d  work  out  the  general  homologies  of  the  bones  of  the  head,  is  also  the 
Most  formidable  in  respect  of  the  great  and  deserved  eminence  of  the  ob- 
jector. In  a manuscript  left  by  Baron  Cuvier,  entitled,  “ Le  crane  est-il 
ane  vertebre  ou  un  compose  de  trois  ou  quatre  vertebres?”  appended  to 
ihe  posthumous  edition  of  the  ‘Le9ons  d’Anatomie  Comparee*,’  he  admits 
nat  “the  analogy  of  the  basilar  and  two  condyloid  parts  of  the  occiput  with 
oe  body  and  two  halves  of  the  annular  part  of  the  atlas  is  very  appreciable. 
:Tie  basioccipital  and  the  body  of  the  atlas  serve  equally  to  support  the 
iiyelon  ; the  exoccipitals  and  the  two  halves  of  the  ring  of  the  atlas  to  cover  it. 
..he  condyles  are  represented  by  the  articular  processes  by  which  the  atlas  is 
oined  to  the  dentata.  The  condyloid  foramen,  which  gives  passage  to  the 
• erve  of  the  ninth  pair,  has  some  relation  with  the  hole  in  the  atlas  which 
; ives  passage  to  the  first  cervical  nerve  and  to  the  first  bend  of  the  vertebral 
ntery.  Some  have  also  found  a certain  relation  between  the  mastoid  process, 
"hich  in  most  animals  appertains  to  the  occipital  bone,  and  the  transverse 

■ rocess  of  theatlcis  and  the  other  vertebrae  ; upon  which  it  must  be  remarked 
aat  these  relations  are  less  in  man,  in  some  respects,  than  in  the  quadrupeds, 
ince  the  atlas  has  commonly  only  a notch  for  the  passage  of  the  artery,  and 
le  mastoid  belongs  in  man  entirely  to  the  petrosal  ”f.  “ We  may  even  com- 

.*  P-  (18.37)  par  M.M.  F.  G.  Cuvier  and  Laurillard,  who  hold  the  arguments 

; their  author  to  be  conclusive.  The  criticism  in  the  ‘ Ilistoire  des  Poissons,’  t.  i.  p.  230 
f ^ only  upon  the  priori  cranio-vertebral  theory  of  Geoffroy,  and  does  not  concern  us 

' l pieces,  le  ha.silairc  et  Ics  deux  condyloidiens,  avee  les  trois 

j .eces  de  I’atlas,  son  corps  et  les  deux  inoities  dc  sa  partie  annulaire  est  tres  sensible.  Le 
Milaire  et  le  corps  de  I’atlas  servent  egalement  ii  supporter  la  moellc  epiuiere  ; les  condy- 


142 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


pare,”  Cuvier  says,  “ the  supraoccipital  to  the  spinous  processes  which  in  B' 
certain  animals  originate  by  special  points  of  ossification  and  remain  for  some  i 
time  distinct  from  the  rest  of  the  vertebra  : nevertheless,  there  is  already  here  I 
a great  difference  of  structure  and  function  With  regard  to  the  points  in  I 
which  Cuvier  is  willing  to  admit  an  ‘ analogy  ’ between  the  occiput  and  the  | 
atlas,  he  subjoins,  agreeably  with  his  idea  of  the  law  which  governed  such  | 
correspondences, — “ These  resemblances  might  naturally  be  expected  in  the  ' 
part  of  the  head  placed  at  the  extremity  of  the  vertebral  column,  and  the 
functions  of  which  are,  in  fact,  analogous  to  those  of  vertebrae,  since  it  gives  < 
passage,  like  them,  to  the  great  neural  axisf.” 

With  regard  to  the  feature  of  resemblance  (quelque  rapport)  which  some- 
had  seen  between  the  mastoid  process  and  a transverse  process,  Cuvier  founds- 
his  objection  to  its  application  to  the  vertebral  character  of  the  occipital  i 
bone  on  a false  homology.  Concluding  that  the  mastoid  in  man  (fig.  25,  s) 
was  homologous  with  the  paroccipital  in  the  hog  (fig.  24-,  4)J  and  some- 
other  quadrupeds,  he  deems  the  determination  of  the  paroccipital  as  the- 
transverse  process  of  the  occipital  vertebra  to  be  invalidated  by  the  fact  i 
that  the  ‘ mastoid  ’ belongs,  in  man,  not  to  the  occipital  but  to  the  petrosal.: 
There  were  cases,  however,  not  unknown  to  the  able  Editors  of  the  posthu- 
mous edition  of  the  ‘ Lemons  d’Anatomie  Comparee,  where  the  true  trans- 
verse processes  of  the  occipital  vertebra,  though  exogenous  like  those  of  the- 
succeeding  trunk-vertebrm  in  man,  had  become  developed  to  an  equal  extent 
w'ith  such  transverse  processes  ; the  abnormality  of  the  human  occipital  thus 
repeating  its  normal  condition  in  the  quadruped.  They  howevei  do  not  cite! 
these  instances,  or  notice  the  confusion  by  their  author  of  the  true  mastoid ) 
with  the  paroccipital  in  reference  to  this  his  first  objection  to  the  veitebral 
homology  of  the  occipital  segment.  But  it  might  further  have  been  re-' 
marked,  in  respect  of  the  segment  of  the  skull  to  which  the  mastoid  reallyi 
stands  in  parapophysial  relation,  that  although  the  mastoid  belongs  in  man  to  i 
the  petrosal  in  the  sense  of  being  anchylosed  with  it,  it  articulates  with  thel 
parietal ; and  the  persistence  or  obliteration  of  a primitive  suture  is  too  vari-i 
able  a phenomenon  to  determine  to  which  of  two  bones  a third  connected  with- 
both  essentially  belongs.  The  constant  existence  of  the  paroccipital  either  I 
as  an  autogenous  element  or  an  exogenous  transverse  process  in  all  the! 
oviparous  vertebrate  classes,  its  eommon  existence  in  mammals,  and  occa-» 
sional,  though  rare,  development  in  man,  establish  that  additional,  though  i 
by  no  means  essential  vertebral  character  in  the  occipital  segment,  which 


loidiens  et  les  deux  moiti4s  de  I’anneau  de  I’atlas  ii  la  couvrir.  Les  condyles  sent  repre 
sentes  par  les  facettes  articulaircs  au  moyen  desquelles  1 atlas  s unit  a 1 axis.  Le  con 
dylien  qui  laisse  passer  le  nerf  de  la  neuvifeme  pair,  a quelque  rapport  ayec  le  tmu  de  1 atla 
qlii  laisse  passer  le  premier  nerf  cervical,  et  la  premiere  courbure  de  artere  w^ebrale.  On 
a aussi  trouv^  quelque  rapport  entre  I’apopbyse  mastoide  qui  ^ans  la  plupart  des  ammaux 
appartient  a I’occipital,  et  I’apophyse  transverse  de  I’atlas  et  des  autr^  yertCbres , sur  quo, 
iUaut  remarquer  que  ces  rapports  sont  moindres  dans  1 homme  a certains 
les  quadrupedes,  puisque  I’atlas  n’y  a ordiiiairement  qu’iine  echancrure  pour  le  passage  ut 
I’artere  et  que  I’apophyse  mastoide  y’appartieiit  entierement  au  roclier.  P-  ' 

“•=  “ On  pourrait  ineme  comparer  I’occipital  superieur  aux  apophyses  epineuses  q , * - 
certains  animaux,  naissent  par  des  points  d’ossification  particuliers,  et  ! 

distincts  dll  reste  de  la  vertebre;  cependant  il  y aurait  deja  ici  une  grande  difference  de  str 

ture  et  de  fonction.” — Z.  c.  p.  711.  . , , 

t “Ces  resemblances  etaient  naturelles  a attendre  dans  la  partie  de  la  tete  placee 
mite  de  la  colonne  vertebrale,  et  dont  les  fonctions  sont  en  effet  analogues  a celles  des 
tebres  puisqu’elle  laisse  passer  comme  elles  le  grand  tronc  medullaire.  — c.  P-  ni- 
t Cuvier,  e.  a.  describes  this  element  as  “ L’apopbyse  mastoide,  qni  est  tres-longne,  tr 
pointue  et  toute  de  I’occipital,”  in  his  elaborate  Ossemms  des  Cochons,  Oss.  Tossiles,  t. 
pt.  i.  p.  117. 


GEXERAL  HOMOLOGY.  OBJECTIONS  TO  CRANIAL  VERTEBR.E.  143  ' 


Cuvier  seeks  to  obscure  by  the  normal  absence  of  its  jiroper  transverse  pro- 
cesses in  man,  and  the  assumed  transference  of  them  to  another  part  of  the 
-skull. 

Cuvier  in  the  next  plaee  objects  to  the  comparison  of  the  supraoccipital 
.with  the  neural  spine  of  a trunk-vertebra,  “ because  of  its  vast  differenee  of 
structure  and  function.”  He  does  not  specify  the  nature  of  the  difference  : 
he  admits  that  the  neural  spines  have  distinct  centres  of  ossification  in  certain 
lanimals ; and  all  will  allow  that,  in  most  of  the  trunk-vertebrae  of  such,  the 
neural  canal  is  closed  by  the  coadapted  ends  of  tlie  neurapophyses  to  which 
the  spine  articulates  or  becomes  anchylosed : that  therefore  such  spine  does  not 
Ldirectly  cover  the  neural  axis,  but,  retaining  the  shape  signified  by  its  name, 
performs  exclusively  the  function  in  relation  to  muscular  attachments.  At 
nfirst  view  the  contrast  seems  conclusive  against  all  homology  between  such 
tmere  intermuscular  spine  and  the  broad  thin  convex  plate  applied  over  the 
L-cerebellum  and  posterior  cerebral  lobes  in  man.  And  it  must  be  confessed 
that  the  determination  of  their  general  homological  relations  could  not  have 
jbeen  satisfactorily  demonstrated  by  the  mere  relations  of  the  parts  to  the 
iarainae  supporting  them,  in  so  limited  a range  of  eomparison.  But,  if  we 
clescend  to  fishes,  we  shall  find  the  supraoccipital  often  equally  excluded  from 
lihe  neural  canal  by  the  meeting  of  the  exoccipitals  beneath  its  base ; we 
fsball,  also,  see  it  still  retaining  the  spinous  figure,  indicating  its  fnnction  in 
rjelation  to  muscular  attachments  to  predominate  over  that  in  subserviency 
;o  the  protection  of  the  epencephalon.  If  we  then  ascend  to  the  crocodile, 
swe  shall  find  the  neural  spine  of  the  atlas  to  be  one  of  those  examples  alluded 
:o  by  Cuvier,  where  the  ossification  proceeds  from  an  independent  centre : 
land  it  not  only  thus  manifests  its  essential  character  as  an  autogenous  ver- 
tebral element,,  but  maintains  its  permanent  separation  from  the  neurapotJ 
ohyses:  and  it  further  indicates  the  modifications  of  form  to  which  the  cor- 
ponding  elements  will  be  subject  in  the  more  expanded  neural  arches  of  | 
Jie  antecedent  cranial  segments  by  having  already  exchanged  its  compressed 
spinous  for  a depressed  lamellar  form.  Here  indeed  Cuvier  might  not  only 
aave  objected  to  recognise  it  as  a vertebral  spine  by  reason  of  its  change  of 
form  and  function,  but  also  by  its  continuing  a distinct  bone,  which  is 
aot  the  case  with  ihe  expanded  ‘ spine  ’ of  the  mammalian  occipital  vertebra. 
But  returning  to  the  crocodile,  we  observe  in  the  segment  anterior  to  the  atlas  \ 
|shat  both  the  form  and  connections  of  the  snpraoccipital  (fig.  22,  3)  are 
closely  similar  to  those  of  the  nenral  spine  of  the  atlas  that  the  recog- 
lition  of  their  serial  homology  is  unavoidable ; and  we  have  a repetition 
of  the  same  characters  of  the  vertebral  element  in  question  in  the  small  and'" 
ondiyided  parietal  Now  Cuvier  makes  no  difficulty  in  admitting  the 

occipital  superieur  ’ in  the  crocodile  to  be  the  homologous  bone  with  its 
nore  expanded  namesake  in  the  bird;  or  this  with  the  still  more  expanded 
partie  grande  et  mince  de  I’occipital  ’ in  mammals  and  man : he  is  also 
lisposed  to  admit  the  special  homology  of  the  supraoccipital  under  all 
ts  variations  of  form  and  function  in  the  above-cited  air-breathing  animals 
vith  the  bone  3 in  fishes,  which  he  sometimes  calls  ‘occipital  superienr,’ 
‘ometimes  ‘interparietal.’  If  then  the  special  homology  be  admitted  on  the 
■ground  of  the  constancy  of  the  connections  of  the  part,  with  what  show  of 
‘ ‘eason  can  its  general  homology  be  rejeetcd  whieh  forms  the  very  basis  or 
:ondition  of  the  characters  determinative  of  such  admitted  special  homology  ? 
lut  Cuvier  is  not  consistent  with  himself  in  Ids  grounds  of  objection  to  the 
*-^ential  nature  of  the  human  supraoccipital  as  the  neural  spine  of  its  seg- 
' “6nt ; for  he  does  not  hesitate  to  call  the  atlas  of  the  crocodile  a vertebra. 


144 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


although  its  ‘ annular  part’  is  closed  above  by  a transverse  plate*  instead  of 
by  a vertical  spine,  of  which,  indeed,  there  remains  hardly  more  vestige  than 
is  presented  by  the  tubercle  or  rudiment  of  the  spinous  process  in  the  supra- 
occipital  of  man.  It  must  also  be  remembered,  that  the  human  supraocoipital 
does  retain  to  a certain  extent  the  same  function  in  relation  to  the  attach- 
ment of  the  proper  vertebral  muscles  (splenii  capitis,  complexi,  and  the  modi- 
fied interspinales  called  ‘recti  capitis postici  maj.  et  min,)  as  the  succeeding 
vertebral  spines ; and  combines  this  with  the  same  place  of  completing,  as 
the  key-stone,  the  neural  arch;  although  by  reason  of  the  more  voluminously 
developed  segment  of  the  neural  axis  protected  by  that  arch  the  peripheral  ele- 
ment is  chiefly  modified  for  the  acquisition  of  the  required  increase  of  space. 

Cuvier  next  proceeds  to  comment  on  Oken’s  endeavour  to  represent  the 
basisphenoid  and  the  two  alisphenoids  with  the  two  parietals  as  forming  a ver- 
tebra : and  he  admits  that  there  is  some  analogy,  though  this  is  much  more 
feeble  than  the  differences.  “The  basisphenoid,  having  another  function, 
takes  on  a different  form  from  the  basioccipital,  especially  above,  by  virtue 
of  the  posterior  clinoid  processes : and  in  the  embryo  it  is  composed  not  of 
a sino-le  nucleus,  but  of  twof.”  With  respect  to  the  objection  from  the 
modification  of  form  alluded  to,  it  may  be  remarked  that  the  same  element 
in  other  vertebral  segments  of  the  body  undergoes  much  greater  change 
of  shape;  the  centrums  of  the  lower  cervical  vertebrae  in  many  birds  send  down 
two  processes  as  well-marked  as  the  ascending  ones  called  ‘ clinoid  ’ in  that 
of  the  parietal  vertebra,  not  to  speak  of  the  ‘ soc  de  charrue  ’ of  the  coccy- 
geal vertebrae  of  the  bird,  for  example,  without  any  difficulty  having  been  felt 
or  expressed  by  Cuvier  in  their  recognition  as  modified  vertebral  bodies,  the 
more  essential  characters  of  their  general  homology  being  as  plainly  retained 
as  in  the  case  of  the  basisphenoid  ; in  its  relation,  e.  g.  to  the  neur- 
apophyses  and  the  support  of  the  mesencephalon.  With  regard  to  the 
objection  from  the  two  centres  of  development,  if  this  be  valid  against  the 
general  homology  of  the  basisphenoid  (o,  fig.  25)  as  a vertebral  centrum,  it 
equally  tells  against  the  body  of  the  atlas  (c),  which,  as  Cuvier  well  knew, 
was  ossified  sometimes  from  two,  and  sometimes  from  three  centres  X-  And 
I may  further  observe  that,  although  Cuvier  affirms  the  two  ossific  centres  of 
the  basisphenoid  to  retain  for  a long  time  between  them  simple  cartilages, 
my  observations  bear  out  the  accuracy  of  the  remark  of  Kerknngius,  (whose  i 
figures  Cuvier  cites,)  touching  the  “ dua  ossicula  distincta  (tab.  xxxiv.  fig. 
iii  c,  c),  viz.  “ quee  celerrime  in  formam  figurae  apposite  K coalescunt  : 
and  the  figure  of  the  coalesced  rudiments  of  the  basisphenoid  given  by  Kerkrin- 
gius  closdy  resembles  the  bilobed  rudiment  of  the  vertebral  centrums  in  the 
sacrum  of  the  chick. 

Cuvier  next  objects  to  the  neurapophysial  character  of  the  alisphenou L, 
that  the  ‘ foramen  ovale  ’ is  rarely  a notch,  more  often  a complete  hole. 

* “ Les  vertibres.  L’atlas  est  compose  de  six  pieces,  &c.— La  premiere,  a,  est  une  lame 
transverse  qui  fait  le  dos  de  la  partie  annulaire.  Elle  n’a  qu’une  Crete  a peme  sensible  pou 
toute  aDoohvse  epineusc/* — Ossemens  Fossilcs,  t.  v.  pt.  ii.  p.  ^ a.  / i 

t En  avaL  du  basilaire  se  trouve  le  corps  du  sphenoide  posteneur,  aux 
herent  les  deux  ailes  temporales  ou  grandes  ailes.  On  a aussi  c^ierche  a ® ouelque 

pieces  comme  formant  une  vertebre  avccles  deux  parietaux.  II  reste  en  eftet  encore  quelq 
inaloKie  mais  beaucoup  plus  faible,  tandis  que  les  differences  devieniient  plus  fortes.  L 
corps^du  spbenoide  abienl’air  d’une  repetition  du  basilaire,  mais  ayant 
preude  aussi  une  autre  forme,  surtout  cn  dessus,au  moyen  des  apophyses  <='inoidespostene  , 

et Ss  les  premiers  temps  du  foetus  il  n’est  pas  compose  d’un  seul  noyau,  mais  de  deux,  qui 
out  lone-temps  entre  eux  de  simples  cartilages.” — 1.  c.  p.  712. 

" : Lelons  d’Anat.  Comparee,  I i.  (1836)  p.  174.  Mecke  has  figured 

ossific  centres  in  this  element  of  the  human  atlas  in  the  1st  vol.  of  his  Archiv  fur  di  5 

siologie,  taf.  vi.  fig.  1 ■ 


jENERAL  homology,  objections  to  cranial  VERTEBRA!.  145 

Now,”  he  urges,  “ vertebrae  properly  so  called  give  passage  to  the  nerves  only  1 
y the  intervals  that  exist  between  them  and  the  other  vertebrae,  and  not  by 
larticular  tbramina*.”  Therefore  the  young  anatomist  must  conclude  that  -f 
ae  dorsal  vertebrae  of  the  ox,  the  abdominal  vertebrae  of  the  lophius,  and 
very  other  segment  of  the  trunk  whose  neural  arches  are  directly  perforated 
V the  spinal  nerves,  are  to  be  rejected  from  the  vertebral  category  ! i 

' It  has  been  shown  in  the  generalities  on  the  corporal  vertebrae  (p.  95),  that 
ae  neurapophyses  in  relation  to  the  passage  of  their  governing  nerves  may 
. e either  untouched,  notched  or  perforated  by  them,  without  prejudice  to 
aeir  neurapophysial  character.  Viewed  in  the  entire  series  of  vertebrata 
; le  cranial  neurapophyses  are  more  frequently  perforated  than  notched,  those 
:T  the  trunk  more  frequently  untouched  or  notched  by  the  nerves  in  passing 
1 trough  their  interspaces. 

The  penetration  and  sagacity  of  Cuvier  nowhere  shine  forth  more  brightly 
uan  in  his  bold  and  true  determination  of  the  bone  e,  fig.  5,  in  the  cod-fish  f 
; ; the  homologue  of  the  temporal  wing  of  the  sphenoid  in  the  human  skull. 

0 any  less-gifted  comparative  anatomist  the  relation  would  have  been  masked 
rf  the  coalescence  of  the  homologous  part  in  man,  by  its  connections  with  the 
[ijuamosal  and  frontal,  and  its  comparatively  small  proportions  under  the 
Liise  of  a subordinate  process  ; none  of  which  characters  exist  in  the  ali- 
;>henoid  of  fishes : it  .still  retains,  however,  in  that  class,  as  in  man,  its  most 
ssential  connections  in  relation  to  the  bones  of  its  own  segment  and  to  the 
rrain  and  nerves ; and  Cuvier  availing  himself  of  these  in  the  determination 

■ its  special  homology,  was  little  likely  to  be  swayed  by  so  unimportant  a 
i.iriety  as  the  transmission  of  the  characteristic  nerve  by  a foramen  instead 

■ by  a notch.  No  sooner,  however,  has  the  time  arrived  and  the  call  been 
junded  for  an  advance  to  a higher  generalization,  which  includes  and  ex- 
lains  the  minor  proposition,  than  Cuvier  interposes  the  least  important 
ffference  of  the  alisphenoid  to  check  the  progress.  It  will  be  obvious  to 
-e  anatomist  that  the  foregoing  explanation  of  the  value  of  the  nerve- 
:<tch  or  hole  in  the  homological  character  of  a neurapophysis  has  been 
..lied  forth  bj-  the  weight  of  the  name  of  the  objector  rather  than  by  the 
rxce  of  the  objectioq. 

'.Cuvier  directs  his  next  argument  against  the  vertebral  character  of  the 
' eural  arch  of  the)  parietal  segment  generally.  “ Its  composition,”  he  avers, 

-3  different  from  that  of  other  vertebrae,  since  the  ring  (he  had  just  before 
nied  its  annular  form)  would  be  composed  of  five  pieces  or  even  of  six,  inclu- 
ng  the  interparietal.”  Yet  Cuvier  does  not  hesitate,  in  his  Article  V.,  ‘Zcs  Ver- 
wcs  ’ (Osteologiedes  Crocodiles)  j;,  to  reckon  as  the  first  vertebra,  the  atlas 
'twithstanding  its  composition  of  six  pieces. 

. If.indeed, Cuvier  had  subscribed  to  Geoffroy’s  assertion,  that  “Nature  repro- 
■ces  the  same  number  of  elements,  in  the  same  relations,  in  each  vertebra, 
ly  .she  varies  indefinitely  their  form,” — his  objection  to  the  vertebral  charac- 

■ of  any  given  segment  that  might  deviate  from  the  assumed  normal  number 
pieces  would  have  been  intelligible.  But  even,  then,  he  would  not  have 

’ en  guided  consistently  by  his  own  principle  ; for  the  objection  founded 
•on  the  supposed  abnormal  number  of  pieces  in  a cranial  segment  weighs 

’ Ses  ailes  different  beauconp  pins  encore  et  des  deux  condyliens,  et  des  deux  pieces  qui 

1 ment  la  partie  annulaire  des  vertebres.  A'  la  verite,  le  trou  ovale  n’est  quelquefois  qu’une 
1 lancmre  ; mais  le  plus  souvent  il  est  entourf;  d’os,  et  par  consequent  un  vrai  trou.  II  en 
■ de  meme  dn  trou  rond  toutes  les  fois  qu’il  est  distinct  du  sphdno-orhitaire  ; or  Ics  verte- 

■s  proprement  dites  ne  laissent  passer  les  nerfs  que  |)ar  les  intervalles  qui  existent  enlro 
» rt  les  autres  vertebres,  et  non  par  des  trous  particuliers.” — I.  c.  p.  712. 

I , ,,  Animal,  1817.  pi.  viii.  fig.  2,o,  p.  181. 

j L atlas  est  comjms^  de  six  pieces  qui,  a ce  qu’il  paroit,  demeurent  ])cmlent  toutc  la  vie 
' *'*'Ctes.  ’ — Ossemens  Fossiles,  t.  v.  pt.  ii.  p.  y j. 


L 


146 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


not  at  all  against  the  recognition  of  a corresponding  segment  of  the  trunk, 
tliough  similarly  composed. 

In  fact,  throughout  this  attack  upon  the  vertebral  theory  of  the  skull,  it 
will  be  seen  that  it  is  based  upon  the  d priori  assumption  that  all  the  endo- 
skeletal  segments  of  the  trunk,  however  modified,  are  vertebrae,  and  all  those« 
situated  in  the  head,  are  not  vertebrae.  The  essential  character  of  a vertebra ■“ 
is  thus  deduced  from  its  position,  not  its  composition.  It  needs  only  to  com- 
pare any  of  Cuvier’s  objections  to  the  vertebral  character  of  the  cranial  seg- 
ments, with  the  modifications  of  the  corporal  segments  admitted  by  him  to 
be  vertebrae,  previously  enumerated  in  this  Work  (pp.  96-101), .to  see  that 
the  characters  of  the  cranial  vertebi  ae  objected  to  by  Cuvier  differ  in  degree  not 
in  kind,  and  become  valid  arguments  against  the  admittance  of  natural  seg-> 
ments  into  the  vertebral  category,  only  when  they  happen  to  be  situated  at  or 

near  the  commencement  of  the  series.  . , „ , 

It  has  been  abundantly  proved,  I trust,  that  the  idea  of  a natural  segment 
^vertebra)  of  the  endoskeleton,  does  not  necessarily  involve  the  presence  ol 
I particular  number  of  pieces,  or  even  a determinate  and  unchangeable  ar-' 
rangement  of  them.  The  great  object  of  my  present  labour  has  been  tc 
deduce,  by  careful  and  sufficient  observation  of  Nature,  the  relative  value 
and  constancy  of  the  different  vertebral  elements,  and  to  trace  the  kind  ano^ 
extent  of  their  variations  within  the  limits  of  a plain  and  obvious  mamtenancd 

of  a typical  character.  . . . , , , 

In  reference  to  the  neural  arch,  the  variation  in  the  number  and  dispositior 

of  its  parts,  illustrated  in  the  figures  1,  2,  3,4,  18,  19,  20,  21,  do  not  seem  tc 
me  nor  will  they  I apprehend  to  any  unbiassed  anatomist,  to  obliterate  thi 
common  typical  character  of  that  part  of  a vertebra.  Those  elements  whicl 
are  furthest  from  the  centrum  are  the  chief  seat  of  the  changes.  If  the  readenf 
will  compare  figure  2 with  figure  19,  he  will  see  for  example  that  the  crown  o 
the  arch  is  formed  by  a single  bone(7)  in  the  crocodile,  butby  two  bones  (7,7 
in  fish  • nay,  in  most  fishes  the  halves  are  even  pushed  apart  by  the  interposis 
tion  of  a third  bone.  Yet  the  sagacity  of  Cuvier  led  him  to  determine  the  dr 
varicated  moieties  of  the  divided  parietal  in  sucli  fishes  to  be  the  same  (homo 
loeous)  bone  with  the  single  parietal  of  the  crocodile.  With  what  consistency 
tlien,  can  the  general  homology  of  the  segments  be  rejected,  which  suffer  m 
other  change  in  their  composition  than  that  resulting  from  the  single  or  bifia 
character  of  the  same  bone  in  each?  Is  single  frontal  of  the  ^ 
adult  regarded  as  a distinct  bone  from  the  bifid  frontal  of  the  fetus?  II 
therefore,  the  neural  arch  of  the  parietal  vertebra  (mesencephalic  arch)  0 
the  crocodile  be  free  from  the  objection,  raised  by  Cuvier  to  the  vertebra 
character  of  the  homologous  arch  in  man,  on  the  score  of  the  number  of  1 
elements ; neither  can  that  objection  be  allowed  to  have  any  fe^e  when 
rests  upon  the  mere  division  in  the  human  mesencephalic  arch  of  the  recog 
rnised  homologue  of  the  single  spinous  element  in  the  crocodile. 

In  the  sheep,  the  arch  which  encompasses  the  epencephalon  is  formed  b 
only  three  elements,  the  neural  spine  resting  upon  the  conjoined 
of  the  neurapophyses.  In  the  dog  these  elements  are 
epencephalic  arch  is  closed  above  by  the  neural  spine,  Cuvier  do  . 

not  allo^w  this  difference  of  arrangement  of  the  latter  element  (3)  to  affect  1. 
recognition  of  the  ‘ suroccipital’  in  both  mainmals;  and,  ^ 

a loss  to  discover  the  consistency  of  the  ideas  which  repu^^^^^ 

general  homology  of  the  bones  or  of  the  entire  arches  which  they  sunnoun 
Lcause,  as  Cuvier  would  say,  “ the  composition  of  the  arch  is  deferent 


, as  \^UVIC1  vTuiina  OO.J,  1- ,>  AT  . -1  • nrf 

of  three  pieces  in  the  sheep  and  of  four  pieces  in  the  dog.  let  1 p 
cisely  the  kind  of  objection  which  he  has  directed  against  the  niesen 


cisely  tne  Kinu  of  objection  which  he  has  duecteU  against  „ 

Lch;  viz.  because  it  may  be  composed  of  five  or  even  six  pieces,  111  certa. 


iGENEUAL  homology,  objections  to  cranial  VERTEBRAi.  147 

iiniiuals.  In  the  fish,  in  fact,— by  reason  of  the  parietal  parapophyses  (a,  s) 
oeing  subject  to  the  same  variation  in  their  relative  position  to  the  other 
‘elements,  which  has  been  illustrated  in  i*espect  of  the  neural  spine  in  the 
jpeucephalic  arch  of  the  dog  and  sheep, — the  mesencephalic  arch  is  com- 
posed of  seven  pieces,  or,  including  the  interposed  supraoccipital,  of  not  less 
,..han  eight  bones.  Yet  even  here  we  clearly  and  easily  trace  the  kind  and 
degree  of  modification  to  which  the  fundamental  plan  of  the  neural  arch 

Ijas  been  subject.  The  archetype  is  nowise  obliterated  : the  general  homo- 
xrgies  of  the  modified  elements  are  not  less  recognisable  than  their  special 
romologies.  The  centrum  and  neurapophyses  are  the  steadiest  elements : 
he  spine  is  not  only  subject  to  great  divei'sity  of  size  and  shape,  but  to  some 
'ariety  of  position,  and,  moreover,  to  be  either  single  or  bifid : the  parapo- 
jhvses  have  less  range  of  variety  in  point  of  dimensions,  but  may  be  more 
ir'less  interposed  between  spine  and  neurapophyses,  or  may  become  con- 
Juent  with  either  element.  Thus  the  epencephalic  arch  of  the  crocodile 
■fig.  18)  differs  essentially,  in  a Cuvierian  sense,  from  that  of  the  tortoise  or  the 
Ush  (fig.  1),  because  it  is  composed  of  four  pieces  in  the  first  and  of  six 
pieces  in  the  latter ; the  difference  of  composition  merely  depending,  how- . 
‘ ver,  on  the  more  exterior  position  and  connation  of  the  parapophyses,  4,  4,  in 
-he  crocodile. 

The  independency  of  the  parietal  and  frontal  bones  is  next  urged  by 
Muvier  as  militating  against  the  idea  that  they  complete  a vertebral  arch 
iormed  respectively  by  the  alisphenoids  and  orbitosphenoids  as  the  piers  or 
uaunches : and  the  more  so,  inasmnch  as  they  are  separated  from  those  bones 
Cl  some  animals  by  the  intercalation  of  the  squamosals*.  By  parity  of  reason 
r/e  must  reject  the  general  homology  of  the  neural  arch  and  spine  of  the 
litlas  in  the  Silurus  (PI.  I.,  fig.  3,  n a),  Ephippus  and  some  other  fishes,  be- 
■:anse  that  part  of  the  vertebra  is  not  only  distinct,  but  uplifted  and  removed 
n:om  the  piers  or  base  of  the  arch  by  the  intercalation  of  the  articular  pro- 
>?£sses  of  the  neural  arches  of  the  occiput  and  axis.  According  to  Cuvier  such 
reparated  atlantal  arch  must  be  regarded  as  a new  bone,  and  the  centrum 
mght  therefore  equally  to  be  viewed  as  ‘ une  piece  particuliere  qui  a une  desti- 
iation  particuliere  but  the  general  homology  of  vertebral  elements  may  be 
-etermined  not  only  by  the  irrelations  to  their  own  segnient,but  bythosewhich 
loey  maintain  with  their  less  modified  homotypes  in  contiguous  segments. 

The  centrum  of  the  atlas  in  the  Ephippus  directly  sustains  other  neur- 
ppophyses  than  its  own,  and  so  far  has  a new  or  particular  function  ; but, 
I'.nce  it  continues  to  unite  the  centrum  of  the  axis  with  that  of  the  occiput, 
?e  still  regard  it  as  their  homotype,  and  as  standing  in  the  relation  of  the 
fcentrum  to  its  uplifted  and  shifted  neurapophyses.  So,  likewise,  although 
lese  elements  now  aid  in  strengthening  the  joint  between  the  zygapophyses 
i f the  neural  arches  of  the  occiput  and  axis,  and  thus  perform  a new  and 
• cry  peculiar  function,  their  relation  to  these  and  other  neural  arches  in  the 
(■•ries  of  vertebrae  renders  it  impossible  to  overlook  the  serial  homology  of 
ie  separated  ' laminae’  of  the  atlas  and  that  of  its  spine  with  the  other  and 
^rge^  vertebral  laminae  and  spines. 

’ * “ Dans  tons  les  cas,  on  ne  pourrait  regarder  cette  vertebre  comme  annulaire,  ni  supposer 
1-  1C  les  pariAaux  en  forment  le  complement ; d’une  part,  ce  serait  une  composition  differente 
! celle  des  autres  vertebres,  puisque  I’anncau  serait  formd  de  cinque  pieces  et  meme  de 
' i,  en  comptant  I’inter-parictal ; de  I’autre,  il  arrive  dans  plusieurs  animaux  que  les  ailes 
■ mporales  da  sphenoi'de  n’atteignent  pas  au  paridtal,  parceque  le  temporal  va  toucher  an 
issas  d’clles,  soit  au  frontal  soit  au  sphenoi'de  antdrieur.  Ainsi  les  paridtaux  sont  des 
f iMS  independantes  du  sphdno’ide  postdrieur,  dcs  pieces  particulieres  qui  out  une  desti- 
■ ition  particuliere,  celle  de  servir  de  bouclicr  a la  partie  moyenne  et  postdrieure  des  hdmi- 
f 'heres,  tout  comme  les  grandes  ailes  ont  celle  de  servir  de  support  aux  lobes  moyens  dans 
* iqnels  ces  hemispheres  se  terminent  vers  le  has.” — 1.  c.  p.  713. 

I.  2 


148 


ON  THE  VERTEBUATE  SKELETON. 


The  new  functions  which  the  uplifted  and  independent  spines  of  the  pari- 
etal and  frontal  vertebrae  perform  in  man  and  many  mammals  are,  with 
respect  to  the  parietal  bones,  to  shield  the  upper  surface  of  the  middle  and 
posterior  parts  of  the  cerebral  hemispheres,  whilst  the  frontal  is  confined  to  ■ 
covering  the  anterior  lobes  of  the  same  hemispheres. 

Hereupon  it  may  be  asked  whether  such  relations  and  offices  are  the  rule 
or  only  the  exception  ; and,  if  the  latter,  whether  it  occurs  in  the  lowest  or 
the  highest  of  the  vertebrate  series  ; whether  in  that  class  where  the  arche- 
typal arrangement  of  parts  is  most,  or  in  that  in  which  it  is  least  departed! 
from?  All  these  considerations  are  felt  to  be  indispensable  by  the  homo- - 


■If 


logist  in  quest  of  the  true  signification  of  the  parts  of  the  animal  frame, 
before  drawing  his  conclusions  from  the  first  modification  that  may  present  i S 
itself.  They  are  neglected  by  Cuvier  in  the  objection  to  the  vertebral  cha- 
racter of  Oken’s  ‘ kiefer-wirbel,’  founded  upon  the  relations  which  the  parietal 
bones  present  to  the  encephalon  in  the  mammalian  class.  Yet  the  more- 
normal  relations  of  those  bones,  both  to  the  encephalon  and  to  the  alisphen- 
oids,  seem  to  have  been  present  to  the  mind  of  Cuvier,  and  to  have  been 
duly  appreciated  by  him  when  he  defined,  in  1817,  the  second  cranial  cinc- 
ture as  constituted  by  the  painetals  and  sphenoid*. 

With  regard  then  to  the  first  of  Cuvier’s  arguments  for  viewing  the  human 
and  mammalian  parietals  as  ‘ des  pieces  particulieres  qui  ont  une  destination: 
particuliere,’  viz.  that  they  are  separated  from  the  alisphenoids  by  the  tem- 
poral bones.  If  we  commence  our  consideration  of  it  by  the  question,  whether 
this  separation  be  the  rule  or  the  exception,  the  reply  which  Nature  sanc- 
tions will  be  that  they  are  not  so  separated  in  any  of  the  three  great  classes  of 
oviparous  vertebrata,  nor  in  the  majority  of  mammalia,  nor  even,  as  a general 
rule,  in  man  himself.  With  regard  to  the  second  objection  founded  on  the 
interposition  of  the  enormously  and  backwardly  developed  prosencephalon 
between  the  mesencephalic  spines  (fig.  25,  t)  and  the  mesencephalic  segment 
of  the  brain,  to  which  the  parietal  vertebra  essentially  relates,— its  value  will 
depend  on  the  choice  made  by  the  homologist  between  the  function  of  the 
parietals  as  immediate  shields  to  the  optic  lobes  (mesencephalon)  in  the  cold- 
blooded classes,  and  their  function  as  mediate  ones  through  the  interposed i 
mass  of  the  hemispheres  (prosencephalon)  in  the  warm-blooded  classes,  as  that, 
which  best  manifests  adhesion  to  the  ideal  archetype.  What  to  me  has  ever- 
appeared  one  of  the  most  beautiful  and  marvellous  instances  of  the  harmony 
and  simplicity  of  means  by  which  the  One  great  Cause  of  all  organization  hat. 
effected  every  requisite  arrangement  under  every  variety  of  development,  is 
the  fact,  that  the  protection  of  the  enormous  cerebrum  peculiar  to  the  highei 
mammals  has  not  been  provided  for  by  new  bones — by  bones,  e.  ff.  developeo 
from  centres  so  numerous  or  so  situated  as  to  render  any  determination  o» 
their  homologies  as  vague  and  unsatisfactory  as  would  result  from  the  attempt: 
to  determine  those  of  the  dermal  ossifications  upon  the  head  of  the  sturgeon 
in  reference  to  the  endoskeletal  epicranial  bones  in  fishes  and  reptiles.  ( 
might  well  have  expected,  had  conformity  to  type  not  been  a recognizabU 
principle  in  the  scheme  of  organized  beings,  to  have  had  so  many  ‘ particulai 
bony  pieces’  and  so  situated  in  the  expanded  human  cranium  as  would  liavi 
baffled  all  our  endeavours  to  reduce  them  to  the  type  of  the  epicranial  bonei 
of  the  reptile  or  fish.  Yet  the  researches  of  the  great  comparative  anatomisw 
of  the  present  century,  and  more  especially  those  of  Cuvier  ffimsf'h 
proved  that  there  is  no  such  difficulty  : and  a glance  at  the  Table  o bpec  a 
Homologies,  No.  1,  will  show  that  the  bones  (s,  z,  ii)  most  modified  in  re 
tion  to  the  expanded  cerebrum  and  cerebellum  of  man  and  mammals  a 

* Regne  Animal,  i.  p.  73. 


GENERAL  HOMOLOGY.  OBJECTIONS  TO  CRANIAL  VERTEBRAS.  149 

• precisely  those  of  which  the  deteriuiiiatioii  has  been  easiest,  and  respecting 
tthe  names  and  nature  of  which  tlierc  has  been  the  least  discrepancy  ol  opi- 
luion.  It  is  with  pain  and  a reluctance,  which  only  tlie  cause  ol  truth  has 
I overcome,  that  I am  compelled  to  notice  the  inconsistencies  bito  which  the 
[.•great  Cuvier  fell,  when  his  judgement  became  warped  by  prejudices  against 
la  theory,  extravagantly  and,  perhaps,  irritatingly,  contended  for  by  a con- 
itemporary  and  rival  anatomist.  After  having  established  by  the  clearest 
i?vidence  and  soundest  reasoning  in  his  great  and  immortal  works  that  the 
>aoues  (7)  in  the  fish  (figs.  2 and  5)  and  reptiles  (figs.  9,  10,  13, 19,  22)  were 
Momologous  with  those  in  birds  (7,  figs.  8 and  23),  mammals  (7,  figs.  12  and 
.24),  and  even  in  man  (7,  figs.  11  and  25);  and,  after  contending  that  they 
jjught  to  bear  the  same  name — under  which,  indeed,  we  find  him  describing 
hem  in  the  ‘ Lemons  d’Anatomie  Comparee  from  man  down  to  the  fish 
.Tuvier  comes  at  last  to  declare  that,  in  those  animals  in  which  they  are 
»eparated  from  the  alisphenoids  and  mesencephalon,  they  are  “'particular 
; lieces  which  have  a particular  destination  !” 

The  relation  of  the  mastoids  (s,  s),  as  parapophyses,  to  the  parietal  or 
iphenoidal  vertebra  not  having  been  detected  in  Cuvier’s  time,  he  supposes 
'hat  the  pterygoids,  in  the  system  which  makes  a vertebra  of  the  sphenoid, 
uan  be  compared  to  nothing  else  than  the  transverse  processes  of  such.  As, 
icccording  to  my  views,  they  are  recognizable  in  General  Homology  as  quite 

I net  elements  of  another  cranial  vertebra,  the  arguments  which  Cuvier 
inces  in  disproof  of  what  he  thought  they  must  be  called,  do  not  concern 
subject  of  the  present  Report.  The  inferior  exogenous  processes,  in- 
1,  of  the  basisphenoid  in  mammals  are  not  unlike  those  developed  from 
under  surface  of  the  centrum  of  the  atlas  in  Sudis  gigas,  or  from  some 
lie  cervical  centrums  in  birds.  The  argument  founded  by  Cuvier  on  the 
igenous  development  of  the  true  pterygoid  (figs.  24  and  25,  24)  would 
;h  little  against  its  parapophysial  nature,  if  other  characters  concurred 
irove  it  a ‘ parapophysis but  its  connections  and  position  show  it  to  be 
liverging  appendage.’ 

fith  respect  to  the  anterior  sphenoid,  Cuvier  affirms  that  its  composition 
dally  different  from  that  of  the  posterior  sphenoid  and  occipital,  and  from 
of  any  vertebra.  By  the  term  ‘ sphenoide  anterieure  ’ is  meant  the 
esced  presphenoid  and  orbitosphenoids  (figs.  24  and  25,  9 and  10)  ; and  the 
bones  referred  to  in  the  comparison  signify,  the  one,  the  basi-  and  ali- 
moids  (li.  5 and  e),  and  the  other  the  basi-  and  ex-occipitals  (ib.  1 and  2). 
h respect  to  the  bone  9 and  10,  Cuvier  remarks  that  it  is  never,  in  mam- 
3,  formed  of  three  pieces,  but  only  of  two  ; and  that  these  are  properly 
rings  for  the  optic  nerves,  which  in  course  of  time  approximate  and  coa- 
e with  each  other:  but  so  long  as  the  median  suture  divides  them,  no 
inct  or  third  bony  nucleus  is  developed  in  the  intervening  cartilage*, 
iijce,  however,  we  see  that  the  homologues  (recognised  as  such  by  Cuvier) 
he  orbitosphenoids  are  something  more  than  rings  surrounding  the  optic 
7es  in  the  bird  ffigs.  8 and  23,  10)  and  crocodile  (figs.  9 and  22,  s) — that 
7 are  merely  notched  by  the  optic  nerves,  and  are  chiefly  developed  in 

“ L’on  a voulu  aussi  considerer  le  sphdnoide  antericur  comme  une  vertebre  dont  les 
laii.v  completeraient  la  partie  annulaire,  et  on  la  position  du  trou  sph^io-orbitaire  entre 
lenx  sphenoides  repondrait  asstri  anx  trous  inter- vertebraiix  ordinaires.  Mais  la  compo- 
n dn  sphenoide  antcrieur  lui-meme  est  toute  differeiite  de  celle  des  deux  os,  dont  nous 
IS  parle  avant  lui,  et  de  celle  d’aueunc  vertebre.  11  n’est  jamais,  dans  les  uuimmiferes, 
16  de  trois  pieces,  mais  seulcment  de  deux  ; cc  sont  proprcrnent  des  anueaux  osseux  pour 
lerfs  optiques,  fpii  par  suite  du  temps  se  rapproebent  et  se  soudeut  entre  eux  ; la  suture 
onjours  an  milieu,  et  tant  que  I’ossirication  n’est  pas  complete,  il  u’y  a entre  les  deux 
;aux  quedu  cartilage,  dans  lequel  il  ne  sc  forme  pas  de  troisieme  noyau.” — 1.  c.  p.  714. 


150 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


Fig.  26. 


neurapophysial  relation  to  the  sides  of  the  prosencephalon,  we  are  led  to 
carry  our  inquiries  into  an  earlier  period  of  their  development  than  that  ad- 
duced by  Cuvier,  as  contravening  their  vertebral  characters.  Cuvier  cites 
the  figure  2,  in  pi.  xxxv.  of  the  ‘ Osteogenia  Fcetuum’  of  Kerkringius,  as  evi- 
deuce  of  his  statement  of  the  developmental  characters  of  the  ‘ sphenoide 
antgrieur.”  That  figure,  however,  exhibits  the  condition  of  the  bone,  when, 
although  the  median  suture  remains,  each  orbital  ala  has  become  anchylosed 
with  the  posterior  sphenoid,  and  is  likewise  directly  perforated  by  the  optic 
nerve.  The  gelatinous  cells  of  the  anterior  extremity  of  the  notochord  very 
early  retrograde  to  the  basioccipital  region  of  the  basis  cranii,  and  the  noto- 
chordal capsule  alone  is  continued  to  the  anterior  extremity  of  the  basis. 
This  is  converted  into  cartilage, 
and  the  osseous  particles  which 
ultimately  constitute  the  anterior 
sphenoid  are  deposited  as  follows : 
first  a centre  or  nucleus  appears, 
in  each  orbital  ala,  external  to  the 
hole  by  which  the  optic  nerve 
passes  through  the  primitive  carti- 
lage (fig.  26,  A,  lo)  ; soon  after  a 
second  nucleus  (ib.  B,  lo)  is  esta- 
blished at  the  inner  or  mesial  side 
of  each  optic  foramen  ; these  cen- 
tres form  the  foundation  of  the 
neurapophyses  or  orbitosphenoids, 
and  ultimately  coalesce  around  the 
optic  nerve,  as  Kerkringius  has 
depicted.  But  a third  pair  of  ossi- 
fic  centres  (ih.  C,  o)  is  established 
behind  the  optic  foramina  between 

these  and  the  baispshenoid  (s).  ...  „ i,„„  nu  D q\ 

This  third  pair  unite  together  into  a single  transverse  ba  ( . » / 

bXe  coaleLing  with  the  orbitosphenoids  in  front,  or  with  the  basisphenoa 
transitorily  represents  tl.^ 

To  the  obiection  that  such  supposed  centrum  is  developed  from  two  poin 
talelP  oTone,  U.e  same  reply  m'Py  be  made  that  was 

obiection  raised  by  Cuvier  against  the  general  homology  o the  basispneno  o 
P^icrobjecu'on,  i was  then®  shown,  wonld  be  eqnally  PS-nsl  the  urn 
versally  admitted  homology  of  the  body  or  centrum  of  the  fas 

The  frontal  neurapophyses  manifest  in  their  developme  , 
centres  fig  26,  B,  C,'^io),  1 transitory  mark  of  vegetative  repetition  anal  ju 
to  that  vvhich  permanently  characterizes  the  neurapophyses  of  the  trunk-ve  - 
br“  I'm  s^  and!  perhaps,  the  frontal  neurapophyses  themselves  . 

the  fishes  with  the  bone  o',  fig.  5,  PI.  I-  , 

Thus  the  evidence  of  development,  when  complete,  te  , 

against  the  serial  homology  of  the  ‘ sphenoide  anterieur  f ® 

centrum  and  the  neurapophyses  of  other  f ^ f , of  their  own  seg 

important  characters  of  relative  position  to  the  othe  proser. 

ment,  and  to  their  homotypes  in  the  contiguous  ’ ^'tfg^aU^serve 

cephalic  segment  and  characteristic  nerves,— which  characters  ^ 
to  determine  the  special  homologies  of  the  coalesced  f ^ characters  i 
from  man  down  to  the  fish,-concur  with  Developmental 
establishing  the  general  homology  of  the  presphenoid  as  centr 
orbitospheLids  as  neurapophyses  of  the  frontal  vertebra. 


Phases  of  development  of  the  nnraan  Sphenoid  bone : 
after  Mcckcl. 


3ENERAL  HOMOLOGY.  OBJECTIONS  TO  CRANIAL  VKRTEBK/E.  151 

Cuvier  affirms,  however,  in  support  of  his  argument,  tliat,  altliough  tlie 
arbitosphenoids  are  never  separated  from  the  frontals,  as  the  alisplienoids  are 
r’rom  the  parietals,  in  the  mammalia,  they  are  almost  always  separated  from 
he  frontals  in  the  other  classes,  so  that  the  vertebral  ring  is  again  inter- 
rupted *.  But,  were  even  the  frontals  commonly  uplifted  above  the  orbito- 
.phenoids  in  birds,  reptiles  and  fishes,  which  does  not  accord  with  my  ex- 
,«?rience,  the  objection,  on  that  score,  to  regarding  them  as  ‘ neural  spines,’ 
1 vould  as  little  apply,  as  it  docs  to  the  universally  recognised  general  homology 
: f the  separated  and  uplifted  neural  arch  of  the  first  vertebra  of  the  trunk 
: f the  Silurus  (PI.  I,  fig.  3),  Ephippus  and  some  other  fishes. 

Cuvier  finally  regards  the  connection  of  the  frontals  with  the  prefrontals, 
t>hich  he  calls  ‘ ethmoid  ’ in  mammals,  ‘ I’enchassement  de  I’ethmoide,’  as  a 
ninction  quite  remote  from  any  of  a vertebral  character,  “ relative  a toute 
..utre  chose.”  This  objection  only  shows  the  necessity  of  a right  apprecia- 
,on  of  special  homologies,  in  order  to  form  a true  judgement  respecting 
leneral  homology  ; and,  with  respect  to  the  ‘ ethmo'ide,’  I must  refer  to  the 
^HJtion  on  the  prefrontals  in  the  chapter  on  ‘ Special  Homology  (p.  46).  If 
1 le  arguments  there  adduced  be  held  to  prove  the  crista  galli  and  cribriform 
Liate  in  the  human  skull  to  be  the  homologues  of  portions  of  the  coalesced 
rrefrontals  and  olfactory  capsules,  we  may  next  remark  that  these  portions 
rce  not  merely  wedged  between  the  orbital  plates  of  the  frontal,  but  articu- 
>:te  behind  by  a persistent  suture  with  the  orbitosphenoids.  As  neurapo- 
nyses,  the  coalesced  prefrontals  of  the  terminal  vertebra  of  the  skull  thus 
"•ticulate  with  their  next  succeeding  homotypes ; and,  by  virtue  of  the  ex- 
sssive  development  of  the  spine  of  the  frontal  vertebra,  as  well  as  from  their 
ijing  contracted  and  drawn  backward  in  the  human  skull,  they  articulate 
;ith  such  spine  (the  frontal)  as  well  as  with  that  of  their  own  proper  seg- 
tent  (the  nasals).  But,  in  the  crocodile  (fig.  9),  we  have  seen  a similar 
'Jation  manifested  not  only  by  the  more  normal  neurapophyses  (14)  of  the 
ssal  vertebra,  but  likewise  by  those  (10)  of  the  frontal,  those  (0)  of  the 
•irietal,  and  those  (2)  of  the  occipital  vertebra. 

■ All  the  objections  raised  by  Cuvier  to  the  general  homology  of  the  cranial 
anes  as  modified  vertebral  elements,  equally  apply  to  elements  of  vertebrae 
the  trunk,  which  Cuvier  himself  has  admitted  to  be  vertebrae,  notwith- 
Linding  such  modifications.  The  repetition  of  the  perforated  character  of 
ee  human  alisphenoid  and  orbitosphenoid  in  the  neurapophyses  of  the  trunk- 
'rtebrae  of  many  inferior  animals,  requires  only  a passing  notice.  The 
Utening,  expansion  and  sutural  union  of  the  human  supraoccipital,  parietal 
>id  frontal  bones,  are  matched  by  the  neural  spines  in  the  carapace  of  the 
trtoise.  If  the  basioccipital,  basisphenoid  and  presphenoid  are  broad  and  flat, 
utead  of  cylindrical,  so  likewise  are  the  bodies  of  the  sacral  vertebrae  in  the 
•oad-bodied  megatherioids  and  in  many  birds.  If  the  basioccipital  and 
nisisphenoid  are  lengthened  out  and  firmly  united  together  by  deeply  in- 
nted  sutural  surfaces  in  most  fishes,  so  likewise  are  the  bodies  of  the  four 
tenor  vertebrae  of  the  trunk  in  the  pipe-fish  {Fistularia,  PI.  I.,  fig.  6).  If 
5 basisphenoid  and  presphenoid  be  developed  each  from  two  ossific  centres, 
in  man,  so  likewise  may  the  body  of  the  human  atlas  be  ossified  ; and  even 
Juld  the  moieties  of  that  centrum  not  coalesce  at  the  median  plane,  they 

‘ “Ce  qne  j’ai  dit  des  parietaux  s’applique  aux  frontaux,  coiisiddros  comme  complements  du 
• iCToide  antmeur ; leur  fonction  est  relative  a toute  autre  chose,  a la  protection  des  lolies 
■eneurs  dn  cerveau  et  a I’enchassement  de  I’ethmoide ; et  quoiipie  le  sphenoidc  aiitericur 
n soit  jamais  separe  dans  lea  mammiferes  comme  le  jmsterieur  Test  souvent  des  parietaux, 

I -Mt  presque  toujours  dans  les  autres  classes,  cn  sorte  qii’alors  I’anneau  vertehral  serait 
► SI  intenompii." — /.  e.  p.  71 1. 


152 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


would  nevertheless  still  retain  their  essential  characters  as  divisions  of  a single  ■ 
vertebral  element : just  as  does  the  vomer  in  the  salamanders,  salamandroid  1 
fishes  and  serpents,  which  begins  to  be  developed  from  two  lateral  points, 
like  the  body  of  the  human  atlas  occasionally,  without  the  development  end- 
ing, as  it  always  does  in  such  atlas,  by  confluence  of  the  resulting  halves.  It 
would  be  more  reasonable  to  repudiate  the  general  homology  of  the  body  of 
a whale’s  dorsal  vertebra  with  the  centrum  of  the  typical  vertebra,  because 
it  consists  of  three  pieces  set  end  to  end,  than  to  deny  the  general  homology, 
of  the  vomer  because  it  may  consist  of  two  pieces  set  side  by  side,  or  that 
of  the  anterior  trunk-vertebrae  of  the  silurus  because  they  consist  of  two^ 
pieces  set  one  upon  the  other  (PI.  L,  fig.  3,  ca,  c a,  ex,  &c.).  These  are  ex- 
amples of  a principle  of  variation  which  Cuvier  never  permitted  to  blind  his 
perception  of  the  special  homology  of  certain  bones,  the  mandibular  ramus,, 
for  example  ; though  vegetative  or  teleological  subdivision  is  carried  out  to 
a much  greater  extreme  there  than  in  any  vertebral  centrum  ; unless,  indeed, 
the  number  of  points  from  which  the  whale’s  vomer  be  ossified  may  equal 
those  in  the  crocodile’s  lower  jaw.  But  if  the  differences  in  this  develop- 
mental character,  viz.  of  ossification  from  a single  ossific  point  as  in  the  vomei 
of  the  cod,  or  from  two  points  as  in  that  of  the  lepidosteus,  or  from  three  oi 
more  points  as  in  the  human  vomer,  interpose  no  obstacle  to  the  determinatior 
of  the  special  homology  of  the  bone  i3  from  man  to  fish,  it  can  as  little  avai. 
as  an  argument  against  its  general  homology,  which  is  determined  not  by  the 
development  of  the  vomer  but  by  its  relations  to  the  other  constituents  of  the 
segment  of  the  skeleton  to  which  it  naturally  belongs. 

The  great  difficulty  which  the  anthropotomist  may  naturally  experience  ir 
forming  an  idea  of  the  vomer  as  the  body  of  a vertebra,  will  arise  from  iti 
extremely  modified  form  in  the  human  subject:  but  he  must  bear  m imiK 
that  it  is  an  extreme  part,  the  last  of  its  series  counted  forwards  ; and  if  h< 
should  desire  some  higher  and  better  established  authority  than  the  preseni 
Work  before  yielding  assent  to  the  vertebral  character  of  the  bone,  undo 
its  characteristic  ‘ ploughshare  ’ mask  in  man,  I know  no  name  more  influen* 
tial  than  that  of  Cuvier  himself,  in  regard  to  the  equally  and  similarly  modi 
tied  centrum  at  the  opposite  end  of  the  vertebral  series  in  the  bird,  to 
althoii'^h  the  mask  of  coalescence  is  superadded  to  that  of  strangeness  o 
shape  fn  the  bone  which  Cuvier  there  compares  to  a ploughshare  [vomer,  o 
‘soc  de  charrue’],  the  great  anatomist  and  cautious  generahzer  does  not  liesi 
tate  to  aflflrm  that  it  is  “ composed  of  many  vertebrae  (see  ante,  p.  J5> 


ite  to  amrm  uiai,  n,  j n ,11  p 

It  may,  perhaps,  be  said  that  the  coccygeal  vomer  must  be,  vertebral  m it 

nature  because  it  is  situated  in  the  tail;  but  the  ‘ petitio  principii  m thi 


nature  oecause  11.  IS  Bii-uaiLu  i ‘ 

argument  will  be  transparent,  if  we  transpose  the  locality,  and  say  that  th. 
crLial  vomer  must  be  vertebral  in  its  nature  because  it  is  placed  m th* 
head.’  For  what  are  ‘ head,’  ‘ tail,’  ‘ thorax,’  or  ‘ pelvis,  but  so  ™any  di 
versely  modified  portions  of  a great  segmental  whole  ? These  localities  do  n 
determine  the  nature  of  the  segments  composing  them  ; 
only  be  acquired  by  a study  of  the  composition  of  the  segments  ; and  it  is  t 
raoLcatio^ns  of  the  segments  that  determine  the  nature  of  the  l^alities 
divisions  of  the  endoskeleton,  to  which  such  special  names  as  head, 

Yef  CuvTer  Wmself,  perhaps,  little  suspected  how  much  his  i^^s  of  th 
essential  nature  of  a segment  of  the  endoskeleton  were  governed  by  the  pa 
of  the  body  in  which  it  happened  to  be  placed.  Whenever  the 
toraist  finds  a difficulty  from  the  peculiar  form  or 
or  coalescence,  of  a cranial  bone,  in  recognising  or  admitting  its  ^elt 


3ENERAL  HOMOLOGY.  OBJECTIONS 


TO  CU.VNIAL  VEBTEBRAi.  153 


character,  let  him  compare  the  results  of  his  own  observations  with  those 
iummecl  up  in  pp.  96-101,  ami  see  whetlier  the  same  kind  of  modification 
nay  not  be  repeated  in  the  homologous  element  ol  a vertebra  of  the  trunk 
n one  or  other  of  the  species  of  vertebrate  animals. 

The  latest  direct  objection  to  the  cranio-vertebral  system  is  from  the  pen 
if  the  celebrated  iehthyotomist  of  Neuchatel.  M.  Agassiz  represents  the 
mrrent  ideas  respecting  this  system  at  the  period  wlien  he  published  his 
objections  to  it,  in  the  following  graphic  passage  of  his  invaluable  and 
splendid  work: — “ It  was  M.  Oken  who  had  printed  the  first  programme  on 
she  signification  of  the  bones  of  the  skull.  The  new  doctrine  which  he  set  forth 
vas  received  with  extreme  enthusiasm  in  Germany  by  the  school  of  Natu- 
•alists  called  ‘ Natur-philosopher.’  The  author  at  that  time  required  three 
srauial  vertebrae,  and  the  basioccipital,  the  sphenoid  and  the  ethmoid  were 
viewed  as  the  central  parts  of  these  cranial  vertebrae.  Upon  these  pretended 
lodies  of  vertebrae  were  raised  the  arches  enveloping  the  central  parts  of  the 
lervous  system  (our  ‘protective  plates’)  ; whilst  to  the  opposite  side  were  at- 
ached  the  inferior  pieces  which  should  form  the  vegetative  arch  destined  to 
•nibrace  the  intestinal  canal  and  the  great  vessel  (the  ‘ facial  arches  ’ of  which 
ve  shall  presently  speak).  It  would  be  tedious  to  enumerate  here  the  changes 
vhich  each  author  has  rung  upon  this  theme  in  modifying  it  agreeably  with 
lis  notions.  These  contented  themselves  with  the  number  admitted  by  Oken; 
ihose  raised  the  number  of  cranial  vertebrae  to  four,  six,  seven,  or  even  more  : 
ome  saw  nothing  but  ribs  in  the  branchial  arches  and  jaws;  others  took  the 
iatter  for  limbs  of  the  head,  analogous  to  arms  and  legs.  If  they  could  not 
jree  about  the  number  of  the  vertebrae,  still  less  were  they  at  one  in  regard 
o the  part  assigned  to  each  bone.  The  most  bizarre  nomenclatures  have 
-jeen  proposed  by  different  authors  who  thus  sought  to  generalize  their 
'deas.  Some  have  gone  so  far  as  to  pretend  that  the  vertebrae  of  the  head 
cere  as  complete  as  the  vertebrae  of  the  trunk,  and  by  means  of  dismember- 
aents,  with  divers  separations  and  combinations  they  have  reduced  all  the 
'.onns  of  skull  to  vertebrae,  assuming  that  the  number  of  pieces  was  in- 
lariable  for  every  form  of  skull,  and  that  all  vertebrate  animals,  whatever 
leir  definitive  organization,  bore,  in  their  respective  crania,  the  same  number 
;f  points  of  ossification 

And  thus  it  is  that  a great  truth  in  nature  has  been  endeavoured,  and 


♦ “ C’est  M.  Oken  qui  fit  imprimer  le  premier  programme  sur  la  signification  des  os  du 
ne.  La  nouvelle  doctrine  qu’il  exposait  fut  accueillie  en  Allemagne  avec  un  enthousiasme 
txtreme  par  I’ecole  des  philosophes  de  la  nature.  L’auteur  postulait  alors  trois  vertebres 
;n  crane,  et  I’occipital  basilaire,  le  spbenoide  et  I'ethmoide  etaient  envisages  comme  les 
lies  centrales  de  ces  vertebres  craniennes.  Sur  ces  pretendus  corps  de  vertebres  s’elevaient 
es  arcs  enveloppant  les  parties  centrales  du  systeme  nerveux  (nos  plaques  protectrices) ; 
indis  que  du  cote  oppose  etaient  attachees  des  pieces  inferieures  qui  devaient  former  I’arc 
igetatif  destine  a embrasser  le  canal  intestinal  et  les  gros  vaisseaux  (les  arcs  de  la  face  dont 
003  traiterons  plus  tard).  11  serait  trop  long  d’enumerer  ici  les  changements  que  chaque 
ntenr  apporta  a ce  travail  en  le  modifiant  a sa  maniere.  Les  uns  se  contenterent  du  nombre 
As  par  Oken,  les  autres  eleverent  le  nombre  des  vertebres  craniennes  jusqu’a  quatre,  six, 
jpt  et  meme  plus  ; les  uns  voulurent  voir  des  cotes  dans  les  arcs  branebiaux  et  les  machoires  ; 
s autres  prirent  ces  dernieres  pour  des  membres  de  la  tete,  analogues  aux  bras  et  aux 
imbes.  Si  Ton  n’^tait  pas  d’accord  sur  le  nombre  des  vertebres  on  I’etait  encore  nioins  sur 
' role  qn’on  assignait  a chaque  os.  Les  nomenclatures  les  plus  bizarres  ont  dte  proposees 
ar  les  difFerens  auteurs,  qui  cherchaient  ainsi  a generaliser  leurs  idees.  On  alia  jusqu’ii 
retendre  que  les  vertebres  de  la  tete  etaient  au.ssi  completes  que  les  vertebres  du  tronc,  et 
1 moyen  de  demembremens,  de  separations  ct  de  combinaisons  diverses,  on  ramena  toutes 
8 formes  du  crane  a des  vertebres,  en  admettant  que  le  nombre  des  pieces  etait  invariablc- 
lent  fixd  pour  tontes  les  tetes;  et  que  tons  les  vertebres,  quelle  que  soit  d’ailleurs  lour 
.rganisation  definitive,  portaient  dans  leur  tete  le  meme  nombre  de  points  d'ossifications.” 
-Recherches  sur  les  Poissons  FossUes,  f.  i.  (1813),  p.  125. 


154 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


too  successfully  in  regard  to  the  rising  generation  of  anatomists,  to  be 
obscured.  Ideas  and  statements  are  misquoted,  unintentionally,  doubtless, 
and  through  neglect  of  reference  to  the  original  work  (as  in  the  citation  ofi  - 
the  bones  representing  the  bodies  of  the  cranial  vertebrae  in  the  Okenian  t • 
theory) ; or  they  are  misunderstood  (as  where  the  arches,  neurapophyses  or  r ‘ 

‘ bogentheile,’  composed  as  Oken  truly  said  by  the  alisphenoids  and  orbito-- 
sphenoids  are  held  to  be  synonymous  with  the  ‘ plaques  protectrices  ’ of  M.  > 
Vogt)  : the  most  extreme  and  least  defensible  views  are  selected  out  of  each  i ► 
tentative  step  in  the  inquiry,  and  are  clubbed  together  to  represent  the 
general  result,  which  is  of  course  dismissed  with  as  sweeping  a condemnation,  t 
The  specific  objections  raised  by  Cuvier  are  deemed  well-founded  and  un-- 
assailable ; and  to  these  M.  Agassiz  adds  the  following.  Assuming  that,  i 
“ the  formation  of  vertebrae  presupposes  as  a first  condition  the  existence  f' 
of  a notochord*;”  and,  arguing  upon  this  basis,  and  with  a belief  that  the  ii- 
cephalic  extension  of  the  ‘ chorda  dorsalis’  as  it  is  permanently  manifested; 
in  the  Branchiostoma  is  not  so  great  in  the  embryos  of  other  and  higher  i 
fishes,  but  is  arrested  at  the  region  of  the  alisphenoid  from  the  commence-- 
ment  of  its  development,  M.  Agassiz  concludes : — “ Now,  the  application  of 
this  principle  to  the  composition  of  the  skull  demonstrates  at  once  that  there: 
exists  hut  one  cranial  vertebra,  the  occipital  vertebra,  and  that  the  rest  of 
the  skull  is  foreign  to  the  vertebral  system f.” 

At  the  period  of  development  described  and  figured  by  M.  Vogt  in  the  em- 
bryo of  the  Coregonus,  which  period  M.  Agassiz  conceives  to  represent  theveiyi 
earliest  condition  of  the  anterior  extremity  of  the  notochord,  the  pointed  ex- 
tremity of  the  gelatinous  central  cells  of  this  part  terminates  at  the  posterior 
boundary  of  the  hypophysial  space:  but  the  peripheral  capsule  of  the  notochord 
extends  over  that  space  and  forwards  to  the  obtuse  anterior  extremity  of  the. 
embryonal  ‘ basis  cranii  and  it  is  in  the  expanded  aponeurosis,  directly  con- 
tinued from  the  chorda  along  the  basis  cranii,  that  the  thin  stratum  of  carti- 
lage cells  are  developed,  arching  along  the  sides  of  the  hypophysial  space, 
from  which  the  ossification  of  the  basisphenoid,  presphenoid  and  vomer 
proceeds  %. 

The  superaddition  or  the  later  continuation  of  the  cylindrical  gelatinous 
‘chorda’  in  the  aponeurotic  basis  of  the  cartilaginous  and  osseous  growths  of 
the  vertebral  centres  in  the  trunk,  seems  to  relate  chiefly  to  their  more  or 
less  cylindrical  form  in  that  region  : the  notochord  regulates,  as  a mould,  the 
course  of  ossification,  disappearing  by  absorption  as  the  bony  lamellae  of  the 
vertebral  bodies  encroach  upon  it  in  their  centripetal  progress:  the  notochord 
plays  an  important  part  also  in  the  establishment  of  the  elastic  jelly-filled 
capsular  joints  in  the  back-bone  of  fishes ; and  therefore  it  might  well  be 
dispensed  with,  or  be  early  and  rapidly  removed,  in  the  development  of  the 
flattened,  expanded  and  anchylosed  or  immoveably  articulated  bodies  of  the 
cranial  vertebrae.  And,  besides,  the  notochord  is  immediately  concerned  in 
the  development  of  only  one  of  the  elements  of  the  typical  segment  of  the 
endoskeleton.  It  is  obviously,  therefore,  an  unwarrantable  and  erroneous 
application  of  a developmental  character,  to  conclude,  from  a modifica- 
tion of  this  one  character  in  respect  of  a single  element,  the  ‘ centrum,  that 
every  other  character  establishing  the  general  homology  of  such  element,  as 

* “ La  formation  des  vertebres  suppose,  comme  premiere  condition,  I’existence  d’une 
‘ corde  dorsale.’”— 0>).  cit.  tom.  i.  p.  127,  livr.  xviii.  (1843.)  ^ 

-f-  “ Or,  I’application  de  ce  principe  a la  composition  de  la  tete  nous  montre  d entree  qu  ■ 
n’existe  qu’une  seule  vertihre  crdnienne,  la  vertibre  occijjitale,  et  que  le  reste  de  la  tete  es 
etranger  au  systeme  vertebrate.” — Ib.  p.  127. 

i Hunterian  Lectures  on  Vertebrata,  1846,  p.  71.  ( 


JENERAL  UOMOLOGY.  OBJECTIONS  TO  CRANIAL  VERTEBRAE.  155 

t'ell  as  everj'  character  determining  that  of  the  surrounding  vertebral  elements, 
re  to  be  nullitied  and  set  aside  I M.  Agassiz,  moreover,  seems  not  to  liave 
1 ispected  that  the  notochord  may  have  other  and  more  immediate  and  iinport- 
nt  functions  than  even  those  relating  to  the  vertebral  column.  The  peculiar 
elective  attraction  of  its  component  cells  for  the  gelatinous  principle  maybe  es- 
;:?ntial  to  the  due  operation  of  those  neighbouring  cells  which  form  the  basis  of 
: le  neural  axis,  and  which  as  exclusively  assimilate  the  albuminous  principle  : 
i;nd  this  reciprocal  antagonism  in  the  selection  of  particular  proximate  prin- 
mples  from  the  common  primitive  blastema  may  explain  the  contemporaneous 
rrigin  of  notochord  and  myelon  in  the  embryonic  trace,  when  all  development 
as  yet  the  work  of  cell-assimilation  and  metamorphosis,  without  any  supply 
fom  a vascular  system,  this  being  a later  formation  in  the  building  up  of  the 
n^anic  machinery.  By  confining,  however,  his  views  of  the  notochord  to  one 
tf  its  functions  in  relation  to  a single  vertebral  element,  and  by  extending  his 
I'onclusions  from  this  to  the  entire  vertebra,  M.  Agassiz,  though  recognising 
.lore  absolutely  than  Cuvier,  the  vertebral  character  of  the  neural  arch  of 
Me  occipital  segment,  concludes  that  Nature  discards  that  type  in  the  con- 
.'jrmation  of  the  bony  cinctures  that  precede  it  and  which  successively  girt 
Me  mesencephalon,  prosencephalon  and  rhinencephalon. 

Premising  a gratuitous  explanation  of  the  hypothetical  absence  of  the  bodies 
ff  the  cranial  vertebrae  (Poissons  Fossiles,  t.  i.  p.  128),  M.  Agassiz  asks, 

. Ainsi,  que  seraient  dans  cette  hypothese,  le  sphenoide  principal,  les  grandes 
i.iles  du  sphenoide,  et  I’ethmoide,  qui  forment  pourtant  le  plancher  de  la 
irvite  cerebrale  ? — Des  apophyses  ? — Mais,  les  apophyses  ne  protegent  les 
centres  nerveux  que  du  cote  et  d’en  haut  ? — Des  corps  des  vertebres  ? — • 
llais  ils  se  sont  formes  sans  le  concours  de  la  corde  dorsale ; ils  ne  peuvent 
oonc  pas  etre  des  corps  des  vertebres.”  (/A.  p.  129.)  To  this  it  may  be 
:3pbed,  first  that  the  bodies  of  the  cranial  vertebrae  are  not  absent ; they 
?re  represented,  as  above  explained,  by  their  cortical  portions  in  the  vomer 
liag.  5,  u),  presphenoid  {ib.  9)  and  basisphenoid  (ib.  5),  and  by  both  cortical 
cad  central  portions  in  the  basioccipital  {ib.  1)  : nay,  the  central  part  of  the 
C’jdy  of  the  frontal  vertebra  is  represented  in  some  fishes  by  the  entosphenoid 
lib.  s'),  which  remains  distinct  from  the  cortical  part  below,  as  does  the  central 
lart  of  the  body  of  the  atlas  in  the  siluroid  fish.  If  it  were  true,  indeed, 
uat  the  entosphenoid  was  pierced  by  the  canals  transmitting  the  olfac- 
irry  nerves*,  Bojanus’  idea  of  its  general  homology  as  the  centrum  of  the 
f'^ertebra  optica’  must  be  abandoned.  But  the  parts  called  ‘olfactory 
serves  ’ by  M.  Agassiz,  pass  from  the  prosencephalic  to  the  rhinencephalic 
•ompartments  of  the  cranium  not  merely  above  the  bone  called  ‘ cranial 
Uimoid  ’ by  the  same  author,  but,  also,  through  the  upper  part  of  the  inter- 
wace  between  the  bones  (orbitosphenoids)  which  the  entosphenoid  (9') 
i^stains:and  the  true  olfactory  nerves  perforate  the  neurapophyses  (14) 
thich  Bojanus  called  ‘ ethmoid  ’ and  which  Cuvier  and  M.  Agassiz  have 
rrmed  ‘ frontaux  anterieurs’  (see  an(e,  pp.  46-58).  The  alisphenoids,  being 
•itched  or  perforated  by  their  proper  intervertebral  nerves,  are  ‘ apophyses’ 
i -eurapophyses),  and  accordingly  do  protect  the  sides  of  their  proper  nervous 
■ ntre,  the  mesencephalon.  The  central  jelly-cells  of  the  notochord  appear  to 
withdrawn  into  the  occipital  region  before  ossification  of  the  basisphenoid 
mmences,  and  that  modified  vertebral  body  is  therefore  developed  at  the 
'pense  of  the  fibrous  sheath  of  the  notochord,  and  is  represented  by  its 
t lortical  part  only.  But  its  general  homology  is  determined  by  its  con- 

M.  Agavsiz  has  (lescriberl  this  bone  under  the  name  of  ‘ etlimoide  cranien  ’ as  “ un  os 
■psir,  conrt,  de  forme  pres<|ne  carr^  dans  leqiiel  sont  perc^  les  canaux  servant  aux  nerfs 
lactiis.  — Recherches  surles  Poissons  Fossiles,  l.  i.  p.  120. 


156 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


- 


nections  with  the  basioccipital  (admitted  by  Agassiz  to  be  a vertebral  body) 
behind,  and  with  the  alisphenoids  above. 

In  many  fishes  the  basisphenoid  unites  with  the  basioccipital  by  a deeply  ■ 
indented  sutural  surface,  like  that  which  unites  together  the  elongated  bodies^  - 
of  the  anterior  trunk-vertebrae  in  the  Fistularia.  In  mammals  the  basioc-' 
cipital  and  basisphenoid  join  each  other  by  flat  surfaces,  also  like  the  bodies  ^ 
of  the  trunk-vertebrae,  until  the  period  when,  in  most  of  the  class,  the  * 
joint  is  obliterated  by  anchylosis.  These  and  similar  repetitions  of  class-t  ^ 
characters  of  vertebral  elements  in  the  regions  of  the  head  and  trunk  are  not. 
so  wholly  devoid  of  signification,  as  they  must  seem  to  be  to  the  opponents 
of  the  cranio-vertebral  theory. 

In  his  new  and  elaborate  classification  of  the  bones  of  the  skull  of  fishes,- 
M.  Agassiz  divides  them  primarily,  like  Cuvier,  into  bones  of  the  cranium^  k' 
or  ‘ box  which  envelopes  the  brain  and  the  organs  of  sense  ’ : and  into  bones 
of  iheface,  ‘which  is  composed  of  the  moveable  pieces  subservient  to  nutrition 
and  respiration’  (1.  c.  p.  110). 

This  division  is  open  to  the  objection  that  the  bony  or  cartilaginous  cap- 
sules which  immediately  envelope  the  organs  of  sense  are  always  originally, 
and  most  of  them  permanently,  separate  from  the  box  or  capsule  that  enve- 
lopes the  brain.  The  independent  character  of  the  ear-capsules,  for  example, 
is  manifest  on  their  first  appearance  in  the  ammocete ; and,  although  they 
subsequently  lose  their  distinctive  features  by  the  accumulation  of  cartilage- 
cells  around  them  in  which  the  foundations  of  the  neurapophyses  and  parapo- 
physes,  contributing  to  the  otocrane,  are  laid,  one  centre  of  ossification  is 
commonly  established,  even  in  fishes,  in  special  relation  to  the  immediate 
protection  of  the  vascular  and  nervous  parts  of  the  labyrinth. 

As  to  the  proper  bony  envelope  of  the  eye,  M.  Agassiz  does  not  enumerate- 
it  amongst  the  cranial  bones  of  fishes  : but  admits  into  that  series  only  the 
accessory  protecting  pieces  which  form  the  orbit ; or  rather  only  those  thatjL 
at  the  same  time  form  the  brain-case  : for,  the  suborbitals,  the  entopterygoidsij 
and  palatines  are  placed  amongst  the  ‘facial’  bones  : whilst  the  supraorbi- 
tals  are  transferred  to  another  category  of  osseous  pieces,  the  natural  system 
here  prevailing  over  the  artificial  one. 

Subjoined  • is  an  outline  of  the  arrangement  of  the  two  primary  classes  ol 
‘cranial  ’ and  ‘facial’  bones,  founded  upon  the  embryological  researches  of 

* CRANIAL  BONES.  (OS  CRANIENS.)  t 

A.  EMBRYONIC  BASIS  {‘BASE  EMBRYONALE,’  Vogt). 

a.  Nuchal  plate  {‘Plague  nuchale,’  V.).  Basioccipital,  Exoccipitals,  Paroccipitals. 

Supraoccipital,  Petrosals. 

b.  Lateral  loops  {‘ ^nses  laterales,’ Y.)p  Alisphenoids,  Orbitosplienoids. 

c.  Facial  plate  (‘  Plague  faciale,’  V.).  Entosphenoid  (I’ethmoide  cranien,  Ag.). 

B.  PROTECTIPE  PLATES  {‘PLAQUES  PROTECTRICES,’  V.). 

a.  Superior  plates.  Parietals,  Frontals,  Nasals. 

b.  Lateral  plates.  Prefrontals,  Postfrontals,  Mastoids  (temporaux,  Ag.).  | 

c.  Inferior  plates  (‘  Plaque  buccale,’  V.).  Basi-  pre-  sphenoid,  Vomer. 


FACIAL  BONES.  (OS  DE  LA  FACE.) 

I.  Maxillary  arch.  Suhorhitals  (jugaux,  Ag.),  Maxillary,  Premaxillary. 

II.  Palatine  arch.  Palatines,  Entopterygoids,  Pterygoids  (transverses,  Ag.). 

III.  Mandibular  arch.  Pretympanics  (‘  caisses,’  Ag.),  Mesotympanics  ('  tympano-mai- 

leaux,’  Ag.),  Hypotympanics  (‘  os  carres,’  Ag.),  Mandible.  o.  , , i.  nw, 

IV.  Hyoidean  arch.  Epitympaiiics  (‘ mastoidiens,’ Ag.),  Preoperculars,  Stylohyals,  isp  I 

hyals,  Ceratohyals,  Basihyals  (‘ I’os  lingual,’ Ag.). 

V.  VI.  VII.  VIII.  Branchial  arches.  ‘ Composes  chacun  de  deux  ou  trois  pieces  et  reui 

sous  le  gorge  par  le  corps  de  I’hybide.’  ^ r,  ..n  i i. 

IX.  Pharyngeal  arch.  ‘ Compose  d’une  ou  de  plusieurs  pieces,  &c.  Op.  cti.  • 
pp.  124,  130. 


JENERAL  HOMOLOGY.  OBJECTIONS  TO  CRANIAL  VERTEBRAE.  157 


iM.  Vo<^t.  With  regard  to  the  series  of  nine  arches  into  whicli  the  facial 
Mones  are  distributed,  it  may  be  remarked  that  the  independence  of  the  maxil- 
arv  from  the  palatine,  which  is  more  apparent  than  real  in  tlie  osseous  fishes, 
leases  to  be  manifested  in  any  degree  in  the  plagiostomes  and  lepidosiren  : 
bhat  the  first  and  second  arches  are  sus])ended  by  their  crowns  with  their 
launches  projecting  freely  outwards,  wliilst  the  third  and  fourth  arches  are 
1 uspended,  in  the  revei’se  position,  viz.  inverted,  with  the  crowns  or  key-stones 
ownwards : the  four  next  arches  are  rather  complete  cinctures,  their  sum- 
aits  meeting  and  being  loosely  suspended  to  tlie  basis  cranii,  or,  in  pla- 
iostomes  and  cyclostomes,  to  the  under  part  of  the  vertebral  column  of  the 
mink.  Although  professing  to  base  his  classification  upon  developmental 
rharacters,  M.  Agassiz  owns  with  regard  to  the  posterior  branches  of  the 
uaxillary  arch,  e.  g.  the  suborbitals,  “ that  they  ajjpear  to  be  rather  formed 
ly  the  dermal  sj-stem.”  And  this  is  unquestionably  true  : whilst  the  pala- 
iines,  which  are  the  true  piers  of  the  arch,  are  developed  from  the  blastema 
if  the  same  visceral  arch  as  the  maxillaries  and  premaxillaries. 

The  error  in  regard  to  the  special  homology  of  the  suborbital  bones,  deter- 
mined by  M.  Agassiz  as  the  malars,  and  which  is  so  clearly  exposed  by  the 
::ructure  of  the  skull  of  the  Psittacidce  {ante,  p.  41),  has  misled  him  in  re- 
)oect  to  the  natural  and  typical  constitution  of  the  maxillary  arch. 

The  mistake  in  reference  to  the  special  homology  of  the  epitympanic  {isa'), 
e’termined  by  M.  Agassiz  as  the  ‘ mastoid,’  has,  in  like  manner,  influenced 
turn  in  dissociating  it  from  the  other  dismemberments  of  the  tympanic  pedicle, 
md  referring  it  to  a different  arch. 

With  regard  to  the  hyoid  and  branchial  arches,  it  will  be  observed  that 
II.  Agassiz  makes  no  distinction  between  the  systems  of  the  neuro-  and 
blanchno-skeleton.  An  arch  constant  and  ossified  in  all  vertebrates  where 
i-.e  rest  of  the  endoskeleton  is  ossified,  and  which,  even  admitting  M.  Agassiz’ 
leecial  homology  of  the  preopercular  as  the  styloid  process  of  the  temporal, 
oould  still  be  suspended  in  the  inverted  position,  like  a true  haemal  arch,  is 
laced  in  the  same  category  as  the  branchial  girdles,  which  are  often  cartila- 
nnous  when  the  hyoid  is  osseous,  in  bony  fishes ; and  which  disappear,  in  the 
eetamorphosis  of  the  tadpole,  with  the  evanescent  respiratory  viscera  for 
re  support  of  which  they  are  exclusively  developed. 

The  constitution  of  a distinct  9th  facial  arch  for  the  posterior  pair  of  bran- 
ii.ial  girdles,  which  retain  their  gills  in  lepidosiren,  though  modified  in  sub- 
rrvience  to  mastication  in  most  osseous  fishes,  appears  to  be  giving  undue 
ipportance  to  an  artificial  or  adaptive  character.  Finally,  the  natural  coll- 
ections of  the  scapulo-coracoid  arch  in  osseous  fishes  are  totally  disregarded, 
<:d  it  is  left  out  of  the  enumeration  of  the  bones  of  the  head. 

IThe  unbiassed  anatomist  may  find  an  element  for  judging  of  the  natural 
laracter  of  the  cranio-vertebral  system  propounded  in  the  present  Report, 
contrasting  the  classification  of  the  bones  of  the  fish’s  skull  to  which  it 
kjIs,  with  that  proposed  by  I\I.  Agassiz,  and  with  nature*. 

IHaving  thus  responded  to  the  objections  advanced  by  Cuvier  and  M. 
r^assiz  to  the  interpretations  of  the  segmental  constitution  of  the  bones  of 
head  which  were  open  to  the  criticism  of  those  great  authorities  in 
•atomy,  I proceed  briefly  to  explain  the  segmental  constitution  of  the  bones 

V ' I am  bound  here  to  say  that  in  the  discussion  of  the  subject  of  this  Report  with  M. 
'•‘assiz,  which,  amongst  other  advantages  of  the  meetings  of  the  British  Association,  I en- 
wed  at  Southampton,  he  admitted,  with  his  characteristic  frankness,  tliat  some  points  of 
B ' classification  of  the  hones  of  the  head  in  fishes  would  rerpure  reconsideration.  One  of 
H eminent  physiologists  who  was  present  at  the  debate  wliich  followed  the  rending  of  the 
B-iort,  ha.s  recorded  the  impression  it  produced  upon  him  in  a review  of  my  ‘ Hunterian 
B'Aures  on  Vertebrata’  in  'The  British  and  Foreign  Medical  Review,’  No.  xlvi.  p.  4'JO. 


15S 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


of  the  trunk  of  the  human  subject  according  to  the  archetypal  vertebra  will  „ 
which  the  segments  in  the  head  have  been  illustrated. 

The  first  seven  segments  of  the  trunk  consist  each  of  centrum  (fig.  25,  c)  ' 
neurapophyses(«),  neuralspine  (s),  and  rudimental  pleurapophyses(p/),whicl 
coalesce,  in  each  segment,  into  one  bone,  called  ‘ cervical  vertebra’  in  anthro 
potomy.  If  the  haemapophyses  (52)  have  the  same  relation  to  their  centrun  ,, 
which  those  of  the  seventh  dorsal  vertebra,  in  the  Ciconia  Argala,  more  ob 
viously  bear  to  theirs, — that  is,  being  attached  below  and  disunited  at  their  uppe< 
ends  from  their  pleurapophyses,  which  are  short,  stunted  and  anchylosed  tothf  ' 
centrum,— and  if,  as  the  apparent  homologues  of  52'  in  fishes  would  indicate 
the  atlas  be  actually  the  centrum  to  which  such  detached  and  shifted  haemai 
pophyses  belong,  then  the  first  will  be  the  sole  segment  of  the  cervical  region  0 . 
the  trunk  in  which  those  elements  are  ossified.  'i 

In  the  seven  vertebrae  which  succeed  the  cervicals  the  pleurapophyses  (pi 
are  progressively  elongated;  they  are  shifted  from  their  proper  centrum  to  th- 
interspace  between  it  and  the  next  segment  above,  or  in  advance,  and  retail 
their  moveable  joints.  The  haemapophyses  (/<)  are  cartilaginous  and  articulat 
with  the  ends  of  the  pleurapophyses  and  with  the  haemal  spines  (/is),  which  ar  ‘ 
flattened,  slightly  expanded,  and  ultimately  blended  into  one  bone  called  ‘ ster 
num.’  The  haemal  spine  of  the  first  typical  segment  remains  longest  distinct 
it  receives,  also,  the  extremities  of  the  displaced  haemapophyses  (sa')  and  ha  ^ 
been  called  ‘ manubrium  sterni.’  The  haemal  spine  of  the  seventh  segmen 
commonly  continues  longer  distinct,  and  is  later  in  becoming  ossified,  whenC' 
it  is  called  ‘ ensiform  cartilage  ’ : it  probably  includes  the  rudiments  of  som 
succeeding  hamal  spines.  In  the  four  succeeding  segments  the  pleurapophyse  ^ 
become  progressively  shorter,  and  the  haemapophyses,  still  cartilaginous,  ar 
severally  attached  by  their  lower  attenuated  ends  to  the  pair  in  advance  ■ 
leaving  the  haemal  arch  incomplete  below.  In  the  next  vertebra  (19th  froi  ^ 
the  skull)  the  still  shorter  pleurapophyses  resume  the  exclusive  articulatio  E 
with  their  proper  centrum  ; and  the  correspondingly  short  and  pointed  haeir 

apophyses  terminate  freely.  . 

Those  pleurapophyses  and  haemapophyses  which  directly  articulate  wit 
haemal  spines  (sternum)  are  called  collectively  ‘ true  ribs  ’ (costae  verae),  th 
proximal  element  being  ‘the  bony  part  of  the  rib  (pars  ossea  costae),  the  dista 
one  the  ‘ cartilage  of  the  rib.’  The  rest  of  the  haemal  arches  which  are  ir 
complete  through  the  absence  of  the  haemal  spine,  are  called  ^ false  ribs 
(costae  spuriae) ; and  the  last,  which  terminates  freely  in  the  origin  of  th 
diaphragm,  is  a ‘ floating  rib.’  The  centrum,  neurapophyses  and  neural  spin 
of  each  segment  with  freely  articulated  pleurapophyses  coalesce  into  one  bone 
called  ‘ dorsal  vertebra  ’ in  anthropotomy  : these  vertebrae  are  twelve  1 
number.  Each  of  the  five  succeeding  segments  is  represented  by  the  sani 
elements  (centrum  and  neural  arch)  coalesced  that  constitute  the  so-calle 
dorsal  vertebne  : they  are  called  ‘ lumbar  vertebrae  ’ (fig.  25, L.):  they  have  n 
ossified  pleurapophyses  ; and  the  haemapophyses  of  these  segments  are  repn 
sented  only  by  the  aponeurotic  ‘ inscriptiones  tendiiieae  muscuh  recti  (A  )• 

Certain  elements  of  the  five  succeeding  segments  (ib.  S.)  coalescing  tpS®  / 
in  the  progress  of  growth  form  the  bone  called  ‘sacrum  : and  are  describe  u 
dividually  as  sacral  vertebrae.  The  first  four  of  these  each  combine  the  sain 
elements,  coalesced,  as  in  the  neck ; viz.  centrum,  neurapophyses,  neural  spun 
and  short  but  thick  pleurapophyses* : in  the  fifth  sacral  vertebra  there  are 


* J Muller  notices  the  rudimental  ribs  in  the  first  and  second  sacral  vert^rse  of  tl 
human  foetus  in  his  Anatomic  der  Myxinoiden,  heft  i.  1834,  p.  240.  M''- 

Ascribed  (Report  of  British  Association,  1837,  p.  112),  and  Dr.  Knox  has  fig«^d  (Lane 
1839,  p.  191)  these  ribs  and  their  homotypes  in  the  third  and  fourth  sacral  vertebra. 


GENERAL  HOMOLOGY.  HUMAN  TRUNK-VERTEBR.E.  159 


asseous  rudiments  of  pleurapophyses ; and  the  neural  spine  is  commonly  un- 
leveloped.  One  or  more  typical  segments  are  obviously  completed  by  the 
meeting  of  the  broad  sides  of  the  inverted  arch  («2,  03,  01)  at  the  ‘ ischio- 
joubic  symphj’sis  ’ forming  the  ‘ pelvis’  of  anthropotomy.  Before,  however, 
mtering  upon  the  difficult  inquiry  into  the  general  homology  of  the  pelvis, 
would  beg  to  refer  the  reader  to  the  analysis  of  the  sacrum  of  the  ostrich 
;;iven  at  p.  95  : and  I here  subjoin  a figure  of  seven  of  those  vertebrae, 
from  an  immature  specimen,  the  pleurapophyses  being  removed  from  all 
.■ave  the  last  (pi),  in  order  to  show  the  change  of  place  of  the  neurapophyses 
It  1—1,  in  relation  to  their  centrums,  c i to  ^ : d d are  the  long  diapophyses  ; 
1 1 the  short  parapophyses.  The  sacral  spines,  s s,  are  enormously  developed. 

In  the  bird  the  modification  of  the  vertebral  segments  at  the  posterior 
region  of  the  trunk  in  relation  pj^.  27, 

i>o  the  transference  of  the  whole  “ 

rreight  of  the  body  and  fore- 
iiinbs  (wings)  upon  the  hind- 
iimbs,  is  greater  and  more  ex- 
eansive  than  in  the  ‘ bipes  im- 
Bume,’  and  the  essential  nature 
tf  the  pelvic  arch  is  still  more 
uasked  in  the  bird  than  in  man. 

Cl  order  to  obtain  an  insight 
nto  the  model  according  to 
:hich  it  is  constructed,  we  must 
eescend  still  lower,  even  to  the 
camblest  of  the  vertebrated 
rreatures  that  crawl  upon  the  7 sacra!  vertebrse  of  a young  ostrich  (StriUhio  camelus), 
larth.  The  example  which  is  here  selected  for  that  purpose  is  the  perenni- 
rranchiate  amphibian  called  Menopome  Alleghanniensis. 

' The  three  anterior  ver-  Pig.  28. 

cbrae  which  answer  in  po- 
laon  to  the  ‘lumbar’  in 
rp  25,  differ  chiefly  in  ha- 
cDg  rudimental  pleurapo- 
iiyses  (PI)  articulated  to 
ee  ends  of  the  diapophyses 
>)).  In  the  next  vertebra 
eediapophysis  (D')  and  the 
ddimental  pleurapophysis 
‘H')  are  thickened  and 
iJarged:  a second  pleur- 
r«phy3ialrib-likepiece(62) 

, joined  by  one  end  to  the 
reurapophysis,  and  by  the  '’ertebra  and  appendage  with  contiguous  vertebrae.  Menopome. 

i<ier  to  a broad  partially  ossified  cartilage  (04)  which  meets  and  joins  its 
I low,  completing  a haemal  arch  and  raising  the  vertebra  in  question  to 
» J typical  character.  A radiated  appendage,  moreover,  diverges  on  each 
^.e  from  the  articulation  between  02  and  01,  and  forms  the  hind-limb.  Now 
• i special  homology  of  this  limb  with  the  undivided  filamentary  appendage 
•nilarly  situated  in  the  lepidosiren,  and  with  the  ventral  fins  of  fishes,  in 
B s descending  series ; and  with  the  hind-limb  of  other  reptile.s,  of  birds  and 

■ imammals  in  the  ascending  series,  is  unmistakeable,  and,  I believe,  is  gene- 
■My  admitted : so  that  comparative  anatomists  liave  not  hesitated  to  call 

■ : rib-like  bone,  m,  ‘ ilium,’  and  the  jiart,  r.i,  ‘ pubis  ’ in  the  menopome. 


160 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


i- 


lb 

t 


SI 


S' 

The  special  homologies  of  these  elements  of  the  pelvis  being  thus  deter- 
mined, it  follows,  that  their  general  homology,  as  it  may  be  revealed  by  the 
simple  condition  of  the  pelvic  arch  in  the  species  in  which  the  pelvis,  as 
complete  and  fixed  to  a sacrum,  makes  its  first  appearance  in  the  animal 
kingdom,  will  be  equally  applicable  to  the  parts  under  all  their  metamor 
phoses  in  the  higher  air-breathing  vertebrates. 

The  correspondence  of  the  segment  of  the  endoskeleton  in  the  menopome 
D',  PI',  H,  A,  with  the  typical  vertebra,  as  illustrated  by  fig.  15,  is  such, 
that  any  other  explanation  of  its  essential  nature  than  as  a representative  or 
repetition  of  such  fully  developed  segment  or  vertebra  seems  contrary  to 
nature.  The  chief  modification  has  its  seat  in  the  most  peripheral  part  or 
appendage  A,  as  compared  with  its  simple  homologue  in  tlie  thoracic  segment 
of  the  bird  (fig.  15).  If  ea  and  64  are  to  be  regarded  as  strangers  to  the 
vertebral  system,  new  parts  introduced  for  special  purposes,  and  not  aa  f- 
normal  elements  modified  for  such  purposes,  I am  at  a loss  to  know  on- 
what  principles,  or  by  what  series  of  comparisons  we  can  ever  hope  to  attain 
to  the  higher  generalizations  of  anatomy,  or  discover  the  pattern  according 
to  which  the  vertebrate  forms  have  been  constructed.  It  may  be  said  that  the  Ifi 
arch  which  they  constitute  performs  a new  function,  inasmuch  as  it  sustains 
a locomotive  limb  which  reacts  upon  the  ground.  But  this  new  function 
arises  in  the  menopome,  rather  out  of  the  modifications  of  the  appendage 
than  of  the  arch  itself.  In  so  far  as  the  mere  support  of  the  appendage  is 
concerned,  the  inverted  or  haemal  arch  PI',  H,  performs  no  new  function,  bui  it 
one  which  is  common  to  such  arches  in  the  thorax  of  birds,  and  to  the  less  com- 
pletely ossified  homologous  arches  in  the  abdomen  of  fishes,  where  moreovei 
the  simple  diverging  appendages  do  give  attachment  to  the  muscles  of  locomo- 
tion.  Comparing,  then,  the  haemal  arch  in  question  with  that  of  the  typicai 
vertebra  (fig.  15),  we  find  that,  like  the  scapulo-coracoid  arch  in  fishes 
(fig.  5,  H i),  its  parts  are  open  to  two  interpretations.  The  upper  piece  oj  m 
PI'  may  be  the  whole  pleurapophysis,  the  lower,  ea,  the  haemapophysis,  and  the 
part,  64,  the  half  of  an  expanded  and  bifid  haemal  spine  : or  PI'  with  62,  may  i 
be  two  portions  of  a teleologically  compound  pleurapophysis,  and  64  the  haemi  i 
apophysis,  which  would  join  with  its  fellow  without,  or  with  a mere  rudimen’  t 
of,  a haemal  spine  intervening.  From  the  analogy  of  the  scapulo-coracoir 
arch  in  fishes,  which  is  proved  by  its  modifications  in  higher  animals  t(  l 
want  the  haemal  spine,  it  is  most  probable  that  such  is  the  condition  anc  " 
true  interpretation  of  the  correspondingly  simple  pelvic  arch  under  considera 
tion.  But  the  general  relation  of  this  arch  to  the  haemal  one  of  the  typica 
segment  is  not  affected  by  the  alternative. 

I regard,  therefore,  Pl',  ea,  as  two  portions  of  a fully  developed  pleurapophy 
sis : and  the  pleurapophyses,  PI,  PI  of  the  contiguous  vertebrae  as  answerinf 
only  to  the  upper  portion  of  the  pelvic  one.  In  ascending  from  the  meno 
pome  to  the  crocodile,  we  find  the  homologue  of  62  broader  than  it  is  long 
and  articulated  to  the  thickened  proximal  portions  of  the  pleurapophyses  o 
two  segments ; and  we  observe,  likewise,  the  pelvic  arch  completed  belov 
by  two  pairs  of  haemapophyses : for  the  anterior  pair  the  name  oi  ossi 
pubis  ’ is  retained  ; to  the  posterior  pair  that  of  ‘ ischia  is  given.  In  generaf 
homology  these  bones  complete,  as  haemapophyses,  the  two  vertebral  seg 
ments  modified  to  form  the  sacrum  of  the  crocodile ; and  the  ‘"termexii 
connecting  piece  (ilium)  may  be  interpreted,  as  either  the  confluent 
portions  of  the  pleurapophyses  of  both  vertebrae,  or  as  an  expansion  o 
such  portion,  answering  to  62  in  the  menopome,  and  intruding  itse  e 
the  stunted  pleurapophysis  and  distant  haemapophysis  of  the  secon  s 
vertebrae  in  the  crocodile. 


II 


GENERAL  HOMOLOGY. 


HUMAN  TRUNK-VERTEHRiK.  161 


In  tli0  bird  the  expansion  of  tli6  elonicnt  02  proceeds  to  a finther  extent, 
itnd  besides  tlie  proximal  piece  of  the  pleurapopliysis  of  its  own  segment,  the 
wone  02  is  brought  into  connection  with  the  homologous  stunted  or  proximal 
‘ nds  of  pleurapophyses  of  several  contiguous  segments,  in  the  manner  indi- 
cated bj'  the  dotted  line  in  fig.  28,  and  in  PI.  II.  tig.  4, 02.  Now,  if  the  ilium, 
.0  expanded,  were  interpreted  as  the  coalesced  complementary  portions  of  all 
.he  short  pleurapophyses  with  which  it  articulates,  its  condition  would  be  very 
liinilar  to  that  which  Oken  has  attributed  to  the  scapula.  But  its  ossification 
aadiates,  as  in  the  simple  rib-like  ilium  of  the  menopome,  from  a common 
ventre  : there  are  no  corresponding  multiplications  of  haemapophyses  below ; 
fahese  are  restricted  in  the  pelvis  of  all  animals  to  the  number  which  they 
irresent  in  the  crocodile.  And  since  the  scapula  has  been  proved  to  be,  under 
:.nS  most  expanded  form,  the  homologue  of  a single  pleurapopliysis,  so  also  I 
.in  disposed  to  regard  its  homotype,  the  ilium,  as  maintaining  under  every 
arietv  of  form  and  proportion,  the  same  fundamental  singleness  of  character, 
it  presents  on  its  fir>t  appearance  in  the  perennibranchiate  batrachian. 

The  first  sacral  vertebra,  then,  in  man  is  complete;  but  its  pleurapo- 
rhysis  is  divided,  and  the  lower  portion  expanded  to  form  the  so-called 
ilium’  (ei).  The  haemapophysis  (ei)  coalesces  with  that  of  the  succeeding 
esrtebra  (es),  and  with  its  own  pleurapopliysis  (02,  fig.  25,  and  PI.  II.  fig.  6). 

The  second  sacral  vertebra  has  its  haemapophysis  (03,  called  ‘ ischium  ’) 
jssified,  but  separated  from  its  proper  pleurapophysis  by  the  expanded  (iliac) 
rirtion  of  that  of  the  preceding  vertebra,  with  which  it  coalesces,  as  well  as 
:ith  the  preceding  haemapophysis  (pubis).  The  short  and  thick  pleurapo- 
hivses  of  the  third  sacral  vertebra  also  articulate  in  the  adult  with  the  ex- 
unded  distal  portions  of  those  of  the  first  sacral  vertebra:  but  these  (iliac 
eones)  are  restricted  in  infancy  and  early  childhood  to  their  connections 
ith  the  first  and  second  sacral  vertebrae,  which  connections  are  permanent 
I most  reptiles  (PI.  II.  fig.  3). 

' The  fourth  sacral  vertebra  consists,  in  man,  of  centrum,  neurapophyses, 
:id  rudimental  pleurapophyses ; the  fifth  sacral  vertebra  of  centrum  and 
i:dimental  neurapophyses,  which  rarely  meet  above  the  neural  canal. 

• In  each  sacral  vertebra  the  elements  of  the  neural  arch  and  rudimental 

I first  coalesce  together;  and  afterwards  the  vertebrae  unite  with  each 
r and  form  the  anthropotomical  bone  called  ‘ sacrum.’ 
he  first  coccygeal  vertebra  in  man  consists  of  a centrum  and  of  stunted 
■apophyses*  wide  apart  above,  but  developing  zygapophyses,  which  join 
e of  the  last  sacral  vertebra,  and  diapophyses  which  extend  outwards 
ler  than  those  of  the  same  vertebra.  "The  neurapophyses  are  represented 
ixogenous  tubercles  of  bone  in  the  second  coccygeal  vertebra  ; and  the 
J and  fourth  vertebrae  are  reduced  to  the  centrums  only, 
he  cartilaginous  deposits  in  the  primitive  blastema  of  this  extremity  of 
trunk  indicate  a greater  number  of  caudal  vertebrae,  and  the  rudimental 
is  proportionally  longer  in  the  embryo  than  in  the  adult.  It  is  shortened, 
ever,  by  absorption  prior  to  the  commencement  of  ossification,  and  but 
• segments  are  indicated  by  depositions  of  the  earthy  salts  in  the  situations 
per  to  the  above-specified  elements  of  a typical  vertebra  : these  finally 
esce  into  a single  bone  “ of  a crooked  pyramidal  figure,”  which  got  its 
le  of  ‘ 03  coccygis  ’ from  its  supposed  resemblance  to  a cuckoo’s  beak  f. 
'he  early  recognition  of  these  and  other  specialities  arising  out  of  tlie  va- 
is  adaptive  modifications  of  the  typical  segments  of  tlie  liuman  skeleton 
lid  its  expression,  necessarily,  in  special  terms,  the  convenience  of  which 
ensure  their  permanence  ; but  the  progress  ol’  anatomical  science  having 

* “ Shoulders  of  the  os  occcygis.” — Monro,  l.c.  p.  H2.  f P- 


162 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


f 


unfolded  the  primary  form  which  is  the  basis  of  those  modifications,  there 
arises  the  same  necessity  for  giving  utterance  to  ideas  of  the  generic  cha- 
racter of  the  parts  by  general  terms. 

Inasmuch,  however,  as  the  different  segments  of  the  human  skeleton  de- 
viate in  various  degrees  from  the  common  archetype,  and  as  the  differenl 
elements  of  such  segments  differ  in  their  modifiability,  anthropotomy  has  at 
no  period  wanted  also  its  ‘ general  terms’  expressive  of  the  recognised  exs 
tent  of  such  conformity  : such  terms  also,  indicating,  obscurely  indeed,  so 
much  perception  of  the  pre-existing  model  as  could  be  obtained  from  tht 
study  of  one  form,  at  a period  when  that  form — the  human  frame — waj 
viewed  as  something  not  only  above,  but  distinct  from,  if  not  antithetica. 
to  the  structures  of  the  brute  creation,  and  when  it  was  little  suspectec 
that  all  the  parts  and  organs  of  man  had  been  sketched  out,  in  anti«pation 
so  to  speak,  in  the  inferior  animals.  Thus  the  word  ‘ vertebra  shows 
by  the  number  of  the  segments  or  parts  of  segments  to  which  it  is  applie. 


in  anthropotomy,  a recognition  of  the  degree  m which  the  principle  o 
repetition  of  similar  parts  more  obviously  prevails  m the  construction  of  thr 
human  endoskeleton.  And,  inasmuch  as  in  some  regions  (the  cervical,  e.g. 
the  ‘ vertebra’  includes  all  the  elements  of  the  typical  segment,  there  developec 
it  has  been  retained  in  homological  anatomy,  but,  with  a more  consistent  an- 
definite  meaning,  as  the  technical  term  of  the  primary  segment  of  thj« 

endoskeleton  in  all  vertebrate  animals.  i • i • u 

The  ‘ true  vertebrm’  of  anthropotomy  are  those  segments  which  re  am  th 
power  of  moving  upon  each  other ; and  the  term  is  apifiied  in  a peculiar  an. 
empirical  sense  very  different  from  the  meaning  which  the  anatomis  at  » 
taches  to  a true  or  typical  vertebra.  The  ‘ false  vertebrae  of  anthropotom. 
are  those  segments  or  parts  of  segments  forming  the  lower  or  hinder  extrem 
of  the  endoskeleton,  and  which  do  not  admit  of  reciprocal  motion  at  thei  . 
joints.  And  Monro,  admitting  that  the  condition  of  even  the  human  ( 
'coccygis  sometimes  militates  against  the  definition,  meets  objection  b 
arguing  for  the  speciality  of  that  bone,  and  with  as  good  or  bet  er  reaso  J 
than  tLse  who  have  subsequently  contended  against  admitting  the  cram.  J 
segments  into  the  category  of  vertebr®.  “From  the  description  of  this  bone  J 
(os  coccygis),  “ we  set  how  little  it  resembles  vertebm ; since  it  seldom  h.  ^ 
processed  never  has  any  cavity  for  the  spinal  marrow,  nor  holes  for  the  pa  « 

EmLTobgy  has  since  demonstrated  that  the  parts  of  the  coccygis  a 
originally  in  vertebral  relation  with  the  neural  axis;  and  that  this  is  subs 
qufntly  withdrawn  by  a concentrative  movement,  which  in  "lann 

withdraws  it  from  the  teririinal  segment  at  the  opposite  extreme  of  the  end 
skeleton.  The  homology  of  the  divisions  of  the  sacrum  with  the  true  vf 
tebrm  is  admitted  by  Monro,  because  of  the  perforations  for  the  nerves  : ar  , 

St  toSs  stili  retained  in  the  naeal  ™ l 

form  foramina,  although  its  neurapophyses,  like  those  of  the  sacrum, 

and^’definiL^L^e'^  iUultitel  and  em 

modified  and  reciprocally  irantioveable  ^ ^ j ^ g q, 

.he^t:n.a.neeh/.eheeC‘.oina,:..^^^^^^^ 


ine  leriiis  uciiik,  , ,.u. 

segments  characterized  by  specific  modifications,  the 

* Monro,  1.  c,  p.  143. 


If 


GENERAL  HOMOLOGY.  HUMAN  TRUNK-VERTEBRiE.  163 


be  added  to  the  ‘ cervical,’  ‘ thoracic  or  dorsal,’  ‘ lumbar,’  ‘ sacral,’  and  ‘ coccy- 
geal or  caudal.’ 

Such,  with  reference  to  the  ‘general’  term  ‘vertebra,’  seems  to  be  the 
advance  of  which  anthropotomical  science  is  susceptible,  in  oriler  to  keep 
progress  and  be  in  harmony  with  anatomy. 

As  to  the  elements  of  the  typical  vertebra,  anthropotomy  has  also  its  gene- 
ral phrases  (see  Table  II.  column  vi.  ‘ Soemmerring.’),  some  of  which  are 
1 equivalent  to  the  clearly  defined  technical  terms  of  such  elements  in  anatomy 
■.properly  so  called. 

The  serial  homology  of  the  centrum  {corpus  vertebra:)  has  been  recognised 
in  all  the  so-called  ‘ true  vertebrm,’  and  in  some  of  the  ‘ lalse  vertebrae  : ’ thus 
.'Monro  says,  “ The  fore-part  of  the  os  sacrum,  analogous  to  the  bodies  of  the 
•.true  vertebrae,  is  smooth  and  flat*.”  But  their  smooth  and  flat  homotypes  in 
;the  skull  have  only  the  special  names  of  ‘basilar’  and  ‘cuneiform’  processes ; of 
■‘processus  azygos ’ and  ‘ vomer.’  The  ‘ neurapophyses  ’ are  recognised  as  re- 
ipetitions  of  the  same  part  under  the  definitions  of  ‘ a bony  bridge  produced 
cbackwards  from  each  side  of  the  body  of  the  vertebra,’  of  ‘ a7-cus  posterior 
vertebra,'  of  ‘ vertebral  laminm  ’ or  ‘ pedicles.’  Monro  describes  these  rudi- 
tmental  elements  in  the  last  sacral  vertebra  as  ‘ knobs,’  and  in  the  first  coccy- 
geal vertebra  as  its  ‘shoulders.’  In  the  skull  they  receive  the  special  defini- 
liions  of  “ the  pieces  of  the  occipital  bone  situated  on  each  side  of  the  great 
t.\)ramen ; from  which  nearly  the  whole  condyles  are  producedf  ” {partes  late- 
ales  sett  condyloidea,  Soem.)  ; ‘ great  ’ or  ‘ temporal  wings  of  the  sphenoidal 
■jone  J ‘ orbitar  wings  ’ or  ‘ processes  of  the  sphenoidal  bone ; ’ ‘ nasal  ’ or 
vertical  plate’  and  ‘ crista  galli’  of  the  ethmoid  {‘pars  media  ossis  athmoidei,' 
Soem.). 

The  neural  spines  are  called  generally  ‘ spinal  processes'  in  every  segment 
»f  the  trunk:  in  the  head  they  are  known  only  by  the  special  names  of  ‘oc- 
apital  plate,’  ‘parietal  bones,’  ‘ frontal  bone,’  ‘ nasal  bones.’ 

The  pleurapophyses,  when  free,  long,  and  slender, are  called  ‘ribs,'  ‘verte- 
jral  ribs,’  or  ‘bony  parts  of  the  ribs’;  when  short  and  anchylosed,  they  are 
lalled,  in  the  neck,  “ the  second  transverse  processes  that  come  out  from  the 
ides  of  the  body  of  each  vertebra  § {radix  prior  processus  transversi  ver- 
ebra,  Soem. ;)  in  the  sacrum  ‘ transverse  processes  ’ and  ‘ ilium’;  in  the  skull, 
jscapula’,  ‘ styloid  process  of  the  temporal  bone,’  ‘ external  auditory  or  tym- 
panic process  of  the  same  bone  ’;  ‘palatine  bone.’ 

In  like  manner  the  serial  homology  of  the  hasmapophyses  is  recognised  in 
r.ie  thoracic  region  by  the  general  term  ‘ cartilages  of  the  ribs’  or  ‘ cartilages 
iff  the  sternum’  ||  there  applied  to  the  same  elements  of  twelve  successive  seg- 
nents.  When  ossified  in  other  vertebrae  they  have  received  the  special  names 
•f  ‘ ischium,’ ‘pubis,’ ‘ coracoid  process  of  the  scapula,’  ‘clavicle,’  ‘appendix 
lesser  cornua  of  the  hyoid  bone,’  (‘  aura  superiora,'  ‘ os  linguale  superius,' 
oem.),  ‘ lower  jaw  ’ or  mandibula,  ‘ upper  jaw  ’ or  maxilla. 

The  exigences  of  descriptive  anthropotomy  and  its  highly  important  ap- 
ications  to  Medicine  and  Surgery  necessitate  such  special  nomenclature,  and 
e reform  which  that  nomenclature  chiefly  requires  is  the  substitution  of 
imes  in  the  place  of  phrases  for  the  parts  of  the  human  body. 

I Monro,  /.  c.  p.  138.  t e.  p.  76.  J L.  e.  p.  86.  § L.  c.  p.  126. 

D Laurentins,  in  describing  the  human  thoracic  pleurapophyses,  says,  “ Earum  duplex 
1 . articalatio,  altera  cum  spondylis  dorsi,  altera  cum  steriii  cartilaginibus  ” (Anatomica 
cimani  Corpori.s,  Fol.  1600,  p.  94).  The  perception  of  the  essential  distinctness  of  the 
rnebral  ribs  ha<l  not  then  been  blunted  by  the  constant  repetition  of  the  conventional  idea 
their  forming  an  ossihed  part  of  a whole,  completed  by  thehaemapophysis  under  the  name 
the  ' cartilago  cosUe.’  In  birds  it  is  not  uncommon  to  find  the  luemapophyses  not  only 
1 '.ified,  but  some  of  them  attached  to  the  sternum,  and  detached  from  the  pleurapophyses. 

M 2 


164 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


H 

cl 

It 

o( 

di 

fc 

fa 

de 

»i 


But  the  retention  and  use  of  specific  names  for  specially  modified  elements 
in  the  diflterent  segments  by  no  means  preclude  the  entertainment  of  general 
ideas  and  the  necessity  of  expressing  them  by  generic  names  for  the  homo- 
logous elements  in  the  entire  series  of  vertebrae. 

If  anthropotomy  is  to  make  corresponding  progress  with  anatomy,  and 
to  derive  the  same  light  from  the  generalizations  of  zootomical  science  which 
medical  botany  has  done  from  general  botanical  science,  its  nomenclature 
must  expand  to  receive  those  generic  terms  which  express  the  essential 
nature  of  the  parts,  heretofore  named  and  known  only  according  to  the 
results  of  particular  and  insulated  observation.  A term  which  truly  ex- 
presses the  general  homology  of  a part  enunciates  the  most  important  and 
Constant  characters  of  such  part  throughout  the  whole  animal  J^nes,  and 
implies  therefore  a knowledge  of  such  characters  in  that  part  of  the  h^an 
body,  when  used  and  understood  by  the  human  anatomist.  Before  the  cunei- 
form process  of  the  occipital  bone  could  be  defined  as  the  occipital  cen- 
trum ’the  modifications  and  relations  of  the  homologous  part  in  all  classes  of 
lerSbrate  Tnimals  had  to  be  accurately  determined.  The  generic  homo- 
logical  term  expresses  the  sum  or  result  of  such  comparisons,  a^nd  the  use  of 
such  terms  by  the  anthropotomist  implies  his  knowledge  of  the  plan  or  pattern 
of  the  human  frame  which  lies  at  the  bottom  of  all  the  modifications  that 
raise  it  to  an  eminence  so  far  above  those  of  all  other  vertebrate  a^mials 
In  no  species,  however,  is  each  individual  segment  of  the  endoskeleton 
so  plainly  impressed  with  its  own  individual  characters,  as  in  Man  ; the  prac- 
tised anthro^toniist,  for  example,  will  at  once  select  and  name 
vertebra  from  either  the  cervical,  the  dorsal,  or  the  lumbar  series.  During 
that  brilliant  period  of  human  anatomy  which  was  illuminated  by  a 
an  Eustachiu^,  a Fallopius,  and  a Laurentius,  the  terms  expressive  of  the*  p, 
>ir,n  nf  «snch  soccific  characters  were  more  numerous  and  often  more.  ^ 

Pleurapophyses  were  ind  v -f 

dualized  in  the  thorax  as  well  as  in  the  head  : the  ‘ antistrophoi,  stereai 
and  ‘sternitides,’  for  example,  were  distinguished  from  the  other  pleuraul 

^"Sneral  anatomical  science  reveals  the  unity  which  pervades  the 

rs"oir 

the  other,  and  all  vary  from  their  archetype. 


'o-  111 


Chapter  III."*Serial  Homology. 


9incP  then  we  are  led  by  the  observations,  comparisons  and  reasonings  re  I 

throughout  the  vertebral  segments  of  the  same  individual,  is 

*“  x\fr“  otTto  the  same  elements  throughout  the  series  of  segment 
ofIhe\are**eleto„  I call  - the  determinaUon  of  senal  . 

printed  in  the  MSmoires  de  T Aeadtaie  des  Sciences  for  the  year  177*, 


* Auatoiuic.  II.im.nl  Cerpori.,  &c.,  multls  conlroversiis  M ote.r..tionita>  r.ov»  illnsim'-  ; 
Andr.  Laurentio,  fol.  1600,  p.  95. 


SERIAL  llOMOLOGV. 


165 


Condorcet,  in  his  Report  on  this  ingenious  Essay,  speaks  of  it  as  “ un  essai 
d’une  autre  espece  d’Anatoniie  coniparee,  qui  jusqu  ici  a ete  peu  cultivee. 

\'icq  d’Azyr  compares,  or  points  out  the  serial  homology  ol,  the  scapula 
with  the  ilium,  the  humerus  with  the  femur,  the  two  bones  of  the  fore-arm 
with  the  two  bones  of  the  leg,  the  small  bones  of  the  carpus  with  those  of 
the  tarsus,  the  metacarpus  with  the  metatarsus,  and  the  fingers  with  the  toes. 
He  is  not  so  happy  in  his  particular  as  in  his  general  determinations:  his 
choice  in  the  leg,  for  example,  of  the  homotypes  of  the  radius  and  ulna  in 
the  fore-arm,  is  erroneous  ; but  the  whole  memoir  is  an  admirable  example 
of  the  appreciation  of  correspondences  which  later  researches  in  the  same 
direction  have  proved  to  How  from  a higher  and  more  general  law  of  uni- 
formity of  type.  It  is,  indeed,  a striking  instance  of  the  secret  but  all-pre- 
vailing harmony  of  the  vertebrate  structure  that  serial  homologies  should  be 
■ determinable  to  such  an  extent  in  the  parts  of  the  diverging  appendages, 
■which  are  the  seat  of  the  greatest  amount  and  variety  of  deviations  from  the 
I fundamental  type. 

It  will,  of  course,  be  obvious  that  the  humerus  is  not  ‘the  same  bone’  as 
tthe  femur  of  the  same  individual  in  the  same  sense  in  which  the  humerus 
lof  one  individual  or  species  is  said  to  be  ‘the  same  bone’  as  the  humerus  of 
canother  individual  or  species.  In  the  instance  of  serial  homology  above-eited, 
tthe  femur,  though  repeating  in  its  segment  the  humerus  in  the  more  advanced 
isegraent,  is  not  its  namesake,  not  properly,  therefore,  its  ‘homologue’.  I 
•.propose,  therefore,  to  call  the  bones  so  related  serially  in  the  same  skeleton 
•‘homotypes,’  and  to  restrict  the  term  ‘ homologue’  to  the  corresponding  bones 
Lin  different  species,  which  bones  bear,  or  ought  to  bear,  the  same  names. 

In  the  skull  those  bones  are  homotypes,  or  repetitions  of  the  same  essential 
tpart  in  the  series  of  vertebral  segments,  which  succeed  each  other  length- 
■wise,  as  in  the  last  four  columns  of  the  subjoined  Table : — 


VeaTEBa-E. 

Occipital. 

Parietal. 

Frontal. 

Nasal. 

Centrums 

ear  apophyses 

yasal  spines 

Parapophyses 

Pleurapophyses  

Hcemapophyses  

Hamal  spines 

Dieerging  appendages  . . 

Basioccipital .... 
Exoccipital  .... 
Supraoccipital  . . 
Paroccipital  .... 

Scapula 

Coracoid 

Eplstemum  .... 
Fore-limb  or  fin 

Basisphenoid 

Alisphenoid  

Parietal 

Mastoid 

Stylohyal  

Ceratohyal 

Basihval 

Branchiostegals  . . 

Presphenoid  .... 
Orbitosphenoid. . 

Frontal  

Postfrontal 

Tympanic 

Articular  

Dentary 

Operculum  .... 

Vomer. 

Prefrontal. 

Nasal. 

None. 

Palatal. 

Maxillary. 
Premaxillary. 
Pterj'goid  and  Zygoma. 

Thus  the  basioccipital,  basisphenoid,  presphenoid  and  vomer  are  homo- 
l-ypes  with  the  centrums  of  all  the  succeeding  vertebrae.  The  exoccipitals, 
L.lisphenoids,  orbitosphenoids,  and  prefrontals,  are  homotypes  with  the  neur- 
Lpophyses  of  all  the  succeeding  vertebrae.  The  paroccipitals,  mastoids  and 
Mostfrontals  are  homotypes  with  the  transverse  processes  of  all  the  succeeding 
i-'ertebrae.  The,  supraoccipital,  parietal,  frontal  and  nasal  are  horaotypes 
>/ith  the  vertebral  neural  spines. 

The  petrosals,  sclerotals,  and  turbinals  are  homotypes  of  each  other,  as 
"eing  respectively  sense-capsules  of  the  splanchno-skeleton. 

The  suprascapula  and  scapula  are  together  the  homotypes  of  the  stylohyal 
i:nd  epihyal ; of  the  tympanic,  whether  single  or  divided  ; and  of  the  palatal: 
Lnd  all  the.se  are  the  homotypes  of  the  pleurapophyses  collectively,  whether 
Modified  as  ribs,  hatchet-bones,  or  iliac  bones,  in  the  rest  of  the  vertebral 
Figments. 

The  coracoid  is  the  homotype  of  the  ceratohyal,  this  of  the  articular  di- 
vision of  the  mandible  (with  its  subdivisions  called  angular,  sur-angular  and 
TDronoid, in  cold-blooded  animals),  and  this,  again, of  the  maxillary  bone:  all 


166 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


four  being  hoinotypes  of  the  haetnapophyses  of  the  remaining  vertebral  seg- 
ments, whether  modified  to  form  clavicles,  pubic  bones  or  ischia,  chevron-bones,  ^ 
sternal  ribs,  abdominal  ribs,  cartilages  of  ribs,  abdominal  cartilages  or  tendi- 
nous intersections  of  the  modified  intercostal  muscles  called  ‘recti  abdominis.’  j 
The  entosternal,  when  present,  is  the  homotype  of  the  basihyal,  of  the  j 
dentary  or  premandibular,  and  of  the  premaxillary  bones  ; and  these  codec-  > 
tively  are  homotypes  of  the  haemal  spines  of  the  rest  of  the  vertebral  seg- 
ments, w'hether  retaining  their  spinal  shape  as  in  the  caudal  haemapophyses, 
or  flattened  as  ordinary  ‘ sternal  bones,’  or  expanded  and  subdivided,  like  the 
neural  spines  in  the  cranium,  in  order  to  complete  below  the  thorax  of  thev 
bird  or  to  form  the  plastron  of  the  turtle*.  ■ ' 

There  reigns  a beautiful  parallelism  in  the  kind  and  degree  of  modification 
of  the  parts  of  the  neural  with  the  corresponding  parts  of  the  hmmal  arch  ol . 
the  same  vertebral  segment : and  as  the  serial  homologies  which  have  just 
been  enunciated  succeed  each  other  longitudinally  (horizontally  m beasts, 
vertically  in  man)  in  the  axis  of  the  vertebral  column,  so  these  manifest  them- 
selves in  a direction  perpendicular  to  that  axis.  ^ ^ , u 

The  manubrium  sterni  of  the  bat  developes  a spine  downwards,  as  the_ 
supraoccipital  of  the  fish  sends  a spine  upwards:  the  expanded  manubriuni 
sterni  of  the  whale  repeats  the  condition  of  the  supraoccipital  m birds  and 
mammals.  The  form  of  the  ordinary  sternal  bones  in  mammals  is  repeated 
bv  the  parietal  and  supraoccipital  bones  of  the  crocodile.  The  divided  sternum 
of  the  voung  ostrich,  before  the  two  lateral  ossifications  have  coalesced 
at  the  median  suture,  repeats  the  condition  of  the  divided  parietal  in  most 
mammals.  The  development  of  the  crista  from  the  obliterated  suture  ot 
the  lateral  halves  of  the  expanded  haemal  spine  in  the  thorax  ot  birds  is 
naralleled  bv  the  development  of  the  crista  from  the  obliterated  suture  ot 
Sie  expanded  neural  spine  in  the  cranium  of  carnivores.  The  interposition 
of  the  entosternal  piece  in  the  chelonian  carapace  parallels  below  the  inter- 
nosition  of  the  interparietal  bone  in  the  rodent  cranium  above. 

^ Thus  modifications  and  developments  of  the  same  kind  and  degree  manifest 
themselves  in  the  upper  (neural)  as  in  the  lower  (haemal)  peripheral  elements 
of  the  vertebrae  ; and  though  not  always  in  the  same  vertebr^  noi  in  the 
same  animal,  yet  they  are  sufficiently  exemplified  in  the  myelencephalous  senes 
generally,  to  establish  the  conclusion  that  the  haemal  spines  under  a'* 
modifications  are  vertical  homotypes,  not  of  the  centrums,  as  Oken,  Meckel 
and  De  Blainville  have  supposed,  but  of  the  neural  spines  of  the  same  vei  te- 
brae.  In  the  composition  of  the  neural  arch  of  the  occipital,  parietal  and 
frontal  vertebrm,  we  find  the  neurapophyses  repeating  the  pleurapophyses  of 
the  haemal  arch,  and  the  parapophyses  repeating  the  haemapophyses  in  th 
relative  positions  to  the  centrum  and  the  spine  or  key-bone  of  such  ai’che.. 

Symnietry,  polarity,  or  serial  homology  of  parts  of  the  same  vertebral  seg- 
ment is  usuLly  still  more  strictly  preserved  in  the  transverse  direction,  and  is 
”o“blus!J.o  have  i„. mediately  led  to  the  detection  o the  homologon, 

narts  which  are  accordingly  distinguished  as  ‘ right  and  felt. 

Returning  to  the  consideration  of  those  serial  homologies  with  ”ch  Vmq 
d’Azyr  commenced  the  study  of  these  relations,  f may  remark  that  he  b^ 
of  the  fore-  and  hind-limbs  of  some  of  the  marsupial  quadrupeds  best  llus- 
trate  the  true  relations  which  my  revered  Preceptor  in  A natomy.  Dr.  Barclayt, 


n 


* These  homotypical  relations  will  be  readily  traced  by  the  markings  characteristic  of  the 

Plates  of  the  Bones,  4to,  \824  pl.  24  figs.  3 
Dr  Barclay,  without  referring  to  Vicq  d’Azyr’s  Memoir, 
view  of  the  serial  homology  of  the  bones  of  the  fore-arm  and  leg,  as  follow  . 


Cl 


til 


tli 


thi 


lilt 


Co 

ai 

h 


■I! 

Ik 


HI 

iti 


If 


W 


il!( 


li- 


fv 


!*' 


SERIAL  HOMOLOGY. 


167 


was,  I believe,  the  first  to  enunciate  in  respect  of  the  bones  of  the  fore-ann 
and  leg. 

The  skeleton  of  the  Phalangista  or  Phascolomys  plainly  demonstrates  that 
the  tibia  (PI.  II.  fig.  16,  ee)  is  the  hoinotype  of  the  radius  {ib.  fig.  15,  ss  , 
and  that  the  fibula  {ib.  fig.  16,  er)  is  the  homotype  of  the  ulna  {ib.  fig.  15, 
84  ).  In  the  wombat  the  part  of  the  fibula  (or')  representing  the  olecranon 
{o)  is  a detached  sesamoid,  as  the  olecranon  itself  is  in  the  penguin  and 
the  bat : in  the  ornithorhynchus  the  fibula  assumes  those  proportions  and 
developes  that  process  from  its  proximal  end,  the  want  of  which  in  man  and 
most  mammals  deceived  Vicq  d’Azyr,  as  it  has  misled,  more  recently,  M, 
Cruvelhier.  The  complex  explanation  of  the  .serial  homologies  of  the  bones 
of  the  upper  and  lower  extremities  proposed  by  the  last  named  pains-taking 
anthropotoniist*,  involves  more  unnatural  transpositions  and  combinations  of 
:the  parts  than  those  of  the  D’Azyrian  hypothesis,  which  its  ingenious  author 
.could  not  but  admit  seemed  paradoxical ; viz.  that  the  anterior  member  of 
one  side  of  the  body  repeated  or  corresponded  with  the  posterior  member  of 
-.the  opposite  side.  Cuvier,  however,  seems  to  sanction  this  idea  by  repeating 
;the  statement  of  Vicq  d’Azyr,  “ C’est  la  droite  d’une  paire,  qu’il  faut  com- 
'parer  a la  gauche  de  I’autret.” 

M.  Flourens  has  exposed  in  detail  the  fallacies  of  this  view  in  an  excellent 
anemoir  in  the  ‘ Annales  des  Sciences’  for  1838  (t.  x.  p.  35)  ; in  which  he 
3arrives  at  the  same  conclusions  as  Dr.  Barclay,  and  from  similar  considera- 
;tions  from  Comparative  Anatomy,  as  to  the  serial  homologies  of  the  bones  of 
•.the  fore-arm  and  leg ; and  he  confirms  those  of  the  carpal  and  tarsal  bones, 
•which  had  been  so  truly  and  acutely  discerned  by  Vicq  d’Azyr. 

In  mammalian  quadrupeds  generally  the  fore-limb  takes  the  greater  share 
;in  the  support,  the  hind-limb  in  the  propulsion  of  the  body.  The  manus  is 
^accordingly  commonly  shorter  and  broader  than  the  jues ; this  may  be  seen  in 
:the  terminal  segment  of  even  the  monodactyle  hand  and  foot  of  the  horse. 
Consequently  the  transverse  direction  prevails  in  the  arrangement  of  the 
ccarpal  bones  and  the  longitudinal  in  that  of  the  tarsal  bones.  The  dif- 
ference is  least  in  the  carpus  and  tarsus  of  the  long  and  slender  fore- 
and  hind-hands  of  the  qnadrumana.  If  the  carpus  of  the  chimpanzee,  for 
='xample,  be  compared  with  that  of  man,  the  first  difference  which  presents 
Itself  is  the  comparatively  small  proportion  of  the  scaphoid  which  articulates 
»vith  the  radius,  as  compared  with  that  in  man,  in  whom  the  distal  articu- 
ation  of  the  radius  is  equally  divided  between  the  scaphoides  and  lunare 
which  are  on  the  same  parallel  transverse  series.  In  the  orang  (PI.  II. 
'ig.  13),  the  divided  scaphoid  {s,  s')  extends,  almost  as  much  from 
he  os  lunare  as  from  the  radius,  along  the  radial  side  of  the  carpus,  to 
-each  the  trapezium  {()  and  trapezoides  {z)  ; it  is  in  great  part  interposed 
'between  the  lunare  (/)  of  the  proximal  row  and  the  trapezium  and  trapezoid 
•f  the  distal  row  of  the  carpal  bones.  The  similarity  of  its  connections,  there- 
fore, in  the  carpus  with  those  of  the  scaphoid  in  the  tarsus  (PI.  II.  fig.  14,  s) 
iiso  close  that  the  serial  homology  of  the  two  bones  is  unmistakeable.  The 


laring  the  atlantal  (pectoral)  and  sacral  (pelvic)  extremities,  the  fibula  is  found  to  be  the  bone 
;nrresponding  to  the  ulna ; and  accordingly,  upon  extending  our  researches  to  Comparative 
-natomy,  we  perceive  it  exhibiting  the  like  variety  and  unsteadiness  of  character,  sometimes 
erge,  sometimes  small,  and  sometimes  merely  a process  of  the  tibia,”  &c.  He  does  not  push 
'^s  comparison  to  the  bones  of  the  distal  segment  of  the  limbs. 

* “ L'extremite  superieure  du  tibia  est  representee  par  la  moltid  superieurc  du  cubitus, 
la  moitie  inferieure  du  tibia  par  la  moitiu  infericurc  du  radius  ; tandis  quo  le  jierone  cst 
5:presente  par  la  moitie  superieure  du  radius  ct  par  la  moitie  iuferieurc  du  cubitus.” — Analo- 
'Af.  betcriplive,  t.  i.  p.  .'H.j. 
t Lemons  d’Anat.  Comp.  t.  i.  IS.Ifi,  p.  .312. 


168 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


astragalus  (ib.  a'),  then,  in  the  foot,  repeats  the  os  lunare  (Z)  in  the  hand,  but 
usurps  the  whole  of  the  articular  surface  of  the  tibia,  and  presents  a larger 
proportional  size,  especially  in  man,  whose  erect  position  required  such  ex- 
aggerated development  of  the  astragalus,  or  homotype  of  the  lunare.  The 
proiTiinent  part  of  the  calcaneum  (Ph  IP  6 and  24,  cV^  obviously  repeats 
the  prominent  pisiforme  (fig.  6 and  13,  p)i  and  the  body  of  the  calcaneum 
(fig.  6 and  14,  cl)  articulates  with  the  fibula,  as  the  cuneiforme  (fig.  6 and  13, 
cu)  articulates  with  the  ulna.  The  strain  upon  the  homotype  of  the  pisi- 
forme (d')  to  produce  the  required  effect  in  raising  the  back-part  of  the  foot 
with  its  superincumbent  weight  upon  the  resi>ting  ends  of  the  toes,  .required 
its  firm  coalescence  with  the  homotype  of  the  cuneiforme ; in  other  woids, 
the  cuneiforme  and  pisiforme  of  the  carpus  represent  together  the  os  calcis 
of  the  tarsus.  With  regard  to  the  other  bones  there  is  no  difficulty ; the 
cuboid  (fig.  14,  b)  supports  the  two  ulnar  digits,  iv,  v,  of  the  foot,  as  the 
unciform  bone  (u)  does  those,  iv,  v,  of  the  hand  : the  ecto-cuneiform  ( g. 
14,  ce)  supports  the  digitus  medius,  Hi,  of  the  foot  as  the  os  magnum  {mj 
does  that  of  the  hand:  the  meso-cuneiform  (fig.  14,  cm)  supporting  the  toe, 
a,  is  the  homotype  of  the  trapezoid  supporting  the  finger  ii,  and  the  ento- 
cuneiform  (fig.  14,  ci)  is  the  homotype  of  the  trapezium  (fig.  13,  t). 

It  is  no  unusual  exception  that  of  two  essentially  distinct  bones  in  one 
semnent  being  represented  by  their  coalesced  homotypes— a single  bone— in 
another  segment,  as  in  the  explanation  above  given  of  the  serial  honiology  of 
the  calcaneum.  The  scaphoides  and  astragalus  in  the  tarsus  of  the  cat  and 
wombat  (fig.  16,  .vc,  a)  are  represented  by  the  single  scapho-lunar  bone  in 
the  carpus  (fig.  1.5,  sc,  /).  The  scaphoid  and  a cuneiform  bone  in  the  tarsus 
of  the  sloth  and  megatherium  are  represented  by  the  single  scapho-trapezium 
fUo  ncr-niio  'Hip  acanhnid  and  unciform  bones  in  the  carpus  of  the  ox  are 


savoir,  le  marteau.”— “ M.  Spix  croit  aussi 
qu’il  decore  du  titre  d’i7^on  de  la  tUe.  — &c 


de  la  me:’—SiC.  Ib.  pp.  85,  86. 


SERIAL  HOMOLOGY. 


1G9 


entitled  to  respectful  consideration,  even  when  they  happen  to  be  least  in- 
telligible or  most  counter  to  the  conventional  expressions  of  the  current 
anatomical  knowledge  of  the  day  ; and,  for  my  own  part,  I must  acknowledge 
that  reiterated  attempts  to  detect  their  latent  meaning  have  not  been  wholly 
unproductive. 

With  regard,  for  example,  to  the  term  ‘scapula  capitis’  applied  by  Oken 
to  the  tympanic  bone  in  birds  (fig.  23  and  PI.  II.  tig.  4,  as),  it  is  quite  possible 
that  some  appreciation  of  its  serial  homology  with  ribs  and  other  modifications 
of  the  pleurapophysial  element,  besides  that  exhibited  by  the  blade-bone,  may 
have  lain  at  the  bottom  of  the  expression.  And,  we  may  ask,  whether  the  error 
here  be  not  rather  in  the  mode  of  stating  the  relationship  than  in  the  rela- 
tionship itself?  Had  Oken,  for  example,  said  that  the  tympanic  bone  of  the 
bird  was  a modified  ‘ pleurapophysis,’  or  expressed  by  any  other  equivalent 
general  term  his  idea  of  its  standing  in  such  general  relation  to  its  proper 
cranio-vertebral  segment,  his  language  would  not  only  have  been  accurate,  but 
might  have  been  intelligible  to  Cuvier.  When  Oken  called  the  ‘ tympanic  ’ 
a ‘cranial  scapula’  he  unduly  extended  the  meaning  of  the  term  ‘scapula,’ 
and  converted  it  from  a specific  to  a generic  one.  The  tympanic  is  the  homo- 
type of  the  scapula,  both  being  modified  pleurapophyses,  but  each  has  an 
equal  claim  to  its  proper  or  specific  name  indicative  of  their  respective 
modifications. 

I am  aware  that  Oken  meant  more  than  mere  serial  homology  when  he  called 
the  tympanic  the  ‘ blade-bone  of  the  head  ’:  it  is  part  of  the  phraseology  of  the 
hypothesis  of  the  head  beinga  repetition  of  the  whole  body,  &c.  But  at  thetime 
when  that  anatomist  wrote  it  was  not  known  or  suspected  that  the  head  already 
possessed  the  scapula,  and  that  the  modified  pleurapophysis  so  called,  actually 
appertained  to  a segment  of  the  skull  (tig.  5,  p.  17,  and  PI.  II.  figs.  2 and  7, 
50, 5i).  In  the  terms  '■femur  capitis,’  'tibia  capitis,’  'fibula  capitis,’  ‘pes  capitis,’ 
applied  by  Oken  to  the  parts  of  the  teleologically  compound  mandibular  ramus, 

■ and  in  those  of  'ulna  capitis'  and ‘ capitis^  applied  to  the  distal  seg- 
ments (21,  22)  of  the  maxillary  arch,  we  have  not  only  instances  of  the  attempt 
'to  express  general  relations  of  repetition  or  homology  by  special  terms,  but 
I these  modes  of  expressing  the  serial  homologies  of  nos.  29, 30, 32,  and  of  21  and 
;22,  betrays  the  misappreciation  of  the  general  homologies  of  the  locomotive 
1 extremities,  and  their  relations  to  the  vertebral  arches  supporting  them. 

To  gain  an  insight  into  whatever  proportion  of  truth  may  be  involved  in 
Ithe  ideas  signified  by  the  phrases  above  cited,  it  is  necessary  to  determine 
tthe  essential  nature  of  the  parts  called  ‘ femur,’  ‘ tibia,’  ‘ humerus,’  ‘ ulna,’ 
manus,’  ‘ pes,  &c.,  or  the  general  homology,  in  short,  of  locomotive  members, 
-land  the  attempt  to  master  this  problem  has  been  not  the  least  difficult  part 
of  the  present  inquir)'.  Cuvier  has  offered  no  opinion,  nor  does  he  appear 
;to  have  ever  troubled  himself  with  the  attempt  to  decipher  the  significa- 
ition  of  the  locomotive  members  of  the  vertebrate  animals;  i.  e.  of  what 
iparU  of  the  common  vertebrate  model  they  are  the  modifications. 

Oken’s  idea  of  the  essential  nature  of  the  arms  and  legs  is,  that  they  are  no 
other  than  ‘liberated  ribs’:  “ Freye  Bewegungsorgane  kdnnen  nichts  anderes 
aals  frey  gewordene  Rippen  seyn 

Cams,  in  his  ingenious  endeavours  to  gain  a view  of  the  primary  homologies 
of  the  locomotive  members,  sees  in  their  several  joints  reiietitions  of  vertebral 
bodies  — vertcbrm  of  the  third  degreet— a resultof  an  ultimate 

analpis  of  a skeleton  pushed  to  the  extent  of  the  term  ‘ vertebra’  being  made 
•to  signify  little  more  than  what  an  ordinary  anatomist  would  call  a ‘bone.’ 

* Lehrbiich  dcr  Natnr  Philosophic,  p.  330,  8vo,  18-13. 
t Urtheilen  dcs  Knochen  tind  Schalcngcrustcs,  fol.  1828. 


170 


ON  THE  VERTEBRATE  SKELETON. 


But  these  transcendental  analyses  sublime  all  differences,  and  definite  know- 
ledge of  a part  evaporates  in  such  unwarrantable  extension  of  the  meaning  of 
terms. 

It  has  been,  however,  I trust,  satisfactorily  demonstrated  that  a vertebra 
is  a natural  group  of  bones,  that  it  may  be  recognised  as  a primary  division 
or  segment  of  the  endoskeleton,  and  that  the  parts  of  that  group  are  definable 
and  recognizable  under  all  their  teleological  modifications,  their  essential 
relations  and  characters  appearing  through  every  adaptive  mask. 

According  to  the  definition  of  which  a vertebra  has  seemed  to  me  to  be  sus- 
ceptible, we  recognise  the  centrum,  the  neural  arch,  the  haemal  arch,  and  the 
appendages  diverging  or  radiating  from  the  haemal  arch.  The  cehtrum, 
though  the  basis,  is  not  less  a part  of  a vertebra  than  are  the  neurapophyses, 
haemapophyses,  pleurapophyses,  &c. ; and  each  of  these  parts  is  a different 
part  from  the  other:  to  call  all  these  parts  ‘vertebrae’  is  in  effect  to  deny 
their  differential  and  subordinate  characters,  and  to  voluntarily  abdicate  the 
power  of  appreciating  and  expressing  them.  The  terms  ‘ secondary  or 
‘ tertiary  vertebrae  ’ cannot,  therefore,  be  correctly  applied  to  the  parts  or 
appendages  of  that  natural  segment  of  the  endoskeleton  to  the  whole  of 
which  segment  the  term  ‘vertebra’  ought  to  be  restricted. 

So  likewise  the  term  ‘ rib  ’ may  be  given  to  each  moiety  of  the  haemal  arch 
of  a vertebra ; although  1 would  confine  it  to  the  pleurapophyses  when  they 
present  that  long  and  slender  form  characteristic  of  the  thoracic  abdominal 
region,  viz.  that  part  of  such  modified  haemal  or  costal  arch  to  which  the  term 
‘ vertebral  rib  ’ is  applied  in  comparative  anatomy  and  the  term  pars  ossea 
costae  ’ in  anthropotomy  : but,  admitting  the  wider  application  of  the  term 
‘ rib  ’ to  the  whole  haemal  arch  under  every  modification,  yet  the  bony  di- 
verging and  backward  projecting  appendage  of  such  rib  or  arch  is  something 

different  from  the  part  Supporting  it.  . * , . 

Arms  and  legs,  therefore,  are  developments  of  costal  appendages  , but  are 
not  ribs  themselves  liberated : although  liberated  ribs  may  perform  analo- 
gous functions,  as  in  the  serpents  and  the  Draco  volans. 

If  then  the  arms  or  pectoral  members  be  modified  developments  of  the 
diverging  appendage  of  the  scapulo-coracoid  archfj  and  if  this  be  the  haemal 
arch  of  the  occipital  vertebra,  it  follows  that  the  pectoral  members  are 
parts  of  the  head,  and  that  the  scapula,  coracoid,  humerus,  radius  and  ulna, 
carpals,  metacarpals  and  phalanges,  are  essentially  bones  of  the  skull. 

The  transcendentalism,  therefore,  which  requires  for  its  illustration  that 
the  maxillary  arches  be  the  arms  and  hands  of  the  head,  meets  its  most  direct 
refutation  in  the  fact  of  the  diverging  appendages,  properly  called  arms  and 
hands,  belonging  actually  to  one  of  the  modified  segments  of  which  the  head 

itself  consists.  p „ , , 

The  head  is,  therefore,  in  no  sense  a summary  or  repetition  of  all  the  rest 

of  the  body:  the  skull  is  a province  of  the  whole  skeleton,  consisting  of  a 
series  of  segments  or  ‘ vertebrae  ’ essentially  similar  to  those  of  which  the 

rest  of  the  skeleton  is  constituted.  _ 

Most  of  the  phrases  by  which  Spix  J attempted  to  systematize  and  carry  out 
the  repetition-hypotheses  of  Schelling  and  Oken,  as  applied  to  the  osteology 
of  the  vertebrate  skull,  may  be  similarly  explained,  and  when  well-winnowed 

some  grains  of  truth  may  be  recovered.  , r . c • 

In  denominating  the  palatine  bone  the  ‘ hyoid  bone  of  the  face,  Spix  - 
deavours  to  express  a relation  of  general  homology  by  a tenn  . 

be  confined  to  the  enunciation  of  a special  homology  : but  he  adds  cornu 
ossis  hyoidei  anterior!  analogum,”  which  shows  an  almost  correct  appreci- 
* P]  II  fig.  \,aa.  t lt>.  fig-  7.  « - Ccphalogcnesis,  fol.  1815. 


CONCLUSION. 


171 


ation  of  the  serial  homology  of  the  palatine  bone.  It  answers,  however  (see 
no.  20  in  figs.  1-6,  PI.  II.),  in  the  maxillary  arch  to  the  stylo-hyal  or  proximal 
element  (no.  as)  of  the  hyoiclean  arch,  not  to  the  cerato-liyal  or  haemapo- 
physial  element  (40);  and  it  needs  only  to  recognise  the  palatine  as  the  ‘pleur- 
apophysis  ’ of  its  vertebral  segment,  to  appreciate  all  its  true  serial  homologies. 
It  might  as  well  have  been  called  the  ‘tympanic  pedicle  of  the  face,’ the  ‘styloid 
process  of  the  face,’  the  ‘scapula  of  the  face,’  or  the  ‘ilium  of  the  lace’,  according 
to  Oken’s  and  Spix’s  faulty  method  of  expressing  serial  homological  relations, 
since  it  holds  in  its  vertebral  segment  the  same  place  which  each  of  the  above- 
I named  bones  respectively  does  in  its  segment. 

So  also,  with  regard  to  the  term  ‘ os  faciei  iliacum  ’ applied  by  Spix  to  the 
1 mastoid  (s),  the  error  lies  not  only  in  the  application  of  a special  term  to  ex- 
: press  a general  homological  relation,  but  in  the  supposed  serial  homology  so 
•expressed.  Had  Spix  detected,  in  a cranial  vertebra,  the  precise  element 
answering  to  that  called  ‘iliac  bone’ in  a post-abdominal  vertebra,  yet  it 
iwould  have  been  more  proper  to  have  signified  such  serial  homology  by  giving 
(the  general  term  applicable  to  such  parts,  as  abstract  vertebral  elements. 

The  fact  is,  however,  that  the  mastoid  (s)  is  the  parapophysis  of  its  verte- 
bra, whilst  the  ilium  is  a portion  of  the  pleurapophysis  of  its  vertebra;  and 
ithe  mastoid  is  serially  homologous  with  the  transverse  process  of  a sacral 
wertebra  (fig.  21,  p),  not  with  its  expanded  rib  or  ‘ ilium  ’ ; it  is  not,  there- 
:fore,  a repetition  of  the  ilium  in  the  skull.  The  true  expression  of  the  ideas 
■■which  suggested  the  terms  ‘ ilium  of  the  head,’  ‘ scapula  of  the  head,’  &c., 
iwill  be  found  in  the  true  enunciation  of  the  serial  homologies  of  the  verte- 
:brate  skeleton. 

Conclusion. 

It  finally  remains  for  future  inquiry,  admitting  the  explanation  of  the  endo- 
■skeletal  archetype  given  in  the  present  Essay  to  be  the  true  one,  whether  such 
is  the  ultimate  attainable  generalization,  or  whether  we  may  not  gain  an  insight 
into  the  nature  of  the  force  by  which  all  the  modifications  of  the  vertebrate 
-skeleton,  even  those  subservient  to  the  majesty  of  man  himself,  are  still 
•subordinated  to  a common  type. 

We  perceive  in  the  fact  of  the  endoskeleton  consisting  of  a succession 
:of  segments  similarly  composed, — in  the  very  power,  in  short,  of  enunciating 
‘Special,  general  and  serial  homologies, — an  illustration  of  thatlaw  of  vegetative 
>r  irrelative  repetition  which  is  so  much  more  conspicuously  manifested  by 
:he  segments  of  the  exoskeleton  of  the  invertebrata ; as,  for  example,  in  the 
rings  of  the  centipede  and  worm,  and  in  the  more  multiplied  parts  of  the 
■skeletons  of  the  echinoderms. 

The  repetition  of  similar  segments  in  a vertebral  column,  and  of  similar 
1 elements  in  a vertebral  segment,  is  analogous  to  the  repetition  of  similar  cry- 
‘Stals  as  the  result  of  polarizing  force  in  the  growth  of  an  inorganic  body. 

Not  only  does  the  principle  of  vegetative  repetition  prevail  more  and  more 
1.13  we  descend  in  the  scale  of  animal  life,  but  the  forms  of  the  repeated  parts 
I )f  the  skeleton  approach  more  and  more  to  geometrical  figures;  as  we  see, 
or  example,  in  the  external  skeletons  of  the  echini  and  star-fishes  : nay,  the 
■;alcifying  salt  actually  assumes  in  such  low-organized  skeletons  the  very 
;rystalline  figures  which  characterize  it  when  deposited,  and  subject  to  the 
general  polarizing  force,  out  of  the  organized  body.  Here,  therefore,  we 
lave  direct  proof  of  the  concurrence  of  such  general  and  all-pervading  polar- 
zing  force  with  the  adaptive  or  special  organizing  force  in  the  development 
^f  an  animal  body. 


172 


CONCLUSION. 


The  marvellous  phaenomena  of  this  development  have,  hitherto,  been  ex- 
plained by  two  hypotheses  or  forms  of  expression — the  one,  as  the  result  of 
‘ vital  properties’  either  peculiar  to  living  matter  or  common  to  all,  but  latent 
in  dead,  matter;  the  other,  as  due  to  the  operation  of  one  or  more  ‘vital  prin- 
ciples,’ vital  forces,  dynamics  or  faculties,  answering  to  the  ISeai  of  Plato, 
deemed  by  that  philosopher  to  be  superadded  to  matter  and  mind,  and  which 
he  defined  as  a sort  of  models,  or  moulds  in  which  matter  is  cast,  and 
which  regularly  produce  the  same  number  and  diversity  of  species. 

Now  besides  the  i^ea,  organizing  principle,  vital  property,  or  force,  which 
produces  the  diversity  of  form  belonging  to  living  bodies  of  the  same  niaterials, 
which  diversity  cannot  be  explained  by  any  known  properties  of  matter,  there 
appears  also  to  be  in  counter-operation  during  the  building  up  of  such  bodies 
the  polarizing  force  pervading  all  space,  and  to  the  operation  ot  which  force, 
or  mode  of  force,  the  similarity  of  I'orms,  the  repetition  of  parts,  the  signs 
of  the  unity  of  organization  may  be  mainly  ascribed. 

The  platonic  ISea  or  specific  organizing  principle  or  force  would  seem  to 
be  in  antagonism  with  the  general  polarizing  force,  and  to  subdue  and  mould 
it  in  subserviency  to  the  exigences  of  the  resulting  specific  form. 

The  extent  to  which  the  operation  of  the  polarizing  or  vegetative-repeti- 
tion-force is  so  subdued  in  the  organization  of  a specific  animal  form  becomes 
the  index  of  the  grade  of  such  species,  and  is  directly  as  its  ascent  in  the  scale 
of  being.  The  lineaments  of  the  common  archetype  are  obscured  in  the  saine 
degree:  but  even  in  Man,  where  the  specific  organizing  force  has  exerted  its 
highest  power  in  controlling  the  tendency  to  type  and  in  modifying  each 
part  in  adaptive  subserviency  to,  or  combination  of  power  with,  another  part, 
the  extent  to  which  the  vegetative  repetition  of  sepients  and  the  archetypal 
features  are  traceable  indicates  the  degree  in  which  the  general  polarizing 
force  may  have  operated  in  the  arrangement  of  the  parts  of  the  developing 
frame : and  it  is  not  without  interest  or  devoid  of  significance  that  such 
evidence  should  be  mainly  manifested  in  the  system  of  organs  in  whose  tissue 
the  inorganic  earthy  salts  most  predominate.  _ 

With  regard  to  the  ‘ adaptive  force,’  whatever  may  be  the  expressions  by 
which  its  nature  and  relations,  when  better  understood,  may  be  attempted  to 
be  explained,  its  effects  must  ever  impress  the  rightly  constituted  mind  with 
the  conviction,  that  in  every  species  “ends  are  obtained  and  the  interests  ot 
the  animal  promoted,  in  a way  that  indicates  superior  design,  intelligence 
and  foresight;  but  a design,  intelligence  and  foresight  in  which  the  judge- 
ment and  reflection  of  the  animal  never  were  concerned  ; and  which,  there- 
fore, with  Virgil,  and  with  other  studious  observers  of  nature,  we  must 
ascribe  to  the  Sovereign  of  the  universe,  in  whom  we  live,  and  move,  and 
have  our  being*.” 

* See  Barclay,  Life  and  Organization,  8vo,  1822. 


IHEAD  [Insert  at  the  end  of  the  Report.'] 


hjs,  birtls  ac 


)«i9 

:»&9 


a carpe  (ij 
du  metaci 


SOEMMERRING^. 

Names. 

Nos. 

rior  sive  basilaris  partis  occipitalis  ossis 

1. 

jheno-occipitalis. 

2, 

jferalis  sive  coudyloidea,  &c 

,ir>ii«tjilis  striete  sip  diptn.  fcp. 

»■> 

- 

51. 



1 

jis  coracoideus  ® 

52. 

ias  

52'. 

53. 

1 

54. 

1 

55 

rpi  et  metacarpi  ® 

56. 

res  digitonim® 

57. 

58 

1 

71. 

72. 

73'. 

male  

73. 

74. 

trbeen  appl-^^-  P-  516):  but  he  also  ascribes  a distinct  petrosal 
in  birds,  der  Schlafbein)  to  chelouians,  ophidians  and  sau- 
id.  p.  507),  which  must  be  either  part  of  the  exoccipi- 
WtaI”ofthe>pbenoid. 

taistes  ont  iuppentheil  des  Schlafenheins  ” (in  fishes,  reptiles  and 
■-er  gives  rfntere  Abtheilung  des  Schlafenfliigels  (in  monotremes), 
«one  in  fish  “ Pelsentheil  desselhen  (os  petrosum),”  Bojanus. 

1 1 by  GeoffrWne  Flugel  des  Keilbeins,”  Bojanus  ; “ Yordere  Schla- 
’’  Kostlin. 

rile  qui  repdbein,  Kostlin. 

:19.3.  Bu'toideum,  Bojanus  and  Kostlin. 
hyal  of  th»  transversum,”  Kostlin. 

atue  de  ladenktheil  des  Schlafenshcin,”  Kostlin ; “ Paukenring- 
■)S.  38,  39  i’  Bojanus. 

ranals  by  CiP*i®nfliigcI  des  Keilhein,  Bojanus. 

‘vhich  the  ^fortsatz,  Kostlin;  Fliigelhein,  Bojanus. 
rces." — Ossbcrches  sur  les  Poissons  Fossiles,  Ito,  t.  i.  1813. 
Corporis  hiimani  Fabricii,  8vo,  1791. 


1 


SOEMMERRING8. 

Corpus  vertebrae. 

Arcus  posterior  vertebraej  seu  radices  arcus 
posterioris. 

Radis  prior  seu  antica  processus  transversi  ver- 
tebrae. 

Processus  transversus  vertebrae  cervicalis.  Costa, 
seu  pars  vertebralis,  seu  ossea,  costae. 

Cartilago  costae  seu  pars  stemalis  costae ; (in 
the  abdomen)  inscriptiones  tendiueae  mus- 
culi  recti. 

Processus  spinosus  vertebrae. 

rrales 

!3  abdomi- 
(in  abdo- 
11  tail). 

Ossa  stemi  et  processus  ensiformis ; (in  the  ab- 
domen) linea  alba. 

Radis  posticus  processus  transversi  vertebrae, 
(and)  processus  transversus. 

Processus  obliquus  vertebrae. 

der  Wissenschaften  zu  Berlin,  1834.  The  terms  adopted  in 
most  of  the  recent  works  of  the  German  zootomists  correspond 
with  those  of  John  Muller. 

7 Le9ons  d’Anatomie  Comparee,  t.  i.  edit.  1835. 

® De  Corporis  Humani  Fabrica. 


* -J 

■*  -•'  ’« i ii'  T 

. t * 'I,  A '•  «•— i.j  I i-M  ]’ 


V i . • 


• k^*>  *•’* 

■ .2aT/t4^'JO  lg>mW’>B3D 


^ „■ 


' V . • 

' I 3 rA  *l^  t 


M ‘.) 


3^^'nfe  «***'*  " ♦»•■?¥  ^ I *^'a 

t.>s''  *'  - *l*  »'•>«  iMiMliHjfctj#  , I'l.  'i 


V>  if.il  If 


h ^ 


-i'p  f « .\A  1 1^ 

. t.  -.  '*  .B  I 


i r 


.1.^  ' i .1, 

( ..  . 1I4.U  ’i  *.f  -ntfli.  A 

I >*  **• 

> artlWIl.V  ■ ^ »m.  i .•to- 

.«>f»  «u  » ^ 

*•#  • 

. '■• 


t Ji*  • V'^»  iw*' 

ft  * ^ , . 

I — i-k«  I ■/;.■»  .''I*  w# 

«n4ii«Vh  ..*♦  V*,l«'*.^»^,*. 

'i»r ^ - 


H- 


.,  jt^',  ■<..<)  .i, 

*.  fctj'Ki 


•r  ■■•  H ^PMi m <ji  ■ - - — . - 

,i  ..  '—n  i’>  ,xi 


*»-**•*  ■ ' ■ v|Ji'  '■  Ui»(  4*ui 

(■  1%  kfik^  ^ 

' ■ -,n  W-  It* 


iir':  ^ .**<**(#1 V •♦ft;  ^ ■ 

•»  '•*  v»*st'‘  •'  *•  !*  '•”7'  ■•**  ^ 

Bp  /'Vt'  < '■  I 

> - - -•  * **  '•  '•*  • ■ •'  * ”,  * «r  i *‘  * < ' V*  s»  * 


i sq. 


* (;  It  M'*  w 4^»T‘>  " ''  ?>’  ■ «6 

' ■ •'>  «'> 


•*  ' 


T«>  * 


i<*..  * « * 


„ vi;  V*'  ' itKHf  ■ ‘ ’ 

"*t  t|4lX’.  *-  “ ‘,1*1  *M 

•«.••.  ''011 

4*4  '“  .OH 


l!|J 

■ 4kA 


DESCRIPTION  OF  PLATES. 


PLATE  I. 

In  each  of  the  figures  the  nos.  upon  the  bones  ansioer  to  those  in  the  first 
column  of  Table  I.  and  PL  II.,  except  xohere  otherwise  expressed. 

jg.  1.  Skull  of  a Maccaw  (Culyptorhynchus),  see  pp.  41,  42,  61. 

:jg.  2.  Skull  of  a Scisenoid  fish,  (Pristipoma). 

ol.  Foramen  in  nasal  neurapophysis  (prefrontal)  for  olfactory  nerve. 
■;jg.  3.  Section  of  a skull  of  a Siluroid  fish,  (Pagrus). 
c.  Centrum  of  ordinary  abdominal  vertebra. 

n.  Neural  arch  of  ditto.  c s.  Centrum  of  5th  corporal  vertebra. 
ch'.  Portion  of  peripheral  or  cortical  part  of  the  same  centrum, 
forming  the  posterior  aperture  of  the  aortic  canal. 
n 5.  Neurapophysis  of  the  same  vertebra,  separately  perforated  by 
the  motor  and  sensitive  roots  of  the  spinal  nerve, 
c 4.  Centrum  of  4th  vertebra. 

c 4,  ex.  External  or  cortical  development  of  same  centrum, 
n 4.  Neurapophysis,  and  p 4 parapophysis,  of  same  vertebra. 

C3.  Centrum  of  3rd  vertebra. 

c 3,  ex.  External  or  cortical  development  of  same  centrum, 
n 3.  Neurapophysis,  and  p 3 parapophysis,  of  3rd  vertebra. 
c X.  Centrum  of  2nd  or  axis  vertebra. 
cx,  ex.  External  or  cortical  development  of  same  centrum. 
n X.  Neurapophysis  of  axis.  7is,  x.  Neural  spine  of  axis. 

p X.  Parapophysis  of  axis. 

c a.  Centrum  of  1st  corporal  vertebra  or  ‘ atlas.’ 
c a,  ex.  External  or  cortical  development  of  same  centrum. 
n a.  Neurapophysis  of  atlas  separated  from  its  centrum. 
p a.  Parapophysis  of  atlas. 

c h.  Anterior  aperture  of  aortic  canal,  formed  by  the  development 
and  coalescence  of  the  inferior  cortical  portions  of  the  bodies  of 
the  five  anterior  vertebrae  of  the  trunk, 
c 0.  Centrum  of  occipital  vertebra. 

in.  Internal  part,  and  ex  external  or  cortical  part  of  the  anterior 
prolongation  of  the  same  centrum. 
n o.  Neurapophysis  of  occipital  vertebra ; 2 is  a continuation  of 
the  same  bone,  forming  its  otocranial  plate. 


174 


DESCRIPTION  OF  PLATES. 


ns,  0.  Neural  spine  of  occipital  vertebra. 

cp.  Centrum  of  parietal  vertebra:  it  appears  to  consist  of  th. 
denser  cortical  part  only. 

np.  Neurapophysis  of  parietal  vertebra:  the  hinder  figure  e mark, 
the  otocranial  plate  which  combines  with  2,  s (occipital  i)ar. 
apophysis), and  i2(parietal  parapophj'sis),  in  forming  the  chambe. 
for  the  cartilaginous  petrosal  or  acoustic  capsule. 
cf.  Centrum  of  frontal  vertebra,  connate  with  cp. 
n f 10.  Neurapophysis  of  frontal  vertebra. 
ns,f  11.  Neural  spine  of  ditto. 

cn.  Centrum  (represented  by  its  cortical  part)  of  nasal  vertebra.,  i 
n n.  Neurapophysis  of  ditto : it  coalesces  with  its  fellow  at  thr 
median  line. 

ns,n.  Neural  spine  of  nasal  vertebra : it  coalesces  anteriorly  wit; 

the  centrum ; closing  there  the  neural  canal. 
tr.  Intervertebral  foramen  between  parietal  and  frontal  neur 
apophysis,  for  the  exit  of  the  trigeminal  nerve. 
op.  Foramen  in  frontal  neurapophysis,  for  the  exit  of  the  opti 
nerve. 

ol.  Foramen  in  nasal  neurapophysis,  for  the  exit  of  the  olfactor; 
nerve. 

The  two  foramina  for  the  nerves  of  the  epencephalic  segmeni 
are  below  the  letters  n o : beneath  the  foramina  is  the  ‘ sina 
auditorius.’ 

Fig.  4.  Upper  view  of  part  of  the  preceding  cranium  : chiefly  to  show  th 
modifications  of  the  corporal  parapophyses,  jo  6 to  a,  as  they  ap 
proach  the  region  of  the  cranial  vertebrae  : here  jo  o is  the  occipita. 
parapophysis ; p p the  parietal  parapophysis,  and  jo  f the  frontal  par 
apophysis,  ns,  f the  permanent  fontanelle  in  the  bifid  frontal  spine 
pi  the  occipital  pleurapophysis;  the  letters  indicate  the  part  answerinj 
to  the  tubercle  of  the  human  thoracic  rib,  which  here  bifurcates  am 
articulates  with  both  the  parapophysis  of  its  own  segment  (4)  am 
with  tliat  of  the  preceding  segment  (s).  The  numbers  give  th 
special  homologies  of  the  bones,  according  to  Table  I. 

Fig.  5.  Section  of  the  skull,  atlas  and  axis  of  a sword-fish  (^Xiphias  Gla 
dins'). 

c X.  Centrum  of  the  axis  vertebra. 

nx.  Neurapophysis  of  ditto.  sx.  Neural  spine  of  ditto. 

ca.  Centrum  of  the  atlas.  na.  Neurapophysis  of  ditto. 

sa.  Neural  spine  of  ditto, 
c o 1.  Centrum  of  the  occipital  vertebra. 
n 0.  Neurapophysis  of  ditto.  nso.  Neural  spine  of  ditto. 
po.  Parapophysis  of  ditto.  cjas.  Centrumof  parietal  vertebra 

n p.  Neurapophysis  of  ditto.  cf  9.  Centrum  of  frontal  vertebra 

nf.  Neurapophysis  of  frontal  /.  Medullary  part  of  ditto, 
vertebra. 

cn.  Centrum  of  nasal  vertebra.  ns,f.  Neural  spine  of  fronta. 

vertebra. 

nn.  Neurapophysis  of  nasal  vertebra,  which,  by  its  cellular  strue 
ture,  resembles  that,  called  ethmoid,  in  mammals. 
ns,  n.  Spine  of  nasal  vertebra. 

Fig.  6.  Occipital  and  five  following  vertebrae  of  Fistularia  tabacearia. 
c n.  Centrum  of  fifth  corporal  vertebra. 
p 5.  Parapophysis  of  ditto. 


DESCRIPTION  OF  PLATES. 


175 


p.  Diapophysis  of  ditto. 
n f.  Neural  spine  of  ditto. 

c 4,  c 3,  c X,  c a.  Elongated  and  immoveably  articulated  centrums  of 
four  anterior  corporal  vertebra;. 
p *,p  3,  p X,  pa.  Similarly  modified  parapophyses  of  ditto. 

«4,  n 3,«  x,n  a.  Similarly  modified  neui’apophyses  and  spines  of  ditto. 
CO.  Occipital  centrum;  by  a rare  exception  in  the  class  of  fishes 
this  presents  a convex  articular  surface  to  the  atlas. 

71  o.  Occipital  neurapophysis.  71s,  o.  Occipital  neural  spine. 
po.  Occipital  parapophysis. 

iFig.  7.  Skull  and  anterior  trunk-vertebrae  of  the  loach  ( Cobitis). 
pi  5.  Pleurapophysis  of  fifth  vertebra  of  the  trunk, 
s s.  Neural  spine  of  ditto. 
pi  4.  Pleurapophysis  of  fourth  vertebra. 

S4.  Neural  spine  of  ditto. 

px,  pi  X and  3.  Pleurapophyses  and  parapophyses  of  third  and 
second  vertebrae  of  the  trunk,  anchylosed  and  expanded  to  con- 
tain and  protect  the  air-bladder ; being  modified,  like  the  par- 
apophyses of  the  occipital  and  parietal  vertebrae,  in  relation  to  the 
organ  of  hearing. 

71  3.  Neurapophysis  of  third  trunk-vertebra. 
s 3.  Spine  of  ditto. 

sx.  Spine  of  axis  or  second  trunk-vertebra, 
c a.  Centrum  of  atlas. 

71  a.  Neural  arch  of  ditto. 

771,  n.  Ossicles  discovered  by  Prof.  Weber,  which  bring  the  tym- 
paniform  air-bladder  into  communication  with  the  acoustic  laby- 
rinth. 

The  great  fontanelle  or  foramen  between  the  bifid  spine  (7,  t)  of  the 
parietal  vertebra  is  the  homologue  of  the  small  hole  in  the  parietal  bone  of 
nmany  saurians,  called  ‘ foramen  homianum.’ 


PLATE  II. 

This  Plate  includes  diagrams  of  the  ideal  pattern  or  archetype  of  the  ver- 
ttebrate  endoskeleton,  and  of  the  modifications  of  it  characteristic  of  the  four 
sgreat  divisions  of  the  vertebrate  subkingdom,  viz.  fishes,  reptiles,  birds,  mam- 
rmals,  and  of  mao. 

In  each  figure  the  parts  or  ‘elements’  of  the  four  anterior  segments — the 
•seat  of  the  chief  modifications  in  relation  to  the  lodgment  of  the  brain,  the 
a action  of  the  jaws  and  tongue,  and  the  interposition  of  the  sense-organs — 
a are  numbered  as  in  the  column  of  Nomina  in  the  Plate,  and  as  in  the  first 
(Column  of  the  Table  of  Synonyms,  No.  1. 

As  the  four  anterior  segments  of  the  neural  axis  are  called  collectively 
'*\irA\n’  (encephalon'),  so  the  four  corresponding  segments  of  the  vertebral 
a axis  are  called  collectively  ‘ skull’ (cranawm).  The  head  therefore  is  not 
' otherwise  a repetition  of  the  rest  of  the  body,  than  insofar  as  each  segment 
' of  the  skull  is  a repetition  or  ‘ homotype’  of  every  other  segment  of  the 
body  ; each  being  subject  to  modifications  which  give  it  its  individual  cha- 
1 racter,  without  obliterating  its  typical  features.  So  neither  are  the  ‘arms’ 
■ and  ‘legs’  repeated  in  the  head  in  any  other  sense  than  as  the  cranial  seg- 
ments may  retain  their  diverging  appendages.  The  ‘ fore-limbs’  are  actually 


176 


DESCRIPTION  OF  PLATES. 


such  appendages  of  the  occipital  vertebra,  whicli  undergo  modifications  < r 
closely  analogous  to  those  of  the  appendages  of  the  pelvic  segment  or  ‘ hind  : ' 
limbs.’  And  inasmuch  as  in  one  class  the  pelvic  appendages,  with  their  sup-  ; 
porting  haemal  arch,  are  detached  from  the  rest  of  their  segments,  and  sub-  i 
ject  to  changes  of  position  (fig.  2,  V,  V',  V"),  so  also  in  other  classes  the 
appendages  of  the  occipital  segment  are  liable  to  be  detached  with  their  > 
sustaining  haemal  arch,  and  to  be  transported  to  various  distances  from  their  i 
proper  centrum  and  neural  arch. 

The  head  therefore  is  not  a virtual  equivalent  of  the  trunk,  but  is  only  a . » 
portion,  i.  e.  certain  modified  segments,  of  the  whole  body. 

The  jaws  are  the  modified  haemal  arches  of  the  first  two  segments ; they 
are  not  ‘ limbs’  of  the  head. 

The  different  elements  of  the  primary  segments  are  distinguished  by  pecu-- 
liar  markings : — 

the  neurapophyses  by  diagonal  lines,  thus : — Ijjljjjl 
the  diapophyses  by  vertical  lines : — jjjj|jjj 
the  parapophyses  by  horizontal  lines  : — ■ ~ 


the  centrum  by  decussating  horizontal  and  vertical  lines : — 
the  pleurapophyses  by  diagonal  lines : — 

the  haemapophyses  by  dots: — ;;;;;;;; 


the  appendages  by  interrupted  lines: — _ 

the  neural  spines  and  haemal  spines  are  left  blank. 

In  certain  segments  the  elements  are  also  specified  by  the  initials  of  their' 
names,  as  in  the  third  segment  in  fig.  1,  and  the  fourth  in  fig.  2,  for  example : — 
ns  is  the  neural  spine. 
n is  the  neurapophysis. 

•pi  is  the  pleurapophysis. 
c is  the  centrum. 
h is  the  haemapophysis. 
hs  is  the  haemal  spine. 
a is  the  appendage. 

Fig.  1.  Ideal  pattern  or  archetype  of  the  vertebrate  endoskeleton,  as: 
shown  in  a side  view  of  the  series  of  typical  segments  or  ‘ vertebrae’  of  whichi 
it  is  composed,  with  the  commencement  indicated  at  the  two  ends  of  those! 
modifications,  which,  according  to  their  kind  and  extent,  impress  class-cha- 
racters upon  the  type.  | 

The  four  anterior  neurapophyses,  i4,  lo,  o,  2,  give  issue  to  the  nerves,  thel 

terminal  modifications  of  which  constitute  the  organs  of  special  sense. 

'I'he  first  or  foremost  of  these  is  the  organ  of  smell  (is,  lo),  always  situated 
immediately  in  advance  of  its  proper  segment,  which  becomes  variously  and 
extensively  modified  to  inclose  and  protect  it.  ^ 

The  second  is  the  organ  of  sight  (ir),  lodged  in  a cavity  or  ‘ orbit  betweem 
its  own  and  the  nasal  segment,  but  here  drawn  above  that  interspace. 

The  third  is  the  organ  of  taste,  the  nerve  of  which  (gustatory  portion  of 
the  trigeminal)  perforates  the  neurapophysis  (o)  of  its  proper  segment  (iw- 
tehra,  parietalis  seu  guslatoria),  or  passes  by  a notch  betweeri  this  and  the 
frontal  vertebra,  to  expand  in  the  organ  which  is  always  lodged  below  in  the 
cavity  called  ‘ mouth,’  and  is  supported  by  the  haemal  spine  (ii,  42}  of  its 

The  fourth  is  the  organ  of  hearing  (ic),  indicated  above  the  interspace 


PISCINE  TYPE. 


177 


■etween  the  neurapophysis  of  its  own  (occipital)  and  that  of  the  antecedent 
oarietal)  vertebra,  in  winch  it  is  always  lodged;  the  surrounding  vertebral 
ements  being  modified  to  form  the  cavity  for  its  reception,  which  I have 
died  ‘ otocrane.’ 

The  mouth  opens  at  the  interspace  between  the  htemal  arches  of  the  an- 
jrior  and  second  segment;  the  position  of  the  vent  varies  (in  fishes),  but 
ways  opens  behind  the  pelvic  arch  (I’v)  when  this  is  ossified. 

Outlines  of  the  chief  developments  of  the  dermoskeleton,  in  different  ver- 
ibrates,  which  are  usually  more  or  less  ossified,  are  added  to  the  endoskele- 
d archetype*;  as,  e.g.  the  median  horn  supported  by  the  nasal  spine  (is)  in 
le  rhinoceros;  the  pair  of  lateral  horns  developed  from  the  frontal  spine 
n)  in  most  ruminants;  the  median  folds  (Di,  Dii)  above  the  neural 
lines,  one  or  more  in  number,  constituting  the  ‘dorsal’  fin  or  fins  in  fishes 
nd  cetaceans,  and  the  dorsal  hump  or  humps  in  the  buffaloes  and  camels  ; 
milar  folds  are  sometimes  developed  at  the  end  of  the  tail,  forming  a ‘ cau- 
.al’  fin,  C,  and  beneath  the  hmmai  spines,  constituting  the  ‘ anal’  fin  or  fins, 
u,  of  fishes,  or  the  subcaudal  dermo-adipose  tumour  of  the  Cape-sheep. 

Fig.  2.  Typical  skeleton  of  a fish  (class  Pisces).  The  plane  of  the 
nterior  haemal  arch  (20,  21,  22)  is  here  raised  to  parallel  with  the  axis  of  the 
•unk,  and  its  apex  or  spine  (22)  is  modified  and  developed  so  as  to  articu- 
■rte  with  the  neural  spine  (is)  of  the  same  segment,  which  thus  becomes 
Hosed  anteriorly;  both  22  and  the  haemapophysis  21  are  developed  down- 
rards  and  backwards  in  relation  to  the  protractile  and  retractile  motions  of 
. le  arch  ; and  for  the  purpose  of  associating  these  motions  with  correspond- 
:jg  ones  of  the  succeeding  haemal  arch,  the  diverging  appendage  is  subdi- 
ided  (23  and  24)  and  developed  so  as  to  articulate  with  the  pleurapophysis 
.•23)  of  the  next  arch;  a rudiment  of  an  appendage  (2a)  is  attached  in  some 
-shes  to  the  haemapophysis  (21)  of  the  nasal  segment,  but  it  will  be  observed 
bat  no  new  element  is  added  to  the  haemal  arch  ; and,  although  the  Lepi- 
oosteus  offers  an  exceptional  instance  of  subdivision  of  the  pleurapophysis 
.21),  that  kind  of  modification  is  usually  restricted  to  the  diverging  ap- 
rendage. 

In  the  next  segment  the  haemal  arch  has  been  the  seat  of  unusual  growth, 
ut  retains  more  of  its  normal  position  and  attachments.  Its  weight  and 
i.hat  of  the  appendages  it  supports  have  required  an  extension  of  the  proxi- 
'.aal  articulation  of  its  pleurapophysis  (28  a)  from  its  proper  parapophysis  (12) 
‘lackwards  to  the  next  parapophysis  (s) ; and  the  pleurapophysis  itself  is 
ubdivided  into  two,  three,  or  four  overlapping  pieces  for  the  final  purpose 
yrplained  in  p.  112;  but  it  is  evident  that  no  new  element  has  been  intro- 

* I have  used  this  word  here,  and  in  the  ‘ Report  of  the  British  Association  for  1846,’ 
■p.  169,  211,  in  the  sense  which  it  bears  in  such  classical  works  of  our  own  language  as 
I rlanville’s  Scepsis  and  Watts’s  Logic,  and  agreeably  with  its  definition  in  Johnson’s  and  other 
detionaries,  as  the  original  or  pattern  of  which  any  resemhlance  is  made  : and  as  equivalent 
1 the  terms  ‘ general  type’  and  ‘ fundamental  type  ’ as  they  occur  in  my  “ Lectures  on  the 
Vertebrate  Animals,”  8vo.  1846,  p.  41,  and  passim. 

In  the  ‘ Comparative  Osteology  ’ of  Joseph  Maclise,  Esq.,  in  which  the  author’s  views  of 
he  homologies  of  the  bones  of  the  trunk  are  illustrated  by  fifty-four  beautiful  plates,  many 
■ f which  are  peculiarly  well  adapted  to  convey  clear  ideas  of  those  relations  in  the  human 
keleton,  the  word  ‘ archetype  ’ is  used  as  synonjunous  with  • unity.’  “ Unity  under  metamor- 
phosis is  an  archetype  plus  quantity,  being  subjected  to  the  law  of  proportion.  Unity  and 
he  archetype  may  hence  be  regarded  as  one  and  the  same  thing,  consequently  the  incta- 
:o«rpho3e3  and  j)roportionals  are  also  understood  as  the  products  of  unity  or  the  archetype.” 
-iRemarks  on  plate  l.i.  And  again  the  author  says,  “ Unity,  or  the  archetype,  is  a name 
> vhich  may  be  applied  to  characterise  that  whole  structure  which  is  capable  of  undergoing 
netamorphosis  or  subtraction  through  all  degrees  of  quantity  severally  eipial  to  all  those 
' iroportional  forms  which  stand  in  series  with  itself.” — Remarks  on  plate  16. 

N 


17S 


DESCRIPTION  OF  PLATES. 


duced,  because  the  extremities  of  the  subdivided  pleurapophysis  (as  a and 
28  d)  retain  their  normal  connections,  the  one  with  the  parapophysis  (12), 
the  other  with  the  hsemapophysis  (29,  :io).  This  element  is  also  subdivided, 
for  the  same  final  purpose  as  the  pleurapophysis ; and  its  squamous  union 
with  the  haemal  spine  (sa)  is  retained.  Yet  the  connections  of  29  with  the 
condyle  of  the  pleurapophysis  and  of  32  with  its  fellow,  forming  the  free 
apex  of  the  inverted  arch  of  the  second  segment,  show  that  the  complexity 
is  the  result  of  mere  (teleological)  subdivision,  and  that  no  new  part  has 
been  added  to  the  typical  elements  as  exhibited  in  the  archetype*  (fig.  1,29- 
32) ; every  anatomist  has  recognised  the  bones  so  numbered  in  the  fish  as 
the  homologue  of  the  single  (undivided  or  anchylosed)  bone  forming  the  lower  • 
jaw  (29—32)  of  the  mammal  (fig.  5)  and  of  man  (fig.  6).  In  addition,  there- 
fore, to  change  of  shape  and  proportion,  the  parts  of  the  archetype  may 
be  modified  by  division  and  subdivision.  And  in  this  respect  the  pleur- 
apophyses  (as)  and  hsemapophyses  (29,  30,  31)  of  the  fish  deviate  further 
from  the  archetype  than  the  same  parts  do  in  the  warm-blooded  vertebrates. 
Herein  is  manifested  the  early  divergence  to  a special  form  for  the  lowest 
class,  which  the  higher  classes  do  not  assume  in  passing  towards  their  own 
types.  The  diverging  appendages  are  the  seat  of  such  excess  of  subdivi- 
sion with  special  development  of  the  divided  parts,  as  best  to  countenance 
the  idea  of  a superaddition  of  new  parts  to  the  typical  element ; yet  the  most 
essential  character  of  the  diverging  appendage  is  retained  under  its  extremest 
modification,  as  where  it  forms  the  wing  of  the  bird  or  the  arm  of  man  ; viz. 
its  connection  by  one  extremity  to  a haemal  arch,  and  the  free  projection  ofl 
the  opposite  subdTvTded-extremity,  carrying  out  with  it  a fold  of  integument. 
With  regard  to  the  diverging  appendage  of  the  luEinal  arch  of  the  second 
segment,  its  modifications  are  arrested  at  different  stages  of  departure  from 
the  simple  archetypal  form  (34-37,  fig.  1),  as  explained  at  pp.  66  and  112. 
The  most  common  modification  in  bony  fishes  is  that  shown  in  fig.  2,  where 
it  is  divided  into  two  segments,  and  the  second  segment  into  three  pieces! 
(35,  36,  37),  usually  broad  and  flat,  for  the  office  explained  at  p.  112.  1 

The  parietal  segment,  or  third  counting  backwards,  has  the  haemal  arch  | 
(38-4i)  detached  from  its  proper  supporting  parapophysis  (a)  by  the  back- 
ward  develophient  of  2s  a of  the  preceding  segment.  This  is  the  first  ex-jj 
ample  of  another  modification,  viz.  that  of  dislocation,  sometimes  accom- 
panied by  great  change  of  place,  which  has  tended  most  to  obscure  the  essen- 
tial nature  of  parts,  and  their  true  relations  to  the  archetype.  The  principle 
of  subdivision  still  manifests  itself  in  the  elements  of  the  haemal  arch,  espe- 
cially in  its  spine,  4i-43;  and  in  a greater  degree  by  a vegetative  repetition 
of  the  ‘ appendage’  (44),  without  departure  from  its  primitive  ray-hke  form.  B 
The  pleurapophysis  of  the  occipital  segment  (so,  si)  is  divided  into  t\vo, 


and  irs^roximarend  is  usually  bifurcate  in  fishes,  articulating  like  the  nor- 
mal ribs  of  higher  animals,  by  a ‘ head’  and  a ‘ tubercle  to  two  points  of 
the  neural  arch  of  its  segment 


Almost  every  stage  of  development  and  departure  from  the  primitive  type 
is  manifested  by  the  diverging  appendage  (si-si)  up  to 
fication  attained  by  the  typical  osseous  fish.  1 he  proximal  segment  is 
divided  into  two  pieces  (iS  and  ss),  the  next  segment  into  four  or  more  (so) 
and  the  last  segment  into  a greater  but  variable  number  of  pieces,  retaining. 

the  elementary  form  of  rays.  ■ .1, 

The  Lepidosiren  (fig.  7)  is  eminently  instructive  by  the  retention  in  the 

occipital  vLtebra  of  the  primitive  condition  of  the 

the  archetype  (fig.  1 , 53-57),  modified  only  by  segmentation  of  the  ray.  1 

* See  note,  p.  177. 


PISCINE  TYPE. 


179 


loleurapophysis  of  the  arch  (51)  likewise  retains  its  simple  cyliiulrical  form,  and 
i-s  articulated  to  its  centrum,  like  the  other  ribs  of  the  Lepidosiren,  by  an  un- 
i.livided  head. 

The  haemal  arch  of  the  fifth  segment  (first  of  tlie  trunk)  is  commonly  de- 
I ached  from  its  centrum  and  neural  arch  in  fishes,  without  being  displaced 
loackwards.  The  pleunipophysis  {pi)  is  short  and  simple,  sometimes  ex- 
panded ; the  hoemapophj’sis  (ss,  h)  is  simple,  long  and  slender.  When  this 
iirch  supports  an  appendage  it  is  a simple  diverging  ray. 

All  the  succeeding  abdominal  segments  of  the  fish  have  their  haemal  arches 
i ncomplete  by  bone ; the  hcemapophyses  and  spines  retaining  the  primitive 
Tbrous  condition.  The  pleurapophyses  of  most  support  diverging  appen- 
dages in  the  form  of  simple  undivided  bony  rays. 

A part  of  the  haemal  arch  of  a post-abdominal  (pelvic)  segment  is  ossified 
’as),  and  supports  a more  complex  appendage  (09)  in  the  form  of  one,  two  or 
'iiore  jointed  rays,  which  project  beyond  the  surface  and  are  enveloped  by  a 
bid  of  skin  forming  the  ‘ ventral’  fin,  V,  making  a pair  with  the  one  on  the 
opposite  side.  This  partially  ossified  hsemapophysis  articulates  with  its  fel- 
«w  by  its  anterior  apex,  forming  a ‘symphysis  ischii’  seu  ‘ pubis’;  and,  in 
vome  fishes  called  ‘abdominal,’  it  is  connected  to  its  proper  pleurapophysis  (02) 
sy  an  aponeurosis  representing  its  unossified  continuation. 

The  remarkable  degree  to  which  one  and  the  same  part  ma}’^  be  subject  to 
hhe  modification  of  change  of  position,  is  strikingly  exemplified  in  this  lower 
•lortion  of  the  pelvic  arch  with  its  appendages  in  fishes.  It  may  be  moved 
oorwards,  so  that  the  symphysis  of  the  pelvic  arch  is  brought  into  connection 
rrith  that  of  the  scapular  arch  ; when,  according  to  the  length  of  the  ossified 
■ <arts  of  the  pelvic  haemapophyses,  the  species  is  either  ‘ thoracic,’  as  when  the 
central  fins  are  at  V',  or  ‘jugular,’  when  they  are  advanced  to  V".  The 
ir.niversally  acknowledged  and  long  recognised  special  homology  of  the  haemal 
u’rch  and  appendages  of  the  pelvic  vertebra,  as  the  ‘ventral  fins’  of  fishes, 
ir.nder  these  changes  of  position,  prepare  us  for  the  recognition  of  an  analogous 
modification  of  the  haemal  arch  and  appendages  of  the  occipital  vertebra  in 
■he  higher  elasses  of  vertebrate. 

Beyond  the  abdomen  the  osseous  and  aj)oneurotic  parts  of  the  haemal 
Tches  rapidly  contract;  the  progressively  elongated  parapophyses  usually 
■eend  down  and  complete  the  inverted  arch  by  their  apical  coalescence; 
'■ometimes  distinct  pleurapophyses  continue  to  form  these  arches ; sometimes 
these  elements  may  be  traced,  anchylosed  with  their  fellows  of  the  opposite 
i'ide,  and  with  the  coalesced  extremities  of  the  parapophyses.  The  bodies 
•f  a certain  number  of  the  terminal  segments  coalesce  together  in  the  typical 
»<s8cous  fishes,  and  support  several  neural  and  haemal  arches  and  spines,  usually 
more  or  less  expanded,  and  forming  the  basis  of  the  caudal  fin,  C. 

The  ossified  parts  of  the  dermal  median  and  symmetrical  folds,  consti- 
'.uting  the  dorsal  (Di,  Dii),  the  anal  (A),  and  caudal  (C)  fins,  are  added  to 
■■■he  endoskeleton  in  fig.  2 ; in  are  the  interneural  spines  ; dyi  the  dermoneural 
•pines;  ih  the  interhaemal  spines;  dh  the  dermohaemal  spines;  these  form 
opart  of  the  true  vertebral  skeleton,  and  are  peculiar  to  fishes.  The  dia- 
gram of  the  modified  cranial  segments  is  not  eomplicated  by  the  outlines  of 
he  sense-capsules  or  mucodermal  bones;  the  latter  are  shown  in  fig.  2,  72, 73, 

I ’late  I. 

I Thus,  compared  with  the  archetypal  figure,  the  endoskeleton  of  the 
I sh  deviates  by  excess  of  development,  manifested  chiefly  in  the  diverging 
rppendages  of  the  four  anterior  or  cranial  segments,  and  by  arrest  of  de- 
: i elopment  in  most  of  the  other  segments;  but  the  principle  of  polaric  or 
I N 2 


ISO 


DESCRIPTION  OF  PLATES. 


vegetative  repetition  greatly  prevails,  and  more  of  the  segments  resemble  1 
one  another  than  in  any  of  the  higher  classes.  C 

Fig.  3.  The  Crocodile  is  here  taken  as  the  type  of  the  class  Ifeptilia.  | 
- The  haemal  arch  of  the  anterior  segment  is  now  firmly  fixed  by  excessive  I 
de.vclopment,  chiefly  of  its  haMuapophyscs  (ii),  which  have  extended  their  [ 
attachments  to  all  the  elongated  elements  (13,  14  and  15)  of  their  own  neural  | 
arch.  The  diverging  appendage  (-44)  from  the  pleurapophysis  (20)  fixes  | 
the  arch  extensively  to  the  centrums  of  the  second  and  tliird  segments:  the 
appendage  from  the  htemapophysis  (21)  bifurcates;  one  branch,  divided  intc 
two  pieces  (20  and  27),  connects  the  arch  with  the  pleurapophysis  (w)  of  the 
next  segment ; the  other  branch  (25)  extends  the  attachment  to  the  parapo-  | 
physis  (12)  of  the  same  segment,  and  also  to  the  appendage  (24)  of  its  owri 
arch.  g 

The  pleurapophysis  (2s)  of  the  frontal  segment  is  undivided ; it  is  repre- 
sented as  displaced  and  depressed  ; but  in  nature  it  still  retains  a small  parr 
of  its  connection  with  its  proper  pleuraimphysis  (12),  although  it  is  developee 
backwards  so  as  chiefly  to  articulate  with  that  (s)  of  the  following  segt 
ment:  it  supports  no  diverging  appendage.  The  hannapophysis  (29-31  « 
is  more  subdivided  than  in  fishes,  in  relation  to  functions  explained  in  pp1 


122,  123.  y 

The  excess  of  development  of  the  hamal  arch  of  the  froutiil  vertebra  i | 
compensated  by  the  defect  of  development  of  that  of  the  parietal  one  (ir  j 
4i);  and  this  constitutes  the  next  great  additional  step  in  the  deviation  fronj| 
the  archetype.  Only  the  haemapophyses  (40)  are  ossified : the  luemal  spinet^ 
though  much  expanded  and  flattened,  remains  cartilaginous,  and  the  pleuni 
apophysis  is  represented  by  a feeble  ligament.  I he  whole  arch  is  detached  anuij 
displaced  backwards,  and  its  diverging  appendages  cease  to  be  developed,  ij 
The  tendency  to  retrogrudation  manifested  by  the  preceding  luemal  arched 
is  carried  out  to  a striking  extent  in  that  (51,  52)  of  the  occipital  segment  (th  j 
fourth  counting  backwards) : it  overlaps  the  homotypal  arches  of  the  8th  t|j 
the  11th  segments  of  the  trunk:  the  ossified  portions  of  both  its  constituerj 
element,  si  and  .12,  are  simple;  the  hcemal  spine  52'  is  prolonged  backward:'^ 
I'he  diverging  appendage  manitests,  in  comparison  with  that  in  the  fish,  aji 
additional  segment  (53),  which  is  single ; the  segment  of  two  pieces  (s4  ,an 
as)  is  now  the  second.  The  rays  of  the  distal  segment  are  reduced  to  fiv; 
in  number,  which  is  never  afterwards  exceeded  in  the  vertebrate  subkmjjj 
dom.  The  dislocation  and  retrogradation  of  the  posterior  luemal  segmei  jj 
of  the  skull  form  the  second  chief  additional  feature  of  departure  from  tlrjj 
Archetype,  as  compared  with  the  skeleton  ol  fishes.  1 he  thiril  well-markeJ 
modification  is  the  development  of  an  inferior  (cortical)  portion  ot  the  bodB 
of  the  atlas  (ca,  a-),  distinct  from  the  main  part  of  that  centrum  (ca),  whici 
coalesces  with  that  of  the  axis,  and  is  commonly  called  its  ‘ odontoid  pn]| 


cess  (see  p.  93).  , , , , r c i • .1-4 

The  nine  segments  that  succeed  the  head  resemble  those  of  fishes  in  ttl 

non-assification  of  the  hcemapophyscs  and  luemal  spines,  but  deviate 
from  the  archetype  by  the  minor  development  of  the  pleurapophyses.  lhe:| 
progressively  elongate  to  the  12th  vertebra,  where  the  hmiiial  arch  is  coiijl 
Dieted  by  a hieniapophysis  and  hajinal  spines.  i 

The  hmmapophyses  are  not  so  completely  ossified  as  the  pleurapophyse 
and  they  are  divided  from  these  by  the  interposition  ot  eartilaginous  piece 
fl  a ; these  pieces  may  be  regarded  either  as  dismeinbermeuts  ot  the  h?ei.j 
apophyses,  or  as  unossified  parts  of  the  pleurapophyses.  Ihe  divergii  J 
appendages  (<i,  w)  are  usually  cartilaginous.  . , 


REPTILIAN  TYPE. 


181 


Beyond  the  21st  segment  of  the  trunk  ''  tlie  pleurapophyses  usually 
ease  to  be  represented  either  by  bone  or  cartilage : but  tlie  partially 
•ssified  hmuiapophyses  are  continued  to  those  of  the  pelvic  segments,  oi 
nd  63,  h.  In  these  segments  the  pleuraj)ophyses  reappear,  and  are  di- 
ided  into  two  parts,  like  those  in  the  thorax  : the  proximal  portions  (pi, 
1)  are  short  and  thick;  the  distal  portions  have  either  eoalesced  into  one 
road  and  thick  plate  (os />/),  or  the  distal  portion  of  one  pleurapophysis 
i still  more  remarkably  developed  and  takes  the  place  of  two : this  question 
I discussed  at  pp.  160,  161.  The  two  haemapophyses  (03,04)  are  distinct 
, nd  well-ossified.  The  diverging  appendage  (os-oo)  has  been  subject  to 
Lae  same  kind  and  amount  of  development  as  that  of  the  scapular  arch 
^ 53—57).  The  first  steps  in  the  progression  of  this  metamorphosis  from  the 

rimitive  type  is  shown  in  t\\e  Lepidosiren  (fig.  9),  and  the  Proteus  (fig.  10). 
,'he  modification  of  the  pelvic  segments  and  their  appendages  in  the  reptile 
arms  another  prominent  feature  of  deviation  from  the  archetype.  The 
leurapopliyses  are  continued,  progressively  shortening,  attached  to  the 
:iapophyses  of  a certain  number  of  the  vertebras  that  succeed  the  sacrum; 
hhe  haemapophyses  are  no  longer  attached  to  their  extremities  but  are  directly 
irrticulated  to  the  central  elements,  with  a slight  degree  of  displacement, 
1 .’hereby  they  articulate  to  another  segment  as  well  as  to  their  own.  The 
Mode  and  degree  of  departure  from  the  archetype  are  now  such  that  dif- 
eerent  series  of  vertebral  segments  may  be  classed  into  groups,  with  di- 
:tinctive  characters  and  names : — 

The  first  four  segments,  by  the  fixed  union  of  their  neural  arches,  as  cranial 
'.Cr),  under  the  collective  name  of  ‘ skull.’ 

The  next  nine  segments,  moveably  articulated,  and  with  free  or  ‘ floating’ 
Lleurapophyses,  as  cervical,  C,  forming  collectively  the  region  called  ‘neck’. 

The  succeeding  nine  segments  with  ossified  and  moveable  pleurapophyses 
;:nd  haemapophyses,  as  dorsal,  D,  forming  the  ‘ back,’  ‘ thorax’  or  ‘ chest.’ 

The  three  following  moveable  vertebrae,  without  free  bony  pleurapophyses, 
.-s  lumbar,  L,  forming  the  ‘ loins.’ 

The  next  two  vertebras,  immoveably  united,  and  with  modified  and  much- 
lieveloped  haemal  arches  and  appendages,  are  called  sacral,  and  collectively 
: pelvis  and  hind  limbs.’ 

All  the  other  segments  are  ^caudal'  and  constitute  the  ‘ tail.’ 

The  haemal  arch  (51,  52)  with  the  developed  appendages  (53-57  a)  detached 
:rom  the  occipital  vertebra,  may  require  to  be  specially  noticed  in  this  sum- 
i.uary  of  the  parts  of  the  endoskeleton,  as  from  the  circumstance  of  its  com- 

• .According  to  Cuvier,  the  pleurapophyses  cease  to  appear  after  the  20th  trunk-vertebra 
aa  the  Crocodilus  biporcalus,  and  after  the  19th  in  Alligator  lucius.  I allude  to  these  dif- 
'wences  for  the  purpose  of  remarking  that  the  conformity  of  organization  is  greater  than 
■^oold  appear  at  first  sight  from  the  formulae  of  the  vertebrae  of  the  different  species  of 
■TOCodile  cited  in  the  Table  at  p.  220,  tome  i.  Lejons  d’ Anatomic  Comparce,  1835.  The 
inmber  of  vertebra:  from  the  atlas  inclusive  to  the  sacrum  is  the  same  in  each  species,  as 
•vill  be  seen  by  the  following  extract ; — 


Crocodile  a deu.x  aretes 

Cervical. 

7 

Dorsal. 

13 

Lumbar. 

4 = 

24 

Crocodile  du  Gange 

7 

14 

3 = 

24 

Caiman  a raus.  de  brochet 

7 

12 

5 = 

24 

I The  difference  in  the  dorsal  and  lumbar  scries  depends  merely  on  the  ossification  or 
t itherwise  of  the  pleurajmphysial  tendons  or  fibrous  basis  attached  to  the  diapophyscs  of  the 
! 21st  and  22nd  vertebra:. 

< A slight  change  in  the  form  and  size  of  the  pleurapophysis  is  all  that  distinguishes  the 
: int  dorsal  from  the  last  cervical  vertebra  in  the  Cuvierian  Table. 

I 


182 


DESCRIPTION  OF  PLATES. 


monly  remote  position  from  its  proper  segment,  it  may  not  have  been  thought  i 
of  as  a part  included  in  the  first  class  of  vertebrae  constituting  the  skull,  f 
Many  striking  and  extreme  deviations  from  the  archetype  are  manifested  I 
in  the  skeleton  of  the  more  aberrant  forms  of  the  reptilia.  The  number  off  • 
moveable  trunk-segments  is  reduced  to  the  minimum  in  the  Batrachia  (e.g.  7 ’ ' 
in  Pipa),  and  increased  to  the  maximum  in  the  Ophidia  (4-22  in  Python), , 
At  first  view  the  principle  of  vegetative  repetition  seems  to  have  exliausted  I f 
itself  in  the  long  succession  of  incomplete  vertebrae  which  support  the  trunk  t 
of  the  great  constrictors:  but  by  the  endless  combinations  and  adjustments i 
of  the  inflections  of  their  long  spine  the  absence  of  locomotive  extremities  isi  • 
so  compensated  that  the  degraded  and  mutilated  serpent  can  overreach  and  ", 
overcome  animals  of  far  higher  organization  than  itself:  it  can  outswim  the  ^ 
fish,  outrun  the  rat,  outclimb  the  monkey,  and  outwrestle  the  tiger;  crush- 
ing the  carcase  of  the  great  carnivore  in  the  embrace  of  its  redoubled  coils,  ■ 
and  proving  the  simple  vertebral  column  to  be  more  effectual  in  the  struggles  *• 
than  the  most  strongly  developed  fore-limbs  with  all  their  exquisite  rotatory* 
mechanism  for  the  effective  and  varied  application  of  the  heavy  and  formi-* 
dably  armed  paws.  And  whilst  the  vertebral  column  of  the  ophidian  order: 
exhibits  the  extreme  of  flexibility,  that  of  the  chelonia  manifests  the  opposite, 
extreme  of  rigidity  : back,  loins  and  pelvis  constitute  one  vast  sacrum,  or; 
rather  abdominal  skull,  but  a skull  suboi’dinated  chiefly  to  the  lodgment  and 
defence  of  a much-developed  haemal  system,  and  in  which  the  pleurapophyses, 
haemapophyses  and  their  spines  repeat  the  same  modification  of  great  expan- 
sion and  fixed  union  by  marginal  sutures,  which  the  neurapophyses  and  spines; 
undergo  in  the  cranium  of  the  higher  vertebrates.  The  well-known  deter- 
mination of  the  ordinary  elements  of  the  typical  vertebra  in  the  thoracic-ab- 
dominal segments  of  the  tortoise  need  not  here  be  discussed  (see  pp.  100,* 

■ 101)  : but  it  is,  perliaps,  w'orthj'  of  repetition  that  the  neurapophyses  exhibit 
the  modifieation  of  cliange  of  position,  like  that  which  has  been  described  in; 
the  sacrum  of  the  bird  ; being  sliifted  from  their  own  centrum  over  one  half 
of  the  next  eentrum,  thus  adding  to  the  strength  and  elasticity  of  the  whole< 
osseous  vault  (see  p.  95).  The  confluence  of  the  neurapophysis  (14)  withi 
its  own  moiet}'  of  the  neural  sjnne  (15)  has  already  been  noticed  (p.  124)  iml 
tlie  anterior  segment  of  tlie  ce])halic  skull  of  most  chelonia.  I may  here  add 
that  the  typical  condition  of  the  haemal  (maxillary)  arch  of  the  sanie  segment 
is  well  shown  in  the  Etnys  expansa.  The  pleurapojihyses  (palatines)  meet 
at  the  base  of  the  cartilaginous  vomer,  above  and  behind  the  posterior  iiares,- 
sweep  outwards  and  downwards,  give  attachment  to  the  haemapophyses 
(maxillaries)  which  advance  and  converge,  and  the  arch  is  closed  below  the 
nasal  passage  by  the  haemal  spine  (premaxillary).  Cut  through  the  junction 
of  the  haemapophyses  with  the  neurapophyses  (prefrontals),  and  with  the  di- 
verging appendages  (malars),  and  the  inverted  arch  is  then  suspended  by  its 
proper  piers,  the  pleurapophyses  or  palatines. 

In  the  connation  or  coalescence  of  the  neurapophyses  and  spines  foiming. 
the  parietal  and  frontal  neural  arches  in  the  ophidian  and  some  cheloniau 
reptiles,  we  perceive  a return  to  the  common  constitution  of  those  arches  in 
the  vertebrae  of  the  trunk,  in  which  the  permanent  scparution  of  the  neural 
spine  from  the  neurapophyses  occurs  as  a rare  exception. 

In  the  class-skeleton  {Aves)  represented  in  fig.  4 the  archetype  is  further 
departed  from  than  in  the  typical  reptilia ; and  when  the  general  form  of  this 
diagram  is  contrasted  with  that  of  the  first  figure,  the  power  of  demonstrating 
the  fundamental  agreement  which  reigns  throughout,  and  which  is  equally 
manifested  in  the  comparison  of  figure  4 with  those  of  the  piscine  and  rep- 


AVIAX  TYPE. 


183 


:tiliai)  skeletons,  atibnls  a most  striking  proof  of  the  unity  of  plan  which 
pervades  the  whole  series. 

As  compared  with  the  crocodile  (fig.  3)  the  proportions  of  the  hmmapo- 
physis  (>i)  and  spine  (-n)  of  the  anterior  segment  are  reversed;  there  is 
..a  return  towards  the  condition  of  the  parts  in  fishes  (fig. ‘i)  ; the  strength 
of  the  arch  being  chietly  due  to  the  great  development  and  extensive 
.connections  of  -ii,  which  usually  sends  a process  upwards  and  backwards 
between  the  divided  neural  spine  (is)  of  its  own  to  that  (n)  of  the  next 
-segment.  The  pleurapophysis  (-io)  has  often  a slender  rib-like  form,  and  the 
appendages  retain  the  form  of  bony  rays.  That  (24)  from  the  pleurapophysis 
is  simple  ; that  (->6,  27)  from  the  hajinapophysis  is  divided  in  the  embryo- 
bird  : both  concur  in  attaching  the  haemal  arch  of  the  anterior  segment  to 
the  pleurapophysis  of  the  second  segment.  The  neurapophyses  of  the  an- 
terior segment  coalesce  and  form  a single  vertical  bone,  slightly  expanded 
jabove  and  sometimes  appearing  anterior  to  the  frontal. 

The  lucmal  arch  of  the  second  segment  is  detached  from  its  neural  arch  ; 
jand,  although  its  proper  parapophysis  (12)  sometimes  joins  the  next  one  (s), 
yet  this  exclusively  supports,  in  birds,  the  pleurapophysis  (2s)  of  the  frontal 
'Segment.  The  haemapophysis  is  developed,  as  in  the  reptile,  from  several 
.-centres  (-29,  29',  30',  31),  but  these  coalesce  with  each  other  and  with  the 
bhEemal  spine,  32,  to  form  the  single  bone  called  lower  jaw  in  most  birds. 

The  haemal  arch  (40-40)  properly  appertaining  to  s — the  parapophysis  of 
the  parietal  segment — is  detached  from  it,  and  freely  suspended,  somewhat 
rretrograded  in  position  beneath  the  next  segment : its  development  has 
sutiered  as  marked  an  arrest  as  in  the  crocodile. 

The  haemal  arch,  with  its  appendages  of  the  hindmost  segment  of  the  skull, 
is  displaced  backwards  to  a greater  extent  than  in  the  reptile. 

The  pleurapophysis,  51,  retains  the  form  of  a long,  flat,  slightly-arched  rib  : 
the  haemapophysis  (52)  is  straighter  and  stronger.  There  are  birds  (Apteryx, 
e.  g.)  in  which  this  arch  is  arrested  at  almost  as  early  a stage  of  growth  as 
is  the  antecedent  (hyoid)  arch  of  the  skull.  The  elements  of  the  neural 
arches  of  the  skull,  1—15,  early  anchylose  together  in  most  birds,  with  the 
exception  of  the  centrum  (13)  of  the  foremost  segment,  which  more  com- 
monly coalesces  with  the  pleurapophyses  (20)  of  its  haemal  arch. 

The  size  of  the  brain  now  demands  a modification  of  the  neural  arches 
superadded  to  those  which  they  present  in  the  cold-blooded  vertebrates,  and 
occasions  a marked  difference  in  the  form  of  the  skull  : it  is  important  to 
note  how  this  is  obtained.  The  nature  of  the  modification  is  well  shown  in 
the  young  of  those  large  birds  which  are  devoid  of  the  powers  of  flight. 
No  new  bone  is  introduced  to  increase  the  cranial  walls  and  give  the 
cavity  its  due  capacity  ; this  is  gained  by  excess  of  growth  of  common  and 
constant  elements ; and,  as  has  been  showm  in  pp.  126-128,  those  furthest 
from  the  centrum  (3,  7,  11)  are  the  chief  seat  of  such  excess.  With  regard 
to  the  neural  spines  of  the  frontal  and  parietal  vertebrae,  it  is  accompanied 
by  a temporary  bipartition,  the  ossification  commencing  from  two  lateral 
centres  in  each  ; but  the  halves  soon  coalesce  with  each  other  and  with  their 
sustaining  neurapophyses  (2,  e,  10). 

In  those  segments  which,  from  the  brevity  and  free  termination  of  the 
pleurapoph3-ses,  may  be  called  ‘ cervical,’  the  elements  of  the  neural  arch 
and  also  the  pleurapophyses  early  anchylose  together  in  each  segment,  con- 
verting it  into  the  single  bone,  called  in  comparative  osteology  a ‘vertebra,’ 
and  these  vertebra;  are  remarkable  for  their  great  number  in  most  birds  ; and 
conserjuently  the  neck  is  as  remarkable  for  its  great  length  and  flexibility. 
The  detached  brnmapophyses  (53)  of  one  of  these  vertebrae,  (which  vertebra, 


184 


DESCRIl’TION  OF  PLATES. 


by  the  analogy  of  the  fish  (fig.  2,  ss),  should  be  the  atlas,)  commonly  coalesced 
together  at  their  distal  ends  torining  a bony  arch,  like  a slender  edentulous 
lower  jaw,  have  followed  the  haemal  arch  of  the  occipital  vertebra  (51,  55)  in 
its  retrograde  course,  though  not  quite  to  the  same  extent.  These  mutually 
anchylosed  haemapophyses  (ss)  forming  the  bone,  called  ‘furculum’  in  or- 
iiithotomy,  are  generally  the  otdy  pair  of  ossified  cervical  haemapophyses. 
It,  however,  we  define  the  cervical  vertebrae,  as  in  the  crocodile,  by  their 
mobility  and  the  free  termination  of  their  pleurapophyses,  we  may  then 
recognise  in  some  birds  the  detached  haemapophyses  of  the  last  cervical 
vertebra  attached,  as  at  /i,  to  those  of  the  succeeding  segment : this  struc- 
ture may  be  observed  in  the  common  goose  (^Anser  palustris).  The  pleur- 
apophyses  of  the  posterior  cervical  vertebrae  are  free,  and  rapidly  elongate. 
The  haemapophyses  of  the  segments  with  complete  haemal  arches  are  bony, 
and  are  commonly  defined  as  ‘ sternal  ribs’,  their  pleurapophyses  being  called 
‘ vertebral  ribs,’  agreeably  with  the  restricted  anthropotoinical  meaning  of 
the  term  ‘ vertebra.’  These  pleurapophyses  support  bony  appendages  (a  a), 
which  serve,  like  those  of  the  foremost  haemal  arch  of  the  skull,  to  connect 
their  own  arch  to  the  next  and  associate  them  together  in  movement*. 
After  six  or  seven  segments  with  these  typical  haemal  arches  come  othera 
with  shorter  pleurapophyses  terminating  freely,  not  reaching  their  haem- 
apophyses, one  of  which,  ossified,  is  shown  in  the  diagram  at  h',  adhering  by 
its  distal  end  to  the  preceding  haemapophysis  and  terminating  freely  above. 
These  ‘ floating  sternal  ribs’  are  more  numerous  in  the  crocodile  (fig.  3,  h!). 
The  haemal  spines  of  the  dorsal  segments  with  complete  haemal  arches, 
become  the  seat  of  the  most  extensive  and  characteristic  modifications  of 
the  avian  type  of  skeleton.  They  are  greatly  extended  in  breadth,  and, 
like  the  correspondingly  expanded  neural  spines  of  the  cranial  vertebrje, 
are  developed  from  two  lateral  moieties ; but  the  individual  spines,  indi- 
cated by  dotted  lines  in  the  diagram  (go),  are  not  ossified  from  separate 
centres,  but  continuously,  so  that  the  haemal  spines  of  six  or  eight  vertebrae 
are  at  first  represented  by  a pair  of  osseous  plates.  A cartilage  is  usually 
extended  vertically  from  their  median  junction,  which,  when  ossified,  forms 
a strong  crest  or  ‘ keel  ’ (oo').  The  haemal  spine  of  the  scapular  arch  (52') 
is  sometimes  ossified  from  a proper  cenli'e ; as  is  also  a piece  prolonging  the 
series  posteriorly : but  all  soon  coalesce  into  one  bone  called  ‘ sternum.’  The 
anterior  portion,  52',  has  received  the  name  of  ‘ episternum’,  the  median 
keel,  go',  that  of  ‘ entoKlernum,’  the  posterior  piece,  which  sometimes  remains 
cartilaginous,  that  of  ‘ xiphisternum.’  In  the  terrestrial  birds  incapable  of 
flight  the  keel  or  ‘ entosternum  ’ is  not  developed  : in  the  rest  of  the  class 
the  extent  of  this  part  and  of  the  ossified  portion  of  the  body  of  the  sternum 
bears  a direct  ratio  to  their  power  of  flight-,  the  peculiar  modification  of 
these  extreme  elements  of  the  dorsal  segments  being  governed  by  the  size 
of  the  muscles  moving  the  wings. 

The  next  great  deviation  from  the  typical  standard,  pecidiar  to  birds,  is 
the  great  extent  of  the  vertebral  axis  which  is  embraced  by  the  enormously 
developed  pelvic  pleurapophyses,  02,  and  the  unusual  number  of  segments 
which,  being  thus  deprived  of  reciprocal  motion,  grow  together  and  form, 
according  to  this  character,  the  bone  or  region  called  ‘sacrum.’  In  investi- 
gating the  structure  of  this  part  of  the  endoskeleton  in  the  embryo-bird,  the 
neural  arches  are  found  to  manifest  a change  of  position  analogous  to, 

* These  appendages  are  not  the  result,  as  has  been  supposed,  of  a bifiirealion  of  the 
vertebral  rib : they  are  independent  pieees  originally  in  all  birds,  and  retain  their  indi- 
viduality in  some,  e.g.  apteryx,  penguin,  with  proper  muscles  for  their  elevation  and  depres- 
sion— potential  homotypes  of  tlie  flexors  and  extensors  of  more  developed  limbs. 


AVIAN  TYPE. 


185 


though  less  extensive  than,  tliat  of  certain  of  the  lia'inal  arches  of  more 
anterior  segments  (si-si,  e.  g.)  : tlie  results  of  tliis  analysis  arc  fully  de- 
tailed at  pp.  95  ami  159.  Alost  of  the  pleurapophyses  of  the  sacral  ver- 
tebras are  stunted  in  their  growth,  which  may  literally  be  said  to  be  stopped 
by  the  pressure  upon  their  extremities  of  the  overgrown  distal  portion  of  one 
of  their  liomotypos,  forming  the  bone  called  ‘ ilium  ’ (02,  pi).  But  one  or  two 
of  the  pleurapophyses  at  the  anterior  part  of  the  series  ( pi)  escape  from 
beneath  the  ‘ilium’  to  terminate  freely  at  some  distance  below  it:  these  are 
usually  bifurcate  at  their  proximal  ends,  anil  moveably  articulated  to  their 
anchyiosed  centrums  and  diapophyses  : the  shorter  ancliylosed  sacral  pleur- 
apophyses have  simple  proximal  ends  and  articulate  in  the  embryo  to  the  in- 
terspace between  their  own  and  the  adjoining  centrum,  as  shown  in  the  cut 
21,  pi.,  to  which  they  soon  become  anchyiosed. 

The  contemplation  of  the  modifications  of  the  different  natural  segments 
in  the  trunk  of  the  bird,  particularly  the  freedom  of  some  elements  and  the 
fixation  of  others,  strongly  impresses  on  the  mind  the  purely  artificial  cha- 
racter of  the  regions  of  the  spine  which  have  been  transferred  from  anthro- 
potomy  into  the  anatomy  of  the  vertebrate  animals.  Thus  Cuvier  declares, 
“ II  n’y  a point  de  vertebres  lombaires  proprement  dites*.”  And  a later 
author: — “DieWirbel  zerfallen  in  Hals-  Riicken-  Kreuzbein-  und  Stuss- 
wirbel;  eigentliche  Lendenwirbel  sind  gewdhnlich  nicht  zu  unterscheiden.” 

Cuvier’s  negation  of  proper  lumbar  vertebrae  in  birds  of  1799  is  repro- 
duced in  succeeding  systems  and  handbooks  of  comparative  anatomy  down 
to  the  latest  by  Siebold  and  Stannius,  e.  ofl846.  But  the  student  of 
anatomy  in  its  wider  acceptation  will  understand  that  the  segments  homo- 
logous with  those  included  under  L in  fig.  3,  are  by  no  means  wanting  in 
fig  4,  but  only  otherwise  modified. 

It  may  be  regarded  as  highly  probable  at  least,  from  the  striking  points  of 
agreement  which  are  observable  in  the  organization  of  the  crocodile  and  of 
the  bird,  that,  counting  backwards  from  the  first  ‘ dorsal  ’ in  figs.  3 and  4, 
the  next  twenty  segments  are  homologous  in  both.  But,  in  the  bird,  those 
that  answer  to  the  three  or  four  last  dorsal  vertebrae  in  the  crocodile  are  an- 
chyiosed together,  and  the  last  of  these  had  its  pleurapophyses  modified  to 
form  abutments  against  the  elongated  ilia.  The  next  three  segments,  an- 
swering to  the  lumbar  in  the  crocodile,  are  modified  as  in  the  last  ‘ dorsal.’ 
The  two  following  segments  similarly  modified  will  answer  then  to  the  two 
sacral  vertebrae  of  the  crocodile,  and  anchylosis  extends  backwards  so  as  to 
include  tw’o  or  three  vertebrae  homologous  with  the  anterior  caudals  in  the 
crocodile.  This  appears  to  be  the  true  interpretation  of  the  enormous i 
‘sacrum’  of  the  bird;  it  is  not  merely  ‘ lumbo-sacral  ’ but  ‘ dorso-lumbo-j 
sacro-caudal’,  including  as  it  does  representatives  of  each  of  those  classes  of 
vertebrae  in  the  crocodile,  but  which  have  lost  the  artificial  characters  thali 
distinguished  them  in  that  nearest  allied  existing  vertebrate.  The  special 
homologies  are  indicated  by  the  letters  D,  L and  S. 

The  characters  of  the  regions  of  the  vertebrate  skeleton  are,  as  already 
remarked  in  reference  to  the  crocodile,  artificial,  and  are  used  for  the  sake 
of  convenience  in  describing  and  comparing  the  vertebra?  of  different  species. 
Those,  therefore,  are  the  best  which  are  the  most  constant  and  most  readily 
applicable  in  any  given  class.  Proceeding  to  assign  such  to  the  bird,  as  in 
the  crocodile,  unbiassed  by  anthropotomical  characters  of  the  vertebral 
regions,  all  those  may  be  called  ‘ cervical  ’ in  the  bird  that  extend  from  the 
skull  to  the  first  vertebra  with  the  hiemal  arch  coinj)letc,  and  those  dorsal 

* Cuvier,  Lefons  d'Anatoraic  Coinpanic,  i.  (Ed.  1790,  p.  170;  Ed.  183G,  p.  205). 


186 


DESCRIPTION  OF  PLATES. 


tliat  extend  from  that  vertebra  inclusive,  to  the  first  vertebra  embraced  by, 
and  anchylosed  to,  the  iliac  bones.  One  usually  finds  in  the  falcons,  the 
gallinaceous  birds  and  in  some  waders,  five  or  six  of  the  centrums  and  neural 
arches  of  the  dorsal  vertebrae  anchylosed  into  one  mass,  a single  free  cen- 
trum usually  intervening  between  this  mass  and  the  true  sacrum.  Some 
comparative  anatomists  call  that  cervical  vertebra  the  ‘first  dorsal  ’ in  which 
the  pleurapophyses  retain,  or  begin  to  regain,  their  moveable  articulations : 
but  this  character  varies  in  different  individuals  of  the  same  species.  I have 
even  found  the  pleUraj)ophysis  of  the  last  cervical  vertebra  anchylosed  on  one 
side  and  not  on  the  other. 

The  retention  by  the  pleurapophyses  of  moveable  articulations  with  the 
centrum,  might  also  seem  a good  character  of  dorsal  vertebrae  at  the  hinder 
end  of  the  series  ; but  it  is  inconstant : I have  found  those  elements  an- 
chylosed in  one  individ\ial  and  free  in  another  of  the  same  species,  in  the 
anterior  vertebrae,  which  are  sacral  by  coalescence.  All  those  vertebras 
may  be  called  for  convenience  ‘sacral’  in  the  bird,  which  are  confluent  by 
both  centrums  and  neural  arches  with  each  other  and  with  the  iliac  bones ; 
and  this  confluence  is  so  complete  that  it  usually  requires  a vertical  section 
and  reference  to  the  nerve-outlets  in  order  to  determine  their  number.  The 
free  vertebrae  that  succeed  these  are  the  caudal,  of  which  the  last,  as  in 
most  osseous  fishes,  is  a coalesced  congeries  of  several,  though  for  con- 
venience, counted  as  one,  and  called  in  ornithotomy  the  plough-share  bone 
(c,  n,  h).  Although  so  many  segments  of  the  bird’s  skeleton  are  modified  to 
transfer  the  weight  of  the  horizontal  trunk  upon  the  ilia  (ea),  the  ‘pelvis,’  as 
in  the  crocodile,  has  but  two  haeniapophyses,  ea,  oj,  below  : it  is  characteristic 
of  birds,  however,  that  these  are  not  united  at  their  distal  ends  to  their  fellows 
of  the  opposite  side,  either  with  or  without  the  intervention  of  a haemal  spine. 
The  exception  which  the  ostrich  offers  in  regard  to  the  anterior  pair  (pubic 
bone,  04)  and  that  which  the  rhea  presents  in  respect  to  the  posterior  pair 
(ischia,  cs),  serve  to  prove  the  rule  of  the  inferiorly  open  pelvis  in  birds. 

In  regard  to  the  diverging  appendages  of  the  two  haemal  arches  (scapular 
and  pelvic)  which  have  been  selected  for  development  into  locomotive  organs 
in  all  classes  of  vertebrata,  the  corresponding  segments  (carpal,  su,  and  tarsal, 
6s)  agree  in  the  paucity  of  their  divisions,  two  bones  in  each,  in  all  birds ; and 
the  succeeding  segments  (metacarpal  and  metataTsal)  in  consisting  of  three 
coalesced  bones  in  both  wing  and  leg,  supporting  digits  answering  to  those 
marked  ii,  iii  and  iv,  ii,  Hi,  iv,  in  the  crocodile.  Such  at  least  is  their 
general  character,  the  minor  differences  being  the  following: — In  the  hand- 
segment  of  the  wing  the  anchylosed  metacarpal  of  digit  ii  is  very  short,  re- 
presented as  it  seems  only  by  its  proximal  end  ; those  of  the  digits  numbered 
III  and  IV  attain  their  normal  length,  and  are  anchylosed  together  at  the  ex- 
tremities only,  with  an  interspace  between  their  shafts. 

In  the  metatarsus  the  three  homotypal  bones  coalesce  throughout  their 
length,  except  in  the  penguin,  where  interspaces  are  left  between  their  shafts 
or  middle  parts.  But  they  also  coalesce  proximally  with  the  two  primitively 
distinct  tarsal  bones  (os),  whilst  the  metacarpals  coalesce  proximally  with 
only  part  of  the  carpal  series,  if  at  all.  And  to  the  metatarsus  there  is 
usually  superadded  a rudimental,  but  unanchylosed,  metatarsal  bone  of  the 
digit  answering  to  no  1 in  the  crocodile;  but  directed  backwards,  except  in 
the  swift.  The  numbers  of  the  phalanges  of  the  toes,  i ii  and  iii  in  birds, 
correspond  with  those  of  their  horaologues  in  the  crocodile  : the  toe  iv  has 
an  additional  phalanx,  and  the  regular  progression  of  the  increase  from  2 to 
5,  with  one  or  two  exceptions,  is  constant  in  the  class,  and  serves  to  deter- 
mine the  toes  in  those  birds  in  which  they  are  reduced  to  three  or  two  : thus, 


MAMMALIAN  TYPE. 


187 


ill  the  ostrich  (fig.  1 1 ),  the  shorter  of  the  two  toes  is  dcterininecl  by  its 
greater  number  of  phalanges,  5,  to  be  tlie  honiologue  of  tlie  fourth  in  tetra- 
dactyle  birds;  and  it  is  interesting  to  observe  that  tlie  toe  Hi,  notwitlistanding 
its  much  greater  length,  has  the  usual  smaller  number  of  phalanges.  But 
whilst  unity  of  design  is  thus  manifested,  the  wisdom  of  the  Designer  is  dis- 
played by  the  greater  strength  which  results  from  the  minor  degree  of  sub- 
division of  the  part  which  takes  the  largest  share  in  the  support  and  propul- 
sion of  the  body.  The  toe  v is  never  present  in  birds,  there  is  not  even  the 
rudiment  of  its  metatarsal  bone.  The  toe  i is  ecjually  absent.  (See  para- 
graph at  p.  193,  on  the  spurs  of  the  GaUinacea.') 

Fig.  + is  the  diagram  of  the  skeleton  of  a typical  mammalian  quadruped; 
e.  g.  the  dog  (genus  Cams).  The  modifications  of  the  haemal  arch  of  the 
anterior  segment  resume  the  characters  of  those  in  the  crocodile  ; the  haem- 
apophysis  (■^l)  being  the  ehief  seat  of  development,  and  for  the  same  purpose 
of  extending  its  attachments,  and  adding  to  the  firmness  and  strength  of  the 
henceforth  immoveable  maxillary  arch.  The  diverging  appendage  from  the 
pleurapophysis  (20)  is  a single  bone  on  each  side  (24),  and  in  most  mammals 
becomes  confluent  with  the  pan  of  the  posterior  segment  (5)  against  which 
it  abuts. 

The  neurapophyses  (u)  of  the  anterior  segment  have  coalesced  together, 
as  in  birds,  but  are  complicated,  and  their  nature  further  obscured  by  anchy- 
losis with  ossified  portions  of  the  olfactory  capsules,  often  extremely  complex 
and  extensive  in  the  class  Mammalia,  in  which  the  organ  of  smell  attains  its 
maximum  of  development.  The  neural  spine  (is),  sometimes  single,  more 
frequently  bifid,  enjoys,  agreeably  with  its  extreme  position  in  the  series,  a 
vast  range  of  variety  in  its  forms  and  proportions.  In  the  rhinoceros  it  sup- 
ports a dermal  spine  or  ‘ horn.’ 

The  second  (frontal)  segment  presents  unexpectedly  a return  to  the  arche- 
typal character  in  a particular,  in  the  absence  of  which  all  the  lower  classes 
of  vertebrata  depart  from  it,  viz.  the  primitive  independence  of  its  centrum 
(9)  from  that  (5)  of  the  succeeding  segment.  The  spine  (11)  of  this,  as  well 
as  those  (7,  3)  of  the  two  following  segments,  continue,  as  in  birds,  to  be  the 
chief  seat  of  the  expansion  requisite  for  the  protection  of  the  progressively 
developing  brain.  But  in  most  mammals  an  additional  element  in  the  cranial 
walls  is  gained  by  the  expansion  of  the  distal  end  of  the  diverging  appendage 
from  the  haemapophysis  (21)  of  the  anterior  segment.  This  appendage  con- 
sists, as  in  birds  and  reptiles,  of  two  pieces,  and  it  is  the  second  or  most  re- 
mote piece  (27)  which  is  the  seat  of  the  principal  varieties,  and  especially  of 
that  sciuamous  development  which  enables  it  not  only  to  extend  the  points 
of  fixation  of  the  maxillary  arch,  but  at  the  same  time,  to  subserve  the  re- 
quirements of  cranial  space  consequent  on  the  large  size  of  the  eerebrum. 
The  dismemberment  called  ‘ interparietale,’  x,  of  the  spine  3,  has  a less  con- 
stant relation  to  the  increased  capacity  of  the  cranium. 

The  pleurapophysis  (2s)  of  the  second  segment  becomes,  in  the  present 
class,  still  further  displaced  from  its  typical  connections,  and  is  even  super- 
seded in  its  typical  functions  by  the  intervention  and  development  of  27.  It 
is  consequently  much  reduced  in  size,  and  strangely  distorted  in  form  in  sub- 
serviency to  the  almost  sole  office  that  now  remains  to  it,  viz.  the  support  of 
the  tympanic  menibrane. 

The  frontal  haemapophyses  and  spine  (29-32)  have  coalesced  into  a single 
bony  arch,  articulated  by  its  extremities  to  the  under  part  of  the  append- 
age 27. 

The  pleurapophysis  (ss)  of  the  hyoid  or  third  haemal  arch  resumes  in  many 


188 


DESCRIPTION  OF  PLATES. 


ff 


maminals  its  typical  connections  with  the  parapopliysis  (s)  oC  its  proper  seg- 
ment; but  its  development  is  usually  more  or  less  restricted.  * 

Ihe  articulation  of  the  fourth  (occipital)  segment  with  the  succeeding  one 
called  ‘ atlas,’  is  chiefly  by  means  of  zygapophyses  (condyles)  developed 
from  the  neurapophyses  (-i) ; the  parapophyses  (4)  are  likewise  exogenous 
processes  of  the  same  elements. 

The  haemal  arch  of  the  occiput  (51,  .02),  though  in  close  proximity  with  its 
proper  neural  arch  in  some  mammals,  and  in  all  mammals  at  the  earlier 
period  of  development,  is  not  directly  articulated  thereto,  and  sometimes  re- 
cedes far  from  the  rest  of  the  skull. 

The  haemapophysis  (52)  of  the  arch  is  ossified  throughout  its  entire  extent 
and  the  haemal  spine  52',  below,  in  only  one  small  exceptional  order  of  the 
class  (Monotremata).  It  becomes  anchylosed  with  the  pleurapophysis  in  all, 
and  appears  in  the  majority  therefore  as  a mere  process  of  51. 

The  single  pair  of  cervical  haemapophyses  (53)  are  more  variable,  both  as 
to  their  extent  of  ossification  and  even  existence. 

The  body  of  the  atlas  continues  subject  to  the  same  modification  of  de- 
velopment from  two  centres  with  coalescence  of  one  portion  with  the  next 
centrum,  which  characterises  it  in  all  the  other  vertebrates  above  Batra- 
chians*. 

The  confluence  of  the  centrum  with  the  neural  arch  takes  place  in  every 
vertebra  of  the  trunk ; and  the  pleurapophyses,  which  are  very  short  in  the 
seven  segments  that  succeed  the  skull,  here  also  commonly  coalesce  with  the 
other  elements,  circumscribing  the  lateral  foramina  for  the  ‘ vertebral’  arte- 
ries. With  the  exception  of  the  detached  bones  6S,  they  are  the  only  ossified 
parts  of  the  haemal  arches  of  those  segments. 

The  constancy  of  the  number,  seven,  of  the  segments  so  modified,  is  truly  re- 
markable and  characteristic  of  the  class  Mammalia.  It  is  true  that  the  num- 
ber is  established  at  a very  early  stage  of  development,  when  the  neck  is 
alike  short  in  all ; and  its  law  must  be  sought  for  in  the  circumstances,  such 
as  the  existence  of  a complete  diaphragm  in  the  mammalia,  which  deter- 
mined the  number  and  distribution  of  the  pairs  of  cervical  nerves,  upon 
which  the  development  of  the  cervical  vertebrae  more  immediately  depends. 
The  exceptions  to  the  number  seven,  viz.  six  in  the  manatee,  and  eight  or  nine 
in  the  three-toed  sloths,  serve  to  establish  the  rule. 

The  eighth  segment  of  the  trunk  in  mammalia,  like  the  tenth  in  the  cro- 
codile, has  a complete  haemal  arch,  and  here  therefore  the  ‘ dorsal  series 
begins ; but  the  haemapophysial  elements  are  rarely  ossified  in  the  present 
warm-blooded  class. 

The  pleurapophyses  (jo/)  of  these  arches  are  not  only  moveable,  but  are 
subject  to  a slight  displacement,  and  their  articulations,  like  those  of  the  neur- 
apophyses in  the  bird’s  sacrum,  extend  over  the  interspace  of  their  own  and  a 
contiguous  centrum. 

The  haemal  spines  (ao,  ei,  hs')  commonly  remain  distinct,  and  form  a chain 
of  ossicles  corresponding  in  number  with  the  complete  haemal  arches,  but 
they  coalesce  with  each  other  in  some  of  the  higher  mammalia,  and  are 
called  collectively  ‘ sternum.’  (See  p.  158.) 

As  the  segments  recede  the  pleurapophj^ses  become  shorter,  return  to  their 
proper  vertebra,  and  usually  become  appended  to  its  diapophyses ; the  haem- 
apophyses also  become  shorter,  and  terminate  at  first  by  abutting  against 
their  antecedents,  and  finally  by  projecting  freely. 

* See  p.  93,  and  Annals  of  Natural  History,  vol.  xx.  p.  217. 


HOMOLOGIES  OF  THE  HAND  AND  FOOT. 


189 


These  segments  are  t'olloweit  by  others  (I.)  in  which  only  tlie  plenrapopliy- 
sial  parts  {pi)  of  the  hteinal  arch  are  ossified,  and  these  parts  coalesce  witli  tlie 
diapophyses  (</). 

Then  come  the  segments  (S)  which,  like  those  of  the  skull,  are  the  scat  of 
the  modification  by  anchylosis,  and  of  great  and  peculiar  development  of  two 
of  the  htenuil  arches  in  connection  with  them  ; the  nature  of  the  deviations 
from  the  typical  standard  which  characterise  the  province  of  the  endoskele- 
ton  called  ‘sacrum’  and  ‘pelvis,’  has  been  explained  at  pp.  158-161.  In 
most  mammals  a greater  number  of  segments  is  involved  in  this  metamor- 
phosis than  in  reptiles,  in  none  are  so  many  the  scat  of  it  as  in  birds.  In 
the  cetacea  the  modification  by  anchylosis  is  transferred  to  segments  at  the 
fore-part  of  the  trunk,  their  ‘ sacrum’  may  be  said  to  be  in  the  neck  ; none 
of  the  post-abdominal  vertebrm  are  subject  to  it  any  more  than  in  serpents, 
fishes,  or  the  extinct  marine  reptiles  {Enaliosauria). 

Great  diversity  of  form,  number  and  degree  of  development  prevails  in  the 
vertebree  that  succeed  the  sacrum  in  mammalia.  Short  pleurapophyses  are 
developed  at  the  extremities  of  the  diapophyses  of  the  anterior  ones  and  coa- 
lesce with  them.  The  hsemapophyses,  when  present  or  ossified,  are  articu- 
lated, as  in  reptiles,  to  the  centrum  directly,  and  alone  form  the  haemal  arch. 
The  terminal  vertebrae  are  reduced  to  the  central  element,  and  rarely  anchy- 
lose  together. 

The  anterior  anchylosed  and  expanded  vertebrm  are  the  cranial,  Cr. 

Those  usually  free  vertebrae  with  short  pleurapophyses,  anchylosed  to  both 
their  centrum  and  neural  arch,  are  called  ‘ cervical,’  C.  In  some  whales  and 
armadilloes  all  or  some  of  these  vertebrae  coalesce  into  one  mass. 

The  series  with  moveable  and  usually  longer  pleurapophyses  is  called 
‘ dorsal,’  D. 

Those  with  pleurapophyses  confluent  or  connate  with  the  extremities  of 
the  diapophyses  are  called  ‘ lumbar,’  L. 

The  succeeding  vertebrae  which  anchylose  together  are  called  ‘ sacral,’  S. 

The  rest  are  ‘ caudal,’  Cd. 

The  modifications  of  the  diverging  appendages  of  the  scapular  and  pelvic 
arches  are  numerous  in  kind  and  extreme  in  degree  : with  the  exception  of 
the  cetacea,  in  which  the  hinder  pair  is  absent — the  cheiroptera,  in  which  the 
fore-pair  is  specially  developed  for  the  actions  of  flight — and  some  barrowers, 
as  the  mole — a close  analogy  is  commonly  kept  up  between  the  two  pairs : 
both,  for  example,  are  reduced  to  the  same  degree  of  simplicity  in  the  solid- 
ungulous  horse;  both  arrive  at  almost  the  highest  stage  of  development,  in 
the  special  adaptation  of  one  of  the  digits  to  react  upon  the  rest  as  an  op- 
posable thumb  in  both  the  fore-  and  hind-feet  of  the  quadrumana. 

Fig.  15,  bones  of  the  fore-limb,  and  fig.  16,  bones  of  the  hind-limb,  of 
the  wombat,  illustrate  the  serial  homology*  of  those  bones,  explained  at 
pp.  166-168. 

* It  is  with  pleasure  that  I see  any  of  the  new  terms  proposed  in  my  “ Lectures  on  the 
Vertebrata”  (1816)  and  “Report  on  the  Archetype  and  Homologies  of  the  Vertebrate 
Skeleton  ” (Report  of  the  sixteenth  meeting  of  ‘ the  British  Association  held  at  Southampton 
in  1816’),  and  in  earlier  publications,  as  the  “ Geological  Transactions  for  1838,”  sanctioned 
by  an  original  author  like  that  of  the  ‘ Comparative  Osteology,’  folio,  1847,  before  cited. 
Thus  .Mr.  .Maclise  says,  “ The  laws  of  symmetry  or  Serial  Homology  preside  over  the  genesis 
of  formation.” — Remarks  on  plate  49.  And  again  : — “ But  in  each  of  these  three  series  of 
distinct  parts,  in  that  of  spinous  processes,  of  neural  arches,  and  of  bodies  of  vertebra;.” 
“ The  spinous  process,  the  neural  arch  and  the  vertebral  body  are  structural  varieties.” — 
Explanation  of  plate  3.  M'hether  the  adoption  of  such  terms  as  ‘ neural  arch,’  ‘ serial  homo- 
logy,’ &c.  he  implied  or  acknowledged,  the  gratification  is  the  same,  provided  they  arc  uot 
turned  from  their  original  sense.  By  ‘ neural  arch  ’ I mean  both  ‘ neurapophyses  ’ and 


IC-O  DESCRIPTION  OF  PLATES. 

83,  ‘ humerus,’  is  the  homotj'pe  of  05,  ‘ femur.’ 

64,  ‘ ulna,’  is  the  homotype  of  07,  ‘fibula.’ 

o,  ‘ its  olecranon,’  is  the  homotj'pe  of  st',  ‘ fabella,’  or  the  sesamoid  bone 
articulated  to  the  produced  and  expanded  head  of  the  fibula. 

65,  ‘ radius,’  is  the  homotype  of  00,  ‘ tibia’*. 

sc,  scaphoid  portion  of  ‘ os  scapholunare,’  is  the  homotype  of  sc,  * sca- 
phoides.’ 

/,  lunar  portion  of  ‘ os  scapholunare,’  do.  of  a,  ‘astragalus.’ 

cu,  cuneiform  portion  of  ‘ os  scapholunare,’  do.  of  cl,  articular  part  of  ‘ cal- 
caneum.’ 

JO,  ‘ pisiforme  ’ is  the  homotype  of  cl',  fulcral  part  of  ‘calcaneum.’ 

t,  ‘ trapezium  ’ do.  of  ct,  inner  cuneiform. 

z,  ‘ trapezoides  ’ do.  of  cm,  middle  cuneiform. 

tn,  ‘ magnum  ’ do.  of  ce,  outer  cuneiform. 

u,  ‘unciforme’  do.  of  d,  cuboides;  both  of  these  represent- 

ing two  distinct  carpals  coalesced,  as  the  scapholunar  in  the  carpus 
represents  the  astragalus  and  scaphoid  in  the  tarsus,  and  the  cal- 
caneum reciprocally  the  cuneiform  and  pisiform  bones. 

The  serial  homologies  of  the  carpals  and  tarsals  are  better  illustrated  in 
the  hand  (PI.  II.  fig.  13)  and  foot  (fig.  II')  of  the  orang,  as  will  be  presently 
explained. 

With  regard  to  the  digits,  they  never  exceed  five  in  number  in  mammalia, 
and  with  the  exception  of  the  cetacea,  the  number  of  phalanges  is  limited  to 
two  in  the  first,  i and  t,  and  to  three  in  each  of  the  other  digits,  in  both  fore- 
and  hind-feet.  The  first  or  innermost  digit,  as  a general  rule,  is  the  first  to 
disappear;  in  the  hind-foot  of  the  orang  (fig.  1 4)  commonly,  and  in  that  of 
the  wombat,  fig.  16,  constantly,  its  short  metatarsal  supports  but  one  pha- 
lanx ; in  the  dog,  taken  as  the  type  of  the  class  (fig.  4),  the  inner  digit  is 
usually  wanting  in  the  hind-foot,  and  is  always  very  diminutive  in  the  fore- 
foot. The  first  digit  of  the  hand  is  reduced  to  a short  metacarpal  in  the 
spider-monkeys  (Ateles). 

The  outer  digit  v and  v is  the  next  to  disappear.  In  the  tapir  it  is  wanting 
in  the  liind-foot;  and  in  the  rhinoceros  (fig.  17)  in  both  hind-  and 
fore-feet. 

In  the  bisulcate  quadrupeds  the  development  of  the  second  digit  (ii  and 
n)  is  arrested  in  addition  to  the  two  extreme  ones  (i  and  v),  and  the  func- 
tions of  support  and  progression  are  committed  to  the  equally  and  symme- 
trically developed  3rd  and  4th  digits  m and  iv.  In  most  of  the  ruminants 
rudiments  of  the  2nd  and  5th  digits  are  retained  (as  at  ii  and  v,  fig.  18)  ; 
but  in  the  camel-tribe  they  have  entirely  disappeared  together  with  the  first 
digit,  1 and  i. 

‘ neural  spine,’  or  the  totality  of  the  distinct  parts  of  which  such  arch  is  composed.  And 
I am  of  opinion  that  the  parts  of  the  neural  arch  which  I have  called  ‘ neural  spine  ’ (spi- 
nous process),  neurapophysis  (‘  neural  arch,’  Maclise),  together  with  the  basis  on  which 
the  arch  rests,  called  ‘ ceiitnim  ’ or  ‘ vertebral  body,  ’ are  not  ‘ structural  varieties,’  but  the 
most  constant  and  important  elements  of  the  typical  segment  or  vertebra.  I have  been 
also  led  to  conclude,  with  other  physiologists,  that  other  laws  besides  those  of  ‘ senal 
homology  ’ preside  over  the  formation  of  the  animal  body.  The  text  of  the  body  of  my 
present  work  was  struck  off,  with  an  alteration  of  the  paging  and  a few  corrections  imme- 
diately after  the  printing  of  the  “ Volume  of  the  Reports  ” in  which  it  originally  appeared, 
and  several  months  before  I received  the  valuable  presentation  copy  of  the  work  with  which 
Mr.  Maclise  has  favoured  me.  This  must  be  my  excuse  to  him  for  not  noticing  his  work 
in  an  earlier  part  of  the  present  one. 

* The  tendon  of  the  triceps  feraoris  is  not  ossified  in  this  species,  where  it  passes  over 
the  knee-joint  at  66' ; it  resembles  in  this  respect  its  homotype,  the  tendon  of  the  biceps 
brachii,  in  the  fore-limb. 


HOMOLOGIES  OF  THE  HAND  AND  FOOT. 


191 


In  the  liorse  (fig.  19)  the  tburtli  digit  is  the  additional  subject  of  arrested 
development,  and  the  median  one  in  both  fore-  !tnd  liind-feet,  iii  and  Hi,  is 
the  last  and  sole  digit  which  retains  its  full  and  functional  development,  thus 
manifesting  its  charaeter  as  the  most  constant  and  essential  of  the  terminal 
ramifications  of  the  primitive  ray.  Rudiments  of  the  metacarpals  and  meta- 
tarsals of  the  second  and  fourth  digits  (n  and  iv,  fig.  19)  are  retained,  con- 
cealed beneath  the  skin;  these  ‘ splint-bones’ of  the  veterinarian  are  duly 
adjusted  to  serve  important  uses,  and  their  anchylosis  and  other  abnormal 
conditions  are  a common  cause  of  lameness ; but  the  appreciation  ot  their 
final  purpose  does  not  prevent  the  philosophic  anatomist  from  recognising 
their  real  nature  and  archetypal  relations,  and  thereby  the  essentially  tri- 
daetyle  character  and  true  affinities  of  the  genus  Equus. 

The  carpal  and  tarsal  ossicles  undergo  corresponding  modifications,  by 
confluence  or  arrested  development,  concomitant  with  this  progressive  sim- 
plification of  the  mammalian  hand  and  foot.  And  here  I am  induced  to 
ofler  a few  observations  on  these  bones  in  addition  to  the  remarks  contained 
in  the  text  (pp.  167,  168). 

Much  difficulty  has  been  experienced  in  determining  the  special  homology 
of  the  carpal  and  tarsal  bones  in  the  lower  vertebrates,  more  particularly  the 
Beptilia,  according  to  the  names  arbitrarily,  in  the  first  instance,  applied  to 
them,  as  they  exist  in  the  human  skeleton.  To  gain  a clear  insight  into  their 
nature  and  relations,  it  becomes  necessary  to  reverse  the  usual  order  of  com- 
parison, and  to  proceed  from  the  lower  vertebrates  upwards.  We  first  re- 
cognise a carpal  segment  of  the  fore  limb  in  fishes,  where  it  is  represented 
by  a series  of  short  ossicles  (fig.  2,  5o)  intervening  between  the  antibrachial 
bones  (54  and  55)  and  the  elongated  rays  or  fingers  (sr)  of  the  fin,  and 
usually  corresponding  in  number  with  the  proximal  or  metacarpal  series  of 
those  longer  rays.  When,  in  the  air-breathing  yertebrates,  the  typical  num- 
ber Jive  is  established,  and  governs,  as  a general  rule,  that  of  the  terminal 
series  of  rays  or  digits,  the  number  of  ossicles  or  short  rays  at  the  base  of 
these  ought,  theoretically,  to  accord  in  numl)er  with  them  ; and  when  there 
are  two  series  of  such  ossicles,  there  should  be  five  in  each.  As  regards  the 
second  or  distal  row,  this  number  is  actually  maintained  as  a general  rule  in 
the  order  Chelonia.  The  metacarpal  bones  of  the  two  outer  digits  are  com- 
monly each  supported  by  a distinct  carpal  ossicle  (fig.  12,  u and  m'),  and 
these  two  carpal  bones  obviously  answer  to  that  single  one  in  Mammalia  (m) 
which  supports  the  metacarpal  bones  of  the  fourth  and  fifth,  or  two  outer 
digits  (iv  and  v).  In  large  and  old  turtles  (Chelone)  the  same  confluence 
sometimes  takes  place  which  converts  the  two  outer  bones  of  the  second 
carpal  series  into  the  ‘os  uncil'orme’  of  anlhropotomy ; and  I have  seen  an 
instance  in  Chelone  Mydas  in  which  the  ‘ os  magnum’  had  also  partially  coa- 
lesced with  the  ‘ unciforme.’  With  regard  to  the  homology  of  the  distal 
carpal  bones,  supporting  respectively  the  pollex  and  index,  there  can  be  no 
difficulty;  one  is  the  ‘trapezium’  (fig.  12,  <),  the  other  the  ‘ trapezoides’ 
(Jb.  z),  and  the  bone  supporting  the  middle  digit,  iii,  is  obviously  the  ‘os 
magnum.’  The  determinations  of  the  bones  of  the  proximal  row  is  at  first 
sight  less  easy;  we  have  said  that  they  are  theoretically  five  in  number,  and 
we  find  so  many  actually  in  most  Qiiadrumana,  even  in  the  anthropoid 
orang*.  In  this  species  two  of  the  series  (fig.  13,  s,  s')  answer  to  one  in  the 
human  carpus,  namely,  the  bone  called  ‘ scaphoides’ (fig.  6,  sc)  ; that  name 
is  accordingly  applied  to  the  two  inner  or  radial  ossicles  of  the  proximal  car- 
pal series  in  the  orang,  and  they  are  considered  as  subdivisions  of  the  ‘ os 

* Zool.  Trans,  i.  1835,  p.  365. 


192 


DESCRIPTION  OF  PLATES. 


Bcaphoides’*.  The  ‘ lunare  ’ (fig.  12,  /)  is  situated  on  a plane  above  or  proxi- 
mal of  these,  and  is  wedged  into  the  distal  interspace  between  the  radius 
and  ulna.  The  pisiforme  (ib.  p)  descends,  or  is  placed  more  distal,  and 
articulates  with  both  the  ‘cuneiforme’  (ih.c)  and  the  outer  ‘unciforme’ 
{ih.  u). 

In  many  Chelonia,  as  in  Testudo  Elephayitopus,  Testudo  grcEca,  in  large 
individuals  of  Chelone  mydas,  the  two  inner  or  radial  ossicles  of  the  proxi- 
mal carpal  series  are  distinct  as  in  the  orang ; they  obviously,  therefore,  re- 
present the  human  ‘ scaphoid,’  and  the  scaphoid  only.  Ossification  com- 
mences in  that  portion  which  is  nearest  the  middle  of  the  wrist,  or  which  re- 
lates to  the  ‘ trapezoides  ’ and  index  digit  in  younger  Chelones : in  some 
Emydes,  as  Chelodina  longicollis,  this  is  the  only  portion  of  the  scaphoid 
which  is  ossified;  in  other  species  again,  as  Testudo  indica  (at  least  in  old 
individuals),  in  Cistudo  clausa  and  in  Emys  europcea  (fig.  12,  s),  these  two 
portions  coalesce,  and  so  form  a single  scaphoid  bone,  as  in  man. 

In  all  Chelonia  the  next  bone  of  the  proximal  row  of  the  carpus  (fig.  12,  /) 
holds  a higher  or  more  proximal  position  than  the  rest,  and  is  more  or  less 
wedged  into  the  distal  interspace  between  the  radius  and  ulna;  this,  there- 
fore, is  plainly  the  homologue  of  the  ‘lunare’  in  the  orang  (fig.  13,  l)\  it  is 
theoretically,  and  in  most  Chelonia  actually,  the  third  bone  of  the  proximal 
row  of  the  carpus.  The  next  bone  towai’ds  the  outer  side  which  articulates 
exclusively  with  the  ulna  is  the  ‘cuneiforme’  {ih.c)\  usually  it  terminates 
the  proximal  series,  but  sometimes,  as  in  Cistudo  clausa  and  Emys  europcea 
(fig.  12, /»),  it  supports  a small  ‘ pisiforme  ;’  and  this  bone,  which  is  more  de- 
veloped, elongated  and  compressed  in  the  turtles,  articulates,  as  in  the  orang, 
in  greater  proportion  with  the  ‘ unciforme  ’ than  with  the  ‘ cuneiforme.’ 

In  the  proximal  row  of  the  tarsus  in  Chelonia,  one  never  finds  more  than 
two  bones ; and  sometimes,  as  in  the  old  Testudo  graeca,  these  have  coa- 
lesced into  one.  Tlie  larger  of  the  two,  in  most  Chelonia  (when  they  are 
distinct),  articulates  proximally  with  both  tibia  and  fibula,  crossing  their  in- 
terspace, and  distally  with  all  the  bones  of  the  second  row  except  the  outer- 
most. It  therefore  answers  to  both  tlie  ‘ astragalus  ’ and  the  ‘ naviculare  ’ in 
the  human  tarsus,  and  sometimes  also,  as  in  the  Testudo  grceca  above  cited, 
to  tlie  ‘ calcaneum.’  The  distal  series  of  tarsal  bones,  like  their  homotypes 
in  the  carpus,  are  five  in  number  in  all  Chelonia ; the  innermost,  which  sup- 
ports the  metacarpus  of  the  hallux,  answers  to  the  ‘ os  cuneiforme  internum  ;’ 
the  second  to  ‘ o.  c.  medium;’  tlie  third  to  the  ‘ o.  c.  externum  ;’  the  fourth, 
which  supports  the  fourth  metatarsal,  answers  to  the  inner  or  tibial  half  of 
the  ‘ os  cuboides;’  the  fifth,  which  sustains  the  fifth  digit,  to  the  outer  half 
of  the  ‘ os  cuboides.’ 

Thus,  in  the  human  carpus,  the  scaphoid  (fig.  6,  sc)  and  the  unciforme 
(u)  are  each  two  connate  carpal  bones,  and  they  actually  manifest  this  theo- 
retical division  in  most  Chelonia.  In  the  human  tarsus  the  os  naviculare  (es,  s), 
the  calcaneum  (cl,  cV),  and  the  cuboides  (h),  are  each  theoretically  a com- 
pound of  two  bones ; but  in  the  Chelonia  the  principle  of  coalescence  ex- 
tends further : there  are  but  two  bones  in  the  proximal  row ; three  bones 
being  represented  by  the  larger,  and  two  by  the  smaller  of  the  proximal 
tarsals  ; on  the  other  hand,  the  five  bones  of  the  distal  series  maintain  their 
normal  or  typical  distinctness. 

In  the  crocodile  a single  bone  of  the  carpus  (fig.  3,  sit)  represents  the  two 
divisions  of  the  scaphoid,  as  well  as  the  lunare,  the  trapezium  and  trape- 
zoides ; a second  bone  (c)  answers  to  the  ‘ cuneiforme,’  and  there  is  a small 

* Vrolik,  Anatoniie  Comparee  du  Chhnpanse,  fol.  1841. 


HUMAN  TY1>E. 


193 


‘ pisifonne (/;);'  the  bone  u represents  a small  ‘ magnum ' and  ‘ uncilorme.’  In 
the  tai-sus,  ossification  extends  from  the  astragalo-naviciilar  bone  asc,  and 
takes  the  place  also  of  the  internal  and  middle  cuneiform  bones.  There  is 
an  external  cuneiform  bone,  and  a single  bone  b supports  the  two  outer  toes, 
and  represents  both  divisions  of  the  ‘ cuboides’ in  the  Chelonia.  In  some 
Saurians  the  calcaneum  retains  its  true  or  theoretical  character,  the  articular 
portion  (fig.  3,  cl)  being  distinct  from  the  fulcral  or  sesamoid  portion  (cl'). 

In  the  dog  and  other  carnivora,  and  in  the  wombat,  the  scaphoid  is  con- 
nate with  the  lunare  ; three  carpal  bones  in  the  wrist  of  the  orang  are  here 
therefore  represented  by  one.  In  the  hind-foot  of  the  rhinoceros  (fig.  17) 
the  internal  cuneiforine  is  gone,  together  with  the  digit  it  would  have  sup- 
ported. In  the  ruminant  the  cuboid  has  coalesced  with  the  navicular  (fig. 
18,  bs).  In  the  horse  the  external  cuneiform  (fig.  19,  ce)  is  the  largest  of 
the  distal  row  corresponding  with  the  enormous  toe  which  it  supports ; and 
the  navicular,  s,  remains  distinct  from  the  cuneiform,  b,  which  we  may  sup- 
pose to  be  represented  by  that  portion  which  in  the  Emys  supports  the 
fourth  toe. 

In  the  ruminant  the  fibula  is  reduced  to  a small  ossicle  (fig.  18,  or),  repre- 
senting its  distal  end,  wedged  between  the  tibia  and  the  calcaneum  : the  ulna 
is  almost  as  much  reduced  in  the  fore-limb,  and  is  commonly  anchylosed  to 
the  radius.  The  two  metacarpals  of  the  principal  digits,  iii  and  iv,  coalesce 
to  form  the  single  cannon-bone,  and  the  two  corresponding  metatarsals  are 
subject  to  a like  coalescence  (fig.  18),  a single  bone  supporting  the  fully 
developed  toes,  as  in  the  bird  : the  rudimental  back-toes,  ii  and  v,  have 
small  detached  metatarsals  when  they  exist.  Whilst  the  number  of  toes  is 
thus  seen  to  fall  short,  progressively,  of  five,  the  typical  character  of  that  num- 
ber is  still  indicated  by  the  power  of  determining  the  particular  toe  or  toes  of 
the  five  in  man,  which  are  retained  in  the  tetradactyle,  tridactyle,  didactyle 
and  monodactyle  feet  respectively  of  the  lower  mammals.  But  although  the 
number  ‘five’  thus  governs  the  development  of  digits,  properly  so  called,  in 
all  existing  air-breathing  vertebrate,  the  tendency  to  multiplication  of  terminal 
rays  in  the  diverging  appendages  developed  for  locomotion  may  be  seen  to 
manifest  itself  in  the  sexual  ‘spurs’  of  the  Gallmacea  and  Monotremes-,  in 
the  hereditary  supernumerary  toes  in  certain  varieties  of  the  common  fowl, 
and  even  in  some  individuals  of  the  human  race.  But  the  single  spur  of 
the  tetradactyle  cock  is  not  more  a homologue  of  a normal  digit  in  a penta- 
dactyle  reptile  or  mammal,  than  is  the  spur  of  the  Platypus,  or  the  second 
spur  in  the  Pavo  bicalcaratus. 

Having  thus  noticed  some  of  the  chief  varieties  of  the  mammalian  modifi- 
cation of  the  vertebrate  archetype,  there  remains  to  add  only  a few  words  in 
explanation  of  fig.  6, — the  diagram  of  the  human  skeleton. 

As  this  is  that  which  the  anatomist  has  been  accustomed  to  hear  described 
most  frequently  and  exclusively  by  the  special  terms,  and  according  to  the 
special  views  and  ends  of  anthropotomy,  the  language  in  which  its  deviations 
from  the  common  archetype  have  now  to  be  noticed  will  probably  appear 
strange  and  bizarre.  The  comprehension  of  the  explanation  wall  be  facili- 
tated by  reference  to  the  special  name  of  the  bone  through  its  numeral  in  the 
column  of  names  whenever  such  bone  is  alluded  to  under  its  general  or 
archetypal  name. 

In  the  first  and,  notwithstanding  the  upright  posture,  the  most  anterior 
of  the  cranial  segments,  by  reason  of  their  forward  curvature,  the  haem- 
apophysis  (21)  coalesces  early  with  its  own  moiety  of  the  divided  spine  (22),  and 
the  same  thing  happens  to  the  next  haemal  arch  (20)  with  subsequent  oblite- 
ration of  the  .“ympliysis  between  the  halves  of  its  s])ine  (32). 


o 


194 


DESCUII'TION  OF  PLATES. 


The  pleurapopliysis  (?o)  of  tlie  first  arch  remains  a distinct  bone : its  di- 
verging  appendage  (24)  coalesces  with  and  becomes  a ‘ process  ’ of  the  centrum 
(5)  of  the  parietal  vertebra. 

Ihe  neurapophyses  (ni)  of  the  anterior  segment  are  modified  as  in  other 
mammalia,  i.  e.  become  confluent  together  and  with  the  olfactory  capsules ; 
but  appear  externally  below  the  orbital  process  of  the  frontal. 

The  spine  (15)  is  small,  but  bifid. 

That  of  the  second  segment  (u)  attains  its  maximum  of  development,  as 
do  also  the  spines  of  the  two  following  vertebrae  (7  and  3).  The  bifid  spine 
of  the  parietal  segment  is  truly  enormous  as  compared  with  that  of  the  fish 
(fig.  2,  7)  or  the  reptile  (tig.  3,  7),  in  which  latter  animal  the  spine,  being  un- 
divided, adheres  closer  to  the  archetype. 

The  diverging  appendage  (28,  27)  from  the  haemapophysis  (21)  is  divided 
into  two  pieces,  as  in  most  mammals  and  reptiles  ; both  are  broad  and  flat : 
the  first  (20)  serves  to  fix  the  arch  to  the  parapophysis  (12)  of  the  second  seg- 
ment, from  which  it  is  here  dislocated;  the  portion  (27),  which  becomes 
enormously  expanded,  covers  a large  vacuity  between  the  third  and  fourth 
neural  arches,  and  overlaps  by  a squamous  suture  part  of  the  expanded  spines 
of  both  those  vertebrae.  It  also  anchyloses  below  with  the  pleurapopliysis 
(23)  of  the  second  segment,  with  the  parapophysis  (s)and  the  pleurapopliysis 
(3s)  of  the  third  segment,  as  well  as  with  the  bony  capsule  of  the  organ  of 
hearing  (le),  forming  with  those  parts  the  most  singularly  complex  ‘ cranial 
bone  ’ of  anthropotomy. 

The  centrums  (5,  9)  and  neurapophyses  (0,  10)  of  the  second  and  third 
segments  coalesce  with  each  other,  and  with  the  first  pair  of  diverging  ap- 
pendages (24)  of  the  anterior  hmmal  arch  (20,  21,  22),  forming  the  complex 
‘ sphenoid  ’ bone  of  anthropotomy. 

The  centrum  (1),  neurapophyses  (2),  and  neural  spine  (3)  of  the  fourth 
segment  speedily  anchylose  together,  and  their  centrum  afterwards  coalesces 
with  that  (5)  of  the  parietal  vertebra,  forming  the  still  more  complex  cranial 
bone  called  ‘os  spheno-occipitale’  by  Soemmering. 

The  hmmapophyses  of  the  third  much-reduced  haemal  arch  (40)  are  ossified 
only  at  the  extremity  which  joins  the  spine  (41)  : the  remainder  of  the  hasm- 
apophysis  is  continued  in  a ligamentous  state  to  their  anchylosed  pleurapo- 
physes  (ss),  forming  the  ‘ styloid  processes  of  the  temporal  bone.’ 

The  detached  and  displaced  pleurapophyses  (51)  of  the  occipital  vertebra 
attain  considerable  breadth:  their  haemapophj'ses  (52)  are  ossified  only  at  the 
extremity  which  joins  the  pleurapopliysis,  and  with  which  it  coalesces.  The 
diverging  appendage  (53-57)  here  attains  its  maximum  of  adaptive  develop- 
ment; as  in  the  skate-fish  (Maia)  it  exhibits  the  extreme  of  vegetative  or 
polaric  growth.  But  the  progressive  steps  by  which  it  departs  from  the  primi- 
tive or  archetypal  simplicity,  shown  in  figures  7 and  8,  are  so  gradual  that  the 
special  homology  of  the  arm  and  hand  of  man  with  the  bifid-jointed  appendage 
of  the  scapular  arch  in  the  amphiuma,  and  with  the  simple  jointed  ray  of  that 
of  the  scapular  arch  of  the  lepidosiren,  has  never  been  doubted  or  called  in 
question.  In  ascending,  therefore,  to  the  higher  generalization  of  the  signi- 
fication, or  relation  to  the  archetype,  of  such  simple,  or  bifid,  jointed  or  more 
complicated  appendage  of  such  scapular  arch,  we  are  compelled  by  the  truth, 
as  it  exists  in  nature,  to  admit  tliat  the  scapular  arch  in  the  leiiidosiren  and 
other  fishes  forms  the  inferior  costal  or  haemal  arch  of  the  occipital  segment 
or  vertebra  ; and,  by  rel'erence  to  the  archetype,  to  see  in  the  diverging  ap- 
pendage of  such  arch,  a repetition  of  similarly  simple  diverging  appendages 
of  succeeding  segments.  These,  indeed,  retain  their  primitive  simplicity,  as 
shown  in  the  trunk- vertebras  of  the  fish  (fig.  2,  a a)  and  of  the  bird  (fig.  4, 


HUMAN  TYl’li. 


193 


a a)  ; and  that  simplicity  is  very  gradually  departed  from  in  tlie  case  of  the 
appendages  of  the  occipital  vertebra,  by  the  stages  recognisable  in  figs.  7 
and  8.  If,  then,  it  be  admitted  that  the  upper  limb  (arm  and  hand)  of  man 
is  the  homologue  of  the  fore  limb  of  the  amphiume,  of  the  pectoral  fin  of  the 
fish  and  of  the  pectoral  ray  of  the  lepidosiren ; it  follows,  that,  like  the 
latter,  it  must  also  be  the  ‘ diverging  appendage’  of  the  arch  called  ‘scapu- 
lar,’ which  is  the  hmmal  arch  of  the  occipital  vertebra ; and,  therefore,  how- 
ever strange  or  paradoxical  the  proposition  may  sound,  that  the  scapular 
arch  and  its  appendages,  down  to  the  last  phalanx  of  the  little  finger,  are 
truly  and  essentially  bones  of  the  skull. 

The  centrum  of  the  first  segment  of  the  neck  is  subject  to  the  same  modi- 
fication as  in  the  ordinary  mammalia,  the  major  part  (c  a)  remaining  aiichy- 
losed  to  the  centrum  of  the  succeeding  segment  {cd),  of  which  it  forms  the 
‘ odontoid  process  ’ in  human  anatomy'.  The  cortical  part  (c  a,  x)  is  that 
which  is  usually  called  the  ‘ body  ’ of  the  atlas  : it  is  connected  by  aponeurosis 
to  the  corresponding  part  of  the  centrum  of  the  occipital  vertebra:  the  arti- 
culation of  the  head  with  the  neck  is  chiefly  by  means  of  zygapophyses  deve- 
loped in  the  form  of  convex  condyles  from  the  neurapophyses  (2)  ; and 
received  by  the  concave  zygapophyses  of  the  neural  arch  of  the  atlas.  In  the 
other  cervical  segments,  the  autogenous  elements  of  which  they  are  composed 
are  represented  diagrammatically  in  fig.  6 as  distinct,  viz.  the  centrum, 
neurapophysis,  neural  spine,  and  pleurapophysis ; the  latter  element  in  the 
seventh  vertebra  sometimes  attains  a length  nearly  equal  to  that  of  the  first 
dorsal.  In  the  eleventh  dorsal  vertebra  the  elements  are  additionally  indicated 
by  the  initial  letters.  The  cervical  haemapophyses  (ss)  are  wholly  ossified 
and  well -developed.  The  haemal  arches  in  the  abdominal  region  retain  their 
aponeurotic  texture : the  anchylosed  and  stunted  pleurapophyses  are  con- 
tinued by  the  tendinous  origins  of  the  ‘transversus  abdominis;’*  the  haem- 
apophyses are  the  ‘ inscriptiones  tendineae  recti  abdominis and  the  basis  of 
the  haemal  spines  is  the  ‘ linea  alba.’  But  these  and  other  modifications  of 
the  bones  of  the  trunk  have  been  described  at  pp.  158-161. 

On  reviewing  the  figures  in  Plate  II.  it  will  be  seen  that  the  disposition  of 
the  whole  vertebral  column  has  changed  with  the  progressive  modifications 
of  its  segments ; it  soon  departs  from  the  geometric  simplicity  of  the  arche- 
type, and  exchanges  the  straight  line  for  the  curve  or  a succession  of  curves. 

In  the  fish  the  deviation  is  least:  the  whole  column  is  straight  in  some; 
or  it  describes  but  one  slight  curve,  convex  dorsal,  from  the  nasal  to  the 
caudal  vertebrae  : some  fishes  show  a slight  upward  curve  of  the  latter. 

In  the  lower  reptiles  the  whole  spine  is  straight,  or  simply  curved  as  in 
fishes : in  crocodiles  the  general  curve,  extending  from  the  segments  of  the 
head  along  the  back  of  the  tail,  is  interrupted  by  a slight  bend  of  the  neck  in 
the  opposite  direction. 

In  the  bird,  the  longer  and  more  slender  neck  is  the  seat  of  an  elegant 
double  or  sigmoid  curve ; the  segments  of  the  head  are  directed  at  right 
angles  to  the  chord  of  the  cervical  curves ; and  the  tail  bends  upwards  in  a 
direction  contrary  to  that  of  the  fixed  part  of  the  trunk. 

The  degree  and  variety  of  the  curves  of  the  vertebral  column  vary  much 
in  mammalia,  according  to  the  medium  and  mode  of  their  locomotion.  In 
the  subject  of  the  diagram  (fig.  5),  the  cranial  segments  form  a slight  angle 
with  the  cervical  ones ; and  these  form  another  with  the  dorsal  segments : 
the  curve  of  the  back  is  slightly  reversed  in  the  loins,  and  again  resumed  in 
the  sacrum  and  base  of  the  tail ; which  latter  is  the  seat  of  extensive  and 
variable  degrees  of  flexuosity,  its  extremity  being  spiral  and  prehensile  in 
* See  Albinus,  ‘ Historia  Musculorum,’  Tab.  XIV.  fig.  3. 

o 2 


196 


DESCRIPTION  OF  PLATES. 


some  quadrupeds.  Another  mark  of  adaptive  modification  may  now  be  seifl 
in  tlie  convergence  of  the  spines  of  the  cervical  vertebrae  towards  that  of  the 
fourth  of  this  series,  and  by  a more  marked  convergence  of  the  spines  of  the 
dorsal  and  lumbar  vertebrae  towards  that  of  the  eleventh  of  the  dorsal  series  : 
both  these  points  of  convergence  indicate  centres  of  special  motion  in  these 
regions  of  the  spine.  That  in  the  back  commonly  relates  to  the  bounding 
mode  of  progression  of  the  animal,  in  which  the  spine  is  alternately  bent  and 
extended,  upon  the  vertebra  with  the  vertical  spine.  When  the  quadruped 
moves  along  with  a rigid  spine  by  rapid  walking  or  a kind  of  stiff  trot,  as  in 
the  heavy  pachyderms,  the  spinous  processes  of  the  dorsal,  lumbar  and  sacral 
vertebra  all  bend  in  one  direction — slightly  backwards — and  no  centre  of 
motion  is  indicated  by  a point  of  convergence.  The  elephant  and  rhinoce- 
ros resemble  in  this  respect  the  stiff-backed  crocodile.  < 

In  the  human  frame  the  succession  of  slight  but  graceful  curves,  and  their 
relation  to  diffusing  shocks  and  balancing  the  body  in  the  erect  position,  have 
been  explained  in  various  estimable  physiological  works. 

In  no  species  do  the  cranial  vertebrae  bend  at  so  strong  an  angle  from  the 
chord  of  the  opposite  curve  of  the  neck  : and  in  none  is  the  curve  of  the 
sacrum  and  coccyx  so  strong  in  proportion  to  the  small  number  of  the 
vertebrae. 

But  the  most  striking  characteristic  of  the  human  modification  of  the 
endoskeleton  is  the  enormous  development,  both  in  bulk  and  special  adaptive 
modification,  of  the  two  pairs  of  diverging  appendages  retained  for  the  pur- 
poses of  support,  locomotion  and  prehension.  In  no  mammal  does  the  length 
of  the  pelvic  appendages,  as  compared  with  that  of  the  vertebral  column, 
equal  that  in  man. 

Perhaps  the  greatest  obstacle  to  the  contemplation  of  these  members  as 
homologues  of  the  simple  diverging  rays  (a,  a)  of  the  haemal  arch  of  the 
typical  vertebra,  as  they  are  shown  in  the  archetype,  and  in  many  segments 
of  the  bird  and  fish,  will  arise  from  the  early  and  habitual  contemplation  of 
them  by  the  anatomist  under  their  maximum  condition  of  growth  and  de- 
velopment in  its  completest  sense  in  man. 

In  the  skate  (JRaia)  the  pectoral  members  surpass  in  relative  bulk  their  ho- 
mologues  in  man  : but  the  development  of  these  appendages  is  of  a lower  kind : 
it  consists  of  a vegetative  repetition, — division,  bifurcation  and  segmentation 
— of  mere  rays,  of  a multiplication  of  essentially  similar  parts,  without  power 
of  reciprocal  action  and  reaction  on  one  another ; all  being  bound  up  in  one 
common  fold  of  integument  for  one  simple  action — the  only  one  required  for 
an  animal  so  low  in  the  scale,  but  perfectly  provided  for  by  the  form  of  fin  in 
question.  At  first  sight  the  pectoral  fin  of  the  skate  with  its  hundred  digits 
seems  a more  complex  deviation  from  the  primordial  single  ray,  as  shown  in 
the  lepidosiren  (fig.  7),  than  the  pentadactyle  upper  extremity  (53-57)  of  man  ; 
but  the  complexity  is  more  apparent  than  real.  The  high  characteristics  of 
the  human  arm  and  hand  are  manifested  by  the  subordination  of  each  part  to 
a harmonious  combination  of  function  with  another,  by  the  departure  of  every 
element  of  the  appendage  from  the  form  of  the  simple  ray,  and  each  by  a 
special  modification  of  its  own  ; so  that  every  single  bone  is  distinguishable 
from  another:  each  digit  has  its  own  peculiar  character  and  name,  and  the 
‘thumb,’  which  is  the  least  constant  and  important  of  the  five  divisions  of  the 
appendage  in  the  rest  of  the  class,  becomes  in  man  the  most  important 
element  of  the  terminal  segment,  and  that  which  makes  it  a ‘ hand  ’ properly 
so  called. 

In  the  pelvic,  as  in  the  scapular  extremity,  the  same  digit  (i),  which  is  the 
first  to  be  rejected  in  the  mammalian  series,  becomes,  as  it  were,  ‘ the  chief 


UOMOLOOIES  OF  THE  HAND  ANU  FOOT. 


197 


Stone  of  the  corner,’ and  is  termed  ‘par  excellence,’  the  ‘great  toe:’  and 
tins  is  more  peculiarly  characteristic  of  the  genus  Homo  than  even  its  homo- 
tvpe  the  thumb;  for  the  monkey  has  a kind  o\'  poUe.v  on  the  hand,  but  no 
mammal  presents  that  de\elopment  of  the  hallux,  on  which  the  erect  posture 
and  gait  of  man  mainly  depend. 

We  perceive,  however,  that  although  the  first  toe  (fig.  6,  /)  is  the  longest 
as  well  as  the  largest,  it  retains  its  characteristic  inferior  number  of  pha- 
langes ; its  bulk  depending,  like  the  larger  toe  in  the  didactyle  ostrich,  on 
the  superior  size  instead  of  an  increased  number  of  bones;  whilst  the  filth 
or  little  toe  (c)  still  retains  with  diminished  proportions  its  full  complement 
of  phalanges.  The  teleologist  will  discern  that  the  requisite  strength  of  the 
toe,  which  is  the  chief  fulcrum  when  tlie  whole  body  is  raised  by  the  power 
acting  on  the  heel,  as  in  stepping  forward,  has  been  regarded  in  the  dimi- 
nished number  of  its  joints  ; but  the  same  final  cause  would  not  appear  to 
have  governed  the  different  number  of  the  equally-sized  first  and  fifth  of  the 
five  toes  inclosed  in  the  massive  hoof  of  the  elephant  or  the  webbed  hind- 
paddle  of  the  seal : and  whether  the  hallux  be  the  shortest  of  the  five  or  the 
longest,  it  has  always  the  same  number  of  phalanges  whenever  it  is  present, 
provided  it  supports  a nail,  a hoof  or  a claw,  in  the  mammalian  series. 

The  satisfaction  felt  by  the  rightly  constituted  mind  must  ever  be  great  in 
recognising  the  fitness  of  parts  for  their  appropriate  functions  ; but  when  this 
fitness  is  gained,  as  in  the  great  toe  of  the  foot  of  man  and  the  ostrich,  by  a 
structure  which  at  the  same  time  manifests  a harmonious  concord  with  a 
common  type,  the  power  of  the  One  Great  Cause  of  all  organization  is  ap- 
preciated as  fully,  perhaps,  as  it  is  possible  to  be  by  our  limited  intelligence. 

Tt  is  interesting  to  perceive  both  in  the  human  hand  and  foot  that  the  digits 
that  have  been  most  modified  either  by  excess  or  defect  of  development  are 
precisely  those  that  are  the  least  constant  in  the  mammalian  series,  the  two, 
for  example,  that  form  the  extremes  of  the  series ; whilst  the  three  interme- 
diate digits  are  more  conformably  and  equably  developed.  In  the  hand,  the 
‘ digitus  medius’ — the  most  constant  of  all  in  the  vertebrate  series,  and  most 
entitled  to  be  viewed  as  the  persistent  representative  of  the  terminal  seg- 
ments of  the  primitive  elementary  ray, — still  shows  a slight  superiority  of  size; 
though  few,  perhaps,  are  aware  that  the  bones  forming  the  three  joints  of 
this  finger  answer  to  those  called  ‘great  pastern  bone,’  ‘little  pastern  bone,’ 
and  ‘ coffin  bone  ’ in  the  horse,  and  that  the  nail  of  this  finger  represents  the 
hoof  in  the  horse. 

In  the  human  foot  the  three  more  constant  toes,  ii,  Hi,  iv,  maintain  more 
equality  of  size  than  their  homotypes  in  the  hand  : the  middle  toe  here  also 
is  the  representative  of  the  chief  part  of  the  hind-foot  of  the  horse  : but  the 
fourth  toe  answers  to  that  which,  by  excess  of  growth,  becomes  the  chief 
member  of  the  long  and  strong  hind-foot  of  the  kangaroo.  These  and  the 
like  relations  to  the  vertebrate  archetype,  which,  together  with  the  principle 
of  the  fitness  of  things,  govern  the  forms  and  proportions  of  parts  of  the 
human  frame,  cannot  but  be  both  interesting  and  useful  to  the  artist,  as  being 
calculated  to  call  his  attention  to  differential  characters,  which,  though  con- 
stant, may  be  so  slight  as  to  escape  attention  until  their  true  significance  is 
made  known. 

The  few  examples  of  unmutilated  feet  from  the  works  of  the  ancient  Greek 
sculptors  show,  indeed,  how  truly  their  just  observation  of  nature  supplied 
the  insight  into  the  archetypal  law,  and  guided  tliem  to  an  exact  and  beau- 
tiful indication  of  the  affinities  of  the  three  midfile  toes  as  contrasted  with 
the  first  and  fifth,  the  distinctive  characters  of  the  last  being  as  truly  given 
as  those  of  the  great  toe. 


19S 


DESCRIPTION  OF  PLATES. 


In  ‘II  Giorno’ — the  chef-d’oeuvre  of  Correggio  at  Parma,  in  some 
respects  the  noblest  production  of  modern  painting — these  characters  have 
been  overlooked  in  the  foot  of  the  kneeling  Magdalen,  in  which  the  toes  pro- 
gressively decrease  in  equable  proportion  from  the  second  to  the  fifth.  The 
same  fault  may  be  seen  in  the  right  foot  of  the  Mercury  in  the  painting, 
No.  10,  in  our  National  Gallery,  attributed  to  the  same  great  artist,  and  with 
which  the  beautiful  right  foot  of  the  dead  Saviour  in  the  adjoining  painting 
by  the  more  truthful  and  severe  Francia  favourably  contrasts.  Both  the 
Venus  and  Cupid  in  the  Guido  of  the  same  Gallery  afford  examples  of  the 
conventional  foot,  whilst  that  (the  left  one)  of  the  Christ  in  the  ‘ Raising  of 
Lazarus  ’ by  Sebastian  del  Piombo  is  an  example  of  the  beautiful  and  the 
true. 

To  return  from  this  digression  to  the  immediate  subject(fig.6)  ofthepresent 
explanation,  besides  the  ‘ bones  ’ indicated  by  the  figures  and  named  in  the 
adjoining  column,  the  following  are  referred  to  by  letters  : — in  the  carpus  (se) 
sc  is  the  ‘ scaphoides,’  I the  ‘lunare,’  cic  the  ‘ cuneiforme,’^;  the  ‘ pisiforme,’ 
/ the  ‘ tra])ezium,’  z the  ‘ trapezoides,’  m the  ‘ magnum,’  u the  ‘ unciforrae  :’ 
in  the  tarsus  (es)  s is  the  ‘ scaphoides’  or  ‘ naviculare,’  a the  ‘astragalus,’  cl 
the  articular  part  of  the  ‘ calcaneum,’  cl'  ‘its  fulcral  part,’  c i is  the  ‘ cuneiforme 
internum,’  cm  the  ‘cuneiforme  medium,’  ce  the  ‘ cuneiforme  externum.’ 

In  the  hand,  the  bones  or  segments  of  the  rays  immediately  supported  by 
the  carpus  are  called  ‘ metacarpals,’  the  corresponding  series  in  the  foot  ‘ me- 
tatarsals :’  the  remaining  segments  are  called  ‘ phalanges;’  those  nearest  the 
trunk  are  ‘proximal;’  those  furthest  from  it  and  supporting  the  nail  ‘distal’ 
or  ‘ ungual ;’  the  intermediate  ones  are  the  ‘middle  phalanges  ;’  the  middle 
phalanx  is  absent  in  the  thumb  and  great  toe.  It  is  only  in  the  horse  that 
the  phalanges,  from  their  great  and  peculiar  development  and  frequent 
disease,  have  received  special  names  : the  hippotomist,  in  this  respect,  having 
done  exactly  what  the  anthropotomist  had  done  before  in  regard  to  other  bones, 
and  for  the  same  good  reason.  Both,  however,  will  appreciate  the  necessity 
of  knowing  something  more  of  a bone,  besides  its  specialities  of  form  and 
structure  in  relation  to  its  uses  and  diseases,  in  order  fully  and  truly  to  un- 
derstand it.  Some  knowledge  of  the  archetype,  indeed,  would  seem  to  be 
required  to  enable  the  anthropotomist  to  appreciate  even  the  differences  of 
conformation  and  proportion  which  must  strike  his  eye  in  contemplating  the 
immediate  object  of  his  descriptions.  In  the  elaborate  article  on  the  ‘ Bones 
of  the  Foot,’  for  example,  in  the  ‘ Cyclopaedia  of  Anatomy  and  Physiology  ’ 
by  its  accomplished  editor,  it  is  stated “ The  toes  are  numbered  from  the 
inner  or  great  toe  ; they  gradually  diminish  in  length  from  the  first  to  the 
fifth  — “ All  the  metatarsal  phalanges  possess  these  general  characters  : that 
of  the  great  toe  is  very  considerably  thicker  than  the  others,  and  is  slightly 
longer  : the  remaining  ones  differ  but  little  in  size,”  vol.  ii.  p.  34?2.  Now, 
besides  the  difference  in  degree  of  diminution  observable  in  the  skeleton  of 
well-formed  feet,  and  especially  in  the  races  where  no  artificial  compression 
has  been  applied  to  the  foot  during  growth,  the  proximal  phalanx  of  the  little 
toe  is  broader  and  more  depressed  in  proportion  to  its  length ; those  of  the 
three  middle  toes  being  narrower  or  more  compressed  at  the  middle  of  their 
shafts*. 

* How  little  the  true  nature  of  the  science  of  comparative  anatomy,  or  anatomy  rightly 
so  called,  is  comprehended,  and  its  indispensable  aid  to  a true  understanding  of  anthropo- 
tomy  recognised,  mav  he  inferred  by  the  definitions  of  the  science  of  ‘ Anatomy  ’ in  the 
latest  summaries  of  human  knowledge  published  in  this  couniry.  Thus  in  the  excellent 
‘ Penny  Cyclopa:dia  ’ we  read  that  “ Comparative  anatomy  includes  an  account  of  the  struc- 
ture of  all  classes  of  animals  excepting  that  of  man  \ Human  anatomy  is  restricted  to  an  ac- 
count of  the  structure  of  man  only,”  vol.  i.  p.  198.  Art.  Anatomy. 


HOMOLOGIES  OK  THE  HAND  AND  FOOT. 


199 


In  tig.  5.  the  typical  dentition  of  the  placental  inaniinal  is  shown,  viz.  that 

expressed  by  the  formula : — i J ~ J ! P 3-^  ~ ^ ^ " " **'^'* 

signifies  that  there  arc  on  each  side  of  both  jaws  three  incisors  (i,  i,  2,  3),  one 
canine  (c),  four  preinolai-s  (/»,  1,  2,  :i,  •»),  and  three  molars  (/«,  1,2,3).  The 
fourth  premolar  in  the  upper  jaw  and  the  first  molar  in  the  lower  jaw  are 
called  ‘ sectorial’  or  ‘carnassial’  teeth  in  the  carnivora.  In  the  human  sub- 

ject  the  dentition  is: — ^ J ^ ^ 

absent  premolars  are  the  fii-st  and  second  of  the  typical  formula*. 

Fig.  7.  Hind  view  of  the  occipital  vertebra  of  the  Lepidosiren  (Proto- 
pterus)  annectens  (from  nature).  The  letters  indicate  the  bones  in  their  general 
relation  as  elements  of  the  primary  segment,  the  numbers  their  special  names. 

All  the  bones  of  the  fore-limb,  from  the  humerus  53  to  the  manus  57,  are 
potentially  included  in  the  segmented  ray  a. 

Fig.  8.  Hind  view  of  the  occipital  vertebra  of  the  Amplduma  didactylum 
(from  nature).  The  general  and  special  names  and  homologies  of  the  parts 
are  similarly  indicated.  The  articulation  of  the  head  to  the  trunk  is  already 
here  (in  batrachians)  transferred,  as  afterwards  again  in  mammals,  from  the 
centrum  to  the  neurapophyses  (?t  2),  and  the  parts  of  the  neural  arch  have 
coalesced  together.  The  htemal  arch  is  detached  from  the  neural  arch,  and 
slightly  displaced  backwards;  but  the  pleurapopliysis  {pi,  s\)  retains  its 
simple  rib-like  form  and  position,  slightly  inclining  outwards  below  from  the 
vertical  line.  The  hsemapophyses  {h,  52)  do  not  pass  beyond  the  state  of 
gristle,  but  are  much  expanded  : they  resemble  in  their  histological  condition 
their  homotypes,  called  ‘cartilages  of  the  ribs,’  in  the  thorax  of  man.  If  the 
study  of  the  essential  nature  of  the  detached  inverted  arch  so  formed  had 
been  begun  at  this  point  and  compared  with  that  of  the  vertebrates  lower  in 
the  scale,  no  doubt,  I apprehend,  would  have  been  entertained  as  to  the 
detachment  of  such  haemal  arch  in  the  amphiuma  being  a deviation  from 
type,  and  its  attachment  to  the  rest  of  its  segment  in  the  osseous  fishes  as 

I being  a retention  of  the  typical  structure  : this  condition  would  have  been  in 
point  of  fact  the  rule,  and  the  other  the  exception.  In  extending  the  compa- 
rison to  the  higher  classes,  the  instances  of  the  detachment  and  distance  of 
the  scapular  arch  from  the  occiput  predominate,  and  its  attachment  to  that 
neural  arch  of  the  skull,  in  fishes,  becomes  numerically  the  exception. 

The  question  then  arises,  whether  the  number  of  instances,  or  the  circum- 
, stances  under  which  the  instances  occur,  are  to  be  our  guides  in  judging  of 
adherence  to.  or  departure  from  the  archetype.  Fishes  are  the  lowest  of  the 
classes  of  vertebrata,  and  if  it  be  true  that  to  understand  the  fundamental 
type  of  the  verte’orate  skeleton  its  study  must  be  commenced,  not  in  the 
highest  species, — not  in  that  skeleton  where  irrelative  repetition  is  least  and 
adaptive  modification  most  displayed,  but  in  the  lowest  class,  where  the 
reverse  conditions  prevail, — then  the  position  and  connections  of  the  scapular 
arch  in  fishes  must  be  regarded  as  more  conformable  to  the  typical  structure 
than  the  alterefl  position  which  that  arch  presents  in  all  the  higher  classes ; and 
in  this  conclusion  we  are  supported  by  observing  that  the  position  and  re- 
lations of  the  scapular  arch  in  fishes  render  the  cranial  segment,  of  which  it 
there  forms  part,  more  conformable  with  the  other  segments  of  the  skeleton  ; 
whilst  in  the  crocodile,  for  example,  as  explained  at  pp.  117-119,  the  occi- 
jntal  segment  is  unconformable  by  reason  of  the  absence  of  its  hrninal  arch, 
and  can  only  be  made  conformable  by  the  restoration  of  the  scapular  arch  to 

* For  the  (ictermination  of  the  teeth  in  mammalia,  see  my  ' Odonlogrupliy,’  pp.  51  l-j2'.k 


200 


DESCRIPTION  OF  PLATES. 


the  place  it  holds  in  fishes.  For,  in  fig.  3,  with  regard  to  the  three  segments 
that  precede  the  occipital  one,  there  are  three  hmnial  arches— maxillary,  man- 
dibular and  hyoidean  ; and  with  regard  to  the  segments  which  succeed  the 
occipital  one  as  far  as  the  sacrum  inclusive,  every  one  has  its  pleurapophyses 
if  not  its  entire  haemal  arch.  The  scapulae,  therefore,  being  what  fig.  7 shows 
them  to  be,  pleurapophyses,  the  occipital  segment  in  the  crocodile  is  the 
only  one  in  which  those  elements  are  wanting,  and  the  scapulae  are  the  only 
pleurapophyses  by  which  the  want  can  be  supplied  in  order  to  restore  the 
type  as  it  is  displayed  in  nature  by  the  class  of  fishes. 

With  respect  also  to  the  diverging  appendages,  a a,  of  the  occipito-haemal 
arch  of  the  amphiuma,  if  the  anatomist  had  observed  them  with  a previous 
knowledge  only  of  the  lower  class  of  vertebrata,  the  bones  54,  ns  and  or 
would  doubtless  have  been  regarded  and  described  only  as  bifid  segments  of 
the  primitive  simple  ray.  But  the  parts  having  been  originally  studied  from 
a higher  point  in  the  animal  series,  where  the  homologues  of  those  segments 
by  virtue  of  their  special  developments  in  adaptation  to  special  functions  had 
obtained  special  names,  those  names  are  naturally  and  properly  transferred 
to  their  simplified  homologues  in  the  appendage  recognized  as  the  anterior 
limb  or  extremity  of  the  amphiume  : the  proximal  single  segment  53  as  ‘ hu- 
merus,’ the  ossified  divisions  of  the  next  segment  as  34  ‘radius’  and  55  ‘ulna,’ 
the  terminal  bifurcation  as  the  ‘ digits.’  This  extreme  instance  of  the  unity 
of  the  plan  upon  which  the  limbs  of  the  vertebrate  animals  have  been  con- 
structed is  a perfectly  true  one. 

Cuvier  has  most  accurately  assigned  their  special  names  to  each  of  the 
parts  of  the  fore-limb  in  the  amphiume  in  his  celebrated  memoir*.  All  that 
I would  ask  of  his  most  devoted  disciple  is  to  reciprocate  ; to  grant  the  in- 
ference as  to  the  signification  of  the  parts  arrived  at  by  their  study  in  the 
ascending  route  of  inquiry,  which  the  homologist  is  ready  to  give  to  the 
determinations  of  the  special  character  of  the  parts  which  have  been  ob- 
tained by  comparisons  pursued  descensively  from  man : in  other  words, 
to  admit  that  the  whole  (53-57)  in  the  amphiume  (fig.  7)  may  be  the  homo- 
logue  of  the  ray  (53-57)  in  the  lepidosiren  (fig.  6)  ; that  this  may  answer  to 
the  ray  (53-57  a)  in  the  fourth  segment  of  the  archetype  (fig.  1)  ; and  that  such 
ray  is  repeated  in  the  diverging  appendages,  a a,  of  the  succeeding  segments 
of  the  skeleton  : whereby  we  are  led  to  the  recognition  of  the  essential  nature 
of  the  limbs  as  developed  diverging  appendages  of  the  haemal  arches  of 
vertebrae,  and  the  fore-limbs  as  being  such  appendages  of  the  occipital 
vertebraf. 

In  fig.  9 the  elementary  condition  of  the  hind-limbs  in  the  vertebrata  is 
shown  in  nature  in  a back  view  of  the  pelvic  vertebra  of  the  Protoptcrus  or 
lepidosiren.  The  letters  signify  the  general  and  the  figures  the  special  homo- 
logies of  the  parts.  The  apical  elements  (03)  of  the  haemal  arch  are 
detached  from  the  basal  ones  (02)  and  the  rest  of  the  segment,  and  carry 
with  them  the  diverging  appendages  (f.5-09),  as  in  all  other  fishes. 

Fig.  10  is  the  corresponding  arch  and  appendages  of  \\\e.  Proteus  an guinus. 

* Dans  CCS  deux  figures  a cst  Vomoplate,  b les  plaques  sternales  cartilagiiieuses  forniees 
probablement  des  os  coracoidiens ; c Y humerus,  suivi  du  cubitus  et  du  radius  qui  portent  uu 
carpe  cartilagineux  et  deux  os  rnetacarpiens  et  phalangiens  osseux.  Menioire  lu  a 1 Aca- 
demic des  Sciences,  le  13  Novembre  1826,  p.  15. 

The  want  of  connection  of  a peripheral  piece,  at  its  peripheral  border,  appears  to  be 
one  condition  of  its  greater  extent  of  variety  of  form  and  proportion  than  in  the  more  cen- 
tral pieces  of  a natural  segment.  There  is  notliing  to  restrain  its  luxuriant  development 
from  a simple  spine  to  a plate,  to  a divided  plate  with  intercalations,  &c.,  or  to  a lengthened 
segmented  ray  bifurcating  and  shooting  out  into  additional  segments  with  indefinite  modi- 
fications of  these. 


HOMOLOGIES  OF  THE  HAND  AND  FOOT. 


201 


Here  the  hteiual  arch  retains  its  natural  connections  with  the  rest  of  its 
vertebra,  and  henceforth  preserves  tlicm,  with  a few  exceptions  (Enaliosanria 
and  Cetacea),  in  all  the  air-breathing  classes,  up  to  and  including  Man.  In 
respect  of  the  modification  by  displacement,  the  numerical  examples  of  ad- 
hesion to  or  departure  from  type  are  reversed  in  the  pelvic  segment,  as  com- 
pared with  the  occipital  one.  iMammals,  birds  and  reptiles  show  the  rule, 
and  fishes  the  exception,  typically  as  well  as  numerically.  There  has  been, 
therefore,  no  difficulty  or  discrepancy  of  opinion  in  regard  to  the  homology 
of  the  detached  htemal  arch  and  its  appendages  in  fishes.  Cuvier  saw  in  o;i, 
fig.  2,  the  representative  of  the  ‘os  innominatum  ’ or  ‘ os  du  bassin ; ’ and, 
notwithstanding  the  degree  of  displacement  to  which  such  rudiment  of  a 
pelvis,  with  its  pelvic  members,  were  subjeet  in  fishes,  Linnaeus  had  as  little 
hesitation  in  recognizing  in  the  ventral  fins  the  homoJogues  of  hind-limbs 
wherever  they  were  placed.  When  in  their  normal  position,  as  at  v,  fig.  2, 
they  characterized  the  ‘abdominal’  fishes;  when  advanced  to  beneath  the 
pectoral  fins,  as  at  v',  they  characterized  the  ‘thoracic’  fishes;  when  still 
more  advanced,  as  at  v",  they  characterized  the  ‘jugular’  fishes.  The  species 
in  which  the  ventral  fins  were  absent  were  ‘apodal,’  in  the  philosophic  lan- 
guage of  the  immortal  Swede. 

Now  all  that  is  here  required,  in  regard  to  the  determination  of  the  loco-\ 
motive  members,  is,  that  no  more  value  be  given  to  the  character  of  detach- 
ment and  change  of  place  in  regard  to  the  scapular  arch  and  its  appendages 
than  Linnaeus  allowed  in  the  case  of  the  pelvic  arch  and  its  appendages. 

^ The  arms  are  shifted  to  and  fro  in  the  bodies  of  the  air  breathing  verte- 
brates, the  legs  in  those  of  the  water-breathing  vertebrates  : the  arch  sup- 
porting the  arms  is  fixed  in  its  true  place  in  fishes,  and  the  arch  supporting 
the  legs  retains  its  true  place  in  the  higher  classes  ; only  it  is  often  necessary 
that  it  should  be  so  developed  as  to  be  applied  to  many  segments  besides  the 
one  to  which  it  properly  belongs.  In  the  proteus  (fig.  10),  however,  the 
ilium  (ei)  retains  its  simple  primitive  rib-like  form,  just  as  the  scapula  does 
in  fig.  8;  and  it  is  connected,  as  we  saw  likewise  in  the  menopome  (p.  159, 
fig.  28),  to  its  proper  vertebra  exclusively.  The  segments  of  the  bifurcated 
ray  in  the  proteus  have  been  determined  by  descensive  comparison  from 
the  higher  classes  to  be,  ei,  the  femur ; ee,  or,  tibia  and  fibula  ; os,  tarsus  ; oo, 
metatarsus  and  phalanges. 

Fig.  11.  Distal  half  of  anchylosed  metatarsus,  with  the  two  toes,  of  the 
ostrich  (Struthio  camelus),  answering  to  the  third  and  fourth  in  tetradactyle 
birds. 

Fig.  12.  Bones  of  the  fore- foot  of  a freshwater  tortoise  (Emys  europoEo)-. 
s outer  division  of  ‘ seaphoides,’  s'  inner  division  of  ‘ scaphoides,’  I ‘lunare,’ 
c ‘ cuneiforme,’ jo  ‘ pisiforme,’  t ‘ trapezium,’  z ‘ trapezoides,’  m ‘ os  magnum,’ 
w,  M the  two  divisions  of  the  ‘unciforme:’  in  this  reptile  the  number  of 
carpal  bones  is  ten,  five  in  each  row,  corresponding  with  the  number  of  the 
digits. 

Fig.  13.  Bones  of  the  hand  of  the  orang-utan  (Sintia  safyriis).  The 
letters  indicate  the  same  parts  as  in  the  preceding  figure.  The  two  unciform 
bones  have  coalesced  into  one,  and  the  number  of  carpal  bones  is  nine.  In 
the  human  hand,  by  the  coalescence  of  the  two  radial  bones  of  the  proximal 
row  to  form  the  ‘ scaphoid,’  it  is  reduced  to  eight. 

Figure  11-.  Bones  of  the  hind-foot  of  the  orang-utan:  s,  ‘ scaplioides,’ 
answering  to  s s'  in  the  carpus ; a ‘ astragalus,’  answering  to  I in  the  carpus  ; 
el  articular  part  of  ‘ calcaneum,’  answering  to  c in  the  carpus;  cl’  fulcral 
part  of  calcaneum,  answering  to p in  the  carpus  ; c?  ‘ cuneiforme  internum,’ 
answering  to  t in  the  carpus;  c wi  ‘ cuneiforme  medium,’  answering  to  r iu 

p 


202 


DESCRIPTION  OF  PLATES. 


tlie  carpus ; c e ‘ cuneiforme  externum,’  answering  to  m in  the  carpus ; 6 ‘ cu- 
boides,’  answering  to  u in  the  carpus,  and  like  it  consisting  essentially  of  two 
connate  bones : by  a similar  connation  of  two  bones  in  s,  and  also  in  cl,  the 
number  of  tarsal  ossicles  is  reduced,  as  in  man,  to  seven. 

Fig.  15.  Bones  of  the  fore-limb  of  the  wombat  (^Phascolomys  vombatus). 
The  letters  indicate  the  same  bones  as  in  fig.  12,  but  the  lunare  having 
coalesced  with  the  two  connate  bones  forming  the  scaphoid,  the  number  of 
carpals  is  seven. 

Fig.  16.  Bones  of  the  hind-limb  of  the  wombat,  showing  the  resemblance  to 
the  ulna  in  its  homotype,  the  fibula  or,  by  its  proximal  enlargement,  and  the 
superaddition  of  the  sesamoid  ossicle  or',  which  answers  to  the  olecranon,  and 
becomes  anchylosed  to  the  fibula  in  the  monotremes.  The  olecranon  itself 
is  a detached  sesamoid  in  some  bats.  The  hallux  is  reduced  to  a-  small 
metatarsal  (i)  and  one  rudimental  phalanx,  i.  The  letters  signify  the  same 
bones  as  in  the  tarsus  of  fig.  14.  The  foot  can  be  rotated  like  the  hand. 

Fig.  17.  Bones  of  the  hind-foot  of  the  rhinoceros.  The  tarsus  is  reduced 
by  the  continued  connate  condition  of  s and  of  cl,  cl',  and  by  the  absence  of 
c i and  of  the  outer  division  of  b,  to  six  bones.  The  inner  toe  i and  the  outer 
toe  V have  disappeared. 

Fig.  18.  Bones  of  the  hind-foot  of  the  ox.  By  the  connation  of  b with  s, 
forming  a scapho-cuboid  bone,  the  number  of  tarsal  bones  is  further  reduced 
to  five,  and  of  these  the  cuneiforme  medium  is  a mere  rudiment  attached  to 
the  back  part  of  c e.  The  functional  toes  are  reduced  to  two  by  the  rudi- 
mental condition  of  the  second  ii  and  fifth  v : the  first  being  wholly  absent. 

Fig.  19.  Bones  of  the  hind-foot  of  the  horse.  Here  the  number  of  the 
tarsal  bones  is  the  same  as  in  the  rhinoceros,  but  the  toes  ii  and  iv  are  re- 
duced to  mere  rudiments  of  their  metatarsal  segments,  forming  the  ‘splint- 
bones  ’ of  veterinary  surgeons.  Only  the  third  toe  is  retained  for  the  func- 
tions of  the  foot,  which  it  almost  exclusively  represents. 

With  regard  to  the  order  of  the-  descriptions  of  the  cranial  vertebrae, 
pp.  106-139,  and  of  the  numbers  of  the  bones  in  the  several  figures,  it  may 
be  asked  why  I have  not  begun  to  enumerate  the  segments  of  the  head  from 
the  most  anterior  one  in  the  archetypal  figure,  and  the  elements  of  the  cra- 
nial vertebrae  from  the  centrum  of  such  anterior  segment  (vomer,  13),  and 
why  I did  not  count  all  the  elements  of  that  segment  before  going  to  the 
next  ? This  order  seems  so  natural,  that  it  may  one  day  be  proposed,  and 
perhaps  supersede  the  order  of  enumeration  here  adopted.  By  those,  how- 
ever, who  may  view  the  prenasal  and  other  supplementary  ossicles  in  certain 
fishes  and  mammals  that  are  anterior  to  the  nasal  vertebra,  as  rudiments  of 
still  more  anterior  vertebrae  analogous  to  those  abortive  ones  at  the  opposite 
extreme  of  the  body,  the  commencement  with  the  vomer  as  no.  1,  would 
appear  equally  artificial  and  arbitrary,  as  being  then  regarded  the  centrum 
of  the  2nd  vertebra,  or  perhaps  the  3rd  vertebra  of  the  head.  It  is  therefore 
in  order  to  secure  a constant  element  to  commence  with,  in  all  vertebrates, 
that  I have  begun  wdth  the  basioccipital.  It  will  be  seen  by  a glance  at  the 
typical  skeletons  in  Plate  II.,  that  the  vertebrae  in  the  middle  of  the  body 
retain  most  of  their  typical  character,  whilst  those  at  the  extremities  aresub- 
]ect  to  most  modification  : the  direction  in  which  the  segments  are  counted 
must  in  any  case  be  arbitrary,  and  in  enumerating  those  of  the  skull  the  ad- 
vantage of  commencing  with  the  one  that  certainly  and  invariably  begins  the 
cranial  series  determined  my  choice  in  counting  from  the  trunk  forwards; 
when  if  rudiments  of  segments  should  be  determined  anterior  to  the  nasal  one, 
in  any  animal,  they  may  be  reckoned  as  repr^enting  a 5th  or  6th  cranial 
vertebra.  The  order  of  enumeration  of  the  jjConstituent  elements  or  bones 


ENUMERATION  OF  BONES. 


203 


being  likewise  to  a certain  extent  arbitrary,  I have  chosen  that  which  appears 
to  me  to  guide  to  the  most  natural  course  of  description  of  the  skull  in 
diderent  animals. 

1 would  entreat  the  innovator,  therefore,  to  be  well  assured  that  he  has 
better  grounds  than  these  for  changing  the  order  of  enumerating  the  cranial 
vertebrai  and  their  elements,  before  he  does  away  with  the  advantage  of 
having  a number  as  a fixed  and  determinate  symbol  of  a bone ; which  ad- 
vantage would  be  gained  to  Anatomy  if  its  cultivators  should  agree  upon  a 
given  order  of  enumeration. 


THE  END. 


PRINTED  BY  RICHXRD  AND  JOHN  E.  TAYLOR, 
RED  LIO.V  COURT,  FLEET  STREET. 


» 


# •" 


' » ■.J-  ,1^*  *'  ^ # 

’■A  ' _ ■ 'i''^-' ■ <»► '«*  trj,  ^ 

. \4  . A 

'!*<*■  «*-ii«|j^.-i  ,•  H *?3.',  *;  .*  •i»^..!.,i  ■ 

-4  Villv-#v>  V •* '• 

jja 'i  * Vt  ! .’.-..vy^fc  V , 

■ ’ 


'7V|j 


•i 


'•.#■— 1 


♦ 


t , 


% • **  f'  * 


/ 


. s\  ■ 


fi' 


*♦«  (jOkT' 


i- 


' •■■  V ••  N- 

•'.  ,' ‘V-'"  ■-< 


■ ►.  .J.* 


rr. 


M**  ^ ' » 


^ -f 


v»>  V 

^ t ^ . 


'•  ' - . A'“.  *■  -« 

, ‘ ^ ■ ? S • ■ . 

KTr^i,  ; 

-^<-i  \ -•‘^*  '■•''il 


> • 


I 


StfU'l/hi  rdSC.  - :/' 


» V 


. 4 


KING’S 

College 

LONDON 

'TffMM  CfLXZl  OiiZ 


'Teit  l/litriCe.A7^ 


KING’S  COLLEGE  LONDON 


^ t 

« 


;.,  'i,'  ■ ,:1
