Pahlavi Texts, Vol. 5 (SBE 47)
==============================
Pahlavi Texts, Vol. 5 (Sacred Books of the East 47), translated by E. W. West (Oxford, 1897), public domain. West's rendering of the Marvels of Zoroastrianism, the final volume of his Pahlavi series. Scan via Internet Archive.

\ I^ ) à g | Pe . 4 UON V aa x : 


= 'THESACRED BOOKS  — 
© OFTHEEAST | 


L4 


. er ; 
e 


— — PAHLAVITEXTS > 


Marvels of Zoroastrianism — .. 


due 


THE 
SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST 


Translated by 
VARIOUS ORIENTAL SCHOLARS 


Edited by 
F. MAX MULLER 


Vol. 47 


SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST 


(50 VOLUMES) 
Series Editor : F. Max-Müller 


ISBN: 978-81-208-0101-1 (Set) | - NHELSO 
These volumes of the Sacred Books of the East series include translations of 
all the most important works of the seven non-Christian religions that have 
exercised a profound influence on the civilisations of the continent of Asia. 
The Vedic Brahmanic system claims 21 volumes, Buddhism 10, and Jainism 
2;8 volumes comprise Sacred Books of the Parsis;2 volumes represent Islam; 
and 6 the two main indigenous systems of China. Translated by twenty 
leading authorities in their respective fields, the volumes have been edited 
by the late F. Max Miiller. The inception, publication and the compilation of 
these books cover almost 34 years. 
I. BUDDHISM 
Vol. 49: Buddhist Mahayana Texts (2 Parts) 
Vol. 11: Buddhist Suttas 
Vol. 10: The Dhammapada and Sutta Nipata 
Vols. 35 & 36: The Questions of King Milinda (2 Parts) 
Vol. 21: The Saddharma Pundarika or the Lotus of the True Law 
Vols. 13, 17 & 20: Vinaya Texts (3 Parts) 
Il. CHINESE 
Vol. 19: The Fo-Sho-Hing-Tsan-King 
Vols. 3, 16, 27, 28, 39 & 40: The Sacred Books of China (6 Parts) 
III. A GENERAL INDEX 
Vol. 50: A General Index to the Names and Subject-matter of the Sacred Books 
of the East 


IV. ISLAM 
Vols. 6 & 9: The Qur'an (2 Parts) 
V. JAINISM 
Vols. 22 & 45: The Jaina Sutras (2 Parts) 
VI. PARSIS 
Vols. 5, 18, 24, 37 & 47: Pahlavi Texts (5 Parts) 
Vols. 4, 23 & 31: The Zend-Avesta (3 Parts) 
VII. VEDIC-BRAHMANIC SYSTEM 
Vol. 8: The Bhagavadgita with the Sanatsujatiya and the Anugita 
Vols. 29 & 30: TheGrihya-Sutras: Rules of Vedic Domestic Ceremonies (2 Parts) 
Vol. 42: Hymns of the Atharva Veda together with Extracts from the Ritual 
Books and the Commentaries 
Vol. 7: The Institutes of Vishnu 
Vol. 25: The Laws of Manu 
Vol. 33: The Minor Law Books 
Vols. 2 & 14: The Sacred Laws of the Aryas as Taught in the Schools of 
Apastamba, Gautama, Vasishtha and Baudhayana (2 Parts) 
Vols. 12, 26, 41, 43 & 44: The Satapatha Brahmana According to the Text of 
the Madhyandina School (5 Parts) 
Vols. 1 & 15: The Upanishads (2 Parts) 
Vols. 34 & 38: The Vedanta Sutras (2 Parts) 
Vol. 48: The Vedanta-Sutras (with the commentary by Ramanuja) 
Vols. 32 & 46: Vedic Hymns (2 Parts) 


PAHLAVI TEXTS 


MARVELS OF ZOROASTRIANISM 


Translated by 
E.W. WEST 


PART V 


MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS 
PRIVATE LIMITED e DELHI 


7th Reprint: Delhi, 2012 
First Published by the Oxford University Press, 1897 


© MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PRIVATELTD. 
All rights reserved 


ISBN: 978-81-208-0148-6 


MOTILAL BANARSIDASS 


41 U.A. Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi 110 007 
8 Mahalaxmi Chamber, 22 Bhulabhai Desai Road, Mumbai 400 026 
203 Royapettah High Road, Mylapore, Chennai 600 004 
236, 9th Main III Block, Jayanagar, Bangalore 560 011 
Sanas Plaza, 1302 Baji Rao Road, Pune 411 002 
8 Camac Street, Kolkata 700 017 
Ashok Rajpath, Patna 800 004 
Chowk, Varanasi 221 001 


UNESCO COLLECTION OF REPRESENTATIVE WORKS— Indian Series 
This book has been accepted in the Indian Translation Series of the 
UNESCO Collection of Representative Works, jointly Sponsored 
by the United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural 
Organization (UNESCO) and the Government of India 


Printed in India 


By Jainendra Prakash Jain at Shri Jainendra Press, 
A-45 Naraina, Phase-I, New Delhi 110 028 
and Published by Narendra Prakash Jain for 
Motilal Banarsidass Publishers Private Limited, 
Bungalow Road, Delhi 110 007 


RaAsHTRAPATI BHAVAN, 
New DeLHI-4 
June 10, 1962 


I am very glad to know that the Sacred 
Books of the East, published years ago by 
the Clarendon Press, Oxford, which have 
been out-of-print for a number of years, 
wil now be available to all students of 
religion and philosophy. The enterprise 
of the publishers is commendable and I 
hope the books will be widely read. 


S. RADHAKRISHNAN. 


PUBLISHER’S NOTE 


First, the man distinguished between eternal and perish- 
able. Later he discovered within himself the germ of the 
Eternal. This discovery was an epoch in the history of the 
human mind and the East was the first to discover it. 


To watch in the Sacred Books of the East the dawn of 
this religious consciousness of man, must always remain one 
of the most inspiring and hallowing sights in the whole history 
of the world. In order to have a solid foundation for a 
comparative study of the Religions of the East, we must have 
before all things, complete and thoroughly faithful translation of 
their Sacred Books in which some of the ancient sayings were 
preserved because they were so true and so striking that they 
could not be forgotten. They contained eternal truths, 
expressed for the first time in human language. 


With profoundest reverence for Dr. S. Radhakrishnan, 
President of India, who inspired us for the task; our deep 
sense of gratitude for Dr. C. D. Deshmukh & Dr. D. S. 
Kothari, for encouraging assistance; esteemed appreciation of 
UNESCO for the warm endorsement of the cause ; and finally 
with indebtedness to Dr. H. Rau, Director, Max Müller 
Bhawan, New Delhi, in procuring us the texts of the Series 
for reprint, we humbly conclude. 


CONTENTS. 


PAGB 
INTRODUCTION : un ^x 
Abbreviations used in this E . : : . xlviii 
MARVELS OF ZOROASTRIANISM. 
Dinxarp, Book VII. 

CHAF. 
1. Descent of the glorious destiny . . : ape 3 
2. Parentage of Zaratüst . : : : Die is 
3. His birth, childhood, and youth till his a i 38 
4. His missions to the Karaps, and Vistásp's conversion . 50 
5. Events in the last thirty-five years of his life . j 2843 
6. Further events till the death of Vistásp . ; BET hy 
7 » . » til end of Sásánian monarchy ; . 82 
8. - » Will end of Zaratüst's millennium . "T 
9. Afishédar’s millennium " : : : 4 107 
10. Afishédar-mah’s millennium . ; i : à > Ir 
11. Sósháns and the renovation e 116 

Dinxarp, Book V. 

1. Kai-Loharásp at Jerusalem, and descent of the religion. — 119 
2. Parentage, birth, and life of Zaratüst. Future apostles . 122 
3. Events after Vistásp's conversion and in later times a 126 
4. Descent of the Iranians. The tribe having a Gyémará . 127 


SELECTIONS OF ZAD-SPARAM. 


12. Two old legends of Spendarmad and of the hero Srit6. 133 


13. Parentage of Zaratüst . 4 v! *148 

14. Dempns try to injure him before and at bts birth ; m TI 

15. Five Karap brothers opposed to Zaratfist and his four 
brothers ; A 1 143 


16. One Karap tries to kill Zaratûst five times . ; : 144 


Vill CONTENTS. 


CHAP. PAGE 


17. Another foretells his glorious destiny . i j - 147 
18. His father disagrees with him . . 148 
19. And he disagrees with his father and the chief CA A 
20. Legends indicative of his good disposition  . i . I5I 
21. His going to confer with Aüharmazd . ; " . URB 
22. His conferences with the archangels  . à : . I59 
23. Dates of conversions, births, and deaths ; i » 153 
24. Five dispositions of priests and ten admonitions . . 167 
ĪNDEX : ‘ ; A i : , . $ v ETE 


Transliteration of Oriental Alphabets adopted for the Trans- 
lations of the Sacred Books of the East ; ; as: 183 


INTRODUCTION. 


I. IN the summary account of the Spend Nask, given in 
the eighth book of the Dinkard, chapter XIV, it is stated in 
§ 4 (see S. B. E., vol. xxxvii, p. 32) that many marvels, owing 
to Zaratüst, are published therein, *just as there are some 
which, collected and selected, are noticed by the Dinkard 
manuscript. This statement evidently refers to the seventh 
book of the DinkazZ, which contains the legendary history 
of Zaratüst and his religion, related as a series of marvels 
extending from the creation to the resurrection of mankind. 
A much briefer account of some of the same details occurs 
at the beginning of the fifth book of the Dinkard, and 
appears to have been abridged from a compilation which 
was either derived partially from a foreign source, or pre- 
pared for the use of foreign proselytes. A third compila- 
tion of similar legends is found among the Selections of 
Zad-sparam. And a careful translation of these three 
Pahlavi Texts constitutes the Marvels of Zoroastrianism 
contained in this volume. 

2. As the extent of Dk. VII is about 16,coo Pahlavi 
words (without allowing for one folio lost) it probably 
contains about four-fifths of the details included in the 
Spend Nask, the Pahlavi version of which has been esti- 
mated, in S. B. E., vol. xxxvii, p. 469, to extend to 20,500 
words. It says very little about Zaratüst's conferences 
with the sacred beings (mentioned in Dk. VIII, xiv, 5, 6), 
and gives no description of the other world and the way 
thither (as reported ibid. 8) But it probably contains 
many verbatim extracts from other parts of the Pahlavi 
version of the Spend Nask, which appear, however, to have 
been previously collected in the Exposition of the Good 
Religion, an older MS. than the DinkazZ, which is quoted 


as an authority in Dk. VII, i, 2. 


X PAHLAVI TEXTS. 
Eee 

3. This seventh book commences with a detailed 
statement of the descent of the glorious ruling dynasty 
from the primeval man GáyómarZ, through his descen- 
dants, the PésdáZian and Kayánian rulers, to Kai-Vistasp. 
Among the individuals, rarely mentioned elsewhere, are the 
sacred being Hadish (the protector of homesteads in the 
Visperad) Vaégered the brother of king Hósháng, Pata- 
khsróbó king of the Arabs, and Aóshnar the chancellor of 
Kai-Us. Zaratüst and the three millennial apostles are 
also mentioned, but the contents of this first chapter are 
probably derived from the Kitradad Nask (see Dk. VII, 
xiii, 20) and from Yt. XIX, 25-93. 

4. Chapter II begins the legendary history of Zaratüst 
with the descent of his glory, from the presence of 
Aüharmazd to the house in which Zaratüst's mother was 
about to be born; and, alarmed at her radiance, the Kavigs 
and Karaps, or ruling priests of the district, oblige her 
father to send her away to another valley, where Póráü-. 
sháspó resided, to whom she was afterwards married; and 
several legends are related, in which both the archangels 
and archdemons are active agents, which lead on to the 
birth of Zaratüst, thirty years before the end of the ninth 
millennium of the universe, and his complete genealogy is 
given. 

5. Chapter III begins with his laughing at birth, and 
describes the ill-will of the Karaps, or priests of those 
times, and their many attempts to destroy him during his 
childhood, till he openly defied them at the age of seven. 
At the end of the ninth millennium, when he was thirty 
years old, as he was bringing Hóm-water out of the fourth 
effluent of the Daiti river, he met the archangel Vohümanó 
who had come to invite him to a conference with 
Aüharmazd, about which no details are given. 

6. Chapter IV, however, proceeds to mention that, in 
two years, he returned from his first conference, by order 
of Aüharmazd, to preach his religion to the Kigs and 
Karaps in the presence of their ruler, Aürvàitá-dang the 
Tür. They seem to have listened attentively till he advo- 
cated Khvétükdas, when they demanded his death, and 


INTRODUCTION. xi 
were supported by the Tür's brother; but the Tür's son, 
who presided, remonstrated with them, and Aurváitá-dang 
himself protected him, but refused to be converted. 
Zaratüst was afterwards sent to demand slaves and horses 
from Védvoist, a rich Karap, who refused them arrogantly ; 
he also went to Parshad-gau in Sagastán and cured his bull 
with Hóm-water, whereupon Parshad-gau joined him in 
worship, but not in public. Zaratüst repulsed the demons 
as in Vd. XIX, 1-4; he is then tempted by a Karap in 
the form of Spendavinad, whom he also repulses. And he 
is finally sent to the court of Vistásp, where he is relent- 
lessly opposed by the Kigs and Karaps who obtained his 
imprisonment, during which he is saved from starvation by 
a miracle; then some of the sacred beings arrive to assist 
him, and Vistásp is at last converted, twelve years after 
the coming of the religion when Zaratüst went to his first 
conference with Adharmazd. 

7. Chapter V refers to the marvels of the last thirty-five 
years of Zaratüst's life, after Vistásp's conversion, but says 
nothing about his own death, except that he departed to the 
best existence at the age of seventy-seven. It mentions the 
establishment of ordeals of thirty-three kinds, the victory of 
Vistásp over Argásp the Khyón, the useful works and 
advice of Zaratüst, the compilation of the Avesta, and the 
birth of Péshyótan, the immortal ruler of Kangdez. 

8. Chapter VI continues this account of marvels till the 
death of Vistásp,which occurred forty-three years later. The 
legends related are about the presentation of a heaver.ly 
chariot to Vistásp by the soul of an old hero Sritó who had 
been killed about 350 years before; and regarding the 
coming of two high-priests from the southern regions of 
the earth, ten years after the departure of Zaratüst, to 
enquire about the religion. 

9. Chapter VII relates the marvels occurring after the 
death of Vistásp until the end of the sovereignty of Iran; 
mentioning king Vohümanó who was a grandson of Vistásp, 
the high-priest Sénév who lived throughout the second 
century of the religion, the devastator Alexander the 
Great, the four successive high-priests who restore ortho- 


Xil PAHLAVI TEXTS. 


o ee 


doxy in the fifth and sixth centuries of the religion, the 
apostate kashn-résh of about the same period, king 
Artakhshatar the founder of the Sásánian dynasty, his 
chancellor Tanvasar, ÀtürpáZ-i Máraspendán and his son 
surnamed Avarethrabau, with an anonymous arch-apostate 
of their time, and then king Khüsró Anóshérván. Finally, 
it condemns the proceedings of the devastators in later 
times, whose names are not mentioned. 

10. Chapter VIII deals with the ninth and tenth 
centuries of the religion, which bring the millennium of 
Zaratüst to a close. After a bitter lamentation over the 
anarchy in religion and government—in which parts of 
8$ 34 and 36 are taken from the Varstmánsar commentary 
on Yas..X XXII in Dk. IX, xxxii, 17, 20—it refers to the 
arrival of Kitró-méhónó, ‘im of the racial home, a title 
of Péshyótanó, son of Vistásp, and immortal ruler of 
Kangdez, who arrives with 150 disciples to restore the 
religion and destroy the wicked, including the Turkish 
demons, the Arabs, and the ecclesiastical Shégáspó! 
(Theodosius?) In the thirtieth year before the end of this 
tenth millennium A üshéZar, the Developer of Righteousness, 
is born, and confers with the archangels at the end of the 
millennium, when the sun stands still for ten days and 
nights. 

11. Chapter IX describes the eleventh millennium, that 
of AüshéZar, who produces much prosperity and progress 
which continue until the fifth century. Then the wizard 
Mahrküs appears for seven years, and produces awful 
winters in four of them, in which most of mankind and 
animals perish, till he is himself destroyed by the Dahman 
Afrin. Afterwards, Yim's enclosure is opened to replenish 
the earth with animals and men who then begin to subsist 
more upon the milk of cattle, which is plentiful; and 
Ashavahistó interferes to diminish the slaughter of cattle. 
At the end of the fifth century two-thirds of the Iránians 
have become righteous, and in the thirtieth year before the 
end ofthis eleventh millennium A üshégar-máh,the Developer 


* This name can be read ShéwAsfas in Byt. III. 


INTRODUCTION. xiii 


of Worship, is born, and confers with the archangels at the 
end of the millennium, when the sun stands stili for twenty 
days and nights. 

,I2. Chapter X describes the twelfth millennium, that of 
Adshédar-mah, during which mankind continue to improve, 
are better supplied, and have fewer wants, while deaths 
occur only through old age and the executioner. During the 
last fifty-three years, they leave off eating meat and subsist 
upon vegetables and milk, for which latter they substitute 
water for the last three years. But the old tyrant Dahák 
breaks loose, and Kerésáspó has to be roused to smite him. 
In the thirtieth year before the end of this twelfth millen- 
nium Sósháns, the Triumphant Benefiter, is born; Kai- 
Khásró and his companions afterwards arrive to assist him, 
and the sun stands still for thirty days and nights. 

13. Chapter XI describes how Sósháns and his assistants 
destroy all the evil remaining in the world, during the course 
of fifty-seven years, while mankind subsist for seventeen 
years on vegetables, thirty years on water, and ten years on 
spiritual food. And, at the end of these fifty-seven years, 
Aharman and the fiend are annihilated, and the renovation 
for the future existence occurs. 

14. Several of the details described in Dk. VII are 
briefly mentioned in Dk. V, i-iv, where they are introduced 
by a statement of the siege of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar 
(Bikht-Narsith) assisted by Kai- Lóharásp, father of Vistasp. 
Excepting this account of the siege, in which the Jews are 
evidently called ‘a congregation or tribe’ (vam), and some 
remarks about the same ‘tribe’ at the end of Chapter IV, 
all the other details which are mentioned have reference 
only to Iranians; but they are said to be the sayings of 
Átür-farnbag as to the MS. which that tribe call really 
their Gyémara (Chaps. I, 2, 3; IV, 8), as the name can be 
most plausibly read. Most of the strictly Iranian details 
have manifestly been derived from the same sources as 
were consulted by the writer of Dk. VII, that is, from the 
Pahlavi versions of the Spend and KXitradad Nasks. It 
would probably be hazardous to suppose that the Jewish 
compilers of the Gemara could have had access to these 


xiv PAHLAVI TEXTS. 
eS SS 
sources, and it might be preferable to assume that Atdr- 
farnbag was himself compiling a record of Zoroastrian 
traditions for the use of some converts from Judaism, to 
take the place of the Gemara of their former faith. 

15. The Zaratüst-námak of Zad-sparam is contained in 
the latter half (Zs. XII-X XIII) of the first series of his 
Selections, the former half of which, being a paraphrase of 
the first half of the Bundahis, has been translated in S. B. E., 
vol. v, pp. 155-186. In Chapter XII Zad-sparam relates two 
of the earliest legends referring to Mazda-worship, which he 
had found in old MSS. The first of these describes the 
appearance of the archangel SpendaxmaZ, wearing a golden 
sacred girdle, at the court of king MánüsZihar, 428! years 
before the coming of the religion to Zaratüst when he went 
to his conference with the sacred beings. The other is the 
legend of the warrior Sritó, the seventh brother, who was 
sent by Kai-Üs to kill the frontier-settling ox which 
threatened him, 300 years before the coming of the religion, 
with future execration by Zaratüst. 

16. Chapter XIII refers to the descent of Zaratüst's 
glory upon his mother at her birth, and the combination 
of his spiritual and worldly natures; also detailing his 
genealogy. Chapter XIV describes the attempts of the 
demons to destroy him before and at his birth, when 
Vohümanó entered his reasoning powers and made him 
laugh with delight and utter one form of the Ahunavair 
formula, Chapter XV is about the five Karap brothers, 
with their first cousins the Aüsikhshes, all descended from 
the demon of Wrath and a sister of king Mânûskîhar ; also 
about the four brothers of Zaratüst who seem to be 
unmentioned elsewhere. 

17. Chapter XVI details the attempts of one of the 
Karaps to destroy Zaratüst during his infancy, and the 
means by which he is preserved ; it also explains who Rágh 
and NóZar were. In Chapter XVII one of the Karaps 
foretells the future success of Zaratüst. In Chapter XVIII 


———M Me ie dace d a 


1 The MSS. have 528, but this would be twenty-eight years before the 
accession of Mán(sAihar, see the synopsis in § 55. 


INTRODUCTION. XV 


his father hears him accused of folly, and takes him to 
a Karap to be cured. In Chapter XIX the chief Karap 
comes to the house of Zaratüst's father, and is invited to 
consecrate the food set before him; but Zaratüst objects 
and a quarrel ensues, which so much disturbs the Karap 
that he leaves the house, and drops dead from his horse on 
the road home. In Chapter XX instances are given of 
Zaratüst's righteous desires, his compassionate assistance of 
people fording a river, his liberal disposition, his abandoning 
worldly desires, his pity for dogs, his wish for a good- 
looking wife, and his acceptance of progress even from the 
wicked, during his youth. 

18. Chapter XXI relates that, at thirty years of age, on 
his way to the festival of spring, he saw in a vision all man- 
kind following MéZyómáh, his first cousin, into his presence. 
He then went on to the bank of the Dáitih, and crossed its 
four channels, when he met Vohümanó who led him to the 
assembly of the archangels, where he received instruction 
from Atharmazd and saw the omniscient wisdom; the 
archangels also subjected him to various ordeals. 

I9. Chapter XXII refers to his conferences with the 
seven archangels, each at a different place, and extending 
over ten years. In Chapter XXIII, MéZyómáh is con- 
verted at the end of these ten years. The next two years 
are spent on the conversion of Vistásp, in which Zaratüst 
is assisted by some of the sacred beings, and the narrative 
ends by giving the dates of several other conversions, births, 
and deaths. But after its 300th- year the religion is dis- 
turbed and the monarchy contested ; referring, no doubt, to 
the effects of Alexander's conquest of Persia. 

20. These three narratives appear to be the only con- 
nected statements of the Zoroastrian legend that remain 
extant in Pahlavi, and all three seem to be chiefly derived 
from the Sásánian Pahlavi version of the Spend Nask, with 
some probable additions from the similar version of the 
Kitradad Nask, as may be gathered from the summary 
accounts of the contents of these Nasks given in Dk. VIIT, 
xiii, 20-xiv, 15, and translated in S. B. E., vol. xxxvii, 
pp. 31-34. There are, however, allusions to other legends 


xvi PAHLAVI TEXTS. 


regarding Zaratûst to be found scattered about in Pahlavi 
literature, to which we shall return after mentioning the 
manuscript authorities for the texts translated in this 
volume. 

21. The chief existing authority for the Pahlavi text of 
the DinkazZ, Books III-IX, and the only independent one 
for Book VII, is the MS. B in Bombay, which has been 
fully described in S. B. E., vol. xxxvii, pp. xxxiii-xxxvii ; 
it will therefore be sufficient here to give a short statement 
of the information which was there detailed at full length. 
This MS., written in 1659, was an unbound quarto volume 
of 392 folios when it was brought from Irán to Surat in 
1783; after which time 70 folios became detached from 
various parts of the MS., but nearly all these had been 
discovered more than twenty years ago. 

22. The writer of the MS. not only recorded the date of 
his own work, but also copied two previous colophons of his 
predecessors, with dates corresponding to A.D. 1516 and 
1020, and it appears that there had been an intermediate 
copy about 1355. The MS. of 1020 had been copied at 
Bakdad, possibly from the original MS. of the last editor 
of the Dinkard, which must have been completed about 
A. D. goo, 

23. For the text of Dk. V we have a second authority, 
independent of B, in the MS. K43 at Kopenhagen (see 
S. B. E., vol. xxxvii, pp. xxxvii-viii), written shortly after 
1594 and also descended from the MS. of 1020. 

24. The Selections of Zád-sparam are found in some of 
the old MSS., which also contain the Dázistán-i Dinik (see 
S.B. E, vol. xviii, pp. xv-xvii). Of the two MSS. used 
for the text of Zad-sparam’s Zaratüst-nàmak, K35 was 
brought from Irán to Kopenhagen in 1843. It has lost 
many folios, both at the beginning and end; but, before 
it was so mutilated, a copy (BK) of it was made, which 
is now in Bombay and contains a copy of its colophon, the 
date of which corresponds to A.D. 1592. For the text of 
Zs.: xxii, 4-xxiv, 19, which has been lost from K35, the 
translator is indebted to this old copy. The other MS. 
authority T, belonging to Ervad Tehmuras in Bombay 


INTRODUCTION. xvii 
— ——Á— a —rÓ———nóÓÁ— —Ó(á€—Ó—— Ha P—— (Ga Ó 
(a copy of which has been used), is dated two generations 
earlier. 

25. Regarding the period of Zad-sparam’s career we are 
well informed by the date of the third Epistle of Mânû- 
skihar, corresponding to A.D. 881, at which time Zad-sparam 
was probably in the prime of life; but his Selections were 
certainly compiled as late as A. D. 9oo, or about the same 
time as the completion of the DinkazZ. So that the 
Pahlavi texts, from which these three narratives of the 
Zoroastrian legends have been translated, were no doubt 
all written about A.D. goo, and the information they 
contain was nearly all derived from the Pahlavi versions 
of two of the Nasks. 

26. We have reason to believe that the Pahlavi versions 
of Avesta texts were completed in the fourth century and 
revised in the sixth, after the downfall of the heretic 
Mazdak. This may not only be clearly inferred from the 
traditional account of the compilation and restorations of 
the Avesta and Zand, preserved in Dk. IV, 21-36, and 
translated in S. B. E., vol. xxxvii, pp. 412-418 ; but is also 
in accordance with the actual condition of the Pahlavi 
versions of the liturgical Avesta texts. With the exception 
of a few interpolated passages, the whole of these Pahlavi 
versions might have been written, or revised, in the time 
of king Shahpühar II (A.D. 309-379). And the excep- 
tional passages mention no persons or events of a later 
date than the reign of king Khûsrô I (A. D. 531-578) ; 
being merely references to such persons as Mazdak, the 
heretic, and certain commentators who lived about that 
time. 

27. If we examine the Zoroastrian legends, translated in 
this volume, we shall also find it difficult to discover 
a passage that clearly alludes to any historical personage 
of later date than Khüsró I, who is named in Dk. V, iii, 3; 
VII, vii, 26, although the compiler of the Dinkard had the 
traditions of 250 years of Arab rule to draw upon for facts, 
if he had been disposed to continue the statements of the 
Pahlavi. Spend Nask down to his own time. No doubt, 
these traditions may have intensified his denunciations of 


[47] b 


xvili' PAHLAVI TEXTS. 


the devastators in Dk. VII, vii, 29-38; viii, 4-9, but, like 
most Pahlavi writers, he is careful not to mention Muham- 
madanism. Dk. VII, vii, 33, 34 seem to refer to some 
particular individual of this later time ; but the references 
to Kaisar and Khákán, the Turkish demons with dishevelled 
hair, the Arab, and Shedasp6 (Theodosius?) of Arüm, may 
all have been taken from a Pahlavi version revised in the 
time of Khásró I. 

28. That the original Pahlavi version was translated from 
an Avesta text, though many Pahlavi commentaries were 
intermingled, appears certain. Apart from the numerous 
quotations from revelation (dénó), which may be safely 
assumed to have had an Avesta original, there are many 
passages interspersed with glosses, such as the Pahlavi 
translators habitually used, as well as numerous sen- 
tences beginning with a verb, an Avesta peculiarity which 
generally disappears in an English translation. Regard- 
ing the age of this Avesta text it would be hazardous 
to speculate without further information than we yet 
possess. 

29. The principal details connected with the Zoroastrian 
legends which have been noticed in other Pahlavi and 
Pazand texts, with references to the passages where they 
occur, are as follows :— 


GÓsürvan informed of the future coming of Zaratüst in Bd. IV, 4. 

Z.’s genealogy and family in Bd. XXXII, 1-10. 

Summary account of Z. and Zoroastrianism, from the creation 
to the resurrection, in Dk. VIII, xiv, 1-15. 

The abode of Z.’s father, when Z. was born, was on the bank of 
the Dárega river (Bd. XX, 32; XXIV, r5). 

150 demons were prevented from destroying Z., before his birth, 
by the presence of a fire in his father's house (Sls. X, 4; XII, 
I1; SQ XE 3). 

Detailed account of the birth of Z. in Dk, IX, xxiv, 1-18. 

When Z. first saw the archangels, he thought they were arch- 
demons (Ep. I, x, 9). 

Omniscient wisdom temporarily conferred upon Z., and what he 
then saw (Dk. IX, viii, 1-6 ; Byt. I, 1-5; II, 5-22). 

He saw the soul of Daváns tormented in hell, excepting one foot 
(AV. XXXII, 1-6; Sls, XII, 29; Sd. IV, 3-11). 


INTRODUCTION. xix 


He also saw a mortal with children and an immortal without 
any, and preferred the former (Dd. XXXVII, 43`. 

And he beheld the terrible condition of Keresásp's soul (Dk. IX, 
XV, 1—4). 

Advice of Aüharmasd to Zaratüst (Sd. XXV, 6-9; LXXXI, 
2-16). 

The demon Envy (Aresh) converses with Z. in Dk. IX, xxxi, 
6—11. 

Aharman tempts Z. with the promise of rooo years dominion, 
in Mkh. LVII, 24-29. 

About Maigók-máh, in Dk. IX, xliv, 19. 

Z. coming to preach to king Vistásp, in Sg. X, 64-68. 

Archangels assist Z. in converting Vistásp, also the war with 
Argasp, in Dk. VIII, xi, 2-4. 

The war of the religion with Argásp mentioned in Bd. XII, 33. 

The families of Zaratüst, Hvóv, and Vistásp mentioned in Dk. 
VIII, xxix, 25. 

About Frashóstar and Gámásp in Dk. VIII, xxxviii, 68; IX, 
xlii, 8, 9 ; xliv, 17, 18. 

About Kaí-Vistásp, Frashóstar, PorüA4ást, Gámásp, and Hátós 
in Dk. IX, xlv, 3-5. 

Brád-rükhsh, or Brádró-résh the Tr, mentioned as destroying 
the righteous man, in Dd. LXXII, 8; Sd. IX, 5; Dk. VIII, 
XXXV aa, IX, x, 3. 

The last millenniums mentioned in Dk. IX, xxxix, 18; xli, 6-8. 

Events in the last two millenniums, in Byt. II, 22-III, 62. 

The resurrection described in Bd. XXX. 


30. Beyond the frequent occurrence of the names of the 
chief actors in the traditions, there are not many references 
to the Zoroastrian legends in the extant Avesta. ‘shis is 
owing to the fact that three-fourths of the Avesta texts, 
including the Nasks specially devoted to these legends, 
have been lost. The chief references to them that still 
survive in the Avesta are as follows :— 

The passing on of the kingly glory from ruler to ruler, from 
Haoshyang,ha to Kava-Haosrava, from Zarathustra to Kava- 
Vistáspa and the Saoshyazt, in Yt. XIX, 25-90. 

The terror of the demons on hearing of the birth of Z., in Vd. 


XIX, 43-47. 
Z. mentioned as son of Pourushaspa in Yt. V, 18. 
Verethraghna gives Z. strength, health, vigour, and keenness of 


sight (Yt. XIV, 33). 
2 


XX PAHLAVI TEXTS. 


References to Z.’s conference with Ahura Mazda, and his rejection 
of the Cemons, in Yas. XII, 5, 6. 

The demons attempt to destroy Z., and to tempt him, but are 
repelled by recitations, in Vd. XIX, 1-10. 

Commentary on the Ahunavair, in Yas. XIX. 

Z. converses with Haoma, in Yas. IX, 1-16. 

Fate of the soul after death revealed to Z., in Vd. XIX, 26-34. 

Z. is taught various spells, in Yt. XIV, 34-38. 

He prays that he may convert the queen Hutaosa, in Yt. IX, 26; 
XVII, 46. 

References to the battle with Aregad-aspa, in Yt. V, 109, 113, 
116, 117 ; IX, 30; XVII, 50, 5r. 

Z.’s reply to Frashaostra regarding the ritual, in Yas. LXXI, 
I-II. 

There are also other references to Kava-Vîstâspa, Frashaostra, 
Gâmâspa, Pourużistâ, Maidhyômau, the Haé£aZaspas, Spita- 
mas, and Saoshyazts. And the Fravashis of all the righteous 
persons receive homage in Yt. XIII. Of the unbelievers, the 
Karapans and Kavis are mentioned several times in the 
Gâthas and Yasts, including the Hôm Yast; and the Usikhsh 
once in the Gâthas. 


31. So far as these references in the Avesta extend, 
they agree with the Pahlavi versions of the legends, and 
occasionally state some further particulars. We may, 
therefore, safely conclude that these Pahlavi versions 
present a fairly complete view of the Zoroastrian legends 
current in Sásánian times. But we have another means 
of testing this conclusion more fully in the Persian Zartust- 
námah, translated by Eastwick in the Appendix to Tke 
Parsi Religion, as contained in the Zand-Avasta, by John 
Wilson, D. D. (Bombay : 1843). 

32. This Zartust-namah contains 1570 Persian couplets, 
composed by Zartust Bahram Pazdü, apparently at the 
ancient city of Rai, and finished on August 12, 1278. But 
Eastwick's English translation was made from a good MS. 
of this poem, written by Dastür Barzü Qiyámu-d-din 
(=Kamdin) in 1636, belonging to the Wilson Collection 
and now in the library of Lord Crawford at Wigan. 
Zartust Bahrám relates how a priest of Rai, named Kai- 
Káüs, son of Kai-Khusró, showed him an old Pahlavi MS. 


INTRODUCTION. xxi 


narrating the history of Zartust, and offered to interpret 
it, if he would undertake to paraphrase it, in Persian verse, 
for the information of others. 

33. After mentioning Z.'s grandfather and father, de- 
scended from king Frédün, a frightful dream of his mother 
is related, in which she sees herself attacked by wild beasts 
eager for the destruction of her son, who drives them away. 
She relates her dream to an astrologer, who prognosticates 
a wonderful career for the unborn child ; but this dream is 
an addition to the Pahlavi texts. 

34. The child is born, and laughs at birth, exciting 
admiration among the women and dismay among the 
magicians. Düránsarün, their chief, comes to see the child, 
and tries to kill him with a dagger; but his hand is 
withered, and the magicians carry off the child, who is ex- 
posed to death from fire, oxen, horses, and wolves, but all 
in vain, as his mother brings him home safe on each 
occasion. Another magician, named Bartarüsh, then fore- 
tells that Z. cannot be destroyed, and will establish a new 
religion ; and he repeats this to the child's father, naming 
Gustásp as his future protector. This narrative corresponds 
with Dk. VII, iii, 2-31; but then follows the addition that 
he was confided to the care of an old man, named Barzin- 
karûs, till he completed his seventh year. 

35. Then Düránsarün and Bartarüsh went together to 
see him, and tried their magic arts upon him in vain (ibid. 
32, 33). Afterwards, when Z. was sick, Bartarüsh supplied 
him with filthy drugs, but he threw them on the groutd, 
which seems to be another version of Zs. XVIII, 5, 6. 
Then follows a paraphrase of Dk. VII, iii, 34-48, and Zs. 
XX, 4, 5; XXI, 1-20, 23-27, with some additional remarks 
about worship and the Avesta being taught to Z. The 
conferences with the six archangels are more detailed than 
in Zs. XXII, and more ritualistic in their tendency. 

36. When Z. returns to the earth, he is met by the 
demons and magicians, who oppose him, but are killed or 
dispersed by the utterance of an Avesta text; in which 
account we have an extreme condensation of Dk. VII, iv, 
36-46, 57-62. He then goes to the court of king Gustasp, 


xxii PAHLAVI TEXTS. 
ee — 
where he is hospitably received by the king, surrounded by 
his princes and wise men. With the latter Z. enters into 
argument, and overcomes them all successively. This is 
repeated, till all the learned of the realm are vanquished in 
argument, in the course of three successive days. 

37. Then Z. produces the Avesta and Zand, and reads 
a chapter; but the king hesitates to accept it, until he 
learns more about it; and Z. retires to his lodgings. In 
the meantime, the wise men form a conspiracy to ruin Z., 
by secreting in his lodgings, with the connivance of his 
doorkeeper, many of the impure things used by sorcerers. 
The next day, while the king and Z. are examining the 
Avesta, the wise men denounce Z. as a sorcerer; his 
lodgings are searched, and the impurities are brought to 
the king, who becomes angry and commits Z. to prison. 

38. Now the king had a magnificent black horse, and 
when Z. had been a week in prison, this horse fell sick, 
and was found with its four feet drawn up to its belly. 
When the king was informed, he summoned his wise men, 
but they could suggest no remedy ; so the king and all his 
people remained fasting all day and lamenting, and the 
jailer forgot to take any food to Z. till the evening, when 
he told Z. about the state of the black horse. 

39. Z. requested the jailer to inform the king that he 
could cure the horse; and the king, on hearing this the 
next day, releases Z., who undertakes to restore the horse’s 
limbs to their natural state, on receiving four solemn 
promises, one for the cure of each leg. Three of these 
promises are that the king, his son Isfendyâr (= Spend-dad), 
and the queen, should each undertake to accept his religion 
and never forsake it; and the fourth promise is that the 
false accusation of sorcery, made by the wise men, should 
be investigated. 

40. After each promise Z. prays vehemently, and each 
limb is restored to use. While, on the confession of Z.’s 
doorkeeper, the wise men are convicted of fraudulent deceit, 
and are sent to execution. The Persian version is here 
à highly embellished paraphrase of Dk. VII, iv, 64-70, 
especially in the horse episode. 


INTRODUCTION. xxiil 


41. King Gustásp next asks Z. to pray for information 
as to the king's future position in the other world, also that 
he may become invulnerable, omniscient as to worldly 
affairs, and immortal; but Z. tells him that he must be 
satisfied with the first wish for himself, and the remaining 
three for other persons. The next day, while the king is 
sitting in court with Z. present, horsemen arrive, who are 
the archangels Bahman and Ardabahist, with the spirits of 
the Khürdád and Gusásp fires. They are sent to testify 
the truth of Z.'s mission, and to urge the king to accept the 
religion ; this he does, and they then depart; when Z. 
informs the king that his four wishes will be granted, as he 
will soon see. For some of these details see Dk. VII, iv, 
74-82. 

42. Zartust then performs the Darun ceremony, having 
provided wine, perfume, milk, and a pomegranate. After 
reciting prayers from the Avesta, he gives the wine to the 
king to drink, who then falls into a trance and sees his own 
future position in heaven, and those of others. His son 
Peshótan receives the milk which makes him immortal. 
The perfume, or incense, is given to Gámásp who obtains 
knowledge of all events till the resurrection. And 
Isfendyár, the warlike son of Gustásp, eats one grain of the 
pomegranate and becomes invulnerable. The Pahlavi 
versions are silent about the king’s four wishes and their 
fulfilment, except such hints as may be conveyed in Dk. 
VII, iv, 84-86. Afterwards, Z. reads the Avesta to the 
king and comments upon it; concluding with piaises of 
the creator. 

43. To this narrative Zartust Bahram adds a further 
episode of Z. asking for immortality, at the time when he 
went with Bahman to confer with the creator. His request 
is refused, but the creator gives him a drop of liquid to 
drink, like honey, and he sees everything in both worlds, 
as in a vision. When he wakes up, he relates what he saw 
in heaven and hell; and also describes a tree with seven 
branches of gold, silver, copper, brass, lead, steel, and 
mixed iron, respectively, overshadowing the world. The 
creator explains that these seven branches represent seven 


XXIV PAHLAVI TEXTS. 


EE 


powerful personages who arise in successive ages of the 
world. The golden branch is Z. himself, the silver is 
Gustásp, the copper is an Askánian king, the brass is 
Ardashir the Sásánian, the lead is king Bahram (Gêr), the 
steel is Nóshérván who destroys the heretic Mazdak, and 
the mixed iron is the malicious monarch who upsets the 
true faith. Then follow many details of the lamentable 
evils which then occur; and when the Hazárahs! appear, 
the condition of Irán becomes still worse, as described in 
Byt. II, III, until the arrival of king Bahrám the Hamávand 
from India, and Peshótan from Kangdiz, who restore the 
Iránian monarchy and religion. 

44. This additional narrative is evidently a paraphrase 
of the Pahlavi Bahman Yast, translated in S. B. E., vol. v, 
pp. 191-235; and that Pahlavi text appears to be merely 
an enlarged edition of Fargard VII of the Sügkar Nask, of 
which a short summary is given in Dk. IX, viii. 

45. From the foregoing epitome of the Persian Zartust- 
namah, it will be evident that its author's information was 
a combination of the statements still surviving in Dk. VII 
and Zs. XII-XXIII, so far as they suited his fancy and 
convenience. Many statements are omitted, others either 
condensed, or greatly elaborated ; but very few novelties 
can be detected, excepting such as are clearly due to the 
writers own imagination. Whether any small residuum of 
these novelties car. be attributed to other sources than the 
Persian writers fancy, must remain doubtful until some 
older av thority for such details is discovered. 

46. With regard to Z.'s vision of heaven and hell, which 
is mentioned in Zartust Bahrám's final episode, his 
immediate informant was certainly Byt. II, 11-13; but the 
original authority was the Spend Nask, as summarized in 
Dk. VIII, xiv, 7, 8, although Dk. VII omits this incident, 
and Zs. XXI, 21, 22 merely mentions the bodily appearance 
of the omniscient wisdom, without referring to Z.'s vision. 


The details of the conferences with the six archangels, 
———M — a 
* Those specially belonging to the latter millenniums, probably meaning the 


people who were expected to make most of the last two centuries intolerably 
wicked, 


INTRODUCTION. XXV 


which are summarized in Dk. VIII, xiv, 9, as having 
existed in the Spend Nask, are also omitted in Dk. VII, 
though briefly stated in Zs. XXII. 

47. It is worthy of notice that Z. was first sent to offer 
his religion to the Kigs and Karaps and their sovereign, 
Aürváitá-dang the Tür (see Dk. VII, iv, 2-20) who 
seem to have received his doctrines favourably, excepting 
his advocacy of Khvétük-das!, which led to their rejection 
of his proposal. He was next sent to the Karap Védvóist 
(ibid. 21-28), whom Aüharzmaz4 had hitherto befriended ; 
but this Karap was rejected for illiberality and arrogance. 
Z. then went to ParshaZ-tórà in Sagástán (ibid. 31-35), 
taking some Hóm-water with him, to cure an infirm bull 
belonging to this chieftain, as soon as the latter had accepted 
the religion in public; the chieftain assented to the religion, 
though only privately, but this was sufficient to obtain the 
cure of his bull. It was only after these three trials that 
the conversion of king Vistásp was attempted. 

48. There is some difficulty in understanding the exact 
difference between the primeval religion and that taught by 
Zaratüst. When Dk. VII, i, g-11 speaks of Atharmazd 
talking with Masyé and Masyáói; or Hadish tells them of 
AühazmazZ, the archangels, and the Ahunavair (ibid. 12, 
13); or the sacred beings are said to have taught them the 
primitive arts (ibid. 14); or we are told of the existence of 
demons in the times of Hósháng and Tákhmórup (ibid. 18, 
19); or of Ashavahistó in the time of king Pátakhsróbó 
(ibid. 34) ; it may be urged that the mention of these beings 
in connection with the men of those times is no proof that 
their existence was known then. Because it only shows 
that the old writers, being satisfied that these beings 
existed in their own time and were immortal, only logically 
assumed that they must have existed in formertimes. The 
really weak point in their argument being the assumption 
of the existence of such beings in their own time. 

49. Safer conclusions may be formed by noticing the 


ne 


1 For the meaning of this term, as defined by the texts which use it, see 
S. B. E., vol. xviii, pp. 389-430. 


xxvi PAHLAVI TEXTS. 


dogmas that Zaratüst most strongly advocates and repro- 
bates. When he goes to his first conference (Dk. VII, iii, 
56—62) he goes in search of righteousness. When he went to 
A drvaita-dang, as mentioned above, he advocated the praise 
of righteousness, scorn of the demons, and the observance 
of ceremonies; but it was only his scorn of the demons, 
which took the form of Khvétük-das, that the Karaps 
really rejected. In Dk. VII, iv, 14, he says, ‘worldly 
righteousness is the whole worship of the demons, and the 
end of the Mazda-worship of Z? Though the Hôm plant 
was sacred before Z.'s birth (ibid. ii, 22-47), the Hóm-water 
(ibid. iv, 29-35) seems to have been a distinctive token of 
Z.’s religion ; also chanting the Ahunavair (ibid. iv, 38, 41, 
42, 56, 61) and the Avesta in general (ibid. 63). The 
perverted religion and demonizing of the Kigs and Karaps 
appear to have been the worst faults he had to find with 
them (ibid. 64, 67). And the archangels tell Vistásp that 
the world requires the good religion which proceeds through 
Z.s recitation, so he should chant the Ahunavair and 
Ashem-vohü, and not worship the demons (ibid. 79, 8o). 
Again, when Dürásrób and Brágrók-résh partake of food 
with Pórüsháspó and Zaratüst (ibid. iii, 34, 38), the latter 
does not object to the form of worship proposed, but to 
the person selected to conduct it; and he then proclaims 
his own reverence for the righteous and the poor. 

50. From these statements we may conclude that the 
old writers, who have handed down these legends from 
ancient times, were of opinion that Zaratüst was not so 
much the founder of a totally new religion, as he was 
a reformer who retained as much of the prior religion as 
was not seriously objectionable. While strongly insisting 
upon the necessity of reverencing all good spirits, he strictly 
prohibited all propitiation of evil spirits. His law was to 
resist and destroy all that is evil and injurious to man, and 
to respect and honour all that is good and beneficial to him. 
According to the legends, he seems to have found little 
gross idolatry, in the form of image-worship, to reprobate. 
F rom the times of the idol-worship encouraged by Dahak 
in Bapél (Dk. VII, iv, 72), and of the destruction of the 


INTRODUCTION. xxvii 


celebrated idol-temple on the shore of Lake Kékast by 
Kai-Khüsrói (ibid. i, 39; Mkh. ii, 95), we find nothing in 
the legends about this form of idolatry, till *the oppres- 
siveness of infidelity and idol-worship, shortly after the 
downfall of the Sásánians, is lamented (Dk. VII, viii, 6). 
Demon-worship (ibid. iii, 35; iv, 30; vii, 17, 36, 37 ; viii, 
7, 34), although a term sometimes applied to idolatry, seems 
to be often used in its literal sense of ‘worship of evil 
spirits, one form of which is described by Zaratüst (ibid. 
iv, 47-53). 

51. Another interesting study, for which these Zoroastrian 
legends supply materials, is the traditional chronology 
which they contain; and how far it will be found, upon 
examination, to harmonize with the system stated in Bd. 
XXXIV, or to explain the manifest inaccuracies of that 
system. The matter is rather complicated, but the 
Zoroastrian system can be connected with the European 
system of chronology with some degree of probability. 

52. The epoch of Zoroastrian chronology is ‘the coming 
of the religion, but it has long been doubtful whether 
this event was the birth of Zaratûst, or his going to 
conference with the saçred beings, or the acceptance of 
the religion by Vistâsp. Any doubt, however, as to the 
meaning of the phrase, has now been removed by the 
statement in Dk. VII, viii, 51, that the first century of the 
religion is that from the time when Zaratûst came forth to 
his conference, which event happened when he was thirty 
years old (ibid. iii, 51, 60, 62). It is also stated, in Ed. 
XXXIV, 7, that Vistasp reigned thirty years before the 
coming of the religion, that is, before Zaratüst went to his 
conference. From these data it is evident that the tradi- 
tional Zoroastrian chronology makes the birth of Zaratüst 
coincide with the accession of Vistásp. 

53. The nearest date to these events, which is well 
defined in both the Zoroastrian and European systems of 
chronology, is that of the death of Alexander, near mid- 
summer in B.C. 323, which Bd. XXXIV, 7, 8, places 272 
years after the coming of the religion, that is, after the 
thirtieth year of Vistásp's reign. And if this were the first 


xxviil PAHLAVI TEXTS. 
ccc MR 
year of the religion, the death of Alexander must have 
occurred in its 273rd year, according to the Bundahis. 

54. But this has to be reconciled with the statement in 
Zs. XXIII, 12, that, after its 300th year, ‘the religion is 
disturbed and the monarchy is contested ;' which statement 
is expressed more definitely by AV. I, 2-6, when it asserts 
that the religion remained in purity for 300 years, but 
then Alexander came to Irán and destroyed the monarchy. 
If these statements be accepted literally, they imply that 
Alexander invaded Iran either in the 300th year of the 
religion, or shortly after that date, but certainly not before 
it. We cannot place Alexander's invasion of Irán itself at 
a later date than the battle of Gaugamela (B.C. 331) ; and 
if this were the 300th year of the religion, the death of 
Alexander (B.C. 323) must have occurred in its 308th, 
instead of its 273rd year, and the coming of the religion 
would have to be put back thirty-five years. This may be 
done with some plausibility by assuming an omission of 
thirty-five years between the reigns of Hümái and Dárái, 
where the Bundahis passes from traditional to historical per- 
sonages. Alexander's invasion must also have been a good 
and sufficient reason for the dissolution of the hundred- 
discipledom, or priestly college, established by .Sénó, which 
lasted only till the 300th year, as Zs. XXIII, 11 informs us. 

55. If we now adopt the abbreviations A.R. for ‘anno 
religionis? and B.R. for ‘ before the religion, we are prepared 
to compile the following synopsis of Zoroastrian Chronology 
according to the millennial system of the Bundahis, 
extended to the end of time, but dealing only with tradi- 
tional matters, combined with the European dates of the 
same events, deduced from the synchronism of A.R. 300 
with B. C. 331, as stated above in § 54 :— 


B.R. 9000, B.C. 9630. Beginning of the first millennium of 
Time ; and formation of the Fravashis, or primary ideas of the 
good creations, which remain insensible and motionless for 
3000 years (Bd. I, 8; XXXIV, r). 

» 6000, B.C. 6630. Beginning of the fourth millennium, when 
the spiritual body of Zaratüst is framed together, and remains 
3000 years with the archangels (Dk. VII, ii, 15, 16), while 


INTRODUCTION. XXIX 


——————————————À 


the primeval man and ox exist undisturbed in the world, 
because the evil spirit is confounded and powerless (Bd. I, 20, 
32; II], 1, 3, 5; XXXIV, 1). 


B.R. 3000, B.C. 3630. Beginning of the seventh millennium, 


when the evil spirit rushes into the creation on new-year's 
day, destroys the primeval ox, and distresses GáyÓmard, the 
primeval man (Bd. I, 20; III, 10-20, 24-27; XXXIV, 2). 
Z. appears to remain with the archangels for 2969 years 
longer. 

2970, B.C. 3600. Gaydémard passes away (Bd. III, 21-23; 
XXXIV, 2). 

2930, B.C. 3560. Masyé and Masyáói had grown up (Bd. 
XV, 2; XXXIV, 3). 

2787, B. c. 3417. Accession of Héshang (Bd. XXXIV, 3). 

2747, B.C. 3377. Accession of Tákhmórup (ibid. 4). 

2717, B.C. 3341. Accession of Yim (ibid.). 

2000, B.C. 2630. Beginning of the eighth millennium. Ac- 
cession of Dahak (ibid. 4, 5). 

1000, B. C. 1630. Beginning of the ninth millennium. Acces- 
sion of Frédfin (ibid. 5, 6). 

500, B.C. 1130. Accession of Mânûskîhar (ibid. 6). 

428, B.C. 1058. Spendarmad comes to Mânûskîhar at the 
time of Frasiyd’s irrigation works (Zs. XII, 3-6). The MSS. 
have B.R. 528, but to bring this date into the reign of 
MánásZihar would be inconsistent with the millennial arrange- 
ment; while to assume a clerical error of one century is 
a probable explanation, as it makes the date more consistent 
with the allusion to Frâsiyđv, whose irrgation works, men- 
tioned in Bd. XX, 34; XXI, 6, must hav. been carried out 
in the latter part of Mânûskîhar’s reign. 

380, B.c. ro10. Accession of Aüzóbó (Bd. XXXIV, 6). 

375, B.C. 1005. Accession of Kai-Kobad (ibid. 6, 7). 

360, B.c. 990. Accession of Kaí-Üs (ibid. 7). 

300, P.C. 930.  Zaratüst first mentioned by the ox that 
Srit6 killed (Zs. XII, 7—20). 

210, B.C. 840. Accession of Kai-Khásrói (Bd. X XXIV, 7). 

150, B.C. 780. Accession of Kai-Loharásp (ibid.). 

45, B.C. 675. The Glory descends from heaven at the birth 
of Dfikdak (Zs. XIII, 1). 

30, B.c. 660. Accession of Kai-Vistásp (Bd. XXXIV, 7). 
Vohümanó and Ashavahist6 descend into the world with 
a stem of Hôm (Dk. VII, ii, 24). Zaratfist is born (ibid. 


Y 3. 


XXX PAHLAVI TEXTS. 


2 SSS ee eee 


B. R. 23, B.C. 653. Z. is seven years old when two Karaps visit 
his father, and Dürásróbó dies (Dk. VII, iii, 32, 34, 45). 

» 15, B.c. 645. Z.is fifteen years old when he and his four 

brothers ask for their shares of the family property (Zs. XX, 1). 

» IO, B.C. 640. Z.leaves home at the age of twenty (ibid. 7). 
A.R. I, B.C. 630. Beginning of the tenth millennium. Z. goes 
forth to his conference with the sacred beings on the 45th day 
of the 31st year of Vistásp's reign (Dk. VII, iii, 51-62 ; viii, 
51; Zs. XXI, 1-4). 

3, B.C. 628. Z. returns from his first conference in two 
years, and preaches to Afirvaité-dang and the Karaps without 
success (Dk. VII, iv, 2-20). 

II, B.C. 620. After his seventh conference, in the tenth year 
he goes to Vistásp; Médyómáh is also converted (ibid. 1, 65; 
Zs. XXI, 3; XXIII, 1, 2, 8). 

13, B.c. 618. Twelve years after Z. went to conference, 
Vistásp accepts the réligion, though hindered for two years by 
the Karaps (Dk. VII, v, 1; Zs. XXIII, 5, 7). 

» 20,B.C. 611. A Kavig, son of Kündah, is converted (Zs. 
XXIII, 8). 

» 30, B.C. 601. Defeat of Argásp and his Khyons (ibid.). 

» 40, B.C. 591. Vohfiném is born (ibid.). About this time the 
Avesta is written by Gámásp from the teaching of Z. (Dk. IV, 
21; V, iii, 4; VII, v, 11). 

» 48,B.c. 583. Z. passes away, or is killed, aged seventy-seven 
years and forty days, on the 41st day of the year (Dk. V, iii, 
a; VII, v, 1; Zs, XXII 5) 

» 58,B.c.573. Arrival of the religion is known in all regions 
(Dk. VII, vi, - 2). 

» 63, B.C. 568.  Frashóstar passes away (Zs. XXIII, 10). 

» 64, B.C. 567.  Gámásp passes away (ibid.). 

» 73,B.c. 558.  Hangáürüsh, son of Gámásp, passes away 
(ibid.). 

» 80, B.C. 551. Asmók-khanvató passes away, and Akht the 
wizard is killed (ibid.). 

» 91, B.C. 540. Accession of Vohüman, son of Spend-dád 
(Bd. XXXIV, 7, 8). 

» 100, B.C. 531. .Sénó is born (Dk. VII, vii, 6). 

» 200, B.C. 431. S€nd passes away (ibid.; Zs. XXIII, 11). 

» 203, B.C. 428. Accession of Hümái (Bd. XXXIV, 8). 


E 


»- 
E 


[Here ends the fragment of the old millennial system 
preserved in the Bundahis which omits thirty-five years in 


INTRODUCTION. xxxl 


this place, as explained in $ 54, with tlie effect of postponing 
the end of the millennium. It then proceeds to finish the 
chronology in its own fashion; mentioning only three 
historical names, which are here added; the thirty-five 
omitted years being also inserted. | 


A. R. 268, B. c. 363. Accession of Dárái (ibid.). —— 

» 280, B.C. 351. Accession of Dárái, descendant of Dárái 

(ibid.). 

» 294, B.C. 337. Accession of Alexander! (ibid.). 

» 300, B.C. 331. Invasion by Alexander. .Sénó's hundred- 
discipledom ends, the religion is disturbed, and the monarchy 
contested (Zs. XXIII, 11, 12; AV. I, 2-6). 

308, B.c. 323. Death of Alexander (Bd. XXXIV, 8). 

» 400, B.C. 231. Benightedness arises (Dk. VII, vii, 9). 

» 440-560, B.C. 191-71 *, Orthodoxy is still upheld by four 
successive high-priests (Dk. VII, vii, 8-10). 

» 800-950, A.D. 170-320. The ninth and tenth centuries are 
represented as very evil and miserable (ibid. viii, 2-45, 61). 

» 971, A.D. 341, Afshédar is born (ibid. 55-57). 

IOOI, A.D. 371. Beginning of the eleventh millennium, when 
the sun stands still for ten days, and A(üshédZar is thirty years 
old and confers with the sacred beings (ibid. 58-60). 

» 1400-1500, A.D. 770-870. In this century the wizard 
Mahrkfis produces seven awful winters successively, in which 
most of mankind and animals perish, including himself (ibid. 
ix, 3). 

» 1971, A.D. I341.  AQshéZar-máh is borr (ibid. 18-20). 

2001, A. D. 1371. Beginning of the twelft. millennium, when 
the sun stands still for twenty days, and Afishédar-mah is 
thirty years old and confers with the sacred beings (ibid. 
21—23). 

» 2971, A.D. 2341. SóÓsháns is born (ibid. x, 15-18). 

3001, A.D. 2371. Beginning of the preparation for the 
Renovation, when the sun stands still for thirty days, and 
Sósháns is thirty years old (ibid. 19); but another passage 
(ibid. xi, 2) implies that this is the date of his birth. 

3028, A.D. 2398. The renovation of the universe occurs at 
the end of the fifty-seventh year of SÓsháns (ibid. 4, 7). 


a $$ 


1 He became king of Macedon B. C. 336, and of Persia in 331. i 
2 The erroneous dates in the Bundahis chronology (see § 57) alter this period 


to B. C. 156-36. 


` 
- 


» 


xxxii PAHLAVI TEXTS. 
Wu o 

56. We must suppose that the millennial chronology, 
which the Bundahis discontinues in the middle of the 
tenth millennium, was originally completed to the end of 
Time, as attempted in this synopsis, in accordance with the 
statements in Byt. and Dk. But the allusions to future 
events and denunciations of coming evils were, no doubt, 
of a mythological or general character, such as those still 
surviving in Dk. VII, vii, 29732 ; viii, 40, 4T, 44-46, 48-60 ; 
ix-xi. Whenever we meet with seemingly prophetic 
descriptions and denunciations, which clearly allude to 
historical events, such as those in Dk. VII, vii, 3-28 ; viii, 
2, 10, 23, 32-36, 42, 43, 47, 61, they must, of course, be 
treated as interpolations of a later date than the events 
themselves. And there are several passages that may 
belong to either class. 

57. It has been already shown, in $ 54, that the death 
of Alexander, which the Bundahis places in A.R. 273, must 
have occurred in A.R. 308 according to other traditional 
records. If this error of thirty-five years stood alone, it 
might be considered accidental; but when we find that the 
Bundahis supplies only 284 years for the Askánians, to fill 
up the whole interval of 548 years between Alexander and 
Ardashir, son of Papak, we must conclude that these two 
errors were intended for the purpose which they both fulfil, 
that of postponing the end of the tenth millennium. On 
the other hand, the Sásánians who ruled for 425 years, are 
allowed 460 years in the Bundahis, which just counter- 
balances the thirty-five years omitted after the time of 
Hümái. This third error may be considered unintentional, 
as it probably arose from counting the year of each suc- 
cession twice over, first in the reign of the deceased king, 
and again in that of his successor. 

58. The extent to which the Bundahis chronology is 
distorted, by these three errors, will be better understood on 
inspection of the following tabular statement than from 
any description of the results, merely observing that the 
year of the religion (A. R.) is given according to Bundahis 
dates in the first column, and according to real dates in 
the second. Several intermediate events have been inserted, 


INTRODUCTION. xxxiii 
— o O ü b, Tai 
for the sake of illustration, and each of their Bundahis 
dates includes its proper proportion of the errors !:— 


Bd. date. Real date. Real date. Bd. date. 
A.R. 265, A.R. 300. Invasion by Alexander . . B.C. 331, B.C. 331. 
» 273 » 308. Death of Alexander... SUM » 33 
d 321, ,, 400. Realdateofa.R. 400 . . SL a 275 
» 400, 5, 553. Bd.dateofA.R.400. . .  ,, 78, „ 196. 
» 528, ,, 800. Real dateofa.R.800 . . A.D.170 ,, 68. 
» 587, » S856. Accession of Ardashir . . BONS. .. 19 
» $695, »  9oo. Realdateofa.R.goo . » 270, A.D. IO. 


» 647, » 939. Accession of Shahpühar II . < D. » 54. 
7 713, , 1000. Real date of A.R.1000 . . s 279 ,, 11M 
» 786, ,, 1068. Accession of Yazdakard II . 438; , 19r. 
s» S60, 1081. Bdodateo[A.R. S00 . .» 95 45I, 5) 205. 
» 841, ,, 1118. AccessionofKavad . . . ,, 488, ,, 246. 
» 884, ,, 1158. Execution of the Mazdakites s» $48, », 289. 
» 887, ,, 1161. Accession of Khüsró I . . ,, 531, ,, 292. 
mo 98 4 1173. Bd datn GER. 900. ... MAS 9p 305 


» 951, ,, 1220. Accession of Khüsró II . . ,, 590, ,, 356. 

;» 1000, ,, 1265. Bd.dateofA.R. 1000 . .  ,, 635, 5, 405. 

» 1017, ,, 1281. Death of Yasdakavd III. .  ,, 651, ,, 422. 

59. The object of preparing this statement has been to 
ascertain the reason for the intentional errors in the 
Bundahis chronology, and the probable period at which 
they were introduced. It has been mentioned, in $ 57, that 
the effect of both the errors, which are not accidental, has 
been to postpone the end of the tenth millennium, but 
they also postpone the dates of some other events which 
are mentioned in the Zoroastrian legends. 

60. Thus, we are told in Dk. VII, vii, 9 that benighted- 
ness arises after A.R. 400, which is postponed by the errors 
from B. C. 231 to 78, but both of these times seem to have 
been equally unpropitious to the Zoroastrians. Then we 
learn (ibid. 10, 11) that in the fifth and sixth centuries, say 
A.R. 440-560, orthodoxy is still upheld by four successive 
high-priests. This period is postponed by the errors from 
B. C. 191-71 to 156-36 (see p. xxxi, n. 2), and Zoroastrianism 
was probably flourishing the whole time. So far, no reason 
for the alterations can be discovered, as the vague descrip- 
tion of events, supplied by the old writer, appears to be 


1 The basis of calculation is the real date of each event and real century, but 
the Bd. date of each Bd. century. The only Bd. data are 284 years from the 
death of Alexander to the accession of Ardashír, and 460 years from the latter 
to the death of Yazdakard III, as stated in $ 57. 


[47] S 


XXXIV PAHLAVI TEXTS. 


just as applicable to the original periods as to the altered 
ones. 

61. We are further informed (Dk. VII, viii, 2-45) that 
much evil and misery occur in the ninth and tenth centuries 
(A.R. 800-1000), at all events until the birth of Adshédar 
(ibid. 55-57) in A.R. 971 ; and such events as war, invasion, 
fall of monarchy, oppression, persecution, infidelity, and 
apostasy are mentioned. Adshédar confers with the arch- 
angels in A.R. 1001 (ibid. 58-60), and the evils afterwards 
pass away till A.R. 1400-1500 (ibid. ix, 3), when frightful 
winters occur. The evil period A.R. 800-971 was originally 
A.D. 170-341, or from the middle of the reign of Volo- 
geses III to the middle of that of Shahpühar II. But 
the Bundahis postpones this period to A.D. 451-608, 
or from the time of the Armenian revolt in the reign 
of Yazdakard II, to that of the first total defeat of a 
Persian army by the Arabs near Dhû-Qâr in the reign 
of Khüsró II. The evil times were probably expected to 
continue till the end of the millennium, or later, as in the 
case of Zaratüst himself; for Adshédar does not go to his 
conference till A.R. 1001, and might not be expected to 
begin to preach till A.R. 1011. These dates, originally 
A.D. 371-381, comprising the remainder of the reign of 
Shahpühar II, would be altered by Bd. to A. D. 636-645, 
a period which includes the last two great battles with the 
Arabs, that decided the downfall of the Sásánian dynasty, 
though king Yazdakard III lived some six years longer as 
a fugitive !. 

62. It is hardly possible that king Ardashir (A.D. 226— 
241) and his chancellor Tanvasar, when collecting and 
revising their sacred books, would have compiled the 
original traditional system of chronology, however general 
might have been the terms in which the evils were described 
by the records they possessed, because it would have been 
a voluntary confession that they had no power to remedy 


ee Es n 


| The authorities consulted, for Persian historical facts and dates, have been 
Nóldeke, Aufsätze sur perstschen Geschichte; and A. von Gutschmid, 
Geschichte Irans und seiner Nachbarländer von Alexander dem Grossen bis 
sum Untergang der Arsaciden: edited by Noldeke, 


INTRODUCTION. XXXV 


the evils of their own time. But if they found the system 
in an ancient document, they might have been quite willing 
to admit that evils existed, owing to their enemies, which 
would have become much worse if they had not been 
mitigated by their own exertions. In fact, an old document 
prophesying evil which actually occurred at the time 
specified, could be used as evidence of the truth of their 
religion, and would therefore be carefully preserved. And 
it is quite certain that, if they had altered the chronology 
of an old document which foretold the time of the downfall 
of the monarchy, they could not have correctly guessed 
that time before the downfall occurred. For these reasons 
we must conclude that the original system of chronology, 
handed down by the Bundahis, was neither compiled nor 
altered in the time of Ardashir. 

63. For the long reign of Shahpühar II (A.D. 309-379) 
the original tradition predicted not only a continuation of 
evil times, but also the birth and education of a new 
apostle, AüshéZar, for the next millennium, who was 
expected to put an end to evil for about four centuries. 
His birth was to take place in A. D. 341, and his conference 
was to commence in 371. These dates are so well defined 
that, if we could discover any important religious teacher 
to whom they could refer, we might be justified in believing 
that the original chronology was compiled in his time. 
Unfortunately, we know very little of the ‘nternal history 
of Persia during this reign; there was war with the Romans 
in 337-350 and 358-363, and on the eastern frontiers in 
the intervening period ; also a persecution of the Christians, 
beginning about 339; all of which fairly represent the 
predicted evils. 

64. Regarding the priesthood and religious history of 
the reign, we have only the traditions handed down in 
Pahlavi texts to guide us. In these we are told that 
Átürpád, son of Máraspend (Dk. VII, vii, 19), was born in 
the steel period (Dk. IX, viii, 4), and lived in the reign of 
king Shahpühar II, son of AüharmazZ (AW. p. 145 n), 
being high-priest over the religion (Dd. NN VII,360. He 
also collected and preserved the Nasks (Dk. VIII, i, 22), 

c 2 


XXXVI PAHLAVI TEXTS. 


and, after he had proved his orthodoxy by ordeal (Sg. X, 
70, 71), the king proclaimed his intention of not allowing 
any more heterodoxy (Dk. IV, 27!). In his old age he 
obtained a son, after devout prayer, and named him Zara- 
tüst (Pandnámak, 1); but this son also bore the Avesta 
title of Avarethrabau (Dk. VII, vii, 20, 21; VIII, xiii, 
18), who is called the son of Rástare-vaghezt in Yt. 
XIII, 106, showing that this latter Avesta title was adopted 
by ÁAtürpág himself. Finally, we meet with another 
Atürpád, son of Zaratüst, described in Peshotan's Dk. III, 
cxxxvii, 2, as high-priest in the reign of Yazdakard I 
(A.D. 399-420), son of Shahpühar, and also mentioned in 
Pahl. Yas. p. 120, ll. 14, 15 Sp. (translated in Dk. VIII, 
i, 7 n). 

65. We have here, evidently, three successive high-priests, 
father, son, and grandson, and all celebrated men. The 
father had been employed in collecting and revising, or 
probably translating, some of the sacred books, and then, 
after a religious discussion, submitted himself to the ordeal 
of melted metal, as a test of his orthodoxy. The king was 
convinced, and his proclamation meant persecution of the 
heterodox, such as was commenced about A.D. 339, as 
regards the Christians. So that we may safely assume 
that ÀÁtürpád's ordeal took place shortly before this date, 
and probably shortly after 337, when the Roman war 
commenced. As we must also certainly assume that the 
original chronology could not have come into existence at 
a much later date than 341, when so remarkable an event 
as the birth of a new apostle was fixed by it to occur, we 
have to consider who this apostle could have been; and 
whether it may not have been intended to identify him 
with Atüzpáz's own son. 

66. In the first place, is such a suspicion consistent with 
known dates? To represent Aüshégar, according to the 
original chronology, the son must have been born A. D. 341 
($63); and we may suppose that the time of Adshédar’s 
conference (371) would represent the time of Atdrpad’s 


' See S. B. E,, vol, xxvii, p. 415. 


INTRODUCTION. xxxvii 


death, when his son succeeded him in the high-priesthood. 
If Atürpág were aged eighty-one at his death, he would 
have been fifty-one at the birth of his son, or approaching 
old age; and he would have been born in 290, or nineteen 
years before the king. His grandson may have been born 
in 365, when his father Zaratüst was twenty-four, and may 
have succeeded that father in the high-priesthood about 
400, the second year of king Yazdakard I. As all these 
dates are reasonably consistent with the few facts that are 
known, there seems to be no impossibility in the hypothesis 
that the original chronology of AüshéZar's birth may have 
had some connection with the date of the birth of Âtûrpâd’s 
son. The dates assumed, with regard to these three high- 
priests, which may be slightly varied, are as follows : — 


Atürpád, born 2996, high-priest 320, died 371. 
Zaratüst, , 341, » 371, » 400. 
Atfirpad, ,, 365, p 400, ,, 420, or later. 


67. On the other hand, we must recollect that the time 
of the birth of Afishédar was not an isolated date which 
could be varied at pleasure, to suit any circumstances that 
might arise; but it was intimately connected with the 
dates of birth of three other apostles, which were each 
placed at the same distance from the ends of three other 
millenniums. It would perhaps be more difficult to suit 
a new millennial system of chronology, to the accidental 
year of a particular child’s birth, than to have the child 
born in a particular year of an old system already 
existing. And, if so, it may be safer to assume that 
ÁtürpáZ, knowing the year of the expected birth, took 
measures to secure the fulfilment of the prophecy, so far as 
the birth was concerned. If the child did not turn out so 
capable of regenerating the world as had been expected, 
that was a matter for posterity to explain. Under such 
circumstances of merely seeming fulfilment of a single 
particular, fraudulently obtained, the original prediction 
might be of any age. 

68. It does not appear that the priestly councillors 
assembled by Khüsró I (Byt. I, 7), made any alteration in 


XXXVili PAHLAVI TEXTS. 


the original chronology, although they slightly revised the 
Pahlavi Vendidad. In fact, the priests, who must have 
been long expecting the end of Zaratüst's millennium, were 
probably looking forward for the approaching downfall of 
the Sásánian monarchy, which might readily be understood, 
as the surest sign of the termination of this period, from 
such statements as those in Dk. VII, viii, 1, 2. At any 
rate, the alterations in the chronology, for the purpose of 
postponing the end of the tenth millennium till A. D. 635, 
would not have been made till some time after the ter- 
mination of the monarchy in 651, but probably long before 
the compilation of the Bundahis about goo. The effects 
of these alterations upon the dates of the evil ninth and 
tenth centuries, and upon those of the birth, conference, 
and preaching of Aüshégar, have been already stated in 
$61. And their object has evidently been to adapt the 
old predictions as much as possible to real events; for 
which purpose also, the predictions themselves have prob- 
ably been often made more definite than they were 
originally. 

69. It follows, from the foregoing investigation, that the 
original chronology must have existed A.D. 341, and, in 
fact, we have found no sufficient reason for supposing that 
it was compiled as late as Sásánian times. While the 
alterations, we find in the Bundahis, could have hardly been 
made till after 651. 

70. Regarding the age in which Zaratüst lived, the dates 
stated in the synopsis of traditional chronology (8 55), are 
B. C. 660-583, while the reign of Vistásp, which extends to 
the fabulous length of 120 years, or 660-540, evidently 
represents a short dynasty, including Hystaspes and his 
next four forefathers, if we accept the traditional identifica- 
tion of Vistasp with the father of Darius I. But the names 
of those four forefathers, which are known on the unim- 
peachable authority of the Behistün inscription of Darius 
himself, render it almost impossible to accept this tra- 
ditional identification, as they differ totally from those of 


the forefathers of Vistasp in the Avesta. The two 


dynasties 
are as follows :— 


INTRODUCTION. XXXIX 


Behistün : Hakhamanis Avesta: Kavi Kaváta 


K aispis Kava Usa 
Ariyárámna Kava Husrava 
Arsháma Aurvadaspa 
Vistaspa Kava Vistáspa!. 


Unless it can be shown that these two series of names 
have the same meaning in two different languages, there 
seems little chance of proving the identity of the two 
dynasties. We may, however, quote the instances of the 
high-priest Atarpad=Atare-pata and his son Zaratüst— 
Zarathustra being called Rastare-vaghewt and Avarethra- 
bau, respectively, in the Avesta (see § 64); but these 
latter names seem more like titles than translations. 

71. The date of Zoroaster and his religion has formerly 
been fully discussed by Windischmann ? and others, and 
the question has been lately re-examined by Williams 
Jackson?. He divides the ancient statements, that have 
been made on the subject, into three classes: those which 
declare that Zaratüst lived before B.C. 6000, those which 
associate his name with Ninus and Semiramis, and the 
native tradition which, as we have seen, places his life in 
the period B.C. 660-583. Singularly enough, the oldest 
writers, those who lived only two to four centuries after the 
traditional period of the lifetime of Zaratüst, are those who 
report that he lived some 6000 years before that period. 
Pliny the Elder (Nat. Hist. XXX, 2) quotes Eudoxus 
(B.C. 368) as stating that Zaratüst existed 6000 years before 
the death of Plato, that is, B.C. 6347, which is also cun- 
firmed by Aristotle. And he quotes Hermippus (about 
B.C. 250) as placing him 5000 years before the Trojan war, 
that is, B.C. 6184. A third mode of describing this period 


1 These were the reigning sovereigns, but the last two are descended from 
a collateral branch, and their actual pedigree is as follows :—Kavi Kaváta, Kavi 
Aipivanghu, Kavi Pisanangh, Manus, Uzava, Aurvadaspa, Kava Vistáspa (Bd. 
XXXI, 28, 29). 

2 Zoroastrische Studien, von Fr. Windischmann, edited by Spiegel, 1863 ; 
pp. 121-165, 260-313. ; 

* On the date of Zoroaster, by A. V. Williams Jackson; Journal of American 
Oriental Society, vol. xvii, pp. 1-22. 


xl PAHLAVI TEXTS. 

i an 
seems to have been used by Xanthus of Lydia (B.C. 500- 
450)! who stated that Zaratüst lived 6000 years before 
Xerxes, as quoted by Diogenes Laertius, that is, B.C. 6485. 

72. Three or four other classical writers mention similar 
statements, and Jackson points out that these extravagant 
dates are probably owing to the European writers mis- 
understanding Persian statements with reference to the 
pre-existence of Zaratüst's Fravashi. It will, in fact, be 
seen from the synopsis ($ 55) that the traditional account 
is that the spiritual body of Zaratüst was framed together 
as early as the beginning of the fourth millennium, which 
occurred B.C. 6630, and this may be accepted as a close 
approximation to the three dates, B.C. 6347, 6184, and 
6485, indicated by the ancient writers, considering that 
their statements are made in even thousands of years. 

73. Pliny also mentions, on the authority of other writers 
who are not named, that another Zoroaster, a Proconnesian, 
lived a little before the time of Osthanes who accompanied 
Xerxes to Greece (B.C. 480). And, so far as time is con- 
cerned, this Zoroaster might have been the traditional 
Zaratüst who died 103 years before this journey of 
Osthanes. 

74. The old statements about Zoroaster or Oxyartes, 
the Magian king of Bactria in the time of Ninus and Semi- 
ramis, can hardly refer to the traditional Zaratüst who is 
never represented as a king, although the supreme Zara- 
thustra of the Avesta was apparently a ruling priest. The 
time in which this Bactrian lived is also very uncertain, 
for though Semiramis has recently been placed about 
B.C. 800, her position in Albirüni's tables is certainly 1200 
years earlier. 

75. It seems, therefore, that the ancient statements, 
regarding the date of Zaratüst, reported by Pliny and cor- 
roborated by a few other classical writers, can be fully 
explained from the traditional system of chronology used 
in Pahlavi texts, by identifying the classical Zoroaster of 
the seventh millennium B.C. with the traditional Zaratüst 


es DEL S 


| There are some doubts as to the correctness of these dates. 


INTRODUCTION, xli 


in his ante-natal spiritual state, after he had ceased to be 
a mere Fravashi, or primary idea, and had become an 
intelligent, moving, and personal existence, but still a spirit. 
While the later Zoroaster of Pliny, who flourished before 
the fifth century B.C. must have lived about the same 
time as the same traditional Zaratüst after he came into 
the worldly existence, and may reasonably be identified 
with him, although Pliny had little information to give 
about him. 

76. It will be noticed that this explanation depends 
entirely upon the peculiarly artificial system of the tra- 
ditional chronology, in which the whole of time is assumed 
to consist of twelve millenniums devoted to different pur- 
poses; and if this particular system had not been in use 
at the time the statements, quoted by Pliny and Diogenes 
Laertius, were made, those statements could not have been 
explained as referring to the same individual. But if they 
do not refer to the same individual, we have only the 
options of rejecting all the statements, or believing an im- 
possible date to be literally correct; neither of which 
decisions would be altogether satisfactory to a judicious 
mind. The only reasonable conclusion seems to be that 
the chronology based upon the twelve millenniums was in 
use in the fifth century B.C., about which time the earliest 
quoted statement seems to have been made. 

77. It will also be observed that this millennial chronology 
is inextricably associated with the idea of the primeval 
existence of all good creations in the state of Fravashi.. 
These are described as spiritual existences who remained 
three millenniums unthinking, unmoving, and intangible 
(Bd. I, 8); and the next three millenniums they still re- 
mained undisturbed by evil, mankind being represented, 
for that period, by Gayémard in the world (Bd. XXXIV, 1) 
and by the spiritual form of Zaratüst in heaven (Dk. VII, 
ii, 15), while the animals were symbolized by the primeval 
ox for the same period. Six millenniums, which are half 
the duration of time, were thus appropriated to Fravashis, 
spiritual and embodied, probably before the birth of Plato, 
if we may rely upon classical statements ; and it must have 


xlii PAHLAVI TEXTS. 


been before this date that the series of millenniums was 
arranged for all future history, till Time was expected to 
merge once more into Eternity at the renovation of the 
universe. 

78. As we have seen that Zoroastrian tradition is very 
consistent in fixing the date of Zaratüst's activity about 
the end of the seventh century B.C., it may be asked, why 
have Avesta scholars so strongly insisted upon its greater 
antiquity? They may have had several reasons, but three, 
at least, were important. First, they had the classical 
statements which, as we have seen ($ 71), generally placed 
Zaratüst as far back as the seventh millennium B.C., on 
the testimony of persons who lived from two to four 
centuries after the traditional date of Zaratüst's death. 
No one, of course, could believe in the literal accuracy of 
the number of millenniums, which referred, as we have 
seen, to an imaginary period of spiritual existence, but 
this number was considered merely as an exaggeration 
which might be reduced to any amount that seemed 
reasonable. At the same time, this evidence for antiquity 
was quite sufficient, in the second place, to discredit the 
traditional date, of which these old authorities seemed 
ignorant, though it was a period then comparatively recent. 
And, if this discredit had not been sufficient to shake the 
faith of Avesta scholars in the traditional date of Zaratüst, 
they still had a taird reason for their scepticism, when they 
discovered that the language of the Avesta was not merely 
a sister of Sanskrit, but that a large portion of it was sister 
to the oldest Sanskrit with which they were acquainted, 
and which appeared to them certainly older than the time 
of Gautama Buddha, who lived about one generation later 
than the traditional Zaratüst. 

79. How far Avesta scholars were justified in their con- 
clusions must be left for future ages to determine; at 
present we have no really historical information about the 
origin of Zoroastrianism, and must still consider it as 
decidedly prehistoric; though, it may be admitted that the 
Parsi calendar, as used in Persia, so far agrees with tradition, 
that it still bears witness to its own original institution in 


INTRODUCTION. xliii 


the reign of Darius Hystaspes, as will be seen from the 
following details. 

80. The Parsi year consists of twelve months, each con- 
sisting of thirty days, with five additional days added at the 
end of the year, and the total number of 365 days never 
varies, so that, whenever a leap-year occurs in our calendar, 
the beginning of the Parsi year retreats one day in the 
Christian calendar. In this manner, the total number of 
days which the beginning of the Parsi year has retreated, 
since the institution of their calendar, records the number 
of leap-years which would have occurred in the same period 
of Christian years, if the regular leap-years had existed the 
whole time; and four times the number of leap-years 
would be the total number of years. But as leap-years 
have not been used the whole time, we have to calculate 
from astronomical data. 

81. In the first place, we want to know at what season 
the Parsi year originally began, and we learn this from 
Bd. XXV, 7, 20, where we are told that the winter of the 
rectified year ends with the five extra days, and the spring 
begins with the first month ; which means that the rectified 
year begins with the vernal equinox. We also have to 
observe that, retreating at the rate of one day every four 
years, the beginning of the year retreats all round the year 
in 1460 years ; and we know from general history that the 
period, with which we have to deal, is much more than 
1460 years and less than 2920. Then we have to ascertain 
the exact length of the tropical year, which astronomers 
say is 365:2422 days, with an infinitesimal decrement, quite 
inappreciable in the period we have in view. 

82. We may calculate back from any vernal equinox 
which occurs not too far from noon, say that of March 22, 
1865, when the beginning of the Parsi year, according to 
Persian reckoning, had retreated to August 24, 1864, or 
210 days, in addition to a previous retreat of a whole year 
of 365 days, or altogether 575 days since the establishment 
of the calendar. So that the difference between the Parsi 
year of 365 days and the correct tropical year of 365-2422 
days had then accumulated to a total of 57 5 days. Divid- 


xliv PAHLAVI TEXTS. 


ing the accumulated error of 575 days by the annual in- 
crement of 0-2422 of a day, we obtain a quotient of 2374 
years, including A.D. 1865, as the time in which this error 
had accumulated, and this carries us back to B.C. 510 as an 
approximate date of the establishment of the Parsi calendar, 
with the first day of the year coinciding with the vernal 
equinox. 

83. This date is, however, liable to some modifications 
for errors of observation on the part of the ancient 
astronomers, one of which errors, being constantly in one 
direction, must be taken into account. These old observers 
were not aware of the effect of refraction, which always 
makes the night seem somewhat shorter than it is in reality ; 
and this would lead them to antedate the vernal equinox 
by rather more than a day; so that they would observe an 
apparent equinox in B.C. 505 on the same day in the Parsi 
year as that on which the real equinox occurred in B.C. 510. 
The most probable date of the establishment of the Parsi 
calendar is therefore B.C. 505, with a margin of four to 
eight years in either direction for accidental errors of 
observation. 

84. A few years before this period we know, from the 
cuneiform inscriptions of Behistün, that Darius Hystaspes 
used an older calendar, when recording his early victories 
over insurgents, which consolidated his empire. It was 
a time when he was introducing many reforms in the 
government, and, being a believer in Auramazda, his most 
induential advisers would probably be Zoroastrian priests. 
If they thought it necessary to reform the old calendar, 
the adoption of strictly Zoroastrian names for the new 
months and days in the Parsi calendar would be fully 
explained. 

85. But, besides this ordinary civil calendar, in which 
new-year's day was constantly retreating, the Persians had 
a rectified calendar for religious purposes, which intercalated 
an extra month from time to time, for the purpose of 
bringing new-year's day forward again to the vernal 
equinox, and restoring the festivals to their proper seasons. 
It is this calendar which is used in Bd. XXV, and its days 


INTRODUCTION. xlv 


and months are distinguished by the epithet vehifakig 
(veh+i£+ak+ig), ‘belonging to what is really good,’ or 
vehi&ak, ‘belonging to the really good,’ which, in this 
connection, may be best expressed by the word ‘ rectified.’ 

86. This intercalation is described by Albirüni in various 
passages! which inform us that, after the new-year's day 
had retreated more than a month from the vernal equinox, 
the king would order the priests to arrange for the solemn 
proclamation of an extra month to be intercalated, between 
the last month of the year and the five extra days, by 
merely moving those five days from the end of the twelfth 
month to the end of the first month of the next year. The 
effect of this was to put an extra month into the earlier 
year which, beginning with the first month, would also end 
with the first month augmented by the five extra days as 
the usual termination of the year. All following years 
would begin with the second month, and end with the first 
month and the five extra days, until the second intercala- 
tion, when a year of thirteen months and five days would 
be again obtained, by merely moving the. five extra days 
to the end of the second month which would thus become 
the last month of the year, while the third month would 
begin the year until the third intercalation. By these 
means, any number of intercalations could be made without 
any additional month being named, and the position of the 
five extra days always indicated the end of the rectified 
year, and that the rectified first month, which followed 
them, was to become the last month of the preceding year 
at the next rectification, or intercalation. 

87. If the Parsi calendar, as used in Persia, were es- 
tablished B.C. 505, as we have calculated, it ought to have 
been rectified by an intercalation of one month about each 
of the following years :—B.C. 381, 257, 133, 10, A.D. 115, 
239, 363, 487, 610. Albirdni (p. 121), however, has re- 
corded only one intercalation of two months in the time of 
Yazdakard I (A.D. 399-420), son of Shahpühar, when the 


1 Sachau's Albírüni's Chronology of Ancient Nations, pp. 12, 13, 38, 53-56, 
121, 184, 185, 220, 221. 


xlvi PAHLAVI TEXTS. 


five extra days were removed to the end of the original 
eighth month Ábán, where they remained until Albirüni's 
own time (Alb. p. 56), about A.D. 1000. The reason for 
intercalating two months at once, was because the time for 
the seventh intercalation (A.D. 363) was already long past ; 
so the eighth was added three or four score years in 
advance, being due in 487. 

88. All that Albirüni says about this double intercalation 
is quite in accordance with the original establishment of 
the calendar by Darius Hystaspes, and would render any 
date more than thirty-seven years later than his reign im- 
possible’. With regard to the earlier intercalations (which 
must have occurred to account for the movement of the 
five extra days) that of A. D. 115 was neither in the reign 
of Vologeses I, nor in that of Vologeses III, one of whom 
must have been the Askánian renovator of the Avesta. 
That of A.D. 239, if carried out punctually, would have 
been at the extreme end of the reign of Ardashir ; but the 
intercalations seem to have been usually delayed, as in the 
case of that of 363 which was delayed for thirty to fifty 
years, although it ought to have been carried out under 
the direction of one of those ultra-orthodox high-priests, 
Átürpád son of Máraspend, or his son Zaratüst, in the 
reign of Shahpühar II. 

89. It is worthy of notice that the names of both the 
days and months, which have come down to us in this 
calendar of Darius, include the names of the six Amesha- 
speztas, which, according to Darmesteter's hypothesis, were 
not invented till the time of Vologeses I, in the first century 
A.D. We have positive evidence that the calendar of 
twelve months of thirty days each, with five extra days to 
complete the year, must have been established in the time 
of Darius. This fact being recorded mechanically by the 
extent of the retreat of the Persian Parsis’ new-year's day 
down to the present time, and by the number of months 
intercalated in their religious calendar down to the fifth 


SEE v0 CS agan kh.” 
* If the calendar had been established thirty-eight years after the death of 


Darius, the seventh intercalation would not have been due till one year after 
the death of Yazdakarw I, 


INTRODUCTION. xlvii 


century A.D., being known from the position of the five 
extra days in the rectified calendar. We have no evidence 
of any change of names having been made in this calendar 
at,any time ; and only positive and indisputable evidence 
could be admitted, because reformers of calendars are 
hardly ever satisfied with mere change of names, and the 
calendar itself is a permanent witness that no alteration 
can have been made in any other particular, since the 
time of Darius. 

9o. Darmesteter's theory of a late origin for the Avesta 
having been mentioned, it may be allowable to add, that 
the likelihood of this theory does not increase upon closer 
examination. It is a brilliant hypothesis, very carefully 
prepared to meet ordinary criticism; but it does not 
appear to convince Avesta scholars in general, for want of 
sufficient evidence, as it is very necessary to distinguish 
carefully between possibilities and probabilities ; the former 
being not admissible as evidence, unless corroborated by 
positive facts. Its chief use has been in checking the 
tendency to exaggerate the age of the Avesta, but it seems 
itself to be an exaggeration in the opposite direction, 
a returning swing of the ever-restless pendulum of judg- 
ment. On the other hand, the traditional age of the 
religion cannot be fairly considered as exaggerated, for 
the chief difficulty in accepting it as sufficiently old, is that 
the nearer our researches penetrate to thet time the less 


real light we obtain. 
E. W. WEST. 


April, 1897. 


ABBREVIATIONS USED IN THIS VOLUME. 


A.D. for Anno Domini; Alb. for Albírüni's Chronology of 
Ancient Nations, translated by Sachau; a.r. for Anno Religionis; 
Ar. for Arabic; AV. for the Book of Arda-Viraf; Av. for Avesta ; 
B for Bombay MS. of Dinkard, brought from Irán in 1783; B.C. 
for Before Christ; Bd. for Bundahis (S. B. E. v, 1-151), and Band 
(volume); Beh. for Behistün inscription; BK for an old copy of 
K35, made when this MS. was more complete than it is now; 
B. R. for Before the Religion; Byt. for Bahman Yast (S. B. E. v, 
189-235); Chald. for Chaldee; Chap. for chapter; Chaps. for 
chapters; Dd. for DáZistán-t Dinik (S. B. E. xviii, 1-276); Dk. for 
Dînkazd (S. B. E. xxxvii, 1-397, 406-418, and this volume); ed. 
for editor or edition; Ep. for Epistles of Maêndskihar (S. B. E. 
xviii, 277-366) ; Études irán. for Études irániennes; Farh. Oim 
for Farhang-i Otm-aévak; gen. for genitive case; Gesch. der Sas. 
for Geschichte der Perser und Araber zur Zeit der Sásániden; 
Gf. for the Tale of Gêst-i Fryánó; Heb. for Hebrew; Ibid. 
for ibidem; Ind. vers. for Indian version; J. for Jamésp’s 
old MS.; K for University Library at Kopenhagen; L for 
India Office Library at London; l. for line; ll. for lines; Mkh. 
for Mainyó-i Khirad (S.B. E. xxiv, 1-113); MS. for manuscript; 
MSS. for manuscripts; n. for footnote; nom. for nomina- 
tive case; p. for page; Pahl. for Pahlavi; Pers. for Persian; 
pp. for pages; Pt. for Peshotan's old MS.; S. B. E. for Sacred 
Pooks of the East; Sd. for Sad-dar (S. B. E. xxiv, 253-361); Sg. 
for Sikand-gumánik Vigár (S. B. E. xxiv, 115-251); Sls. for 
Shayast-l4-shayast (S. B. E. v, 237-406); Sp. for Spiegel's edition; 
T for Tehmurass MS. of Dd., Zs., &c.; Vd. for Vendidad, ed. 
Geldner; Vig. for Vigirkard-i Dinik; Visp. for Visperad, ed. 
Geldner; vol. for volume; Westerg. Frag. for Westergaard's Frag- 
ments; Yas, for Yasna, ed. Geldner; Yt. for Yast, ed. Geldner ; 
YZ. for Geiger’s Yátkár-i Zarirán; Z. for Zaratüst ; Zs. for Selec- 
tions of Zág-sparam, first series. 


MARVELS OF ZOROASTRIANISM 


AS STATED IN 


THE SEVENTH AND FIFTH BOOKS 


OF THE 


DINKARD 


AND IN THE 
SELECTIONS OF ZAD-SPARAM 
CHAPTERS XII-XXIV. 


[47] B 


OBSERVATIONS. 


1. For all divisions into chapters and sections the translator is 
chiefly responsible, as the stops found in the manuscripts are not 
used systematically. 

2. Italics are used for any English words which are not expressed, 
or fully understood, in the original text, but are added to complete 
the sense of the translation. 

3. Italics occurring in Oriental words, or names, represent 
certain peculiar Oriental letters (see the ‘ Transliteration of Oriental 
Alphabets’ at the end of this volume), or certain abbreviated modes 
of writing Pahlavi letters. Italic a, 4,6, d, e, €, A, z, f, kh, 1. p, T, sh, 
u, v, 2d indicate no change of pronunciation; but g should be 
sounded like j, Av like wh, & like ch in ‘church,’ s like sh, and 
Avesta 2 like French j. 

4. In the translation words in parentheses are merely ex- 
planatory of those that precede them, and often translate Pahlavi 
glosses in the original text. 

5. For the meaning of the abbreviations, used in the notes, see 
the explanatory list after the Introduction. 

6. The manuscripts used for the Dinkard are :— 

B (written a.D. 1659), the only independent authority for 
Book VII; it was brought from Iran to Surat in 1783, and one 
folio, at the end of Chap. iv, appears to be missing. 

K 43 (written a.D. 1594 and later), No. 43 in the University 
Library at Kopenhagen, which contains another independent 
authority for Book V in its later portion. 

7. The manuscripts used for the Selections of Zad-sparam 
are :— 

K 35 (probably written A. p. 1 512), No. 35 in the same library, 
which was brought from Irán by Prof. Westergaard in 1843, along 
with No. 43. 

T, a copy of a MS. about fifty years older, belonging to Ervad 
Tehmuras Dinshawji Ankalesaria of Bombay. 


MARVELS OF ZOROASTRIANISM. 


DINKARD.—BOOK VII. 


CHAPTER I. 


1. For the gratification of the creator Aühazmazd, 
even through the complete superiority of the Mazda- 
worshipping religion, adorned by omniscience, in the 
world. 

2. The seventh 400k is about the marvellousness 
of the greatest reminder of the Mazda-worshipping 
religion, Zaratüst' of the Spitámas; also of the 
mindfulness of that illustrious ore by Aühazmazd, 
and of his religion, arisen through the word of 
Atthaymazd, being blessed among those of the 
region of king Vistásp; from the Exposition of the 
Good Religion *. 

3. But, before that, /Zere is purposely written 
whatever was the progress of the character and 
effect of the good religion and its first acceptor in 
the spiritual and worldly existences ; and, after that, 


1 Nearly always spelt Zaratükhsht in the MS., the counterpart 
of the Persian form Zaratuhsht or Zaraduhsht. 

2 This Nikézó-i Véh-dénó was evidently the name of an older 
pook, from which the Dinkard quotes much of its information on 
religious matters. 

B 2 


4 DÍNKARD, BOOK VII. 


the prophets, apostles, and upholders in the period 
as far as Zaratüst, whose guardian spirit is reverenced, 
and their religion, which is this, due to the utterance 
and splendour with which they have been blessed 
with prophecy among mankind !. 

4. According to the Mazda-worshipping religion 
and the Exposition of the Good Religion, it is the 
nature of AüharzmazZ's disposition and his knowledge 
as to the complete obtainment of the first creature, 
the archangel Vohümanó, and the first progress 
spiritually among the archangels and the other 
sacred beings of the spiritual and worldly existences, 
and materially in Gayémard, the first man, through 
concurrent and complete acceptance from the creator 
Atharmazd, and the needful atonement in his own 
period through meditation, and the smiting thereby 
of the fiend of that period and the opposition thereof, 
by thinking of the creator's teaching, ‘hat constitute 
the whole of that first utterance * of the religion of 
A ühazmazd. 

5. According to the declaration of the good reli- 
gion about the production of existence, which is the 
praise of him who as the causer of existence and 
creator, the beneficent spirit, the first craving among 
mankind was this, that ‘we be happy and ġe the 
creation of Athaymazd;’ and the last, as regards 
the preservation of a remedy for mankind, is ZZs, 
that ‘the best is this, that the formation of lives be 
perfect now, though rendered sickly by him; and 
the spiritual existences of mankind ġe so now, though 


the destroyer as come to the creatures.’ 6. For 
$e See ee 
* This preliminary matter occupies the whole of Chap. I. 


* The Yathá-ahü-vairyó, or most sacred religious formula of 
the Parsis. 


CHAPTER I, 4-8. 5 


human beings of the lineage of Gayémard this is the 
one thing good, when they shall perform their duty 
and good works; and one’s work is to smite one’s 
own opposing fiend; an instance presentable to any 
of the lineage, that it is important for every one of 
you to smite his own opposing fiend, is the freedom 
from molestation which occurs thereby, and the non- 
contamination of the creatures by the destroyer; 
and it is that effect which the creator of creation has 
produced for it. 

7. And this, too, is declared by the good religion, 
that through a true-spoken statement GáyómardZ 
attained to the good spiritual lordship! of the arch- 
angels (that is, Ze was fit for the supreme heaven 2). 
8. And after Gayémard, at various periods until the 
ever-favouring? Zaratüst of the Spitámas, whose 
guardian spirit is reverenced; much also was his 
acquaintance with knowledge, and Zzs work was the 
preservation of the mankind of that time in which he 
came into notice ; moreover he became requisite for 
conference with the creator; and because of heir 
superior carrying on of destiny *, by command of the 


1 Reading hfi-ahfiih, Av. hvanghevi. ‘This section is one of 
the numerous quotations from the Pahlavi version of a lost Aves'a 
text. When we are furnished with a complete Pahl.-Av. vocabulary, 
it will be possible to recover much of the original Avesta of such 
quotations, with some degree of certainty. 

? Pahl. garógmáníg. Such glosses and comments, inserted 
by the Pahlavi translator, are always marked as parenthetical. 

* Pahl. hamáíi-báhar; it might be read hamái-bídár, ‘ever 
vigilant." 

* Reading vakhsh (— Pers. bakhsh), which is usually expressed 
by its Zváris equivalent gad (traditionally gad man), and this means 
both ‘destiny’ and ‘the star, or glory, of destiny’ (Av. hvarenó, 
Pers. khura) Here the first letter of vakhsh is omitted, and 
this error converts the word into khayá, the Zváris of gan, ‘life.’ 


6 DINKARD, BOOK VII. 


creator, Z/ zs declared in the good religion, ać the 
combined titles of prophet (vakhshvar), acceptor, and 
promoter ave enumerated of them. 

9. As Gayémard passed away, 77! came to Masyé 
and Masyáói *, the second of worldly beings who were 
the progeny of Gayémard the first; and z/ zs declared, 
by the word of Athavmazd, that he spoke to them, 
when they had been produced by him, thus: ‘ You 
are the men I produce, you are the parents of the 
parents of all embodied existence; and so do you 
men not worship the demons, for the possession of 
complete mindfulness is the best ZZzzg produced by 
me for you, so that you may fully observe duty and 
ordinances with complete mindfulness. 10. And 
the bountifulness of Aühazmazd was extolled by 
them, and they went on with their own duty ; they 
also performed the will of the creator, enjoyed the 
advantage of the many duties of the world, and 
practised next-of-kin marriage for procreation, union, 
and the complete progress of the creations in the 
world, which are the best good works of mankind. 
11. The creator showed them the sowing of corn, as 
declared in the words of Aühazmazg thus: “This is 
thine, O Masyé! which is an ox; thine, too, is this 
curn ; and thine those other appliances; henceforth 
thou shouldst know ¢hem well.’ 


This must have also occurred twice in a previous copy of the MS. 
in $ 28, where the word is written gân, ‘life,’ in the MS. B. In 
S. B. E, vol. xxxvii, Dk. VIII, xiii, 20, vakhsh has been erro- 
neously translated “word,” 

" The glorious destiny. $$ 9 and ro have been previously 
translated in S. B. E., vol. xviii, Pp. 411, 412. 

* Literally * man and woman ' who grew up as plants from the 


earth fertilized by Gáyómard, the prototype of the human race; 
see Bd. XV, 1-5. 


CHAPTER I, 9-I4. y 


12. This, too, is declared by the good religion, 
that Adhaymazd spoke to Hadish !, one of the sacred 
beings thoroughly worthy through righteousness, 
thus: ‘© Hadish, who arź thoroughly worthy 
through righteousness! thou shouldst proceed to 
Masyé and Masyáói, thou shouldst procure thy? 
corn and bread from Masyé and Masyáói, and 
shouldst bless theirs thus: “This corn comes up 
owing to you, and, as it came unto you from 
Atharmazd and the archangels, may the corn ex- 
tend from you unto your descendants without dis- 
turbance from the demons ;" and two Ahunavairs ? 
are to be recited for the staying away of the demon 
and fiend. 13. And Hadish, the thoroughly worthy 
through righteousness, went to Masyé and Masyáói, 
and he procured his corn and bread from Masyé and 
Masyáói, and z¢ was given by them; he also blessed 
them thus: ‘ May this corn come up from you, as 
from the archangels! as it came unto you from 
AühazmazZ and the archangels, may it extend from 
you unto your descendants, without disturbance from 
the demons;’ and two Ahunavairs were recited by 
him, for the staying away of the demon and fiend. 

14. And, owing to the explanation of the sacred 
beings, Masyé and Masyáót attained also to ine 
manufacture of clothing, the tending of sheep, house- 
building, and primitive carpentry, the agriculture 
and husbandry of the ancients, and the memory of 
their original state; and /Zese proceeded from them 
through ¢heir lineage, presenting an example and 


1 Mentioned in Visp. i, 9: ii, 11: ix, 5, and recognized as a 
spirit in Pahl. Visp. i, 31 (Sp.). The spirit who assists the hus- 
bandman, see Etudes irán. ii, 201. 

2 The MS. has ‘his,’ as in § 13, by mistake. 

3 Two of the sacred Yathá-ahá-vairyó formulas. 


8 DÍNKARD, BOOK VII. 


spreading zz the world, to artificers among the 
plenitude of artificers. 

15. And after that, the destiny to be carried on 
came to Sámak !, who was their son, and the descent 
of their collateral descendants was on to each region 
and each quarter of the world, Zo that extent which the 
creator chose for that region and quarter ; and thereby 
there was a completion of the progress and spreading 
of mankind into the various regions and quarters. 

16. At another time it came to Váégered and 
Hósháng? of the early law (pés-dad), for pro- 
viding in the world the law of husbandry, ox cultiva- 
tion of the world, and of sovereignty or protection of 
the world. 17. And through their companionship 
and united force, given by religion, the sovereignty 
and cultivation of the world were prepared through 
progress and a succession of provisions of Aüha- 
mazd@’s creatures, as well as the religion appointed 
by Afhaymazd. 18. And through that glory of 
destiny (gadá) two-thirds of the demons of Mázanó ° 
and the seven evil-instructed ozes* of Aéshm were 
destroyed by Hósháng. 

19. After that it came to Tákhmórup* the well- 
armed, and through that glory the demon and evil 
mankind, the wizard and witch, were smitten by 
him; idolatry was also cast out by him, and he 
propagated in Azs time the reverence and service of 
the creator ; the evil spirit, converted into the shape 
of a horse, was also carrying him for thirty winters. 


! See Bd. XV, 24-26. 

* Grandsons of Sámak, see Bd. XV, 28, and Sachau’s Albirünf's 
Chronology of Ancient Nations, pp. 206, 212. 

* The idolators of Mázandarán. See Yt. XIX, 26. 

* Called ‘seven powers’ in Bd. XXVIII, 15. 

® See Bd. XXXI, 2, and Yt. XIX, 28, 29. 


CHAPTER I, 15—24. 9 


20. And it came, at another time, for the con- 
ference with AühazmazZ, to Yim' the splendid, the 
son of Vivang,ha; and owing to his accepting the 
four classes of the religion, which are priesthood, 
warriorship, husbandry, and artisanship, ‘herve are 
the. four classes which are priesthood, warriorship, 
husbandry, and artisanship, and thereby the world 
was improved, extended, and developed; he also 
rendered even the creatures, in a measure, immortal, 
undecaying, hungerless, thirstless, plentiful, and 
fully-settled. 21. And in the good religion? z/ is 
declared, by the word of the creator Aühazmaz4Z to 
Yim, thus: * Then do thou widen my world! (that 
is, make up 24s measure more), then do thou extend 
my world! (that is, make 77 up larger), and then 
thou shouldst accept from me the protection, nourish- 
ment, and chieftainship of the world; and do thou 
effect such watchfulness over 27, that no one shall be 
able to occasion the wounding or injury of another.’ 
22. And /zs was accepted and done by Yim, as 
A ühazmazg commanded him; and through the same 
glory he widened the earth three-thirds larger than 
that whzch it was theretofore. 23. And, in that 
realm of his, the cattle and men of the realm were 
made immortal by him, and the other creations, 
water, vegetation, and the various foods, imperish- 
able. 24. And this, too, is declared by the good 
religion, that the world was made by him like the 
supreme heaven in pleasantness; also the enclosure 
made by Yim, constructed by him according to all 
the commands of the creator °, about guarding the 
creatures from perishing through the winter of 


! See Bd. XXXI, 3-5, and Yt. XIX, 31-33. 5 1n Vd. LI, 4. 
s As detailed in Vd. II, 22-31, 40, 41. 


10 DINKARD, BOOK VII. 


Mahrküs, and likewise many other wonders are 
reported by the good religion. 

25. And it came, at another time, by command of 
the creator, to Frédan the Áspigán when he was in 
the pregnant womb, owing to the share of husbandry 
in the avocations of the religion, through allotment 
from the glory of Yim, and through its triumphant 
splendour. 26. And Frédin, through that triumphant 
splendour, became a responder fo Dahak? from the 
pregnant womb, and that degraded fiend was averted 
and paralysed by him; Zavzzg come to nine years of 
age, he proceeded about his destruction, and through 
that victory Dahák was smitten by him ?, the crea- 
tures were saved and relieved thereby, those of 
Mázandar and Mada were smitten, their ravage and 
mischief were removed from the region of Khvaniras, 
aid the region of Khvaniras was preserved for his 
three sons. 27. And owing to his husbandry, which 
is the third avocation of the religion, pestilence and 
disease weve disturbed by the medical treatment even 
of pestilence itself, and he exhibited to mankind also 
many other wonders produced and useful occupation 
for the world. 

28. And, in the life-Z of Frégdün, the same 
destiny came to Airi£*, son of Fréddn, owing to 
introduction ġy the creator, and was diffused in him, 
and he practised humility ; the life* which is perfect 
is brought through a prayer from Zzs father Frégün, 


' See Bd. XXXI, 7, 8, and Yt. XIII, 131; XIX, 36. 

* The Arab usurper, or usurping dynasty, that conquered Yim 
in his old age; see Bd. XXXI, 5, 6. 

! See Yt. XIX, 37. * See Bd. XXXI, 9, ro. 

* Probably ‘destiny ;’ the initial letter of vakhsh, ‘destiny,’ has 
been omitted, and this blunder converts the word into khayá, ‘life.’ 


CHAPTER I, 25-31. II 


— 


and that life' came to him from the creator through 
the blessing of Frédan. 

29. And it came, through 47s mother, to a descen- 
dant of Frégün and descendant of Airi£ ; it proceeded 
with the angel Néryósang to MánáüsZihar?, and its 
entire progress was in the lineage of Airi#. 30. 
And it came to MánüsZihar, the monarch of Irán, 
and through it many wonder-wrought actions were 
performed by him; he smote Salm and Tag in 
revenge for Airi£?, he was a responder Zo the super- 
fluities of foreign countries, he arranged the realm 
of Iran, improved and fertilised the land of Iran, and 
made the country of Iran victorious over foreigners. 

31. At another time it came to Aüzóbó, son of 
Tümásp +, a descendant of MánüsZihar the monarch 
of Iran; and, through that destiny and glory com- 
bined, the new-born came to mature activity and the 
proportions of a man during childhood, through 
agriculture; he disclosed Zis lamenting mother to 
the countries of Irán, he marched on to the destruc- 
tion of foreigners, to drive out and make ‘hem 
outcast from the land of Iran; he also defeated the 
village-terrifier of the country of Irin, the wizard 
who frightened his father and fellow-immortals, 
Frangrásiyák of Tar®; and he developed and ferci- 


1 See note 5 on preceding page. 

? Here spelt Néresang and Manfisir. The former is the usual 
spiritual messenger of Aüharmazd; and for the lineage of the 
latter see Bd. XXXI, 9-14. It appears that the glorious destiny 
was preserved by the angel Néryésang for some generations, and 
he conveyed it to the grandfather of Manfiskihar (see Chap. II, 70). 

3 The three sons of Frégün, among whom he divided his 
dominions, with the usual result of triumvirates. 

* See Bd. XXXI, 23; XXXIV, 6. 

5 See Yt. XIX, 56-64, 77, 82, 93, and Bd. XXXI, 14, 15, 18, 
21,22, 35; XXXIV, 6; where the Av. form Frangrasyan is further 


12 DINKARD, BOOK VII. 


lised the country of Iran, and increased the many 
streams and cultivated lands in the country of Irán. 

32. At another time it came to Kerésáspó the 
SAmán!, owing to the share of warriorship which is 
the second avocation of the religion, through allot- 
ment from the glory of Yim ? ; and, through it, the 
serpent Sróbóvar which was swallowing horses and 
swallowing men, the golden-heeled demon Ganda- 
repó, and much other production of adversity dy 
the demon and the fiend—the murderess of the 
creatures—were destroyed by him. 

33. At another time it came to Kai-Kobáz?, the 
progenitor of the Kayáns; through it he arranged the 
realm of Irán, he united the sovereignty with himself 
in the Kayán race, azd he thereby occasioned much 
splendour and actions of advantage 7o the creatures. 

34. And it came to Pátakhsróbó 4, son of Airyéf- 
shva 8, son of Téz, who was king of the Arabs, 
through the mindfulness of the archangel Ashava- 
histó, and his enquiry about it from its own tribe 5— 
for the demon of greediness (426), with oze similarly 
corrupted into Frásiyáv, as it is also hereafter in Chap. II, 68; 
Zs. XII, 3. 

' A famous hero whose exploits, like those of Hercules, have 
given birth to many legends; see S. B. E., vol. xviii, pp. 369-382. 

2 Compare $ 25. 

* See Yt. XIX, 71; Bd. XXXI, 24, 25, 28; XXXIV, 7. 

* Or Pátásróbó, spelt Pátsróbó in Pahl. Vd. XX, 4 (Sp.). 

* Or Airyéfshnig; evidently the same as Virafsang in Bd. 
XXXI, 6, which is spelt Avirafshanég and Airafshanig in two 
MSS. of the Iranian Bundahis. Hence we may conclude that 
Pátakhsróbó was a brother of Záinigáv, and a great-uncle of 
Dahák ; but how his daughters could have been married to the 


three sons of Frégün, as stated in the Aitradad Nask (see Dk. 


VIII, xiii, 9), is a chronological difficulty that throws doubt upon 
this identification. 


* The people of the primitive faith, who are supposed to have 


CHAPTER I, 32-37. 18 


destined, had rushed for the destruction of him who 
was very gentle to that tribe '—as he had a full 
inclination for the ascendancy of the portion whose 
guidance to the lofty priestly master was owing to 
the archangel Ashavahistó, just as the fish image ? 
of that offer portion was for falling into the river; 
and z/ zs declared ¢hat he came to the ceremonial of 
Zaratüst. 

35. At another time it came to Kai-Arsh and his 
brothers ê, the descendants of KobáZ; through it 
they have been all-experienced and powerful, heed- 
ful and performing wonders ; and the eldest brother 
of them, Kai-Üs, seized upon the sovereignty of the 
seven regions, and became very illustrious and full 
of glory. 36. A the same time it came to Aóshnar* 
who became fully sagacious (pür-zir), owing to the 
glory of Yim, when he was in Zzs mother's womb, 
and many wonders were taught by him to Zzs mother, 
through speaking from the mother's womb; also at 
his birth he vanquished the maleficent spirit by 
uttering answers /o the questions of the deadly 
Frékih the demon-worshipper. 37. He also attained 
to the chancellorship (farmázárih) of Kai-Us, and 
became administrator (rayinidar) in his realm of 
the seven regions; the frontier speech (vimand- 
góbisnih) was also explained and taught by him, 


already practised most of the duties upheld by Zarathustra before 
his appearance as a reformer. 

1 Indicating that the Arab subjects of the king had revolted, 
because he favoured those of the primitive faith who, no doubt, 
gained further favour by putting down the rebellion. 

4 Or it may be ‘ fish priest,’ as karapó, ‘a heathen priest, and 
kerpó, ‘shape, image,’ are written alike in Pahlavi letters. 

* See Yt. XIX, 71; Bd. XXXI, 25. 

* See Yt. XIII, 131; Dd. XLVIII, 33. 


14 DÍNKARD, BOOK VII. 


and much other learning of advantage /o mankind 
who are unaffected by the utterance of replies of 
a foreigner; he a/so advised the Iranian country 
with the best-instructed counsel. 

38. And 7ts coming to Kai-Siyavakhsh’ the 
illustrious, through the wondrous-formed Kangdez 
being held by him for the retention of protection for 
the much splendour avd suitable glory of the religion, 
from which the restoration of time, the re-arrange- 
ment of the realm of Iran, and the reunion of power 
and triumph with the religion of Athaymazd are 
manifest. 

39. It came to Kat-Khásrói ?, son of Siyavakhsh, 
and through it he smote and vanquished Frangrá- 
siyák ? of Tür, the wizard, and his fellow-miscreation 
Kérsévazd * of those of Vakgir®, and many other 
very evil devastators of the world; he also joined in 
the destruction of that idol-temple which was on the 
shore of Lake A'éZast*, and demolished that fiendish- 
ness which was awful. 40. On account of the 
desirableness of means for the renovation of the 
universe, he is also on a throne (nam#£5), which is 
assuredly selecced by that destiny, at a secret place 
where /Zere is an immortal preserver for his body 
until the renovation, through the will of the creator. 

41. And it came from him, after Zaratüst of the 
Spitimas came to the conference of the creator 


! See Yt. XIX, 71, 77; Bd. XXXI, 25; Byt. III, 25, 26. 

? See Yt. XIX, 74, 77, 93; Bd. XXXI, 25. 

> See $ 31. 

* Brother of Frangrásiyák, see Yt. XIX, 77; Bd. XXXI, 15. 

" Reading Vakgiragánó, probably the inhabitants of the 
Bakyir mountain, mentioned in Bd. XII, 2, 20 as a stronghold 
of Frasiyav (= Frangrásiyák). 

* See Bd. XVII, 7; Mkh. II, 95. 


CHAPTER I, 38-43. 15 


Aüharmazd, and accepted from the omniscient 
creator Aühazmaz4 unmixed freedom from pollution, 
the comprehensive and also recited acquaintance 
with the knowledge and work of priesthood, warrior- 
ship, husbandry, and artisanship, and the separate 
portions of the Mazda-worshipping revelation (dénó) 
brought to king Kai-Vistásp by command of the 
creator, illuminated by the great splendour in that 
supreme sovereign of the sacred beings, and propa- 
gated 2y the learned of the region, in the regions 
which ave seven, through the good eloquence which 
is owing to the succession of creatures until the 
renovation of the universe. 42. And through its 
production by those who wz be Azs sons, Aüshézar, 
A üshégar-máh, and Sósháns !, the renovation in the 
existence of the creatures of Aühazmaz4 is immortal; 
and a more remindful statement of its splendour, 
glory, and marvellousness is a statement ZZa£ is 
written and found below *. 

43. And ZZere have also been others before Zara- 
tüst, the prophet (vakhshvar) of desired fame in 
the Mazda-worshipping religion; for it is declared 
that, at times, some came from the spiritual ġerngs 
to him who was more of a leader, and mankind have 
become as captivated by the solicitation and interro- 
gation of that affair, as now by the solicitation and 
interrogation of the religion; the necessity for that 
period is not now necessary, because all mankind 


1 The Pahlavi transcripts of the Avesta names, Ukhshyad-ereta, 
Ukhshyad-nemangh, and Saoshyás, of the three apostles expected 
to revive and renovate the Parsi religion in successive millenniums. 
According to the imperfect chronology of the Bundahis, the 
millennium of AushéZar-máh has now nearly one-fourth elapsed. 

2 See Chap. XI, 7-11. 


16 DÍNKARD, BOOK VII. 


are made acquainted with the religion, and Zaratist 
of the Spitamas, whose guardian spirit is righteous, 
is to be reverenced. 

44. Now, that which is declared in the world is 
written, about the splendour, glory, and marvellous- 
ness of the prophet of the Mazda-worshipping re- 
ligion, the best of creations, whose guardian spirit 
is reverenced, Zaratüst of the Spitamas; and ten 
chapters are published here, as to the information 
from the Avesta, and zz benediction of the religion 
of Aüharzmazd !. 

45. That of it which is before the birth of that 
glorious oxe from Zzs mother zz the present world. 

46. That of it which is from the birth of that 
illustrious ove onwards, /7// his coming to a con- 
ference with Atharmacd. 

47. That of it which is from the conference on- 
wards, till his pre-eminence over prophecy in the 
world, and the acceptance of the religion óy the 
exalted Kai-Vistásp. 

48. That of it which is onwards from that, till 
the departure (vikhézó) of that pure soul to the 
existence which is best. 

49. That of it which is also successively after that, 
in the reign of the obedient king Kai-Vistásp. 

50. That of it which is after that, until the collapse 
(angávisnó) of the sovereignty of Irán. 

51. That of it which is also after that, until the 
end of the millennium of Zaratüst and the arrival of 
A üshédar. 

52. That of it which is also after that, until zke 
end of the millennium of Adshédar and the arrival 
of AüshéZar-máh. 


-———— a 1 ml. 6. 8 dte 
' Then follow the headings of these ten Chapters (II to XI). 


CHAPTER I, 44 — II, 3. 17 


53. That of it which is also after that, until the 
end of the millennium of AüshéZar-máh and the 
arrival of Sósháns. 

54. And that of it from the arrival of the Tri- 
umphant Benefiter, nti the wonder of the renova- 
tion and future existence; a statement of them 
each separately. 


CHAPTER II. 


1. About the marvellousness of the manifestations 
before ! the birth of that most auspicious of offsprings 
from 4s mother *. 

2. One marvel is this which is declared, that 
the creator passed on that glory of Zaratüst 
through the material existences of the creatures ? to 
Zaratüst; when the command arose from Aühaz- 
mazd, the coming of that glory from the spiritual 
existence to the worldly, and zə the material sub- 
stance (máZiyátó) of Zaratüst, is manifested as 
a great wonder to the multitude (va/ kabedánó). 
3. Just as revelation mentions z¢ thus: ‘ Thereupon, 
when AühazmazgZ had produced the material 
(dahisnó) of Zaratüst, the glory then, in the 


1 The MS. has patas for pé. 

2 The contents of this chapter are thus mentioned in the 
summary of the Spend Nask (Dk. VIII, xiv, 1 in S.B.E., vol. xxxvii, 
p. 31):—' The Spend contains particulars about the origin and 
combination of the material exzs/emce, guardian. spirit, and soul (or 
glory) of Zaratüst; how the creation of each one occurred in the 
spiritual exzs/emce, and zy what mode 7/ was produced for the 
worldly existence; how their connection with the parents arose, 
the coming of the parents together, the combination in the mother, 
and the birth from the mother; and whatever is on the same 


subject.’ 
. ^ ^ XP i wo], 
3 The writer uses two Arabic words: mádiyátó-i ' 2alqó. 


(47) C 


18 DÍNKARD, BOOK VII. 


presence of Aühazmazd, fled on towards the material 
of Zaratüst, on to that germ ; from that germ it fled 
on, on £o the light which is endless’; from the light 
which is endless? it fled on, on to that of the sun; 
from that of the sun it fled on, on Zo the moon; from 
that moon it fled on, on to those stars ; from those 
stars it fled on, on to the fire which was in the house 
of Zóis?: and from that fire it fled on, on to the 
wife of Fráhimrvazá-zóis*, when she brought forth 
that girl who became the mother of Zaratist.’ 

4. Of that splendour, escaped at the same time 
into the earth az into the sky, the father-in-law's 
ignorante is declared, so that it is said by those in 
the village of the more instructed and invoking 
Zóis^, as to the self-combustion wich burns the fire, 
that fuel is not necessary for its use. 5. Then they 
went on to the governor (kézó), and he explained 
to them concerning that same (that is, he spoke to 
them) thus: ‘ The full glory of embodied existence 


' Perplexed by the repetitions, some copyist has evidently 
omitted this phrase by mistake. 

? Pahl. anagar, a transcript of Av. anaghra which is always 
translated by Pahl. asar, ‘endless.’ The ‘endless light’ is the 
abode of Aübarmazd, see Bd. I, 2. 

* Written in Pázand. 

* Also written in Pázand. In Bd. XXXII, ro, it is stated that ‘the 
name of the father of the mother of Zaratüst was Frahimrava’ (or 
Fereahimruvana in the Iranian version); but very little reliance 
can be placed on such Pazand readings of names originally written 
in Pahlavi. 

^ Here written in Pahlavi letters which can also be read Zandth. 
In the text, the two preceding adjectives, farhakhtar va-khván, 
might be read Farákht-ruvánán as the beginning of the name. 
Dut, as it stands, the text implies that Zóis, the father-in-law of his 


son Fráhim-rvazà's wife, was the master of the house, which is the 
usual oriental arrangement. 


CHAPTER II, 4-9. 19 


is the glory of life afar¢ from the body, so that all 
diligence devoid of this is only movement.’ 

6. And z£ zs declared that the demons, on account 
of their defeat by that glory in maintaining! adversity 
for the girl, were bringing on to that district three 
armaments (hén6), winter, the demon of pestilence, 
and oppressive enemies; and a suspicion was cast 
by them into the minds of those of the district, that 
this harm happened to the district owing to the 
witchcraft of this girl; so that those of the district 
quarreled dreadfully with the parents, as to the 
witchcraft of antagonism zz the girl, and about 
putting žer out from that district. 

7. And the father of that girl spoke even these 
words to those of the district, with much reason, 
about the unjust assertion of witchcraft relative to 
the girl, that is: ‘When this girl was brought forth 
among those of mine, her whole destiny (vakhsh) 
was afterwards set forth dy that manifest radiance 
of fire, where it brought out radiance from all over 
her in the dark night. 8. When this girl sits in the 
interior of the house, wherein there is no fire, and 
in the chamber (sarái) of fire they increase z/s 
intensity (bürzó), it is lighter there, where and when 
this girl sits, than there where they increase tre 
intensity of the fire; ove is dazzled by the radiance 
from her body, and that of a wizard would not have 
been so glorious.’ 

9. Even then, owing to the influence (sárinisnó) 
of the demons, and the Kavig and Karap? of the 


1 Reading darih, but it may be garth for karth, * producing.’ 
2 The Karaps were apparently idolatrous priests, especially those 
before the conversion of Vistásp by Zaratüst; one being called 
‘a wizard’ in Chap. III, 5, 42—44, another ' unsanctified' in IV, 24, 
c2 


20 DÍNKARD, BOOK VII. 


district, they did not become satisfied ; so the father 
ordered the girl to go to Padiragtaráspó !, the father 
of a family in the country (matá) of the Spitámas, 
in the district (rüZasták) of Arak; and the girl 
obeyed the command of Aer father. 10. That dis- 
turbance which the demons caused, with evil inten- 
tion, for the expatriation of that girl, the sacred 
beings assiduously made the reason for the coming 
of the girl for marriage to Pórüsháspó, the father of 
Zaratüst, through er father sending the girl to the 
dwelling of Padiragtaraspé, the father of Pórüsháspó. 

11. One marvel? is this which is declared, that 
when that girl, in going to that family, stood on the 
loftiest place in the country of the Spitámas, and z/ 
is surveyed by her, a great wonder is manifested to 
the girl, 7us¢ as revelation mentions: ‘It is their? 


a third is ‘deadly’ in IV, 67, and a demon himself is a Karap in 
IV, 61, and has Karaps under his control in II, 45. The following 
Karaps are named in the time of Zaratüst :— Dürásróbó mentioned 
in Chap. III, 4-41; Brágrók-résh in III, 20-34, who is called 
a Tûrânian in III, 28; Vaédvóist in IV, 21-24; and Zák in IV, 67. 
Some others are named by other writers. The Kavigs, Kais, or 
Kigs are mentioned with the Karaps in Chaps. II, 9; III, 50; IV, 
2, 6, 14, 64, 67; VIII, 26, 4o, as equally objectionable, but their 
avocation as officials is not defined. Both classes seem to have 
he'= official rank, but whether their titles were tribal or official is 
uncertain. The Avesta calls them Karapan and Kavi; the latter 
word being also the royal title of the Kayán dynasty, of which 
Vistásp was a member. Compare Zs. XV, 1-4; XXIII, 8. 

' So also in $$ 13, 7o. In Bd. XXXII, 1, 2, the two old MSS. of 
the Iranian Bundahis have Padtarásp thrice and Pírtarásp once; 
K 20 has Sp:tarsp and Paitiresp; K 20b has Padirtaráspó and 
Paitirispó; and M6 has Padirtarásp and Paitiresp. Zs. XIII, 6, has 
Purtaráspó. 

* One of the marvellous manifestations mentioned in $ r. 

* Probably we should read: ‘It is the voice of those sacred 
beings ' who are mentioned in $ ro. As the word yazdán, ‘sacred 
beings,’ is exactly similar, in. Pahlavi, to shán (in valdshán, ‘their’ 


CHAPTER II, IO—-15. 2I 


voice is carried away to her from them; “do thou 
proceed to that village which is theirs; it is very 
depressed in height and very wide in breadth, in 
which he who is living and the cattle mostly walk 
together; besides, for thy assistance that village is 
divinely fashioned and compassionate." 12. There- 
upon that damsel stopped, and also fully observed 
that ¢hezr recital seems o be for the conveyance 
of this statement, that my action sould de such as 
was ordered me by my father also. 13. Then that 
damsel thoroughly washed er hands, and proceeded 
from them to that village which was PaZiragtaráspó's, 
and the glory came to Pórüsháspó, the son of Padi- 
ragtaraspo. 

14. One marvel is this which is declared, that the 
creator Athaymazd passed on the guardian spirit 
(fraváhar) of Zaratüst, to the parents of Zaratist, 
through (le-£adón) Hóm!, by a marvel produced 
by cultivation. 15. Again, too, revelation says that, 
when the separation (burinó) of the third millen- 
nium occurred, at the end of the 3,000 years of 
spiritual existence without a destroyer, (after the 
creatures weve in spiritual existence, and before the 
arrival of the fiend); then the archangels framed 
Zaratüst together, and they seated the guardian 
spirit within, having a mouth, having a tongue, and 
the proclaimer o/ the celestial mansions. 


or ‘ those’), a copyist would be liable to the blunder of leaving out 
the final word in writing valdshán yazdan. Or the original 
writer himself may not have quoted enough of the text he was 
reading, to make his meaning clear. 

1 A sacred and mythical tree, described in Bd. XVIII, 1-3, and 
often personified as a sacred being. It is now represented, in 
Parsi ceremonies, by twigs of a particular plant brought from 
Persia. 


22 DINKARD, BOOK VII. 
BEN — —— h|— —  3w— 


16. Then the three millenniums of Zaratüst * were 
the number manifest to them through observation 
by the eye, azd it seemed that he became just like 
an archangel through bodily contact with (ham- 
kerpih)? the archangels. 17. And when the separa- 
tion of the third millennium occurred, after the 
framing of Zaratüst together, and before the con- 
veying of Zaratüst down to the worldly sale, at the 
end of the 3,000 years of worldly existence with 
a destroyer, then Aühazmazd argued with Vohümanó 
and Ashavahistó? thus: ‘Is his mother beheld by 
you, so that we may produce Zaratüst ?' 

18. And Ashavahistó spoke zz reply thus: ‘Thou 
art aware even of that, O propitious ove / about the 
Zaratüst we shall produce, and thou and we have 
produced, thou knowest, O Atharmazd! and fo us 
who are the other archangels do thou announce the 
place, because its appearance thou knowest, /Zou 
propitious spirit Aühazmazz !' 

19. Then Aftthaymazd argued with Vohümanó 
and the reminding by Avdavahist6*, Shatraver, 
Spendaymad, Khirdad, and Amüxrdad*, saying: 


` Meaning the period of Zaratüst's existence merely as a guardian 
spirit, the first period of the destroyer (§ 17) who then remained 
powerless in confusion (see Bd. I, 22). 

* Or ‘sheltering with’ (ham-kar££ih). 

` The personifications of the Avesta phrases for “good thought’ 
and ‘perfect rectitude, who are two of the seven that hold a 
superior position among sacred beings, somewhat similar to that 
of archangels. When a Parsi speaks of Aflharmasd as the first of 
the Ameshaspends, or archangels, he does not put him on an equality 
with the rest, any more than we put a commander-in-chief on an 
equality with his troops when we call him a good soldier. 

* Another pronunciation of Ashavahistó. 

* These last four archangels are personifications of the Avesta 


CHAPTER TI, 16-24. 23 


“The conveying of Zaratüst down does not seem /o 
be for me, because, having a mouth and having 
a tongue, Ze will be a proclaimer to the world of 
embodied beings. 20. If we convey Zaratüst down 
on to the world of embodied beings, having a mouth 
and having a tongue, as a proclaimer of the celestial 
mansion, this is evident: they wz% say, concerning 
the origin of him who is my righteous man, /Za/ we 
frame him together with the water, with the land, 
with the plants, and with the animals!. 21. There- 
fore we wil carry off there, to the village of Pórà- 
sháspó, him whom they wz% call Zaratüst of good 
lineage of both natures, both of Néryósang * who is 
of the archangels, and of Yim who is of mankind.’ 

22. Then the archangels framed together a stem 
of Hóm the height of a man, excellent in colour, 
and juicy where fresh ; also to carry off the guardian 
spirit of Zaratüst to that stem of theirs, the arch- 
angels made it go forth thither from that endless 
light, and gave it up there also to the instinctive 
intellect (ásnó vir). 23. Likewise their carrying 
off was manifest around, and a wall was openly 
displayed round them, but a restless one; the Hóm 
was constantly provided with a mouth, where it was 
suitable, and sap constantly oozed from the Hom 
where it was moist. 

24. And when thirty ? years of the 3,000 years of 


phrases for * desirable dominion, bountiful devotion, completeness 
or health, and immortality.’ 

1 That is, as an inferior and irresponsible being. 

? Here spelt Nérósang ; see Chaps. I, 29; II, 70; and Zs. XIII, 
6, for this angel's influence on the royal race. 

3 The MS. has 330 years, but the time intended is evidently that 
shortly before the birth of Zaratüst, and this third 3,000 years 


24 DINKARD, BOOK VII. 


well-disturbed ! worldly existence remained, Vohá- 
manó and Ashavahistó then associated their pre- 
eminence together, and turned off into the embodied 
existence ; there they came up to where two birds 
had settled in quest of progeny, and seven years 
before the serpents devoured the inexperienced 
progeny. 25. For their owz designs, Vohümanó 
and Ashavahistó went on, and those birds consulted 
them thus: ‘We have to offer homage, and our 
want is that Hôm.’ 

26. The circumstances of those associated together 
in pre-eminence and the request of these for that 
Hêm were a double marvel; Vohümanó seized one 
of those dvds by both legs, and the other ġy one; 
he also brought them that Hóm, and gave it up to 
them there, on that tree within ZZezx nest. 27. And 
they uncovered above the serpents, that have gone 
up to the progeny of the birds; then that guardian 
spirit of Zaratüst started up, and the serpents on 
the tree rushed also from them away towards the 
demons ; z/ that guardian spirit of Zaratüst smote 
them on the jaws, and the serpents fell down and 
expired, which events have also occurred among 
them till now, Zavzzg been requisite as regards 
a aepriver of life (gan-gir) and any one of that 
species. 28. And that Hóm was connected with 
that tree; and on the summit of that tree, there 


ended either when Vistáspó accepted the religion, in Zaratüst's 
forty-second year, or when Zaratüst received the religion in his 
thirtieth year, but this earlier date is the more likely. 

' This word, hQ-afbigadig, is written in Pahlavi precisely like 
an-aibigadig, ‘without a destroyer,’ though its meaning is the 


reverse, which is an unexpected cause of perplexity to a cursory 
reader, 


CHAPTER II, 25-33. 25 


where the nest of the birds was, it grew constantly 
fresh and golden-coloured '. 

29. After the coming of her who bore Zaratist, 
to Pórüsháspó for marriage, Vohümanó and Arda- 
vahistó, thus associated together in their pre- 
eminence, came up there to Pórüsháspó in the 
cattle-pasture of the Spitámas, and their thoughts 
were confined to that Hôm brought by them. 30. 
Then Póráüsháspó walked forth, with spiritual desire, 
up to the water of the Dáit?, because the require- 
ment of the spirits is the spiritual knowledge ? that 
spirits are ever-beneficial; and that Hóm «was also 
seen by him, when it had grown on that tree, on the 
inside of the nest. 31. Then Pórüsháspó thought 
thus: ‘It is for me, really (madam-24-am) to pro- 
ceed and, even as ere is no reaching by me up to 
that Hóm, that tree must be cut down, for apart from 
that, O Hôm of Aühazmazz! thou seemest fresh, 
so that the benefit of something from thee wall de 
advantageous.' 

32. Then Pórüsháspó walked on and washed 
their clothes acquiescently (patásig), and here a 
great wonder was manifest to Pórüsháspó. 33. About 
this it says that, all the while that Pórüsháspó 
washed their clothes, Vohümanó then proceeded 
from the uppermost third of the tree unto the 
middle of it, whereon z¢ was the desire of Pórü- 


! Or it may be ‘ verdant.’ 

2 Av. Dáitya, a mythic river in Afran-vég (Bd. XX, 13); 
a favourite place for religious rites, see Yt. V, 17, 104, 112; IX, 
25, 29; XVII, 45, 49, 61. Or it may be merely mayá-i shêd, 
‘brilliant water.’ 

3 Reading mainég-danisnith, but the MS. has maínóg 
dénó-dániíh which might be translated ‘spiritual knowledge of 
religion,’ though the latter Pahlavi word is unusual. 


26 DÍNKARD, BOOK VII. 


sháspó to be conveyed. 34. Then Pórüsháspo, 
having washed the clothes, walked up to it and, 
thereupon gathering up the whole of that Æóm, all 
of it was then also appropriated by him through 
assistance like that of that archangel, just as what 
thou offerest for the food-sustenance of a friend's 
son of two years or three years of age; and it 
seemed to him that archangel’s joyful payment. 

35. Carrying off their Hóm, Pórüsháspó spoke of 
it to Zzs noble (mas) wife thus: ‘So thou, O Dak- 
dàüb! shouldst keep their Hôm in custody, all the 
while that their Hóm fulfils duty and routine.’ 

36. One marvel is this which zs declared, that 
the coming of the nature (góhar) of the body of 
Zaratüst, through water and vegetation, to the 
bodies of Zzs parents, is manifested as a great 
wonder of the creator to the multitude. 37. As 
revelation mentions z/ thus: ‘Thereupon, when 
Aühazmazd had produced the material (dahisnó) 
of Zaratüst!, the nature of Ais body then, in the 
presence of Aühazmazd, fled on Zowards the material 
of Zaratüst.' 

38. About Khûrdaď and Mirdad? bringing the 
cloud-water down in a compassionate manner ever 
anew, drop by drop, and completely warm, for the 
delight of sheep and men, awd—with as much seed 
as the roving of two rampant bulls zoz/d thereby 
cast upon the plants wich have grown, all of every 
species—¢hey are casting 7¢ upon those other plants 


at that time, even upon the dry owes; and the 
— M ni P a e RE 
* Compare § 3. 
* These two archangels have special charge of water and 
vegetation (see Sls. XV, 25-29), and here they are represented 
as acting in a manner usually ascribed to Tistar, the Dog-star. 


CHAPTER II, 34-43. 27 


nature of Zaratüst came from that water to those 
plants. 

39. One marvel is this which zs declared, that, in 
order that the nature of Zaratüst shall come unto 
Ais parents, after! the mounting of the archangels 
Pórüsháspó drives six white cows, with yellow ears, 
up to those plants. 40. And here is manifested a 
great wonder, such as revelation mentions thus: 
Two? of those cows, unimpregnated, Zad become 
full of milk, and the nature of Zaratüst came 
from the plants to those cows, and is mingled with 
the cows milk; it is owing thereto ¢#a¢ Pórüsháspó 
drove those cows back. 41. And Pórüsháspó spoke 
to Dûkdâûb thus: ‘O Dükzaáüb! in two of those 
cows, which are unimpregnated and have not calved, 
milk Aas appeared; do thou milk those cows, which 
are the splendour and glory of the cows and of any 
embodied existence whatever. 42. And Ddkdadb 
arose and, taking that pail of hers which had a four- 
fold capacity, she also milked from them the milk 
which was in them, and a great fart of what they 
gave up to her she had to throw away; and the 
nature of Zaratüst was in that milk. 

43. One marvel is this which is manifested in the 
struggle of the adversary for concealing and spoiling 
that milk, 7zs¢ as revelation mentions thus: There- 
upon, at that time, the demons formed ‘themselves 
into an assembly, and the demon of demons growled 
thus: ‘You demons become quite unobservant : 
that food is really supplied fresh, so that the forma- 
tion is settled which w2// extend as far as to that 


1 Reading akhar instead of adén, ‘then.’ 
2 [n some places the singular number is used, in others the 


plural, 


28 DINKARD, BOOK VII. 


man who will be the righteous Zaratüst; which of 
you wz// undertake his destruction, all the while that 
he exists for mankind, so as to make 4zm more con- 
temptibly impotent?’ 44. Aéshmak!, astute in 
evil, growled thus: ‘I wall undertake his destruc- 
tion. 45. Astute in evil, he rushed away with 
thrice fifty of the demons who are Karaps of 
Késhmak; and that village was partly uprooted 
and partly destroyed* by him, fellow-workers were 
ruined, and the number of fellow-eaters of broken 
victuals, attending the great, was not broken up, 
among whom was he that had repelled his authority. 

46. Žt is declared that, afterwards, Pórüsháspó 
asked again for that Hôm from Dakdadb, and he 
pounded it, and with that cows' milk?, into which 
the nature of the body of Zaratüst had come, he 
here mingled the guardian spirit of Zaratüst, and 
the nature of the body came at once into union 
with it. 

47. One marvel is this which zs declared, that 
Pórüsháspó and Dûkdâûb drank up that Hôm and 
milk, when they were mingled together and an- 
nounced to Aühazmaz4 ; and here occurred a com- 
bination of the glory, guardian spirit, and bodily 
nature of Zaratüst into a mancZz/d. 48. And a 
great wonder is manifested to both of them, through 
that which revelation mentions thus: Thereupon, 
both have embraced the first /i* with desire 


* The whirlwind demon; see Bd. XXVIII, 24. Compare 
Chap. IV, 6r. 

? The usual effects of a hurricane. 

* The mingling of milk with pounded Hóm still constitutes part 
of the Parsi ceremonial; see Haug's Essays, 3rd ed., p. 405. 

* Pahl. ' ko/À 2 lâlâ fratim vapdidd havánd.' 


CHAPTER II, 44-53. 29 


for a son, and the demons shouted out unto them, 
in the villainous speech of sinfulness, thus: ‘Why 
shouldst thou act like this, vile’ Pórüsháspó ?’ 
whereupon they started up like people who are 
ashamed. 49. A second Ze they have embraced, 
and the demons shouted out unto them, in villainous 
speech ; whereupon they started up like people who 
are ashamed. 50. A third zīme they have embraced 
thus, with desire for a son; and the demons shouted 
out unto them, in villainous speech ; whereupon they 
started up like people who ave ashamed. 51. And 
they spoke with one another about z, and continued 
at this duty, and accomplished it ?, saying : ‘We will 
not so stop without accomplishing something, not 
even though both Rak and Nédar should arrive here 
together? 52. Then that manchz/d who was the 
righteous Zaratüst became complete, and here below 
there came together the nature of the body, the 
guardian spirit, and the glory of Zaratüst in the 
womb of his mother. 

53. One marvel is this which is declared, that, 
after the combination of Zaratüst in the womb of 
his mother, the demons strove anew wonderfully 


1 Reading anág, but it may be intended for hana=aé, ‘O; 

2 Pahl. ‘afshan madam har szfió, aéghshánó pavan akósh fráz 
validüntó.'" 

* Evidently an old proverb, implying a fixed determination what- 
ever catastrophe may happen, even if one's ancestors of the eleventh 
or twelfth generation shall appear. Nódar (Av. Naotara) was 
a son of King Mânûskîhar (Bd. XXXI, 13, 23), and Rak was 
a nephew of Nódar (Bd. XXXI, 31), doubtless the same as Ragan 
(Bd. XXXII, 1; XXXIII, 3) which seems to be a Pázand mis- 
reading of Airi£ó, or Éri£ó, see Zs. XVI, 11-13, and compare the 
genealogies in Chap. II, 7o and Zs. XIII, 6. The proverb is 
used again in Chap. III, 19, and the names are mentioned in 
IIT, 39. 


30 DÍNKARD, BOOK VII. 


to cause the death of Zaratüst in Zzs mother's womb, 
and she who bore him was rendered sickly by them 
through the sharpest of sharp and afflictive pain, 
until she wished to ask the wizard physicians for 
a desirable remedy. 54. And here is manifested a 
great wonder, just as revelation says: ‘It is then 
a voice of theirs is carried away there to her from 
the higher region, from AühazmazZ and from the 
archangels, thus: “ Thou damsel who goest! do not 
proceed thither, because anything of theirs is 
destruction through wizard medical treatment; for 
healthfulness wash zy hands thoroughly, and those 
hands shall take firewood, and upon it thou shalt 
offer meat for the sake of the infant, thou shalt offer 
up cows’ butter Zo the fire for his sake; thou shalt 
likewise heat z¢ at the fire for his sake, and shalt 
quaff (paimés) zZ off at the proper time for his sake, 
and thou wz% become well.”’ 55. Then at once 
that damsel washed Zex hands thoroughly, and she 
did just as she had heard, and became well !. 

56. One marvel is this which is manifested to the 
multitude when three days remained to his coming ? 
forth; in the manner of the sun, at the approach 
of z/s uprising, when its first advancing twilight is 
diffused, ïs body is then announced as revelation 
says: ‘It is then when in those last three nights 
during which Zaratüst was in the womb, where he 
still subsisted three days till afterwards born, ¢ha¢ 
the village of Pórüsháspó became all luminous. 57. 
Then spoke the horse-owners and cattle-owners of 
the Spitámas, in running away, thus: “It is requisite 
to be forgiven?; the village of Pórüsháspó, on which 

' Compare Zs. XIV, 2-5. * Literally ‘ going.’ 
* Apparently an appeal for mercy. 


CHAPTER II, 54-62. 31 


that fire! is in every crevice, is disturbed by con- 
fusion?" 58. Then, on running together again, 
they said: “It is not fully forgiven for the village 
of: Pórüsháspó ; fire is on it in every crevice and it 
is disturbed by confusion; unto him is born, at his 
house, a brilliant mancZz/Z." ' 

59. This, too, is one of the wonders, when the 
report of the marvellousness of the birth of that 
mancAz/d and of his great glory,is due to statements 
of Yim and also others, brilliant in carrying on the 
destiny which had entered them from the sacred 
beings. 60. Wherein Yim spoke to the demons 
thus: “Here below the pure and righteous Zaratüst 
will be born, who z// produce for you who are 
demons that absence of intercession which is pre- 
pared for you (that is, he will produce for you 
a thoroughly-harassed actual inactivity, an absence 
of intercession so that you are not able to pray on 
your own account, and no one prays for you).' 

61. /¢ zs declared that the report about the birth 
of Zaratüst, and concerning his prophesying, is 
explained (avazandi-hastó) only by the illustrious, 
such as Yim and Frégün and many learned people ; 
but the sacred beings are also heard through the 
tongues of the animals scattered in the world, in 
order that even that witness shall arise as regards 
his prophesying. 62. Just like that which is de- 
clared, that in the reign of Kai-Üs there was an ox, 
and a splendour had come to his body from the 
sacred beings; and whenever a dispute as to the 
frontier arose between Irán and Türán, that ox was 
brought, and the boundary between Irán and Türán 


1 Assuming that niram stands for nird, a variant of ndra. 
? Or ‘terrified with fear.’ 


22 DÍNKARD, BOOK VII. 


was truly shown by him. 63. And because, when an 
Iranian fad to seek a decision as to a Türánian in 
a dispute and lies occurred, the Türánians were 
constantly convicted through the showing of the 
boundary óy the ox, and happened to be defeated 
by the Iranians—and, besides that, their envy also 
arose as to Kat-Üs, even of Ais ownership—there- 
fore, on account of Zzs possession of that wonder, 
the Türánians proceeded about the smiting and 
destruction of that ox, and through their sorcery 
and witchcraft the mind of Kat-Us was disturbed 
about that ox, and he went to a warrior, whose name 
was Sritó 1, and ordered him to kill that ox ; so that 
man came to smite the ox. 64. And here is mani- 
fested a wonder of importance by that ox, such as 
revelation mentions thus: ‘To him spoke the ox, in 
grave words, thus: “ Thou shouldst not murder me, 
O Sritó! thou seventh * of those of this race; you 
will atone for this malice when Zaratüst, the most 
desirous of righteousness among the existences, 
arrives and proclaims thy bad action in revelation; 
and the distress in thy soul becomes such as is 
declared by that passage where z¢ says: ‘As death 
occurs to him, that of Vagak? and the like occurs." ' 
65. /¢ is declared that that man, when this wonder 
was thus seen by him proceeding from the ox, did 
not kill 24, but went back to Kai-Us and told him 
what he Zad seen. 66. Kai-Üs then still, on account 
of the amazing deceitfulness of the demons and 
wizards, ordered the same man to smite that OX ; 


! This legend is also told, with further details, in Zs. XII, 1-25. 

* Compare Zs. XII, 10. 

* The mother of Dahák, who first committed adultery in an 
aggravated form (see Dd. LXXIT, 5; LXXVIII, 2). 


CHAPTER II, 63-68. 33 


and that man proceeded also again to the ox, azZ 
though z/ was carrying oz still much of that talk, he 
did not lend an ear to z/, bal killed zz. 

67. Regarding the sole-created ox', too, z¢ is 
declared that, o» meeting its destruction by the evil 
spirit, it bellowed thus: ‘Though thou thinkest it as 
to us, O evil spirit, astute in evil! that thou art zz 
every way a winner by destruction, 24 zs not to our 
destruction thou art even then an attainer zz every 
way (that is, z/ is not possible for thee so to 
annihilate that we sZ2// not arise again); even now 
I proclaim that that man, Zaratüst of the Spitámas, 
well arrive in that last revolution, who wz// produce 
distress for the demons, the assistants of the demon, 
and also the wicked who are bipeds.' 

68. Likewise the marvellousness of Zaratüst's 
defeat of the demons, owing to his glory and by 
means of his sagacity, even before he had come into 
the world by birth; when Frásiyév? the wizard is 
amazingly distressed through seeking that glory of 
his by desire of the demons, just as revelation? 
mentions thus: ‘Thereupon Frásiyéo, the very 
powerful Türánian, rushed away, O Zaratüst of the 
Spitamas! to the wide-formed ocean a first, a second, 
and a third time; and he wished to obtain that glory 
which is specially for those of the countries of Irán, 
for the born and the unborn, and which is for the 
righteous ove; but he did not attain to that glory.’ 


1 Pahl. tórá-1 aévak-d4do, the primeval ox, from whom the 
animals and plants have all descended (see Bd. III, 14, 17, 18; 
IV, X555 X, 1; XIV, 1-35; XXVII, 2). 

2 The same person as Frangrásiyák of Chaps. I, 31, 39; II, 69; 


XI Be 
3 In Yt. XIX, 56-62; V, 42. 


[47] D 


34 DÍNKARD, BOOK VII. 


69. And this, too, zs mentioned, that to all the seven 
regions the villain Frangrásiyák rushed away, and 
the glory of Zaratüst «as sought by him !. 

70. Here is an enumeration of the worthy lineage 
of Zaratüst?:—Zaratüst was son of Pórüsháspó, son 
of Padiragtaráspó, of Urugadhasp*, of Haééadaspé*, 
of Aikhshnus*, of Paétrasp*, of Aregadharsn*, of 
Hardhar*, of Spitám, of Vaédist*, of Nayázem* 5, 
of Airi£?, of Dürásróbó, of MánüsZihar monarch of 
Irán, of Mánüs-khürnar, of Mánüs-khürnák whom 
Néróksang implanted in * Vizak*, daughter of Air- 
yak*, son of Thritak*, of Bitak*, of Frazüsak*, of 
Züsak*,'of Fragüzak*5, of Güzak**, daughter of 
Airi£, son of Frégün monarch of Khvaniras, son 
of Pür-tórá the Áspigán, of Névak-tózá the Aspigan, 
of Ség-téva the Áspigán, of Bór-tózá the Aspigan, 
of Kasdar-têra” the Aspigan, of Siyah-tórá the 
Aspigan, of Spétó-tórà the Aspigan, of Géfar-tórà 
the Aspigan, of Ramak-tó7á * the Aspigan, of Vanó- 
fravisn the Áspigán, of Yim monarch of the seven 


! See Yt. XIX, 82. 

* Compare the genealogy in Zs. XIII, 6 ; Bd. XXXII, r, and that 
quoted there from the Vigirkard-i Dénig. The names marked here 
with an asterisk are written in Pázand, or partly so. 

* Ayazem, of Ragan, in Bd. The latter name is Ragisn in Vig., 
but Eri£ó in Zs. XVI, r3. 

* This wants confirmation, but varzid bên can hardly be 
a name as assumed in Vig., where it is altered tc Varzig-dén. 

* The g is of the old form like s. 

* The G is omitted, but see Bd. XXXI, 14. 

M. Kütál-tó7à ; this generation is omitted both in the Vigirkard 
and Bundahis. 

* This generation is interlined in the MS. of the Dinkard. The 
Bundahis, XXXI, 7, also omits Névak-tórá ; and the Vigirkard omits 
Bór-iórá, Siyah-tórà, Spétó-tórá, and Ramak-tórá. The termina- 
tion tÓrá is merely the Zváris equivalent of gau. In Iranian MSS. 
the Pahlavi î and 4 are practically written alike in most cases. 


CHAPTER II, 69-111, 4. 35 


regions, sow of Vivangha, of Ayang,had*, of Anan- 
g,haz*, son of Hósháng the Pésdadian monarch of 
the seven regions, son of Fravak, of Siyamak, of 
Masya, of Gayémard the first man. 


CuaPTER III. 


1. About the marvellousness which is manifested 
after the birth of that most auspicious of offsprings 
from Zzs mother, till his coming to a conference wz/Z 
A ühazmazd !. 

2. One marvel is this whzch zs declared, that on 
being born he laughed outright; the seven midwives 
(dayah) ?, who sat around him, were quite frightened 
thereby ; and those terrified ones spoke thus: ‘ What 
was this, on account of grandeur or contempt ? when, 
like the worthy man whose pleasure is due to 
activity, the man's child so laughs at the birth owing 
tohim.’ 3. Pórüsháspó also spoke thus: ‘ Bring out 
this manchz/d to the sheeps&zx clothing which is 
soft; the affair was owing to thee, owing to the 
virtue of thee who art Dükzàáüb, that the advent of 
glory and coming of radiance to this manchz/d was 
openly seen when he laughed outright at his birth. 

4. One marvel is this which is declared, that 
Pórüsháspó afterwards went to a Karap, Dürásróbó 
by name, who was the most renowned for witchcraft 
in that district, and informed him of the birth of 
Zaratüst azd the wonders which were. manifested 


1 The contents of this chapter refer chiefly to ‘the rearing of 
Zarattst. For the other matters mentioned in Dk. VIII, xiv, 2, 
see Zs. XIV, 6-12. 

2 Sls. X, 15 prescribes ‘ten women. Zs. XIV, r3 mentions 
‘seven wizards (yátàkó).' 

D2 


36 DINKARD, BOOK VII. 


therein ; he a/so brought Az to the house for the 
purpose of seeing Zaratüst. 5. That wizard, owing 
to the coming oz of vexation at that glory in Zara- 
tüst, desired with evil intention a really mischievous 
deceit (shéd5), to compress with Zzs paws (góv) the 
tender head of that full-glorious child, to cause As 
death. 6. And here is manifested a great wonder 
to the multitude, just as revelation mentions 24 thus: 
‘Thereupon the paws of that deadly ove (mar) are 
driven back to behind him (that is, reversed (afisk ûn) 
backwards); nor ever after add that deadly one be- 
come again a devourer of meat with Zis jaws by 
means of those paws.’ 7. That Karap also, besides 
that, examined the marks and evil specks on Zara- 
tüst!; and Pórüsháspó, zz awful alarm as to the 
dispersion of the emanation of splendour (à p- dihih) 
from Zaratüst, hastened (sáriniz) to make Zaratüst 
invisible. 

8. One marvel is this which is declared, that the 
Karap Dürásróbó, through witchcraft, cast such fear 
of Zaratüst into the mind of Pórüsháspó, and so 
injured the mind of Pórüsháspó, that, owing only to 
that very fear as regards himself, he asked the Karap 
for the death of Zaratüst. 9. Also about?the mode 
of putting to death for which Pórüsháspó, owing to 
the distraction (vishópisnó) by which he becomes 
helpless, asks Dürásróbó ; and that Karap is bring- 
ing much firewood together, and to shelter (nipa- 
yldanó) Zaratüst amid that firewood, to stir up a fire, 
and to make 77 blaze with the wood were the remedy 
he arranged (virast6); and Pórüsháspó acted accord- 


iS dM i AN 
" Compare Zs. XVI, 1-3. 


? Pahl. madam-m4, where md=Ai, ‘what? whatever, is used 
for -i£, ‘also,’ as often happens. 


CHAPTER III, 5-12. 37 


ingly. 10. And here is manifested a great wonder 
to the multitude, just as revelation mentions it thus : 
‘Neither was fire among the vegetation on a tree 
(that is, it does not come on), nor Zas fire seized 
upon plants ; óz/ on rushed, at dawn !, that son-loving 
mother, and she came forth to him intelligently 
(hüshümónd), and seizing him, thereby removed 
him with 4er right hand aloft as he sat *.' 

II. One marvel is this which is declared, that 
after Pórüsháspó spoke to the Karap Diürásróbó 
about the fire not burning ¿že child, he asked anew 
about putting Zaratüst to death; ZZez to ensconce 
(nipáyizanó) Zaratüst in a narrow path, and de- 
spatch many oxen on that path, so that he may be 
trampled on dy the feet of the oxen a7 night, were 
the remedy that Karap proposed (giráyizó) to 
Pórüsháspó; and Pórüsháspó acted accordingly. 12. 
Here also is manifested a wonder of grandeur to the 
multitude, just as revelation mentions: ‘It was that 
ox walked on which sad become sorrowful (that is, 
its sorrow was great owing to another ox) and 24 was 
aged and walked before that ove (before the leading 
ox) it also hastened before that other (that is, it 
stood up before Zaratüst), and he was greatly pitied 
by it for the whole day, so that it kept away the 
oxen from him, beng the first ‘hat walked thither 
and the last that walked away; on rushed at dawn 
that son-loving mother, forth to 4zm she came intelli- 


1 Reading pavan aüsh, but it might be pavan háüsh, ‘with 
sense,’ here and in § 14, where there is nothing to indicate that the 
child was out all night, but in $$ 12, 18 he is evidently rescued the 


next morning. 
2 Pahl. ‘madam pavan aûstakð Compare Zs. XVI, 7. 


38 DÍNKARD, BOOK VII. 


gently, and seizing him, thereby removed him with 
her right hand aloft as he sat !.' 

13. One marvel is this which is declared, that 
Pórüsháspó came a second time (idan6) to that 
Karap also about the oxen not trampling on Zara- 
tüst, and asked anew about the mode of putting 
Zaratüst to death; /Zez to ensconce Zaratüst near 
a drinking-pool (£vkhür) in the domain (géhán), 
and to drive many horses to that drinking-pool, so 
that he may be trampled on by the hoofs of the 
horses, were the substituted? remedy that Karap 
proposed; and Pórüsháspó acted accordingly. 14. 
And here is manifested a great wonder to the 
multitude, just as revelation mentions thus: ' That 
horse walked on which ad become fully-hoofed 
(that is, its hoofs were very thick) ; 77 zs yellow-eared 
and it walks before that oe (before the leading 
horse) and it hastens before that other (that is, it 
stood up before Zaratüst), and was the first shat 
walked on thither, and the last that walked away ; 
on rushed at dawn that son-loving mother, forth to 
him she came intelligently, and seizing him, thereby 
removed him with fer right hand aloft as he sat 3.’ 

15. One marvel is this which zs declared, that 
Pórüsháspó came again to that Karap, spoke also 
about the horses, too, not trampling on Zaratüst, and 
asked anew as to what may de the mode of putting 


eS 


! Compare Zs. XVI, 5. 

* Possibly ‘supplementary’ or ‘ gratuitous. The word is 
nirmat6 which, as a noun, means the gratuity or honorarium 
paid to a priest for acting as a substitute for another. Its etymology 
is obscure, unless it be an abbreviation of nirümandi, < strength,’ 
used in the legal sense of ‘ refresher.’ 

* Compare Zs. XVI, 6. 


CHAPTER III, 13-19. 39 


Zaratüst to death ; zken to have Zaratüst carried off 
into the den (sarak) where a wolf's cubs (hünüskán) 
are slaughtered, so that when the wolf arrives and 
sees the slaughtered cubs, she wz% wrathfully growl 
and mangle Zaratüst in revenge for those cubs, was 
the remedy that Karap proposed; and Pórüsháspó 
acted accordingly. 16. And here is manifested 
a great wonder to the multitude, just as revelation 
mentions: ‘It is when that wolf came on, several 
Yügyásts!, towards Zaratüst, the wolf was struck 
dumb by the assistance of the sacred beings, so that 
its mouth was down a4 the cubs, one with the other,’ 

17. One marvel is this which is declared, that 
Srésh? the righteous and Vohümanó proceeded to 
him, and a woolly (kürüsak) sheep was brought by 
them unto him; the nurses (dáyagán)? also were 
terrified, apart from him, the whole night. 18. Zhen 
on rushed at dawn that son-loving mother, forwards 
from the position of that woolly sheep she walked, 
and she, the mistress of the domain (zan-i gehan), 
spoke thus: ‘Thou runnest on violently (ütayütó) 
in excess ;’ for she considered in this way, that ‘the 
wolf is so much better to that son than thou arti 
good to me, when I shall show Ais 5.bone or blood 
in thy sight? 19. Forwards to him has she come 


1 The Yáügyást is a distance of sixteen Roman miles of a thousand 
paces each (see Dk. VIII, xx, 19, note). But the writer of the 
scripture here quoted could have had no idea of the distance he 
was mentioning. 

? A sacred being who personifies * obedience, and is a special 
protector of man, particularly at night. 

* It may also be read dehígán, ' the country-folk.’ 

* Or ‘ she would be.’ 5 Or ‘they show my.’ 

6 This seems to be a bitter reproach addressed to her husband ; 
but the ambiguity of the Pahlavi makes its exact meaning rather 


uncertain. 


40 DÍNKARD, BOOK VII. 
nn eee 


intelligently and, seizing him, she thereby removed 
him, through the grace (dahisnó) of the sacred 
beings, aloft as he sat; and she, the mistress of the 
domain, spoke thus: ‘I sZa// not give thee up again, 
my son, not even though both Rak and Nódar should 
arrive here together 1. 

20. And z/ is declared that, afterwards, the Karap 
Dürásróbó, with a malicious disciple, came to the 
same district and noticed about the advancement of 
Zaratüst; and they saw no means for injuring 07 
putting 42m to death, but his condition (mindavam) 
was a marvel as full of vigour as this which is 
declared, that Bradrék-résh, the Karap, growled thus: 
—21. ‘Then I, who am the most far-seeing of the 
people in that district of ours as to witchcraft, see 
upon their district that well-directing (that is, he 
understands good commands) produce of develop- 
ment (that is, the increase which continually becomes 
more, which Zas come and which wz% arrive), with 
good flocks (that is, he understands to keep good 
sheep), with good herds (that is, he understands to 
keep a herd which is better /Zaz another's) the 
well-exerting (that is, he understands to do work 
which is better /Zaz another's) well-fighting (that 
is, he understands to do battle well), and perfectly 
liberal (that is, he understands to exercise beneficial 
liberality) bantling (hûnûskö) of Pórüsháspó?, in 
the three nights while he was begotten out of 


————————————— P ee NU S 


' See Chap. II, 51. Compare Dk. V, ii, 4; Zs. XVI, 8-13. 

* The Pahlavi version of an Avesta text, here translated, is 
a fair specimen of the complication produced by appending a gloss 
to every epithet. It is useful as a combination of translation and 
lexicon, but it is apt to be perplexing, unless all the glosses are 
carefully omitted by the reader who can dispense with a lexicon. 


CHAPTER III, 20-26. 4I 


his parents. 22. Unto him wz// Vohümanó come 
in the embodied world (that is, Vohümanó wz? 
come unto Zaratüst), and conducting him unto a 
conference, his good religion wz% extend into the 
seven regions of the earth; and so I skal not even 
let him produce in Zzs mind (that is, he wall not 
know) where and how I sZa// murder him; and a 
token of this matter, that one speaks truly, is this, 
that I state 77 beforehand, promptly after the full 
hearing of the statement of the matter, when you 
heard this statement.' 

23. Pórüsháspó advanced, conveyed in a four-in- 
hand chariot! ; then, on hearing that statement, and 
when they had heard that statement, Pôrûshâspô 
started forth, conveyed in that four-in-hand chariot. 
24. And Pórüsháspó spoke to Brágrók-résh, the 
Karap, thus: ‘ Brázrók-résh, zhou Karap! whatever 
men they shall behold, cry out when at birth ; even 
the offspring of that secluded person they behold in 
death, cry out when at birth?; óz/ what was that 
which ZZey beheld 24 the birth of my son? 25. When 
at birth he laughed outright; was that also beheld 
in thy son, when at birth did he laugh outright ? 
26. When Vohümanó comes unto him, into /Zs 
embodied existence, 77 is also said by him on Zzs 
return: “O Pórüsháspó! where is thy servant??" 
So, O Karap! concerning him who is my son, 7/ zs 
beheld that Ze was seen sagaciously by thee.’ 


For restoring the original Avesta, the Pahlavi translation, without 
the glosses, is usually the best guide. 

1 Pahl. 4-ayfigisnd r4é (Av. £athruyukhta and ratha). 

2 This seems to be the meaning of Pahl. ‘zag-ík tanó arméstó- 
dahisnih pavan fráz khaditund margih, amat pavan zerkhünisnó, 
bara bekhánd.' 

3 Pahl. * Pórüsháspó! aéghat bandakó ?’ 


42 DINKARD, BOOK VII. 


27. And! when Pórüsháspó enquired of him thus: 
‘What was the matter with thee when, through 
bringing thee unto that son of mine, Ze was thereby 
offered ; and thou lookedst long up away from him 
in height, and thou lookedst long down away from 
him in depth, and thou lookedst long out away from 
him in different directions?’ 28. The Türánian, 
Bradrék-résh the Karap, spoke zz reply thus: 
‘When through bringing me unto that son was thy 
offering of him, and I? looked long up away from 
him in height, then the radiance and glory out of 
him kept together up to the sun, and through him? 
I have accompanied ¢hem on the boundary of 245 
radiance and glory; so that I saw this, that mankind 
through speaking to the soul may attain to the 
firmament of the sun; óz/ this, namely, how the 
routine (dadistan6) is in the supreme heaven, was 
not seen by me. 29. When through bringing me 
unto that son of thine was ¢hy offering of him, and 
I looked long down in depth away from 7Zy offering 
of him, then the radiance and glory out of him kept 
together unto the sky which is below this earth, and 
through him‘ to the boundary of z/s radiance and 
glory; bul this, namely, how the routine is in that 
sky, was not seen by me. 30. And when through 
bringing me unto that son of thine was thy offering 
of him, and I looked long out away from him in 
different directions, then the radiance and glory 
from him kept together for adorning this earth, and 


' The first five words of $ 28 are here inserted in the MS., so as 
to combine the two sentences in a perplexing manner. 
? The MS. has afat for afam by mistake. sr ‘that? 


* The differences of form in $$ 28-30 are probably due to errors 
of copyists. 


CHAPTER III, 27-35. 43 


through him I have accompanied zem on the boun- 
dary of z/s radiance and glory; so that I saw this, 
that only from the action of this oze the future exist- 
ence w7// arise; but the routine of the future exist- 
ence was not seen by me. 31. This son of thine 
thinks thus: “I will make a grander material exist- 
ence than that of azy other ; " so he w// also make 
thy spiritual-ozz, where thou goest; and this son of 
thine w2// remain in the great protection of Vistásp, 
not in thine.’ 

32. One marvel is this which is declared, that when 
Zaratüst was seven years old, that Dürásróbó being 
joined by Brázrók-résh the Karap at the village of 
Pórüsháspó, on account of the little previous seeing 
of Zaratüst dy the latter, they saw Zaratüst in that 
neighbourhood when a hut (kàZakó) was constructed 
by him with the children; and they sat with evil 
intention to injure the mind of Zaratüst through 
witchcraft, and for that reason fear and terror were 
cast by them upon the children. 33. Here a great 
wonder became manifest to them, owing to the 
powerful intellect, cautiousness, and practice of Zara- 
tüst, just as revelation mentions thus: ' When the 
other children were excessively terrified at their own 
silliness of speech, Zaratüst did not quite close the 
eye in his mind as regards them.’ 

34. One marvel is this which zs declared, that 
when these two Karaps came to the dwelling of 
Pórüsháspó, he ordered the preparation of food for 
their eating; and his prepared food is chewed up 
(fráz khayái-ait), with a gobletful (pûr dólakó) of 
mare's milk. 35. He also spoke to Dürásróbó thus : 
‘Thou art the most spirit-worshipping ' of mankind 
Rie — iC EE Ss Du. 


1 Literally ‘demon-worshipping ;’ it is not clear that idolatry is 


44 DÍNKARD, BOOK VII. 


in our district; do thou worship this of mine. 36. 
A great marvel, owing to the sagacity of Zaratüst at' 
a childish age, is just as revelation mentions that 
Zaratüst spoke thus: ‘I worship this, O father! z¢ 
7s not that which it is necessary for me to worship 
that he should worship. 37. And Pórüsháspó spoke 
thus: ' // zs not that of mine thou worshippest, and 
it is that of mine he should worship. 38. As many 
as three times those persons (gabzáán) carried on 
those assertions; when up stood Zaratüst and spoke 
concerning them, .and he broke forth with that 
eternal statement!, namely : * The righteous I rever- 
ence, nien o» women; the poor I reverence, men or 
women ; mol the wicked, men or women; when any 
one whatever shall join Pórüsháspó, where he shall 
be celebrating worship, the worship shall then be 
suitable to the worshippers, that is, he shall worship 
that which it is necessary to worship.' 

39. One marvel is this which is declared, that 
afterwards Dürásróbó the Karap shouted to Zaratüst 
thus : ‘ Evil was thy reckoning? which, owing to the 
conduct of fate (báhar), I, the foremost of the exist- 
ences embodied in Rak and Nócr?, bring to thee ; 
I am made further worthy where thy fate is carried 
away from me; now is the joy (parkán) which 
I convey to him‘ through bringing 77 on, and this 


intended, but rather some form of worship antecedent to Zoroastrian 
Mazda-worship which latter had not yet been established. The 
author of this legend must have supposed that it differed very little 
from the religion of Pórüsháspó. 

* Reading sakhün-i leyalmin which is written in Pahlavi 
exactly like dashinó rigeld, ‘the right foot.’ 

* Pahl. marakó, possibly for marg, ‘death.’ 

? See Chap. II, 51, note. 


* Probably referring to his companion Bradr6k-résh who, accord- 


CHAPTER III, 36-44. 45 


will occur, so that I may observe he wl kill thee 
with the evil eye in the house. 40. And here is 
a great wonder which became manifest about Zara- 
tüst, in the sagacity of Zzs reply to that deadly one 
at that childish age, which was just like this which 
revelation mentions, that Zaratüst spoke thus : 'With- 
out the joy of a murderer I observe, with propitious- 
ness and complete mindfulness, that it is thee 
I notice in that house which is thine !.' 

41. One marvel is that which, after this reply of 
Zaratüst to Déíürásróbó, became manifest in that 
Karap, just as revelation mentions thus: “The 
deadly oze became disabled and stupefied as long as 
the milking of ten mares zz milk whose milker is 
only one.’ 

42. One marvel is this which zs declared, that 
when that wizard emerged from /Za/ stupefaction, 
he then shouted again to Zaratüst zz the same 
manner, Zaratüst uttered that same reply, and the 
deadly ove became anew disabled and stupefied as 
long as the milking of twenty mares full of milk 
whose milker zs only one. 

43. One marvel is this which is declared, that 
again when that wizard emerged from ¢hat stupe- 
faction, he then shouted to Zaratüst zz the same 
manner, Zaratüst uttered that same reply, and the 
deadly one becomes anew disabled and stupefied as 
long as the milking of thirty mares full of milk whose 
milker is ozZy one. 

44. One marvel is this which zs declared, that 
when that wizard emerged from that stupefaction, he 


ing to most accounts, was the murderer of Zaratüst in his old age. 
This tradition is mentioned in Dk. VII only here and in § 22. 
1 Alluding to Dürásróbó's own fate, see $ 45. 


46 DINKARD, BOOK VII. 


Se 


then grumbled thus: ‘ Do ye have the horse driven 
for us,and turn round the chariot wherein you harness 
it; for really this smiting ove (ganak) wall destroy 
me through the arrival of the sacred text and through 
his possession of authority. So they had the horse 
driven, and 24 was harnessed to the chariot by them. 
45. And here is manifested a great wonder to the 
multitude, just as revelation mentions thus: ‘ When 
he ad proceeded several Yügyásts! in driving, he 
stopped in his distress through being terrified, and 
this occurred which I mention for a warning ?, his 
semen was expelled, so that. it arose in his skin and 
burst it ê, and Zzs loin thereby broke from Zzs thigh ; 
he then died outright, then his progeny, and then the 
offspring of his progeny. 

46. One marvel is this which is declared that, even 
before the coming of Zaratúst to a conference +, there 
is manifested in him a mind which is more capacious 
than the whole world, and more exalted than every 
worldly possession, with an understanding whose 
strength is perfectly selected, an intellect of all- 
acquiring power, and a sagacity of all-deciding 
ability ; also with the much heedfulness of the kingly 
glory, and the full desire for righteousness, the effi- 
cacious diligence and authority, and even the superi- 
ority in mightiness and grandeur of the priestly 
glory. 47. Also the handsomeness of body and 
completeness of strength which are in the character 
of these four classes of his, which are priesthood, 


! See $ 16 n. 

? Pahl. *avó pés yema/e/inam.’ 

* Or ‘in his back and broke it,’ if we suppose that pést, ‘ skin,’ 
stands for pêst, ‘back.’ Compare the same legend in Zs. XIX, 
1-8, 

* With the sacred beings. 


CHAPTER III, 45—51. 47 


warriorship, husbandry, and artisanship ; Jdeszdes a 
perfect friendship for the sacred beings and the 
good, and an awful enmity for the demons and the 
vile. 48. That is the nature by which the habits 
(dâdðih) of mankind and bipeds, the perfection and 
completeness of the sacred beings through the crea- 
tiveness of Aühazmazd, and its own commemoration 
of them are provided. 49. So that the sacred beings 
shall bring a report, as to his superiority, from every 
one of those who are and were and will be, and of 
his coming for reminding ws of AühazmazZ and of 
the lord-and-mastership (ah à-va-ra zih) of the world, 
also of the preservation of the creations therein 
(ay£pó-dahisnán), from the destroyer, by the tongue 
of the many-mannered (kabed-saráZakó) sage, the 
fully-virtuous ove of the age producing no harm 
(avazand-dahig) in the world. 50. And the de- 
mons on this account, that this is Ze whom many 
Kigs! and Karaps žave to influence the good to con- 
found and destroy, then also kept ¢hezr promise and 
practised friendship. 

51. And on the completion of thirty years beyond 
his birth ?, the archangel Vohümanó came on in 
commemoration of AühazmazdZ, when Ze was bring- 
ing his Hóm-water (mayá-1 Hómigán)? from the 


1 See Chap. II, 9 n. 

? 'The remaining contents of this and the following chapter are 
thus summarized in Dk. VIII, xiv, 3, 4:—‘His attainment on 
maturity, at thirty years of age, to a conference with Aüharmazd ; 
and the occurrence of seven conferences in ten years. Many 
marvels, owing to him are published therein, just as there are 
some which, collected and selected, are noticed by the Dinkard 
manuscript, that is, in this seventh book, in which, however, the 
details of the seven conferences do not occur; but some are 
mentioned in Zs. XXI, 8-XXII, 13. 

? See Visp. XI, 2. 


48 DINKARD, BOOK VII. 


river Aévaták !, just as this which revelation men- 
tions thus: ‘ When Zaratüst came forth to the third 
effluent (bazrá-tagisnih), that of the good Daiti, 
he further proceeded through that; and when he 
marched onwards from that, a man was seen by him, 
who marched from the southern quarter. 52. That 
was Vohümanó, and it seemed Zo him ZZa£ Vohümanó 
was of early form (so that he is more discerning as 
to a person) and foreseeing (that is, he was before- 
hand in everything); it seemed o him /Za/ Voht- 
manó was as much zz height as three men's spears ; 
and it seemed /o him, as to Vohümanó that a glossy 
twig (ards tak) was brought by him in Zzs hand, 
through carrying off which branch the plant was not 
injured by him; that became the spiritual twig of 
the religion, and this was indicated by it, that it is 
necessary to proceed as uninjuriously by the religion. 
53. There is some one who says that it became a 
reminder of the spiritual exzszezce, and this was indi- 
cated by it, that it is necessary to proceed as unin- 
juriously in the world, so that peace may exist with 
every one. 

54. When he came onward to the fourth effluent, 
as far as the Aüshán-rüZ of the good Daiti (which 
was the name of it) and Ze was in it, Zaratüst was 
bringing the Hóm-water from the middle of it ; and 
on the ascent Zaratüst, bringing his right foot out of 
the Aüshán-rüg, covered Azmse/f with his clothes, 
and upon that Vohümanó, advancing, joined him in 
front. 


! Literally ‘single-flowing.’ In Bd. XXIX, 4, 5, it is Naivtak 
which has been translated as * navigable' in Bd. XX, 34, and as 
‘flowing in a channel’ in Dk. VIII, xxxvii, 38, 42; IX, xvi, 16.— 
From $ 54 it appears to have been a channel of the good Dáiti 
river which flows from Aîrân-vêg (see Bd. XX, 13). 


CHAPTER III, 52—60. 49 


55. And that man enquired of him thus: ‘Who 
art thou; from whom of them art thou!?' He 
replied: ‘I am Zaratist * of the Spitamas.’ 

56. The words of Vohümanó were: ‘O Zaratist 
of the Spitamas! about what is thy foremost distress 
(that is, for what is thy need when thou becomest 
quite distressed); about what is thy foremost 
endeavour; and for what is the tendency of thy 
desire (lak kámakó-dahisnih)?' 57. The reply 
of Zaratüst was thus: ' About righteousness, I con- 
sider my foremost distress ; about righteousness my 
foremost endeavour; and for righteousness the 
tendency of my desire (that is, my need is for that 
thing, and I am a distressed seeker of righteous- 
ness).' 

58. The words of Vohümanó «were: *O Zaratüst 
of the Spitamas! that which is righteousness is ex- 
isting (that is, a real thing is, as z/ were, that which 
is righteousness), so that whatever is that which is 
righteousness is thus what is ones own. 59. And 
Zaratüst spoke thus: ‘ That which is righteousness 
exists, and concerning that I am completely clear 
and aware; bul where and how is that radiance which 
is that whose arrival is through Vohümanó.' 

60. And Vohümanó spoke to him thus: ‘ O Zara- 
tüst of the Spitámas! deposit this one garment which 
thou carriest, so that we may confer with him dy 


1 See Pahl. Yas. XLII, 7 c (Sp.). 

2 According to the numbering of the folios in the old Bombay 
MS., written in 1659, nine folios were here separated from it last 
century. They contained the text as far as the end of Chap. IV, 
and the first eight of them were found at Naosári about twenty 
years ago and copied. But all Indian copies, written before that 
time, omit this mislaid text. See S. B. E., vol. xxxvii, pp. xxxvi, 
xxxvii. 

[47] E 


50 DÎNKARD, BOOK VII. 


i  —— — — 
whom thou art produced and ġy whom I am pro- 
duced, who is the most propitious of spirits, who is 
the most beneficent of existences, and who is he ¢hat 
I, who am Vohümanó, am testifying (that is, I am 
a reminder of him).’ 

61. Thereupon, Zaratüst thought thus: ' Good is 
he who is the creator, who is better than this re- 
minder. 62. Then they proceeded in company, 
Vohümanó and Zaratüst; Vohümanó first and 
Zaratüst after. 


CHAPTER IV. 


1. About the marvellousness which is manifested 
from the first conference onwards till the end of the 
seventh conference which occurred within the dura- 
tion of ten years, also his pre-eminence in prophecy 
in the world, and the acceptance of the religion dy 
the exalted Kai-Vistásp, as happened after the ten 
years of conference. 

2. In zke first two years, one marvel is this which 
is declared, that when he was back from the first 
conference, he then, by the first command of the lord 
and creator Aühazmazd, recited the unique formula. 
(àyinó) in an assemblage (ram) of Kigs and Karaps, 
the prophecy of his Magda-worshipping religion and 
commemoration of Aühazmazd, as he chanted with 
a loud voice, and invited mankind to the religion of 
Adharmazd. 3. Just as this passage of revelation 
mentions thus: ‘ Thereupon, the thorough inspection 
for this material existence of those with a sacred 
girdle, provided with dwellings and provided with 
cattle, was altogether arranged by Zaratüst.' 

4. And when their announcement (nivédisnó) for 


CHAPTER III, 6I-—IVv, 7. 51 


speaking to be heard was issued’, then Zaratist, on 
becoming exalted, called out unto the embodied 
world of righteousness to extol righteousness and to 
scorn the demons?. 5. “The homage of the Mazda- 
worship of Zaratüst, and the ceremonial and obeis- 
ance for the archangels ave the best for you I assert ; 
and of deprecation (ay azisnih) for the demons next- 
of-kin marriage is really the best intimation, so that, 
from the information which is given as Z0 the trust- 
worthiness of a good work, the greatest are the most 
intimate of them, ¿kose of father and daughter, son 
and she who bore Zzzz, and brother az sister.’ 

6. /¢ is declared that, upon those words, innumer- 
able demon-worshipping Kigs and Karaps have 
rushed upon Zaratüst and strove for his death, just 
like this which revelation states:—' It is then a 
number (mar) have run away who have sat in the 
vicinity of Türs progeny (hünüskó)?, the arbitrator ; 
and the shame of the brother of Tür arose, like that 
of a person whose shame was that they spoke of his 
next-of-kin marriage so that he might contract it.’ 

7. This Tar was Aürváitá-dang * the Tür, the 
scanty giver, who was like a great sovereign of that 


1 From this point $$ 4-8 and 11 have been already translated in 
S. B. E., vol. xviii, pp. 412, 413, in illustration of the meaning of 
Khvétük-das in Sasanian times and later. 

2 Av. staomi ashem ; náismí daêvô (Yas. XI, 19; XII, 1). 

* An opprobrious term for the progeny of evil beings and 
animals, also used by a Karap when speaking of Zaratüst in Chap. 
Iib 21. 

4 As this name has not been found in the extant Avesta, its 
correct reading is uncertain. In Zs. XX, 8, it can be read Aûr- 
vaító-dih, in which dih is the Pahl. translation of Av. dang,hu, 
of which dang is a Pahl. transliteration; and the whole name 
may mean ‘friendly to the province,’ which seems suitable to this 
particular ruler. The MS. appears to have déng. 

E 2 


52 DINKARD, BOOK VII. 


quarter; many troops and much power were also 
maintained by him, and the multitude (mar) told 
him they would seize the great one from Aim who is 
little. 

8. But the progeny of Aürváitá-dang the Tar, the 
scanty giver, spoke thus: ‘ Should we for that speech 
destroy him, this great one who mingles together 
those propitious words for us—where we are thus 
without doubt as zo one thing therein, suc as next- 
of-kin marriage, that it is not necessary to contract 
7/—it would make us ever doubtful whether it mzght 
be necessary to contract it.’ 

9. And Aáürváitá-dang the Tür, the scanty giver, 
spoke thus : ‘ Thou shalt not destroy that man whom 
mine eyes ave seen as the most loving-eyed of the 
whole embodied existence; he wz/ attain strength, 
for it Aas not seemed to me, when thou destroyest 
him on this account, ZZa/ wisdom fas arisen for a 
long time ; so that no rule (AhankS) of wisdom wz? 
arise, in this earth, which is so counselling (hanga- 
manig) as this ove is (that is, when they destroy 
a man who is counselling, wisdom wz% not arise for 
a long while).' 

10, Afirvaita-dang the Tür, the scanty giver to his 
own feof/e, also spoke thus: ‘ For me thou art a pure 
man who is counselling.’ 

11. And Zaratüst spoke thus: ‘I shad/ not always 
be that quiet speaker, by! whom that I Zave men- 
tioned is the most propitious ZZ/zg to be obtained ; 
and of interfering? speaking and managing the 
temper Z/ere is a next-of-kin marriage, and the high- 


————— 5 SS 


! Or ‘from,’ 


* It may be ‘ parenthetical or ambiguous.’ 


CHAPTER IV, 8-15. 53 
priest who has contracted ' 7/ is to perform the cere- 
monial.’ 

12. And here the good spiritual lordship and mighti- 
ness of glory of Zaratüst, those which are provided 
for commemoration of the supreme lord and creator 
Aüharmazd, are manifested as a great wonder to the 
multitude, and there is rendered visible the great 
pre-eminence which is in him as a prophet of the 
creatures, which for the baseness (nankih) of the 
deceitful Agash ?, the secret-moving and deceiving- 
natured, is the concealed control of a good disposi- 
tion. 13. Then idleness, like even the habit of fear 
and nature of apostasy, is an attractor of every one 
of the multitude, when it extends to much length ; 
little by little, too, that guide and combatant becomes 
a petitioner for greatness, and z¢ 7s manifest through 
that compassion (tang-libbemd@ih) and superior 
mindfulness of his, and through the glory of that 
stout champion, ¢here are much fame and treasure. 

14. The nobles of Aürváitá-dang the Tür, the 
ruler of the land, weve angry and clamourers for 
Zaratüst's death ; but he invited the Kigs and Karaps 
to the religion of Aühazmaz4, just as this Passage of 
revelation states that Zaratüst also spoke thus: 
‘Worldly righteousness, O Aürváitá-dang, kou Tür 
and scanty giver! is the whole of the worship of the 
demons and the termination of the Mazda-worship of 
Zaratüst/ 15. And Afrvaita-dang the Tür, the 
scanty giver, spoke thus: ‘O Zaratüst of the 
Spitamas! thou shalt not attract me to this evil in 


which thou really art.' 

eo JPR T 
1 Or, perhaps, ‘celebrated.’ 
2 The demon of the evil eye (see Bd. XXVIII, 33); Av. Ag- 


hashi, Vd. XX, 3, 7; 9. 


54 DINKARD, BOOK VII. 


16. Zaratüst also spoke thus: 'AühazmazZ en- 
quired of me thus: “O Zaratüst! when thou hast 
come away to us, among the spiritual lords, who of 
the people in thy material existence was the protector 
of the powerful men who are warriors, ‘hat was most 
seeking benefit, most seeking cattle, most extensively 
associating, most fully-supplying (that is, he gives 
out most things), and most hospitable’ (zhat zs, one 
saw the door of a prince's (khidivó) treasury)?" 
I replied to him thus: “ Aürváitá-dang the Tar, the 
scanty giver.” ’ 

17. ‘And he spoke zz reply to me thus: “ Him, 
O Zaratüst! thou shalt attract, first of the men who 
are warriors, to thinking about, speaking about, and 
acting about this religion which is Athaymaza’s and 
Laratüsts. 18. If you attract him, O Zaratüst ! and 
he believes in it and also gives currency to this rež- 
gion of thine, and sits before //e in discipleship, this 
that ove calls discipleship of thine he shall undertake, 
and the religion he hears fully he shall propagate 
(rabak vadiddnyén) ; he is also ever after, O Zara- 
tüst! the first of the men who are warriors, the one 
most seeking benefit, most seeking cattle, most ex- 
tensively associating, and most hospitable of those 
who have yet been born axd who will henceforth be 
born. 19. Andif you do not attract him, O Zaratüst ! 
aríd he does not believe in it, nor gives currency ¿o 
this vedizgion of thine, nor hears 74, nor even sits 
before thee, nor would sit before thee, so that z/ zs 
obvious to me that Ze is not attracted, thou shalt 
speak unto him thus, O Zaratüst: ‘Thou art a 
stricken supplicant for righteousness, and a producer 
of lamentation for the souls of Tanápühar sinners 


_' Literally * most many-doored.' 


CHAPTER IV, 16-23. 55 


worthy of death;' for even so it is, and for this 
reason he becomes worthy of death, because the 
existence of the religion is known to him." 20. What 
I tell thee, O Aürváitá-dang, thou Tür and scanty 
giver! is that thou art a stricken supplicant for 
righteousness, a producer of lamentation for the 
souls of Tanépühar sinners worthy of death.’ 

21. One prodigy of the demons is specified, who 
was the enemy of whatever sacred beings ¢here are, 
a Karap, Vaédvóist! óy name, of those unsanctified 
(ayastan) óy Atharmazd?. 22. And Aûharmazd 
spoke thus: ‘I so befriend that man, O Zaratüst! 
who is put forward by me over the creatures, whom 
thou shalt invite (khvanés), I wo am Aühazmazd, 
because I am through righteousness opposed to harm 
(that is, through virtue I keep harm away from the 
creatures), and the archangels are opposed to harm. 
23. Therefore do thou proceed, O Zaratüst! and 
thou shalt demand from him for me (that is, keep 
as my property) a hundred youths of vigour (tósh 
tal)?, girls, and teams of four horses; so do thou 
speak to him thus: “O Védvoist! Athaymazd 
demands from thee a hundred youths of vigour, 
girls, and teams of four horses; if thou givest ¢hem 


1 Here written in Pázand, but the Pahlavi form, Védvoist, occurs 
in $$ 23, 24. 

2 Or ‘of the non-worshippers of Aftharmazd.’ 

* For an instance of gifts of slaves see the Pahlavi inscription on 
an engraved stone from Baghdad, in Indian Antiquary, vol. Xi, 
p. 224, ll. 2, 3 of inscription: * kevan bidan va-kanígakó . .. 


lakhvár . . . shedrünam . . . va-zak shibá rido va-shibá kaniga- 
kóán shedrünt:'—'Now . . . I send back a slave-boy and slave- 
girl . . . and those seven slave-boys and seven slave-girls are sent.’ 


This inscription was probably engraved in the seventh century, 
judging from the forms of the letters. 


56 DINKARD, BOOK VII. 


to him, splendour and glory are thine through that 
giving; and if thou dost not give to him, evil destiny 
is thine through that not-giving.” ’ 

24. Then Zaratüst walked on to that Védvoist of 
those unsanctified, and spoke to him thus: ‘ O Véd- 
voist of the unsanctified! that wich AühazmazZ 
demands from thee is a hundred youths of vigour, 
girls, and teams of four horses; if thou givest them 
to him, splendour and glory are thine through that 
giving ; and if thou dost not give to him, evil destiny 
is thine through that not-yiving. 25. And that 
Karap shouted in reply zo Zaratüst thus: “For me 
there is no more from thee (that is, there is no 
.opulence for me from thy action), nor from Athar- 
mazď; I am more of a divinity (bagtar) and am 
more forward in opulence than even Aühazmaz4; 
many droves of a thousand swine are also acquired 
by me.’ 

26. On went Zaratüst, up to Aühazmazd and up 
to the archangels, and Zaratüst spoke thus: ‘O 
Atharmazd, propitious spirit, creator of the world of 
embodied dccngs, thou righteous one / thus spoke he 
in reply to me: “For me ¢heve is no more from 
thee, nor from Adhaymazd; I am more of a divinity 
than thee ov even Aühazmazd, and many droves of 
a thousand swine are acquired by me.” 

27. And Aüharmazd spoke thus: ‘Owing to the 
splendour and glory of those which are ours, O Zara- 
tüst! that man has acquired arrogance (that is, the 
cattle we produced are the many cattle of his 
arrogance). 28. This will de his retribution for it 
then, however, when he does not reach further alive 
at the end of the third night?; in that third night 


eee 
' Apparently the third night after death, on the passing away of 


CHAPTER IV, 24-32. 57 
— O CO -— clam d 


they wil have stood aloof from alongside his life 
(that is, they wz// have stood away from assisting it) ; 
those seven of them who are radiant and bright- 
eyed (sf€d5 dóisar) make him rush up on high, 
and up there on high Ze shall be fed upon mouldy 
bread (parnàn). 

29. One marvel is the great healthfulness owing to 
the Hóm-water and the bringing of this dy Zaratüst 
from the river Dáiti, which is manifested when 
Vohümanó was conveying ím to the conference. 
30. Just as is declared in the words of Atharymazd 
to Zaratüst thus: 'For them is the Hóm-water 
which thou bringest, O Zaratüst! not for those 
demon-worshipping people wo worship the demons, 
or for a satisfier of courtezans (géh-vigár); they 
shall sprinkle it on to that bull thou shalt bring 
forward, who is a four-year-old of exhausted vigour, 
black-haired and useful; oz drinking up the water, 
that bull will become quite sound from that 
infirmity.’ 

31. Thereupon, Zaratüst went on first into the 
embodied existence, on which dwelt, at the end of 
Sagástán !, that same Parshad whose title was Tôrâ 


(the Bull). 32. Parshad-téra? also spoke to him 


which the soul is supposed to have its destination determined, 
until the resurrection (see Had6kht Nask, II, 18; III, r7). If the 
seven sacred beings who stand aloof from him be the archangels, 
they treat Védvoist very leniently ; but this legend treats of a period 
which it assumes to be earlier than the laws of Zaratást. 

1 The modern Sístán, bordering upon Afghánistán and Bulá- 
kistân. 

2 Av. Parshad-gau, mentioned twice in Yt. XIII, 96, 127, but 
it is not certain that both allusions refer to the same individual. 
The name also occurs in Bd. XXIX, 5, but only in one old MS. ; in 
all others another name is given, though the locality appears to be 


58 DÍNKARD, BOOK VII. 


thus: ‘O Zaratüst of the Spitamas! give me this 
Hóm-water which thou bringest. 33. And Zara- 
tüst spoke thus: ' Do thou praise righteousness, O 
Parshad-tórá! and scorn the demons; 2/so utter the 
profession ! of the Mazda-worship of Zaratüst among 
the iniquitous.’ 34. /¢ was praised by Parshaz-tó7á, 
and the demons were scorned by him; yet he did 
not speak among the iniquitous as to his accepting 
the Mazda-worship of Zaratüst. 35. Forward to 
him came Zaratüst at that praise of righteousness, 
for him was that Hóm-water which Zaratüst brought ; 
not for those demon-worshipping people who have 
worshipped the demons, óz/ for that bull of his 
which Zaratist brought forward, a four-year-old of 
exhausted vigour, black-haired and useful; owing to 
that bringing forward of the water, the bull became 
quite sound from that infirmity. 

36. One marvel is that which is declared regard- 
ing the rushing of the evil spirit for the slaughter of 
Zaratüst, just as revelation? mentions thus: ‘ From 
the northern quarter forth rushed the deadly evil 
spirit, and thus shouted he, astute in evil, the deadly 
evil spirit: “Rush on, O fiend! and destroy the 
righteous Zaratist.” 37. On to him they rushed, 
the fiend, the demon Bad, and secret-moving Pesti- 
lence, the deceiver. 38. Zaratüst chanted aloud 
the Ahunavair; the fiend was confounded at that, 
and away they rushed, the demon Bid and secret- 
moving Pestilence, the deceiver. 39. And the 
fiends shouted thus: * Thou art scornfully observing, 
O evil spirit! (that is, anything to the purpose thou 


nearly the same. In § 31 the first part of the name is here written 
Parshéd. 


! The Fravaráné, Yas. XI, 16. * Pahl. Vd. XIX, 1-4. 


CHAPTER IV, 33-44. 59 


dost not thoroughly observe, and what thou orderest 
us to do is not possible); the death of him who is 
Zaratüst of the Spitamas is not contemplated by us." 
40. Owing to the full glory of the righteous Zara- 
tüst, he perceived in Zzs mind thus: “ The wicked 
demions, astute in evil, consult together about my 
death ;” and up stood Zaratást, forth went Zaratüst.' 
41. Here is manifested a great wonder to the malti- 
tude, in that which is mentioned thus: ‘ And a stone 
was put forth by the righteous Zaratüst, that was 
held in Zzs hand, and the size of a hut, and which 
was obtained by him from the creator AühazmazZ, 
the spiritual Yathá-ahá-vairyó 1’ 

42. And one marvel is this which is manifested 
not only in the country of Irán to Iránians, but in 
every land and to every race: the shattering of the 
demons’ bodies ¢hrough the chanting of the Ahuna- 
vair aloud óy Zaratüst 43. Just as that which 
a passage? mentions thus: 'I worship the resources 
of the Kayán glory, with which the righteous Zara- 
tüst was associated in thinking about, speaking 
about, and acting about the religion which was, 
of all embodied existences, the most righteous in 
righteousness, the most lordly in sovereignty, the 
most radiant in radiance, and the most glorious in 
glory. 44. At kis appearance? the demons have 
fallen before him, at ís appearance their semen 
(máyagán) also drops, at As appearance the 
courtezan is also withdrawn by them from mankind ; 


i EEE 


1 The first three words of the Ahunavair formula. 


? See Yt. XIX, 78-81. i 
s Reading véndvdahakih, but the first letter is omitted in all 


three occurrences of the word. 


60 DINKARD, BOOK VII. 


on hearing! him /Zey lamented, very violently is it 
lamented by the demons. 45. By the Ahunavair, 
which the righteous Zaratüst chanted aloud to them, 
all the demons are seized and buried in the earth, 
where the complete shattering of their bodies is 
manifest. 46. So that, after the shattering of their 
bodies, it became evident to those in the world /Za£ 
they were not able to do mischief in the bodily form 
of a demon, and they have been declared of the 
nature of sacred beings to mankind, óz/ mankind 
fully understood that they are not sacred beings, 
but demons. 

47. Zaratüst revealed (gushüftó) to mankind by 
the word of Athaymazd, how in this religion 7Ze 
latter tells in words to Zaratüst where and how, in 
the embodied existence, mankind consider a demon 
as exalted o» as a high-priest, because they are 
where they say that they must consider some one as 
high-priest. 48. So Aüharmaz4 spoke /o Zaratüst 
thus: ‘ How do they who are good people, O Zara- 
tüst! consider a demon as exalted? and how are 
they that even tell a demon thus: “We should 
accept you," because the demons speak thus: “It 
wall happen to you” ?' 

49. And Zaratüst spoke thus: 'Only for the 
reason, O Atharmazd! that people hasten on to 
that which is a jungly plain without dwellings, where 


no one resides from the departure of light until sun- 
———— GNO eS 

' If the word be Pahlavi, it is probably intended for snáyán, 
‘hearing’; but it may be merely an approximate transcript of Av. 
snaodheztis, which word, if this be the case, must have puzzled 
Sasanian scholars as much as it does those of the present time. 
As a transcript, the word might be read snódiyin, and we might 


guess the meaning of the phrase to be 'thereupon weeping /Aey 
lamented,’ 


CHAPTER IV, 45-53. 61 


rise arrives, when 77 zs two Hásars! of night, and 
again silently (agóp) from sunset until their 
returning together when the two Hasars of night 
are gone, they hear that no work, no men, and no 
voices of dogs are there. 50. Then they say as to 
that, on arriving back, thus: “ We have consulted 
with the demons there; when we request (záém) 
monarchy (sástárih) and leadership from them, 
they give them to us; when we request the 
possession of flocks and opulence from them, they 
give them to us." ' 

51. Then Attharmazd spoke thus: ‘ How can they 
do such a thing for them, O Zaratüst! (that is, how 
does it happen ¢ha¢ ít zs continually given by 
them for those that speak thus: “It happened to 
ds)? 

52. And Zaratüst spoke thus: ‘They speak 
variously, O Atharymazd! as to that generosity ; 
there is oze who speaks thus: “I have ever after 
been possessing more flocks, so long as I am :z 
consultation with the demons ;" and there is another 
who speaks thus: “I have ever after been worse 
and more ill-fated, so long as we are zz consultation 
with those demons;” according as they possess 
a full subsistence for themse/ves from the demons 
(that is, when they diversely subsist fully o» what- 
ever they bespeak from the demons)! 53. Zaratüst 
also spoke thus: ‘So they speak about it, O Adhar- 
mazd! thus: “Observe further, where any one of 
us returns Ze is either shrunk together (that is, he 
holds ZZzs head down to Zzs chest), or shrunk away 
(that is, he looks quite aside), or is only pleasantly 


GEDULD... I —BÉÉ——— 
1 Ay. háthra, which, as a measure of time, varies from one to 
two hours (see Farh. Oim, p. 43, ll. 1-3). 


62 DÍNKARD, BOOK VII. 


cast down and, owing to acquiescence in him, the 
demons tempt (nes,hünd) 42m away out of man- 
kind." ' 

54. And Aühazmaz4 spoke thus: ‘According to 
thy wish, do thou, O Zaratüst! fully observe thy 
existence, upwards from the head, downwards from 
the sole! of the foot, and afar oz various sides; and 
thou shouldst beseech before and behind and zz 
every direction, for we ave not as to thee as the 
demons ave as to mankind, we give away everything 
only in invisibility ; but the demons, through close 
connection, when they rush out, tempt only with 
pleasantness. 55. Even unto thee, O Zaratdst! 
a fiend wz// rush, a female, golden-bodied and full- 
bosomed (so that she wears a bodice), and she 
rushes to request companionship from thee; a 
female, golden-bodied and full-bosomed, to request 
conversation from thee, to request co-operation from 
thee. 56. Bul thou shouldst not grant her com- 
panionship, nor conversation, nor shalt thou prescribe 
any conduct for her; afterwards, to revert her 
downwards, thou shalt utter aloud that triumphant 
saying the Yathá-ahü-vairyó.' 

57. Zaratüst proceeded to the habitable and 
friendly world, for the purpose of fully observing 
that beaten track (khd@pisnd) of the embodied 
existence; then that fiend came forward when he 
sat in the vicinity of a garment—that garment? 
which, when Vohümanó was conveying fim to the 
conference, was deposited by him—a female, golden- 
bodied and full-bosomed, and companionship, con- 


———— —— — eS I S 
* Assuming that lély4 stands for zérih; the only difference, in 
Pahlavi writing, being in the first letter. 
* See Chap. III, 6o. 


CHAPTER IV, 54-62. 63 


versation, and co-operation were requested by her 
from him; she also whined (dandiZó): “I am 
Spendaymad !.' 

‘58. And Zaratüst spoke thus: ‘She who is 
Spendazmad4 was fully observed by me in the light 
of a cloudless day, and that Spendaymad appeared 
to me fine behind and fine before and fine all round 
(that is, zz all positions she was handsome); do 
thou turn Z£y back, and I shall know if thou art 
SpendazmaZ.' 

59. And the fiend spoke to him thus: ‘O Zara- 
tüst of the Spitamas! where we are, those who 
are females are handsome in front, du¢ frightfully 
hideous behind; so do not make a demand for my 
back. 60. After she kad protested a third zīme, the 
fiend turned Zex back, and she was seen by Zara- 
tüst behind in the groin; and when matter was 
exuded, z¢ was full of serpents, toads, lizards, centi- 
pedes, and frogs. 

61. And that triumphant saying, the Yathá-ahà- 
vairyó, was uttered aloud by Zaratüst; then that 
fiend was annihilated, and Aéshmak? the Karap 
rushed forth. 62. And he grumbled in leaving, 
thus: “The misery which is here below is such as I 
have obtained, because, owing to thee, I thought 
that thy sacred beings were more joyful than any 
heroes who through defeat go to hell; I proceed 
more joyfully zkan the sacred beings, as regards the 
life in the body, so that I fully deceive the life in 
thy body, and thou art fully deceived by me as 
regards thine.’ 


1 The female archangel Bountiful Devotion, in whose special 
charge are the earth and virtuous women; sce Sls. XV, 5, 20-24. 
2 See Chap. II, 44, 45. 


64 DÍNKARD, BOOK VII. 


L o a ——————————— 


63. Zaratüst also revealed (gushüftó) this secret 
to mankind, and their knowledge ow to test a 
demon is manifested therein, even by a great won- 
der of the same nature to mankind: the visible 
rushing of the demons into the world before Zara- 
tüst, and their bodies dezng afterwards shattered by 
the loud chanting of revelation ġy Zaratüst from the 
Avesta announced, which was the acceptance of z/s 
truth by the ruler Vistásp and the people of that 
time; and if this Zad not been so, and Vistásp and 
those of Aís time were not accepting the Avesta 
which was announced by Zaratést zz this fashion, 
through ¢her considering 24 false, it would not have 
reached unto us. 

64. One marvel is this, with which, too, he who 
was Zaratüst became aware from revelation, about 
the vileness and perverted religion of Zak of the 
deadly Karaps of Vistásp and many other Kais and 
Karaps who were at the residence of Vistásp, their 
combination for the death of Zaratüst, the prepara- 
tion for severe abuse of him to Vistásp, and 
influencing Vistásp for his death by command of 
Vistásp, wich extends to awful imprisonment and 
punishment. 65. Afterwards, too, his knowledge 
about Zzs preservation therefrom, the manifestation 
of his wondrousness, and the evidence concerning 
fis attainment unto prophesying; also after the 
continuance of the last questioning of the ten years 
of conference, Zzs departure alone, by the advice and 
command of Aühazmazd, to the residence of Vistásp 
and the precinct (var) of that terrible conflict. 66. 
His uttering, on the horse-course (aspánvar) of 
Vistásp, a reminder of the power and triumph of 
Aühazmazg over himself, as he invited Vistásp to 


CHAPTER IV, 63-69. 65 


the religion of Adhaymazd ; and with great wisdom 
Vistásp heard the words of Zaratüst, on account of 
his own complete mindfulness and spiritual knowledge 
of ritual, and would have asked for an outpouring of 
prophecy. 

67. But thereupon, too—before the words of 
Zaratüst were fully heard by him, and he could have 
understood the character of Zaratüst—owing to the 
demonizing of the deadly Zák and the rest of those 
Kigs and Karaps, spoken out with slanderous know- 
ledge and perverse actions to Vistasp about Zaratüst, 
there then occurred his consignment of Zaratüst to 
that confinement and punishment as stated in the 
words of Zaratüst thus: ‘I have spoken about their 
three enquiries, and I am bound by thirty of them, 
I with thirty-three fetters of murderers, wicked ones, 
and demon-worshippers'. 68. But the hunger of 
manhood's inclination? violently affected the strength 
of my legs, but the hunger of manhood's inclination 
violently affected the force of my arms, but the 
hunger of manhood's inclination violently affected 
the hearing of my ears, but the hunger of manhood' s 
inclination violently affected the sight of my eyes, 
and it would force away my bosom up to my back 
(so that it? would stay behind at my back) through 
the continuance of that deadly hunger of manhood's 
inclination.' 

69. And here, through the mightiness of Zaratüst 


—who proceeded alone to the terrible combat wz¢h 
EN 0 Er ae 

! Compare Zs. XXIII, 5. 

? Reading güsn-giráih; but it might be dûs-vîrâfh, ‘bad 
provision.’ He was left to starve to death in prison. 

s The bosom. The idea of the writer appears to have been that 
in case of utter starvation the chest would totally collapse, so that 


the breast bone would touch the spine. 
[47] F 


66 DÍNKARD, BOOK VII. 


evil, where kere became manifest, in the mode which 
is written, the descent of his life into so much 
punishment, due to hunger and thirst, heavy fetters, 
and other misery unto which the strength of human 
nature is attaining, óu/ unto which 24 is not destined 
—is manifested a great wonder to king Vistásp and 
his officials, when Zzs full-glorious person was found 
by them alive in awfulness, imprisonment, and those 
other transformations (padgastakih) of long-con- 
tinued starvation. 

70. One marvel is this, that the sacred beings con- 
trived, for the sake of (va/ vahán-1) his preservation 
from that awfulness, a body possessing life, and on 
his account it became lifeless and imperceptible ; 
afterwards, in the great session of Vistásp and the 
assembly of the world, Zaratüst, through the strength 
and blessedness of the true word, restored the same 
body anew, like that which is issuing in the state- 
ment of the wonder about the splendid horse of 
Vistásp!. 

71. One marvel is his telling and disclosing the 
thoughts of king Vistasp and of those of the realm, 
and many other concealed matters, through spiritual 
perception. 

72. One marvel is several matters of evil deceit 
(vad gamás) which Dahak had done in Bápél ? 


———— — ——A0—— o3 

* This very slight allusion to the cure of Vistasp’s horse by 
Zaratüst is sufficient to show that this legend existed in the ninth 
century ; but the writer of the Dinkard seems inclined to trace it 
back to a tale that he vaguely relates in the earlier part of this 
section, and which he evidently found in older writings ; this tale, 
however, does not mention a horse, but only an animated body. 
The Persian Zaratüst-náma developes the legend of the sick horse, 
whose legs are drawn up to its belly, into 160 couplets. 

? Babylon; see Yt. V, 29-31 ; XV, 19-21. 


CHAPTER IV, 70-75. 67 


through witchcraft, and mankind had come to idol- 
worship through that seduction, and 245 increase was 
the destruction of the world; 644 through the 
triumphant words of the religion, which Zaratüst 
proclaimed opposing it, that witchcraft is all dissi- 
pated and disabled. 

73. One marvel is this which is manifested, with 
wonders owing to Zaratüst, in controversy about the 
religion with the famous learned of the realm, among 
whom, known for learning zz the world, ave the 
investigators (giráyagánó) of the words of speech ; 
and among those ZZzzzgs which are more surprisingly 
controversial ave those later (sibastar) words which 
are to save their creatures by a later religion. 74. 
Also to proclaim its truth intelligibly, and to make 
king Vistásp and those previously learned men with- 
out doubt as to the truth of the religion, the creator 
Aühazmazd sends some sfzrz¢s, Vohümanó, Ashava- 
histó, and the propitious fire', as a reminder to 
Vistasp about the true prophesying of Zaratüst, and 
the desire of Aühazmaz4 for the acceptance of the 
religion of Mazda-worship dy Vistásp and for its 
propagation in the world. 

75. The wondrousness which is manifested to 
Vistasp and those of the realm—both through the 
travelling (véziZanó) of those archangels down 
from the sky to the earth, and in ¢her travelling to 
the abode of Vistasp—was like this which tevelation 
mentions thus: “Then he who is the creator Aù- 
hazmazd spoke 40 them, to Vohümanó, Ashava- 
histó, and also the fire of Aühazmaz4, the propitious, 
thus: “ Proceed! you wo are archangels, unto the 


1 Compare Zs. XXIII, 7. 
F 2 


68 DINKARD, BOOK VII. 


abode of Vistásp, whose resources (2fzár) are cattle 
and who is far aud widely famed, with a view to Zzs 
reliance upon this religion (that is, till he shall stand 
up for this religion); and, as regards the answering 
words of the righteous Zaratüst of the Spitamas, to 
approve the nature (zag sán) of those words." 76. 
The archangels proceeded unto the abode of Vistásp, 
whose resources are cattle and who is far and widely 
famed ; their radiance, in that lofty residence, seemed 
to him, that Vistásp, a heaven of complete light, 
owing to their great power and triumph; this was 
so that, when he thus looked upon it, the exalted 
Kai-Vistasp trembled, all his courtiers (pésakó) 
trembled, all his chieftains (pagó) were confused, 
and he of the superior class as like the driver of 
a chariot-horse. 

77. ‘And the fire of Aühazmazd spoke, in the 
words of heroes, thus: “ Fear not, for ¿kere is no 
fearing for thee, zkou exalted Kai-Vistásp! they 
have not come for alarming thy abode, as a reminder 
of the deputed envoys of Argásp'; ‘here have not 
come, for alarming thy abode, the two Khyóns of 


* Av. Aregad-aspa, king of the Hvyaonas (Pahl. Khyóns), men- 
tioned in Yt. V, 109, 113, 116; XVII, 5o; XIX, 87. His war with 
Vistásp, for the purpose of compelling the latter to abjure his new 
religion, is described in the Yágkár-i Zarirán (see Geiger in 
Sitsungsberichten der p-p. und h. Classe der k. bayer. Akad. der 
Wiss. 1890, Bd. II, pp. 43-84). Argásp sends two envoys, Vidrafs 
the wizard and Námkhvást of the Hazárs, to demand Vistásp's sub- 
mission; this is refused defiantly by advice of Zarir, the king's 
brother; and both nations prepare for war. When the Iránians 
meet the Khyóns, Vistásp consults his vazir Gamasp, who prog- 
nosticates prodigious slaughter. And, after losing most of their 
chieftains (including twenty-three brothers and sons of Vistásp), 
the Iránians utterly annihilate the Khyón army. This war is 
called the “war of the religion’ in Bd. XII, 35; Byt, IIS 


CHAPTER IV, 76-81. 69 


-` Argásp who demand tribute and revenue (sak va- 
bázó); and /Zere has not come, for alarming thy 
abode, the all-overpowering thief who is an injurer, 
or the dog who is a highwayman. 78. We are three 
who have come over (taristó) to thy abode, Vohà- 
manó, Ashavahistó, and also the fire of the propitious 
lord; of these thy knowledge is most wisely most 
just. 79. If thou helpest vision, so that it becomes 
wisdom for thee, the worldly exzs/euce requires the 
good religion of the Mazda-worshippers, which pro- 
ceeds purely through the recitation which Zaratüst 
of the Spitamas ¢eaches. 80. Do thou chant the 
Ahunavair, do thou praise perfect righteousness !, 
and utter no worship? for the demons! because the 
desire of Aühazmazd, as regards thee, is for thy 
reliance upon this religion; 77 is also the desire of 
the archangels, and the desire, as regards thee, of 
the other sacred beings who are beneficent (sapir- 
dahakó) and righteous. 

81. ‘“ And as the recompense in this life, if you 
praise the good and pure religion of the righteous 
Zaratüst of the Spitamas, we will give unto thee 
a long reign and sovereignty, and the long lifetime 
of a life of 150 years; we will give unto thee Good 
Integrity and Rectitude ? which is long-continued in 
desire for constantly assisting, good for assistance 


1 That is, recite the Yathá-ahü-vairyó and the Ashem-vohü 
formulas. 

? Pahl. 4-a £zisníh, literally, a ‘ non-worship, which may mean 
something worse than 'no worship;' but *execration or male- 
diction’ is usually expressed by gazisn, ' cursing, which is written 
exactly like yazisn, ‘ worship.’ 

8 Pahl, Aharisvang and R4é-astisnih, the equivalents of Av. 
Ashis-vanguhi and Rasástát who are spiritual personifications 
of the qualities mentioned in the text. 


70 DINKARD, BOOK VII. 


through constantly assisting, and not passing away ; 
and we w7// give unto thee a son, Péshyótan! is Zzs 
name, he is immortal, and so is undecaying, hunger- 
less, and thirstless, living and predominant in both 
existences, ‘hose of the embodied Zeizgs and of the 
spirits. 82. Bul, as the recompense in this life, if 
you do not praise the good azd pure religion of 
the righteous Zaratüst of the Spitamas, we 2/7// not 
convey thee up on high, and we will order thine 
end; the vultures which exe mindful of decay w:// 
see and eat up those and these of thine, thy blood 
will reach the ground, and the waters wz// not reach 
thy body."' 

83. One marvel is that connected with the confi- 
dence (vd@vari-hastan6) of Vistásp in the religion, 
even through that occurrence of the speech of the 
archangels ; and, afterwards, the obedience (patya- 
sai?) of his thoughts in the case of the delays 
through the bloodshed owing to Argásp? the Khyón 
and his attendant heroes (pas-gurdánó) through- 
out the same Khyóns, because of the acceptance of 
the religion. 84. Also, for the sake of daily and 
visibly showing to Vistásp the certified victory over 
Argásp and the Khyóns, and his own superior 
position, unceasing rule, splendour, and glory, the 
creator Adhaymazd sends, at the same time, the 
angel Néryósang? to the abode of Vistásp, as a 
reminder for the archangel Ashavahistó to give to 
Vistásp to drink of that fountain of life, for looking 


——————————ÉÉÉR IE 

' Written Péshyáótanó, both here and in Chap.V, 12. He is 
the immortal priestly ruler of Kangdez, who was expected to come 
to restore the religion in Iran in the time of Aüshédar, see Bd. 
XXIX, 5; Byt. III, 25-32, 36-42, 51, 52. 

* Here written Argadáspó; see $70 

* Written Néróksang here and in $ 85. 


CHAPTER Iv, 82-86. 71 


into the existence of the spirits, the enlightening food 
by means of which great glory and beauty are seen 
by Vistásp. 

85. Just as this passage of revelation mentions 
thus: ‘And he who is the creator AühazmazZ spoke 
to the angel Néryósang thus: “ Proceed az4 travel, 
O Néryósang the assembler!! unto the abode of 
Vistásp, whose resources are cattle and who is far 
and widely famed, and thou shalt say this to Ashava- 
histó, thus: * O Ashavahistó! do thou authoritatively 
take this fine saucer (tastó), which is fully finer than 
the other saucers that ave made (that is, the cup 
(gam) is as fine as is possible to make for royalty), 
and carry up to Vistásp the Hôm and Vars? (mái) 
which are for us; and do thou give it? unto the 
ruler Vistásp to drink up, by whose word it is 
accepted. " 86. Ashavahistó authoritatively taking 
the fine saucer from him, also, thereupon, gave it 
unto the exalted ruler Kai-Vistásp to drink from *; 
and the ruler of the country (dih), the exalted Kai- 
Vistásp, lay down when divested of Zs robes, and 
he spoke to Hátós5 thus: “ You, O Hátós! are she 


1 Compare Vd. XXII, 7. 

? A lock of three, five, or seven hairs from the tail of a white 
bull, that is tied to a metal thumb-ring which is put into the 
Hóm-strainer when the Hóm-juice is about to be poured through 
it. See Haug’s Essays, 3rd ed., pp. 397-403. This ring and 
lock of hair may be the relic of a hair-sieve that may have been 
used for straining the Hóm-juice in former times. 

8 The saucer, or cup, of strained Hóm-juice. 

* The foregoing twenty-six words, excepting two, have been 
here repeated by the writer of the old Bombay MS., after turning 
over a folio. 

5 Av; Hutaosa, wife of Vistásp and descendant of Nédar (Av. 
Naotara); see Yt. XV, 35, 36. According to the later authority 
of the Yádkar-i Zarí;àn, $ 48, she was also a sister of Vistasp. 


72 DINKARD, BOOK VII. 


pce ES 


whom the prompt ability (t@z6 hünar) of Zaratüst of 
the Spitamas should reach; and through the dili- 
gence of the prompt ability of Zaratüst of the 
Spitamas, you? would expound the religion of 
Aühazmazd and Zaratüst."' 

87. One marvel is this which is declared, that 
when Vistásp, accepting the religion, praises right- 
eousness, the demons in hell are disabled, and the 
demon Aeshm ? rushes to the country of the Khyóns 
and to Axgásp, the deadly one of the Khyóns, because 
he was the mightiest of the tyrants at that time; and 
the most hideous of all, of so many of them in the 
country of the Khyóns, are poured out by him for 
war. 

88. And here, too, is manifested a great wonder 
also to the host (ram) of Irán who have been coming 
there, unto the residence of Argásp the Khyón, like 
this which revelation mentions thus: ‘ Then, just at 
the time his legion is separately displayed, Aeshm 
the unredeemable (tanépüharak) adheres (gére- 
védó) to him, as eng himself without escort 
(aguróh), and quite opposes (barà sperezéd5) 
him, because: “You, who are a Khyón, Zave become 
unlucky through want of success after you engage 
in conflict." 89. Henceforth, it is not that the 
victory of Iran has come over foreigners and 
Khyóns—through companionship at the abode of 
that man who is mightier by the birth of Zaratüst 


The similarity of her name to that of Atossa, the wife and sister of 
Cambyses, whom Darius afterwards married, is striking. 

* As the verbal forms of the present third person singular and 
second person plural are alike in Pahlavi, it is doubtful which 
personal pronoun to use, 


* The demon of Wrath; see Bd. XXVIII, 15-17. 


CHAPTER IV, 87-V, I. 73 


of the Spitamas—when that hideous sovereignty of 
Argásp, the deadly Khyón, is swallowed up by him 
(Vistasp), for the confusion of the deadly species 
(that is, ‘ey are further smitten by him, one through 
the other; and are swallowed together by him, 
mutually struggling and through mutually devour- 
ing). 90. And apart from him, that bitter az4 well- 
hardened Khyón that is quite disabled by him the 
good L7s/ásb, that deadly fend is disturbed about 
him of eloquent abilities (Zaxa/Zs?); and so he 
grumbled at the hideous sovereignty thus: * Prompt 
ability comes into existence and the Khyón came; 
thereupon prompt ability comes into existence and 
the Iranian has come.’ 


CHAPTER V. 


1. About the marvellousness which is manifested 
from the acceptance of the religion dy Vistásp on- 
wards til the departure (vikhézó) of Zaratdst, 
whose guardian spirit is reverenced, to the best 
existence, when seventy-seven years? had elapsed 
onwards from Zzs birth, forty-seven onwards from 


1 According to the numbering of the folios of the old MS. of 
1659 (brought from Persia to India in 1783) one folio, numbered 
313 in Persian words, is here missing. It has not yet been found 
in India, and, owing to folio 312 apparently completing a sentence, 
and folio 314 evidently beginning a new chapter, the loss of text 
is hardly perceptible. It would have filled the next two pages. 

2 The MS. has ‘57 years, through -90 ‘50’ being written 
instead of 2^6 ‘70’; but see Chap. III, 51 which states the interval 
of thirty years between his birth and conference. 


74 DÍNKARD, BOOK VII. 


Ais conference, and thirty-five years onwards from 
the acceptance of the religion by Vistásp !. 

2. One marvel is this whitch zs declared that, 
when Zaratüst chanted revelation in the abode of 
Vistásp, 77 was manifest fo the eye that it is danced 
to with joyfulness, both by the cattle and beasts of 
burden, and dy the spirit of the fires which ave in 
the abode. 3. By whch, too, a great wonder is 
proclaimed, like this «sz revelation mentions 
thus: ‘ ZZere seemed a righteous joyfulness of all 
the cattle, beasts of óurden, and fires of the place, 
and there seemed a powerfulness of every kind of 
well-prepared spirits and of those quitting the abode 
(mán-hishánó), “that will make us? henceforth 
powerful through religion,” when they fully heard 
those words which weve spoken by the righteous 
Zaratüst of the Spitamas.’ 

4. And one marvel is the provision, óy Zaratist, 
of the achievement of ordeal, that indicator of the 
acquitted and incriminated for sentence dy the judge, 
in obscure legal proceedings ; of which 7¢ is said in 
revelation ¢here are about (£igün) thirty-three kinds. 
5. These, too, the disciples of Zaratüst kept in use, 
after that zīme, until the collapse of the monarchy of 
Irán; and the custom of one of them is that of pour- 
ing melted metal on the breast, as in the achieve- 
ment of the saintly (hà-fravargó) Átürpàd son of 
Máraspend, through whose preservation a know- 


1 The contents of this chapter and the next, as far as VI, 11, 
may be connected with the following summary in Dk. VIII, xiv, 
9 :—' Information also as /o many other things which are marvellous, 
and as /o a summary of the statements of these seven enquiries, 
which is derived from knowledge of every kind. For the seven 
enquiries, see Zs, XXII. 

* Or, perhaps, ‘ make the abode.’ 


CHAPTER V, 2-8. 75 


ledge about the religion was diffused in the world ; 
and of the manifestation, too, through that great 
wonder, this is also said, on the same subject, in the 
good religion, that of those many, when they behold 
that rite of ordeal, it convinces the wicked ones !. 

6. One marvel is that which is afterwards mani- 
fested, after the former captivity of Zaratüst? and 
his speaking about the religion to Vistasp and those 
of the realm °, such as the acceptance of the religion 
by Vistásp and that which Zaratüst said to him at 
Ais original arrival, as regards the declaration of 
a ruler's religion, thus: ‘Thine is this disposition, 
and this religion which is calling (khrósakó). is 
a property of that description whzch thou puttest 
together, O Kai-Vistásp! so that zf thou wilt accept 
this disposition of thine, thou wilt possess this 
religion which exists (that is, the learning of learn- 
ings), and be the ruler that shall cause 245 progress ; 
thou wall possess in this disposition of thine, as 
it were, a new support (stünakó), avd any one 
will uphold ¢hee by upholding 24, as thou art the 
possessor of the support of this religion.’ 7. Also 
the victory of Vistásp over Argásp the Khyón and 
other foreigners in that awful battle‘, just as Zara- 
tüst explained unto Vistásp in revelation ; and much 
which is declared by revelation. 

8. One marvel is the disclosure by Zaratüst, in 
complete beneficence, medical knowledge, acquain- 
tance with character, and other professional reten- 
tiveness (pishakó-girükih), secretly and completely, 


of what is necessary for legal knowledge and spiritual 
‘nae. | ||| 1 2 Lu LLL ee 
1 §§ 4, 5 are already translated in AV. p. 145. 
2 See Chap. IV, 67-69. * See Chap. IV, 73. 
* See Chap. IV, 88-90. 


76 DINKARD, BOOK VII. 


perception ; also the indication, by revelation, of the 
rites for driving out pestilence (ségó), overpowering 
the demon and witch, and disabling sorcery and 
witchcraft. 9. The curing of disease, the counter- 
action of wolves and noxious creatures, the liberating 
of rain, and the confining of hail, spiders, locusts, 
and other terrors of corn and plants and adversaries 
of animals, óy the marvellous rites which are also 
relating to the worship of Khüzdaz and Amivdad’, 
and many other rites which weve kept in use until 
the collapse of the monarchy of Iran; and there are 
some which have remained even Z// now?, and are 
manifested with a trifle of marvellousness by the 
sacred fires. 10. And the disclosure to mankind 
of many running waters from marvellous streams 
(ardaya), and remedies for sickness which ave 
mixed (fargazdakó) by well-considering physicians ; 
many are spiritual and celestial, gaseous (váyig) 
and earthy; and the worldly advantage of others, 
too, is the praise (l@f5) which ought to come to one 
for angelic? wisdom. 

11. One is the marvel of the Avesta itself, which, 
according to all the best reports of the world, is 
a compendium of all the supremest statements of 
wisdom. 

12. One marvel is the coming of this also to 


" These two archangels personify health and immortality, 
respectively (see Chap. II, 19), and are supposed to have special 
charge of water and plants. 

* The ninth century, unless this phrase be copied from one of 
the sources of the Dinkard. 

` The MS. has yazdánó-khiragóih which has the meaning 
given in the text; but this word can also be read gehánó- 
khiragóih, ‘worldly wisdom, though géhánó is the more usual 
orthography. 


CHAPTER V, 9- VI, 2. By 


Vistásp, which the archangels announced as a recom- 
pense for accepting the religion ', as he saw Péshyó- 
tan the happy ruler, that immortal and undecaying 
son, not wanting food, large-bodied, completely 
strong, fully glorious, mighty, victorious, and resem- 
bling the sacred beings; the unique splendour of 
Péshyótan for the sovereignty of Kangdez zx 
yonder world, as allotted to him y the creator 
Atthaymazd, is manifested even through that great 
wonder to the multitude *. 


CHAPTER VI. 


I. About the marvellousness which is manifested 
after the departure (vikhézó) of Zaratüst, whose 
guardian spirit is reverenced, to the best existence, 
and in the lifeZzzze of Vistásp. 

2. One marvel is this which is declared by revela- 
tion, about the provision of a chariot? by Sritó * of 
the Visraps^; this is through a famous wonder and 


1 See Chap. IV, 81. 

? It is singular that nothing is stated here about the death or 
departure of Zaratüst, which event, according to § 1, ought to have 
concluded this chapter. But in Chap. III, 39, Dürásrób evidently 
foretells that Zaratüst will be killed by the evil eye of Brágrók-résh. 
In Dk. V, iii, 2, the killing of Zaratüst by Brádró-résh the Tar is 
merely mentioned. In Zs. XXIII, 9, it is stated that Zaratüst 
passes away (vidiréd6) forty-seven years after his conference and 
preaching to Vistásp. While the modern Persian Zaratüst-náma 
does not mention his death, though it speaks of Bartarüsh as his 
chief enemy in his younger days. But compare Chap. III, 22. 

3 Pahl. ré which is written exactly like the Pahlavi ciphers for 
twenty-two and, no doubt, stands for Av. ratha. 

4 So spelt ten times in $$ 2-11, but here Srátó. Itis also Srító 
in Dk. V, iii, 2. 

5 Pahl. Visrapán in $$ 9, 11 and Dk. V, iii, 2; but here it is 


78 DINKARD, BOOK VII. 


the coming of a report about the marvellousness of 
that chariot to Vistásp, Vistásps begging that 
chariot from Srit6, and Sritô saying in reply to 
Vistasp: “That chariot is for a righteous man, 7” 
which the soul of Sritó in the lifeézme of Sritó's 
body!, and that of that man in the lifeZ/;ze of his 
body, come visibly together once in the worldly 
existence. 3. And the soul of Srító, through the 
generosity of that Srító, presents that chariot to 
the eyesight of that man of righteousness; thereby 
it becomes evident he had seen z/, and is told not to 
actin another manner. 4. The exalted Kai-Vistasp, 
as becoming from revelation more particularly aware 
of this marvel about the future at that time, and for 
the sake of this marvel being published to the 
worldly existence (géhánigih), and of Zzs becoming 


Visrap4n, and in § 7 the first letter is omitted, leaving only israpán. 
In Pahl. Vd. XX, 11 (Sp.) we have Srit-f je (in L4), which latter 
name may also be íisrapánó, though more likely to be read 
Sérzánó when considered by itself. It is almost certain that the 
person mentioned in Pahl. Vd. XX, 11 is intended to be the same as 
that named here in the text. But it is doubtful if this person be 
the Av. Thrita son of Sáyuzdri (or Sáizdri) of Yt. V, 72; XIII, 113. 
As the legend in the text appears to refer to the soul of Sritó, or 
Thrita, revisiting the world to meet Vistásp, this Sritó may have 
been the warrior Srító, the seventh brother, employed by Kai-Us, 
about 350 years earlier, to kill the frontier-settling ox of that time, 
but there seem to be no means of so identifying him with absolute 
certainty. 

' This is the literal meaning of the Pahl. *mün rûbân-î Sritó 
pavan zindagth-f Sritó tanó, but it is not quite consistent with 
Srit6’s return to the earth as a spirit. The Indian copyists seem 
to have observed this, as they have omitted several words, so as to 
alter the meaning to the following :—‘ That chariot is for a man of 
the righteous, wth whom Srító in the life//me of that man’s body 


comes visibly together, &c/ But the sentence is not quite gram- 
matical. 


CHAPTER VI, 3-9. 79 


more invoking for the supremacy of the Mazda- 
worshipping religion, became discernible by those of 
the realm, is sought for, and is most attended. 

+5. A great wonder became manifest to Vistásp 
and those of the world, just as revelation mentions 
thus: ‘Thereupon the archangels are letting forth 
the soul of that .S72/ó from the light of the supreme 
heaven, from the light on to the earth created by 
Aühazmaz4 ; and the soul of Vistásp proceeded from 
him into the light to meet zz. 6. Vistasp proceeded 
on to the propitious south (rapitvinó); he was 
producing more gain than the gainers, and he 
was more inquisitive than the inquisitive; to all 
whom he saw he spoke, and unto such as spoke he 
listened; when he gazed at them looking simul- 
taneously they stood up, azd obeisance was offered 
by them unto the soul aud person of Vistásp.' 

7. Immediately upon that no delay occurred until 
there came on at a run—4eszdes the soul of Sritó of 
the Visraps—the most horrid (agrandtüm) of 
demons, from the horrid northern quarter of the 
horrid destroyer (zaZár), that was himself black, 
and his deeds, too, were very black. 8. And as 
he comes himself, so also he grumbles Zo the soul 
of Sritó thus: ‘Give a maintenance (khvárag) zo 
Vistásp who is thy driver!', for the sake of good 
fellowship and service, and for that, righteousness is 
suitable unto a pure one; do not give zt as a thing 
which is protective (that is, do not give 7/ for the 
sake of worldly gratuity), bul for love of the 
righteousness which is owing to the perfect exis- 
tences.' 

9. When those words were fully heard by Sritó of 


1 This speech seems intended as veiled irony. 


80 DÍNKARD, BOOK VII. 


the Visraps, the early bestower (levinó-vakhsh), 
he stood still and so he spoke in words thus: ' For 
righteousness I give thee, O mighty Kai-Vistásp ! 
this chariot which is without a driver, only for love 
of the righteousness which is owing to the perfect 
existences. 10. As much for righteousness as is 
best for righteousness, and as much for the soul as 
is best for the soul, the gift of the whole was secured 
(that is, its acceptance was announced as often as 
three times). 

11. Then that chariot became two chariots, one 
spiritual and the, other worldly; in the worldly one 
the exalted Kai-Vistásp travelled forth unto the 
village of the Nédars? in the joyfulness of good 
thoughts, and in the spiritual oze the soul of Sritó of 
the Visraps travelled forth unto the best existence. 

12. One marvel is this which is declared that in 
fifty-seven years onwards from the acceptance of the 
religion 2y Zaratüst ?, the arrival of the religion is 
published in the seven regions?; and within the 
life/zme of Vistásp, the circumstance (aégünóih) is 
manifested by the coming of some from other regions 
to Frashóstar of the Hvóbas * for enquiry aboné the 


" Nódar (Av. Naotara) was a son of king Mánüs£ihar (Bd. 
XXXI, 13) and an ancestor of king Vistásp. — Vistásp being a des- 
cendant of Kaí-Kavág (Bd. XXXI, 28, 29) who was the adopted son 
of Aüzóbó (Bd. XXXI, 24) a son of Zágh, son of Masvák, son of 
Nédar (Bd. XXXI, 23 corrected from XXXIII, 5). Hütós, the wife 
of Vistásp, was also of the village of the Nédars (Xt. XV, 35). 

* That is fifty-seven years after the conference of Zaratüst (see 
Chap. V, r). 

* See the summary in Dk. VIII, xiv, 10 :—' Likewise, about the 
communication of Zaratüst's knowledge of the Mazda-worshipping 
religion to the world, his attracting mankind to the religion, and 
the ages, after Zaratfist, until the renovation of the universe,’ 

* Av, Ferashaostró Hvégvé (Yas. LI, 17); he was a brother 


CHAPTER VI, 10-14. 81 


religion, even as revelation mentions thus: “Two 
whose names are thus, Spitêis! and Arezráspó?, who 
have hastened unto Frashóstar of the Hvóbas in 
search of wisdom.’ 

13. Thus much splendour and wonder of Vistásp 
and those of the realm regarding Zaratüst?, and 
thus much due to the coming of the archangels 
from the sky to the earth before Vistásp, as evi- 
dence about the true prophesying of Zaratüst*; and 
that, too, about Péshyótan 5, the chariot of Sritó °, 
and other subjects seen written above, ave declared 
by the Avesta, which is the same that they accepted 
from Zaratüst, as the culmination’ (avarigánih) of 
Atharmazd’s words. 14. And if this splendour, 
glory, and wonder that ave written above as regards 
what those learned men of the realm saw—which 
are in the statement revealed by the Avesta—had 
not occurred, king Vistasp aud those learned men 
of the realm would not have seen what this Avesta 
had revealed to them—which was thus much 
splendour and wonder reported by it to them—and 
not one word about leaving 245 preservation to us 
would be annexed. 


of Gámásp (Dk. V, ii, 12; iii, 4; Zs. XXIII, 10), and the father 
of Zaratüst's wife Hvóvi. The Hvóvas (Pahl. Hvóbas) were 
a numerous family. 

1 Av. gen. Spitóis (Yt. XIII, 121). He was high-priest of 
Fradadafsh, the south-east region. 

2 Av, Erezráspa (ibid. He was high-priest of Vidadafsh, the 
south-west region (see Bd. XXIX, 1). These foreign envoys were 
brothers, each being a son of Uspásnu. 

5 See Chap. IV, 73. * See Chap. IV, 74-82. 

5 See Chap. V, 12. 9 See $$ 2-11. 

7 See Chap. V, r1. 


[47] G 


82 DINKARD, BOOK VII. 


CHAPTER VII. 


1. About the marvellousness which is manifested 
after the time of Vistasp until the collapse (hangaf- 
tanó) of the sovereignty of Iran. 

2. There is marvellousness which is manifested 
after Vistásp until the collapse of the sovereignty of 
Irán, apart from the blessedness of ordeal, the 
accomplishment of other Avestic rites, the great 
power over the sacred fires, and many other 
religious observances wch were connected with 
the disciples of Zaratüst. 

3. Even after the devastation which happened 
owing to Alexander, those who were rulers after 
him brought back much to the collection from a 
scattered state'; and there are some who ave or- 
dered the keeping of z¢ in the treasury of Shapan *. 

4. Likewise there is to be brought forward what 
there is concerning the names of rulers and high- 
priests, such as arrive for it at times and periods, 
which ave each consecutive, as organizers of the 
religion and the world; also of the tyrant or 
apostate, who is manifest at various periods, for the 
disturbance of the religion and monarchy and the 
penance of the world, w:/% the coming of the peni- 
tential oxe. 


* Referring to king Valkhas the Askánian (probably Vologeses I, 


see S. B. E, vol xxxvii, p. 413); possibly also to Ardashir 
Pápakán. 


* So here, but usually written Shapigán, and sometimes Shas- 
pigán. It was no doubt a royal treasury, and Dk. V, iii, 4, calls 
it so, but uses the words gangó-1 khüdáyán, in which Gámásp 
is said to have deposited the Avesta and Zand written in gold upon 
ox-hides. If Shapigán be a corruption of sháyagán, ‘royal; it is 
singular that some copyist has not corrected the spelling. t 


CHAPTER VII, 1-8. 83 


5. Such as Vohümanó, son of Spend-dá4 !, of the 
rulers, about whom it says even this in the Avesta, 
that Ze zs Vohümanó, the just, who is the most 
efficient of the assembly of Mazda-worshippers. 
6. And .Sénóv * of the high-priests, as about him it 
says even this: ' The religion becomes a hundred 
years old when .Sénóv is born, and two hundred 
years when he passes away; he was also the first 
Mazda-worshipper with a life of a hundred years, 
and who walks forth upon this earth with a hundred 
disciples.’ 

7. Also Alexander of the devastators, as it says 
even this of him in revelation ?, that zz those three 
winters, which ave of like purpose (ham-ay4zakó), 
that Aeshm * would set up a deadly king in the im- 
penitent world, who is the evil-destined Alexander. 

8. And of the high-priests are Arezvak’, the 
interpretation of whose name is ‘the pure word; 
Srütvók-spáZák 5, the interpretation of whose name 
is ‘the propitious recitation;' Zrayang,hau °, the in- 
terpretation of whose name is 'the ocean exis- 
tence ;' and Spewtdé-khratvau °, the interpretation of 


1 Av. Speztó-dáta of Yt. XIII, 103, a son of Vistásp, with 
whom Avesta dynastic history ends. He was the Persian Isfendiyár, 
and his son Vohümanó is unknown to the Avesta. The Aitradad 
Nask (Dk. VIII, xiii, 18) mentions a * Namáün, son of Spend-shéd,’ 
which probably stands for ‘ Vohümanó, son of Spend-dad,’ but this 
appears to have been in a Pahlavi supplement compiled in Sasanian 
times. He is also mentioned in Bd. XXXIV, 8, a chapter ‘ about 
the computation of years by the Arabs,’ according to the Iranian 
Bundahis. 

? Av. Saéna of Yt. XIII, 97, where the last clause of the passage 
here translated from the Avesta occurs. Compare Zs. XXIII, 11. 
* Not in the extant Avesta. * The demon of Wrath. 

5 Ay. gen. Erezvau and Srfit6-spadau in Yt. XIII, 115. 

* These two names are written in their Av. gen. forms, as they 
occur in Yt. XIII, 115. 

G 2 


84 DÍNKARD, BOOK VII. 


whose name is ‘the propitious wisdom.’ 9. Because 
it says even this about them, namely: ‘I mention 
thy manifestation, and also the tokens of its 
publicity when this religion of thy Mazda-wor- 
shippers becomes four hundred years o/d@'; in 
this law benightedness (lélyáih) arises, and the 
embodied existences see the manifestation through 
calculation of the planets and also the stars; and 
whoever, too, ave mine are so for a century, through 
the average opinion of thirty medium winters for 
a man’; and the righteous Arezvak and those three 
others are they of the most righteous existences, 
over whom they are the most masterly and most 
authoritative in that time. 10. And this, too, that 
they who glorify the religion of the Mazda-wor- 
shippers in the fifth and sixth centuries ave they; 
and no persons save their souls, except those who 
remain for the arrival of the four? interpretations 
that avzse through the authority of these four 
individuals, "Arezvák, Srütó-spádhau *, Zrayang,hau, 
amd Speztó-khratvau who, all four of them, seek 
their thoughts, words, and deeds in the sacred text 
(mánsar). 

11. Also Rashn-résh* is the apostate of that 


* If the chronology in Bd. XXXIV, 7, 8 were correct, the interval 
between the first revelation. of the religion and the death of 
Alexander would be 272 years, and this would make the 4ooth year 
of the religion coincide with B. c. 195. 

* That is, for a generation. The meaning appears to be, that 
these four successive high-priests insure the continuance of orthodox 
religion for more than a century, or well into the sixth century of 
the religion, as mentioned in $ ro. 

* The MS. has the cipher for ‘ three,’ by mistake. 

* Here written in Avesta characters. 


* In Dk. III, cxcviii, 2, this apostate is said to have been an 


CHAPTER VII, 9-14. 85 


time, as some one! says unto Rashn, ome of the sacred 
beings, and about many besides this ove, thus: ‘ All 
who are creatures of the beneficent spirit are dis- 
tressed by their persecution, óz/ put trust in those 
men, Arezvak and those three others.’ 

12. And of the organizers of the period is 
Artakhshatar?, son of Pápak, as it says even this 
about him, namely: *Which is that ruler who is 
powerful, more striving than the Kayáns, and 
mighty, an embodiment of the sacred commandments 
and awfully armed ?; in whose abode Aharisvang 4, 
the virtuous and radiant, walks forth in maiden 
form, beneficent and very strong, well-formed, high- 
girded, and truthful, of illustrious race and noble? 
13. Whoever it is that, on the occurrence of strife, 
seeks prosperity for 4zmself with his own arm; who- 
ever it is that, on the occurrence of strife, encounters 
the enemies with his own arm.’ 

14. Tanvasar 5 is also for his assistance, as it says 


associate (ham-p4f£gar) of the Christian ecclesiastic Akván, and 
yells out ten admonitions contradicting those of the righteous .Sénóv 
who is mentioned in $ 6 (see Peshotan's edition, vol. v, pp. 239, 
311) It does not follow that he was a contemporary of Sênôv, 
and here he seems to be placed fully two centuries later. 

1 Probably Aáühazmazd. 

2 The founder of the Sásánian dynasty, who reigned as king of 
the kings of Persia, A.D. 226-241. ] 

2 Most of these qualities are applied to the angel Srósh, the 
personification of obedience (see Yas. LVII, 1); also to Kavi Vistáspa 
and Karsna, son of Zbaurvazt, in Yt. XIII, 99, 106. 

* Av. Ashis vanguhi, * good rectitude,' personified as a female 
angel; her description is given in Yt. XIII, 107, and is similar to 
that of Anáhita in Yt. V, 64. 

5 So spelt here and in $8 17, 18, thrice in all; it is also thrice 
spelt Tansar, in Dk. III, last chapter, 7; IV, 25, 25, and this 
mis-spelling has led to the mis-pronunciation Tósar. It appears, 
however, that Tanvasar is a transposition of Tanvars, * hairy- 


86 DINKARD, BOOK VII. 


this, too, about them: ‘ Zaratüst asked again thus: 
‘Who is he who is the most salutary for a country, 
which the demons fave exhausted of everything 
virtuous, over which his authority is brought and 
which is wicked and teaching falsehood?” 15. Aù- 
hazmazd spoke thus: “ An autocrat (sástár), to cure 
a country, who Zas not gone mad (that is, he does 
not annoy the good) and is well-directing (that is, he 
gives virtuous commands), who is a/so of noble race, 
and likewise a priest who is acquainted with war, of 
a famous province, and righteous, are most salutary 
for that country. 16. And I tell thee this, that the 
apostasy of destruction is 7zs/ like the four-legged 
wolf which the world gives up to running astray 
(vardak-takhshisnih) (that is, owing to its action 
they are leading 77 off as astray; which is so that even 
he who is not opulent is rendered sickly, that they 
(the apostates) may take away his things by the 
hand of the assassin (khünyán); and they shall 
lead the world, the dwelling for 47s residence, into 
wandering. 17. But that wicked (avárünó) strife 
descended upon that country, besides that wicked 
demon-worship, besides that wicked slander; and 
not even that wicked strife, nor that wicked demon- 
worship, nor that wicked slander, is dissipated from 


bodied, because we are told that Tansar, or Tanvasar, was so 
called ón account of all his limbs being covered with hair (vars). 
This statement occurs in the introduction to Tanvasar's letter to 
Gushnaspsháh (Ar. Gasnasf-sháh), king of Padashkhvargar (Ar. 
Farshvádgar) and Tabaristán ; and is made on the authority of 
an old Pahlavi copyist, Bahram Khürzád, whose Pahlavi was 
translated into Arabic by Ibn al-Muqafa in the middle of the 
eighth century, and that into Persian early in the thirteenth 


century (see Darmesteter's edition in Journal Asiatique for 1894, 
pp. 185-250, 502-555). 


CHAPTER VII, I5—20. 87 


that country until ZZe “me when they attach the 
grant of approval to him, the spiritual leader, 
the eloquent (pür-güftár), truthful-speaking, and 
righteous Tanvasar. 18. And it is when they 
grant approval to the spiritual leader, the truthful 
speaker of eloquence, the righteous Tanvasar, that 
those of the country obtain redress (béshzagánih) 
when they seek 77, and no deviation (andy üinakóih) 
from the religion of Zaratüst." ' 

I9. As to the nature of the questions and state- 
ments of the organizer of the religion, Ataypad? son 
of Mavaspend, about the connection of the glory 
with the race, it also says this, that 'though 
righteousness may arise from the statements and 
prosperity of the Türánians when extracted by 
questions, z¢ zs said that its acceptance occurs there 
through complete mindfulness?; they benefit the 
embodied world of righteousness, and produce 
distress for the fiend; in like manner, they rely upon 
Vohümanó, and Zaratüst is their delight through 
the report of the birth of Zaratüst from us who are 
archangels. 20. This liberality for thee is from us 
who are archangels, and Átürpáz, the very best 
well-destined man arose; and this, too, do thou say 
about him, that it is the steel age in which that 
man, the organizer of development ard organizer of 
righteousness, Âtûrpâď son of Máraspend, of the 
convocation, begets Avarethrabau °.’ 


1 A high-priest who was prime minister of king Shahpühar II 
(A.D. 309-379). He is often mentioned in Pahlavi writings, but in 
the Avesta he is only alluded to, apparently, by the title Rástare- 
vaghezt in Yt. XIII, 106. 

2 A translation of Av. spezta - ármaiti, the archangel Spen- 


darmad. 
3 So written, all three times in Pázand. He is the Avarethra- 


88 DINKARD, BOOK VII. 


21. This Avarethrabau, too, is an organizer whose 
righteous guardian spirit we reverence, and zz 
memory of MánüsZihar, the well-destined, and a pro- 
genitor of Átürpád!, it says that ‘only from him 
comes Avarethrabau;’ and Zhen also-arises this one 
of the adversaries of the religion, the apostate of 
apostates, whom they have even called the Mazdag- 
like (Mazdagig-i£)* 22. As it says this, too, 
about them, namely: ‘This religion of mine thou 
dost survey with thoughts of spiritual life, thou dost 
very thoroughly inspect 77, O Zaratüst! when many, 
aware of apostates, call the performance of righteous- 
ness and even the priesthood innocence, and few are 
frank and practising z£? 23. In the revelation of the 
Mazda-worshippers is this, namely: ‘ Thoroughly 
look into revelation, and seek a remedy for them 
and any whatever of them who have become dis- 
turbing in the embodied existence, and uncaptivated 
by the orthodox (à yin-aü mónd) righteousness which 
is owing to the perfect existences ; and so they divide 
the religion of the Mazda-worshippers through 
division of race, they speak regarding the action of 
their own followers, and give the endowment to 
their own. 24. They grant supplies of food, so that 
they may say the food is proportional to the hunger ; 
they speak of procreation, and say that they say 
lineage is through the mothers; and they approve 


of wolfishness, so that they would act something like 
———— ee — 0 COMM 


bangh, son of Rastare-vaghent of Yt. XIII, 106, better known as 
Zaratüst, son of Atürpád in his old age, for whom the Andarz-i 
Atûrpâd-î Máraspendán was written. 
! Whose pedigree is traced back to Mânûskîhar in Bd. XXXIII, 3. 
* Probably some disciple of Mánih, the heretic who had been 


put to death a.p. 276-7.  Mazdag was put to death A.D. 528. 
See S.B.E., vol. xxxvii, pp. 257 n, 278 n. 


CHAPTER VII, 21-27. 89 


wolves zz the performance of gratifying their desires, 
like that of the wolf's progeny behind the mother. 
25. Moreover, they form their lineage through the 
mothers; buying their women as sheep, they shall 
carry off for profit even that son ox brother who is 
the progeny, those that we have produced for your 
companionship; you are not predominant, but Zave 
remained in companionship ; you do not even believe 
them, óz/ you do not establish an ordeal, although 
24 zs evident that you will be acquitted; they lie 
even to ZZe children, so that the advance of the 
promise-breaker is through them, and even in their 
own persons !.' 

26. Here it speaks about the organization of the 
religion óy the glorified? Khüsrót, son of Kavad, 
thus: ' Upon their lingering behind, a man is pro- 
duced who is righteous, the Glorified oze?, an 
approver (khéniZár) of speech who is wise, whom 
the convocation, on hearing the words that he utters, 
speaks of as a high-priest; that is when he gives 
out penance (sróshigih), so that he may effect the 
punishment of sinners. 27. The constant out- 
pouring of perplexity (pêk sháriZan) óy the per- 
verters is the fear of that hero, as regards that 


' This quotation, from a Pahlavi version of an Avesta text, would 
probably be very applicable to the state of the Persian people at 
many periods in the fourth and fifth centuries, when heresy was 
prevalent and orthodox Zoroastrianism was by no means universal. 
Some of the evils mentioned are inseparable from slavery at all 
times. 

2 Literally * immortal-soulled, Anóshak-rübán, the usual title 
of king Khásró I, who reigned A.D. 531-578. Before he became 
king, a. D. 528 or 529, he had summoned an assembly of priests to 
condemn the heretic Mazdag, when the last important revision 
of the Pahlavi versions of the Avesta probably took place (see Byt. 
I, 6-8, and Néldeke’s Gesch. der Sas. pp. 463-466). 


go DINKARD, BOOK VII. 


convocation, when he casts them forth by expulsion 
from the vicinity, so that he may make žem extin- 
guished very quickly; owing to that, they, whose 
producer is even he who is a person destroying the 
righteous man, become gloomy on account of the 
Glorified oxe, through Zzs smiting the spiritual life 
of apostasy ; just as now, when he who is gloomy, 
and of scattered intellect, is gloomy owing to you 
of the Spitamas.’ 28. This, too, it states, namely : 
‘In every way, I tell thee, O Zaratüst of the Spita- 
mas! that their time is mistrustful (avévar) as to 
him who is an open friend, and most deceitful both 
to the wicked and the righteous; the Glorified oze 
is a controller (aydkhtar) exalting the creatures, 
and whoever is possessing the creatures of the 
righteous ozes ', so that he remains again at work in 
the doings of the Glorified oze, is he who is a com- 
biner of the actions az an utterer of the true replies 
of that Glorified one.’ 

29. And about the occurrence of a symptom of 
the devastators of the sovereignty and religion of 
the country of Irán one wonder, which is associated 
with the religion, is even this which it mentions 
thus: ‘Thereupon, when the first symptom of a 
ravager of the country occurs, O righteous Zara- 
tüst! then the more aggressive and more unmerciful 
in malice becomes the tyrant of the country, and 
through him, too, they ravage (réshénd) the house, 
through him the village, through him the community, 
through him the province, and through him even 
the whole of that manifestation zz the country of 
any teaching whatever that occurs through the 
ravager of the country; and so the country should 


* Of the good spirits. 


CHAPTER VII, 28-32. 91 


keep a man who is observant and learned on the 
watch, because information is in his mind. 3o. 
Thereupon, when the second symptom of a ravager d 
the country occurs, Gc. . à 

31. Thereupon, when the third palatal a a ravager 
of the country occurs, the priestly people are dis- 
turbing the tradition, so that they speak nothing 
wisely; it is even on this account they do not accept 
them, and it is not when ome speaks truly /Za/ the 
ravager of the country believes them, and through 
him, too, they ravage the house, through him the 
village, through him the community, through him the 
province, and through him even the whole of that 
manifestation zz the country of any teaching what- 
ever that occurs through the ravager of the country ; 
and so, too, the country should keep a man who is 
observant and learned on the watch, because infor- 
mation is in his mind. 32. Thereupon, when the 
fourth symptom of a ravager of the country occurs, 
it upsets the replenishment of the fires, and upsets 
those men of the righteous, so that they shall not 
undertake the care of them ; and thus they shall not 
convey the holy-water to him who is a priestly 
authority, so that they may not produce the seizing 
upon the stipend of the priestly authorities dy him 
who is the ravager of the country ; through him, too, 
they ravage the house, through him the village, 
through him the community, through him /4e ro- 
vince, and through him even the whole of that 


1 The whole of this section is omitted in the old MS., evidently 
by mistake. Perhaps the second symptom of devastation was con- 
nected with the evil deeds of the warrior class, but this is very 
uncertain, Passages of four or five words are also omitted by the 


MS. in $$ 31, 32. 


92 DÍNKARD, BOOK VII. 


manifestation zz the country of any teaching what- 
ever that occurs through the ravager of the country ; 
and so, too, the country should keep a man who 
is observant azd learned on the watch, because 
information is in his mind.’ 

33. About the collapse of the sovereignty of Irán, 
it also states this, namely : * That very villain (mar), 
O Zaratüst! brings those provinces on to running 
astray, so that he may make those quite dissevered 
which constitute the existence of that powerful sove- 
reignty; and then he is a thorough assailant of the 
righteous, then he is an assailant of the righteous 
with eagerness. 34. That same deadly ove (mar), 
O Zaratüst! does not continue living long after- 
wards; moreover his offspring disappear (that 
is, they perish utterly); but his soul falls to the 
bottom of the gloomy existence which is horrible 
hell, and upon their bodies every kind of unseemly 
unhappiness comes from themselves, owing to their 
own actions when they give approval to the im- 
prisonment of a guardian of spiritual afazrs who is 
eloquent, true-speaking, and righteous. 35. Against 
that deadly ove he contends, O Zaratüst! for the 
spiritual lordship az priestly authority that I approve 
as good for the whole embodied existence; also 
against the preparation of a decree to produce evil 
decisions, and against the dismissal of litigants, 
whether heterodox or orthodox, who are of a family 
of serfs of a far-situated village and are making 
petitions,’ 

36. ‘And as /o the land, too, over which he 
wanders, the evil spirit utterly devastates their 
country through pestilence and other misery; and, 
moreover, strife which is tormenting falls upon that 


CHAPTER VII, 33-39. 93 


country, besides demon-worship which is iniquitous, 
and besides slander which is iniquitous. 37. And 
the strife which is iniquitous is not to be dissipated 
(apási-aitanó) from that country, nor the demon- 
worshippers who ave iniquitous, nor the slander 
which is iniquitous, before the Zzz when they give 
approval to him, to the priest who is a guardian 
of spiritual afazrs, who is eloquent, true-speaking, 
and righteous; and it is when they give him 
approval, that they obtain healthfulness for their 
country when they pray for z¢, and not irregularly 
from him, O Zaratist!’ 

38. And this which is recounted is a statement 
that is execrated (nafrig-aitó) by many, details 
from the Avesta as to occurrences ¢hat will arise 
after Vistásp until the dispersion (angévisnó) of 
the sovereignty of Iran from the country of Iran; 
zt ís also declared that this which is written happened 
to the knowledge of those of the world. 39. This, 
too, is about the evidence of the above :— And 
if this which is declared from the Avesta, as to what 
happens after Kai-Vistásp until the end of the sove- 
reignty of Irán, should not have happened, and zz 
being the pre-eminence of the Avesta which really 
became this present treasure, it thereby ensues, 
owing to its position in that former', and the 
manifest absence of the destruction of those rulers 
and high-priests from Vistasp onwards in this /aZ/er ?, 
that it could not be connected with us ?.' 


1 The above declaration from the Avesta. 

? The present Avesta itself. 

* Meaning perhaps that, for some good reason, it could not be 
communicated to us in the extant Avesta. If § 39 be not a later 
addition to this chapter, it implies that the prophetical quotations 
from the Avesta, regarding the history of the religion after the time 


94 DÍNKARD, BOOK VII. 


ee aana 


CHAPTER VIII. 


1. About the marvellousness which is manifested 
and is openly specified after the collapsing of the 
sovereignty of Iran and the country of Iran; also the 
end of the millennium of Zaratüst and the arrival 
of Afishédar the descendant of Zaratást '. 

2. There is this marvellousness, really over- 
throwing the blessedness of the knowledge of former 
government, revealed by the Avesta about the ninth 
and tenth centuries, that which is an indicator of 
circumstances (aégünóih) now visible, such as the 
dispersion of the sovereignty of Iran from the 
country of Irán, the disturbance of just law and 
custom, the predominance of ZZose with dishevelled 
hair ?, and the haughty profession of ecclesiastics *. 
3. Also the collection and even connection of all 
their four systems of belief (vévari-hastanó)* to- 


of Vistásp, were no more extant in the Avesta, when the Dinkard 
was compiled, than they are now. 

! The contents of Chaps. VII-XI have some connection with the 
following summary in Dk. VIII, xiv, 11, 12:—‘ And about the 
nature of the advancement of the people of the period, the separa- 
tion of centuries and millenniums, and the signs, wonders, and 
perplexity which are manifested in the world at the end of each 
millennium in the world. Also as to the birth azd arrival of 
Aüshédar, son of Zaratüst, at the end of the first millennium, and 
a report of him and his time, and of the many destroyers of the 
organizers of the period between Zaratüst's millennium and the 
coming of Adshédar.’ 

* This meaning for vigárdó -vars is chiefly based upon the use 
of vigárd in AV. XXXIV, 5, for a woman's hair being ‘ combed.’ 
These invaders of Irán from the east, at the end of the first 
millennium of the religion, are mentioned in Byt. II, 22, 24, 38 ; 
IH, 1, 6, 13. They are called * Turkish demons’ in $ 47. 

* The Byzantine Christians. 

* Zoroastrianism, Muhammadanism, Christianity, and either 
Judaism or Idolatry. 


CHAPTER VIII, I~7. 95 


gether for the upper rank; the coming of one 
working with the sacred beings to the inferior, the 
transient, and the captive of the period; and the 
dispersion and downfall of dependent and public 
men in their time. 

4. The disappearance of a disposition for wisdom 
from the foreigners zz the countrits of Irán, which 
is an indication of shame a/ the truth of the religion, 
and 27 the praise, peace, liberality, and other good- 
ness whose provision Zas lodgement in a disposition 
for wisdom. 5. Also the abundance of the decisions 
of apostasy, the falsehood, deceit, slander, quarrel- 
someness, fraudulence, ingratitude, discord, stingi- 
ness, and other vileness whose real connection is 
a disposition to devour, neglecting heedfulness for 
the archangels of fire, water, and worldly exzstence'. 
6. The oppressiveness of infidelity aud idol-worship, 
the scarcity of freedom, the extreme predominance 
of avarice in the individuals (tanó) of mankind, the 
plenitude of different opinions about witchcraft, and 
the much inclination of many for paralyzing the 
religion of the sacred beings. 

7. The annihilation of the sovereignty of man- 
kind one over the other, the desolation of localities 
and settlements by severe actual distress, and the 
evil foreign potentates who are, one after the other, 
scattering the valiant; the destruction among cattle 
and the defilement of the spirit of enjoyment, owing 
to the lodgement of lamentation and weeping zz the 
countries of Iran, the clamour of the demon-wor- 
shipper in the country, avd the unobtainable stature, 
non-existent strength, blighted destiny, and short 


1 Ashavahistó, Kházdad, and Spendarmad. 


96 DÍNKARD, BOOK VII. 


life of mankind. 8. Also the abundance of ordi- 
nances (Ayinó)! of various descriptions, the approval 
of the apostate among tyrants and the non-approval 
of the Zoti? who is well-disposed and wise, the 
coming of the Zoti to want, 4z all the other adver- 
sity, disruption, and running astray which ave over- 
powering even in districts and localities of the 
countries of Irán. 

9. The maintenance of no ritual (zpandih) of 
the religion of the sacred beings; the weakness, 
suffering, and evil habits of those of the good re- 
ligion; the lamentation and recantation (kh üstükih) 
of the upholders of the religion; and the wickedness 
and extermination of good works in most of the 
countries of Iran. 10, Also much other misery in 
these two centuries is recounted in the Avesta, which 
passed away with them and is also now so visible 
therein, and manifestly occurs in them. 

11. This, too, is a statement (nisang-1) as to 
them, wrc revelation mentions thus: “That is the 
age mingled with iron (that is, from every side they 
perceive z¢ zs of iron) in which they bring forth into 
life him who is a sturdy praying apostate. 12. This 
is their sturdiness, that their approval is unobservant 
of both doctrines (4inak5); and this is their pray- 
ing, that whenever 7 zs possible for them they shall 
cause misery to others; a/so when an old man 
publicly advances into a crowd (galakó) of youths, 
owing to the evil times in which that man who is 
learned is born, they are unfriendly zo îm (that is, 
they are no friends ofthe high-priests of the priestly 
assembly) r3. They are freely speaking (that is, 
————————EM gga 


* Or it may be hênô, ‘ squadrons,’ 
* The chief officiating priest in religious ceremonies, 


CHAPTER VIII, 8-16. 97 


they utter phrases smoothly), they are wicked and 
are fully maliciously talking, so that they shall make 
the statements of priests and high-priests useless ; 
they also tear asunder the spiritual lordship and 
priestly authority, and shall bring the ruler and 
priestly authority into evil behaviour as vicious, but 
they bring together those who are singular. 14. Any- 
thing they say is always mischief (agih), and that 
district which had a judge they cast into the smiting 
precinct, into hell; it is misery without any inter- 
mission they shall inflict therein, till they attain unto 
damnation (darvandih) through the recitation they 
persevere in, d0¢ he who is the evil progeny dis- 
seminated by the apostate and he who is the 
villainous wolf full of disaster and full of depravity.’ 

15. ‘Here below they fight, the friend with him 
who is a friend, they also defraud (zivénd) him of 
his own work (that is, whenever z¢ zs possible for 
them, they shall seize upon his property), and they 
give it to him from whom they obtain prosperity in 
return; if not, they seek him who is acting as a con- 
federate (nishin-gün), and they make that other 
one defraud the poor man (so that they shall seize 
upon his property); they also cheat him when he 
shall make complaint. 16. I s£2// not again produce 
such for thee, no friend here for him who is a friend, 
no brother for him who is a brother, no son for 
him who is a father, nor yet a father for him who is 
a son; admonished, ġuź not convinced, they become 
the abode of the will of the place, so that they 
subsist in every single place where it is necessary 
for them Zə be, in each that is necessary for them 
they march on together, and on the way they 
reflect upon the path of blessedness and the 


[47] H 


98 DÍNKARD, BOOK VII. 
SENE co ee 


manifold learning they utter owing to knowledge 
of me. 

17. ‘These three, our increase, learning, and 
reward, we fully understand through the ascendancy 
of him who is ignoble, and through the downfall of 
him who is noble azd superior to him of little 
thorough instruction who, in every thing, will be at 
the foot of the tyrant. 18. Thinking of a priest ove 
becomes spiritual, thinking of a tyrant one becomes 
a Kavig?; a demon in. disposition is an incipient 
demon, a Kavig zz disposition is himself attracted 
towards a youth.’ 

19. Then, when character and wisdom recede 
from the countries of Irán (that is, they depart), so 
that destitution and also winter, produced by demons 
who are worshipping the demon, rush together from 
the vicinity of disaster (vóighn) on to the countries 
of Irán, where even rain becomes scanty and pesti- 
lence is secretly advancing and deceiving, so that 
deaths become numerous; thus even Ze of perverted 
wisdom, who is wicked, and the apostate also, who 
is unrighteous, rush together in companionship. 
20. As what oze says they a// exclaim thus: * Con- 
sume and destroy, O ruler! for z¢ is to be consumed 
and destroyed by thee; destroy even the fre, 
consume even as food those who are the protection 
of the association enforcing e/zgzous obedience, and 
those leading on the poor wan of the righteous 
dispensation by their guidance. 2r. So that they 
shall make him thoroughly detached and smite him; 


1 So far, this statement ($$ 11-16) seems to be ascribed to 
Aüharmazd ; but what follows ($$ 17, 18, 20) appears to represent 
the sentiments of some Iránians of those later times. 

? See Chap. II, 9 n. 


CHAPTER VIII, 17-26. 99 


likewise wisdom is the wealth they bring him, az it 
is when property is being carried off by them, zat 
the wisdom conveyed by them arises. 

22. 'And in that age, O righteous oze of the 
Spitamas! the coming of my desire is not purely for 
thee, nor is a thorough belief of the departure of life, 
so that the bringing and conducting of a speaker of 
promises (mitragóv) is not necessary; those of the 
perfect apostate injure this discourse of thine, the 
Avesta and Zand, so that they shall make 7/ 
thoroughly weak ; and those of the perfect apostate 
harass their own souls, for love of the wealth which 
he produced.' 

23. And about the ninth and tenth centuries this 
also it says, that, ‘as that age proceeds, this is what 
occurs, O Zaratüst of the Spitimas! when many 
apostates utter the righteousness of priestly instruc- 
tion and authority, z/Zzc£ is wickedness towards me, 
they cause begging for water, they wither vegetation, 
and they put down all excellence which is due to the 
manifestation of righteousness.’ 

24. Again Zaratüst enquired of him thus: ‘What 
do they so produce by that, O Athaymazd! when 
they cause begging for water, they wither vegetation, 
and they put down all excellence due to the mani- 
festation of righteousness?’ 25. And Adharmazd 
spoke thus: “They so produce those /ugs among 
them, O Zaratüst! when they mention a greater 
reward for bantlings and relations than that of their 
own souls (that is, they talk more concerning their 
allowance, where it is that for their own). 26. More- 
over, they give to the Kigs and Karaps, for some 
repute wih the shepherd people of the husbandman, 
and with the swift-horsed people of the warrior, as 

H 2 


100 DÍNKARD, BOOK VII. 


though they would provide us! here below with 
a large share of meat, that they would make our 
privilege, just as we’ here supply him with meat 
whom we render greatly precious. 27. The property 
of even a wicked man here below, O Zaratüst! in the 
average opinion among the disorganized (anárá- 
stan6) is a dignified provision (that is, we form 
a strong opinion, the approval of which is more to 
be asserted as being the opinion of a poor righteous 
man, about a worthy righteous man whose manifest 
righteousness is a homage (franámisnó) to duty 
and good works). 

28. Again he enquired of him thus: ‘Is there so 
perfect a manifestation here below, in the age of the 
worldly existence of the religion of the Mazda-wor- 
shippers (that is, is there a lodgement of the religion 
of the Mazda-worshippers in any one)?’ 29. And 
Atharmazd spoke thus: ‘It is so, among those men 
of mine’, O Zaratüst! for here below there are priests 
who are eloquent, and they, too, are men voluble and 
requisite in the embodied existence, all-beneficent 
and producing the destruction of harm and the 
wizard; the people of the wicked tyrant say also 
regarding them, ¢hat, excepting thee, O Zaratüst! 
they rightly practise righteousness more largely, 
more powerfully, and more volubly. 30. Blind are 
those of the fiend, who are consulting with thee and 
are unaware of the tyrant; and observant are also 
those of the fiend who consult with them and think 
of ¿heir intelligence, and oppose the imbecile (aná- 
kásih-aümónd) apostate who is near them, so that 


' The archangels. 


* Reading minam, instead of madam which is unintelligible 
here, 


CHAPTER VIII, 27934. 101 


they say! this, namely: “As /o this which thou 
tellest us, 24 is evidently not so as thou sayest,” of 
which they speak thus: “This duty of thy man is 
not mine (that is, it is not necessary for me to 
perform) nor thine (that is, it is not necessary even 
for thee to perform), because z¢ is not this which is 
righteousness (that is, not a good work). 31. For 
this ove is produced for these words and thoughts 
of thine, of whom thou, too, art aware, he who is 
whatever is here below of Aüshégar*? of thoughtful 
controversy, O Zaratüst of the Spitamas! for he 
brings into notice, through the intermingling of 
his own soul, 42m who is righteous, or has not 
become so.’ 

32. This, too, he says, namely: ‘Of those, O 
Zaratüst of the Spitamas! who come in the ninth 
and tenth centuries, I tell thee that they are of the 
fiend of Greed (Azi); it is in žer womb that they 
are to be fashioned, they who assist those who 
would be vicious, through pre-eminence in leader- 
ship, or through excellence in subserviency.' 

33. And this, too, it says about them: ‘ Those 
men are much to be destroyed;’ so it is said by 
Aühazmazg that ‘these who are righteous, who 
carry away a corpse in this world, distress their 
fire, according to every high-priest?, and even long- 
flowing water; their bodies, which are really cess- 
pools * of a terrible character, become very assisting 
for the tormentors whose corpses are grievously 


wicked. 34. Concerning them I tell thee, O Zara- 
ee IL e td e mnêna 
1 To the apostate. 
2 See §§ 55-60 and Chap. I, 42 n. Here spelt Aükhshédar. 
3 Reading dastür, instead of vastfr. 
* Pahl. mayá-vakhdün = Pers. 4b-gir. 


102 DÍNKARD, BOOK VIT. 


tüst of the Spitamas! that, in the ninth and tenth 
centuries, ‘herve come those who are the brood of the 
fiend and the wound-producer (reshgár)! of the 
evil spirit; even one of them is more to be destroyed 
than ten demon-worshippers?; they also produce 
extermination for these who are mine, for these of 
my religion, whom they calla provision for destruc- 
tion (that is, when it is possible to live in our way, 
and ours are wicked, they diminish in superiority). 
35. Even the iniquity that they shall commit in 
leadership and subserviency, the sin which is smiting 
thee, they call a trifle (khalakó), O pure one of the 
Spitamas! and the smiter, they say, is Ze whom 
these of thy religion of Mazda-worshippers smite. 
36. Besides thee, O Zaratüst! they distress those 
duties, too, which ave to be acquired y thy people 
(lagánó); they think scornfully of this ceremonial 
of thine, scornfully of zy worship, O Zaratüst! and 
they think scornfully of both the two blessed utter- 
ances?, the Avesta and Zand, which were proclaimed 
to thee ġy me who am the most propitious of spirits. 
37. They foster villainous outrage, azd they say the 
best work for mankind is immoderate fighting whose 
joyfulness is due to actions that are villainous; those, 
too, ¿žať they exterminate are the existences due to 
the spirits, they exterminate their own souls, they 
exterminate the embodied existences of the world ; 
and they produce lamentation for the soul, and even 
the religion, as regards what is the mode of controll- 
ing orthodox people ¢egether with the iniquitous of 
the same period.’ 

38. And this, too, it says, that Zaratüst enquired 


' Or it may be riyágár, ‘hypocrite.’ ? Or ‘idolators.’ 
` Pahl. váfrigánih = Av. urvátá. 


CHAPTER VIII, 35-44. 103 


of Adharmazd thus: ‘So what skall we prescribe 
for those who are not capable, through being poor 
(that is, they have no means), nor have they troops, 
nor a protector over žem, and they have many per- 
secutors?' 39. And Aühazmaz4 spoke thus: ‘The 
strong-minded ! man, through understanding, is a 
token of the development of those who, not being in 
the army, are capable; their persecutors also are 
many, and the passing over of authority is owing to 
the iniquitous of the same period.’ 

40. This, too, it says, that Zaratüst enquired thus: 
‘Is he, O Adhaymazd! who is a Kai or a Karap, or 
he who is a most evil ruler in authority, mingled 
again with the good?’ 41. And Atharmazd spoke 
thus: ‘Even he®.’ 

42. Zaratüst also enquired thus: ‘Is he, too, 
O Atharmazd! who is one of those of the good 
sovereignty, mingled again with the good; or these, 
such as the Kaisar and Khákán??' 43. And 
Athaymazd spoke thus: ‘Even that former, O 
Zaratüst !’ 

44. About the same iniquitous‘ this, too, he says, 
namely: ‘When they are aware and understand 
about the sayings (galimakó) due to righteousness, 
they are pleased, so that a bribe seems better to 
them than duty and good works; they love the 
darkness rather than light, the existence they love 


1 Assuming that toshtd-minisnd is a miswriting of toshinó- 
mínisnó. 

2 That is, after expiating his misdeeds by his allotted punishment. 
The last thirteen Pahlavi words of $$ 42, 43 are also added here 
by mistake in the MS. 

3 The Byzantine emperor and the sovereign Khan of the invaders 
from the east. 

* Mentioned in $$ 37, 39. 


104 DÎNKARD, BOOK VII. 


is the worst existence rather than the best existence, 
and they promote difficulty. 45. Concerning them, 
too, I tell thee that they are more to be destroyed 
than the leaping (shasf6) serpent which is like 
a wolf or a lion, and they ever advance in malice 
and persecution from that Zizz till when that man 
arrives who is Kitró-méhónó! the righteous, with 
the victorious club. 46. He Zas marched with fifty 
triplets of men? who are disciples, powerful and 
tall, looking after duties and ordinances, wide- 
shouldered, stout-armed, and very hairy (kabed- 
milih), so that their appearance is rough and of 
a black colour?, wherefore the demon and the 
iniquity proceeding from him fear them. 47. He 
also smites the evil spirit, Zoge/Zer with Azs creatures; 
and those three manifest branches, that worship the 
fiend with simultaneous worship, are really these 
who march for eminent service on horses, even the 
Turkish demons with dishevelled hair, the Arab, 
and also Shedaspé * the ecclesiastical Aruman. 


* So spelt here, but in Dk. IX, xli, 6, it is Kitrag-méhónó, 
and other slight variations occur in the best MSS. of Bd. XX, 7, 31; 
XXIX. 5; Byt. III, 25, 26; Dd. XC, 3; butthey can all be traced to 
an original Aitró-méhan = Av. Kithró-maéthanem, ‘of the 
racial home,’ a title applied both to the river and the immortal 
sacerdotal ruler of Kangdez. The latter is supposed to be 
Péshyótanó, a son of king Vistásp, who is expected to restore 
religious rites in Irán and throughout the world. 

? With 150 disciples, as stated in Byt. III, 27, 29, 42. Here it 
is written levatd 50 3-gabráán. 

* Byt. III, 27, 20, 42, states that they wear black marten fur. 

* In Byt. II, 3, 5, 8, 21, this name is written Shégáspih which 
can also be read Shédasfas, and is probably a corrupt pronunciation 
of the name of some Byzantine emperor or general (such as 
Theodosius) who had signally defeated the Persians some time in 


the fifth to seventh century, in which period Zaratüst's millennium 
probably ended, 


CHAPTER VIII, 45-55. 105 


48. ‘And he Zas then to attract men, contented 
and discontented, mostly through the incentive of 
duty; he who is not contented (that is, not agreeing 
with what he says) contentedly pays respect to him, 
O Zaratüst! (so that he brings him into the religion). 
49. Likewise, through that club, he makes oze press 
in the same manner ; so that oze is distressed by his 
hand to hold others zx contempt, through the valiant 
arm and through the youthful bodily organs. 50. 
And he attaches power and triumph to his religion 
of Aühazmazd, and through that power and triumph 
they become ever respected thenceforth, when those 
arrive who are the sons of Zaratüst, who shall pro- 
duce the renovation in an existence undecaying and 
immortal, hungerless and thirstless, the long-con- 
tinued perpetuity including all.' 

51. And about the separation (burinakó) of the 
ten centuries in the one millennium of Zaratüst, and 
the tidings of AüshéZar!, son of Zaratüst, it says 
also this, namely : * When that century fully elapses 
which is the first of the religion of the Mazda- 
worshippers, from the time when Zaratüst came 
forward to Zzs conference, what is the separation of 
this first century?’ 52. And Aühazmaz4 spoke 
thus: ‘The sun conceals zése/f’ 53. ‘What is the 
separation after the second, third, fourth, fifA, sixth, 
seventh, eighth, ninth, ov tenth century?’ 54. And 
Aûharmazd spoke thus: “The sun conceals 2/se/f-" 

55. Then, when thirty winters of the tenth cen- 
tury are unelapsed (that is, thirty winters are 
remaining) a maiden, who is Shemig-abá ?, walks up 


! See Chap. I, 42. 
2 « Having a renowned father,’ the Zváris of Av. Srû tad- fedhri, 


Yt. XIII, 141. 


106 DÍNKARD, BOOK VII. 


ee. 


to the water; she that is the mother of that famous 
AüshéZar, and her former lineage is from Vóhá- 
ró£ó-1 Frahányán! in the family of [sad vástar, the 
son of Zaratüst ‘dat is brought forth by Arang. 
56. Then ske sits in that water and drinks 24, and 
she kindles in a high degree those germs which 
were the third of the last that the righteous Zaratüst 
was dropping forth originally, and they introduce 
that son whose name is the Developer of Righteous- 
ness? 57. Though she is fifteen years old, the girl 
(kanig) as not before that associated with men ° ; 
nor afterwards, when she becomes pregnant, has she 
done so before the time when she gives birth. 

58. When that man becomes thirty years old, the 
sun stands still in the zenith (bálistó) of the sky 
for the duration of ten days and ten nights, and 
it arrives again at that place where it was first 
appointed by allotment, where it occupies one 
finger-dreadth out of the four finger-dveadths, and it 
shines over all the regions which are seven. 59. So, 
too, O Zaratüst! of them themselves, their declara- 
tion is thus, that they know that the separation of 
the millennium, which this religion as heard about 
by listening, is thus ; aud of those who do not even 
then know, that it is something which is different. 

60. Then, when that man becomes thirty years 
old, he confers with the archangels, the good rulers 
and good providers; oz the morrow, in the daylight 
of the day, 77 zs moreover manifest, when the 
embodied existence is thus undistressed — without 


! pee Yt. XIII, 95. 

? The Pahlavi interpretation of Aüshégar which is an im- 
perfect transcript of the Av. Ukhshyad-ereta of Yt. XIII, 128. 

* Pahl. ‘levat gabráánó bara vepaytdd.’ 


CHAPTER VIII, 56—Ix, 2. 107 


a Kai and without a Karap (that is, not deaf and 
blind to the affairs of the sacred beings), and is to 
be appropriated (that is, has not made its own self 
apart from the affairs of the sacred beings), and is 
produced full of life—that it has become extending 
(válán), and remains again great zz various places 
in Airán-vég where the good Dáiti ! zs. 

61. These are the characteristics as regards the 
two centuries which are the ninth and tenth; the 
accuracy of what was to come has continued and 
this has happened, and both are declared as regards 
the accuracy which is stated on evidence as to what 
will happen. 


CHAPTER IX. 


I. About the marvellousness which is after the 
end of the millennium of Zaratüst and the arrival 
of Afishédar, until the end of the millennium of 
AüshéZar and the arrival of Afishédar-mah ; and as 
to tidings of the same period. 

2. The marvellousness of Afishédar as to birth ?, 
glory of person, sayings and actions; the standing 
of the sun ten days amid the sky *; the perishing of 
the fiend of the four-legged race; the production 
of a three-spring cloudless influence * for vegetation; 
the weakening of superfluity and destitution; the 
extreme strengthening of alliance; the gratification 
due to the good friendship of foreigners; the great 


increase of the wisdom of religion; and the praise 
AD o- En tti 
1 See Chap. III, 51, 54; Bd. XX, 13. It is the name of a river. 
2 See Chap. VIII, 55-57. 8 See Chap. VIII, 58. 
4 Pahl. ‘ 3-zarem4 an-avargarih.’ 


108 DINKARD, BOOK VII. 
Pe oo — 


of Aüshédar's smiting with a serpent-scourge of 
several kinds zz the religion of the Mazda-wor- 
shippers. 

3. The mightiness of the resources in the fifth 
century of the same millennium; the manifestation 
of the wizard Mahrküs ' for seven years, in the year 
which is reported in all the regions which are seven; 
the coming on and arrival of the winter of Mahrkás, 
the perishing of most of mankind az animals within 
three winters and in the fourth, through the awful- 
ness of those winters and the witchcraft of Mahrküs ; 
and the dying away of Mahrküs of scanty progeny 
(gasükó-zahisnó), during the fourth winter, through 
the Dahman Áfrin?. 4. The opening of the en- 
closure made by Yim, the coming of mankind and 
animals therefrom, and the complete progress of 
mankind and animals again, arising specially from 
them. 

s. After those winters, the abundant and great 
increase in the milk of cattle, and the abundant 
nourishment of mankind by milk; the less distress 
of body z cattle, the fullness and prosperity of the 
world; the celebrity of assembled mankind, and the 
great increase of liberality. 6. Also the feebleness 


1 Av. Mahrküsha of Westergaard’s Fragment VIII, 2, who is 
evidently a wizard or fiend; according to Pahl. Vd. II, 49 (Sp.) the 
evil winter which was foretold to Yim is called the winter of 
Markûs. In later times this name has been understood as Heb. 
Malkós, ‘autumnal rain ;’ so the idea of the fatal freezing winter 
of Mahrk(s, the intender of death, was abandoned for that of the 
deluging rain of Malkós, as in Mkh. XXVII, 28. In Dd. XXXVII, 
94, both snow and rain are mentioned as produced by Mahrkás or 
Marküs (as it is always written in Pahlavi), and in Sd. IX, 5 only 
his name is stated. The most complete account of him is given in 
our text, 

? The Afrîn of the Amesháspends. 


CHAPTER IX, 3—10. 109 


of poverty among mankind, 7zs/ like what revelation 
mentions thus: ‘Even so he, O Zaratüst! though 
he be more unfortunate than he who is accepting 
from him, is like the creator whose bounty of 
permanent liberality does thus, in the embodied 
existence, remain in his dwelling.' 

7. And this, too, it says, namely: ‘When that 
winter passes away, of which z/ zs said that 24 zs 
boisterous and destructive !, then a wild beast, black 
and wide-travelling, walks vp to the Mazda-worship- 
pers, and thus it thinks, that they wo worship 
Mazda will therefore not finally hate us more than 
him who is their own progeny, the son whom they 
thus bring up as a Mazda-worshipper here below, in 
fondness and freedom from malice towards well- 
yielding cattle. 

8. “Then Ashavahistó calls out to the Mazda- 
worshippers from the upper region, and thus he 
speaks: “ You are for the worship of Mazda; let no 
one of you become such a slaughterer of cattle as 
the slaughterers you have been before. 9. Recom- 
mend increase in gifts, recommend neighbourliness 
in person; are you worshipping Mazda? do you 
slaughter cattle ? do you slaughter those of them 
which give you assistance, which speak to you thus: 
‘On account of your helpfulness ove tells you that 
you are worshipping Mazda and you may eat?’ 
I am in neighbourliness before that, until the deme 
when you exclaim: ‘ Mine ave the serpent and toad.’ 

10. ‘“ And you recommend increase, you recom- 
mend neighbourliness, and the Mazda-worshippers 
slaughter cattle, even those of them who give them 


1 The Pahlavi version of Av. 'stakhrahé meretó zaya’ in 
Westerg. Frag. VIII, 2. 


IIO DÍNKARD, BOOK VII. 


assistance, so that you are worshipping Mazda and 
you eat; I am in neighbourliness before that, until 
the time when you exclaim: ‘Mine ave the serpent 
and toad. 

11. ‘“Contentedly the Mazda-worshippers slaughter 
cattle, contentedly the cattle of the Mazda-worship- 
pers let ‘hem butcher ', and contented are the cattle 
when they do not butcher /Ze(; contentedly the 
Mazda-worshippers eat cattle, and contented are 
the cattle when they eat them. 12. And then, when 
there are spirits, the slaughterers and whatever they 
slaughter, the butchers and whatever they butcher, 
and the eaters and whatever they eat ave alike 
watched dy them.”’ 

13. And this, too, it says, namely: ‘ When that 
century fully elapses, which is the fifth in the second 
millennium as regards the religion of the Mazda- 
worshippers, then of all those who ave upon the 
earth, the existences which are both wicked and 
righteous, two-thirds zz the land of Irán are righteous 
and one-thzrd wicked ; and so likewise the Türánians 
and those who are around Irán remain non-Iránian 
around Irán; the chief increase in dwellings here 
below, of those in the embodied existence, remains 
just as now.’ 

14. And this, too, it says, namely: ‘When that 
millennium as fully elapsed, which is the first of the 
religion of the Mazda-worshippers, what is the 
separation after the first century ?' 15. And Aühaz- 
maz4 spoke thus: ‘The sun conceals z/se/f' 16. 
‘And what is the separation after the second, third, 
fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth, o» tenth 


* Assuming that bür'závand stands for bürin&nd which occurs 
in $ 12. 


CHAPTER IX, IT-22. III 


century?’ 17. And Aühazmazd spoke thus: * The 
sun conceals z¢se/f’ 

18. Then, when thirty winters of the tenth century 
ave unelapsed (aránakó), a maiden, who is Shapir- 
abal, walks up to the water; se that is the mother 
of that good Afishédar-mah 2, and her former lineage 
is from Vóhà-ró£ó-1 Frahányán?* in the family of 
Isadvastar, the son of Zaretüst that is brought forth 
by Arang. 19. Then she sits in that water and 
drinks 7¢, and she kindles in a high degree those 
germs which were the second of the last that the 
righteous Zaratüst was dropping forth originally, 
and they introduce that son whose name is the 
Developer of Worship‘ (that is, he augments 
liberality). 20. Though fifteen years old, the damsel 
(zihánakó) Žas not before that associated with men ; 
nor yet afterwards, when she becomes pregnant, has 
she done so before the time when she gives birth 5. 

21. When that man becomes thirty years old, the 
sun stands still in the zenith of the sky for the 
duration of twenty days and nights *, and it shines 
over all the regions which are seven. 22. So, too, 
the declaration of them themselves is that they know 


! * Having a good father, the Zváris of Av. Vanghu-fedhri, 
Xt alll, 142. 

2 See Chap. I, 42. 3 See Chap. VIII, 55-57. 

* The Pahlavi interpretation of Afishédar-mah which is an 
imperfect transcript of the Av. Ukhshyad-nemangh of Yt. 
XIII, 128. 

5 Compare the summary in Dk. VIII, xiv, 13, as follows :— 
‘The arrival of Afishédar-m4h, son of Zaratüst, at the end of the 
second millennium ; information aóou/ him and his time, and the 
destroyers of the organizers who were within the millennium of 
A üshédar.' 

* The MS. omits a clause here, which occurs in Chap. VIII, 58, 
possibly by mistake, as part of it is given in Chap. X, 19. 


112 DINKARD, BOOK VII. 


that the separation of the millennium, which this 
religion Zzs heard about by listening, is even thus; 
and of those who do not even then know, that it is 
something which is different. 

23. When that man becomes thirty years old, he 
confers with the archangels, the good rulers and 
good providers; oz the morrow, in the daylight of 
the day, z¢ zs moreover manifest, when the embodied 
existence is ‘Aus undistressed—without a Kai and 
without a Karap (that is, not blind and not deaf to 
the affairs of the sacred beings), and is to be 
appropriated (that is, has not made its own self apart 
from the affairs of the sacred beings), and is produced 
full of life—that it has become extending, and is 
again great 77 various places in Airán-vég where 
the good Dáiti zs. 


CHAPTER X. 


1. About the marvellousness which is after the 
end of the millennium of Aüshézar and the arrival 
of Aüshégar-máh, until the end of the millennium of 
Aüshégar-máh and the arrival of Sósháns; and as 
to tidings of the same period. 

2. The marvellousness of Adshédar-mah as to 
birth?, glory of person, sayings, and actions; the 
standing of the sun amid the sky twenty days long ? ; 
and the increase of the milk of cattle arrives at 
a maximum (avartüm), just as what it says, that 
one milks only one mature cow (tóráà az) for a 
thousand men, avd that he brings as much milk 
as a thousand men veguire; also the feebleness of 


* See Chap. IX, 18-20. ? See Chap. IX, 21. 


CHAPTER IX, 23-X, 6. d 


hunger and thirst is /zs/ as it says, that by only 
a single ration one becomes satisfied for three nights, 
and whoever eats a leg of mutton Zas plenty for 
himse/f for three days and nights. 3. The diminu- 
tion of decay and extension (véshth) of life, the 
increase of humility and peace, and the perfection of 
liberality and enjoyment in the world. 

4. Like this which revelation states, that, when 
the first ten winters in the last millennium pass away, 
the Mazda-worshippers then make enquiry together 
thus: ‘ Ave we really more hairy-headed (sar-vars- 
z£-tar) than occurred before, owing to the well- 
yielding cattle, so that food and clothing are less 
necessary for us? Has affection come to us more 
completely, owing to those cattle, than it was ours 
before? Have we grown up less deteriorated in the 
hair, by old age, than z%ose grown up before? Ave 
the thoughts, words, and deeds of our women and 
children more instructed than they were before? 
5. And Zas this thing occurred, that he is classed 
as disqualifed who in training a child has become 
quite retrogressive (pas-üruzd), and is Zzs penalty 
arranged? Does the fiend think of the Karap class, 
and are they utterly destroyed by her through those 
whose thoughts are most evil, devoid of righteous- 
ness, and devoid of a liking for righteousness? 6. 
Near here, in the disturbance of the existences, does 
that happen as heard by us from the ancients, when 
listening 40 the true proclaimers of the Mazda- 
worshippers? And now, even when our numbers 
are so greatly maintaining this dispensation, do we 
sanctify (aharáyinem) righteousness (that is, do we 
perform duty and good works) more vociferously 
and more strenuously ?’ 


[47] I 


114 DÍNKARD, BOOK VII. 


7. This, too, it says, even that no one passes 
away in the last millennium, other than those whom 
they smite with a scaffold weapon !, and those who 
pass away from old age. 8. When fifty-three years 
of that millennium of his have remained, the sweet- 
ness and oiliness in milk and vegetables are so 
completed that, on account of the freedom of man- 
kind from wanting meat, they shall leave off the 
eating of meat, and their food becomes milk and 
vegetables. 9. When three years have remained, 
they shall leave off even the drinking of milk, and 
their food and drink become water and vegetables. 

ro. And in his millennium ave the breaking 
(lánakó) of the fetters of Dahak?, the rousing of 
Kerésáspó? for the smiting of Dahák, the arrival 
of Kai-Khüsró* and his companions for the assis- 
tance of Sósháns in the production of the renovation 
of the universe, and the provision of most of man- 
kind with the Gáthic disposition and law; also the 
occurrence of many other wonders and marvels is 
manifest in that millennium of his. 

11. And this, too, it says, namely: ‘When that 
millennium Žas fully elapsed, which is the second 
of the religion of the Mazda-worshippers, what is 
the separation after the first century?’ 12. And 
Atthaymazd spoke thus: ‘The sun conceals zdself,’ 


13. ‘And what is the separation after the second, 
—————————— NCC 0n 
" Reading pavan dâr snesh, as in some modern copies; but 
the old MS. of 1659 has run the last two words together, so as to 
produce pavan dárégüsh, “as destitute,’ which must be wrong. 

* For details see Byt. III, 55-57; Bd. XXIX, 9; Dd. XXXVII, 97; 
Dk. IX, xv, 2. It may be noticed that this release of the demoniacal 
tyrant is expected to follow the triumph of strict vegetarianism. 

* See further Byt. III, 59-61 ; Bd. XXIX, 7, 8. 

* See Mkh. XXVII, 59-63; LVII, 7; Dd. XXXVI, 3. 


CHAPTER X, 7-18. IIS 


third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth, oz 
tenth century?’ 14. And Adhaymazd spoke thus : 
“The sun conceals z/se/f-' 

Is. And when thirty winters of the tenth century 
are unelapsed, that maiden, who is Góbák-abü !, 
walks up to the water; she that is the mother of that 
testifying Sósháns who is the guide to conveying 
away the opposition of the destroyer, and her former 
lineage is from Vóhà-róZ£ó-i Frahányán? in the family 
of Îsaďvâstar, the son of Zaratüst that is brought 
forth by Arang. 16. ‘That maiden whose title is 
All-overpowerer is thus all-overpowering, because 
through giving birth she brings forth him who over- 
powers all, both the affliction owing to demons, and 
also that owing to mankind * 17. Then she sits in 
that water, when she is fifteen years old, and it 
introduces zz/o the girl him ‘whose name is the 
Triumphant Benefiter, and Zzs title is the Body- 
maker; such a benefiter as benefits (savinéd6) the 
whole embodied existence, and such a déody-maker, 
alike possessing body and possessing life, as petitions 
about the disturbance of the embodied existences 
and mankind *.’ 18. Not before that Aas she asso- 
ciated with men; nor yet afterwards, when she 
becomes pregnant, as she done so before the time 
when she gives birth °. 


1 «Having a testifying father,’ the Pahlavi of Av. Eredad-fedhri, 
Yt. XIII, 142. 

? See Chap. VIII, 55-57. 

3 'The Pahlavi version of Yt. XIII, 142, latter clause. 

* From the Pahlavi version of Yt. XIII, 129. 

^ Compare the summary in Dk. VIII, xiv, 14, 15, as follows :— 
* The coming and arrival of Sósháns, son of Zarat(st, at the end 
of the third millennium, the destroyers of the organizers who were 
within the millennium of Afishédar-m4h, the arrival of Séshins, 


I2 


116 DÍNKARD, BOOK VII. 


19. When that man becomes thirty years old, the 
sun stands still in the zenith of the sky for the 
duration of thirty days and nights, and it arrives 
again at that place where it was appointed by 
allotment. 


CHAPTER XI. 


1. About the marvellousness which is after the 
end of the millennium of AüshéZar-máh and the 
arrival of the Triumphant Benefiter, until the end 
of the fifty-seventh year of Sósháns and the produc- 
tion of the renovation among the existences. 

2. Concerning the marvellousness of Sósháns as 
to splendour and glory of person, it says that ‘when 
the coming of the last rotation of those rotations 
of the seasons of Adshédar-mah occurs, the man 
Sósháns is born! whose food is spiritual and body 
sunny (that is, his body is as radiant as the sun) ;' 
also this, that *he looks on all sides with six-eyed 
power (6-dóisarih), and sees the remedy for perse- 
cution by the fiend.’ 

3. This, too, that with him is the triumphant 
Kayan glory ‘which the mighty Frégün? bore when 
Az Dahák? was smitten by him; also Kai-Khüsrói* 
was bearing it when the Tür Frangrásiyák* was 
smitten by him; also Frangrástyák bore it when 
the Drvé Zénigák * was smitten by him; and Kai- 


and information aóou/ SÓsháns and his time. Also, as to the 
renovation of s/he universe and the future existence, z/ is declared 
that they arise in his time.’ 

* The date here indicated seems to be about twenty-eight years 
later than that intended in Chap. X, 15-19. 

? See Chap. I, 25. * See Chap I, 26. 

* See Chap. I, 39. * See Chap. I, 31, 39. 

* Av. Drvau Zainigáus, an Arab chieftain who invaded Irán 


CHAPTER X, I9-XI, 7. I17 


Vistásp' shall bear it when you fully attract him 
to righteousness, and through it he shall carry 
off the fiend from the concerns of the world of 
righteousness ?.' 

4. And this, too, that in fifty-seven of his years 
there occur the annihilation of the fiendishness of 
the two-legged race and others, and the subjugation 
of disease and decrepitude, of death and persecution, 
and of the original evil of tyranny, apostasy, and 
depravity; ¿kere arise a perpetual verdant growth 
of vegetation and the primitive gift of joyfulness; 
and there are seventeen years of vegetable-eating, 
thirty years of water-drinking, and ten years of 
spiritual food. 

s. And all the splendour, glory, and power, which 
have arisen in all those possessing splendour, glory, 
and power, are in him on whom they arrive together 
and for those who are his, when many inferior 
human beings are aroused splendid 244 powerful; 
and through their power and glory all the troops of 
the fiend are smitten. 6. And all mankind remain 
of one accord in the religion of AühazmazZ, owing 
to the will of the creator, the command of that 
apostle, and the resources of his companions. 

7. At the end of the fifty-seven years the fiend 
and Aharman are annihilated, the renovation for 
the future existence occurs, and the whole of the 
good creation is provided with purity and perfect 


rn ANNE SUME. i 
in early times and killed many with his evil eye, till the Iránians 
invited Frangrástyák to destroy him (see Darmesteter's French 
translation of part of Chap. XLI of Iránian Bundahis in Annales 
du Musée Guimet, vol. xxii, p. 401). 

1 See Chap. I, 41. 

2 From a Pahlavi version of Yt. XIX, 92, 93, with the second 
and third clauses transposed. 


118 DINKARD, BOOK VII. 
eee a 
splendour. 8. Just as revelation states thus: 
‘When that millennium as fully elapsed, which 
is the third of the religion of the Mazda-worshippers, 
that Mazda-worshipper whose name is so Trium- 
phant! then marches forward from the water 
Kanyisà? with a thousand companions and also 
maidens of restrained disposition and blindly- 
striving behaviour?; and he smites the wicked 
people who ave tyrannical, and annihilates them.’ 
9. Then those Mazda-worshippers smite, and 
none are smiting them. 10. Then those Mazda- 
worshippers produce a longing for a renovation 
among the existences, ove ever-living, ever-beneficial, 
and ever desiring a Lord. 11. ‘Then I, who am 
Atthaymazd, produce the renovation according to 
the longing among the existences, ove ever-living, 
ever-beneficial, and ever desiring a Lord.’ 


1 See Chap. X, 17. 

? Reading the name as Pázand ; if it were Pahlavi it would have 
to be read Kánmásái, because Iranian Páz. yi is very like Pahl. 
má. It is Kyánsih in Bd. XIII, 16; XX, 34; XXI, 6, 7, and 
represents Av. Kasava, the brackish lake or sea of Sagastán. 

* Reading ‘va-bigar-#k-i vand khim va-kür-£akhó ras,’ and 
assuming that bigar is Ar. bikr, as an Arabic word is occasionally 
used in the Dinkard (see Chap. II, 2 n) though very rarely. Bd. 
XXX, 17, mentions ‘ fifteen men and fifteen damsels’ as assisting 
Sôshâns at the time of the renovation of the universe. 


DINKARD.—BOOK V. 


CHAPTER I. 


1. The triumph of the creator Athaymazd, and 
glory of complete wisdom, is the divine (ahütg) 
religion of Mazda-worship. 

2. The fifth book is about the sayings of the saintly 
Átür-farnbag !, son of Farukhzád, who was the leader 
of the orthodox, even as to the manuscript which is 
called Gyémará?. 3. The collected replies of Atay 


! He was the leader of the orthodox about a.p. 815-835, and 
held a religious disputation with the heretic Abális in the presence 
of the Khalifah Al-Mâmûn (a.p. 813-833), as detailed in the 
MáZigán-i Gugastak Abális. He was also the first compiler of 
the Dinkard, probably of its first two Books, which are not yet 
discovered, as well as of some of the materials for the other Books. 
(See S. B. E., vol. xxxvii, p. 411, n. 1.) 

? 'The name of this MS. can be only guessed. It occurs three 
times in each of the two MS. authorities, B and K43, and the 
simplest reading of five of these six occurrences would be 
Síimrá, so that the remaining one (Sarm4) may be neglected as 
a corruption. A final 4 in Pahlavi is a very certain indication 
of a Semitic word, for if a final of similar form occurs in an 
Iránian word, it represents either h or kh; so if the name were 
Iránian, its most probable reading would be Stmurkh. But, in 
$ 3, it is intimated that the MS. belonged to an ancient tribe, or 
congregation (ram); it also seems, from Chap. IV, 8, 9, that the 
religion of this tribe was not so inconsistent with Zoroastrianism 
as to prevent its members being taught that orthodox faith; and 
§§ 4, 5 of the present chapter appear to quote from that MS. some 


120 DÍNKARD, BOOK V. 


farnbag, son of Farukhzág, the leader of the ortho- 
dox, about several significant questions that ave the 
wonder of the moderns, which ave like the friendly 
words, spoken by him as 40 those of the ancient 
tribe! (káàd mon-ramán) who call 7¢ really their 
Gyémará, which ave obtaining? a like wonder for 
them openly accessible to him *. 

4. About the unswerving and co-operating chief- 
tainship of those forefathers who went in mutually- 
friendly command of troops, and the complete 
enclosure of that tribe within the military control of 
Bükht-Narsíh * 5. About the disabling of vicious 
habits and evil deeds, which are entirely connected, 
and of the heinous demon-worship and mischief which 


particulars regarding the siege of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar. 
From these circumstances we may suspect that Átür-farnbag, 
while collecting materials for his Dinkard, had asked some Jewish 
friends what information their MSS. contained regarding the old 
Persians, as the two peoples had been in contact, more or less, 
ever since the time of the Achaemenian dynasty. If he did so 
enquire, the Jews would naturally search in the Talmud, in which 
references to the Persians still survive, though the text is no 
longer complete. The question is, therefore, whether the MS., 
whose name has been provisionally read Simrá, can have had 
any connection with the Talmud. It will be at once evident to 
any Pahlavi student that Pahl. st may be read gyê equally well, 
and that we have no better reason for reading Simrá than for the 
Gyémará, which has been put into the text, as a suggestion 
that Atür-farnbag was really referring to the Gemará of the 
Jews, the supplement to their commentary upon Scripture. 
Whether this can be clearly proved remains to be seen, and 
positive evidence seems scanty. 

' Or ‘ congregation.’ * Or ‘including (vandig).' 

* Pahl. * münsánó ham-shküp-vindig frs aübas yehamtinisnfg.’ 
From which it appears as if there had been a mutual interchange 
of information between him and his Jewish friends. 

* The Pahlavi form of Bu‘At-i-najar, or Nebuchadnezzar. 


CHAPTER I, 4-9. TA 


are owing to them, through the ruler Kat-Loharásp! 
being sent, with Bükht-Narsih, from the country of 
Irán to Béta-Makdis? of Aram, and ¢hezr remaining 
in that quarter. 6. And the orthodox belief in the 
rude particulars of religious custom in the mutual 
deltberation of those of the tribe, the acquaintance 
with religion of a boor (durüstakó-1), the difficult 
arrangements, and the enquirer doubtful of the reli- 
gion after the many controversial, deliberative, and 
cause-investigating questions and answers adapted 
to the importunities of that wordy disciple °. 

7. About how the accepting of this religion dy 
the prophets before Zaratüst occurred *, how the pure 
and saintly Zaratüst of the Spitimas came, and who 
will afterwards come as bringers of the same pure 
and good religion hereafter®. 8. That is, of the 
prophets, apostles, and accepters of the religion, 
there were they who accepted 77 concisely and com- 
pletely such as Gâyômard was, from whom came 
irregularly (durüstakó) suc as Masyé and Styámak, 
Háósháng, Tákhmórup, Yim, Frézàn, MánüsZihar, 
the Sámán, the Kayán, and also many other leaders 
in those times’. 9. And their acceptance expressly 
at various times is produced for action, and thereby 
the adversity of the creatures is removed, benefit 


1 The father of Kai-Vistásp (see Bd. XXXI, 28, 29; XXXIV, 7). 
His expedition to Jerusalem is mentioned in Pahl. Mkh. XXVII, 
67, and by some Arab writers. 

2 «The holy place,’ a title of Jerusalem. 7 

3 Not identified. From this point to Chap, IV, 7, Atûr-farnbag 
must have used the same authorities as the writer of Dk. VII; 
but he returns to the Gyémará in Chap. IV, 8. 

* Dk. VII, i, 7-40. 5 Ibid; 4t. *- Ibid. 42. 

7 See the details in Dk. VII, i, 7-40. $$ 1-8 have been already 
translated in Grundriss der iranischen Philologie, ii, 93-94. 


122 DÍNKARD, BOOK V. 


and prosperity ave sought, the world is controiled, 
and the creator and good creations are propitiated. 


CHAPTER II. 


1. In the pure light and equal to the archangels— 
collected together and reckoned together, since the 
original creation, and completely unmixed—Zara- 
tüst was spiritually fashioned and provided unde- 
fectively for the acceptance and propagation of the 
religion in the world'. 2. And when he is sent for 
the manifestation of restrained saintliness (mókih) 
and bodily substance,great glory and radiance become 
as much discernible in 42m as the same Zad come 
into the posterity of Yim who are Pórüsháspó ?, his 
father, and Dûkdâûb * who is his mother; and also 
while Ze is &ezzg born and for the duration of life, he 
produced a radiance, glow, and brilliance from the 
place of his own abode, that issued intensely and 
strongly, like the splendour of fire, to distant 
lands *. 

3. Also about the wizards and witches, tyrants, 
Kigs, and Karaps, and other miscreants who have 
produced outrage for him during his birth and child- 
hood, with desire for his destruction; who ave 
manifestly come about Zzs death ox disablement, and 
even so far as ¢hose who have come into the visible 
assembly about the destruction of Zís glory and 
other causes of helplessness . 4. And also including 
the wolves and other wild beasts, to whom Ze was 


1 


Dk. VII, ii, 1, 2, 14-21, 36-42, 46, 415 Z8. Bill, 4. 
? Ibid. r3. * Ibid. 3-8; Zs. XIII, 1-3. 

* Ibid. 56-58; Zs. XIV, 7. 

* Dk. VII, iii, 5-14; Zs. XVI, I=", 


CHAPTER II, I-8. 123 


cast forth by those of Pórüsháspó's kinsmen who 
were wizards, and the kindred of those frequenting 
demon-worship, but only as a test !. 

5. Zu like manner zź is declared ¢hat, on account 
of Vohümanó zng welcome to him, he laughed out- 
right at birth ? 6. His coming for conference tth 
Aühazmazd?, and owing to Zzs accepting the religion, 
Aharman and many demons and fiends have come 
to him with exhibition of fear, offering of service, 
and the argument and entreaty of supplicants ; and 
all these have returned from him disapprovingly, 
defeatedly, and confusedly, through the pure pro- 
clamation of his Avesta, the unique perfection of 
Aühazmaz4Z's will *, and the indication of a prepared 
armament (virástó-zénih), a declared reward, a 
powerful sovereignty, and a way of injury Zo the 
destroyer. 

7. Also the triumph of the sacred beings z» the 
end, and the peculiarity of the joint control of the 
demons ; how, before that, they rushed openly into 
the world and have dwindled, zerr bodily forms ae 
shattered^, and they are so converted into secret 
decay, that ZZer supplicants, deceived and de- 
ceivers, became awful disputants through confession 
of it. 

8. And when, through completely accepting the 
religion from AühazmazZ, he came to the obedient 
king Kai-Vistásp to attract those of the world, he 
exhibited glorious actions of many kinds and the 


1 Dk. VII, iii, 15-19; Zs. XVI, 8-11. 
EIBid,.2; Zs, XIV, 25, t3. 

s Ibid. 6o-iv, 1; Zs. XXI, r1-XXII, 13. 
4 Dk. VII, iv, 36-41, 61, 62. 

5 [bid. 42. 44—46, 63. 


124 DINKARD, BOOK V. 


smiting of demons and fiends ; and Ze openly spoke 
the thoughts of king Vistásp and many of the multi- 
tude about hidden matters', zkus: ‘A person is 
possessing life only by destiny, and without his body, 
but with a like destiny, the person possessing life 
is restored;’ Ze was also opposing many wizards, 
demon-worshippers, demon-consulters, and those 
seduced óy? deceivers who are awful disputants. 
g. And this was the utterance of those twelve stars 
whose names ave those of the twelve zodzacal con- 
stellations, and the primitive learned of Bapél °, that 
have come to these, who ave asking questions of the 
chief rulers of Khvaniras, Zave to justify z/, in the 
controversy, with the spiritual and material customs 
and rude observances which are diversely manifested, 
onwards from ¢he £tze of Yim the splendid ; and the 
evidence of it, discernible with him, was that of 
Vohümanó, Ashavahistó, the fire, and some other 
good spirits 4, 

10. Afterwards, too, the estimating and weighing 
of the whole utterance of the religion of A ûharmazd 
were held out by him to Vistásp and those of the 
world, as very accountably a wonder; and further, 
too, he remained as 24 were more conflicting with 
fellow-disputants than his own words opposing the 
fellow-disputants. 

rr. Also when, through the effect of glory and 
the struggle for being saved, every class of apostles 
and prophets and manifestation of tokens and such- 
like were, with certain and striking evidence, casting 
down blessings, even thereupon ‘the obedient king 


* Dk. VII, iv, 65, 71. 
* B has ‘and demon-separatists (va-shéda-gvtdakan),’ 
! DEVI 19, is * Ibid. 74, 85; Zs. XXIII, 7. 


CHAPTER II, 9-15. 125 


Kai-Vistásp's fear of the adversary of religion, and 
also other causes, arose, on account of which he 
was then accepting the propagation of the religion !, 
when its great glory and beauty? were seen by him. 
12. At first, Zarir?, Spend-dåg *, Frashóstar, and 
Gámásp 5, several of the realm who were noble, con- 
spicuous, and well-acting, the good and princes of 
mankind, beheld visibly the will and desirableness of 
Aühazmaz4 and the archangels, and the progressive 
religion of the creatures, fit for those completely 
victorious (hüZiragánig). 

13. Lastly, the seizure and capturing (girinisnó) 
by the demons ave beheld and watched; and they 
have remained opposing, owing to the number of 
idolators competing wranglingly. 14. And much 
conflict and slaughter occurred, which arose purely, 
so that the mingling of the religion in the world 
proceeded $. 

15. There are also his pure new bringers and 
complete controllers of the same religion, Aûshêdar 7, 
AüshéZar-máh?, and Sósháns?*; and through the 
complete progress of this religion of Aühazmaz4, all 
the good creatures become without disturbance and 
all-radiant *°. 


! Dk. VII, iv, 87. 

? K43 has varázó; but B, omitting the first letter, has 14fô, 
* praise.’ 

3 A brother and commander-in-chief of Vistásp, killed in the 
battle with Argásp, see Bd. XXXI, 29; YZ. 54-56. 

* A son of Vistásp; see Dk. VII, vii, 5; YZ. 82-85. 

5 Two brothers, see Chap. III, 4; Dk. VII, vi, 12 ; Zs. XXIII, ro. 

* See Chap. III, 1. 7 Dk. VII, viii, 55-ix, 13. 

$ Dk. VII, ix, 18-x, 10. * Dk. VII, x, 15-xi, 5. 

1. pk, VII xi 6*r1. 


126 DÍNKARD, BOOK V. 


CHAPTER III. 


1. About that which is manifested as regards the 
propitiousness, forward intellect, and complete virtue 
of Zaratüst, it is openly declared that, according to 
his explaining statements, there occurred such events 
as the victory of Kai-Vistásp and the Iranians over 
Argasp' and an army of Khyóns and other foreigners 
of innumerable kinds, and details on that subject; 
also other assistance of Vistásp and those of the 
realm in other necessities. 

2. The killing of Zaratüst himself y Bradré-résh ? 
the Tür; the provision of a chariot ġy Sritó ? of the 
Visraps ; and whatever is on those subjects. 

3. Also, specially, matters in the times to come, 
each consecutively, whew therein arrive devastators 
such as Alexander +, and the killer of Akré-khiradó 5, 
Mahrktis *, Dahák 7, and other devastators; extenders 
of belief (viravisn-valan) such as the Messiah 
(Mashikh), Mánih 5, and others ; periods such as the 
steel age?, that mingled with iron, and others; and 
organizers, restorers, and introducers of religion, such 


! Dk. VII, iv, 77, 83, 84, 87-90; v, 7; this victory occurred in 
the thirtieth year of the religion, see Zs. XXIII, 8. 

! Dk. VIL v1» n. * Dk. VII, vi, 2-11. 

* Dk. VII, vii, 7. 

* Or Aghrérad (Av. Aghraératha), killed by his brother 
Frásiyáv or Frangrásiyák of Tür, see Bd. XXIX, 5; XXXI, 15, 
20—22. 

* Dk. VII, i, 945 ix, 3. " Ibid. i, 26. 

* A heretic who flourished A.D. 2 16-242 ; see Dk. IX, xxxix, 13 n. 

* According to Byt. II, 21, 22, the steel age was the time of 


Khüsró AnóÓshérván, and that mingled with iron at the end of 
Zaratüst's millennium, 


CHAPTER II; I-IV, I. 127 


as Artakhshatar', Átàzpág ?, Khasréi®, Péshyótan 4, 
Aüshégar, Adshédar-mah, Sósháns 5, and others. 

4. The formation of custom, and the indications 
which Zave come to manifestation and wz/ arrive at 
various periods; and the proclamation of these, too, 
by Gamasp 5, from the teaching of Zaratüst, is what 
he wrote, together with the Avesta and Zand, upon 
oxhides, and it was written wzth gold, and kept in 
the royal treasury”. 5. And it was from it the high- 
priests of the rulers made many copies ; and after- 
wards, too, it is from it that it happened, both to the 
less intelligent and the corrupters, that ZZey were 
introducing different opinions avd different views. 


CHAPTER IV. 


1. About the selectness and perfection of the race 
of Iran, that is, how the destroyer and the mingling 
of defects came into the creation, first into the dis- 
tribution of the race [of mankind]? from the children 
of Siyámak ?, and good intellect, good disposition, 


1 Ardashir Pápakán (A.D. 226—241), the founder of the Sásánian 
dynasty. 

2 Son of Máraspend, and prime minister of Shahpühar II 
(A.D. 309-379). 

3 Anóshérván (A.D. 531-578). 

* A son of Vistásp and immortal ruler of Kangdez, see Dk. VII, 
iv, 81. 

5 See Chap. II, 15. * See Chap. II, 12. 

7 This was the original Avesta prepared by order of Vistásp, as 
stated in the last chapter of Dk. III, $ 3 (see S. B. E., vol. xxxvii, 
p. xxxi). 

* B omits the words in brackets. 

* Son of Masyé, called Sámak in Dk. VII, i, r5. 


128 DINKARD, BOOK V. 


proper affection, proper praise, proper modesty, 
observance of hope, liberality, truth, generosity, good 
friendship, and other capability, glory, and proper 
duty are more particularly included for Fravak !, and 
again altered for frontier peoples. 

2. Such-like goodness and glory, again, through 
selection from a promiscuous origin—even till the 
coming on of various new contaminations, from the 
demons, among the children of Fravak—were for 
Háósháng and Vaégered’, as Háósháng through 
superior glory was ruler of the world, and Vaégered 
through provincial government (dahyükánih) be- 
came the cultivator and cherisher of the world ; and 
their well-destined descendants? aggrandized the 
race of the monarchs among the well-born provincial 
governors (dahyükán). 

3. In union, such-like glory and goodness pro- 
ceeded, mutually connected, in various ages as settled 
by the annals (madig4n), and the frontiers of Atür * 
are penetrated ; also in various annals ZZere were in 
succession such men as Tákhmórup, Yim, Frégün 
the Áspigán, and Airi£ of Iran, the progenitor of 
Manas, Mants-khvarnar, and MánüsZihar 5. 

4. And, besides including this one, who was a 
monarch of superior glory, and other monarchs such 
as are also in the same race*, the Kayáns? were 
——— — ——— E SERie 


* Son of Siyamak; he was progenitor of the fifteen undeformed 
races of mankind (see Bd. XV, 25, 3o, 31). 

" Dk. VII, i, 16-18. “ K43 has ‘children,’ 

* Probably Assyria; but it is possible to read atval as Ar. 
a/val, and to translate ‘ancient frontiers.’ 

* For the foregoing names see Dk. VII, i, 19-30; ii, 70. 

* Such as Aüzóbó in Dk. VII, i, 31. 


* From Kai-Kobád to Kai-Khüsró, as stated in Dk. VEE, 
33-49. 


CHAPTER IV, 2-9. 129 


chosen. 5. Even thus, as regards the Kayáns, the 
annals Zave always to consider him who is monarch 
as the right oze, who is a fellow-descendant of the 
lineage, and in whom the glory is residing. 

6. The creator Athaymazd has informed Néryó- 
sang!, his own reminder, al a similar instance is 
the supreme Zaratüstship, and the glory of the reli- 
gion due to the same; also many othcr reasons, 
which ave recountable, ave declared in the Avesta, 
indications known only Zo an Iranian person of the 
best lineage. 7. And this, too, he has said, namely : 
‘Great glory and goodness of this description are 
appropriatable by the same race, and ave even now * 
visibly manifest.’ 

8. About what ave the requirements of the tribe 
of those who call ZZzs really their Gyémara and*how 
they are effected by our acquaintance with revelation, 
that is, dy much recitation of it; only, several occa- 
sions (yávar 1-£and) are necessary in these times. 
9. Also action and precaution ave possible for them, 
and among the actions and precautions ove is to 
assume more especially law and custom, and what- 
ever was perverted by us and again made true; and, 
as to those taught, several persons who are intel- 
lectual, seeking means, and friends of the soul, Lave 
come to teach complete delusions to them ; also for 
the same tribe and whomever it is proper to teach, 
when it is necessary for them, even a worldly 
BEEN 2 S nn L — 

1 The usual messenger of Afiharmazd, see Dk. VII, iv, 84, 85. 

? B has 'even anew, by writing kevan backwards, which 
converts the word into navak. From Chap. I, 7 to this point, 
the compiler could have found very little of his materials in a 
Jewish MS., excepting such as had been recently obtained from 
Persian sources. 


[47] K 


130 DÍNKARD, BOOK V. 


priestly authority is guiding for /Za/ same tribe, 
because he has come}. 


* It would seem that the tribe professed a different religion, but 
one that bore some resemblance to the Parsi faith in certain 
essential particulars. The remaining five-sixths of Dk. V are 
devoted to a miscellaneous collection of religious subjects, resem- 
bling a Riváyat. 


SELECTIONS OF ZAD-SPARAM. 


K 2 


SELECTIONS OF ZAD-SPARAM* 


CHAPTER XII. 


1. About the coming of the religion at a given 
time beng a resemblance such-like as the birth of 
a child through two united powers, which are the 
reception of semen y females in procreation, and 
delivering z¢ back to the fathers, and a period of 
struggling and intermingling, especialy by two 
means: a monarchy with? religion of the same 
tenets (ham-váZ-dénóih), and the existence of 
similar tenets to those of the monarchy zm” the 
custom of the religion. 2. The religion of the 
Mazda-worshippers, when the period of material 


1 Zád-sparam was Dastür of Sirkán, about thirty parasangs 
south of Kirman, in A.D. 881. At a later date, probably about 
A.D. 900, he compiled three series of Selections, from religious 
texts then extant, and these have been preserved by the Parsis in 
the same MSS. as contain the DáZistán-i Dinik (see the Intro- 
duction). The first eleven chapters of this first series of Selections 
have been already translated in S. B. E., vol. v, pp. 155-186, as 
they refer to some of the subjects detailed in the Bundahis. The 
remaining chapters are here translated, except the last which refers 
to the Nasks and Gáthas, and will be found in S. B. E., vol. xxxvii, 
pp. 401-405. The MS. authorities for the text are K35 and T 
(see p. 2 and Introduction). 

? T has ‘devoid of.’ 


134 SELECTIONS OF ZAD-SPARAM. 


Á TT O 


organization is being converted again into a spiritual 
nature, became manifest on the earth, first through 
Spendazmad! and afterwards through Aûharmazd, 
like the reception of a child ġy mothers and de- 
livering 24 back to the fathers. 

3. The manifestation of the religion through 
Spendaymad was at that time when Frasiyav* kept 
back the water from the country of Iran, and 
brought the water again; in damsel form she was 
a speaker for 7/s manifestation, 24 reply 7o foreigners, 
at the house of MánüsZihar?, the monarch of the 
country of Irán. 4. She was also dressed, and wore 
radiant clothing which shone out on all sides for 
the length of a Hásar *, which is a distance, like a 
Parasang ; and, tied on her waist, she wore a golden 
sacred girdle which was the religion of the Mazda- 
worshippers itself. 

5. As to the belt of the religion, it is ¢hat to which 
are connected the thirty-three fetters upon the thirty- 
three sins ë, according to which all sin is divided ; so 
that (kà) the damsels, by whom the tied sacred girdle 
of Spendaymad was seen, have become impetuous 
(taftigó) after that for a tied girdle, on account of 
its seeming beautiful. 

6. And this was the motherhood which is supplied 
through Spendaymad, as a gift, in the year 528 


' The female archangel who has special charge of the earth and 
virtuous women (see Dk. VII, ii, 19 n). 

? See Dk. VII, i, 31; and regarding his irrigation canals, see 
Bd. AX, 1", 345; XXL 

* See Dk. VII, i, 29. 

* A thousand steps of the two feet, or Roman mile ; see Bd. 
XXVI, 1. 

* Thirty sins are detailed in Mkh. XXXVI, and thirty-three good 
works in XXXVII (see S. B. E., vol. xxiv, pp. 71-75). 


CHAPTER XII, 3-IO. 135 


before Zaratüst came out to Zs conference !, which 
is one of their statements from the annals of the 
religion čz a manuscript of the ancients. 

7. The name of Zaratüst is also cited on the 
earth at 300 years before his conference ?. 8. For 
Irán, at the supplication even of the priests in the 
land, and for the sake of the pacification of a dispute 
arisen, Aühazmazg produced a great ox, by whom 
the boundary of Irán next to Türán was intimated 
by pawing with Zzs hoofs, and he was kept in a jungle. 
9. Whenever contention arose, the boundary was 
fully made known by that ox, until it was the wish 
of Kai-Üs to take, fully covetously, a portion of the 
land of Taran back zz£» Irán, and he saw that the 
ox is about to act very ill-naturedly, because it was 
not besought with forms which were prescribed for 
it, where a boundary was intimated by it °. 

IO. There were seven brothers, and he who was 


1 [f this coming to conference with the spirits be ‘the coming of 
the religion,’ in the thirtieth year of Vistásp's reign, then, according 
to Bundahis chronology, these 528 years will carry us back to 
twenty-eight years before the accession of Mânûskîhar. As any 
alteration in the date of Mânûskîhar’s accession would disturb the 
millennial arrangement of Bd. XXXIV, it is probable that some 
copyist has miswritten the ciphers, and we ought to read 428. 
This legend appears not to occur elsewhere. 

? According to Bd. XXXIV, 7, Kaí-Üs reigned from 360 to 210 
years before ‘the coming of the religion.’ At this point a dislocation 
of the text occurs in all existing MSS., owing to the misplacement 
of a loose folio in some unknown copy written before 1530; the 
contents of this folio, $$ 8-16, are found in the existing MSS. 
three folios further on (after Chap. XIV, r4), and are here restored 
to their original position, as determined by the meaning of the 


text. 
s T has ‘by that ox.’ This legend is also told in Dk. VII, ii, 


62-66. 


136 SELECTIONS OF ZAD-SPARAM. 


the seventh was called Sritó'! the Seventh, the 
largest in body and chief in strength, belonging to 
those instructed in many subjects for Kai-Us, and 
he was among his princes. 11. Kai-Us summoned 
him into Ais presence and ordered 47m thus: ‘Go 
and kill that ox in the jungle !’ 

12. Sritó went, azd the ox whom he wished to 
kill expostulated with him, in human words, thus: 
‘Do not kill me! for though thou canst kill me, he 
whose guardian spirit is in the Hóm, the death- 
dispeller, wz// also become manifest on the earth, Ze 
whose name is Zaratüst of the Spitámas ?, and wz 
proclaim thy bad action in the world. r3. And the 
distress in thy soul becomes such as is declared in 
revelation thus: “ As it occurs to him, so it does to 
Vadak?, when they mention his iniquity," and thy 
death becomes the like and, owing to death, it is 
mixed up with hers (that is, owing even to hers is 
the death of Sritó).' 

14. When those words were heard by him, Sritó 
turned back, and went again to Kai-Us; also by his 
manner, and even apart from this, he stated * what 
the ox had spoken with awfulness, ard also thus: 


' Srító, the seventh son (compare Dk. VII, li, 64), is not easy to 
identify. He could not have been Thrita the father of Keresáspa, 
because this Thrita the Sámán is said to have been a third son in 
Pahl. Yas. IX, 30 (Sp). He may have been Sritó of the Visraps, 
whose soul visited Vistásp in the latter part of his reign, about 350 
years later, regarding which a legend is related in Dk. VII, vi, 
2-11, and again mentioned in Dk. V, iii, 2; but there-is a want of 
corresponding details for identification. 

* "This is the citation of his name mentioned in $ 7. 

* The mother of Dahák, whose iniquity is considered as equal 
to that of the evil spirit, see Dd. LXXII, 5; Dk. IX, x, 3. 


' T has “also by his manner he intimated end separately 
stated,’ 


CHAPTER XII, I1—20. t37 


“I am more desirous /Zaz any one who is in the 
earth created by righteousness, tal you should now 
order destruction for the ox.’ 

15. And Kai-Us uttered Zs will, with the con- 
viction of superior wisdom, thus: ‘It is not certain 
whether he whose guardian spirit is in the Hêm, 
the death-dispeller, is himself, or not; and if he be, 
and be born!, whether he will become manifest, or 
not;’ and he commanded with severity, thus: ‘Go 
and kill it!’ 

16. And Sritó spoke thus: ‘/¢ zs not that I am 
without strength to kill, because z¢s reprieval by me 
was Owing to its remonstrance, mentioned to me, 
that a high-priest is to arise ?. 

17. So z£ is declared thus, zz another revelation 
(dénó zagái) *, when the Türánians were backward 
in heart, Kai-Üs spoke thus: ‘Go out to a certain 
jungle, in which dwell many chiefs of the witches, 
and they w% cut thee up without any striving of 
heart.’ 

18. And Sritó went up to the jungle, were many 
witches saw him, who kept their jaws open, and they 
spoke about the handsome man thus: ‘Slay and do 
not spare!’ 19. And compassion having gone out 
of his heart, he went back to the other jungle and, 
with his fist, he broke the back of the ox in three 
places; and the ox, awfully convulsed (skiftó bar- 
hamakó), kept p an outcry. 

20. After the slaughter of the ox, owing to its 

convulsed state which was heard by him, the 


1 T omits ‘and be born.’ 

2 The misplaced folio, which begins with § 8, ends here, but it 
is not quite certain that a few lines of text are not still missing. 

3 T has ‘at another Zime (bên zagá).' 


138 SELECTIONS OF ZAD-SPARAM. 


remembrance of it then became grievous to Srító ; 
and he went back to Kai-Us, and informed him how 
it was, and begged him that he sZoz/Z finish off by 
slaying him !, because his life was not desirable. 

21. Kai-Üs spoke thus: ‘Skal? I slay thee, for 
it was not designed by thee?’ 

22. And Sritó spoke thus: ‘If thou wilt not slay 
me, then I sha// slay thee.’ 

23. Again Kai-Us spoke thus: ‘Do not thou 
slay me, for I am the monarch of the world.’ 

24. Sritó continued Zs discontent, until Kai-Üs 
ordered him thus: ‘Go out to a certain jungle, 
because a witch in the shape of a dog is in it, and 
she will slay thee.’ 

25. Zhen Sritó went out to that jungle, and that 
witch in the shape of a dog was seen by him; after 
he smote the witch, she became two; and he con- 
stantly smote ¢hem till they became a thousand, and 
the host (gird@6) of them slew Sritó on the spot. 


CHAPTER XIII. 


I. About the glory of Zaratüst becoming manifest 
even before Zs birth, z¢ is thus declared, that forty- 
five years before ¢he time when Zaratüst came out 
to his conference?, when Frénó gave birth ¿o the 
mother of Zaratüst?, whom they called Dakdak, it 
—_——_— — — RHET SS 


' T has ‘that he should command the slaying of him.' 

* That is, forty-five years before he was thirty years old (see 
Chap. XXI, 1-14), 

* It is necessary to translate in this manner, to agree with Dk. 
VII, ii, 3, but the text, which is ambiguous, runs as follows :— 
‘amat Frénóg (Frénó-1?) Zaratüst am, zyasin Dükdakóg karítuntó, 


CHAPTER XII, 2I-XIII, 6. I39 


came down from the endless light, in the manner of 
fire, and mingled with the fire which was before her ; 
and from the fire it mingled with the mother of 
Zaratüst 1. 

2. For three nights it was manifest, to all passers- 
by, as a species of fire zz the direction of the house, 
and passers oz the road always saw great radiance. 
3. Also when she became fifteen years old, the radi- 
ance of that glory which was in her, was even such 
that, on the path she was walking along, its bright- 
ness was then shed by her ?. 

4. About the combination of Zaratüst, whose 
guardian spirit is reverenced; that is, his guardian 
spirit, in the Hóm, and his glory are given the cow's 
milk, by his father and mother drinking 24 up ?, and 
Ais spiritual life (ahvó) came into the combination, 
as was proclaimed y his statements in the manuscript 
about the Guidance of the Ceremonial *. 

5. About the backward connection of Zaratüst 
with AühazmazZ, through the two who are Yim, the 
best of the worldly existences, and Néryósang of the 
spirits. 6. The enumeration of the lineage of Zara- 
tüst is Zaratüst, son of PórüshaspÓ *, of Purtaráspó, 


zerkhüntó ;' which might also be translated thus: ‘when Frénó, 
the mother of Zaratüst, whom they called Dükdak, was born.’ 
This Frénó, whether mother or daughter, does not seem to 
correspond with any Freni mentioned in the Avesta. 

! See Dk. VII, ii, 2, 3. ? [bid. 7, 8. 

* [bid. 46, 47. 

* Not identified, but probably like the Nírangistán. 

5 This genealogy was, no doubt, derived originally from the 
same source as that in Dk. VII, ii, 7o, but there are several 
variations, especially in orthography, which are here preserved, 
unless clearly copyist’s blunders. The names marked with an 
asterisk are written in Pázand. 


140 SELECTIONS OF ZAD-SPARAM. 


of Ahürvaaáspó, of Haésadaspé, of Aikhshnüs, of 
Paitiraspó, of Aregadarsi*, of Kharedhar*, of Spita- 
man, of Vaédistó, of Ayazem, of Fris, of Arig*, of 
Dfrasr6b6, of MánüsZihar, of Mánüs-khürnar, of 
Mánüs-khürnák, whom Néryósang the messenger 
of Atharmazd brought, and whose mother was 
Vizag, daughter of Aryag, of Sritak, of Bitak, of 
Frazüsak, of Züsak, of Fragüzag, of Güzag, daughter 
of Airi£, son of Frégün of the Áspigáns to the total 
of ten Áspigáns, of Yim, of the Vivang,has, of the 
Ayang,has, of the Anang,has, of Héshang, of Fravak, 
of Siyámak, of Masiya, of Gáyómard. 


CHAPTER XIV. 


1. About the wonderful striving of the fiend for 
the destruction of Zaratüst. 2. When it became 
near to his birth, the Fever demon, the Pain demon, 
and the Wind demon of Aharman, each one with 
150 demons, have come out to kill Zaratüst, and 
from his spirit they have gone forth to 4s mother. 
3. And she is hurried from there by Fever, Pain, 
and Wind ; and at the distance of one league (para- 
sang) ¿kere was a wizard, Impudent (Storkó) dy 
name, who was the most medical of wizards ; in hope 
of practice he stood up from his seat, as she stopped 
in her progress. 

4. A messenger of Aüharmazd uttered a cry 
thus: ‘Do not go to a wizard! for they are not 
healing (béshazintdàr) for thee; but go back to 
the house, wash #ky hands on the morrow with cow's 
butter held over the fire, also burn (tapd)! firewood 


1 T has ‘consume (viddzó). 


CHAPTER XIV, I-8. 141 


and incense for thy own self and thy progeny which 
is in thy womb. 5, And she acted accordingly and 
became well!; and the co-operators of the demon, 
and those of equal power, who Za4 not obtained 
their remedy from her body, are again exposed ?, and 
spoke thus: 'On account of the existence of fire 
from all sides we have not succeeded; 7/ zs a help 
for every one who is her friend more than opponent ; 
therefore it was not for us, because of the power 
within her.’ 

6. The same night as she gave birth, Aharman 
selected commanders and arrayed his champions 
(güzd); there are some who are with one thousand 
demons, and there are some who ave with two 
thousand demons; pursuing and attacking they have 
contended. 7. The opposing stand of the sacred 
beings ?, especially of the glory itself at the family * 
fire, was manifest at that birth ; and for its splendour 
and brightness (padr6k6), settled opposite a distant 
place, they have then found no remedy. 

8. At last, Aharman sends Akémané® on, and 
spoke to him thus: ‘Thou canst be very spiritual, 
who canst be most intimate; thou canst go with 
deceit into the mind of Zaratüst, and make him turn 


! Compare Dk. VII, ii, 53-55. 

? T has ‘and all the co-operators who had entered her body, 
and those of equal power who had reached them, returned helpless 
from them? 

3 Thus summarized in Dk. VIII, xiv, 2 :— Also about the 
arrival of both spirits, the good one for developing, and the evil one 
for destroying; the victory of the good spirit, and the rearing of 
Zaratist.’ The ‘rearing’ is continued in Chaps. XV-XX. 

4 Assuming that 4r" stands for 4ser dadak. 


* The archdemon of ‘evil thought’ (Bd. XXVIII, 7) and special 
opponent of Vohümanó, the archangel of * good thought.’ 


142 SELECTIONS OF ZAD-SPARAM. 
er 
his mind to us who are demons. 9. And Athar- 
mazd sends Vohümanó on against him; Akómanó 
advanced to the front, and had come forward to the 
door, and wished to go inside. 

10. Vohümanó schemingly (£árakógarihá) turn- 
ed! back, and exclaimed to Akómanó thus: ‘Go 
inside!’ rr. Akómanó imagined thus: ‘There is 
nothing to be accomplished by me of what was 
mentioned to me, for Vohümanó has gone back.' 
12. And Vohümanó went inside, and mingled with 
the reason (váróm) of Zaratüst, and Zaratüst laughed 
outright ?, for Vohümanó is a gratifying spirit. 

13. Also seven wizards? were seated before him, 
and owing to the light in the dwelling, his 4avzug 
laughed at birth was conveniently seen, which is 
opposed to the Za4:£ of the rest of mankind who cry 
out at birth and are quite terrified. 

14. Also, at the same time of birth, he authori- 
tatively accepted the religion from Aühazmazd, as 
it is stated in revelation, that he spoke at birth thus : 
‘As is the will of the spiritual lord (ahvó) mayst 
thou be who art the officiating priest (zótó) (that is, 
mayst thou be the leader of the creatures) *.' 

15. As Zaratüst, on account of his worldly body, 
spoke with a worldly voice, Adhaymazd spoke zz 
reply to him, on account of the spirits, thus: ‘So 


1 Assuming that stó stands for vastó. 

3 Compare Dk. VIT, iii, 2; V, ii, 5. This laughing is not 
mentioned in Dk. IX, xxiv. 

* * Seven midwives' are mentioned in Dk. VII, iii, 2. 

* This is one form of the Pahlavi Ahunavair (see Dk. IX, xxiv, 
4) At this point the text in the MSS. is interrupted by the 
erroneous insertion of Chap. XII, 8-16, the contents of a loose folio 


in some former copy, which have been restored to their original 
position in this translation. 


CHAPTER XIV, 9-XV, 4. 143 


mayst thou be the priestly authority (rad sháe), and 
so mayst thou be virtuous, owing to whatsoever 
righteousness occurs; and I confidently proclaim ¢hee 
righteous (that is, I am thy controller) '/ 

I6. Another day, Pórüshaspó went and enquired 
of the wizards who kept in front at the place, thus: 
‘What is the cause when infants cry out at birth, 
beyond that whzch occurs when they laugh out- 
right??’ 17. And they replied thus: ‘ Because 
those who are made to cry have seen mortality as 
ther end, and those having laughed Zave seen their 
own righteousness.’ 


CHAPTER XV. 


1. About the brothers who were a band of 
opponents of Zaratüst. 2. The Karaps and Adsikh- 
shes* weve brothers’ sons, and have become the 
devastation (gástáragih) of the Iranians; the 
devastators of the Iranians (Éránán) were from 
KókharéZ*, and Kékharéd was born from Aéshm 
and Mánáüsak, the sister of MánüsZihar*. 3. At the 
place where Zaratüst was born, five brothers have 
been, whose names were BráZz-rükhsh, Bráa-róyisn, 
Brág-résh the Tür, Hazán, and Vadast*. 4. Their 


! Compare Dk. IX, xxiv, 4. ? Compare Dk. VII, iii, 24, 25. 

3 Av, 'Karapá Usikhsh-#4’ of Yas. XLIV, 20c; the Kava, 
a third class of pre-Zoroastrian priests, is also mentioned ibid. 20 d. 
Compare Dk. VII, ii, 9 n. 

* Av. Kahvaredha, Yas. LX, 6, 7 (Sp.) where it is translated 
by kástár, ' diminisher, devastator, of whom it is here said to be 
the father; see also Yt. III, 9, 12, 16. 

* Compare the legend of the descent of the ape and bear from 
a demon and Yimak, sister of Yim, in Bd. XXIII, r. 

* As these names do not occur in the Avesta, their pronunciation 


144 SELECTIONS OF ZAD-SPARAM. 


brotherhood of five—of which the middle ove was 
Brad-résh the Tür, who became more of an adver- 
sary of Zaratdst—was a semblance of the brother- 
hood of five who were sons of Pórüshaspó, of whom 
the middle ove was Zaratist. 

s. Of the four brothers of Zaratüst, the names of 
the two before Zaratüst were Ratüstar and Rangüstar, 
and of the two after 42m Nodarigá and Nivédis’. 
6. The middle position of Zaratüst is for the reason 
that he is so produced at that time, as an inter- 
medium of the early narrators and the later narrators, 
that three millenniums came before him and three 
after. 7. So that he Zas prescribed to the creatures 
in what manner he would teach the ancients as to 
what ad occurred, and zz what manner 7/ is also to 
be done as regards what will occur; as is stated in 
the Gáthas? thus: ‘Both those I ask of thee, 
O Atharmazd! even whatever das happened till 
now, and whatever shall happen henceforth ?’ 


CHAPTER XVI. 


I. About the trials (aüzmáyisnó) which occurred 


has to be guessed so as to give a probable meaning to the Pahlavi 
spelling. The writing of the last name is complicated ; it is written 
49! and {© in the two MS. authorities, which forms can be most 
obviously read Vasam and Saman, but Saman can also be read 
as the Zváris yadd=dast, ‘a hand;’ this leads to the conclusion 
that the original name underlies the form Vadast, and this is 
confirmed by the name of the Karap Vaédv6ist written at full 
length in Dk. VII, iv, 21724. See ibid. ii, 9 n. 

1 These brothers seem unmentioned elsewhere, and the existence 
of the elder two would imply another mother. The pronunciation 
of the names is guessed. 

* Pahl. Yas, XXXI, 14 a. 


CHAPTER XV, S-XVI, 6. 145 


to him whose practice was lawful, and the signs of 
prophecy /Za/ are seen therein, 7/ is thus declared, 
namely; ‘Another day, when /Ze child had been 
born, Pórüshaspó called one of those five brothers of 
the race of Karaps, and spoke thus: “ Fully observe 
the marks and specks of my son Zaratüst." ' 

2. The Karap went and sat down before Zaratûst, 
and the head of Zaratdst was thereupon severely 
twisted by him, in order that he should be killed; 
but he, being fearless, watched the wizards whose 
terror was distressing !. 3. As z¢ was in those ten 
nights for hospitality, AühazmazZ sent Spendaymad, 
Arédvisür, and Ar4Zái-fravarZ? down to the earth, 
by way of female care; thereupon no variation 
occurred to ¢he child, and, further, the hand of that 
Karap was withered 3, and that wizard demanded the 
life * of Zaratüst from Pórüshaspó for the harm from 
him, which sprang upon himself from his own action. 

4. At the same time Pórüshaspó took Zaratdst, 
and gave him to the Karap, that he might do with 
him according to his own will. 5. He seized him 
and threw him out, at the feet of the oxen who were 
going on a path to the water; the leader of that 
drove of oxen stood still in 4zs vicinity, and 150 oxen, 
which walked behind it, wese kept away from him 
thereby; and Pórüshaspó took im, and carried him 
back to the house 5. 

6. Also the second day, the Karap threw Aim out 


1 Assuming that vóshíg stands for véshig-béshíg. 

? The three female spirits that represent the earth, pure water, 
and guardian spirits, respectively. 

* Compare Dk. VII, iii, 4-7. 

* Assuming that the MS. dénó stands for gân. 

* Compare Dk. VII, iii, 11, 12. 


[47] L 


146 SELECTIONS OF ZAD-SPARAM. 


at the feet of the horses; and the leader of the 
horses stood still in the vicinity of Zaratüst, and 
150 horses, which walked behind it, were kept away 
from him thereby; and Pórüshaspó took Azm, and 
carried him back to the house !. 

7. Also the third day, firewood is gathered 
together by the Karap, and Zaratüst is deposited 
on z¢ by him, the fire is stirred up by him, yet with 
the same result (ham-bün-i£), the chz/d is not 
burnt by it, and those marks, which existed and 
were made upon him, were a preservation from it ?. 

8. And the fourth day, he is thrown by the Karap 
into the lair (áshyánakó) of a wolf; the wolf was 
not in the lair, and when it wished to go back to the 
den (süràkó), it stopped when it came in front of 
some radiance, 2 the manner of a mother, at the 
place where its cub was. 9. In the night, Vohümanó 
and Srósh the righteous brought a woolly (kérd- 
sak6) sheep with udder full of milk into the den, 
and it gave milk to Zaratüst, in digestible draughts 
(guvárakó guvárak?), until dayZgZ *. 

IO. In the dawn, the mother of Zaratüst went to 
that place, in the expectation that it would be 
necessary to bring a skeleton out of the den, and 
the woolly sheep came out and ran away; his mother 
supposed that it was the wolf, and she spoke thus: 
‘Thou fast devoured to repletion; mayst thou 
endure for ever without it!’ 11, She went farther, 
and when she saw Zaratüst quite safe, she then took 
him up and spoke thus: ‘I wi not give ¢hee to any 
one during life, not though both the provinces of 
Rágh and Nédar shou/d arrive here together *.' 

" Compare Dk. VII, iii, ES T4. * Ibid. 9, 1o. 

* Ibid. 15-17; V, ii, 4. * Ibid. 18, 19. 


CHAPTER XVI, 7-XVII, 3. 147 


12. Because these princes were among the spiritual 
from two provinces which ave in Átür-pàdakán, such 
as are at sixty leagues (parasang) from ist; 
Zaratüst arose from Ragh, and Vistásp from Nódar. 
13. And of these two provinces, Rágh was accordiny 
to the name of ÉriZó, son of Dürésróbó, son of 
MánüsZihar!, from whom arose the race of Zaratüst : 
and Nóar was according to the name of Nódar, 
son of MánüsZihar, from whom arose the race of 
Vistásp. 


CHAPTER XVII. 


I. These were his tokens at birth:— One day, 
one of those five brothers of the Karaps saw 
Zaratüst, and he looked a long while upwards, 
downwards, and on all sides around 2, | 

2. Pórüshaspó enquired thus: ' What was there 
when thou lookedst upwards, what when (¢hou 
lookedst downwards, and what when thou lookedst 
on all sides ? ' 

3. And he replied thus, namely: ‘When I looked 
upwards, it was for this reason, when I saw that our 
souls è /4a/ go up to the sky, will go up to the best 


! Compare Chap. XIII, 6; Dk. VII, ii, 70. 

2 Compare Dk. VII, iii, 27-30. 

* Assuming that the MS. gad4, ‘glory, or destiny, has lost an 
initial n, with which it was originally nism£— Chald. NOU “the 
soul ;^ as the copyists have not been aware of the existence of this 
Zváris equivalent for rübán, ‘the soul,’ for some centuries, it has 
been altered into gad4, by the omission of its first letter, in nearly 
all but the very oldest existing MSS., such as K2o and M6 in Bd. 
XV, 3-5, and even there the medial m is really missing, though 
apparently existing in the final 4; the irregularity of using s for sh 
is common in Pahlav 

LZ 


148 SELECTIONS OF ZAD-SPARAM. 


existence’, owing to the words of this soul of man- 
kind. 4. When I looked downwards, I saw that, 
owing to the action of this one, the demon and fiend, 
the wizard and witch become buried below the earth, 
and fall paralyzed back to hell. 5. And when 
I looked on all sides, I saw that the words of this 
one will extend through the whole earth; and when 
they have become as the law of the seven regions, 
each person is kept clothed wztk a robe (kapah) 
of seven skins, in which the glory of the seven 
archangels as arisen.’ 

6. And Bráz-rükhsh the Tar went forth; when 
he went to the right side (arakó), Zaratüst hastened 
away to the left, and when he went to the left side, 
Zaratüst hastened to the right, and he is thereby 
concealed from Bráz-rükhsh the Tar, who has not 
met with bim. 


CHAPTER XVIII. 


1. About his diverse want of participation (gvid 
akhvésih) with Zi parents this also is declared, 
that the demons, at an assembly of wizards, pro- 
duced an outcry for a conference (ham-và4ó 
láyisnó) thus: “That son of Pórüshaspó is sense- 
less and foolish and secretly corrupted; no one, 
man ox woman, will consider or accept him as 
exalted.’ 

2. The tidings came to Pórüshaspó, and Pérd- 
shaspó spoke unto Zaratüst thus: ‘I thought that 
I ad begotten a son who would become a priest, 
a warrior, and a husbandman, and now thou 


— ÁÁá—À HP aaa € 
* The ordinary heaven, see Dd. XX, $: 


CHAPTER XVII, 4-XIX, I. 149 


wouldst be foolish and secretly corrupted; thou 
shouldst proceed to the Karaps, so that they may 
cure thee,’ 

3. Zaratüst gave answer thus: ‘I am he that is 
thy son, a priest, warrior, and husbandman.’ 4. And, 
by command of Pórüshaspó he harnessed two 
horses to a chariot (varZinó), and he went with 
Pórüshaspó. 

5. When they came to the place according to the 
decision of Pórüshaspó, into the presence of one 
Karap of those said five brethren, that wizard took 
a cup and made water, and spoke thus: ' This he 
should drink who is a son of thine, so that he may 
become well;' and he acted with this conviction, 
that so he would change to the same nature as 
theirs. 

6. Zaratüst spoke to Pórüshaspó thus: ' Thou 
mayst give z¢ back to him who is thy protector and 
high-priest ;' and he arose (Akhégiz)! and went 
back to ZZez place. 

7. On the way, Zaratüst gave ther two horses 
water, on account of /A4e thirst; and he thought 
thus: ‘ Unprofitable was my going to the residence 
of the Karaps, except zz this manner, when, through 
giving water to the horses, my soul was then 
expanded.’ 


CHAPTER XIX. 


1. About his interfering talk (andarg-góbisnóih) 
with the iniquitous, this also is declared, that one 
hh Ae ———————— PEE 

1 T has ‘he saluted (niydyfd).’ This legend has not yet bee 
found elsewhere. 


150 SELECTIONS OF ZAD-SPARAM. 


day Darésr6éb6! the Karap, as 2£ were from the same 
five brethren, came out to the house of Pórüshaspó ; 
and Pórüshaspó placed a bowl (gámakó) of mare's 
milk before 4zm, and spoke to him thus: ‘ Conse- 
crate z/.' 

2. Zaratist expostulated with Pórüshaspó thus: 
' I wall consecrate 77, 3. Pórüshaspó spoke thus: 
‘He should consecrate, and the grace is to be 
offered up by you?;' and as many as three times 
/hey mutually disputed. 

4. Zhen up stood Zaratüst, and his right foot 
struck at the bowl and emptied it, and he spoke thus : 
‘I reverence righteousness, I reverence the righteous 
and the poor, men and women; do thou, O 
Pórüshaspó! prepare a portion for him in whom 
there is worthiness.’ 

5. And Dürésróbó spoke unto Zaratüst thus: ‘As 
some of my portion of daily food was first thrown 
away by thee, it is I who wz bring 77 on both thy 
lives, and will utterly destroy thee. 6. Zaratüst 
spoke interruptingly ? thus: ‘ With complete mind- 
fulness I wz7// look upon thee with both eyes, and 
weld utterly destroy thee.’ 

7. And, for a long time, they constantly looked, 
one at the other, with unshrinking gaze; ów the 
divine nature of Zaratüst is victorious over the 
witchcraft of that wizard, and Dürésróbó is further 
disturbed; he also asked for Zzs horse and spoke 
thus: ‘On account of this doy, zz is impossible for 
me to stay.' 


ee eee 

' So spelt in Zs., but Dürásróbó in Dk.; also the former has 
always Pórüshaspó, but the latter Pórüsháspó. Compare the same 
legend in Dk. VII, iii, 34-45. 


* Pahl. ‘vald aĉ yazédd, alêd vâg dahisnó. ^ * Or“ inwardly.' 


CHAPTER XIX, 2-XX, 4. 151 


8. He sat upon the horse, and when he had gone 
a little way, he fell off from the horse, through severe 
distress, and died ; and the children of his children’s 
children have died upon the same spot !. 


CHAPTER XX. 


I. About the righteousness of his desires z/ is 
thus declared, that when ke became fifteen years 
old, the sons of Pórüshaspó demanded a portion 
from ZZzir father, and their portions are allotted out 
by him. 2. Among the clothes ¢here was a girdle, 
the width of which was four finger-dreadths; and of 
the four? portions around and the girdle, which it 
was possible to bring forth, Zaratüst selected she 
latter and tied zt on himse/f. 3. This was owing to 
the precepts (parvánakán) of Vohümanó who came 
into his reason at birth ; as to whatever is not the 
custom Azs mind was now quite closed, and in that 
which is the custom 77 was impetuously exercised 
by him. 

4. About 4zs compassionate disposition and the 
streams of the Arag province’, this also is declared, 


1 Probably meaning that he died childless. 

? The MSS. have ‘three,’ but there were five sons (Chap. XV, 5), 
and the numbers are written in ciphers which are very easily 
corrupted. 

* Pahl. * Aragistán ódhávó (T dha)’=‘odh4-f Arangístánó ' of 
P. Vd. I, 77 (Sp); compare Av. “upa aodhaéshu Rang,hayau,' 
of Vd. I, 19; Yt. XII, 18. In the Iranian Bd. XX, 8 we are told 
that ‘the Arang river is that of which z/ is said that it comes out 
from Albürz in the land of Sürak, which they call also Sham 
(Sham); and it passes on through the land of Egiptós, which they 
call also Misr, and there they cail it the swift river Egipitdis.’ It is 


152 SELECTIONS OF ZAD-SPARAM. 


that ¢here was a river, and from them the body of 
a naked woman floated, for the reason that, on account 
of the strength and swiftness of the river, a woman, 
except when she was quite naked while she was in 
it, was not able to pass; and an old person, such as 
he who is of seventy years and is called in revelation 
a Hánó !, for want of power (a2páZiyávandih rai), 
was not able to go back through it by his own 
strength. 5. Zaratüst came on to the bank of the 
water, and of women and old people seven persons 
had come, and are passed on by him, zz the manner 
of a bridge?; it was an emblem of the spiritual 
performers? of bridging work, that is, of those pro- 
viding a passage to heaven. 

6. About his liberal disposition z7 is declared, that 
the fodder of Pórüshaspó, which was stored for the 
beasts of burden, was not only for the beasts of 
Pórüshaspó in a scarcity, but also for distribution 
among the beasts of others, which, owing to their 
hunger on account of the scarcity, then constantly 
ate off the tails of each other; and it was given to 
them plentifully. 

7. About his abandoning worldly desire, and his 
laying hold of righteousness of way, this, too, is 
declared, that when he became twenty years old, 
without the consent (bên akámakih) of Zzs father 
and mother, he wandered forth and departed from 


—— M Án Sr). Nao a 
one of the two mythical rivers which were supposed to bound the 
Iránian world, and seems to represent the Aras as a northern and 
the Nile as a western boundary. Aran g often becomes Arag in 
Pahlavi, just as sang becomes sag. 

* Av. hanó in Vd. III, 19, 20; &c. 

* Probably holding each other's hands. 


* The sacred beings who assist the ri 


| ghteous souls to pass over 
the Kinvad bridge, 


CHAPTER XX, 5-13. 153 


their house, and openly enquired thus: “Who is 
most desirous of righteousness azd most nourishing 
the poor?’ 8. And they spoke thus: ‘ He who is 
the youngest (kéhist6) son of Afirvaité-dih! the 
Tr, who every day gives an iron caldron (gêmak), 
which is the height of a horse, full of bread and 
milk and other food, unto the poor. 9. Zaratüst 
went on to that place, and with his co-operation, for 
the nourishment of the poor, some of the chief men 
performed duty by carrying forth food for the poor. 
10. About his compassion, not only upon man- 
kind, but also his other creatures, this, too, is 
declared, that a bitch was seen by him, which had 
given birth to five? puppies, and it was three days 
then that she ZaZ not obtained food *. 11. Whom- 
ever she saw, she then advanced her mouth towards 
him, and became as it were prostrated; Zaratüst 
provided a remedy, dy swiftly bringing up bread for 
her, óz£ when Ze was bringing it she had expired. 
12. About his own desire for the good quality * of 
a wife, on account also of the will of Zzs parents, and 
fis not mingling his own seed before a suitable 
obtainment, this, too, is declared, that when his father 
sought a wife for him, Zaratüst argued with the 
bride (nésh4) thus: ‘Show me thy face, so that | 
may find out (barkhá m) its kind of appearance, and 
this, too, whether its appearance ġe undesirable, or 
shall not be gratifying ;' and the bride turned away 
her face from him. 13. And Zaratüst spoke thus : 


1 See Dk. VII, iv, 7 n. 

2 T has ‘seven,’ but this difference may have arisen from an 
erroneous mode of writing the ciphers in T. 

3 T has ‘a bone for food.’ 

* T has ‘ good child-bearing.’ 


154 SELECTIONS OF ZAD-SPARAM. 


Whoever takes away a sight from me, does not 
practise respect for me.’ 

14. About his saving accepted progress even 
from the iniquitous, 7Za£ listened sinfully desirous, 
who accepted so much advantageousness as was 
manifest, this, too, is declared, that he came into an 
assembly who were well known in the place for 
much knowledge, and he enquired of them thus: 
‘What is most favourable for the soul?’ 15. And 
they spoke thus: ‘To nourish the poor, to give 
fodder to cattle, to bring firewood to the fire, to pour 
Hóm-juice into water, and! to worship many demons 
with words, with the words which are called revela- 
tion (déné).’ 16. Then Zaratüst nourished the 
poor, foddered the cattle, brought firewood to the 
fire, and squeezed Hêm into water, bul never are 
any demons whatever worshipped with words dy 
Zaratist. 


CHAPTER X XI. 


I. About his coming to thirty years of age 7/ is 
thus declared, that ox the lapse of thirty years 
onwards from Zzs appearance, oz the day Anérán of 
the month Spendazmaz"?, he had proceeded in that 
direction zz which ZZere occurred the so-called festival 
of spring (gasn6-i vahár)?, forty-five days beyond 


* T inserts ‘not’ here, which is clearly wrong, and must have 
been introduced by some copyist who did not observe that the 
assembly, though learned, was sinful; and that the object of the 
anecdote is to exhibit Zaratüst's ability to distinguish between good 
works and sin, when still untaught by the sacred beings. 

* On the last day of the twelfth Parsi month. 

* The Maidhyózaremaya season-festival, held on the fifteenth 
day of the second Parsi month. 


CHAPTER XX, I4-XXI, 6. 155 


new-years day, a4 a place become specially noted, 
where people went, from many quarters, out to the 
place of festival (gasnó âr). 

2. When Zaratüst, for the sake of going off to 
the festival place, halted on the way in walking, he 
chanced upon a solitary (aévaták) plain, and he 
saw, in a vision, that mankind and a much-adorned 
worldly exzstence were kept away to the north, so 
that all the people in the earth have become fully 
manifest in the north. 3. And he at the head 
(pavan tékh) of them was Mé4yómáh, son of 
Arástái ! even as Á rástái was brother of Pórüshaspó ? ; 
Médyéméah was the leader of all mankind who have 
gone out to the presence of Zaratüst, and he became 
their guide, so that first MéZyómáh and afterwards 
the whole material existence are attracted. 

4. And about his coming out to the conference, oz 
the lapse of those forty-five days, al the place of 
festival 27 dawn oz the day Dadvó *-pavan-Mitré of 
the month AzZavahistó. 5. And Zaratist, for the 
purpose of squeezing the Hóm, went forth to the 
bank of the water of the Dáitih, because it is the 
river * of the conference for the supremacy (patih) 
of Zaratüst, and is the water of Avan® which has 
consisted of four channels (bét4). 6. Zaratüst also 


! See Yt. XIII, 95. 

? So Médyómáh was first cousin of Zaratüst, and became his 
first convert; see also Chap. XXIII, r. 

s The Pahlavi letters represent Av. dadhvau, ‘creator’ ; com- 
pare the Khvárizmian name ,5» of the fifteenth day of the month 
in Sachau's Albirüni, p. 57, l. 35. The date here given is the 
fifteenth of the second month, as in § I. 

* Assuming that rud stands for rfid. 

^ Probably Anáhita, the female spirit of pure water, mentioned 
by her title Arédvisür in Chap. XVI, 3 


156 SELECTIONS OF ZAD-SPARAM. 


passed on through it; and its first channel was up to 
the ankle!, the second up to the knee, the third up 
to the parting of the two thighs, and the fourth up 
to the neck. 7. This was an indicator that his 
religion comes four times to supremacy ; the mani- 
festations of which are through Zaratüst, Aüshézar, 
A üshédar-máh, and Sósháns *. 

8. When he came up from the water, and put on 
his clothes, he then saw the archangel Vohümanó* 
in the form (àyüinakó) of a man, handsome, brilliant, 
and elegant, who wore his hair curve-tailed *, because 
the curved tail is an indication of duality ; who had 
put on and wore a dress like silk, than which ¢here 
was no making anything superior, for it was light 
itself ; and his height was. nine //z&s as much as ¢hat 
of Zaratüst. 

9. He also enquired of Zaratüst^ thus: ‘Who 
mayst thou be, and from whom of them mayst thou 
be ? also what is mostly thy desire, and the endeavour 
in thy existence?’ ro. And he replied thus: ‘I am 
Zaratüst of the Spitimas; among the existences 
righteousness is more my desire, and my wish is that 
I may become aware of the will of the sacred beings, 
and may practise so much righteousness as they 
exhibit to me in the pure existence.' 


11. And Vohümanó directed Zaratüst * thus : ‘Do 
—— as Pe 088 

* Literally ‘up to the leg (zang).’ 

* The past and future apostles of Zoroastrianism. For the last 
three, see Dk. VII, ix—xi. 

* Compare Dk. VII, iii, 51-54. 

* Assuming that vagdumak isa variant of the usual gagdümak. 
The scorpion (vagdum) would be a sign of duality, as, being 


à noxious creature, it was produced by the evil spirit Aharman. 
* Compare Dk. VII, iii, 55-59. 


* Compare. ibid. iii, 60-62. 


CHAPTER XXI, 7-I9. 157 


thou proceed to an assembly of the spirits!’ 12. As 
much as Vohümanó walked on in nine steps, Zara- 
tüst dz in ninety steps, and when he had gone 
nihety steps farther than him, he saw the assembly 
of the seven archangels. 13. When he came within 
twenty-four feet of the archangels, he then did not 
see his own shadow on the ground, on account of 
the great brilliancy of the archangels; the position 
of the assembly was in Irán, and in the direction of 
the districts on the bank of the water of the Daitih. 
14. Zaratüst offered homage, and spoke thus: 
‘Homage to AühazmazZ, and homage to the arch- 
angels!’ and he went forward and sat down in the 
seat of the enquirers. 

IS. As to the asking of questions by Zaratüst, he 
enquired of Athaymazd thus: ‘In the embodied 
world which is the first of the perfect ones, which 
the second, and which the third?’ 16. And Aüha»- 
mazd replied thus: ‘The first perfection is good 
thoughts, the second good words, and the third 
good deeds.’ 

17. Zaratüst also enquired thus: ‘Which ¢hing 
is good, which is better !, and which is the best of 
all habits?’ 18. And Atharmazd replied thus: 
‘The title? of the archangels is good, the sight of 
them is better, and carrying out their commands is 
the best of all habits.’ 

19. Afterwards he demonstrated the duality of 
the original evolutions (bûn gastánó)?*, and the 
divergence in each control, avd spoke thus: ‘Of 
those spirits, he who was wicked preferred the 
E MM —SLM  . 

1 Both MSS. have ‘ worse’ here. 

2 This title, ameshaspenta, is ‘immortal benefactor.’ 

3 The two prime movers in creation. 


158 SELECTIONS OF ZAD-SPARAM. 


ON 0 50 — 


practice which is iniquitous (Aharman's desire was 
for the practice which is iniquitous), and the spirit 
of righteousness the propitious (Aühazmazg ) prefers 
righteousness!) 20. Specially he demonstrated the 
divergence in each control of the exhibitors of light, 
and he spoke thus: ‘Neither our thoughts’, nor 
desires, nor words, nor deeds, nor religion, nor 
spiritual faculties agree*; he who is loving light, his 
place is with the luminaries; and he who 25 loving 
darkness is with the dark ones 4. 

21. On the same day also, his omniscient wisdom 
appeared three times: as regards the same first 
questions, it pointed out the sky in great light and 
splendour, and in its exhibition of the prevention of 
darkness, at the sight of which z/ decomes an opposing 
existence as regards that darkness. 22. And it. 
exhibited its own appearance proportionally Zo the 
sky, when it kept its head at the summit of the sky, 
zts feet at the bottom of the sky, and z/s hands 
reached to both sides of the sky; the sky also kept 
ít covered, in the manner of a garment. 

23. The six archangels* were manifest by their 
similar stature (ham-basnih), in such manner that 
it is obvious each one successively is apparently one 
fingers breadth shorter than the other. 24. The 
archangels exhibited three kinds of achievement 


* Quoted from Pahl. Yas. XXX, 5 ab. The words in parentheses 
are glosses inserted by the Pahlavi translator. 

* Both MSS. have ‘spirits’ by inserting a stroke in the middle 
of the Pahlavi word. 


* An imperfect quotation, omitting glosses, from Pahl. Yas. 
XLIV, 2 cde (Sp.). 


“A similar idea is expressed in Vd. XIX, 30, but the Pahlavi 
version of half of it is lost. 


* Apart from.AQharmasd, their president. 


CHAPTER XXI, 20—-XXIl, 2. 159 


(pasákhtan)' for the religion; first, 4y means of 
fires, and Zaratüst walked three steps on them, with 
the words, ‘good thoughts, good words, and good 
déeds, and was not burnt; and secondly, hot metal 
is poured on to Zzs chest, cooled thereby, and, grasp- 
ing 24 with zs hand, he held 24 for the archangels. 
25. Adhaymazd spoke thus: “After the establishment 
of the pure religion, when a dispute occurs in the 
religion, those who are thy disciples will pour z¢ on 
to a spiritual lord, they wt take z¢ up with the hand, 
and will thoroughly believe in him who is over the 
whole embodied existence. 26. The third was 
cutting with a knife, and the vital parts (ahvón) 
becoming visible, which are inside the abdomen, 
wth a flowing forth of blood ; and, after the hands 
are rubbed over z/, it became healed. 27. And this 
is pointed out, namely: ‘ Thy and thy correligionists' 
accepting of the pure religion is, as to the steadfast 
tm other religions, such that, through such-like 
burning of fire, pouring of hot metal, and through an 
operation with a sharp instrument, ZZere is no per- 
version from the good religion.’ 


CHAPTER XXII. 


I. About the seven questionings (7-frasnóih), 
with reference to religion, of the seven archangels, 
which occurred in seven places ?. 

2. For the occurrence of the first questioning *, 
that of Aühazmazd, the person of Zaratüst, who was 


! By way of ordeal, a relic of the old faith in incantation. 


? Compare Dk. VIII, xiv, 5, 6, 9. 
3 This has been narrated in the preceding chapter. 


160 SELECTIONS OF ZAD-SPARAM. 


the upholder of Aühazmazd, came out to a conference 
on the bank of the water of Dáitih !. 

3. For the occurrence of the second, which is 
Vohümanó's, five animals out of the five species ? 
which are the worldly tokens of Vohümanó, have 
come with Zaratüst to a conference on Hügar and 
Aüsind?; and on that day also, before their coming 
out to the conference, their tongues are fully liberated 
and spoke with human words. 4. And among the 
rest * is a fish of one species, Arzuvá 5 by name; of 
those in burrows (khanóigánó) ave the white ermine 
and white marten; of the flying creatures (váyan- 
dagán) zs the Karsipt °, a bird like a species of water- 
fowl; of the wide-travellers (farákhvó-raftáránó) 
is the hare which is showing wild beasts the way to 
the water ; and of those suitable for grazing (£arakó- 
argánigán) is the white ass-goat ; with human words 
they also accepted the religion from Aühazmaz4. 
s. With the chieftainship of the five species they 
are intrusted, so that the like animals also, with 
their own voices, and as much as their knowledge is 
capable, shall recount the powerfulness of the religion. 


! See Dk. VII, iii, 51, 54. 

? These species, which are named in § 4, are those mentioned in 
the Avesta, Visp. I, 1. 

* Av. Hukairya of Yt. XII, 24, and Us-hindu of Yt. VIII, 32, 
described in Bd. XII, 5, 6, as two neighbouring mountains, for the 
pure water of Arédvisür falls from the summit of Hagar to Aüsind 
which stands in the circumambient ocean. 

* The remainder of K 35, the MS. brought by Westergaard from 
Kirmán, is lost ; but an old copy of it (BK, see the Introduction) 
exists in Bombay, which supplies the missing text, as an authority 
independent of T. 

* See Bd. XIV, 26; apparently the same as the Ariz, or Kar, 
the chief of fish, ibid. XVIII, 3, 5; XXIV, 13. 

* See Bd. XIV, 23; XIX, 16; XXIV, 11, 


CHAPTER XXII, 3-10. 161 


6. And freedom from assault, exemption from per- 
secution, and proper maintenance of the five species 
of animals, were prescribed by him! to Zaratüst with 
seemingly very awful admonition. 

7. For the occurrence of the third questioning, 
which is Azdavahistó's, the spirits of the fires have 
come out with Zaratüst to a conference at the Tóoán 
water *; and, in that questioning, care for the proper 
maintenance of the Varahrán fire, and the pro- 
pitiation of all fires, is explained to him. 

8. For the occurrence of the fourth questioning, 
which is Shatvé7's, the spirits of the metals have come 
with Zaratüst to a conference at Sardi’, a settlement 
on the Mivan‘; and he was fully admonished about 
various proper preservations of the metals, and as 
fo not producing warlike accoutrements of gold. 

9. For the occurrence of the fifth questioning, 
which is SpendazmaZ's, the spirits of the regions, 
frontiers, stations (aüstámán), settlements (rûga- 
stákán), and districts, as many as were desirable, 
have come out with Zaratüst to a conference where 
there is a spring (khánigó-a6) which comes out 
from the Asnavad mountain’, aud goes into the 
Dáitih, like those of Satavés who is blowing thc 
Páirigs*. 10. And Zaratást was also thus ad- 


1 By Voh&manó, as the protector of useful animals. 

? Possibly the Tegend river, the Zend or Zóndak of Bd. XX, 7, 15. 

3 The Bahrám, or sacred fire at places of worship. 

* Names not clearly identified, and readings uncertain. 

5 In Átür-pátakán, and the Güsnasp, fire was established upon 
it (see Bd. XII, 2, 26; XVII, 7). 

6 Pahl. 'Satavés-i Páirig damánó ánó kîgûn. Referring probably 
to Yt. VIII, 8, 9. Satavés is the southern chieftain of the stars, as 
correctly stated in the Iranian DBündahis (compare BL al, 7; 
XIII, 12) ; and the Páirigs are meteors. 


[47] a 


162 SELECTIONS OF ZAD-SPARAM. 


monished by her, about the care and propitiation 
of the earth: that each district is /o e intrusted 
to a faithful testifier (gókás-i vévar), each settle- 
ment 40 a judge acquainted with the law, each 
station 40 an officiating priest (magópató) of just 
intentions, and each frontier ¢o a pure priestly 
authority (raZó); over all is proclaimed the coun- 
cillor of the spirits, the supreme priest (magópa- 
tánó magópató), and through him the sovereignty 
of Aühazmazd is provided. — * 

II. For the occurrence of the sixth questioning, 
which is KhüzdaZ's, the spirits of seas and rivers 
have come with Zaratüst to a conference at the 
Asnavad mountain !, and he was told about the care 
and propitiation of water. 

12. For the occurrence of the seventh questioning, 
which is Amüzdaz's, the spirits of plants have come 
out with Zaratüst to a conference on the precipitous 
bank of the Darega?, on the bank (bar) of the 
water of Daitih, and different places; and he was 
informed about the care and propitiation of plants. 
13. The seven questionings are explained within 


the length of these winters, which are of five months, 
and within ten years ?. 


c 

! See § 9. 

* Pahl. ‘pavan Daregin zbár'— Av. ‘ Dregya paiti zbarahi’ of 
Vd. XIX, 4; a mythical river in Afran-vég, where Pórüshaspó 
resided (Bd. XX, 32). 

* The Pahlavi is rather vague, but it is clear that Zaratüst starts 
for his conference at thirty years of age (Chap. XXI, 1), returns from 
it ten years later (Chap. XXIII, 1), and the conversion of Vistásp 
occupies two years longer (Chap. XXIII, 5) occurring when 
Zaratüst was forty-two years old and thirty-five years before his 
passing away at the age of seventy-seven (Chap. XXIII, 9). 

At this point another dislocation of text occurs in all existing 


CHAPTER XXII, II—XxXIII, 5. 163 
——————— ee Tg 


CHAPTER XXIII. 


1. On the completion of revelation, that is, at the 
end of the ten years, Médyémah, son of Arastai, 
became faithful to Zaratüst. 

2. Afterwards, on having obtained his requests !, 
he came back to the conference of Aühazmazd, 
and he spoke thus: ‘In ten years oz/y one man has 
been attracted by me. 3. And Atharmazd spoke 
thus: ‘ There will be days when so few are not 
attracted by you, who ave themselves the occasion 
of the resurrection of the world; when, apart from 
Dahák?, the beneficence of the formation of the 
renovation of the universe attracts every one besides, 
and the impenitence of Dahâk is destroyed.’ 

4. When he came out from the presence of 
Aühazmazd, with the same paradox, he thereby 
indicated his religion as complete to SpendazmaZ 
through Zzs intelligence. 

5. In the two years after that?, the Kavigs and 


MSS., owing to the accidental interpolation of three loose folios of 
another text, between this chapter and the next, in some unknown 
copy written before 1530. In the MSS. the text is written con- 
tinuously, without division into chapters. But the connection of 
this chapter with the next one, which is here restored to its proper 
position, is clearly shown by the reference to the ‘ten years’ of 
conference, with which this chapter ends, and the next one begins. 
The accidentally interpolated text is here classified as Chaps, XXIV 
and XXV, but its real connections have not yet been traced. 

1 That is, the replies of the archangels to his enquiries. 

2 See Dk. VII, i, 26. He was chained by Frégün in Mount 
Dimávand, to escape in the latter days, to be slain by Keresásp, 
and to be specially punished at the resurrection (Bd. XII, 31 ; 
XXX, 16; Byt. III, 55-61). 

8 See Dk. VII, iv, 2. 


= 
19 


164 SELECTIONS OF ZAD-SPARAM. 


Karaps of Vistásp, zz the manner of opponents 
(haméstaránih), propounded thirty-three enquiries 
(khvástakó)! to him, so that y command of 
Vistásp he became the explainer of those thirty- 
three enquiries. 6. Of the thirty-three habits? of 
iniquity, come for opposition to the religion of the 
sacred beings; of the declaration, by revelation, of 
those thirty-three indications of fetters °; and of the 
restraint of the thirty-three iniquitous practices by 
the thirty-three best good works, ¢here are state- 
ments in revelation. 7. Including the acceptance of 
the religion by Vistásp from Zaratüst, after the re- 
demonstration of its judicially multiform prophecy 
and spiritual character, which are looked into 
through the evidence of three speakers about ZZezz, 
the archangels who, with worldly manifestation, 
have become apparent unto Vistásp and As coun- 
cillors and mighty ones; they are Vohümanó, Arda- 
vahistó, and the Bürzin-Mitzó fire *. 

8. About the reward which exzs/eZ before the 
beneficence of Zaratüst, and zs being seen how, 
through guidance by Aühazmazd, z¢ is demonstrated 
by him to those of the world, so that Médyémah is 
attracted in the tenth year in the forest of reedy 
hollows (kanyástánó* vésakó) which is the haunt 
of swine of the wild-boar species (khazürá-i varázó 
gas); in the twentieth year the Kavig who is son 


—— —— ee UH 

* See Dk. VII, iv, 67. 

” Reading sôn = Pers. sân; but the MSS. have dénó, 
'religions The thirty sins and thirty-three good works, detailed 
in Mkh. XXXVI, XXXVII, are certainly referred to at the end of 
this section. 

* Compare Chap. XII, 5, and Dk. VII, iv, 67. 

* See Dk. VII, iv, 74. 

* Hybrid Zváris of Pers. nayistán. 


CHAPTER XXIII, 6-10. 165 


of Kandah? is attracted; in the thirtieth year the 
Khyóns* arrive, who make an incursion (vardak6) 
into the countries of Irán, owing to the Kavigs, 
those who ave more of their own race; and in the 
fortieth year Vohüném, son of Avaróstar?, is born. 

9. In the forty-seventh year Zaratüst passes away, 
who attains seventy-seven years and forty days in 
the month Az4Zavahistó, oz the day Khar‘; and for 
eight rectified (véhi£akoó) months, till the month 
Dadvó and day Khar, he should be brought forward 
as to be reverenced. 

10. Zn the same month Arvdavahisté, in the sixty- 
third® year, Frashóstar* passed away, and in the 
sixty-fourth year Gáàmásp", the same as became the 
priest of priests after Zaratüst; in the seventy-third 
year Hangáürüsh, son of Gâmâsp è; in the eightieth 
year Asmók-khanvató?, and also in the eightieth 


1 Or Kfinih which is the name of a demon (see Sg. XVI, 13, 16, 
18, 19) ; but such an identification is uncertain. 

* Av. Hvyaona of Yt. IX, 30, 31; XVII, 50, 51. Compare 
Dk. VII, iv, 77, 83, 84, 87-90; v, 7. 

* Av. gen. ‘ Vohu-nemang,hó Aváraostróis' of Yt. XIII, 104. 

* The eleventh day of the second month. 

5 'T has 43d, and the date is lost in the other MS. authority. 
But 43d is highly improbable for two reasons: first, it would make 
this date the only one out of chronological order in the series here 
given; secondly, it would render it inconsistent with the statement, 
in Dk. VII, vi, 12, that two priests came, from other regions, to 
ask Frashóstar about the religion, fifty-seven years after it had been 
accepted by Zaratüst. By substituting 63d (the Pahlavi cipher 
most likely to be corrupted into 43d) both these inconsistencies 
are removed. 

5 See Dk. VII, vi, 12; V, ii, 12. 

7 See Dk. V, ii, 12; iii, 4. 

* Av. gen. * Hang,haurushó Gamaspanahé’ of Yt. XIII, 104. 

° Av. gen. * Asmó-AvanvatÓ' of Yt. XIII, 96, and Westergaard's 


Yt. RAAT, 37. 


166 SELECTIONS OF ZAD-SPARAM. 


year Kabed-üs-spáé!, who is called also Akht the 
wizard, is killed. 

11. Of the six great upholders of the religion 
there are the two daughters of Zaratüst, whose 
names are Frénó and Sritó*?, wrz% Aharübó-stótó, 
son of Médyómáh?, and another three, who ave 
renowned for their religion for a hundred years, 
who are Vohüném * that is born in the fortieth year 
of the religion, .Sénó 5 is afterwards born and passes 
away in the two-hundredth year, and as to his 
hundred-discipledom °, it exists day and night till the 
three-hundredth year. 12. Afterwards the religion 
is disturbed and the monarchy is contested ( gangi- 
aitó). 

13. About the three customs (d4d46) which Zara- 
tüst prescribed as the best:—The first of them is 
this: ‘Do not go without others, except with 
magisterial authority (apatkár radiha);’ the second 
is: 'Though they shall proceed unlawfully as to 
you, consider your actions lawfully beforehand ;’ 
and the third is: ‘ Next-of-kin marriage, for the 


* As kabed is Zváris for ‘many,’ we may assume that kabed-fis 
= Av. nom. pourus which usually becomes pouru in compounds ; 
so that the compound name, or title, in the text, probably repre- 
sents Av. Pouruspádha (Yt. X, rog, 111), ‘having many 
troops,’ a suitable title for Akht the wizard (Av. Akhtya of Yt. V, 
82) who is said, in Gf. I, 2, to have invaded a district with an army 
of seven myriads. He was killed, in Zoroastrian fashion, by the 
recital of a religious formula. 

* There was a third daughter, Pêrukist (see Bd. XXXII, 5), but 
she may not have survived her father. 

* Av. gen. ‘ Ashastvó Maidhyói-maung,hóis ' of Yt. XIII, 106. 

* See $ 8. 

* He was born in the tooth year; see Dk. VII, vii, 6. 


* This seems to be the sixth upholder of the religion, the third 
of those lasting about a century, 


CHAPTER XXIII, I I-XXIV, 3. 167 


sake of the pure progress of your race, is the best 
of the actions of the living, which ave provided for 
the proper begetting of children !.' 


CHAPTER XXIV. 


1. About the five dispositions of priests, and the 
ten admonitions with which all instruction as to 
religion is connected ?. 

2. Of those five dispositions the first is inno- 
cence. 

3. The second is discrimination among? thoughts, 
words, and deeds; [to fully distinguish the particu- 
lars of destruction from indestructiveness, such as 


' This chapter ends the first series of Selections of Zád-sparam, 
and is immediately followed in the MSS. by a second series. It is 
evident from the extent of this chapter, as compared with the 
amount of text contained in the three misplaced folios (see 
p. 162, n. 3), that this chapter could have occupied only about one 
folio and a half in the dislocated MS., so that the second series 
must have commenced on the same folio as contained the end of 
this chapter, and that Chaps. XXIV, XXV cannot have belonged to 
this series. The three misplaced folios contain two distinct texts ; 
the first (Chap. XXIV) is an Iranian version of the Five Dispositions 
of priests and the Ten Admonitions, and is here translated ; the second 
(Chap. XXV) contains some details about the Nasks and Gáthas, 
and has been already translated in S.B.E., vol. xxxvii, pp. 401—405. 

2 This Iranian version of the Dispositions and Admonitions is 
more complete than the Indian version, which, like the Bundahis, 
was brought from Irán five or six centuries ago, and is found in 
two MSS. (Pt. and J) written in India about 5oo years ago, and 
now in the libraries of Dastürs Dr. Peshotan and Dr. Jámásp, 
respectively. Passages which occur only in the Iránian version are 
here enclosed in brackets, and other differences between the two 
versions are mentioned in the notes. 

3 The Indian version has ‘ of? 


168 SELECTIONS OF ZAD-SPARAM. 


noxious creatures from cattle; and of production 
from unproductiveness, such as the righteous and 
worthy from the wicked and unworthy]. 

4. The third is authoritativeness, because that 
priestly master is always wiser and speaking more 
correctly who is taught wisely and teaches with 
more correct words. 

5. The fourth is to? [understand and consider 
the ceremonial as the ceremonial of AühazmazdZ, 
and the essentials with all goodness, beneficence, 
and authority; to be steadfast in his religion, and 
to consider the indications of protection (sáyag)? 
which are established for his religion. 6. To main- 
tain the reverence of the luminaries prayerfully, 
also the reverence of the emanations ? from the six * 
archangels, be they fire, be they earth, or be they of 
bodily form, and of the creatures w/zch are formed 
by them ; also the pure cleansing from dead matter, 
menstruation, bodily refuse, and other hurtfulness ; 
this is in order that they may be characterised, 
and thereby constituted, as better-principled, more 
sensible*, and purer, and they may become less 
faulty. 7. The reverence of mankind is to consider 
authoritatively about knowledge and property; the 
reverence of cattle is aou? fodder, little hardship, 
and moderate maintenance ; the reverence of plants 
is about sowing and ripening for the food of the 
worthy. 8. The ceremonial which is glorifying all 


* Ind. vers. has only: “to celebrate the ceremonial of the sacred 
beings with the correct words, inward prayers, and complete 
mastery of the text (narm-nasgíhá) in the ritual! It omits 
§§ 6-8 altogether. 

* T has ‘limit (Küstak).' 


3 : , 
T has ‘issue. * T has ‘ seven.’ 


* Or ‘more fragrant ;’ hü-bódtar has both meanings. 


CHAPTER XXIV, 4-14. 169 
the sacred beings, praises the luminaries and worldly 
creations improperly, and is antagonistic to them, 
because complete glorification is proper through 
complete recitation of the ritual; and the ceremonial 
of any one whatever is his own proper duty pro- 
fessionally, so long as it is possible to keep proceed- 
ing with very little sinfulness |. 

9. The fifth is to struggle prayerfully 1, day and 
night, with your own fiend ?, and al! life long not to 
depart from steadfastness, nor allow your proper 
duty? 40 go out of your hands. 

10. And the first of those ten admonitions is to 
proceed with good repute, for the sake of occasioning 
approving remarks as ¢o* the good repute of your 
own guardian and teacher, high-priest and master 5. 

11. The second is to become awfully refraining 
from evil repute, for the sake of evil repute not 
occurring Z0 relations and guardians. 

12. The third is not to beat your own teacher 
with a snatched-up stick, and not to bring scandal 
upon his name, for the sake of annoying him, by 
uttering that which was not heard from your own 
teacher. 

13. The fourth is ZZa7 whatever is taught liberally 
by your own teacher, you have to deliver back to the 
worthy, for the sake of not extorting a declaration of 
renown from the righteous *. 

14. The fifth is ¿ać the reward of doers of good 


1 Ind. vers. has: ‘to remain in diligence intelligently.’ 

2 Ind. vers. has: ‘ opponent.’ 

s Ind. vers. has: ‘steadfastness in religion, and to be diligent in 
your proper duty.’ But it omits the rest of the sentence. 

4 Ind. vers. has: ‘for the sake of the appropriateness of. 

5 Or ‘father.’ 

6 T has: ‘not extracting the purity of the righteous.’ 


170 SELECTIONS OF ZÁD-SPARAM. 


works and the punishment of criminals have £o be 
established by law, for the sake of progress’. 

15. The sixth is to keep the way of the good open 
to your house, for the sake of making? righteousness 
welcome in your own abode. 

16. The seventh is ¢hat, for the sake of not 
developing the fiend insensibly in your reason, you 
are not to keep 77 with the religion of the good *, 
nor to remain in impenitence of sin. 

17. The eighth * is that, for the sake of severing 
the fiend from the reason, you have to force malice 
away from your thoughts, and to become quickly 
repentant of sin. 

18. The ninth is to fully understand the forward 
movement ? of the religion, also to keep the advanc- 
ing of the religion further forwards, and to seek your 
share of duty therein; and on a backward move- 
ment, when adversity happens to the religion, to 
have the religion back again, and to keep your body 
in the continence (makavadih) of religion. 

19. The tenth is /Za£ there zs to be a period of 
obedience (Sróshdárih) towards the ruler and 
priestly authority, the high-priesthood of the re- 
ligious *. 


* Ind. vers. adds: ‘ of religion.’ 

? Ind. vers. inserts : ‘a token of ;’ and T has: “making the righte- 
ousness of the sacred beings in writing welcome.’ 

* Ind. vers. has: ‘not to maintain malice with the good,’ which 
is more probable, and kénó, ‘malice,’ is easily corrupted into 
dén6, ‘religion,’ in Pahlavi writing. 

* This eighth admonition is omitted in the Iranian MSS. 

^ Ind. vers. adds: ‘and backward movement.’ 

* Chapter XXV, about the three divisions of revelation, is trans- 
lated in S. B. E., vol. xxxvii, pp. 401-405. 


EN IE AK 


OBSERVATIONS. 


1. The references, in this index, are to books, chapters, and sections ; 
the chapters being denoted by the larger ciphers. 

2. Though different forms of the same name may occur in the text, only 
one form is usually given in the index, to which the references to all forms 
are attached; except when the forms differ so much as to be widely 
separated in the index. 

3. Pazand forms are printed in italics, as their orthography is usually 
corrupt. In all such italicised names any letters which would elsewhere be 
italic are printed in roman type. ` 

4. Abbreviations used are :—Av. for Avesta, Dk. for Dinkard, Int. for 
Introduction, m. for mountain, meas, for measure, MS. for manuscript, 
n. for footnote, Pahl. for Pahlavi, patron. for patronymic, r. for river, Zs. 
tor Selections of Zid-sparam. 


INDEX. 


Abilis, heretic, Dk. V, 1, 2 n. 

Âbân, month, Int. 87. 

Aeshm, demon, Dk. VII, 1, 18; 4, 
87, 88; 7, 7. 

Aévatak, r., Dk. VII, 3, 5r. 

Agash, demon, Dk. VII, 4, 12. 

Aharisvang, angel, Dk. VII, 7, 12. 

Aharman, demon, Int. 13, 29 ; Dk. 
WIL 1L7; V, 2,485 Zs. 14, 6, 
8 ; 21, 8 n, 19. 

Aharfib6-st6t6, man, Zs. 23, 11. 

Ahunavair, Int. 16, 30, 48, 49; Dk. 
E 1, 12, 13; 4, 38, 42, 45, 

o. 

AhürvaZàspó, man, Zs. 13, 6. 

Airan-vég, land, Dk. VII, 2, 30 n; 
8, 60; 9, 23. 

Airi£, man, Dk. VII, 2, 70; Zs. 13, 
6;—prince, Dk. VII, 1, 28-30; 
25,70; V, 4, 3; Z8: 6: 

Airyak, man, Dk. VII, 2, 70; Zs. 
13, 6. 

Airyéfshnig, man, Dk. VII, 1, 54 n. 

Airyéfshva, man, Dk. VII, 1, 34. 

Akhré-khirad6, prince, Dk. V, 3, 3. 

Akht, wizard, Int. 55; Zs. 23, 10. 

Akômanô, demon, Zs. 14, 8-11. 

Akván, Christian priest, Dk. VII, 7, 
II n. 

Alak or Arak, district, Dk. VII, 2, 9. 

Albirfini, Int. 74, 86-88. 

Albürz, m., Zs. 20, 4 n. 

Ameshaspentas, Int. 89. 

Amûrdad, angel, Dk. VII, 2, 19; 5, 
9; Zs. 22, 12. 

Anáhita, angel, Zs. 21, 5 n. 

"nang ,Pad, d DESVIL 3, 70; 
Zs. 13, 6 

Anéran, day, Zs. Zi t£; 

Aóshnar, priest, Int. SH DE VII, 1, 

36. 


pers Int. 10; Dk. VII, 1, 34; 8, 47. 
Arab victories, Int. 61. 
Arag, land, Zs. 20, 4. 
Arang, r., Zs. 20, 4 n. 


Arang, woman, Dk. VII, 8, 55; 9, 
I8 4°10; 15. 

Arástái, man, Zs. 21, 3; 23, 1. 

Archangels, Int. 4, 10, Tt,'XN 18, 
19, 29, 35, 48, 49, 55, 61; Dk. 

IL, 1, 4, 7, 12, 13, 34 ; 2, 16, 

18, 21, 22, 34, 39, 545 3,51; 
4, 5, 22, 26, 75, 76, 80, 83; 5, 
12 ; 6, 5, 13; 7, 19, 20; 8, 5, 
205860. 9, 21; V 233 12; 
Lis. 17, 5; 2L, 8, 13214518, 25, 
ATA 1; 23, 2 Oy ss 

Archdemons, Int. 4, 29. 

Ardài-fravard, angel, Zs. 16, 3. 

Ardashir the Sdsanian, Int. 43, 57, 
58, 62, 88. 

Ardavahist6, angel, Int. 41; Dk. 
VII, 2, 19, 29; Zs. 22, 7; 28, 
7; month, Zs. 21, 4; 23,9, 10. 

Arédvisür, angel, Zs. 16, 3; 21,5 n. 

Aregad-aspa, king, Int. 30. 

Aregadbarsn, man, Dk. VII, 2, 70; 
Zs. 13, 6. 

Aresh, demon, Int. 29. 

Arezrasp6, priest, Dk. VII, 6, 12. 

Arezvak, priest, Dk. VII, 7, 8-11. 

Argasp, king, Int. 7, 29, 55; Dk. 
VII, 4, 77, 83, 84,87-89; 5,7; 
VIA sans 8; 

Aristotle, Int. 71. 

Ariyaramna, ruler, Int. 70, 

Ariz, fish, Zs. 22, 4 n. 

Armenian revolt, Int. 61. 

Arsháma, ruler, Int. 70. ~ 

Artakhshatar, king, Int. 9; Dk. VII, 
‘balk hs V, a 4s 

Arüm = Asia Minor, DE. WA y. 

Arfiman, nation, Dk. VII, 8, "VA 

Arzuva, ‘fish, Zs. 22, 4. 

Ashavahist6, angel, Int. 11, 48, 55; 
DERUDE dy 343 2, 17; 18, 24, 
25; 4,74, 75, 78, 84-86; 8, 5 
n; '9, 8; , 9: 

Ashem- vohü, Int, 49; Dk. VII, 4, 
80 n, 


174 


Ashis-vanguhi, angel, Dk. VII, 4, 
81 n. 

Askanian, dynasty, Int. 45, 57. 

Asnavad, m., Zs. 22, 9, 11. 

Aspigan, patron., Dk. VII, 1, 25; 2, 
yos V,4, 3; Zs. 18, & 

Assyria, land, Dk. V, 4, 3 n. 

Atossa, queen, Dk. VII, 4, 86 n. 

Atür, land, Dk. V, 4, 3. 

Atar-farnbag, priest, Int. 14; Dk. 
V, o A 

Átürpád, priest, Int. 9, 64-67, 70, 
88 ; Dk. VII, 5, 5; 7, 19-21; 


V 3 $ 
Âtûrpådakân, land, Zs 16, 12; 22, 


9 n. 

A(Gharmaz4, Int. 4—6, 18, 29, 30, 47, 
48; Dk. VII, L, 1, 2, 4, 5, 9-13, 
17, 20-22, 38, 41, 42, 44, 46; 
2, 2, 3, 14, 17-19, 31, 37, 47; 
545 9, 1, 48, 49, 51; 4, 2, 12, 
14, 16, 17, 21-27, 30, 41, 47-49, 
51—54, 65, 66, 74, 75, 77, 80, 
84-86; 5, 12; 6, 5, 13; 7, 15; 
8, 16 n, 24, 25, 29, 33, 38-43, 
50, 52, 54; 9, 15, 17; 10, 12, 
14; 11,6, 11; V, ILES 
10, I2, 15; 4,6; Zs.12,2,8; 
18, 5, 6; 14, 4, 9, 14, 15; 15, 
7; 16, 3; 21, 14-16, 18, 19, 
23 n, 25; 22, 2,4,10; 23, 2-4, 
8; 24, 5. 

— king, Int. 64. 

Auramazda, Int. 84. 

Aurvadaspa, king, Int. 70. 

A(rváità-dang, king, Int. 6, 47, 49, 
55; Dk. VII, 4, 7-10, 14-16, 


20. 

Afirvaité-dih, king, Zs. 20, 8. 

Afishan-rfid, r., Dk. VII, 8, 54. 

Afishédar, apostle, Int. 10, rr, 55, 
61, 63, 66-68 ; Dk. VII, 1, 42, 
si, 38; 4, 81 i: S t 35 50, 

; 10, Ji b 163 
a, 3 Zs. 21, f. 

Aûshêdar-mâh, apostle, Int. 11, 12, 
55; Dk. VII, 1, 42, 52, 53; 9, 
14:185 10, 1, 2; 1L n ay V, 2. 
15; 9, 3; Zs. 21, 7 

A(isikhsh, Int. 16; Zs. 15, 2. 

A(sind, m., Zs. 22, 3. 

— king, Int. 55; Dk. VII, 1, 

sani VEM 

Aa angel, Zs. 21, 5. 

Avarethrabau , priest, Int. 9, 64, 70; 
Dk. VII, 7, 20, 21. 

Avar6star, man, Zs. 23, 8. 


PAHLAVI TEXTS. 


Avesta, Int. 7; 30, 36, 37, 42, 49,55, 
64, 70, 78, 90; Dk s t, 4435 
4, 63; 5,11; 6, 13, 14; 7, 5, 
38, 39; 8, 2, TO, 22, 36; X 2, 
6; 4, 6. 

Avesta scholars, Int. 78, 79, 9o. 

Avestic rites, Dk. VII, 7, 2 

Avirafshanég, man, Dk. VII, 1, 34 n. 

Ayang,bad, man, Dk. VII, 2, 7o; 
Zs. 18, 6. 

Ayazem, man, Dk. VII, 2, 7o n; 
Zs. 18, 6. 

Az-i Dahák, king, Dk. VII, 11, 3. 


Babylon, Dk. VII, 4, 72, n. 
Bactria, Int. 74. 

Bahman, angel, Int. 41, 43. 

Bahman Yast, MS., Int. 44. 
Bahram Gêr, king, Int. 43. 
Bahram-i Hamávand, king, Int. 43. 
Bahram Khéárzàd, copyist, Dk. VII, 


7, 14 n. 
Bakyir, m., Dk. VII, 1, 39 n. 
Bapél, city, Int. 5o; Dk. VII, 4, 72; 


, 2, 9. 
Bartarüsh, karap, Int. 34, 35; Dk. 
VII, 5, 12 n. 
Barzinkarfis, man, Int. 34. 
Barzü Kamdin, dastáür, Int. 32. 
Behistfin inscription, Int. 70, 84. 
Bétà-Makdis — Jerusalem, Dk. V, 1, 


5. 

Bitak, man, Dk. VII, 2, 70; Zs. 
13, 6. 

Bór-tórà, man, Dk. VII, 2, 70. 

Brad-résh = Bradrêk- rêsh, Int. 
Zs. 15, 5. 

Bradrék-résh, karap, Int. 49 ; Dk. 
VII, 2, 9 n; 3, 20, 24, 28, 32, 
19898 1852; V, X 

Brá4-róyisrn, karap, Zs. 15, 3. 

Brad-rukhsh, karap, Zs. 15, 3; 17, 6. 

Bad, demon, Dk. VII, 4, 37, 38. 

Buddha, Int. 78. 

Bükht-Narsih = Nebuchadnezzar, Int. 
14 ; Dk. V,1, 4, 5. 

Bundahis, MS., Int. 15, 53—59, 61, 
62, 68, 69. 

Bürzin- Mitre, fire, Zs. 28, 7. 


29; 


Cambyses, king, Dk. VII, 4, 86 n. 

Ch in Oriental words is printed K. 

Christian persecution, Int. 63, 65. 

Chronology, Int. 51-89. 

Creator, Dk. VII, 1, 4-6, 8, ro, 11, 
15, 19, 21, 24, 25, 28, 415 2,2; 


INDEX. 175 


3, 51; 4, 2, 12, 41, 74, 75, 84, 
85; 5, 12; 9, 6; 11, 6; V, 1, 
1,9; 2,1; 4, 6. 


Dâdistâņp-î Dinik, MS., Int. 24; Zs. 
12, o n. 

Dadvó, month, Zs. 23, 9. 

Dadvó-pavan-Mitró, day, Zs. 21, 4. 

Dahak, king, Int. 12, 50, 55; Dk. 
VII, 1, 26, 34 n; 4,72;10,10; 
V, 3,3; Zs. 12, I3nj 23, 3. 

Dahman Airin, ritual, Int. 11; Dk. 
VIL Ge 

Dat, r., Dk. VIE 2, 3 

Daiti, T., Int. 5, a “Dk. VII, € 
51, 54; 4, 29; 8, 60; 8, 23; 
Zs. 21, 5, 13; 22, 2, 9, 12. 

Dàrài, king, Int. 54, 55. 

Darega, r., Int. 29; Zs. 22, 12. 

Darius Hystaspes, Int. 70, 79, 84, 88, 
89 ; Dk. VII, 4, 86 n. 

Darmesteter's hypothesis, Int. 89, 9o. 

Darun, rite, Int. 42. 

Davans, man, Int. 29. 

Demons, Int. 3o, 36, 48, 49; Dk. 
VII, 1, 9, 12, 13, 18, 19, 34 ; 2, 
6, 9, 10, 43, 45, 48—50, 53, 60, 
66—68 ; 3, 47, 50; 4, 4, 5, 14, 
33-35, 40, 42, 44-48, 50, 52-54, 
63, 80, 87 ; 5,8; 6, 735; 7, 14 ; 
8, 46; V, 3, 66, 8, 13; Zs. 14, 
2, 5,6; 17, 4; 18, 1. 

Demon-worship, Int. 5o ; Dk. VII, 
4, re 35, 67; 7, 17, 36; V, 1, 
55; 4 

Demon wd, Dk. VII, 1, 36; 
7, 37; 8,7,34; V, 2, $. 

Destroyer, Dk. PILIs6; V2.9. 

Dhû Qàr, defeat at, Int. 61. 

Dimavand, m., Zs. 23, 3 n. 

Dinkard, MS., Int. 1, 2, 21-23 ; Dk. 
V,1,2n. 

Diogenes Laertius, Int. 71, 76.: 

Dk. V, i-iv, contents, Int. 14. 

Dk. VII, Int. 2; contents, Int. 3-13. 

Dikdafib, woman, Int. 55; Dk. Ms 
2, 35, 41, 42, 46, 47; 93; V 
2,2; Z8 29, x, 

Düránsar(ün, karap, Int. 34, 35. 

Déárásróbó, karap, Int. 49, 55; Dk 
VII, 2, 9 n; 3, 4, 8, 9, 11, 20, 
32, 35, 39, 41; 5, 12 n; Zs.18, 


Í, 572 
Emo. Dk. VII, 2,70; Zs. 13, 6; 


16, 
Drvé Zenigik, chief, Dk. VII, 11, 3. 


Eastwick's translation of the Zartust 
namah, Int. 31, 32. 

Egiptos, land, Zs. 20, 4 n. 

Enclosure made by Yim, Dk. VII, 


1, 24. 
Epistle of MAanfisfihar, Int. 25. 
Éri4ó, man, Dk. VII, 2, 70 n; Zs. 
16, X3. 
Eudoxus, Int. 71. 
Evil spirit, Int. 55; Dk. VII, 1, 19; 
» 67; 4, 36, 39; 8, 47. 
Exposition of the good religion, MS., 
Int. 3; Dk. VIL 1 a, 4. 


Farukhzad, priest, Dk. V, 1, 2, 3. 

Fiend, Int. 13; Dk. VII, L 6, 12, 
13, 26, 32 ; 4, 36-39, 55, 57, 
59-61; 8, 30, 32; 9,2; 10,5; 
11,7; V; aoe: AS 17, 4. 

Five dispositions of priests, MS., Zs. 
24, 1-9. 

Fradadafsh, region, Dk. VII, 6, 12 n. 

Fragüzak, man, Dk. VII, 2, 70; 
Zs. 13, 6 

Frahányàn, patron., Dk. VII, 8, 55; 
9, 18 ; 10, 15. 

Frahimrvani, man, Dk. VII, 2, 3. 

Frakih, heretic, Dk. VII, 1, 36. 

Frangrasiyak, king, Dk. VII, 1, 31, 
39; 2,69; 11, 3. 

Frashóstar, priest, Int. 29, 3 BBs 
Dk. VII, sua V, 2, 12; Zs. 
23, 10. 

Frasiyav=Frangrasiyak, Int. 
oe VII, i, » n; 

; Zs. WA; 

Fravak, man, Dk. Vit, 2, 70; 

: Z4 13, 6. 
Dita, spirits, Int 305.55, 72,75, 


55; 
2, 68; V, 3, 


V, 4, 


77: 

Frazisak, man, Dk. VII, 2, 70; 
Zs. 18, 6. 

Frédfin, king, Int. 33, 55 ; Dk. VII, 
1,25, 36,7281 429034 n; 2, Or, 
70; 11,3; V, 1, 8; 4, 3; Zs. 
18, 6; 23, 5n 

Frénó, woman, Zs, 13, 
23, 11. 

Fris, man, Zs. 18, 6. 


1; another, 


Gandarepé, monster, Dk. VII, 1, 52. 

Gáthas quoted, Zs. 15, 7. 

Gaugamela, battle, Int. 54. 

Gâyômard, par eaS, 773 Dk. 
VII, 1, i 6-9; 2,70; V,1,8; 
Zs, 13, 6 


176 


Géfar-t6ra, man, Dk. VII, 2, 70. 

Góbák-abfi, woman, Dk. VII, 10, 15. 

Good works, Dk. VII, 1, 6. 

Gésfirvan, Int. 29. 

Gushnaspshah, king, Dk. VII, 7, 14 n. 

Giisnasp fire, Int. 41; Zs. 22, 9 n. 

Gustasp, king, Int. 34, 36, 41-43. 

Gáza£, princess, Dk. VII, 2, 70; Zs. 
18, 6. 

Gyémará, Int. 14; Dk. V, 1, 2, 5; 
4, 8. 


Gamiasp, priest, Int. 29, 30, 42, 55; 
Dk. VIL, 4,77 n; 6, 38 TORE 
3n; V, 2,12; 3,4; Zs. 23, ro. 


Hadish, angel, Int. 3, 48; Dk. VII, 
1, 13,83. 

Haékadaspas, family, Int. 30. 

Haé£adàspó, man, Dk. VII, 2, 70; 
Zs. 13, 6. 

Hakhamanis, ruler, Int. 70. 

Hangâûrûsh, priest, Int. 55 ; Zs. 23, 
10. 

Hânô, septuagenarian, Zs. 20, 4. 

Haoma, angel, Int. 3o. 

Haoshyangha, king, Int. 3o. 

Hardbar, man, Dk. VII, 2, 70; Zs. 


13, 6. 
HAsar of length, Zs. 12, 4. 
— time, Dk. VII, 4, 49. 
Hazan, karap, Zs. 15, 3. 
Hazarahs, Int. 43. 
Heaven (best existence), Dk. VII, 6, 
1, f$. 
— (supreme), Dk. VII, 1, 7, 24. 
Hercules, Dk. VII, 1, 32 n. 
Hermippus, Int. 71. 
Hóm-juice, Dk. VII, 4, 85 ; Zs. 20, 


I5. 

Hóm plant, Int. 49, 55; Dk. VII, 
2, 14, 22, 23, 25, 26, 28-31, 34, 
35, 46; 4, 85; Zs. 12, 12, 15; 
18, 4 ; 20, 16 ; 21, 5. 

Hóm-strainer, Dk. VII, 4, 85. 

Hóm-water, Int. 5, 6, 47 ; Dk. VII, 
3, 51, 54 ; 4, 29, 30, 32, 35. 

Hósháng, king, Int. 3, 48, 55; Dk. 
Vil, 1 16, 18; 3, your 15 A 
8; 4,2; Zs. 18, 6. 

Hágar, m., Zs. 22, 3. 

Hûmâi, queen, Int. 54, 55, 57. 

Hundred-discipledom, Int. 54, 55. 

Htós, queen, Int. 29, 30; Dk. VII, 
4, 86; 6, r1 n. 

Hvóbas, tribe, Int. 29; Dk. VII, 6, 
13. 


PAHLAVI TEXTS. 


Hvóvi, woman, Dk. VII, 6, 12 n. 
Hvyaonas, nation, Dk. VII, 4, 77 n. 
Hystaspes, king, Int. 70. 


Idolators, Dk. VII, 1, 18 n. 
Idolatry, Int. 50; Dk. VII, 1, 19; 


4, 72. 

Idol-temple, Int. 5o ; Dk. VII, 1, 39. 

India, Int. 43. 

Iran, land, Int. 9, 43, 54; Dk. VII, 
1, 30, 31, 33, 38, 50; 2, 62, 68; 
4, 42, 81 n, 88, 89; 5, 5,9; 7, 
I, 2, 29, 33, 38, 39; 8, 1, 2, 4, 
7-9, 19; 8, 13; V,1, 5; 4, 1, 
3; Zs. 19, 3, 8, 9; 21, 13; 23, 8. 

Iranian, Int. 14; Dk. VII, 2, 63, 70 
n; 4, 9o; V, 4, 6. 

Iranian Bundahis, Dk. VII, 1, 34 n; 
2,9n;7,5n; Zs. 22,9n. 

— country, Dk. VII, 1, 57. 

— monarchy, Int. 45. 

Iranians, Int. 11, 14; Dk. VII, 2, 
63; 4, 42, 77n; 8,16n; ll, 
3 ns Veen. 2s. 16,2: 

fsadvastar, man, Dk. VII, 8, 55; 9, 
18; 10,15. 

Isfendyar, prince, Int. 39, 42; Dk. 
VII, 4 5. 


J in Oriental words is printed G. 
Jerusalem, Int. 14; Dk. V, 1,2 n. 
Jews, Int. 14; Dk. V, 1, 2 n. 


Kabed-fis-spaé, wizard, Zs. 28, ro. 

Kai= Kavig, Dk. VII, 4, 64; 8, 40. 
60; 9, 23. 

Kai-Arsh, prince, Dk. VII, 1, 35. 

Kaî-Kâûs, priest, Int. 32. 

Kai-Kháüsrói, king, Int. r2, 50, 55; 
Dk. VII, 1, 39; 10, 10; 11, 5; 


V, 4, 4 n. 
Kai-Kobad, king, Int. 55; Dk. VII, 
1,335 B, 31$ ns V, 4, 4 . 
Kai-Loharasp, king, Int. 14, 55; Dk. 


V, 1, 5. 
Kaisar, Int. 175 Dk. VII, 8, 42. 
Kai-Siyavakhsh, prince, Dk. VII, 1, 
3 


38. 

Kai-Üs, king, Int. 3, 15, 653 DK 
VII, 1, 35, 373 2, 62, 63, 65, 
66; 6, 2 n; Zs. 12, 9-11, 14, 
I5, 17, 20, 2T, 25, 24. 

Kai-Vistasp, king, Int. 3, 29, 55; Dk. 

II, 1, 41, 47, 49; 4, 1,76, 77, 

86 ; 5,6; 0, 4, 9, 11; 7, 39; 
11,3; V;1,$n; 2,8, £1; 8, x. 
Kangdez, fortress, Int. 7, 10, 43; 


INDEX. 


DE VI1,39; 4 Vw: b, 12 ; 


QA ER 

Kanyisa, lake, Dk. VII, 11, 8. 

Kar, fish, Zs. 22, 4 n. 

Karap, Int. 4-6, 16, 17, 47, 49, 55; 
Dk. VII, 2, 9, 45; 3, 4, 7-9, 
II, I3, 15, 20, 24, 26, 28, 32, 
34» 39, 41, 50; 4, 2, 6, 14, 21, 
25, 61, 64, 67; 8, 26, 40, 60; 
9, 23; 10, 5; V, 2,3; Zs. 15, 
2; 16, 1-4, 6-8; 17,1; 18,2, 5, 
7; 19, 1 ; 23, 5. 

Karapans, Int. 3o. 

Kardar-t6ra, man, Dk. VII, 2, 70. 

Karsipt, bird, Zs. 22, 4. 

Karsna, man, Dk. VII, 7, 12 n. 

Kavad, king, Int. 58; Dk. VII, 7, 26. 

Kava Husrava, king, Int. 30, 70. 

— Kaváta, king, Int. 70. 

— Usa, king, Int. 70. 

Kavig, Int. 4, 55; Dk. VII, 2, 9; 
8, 18; Zs. 23, 5, 8. 

Kavis, Int. 30. 

Kavi Vistaspa, king, Int. 30, 70; Dk. 
wit, 7, r2 n: 

Kayan glory, Dk. VII, 4, 43; 11, 3. 

Kayáns, Int. 3; Dk. VII, 1, 33; 2, 
9n; 7, 12; V,1,8; 4, 4, 5. 

Kerésáspó, hero, Int. 12, 29; Dk. 
VII, 1, 32; 10, 10; Zs. 23, 5n. 

Kérsévazd, prince, Dk. VII, 1, 39. 

Khákán, Int. 27 ; Dk. VII, 8, 42. 

Khalifah, Al-Mamfin, Dk. V, 1, 2 n. 

Khár, day, Zs. 23, 9. 

Khiirdad, angel, Dk. VII, 2, r9, 38; 
5,9; 8, sn; Zs. 22. 11. 

Khfirdad fire, Int. 41. 

Khüsró I, king, Int. 9, 26, 27, 58, 
68; Dk. VII, 7, 26; V, 3, 3. 

— Il, king, Int. 58, 6r. 

Khvaniras, region, Dk. VII, 1, 26; 
2,70; V, 2,9. 

Khvêtûkdas, Int. 6, 47, 49; Dk. VII, 


4, 4 n. 

Khyóns, nation, Int. 7, 55; Dk. VIT, 
4, 77, 83, 84, 87-90; 5, 7; V, 
8, 15; Zs. 23, 8. 

Kig, Int. 6, 47, 49; Dk. VII, 2,9 n; 
8, 50; 4, 2, 6, 14, 67; 8, 26; 
wares 3. 

Kirman, town, Zs. 12, o n. 

Kobád4, king, Dk. VII, 1, 35. 

Kêkharêd, Zs. 15, 2. 

Kündah, Int. 55; Zs. 23, 8. 

Kátál-tórà, man, Dk. VII, 2, 7o n. 


Kaispis, ruler, Int. 70. 


[47 


177 


Kêkast, lake, Int. 50; Dk. VII, 1, 39. 

Késhmak, demon, Dk. VH, 2, 44, 
45; 4, 61. 

Ki&b:bnus, man, Dk. VII, 2, 70; 
Zs. 18, 6. 

Kinvad bridge, Zs. 20, 5n. 

Kist, Zs. 16, 12. 

Kitradad nask, Int. 3, 14, 20; Dk. 
VIELE 340; 7,51 

Kitró-méhónó, prince, Int. 10; Dk. 
VIL S, 45. 


Macedon, Int. 55 n. 

Mada, land, Dk. VII, 1, 26. 

Mádigàn-i Gugastak Abilis, MS., 
BERE V L 2 n. 

Manrküs, wizard, Int. rr, 55; Dk. 
VII, 1, 24; 9, 3; V, 3, 5. 
Maidhyózaremaya, festival, Int. 18; 

Zs. 21, 1 n. 
Mánih, heretic, Dk. VII, 7,21n; V, 


Q 

Mânûsak, princess, Zs. 15, 2. 

Mânûsir, for Mânûskîhar, Dk. VII, 
122578. 

Máànü;-khürnàk, man, Dk. VII, 2, 
70; V, 4, 3; Zs. 18, 6. 

Mânûs-khûrnar, man, Dk. VII, 2, 
70; V, 4, 3; Zs. 18, 6. 

Mânûskihar, king, Int. 15, 16, 55; 
Dk; VII, 1, 29-31; 2; 51:5, 70 ; 
6, zrn; 7, 231; V, L8: 3; 
Zada, 3:18, 6; 15,5516, 15. 

Máraspend, priest, Int. 64, 88; Dk. 
VII, 5, 5; 7, 19, 20. 

Marvels of Zoroastrianism, Int. r. 

Masvak, man, Dk. VIT, 6, 11 n. 

Masyáói, woman, Int. 48, 55; Dk. 
VII, 1, 9. 12-14. 

Masyé, man, Int. 48, 55; Dk. VII, 
1, 9, 11-14; 2, 70; V, 1, 8; 4, 
$a; 25. 19, 6. 

Mázandar, land, Dk. VII, 1, 26. 

Mázandarán, land, Dk. VII, 1, 18 n. 

Mázanó, demons of, Dk. VII, 1, 18. 

Mazda, Dk. VII, 8, 7-10. 

Mazdag, heretic, Int. 26, 43; Dk. 
VII, 7, 21, 26 n. 

Mazdakites, sect, Int. 58. 

Mazda-worship, Int. 15, 49; Dk. 
VII, 1, 1, 2, 4, 41, 43, 445 3, 
35 n; 4, 2, 5; 14, 53,34 7 79; 
6.4, 10 n; V, 1, r. 

Mazda-worshippers, Dk. VII, 7, 5, 
6, 9, 10, 23; 8, 28, 35, 51; 9, 
2, 7, 8, 10, II, 13, 14 ; 10, 4, 6, 
11; ll, 8-10; Zs. 12, 2, 4. 


178 


Mêdyômâh, man, Int. 18, 19, 29, 30, 
55; Zs. 21, 3; 23, 1, 8, 11. 

Messiah, Dk. V; 8, 3. 

Millennial apostles, Int. 3. 

Misr, land, Zs. 20, 4 n. 

Mivan, river (?), Zs. 22, 8. 

MárdaZ, angel, Dk. VII, 2, 38. 


Namkhvist of the Hazirs, Dk. VII, 
4, 77 n. 

Nasks, Int. 64. 

Naydzem, man, Dk. VII, 2, 7o. 

Nebuchadnezzar, king, Int. 14; Dk. 
V, 4, 2438 

Néresang, for Néryósang, Dk. VII, 


1, 29 n. 

Néróksang, for Néryósang, Dk. VII, 
2, 21 n, 70; 4,8, n. 

Nérydsang, angel, Dk. VII, 1, 29; 
2,21; 4, 84, 85; V,4, 6; Zs. 
13, 5, 6. 

Névak-tórà, man, Dk. VII, 2, 70. 

Next-of-kin marriage, Dk. VII, 1, 
10; 4, 5, 6,8, 11; Zs. 23, 15. 

Ninus, king, Int. 71, 74. 

Nirangistan, MS., Zs. 13, 4 n. 

Nivédis, man, Zs. 15, 5. 

Nódar, man, Int. 17; Dk. VII, 2, 
51; 3,19, 39; 4, 86 n; 6, 11 n; 
Zs. 16, 11-13. 

Nêdariga, man, Zs. 15, 5. 

Nódars, tribe, Dk. VII, 6, rr. 

Non-Iranian, Dk. VII, 9, 13. 

Noshérvan, king, Int. 43. 

Numfidarih-i Yazisné, MS., Zs. 18, 
4: 


Oldest dates explained, Int. 72. 
Ordeal, Int. 7, 18, 64,65 ; Dk. VII, 
5, 4,5; 7,2; Zs. 21, 234—327. 

Osthanes, Int. 73. 

Ox, frontier-settling, Dk. VII, 2, 
62-66 ; Zs. 12, 8-25. 

— sole-created, Int. 55, 77; Dk. 
VII, 2, 67. 

Oxyartes, king, Int. 74. 


Padashkhvargar, land, Dk. VII, 7, 
14 n. 

Padiragtarasp6, man, Dk. VII, 2, 9, 
10, 15, 70. 

Paétrasp— Paitiraspó, man, Dk, 
Vil, 2, 70; AS 18; & 

Pairigs, meteors, Zs. 22, 9. 

Papak, prince, Dk. VII, 7, 12. 

Parshad-t6ra, man, Int, 6, 47 ; Dk. 
VII, 4, 3t754. 


PAHLAVI TEXTS. 


Parsi calendar, Int. 79-89; how 
rectified, Int. 85. 

Pátakhsróbó, king, Int. 3, 48; Dk. 
VII, 1, 34. 

Persia, Int. 55 n, 63, 79. 

Pésdadian, Int.  ; Dk. VII, 2, 70. 

Péshyótan, prince, Int. 7, 10, 42, 43; 
Dk. VII, 4, 81; 5, 12; 6, 13; 


V, 8, 5. 

Pestilence, demon, Dk. VII, 4, 37, 
38. 

Plato, Int. 71, 77. 

Pliny the Elder, Int. 7 1, 73, 75, 76- 

PórüAàst, woman, Int. 29, 30. 

Pôrûshâspô, man, Int. 4, 3o, 49 ; Dk. 
VII, 2, 10, 15, 21, 29-35, 39- 
41, 46-48, 56-58, 70; 3, 3, 4, 
7-11, 13, 15, 21, 23, 24, 26, 27, 
32, 34, 37, 38; V, 2, 2, 4; Zs. 
13, 6; 14, 16; 15, 4; 16, 1, 
3-6; 17, 2; 18, 1, 2, 4-6 ; 19, 
1-42 20, 1,65 BÀ, 35. 

Pouruspadha, wizard, Zs. 23, 10 n. 

Proconnesian Zoroaster, Int. 73. 

Purtaráspó, man, Zs. 18, 6. 

Pür-tórà, man, Dk. VII, 2, 7o. 


Ragan, man, Dk. VII, 2, 51 n, 7o n. 

Ragisn, man, Dk. VII, 2, 7o n. 

Rai, city, Int. 32. 

Rak, man, Dk. VII, 2, 51; 8, 19, 
39; or Ragh, Int. 17; Zs. 16, 
II-I}. 

Ramak-tôrâ, man, Dk. VII, 2, 70. 

Rangûstar, man, Zs. 15, s. 

Rasastat, angel, Dk. VII, 4, 81 n. 

Rashn, angel, Dk. VII, 7, 11. 

Rashn-résh, apostate, Int. 9; Dk. 
V1, 7, tz. 

Ristare-vaghent, priest, Int. 64, 70 : 
Dk. VII, 7, 19 n. 

Ratü;star, man, Zs. 15, 5. 

Renovation of the universe, Int, t3; 
55, 77 ; Dk. VII, 1, 41, 42, 54; 
10, 10; 11, ro, 11; Zs. 28, 3. 

Romans, Int. 63, 65. 


Sacred beings, Int. 6, 15, 19, 48, 52, 
55; Dk. VII, 1, 4, 12, 14, 41; 
2, 10, 61, 62 ; 3, 47-49; 4, 
21, 46, 62, 70, 80; 5, 12 ; 8, 6, 
60; V, 2, 7; Zs. 14, 7 ; 21, 1o. 

Sacred fires, Dk. VII, 7, 2. 

Sagastan, land, Int. 6, 47; Dk. VII, 

» 31. 
Salm, prince, Dk. VII, L1, 35; 
Samak, man, Dk. VII, 1, 15. 


INDEX. 


179 


——————————————————————— 


Saman, patron., Dk. VII, 1, 32; V, 
1, 8. 

Sanskrit, Int. 78. 

Saoshyant, apostle, Int. 30. 

Sarai, town, Zs. 22, 8. 

Sasanian, Int. 9, 31, 50, 57, 68, 69. 

Satavés, star, Zs. 22, 9. 

Selections of Zà4-sparam, Int. 1, 15, 
24. 

Semiramis, queen, Int. 71, 74. 

Shahpühar II, king, Int. 26, 58, 61, 
63, 64, 88; Dk. VII, 7, 19 n. 

— 111, king, Int. 64, 87. 

Sham — Shám, land, Zs. 20, 4 n. 

Shapan, Dk. VII, 7, 3. 

Shapigan or Shaspigàn, Dk. VII, 7, 


3 n. 
Shapir-abáü, woman, Dk. VII, 9, 18. 
Shatraver, angel, Dk. VII, 2, 19. 
Shatvér, angel, Zs. 22, 8. 

Shédasfas (Theodosius?), Int. ro, 
27; Dk. VII, 8, 47 n. 

Shedasp6, Dk. VII, 8, 47. 

Shemig-abii, woman, Dk. VII, 8, 55. 

Sirkán, town, Zs. 12, o n. 

Siyah-t6r4, man, Dk. VII, 2, 70. 

Siyàmak, man, Dk. VII, 2, 7o; V, 
15,924 1; Zs. 13, 6. 

Siyavakhsh, prince, Dk. VII, 1, 39. 

Sóg-tórà, man, Dk. VII, 2, 7o. 

Sósháns, apostle, Int. 12, 13, 55; 
DE VIE T, 42, 55; 10, 10, 15; 
11, 1, 2; V, 2, 15; 8, 3; Zs. 
2L 4. 

Spendarmad, angel, Int. 6, 15, 55; 
Dk. VII, 2, 19; 4, 57, 58; 8, 
5n; Zs. 12, 2, 3, 5, 6; 16, 5; 
22,9; 23, 4. 

— month, Zs. 21, 1. 

Spend-dad, prince, Int. 39, 55; Dk. 
VILE; V, 2, 12. 

Spend nask, Int. 1, 2, 14, 20, 27, 46 ; 
Dk. VII, 2, 1 n. 

Spent6-khratvau, priest, Dk. VII, 7, 
8, 10, 

Spétó-tórà, man, Dk. VII, 2, 70. 

Spitam, man, Dk. VII, 2, 70; Zs. 
13, 6. 

Spitámas, tribe, Int. 3o; Dk. VII, 
2, 9, II, 29, 37 3 7, 27; 8, 22, 


35. 
Spitóis, priest, Dk. VII, 6, 12. 
Sritak = Thritak, man, Zs. 13, 6. 
Srité, hero, Int. 8, 15, 55 ; Dk. VII, 
2, 63,64; 0, 2, 3, 5) 7-9 TI, 
13; Zs. 12, 1o, 12-14, 16, 18, 
20, 22, 24, 25. 


Sritó, woman, Zs. 23, 11. 

Sróbóvar, snake, Dk. VII, 1, 32. 

Srósh, angel, Dk. VII, 3, 17; Zs. 
6 


» 9. 

Srfitvék-spadak, priest, Dk. VII, 7, 
8, 10. 

Sûdkar nask, Int. 44. 

Sürak, land, Zs. 20, 4 n. 


Sénóv, priest, Int. 9, 54, 55; Dk. 
VII, 7, 6; Zs. 98, 11. 


Tabaristan, land, Dk. VII, 7, 14 n. 
TakhmG6rup, king, Int. 48, 55; Dk. 
VIE, 1 13931:V,1,8; 4, 5. 

Talmud, MS., Dk. V, 1, 2 n. 

Tzn4pühar, sin, Dk. VII, 4, 19, 20. 

Tanvasar, priest, Int. 9, 62; Dk. 
VIL 7 14, 355 18. 

Tdz, man, Dk. VII, 1, 34. 

Tegend, r., Zs. 22, 7 n. 

Ten admonitions, MS., Zs. 24, 10- 


19. 
Thritak, man, Dk. VII, 2, 70. 
Tistar, star, Dk. VII, 2, 38 n. 
Têgan, r., Zs. 22, 7. 

Trojan war, Int. 71. 

Tg, prince, Dk. VII, 1, 30. 

Tfimasp, prince, Dk. VII, 1, 31. 

Tfir, land, Dk. VII, 1, 31, 39. 

— =Têranian, Int. 6, 47; Dk. VII, 
4, 6-10, 14-16, 20; 5, 12n; 
11,431.25; Zs. 18, $, 41 
17, 6; 20, 8. 

Tárán, land, Dk. VII, 2, 62; Zs. 


12, 8, 9. 
TÓránian, Dk. VII, 2, 9 n, 63, 68; 
9, 28; 7,19; 9,13; Zs. 12, 17. 
Turkish demons, Dk. VII, 8, 47. 


Urugadhasp, man, Dk. VII, 2, 70. 
Usikhsh, Int. 30. 
Uspásnu, man, Dk. VII, 6, 12 n. 


Vadak, woman, Dk. VII, 2, 64; Zs. 
12, 15. 

Vadast = Vaédvóist, Zs. 15, 3. 

Vaédist, man, Dk. VII, 2, 7o; Zs. 
13, 6. 

Vaédvóist, karap, Int. 6, 47; Dk. 
VII, 2, 9n; 4, 21, 23, 24. 
Váégered, prince, Int. 3 ; Dk. VII, 

1, 16; V, 4, 2. 
Vakgir, land, Dk. VIT, 1, 39. 
Vanófravi;sn, man, Dk. VII, 2, 7o. 
Varahrán fire, Zs. 22, 7. 
Vars, hair, Dk. VII, 4, 85. 


N 2 


180 


VarstmAnsar nask, Int. ro. 

Verethraghna, angel, Int. 30. 

Vidadafsh, region, Dk. VII, 6, 12 n. 

Vidrafs, wizard, Dk. VII, 4, 77 n. 

Vigirkard-i Dénig, MS., Dk. VII, 2, 
70 n. 

Virafsang, man, Dk. VII, 1, 54 n. 

Visperad, MS., Int. 3. 

Visraps, tribe, Dk. VII, 6, 2, 7, 9, 
11; Zs: 12, 10 n. 

Vistasp, king, Int. 6-10, 14, 19, 29, 
47, 49, 52, 55, 70; Dk. VII, 1, 
2; 2,9 n; 3, 31; 4, 63-67, 
69-71, 74-76, 83-85, 89, 90: 
5, 1, 2, 6, 7, 12 ; 6, 1,2, 5,6,8, 
11 D, 12-14; 7, 1, 2, 5 n, 38, 39; 
V, 2, 8, 10; 8, 1; Zs. 16, 12, 
13 ; 23, 5, 7. 

Vivang,ha, man, Dk. VII, 1, 20; 2, 
70: Zs. 18, 6, 

Vizak, woman, Dk. VII, 2, 70; Zs. 
13, 6. 

Vohümanó, angel, Int. 5, 16, 55; 
Dk. VII, 1, 4; 2, 17, 19, 24-26, 
29, 33; 9, 17,22, 26, 51, 52, 54, 
56, 58-60, 62 ; 4, 29, 57,74, 75, 
78; 7, 19; V, 2, 5, 9; Zs. 14, 
9-12; 16, 9 ; 20, 3; 21, 8, 11, 
12; 22, 3, 6 n. 

— king, Int. 9, 55; Dk. VII, 7, s. 

Vohfiném, man, Int. 55; Zs. 23, 8, 


II. 
Voh@-r646, man, Dk. VII, 8, 55; 9 
18 ; 10, 15. 
Vologeses I, king, Int. 88, 89. 
— II], king, Int. 61, 88. 


Wilson's Parsi Religion, Int. 31. 

Witch, Dk. VII, 1, 19; 5, 8; V, 2, 
35. 22. 17, 4. 

Witchcraft, Dk. VIT, 2, 6, 7, 63; 8, 
4,8; 4,72; 5,8; 8, 6. 

Wizard, Dk. VII, 1, 19, 35 397 8, 
8, 53, 54, 66; 3, 5, 42-44; 8, 
29; V, 2, 3, 4, 8 ; Zs. 14, 3, T3, 
16; 16, 2, 3; 17,4; 18, 1, 5. 

Wrath, demon, Int. 16, 


Xanthus of Lydia, Int. vis 
Xerxes, king, Int. 71; 73. 


'Adkár-i Zarirán, MS., Dk, VII, 4, 
77 n, 86 n, 
Yathà-ah(-vairyó, Dk, VII, 1 


» 4n 
12 nj 4, 41, 56, 61, : 


PAHLAVI TEXTS. 


Yazdakard I, king, Int. 64, 66, 87, 
88 n. 

— II and III, kings, Int. 58, 61. 

Yim, king, Int. 55; Dk. VII, 1, 20- 
22, 24, 25, 26 n, 32, 36 ; 2, 21, 
59-61, 70; 9,4; V,1, 8; 2,2, 
9; 4,3; Zs. 18, 5, 6; 15, 2n. 

Yimak, princess, Zs. 15, 2 n. 

Yim’s enclosure, Int. rr. 

Yügyàást, meas., Dk. VII, 8, 16, 45. 


Zàd-sparam, priest, Int. 15, 25; Zs. 


12, o n. 
Zagh, man, Dk. VII, 6, rr n. 
Zainigav, prince, Dk. VII, 1, 34n. 
Zak, karap, Dk. VII, 2, 9 n; 4, 64, 
6 


Ta 
Zand, Int. 37; Dk. VII, 8, 22, 36; 


; 9 4- 
Zarathustra, apostle, Int. 30; Dk. 
VII, 1, 34 n. 
Zarat(üst, apostle, Int. 1-4, 6-8, ro, 
15-17, I9, 20, 29, 32-43, 46—50, 
52, 55, 61, 70-75, 77, 78; Dk. 
VII, 1, 5, 34, 43, 515 2, 2, 3, 
9 N, IO, 14, 15-22, 24 n, 27, 29, 
36-40, 42,15; 46, 47352, 53, 56, 
60, 61, 64, 68-70; 3, 1 n, 4, 
5, 7-9, 11-16, 20, 22, 32, 33, 36, 
38-43, 46, 51, 54, 57, 59, 61, 
62 ; 4, 3-6, II, 12, I4, 16—19, 
22—27, 29-31, 33-36, 38, 40-43, 
45, 47-49, 51-55, 57, 58, 60, 61, 
63, 64, 66, 67, 69, 79,72—74, 86, 
90; 5, 1, 2, 4-8; 6, 1, 12, 13; 
7, 2, 14, 18, 19, 22, 29, 33-35, 
37; 8, I, 24, 25, 27, 29, 36, 38, 
40, 42, 43, 48, 50,51, 55, 56, 59; 
, I, 6, 18, I9 ; 10, I5; V, 1, 
735 2, I; 3, I, 2, 4j Zs. 12, 6, 
73 13, I, 4-6; 14, I, 2, 8, 12, 
15; 15, 1, 3, 4-6; 16, 1-4, 6, 
7,9-13; 17, 1,6; 18, 2, 3, 6, 
7; 19, 2, 4-7; 20, 2, 5, 9, r1- 
13, 16; 21, 2,3, 5-9, II, 12, 14, 
I5, 17, 24; 22, 2, 3, 6-12, 13n; 
3, 1, 7-11, I3. 
Zarat(ü:t of the Spitàmas, Dk. VII, 
1, 2, 8, 41, 43, 44; 2, 67, 68; 3, 
55, 56, 58, 60; 4, 15, 32, 39, 
39» 75, 79, 81, 82, 86, 89; 5, 3; 
7, 28; 8, 23, 31, 32, 34; V, 1, 
75 Zs. 12, 12 ; 21, ro. 
Zaratiist, priest, Int. 64, 66, 70, 88. 
Zaratist-namak of Zs, contents, 
Int. 15-19; MSS., Int. 24. | 


INDEX. 


Zaratustship, Dk. V, 4, 6. 

Zarir, prince, Dk. VII, 4, 77 n; V, 
2. 12. 

Zartust Bahram Pazdá, writer, Int. 
32, 43, 46. 

Zartust-namah, Persian, Int. 31, 45, 
46; Dk. VII, 4, 70n; 5, 12 n; 
contents, Int. 32-44. 

Zbaurvant, man, Dk. VII, 7, 12n. 

Zend, T, Zs. 22, 7 n. 

Zóis, man, Dk. VII, 2, 3, 4. 


N 


181 


Zóndak, r., Zs. 22, 7 n. 

Zoroaster, Int. 74, 75. 

Zoroastrian epoch, Int. 52. 

— legends, Int. 14, 20, 27, 51, 59; 
scattered in other Pahl. texts, 
Int. 29; in Av., Int. 30, 31. 

Zóti, priest, Dk. VII, 8, 8. 

Zrayang,hau, priest, Dk. VII, 7, 8, 
IO 


Zásak, man, Dk, VII, 2, 70; Zs. 


, 6. 


ioe) 


183 


TRANSLITERATION OF ORIENTAL ALPHABETS, 


CAO NA B Rs E E is leet] u "HOC RON 
e 2 alla 3 PEETI BAKA MDC y6 [eee 
uri o 2|dc9| R & dft 6 [aaa] 

a ke S g Jeees] dtt 
1 iN d x 2 7D N b lt y 113 m 


ee SIJESEN [17 Zl i 


**vwjyedee “ gf | 


Mo OMA. V SI 
v€juidsw “ șI 


o 0: + Se sinus, eI 


("079 *sopeyered) 


euvjeogrpour Se[eumnjjnz 


e enjeouj aadse — * II 
* sivoney stua “ OI 


* sivoney 1odeu LEES 
dide EL ee é 8 


ws Pei) Se sul O D $593] E E e... SG NON y, eee] eee © SNYE sia “ el 
dcr MET > a Ka kbh Ts Sis a E KAB ki 
ee A ae de oe Bana Kaki aa BANK I 
dis a 2|2]|:f[g 68 1424 8| [oe 
d e N | | eee] eee ecole a o cdo oN : ee 
sy yul u " t e Kaaa a eeej] y fee 


K 
E 
E 
^ 
. 

E, 

to 

S 

— 

< 
^ 


e e * * gadse snjuidg 4 


9 0 6 € * SI[€S€ N 9 


eee d e e eee e... eee 6 © © el © s b ec 9979€ SI[eIq9[-01n33n2) c 
eee C eee ee " g h ec eertleee q3 yvy d 9wow 9 * eyeaidse 7 b 
eee C e v» S c 9 le ecco clo eo | 8 didid Rd Ia Tees. See 
uy d "P ee e £9 [51 “eee eee Ux 9 0099 a eyeridse " 6 
x € e e € b [^ bow v ou v E * € 9 9 9 * ? * * * €$ f Sinua, I 

"Se[e1n33n 

BID II]. | SSID II | SSID I 
menuju) | —»1q9H | Ngesv | uesa | AA uz Asung SLNVNOSNOD 


“LHGVHdTV AWVNOISSIN 


"LSV^] AHL AO SXOO([ GAADVG AHL AO 
SNOILVISNVU L JIL ?IO4 QLdOGV SLWSVIId'IW 'IVILNSDI() JO NOILVYALTISNVY J, 


TRANSLITERATION OF ORIENTAL ALPHABETS 


184 


"| se * * Z snuiuod$sg "1 ZE 
(0z |***|-**|**** T snunusdss  * 9€ 


C Es $ os els es 2s Se |e ee Zz ooeee ees iC «c ce 
i ^«^ pads “ Fe 


- 
LJ 
* 
LJ 
LJ 
* 
e 
LJ 
. 
. 
= 
~~ 
~ 
N 
. 
. 
. 
* 
. 


. LI * o£. t* € 2S. a “ee C 8 S © o A B. 3 ee 
Nia yw | oo Bojtttt|tti| 8 [ttttttt podes suds gg 
aren NT) ee “ee ee eas eee 1 a d E S a ue rare as Z SI[[O Uu «€ c£ 
ee ee “ee & @. 4 s.. @ ee ÉL a2 s 1 4 9 e 8s 9 9 a I SI[[O U1 46 16 
4 n n ve eee [^] Og. Fi 995 4 [ scere» owe wo Si[eo0ATU9S 0E 
C m m | / b é 6 6 à "- A u eso mane TTC NT 6€ 
em -a ¢ c ous 5s 6 68 5 “ee Ha ee e; € 0 see oe @ @ 248 Iq isse te 8z 
. £5 Aes e. oes 355 eee yp Se ne * ejendse [1] ZZ 


> R 
€ e > 4 5S e 6 eee p eo 9 aq ooo 9) 9 9 € vrpapq 9Z 
. HL ee ÁO . at wr DU i Re ET) 648 [IqIsse 66 | YA 


* ee p h 2 à 8 8 *e » qj —1á— Ina. 2 2: 00 te pZ 
E p ER T r 4 eq tom isse iri MONT a 


*So|e3ue( 
TAERE L 4 9 e “ejaan. z +. +| * * G6ngejigisse srua[ 66 Zz 
KAN EE ET. re B lee! e * * +] * * snje[iqisse 1odeu 9 IZ 
"le a 99^» . o5 ees eee “ee “eee (A) ee eee n Ss?! MM te oz 
ZEI Oe EET | | oh e| ttt tn n sodsu snyudg 6I 


A ^ € ee hb |'****]***]| £ [5555-5599 equooammg gT 


"SSe III | SSID II | ‘SSe I 
(po riuineo2) 


"—»i1q9H | qey | Wes | AAAA "pung Vg ee” S! NVNOSNOD 
“LHGVHAIV AUVNOISSIA 


: y "E T) 951339» 9 9*9* STA BO 
Bs “eee wu £e qm ve num amaasmuy go 

ETATIS EM Oa uiis em, io 
B 


185 
E 


i es NG TH J ******** Jjodse snjuids 96 
e | elo o.e jol o s ji Aq |< oee * eyoxdsv es cc 
i saa i ET A tee eee t sqeooAnuog $c 

Qa lesa w tee eee t n + + gipsoN £C 
ie oe « @ ) we ee 1 & ois) © les $$ v 6 d EAE d ete|t*5959***«uiesmuog ZS 
CE. t.. ae eee R eee see uq **«*s 6 wendss LL IS 


E 

LE EO [a e Oo box aped b LEE o € 6 s q Re wwe sre rS Dee QE 
G 
G 


Áp 
> 
a 


* vjuidse < 6F 
b eb (2 e Bai: ox d ERA: se tt tts alus Uh 
'SO|8IQq'e'T 


Geel Peel eS Pees | a a qz RERELLLLO ME n 
go irevpr mar T E e h [eee] e] ys |t ttt ttt t gadsesnquidg oF 
way ae 3 ) 7 % . 6. yw $"« Oe ‘es u .. n Tu seee 9Onuoetp «“ Ch 
4 pvc ew] Cee | $339! vw ow KA aa ve v € 4 ees | * o * * * uon « PP 


y [eee jene] a [eee eee sqeooAaneg £p 
m [eee] u [eee jeee eaaa nee gresen Cb 

epis AT Ee rne Ie sse] pio] $e omms rat dee org 
£ 
2 
2 


FOR THE SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST. 


.* "o9 9 p q1'9-^ € py ee ONUS BODL Or 
ec t n y? eee “e.a... eyerdse “ 6g 


SN BM [38 | rico sei evt E 


| ("079 *soyenSum) 
euwjvoyrpour so[ejueqt | 


v 
—— Mo V D 7 2 — mme ———— — u—"—— 


TRANSLITERATION OF ORIENTAL ALPHABETS. 


186 


cow | € ee) e e 9| e» 9 | © 8 6 e... iii a ae 9 | 8 » t seer eee * v3ovij Seyd CC 


JJ nan [ese] eea eee el] (av) | 1 [euevod-om75n2 enfuoujqdiq 9r 
(a) (ve) o 9 9€ vZuo[ «« cI 
ydus (2)3(93 ^»»Jaaswlssnl.6 * * * glA9Jq &r[9je[|vd-01n3jn£) pI 
eee (n) v e... Huo “ £I 


eee eee eee ... ee t... 972 MUS Ou sla v © % e 0.0.2.4 /0 € Byes BIPCAL AU £) US 
ee ee ee ee ee eee 4, €. 8 ©e@e “ee (ng)no «€ €€ £6 
LEN EO LE S-o “ee ee “ee LE . . * 9 “eee M 4 4 (ng) na 66 e co 
my [oes | 6 | [oe | (no) me Wa [eee (no) | ng | suerqu[-01n33n2 snduoyjydia rz 
o "o 
$$ uh $ Ces e. ( Mi $9 54 (o) (nv) 9 à eee suoj "T oz 
0 E ass | 53535 eee 4 oo ELE Bee aa 0 *** * glA0JIQ Si[91Q(9[-01n33n £7) 6I 
s.. ee “ee ee é $6 “eee ea" “eee ee (ng) 10 «c 6 8I 
19 ‘la TE t. CE eee eee oe? | pe .0 104 an (12) 19 “ 66 ZI 
KA ee eee c a ‘ot 2 eee 
S. L] 
CI x e 
6 6 
saa — e . . b “eee ee a LIIIJSJ!S RSS? SIAJA SIEIqer] cl 
“ee eee v ae . è 5. 5. 24 * 9" € $9 ke BADAN ae | ju we TT TUN C vzuo[ [11 LI 
eo “ee B-A g “ee *e#e “eee k& 4.6 ie LE E" 14 oes p oei $1A94Q sienZurT 01 
eee 5» 525 E ea "NT WE. eee “eee W s. 6 lh eae D] 6 6 ^5» hee el eS vuoj [T1 6 
eee eee eee » $5 UN M eee a ANING & H ? 8 a ep BLA9JQ Si[e3uo (T 8 
I Es ka at») [^y " H e 6 eté (5) I e Wm ur ey s vuol e Z 
| EX ea 23 eee f X 4$. 9 $4 47s @ | Cop m» v v SlA9Jq si[eje[edg 9 
v + > *, c wr lh a a TL (D) v 58-9 » 60 9e vuo] 66 c 
v E is —- quit er n lk eee eee 9 TSuP 9o» SIAGIq Si[e1n33n r) P 
sedhang esi] esi ungyan 2 P|) se a 070) 6.42 Q eerie E E £ 
rr rere ewe rrr es eee mee ee eee rere ers ees 2 ****** gi[gje|ed-oZuÁ1e] c 
g Bis or aé ee eee “eee Kus NGA Tu v x 0 ANE TE E US T NER AT I 


'sse[) IIT | sseld IT | SSe I 
‘ssuq | aq H | quay | weg | PAYA *puoz waysues —— kaananku “STAMOA 
“LAQVHd‘IV ANVNOISSIN 


ISBN 978-81-208-0148-6 


eee ||| 


ez | lornmcdsibennidis con ci NG 
ies xs SMS i GO motilalbanarsidass. 
= ue ic Work 


w @mit
