Pahlavi Texts, Vol. 1 (SBE 5)
=============================
Pahlavi Texts, Vol. 1 (Sacred Books of the East 5), translated by E. W. West (Oxford, 1880), public domain. West's rendering of the Bundahishn, Bahman Yasht, and Shayast la-Shayast, the great Zoroastrian Pahlavi compendia. Scan via Internet Archive.

The Library


SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY
AT CLAREMONT


WEST FOOTHILL. AT COLLEGE. AVENUE
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA


LIBRARY
SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA SCHOOL


OF THEOLOGY
CLAREMONT, CALIF.


THE


SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST


HENRY FROWDE, M.A.


PUBLISHER TO THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD


LONDON, EDINBURGH, AND NEW YORK


THE
SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST


BY VARIOUS ORIENTAL SCHOLARS?


AND EDITED BY


F. MAX MULLER


VOL. V


@rford
AT THE CLARENDON PRESS


1880


(All rights reserved |


festa) LE XT


TRANSLATED BY


E. W. WEST


IPI a AI


THE BUNDAHIS, BAHMAN YAST, AND
_SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST


Orford
MT THE CLARENDON PRESS


1880


[All rights reserved |


vy


~ dH


(seiwersty Of Southern Califor ii


Ree 240 Sor
VS


GON ENTS


INTRODUCTION.


1. The Parsi Scriptures


Nn


The Pahlavi Language and Literature
The Bundahis

The Selections of Zad-sparam

The Bahman Yast

The Shayast la-shayast


i Oa o ane cos


Concluding Remarks


TRANSLATIONS.


Bunpauis
SELEcTIONS OF ZAD-SPARAM
Bauman YAst


SHAvAST LA-SHAYAST


Index


Errata


Transliteration of Oriental Alphabets adopted for the Trans-
lations of the Sacred Books of the East


PAGE
x1
Xxil


xlvi


lix


Ixvii


153
189


237


407
434


435


INTRODUCTION


TO


Pode AN TH XS,


1. THE PARSI SCRIPTURES.


THOUGH we must look to the Avesta for information
regarding the main outlines of the Parsi religion, it is to
Pahlavi writings we must refer for most of the details
relating to the traditions, ceremonies, and customs of this
ancient faith, which styles itself emphatically ‘the good
religion of the Mazdayasnians, and calls its laity bahdinan,
or ‘those of the good religion.’ In the fragments of the
Avesta which still exist, we may trace the solid foundations
of the religion, laid by philosophic bards and lawgivers of
old, with many a mouldering column and massive fragment
of the superstructure erected upon them by the ancient
priesthood. These are the last remnants of the faith held
by Cyrus, the anointed of the Lord (Isaiah xlv. 1), the
righteous one (Is. xli. 2), or eagle (Is. xlvi. 11), whom He
called from the east, and the shepherd who performed His
pleasure (Is. xliv. 28); scattered fragments of the creed
professed by Darius in his inscriptions, when he attributes
his successes to ‘the will of Adramazda ;’ and mouldering
ruins of the comparatively pure religion of oriental ‘bar-
barism,’ which Alexander and his civilising Greek successors
were unable wholly to destroy, and replace by their own
idolatrous superstitions. While in the Pahlavi texts we find
much of the medizval edifice built by later Persian priest-
craft upon the old foundations, with a strange mixture of
old and new materials, and exhibiting the usual symptom
of declining powers, a strong insistence upon complex forms
and minute details, with little of the freedom of treatment
and simplicity of outline characteristic of the ancient bards.


X PAHLAVI TEXTS.


To understand the relationship between these two classes
of Parsi sacred writings, it must be observed that the Avesta
and Pahlavi of the same scripture, taken together, form its
Avesta and Zand, terms which are nearly synonymous with
‘revelation and commentary.’ Both words are derived from
verbal roots implying ‘ knowledge;’ Avesta being the Pahlavi
avistak, which may most probably be traced to the past
participle of A, ‘to, + vid, ‘to know,’ with the meaning of
‘what is announced’ or ‘declaration ;’ and Zand, being the
Pahlavi form of Av. zaizti (traceable in the word azaiztis),
must be referred to the root zan, ‘to know,’ with the meaning
of ‘knowledge, understanding!.’ European scholars, misled
probably by Muhammadan writers, have converted the
phrase ‘Avesta and Zand’ into ‘Zend-Avesta, and have
further identified Zand with the language of the Avesta.
This use of the word Zand is, however, quite at variance
with the practice of all Parsi writers who have been inde-
pendent of European influence, as they apply the term
Zand only to the Pahlavi translations and explanations of
their sacred books, the original text of which they call
Avesta. So that when they use the phrase ‘Avesta and
Zand’ they mean the whole of any scripture, both the Avesta
text and Pahlavi translation and commentary. And the
latter, being often their only means of understanding the
former, has now become of nearly equal authority with the
Avesta itself. It is probable, indeed, that the first Zand
was really written in the Avesta language, as we find many
traces of such Avesta commentaries interpolated both in
the Avesta and Pahlavi texts of the Parsi scriptures; but
this is rather a matter of European inference than of Parsi
belief. The later (or Pahlavi) Zand appears also, in many
places, to be merely a translation of this earlier (or Avesta)
Zand, with additional explanations offered by the Pahlavi
translators.

Regarding the sacredness of these Pahlavi translations,
in the eyes of the Parsis, there can be no manner of doubt,
so far as they cannot be shown to be inconsistent with the


* See Haug’s Essays on the Sacred Language, Writings, and Religion of the
Parsis, second edition, London, 1878; pp, 121, 122.


INTRODUCTION. x1


original Avesta text. But besides these translations there
is another class of Pahlavi religious writings whose authority
is more open to dispute. These writings are either trans-
lations and Zands of Avesta texts no longer extant, or they
contain the opinions and decisions of high-priests of later
times, when the Pahlavi language was on the decline. Such
writings would hardly be considered of indisputable authority
by any Parsi of the present day, unless they coincided with
his own preconceived opinions. But for outsiders they have
the inestimable value either of supplying numerous details
of religious traditions and customs which would be vainly
sought for elsewhere, or of being contemporary records of
the religious ideas of the Parsis in the declining days of
their Mazdayasnian faith. It is with a few of such writings
this volume has to deal; but before describing them more
minutely it will be desirable to give some account of the
Pahlavi language in which they are written.


2. THE PAHLAVI LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE.


The term ‘Pahlavi,’ in its widest extent, is applied to all
the varying forms of the medizval Persian language, from
the time when the grammatical inflexions of ancient Persian
were dropped, till the period when the modern alphabet
was invented, and the language became corrupted into
modern Persian by the adoption of numerous Arabic words
and phrases. Some traces of Pahlavi words and phrases,
written in old Semitic characters, have been found in the
legends of coins struck by certain kings of Persian provinces,
subordinate to the Greek successors of Alexander, as early
as the third century B.c.!_ Further traces have been dis-
covered in the legends on some provincial coins of the time
of the Arsacidan dynasty. But, practically, our acquaintance
with Pahlavi commences with the inscriptions, on rocks and
coins, of Ardakhshir-i Papakan (A.D. 226-240), the founder
of the Sasanian dynasty, and ends with certain religious


1 See Levy’s Beitrage zur aramaischen Miinzkunde Eran’s, und zur Kunde
der altern Pehlewi-Schrift ; Zeitschrift der deutschen morgenlandischen Gesell-
schaft, Leipzig, 1867 ; XXI, 421-465.


Xil PAHLAVI TEXTS.


writings of priests and other devout Parsis of post-Muham-
madan times, among the latest of which is one dated A.Y.
250 (A.D. 881). Any fragments of Pahlavi composition of
later date than A.D. 1000, must be considered merely as
modern imitations of a dead language, and cannot be quoted
as authorities for the use of any particular Pahlavi words or
construction.

With regard to.the origin of the word Pahlavi, or lan-
guage of Pahlav, many suggestions have been offered ; but
the most probable explanation! is that which connects it
with the Parthva of the cuneiform inscriptions, the land of
the Parthians known to the Greeks and Romans, and of the
Pahlavas mentioned by Sanskrit writers; the change of
Parthva into Pahlav being very similar to that of Av.
Mithra into Pers. Mihr. No doubt the language of the
Parthians themselves was not Pahlavi, but they were the
actual rulers of Persia for some centuries at the time when
the Pahlavi language was forming there ; and, being formid-
able to their neighbours, it is not surprising that their name
became identified with everything Persian, in the same way
as the Roman name has’been applied by the Persians, not
only to the later Greek empire of Constantinople, but even
to the earlier conqueror, Alexander the Great.

Strictly speaking, the medizeval Persian language is only
called Pahlavi when it is written in one of the characters
used before the invention of the modern Persian alphabet,
and in the peculiarly enigmatical mode adopted in Pahlavi
writings. Whenever it is transcribed, either in Avesta
characters, or in those of the modern Persian alphabet, and
freed from this peculiarity, it is called Pazand.

The peculiar mode of writing Pahlavi, here alluded to,
long made the character of the language a standing puzzle
for European scholars, and was first satisfactorily explained
by Professor Haug, of Munich, in his admirable Essay on
the Pahlavi Language already cited.

Like the Assyrians of old, the Persians of Parthian times
appear to have borrowed their writing from a foreign race.


* See Haug’s Essay on the Pahlavi Language, Stuttgart, 1870; pp. 33-37.


INTRODUCTION. xiii


But, whereas the Semitic Assyrians adopted a Turanian
syllabary, these later Aryan Persians accepted a Semitic
alphabet. Besides the alphabet, however, which they could
use for spelling their own words, they also transferred a
certain number of complete Semitic words to their writings,
as representatives of the corresponding words in their own
language. These Semitic representatives (the number of
which might at any time be increased or diminished at the
discretion of the writer) were probably never very numerous,
and not more than four hundred of them are to be found in
the Pahlavi writings now extant; but, as they represent
nearly all the commonest words in the language (excepting
those specially relating to religious matters), they often
constitute more than half the bulk of a Pahlavi text.

‘The use of such Semitic words, scattered about in Persian
sentences, gives Pahlavi the motley appearance of a com-
pound language; more especially as Persian terminations
are often added to the Semitic words. But there are good
reasons for supposing that the language was never spoken
as it was written. The spoken language appears to have
been purely Persian ; the Semitic words being merely used
as written representatives, or logograms, of the Persian
words which were spoken. Thus the Persians would write
malkan malk4, ‘king of kings,’ but they would read
shahan shah. This is still the mode in which most Parsis
read their Pahlavi literature; and it is only by assuming it
to have been their universal practice, in former times, that
we can account for the total and immediate disappearance
of the Semitic portion of the Pahlavi, from their language,
when the Persians adopted their modern alphabet. As the
Semitic words were merely a Pahlavi mode of writing their
Persian equivalents (just as ‘viz.’ is a mode of writing
‘namely’ in English), they disappeared with the Pahlavi
writing, and the Persians began at once to write all their
words, with their new alphabet, just as they pronounced
them.

In the meantime, the greater part of the nation had
become Muhammadans, and a new influx of Semitic words
commenced, but of a very different character. The Semitic


XIV PAHLAVI TEXTS.


portion of the Pahlavi writing was nearly pure Chaldee, and
was confined (as already stated) to the graphic representa-
tion of most of the simplest and commonest words uncon-
nected with religion; but it seems to have formed no part
of the spoken language, at all events in later times. Whereas
the Semitic portion of modern Persian is borrowed from
Arabic, and includes most words connected with religion,
science, and literature ; in fact, every class of words except
that which was usually Semitic in Pahlavi writings; and
these Arabic words form an essential part of the spoken
language, being as indispensable to the modern Persian as
words of Norman-French origin are to the English.

In Pahlavi writings, moreover, besides the four hundred
Semitic logograms already mentioned, we also find about
one hundred obsolete forms of Iranian words used as logo-
grams; much in the same way as ‘ye’ may be used for
‘the, and ‘Xmas’ for ‘Christmas’ in English. The use of
all these logograms was, however, quite optional, as their
usual Persian equivalents might be substituted for any of
them at any time, according to each particular writer’s taste
and discretion. But whenever they are employed they form
what is called the Huzvaris portion of the Pahlavi; while
the other words, intended to be pronounced as they are
spelt, form the Pazand portion.

Many attempts have been made to explain the word
Huzvaris, but it cannot be said that any satisfactory
etymology has yet been proposed. Like the word Pahlavt
it seems hardly to occur in any old Pahlavi text, but only
in colophons, chapter-headings, and similar notes of modern
writers ; it seems, therefore, more reasonable to trace it to
modern Persian than direct to any more ancient source. Its
Pahlavi form, hizvaris or atizvarisn, appears to represent
the modern Persian uzvdris, which is rarely used ; the usual
Persian form of the word being zuvaris. Now zuvaris is
precisely the form of an abstract noun derived from the
crude form of a verb zuvaridan, which has been admitted
into some Persian dictionaries on the authority of Golius},


x


* See Castelli Lexicon Heptaglotton, Pars altera, London, 1669.


‘


INTRODUCTION. XV


with the meaning ‘to grow old, to become thread-bare.’ If
such a verb really exists in Persian, although its meaning
may imply ‘decrepitude or decay’ rather than ‘antiquity or
obsoleteness,’ yet its abstract noun would not be altogether
inapplicable to the logograms used in Pahlavi, which are,
in fact, last remnants of older writings.

The word Pazand is probably derived from Av. paiti-
zanti, with the meaning ‘re-explanation, that is, a further
interpretation of the Pahlavi Zand in the Persian vernacular.
This term is applied not only to the purely Persian words
in Pahlavi texts, but also (as already noticed) to translitera-
tions of the said texts, either in Avesta or modern Persian
characters, in which all the Huzvaris words are replaced by
their Pazand equivalents. These transliterations form what
are called Pazand texts; they retain the exact idiom and
construction of the Pahlavi original, and represent the mode
in which it was read. It may be remarked, howeyer, that
all such Pazand texts, as have been examined, seem to have
been written in India, so that they may be suspected of
_ representing some corrupt Gugarati pronunciation of Persian,
rather than the peculiar orthography of any period of the
Persian language.

This theory of the origin and development of Pahlavi
writing could hardly be upheld, unless we could trace the
same artificial mixture of Huzvaris and Pazand in all acces-
sible Pahlavi records, from their earliest appearance to the
present time. This we are able to do, even in the scanty
materials afforded by the legends on the provincial Persian
coins of the third century B.C. and second century A.D.
already mentioned. But we can trace it with greater cer-
tainty not only in the coin legends, but also in the rock
inscriptions of the earlier Sasanian kings (A.D. 226-388), in
the latest of which we find the written language differing
very slightly from that contained in the manuscripts pre-
served by the Parsis of the present day, although the
characters differ very much in form. And, finally, in the
legends on the coins of the later Sasanian kings (A.D. 388-
651) and on seals of their times, we find even this difference
in the shapes of the letters disappearing by degrees. In


XVI PAHLAVI TEXTS.


fact, all the materials at our disposal tend to show that
Huzvaris has been an essential constituent of all Pahlavi
writings from the time of Alexander’s successors to that of
the disuse of Pahlavi characters; but we have no reason to
suppose that the spoken language of the great mass of the
Persian people ever contained the Semitic words which
they thus used as Huzvaris in their writings.

Although the use of Huzvaris, until explained recently,
rendered the nature of the Pahlavi language very obscure,
it added very little to the difficulty of understanding the
Pahlavi texts, because the meaning of nearly every Huz-
varis logogram was well known; being recorded in an
old glossary preserved by the Parsis, in which every
logogram is explained by its proper Pazand equivalent.
The extant copies of this old glossary generally contain
the Huzvaris and Pazand words written in the Pahlavi
character, together with their traditional pronunciation,
either in Avesta or modern Persian letters; there is, there-
fore, no particular difficulty in reading or translating the
Huzvaris portion of a Pahlavi text, although doubts may
often be entertained as to the accuracy of the traditional
pronunciation.

The real difficulty of reading Pahlavi texts lies in the
Pazand portion (so far as it may be unexplained by
existing vocabularies), and is chiefly occasioned by the
ambiguity of some of the Pahlavi letters. The alphabet
used in Pahlavi books contains only fourteen distinct
letters, so that some letters represent several different ©
sounds; and this ambiguity is increased by the letters
being joined together, when a compound of two letters
is sometimes exactly like some other single letter. The
complication arising from these ambiguities may be under-
stood from the following list of the sounds, simple and
compound, represented by each of the fourteen letters of
the Pahlavi alphabet respectively :—


a, 4,h, kh. Nb. Sp, f Sta Cee ee
I. § z. » s, yl, yad, yag, yag, di, dad, dag, dae, cimaad:
gag, gag, gi, gad, gag, gag. ~X) sh, s, ya, yah, yakh, ih, ikh,


INTRODUCTION. XV1i


da, dah, dakh, ga, gah, gakh, ga, gah, gakh. pooh. 9k
6m |Javewiornk »sy,,6d, a2.


From this list it is easy to see the confusion produced
by the letter 29 s being exactly like the letter 5 y doubled,
and by the letter +7) sh being identical with a com-
pound of 4 y and wy 4; and there are, in fact, some
compounds of two letters which have from ten to fifteen
sounds in common use, besides others which might pos-
sibly occur. If it be further considered that there are
only three letters (which are also consonants, as in most
Semitic languages) to represent five long vowels, and that
there are probably five short vowels to be understood,
the difficulty of reading Pahlavi correctly may be readily
imagined.

When Pahlavi writing was in common use this difficulty
was probably no more felt by the Persians, than the com-
plexity of Chinese characters is felt as an evil by a Chinese
mandarin, or the corrupt system of English orthography
by an educated Englishman. It is only the foreigner, or
learner, who fully appreciates the difficulty of understand-
ing such cumbrous systems of writing.

With regard, however, to their Huzvaris logograms the
Persians seem to have experienced more difficulty. As
the actual sounds of these Semitic words were rarely
pronounced, in consequence of their Pazand equivalents
being substituted in reading, there must have been some
risk of their true pronunciation being forgotten. That
this risk was understood by the Persians, or Parsis, is
proved by the existence of the Huzvaris-Pazand glossary
already described, which was evidently compiled as a
record both of the pronunciation and meaning of the
Huzvaris logograms. But its compilation does not appear
to have been undertaken until the true pronunciation of
some of these logograms had been already lost. Thus,
although the traditional readings of most of the Semitic
portion of the Huzvaris can be readily traced to well-
known Chaldee words, there are yet many other such
readings which are altogether inexplicable as Semitic


[5] b


Xvi PAHLAVI TEXTS.

SAN so Nee 2 ne et es ee ee
words, In most such cases, however, European scholars
have found that the Huzvaris word can be easily read in
some other way which at once connects it with some
ordinary Chaldee equivalent. It may, therefore, be reason-
ably assumed that the compilers of the glossary had in
some instances lost the correct pronunciation of these old
Semitic words, and that, in such cases, they adopted (as
a Parsi would probably do at the present day) the most
obvious reading of the letters before them, which thence-
forth became an artificial word to be handed down to
posterity, by successive generations of writers, with all
the authority of old tradition.

In the same manner the artificial pronunciation of the
Iranian portion of the Huzvaris may be explained. The
compilers of the glossary found a number of words in
the Pahlavi texts, which were written in some obsolete
or contracted manner; they knew the meanings of these
words, but could not trace the true readings in the altered
letters; they, therefore, adopted the most obvious readings
of the written characters, and thus produced another series
of artificial words, such as anhéma for atharmazd,
yahdan for yazdan, madonad for mainék, shatan for
shatré, &c.

Naturally enough the Parsis are loth to admit the
possibility of any error in their traditional readings of
Huzvaris, and very few of them have yet adopted the
views of European scholars further than to admit that
they are ingenious hypotheses, which still require satis-
factory proof. They are quite right in demanding such
proof, and they may reasonably argue that the conflicting
opinions of various European scholars do not tend to in-
crease the certainty of their explanations. But, on the
other hand, they are bound to examine all proofs that
may be offered, and to consider the arguments of scholars,
before utterly rejecting them in favour of their own pre-
conceived notions of traditional authority.

Fortunately, we possess some means of ascertaining the
ancient pronunciation of a few Huzvaris words, independent
of the opinions of comparative philologists, in the inscrip-


INTRODUCTION. XIX


tions already mentioned as having been engraved on
rocks, and impressed on coins, by the earlier kings of the
Sasanian dynasty in Persia. The earliest of these rock
inscriptions records the name and titles of Artakhshatar
son? of Papak, the first Sasanian monarch (A. D. 226-240);
it is engraved in Greek and two kinds of old Pahlavi
' characters, which have been called Chaldzo-Pahlavi and
Sasanian-Pahlavi, because the one bears more resemblance
to Chaldee, both in its letters and the language they
express, and the other is more frequently used by the
subsequent Sasanian monarchs. A similar tri-lingual in-
scription records the names and titles of his son and
successor Shahpdhar I (A.D. 240-271), who has also left
a long bi-lingual inscription, in Chaldeo and Sasanian-
Pahlavi, in a cave near Persepolis. Another long bi-lingual
inscription, fragments of which have been found on stones
among the ruins of Pai Kill, is attributed to his early
successors, who have also left us several uni-lingual in-
scriptions in Sasanian-Pahlavi, two of which are of great
length, but none later than the end of the fourth century.

The language of the earlier of these inscriptions differs
from that of the manuscripts preserved by the Parsis,
chiefly in the use of several Semitic words unknown to
the manuscript Huzvaris, the non-existence of Iranian
Huzvaris (which is evidently a growth of later times), and
the less frequent use of Persian terminations affixed to
Semitic words. These differences, however, are hardly
greater than those which distinguish the English of Chaucer
from that of our own day. Moreover, they gradually dis-
appear in process of time, as we find the later inscriptions
of the fourth century approaching much closer, in language,
to the manuscripts.

As the alphabets of these inscriptions are less imperfect _
and ambiguous than that of the Pahlavi manuscripts, they
render the pronunciation of many words much more cer-
tain. They consist of eighteen letters, having the following
sounds :—


1 So stated in the ingcription, but Pahlavi MSS. call him the son of Papak’s
daughter and of Sdsan (see Bund, XXXI, 30).


b2


XX PAHLAVI TEXTS.
he Eee meee MO Tae te pee ON I EE 8

Tray Ay gobo 3.8p, fray tages ee ae
moda Bor, Vv, wy, 99: Zi TOMS. *11Sh, Ss. Sra. 13.8:
14l,r, 15m. 16.n, 17.y,3,@ 18. doubtful, being
equivalent to Chaldee 8 and to Pahl. MS. -man*.

Comparing this list of sounds with that of the sounds of
the manuscript alphabet (pp. xvi, xvii) it is evident that the
inscriptions must afford a means of distinguishing 4 from
kh, s from any binary compound of y, d, g, or g, sh from
any compound of y, d, g, or g with 4, h, or kh, n from vy, r,
or 1, and y, d, g from each other; all which letters and
compounds are left in doubt by the manuscript alphabet.
Unfortunately we do not possess trustworthy copies of
some of the inscriptions which are evidently the most
important from a linguistic point of view”; but such
copies as have been obtained supply corrections of tra-
ditional misreadings of about twenty-five Huzvaris logo-
grams, and at the same time they confirm the correctness
of three traditional readings which have been called in
question by most European scholars. So far, therefore,
the inscriptions would teach the Parsis that the decisions
of comparative philologists are not likely to be right more
than seven times out of eight, even when they are tolerably
unanimous.

The Chaldzo-Pahlavi character appears to have soon


1 Whether the sound of this letter can ever be satisfactorily settled remains
doubtful. Levy, in his Beitrage, cited on p. xi, considers it to be the Semitic
7, on paleeographical grounds ; but there are serious objections to all the identi-
fications that have been proposed.

* The Sasanian inscriptions, of which new and correct copies are most ur-
gently wanted, are:—1. An inscription of thirty-one lines high up in the left
side-compartment (behind the king) of the centre bas-relief of Naqs-i Ragab,
near Persepolis. 2. Two inscriptions, of eleven and twelve lines respectively,
on the stones of the edifice near the south-west corner of the great platform at
Persepolis, south of the Hall of Columns (see Ouseley’s Travels in Persia, vol. ii.
p. 237 and plate 42), 3. All the fragments of the Pat Kali inscription, of which
probably not more than half have yet been copied.

OF the very long inscription behind the king’s horse in the bas-relief of :
Naqs-i Rustam, containing more than seventy lines very much damaged, a copy
taken by Westergaard in 1843, with his usual accuracy, probably gives nearly all
that is legible. And of the Hagt&bad and shorter inscriptions, little or nothing
remains doubtful.


INTRODUCTION. Xx1


gone out of use, after the establishment of the Sasanian
dynasty, as the latest known inscription, in which it occurs,
is that of Pai Kali, which contains the name of Ad-
harmazd I (A.D. 271-272); while the long inscriptions
of Naqs-i Ragab and Nagqs-i Rustam, which contain the
name of Varahran II (A.D. 275-283), are engraved only
in Sasanian-Pahlavi. From these facts it seems probable
that Chaldzo-Pahlavi went out of use about A.D. 275.
The Sasanian characters continue to appear, with very
little alteration, upon the coins until the end of the fifth
century, when most of them begin to assume the cursive
form of the manuscript Pahlavi, which appears to have
altered very slightly since the eighth century.

The oldest Pahlavi manuscript known to be extant,
consists of several fragments of papyrus recently found in
a grave in the Faydim district in Egypt, and now in the
Royal Museum at Berlin; it is supposed to have been
written in the eighth century. Next to this, after a long
interval, come four manuscripts written on Indian paper,
all by the same hand, in A.D. 1323-1324; they are two
copies of the Yasna and two of the Vendidad, containing
the Avesta with its Zand, or Pahlavi translation and com-
mentary; two of these old MSS. are now preserved in
Kopenhagen, one in London, and one in Bombay. Next
to these in age are two MSS. of miscellaneous Pahlavi
texts, written probably about fifty years later; one of
these is now in Kopenhagen and one in Bombay. Another
MS. of nearly the same age is also a miscellaneous col-
lection of Pahlavi texts, written in A.D. 1397, and now in
Munich; where there is also one of the oldest Pazand-_
Sanskrit MSS., a copy of the Arda-Viraf-namak, written
in A.D. 1410. Another Pazand-Sanskrit MS., a copy of
the Khurdah Avesta, of about the same age, exists in
Bombay. Pahlavi and Pazand manuscripts of the sixteenth
century are rather more numerous.

Pahlavi literature reached the zenith of its prosperity
about thirteen centuries ago, when it included the whole
literature of Persia. Seventy years later its destruction
commenced with the fall of the Sasanian dynasty (A.D.


XXil PAHLAVI TEXTS.


636-651); and the subsequent adoption of the modern Per-
sian alphabet gave it its death-blow. The last remnants of
Pahlavi writings are now contained in the few manuscripts
still preserved by the Parsis in Western India, and their
almost-extinct brethren in Persia. A careful estimate of
the length of these remnants, so far as they are known to
Europeans, has shown that the total extent of existing
Pahlavi literature is about thirty-six times that of the
Bundahis, as translated in this volume. One-fifth of this
literature consists of translations accompanying Avesta
texts, and the remaining four-fifths are purely Pahlavi
works which are nearly all connected with religion. How
much of this literature may have descended from Sasanian
times can hardly be ascertained as yet; in fact, it is only
very recently that any trustworthy data, for determining
the age of a few Pahlavi writings, have been discovered,
as will be explained hereafter, when considering the age
of the Bundahis.


3. THE BUNDAHIs.


The term Bundahis, ‘creation of the beginning,’ or
‘original creation, is applied by the Parsis to a Pahlavi
work! which, in its present state, appears to be a collection
of fragments relating to the cosmogony, mythology, and
legendary history taught by Mazdayasnian tradition, but
which cannot be considered, in any way, a complete
treatise on these subjects. This term is applicable enough
to much of the earlier part of the work, which treats of
the progressive development of creation under good and
evil influences; but it is probably not the original name
of the book. Its adoption was no doubt partly owing to
the occurrence of the word bin-dahisn, or bin-dahisnth,
twice in the first sentence, and partly to its appropriateness
to the subject. But the same sentence seems to inform


Ss eEEeEEEEEEEESESESESESESESSSSSeeESEeee


* When this work forms part of a collection of Pahlavi texts, the whole
manuscript is sometimes called ‘ the great Bundahis.’ There also exists a Sad-
dar Bundahis, or Bundahis of a hundred chapters, which is a comparatively


modern compilation, detailing the chief customs and religious laws of the Parsis
in a hundred sections,


INTRODUCTION. ; XXIli


us that the actual name of the treatise was Zand-akAs,
‘knowing the tradition,’

The work commences by describing the state of things
in the beginning; the good spirit being in endless light
and omniscient, and the evil spirit in endless darkness and
with limited knowledge. Both produced their own crea-
tures, which remained apart, in a spiritual or ideal state,
for three thousand years, after which the evil spirit began
his opposition to the good creation under an agreement
that his power was not to last more than nine thousand
years, of which only the middle three thousand were to
see him successful. By uttering a sacred formula the good
‘spirit throws the evil one into a state of confusion for a
second three thousand years, while he produces the arch-
angels and the material creation, including the sun, moon,
and stars. At the end of that period the evil spirit,
encouraged by the demons he had produced, once more
rushes upon the good creation, to destroy it. The demons
carry on conflicts with each of the six classes of creation,
namely, the sky, water, earth, plants, animals represented
by the primeval ox; and mankind represented by Gayd-
mard; producing little effect but movement in the sky,
saltness in the water, mountains in the earth, withering
in plants, and death to the primeval ox, and also to
Gayémard after an interval.

Then follows a series of chapters describing the seven
regions of the earth, its mountains and seas, the five classes
of animals, the origin of mankind, generation, the five kinds
of fire and three sacred fires, the white Hém tree and the
tree of many seeds, the three-legged ass, the ox Hadhay6os,
the bird Kamrés, and other birds and animals opposed to
the evil creation, the rivers of the world, the seventeen
species of liquids, the lakes, the origin of the ape and bear,
the chiefs of the several kinds of creatures and creations,
the calendar, lineal measures, trees and plants, the cha-
racteristics of various demons, the spiritual chiefs of the
various regions of the earth, and the resurrection and
future existence ;, all which descriptions are given on the
authority of the Din, which may have been some particular


*


XXIV PAHLAVI TEXTS.


book, or revelation generally. The concluding chapters
give the genealogies of the legendary Persian kings and
heroes, and of Zarattist and certain priests, together with
an epitome of Persian chronology from the creation to the
Muhammadan conquest.

As the work now stands it is evidently of a fragmentary
character, bearing unmistakable marks both of omissions
and dislocations; and the extant manuscripts, as will be
seen, differ among themselves both as to the extent and
arrangement of the text. Many passages have the appear-
ance of being translations from an Avesta original, and
it is very probable that we have in the Bundahis either
a translation, or an epitome, of the Damdad Nask, one of
the twenty-one books into which the whole of the Zoroas-
trian scriptures are said to have been divided before the
time of Darius. This may be guessed from a comparison
of the contents of the Bundahis with those of the Damdad
Nask, which are detailed in the Dini-vagarkard as fol-
lows!:—‘It contained an explanation of the spiritual
existence and heaven, good and evil, the material existence
of this world, the sky and the earth, and everything which
Attharmazd produced in water, fire, and vegetation, men
and quadrupeds, reptiles and birds, and everything which
is produced from the waters, and the characteristics of all
things. Secondly, the production of the resurrection and
future existence; the concourse and separation at the
_ Kinvad bridge; on the reward of the meritorious and
the punishment of sinners in the future existence, and
such-like explanations.’ Moreover, the Damddd Nask is
twice quoted as an authority in the Selections of ZAd-
sparam (IX, 1, 16), when treating of animals, in nearly the
same words as those used in the Bundahis.

The first manuscript of the Bundahis seen in Europe
was brought from Surat by Anquetil Duperron in 1761,
and he published a French translation of it in his great
work on the Zend-Avesta in 17712. This manuscript,


* See Haug’s Essays, &c., second edition, pp- 127, 128,
* Zend-Avesta, ouvrage de Zoroastre, &c., par Anquetil Duperron; Paris
1771. Tome seconde, pp. 343-422, Boun-dehesch.


INTRODUCTION. XXV


which is now in the National Library at Paris, was a
modern copy, written A.D. 1734, and contained a. miscel-
laneous collection of Pahlavi writings besides the Bundahis.
And Anquetil’s translation, though carefully prepared in
accordance with the information he had obtained from his
Parsi instructor, is very far from giving the correct meaning
of the original text in many places.

In 1820 the very old codex from which Anquetil’s MS..
had been copied was brought to Europe, from Bombay,
by the Danish scholar Rask, and was subsequently de-
posited in the University Library at Kopenhagen. This
most important codex, which will be more particularly
described under the appellation of K20, appears to have
been written during the latter half of the fourteenth century;
and a facsimile of the Pahlavi text of the Bundahis, which
it contains, was very carefully traced from it, lithographed,
and published by Westergaard in 18511.

In a review of this lithographed edition of the Pahlavi
text, published in the Gottinger Gelehrte Anzeigen in
18547, Haug gave a German translation of the first three
chapters of the Bundahis. And Spiegel, in his Traditional
Literature of the Parsis®, published in 1860 a German
translation of many passages in the Bundahis, together with
a transcript of the Pahlavi text of Chaps. I, IJ, III, and
XXX in Hebrew characters. But the complete German
translation of the Bundahis by Windischmann, with his
commentary on its contents, published in his Zoroastrian
Studies* in 1863, was probably the most important step
in advance since the time of Anquetil, and the utmost


1 Bundehesh, Liber Pehlvicus. E vetustissimo codice Havniensi descripsit,
duas inscriptiones regis Saporis Primi adjecit, N. L. Westergaard; Havniz,
1851.

2 Ueber die Pehlewi-Sprache und den Bundehesh, von Martin Haug ; Got-
tingen, 1854.

3 Die Traditionelle Literatur der Parsen in ihrem Zusammenhange mit den
angranzenden Literaturen, dargestellt von Fr. Spiegel ; Wien, 1860.

£ Zoroastriche Studien. Abhandlungen zur Mythologie und Sagengeschichte
des alten Iran, von Fr. Windischmann (nach dem Tode des Verfassers heraus-
gegeben von Fr, Spiegel) ; Berlin, 1863.


XXvi PAHLAVI TEXTS.


that could be done on the authority of a single MS. which
is far from perfect.

In 1866 another very old codex, containing the Pahlavi
texts of the Bundahis and other works, was brought to
Europe by Haug, to whom it had been presented at Surat
in 1864. It is now in the State Library at Munich, and
will be more minutely described under the appellation of
M6. In this codex the Bundahis is arranged in a different
order from that in K20, and Chaps. XXVIII, XXIX, and
XXXI-XXXIII are omitted.

A second complete German translation of the Bundahis,
with a lithographed copy of the Pahlavi text, a trans-
literation of the text in modern Persian characters, and
a glossary of all the words it contains, was published by
Justi in 18681. Its author, having had access to other
MSS. (descended from M6) at London and Oxford, was
able to rectify many of the deficiencies in Windischmann’s
translation ; but, otherwise, he made but little progress in
elucidating difficult passages.

Other European writers have published the result of
their studies of particular parts of the Bundahis, but it
does not appear that any of them have attempted a con-
tinuous translation of several chapters.

Whether the existence of previous translations be more
of an assistance than a hindrance in preparing a new one,
may well be a matter of doubt. Previous translations may
prevent oversights, and in difficult passages it is useful
to see how others have floundered through the mire; but,
on the other hand, they occasion much loss of time, by
the necessity of examining many of their dubious render-
ings before finally fixing upon others that seem more
satisfactory. The object of the present translation is to
give the meaning of the original text as literally as pos-
sible, and with a minimum of extra words; the different
renderings of other translators being very rarely noticed,
unless there be some probability of their being of service


* Der Bundehesh, zum ersten Male herausgegeben, transcribirt, iibersetzt,
und mit Glossar versehen, von Ferdinand Justi; Leipzig, 1868,


INTRODUCTION. XXXVI


to the reader. Some doubtful words and passages still
defy all attempts at satisfactory solution, but of these the
reader is warned; and, no doubt, a few oversights and
mistakes will be discovered.

With regard to the original text, we have to recover
it from four manuscripts which are, more or less, inde-
pendent authorities, and may be styled K20, K20b, M6,
and TD. The first three of these have evidently descended,
either directly or through one or more intermediate copies,
from the same original; but the source of TD, so far as
it can be ascertained, seems to have been far removed from
that of the others. All the other MSS. of the Bundahis,
which have been examined, whether Pahlavi or Pazand,
are descended either from K20 or M6, and are, therefore,
of no independent authority.

K20 is the very old codex already mentioned as having
been brought from Bombay by Rask in 1820, and is now
No. 20 of the collection of Avesta and Pahlavi MSS. in
the University Library at Kopenhagen. It consists now
of 173 folios of very old and much-worn Indian paper of
large octavo size, but five other folios are certainly missing,
besides an uncertain number lost from the end of the
volume. This MS. contains twenty Pahlavi texts, written
twenty lines to the page, and some of them accompanied
by Avesta; the Bundahis is the ninth of these texts, and
occupies fols. 88-129, of which fol. 121 is missing. Three
of the texts, occurring before the Bundahis, have dated
colophons, but the dates are A.Y. 690, 720, and 700, all
within 36 folios; it is, therefore, evident that these dates
have been copied from older MSS.; but at the same time
the appearance of the paper indicates that the actual date
of the MS. cannot be much later than A.Y. 720 (A.D. 1351),
and there are reasons for believing that it was written
several years before A. VY. 766 (A.D. 1397), as will be ex-
plained in the description of M6. Owing to its age and
comparative completeness this MS. of the Bundahis is
certainly the most important one extant, although com-
parison with other MSS. proves that its writer was rather
careless, and frequently omitted words and phrases. The


XXVII1 PAHLAVI ’ TEXTS.


loss of fol. 121, though it has hitherto left an inconve-
nient gap in the text (not filled up by other MSS.), is
more than compensated by the three extra chapters which
this MS. and its copies have hitherto alone supplied. The
text on the lost folio was supposed by Anquetil to have
contained a whole chapter besides portions of the two
adjacent ones; this is now known to be a mistake, An-
quetil’s Chap. XXVIII being quite imaginary; the end of
Chap. XXVII has long been supplied from other MSS.,
but the beginning of the next chapter has hitherto been
missing.

Only two copies of K20 appear to be known to Eu-
ropeans ; the best of these is the copy brought from Surat
by Anquetil, No. 7 of his collection of manuscripts, now
in the National Library at Paris; this was written in A.D.
1734, when K20 appears to have been nearly in its present
imperfect state, though it may have had some 15 folios
more at the end. This copy seems to have been carefully
written; but the same cannot be said of the other copy,
No. 21 in the University Library at Kopenhagen, which
is full of blunders,. both of commission and omission, and
can hardly have been written by so good a Pahlavi scholar
as Dastir Darab, Anquetil’s instructor, although attributed
to him.

K20b consists of nineteen loose folios’, found by
Westergaard among some miscellaneous fragments in the
collection of Avesta and Pahlavi MSS. in the University
Library at Kopenhagen, and now forming No. 20b in that
collection. The first two folios are lost, but the third folio
commences with the Pahlavi equivalent of the words
‘knew that Aharman exists’ (Bund. Chap. I, 8), and the
text continues to the end of Chap. XI, 1, where it leaps at
once (in the middle of a line on the fifteenth folio) to
Chap. XXX, 15, ‘one brother who is righteous,’ whence
the text continues to the end of Chap. XXXI, 15, which
is followed by Chaps. XXXII, XXXIV, as in K20. This


* Jam indebted to the late Professor N. L. Westergaard for all information


about this MS., and also for a tracing of the Pahlavi text of so much of Chap.
XXXI as is contained in it,


INTRODUCTION. XxXI1X


MS. is not very old, and contains merely a fragment of
the text; but its value consists in its not being a de-
scendant of either K20 or M6, as it clearly represents a
third line of descent from their common original. It agrees
with K20 in the general arrangement of its chapters, so
far as they go, and also in containing Chap. XX XI; but
_ it differs from it in some of the details of that chapter,
and agrees with M6 in some verbal peculiarities elsewhere;
it has not, however, been collated in any other chapter.
The omission of nearly twenty chapters, in the .centre of
the work, indicates that some one of the MSS. from which
it is descended, had lost many of its central folios before
it was copied, and that the copyist did not notice the
deficiency ; such unnoticed omissions frequently occur in
Pahlavi manuscripts.

M6 is the very old codex brought to Europe by Haug
in 1866, and now No. 6 of the Haug collection in the
State Library at Munich. It consists of 240 folios of very
old, but well-preserved, Indian paper of large octavo size
(to which thirteen others, of rather later date, have been
prefixed) bound in two volumes. This MS. contains nine-
teen Pahlavi texts, written from seventeen to twenty-two
lines to the page, and some of them accompanied by
Avesta; eleven of these texts are also found in K20, and
the Bundahis is the fourteenth of the nineteen, occupying
fols. 53-99 of the second volume. Two of the other texts
have dated colophons, the dates being fifty days apart in
A. Y. 766 (A.D. 1397), and as there are 150 folios between |
the two dates there is every probability that they are the
actual dates on which the two colophons were written.
The arrangement of the Bundahis in this MS. is different
from that in K20, giving the chapters in the following
order :—Chaps. XV-XXIII, I-XIV, XXIV-XXVI]I, XXX,
XXXII, XXXIV, and omitting Chaps. XXVIII, XXIX, and
XXXI. These omissions and the misplacement of Chaps.
I-XIV render it probable that the MS., from which the
Bundahis in M6 was copied, was already in a state of
decay; and this supposition is confirmed by upwards of
fifty peculiar mistakes, scattered over most parts of the


XXX PAHLAVI TEXTS.


text in M6, which are evidently due to the illegibility of
the original from which it was copied, or to its illegible
words having been touched up by an ignorant writer,
instances of which are not uncommon in old Pahlavi MSS.
Eliminating these errors, for which the writer of M6 cannot
be held responsible, he seems to have been a more careful
copyist than the writer of K20, and supplies several words
and phrases omitted by the latter. The close corres-
pondence of K2o and M6 in most other places, renders it
probable that they were copied from the same original,
in which case K20 must have been written several years
earlier than M6, before the original MS. became decayed
and difficult to read. It is possible, however, that K20
was copied from an early copy of the original of M6;
in which case the date of K2o0 is more uncertain, and may
even be later than that of M6.

Several MSS. of the Bundahis descended from M6 are
in existence. One is in the MS. No. 121 of the Ouseley
collection in the Bodleian Library at Oxford, and contains
the chapters in the following order :—Chaps. XV-XXIII,
I-VII,17 (to ‘ Arag river’), XII-XIV, XXIV-XXVII, XXX,
VII, 12-X1; followed by Sls. Chap. XX, 4-17, also derived
from M6. Another is in the library of Dasttr Jamaspji Mino-
chiharji at Bombay, and contains the chapters also in a
dislocated state (due to the misplacement of folios in some
former MS.) as follows :—Chaps., XV-XXIII, I-XI, 5 (to
‘and the evil spirit’), XII, 2 (from ‘ Sikidav’)—XII, 12 (first
word), XI, 5 (from ‘produced most for Khvaniras’)—XII, 2
(to ‘and Kéndras, Mount’), XXX, 32 (from ‘the renovation
arises in’)-XXX, 33, XXXII, XXXIV, Sls. Chap. XVIII,
Bund. Chaps. XII, 12 (from ‘ Airak’)-XIV, XXIV-XXVII,
XXX. A third is in the library of Dasttr Noshirvanji
Jaméaspji at Poona, and contains the text in the same order
as M6. A fragment of the Pahlavi text of the Bundahis,
also descended from M6, occupies eight folios in the Addi-
tional Oriental MS. No. 22,378 in the Library of the British
Museum ; it contains Chaps. XVIII, XIX, 17, and XX,I=2
(to ‘one from the other’).

There are also several Pazand manuscripts of the Bun-


INTRODUCTION. XXXi


dahis, written in Avesta characters, and likewise derived
from M6. One of the best of these is No. 22 of the collec-
tion of Avesta and Pahlavi MSS. in the India Office Library
at London; it is old, and has the date A.Y. 936 (A.D. 1567)
in a Pahlavi colophon on fol. 111, but this may have been
copied from an older MS.; its contents are arranged as
follows :—Chaps. XVIII-XXIII, I-XIV, XXIV-XXVII,
XXX, XXXII, XXXIV, followed by several short Pazand
texts, only part of which are derived from M6, and the last
of them being left incomplete by the loss of the folios which
originally formed the end of the volume; instead of these
lost folios others, containing Chaps. XV-XVII, have been
added and bound up with the rést. Another MS., No. 7
in the same collection, which is dated A.Y. 1174 (A.D. 1805),
is a modern copy derived from No. 22 through one or more
intervening MSS.}!; it contains precisely the same text, but
with many variations in orthography, indicative of the very
uncertain character of Pazand spelling. Two fragments of
the Pazand text are also contained in the MSS. No. 121 at
Oxford, already mentioned ; they consist of Chaps. V, 3-7
(to ‘would have known the secret’) and XXV, 18-22.
Another fragment, evidently copied from an old MS., is:
found on fols. 34, 35 of the Rivayat MS. No. 8 of the col-
lection in the India Office Library ; it consists of Chap.
XVIII, 1-8.

The Pazand text of the Bundahis, derived from M6, is
also written in Persian characters in M7 (No. 7 of the Haug
collection at Munich), dated a.y. 1178 (A.D. 1809). It is
interlined by Persian glosses, word for word, and consists
of Chaps. XVIII-XXIII, I-XIV, XXIV-XXVII, and
XXX on fols. 81-119, with Chaps. XV-XVII on fols. 120-
126, a repetition of Chap. XV and part of XVI on fols.
223-227, and Chap. XXXII on fol. 232.

Thus far, it will be noticed, we have two good indepen-
dent authorities, K20 and M6, for ascertaining the text of
the Bundahis in the fourteenth century, so far as Chaps. I-


1 This is proved by, an omission in fol, 40, which clearly indicates the loss of
a folio in an intermediate MS.


KXXH PAHLAVI TEXTS.


XXVIII, XXX, XXXII, and XXXIV are concerned; and
we have also, in K20b, a second authority for so much of
-Chap. XXXI as occurs in K20; but for Chaps. XXVIII
and X XIX we have nothing but K20 to rely on, and part of
Chap. XXVIII is lost in that manuscript. Such was the
unsatisfactory state of that part of the text until Dec. 1877,
when information about the MS. TD was received, followed
by further details and a copy of Chaps. XXVIII, XXIX,
and XXXI-X XXIII in Oct. 187814.

TD is a manuscript of the Bundahis which contains a
much more extensive text than the MSS. already described,
but whether it be an extension of the hitherto-received text,
or the received text be an abridgement of this longer one,
is likely to be a matter of dispute among Pahlavi scholars
until the whole of the new text has been thoroughly
examined. At any rate, the contents of this MS., combined
with those of some MSS. of the Dadistan-i Dinik, afford a
means of fixing the date of this recension of the Bundahis,
as will be seen hereafter.

This MS. belongs to a young Mobad named Tehmuras
Dinshawji Anklesaria in Bombay, and was brought from

Persia a few years ago by a Mobad named Khodabakhsh
Farod Abadan. It occupies the first 103 folios of the
volume containing it, and is followed by 112 more folios
containing the Nirangistan. The first original folio, which
contained the text as far as Chap. I, 5 (to ‘ endless light’),
has been lost and replaced by another (which, however, is
now old) containing some introductory sentences, besides
the missing text. The last original folio of the Bundahis,
containing the last five lines of the last chapter, has also been
lost and replaced by another modern folio, which contains
the missing text followed by two colophons, both expressing
approval of the text, and asserting that the MS. was written
by Gopatshah Ristam Bondar. The first of these colophons


* Tam indebted to Mr. Khurshedji Rustamji Cama, of Bombay (who is well
known for the interest he takes in all matters relating to the ancient customs
and history of his fellow-countrymen), for obtaining this information, and to the
owner of the MS. for his liberality in supplying me with all the details and
extracts mentioned in the text.


INTRODUCTION. XXXII


is undated, but gives the testimony of Dasttir Rastam 1
Gistasp Ardashir, who is known to have written another
MS. dated A.Y. 1068 (A.D. 1699). The second colophon is
by Dastir Jamshéd Jamasp Hakim, and is dated A.y. i113
(A. D. 1743), which was probably the date when this last
folio was supplied to complete the old defective MS.
__ With regard to the age of the older part of this MS. we
can arrive at an approximation in the following manner :—
A valuable MS. of the Dadistan-i Dinik, which also belongs
to Tehmuras Dinshawji, was written (according toa colophon
which it contains) by Gépatshah Rastém? Bandar Malka-
mardan in the land of Kirman, who was evidently the same
person as the writer of TD. Another MS. of the Dadistan-i
Dinik was written by Marzapan Frédtin Vahrém Ristam
Béndar Malka-mardan Din-aydr, also in the land of Kirman,
in A.Y. 941 (A.D. 1572). Comparing these two genealogies
together it seems evident that Gépatshah was a brother of
Vahrém, the grandfather of Marzapan, and, therefore, a
grand-uncle of Marzapan himself. Allowing for these two
generations, it is probable that Gépatshah wrote TD about
A.Y. 900 (say A. D. 1530); although instances have occurred
in which a son has written a MS. at an earlier date than
that of one written by his father.

The introductory sentences on the first restored folio are ©
evidently a modern addition to the text, after it had acquired
the name of Bundahis; but they seem to have been copied
from some other MS., as the copyist appears to have
hardly understood them, having written them continuously
with the beginning of the text, without break or stop.
The spelling is modern, but that may be due to the copyist ;
and the language is difficult, but may be translated as
follows ?:—

‘The propitiation of the creator Atharmazd, the radiant,


-1 This Dasttr is said to have. sprung from the laity, and not from a priestly
family.

2 The vowels 4 and 6 (or fi) often interchange in Pahlavi MSS. from Persia,
probably owing to peculiarities of dialect, and the very broad sound of Persian
4, like English a in call.

3 English words in italics are additions to complete the-sense.


[5] c


XXXIV PAHLAVI TEXTS.


glorious, omniscient, wise, powerful, and supreme, dy what
zs well-thought, well-said, azd well-done in thought, word,
and deed, and the good augury of all the celestial angels
and terrestrial angels upon the virtuous creation, I beseech.

‘Written at the second fortunate conjunction (akhtar)
in the high-priestship (dastdrih) of the God-devoted, all-
sagacious cultivator of righteousness, the lover of good works
who is God-discerning, spirit-surveying, azd approved by
the good, the high-priest of the good religion of the Maz-
dayasnians, the glorified’! Spendyad son of Mah-vindad, soz
of Ristém, soz of Shatréyar.

‘The writing”? of the Bindahis was set going by the
coming of the Arabs to the country of Iran, whose hetero-
doxy (dais-dinth) and ignorance have arisen from not
understanding the mysteries of Kayan? orthodoxy (ht-
dindith) and of those revered by the upholders of the
religion. From their deep seats it draws the purport of
benedictions, azd from dubious thinking of actions 7¢
draws words of true meaning, the disclosure of which is
entertaining knowledge.

‘On account of evil times, even he of the undecayed
family of the Kaydns and the Kaydn upholders of the
religion are mingled with the obedient and just of those
heterodox; and by the upper class the words of the
orthodox, uttered in assembled worship, are considered as
filthy vice. He also whose wish was to learn propriety
(varag) through this treatise (farhang), might provide z¢
for himself, from various places, by trouble and day and
night painstaking, dv¢ was not able.’

The text of Chap. I then commences (without any inter-
mediate stop) with the words zak zand-akdAsith, ‘that
knowledge of tradition.’ As the whole text of the Bundahis
occupies about 203 pages in TD, and each page contains


* Literally, ‘immortal-soulled,’ a term implying generally that the person is
dead ; but it seems to have been applied to King Khiisré I (Noshirvan) during
his lifetime. The time when this priest lived has yet to be discovered.

? Reading zektibtin-i, equivalent to PAz. nivis-i; the MS. has zak
tibna.

* The hero tribe or princely race of the KayAnian dynasty, from which later
Persian rulers have fancied themselves descended.


INTRODUCTION, XXXV


seventeen lines rather longer than those in K 20, it is evident
that the text in TD must be more than twice the length of
that in K20, which occupied originally about eighty-three
pages of twenty lines each. This additional text consists
not only of additional matter in many of the chapters, but
also of extra chapters, which give the work a more complete
appearance than it presents in the manuscripts hitherto
known. The whole number of chapters in TD appear to
be forty-two, the general character of the contents of which
may be gathered from the following list of the headings of
each chapter, with the space it occupies in TD, and a
reference to the corresponding chapter of the translation
in this volume (such chapters as seem to be entirely wanting
in K2o0 being marked with an asterisk) :-—

1. The knowledge of tradition, first about Adiharmazd’s
original creation and the antagonism of the evil spirit, after-
wards about the nature of the creatures of the world, from
the original creation till the end; 19 pages; see Chap. I.

2. On the formation of light; 11 pages; see Chap. II.

3. The rush of the destroyer at the creatures ; 6 pages;
see Chaps. ITI, IV. .-

4. On the opposition of the two spirits, that is, in what
manner the arch-fiends have come spiritually in opposition
to the celestial angels; 10 pages; see Chap. V for two of
the middle pages.

5. On the waging of the conflict (ardik) of the crea-
tions of the world, encountering the evil spirit; I page;
see Chap. VI.

6. The second conflict the water waged; 3 pages; see
Chap. VII.

7. The third conflict the earth waged; I page; see
Chap. VIII.

8. The fourth conflict the plants waged; $4 page; see
Chap. IX.

g. The fifth conflict the primeval ox waged; 3 page ;
see Chap. X.

*10, The sixth conflict GAyémard waged ; 14 page.

*11, The seventh conflict the fire waged; 3 page.

*12, The eighth conflict the constellations waged ; 3 page.
CZ


XXXVI PAHLAVI TEXTS


*13. The ninth conflict the celestial angels waged with
the evil spirit; three lines.

*14. Tenth, the stars practised non-intermeddling (agt-
mégisn); } page.

*1r5. On the species of those creations; 2% pages.

16. On the nature of lands; 134 page; see Chap. XI.

17. On the nature of mountains ; 43 pages ;, see Chap. XII.

18. On the nature of seas ; 23 pages; see Chap. XIII.

19. On the nature of rivers; 53 pages; see Chaps. XX,
XXI.

20. On the nature of lakes; 1} page; see Chap. XXII.

21. On the nature of the five classes of animals ; 5% pages ;
see Chap. XIV.

22. On the nature of men; 73 pages; see Chap. XV?.

23. On the nature of generation of every kind; 5 pages;
see Chap. XVI.

24. On the nature of plants ; 3$ pages; see Chap. XXVII.

25. On the chieftainship. of men and animals avd every
single thing; 2% pages; see Chap. XXIV.

26. On the nature of fire; 43 pages; see Chap. XVII.

* 27. On the nature of sleep; 2% pages.

*28, On the nature of wind and cloud and rain; 93 pages.
*29. On the nature of noxious.creatures; 4} pages.
*30, On the nature of the wolf species; 2 pages.

31. On things of every kind that are created by the
spirits *, and the opposition which came upon them; 72
pages; see Chaps. XVIII, XIX.

32. On the religious year; 4 pages; see Chaps. XXV,
XXVI.

*33. On the great exploits of the celestial angels; 17}
pages.

34. On the evil-doing of Aharman and the demons;
7 pages, as in Chap. XXVIII.


* TD contains half a page more near the beginning, and a page and a: half
more at the end.

2 Probably Chap. XXIII of the translation forms a part either of this chapter
or the next.

3 This word is doubtful.


INTRODUCTION. XXXVli

a EE aC Te

* 35. On the body of man and the opinion of the world};
7 pages.

36. On the spiritual chieftainship of the regions of the
earth; 3% pages, as in Chap. XXIX.

* 37. On the Xinvad bridge aud the souls of the departed;
53 pages.

*38. On the celebrated provinces of the country of Iran,
the residence of the Kaydns; 5 pages?

* 39. On the calamities of various millenniums happening
to the country of Iran; 832 pages.

40. On the resurrection and future existence; 62 pages ;
see Chap. XXX.

41. On the race and offspring of the Kayans; 82 pages,
as in Chaps. XXXI-XXXIIL.

42. On the computation of years of the Arabs ; 2} pages;
see Chap. XXXIV.

Comparing this list of contents with the text in K20,
as published in Westergaard’s lithographed facsimile edi-
tion, it appears that TD contains, not only fifteen extra
chapters, but also very much additional matter in the
chapters corresponding to Chaps. I, II, V, XVI, XXVIII,
and XXXI of the translation in this volume, and smaller
additions to those corresponding to Chaps. III, IV, XV,
XVII, and XXXIV. The arrangement of the chapters in
TD is also much more methodical than in the Indian
MSS., especially with regard to Chaps. XX, XXI, XXII,
and XXVII, which evidently occupy their proper position
in TD; and so far as Chap. XX is concerned, this arrange-
ment is confirmed by the insertion of its first sentence
between Chaps. XIII and XIV in the Indian MSS., which
indicates that the whole chapter must have been in that
position in some older copy. In fact, the Indian MSS.
must probably be now regarded merely as collections of


1 The meaning is doubtful and must depend upon the context.

2 This chapter begins with a translation of the first fargard of the Vendidad,
and concludes with an account of buildings erected by various kings.

3 Containing an account of the kings reigning in the various millenniums, and
concluding with prophecies similar to those in the Bahman Yast,


XXXViL PAHLAVI TEXTS.


extracts from the original work; this has been long
suspected from the fragmentary character of the text
they contain, but it could hardly be proved until a more
complete text had been discovered.

Whether TD may be considered as a copy of the text
as it stood originally, or merely of an after recension of
the work, can hardly be determined with certainty until
the whole contents of the manuscript have been carefully
examined; it is, therefore, to be hoped that its owner will
be induced to publish a lithographed facsimile of the whole,
after the manner of Westergaard’s edition. So far as
appears in the lengthy and valuable extracts, with which
he has kindly favoured me, no decided difference of style
can be detected between the additional matter and the
text hitherto known, nor any inconsistencies more striking
than such as sometimes occur in the Indian MSS. On the
other hand, it will be noticed that heading No. 25 in the
list of contents seems to be misplaced, which is an argu-
ment against the text being in its original state; and the
style of the Bundahis is so much less involved and obscure
than that of the Selections of Zad-sparam (see Appendix
to the Bundahis), which treat of some of the same subjects,
that it may be fairly suspected of having been written
originally in a different age. But the writer of the text,
as it appears in TD, calls Zad-sparam! one of his con-
temporaries (see Chap. XX XIII, 10, 11 of the translation);
it may, therefore, be suspected that he merely re-edited
an old text with some additions of his own, which, how-
ever, are rather difficult to distinguish from the rest. No
stress can be laid upon peculiarities of orthography in TD,
as they are, in all likelihood, attributable to copyists long
subsequent to Zad-sparam’s contemporaries.

Any future translator of the Bundahis will probably
have to take the text in TD as the nearest accessible
approach to the original work ; but the present translation
is based, as heretofore, upon the text in K20, corrected
in many places from M6, but with due care not to adopt


ee ee
' He writes the name Zad-sparham.


INTRODUCTION. XXXIX


readings which seem due to the illegibility of the original
from which M6 was copied, as already explained. In
Chaps. XXVIII, XXIX, XXXI, XXXII, and XXXIII,
however, TD has been taken as a principal authority,
merely checked by K20, and having its additional passages
carefully indicated; and in Chap. XXXI, K20b has also
been consulted.

Since the present translation was printed, any lingering
doubts, as to the genuineness of the text in TD, have been,
in a great measure, dissipated by the discovery that a small
fragment! of an old MS. of the Bundahis, which has long
been in Europe, is evidently a portion of a text of similar
character to TD, and of exactly the same extent. This
small fragment consists of two folios belonging to an old
MS. brought from Persia by the late Professor Westergaard
in 1843-44, and which is evidently the codex mentioned by
him in the preface to his Zend-Avesta, p. 8, note 3. These
two folios, which are numbered 130 and 131 in Persian
words, now form the commencement of this old mutilated
MS., of which the first 129 folios have been lost. They
contain very little more than one page of the Bundahis text,
namely, the last sentences of the last chapter (corresponding
to Bund. XXXIV, 7-9), followed by a colophon occupying
less than two pages. This fragment of the text contains
some additional details not found in the Indian MSS., as
well as a few other variations of no great importance. It
may be translated as follows :—

‘[.... Sahm? was in those reagus of Adzobd, Kavad,
and MAnts&ihar.] Kai-Kayts, till 42s going to the sky,
seventy-five years, and after that, seventy-five years, alto-
gether a hundred and fifty years; Kai-Khisr6b6 sixty


1 I am indebted to Professor G. Hoffmann, of Kiel, for directing my atten-
tion to this fragment, and also for kindly sending me a facsimile of it. It had
been recognised as a portion of the Bundahis by Dr. Andreas some years ago,
and probably by the owner of the MS., the late Professor Westergaard, long
Dor that.

2 See Bund. XXXI, 27. As the beginning of this sentence is lost, its trans-
lation is uncertain. Details not found in K20 and M6 are here enclosed in
brackets, and words added by the translator to complete the sense are printed
in italics.


x] PAHLAVI TEXTS.


years; Kai-Léharasp a hundred and twenty years; Kai-
Vistasp, till the coming of the religion, thirty years; [total
(mar) one thousand years’. Then the millennium reign
came to Capricornus, and Zaratihast? the Spitaman, with
tidings (pétkhambarth) from the creator Adharmazd, came
to King Vistasp ; avd Vistasp was king,] after receiving the
religion, ninety years.

‘Vohtiman, soz of Spend-dad, a hundred and twelve years;
Htimdai, daughter of Vohiiman, thirty years; Darat, son of
Kihar-azad, that is, of the daughter of Vohiman, twelve
years; Dardai, son of Darai, fourteen years; and Alexander
the Riman® fourteen years.

‘The Askanians should bear the title in an uninterrupted
sovereignty two hundred and so many’ years; and Artakh-
shatar, son of Papak, and the number of the Sdsdnians dear
it four hundred and sixty years, until the withering Arabs
obtained a place® [as far as the year 447 of the Persians ;
now 7¢ zs the Persian year 527|*%’ :

The colophon, which follows, states that the MS. was
finished on the thirteenth day of the ninth month A.y. 936
(A.D. 1567), and was written by Mitré-apan, soz of Anédshak-
riban, soz of Ristam. This MS. is, therefore, of nearly the
same age as TD; but there has been no opportunity of
collating the fragment of it, which is still extant, with the
corresponding portion of TD. That it was a MS. of the
same character as TD (that is, one containing the same text
as K2o, but with much additional matter) appears clearly


' From the beginning of Frédtin’s reign, when the millennium of Sagittarius
commenced,


* The usual way of spelling Zaratist in old MSS., excepting K20 and a few
others.

* Here written correctly Alaksandar-i Arfimai,

* Reading va and; as the final letter is d and not d it cannot be read
navad as a variant of navad, ‘ninety.’ L

° The words are, vad ginak ayaft khiské-i Tazik&nd, but the exact
meaning is rather doubtful.

° The last date is doubtful, as the Pahlavi text gives the ciphers only for
‘five and twenty-seven,’ omitting that for ‘hundred.’ These Persian dates
must either have been added by some former copyist, or Chap. XXXIV must
have been appended to the Bundahis at a later date than the ninth century,
when the preceding genealogical chapters were probably added to the original
work (see p. xliii). The Persian year 527 was a, D. 1158.


INTRODUCTION. xli


from the fragment translated above. Regarding its original
extent, it is possible to make an approximate estimate, by
calculating the quantity of text which the 129 lost folios
must have contained, from the quantity actually existing on
folio 130. According to this calculation, the original extent
of the text of the Bundahis in this MS. must have been
' very nearly 30,000 words; and it is remarkable that a~—
similar calculation of the extent of the text in TD, based
upon the actual contents of ten folios out of 103, gives pre-
cisely the same result. This coincidence is a strong argu-
ment in favour of the absolute identity of the text lost from
Westergaard’s MS. with that actually existing in TD; it
shows, further, that the original extent of the Bundahis may
now be safely estimated at 30,000 words, instead of the
13,000 contained in K20 when that MS. was complete.

That this fragment belonged to a separate MS., and is
not the folio missing from the end of TD, is shown not
only by its containing more of the text than is said to be
missing, but also by the first folio of the fragment being
numbered 130, instead of 103, and by its containing fifteen
lines to the page, instead of seventeen, as would be necessary
in order to correspond with TD.

Regarding the age of the Bundahis many opinions have
been hazarded, but as they have been chiefly based upon
minute details of supposed internal evidence evolved from
each writer’s special misinterpretation of the text, it is
unnecessary to detail them. The only indication of its
age that can be fairly obtained from internal evidence,
is that the text of the Bundahis could not have been
completed, in its present form, until after the Muham-
madan conquest of Persia (A.D. 651). This is shown not
only by the statements that the sovereignty ‘went to the
Arabs’ (Chap. XXXIV, 9), that ‘now, ¢hrough the invasion
of the Arabs, they (the negroes) are again diffused through
the country of Iran’ (Chap. XXIII, 3), and that ‘ whoever
keeps the year by the revolution of the moon mingles
summer with winter azd winter with summer’ (Chap. XXV,
19, referring probably to the Muhammadan year not cor-
responding with the seasons), but also, more positively


xlii PAHLAVI TEXTS.


by the following translation of an extract from Chap.
39 in TD :—

‘And when the sovereignty came to Yazdakard he
exercised sovereignty twenty years, avd then the Arabs
rushed into the country of Iran in great multitude. Yaz-
dakard did not prosper (14 sAkaft6) in warfare with them,
and went to Khardsan and Tirkistan to seek horses, men,
and assistance, and was slain by them there. The son of
Yazdakard went to the Hinds and fetched an army of
champions; before it came, conducted unto Khfrdasan, that
army of champions dispersed. . The country of Iran re-
mained with the Arabs, and their own irreligious law was
propagated by them, and many ancestral customs were
destroyed; the religion of the Mazdayasnians was weakened,
and washing of corpses, burial of corpses, azd eating of
dead matter were put in practice. From the original
creation until this day evil more grievous than this as
not happened, for through their evil deeds—on account
of want, foreign habits (Anirdnih), hostile acts, bad de-
crees, and bad religion—ruin, want, and other evils have
taken lodgment.’

None of these passages could have been written before
the Muhammadan conquest; but the writer, or editor, of
the text as it appears in TD, supplies the means of ap-
proximating much more closely to the date of his work,
in a passage in Chap. 41 of TD, in which he mentions the
names of several of his contemporaries (see Chap. XX XIII,
10, 11). Among these, as already noticed, he mentions
‘Zad-sparham son of Ytidan-Yim,’ who must have been
the writer of the Selections of Zad-sparam, a translation
of which is added as an appendix to the Bundahis in this
volume. This writer was the brother of Mandskihar son
of Yidan-Yim, who wrote the Dadistan-i Dinik}, and from
colophons found in certain MSS. of the Dadistan (which
will be more particularly described in the next section of
this introduction) it appears that this MAntskithar was


=) SSSSSSSSSSSSSsSSsSSSssssssss


* It is quite possible that MAntistihar was also the reviser of the Bundahis ;
see the note on Dadakih-i Ashévahisté in Chap. XXXIII, 10,


INTRODUCTION. xliti


high-priest of Pars and Kirman in a. y. 250 (A.D. 881).
This date may, therefore, be taken as a very close ap-
proximation to the time at which the Bundahis probably
assumed the form we find in TD; but that MS., having
been written about 650 years later, can hardly have been
copied direct from the original. Whether that original
- was merely a new edition of an older Pahlavi work, as
may be suspected from the simplicity of its language, or
whether it was first translated, for the most part, from the
Avesta of the Damdad Nask, in the ninth century, we
have no means of determining with certainty. Judging,
however, from Chap. I, 1, the original Bundahis probably
ended with the account of the resurrection (Chap. XXX),
and the extra chapters, containing genealogical and chro-
nological details (matters not mentioned in Chap. I, 1),
together with all allusions to the Arabs, were probably
added by the revising editor in the ninth century. The
last, or chronological, chapter may even have been added
at a later date.

A Gugarati translation, or rather paraphrase, of the
Bundahis was published in 1819 by Edal Darab Jamshéd
Jamasp Asi, and a revised edition of it was published by
Peshutan Rustam in 18771. In the preface to the latter
edition it is stated that the translator made use of two
MSS., one being a copy of a manuscript written in Iran
in A.Y. 776 by Rustamji Meherwanji Margaban She-
heriar *, and the other a MS. written in India by Dastir
Jamshédji Jamaspji in A. Y. 11393. It is also mentioned
that he was four years at work upon his translation. The
editor of the new edition states that he has laboured to


1 Bundehes ketab, iane dunia-ni awal-thi te akher sudhi pedaes-ni sahruat-ni
hakikat; bigi-var sudharine keapawanar, Peshutan bin Rustam; Mumbai, 1877.

2 There is no doubt whatever that the writer of the preface is referring to
M6, although his description is incorrect. M6 was written at Bhros in India
A.¥Y. 766 by Péshétan Ram Kamdin Shaharyar Néryésang Shahmard Shaharyar
Bahram Afirmazdyér Ramyar; but some portion of it (probably not the Bun-
dahis) was copied from a MS. written a.y. 618 (a.p. 1249) by Ristam Mihir-
apan Marzapén Dahisn-ayar, who must be the copyist mentioned in the preface
to the Gugarati translation.

3 This is probably the copy derived from M6, and mentioned in p. xxx as
being now in the library of Dasttir Jamaspji Minochiharji.


xliv PAHLAVI TEXTS.


improve the work by collecting all the further information
he could find, on the various subjects, in many other
Pahlavi works. The result of all this labour is not so
much a mere translation of the Bundahis, as a larger work
upon the same subject, or a paraphrase more methodically
arranged, as may be seen from the following summary of
its contents :—

The headings of the fifty-nine chapters, which form
the first part of the work, are:—Ahuramazd’s covenant,
account of the sky, of the first twelve things created, of
Mount Alborg, of the twelve signs of the zodiac, of the
stars, of the soul, of the first practices adopted by the
creatures of the evil spirit Ahereman, of Ahereman’s first
breaking into the sky, of Ahereman’s coming upon the
primeval ox, of Ahereman’s arrival in the fire, of Ahere-
man’s coming upon Gaiomard, of the coming of Ahura-
mazd and Ahereman upon Gaiomard at the time of his
creation, of the lustre residing in both spirits; further
account of the arrangement of the sky, another account
of all the mountains, of depressions for water, of great and
small rivers, of the eighteen rivers of fresh water, of the
seven external and seven internal liquids in the bodies of
men, of the period in which water falling on the earth
arrives at its destination, of the three spiritual rivers, of
the star Tehestar’s destroying the noxious creatures which
Ahereman had distributed over the earth, of the prophet
Zarathost’s asking the creator Ahuramazd how long these
noxious creatures will remain in the latter millenniums,
of driving the poison of the noxious creatures out of the
earth, of the divisions of the land, of the creator Ahura-
mazd’s placing valiant stars as club-bearers over the heads
of the demons, of all the things produced by the passing
away of the primeval ox, of the 282 species of beasts and
birds, of the bird named Xamros, of the bird named
_Karsapad and the hollow of Vargamkard, of the birds who
are enemies opposed to the demons and fiends, of the
bitter and sweet plants among the fifty-five kinds of grain
and twelve kinds of herbs, of the flowers of the thirty days,
of the revolution of the sun and moon and stars, and how


INTRODUCTION. xiv


night falls, and how the day becomes light, of the seven
regions of the earth, of depressions, of the creatures of the
sea, of the flow and ebb of the tide, of the three-legged
ass, of the Gahambars, of Rapithvan, of the revolution of
the seasons, of the production of mankind from the passing
away of Gaiomard, of the production of offspring from the |
_seed of men, of all fires, of all the clever work produced
in the reign of King Jamshed and the production of the
ape and bear, of the production of the Abyssinian and
negro from Zohak, of the splendour and glory of King
Jamshed, of the soul of Kersdsp, of Kersdsp’s soul being
the first to rise, of the names of the prophet Zarathost’s
pedigree, of his going out into the world, of his children,
of the orders given by Ahereman to the demons when the
creator Ahuramazd created the creatures, of the weeping
and raging of the evil spirit Ahereman, of the weeping of
the demon of Wrath in the presence of Ahereman when
the prophet Zarathost brought the religion, of the compu-
tation of twelve thousand years.

The headings of the thirteen chapters, which form the
second part, are: — Account of the last millenniums, of
the appearance of Hosedar-bami, of his going out into the
world, of the appearance of Hosedar-mah, of Sosios, of the
fifty-seven years, of giving the light of the sun to men
on the day of the resurrection, of the rising again of the
whole of mankind on that day, of the resurrection, of the
means of resurrection, of the annihilation of the evil spirit
Ahereman and the demons and fiends on the day of
resurrection, of the creator Ahuramazd’s making the earth
and sky one after the resurrection, of the proceedings of
all creatures after the resurrection.

-The third part contains an. abstract of the contents of
the hundred chapters of the Sad-dar Bundahis, and con-
cludes with an account of the ceremonial formula practised
when tying the kusti or sacred thread-girdle.


xlvi PAHLAVI TEXTS.


4. THE SELECTIONS OF ZAD-SPARAM.


In some manuscripts of the Dadistan-i Dinik the ninety-
two questions and answers, which usually go by that name,
are preceded and followed by Pahlavi texts which are each
nearly equal in extent to the questions and answers, and
treat of a variety of subjects, somewhat in the manner of
a Rivayat. Of the texts which follow the questions and
answers the following are the principal :—

Incantations for fever, &c.; indications afforded by
natural marks on the body; about the hamistakdn (‘the
ever-stationary,’ or neutral state of future existence) and
the different grades in heaven; copy of an epistle’ from
Herbad Maniskihar son of Yidan-Yim?, which he ad-
dressed to the good people of Sirkan *, about the decisions
pronounced by Herbad Zad-sparam son of Ytdan-Yim ;
copy of a letter from Herbad Maniséihar son of Yaidan-
Yim to his brother, Herbad Zad-sparam, on the same
subject, and replying to a letter of his written from
Nivshapthar; copy of a notice by Herbad MAaniséthar,
son of Yiidan-Yim and high-priest {rad) of Pars and
Kirmdan, of the necessity of fifteenfold ablution on account
of grievous sin, written and sealed in the third month a.y.
250 (A.D. 881); memoranda and writings called ‘Selections
of Zad-sparam son of Yidan-Yim,’ the first part treating
of many of the same subjects as the Bundahis, together


* This long epistle contains one statement which is important in its bearing
upon the age of certain Pahlavi writings. It states that Nishahpfhar was in
the council of Andshak-rfiban Khiisré, king of kings and son of Kavad, also
that he was Mobad of Mobads and a commentator. Now this is the name of
a commentator quoted in the Pahlavi Vend, III, 151, V, 112, VIII, 64, and very
frequently in the Nirangistan ; it is also a title applied to Arda-Vtraf (see AV.
J, 35). These facts seem to limit the age of the last revision of the Pahlavi
Vendidad, and of the composition of the Pahlavi Nirangistan and Ard4-Viraf-
namak to the time of King Khfisré Néshirvan (a.p. 531-579). The statement
depends, of course, upon the accuracy of a tradition three centuries old, as
this epistle must have been written about a. p. 880.

? Some Parsis read this name Géshnajam, others Yida4n-dam.

* Mr. Tehmuras Dinshawji thinks this is the place now called Sirgan, about
thirty parasangs south of Kirman, on the road to Bandar Abbas, which is no
doubt the case.


INTRODUCTION. xl vii


with legends regarding Zaratist and his family; the second
part about the formation of men out of body, life, and
soul; and the third part about the details of the renovation
of the universe. The last part of these Selections is in-
complete in all known MSS., and is followed by some
fragments of a further series of questions and answers
regarding the omniscient wisdom, the evil spirit, Kangdez,
the enclosure formed by Yim, &c.

A translation of so much of the Selections of Zad-sparam
as treats of the same subjects as the Bundahis, has been
added as an appendix to the translation of that work in
this volume, because the language used in these Selections
seems to have an important bearing upon the question of
the age of the Bundahis. The time when the Selections
themselves were written is fixed with considerable precision
by the date (A. D. 881), when their author’s brother, MAna-
skihar, issued his public notice, as mentioned above. But
Zad-sparam uses, in many places, precisely the same words
as those employed in the Bundahis, interspersed with much
matter written in a more declamatory style; it is, there-
fore, evident that he had the Bundahis before him to quote
from, and that work must consequently have been written
either by one of his contemporaries, or by an older writer.
So far the Selections merely confirm the information already
obtained more directly from TD (see p. xxxviii); but the
involved style of their language seems to prove more than
this. In fact, in none of the text of the Dadistan-i Dinik
and its accompaniments is there much of the simplicity of
style and directness of purpose which are the chief cha-
racteristics of most of the language of the Bundahis. So
far, therefore, as style can be considered a mark of age,
rather than a mere personal peculiarity of a contemporary
writer, the contrast between the straightforward language
of the Bundahis and the laboured sentences of Mantskihar
and ZAd-sparam, sons of Yidan-Yim, tends to prove that
the bulk of the Bundahis was already an old work in their
days, and was probably saved from oblivion through their
writings or influence. That this original Bundahis or Zand-
akas was an abridged translation of the Avesta of the


xlvili PAHLAVI TEXTS.


Damdad Nask appears pretty evident from Zad-sparam’s
remarks in Chap. IX, 1, 16 of his Selections.

The first part of these Selections consists of ‘sayings
about the meeting of the beneficent and evil spirits,’ and
the first portion of these ‘sayings’ (divided into eleven
chapters in the translation) is chiefly a paraphrase of
Chaps. I-XVII of the Bundahis (omitting Chaps. II, V, and
XVI). It describes the original state of the two spirits,
their meeting and covenant, with a paraphrase of the
Ahtnavar formula; the production of the first creatures,
including time; the incursion of the evil spirit and his
temporary success in deranging the creation, with the reason
why he was unable to destroy the primitive man for thirty
years; followed by the seven contests he carried on with
the sky, water, earth, plants, animals, man, and fire, respec-
tively, detailing how each of these creations was modified
in consequence of the incursion of the evil spirit. In the
account of the first of these contests the Pahlavi translation
of -one stanza in the Gathas is quoted verbatim, showing that
the same Pahlavi version of the Yasna was used in the ninth
century as now exists. The remainder of these ‘sayings,
having no particular connection with the Bundahis, has not
been translated.

With regard to the Pahlavi text of the Selections, the
present translator has been compelled to rely upon a single
manuscript of the Dadistan-i Dinik, brought by Wester-
gaard from Kirman! in 1843, and now No. 35 of the collec-
tion of Avesta and Pahlavi MSS. in the University Library
at Kopenhagen; it may, therefore, be called K35. This
MS. is incomplete, having lost nearly one-third of its original
bulk, but still contains 181 folios of large octavo size, written
fifteen to seventeen lines to the page; the first seventy-one
folios of the work have been lost, and about thirty-five folios
are also missing from the end; but the whole of the ninety-
two questions and answers, together with one-third of the


* That is, so far as the late Professor Westergaard could remember in 1878,
when he.kindly lent me the MS. for collation with my copy of the text, already
obtained from more recent MSS. in Bombay, the best of which turned out to be
a.copy of K35,.


INTRODUCTION. xlix


texts which usually precede them, and three-fifths of those
which usually follow them, are still remaining. This MS.
has lost its date, but a copy ! of it exists in Bombay (written
when it was complete) which ends with a colophon dated
A.Y. 941 (A.D.1572), as detailed in p. xxxiii; this may either
be the actual date of that copy, or it may have been merely
_ copied from K35, which cannot be much older. The latter
supposition appears the more probable, as this colophon
seems to be left incomplete by the loss of the last folio in
the Bombay copy, and may, therefore, have been followed
by another colophon giving a later date.

This copy of K35 was, no doubt, originally complete, but
has lost many of its folios in the’course of time; most of
the missing text has been restored from another MS., but
there are still twelve or more folios missing from the latter
part of the work; it contains, however, all that portion of
the Selections which is translated in this volume, but has,
of course, no authority independent of K35. The other
MS. in Bombay, from which some of the missing text was
recovered, is in the library of Dastir Jamaspji Minochiharji ;
it isa modern copy, written at different periods from forty
to sixty years ago, and is incomplete, as it contains only
one-fourth of the texts which usually follow the ninety-two
questions and answers, and includes no portion of the Selec-
tions of Zad-sparam.

Another MS. of the Dadistan-i Dintk and its accompani-
ments, written also at Kirm4an, but two generations earlier
than K35 (say, about A.D. 1530), has been already mentioned
(see p. xxxiii). It is said still to contain 227 folios, though
its first seventy folios are missing ; it must, therefore, begin
very near the same place as K35, but extends much further,
as it supplies about half the text still missing from the


1 The fact of its being a copy of K35 is proved by strong circumstantial evi-
dence. In the first place, it contains several false readings which are clearly
due to mis-shapen letters and accidental marks in K35, so that it is evidently
descended from that MS. But it is further proved to have been copied direct
from that MS., by the last words in thirty-two of its pages having been marked
with interlined circles in K35; the circle having been the copyist’s mark for
finding his place, when’ beginning a new page after turning over his folios.


[5]


] PAHLAVI TEXTS.


Bombay copy of K35, though it has lost about fourteen
folios at the end. This MS. must be either the original
from which K35 was copied, or an independent authority of
equal value, but it has not been available for settling the
text of the Selections for the present translation. ,


5. THE BAHMAN YAST.


The Bahman Yast, usually called the ‘Zand of the

Vohtiman Yast,’ professes to be a prophetical work, in
which Atharmazd gives Zaratist an account of what
was to happen to the Iranian nation and religion in the
future. .
It begins with an introduction (Chap. I) which states
that, according to the Stidgar Nask, Zarattist having asked
Atharmazd for immortality, was supplied temporarily with
omniscient wisdom, and had a vision of a tree with four
branches of different metals which were explained to him
as symbolical of four different periods, the times of Vistasp,
of Ardakhshir the Kayanian, of Khdsré Noshirvan, and of
certain demons or idolators who were to appear at the end
of a thousand years. It states, further, that the commen-
taries of the Vohtiman, Horvadad, and Astad-Yasts men-
tioned the heretic Mazdak, and that: Khisré Néshirvan
summoned a council of high-priests and commentators, and
ordered them not to conceal these Yasts, but to teach the
commentary only among their own relations.

The text then proceeds (Chap. II) to give the details of
the commentary on the Vohiman Yast as follows :—Zara-
tist, having again asked Attharmazd for immortality, is
refused, but is again supplied with omniscient wisdom for a
week, during which time he sees, among other things, a tree
with seven branches of different metals, which are again
explained to him as denoting the seven ages of the religion,
its six ages of triumph in the reigns of Vistasp, of Ardakhshir
the KayAanian, of one of the Askanian kings, of Ardakhshir
Papakan and Shahptr I and II, of Vahram Gér, and of
Khisré Noshirvan, and its seventh age of adversity when


INTRODUCTION, li


Iran is to be invaded from the east by hordes of demons or
idolators with dishevelled hair, who are to work much mis-
chief, so as to destroy the greater part of the nation and
mislead the rest, until the religion becomes nearly extinct.
The details of this mischief, written in a tone of lamentation,
constitute the greater part of the text, which also notices
_ that the sovereignty will pass from the Arabs, Rtiimans, and
these leathern-belted demons (Tiirks) to other Tarks and
non-Titiranians who are worse than themselves.

Distressed at this narrative Zaratist asks Attharmazd
(Chap. III, 1) how the religion is to be restored, and these
demons destroyed? He is informed that, in the course of
time, other fiends with red banners, red weapons, and red
hats, who seem to be Christians, will appear in the north-
west, and will advance either to the Arvand (Tigris) or the
Euphrates, driving back the former demons who will assem-
ble all their allies to a great conflict, one of the three
great battles of the religions of the world, in which the
wicked will be so utterly destroyed that none will be left
to pass into the next millennium. ;

Zarattist enquires (III, 12) how so many can perish, and
is informed that, after the demons with dishevelled hair
appear, Hishédar, the first of the last three apostles, is
born near Lake Frazd4n; and when he begins to confer with
Atharmazd a Kay4n prince is born in the direction of
Kinistan (Samarkand), who is called Vahram the Vargavand,
and when he is thirty years old he collects a large army of
Hindu (Bactrian) and Kini (Samarkandian) troops, and
advances into Iran, where he is reinforced by a numerous
army of Iranian warriors, and defeats the demon races with
immense slaughter, in the great conflict already mentioned,
so that there will be only one man left to a thousand
women.

The writer then proceeds to describe the supernatural
agencies employed to produce this result: how the evil
spirit (III, 24) comes to the assistance of the demon-
worshippers ; how Atharmazd sends his angels to Kangdeg,
to summon Péshydtant, the immortal son of Vistasp, with
his disciples, to re-establish the sacred fires and restore the


a2


li PAHLAVI TEXTS.


religious ceremonies ; and how the angels assist them against
the evil spirits, so that Vahram the Vargdvand is enabled
to destroy the fiendish races, as already detailed, and
Péshyétani becomes supreme high-priest of the Iranian
world.

Finally, the writer gives some details regarding the mis-
sions of the last three apostles, returning for that purpose
(III, 44) to the birth of Hfishédar, the first of the three, whose
millennium witnesses both the invasion and the destruction
of the fiendish races. Htishédar proves his apostolic au-
thority, to the satisfaction of Vargavand and the people, by
making the sun stand still for ten days and nights. His
mission is to ‘bring the creatures back to their proper
state;’ and it is not till near the end of his millennium that
Péshyétanii appears, as before described. As this millen-
nium begins with the invasion of the fiendish races and the
fall of the Sasanian dynasty, it must have terminated in the
seventeenth century, unless it was to last more than a
thousand years. A very brief account is then given of
the millennium of Htishédar-mah, the second of the three
apostles, whose mission is to make ‘the creatures more
progressive’ and to destroy ‘the fiend of serpent origin’
(Az-i Dahak), During his millennium (which appears to be
now in progress) mankind become so skilled in medicine
that they do not readily die; but owing to their toleration
of heretics the evil spirit once more attains power, and
releases Az-i Dahak, from his confinement in Mount Dima-
vand, to work evil in the world, till Atharmazd sends his
angels to rouse Keresdsp the Saman, who rises from his
trance and kills Az-i Dahak with his club at the end of the
millennium, Afterwards, Sdshyans, the last apostle, appears
to ‘make the creatures again pure;’ when the resurrection
takes place and the future existence commences.

Whether this text, as now extant, be the original com-
mentary or zand of the Vohiman Yast admits of doubt,
since it appears to quote that commentary (Chap. II, I) as
an authority for its statements; it is, therefore, most pro-
bably, only an epitome of the original commentary. Such
an epitome would naturally quote many passages verbatim


INTRODUCTION. hii


from the original work, which ought to bear traces of trans-
lation from an Avesta text, as its title zand implies a
Pahlavi translation from the Avesta (see p. x). There are,
in fact, many such traces in this epitome, as indicated by
the numerous sentences beginning with a verb, the mode of
addressing Adharmazd, the quotation of different opinions
from various commentators, and other minor peculiarities.
Some of these might be the result of careful imitation of
other commentaries, but it seems more likely that they are
occasioned by literal translation from an original Avesta
text. In speculating, therefore, upon the contents of the
Bahman Yast it is necessary to remember that we are most
probably dealing with a composite work, whose statements
may be referred to the three different ages of the Avesta
original, the Pahlavi translation and commentary, and the
Pahlavi epitome of the latter; and that this last form of the
text is the only old version now extant.

With regard to the age of the work we have the external
evidence that a copy of it exists in a manuscript (K20)
written about five hundred years ago, and that this copy is
evidently descended from older manuscripts as it contains
several clerical blunders incompatible with any idea of its
being the original manuscript, as witness the omissions noted
in Chaps. II, 10, 13, 14, 22, 27, 45, III, 30, 32, the misplace-
ment of II, 18, and many miswritings of single words.
Owing to the threefold character of the work, already
noticed, the internal evidence of its age can only apply to
its last recension in the form of an epitome, as an oriental
editor (to say nothing of others) generally considers himself
at liberty to alter and add to his text, if he does not under-
stand it, or thinks he can improve it. That this liberty
has been freely exercised, with regard to these professed
prophecies, is shown by the identification of the four pro-
phetical ages of the Stadgar Nask in the first chapter of
the Bahman Yast being different from that given in the
Dinkard. The Dinkard quotes the Stadgar Nask (that is,
its Pahlavi version) as identifying the iron age with some
period of religious indifference subsequent to the time of
Ataré-pad son of Maraspend, the supreme high-priest and


liv PAHLAVI TEXTS.


prime minister of ShahpfirII (A.D. 309-379); but the Bahman
Yast (Chap. I, 5) quotes the Nask as identifying the same
age with the reign of an idolatrous race subsequent to the
time of Khtisré Néshirvan (A.D. 531-579). This example
is sufficient to show that the compiler of the extant epitome
of the Bahman Yast commentary largely availed himself of
his editorial license, and it indicates the difficulty of dis-
tinguishing his statements from those of the former editors.
At the same time it proves that the epitome could not have
been compiled till after Iran had been overrun by a foreign
race subsequent to the reign of -Khaisré Néshirvan. It is
temarkable that the compiler does not mention any later
Sasanian king, that he does not allude to Muhammadanism,
and speaks of the foreign invaders as Turanians and Chris-
tians, only mentioning Arabs incidentally in later times;
at the same time the foreign invasion (which lasts a thou-
sand years) is of too permanent a character to allow of
its having reference merely to the troublous times of
Noéshirvan’s successor.

Perhaps the most reasonable hypotheses that can be
founded upon these facts are, first, that the original zand
or commentary of the Bahman Yast was written and trans-
lated from the Avesta in the latter part of the reign of
Khasré Néshirvan, or very shortly afterwards, which would
account for no later king being mentioned by name; and,
secondly, that the epitome now extant was compiled by
some writer who lived so long after the Arab invasion that
the details of their inroad had become obscured by the more
recent successes of Turanian rulers, such as the Ghaznavis
and Salgtiqs of the eleventh and twelfth centuries. It is
hardly possible that the epitomist could have lived as late
as the time of Gingiz Khan, the great Mongol conqueror
(A.D, 1206-1227), as that would bring him within 150 years
of the date of the extant manuscript of his work, which has
no appearance of being an immediate copy of the original ;
but the rule of the Salgtiqs would certainly have afforded
him sufficient materials for his long description of the iron
age. The Avesta of the Bahman Yast was probably com-
piled from older sources (like the rest of the Avesta) during


INTRODUCTION. lv


the reigns of the earlier Sasanian monarchs; but it was, no
doubt, very different in its details from the epitome of its
commentary which still exists.

These hypotheses, regarding the threefold origin of the
present form of this Yast, derive some confirmation from
the inconsistencies in its chronological details; especially
‘those relating to the periods of the invaders’ reign and of
Hishédar’s birth, The Zoroastrians have for ages been
expecting the appearance of Htshédar, the first of their
last three apostles, but have always had to postpone their
expectations from time to time, like the Jews and other
interpreters of prophecy; so that they are still looking
forward into the future for his advent, although his millen-
nium has long since expired according to the chronology
adopted in the Bahman Yast. This chronology, of course,
represents the expectations of Zoroastrians in past times,
and seems to express three different opinions. First, we
have the statement that the last great battle of the demon-
races is to take place at the end of Zaratist’s millennium
(see Chap. III, 9), when the wicked will be so destroyed
(compare III, 22, 23) that none will pass into the next
millennium (III, 11), which is that of Hashédar (III, 43).
And that the reign of evil is to precede the end of Zarattist’s
millennium is evidently assumed also in Chap. II, 41, 63.
Such opinions may reasonably be traced to the original
Avesta writer, who must have expected only a short reign
of evil to arise and fall near the latter end of Zaratist’s
millennium, which was still far in the future, and to be
followed by the appearance of Hishédar to restore the
‘good’ religion. Secondly, we are told (I, 5, II, 22, 24, 31)
that the invasion of the demon-races, with its attendant
evils, is to take place when Zarattist’s millennium is ended ;
on their appearance Hishédar is born (III, 13), and when
he is thirty years old (compare III, 14 with III, 44) Vahram
the Vargavand is also born, who at the age of thirty (III, 17)
advances into Iran with an innumerable army to destroy the
invaders. Such statements may be attributed to the original
Pahlavi translator and commentator who, writing about
A.D. 570-590, would have before his eyes the disastrous


lvi PAHLAVI TEXTS.


reign of Atharmazd IV, the son and successor of Khfisr6
Noshirvan, together with the prowess of the famous Persian
general Bahram XK pin, which drove out all invaders. This
writer evidently expected the reign of the demon-races to
last less than a century, but still at some period in the near
future; merely illustrating his theme by details of the
disasters and wars of his own time. Thirdly, we find it
stated (III, 44) that Hashédar will be born in 1600, which
seems to mean the sixteen hundredth year of Zaratist’s
millennium, or six hundredth of his own (say A.D. 1193-
1235), also that the reign of the demon-races is to last a
thousand years (III, 34), and that Péshyétani does not
come to restore the religion till near the end of the millen-
nium (III, 51); it also appears (III, 49) that Vargavand
occupies a prominent position when Hishédar comes from
his conference with Atharmazd at thirty years of age (III,
44, 45). Such details were probably inserted by the com-
piler of the epitome, who had to admit the facts that the
reign of the demon-races had already lasted for centuries,
and that Hishédar had not yet appeared. To get over
these difficulties he probably adopted the opinions current
in his day, and postponed the advent of Hfishédar till the
beginning of the next century in his millennium, and put
off the destruction of the wicked, as a more hopeless matter,
till near the end of the millennium. Both these periods
are now long since past, and the present Zoroastrians have
still to postpone the fulfilment of the prophecies connected
with their last three apostles, or else to understand them
in a less literal fashion than heretofore.
For the Pahlavi text of the Bahman Yast the translator
has to rely upon the single old manuscript K20, already
described (p. xxvii), in which it occupies the 13} folios
immediately following the Bundahis; these folios are much
worn, and a few words have been torn off some of them,
but nearly all of these missing words can be restored by aid
of the Pazand version. The Pahlavi text is also found in
the modern copies of K20 at Paris and Kopenhagen, but
these copies (P7 and K21) have no authority independent
of K20. In India this text has long been exceedingly rare,


INTRODUCTION, Ivii


and whether any copy of it exists, independent of K20, is
doubtful.

The Pazand version is more common in Parsi libraries,
but contains a very imperfect text. Of this version two
modern copies have been consulted; one of these occupies
fols. 38-62 of a small manuscript, No. 22 of the Haug col-
- lection in the State Library at Munich ; the other is a copy —
of a manuscript in the library of the high-priest of the Parsis
in Bombay. Both these MSS. are evidently descended
from the same original, which must have been a very imper-
fect transliteration of a Pahlavi text closely resembling that
of K20, but yet independent of that MS., as a few words
omitted in K20 are supplied by these Pazand MSS. (see
BYt. 11, 13;.14, 22, &c.) . To a certain extent, therefore,
these Pazand MSS. are of some assistance in settling the
text of a few sentences, but the greater part of their con- -
tents is so imperfect as to be utterly unintelligible; they
not only omit Chaps. I, 1-8, IT, 17, 30-32, 40, III, 9, 12, 17-
44, 58-63 entirely, but also words and phrases from nearly
every other section of the text. Adhering scrupulously to
the Pahlavi original. for a few consecutive words, and then
widely departing from it by misreading or omitting all
difficult words and passages, this Pazand version is a com-
plete contrast to the Pazand writings of Nérydésang, being
of little use to the reader beyond showing the extremely
low ebb to which Pahlavi learning must have fallen, among
the Parsis, before such unintelligible writings could have
been accepted as Pazand texts.

There is also a Persian version of the Bahman Yast, a
copy of which, written A.D. 1676, is contained in a large
Rivayat MS. No. 29, belonging to the University Library
at Bombay. According to the colophon of this Persian
version it was composed in A.D. 1496 by Rustam Isfendiyar
of Yazd, from an Avesta (PAzand) MS. belonging to his
brother Jamshéd. This Persian version contains less than
three per cent of Arabic words, and is more of a paraphrase
than a translation, but it adheres very closely to the meaning
of the Pahlavi text from Chaps. I, 1 to III, 9, where a dis-
location occurs, evidently owing either to the displacement


lviii PAHLAVI TEXTS.


of two folios in an older MS., or to the second page of a
folio being copied before the first, so that §§ 10-14 follow
§§ 15-22. From the middle of § 22 the folios of the older
MS. seem to have been lost as far as the end of Hiishédar’s
millennium (§ 51), to which point the Persian version leaps,
but the remainder of this paraphrase is much more diffuse
than the Bahman Yast, and is evidently derived from some
other Pahlavi work.

This conclusion of the Persian version describes how
adversity departs from the world, and ten people are
satisfied with the milk of one cow, when Hishédar-mah
appears and his millennium commences. On his coming
from his conference with Atharmazd the sun stands still
for twenty days and nights, in consequence of which two-
thirds of the people in the world believe in the religion.
Meat is no longer eaten, but only milk and butter, and a
hundred people are satisfied with the milk of one cow.
Hishédar-mah destroys the terrible serpent, which ac-
companies apostasy, by means of the divine glory and
Avesta formulas ; he clears all noxious creatures out of the
world, and wild animals live harmlessly among mankind ;
the fiends of apostasy and deceit depart from the world,
which becomes populous and delightful, and mankind
abstain from falsehood. After the five-hundredth year of
Htishédar-mah has passed away, Sdéshyans (Sasan) appears,
and destroys the fiend who torments fire. The sun stands
still for thirty days and nights, when all mankind believe
in the religion, and the year becomes exactly 360 days.
Dahak escapes from his confinement, and reigns for a day
and a half in the world with much tyranny ; when Séshyans
rouses Sam Narfman, who accepts the religion and becomes
immortal. Sam calls upon Dahak to accept the religion,
but the latter proposes that they should together seize
upon heaven for themselves, whereupon Sam kills him.
All evil having departed from the world mankind become
like the archangels, and the resurrection takes place, which
is described with many of the same details as are mentioned
in Bund. XXX.


Accompanying this Persian version in B2g is another


INTRODUCTION. lix
ee ee a
fragment from the same source, which treats of the same
Subjects as the third chapter of the Bahman Yast, but is
differently arranged. It confines itself to the millennium
of Hishédar, and may possibly be some modification of the
contents of the folios missing from the version described
above. After some introductory matter this fragment con-
tains a paraphrase (less accurate than the preceding) of
Chap. ITI, 23-49 of the Bahman Vast; it then proceeds to
state that Hishédar destroys the wolf race, so that wolves,
thieves, highway robbers, and criminals cease to exist.
When Hiishédar’s three-hundredth year has passed away
the winter of Malkés arrives and destroys all animals and
vegetation, and only one man survives out of ten thousand ;
after which the world is repeopled from the enclosure made
_by Yim. Then comes the gathering of the nations to the
great battle on the Euphrates, where the slaughter is so
great that the water of the river becomes red, and the sur-
vivors wade in blood up to their horses’ girths. Afterwards,
the Kayan king, Vargavand, advances from the frontiers of
India and takes possession of Iran to the great delight of
the inhabitants, but only after a great battle; and then
Péshyétanii is summoned from Kangdez to restore the
religious ceremonies, -

A German translation of some passages in the Bahman
Yast, with a brief summary of the greater part of the re-
mainder, was published in 1860 in Spiegel’s Traditionelle
Literatur der Parsen, pp. 128-135.


6. THE SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


Another treatise which must be referred to about the
same age as the Bundahis, though of a very different cha-
racter, is the Shayast la-shayast or ‘the proper and impro-
per.’ It is a compilation of miscellaneous laws and customs
regarding sin and impurity, with other memoranda about
ceremonies and religious subjects in general. Its name has,
no doubt, been given to it in modern times?, and has pro-


1 But perhaps before, the compilation of the prose Sad-dar Bundahis, or
Bundahis of a’ hundred chapters, which seems to refer to the Shayast la-shayast


leo PAHLAVI TEXTS.


bably arisen from the frequent use it makes of the words

shayad, ‘it is fit or proper,” and 14 shayad, ‘it is not fit
or proper.’ And, owing to its resemblance to those Persian
miscellanies of traditional memoranda called Rivayats, it
has also been named the Pahlavi Rivayat, though chiefly
by Europeans.

It consists of two parts, which are often put together in
modern MSS., and bear the same name, but are widely
separated in the oldest MSS. These two parts, consisting
respectively of Chaps. I-X and XI-XIV in the present
translation, are evidently two distinct treatises on the same
and similar subjects, but of nearly the same age. That
they were compiled by two different persons, who had access
“to nearly the same authorities, appears evident from Chaps.
XI, 1, 2, XII, 11, 13-16, 18, 20 being repetitions of Chaps.
I, 1, 2, X, 4, 20-23, 7, 31, with only slight alterations ; such
repetitions as would hardly be made in a single treatise by
the same writer. Minor repetitions in the first part, such
as those of some phrases in Chaps. II, 65, IV, 14, repeated
in Chap. X, 24, 33, might readily be made by the same
writer in different parts of the same treatise. To these two
parts of the Shayast 14-shayast a third part has been added
in the present translation, as an appendix, consisting of a
number of miscellaneous passages of a somewhat similar
character, which are found in the same old MSS. that con-
tain the first two parts, but which cannot be attributed
either to the same writers or the same age as those parts.

The first part commences with the names and amounts
of the various degrees of sin, and the names of the chief
commentators on the Vendidad. It then gives long details
regarding the precautions to be taken with reference to
corpses and menstruous women, and the impurity they occa-
sion; besides mentioning (Chap. II, 33-35) the pollution


in its opening words, as follows:—‘ This book is on ‘‘the proper and im-
proper” which is brought out from the good, pure religion of the Mazda-
yasnians ;’ though this term may possibly relate to its own contents. There is
also a Persian treatise called Shayast na-shdyast, which gives a good deal
of information obtained from the Persian Rivayats, and copies of which are
contained in the MSS. Nos, 56 and116 of the Ouseley collection in the Bodleian
Library at Oxford.


INTRODUCTION, Ixi
(SL Eee Se Sue 1 am
caused by a serpent. It next describes the proper size
and materials of the sacred thread-girdle and shirt, giving
some details about the sins of running about uncovered and
walking with one boot, and thence proceeding to the sin of
unseasonable chatter. Details are then given about good
works, and those who can and cannot perform them; in
which reference is made to Christians, Jews, and those of
other persuasions (Chap. VI, 7). The next subjects treated
of are reverencing the sun and fire, the sin of extinguishing
fire, confession and renunciation of sin, atonement for sins,
especially mortal sins, both those affecting others and those
only affecting one’s own soul; with a digression (Chap. VIII,
3) prohibiting the rich from hunting: The remainder of this
first treatise is of a miscellaneous character, referring to the
following subjects :—The Hasar of time, priests passing away
in idolatry, the discussion of religion, ceremonies not done
aright, throwing a corpse into the sea, evil of eating in the
dark, the four kinds of worship, when the angels should
be invoked in worship, the ephemeral nature of life, proper
looseness for a girdle, when the sacred cake set aside for the
guardian spirits can be used, maintaining a fire where awoman
is pregnant, providing a tank for ablution, the Gathas not
to be recited over the dead, food and drink not to be thrown
away to the north at night, unlawful slaughter of animals,
how the corpse of a pregnant woman should be carried,
forgiveness of trespasses, evil of walking without boots,
when the sacred girdle is to be assumed, breaking the spell
of an inward prayer, ten women wanted at childbirth, and
how the infant is to be treated, sin of beating an innocent
person, evil of a false judge, men and women who do not
marry, a toothpick must be free. from bark, acknowledging
the children of a handmaid, advantage of offspring and of
excess in almsgiving, prayer on lying down and getting up,
Avesta not to be mumbled, doubtful actions to be avoided
or consulted about, evil of laughing during prayer, crowing
of a hen, treatment of a hedgehog, after a violent death
corruption does not set in immediately, necessity of a dog’s
gaze, putrid meat and hairy cakes or butter unfit for cere-
monies, when a woman can do priestly duty, &c.


Ixii | PAHLAVI TEXTS.


The second part also commences with the names and
amounts of the various degrees of sin, followed by the. pro-
per meat-offerings for various angels and guardian spirits.
Next come miscellaneous observations on the following
subjects :—The simplest form of worship, necessity of sub-
mitting to a high-priest, advantage of a fire in the house,
sin of clothing the dead, presentation of holy-water to the
nearest fire after a death, nail-parings to be prayed over,
advantage of light at childbirth, offerings to the angels,
maintaining a fire where a woman is pregnant and a child
is born, a toothpick must be free from bark, acknowledging
the children of a handmaid, advantage of offspring and of
excess in almsgiving, evil of drawing well-water at night,
food not to be thrown away to the north at night, advantage
of prayer at feasts, treatment of a hedgehog, praying when
washing the face, the proper choice of a purifying priest, no
one should be hopeless of heaven, necessity of a wife being
religious as well as her husband, the ceremonies which are
good works, and the cause of sneezing, yawning, and sigh-
ing. These are followed by a long account of the mystic
signification of the Gathas, with some information as to the
errors which may be committed in consecrating the sacred
cakes, and how the beginning of the morning watch is to be
determined.

The third part, or appendix, commences with an account
of how each of the archangels can be best propitiated, by a
proper regard for the particular worldly existence which he
specially protects. This is followed by a statement of the
various degrees of sin, and of the amount of good works
attributed to various ceremonies. Then come some account
of the ceremonies after a death, particulars of those who
have no part in the resurrection, the duty of submission to
the priesthood, whether evil may be done for the sake of
good, the place where people will rise from the dead,
Aéshm’s complaint to Aharman of the three things he could
not injure in the world, the occasions on which the Ahuna-
var formula should be recited, and the number of recitals
that are requisite, &c. And, finally, statements of the
lengths of midday and afternoon shadows, blessings invoked


INTRODUCTION, Ixiii
oe see es 8
from the thirty angels and archangels who preside over the
days of the month, and the special epithets of the same.

With regard to the age of this treatise we have no precise
information. All three parts are found in a MS. (M6)
which was written in A.D. 1397 (see p. xxix), and nearly
the whole is also found in the MS. K20, which may be a
few years older (see p. xxvii), and in which the first part of
the Shayast la-shayast is followed by a Persian colophon
dated A.Y. 700 (A.D. 1331), copied probably from an older
MS. The text in both these old MSS. seems to have been
derived almost direct from the same original, which must
have been so old when M6 was written that the copyist
found some words illegible (see notes on Chaps. VIII, 19,
X, 34, XII, 14, 15, &c.) Now it is known from a colophon
that a portion of M6, containing the book of ArdA-Viraf
and the tale of Gést-i Fry4né, was copied from a MS.
written in A.D. 1249; and we may safely conclude that the
Shayast la-shayast was copied, either from the same MS.,
or from one fully as old. So far, therefore, as external evi-
dence goes, there is every reason to suppose that the whole
of the Shayast 1a-shayast, with its appendix’, was existing
in a MS. written about 630 years ago.

But internal evidence points to a far higher antiquity
for the first two parts, as the compilers of those treatises
evidently had access, not only to several old commentaries,
but also to many of the Nasks, which have long been lost.
Thus, the first treatise contains quotations from the com-
mentaries of Afarg, Gégésasp, Kishtand-bigéd, Médék-
mah, Réshan, and Séshyans, which are all frequently
quoted in the Pahlavi translation of the Vendidad (see Sls.
I, 3, 4, notes); besides mentioning the opinions of Mara-
bid, Néryésang, Nésai Birz-Mitré, and Vand-Attharmazd,
who are rarely or never mentioned in the Pahlavi Vendidad.
It also quotes no less than eleven of the twenty Nasks or
books of the compiete Mazdayasnian literature which are
no longer extant, besides the Vendidad, the only Nask that
still survives in the full extent it had in Sasanian times.


_ 1 Except Chaps. XXII, XXIII (See the note on the heading of Chap. XXII).


lxiv PAHLAVI TEXTS.


The Nasks quoted are the Stidgar (Sls. X, 8), the Bagh
(X, 26), the Damdad (X, 22), the Pazén (IX, 9), the Ratts-
taitth (X, 29), the Kidrast (X, 28), the Spend (X, 4), the
Nihadim (X, 3, 22, 23), the Dibasrigéd (X, 13), the Hts-
param (X, 21), and the Sakadim (X, 25), very few of which
are mentioned even in the Pahlavi Vendidad. The second
treatise mentions only one commentator, Vand-Atiharmazd,
but it quotes eight of the Nasks no longer extant; these
are the Stidgar (Sls. XII, 32), the Damdad (XII, 5, 15),
the Spend (XII, 3, 11, 15, 29), the Bag-yasné (XII, 17),
the Nihadam (XII, 15, 16), the Haisparam (XII, 1, 7, 14,
31, XIII, 17), the Sakadtim (XII, 2, 10, 12, XIII, 36), and
the Hadékht (XII, 19, 30, XIII, 6, 10).

Of two of these Nasks, the Bagh and Had6kht, a few
fragments may still survive (see notes on Sls. X, 26, Haug’s
Essays, p. 134, B. Yt. III, 25), but those of the latter Nask do
not appear to contain the passages quoted in the Shayast
la-shayast. With regard to the rest we only know that the
Damdad, Hiisparam, and Sakaédtim must have been still in
existence about A.D. 881, as they are quoted in the writings
of Zad-sparam and Mandsfihar, sons of Yidan-Yim, who
lived at that time (see pp. xlii, xlvi); and the Nihadim
and Hisparam are also quoted in the Pahlavi Vendidad.
It is true that the Dinkard gives copious information about
the contents of all the Nasks, with two or three exceptions ;
and the Dinkard seems to have assumed its present form
about A.D. goo (see Bund. XX XIII, 11, notes); but its last
editor was evidently merely a compiler of old fragments,
so there is no certainty that many of the Nasks actually
existed in his time.

Thus far, therefore, the internal evidence seems to prové
that the two treatises called Shayast la-shayast, which con-
stitute the first two parts of the present translation, are
more than a thousand years old. On the other hand, they
cannot be more than three centuries older, because they
frequently quote passages from the Pahlavi Vendidad
which, as we have seen (p. xlvi, note 1), could not have as-
sumed its present form before the time of Khisré Noéshir-
_van (A.D. 531-579). As they contain no reference to any


INTRODUCTION. Ixv


interference of the governing powers with the religion or
priesthood, it is probable that they were written before the
Muhammadan conquest (A.D. 636-651), although they do
not mention the existence of any ‘king of the kings,’ the
usual title of the Sasanian monarchs. And this probability
is increased by there being no direct mention of Muham-
madanism among the contemporary religions named in
Chap. VI, 7, unless we assume that passage to be a quota-
tion from an earlier book. We may, therefore, conclude,
with tolerable certainty, that the Pahlavi text of the first
two parts of the present translation of the Shayast 1a-
shayast was compiled some time in the seventh century ;
but, like the Bundahis and Bahman Yast, it was, for the
most part, a compilation of extracts and translations from
far older writings, and may also have been rearranged
shortly after the Muhammadan conquest.

The fragments which are collected in the appendix, or
third part of the present translation, are probably of various
ages, and several of them may not be more than seven cen-
turies old. The commentator Bakht-afrid, whose work
(now lost) is quoted in Chap. XX, 11, may have lived in
the time of Khtsré Ndéshirvan (see B. Yt. I, 7). And
Chap. XXI must certainly have been written in Persia, as
the lengths of noonday shadows which it mentions are only
suitable for 32° north latitude. As regards the last two
chapters we have no evidence that they are quite five cen-
turies old.

For the Pahlavi text of the Shayast 14-shayast and its
appendix we have not only the very old codex M6 (see
p. xxix) for the whole of it, but also the equally old codex
K20 (see p. xxvii) for all but Chaps. XV-XVII, XX, XXII,
and XXIII in the appendix. In M6 the first two parts are
separated by twenty folios, containing the Farhang-i Oim-
khadtik, and the second part is separated from the first
three chapters of the appendix by four folios, containing
the Patit-i Khad; the next three chapters of the appendix
are from the latter end of the second volume of M6, Chap.
XXI is from the middle of the same, and the last two chap-
ters are from some additional folios at the beginning of the


[5] €


Ixvi PAHLAVI TEXTS.


first volume. In K20 the first two parts are separated by
ninety-two folios, containing the Farhang-i Oim-khadtk,
Bundahis, Bahman Yast, and several other Pahlavi and
Avesta texts; Chap. XVIII precedes the first part, Chap.
XIX precedes the second part, and Chap. XXI is in an
earlier part of the MS.

Derived from K20 are the two modern copies P7 and
Kai (see p. xxviii). Derived from M6 are the modern
copy of the first two parts in Mg (No. 9 of the Haug col-
lection in the State Library at Munich), a copy of Chaps.
XIV, XV in L15 (No. 15 of the collection of Avesta and
Pahlavi MSS. in the India Office Library at London), a
copy of Chap. XX, 4-17 in O121 (No. 121 of the Ouseley
collection in the Bodleian Library at Oxford, see p. xxx),
and a copy of Chap. XVIII in Dastir Jamaspji’s MS. of
the Bundahis at Bombay. While an independent Pahlavi
version of Chap. XXIII occurs in a very old codex in the
library of the high-priest of the Parsis at Bombay, which
version has been used for the text of the present transla-
tion, because that chapter is incomplete in M6.

Pazand versions of some of the chapters, chiefly in the
appendix, are to be found in some MSS., but all derived
apparently from M6. Thus, in the Pazand MSS. L7 and
L22 (Nos. 7 and 22 in the India Office Library at London,
see p. xxxi), written in Avesta characters, Chaps. XVIII,
XX, XV follow the last chapter of the Bundahis, and Chap.
XIV occurs a few folios further on. And in the Pazand
MS. M7 (No. 7 of the Haug collection in the State Library
at Munich), written in Persian characters, the following
detached passages occur in a miscellaneous collection of
extracts (fols. 126-133):—Chaps. XX, 14-16, X; 18, 19,
EXS G0, XX, 12; 13; 4) 5, MILL @; 4214, oe eee
sian version of Chap. XVIII also occurs in M5 (No. 5 of
the same collection) on fol. 54.

It does not appear that the Shayast 14-shayast has ever
been hitherto translated into any European language}, nor
A i es ee eee


* Except Chap. XVIII, which was translated into German by Justi, as the
last chapter of his translation of the Bundahis (see p. xxvi).


INTRODUCTION. Lxvil


is any Persian or Gugarati translation of it known to the
present translator, though a good deal of the matter it con-
tains may be found in the Persian Rivayats, but generally
given in a different form. Owing to the technical charac-
ter of the treatise, it is hazardous for-any one but a Parsi
priest to attempt to translate it, so that errors will, no
' doubt, be apparent to the initiated in the present transla-
tion. At the same time it must not be forgotten that the
laws and customs mentioned in the text were those current
in Persia twelve centuries ago, which may be expected to
differ, in many details, from those of the Parsis in India at
the present day. This is a consideration which a Parsi
translator might be too apt to ignore; so that his thorough
knowledge of present customs, though invaluable for the
decipherment of ambiguous phrases, might lead him astray
when dealing with clear statements of customs and rules
now obsolete and, therefore, at variance with his precon-
ceived ideas of propriety.


7, CONCLUDING REMARKS.


The Pahlavi texts selected for translation in this volume
are specimens of three distinct species of writings. Thus,
the Bundahis and its appendix, which deal chiefly with
cosmogony, myths, and traditions, may be roughly com-
pared to the book of Genesis. The Bahman Yast, which
professes to be prophetical, may be likened unto the Apoca-
lypse. And the Shayast la-shayast, which treats of reli-
gious laws regarding impurity, sin, ritual, and miscellaneous
matters, bears some resemblance to Leviticus. But, though
thus dealing with very different subjects, these texts appear
to have all originated in much the same manner, a manner
which is characteristic of the oldest class of the Pahlavi
writings still extant. All three are full of translations from
old Avesta texts, collected together probably in the latter
days of the Sasanian dynasty, and finally rearranged some
time after the Muhammadan conquest of Persia; so that,
practically, they. may be taken as representing the ideas
entertained of their prehistoric religion by Persians in the

Ce


Ixviii PAHLAVI TEXTS.


sixth century, but modified so far as to suit the taste and
exigencies of the tenth.

But, notwithstanding the wide range of subjects embraced
by these texts, it would be rash for the reader to assume
that they afford him sufficient information for forming a
decided opinion as to the character of the Parsi religion.
The texts translated in this volume contain barely one-
eleventh part of the religious literature extant in the Pah-
lavi language, without taking the Pahlavi versions of existing
Avesta texts into account, which latter’ are even more
important than the former, froma religious point of view,
as they are considered more authoritative by the Parsis
themselves. What proportion the literature extant may
bear to that which is lost it is impossible to guess; but,
omitting all consideration of the possible contents of the
lost literature, it is obvious that the remaining ten-elevenths
of that which is extant may contain much which would
modify any opinion based merely upon the one-eleventh
here translated. What the untranslated portion actually
contains no one really knows. The best Pahlavi scholar
can never be sure that he understands the contents of
a Pahlavi text until he has fully translated it ; no amount
of careful reading can make him certain that he does not
misunderstand some essential part of it, and were he to
assert the contrary he would be merely misleading others
and going astray himself. How far the translations in this
volume will enable the reader to judge of the Parsi religion
may perhaps be best understood by considering how far
a careful perusal of the books of Genesis, Leviticus, and
the Revelation, which constitute one-eleventh part of the
Protestant Bible, would enable him to judge of Christianity,
without any further information.

But, though these translations must be cise merely
as a contribution towards a correct account of medizval
Zoroastrianism, the Bundahis does afford some very defi-
nite information upon one of the fundamental doctrines of
that faith. The Parsi religion has long been represented by
its opponents as a dualism; and this accusation, made in
good faith by Muhammadan writers, and echoed more


INTRODUCTION. lxix


incautiously by Christians, has been advanced so strenu-
ously that it has often been admitted even by Parsis them-
selves, as regards the mediaeval form of their faith. But
neither party seems to have fairly considered how any
religion which admits the personality of an evil spirit, in
_ order to account for the existence of evil, can fail to become
a dualism to a certain extent. If, therefore, the term is to
be used in controversy, it behoves those who use it to define
the limits of objectionable dualism with great precision, so
as not to include most of the religions of the world, their
own among the number.

If it be necessary for a dualism that the evil spirit be
omnipresent, omniscient, almighty, or eternal, then is the
Parsi religion no dualism. The Bundahis distinctly asserts
that the evil spirit is not omniscient and almighty (Chap.
I, 16); that his understanding is backward (I, 3, 9), so that
he was not aware of the existence of Atharmazd till he
arose from the abyss and saw the light (I, 9); that he is
unobservant and ignorant of the future (I, 19) till it is
revealed to him by Atharmazd (I, 21); that his creatures
perish at the resurrection (I, 7, 21),and he himself becomes
impotent (I, 21, III, 1) and will not be (I, 3, XXX, 32).
Nowhere is he supposed to be in two places at once, or to
know what is occurring elsewhere than in his own presence.
So far, his powers are considerably less than those gene-
rally assigned by Christians to the devil, who is certainly
represented as being a more intelligent and ubiquitous
personage. On the other hand, Aharman is able to pro-
duce fiends and demons (Chap. I, 10, 24), and the noxious
creatures are said to be his (III, 15, XIV, 30, XVIII, 2); in
which respects he has probably rather more power than
the devil, although the limits of the latter’s means of pro-
ducing evil are by no means well defined.

The origin and end of Aharman appear to be left as
uncertain as those of the devil, and, altogether, the resem-
blance between these two ideas of the evil spirit is remark-
ably close; in fact, almost too close to admit of the possibility
of their being ideas of different origin. The only important
differences are that Zoroastrianism does not believe in an


Ixx PAHLAVI TEXTS.


eternity of evil as Christianity does, and that Christianity
has been content to leave all its other ideas about the devil
in a very hazy and uncertain form, while Zoroastrianism
has not shrunk from carrying similar ideas to their logical
conclusion. If, therefore, a belief in Aharman, as the author
of evil, makes the Parsi religion a dualism, it is difficult to
understand why a belief in the devil, as the author of evil,
does not make Christianity also a dualism. At any rate,
it is evident from the Bundahis that a Christian is treading
on hazardous ground when he objects to Zoroastrianism on
the score of its dualism. .

Another misrepresentation of the Parsi religion is shown
to have no foundation in fact, by a passage in the Selections
of Zad-sparam. Several writers, both Greek and Armenian,
contemporaries of the Sasanian dynasty, represent the Per-
sians as believing that both Adharmazd and Aharman were
produced by an eternal being, who is evidently a personifi-
cation of the Avesta phrase for ‘boundless time.’ This
view was apparently confirmed by a passage in Anquetil
Duperron’s French translation of the Vendidad (XIX,
32-34), but this has long been known to be a mistrans-
lation due to Anquetil’s ignorance of Avesta grammar; so
that the supposed doctrine of ‘boundless time’ being the
originator of everything is not to be found in the Avesta;
still it might have sprung up in Sasanian times. But the
Selections of Zad-sparam (I, 24) distinctly state that Athar-
mazd produced the creature Zérvan (precisely the term used
in the phrase ‘ boundless time’ in the Avesta). Here ‘time,
although personified, is represented as a creature of Athar-
mazd, produced after the first appearance of Aharman ;
which contradicts the statement of the Greek and Armenian
writers completely, and shows how little reliance can be
placed upon the assertions of foreigners regarding matters
which they view with antipathy or prejudice.

With reference to the general plan of these translations
of Pahlavi texts a few remarks seem necessary. In the first
place, it will be obvious to any attentive reader of this
introduction that a translator of Pahlavi has not merely to
translate, but also to edit, the original text; and, in some


INTRODUCTION. Ixxi


cases, he has even to discover it. Next, as regards the
translation, it has been already mentioned (p. xxvi) that
the translator’s object is to make it as literal as possible ;
in order, therefore, to check the inevitable tendency of free
translation to wander from the meaning of the original
text, all extra words added to complete the sense, unless
most distinctly understood in the original, are italicised in
the translation. And in all cases that seem doubtful the
reader’s attention is called to the fact by a note, though it
is possible that some doubtful matters may be overlooked.

The notes deal not only with explanations that may be
necessary for the general reader, but also with various
readings and other details that may be useful to scholars ;
they are, therefore, very numerous, though some passages
may still be left without sufficient explanation. References
to the Vendidad, Yasna, and Visparad are made to Spiegel’s
edition of the original texts, not because that edition is supe-
rior, or even equal, in accuracy to that of Westergaard, but
because it is the only edition which gives the Pahlavi
translations, because its sections are shorter and, therefore,
reference to them is more definite, and because the only
English translation of the Avesta hitherto existing’ is
based upon Spiegel’s edition, and is divided into the same
sections.

No attempt has been made to trace any of the myths
or traditions farther back than the Avesta, whence their
descent is a fact that can hardly be disputed. To trace
them back to earlier times, to a supposed Indo-Iranian
personification or poetic distortion of meteorological phe-
nomena, would be, in the present state of our knowledge,
merely substituting plausible guesses for ascertained facts.
In many cases, indeed, we have really no right to assume
that an Avesta myth-has descended from any such Indo-
Iranian origin, as there have been ample opportunities for
the infiltration of myths from other sources, yet unknown,


1 Bleeck’s Avesta; the Religious Books of the Parsees; from Professor
Spiegel’s German Translation ; London, 1864. Not much reliance can be
placed upon the correctness of this translation, owing to defects in the
German one,


Ixxii PAHLAVI TEXTS.


among the many nations with which the religion of the
Avesta has come in contact, both before and since the
time of Zaratist. For, notwithstanding the ingenious rhe-
toric of the expounders of myths, it is still as unsafe, from
a scientific point of view, to disbelieve the former existence
of Zaratist as it is to doubt that of Moses, or any other
practically prehistoric personage, merely because mythic
tales have gathered about his name in later times, as they
always do about the memory of any individual who has
become famous or revered.

In many cases the original Pahlavi word is appended, in
parentheses, to its English equivalent in the translation.
This has been done for the sake of explanation, when the
word is technical or rare, or the translation is unusual. For,
with regard to technical terms, it has been considered best,
in nearly all cases, to translate them by some explanatory
phrase, in preference to filling the translation with foreign
words which would convey little or no distinct meaning to
the general reader. Some of these technical terms have
almost exact equivalents in English, such as those trans-
lated ‘resurrection’ and/‘demon,’ or can be well expressed
by descriptive phrases, such as ‘sacred twigs’ and ‘sacred
cakes.’ Other terms are only approximately rendered by
such words as ‘archangel’ and ‘angel ;’ others can hardly
be expressed at all times by the same English words, but
must change according to the context, such as the term
variously rendered by ‘worship, ceremonial, prayer, or
rites.” While the meaning of some few terms is so tech-
nical, complicated, or uncertain, that it is safer to use
the Pahlavi word itself, such as Tanapthar, Frasast, Géti-
kharid, Dvazdah-hémast, &c.

The following is a list of nearly all the technical terms that
have been translated, with the English equivalents generally
used to express them :— Afrin, ‘blessing ;? aharmdék,
‘apostate, heretic ;’ ahartibé, ‘righteous ;’ ahartibd-dAd,
‘alms, almsgiving;’ akdind, ‘infidel ;’ ameshdéspend,
‘archangel ;’ armést, ‘helpless ;? ast-hémand, ‘material,’
atisOfrid, ‘propitiation, offering ;’ baghé-bakhté, ‘divine
providence ;’ baresém, ‘sacred twigs or twig-bundle;’


INTRODUCTION, Ixxili


baresOmdan, ‘twig stand;’ dakhmak (Huz. khazan),
‘depository for the dead;’ dashtAnistan, ‘place for men-
struation;’ dind, ‘religion, revelation, religious rites ;’
drayan-giyisnth, ‘unseasonable chatter;? drevand,
‘wicked ;’ dréné6, ‘sacred cake;’ dri, ‘fiend;’ frasha-
kard, ‘renovation of the universe;’ fravahar, ‘guardian
spirit;’ fravardik4n, ‘days devoted to the guardian spirits ;’
ganrdk mainék, ‘evil spirit;’ garzisn, ‘confession of
sin;’ gas, ‘period of the day, time;’ gasAnbar, ‘season-
festival ;’ gasn6, ‘feast ;’ gatis-dak (Av. g4us hudhau),
‘meat-offering, sacred butter ;’ gavid-rastak4n, ‘the he-
terodox ;’ giv (Av. gaus givya), ‘sacred milk;’ géméz,
‘bull’s urine ;’ hamémal, ‘accuser ;’ hamréd, ‘direct pol-
lution, contagion ;’ hazarak, ‘millennium;’ hikhar, ‘bo-
dily refuse ;’ kar, ‘duty;’ késhvar, ‘region;’ khayebit,
‘destroyer ;’ khrafstar, ‘noxious creature ;’ khvétfik-das,
“next-of-kin marriage ;’ kirfak, ‘good works; kistik,
‘sacred thread-girdle ;’ magh, ‘stone ablution-seat ;’ mat-
nok, ‘spirit ;’ marg-argdn, ‘worthy of death, mortal sin;’
myazd, ‘feast, sacred feast ;? nas4i, ‘corpse, dead matter ;’
nasai katak, ‘corpse chamber ;’ nirang, ‘religious formula,
ritual ;’ nirangistan, ‘code of religious formulas ;’ niy4a-
yisn, ‘salutation;’ pad&am, ‘mouth-veil;’ padiyavith,
‘ablution, ceremonial ablution ;) pahlim ahvan, ‘best ex-
istence;’ paitréd, ‘indirect pollution, infection ;’ parahém,
‘hoém-juice;’ partk, ‘witch;’ patitth, ‘renunciation of
sin;’ patiyarak, ‘adversary ;’ poryédkéshih, ‘ primitive
faith ;’ rad, ‘chief, spiritual chief, primate, high-priest ;’
ristakhéz, ‘resurrection;’ sattith, ‘the three nights;’
séda, ‘demon;’ shapik, ‘sacred shirt ;’ shnayisn, ‘ pro-
pitiation, gratification ;’ shniman, ‘dedication formula,
propitiation ;’ spénak maindk, ‘beneficent spirit ;’ tant-i
pasind, ‘future existence ;’ tdgisn, ‘retribution ;’ tora-i
khadt-dad, ‘ primeval ox;’ vag, ‘inward prayer ;’ vigarisn,
‘atonement for sin;’ vishad-dibérisnih, ‘running about
uncovered ;’ yasn6, ‘ritual;’ yast, ‘prayers, ritual, form
of prayer, worship, consecration ;’ yastano, ‘to consecrate,
solemnize, propitiate, reverence ;’ y4tak, ‘wizard ;’ yaz-
dan, ‘angels, sacred beings, celestial beings, God;’ yazisn,


[5] f


Ixxiv PAHLAVI TEXTS.


‘ceremonial, ceremony, sacred ceremony, ceremonial wor-
ship, worship, reverence, rites, prayer;’ yédat6, ‘angel;’
zand, ‘commentary ;? zéhar or zér, ‘holy-water;’ zdt,
‘officiating priest.’

With regard to the orthography of Pahlavi names and
words, advantage has been taken of the system of trans-
literation adopted for this series of Translations of the
Sacred Books of the East, by making use of italics for the
purpose of distinguishing between certain Pahlavi letters
which were probably pronounced very nearly alike. Thus,
besides the usual letters | for v and § for z, the Pahlavi
letter @ is often used to denote those same sounds which,
in such cases, are represented by the italic letters v and
zg. Anextension of the same mode of distinction to the
letters 1 and r would be desirable, but has not been
attempted in this volume; these two letters are usually
written 4), but in a few words they are represented by \ or
by J, in which cases they would be better expressed by
the italics Zand 7 Some attempt has been made to adhere
to one uniform orthography in such names as occur fre-
quently, but as there is no’ such uniformity in the various
languages and writings quoted, nor even in the same manu-
script, some deviations can hardly be avoided.

In conclusion it may be remarked that a translator of
Pahlavi generally begins his career by undervaluing the
correctness of Pahlavi texts and the literary ability of their
authors, but he can hardly proceed far without finding
abundant reason for altering his opinion of both. His
depreciatory view of Pahlavi literature is generally due
partly to want of knowledge, and partly to his trusting
too much to the vile perversions of Pahlavi texts usually
supplied by Pazand writers. But as his knowledge of
Pahlavi increases he becomes better able to appreciate
the literary merits of the texts. Ifthe reader should have
already formed some such low estimate of the ability of
Pahlavi writers, it may be hoped that these translations
will afford him sufficient reason for changing his opinion ;
if not, they will have signally failed in doing those writers
justice.


BUN DAHIS


OR


THE ORIGINAL CREATION.


OBSERVATIONS.


1. For all divisions into chapters and sections the translator is
responsible, as the original text is written continuously, with very:
few stops marked.

2. Italics are used for any English words which are not ex-
pressed, or fully understood, in the original text, but are added to
complete the sense of the translation.

3. Oriental words are usually ‘spaced.’ Italics occurring in
them, or in names, are intended to represent certain peculiar Ori-
ental letters. The italic consonants d, , v may be pronounced
as in English; but g should be sounded like j, Av like wh, & like
ch in ‘church,’ n like ng, s like sh, 2 like French j. For further
information, see ‘ Transliteration of Oriental Alphabets adopted for
the Translations of the Sacred Books of the East’ at the end of
the volume.

4. In Pahlavi words all circumflexed vowels and any final 6 are
expressed in the Pahlavi original, but all other vowels are merely
understood.

5: In the translation, words in parentheses are merely explana-
tory of those which precede them.

6. Abbreviations used are:—Av. for Avesta. Dad. for Dadi-
stan-i Dinik. Huz. for Huzvaris. Mkh. for Mainy6-i-khard, ed.
West. Pahl. for Pahlavi. . Paz. for Pazand. Pers. for Persian.
Sans. for Sanskrit. Vend. for Vendidad, ed. Spiegel. Visp. for
Visparad, ed. Sp. Yas. for Yasna, ed. Sp. Yt. for Yast, ed.
Westergaard.

7. The manuscripts meatoned? in the notes are :—

K2o (about 500 years old), No. 20 in the University Library at
Kopenhagen.

K2ob (uncertain date), a fragment of the text, No. 2ob in the
same library.

M6 (written a.p. 1397), No. 6 of the Haug Collection in the
State Library at Munich.

TD (written about a.p. 1530), belonging to Mobad Tehmuras
Dinshawji Anklesaria at Bombay.


BUNDAHTS.


CHAPTER I,


o. In the name of the creator Atharmazd.

1. The Zand-dkas (‘Zand-knowing or tradition-
informed’)?, which is first about Attharmazd’s original
creation and the antagonism of the evil spirit ?, axd
afterwards about the nature of the creatures from
the original creation till the end, which is the future
existence (tanfi-i pasind). 2. As revealed by the
religion of the Mazdayasnians, so it is declared that
Attharmazd is supreme in omniscience and goodness,


* The Pazand and most of the modern Pahlavi manuscripts
have, ‘From the Zand-akas,’ but the word min, ‘from,’ does not
occur in the old manuscript K2o, and is a modern addition to
M6. From this opening sentence it would appear that the author
of the work gave it the name Zand-akas.

2 The Avesta Angra-mainyu, the spirit who causes adversity or
anxiety (see Darmesteter’s Ormazd et Ahriman, pp. 92-95); the
Pahlavi name is, most probably, merely a corrupt transliteration of
the Avesta form, and may be read Ganrak-matn6k, as the Avesta
Spezta-mainyu, the spirit who causes prosperity, has become
Spénak-main6k in Pahlavi. This latter spirit is represented by
Afiharmazd himself in the Bundahis. The Pahlavi word for ‘spirit,’
which is read madénad by the Parsis, and has been pronounced
minavad by some scholars and mfné? by others, is probably a
corruption of maindék, as its Sasanian form was miné. If it were
not for the extra medial letter in ganrak, and for the obvious
partial transliteration of spénak, it would be preferable to read
gan4k, ‘smiting,’ and to derive it from a supposed verb gandan, ‘to
smite’ (Av. ghna), as proposed by most Zendists. A Parsi would
probably suggest gandazn, ‘to stink.’

Ba


4 BUNDAHIS.


and unrivalled! in splendour; the region of light is
the place of Atharmazd, which they call ‘endless
light,’ and the omniscience azd goodness of the
unrivalled Atharmazd is what they call ‘revelation®.’
3. Revelation is the explanation of both sfzrzds
together ; one is he who is independent of unlimited
time °, because Aftharmazd and the region, religion,
and time of Atiharmazd were and are and ever
will be; whzfe Aharman* in darkness, with backward
understanding and desire for destruction, was zz the
abyss, and it is Ae who wzé/ not be; and the place
of that destruction, and also of that darkness, is
what they call the ‘endlessly dark.’ 4. And between
them was empty space, ¢Aa¢ is, what they call ‘air,
in which is now ¢hezy meeting.

5. Both are limited and unlimited spirits, ioe the
supreme is that which they call endless light, and
the abyss that which is endlessly dark, so that be-
tween them is a void, and one is not connected with


* Reading aham-kaft, ‘without a fellow-sovereign, peerless, un-
rivalled, independent.’ This rare word occurs three times in §§ 2,
3, and some Pazand writers suggest the meaning ‘ everlasting’ (by
means of the Persian gloss hamisah), which is plausible enough,
but hamaki would be an extraordinary mode of writing the very
common word ham4i, ‘ ever.’

? The word dinéd (properly déné), Av. daéna, being traceable
to a root di, ‘to see,’ must originally have meant ‘a vision’ (see
Haug’s Essays on the Religion of the Parsis, 2nd ed. p. 1g2, note 2),
whence the term has been transferred to ‘religion’ and all religious
observances, rules, and writings ; so it may be translated either by
‘religion’ -or by ‘revelation,’

* ‘This appears to be the meaning, but the construction of § 3 is
altogether rather obscure, and suggestive of omissions in the text.

* The usual name of the evil spirit; it is probably an older cor-
ruption of Angra-mainyu than Ganrak-matn6k, and a less
technical term. Its Sasanian form was Aharmani,


CHAPTER f, 3-10, 5


the other; and, again, both spirits are limited as to
their own selves. 6. And, secondly, on account of
the omniscience of Atharmazd, both things are in
the creation of Adharmazd, the finite and the infinite;
for this they know is that which is in the covenant
of both spirits. 7. And, again, the complete sove-
reignty of the creatures of Atharmazd is in the
future existence, and that also is unlimited for ever
and everlasting; and the creatures of Aharman will
perish at the time when! the future existence occurs,
and that also is eternity.

8. Atharmazd, through omniscience, knew that
Aharman exists, axd whatever he schemes he in-
fuses with malice and greediness till the end; and
because He accomplishes the end by many means,
He also produced spiritually the creatures which
were necessary for those means, azd they remained
three thousand years in a spiritual state, so that they
were unthinking? and unmoving, with intangible
bodies.

9. The evil spirit, on account of backward know-
ledge, was not aware of the existence of Aiharmazd ;
and, afterwards, he arose from the abyss, and came
in unto the light which he saw. 10. Desirous of
destroying, and because of zs malicious nature, he


1 Substituting amat, ‘when,’ for mfin, ‘which,’ two Huzvaris
forms which are frequently confounded by Pahlavi copyists be-
cause their Pazand equivalents, ka and ke, are nearly alike.

2 Reading aminid4r in accordance with M6, which has amini-
d&r in Chap. XXXIV, 1, where the same phrase occurs. Windisch-
mann and Justi read amfiftar, ‘uninjured, invulnerable,’ in both
places. This sentence appears to refer to a preparatory creation of
embryonic and immaterial existences, the prototypes, fravashis,
spiritual counterparts, or guardian angels of the spiritual and
material creatures afterwards produced.


6 BUNDAHIS.


rushed in to destroy that light of Atharmazd unas-
sailed by fiends, and he saw its bravery and glory
were greater than his own; so he fled back to the
gloomy darkness, and formed many demons and
fiends ; avd the creatures of the destroyer arose for
violence.

11. Atharmazd, by whom the creatures of the evil
spirit were seen, creatures terrible, corrupt, and bad,
also considered them not commendable (bfiirzisnik).
12. Afterwards, the evil spirit saw the creatures of
Atharmazd; they appeared many creatures of de-
light (vayah), enquiring creatures, and they seemed
to him commendable, and he commended the crea-
tures and creation of Adharmazd.

13. Then Adharmazd, with a knowledge! of which
way the end of the matter would be, went to meet
the evil spirit, and proposed peace to him, azd spoke
thus: ‘Evil spirit! bring assistance unto my crea-
tures, and offer praise! so that, in reward for it,
ye (you and your creatures) may become immortal
and undecaying, hungerless and thirstless.’

14. And the evil spirit shouted thus ?: ‘I wz/7 not
depart, I wz// not provide assistance for thy crea-
tures, I wz// not offer praise among thy creatures,
and I am not of the same opinion with thee as to
good things. I w2d/ destroy thy creatures for ever
and everlasting; moreover, I w7/ force all thy
creatures into disaffection to thee and affection for
myself.” 15. And the explanation thereof is this,
that the evil spirit reflected in- this manner, that


* The Huz. khavittinast stands for the Paz. dAnist with the
meaning, here, of ‘ what is known, knowledge,’ as in Persian.

* Literally, ‘And it was shouted by him, the evil spirit, thus ;’
the usual idiom when the nominative follows the verb.


CHAPTER I, II—20. %


Atharmazd was helpless as regarded him?, therefore
He proffers peace; and he did not agree, but bore
on even into conflict with Him.

16. And Atharmazd spoke thus: ‘You are not
omniscient and almighty, O evil spirit! so that it is

not possible for thee to destroy me, and it is not
- possible for thee to force my creatures so that they
will not return to my possession.’

17. Then Atharmazd, through omniscience, knew
that: If I do not grant a period of contest, then it
will be possible for him to act so that he may be
able to cause the seduction of my creatures to him-
self. As even now there are many of the inter-
mixture of mankind who practise wrong more than
right. 18. And Atharmazd spoke to the evil spirit
thus: ‘Appoint a period! so that the intermingling
of the conflict may be for nine thousand years.’ For
he knew that by appointing this period the evil
spirit would be undone.

19. Then the evil spirit, unobservant and through
ignorance, was content with that agreement; just
like two men quarrelling together, who propose a
time thus: Let us appoint such-and-such a day for a
fight.

20. Atharmazd also knew this, through omni-
science, that within these nine thousand years, /or
three thousand years everything proceeds y the will
of Atharmazd, three thousand years ¢here zs an
intermingling of the wills of AGharmazd and Ahar-
man, and the last three thousand years the evil
spirit is disabled, and they keep the adversary away *
from the creatures.


1 The words dén val stand for dén valman. ;
2 That is, ‘the adversary is kept away.’ In Pahlavi the third


8 ’ BUNDAHIS.


or, Afterwards, Atharmazd recited the Ahunavar
thus: Yatha ahd vairyé (‘as a heavenly lord is to
be chosen’), &c.! once, avd uttered the twenty-one
words?; He also exhibited to the evil spirit His
own triumph in the end, and the impotence of the
evil spirit, the annihilation of the demons, and the
resurrection avd undisturbed future existence of the
creatures for everand everlasting. 22. And the evil
spirit, who perceived his own impotence and the
annihilation of the demons, became confounded, and
fell back to the gloomy darkness; even so as is
declared in revelation, that, when one of its (the
Ahunavar’s) three farts was uttered, the evil spirit
contracted 4zs body through fear, and when two
parts of it were uttered he fell upon 4zs knees, and
when all of it was uttered he became confounded


person plural is the indefinite person, as in English. These gooo
years are in addition to the 3000 mentioned in § 8, as appears more
clearly in Chap. XXXIV, 1.

1 This is the most sacred formula of the Parsis, which they have
to recite frequently, not only during the performance of their cere-
monies, but also in connection with most of their ordinary duties
and habits. It is neither a prayer, nor a creed, but a declaratory
formula in metre, consisting of one stanza of three lines, containing
twenty-one Avesta words, as follows :—

Yatha ahti vairy6, atha ratus, ashad Atd haka,

Vangheus dazda mananghé, skyaothnanim angheus,mazdai,

Khshathrem4a ahurai 4, yim dregubyé dadad vastarem.
And it may be translated in the following manner : ‘As a heavenly
lord is to be chosen, so is an earthly master (spiritual guide), for
the sake of righteousness, zo de a giver of the good thoughts of
the actions of life towards Mazda; and the dominion is for the
lord (Ahura) whom he (Mazda) has given as a protector for the
poor’ (see Haug’s Essays on the Religion of the Parsis, 2nd ed.
pp. 125, 141).

® The word marik must mean ‘word’ here, but in some other
places it seems to mean ‘syllable’ or ‘ accented syllable,’


CHAPTER I, 21-26. 9


and impotent as to the harm he caused the creatures
of Afttharmazd, awd he remained three thousand
years in confusion ?.

23. Atharmazd created 47s creatures in the con-
fusion of Aharman; first he produced Vohtiman
(‘good thought’), by whom the progress of the
creatures of Atharmazd was advanced.

24. The evil spirit first created? Mitdkht (‘false-
hood’), and then Akéman (‘evil thought’).

25. The first of Attharmazd’s creatures of the
world was the sky, and his good thought (Voht-
man), by good procedure’, produced the light of
the world, along with which was the good religion
of the Mazdayasnians; this was because the renova-
tion (frashakard) * which happens to the creatures
was known to him. 26. Afterwards avose Ardava-


1 This is the first third of the gooo years appointed in §§ 18, 20,
and the second 3000 years mentioned in Chap. XXXIV, 1.

2 It is usual to consider daédan (Huz. yehabfintan), when
traceable to Av. da=Sans. dha, as meaning ‘to create,’ but it can
hardly be proved that it means to create out of nothing, any more
than any other of the Avesta verbs which it is sometimes con-
venient to translate by ‘create.’ Before basing any argument upon
the use of this word it will, therefore, be safer to substitute the
word ‘produce’ in all cases.

’ Or it may be translated, ‘and from it Vohiman, by good pro-
cedure,’ &c. The position here ascribed to Vohtiman, or the good
thought of Afharmazd, bears some resemblance to that of the Word
in John i. 1-5, but with this essential difference, that Vohiman is
merely a creature of Afharmazd, not identified with him; for the
latter idea would be considered, by a Parsi, as rather inconsistent
with strict monotheism. The ‘light of the world’ now created
must be distinguished from the ‘ endless light’ already. existing with
Atharmazd in § 2.

¢ The word frashakard, ‘what is made durable, perpetuation,’
is applied to the renovation of the universe which is to take place
about the time of the resurrection, as a preparation for eternity.


TO ; BUNDAHIS.


hist, and then Shatvairé, and then Spendarmad, and
then Horvadad, and then Amerédad'*.

27, From the dark world of Aharman were Akb-
man and Andar, and then Sdévar, and then Nakahéd,
and then Tairév and Zairik 2.

28. Of Atharmazd’s creatures of the world, the
first was the sky; the second, water; the third,
earth; the fourth, plants; the fifth, animals; the
sixth, mankind.


Cuapter II.


o. On the formation of the luminaries.


1. Adharmazd produced illumination between the
sky and the earth, the constellation stars and those
also not of the constellations *, then the moon, and
afterwards the sun, as I sha// relate.


1 These five, with Vohiman and Afharmazd in his angelic capa-
city, constitute the seven Ameshaspends, ‘ undying causers of pros-
perity, immortal benefactors,’ or archangels, who have charge of
the whole material creation. They are personifications of old Avesta
phrases, such as Vohfi-mané, ‘good thought;’ Asha-vahista,
‘perfect rectitude;’ Khshathra-vairya, ‘desirable dominion ;’
Spezta-armaiti, ‘bountiful devotion;’ Haurvatad, ‘ complete-
ness or health ;” and Ameretad, ‘ immortality.’

* These six demons are the opponents of the six archangels
respectively (see Chap. XXX, 29); their names in the Avesta are,
Akem-man6, ‘evil thought ;’ Izdra, Sauru, Naunghaithya, Tauru,
Zairika (see Vendidad X, 17,18 Sp., and XIX, 43 W.), which have
been compared with the Vedic god Indra, Sarva (a name of Siva),
the Nasatyas, and Sans. tura, ‘diseased,’ and garas, ‘decay,’
respectively. For further details regarding them, see Chap. XXVIII,
7-13-

* The word akhtar is the usual term in Pahlavi for a constella-
tion of the zodiac; but the term apakhtar, ‘away from the akhtar,’
means not only ‘the north,’ or away from the zodiac, but also ‘a


CHAPTER I, 27—Il, 4. IT


2. First he produced the celestial sphere, and the
constellation stars are assigned to it by him; espe-
cially these twelve whose names ave Varak (the
Lamb), Tra (the Bull), Dé-patkar (the Two-figures
or Gemini), KalaZang (the Crab), Sér (the Lion),
_Khisak (Virgo), Tarazik (the Balance), Gazdim
(the Scorpion), Nimasp (the Centaur or Sagittarius),
Vahik? (Capricornus), Dfdl (the Waterpot), and
Mahik (the Fish); 3. which, from their original
creation, were divided into the twenty-eight sub-
divisions of the astronomers 2, of which the names
are Padévar, Pésh-Parviz, Parviz; Paha, Avésar,
Besn, Rakhvad, Taraha, Avra, Nahn, Miydn, Av-
dem, Mashaha, Sptir, Husru, Srob, Nur, Gél, Garafsa,
Varazt, Gau, Goi, Muru, Bunda, Kahtsar, Vaht,
Miyan, Kaht* 4. And all his original creations,


planet,’ which is in the zodiac, but apart from the constellations.
The meaning of akhtar, most suitable to the context here, appears
to be the general term ‘ constellation.’

1 Written Nahazik here, both in K20 and M6, which may be
compared with Pers. nah4z, ‘ the leading goat of a flock ;’ but the
usual word for ‘Capricornus’ is Vahtk, asin Chap. V, 6. None of the
other names of the signs of the zodiac are written here in Pazand,
but it may be noted that if the ah in Vahik were written in Pazand
(that is, in Avesta characters), the word would become the same as
Nahazik in Pahlavi.

2 Literally, ‘fragments of the calculators, khurdak-i hamartkan. .
These subdivisions are the spaces traversed daily by the moon
among the stars, generally called ‘lunar mansions.’

8 All these names are written in Pazand, which accounts for
their eccentric orthography, in which both K2o and M6 agree very
closely. The subdivision Parviz is evidently the Pers. parvén,
which includes the Pleiades, and corresponds therefore to the
Sanskrit Nakshatra Kr7ttika. This correspondence leads to the
identification of the first subdivision, Padévar, with the Nakshatra
Asvini. The Pazand names are so corrupt that no reliance can
be placed upon them, and the first step towards recovering the true


T2 BUNDAHIS.


residing in the world, are committed to them’; so
that when the destroyer arrives they overcome the
adversary avd their own persecution, and the crea- —
tures are saved from those adversities.

5. As a specimen of a warlike army, which is
destined for battle, they have ordained every single
constellation of those 6480 thousand small stars as
assistance; and among those constellations four
chieftains, appointed on the four sides, are leaders.
6. On the recommendation of those chieftains the
many unnumbered stars are specially assigned to the
various quarters and various places, as the united
strength axd appointed power of those constella-
tions. 7. As it is said that Tistar is the chieftain of
the east, Satavés the chieftain of the west, Vanand
the chieftain of the south, azd Haptdk-ring the
chieftain of the north®, 8. The great ome which they


Pahlavi names would be to transliterate the Pazand back into Pah-
lavi characters. The ninth subdivision is mentioned in Chap. VU, 1
by the name Avrak.

* That is, to the zodiacal constellations, which are supposed to
have special charge of the welfare of creation.

? Of these four consteHations or stars, which are said to act as
leaders, there is no doubt that Hapték-ring, the chieftain of the
north, is Ursa Major ; and it is usually considered that Tistar, the
chieftain of the east, is Sirius ; but the other two chieftains are not
so well identified, and there may be some doubt as to the proper
stations of the eastern and western chieftains. It is evident, how-
ever, that the most westerly stars, visible at any one time of the
year, are those which set in the dusk of the evening; and east of
these, all the stars are visible during the night as far as those which
rise at daybreak, which are the most easterly stars visible at that
time of the year. TYstar or Sirius can, therefore, be considered
the chieftain of the eastern stars only when it rises before day-
break, which it does at the latter end of summer ; and Haptdk-
ring or Ursa Major is due north at midnight (on the meridian below
the pole) at about the same time of the year. These stars, there-


CHAPTER HU, 5-8. 13


call a Gah (period of the day), which they say is the
great one of the middle of the sky, till zust before
the destroyer came was the midday (or south) ove of
the five, that is, the Rapitvin?.


fore, fulfil the conditions necessary for being chieftains of the east

-and north at the end of summer, and we must look for stars capable
of being chieftains of the south and west at the same season. Now,
when Ursa Major is near the meridian below the pole, Fomalhaut
is the most conspicuous star near the meridian in the far south,
and is probably to be identified with Vanand the chieftain of the
south. And when Sirius rises some time before daybreak, Antares
(in Scorpio) sets some time after dusk in the evening, and may
well be identified with Satavés the chieftain of the west. Assuming
that there has been a precession of the equinoxes equivalent to
two hours of time, since the idea of these chieftains (which may
perhaps be traced to Avesta times) was first formed, it may be
calculated that the time of year when these leading stars then best
fulfilled that idea was about a month before the autumnal equinox,
when Ursa Major would be due north three-quarters of an hour
after midnight, and Fomalhkaut due south three-quarters of an hour
before midnight, Sirius would rise three hours before the sun, and
Antares would set three hours after the sun. In the Avesta these
leading stars are named Tistrya, Satavaésa, Vanazt, and Haptdi-
ringa (see Tistar Yt. 0, 8, 9, 12, 32, &c., Rashnu Yt. 26-28,
Stréz. 13).

1 This translation, though very nearly literal, must be accepted
with caution. If the word mas be not a name it can hardly mean
anything but ‘great ;’ and that it refers to a constellation appears
from Chap. V, 1. The word khéms&k is an irregular form of the
Huz. khémsy4, < five,’ and may refer either to the five chieftains
(including ‘ the great one’) or to the five Gahs or periods of the
day, of which Rapitvin is the midday one (see Chap. XXV, 9g).
The object of the text seems to be to connect the Rapitvin Gah
with some great mid-sky and midday constellation or star, possibly
Regulus, which, about B.c. 960, must have been more in the day-
light than any other important star during the seven months of
summer, the only time that the Rapitvin Gah can be celebrated
(see Chap. XXV, 7-14). Justi has, ‘They call that the great one of
the place, which is great in the middle of the sky; they say that
before the enemy came it was always midday, that is, Rapitvin,’


14 _  BUNDAHIS.


9. Atharmazd performed the spiritual Yazisn cere
mony with the archangels (ameshéspend4n) in the
Rapitvin Gah, and in the Yazisn he supplied every
means necessary for overcoming the adversary’.
to. He deliberated with the consciousness (béd)
and guardian spirits (fravahar) of men’, and the
omniscient wisdom, brought forward among men,
spoke thus: ‘ Which seems to you the more advanta-
geous, when? I shall present you to the world? ¢hat
you shall contend in a bodily form with the fiend
(drag), and the fiend shall perish, and in the end
I shall have you prepared again perfect and im-
mortal, and in the end give you back to the world,
_ and you will be wholly immortal, undecaying, and
undisturbed ; or ¢ha¢ it be always necessary to pro--
vide you protection from the destroyer ?’

11. Thereupon, the guardian spirits of men be-
came of the same opinion with the omniscient wis-
dom about going to the world, on account of the
evil that comes upon them, in the world, from the
fiend (drag) Aharman, and ¢hezr becoming, at last,
again unpersecuted by the adversary, perfect, and
immortal, in the future existence, for ever and ever-
lasting.


Windischmann has nearly the same, as both follow the Pazand
MSS. in reading hémfsak (as a variant of hamisak), ‘ always,’
instead of khéms&k,

Or ‘adversity.’

ai were among the fravashis already created (see Chap.
I, 8).

* Reading amat, ‘when,’ instead of mfin, ‘ which’ (see note to
Chap. I, 7).


CHAPTER II, 9—IIl, 5. 15
ee


Cuapter III,


1. On the rush of the destroyer at the creatures
it is said, in revelation, that the evil spirit, when he
saw the impotence of himself and the confederate?!
_(ham-dast) demons, owing to the righteous man 2,
became confounded, azd seemed in confusion three
thousand years. 2. During that confusion the arch-
fiends * of the demons severally shouted thus: ‘Rise
up, Zhou father of us! for we wz// cause a conflict in
the world, the distress and injury from which w2//
become those of Attharmazd and the archangels.’

3. Severally they twice recounted their own evil
deeds, and it pleased him not; and that wicked evil
spirit, through fear of the righteous man, was not
able to lift up 4zs head until the wicked Géh* came,
at the completion of the three thousand years.
4. And she shouted to the evil spirit thus: ‘ Rise
up, ¢hou father of us! for I wzl/ cause that conflict
in the world wherefrom the distress and injury of
Atharmazd and the archangels wz// arise. 5. And
she twice recounted severally her own evil deeds,
and it pleased him not; and that wicked evil spirit


1 The Pazand MSS. have gardist, for the Huz. hémnunast,
‘trusted.’ Windischmann and Justi have ‘all’

2 Probably Gayémard.

® The word kam4rak4n is literally ‘those with an evil pate,’
and is derived from Av. kameredha, ‘the head of an evil being,’
also applied to ‘the evil summit’ of Mount Areztira (Vend. XIX,
140, 142), which is supposed to be at the gate of hell (see
Chap. XII, 8). That the chief demons or arch-fiends are meant,
appears more clearly in Chap. XXVIII, 12, 44, where the word
is kamartkan.

* The personification of the impurity of menstruation.


16 BUNDAHIS.


rose not from that confusion, through fear of the
righteous man.

6. And, again, the wicked Géh shouted thus:
‘Rise up, Zou father of us! for in that conflict I
wll shed thus much vexation! on the righteous
man and the labouring ox that, through my deeds,
life w2/7 not be wanted, and I will destroy their living
souls (nism6)?; I wz// vex the water, I wz/7 vex the
plants, I wd vex the fire of Adharmazd, I wedl
make the whole creation of Attharmazd vexed.’
7. And she so recounted those evil deeds a second
time, that the evil spirit was delighted and started
up from that confusion; and he kissed Géh upon
the head, and the pollution which they call men-
struation became apparent in Géh.

8. He shouted to Géh thus: ‘What is thy wish ?
so that I may give z¢ thee.’ And Géh shouted to
the evil spirit thus: ‘A man is the wish, so give z¢
to me. |

9. The form of the evil spirit was a flog-like
lizard’s (vazak) body, and he appeared a young
man of fifteen years to Géh, and that brought the
thoughts of Géh to him *.


1 The word vésh or vish may stand either for bésh, ‘ distress,
vexation,’ as here assumed, or for vish, ‘ poison,’ as translated by
Windischmann and Justi in accordance with the Paz. MSS.

* That this is the Huzvaris of riban, ‘soul, appears from Chap.
XV, 3-5, where both words are used indifferently; but it is not
given in the Huz.-Paz. Glossary. It is evidently equivalent to
Chald. nisma, and ought probably to have the traditional pronun-
ciation nisman, an abbreviation of nismman.

* This seems to be the literal meaning of the sentence, and is
confirmed by Chap. XXVIII, 1, but Windischmann and. Justi
understand that the evil spirit formed a youth for Géh out of a
toad’s body. The incident in the text may be compared with
Milton’s idea of Satan and Sin in Paradise Lost, Book Il, 745-765.


CHAPTER III, 6-16. V7


10. Afterwards, the evil spirit, with the confede-
rate demons, went towards the luminaries, and he
saw the sky; and he led them up, fraught with
malicious intentions. 11. He stood upon one-third!
of the-inside of the sky, and he sprang, like a snake,
out of the sky down to the earth.

12. /z the month Fravardin and the day Athar-
mazd * he rushed in at noon, and thereby the sky was
as shattered and frightened by him, as a sheep by
a wolf. 13. He came on to the water which was
arranged® below the earth, and then the middle
of this earth was pierced avd entered by him.
14. Afterwards, he came to the vegetation, then to
the ox, then to Gdyémard, and then he came to
fire*; so, just like a fly, he rushed out upon the
whole creation; and he made the world quite as
injured and dark® at midday as though it were in
dark night. 15. And noxious creatures were dif-
fused by him over the earth, biting and venomous,
such as the snake, scorpion, frog (kalvAk), and
lizard (vazak), so that not so much as the point
of a needle remained /yvee from noxious creatures.


16. And blight*® was diffused by him over the


1 Perhaps referring to the proportion of the sky which is over-
spread by the darkness of night. The whole sentence is rather
obscure. ‘

2 The vernal equinox (see Chap. XXV, 7).

§ Literally, ‘and it was arranged.’

* For the details of these visitations, see Chaps. VI-X.

5 Reading khfst t6m; but it may be hangidttim, ‘most turbid,
opaque.’

6 The word makhé, ‘ blow, stroke, is a Huzvaris logogram not
found in the glossaries; M6 has dar, ‘wood, but this may be a
misreading, due to the original, from which M6 was copied, being
difficult to read.


[5] Cc


18 BUNDAHIS.


vegetation, and it withered away immediately. 17.
And avarice, want, pain, hunger, disease, lust, and
lethargy were diffused by him abroad upon the ox
and Gaydémard.

18. Before 42s coming to the ox, Attharmazd
ground up the healing fruit!, which some call ‘binak,’
small in water openly before zés eyes, so that zés
damage and discomfort from the calamity (zanisn)
might be less; and when it became at the same
time lean and ill, as zs breath went forth and it
passed away, the ox also spoke thus: ‘The cattle
are to be created, avd their work, labour, and care
are to be appointed.’

19. And before 4zs coming to Gayémard, Athar-
mazd brought forth a sweat upon Gayémard, so
long as he might recite a prayer (vag) of one stanza
(vigast); moreover, Adharmazd formed that sweat
into the youthful body of a man of fifteen years,
radiant avd tall. 20.,When Gayémard issued from
the sweat he saw the world dark as night, and the
earth as though not a needle’s point remained /vee
from noxious ereatures; the celestzal sphere was
in revolution, azd the sun and moon remained in
motion: azd the world’s struggle, owing to the
clamour of the M4zinikan demons 2, was with the
constellations.

21. And the evil spirit thought that the crea-
tures of Aftharmazd were all rendered useless except


* The word mivang is an unusual form of mivak, ‘fruit.’ It
is probably to be traced to an Av. mivangh, which might mean
‘fatness,’ as Windischmann suggests.


® The Mazainya daéva of the Avesta, and Mazendaran demons,
or idolators, of Persian legends.


CHAPTER Ill, 17-27. 19


Gayomard; and Asté-vidda" with a thousand demons,
causers of death, were let forth by him on Gayémard.
22. But his appointed time had not come, and he
(Ast6-vidad) obtained no means of noosing (Avizi-
dan) him; as it is said that, when the opposition
of the evil spirit came, the period of the life and
‘tule of Gayémard was appointed for thirty years.
23. After the coming of the adversary he lived
thirty years, and Gayémard spoke thus: ‘Although
the destroyer Zas come, mankind w2// be all of my
race; and this one thing is good, when they perform
duty and good works.’

24. And, afterwards, he (the evil spirit) came to
fire, and he mingled smoke and darkness with it.
25. The planets, with many demons, dashed against
the celestial sphere, and they mixed the constella-
tions; and the whole creation was as disfigured as
though fire disfigured every place and smoke arose
over 77. 26. And ninety days azd nights the
heavenly angels were contending in the world with
the confederate demons of the evil spirit, azd hurled
them confounded to hell; and the rampart of the sky
was formed so that the adversary should not be able
to mingle with it.

27. Hell is in the middle of the earth; there
where the evil spirit pierced the earth? and rushed
in upon it, as all the possessions of the world were


1 The demon of death, Ast6-vidhdtu in the Avesta (Vend. IV,
137, V, 25, 31), who is supposed ‘to cast a halter around the
necks of the dead to drag them to hell, but if their good works
have exceeded their sins they throw off the noose and go to heaven’
(Haug’s Essays, 2nd ed. p. 321). This name is misread Asti-
vihad by Pazand writers.

SEES ee


20 - BUNDAHRIS.


changing into duality, azd persecution, contention,
and mingling of high and low became manifest.


CuapTer IV.


1. This also is said, that when the primeval ox’
passed away it fell to the right hand, azd Gayémard
afterwards, when he passed away, to the left hand.
2. Géstirvan 2, as the soul of the primeval ox came
out from the body of the ox, stood up before the ox
and cried to Atharmazd, as much as a thousand
men when they sustain a cry at one time, thus:
‘With whom is the guardianship of the creatures
left by thee, when ruin Zas broken into the earth,
and vegetation is withered, and water is troubled ?
Where is the man® of whom it was said by thee
thus: I wezd/ produce 42m, so that he may preach
carefulness ?’

3. And Attharmazd spoke thus: ‘ You are made
ill*, O Géstrvan! you have the illness which the
evil spirit brought on; if it were proper to produce
that man in this earth at this time, the evil spirit
would not have been oppressive in it.’


* Literally, ‘the sole-created ox’ from whom all the animals and
some plants are supposed to have proceeded (see Chaps. X and
XIV), as mankind proceeded from GAyémard. It is the ox of
the primitive creation, mentioned in Chap. III, 14, 18.

* The spiritual representative of the primeval ox, called Geus-
urva, ‘soul of the bull,’ in the Avesta, of which name Gésfrvan is
a corruption. The complaint of Gésfirvan is recorded in the
Gathas, the oldest part of the Avesta (see Yas. XXIX).

> Referring to Zarattist.

* In Kao, ‘ You are ill.’


CHAPTER ‘IV, I=V, I. 21


4. Forth Géstirvan walked to the star station
(payak) and cried in the same manner, and forth to
the moon station azd cried in the same manner, and
forth to the sun station, and then the guardian spirit
of Zarattst was exhibited to her, and Adtharmazd
said thus': ‘1 will produce for the world Am who
will preach carefulness.’ 5. Contented became the
spirit Gésirvan, and assented thus: ‘I will nourish
the creatures ;’ that is, she became again consenting
to a worldly creation in the world.


CHAPTER V.


I. Seven chieftains of the planets have come unto
the seven chieftains of the constellations?, as the
planet Mercury (Tir) unto Tistar, the planet Mars
(Vahram) unto Haptdk-ring, the planet Jupiter
(Adharmazd) unto Vanand, the planet Venus (Ana-
hid) unto Satavés, the planet Saturn (Kévan) unto
the great ove of the middle of the sky, Géfthar *


1 As the text stands in the MSS. it means, ‘and then the guardian
spirit of Zaratiist demonstrated to her thus;’ but whether it be
intended to represent the fravahar as producing the creature
is doubtful. The angel Gés, who is identified with Gésfrvan, is
usually considered a female, but this is hardly consistent with being
the soul of a bull (see Chap. X, 4, 2), though applicable enough to
a representative of the earth. In the Selections of Zad-sparam, IJ,
6, however, this mythological animal is said to have been a female
(see Appendix to Bundahis).

2 Five of these are mentioned in Chap. II, 7, 8, to which the
sun and moon are here added. ;

8 As this name stands in the MSS. it may be read Girgdar (as
in the Paz. MSS.), Giréthar, or Darfthar ; the reading is very un-
certain, and Windischmann suggests Gfirg-Athar, ‘wolf progeny’
(compare vehrk6-ithra in Ardabahist Yast 8). A shooting star,


22 BUNDAHIS.


and the thievish (diggun) Mtspar?, provided with
tails, unto the sun and moon and stars. 2. The sun
has attached Mispar to its own radiance by mutual
agreement, so that he may be less able to do harm
(vinas).

3. Of Mount Albfirz? it is declared, that around
the world and Mount Térak *, which is the middle of
the world, the revolution of the sun is like a moat#
around the world; it turns back in a circuit® owing
to the enclosure (var) of .Mount Albdrz around
Térak. 4. As it is said that z¢ zs the Térak of
Albtrz from behind which my sun and moon and
stars return again®. 5. For there are a hundred


or meteor, is probably meant (see Chap. XXX, 18, 31), and as it is
the special disturber of the moon, it may be Gé-éthar (Av. gao-
Rithra, ‘of ox-lineage’), a common epithet of the moon; the
Pahlavi letter & being often written something like the compound
rz; and this supposition is confirmed by the G6ék-4ihar of TD in
Chap. XXVIII, 44.

' This is written Mfs-partk in TD in Chap. XXVIII, 44, and
seems to be the mis pairika of Yas. XVII, 46, LXVU, 23, as
noticed by Windischmann ; it is probably meant here for a comet,
as it is attached to the sun. The zodiacal light and milky way have
too little of the wandering character of planets to be considered
planetary opponents of the sun and moon.

* The hara berezaiti, ‘lofty mountain-range, of the Avesta,
which is an ideal representative of the loftiest mountains known to
the ancient Iranians, the Alburz range in Mazendar4n, south of the
Caspian. See Chaps. VIII, 2, XII, 1, 3.

* The Taéra of Yas. XLI, 24, Ram Yt. 7, Zamyad Yt. 6. See
Chap. XII, 2, 4.

* The word maya-gtr is a Huz. hybrid for 4v-gtr, ‘a water-
holder, or ditch.’

* The word may be either 4végak or khavigak, with this
meaning.

° This appears to be a quotation from the Rashnu Yast, 25.
The Huz. word for ‘month’ is here used for the ‘ moon.’


CHAPTER Vj 2-6. 22


and eighty apertures (régin) in the east, and a hun-
dred and eighty in the west, through Albtrz; and
the sun, every day, comes in through an aperture,
and goes out through an aperture!; axzd the whole
connection and motion of the moon and constel-

lations and planets is with it: every day it always
_ illumines (or warms) three regions (késhvar)? and
a half, as is evident to the eyesight. 6. And twice
in every year the day and night are equal, for on the
original attack *, when‘ it (the sun) went forth from
its first degree (khtirdak), the day and night were
equal, it was the season of spring; when it arrives
at the first degree of KalaZang (Cancer) the time of
day is greatest, zt zs the beginning of summer; when
it arrives at the sign (khfrdak) Taragtk (Libra) the
day and night are equal, z¢ zs the beginning of
autumn; when it arrives at the sign Vahik (Capri-
corn) the night is a maximum, z¢ zs the beginning of
winter; and when it arrives at Varak (Aries) the
night and day fave again become equal, as when it


1 This mode of accounting for the varying position of sunrise
and sunset resembles that in the Book of Enoch, LXXI, but only
six eastern and six western gates of heaven are there mentioned,
and the sun changes its gates of entrance and exit only once a
month, instead of daily.

2 See § 9 and Chap. XI.

’ The reading of this word is doubtful, although its meaning is
tolerably clear. The Paz. MSS. read har dé, ‘both ;’ Justi reads
ardab, ‘ quarrel ;’ and in the Selections of Zad-sparam it is written
Ardik. It seems probable that the word is kharah, ‘ attack,’ which
being written exactly like ardé (Av. ashya, see Yas. LVI, 1, 1) has
had a circumflex added to indicate the supposed d, and this false
reading has led to the more modern form 4ratk (Pers. Ard, ‘anger’).
But probabilities in obscure matters are often treacherous guides.

4 Reading amat, ‘when,’ instead of mfin, ‘which,’ throughout
the sentence (see note to Chap. I, 7).


24 BUNDAHIS.


went forth from Varak. 7. So that when it comes
back to Varak, in three hundred and sixty days and
the five Gatha days}, it goes in awd comes out
through one and the same aperture ; the aperture is
not mentioned, for if it had been mentioned the
demons would have known the secret, and been
able to introduce disaster.

8. From there where the sun comes on on the
longest day to where it comes on on the shortest day
is the east region Savah ; from there where it comes
on on the shortest day to where it goes off on the
shortest day is the direction of the south regions
Fradadafsh and Vidadafsh; from there where it goes
in on the shortest day to where it goes in on the
longest day is the west region Arzah; from there
where it comes in-on the longest day to there where
it goes in on the longest day are the north regions
Vortbarst and Vortigarst?.. 9. When the sun comes
on, it illumines (or warms) the regions of Savah,
Fradadafsh, Vidadafsh, and half of Khvaniras?;
when it goes in on the dark side, it illumines the
regions of Arzah, Vérdbarst, Vérigarst, and one
half of Khvaniras; when 7¢ zs day here 7 zs night
there.


* The five supplementary days added to the last of the twelve
months, of thirty days each, to complete the year. For these days
no additional apertures are provided in Albfirz, and the sun appears
to have the choice of either of the two centre apertures out of the
180 on each side of the world. This arrangement seems to indi-
cate that the idea of the apertures is older than the rectification of
the calendar which added the five Gatha days to an original year
of 360 days.

2 This sentence occurs, without the names of the késhvars or
regions, in the Pahl. Vend. XIX, 19. For the késhvars see
Chap. XI.

* Often corrupted into Khanfras in the MSS.


CHAPTER V, 7—VII, I. 25
nae io B 2  e


CuHaptTer VI,


1. On the conflict! of the creations of the world
with the antagonism of the evil spirit it is said in
revelation, that the evil spirit, even as he rushed in
_and looked upon the pure bravery of the angels and
his own violence’, wished to rush back. 2. The
spirit of the sky is himself like one of the warriors
who has put on armour ; he arrayed the sky against
the evil spirit, and led on in the contest, until
Atharmazd had completed a rampart around,
stronger than the sky and in front of the sky.
3. And his guardian spirits (fravahar) of warriors
and the righteous, on war horses and spear in hand,
were around the sky; such-like as the hair on the
head is the similitude (A€nguni-aitak) of those who
hold the watch of the rampart. 4. And no passage
was found by the evil spirit, who rushed back; and
he beheld the annihilation of the demons and his
own impotence, as Atharmazd dd his own final
triumph, producing the renovation of the universe
for ever and everlasting.


CuaptTer VII,


1. The second conflict was waged with the water,
because, as the star Tistar was in Cancer, the water
which is in the subdivision they call Avrak* was


1 This is the doubtful word translated ‘attack’ in Chap. V, 6
(see the note there); it also occurs at the beginning of each of the
following four chapters.

2 Reading zérth; but it may be zfirth, ‘falsity.’

* The ninth lunar mansion (see Chap. II, 3) corresponding with
the middle of Cancer. Tistar (Sirius) being in Cancer probably


26 BUNDAHIS.


pouring, on the same day when the destroyer rushed
in, and came again into notice for mischief (Avarak)
in the direction of the west. 2. For every single
month is the owner of one constellation; the month
Tir is the fourth month! of the year, azd Cancer the
fourth constellation from Aries, so it is the owner of
Cancer, into which Tistar sprang, azd displayed the
characteristics of a producer of rain; and he brought
on the water aloft by the strength of the wind. —
3. Co-operators with Tistar. were Vohtiman and
the angel Hém, with the assistance of the angel
Birg and the righteous guardian spirits in orderly
arrangement.

4. Tistar was converted into three forms, the form
of a man and the form of a horse and the form of a
bull?; thirty days azd nights he was distinguished
in brilliance*, and in each form he produced rain ten
days and nights; as the astrologers say that every
constellation has three forms. 5. Every single drop
of that rain became as big as a bowl, and the water
stood the height of a man over the whole of this
earth ; azd the noxious creatures on the earth being


all killed by the rain, went into the holes of the
earth *,


means that it rises about the same time as the stars of Cancer, as
is actually the case.

1 See Chap. XXV, 20.

* See Tistar Yt. 13, 16, 18, where it is stated that Tistar assumes
the form of a man for the first ten nights, of a bull for the second
ten nights, and of a horse for the third ten nights. Also in Vend.
XIX, 126 Tistar is specially invoked in his form of a bull.

* Or it may be translated, ‘ he hovered in the light,’ as Windisch-
mann and Justi have it.

* In comparing the inundation produced by Tistar with the
Noachian deluge, it must be recollected that the former is repre-
sented as occurring before mankind had propagated on the earth.


CHAPTER VII, 2—I10. 27


6. And, afterwards, the wind spirit, so that it may
not be contaminated (gtimikht), stirs up the wind
and atmosphere as the life stirs in the body; and
the water was all swept away by it, and was brought
out to the borders of the earth, and the wide-formed!
ocean arose therefrom. 7. The noxious creatures
remained dead within the earth, and their venom
and stench were mingled with the earth, and in
order to carry that poison away from the earth
Tistar went down into the ocean in the form of a
white horse with long hoofs?

8. And Apdésh 3, the demon, came meeting him
in the likeness of a black horse with clumsy (kund)
hoofs; a mile (parasang)* away from him fled
Tistar, through the fright which drove hem away.
9. And Tistar begged for success from Atharmazd,
and Atharmazd gave Aim strength and power, as it
is said, that unto Tistar was brought at once the
strength of ten vigorous horses, ten vigorous camels,
ten vigorous bulls, ten mountains, and ten rivers >.
10. A mile away from him fled Apaésh, the demon,
through fright at 4zs strength; on account of this
they speak of an arrow-sho¢ with Tistar’s strength in
the sense of a mile,


1 The term farakhf-kard, ‘wide-formed,’ is a free Pahlavi
translation of Av. vouru-kasha, ‘ wide-shored,’ or ‘having wide
abysses,’ applied to the boundless ocean (see Chap. XIII, 1).

2 For the Avesta account of this expedition of Tistar, see Tistar
Yt. 20-29.

® Miswritten Apavs or Apavas in Pazand, by all MSS. in this
chapter, but see Chap. XXVIII, 39.

* The word parasang is here used for Av. hathra, which was
about an English mile (see Chap. XXVI, 1).

5 A quotation from Tistar Yt. 25.


28 BUNDAHIS.


11. Afterwards, with a cloud for a jar (khdmb)— .
thus they call the measure which was a means of the
work—he seized upon the water azd made it rain
most prodigiously, in drops Ze bull’s heads and
men’s heads, pouring in handfuls ad pouring in
armfuls, both great and small. 12. On the produc-
tion of that rain the demons Aspengargak! and
Apadsh contended wth zt, and the fire Vazist?
turned zés club over; and owing to the blow of the
club Aspengarg4k made a very grievous noise, as
even now, in a conflict with the producer of rain, a
groaning and raging? are manifest. 13. And ten
nights and days rain was produced by him in that
manner, and the poison and venom of the noxious
creatures which were in the earth were all mixed up
in the water, and the water became quite salt, be-
cause there remained in the earth some of those
germs which noxious creatures ever collect.

14. Afterwards, the wind, in the same manner as
before, restrained the water, at the end of three days,
on various sides of the earth; and the three great
seas and twenty-three small seas‘ arose therefrom,
and two fountains (kashmak) of the sea thereby
became manifest, one the AéZast lake, and one
the Sévbar®, whose sources are connected with the


* Mentioned in Vend. XIX, 135, thus: ‘thou shouldst propi-
tiate the fire Vazista, the smiter of the demon Spengaghra.’ It is
also written Spéngargak in Chap. XVII, 1, and Aspengardga in
Chap. XXVIII, 39.

* That is, the lightning (see Chap. XVII, 1).

* Or, ‘a tumult and flashing.’ Justi has ‘ howling and shrieking;
the two words being very ambiguous in the original.

* See Chap. XIII, 6.

> See Chap. XXII, 1-3.


CHAPTERS Vil, f1—Vili, 2: 290


fountain of the sea. 15. And at its north side?
two rivers flowed out, azd went one to the east and
one to the west; they are the Arag river and the
Véh river; as it is said thus: ‘Through those finger-
breadth tricklings do thou pour azd draw forth two
such waters, O Attharmazd!’ 16. Both those rivers
_ wind about through all the extremities of the earth,
and intermingle again with the water of the wide-
formed ocean. 17. As those two rivers flowed out,
and from the same place of origin as theirs, eigh-
teen? navigable rivers flowed out, and after the
other waters have flowed out from those navigable
streams they all flow back to the Arag? river and
Véh river, whose fertilization (khvA4pardarth) of
the world arzses therefrom.


Cuapter VIII.


o. On the conflict which the evil spirit waged with
the earth.


1. As the evil spirit rushed in, the earth shook 4,
and the substance of mountains was created in the
earth. 2. First, Mount Albdrz arose; afterwards,


1 Probably meaning the north side of the Arédvivstr fountain
of the sea, which is said to be on the lofty Hagar, a portion of
Albfirz, from the northern side of which these two semi-mythical
rivers are said to flow (see Chaps. XII, 5, XX, 1).

psec (Chap. 3X, 2.

8 Here written Aréng, but the usual Pahlavi reading is Arag ;
the nasal of the Av. Rangha being generally omitted in Pahlavi, as
other nasals are sometimes; thus we often find sag for sang,
‘stone.’

* The word gudnfd is a transposition of gundtd, a graphical
variant of gunbfd, ‘ shook.’


30 BUNDAHIS.


the other ranges of mountains (kéfaniha) of the
middle of the earth; for as Albdrz grew forth all
the mountains remained in motion, for they have all
grown forth from the root of Albdirz. 3. At that
time they came up from the earth, like a tree which
has grown up to the clouds and zts root’ to the
bottom; and their root passed on that way from one
to the other, avd they are arranged in mutual con-
nection. 4. Afterwards, about that wonderful shak-
ing out from the earth, they say that a great moun-
tain is the knot of lands; avd the passage for the
waters within the mountains is the root which is
below the mountains; they forsake the upper farés
so that they may flow into it, just as the roots of
trees pass into the earth; a counterpart (angunt-
aitak) of the blood in the arteries of men, which
gives strength to the whole body. 5. In numbers?,
apart from Albirz, all the mountains grew up out of
the earth in eighteen years *, from which avzses the
perfection * of men’s advantage.


CHAPTER IX,


1. The conflict waged with plants was that when®
they became quite dry. 2. Amerddad the arch-


* M6 has rakak, but this and many other strange words are
probably due to the copyist of that MS. having an original before
him which was nearly illegible in many places.

? Or, ‘as it were innumerable ;’ the word amar meaning both
‘number’ and ‘innumerable.’

8 See Chap. XII, 1.

* The word must be farhakhtag4n, ‘proprieties,’ both here and
in Chap. IX, 6, as farhakhtisn is an ungrammatical form. ;

® Reading amat, ‘when,’ instead of min, ‘ which’ (see the note
to Chap. I, 7).


CHAPTER VIII, 3-—X, 1. 31


angel, as the vegetation was his own, pounded the
plants small, azd mixed them up with the water
which Vistar seized, and Tistar made that water rain
down upon the whole earth. 3. On the whole earth
plants grew up like hair upon the heads of men.
4. Ten thousand! of them grew forth of one special
description, for keeping away the ten thousand
species of disease whzch the evil spirit produced for
the creatures; azd from those ten thousand, the
100,000 species? of plants have grown forth.

5. From that same germ of plants the tree of all
germs*® was given forth, azd@ grew up in the wide-
formed ocean, from which the germs of all species of
plants ever increased. 6. And near to that tree of
all germs the Gokard tree* was produced, for keeping
away deformed (dispad) decrepitude; axd the full
perfection of the world arose therefrom.


CHAPTER X.


o. On the conflict waged with the primeval ox.


1. As it passed away®, owing to the vegetable
principle (£iharak) proceeding from every limb of
the ox, fifty and five species of grain® and twelve
species of medicinal plants grew forth from the
earth, and their splendour and strength were the


*-See Chap. XXVil, 2.

2 Here 120,000 are mentioned, but see Chap. XXVII, 2, and
Selections of Zad-sparam, VIII, 2. re

5 Or, ‘of all seeds’ (see Chap. XVIII, 9).

4 The white-Hém tree (see Chaps. XVIII, 1-6, XXVII, 4).

e-See Chap. TV 1. ® See Chaps. XIV, 1, XXVII, z.


32 BUNDAHIS.


seminal energy (t6khmih) of the ox. 2. Delivered
to the moon station’, that seed was thoroughly puri-
fied by the light of the moon, fully prepared in
every way, and produced life in a body. 3. Thence
arose two oxen, one male avd one female; and,
afterwards, two hundred and eighty-two species of
each kind? became manifest upon the earth. 4. The
dwelling (mAnist) of the birds is in the air, and the
fish are in the midst of the water.


CHAPTER XI.


1. On the nature of the earth it says in revela-
tion, that ¢#erve are thirty and three kinds® of land.
2, On the day when Tistar produced the rain, when
its seas arose therefrom, the whole place, half taken
up by water, was converted into seven portions;
this portion’, as much as one-half, is the middle,
and six portions are around; those six portions
are together as much as Khvaniras. 3. The name


1 See Chap. XIV, 3. In the Mah Yt. 0, 7, blessings are in-
voked for ‘the moon of ox lineage’ (gaofithra) in conjunction
with the ‘sole-created ox and the ox of many species.’' In the
Avesta the gender of these two primeval oxen appears doubtful,
owing probably to the dual gen. masc. of their epithets being of the
same form as a sing. gen. fem.

® That is, of each sex. See, Chap. XIV, 13, 27. In all three
occurrences of this number K20 has 272, but all other MSS. have
282 (except M6 in this place only),

$ K2ob has ‘thirty-two kinds,’

* That is, Khvaniras; or it may be ‘one portion, as han4,
‘this, is often used for aé, ‘one,’ because the Pazand form of
both words is ¢.


CHAPTER X, 2—XI, 5. 33
ee
késhvar (‘zone or region’) is also applied to them,
and ¢hey existed side by side (kash kash)!; as on
the east side of this portion (Khvaniras) is the
Savah region, oz the west is the Arzah region; the
two portions on the south side are the Fradadafsh
and Vidadafsh regions, the two portions on the north
side are the Vértbarst and Vortgarst regions, aud
that in the middle is Khvaniras. 4. And Khvaniras
has the sea, for one part of the wide-formed ocean
wound about around it; and from Vértbarst and
Vordgarst a lofty mountain grew up; so that it is
not possible for any one to’ go from region to
region °,

5. And of these seven regions every benefit was
created most in Khvaniras, and the evil spirit also
produced most for Khvaniras, on account of the
superiority (sarih)* which he saw init. 6. For the
Kayanians and heroes were created in Khvaniras;
and the good religion of the Mazdayasnians was
created in Khvaniras, and afterwards conveyed to
the other regions ; Séshyans‘ is born in Khvaniras,
who makes the evil spirit impotent, and causes the
resurrection avd future existence.


1 Possibly an attempt to connect the term késhvar with kash;
but the sentence may also be translated thus: ‘and shey formed
various districts like this portion; on the east side is the Savah
region,’ &c.

2 In the Pahlavi Vend. I, 4a, and in the Mainyé-i-khard, IX, 6,
it is added, ‘except with the permission of the angels’ or the
demons.

5 So in M6; but K2o0 has zadarth, which would imply, ‘ for the
destruction of what he saw of it.’

Always spelt so in the Bundahis MSS. K2o and M6, and
corrupted into Sdéshyés in Pazand; but it is more usually written
Séshans in other Pahlavi works, and its Avesta form is Saoshyas
(see Chap. XXXII, 8).


[5] : D


34 "  BUNDAHIs.


CuaptTer XII.


1. On the nature of mountains it says in revela-
tion, that, at first, the mountains have grown forth
in eighteen years; and Albiirz ever grew till the
completion of eight hundred years; two hundred
years wp to the star station (payak), two hundred
years to the moon station, two hundred years to the
sun station, and two hundred years to the endless
light. 2. While the other mountains have grown
out of Albfirz, in number 2244 mountains, avd are
Hiigar the lofty?, Térak of Albfrz, Kakad-i-Daitik,
and the Areztr ridge, the Atsindé6m mountain,
Mount Aparsén which they say is the mountain of
Pars, Mount Zarid also which is Mount Manis,
Mount Aitraz, Mount Kaf, Mount Vadgés, Mount
Atishdastaér, Mount Areztir-bim, Mount Rdédyisn-
hémand, Mount Padashkhvargar which is the
greatest in Khvarih, the mountain which they call
Kind, Mount Révand, Mount Darspét the Bakyir
mountain, Mount Kabed-sikaft, Mount Siyak-mdi-
mand, Mount Vafar-hémand, Mount Spendyad and
Kéndrasp, Mount Asnavand azd Kéndras, Mount


1 These are the four grades of the Mazdayasnian heaven.

2 In all the geographical details, mentioned in the Bundahis,
there is a strange mixture of mythical tradition with actual fact.
The author of the work finds names mentioned in the Avesta, by
old writers of another country, and endeavours to identify them
with places known to himself; much in the same way as attempts
have been made to identify the geographical details of the garden
of Eden. Most of the names of these mountains occur in the
Zamyad Yast, or in other parts of the Avesta, as will be noticed
in detail further on. The number 2244 is also mentioned in § 7
of that Yast. A very able commentary on this chapter will be
found in Windischmann’s Zoroastriche Studien, pp. 1-19.


CHAPTER XII, 1-6. 25


Sisidav}, a mountain among those which are in
Kangdez?, of which they say that they are a comfort
and delight of the good creator, the smaller hills.

3. I well mention them also a second time; Al-
barz* is around this earth and is connected with the
sky. 4. The Térak* of Albdrz is that through
which the stars, moon, azd@ sun pass® in, and
through it they come back. 5. Hagar the lofty® is
that from.which the water of Arédvivsir’ leaps
down the height of a thousand men. 6. The A‘i-
sind6m* mountain is that which, being of ruby


1 The Av. Sizidava of Zamy4d Yt. 5

2 See Chap. XXIX, 4, 10; the name is here written Kandez in.
Kz2o. In M6 the word is k6f, ‘ mountain,’ which is almost iden-
tical in form; if this be the correct reading, the translation will be,
‘a mountain among those in the mountain which they say is agree-
able and the delight,’ &c. This mountain is, however, probably
intended for the Av. Avtare-kangha, ‘ within Kangha,’ of Zamyad
Yt. 4.

he Haraiti-bares of Zamyad Yt. 1; but it is more usually
called Hara berezaiti (see Chap. V, 3).

4 A central peak of the mythic Albfirz, around which the heavenly
bodies are said to revolve (see Chap. V, 3). It is the Av. Taéra,
mentioned in Yas. XLI, 24, Ram Yt. 7, Zamydad Yt. 6.

5 So in M6, but K20 has ‘go in.’

6 This appears to be another peak of the mythic Albfrz, pro-
bably in the west, as it is connected with Satavés, the western chief-
tain of the constellations (see Chaps. XXIV, 17, and II, 7). It is
the Av. Hukairya berezé, of Yas. LXIV, 14, Aban Yt. a ae 96) Gos
Yt. 8, Mihir Yt. 88, Rashnu Yt. 24, Fravardin Yt. 6, Ram Yt. 15.

7 See Chap. XIII, 3-5.

8 In Afiharmazd Yt. 31 and Zamyad Yt. 2, 66, an Ushidhao
mountain is mentioned as having many mountain waters around it,
but this seems to be a near neighbour of the Ushidarena mountain
(see § 15). The details in the text correspond with the description
of the Hindva mountain, given in Tistar Yt. 32, thus: us Hindvad
paiti gardid yd histaiti maidhim zrayangh6 vouru-kashahé,
‘up on the Hindva mountain, which stands amid the wide-shored

10) 2s


36 BUNDAHIS.


(khan-Ahind), of the substance of the sky’, is 7%
the midst of the wide-formed ocean, so that its
water, which is from Hfgar, pours down into it (the
ocean), 7. KakAd-i-Daitik (‘the judicial peak’) is
that of the middle of the world, the height of a hun-
dred men, on which the Kinvar bridge? stands; and
they take account of the soul at that place. 8. The
Arezir * ridge [of the Albfirz mountain] is a summit
at the gate of hell, where they always hold the con-
course of the demons. 9. This also is said, that,
excepting Albfirz, the Aparsén* mountain is the


—


ocean ;’ and the Pahlavi name, Afisindém, has probably arisen from
the us Hindvad of this passage, as suggested by Justi. (See
Chaps. XIII, 5, and XVIII, 10, 11.)

1 The sky is considered to be a true firmament, or hard and
indestructible dome.

* The Xinvaté-peretu of the Avesta, mentioned even in the
Gathas. In the Pahlavi Vend. XIX, ror, it is stated that ‘they
pass across by the Xinvad bridge, whose two extremities are their
own heavenly angels, one stands at Aakad-i-Daitik, and one at
Albfirg;’ the former mountain seems not to be mentioned in the
Avesta, but the bridge is the path of the soul to the other world ;
if righteous the soul passes by it easily over Albfirz (the confines
of this world) into paradise, but if wicked it drops off the bridge
into hell.

® See Vend. III, 23, XIX, 140. The words in brackets may
perhaps be. inserted by mistake, but they occur in all MSS. exa-
mined, and there is nothing inconsistent with tradition in supposing
Areztr to be the extreme northern range of the mythic Albtirg
which surrounds the earth, being the place where demons chiefly
congregate.

* Justi adopts the reading Harparsén, which occurs in K20 four
times out of eleven, but is corrected thrice. Windischmann suggests
that this mountain is the Av. skyata (or iskata) upairi-saéna of
Yas. X, 29, and Zamy4d Yt. 3, which the Pahlavi translator of the
Yasna explains as ‘the Parsén crag.’ It seems to be a general
name for the principal mountain ranges in the south and east of
Iran, as may be seen on comparing this passage and Chap, XXIV,


CHAPTER XII, 7-15. 37


greatest; the Apdrsén mountain they call the
mountain of Pars, and its beginning is in Sagastan?
and its end in Khfgistan. ro. Mount Mantis? is


great; the mountain on which MAants#ihar was
born.


11, The remaining mountains have chiefly grown
from those; as it is said that the elevation (afsarih)
of the districts had arisen most around those three
mountains*. 12. Mount Airaé‘ is in the middle
from Hamadan to Khvarizem, and has grown from
Mount Aparsén. 13. Mount [Aind]*, which is on its
east, on the frontier of Tirkistan, is connected also
with Aparsén. 14. Mount Kaf® has grown from
the same Mount Aparsén. 15. Mount Afishd4s-


28, with Chap..XX, 16, 17, 21, 22, where the Haro, Héttimand,
Marv, and Balkh rivers are said to spring from Mount Aparsén ;
but its application to the southern range is perhaps due to the
etymological attempt, in the text, to connect it with Pars. The
Selections of Zad-sparam, VII, 7, have Xinistan for Khigistan.

1 This name can also be read Sistan.

2 In § 2 it is also called Zarid, but in Zamyad Yt.1 Zeredhd and
Aredhé-manusha are mentioned as neighbouring mountains. The
word ‘great’ is omitted in M6.

8 That is, around the ranges of Albfirz, Ap4rsén, and Mantis.

4 Perhaps intended for the Erezishé of Zamyad Yt. 2. The de-
scription would apply to any of the mountains near Nisapar.

5 This name is omitted in the MSS., but is taken from § 2 as
suggested by Justi. Perhaps it may be connected with ‘ the country
of Sént’ (Chap. XV, 29), which is explained as being A7%nistan,
probably the land of Samarkand, which place was formerly called
Kin, according to a passage in some MSS. of Tabari’s Chronicle,
quoted in Ouseley’s Oriental Geography, p. 298.

6 Not K4f, nor is it mentioned in the Pahlavi Vend. V, 57, as
supposed by Justi; the kaf kop 4rayad of Spiegel’s edition of the
Pahlavi text being a misprint for kAfako parayad, ‘it traverses a
fissure’ (see Haug’s Essays, 2nd ed. p. 326, note 2).


38 BUNDAHIS.


tar! is in Sagastan. 16. Mount Areztr? is that
which is in the direction of Arim. 17. The Padash-
khvargar* mountain is that which is in Taparistan
and the side of Gilan. 18. The Révand* mountain
is in Khftrdsan°, on which the Barzin fire® was esta-
blished; and its zame Révand means this, that z¢ is
glorious. 19. The Vadgés? mountain is that which
is on the frontier of the Vadgésians ; that quarter is
full of timber avd full of trees. 20. The Bakyir®
mountain is that which Frasiyav of Tr used as a
stronghold, and he made his residence within 2;
and zz the days of Yim® a myriad towns and cities
‘were erected on its pleasant azd prosperous ter-
ritory. 21. Mount Kabed-sikaft! (‘very rugged’)


"1! The Av. Ushi-darena of Yas. I, 41, II, 54, Il, 55, IV, 45,
XXII, 31, XXV, 22, AGharmazd Yt. 31, Zamyad Yt. 0, 2; 97.

2 Called Arezfir-bim in § 2, which name stands for the sixth
and seventh mountains, Erezur6 and Bumyé, in Zamyad Yt. 2.
The land of Arfiim was the eastern empire of the Romans.

° Evidently the mountain range south of the Caspian, now called
Albfirz; but whether this actual Albfirg is to be considered a part
of the mythic Albfirg is not very clear.

* The Av. Raévaus, ‘shining,’ of Zamyad Yt. 6. It is also
called the Ridge of Vistasp (see § 34).

eOr, “theseast., § See Chap. XVII, 8.

7 The Av. Vaiti-gaés6, the twelfth mountain in Zamy4d Yt. 2;
Badghés in Persian.

® In § 2 it is Bakyir, which Justi thinks is another name for
Mount Darspét (‘white poplar’); the latter name not being re-
peated here makes this supposition probable.

° K2o has rfim and M6 has lanman, but both explained by
the Paz. gloss Yim, which is also the reading of the Paz. MSS. If
the gloss be rejected the most probable translation would be, ‘and
tm our days Shatré-ram (or ramisn), the victorious, erected on it a
myriad towns and cities.’

*° Windischmann suggests that this may be intended for the Av.
skyata or iskata mentioned in the note on Aparsén in § 9.


CHAPTER XII, 16-28. 39


is that in Pars, out of the same Mount Aparsén.
22. Mount Siyak-hémand (‘being black’) avd Mount
Vafar-hémand (‘having snow')1, as far as their
Kavial borders, have grown out of it (Aparsén)
towards the direction of Kind. 23. The Spend-
yad* mountain is in the circuit (var) of Révand*®
24. The Kéndrasp* mountain, on the summit of
which is Lake Sévbar®, is in the district (or by the
town) of Tis. 25. The Kondrds* mountain is in
Airan-vég. 26. The Asnavand* mountain is in
Atar6-patakan. 27. The Royisn-hémand® (‘having
growth’) mountain is that on which vegetation has
grown.

28. Whatever? mountains are those which are in
every place of the various districts azd various


* The Av. Syamaka and Vafrayau of Zamyad Yt. 5; and pro-
bably the Siyah-kéh and Saféd-k6h of Afghanistan. With regard
to Kino, see the note on § 13. The former mountain is called
Siyak-mfit-mand, ‘having black hair,’ in § 2, which is certainly a
more grammatical form than Styak-hémand.

2 The Av. Spemt6-data of Zamyad Yt. 6.

8 The term var often means ‘lake,’ but we are not informed of
any Lake Révand, though a mountain of that name is described in
§ 18; so it seems advisable to take var here in its wider sense of
“enclosure, circuit, district.’

4 The Av. Kadrva-aspa of Zamydad Yt. 6.

5 See Chap. XXII, 3. All MSS. have Sdébar here.

° If the circumflex be used in Pahlavi to indicate not only the
consonant d, but also the vowel 3, € when it follows a vowel, as
seems probable, this name can be read Kétras; in any case, it is
evidently intended for the Av. Kaoirisa in Zamyad Yt. 6. It is
written Kéndras in § 2.

7 The Av. Asnavau of Zamyad Yt. 5, Atash NyAy. 5, Stréz. 9.
See also Chap. XVII, 7.

8 The Av. Raoidhit6, the eighth mountain of Zamyad Yt. 2.

® So in M6 and the Paz. MSS., but K2o has, ‘The country
mountains.’


40 BUNDAHIS.


countries, and cause the tillage and prosperity there-
in, are many 2 name and many zz number, end
have grown from these same mountains. 29. 4s
Mount Gandvad, Mount Asparég, Mount Pahargar,
Mount Dimavand, Mount Ravak, Mount Zarin,
Mount Gésbakht, Mount Davad, Mount Migin, and
Mount Marak!, which have all grown from Mount
Aparsén, of which the other mountains are enume-
rated. 30. For the Davad? mountain has grown
into Khiigistan likewise from-the Aparsén mountain.
31. The Dimavand? mountain is that in which
Bévarasp is bound. 32. From the same Padashkh-
vargar mountain unto Mount Kimis+, whzchk they
call Mount Madédfryad (‘Come-to-help’) — that in
which Vistasp routed Argdsp—is Mount Miyan-i-
dast (‘mid-plain’)®, azd was broken off from that
mountain there. 33. They say, in the war of the reli-
gion, when there was confusion among the Iranians
it broke off from that mountain, azd slid down zxzo
the middle of the plain; the Iranians were saved by


1 This list is evidently intended to include the chief mountains
known to the author of the Bundahis, which he could not identify
with any of those mentioned in the Avesta.

® This is the Pazand reading of the name, on which very little
reliance can be placed; the Pahlavi can also be read Danad, and it
may be the Deana mountain, 12,000 feet high, near Kaski-zard.

* See Chap. XXIX, 9. This volcanic mountain, about 20,000
feet high and near Teheran, still retains this ancient Persian name,
meaning ‘wintry.’ It is the chief mountain of the Padashkhvargar
range, which the Bundahis evidently considers as an offshoot of
the Aparsén ranges.

* The present name of a mountain between Nfsdpfr and the
desert.

* The name of a place about midway between Astardbad and
Nisdpir. This mountain is called Migin in § 29, probably from a
place called Mezinan in the same neighbourhood.


CHAPTERe Xi, 20—XiIl, 1. AL


it, and it was called ‘Come-to-help’ by them. 34.
The Gandvad! mountain is likewise there, on the
Ridge of Vistasp (pfist-i Vistasp4n)? at the abode
of the Barzin-Mitré fire, nine leagues (parasang) to
the west. 35. Ravak Bisan® is in Zrdvakad; this
_ place, some say, is Zravad, some call z# Bisan, some
Kalak; from this the road of two sides of the moun-
tain is down the middle of a fortress; for this reason,
that is, because it is there formed, they call Kalak
a fortress; this place they also call within the land
of Sarak. 36. Mount Asparég* is established from
the country of Lake Ké#ast® unto Pars. 37. Pahar-
gar (‘the Pahar range’) is in Khardsdn. 38. Mount
Marak® is in Lardn. 39. Mount Zarin is in Tiirkis-
tan. 40. Mount Bakht-tan? is in Spahan.

4l. The rest, apart from this enumeration, which
they reckon as fostering hills of the country in the
religion of the Mazdayasnians, are the small hills,
those which have grown piecemeal in places.


CHAPTER XIII.


1. On the nature of seas it says in revelation, that
the wide-formed ocean keeps one-third of this earth
on the south side of the border of Albtirzg ’, axa so


1 The Pers. Kandbad, or Gunabad, is near Gumin.

2 Another name for Mount Révand (§ 18). See Chap. XVII, 8.

’ Probably in Kirman.

* The mountain ranges of western Persia, including the Mount
Zagros of classical writers.

5 See Chap. XXII, 2.

§ Probably the Merkhinah range in northern LAristan.

* The Bakhtiyart range in the province of Ispahan.

6 Or perhaps better: thus: ‘the wide-formed ocean is in the


42 BUNDAHIS.


wide-formed is the ocean that the water of a thou-
sand lakes is held by it, such as the source Ar€dviv-
str!, which some say is the fountain lake. 2. Every
particular lake is of a particular kind’, some are
great, and some are small; some are so large that
a man with a horse might compass ¢#em around in
forty days?, which is 1700 leagues (parasang) in
extent.

3. Through the warmth and clearness of the
water, purifying more than other waters, everything
continually flows from the source Arédvivstr. 4. At
the south of Mount Albfrz a hundred thousand
golden channels are there formed, avd that water
goes with warmth and clearness, through the chan-
nels, on to Hiigar the lofty*#; on the summit of that
mountain is a lake®; into that lake it flows, becomes
quite purified, and comes back through a different
golden channel. 5. At the height of a thousand
men an open golden branch from that channel is
connected with Mount Atisindé6m ° amid the wide-
formed ocean; from there one portion flows forth to
the ocean for the purification of the sea, azd one
portion drizzles in moisture upon the whole of this
earth, and all the creations of Atharmazd acquire


direction of the south limit of Albfirg, ad possesses one-third of
this earth.’

1 The Av. Ardvi stra of Aban Yt. x, &c.

? Literally, ‘for every single lake shere zs a single kind;’ but
we may perhaps read 14, ‘not,’ instead of the very similar rAf,
‘for, and translate as follows: ‘every single lake is not of one
kind ;’ which expresses very nearly the same meaning.

% Compare Aban Yt. ror.

4 See Chap, X11 «x.

> Lake Urvis (see Chap. XXII, 11).

* See Chaps. XII, 6, and XVIII, ro, 11.


CHAPTER X1Il, 2-11, 43


health from it, and it dispels the dryness of the
atmosphere.

6. Of the salt seas three are principal, azd twenty-
three are small. 7. Of the three which are principal,
one is the Pfitik, one the Kamrfd, and one the
Sahi-btin. 8. Of all three the Piitik! is the largest,
in which is a flow azd ebb, on the same side as the
wide-formed ocean, and it is joined to the wide-
formed ocean. 9. Amid this wide-formed ocean, on
the Patik side, it has a sea which they call the Gulf
(var) of Satavés*, 10, Thick and salt the stench ®
wishes to go from the sea Piitik to the wide-formed
ocean; with a mighty high wind therefrom, the Gulf
of Satavés drives away whatever is stench, aud
whatever is pure and clean goes into the wide-
formed ocean and the source Arédvivstr; and that
flows back a second t#me to Pitik*, 11. The con-
trol® of this sea (the Pitik) is connected with the


' The Av. Piitika of Vend. V, 52, 57, and evidently the Persian
Gulf.

* So called from the constellation Satavés (§ 12), see Chap. IJ, 7.
The details given in the text are applicable to the Gulf and Sea
of ’Uman, the Arabian Sea of Europeans. The description of
this Gulf, given in the Pahl. Vend. V, 57, which is rather obscure,
' is as follows: ‘In purification ‘he impurities flow, in the purity.
of water, from the sea Pfittk into the wide-formed ocean; at the
southernmost side he water stands back in mist, and the blue body
of Satavés stands back around it. Pfittk stands owt from the side
of Satavés, this is where z/ zs. From which side it stands is not
clear to me. The water comes to Satavés through the bottom ;
some say that it traverses a fissure.’

® Perhaps a better reading would be sttirg stir-i gondakth,
‘the intense saltness which is stench.’ The author appears to have
had some vague idea of the monsoon.

* Or, perhaps, ‘ the other (the stench) flows back to Pattk.’

5 Reading band; but it may be bdéd, ‘consciousness, sensi-
tiveness.’


44 BUNDAHIS.


moon and wind; it comes again azd goes down, in
increase and decrease, because of her revolving.
12. The control! also of the Gulf of Satavés is
attached to the constellation Satavés, in whose pro-
tection are the seas of the southern quarter, just as
those on the northern side are in the protection of
Haptdék-ring 2-13. Concerning the flow azd ebb it
is said, that everywhere from the presence of the
moon two winds continually blow, whose abode is in
the Gulf of Satavés, one they call the down-draught,
and one the up-draught; when the up-draught blows
zt zs the flow, and when the down-draught blows it
is the ebb?, 14. In the other seas there is nothing
of the nature of a revolution of the moon therein,
and there are no flow azd ebb. 15. The sea of
Kamrfd*‘ is that which they pass by, in the north,
in Taparistan; that of Sahi-bfin® is in Arim.

16. Of the small seas that which was most whole-


a


i Sée. p.. 43, note 5.

ase. Chapwll, 7:

* This is not a confused attempt to explain the tides as the effect
of the land and sea breezes, as might be suspected at first, but is a
reasonable conclusion from imaginary facts. Assuming that the
wind always blows eastward and westward from the moon, it fol-
lows that as the moon rises an easterly wind must blow, which may
be supposed to drive the flood tide westward into the Persian Gulf ;
until the moon passes the meridian, when the wind, changing to
the west, ought to drive the ebb tide eastward out of the Gulf,
thus accounting for one flow and ebb every day, dependent on the
position of the moon.

* Evidently the Caspian, which lies north of-Taparistan, a pro-
vince including part of Mazendaran.

® Or perhaps G‘ahi-bfin, meaning probably the Mediterranean or
Euxine, if not both of them; the author appears merely to have
heard of the existence of ey a sea in Asia Minor (Arfim). In the
Selections of Zad-sparam, VI, 14, it is called Géhan-biin.


CHAPTER XIII, 12—XIV, 2. 45


some’ was the sea Kydnsih *, such as is in Sagas-
tan; a¢ first, noxious creatures, snakes, and lizards
(vazagh) were not in 7, and the water was
sweeter ‘han in any of the other seas; later (dadt-
gar) 2¢ became salt; at the closest, on account of the
_ stench, it is not possible to go so near as one league,
so very great are the stench and saltness through the
violence of the hotwind. 17. When the renovation
of the universe occurs it will again become sweet’,


CHAPTER XIV.


1. On the nature of the five classes of animals
(géspend) it says in revelation, that, when the
primeval ox passed away‘, there where the marrow
came out grain grew up® of fifty and five species,
and twelve® species of medicinal plants grew; as it
says, that out of the marrow is every separate crea-
ture, every single thing whose lodgment is in the
marrow’. 2. From the horns avose peas (migtk),


1 Comparing nistim with Pers. nist, ‘ healthy.’

2 The Av. Kasu of Vend. XIX, 18, and Zamyad Yt. 66, 92 (see
also Chaps. XX, 34, and XXI, 7). A brackish lake and swamp now
called Haman, ‘the desert,’ or Zarah, ‘ the sea,’ and which formerly
contained fresher water than it does now.

8 The MSS. here add the first sentence of Chap. XX, and
there is every reason to believe that Chaps. XX-XXII originally
occupied this position, between XIII and XIV, (see the list of the
contents of TD in the Introduction.)

4 See Chaps. IV, 1, and X, 1.

5 All MSS. have lakhv4r, ‘again, but this is probably a blunder
for 1414, ‘up.’

6 Kzo has ‘fifteen’ here, but ‘twelve’ in Chaps. X, 1, and
XXVII, 2.

7 K2o has ‘of every single thing the lodgment is in the
marrow.’


46 BUNDAHIS.


from the nose the leek, from the blood the grape-
vine! from which they make wine—on this account
wine abounds with blood—from the lungs the rue-
like herbs, from the middle of the heart? thyme for
keeping away stench, azd every one of the others
as revealed in the Avesta.

3. The seed of the ox was carried up to the moon
station ®; there it was thoroughly purified, axd pro-
duced the manifold species of animals‘. 4. First,
‘two oxen, one male and one female, and, afterwards,
one pair of every single species was let go into the
earth, azd was discernible in Airan-vég for a HAsar
(‘mile’), which is like a Parasang (‘league ’)*; as it
says, that, on account of the valuableness of the ox,
it was created twice, one time as an ox, and one
time as the manifold species of animals. 5. A thou-
sand days and nights they were without eating, and
first water and afterwards herbage (afirvar) were
devoured by them.

6. And, afterwards, the three classes (kardak) of
animals were produced therefrom, as it says that
first were the goat and sheep, and then the camel


* Probably kadfik-i raz may mean ‘the pumpkin and grape.’

* Reading dil; but the word may also be read sar, ‘the head,’
or jigar, ‘ the liver.’

e see Chap. X) 2.

* This translation suits both text and context very well, but
gospend pfr-sardak is evidently intended for the Av. gdus
pouru-saredhé, ‘the ox of many species,’ of Mah Yt. 0, 7, and
Siréz. 12.

° Reading mtin aé parasang hum4ndak; if 3 be read for aé@
the translation must be, ‘three of which are like a Parasang,’ for
a Hasar cannot be equal to three Parasangs (see Chaps. XVI, Pr
and XXVI). The phrase in the text probably means merely that
_ a Hasar is a measure for long distances, just as a Parasang is.


CHAPTER XIV, 3-13. 47


and swine, and then the horse and ass. 7. For,
first, those suitable for grazing were created there-
from, those are now kept in the valley (lAi); the
second created were those of the hill summits (sar-
i déz)1, which are wide-travellers, azd habits (niha-
dak) are not taught to them by hand; the third
created were ¢hose dwelling in the water.

8. As for the genera (khaddinak), the first genus
is that which Zas the foot cloven in two, and zs suit-
able for grazing; of which a camel larger than a
horse is small avd new-born. 9. The second genus
is ass-footed, of which the swift? horse is the largest,
and the ass the least. 10. The third genus is that
of the five-dividing paw, of which the dog is the
largest, aud the civet-cat the least. 11. The fourth
genus is the flying, of which the griffon of three
natures * is the largest, and the chaffinch ‘ the least.
12. The fifth genus is that of the water, of which
the Kar fish ® is the largest, and the Nemadu ® the
least.

13. These five genera are apportioned out into


1 Justi reads girfsa&, the Av. gairish426, ‘ mountain-frequent-
ing, of Tistar Yt. 36; but this is doubtful.

2-Pahi. zibal = Pers. zibal:

5 The Paz. sin-i se avina is the Pahl. sén-i 3 khadfitnak of
Chap. XXIV, 11, 29, the Sin bird or Simurgh of Persian legends,
the Av. saéna. The word avina is a Paz. misreading either of
4tnak, ‘kind, sort,’ or of angan4ak, ‘dividing.’ The mixture of
Pazand and Pahlavi in this and some other chapters is rather per-
plexing, but the Pazand misreadings can usually be corrected after
transliterating them back into Pahlavi characters.

* Reading va taru (Pers. tar).

® See Chaps. XVIII, 3, and XXIV, 13.

6 If this Pazand word be written in Pahlavi letters it may be
read va magan, which may stand for va magil, ‘and the leech;’
but this is very uncertain.


48 BUNDAHIS.


two hundred and eighty-two! species (sardak).
14. First are five species of goat, the ass-goat *, the
milch-goat, the mountain-goat, the fawn, avd the
common goat. 15. Second, five species of sheep,
that with a tail, that which has no tail, the dog-
sheep, the wether, avd the Kiirisk sheep, a sheep
whose horn is great; it possesses a grandeur? like
unto a horse, axd they use 7¢ mostly for a steed
(bara), as it is said that Mantiskihar kept a Ktrisk
as a steed. 16. Third, two species of camel, the
mountain one and that suitable for grazing ; for one
is fit to keep in the mountain, avd one in the plain;
they are one-humped azd two-humped. 17. Fourth,
fifteen species of ox, the white, mud-coloured 4, red,
yellow, black, azd dappled, the elk, the buffalo,
the camel-leopard ox, the fish-chewing® ox, the
Fars ox, the Kagau, avd other species of ox.
18. Fifth, eight species of horse, the Arab, the
Persian, the mule °, the ass, the wild ass (gér), the
hippopotamus (asp-i Avi), azd other species of
_horse. 19. Sixth, ten species of dog, the shepherd’s
dog, the village-dog which is the house-protector,
the blood-hound, the slender hound’, the water-


1 K2o0 alone has 272 (see Chap. X, 3).

2 The khar-btiz (see Chap. XXIV, 2).

* Supposing se koh to be a P&z. misreading of Pahl. suktih.
Justi’s translation is: ‘it inhabits the three mountains, like the
horse.’

* Paz. ashgun is evidently for Pahl. hasgfin.

® Transcribing the Paz. mahi khu ushan into Pahlavi it may
be read mahikan-khvashan (khashan?).

° Instead of these first three species M6 has ‘ the white, black,
yellow, bay, avd chestnut.’ Kzo omits ‘the ass’ by mistake.

* These first four species are the Av. pasus-haurvd, vis-
haurvé, véhunazg6, and taurund of Vend. V, 92-98, XIII,
21, 20-74, 117, 164, 165.


CHAPTER XIV, 14-22. 49


beaver’ which they call the water-dog, the fox, the
ichneumon (rdsu), the hedgehog which they call
‘thorny-back,’ the porcupine 2, and the civet-cat; of
which, two species are those accustomed ® to bur-
rows, one the fox avd one the ichneumon; and those
accustomed to jungle are such as the porcupine
which has spines on z¢s back, and the hedgehog
which is similar. 20. Seventh, five species of the
black * hare; two are wild species, one dwelling
in a burrow® avd one dwelling in the jungle.
21. Eighth, eight species of weasel; one the mar-
ten, one the black marten, the squirrel, the Bez
ermine *, the white ermine, amd other species of
weasel, 22. Ninth, eight species of musk andmals ;
one is that which is recognised by 7¢s musk’, one


1 The Av. bawris up4p6 of Aban Yt. r29.

* The word indra has usually been taken as a Paz. misreading
of the Pahl. afidrak (Av. udra, ‘otter,’ of Vend. XIII, 48, 167,
169, XIV, 2), but this would be more probably read andra.
The Pahl. sfigar, ‘porcupine,’ is just as likely to be misread
indra, and its meaning suits the context better.

* The Paz. 4mokhtesn, which is an ungrammatical form, is
evidently a misreading of the Pahl. 4mfikhtag4n.

* K2o has seya, M6 has zyagi hest. Perhaps some old copyist
has corrected siy4k-gdésh into khar-gésh, and so both the epi-
thets have crept into the text, the word ‘ black’ being superfluous.

> Reading khan-manist, the Paz. khu being an obvious mis-
reading of khan.

6° The Paz. bez is written bedh in the Pazand MS. (the z in
M6 being shaped something like dh), and Justi supposes it repre-
sents the Arabic abyadh or batdha, ‘ white, and is explained by
the Pers. sapéd, ‘white,’ which follows ; but there is nothing in
the text to indicate that the second name is an explanation of the
first. It is more probable that bez represents the Pers. btgad,
‘reddish, rufous, variegated,’ an epithet quite applicable to “the
ermine in its summer fur.

7 Or, ‘is known as the musk amzmal.’


teiieen E


50 BUNDAHIS.


the musk anzmal with a bag in which is their
pleasant scent, the Bis-musk1 which eats the Bis-
herb, the black musk which is the enemy of the ser-
pent ¢hat zs numerous in rivers, avd other species of
musk animals. 23. Tenth, one hundred and ten
species of birds; flying creatures (vey =vai) such
as the griffon bird’, the Karsipt*, the eagle, the
Kahrkas* which they call the vulture, the crow,
the Arda, the crane, azd the tenth® is the bat.
24. There are two of them which have milk in the
teat and suckle ¢he’r young, the griffon bird and the
bat which flies in the njght; as they say that the
bat is created of three races (sardak), the race
(ayina) of the dog, the bird, awd the musk animal;
for it flies like a bird, has many teeth like a dog,
and is dwelling in holes like a musk-rat. 25. These
hundred and ten species of birds are distributed into
eight groups (khadtinak), mostly as_ scattered
about as when a man scatters seed, avd drops the
seed in /zs fingers to the ground, large, middling,
and small. 26. Eleventh °, fish were created of ten


' A kind of musk-rat; the bits it eats is said to be the Na-
pellus Moysis.

* Pahl. sénd miirdk, the stmurgh of Persian tradition, and
Av. mereghé saéné of Bahram Yt. 41.

® See Chap. XIX, 16. * See Chap. XIX, 2g.

* Counting the ‘flying creatures’ and ‘the vulture’ as distinct
species, ‘the bat’ is the tenth. It has been generally supposed
that we should read ‘ eleventh,’ and consider the bats as an eleventh
group, especially as the MSS. call the next group (the fish) the
‘twelfth ;” but this view is contradicted by the remarks about the
bats being mingled with those about the birds, and also by Zad-
sparam in his Selections, Chap. IX, 14 (see App. to Bund.), not
mentioning any group of bats among the other animals.

* All the MSS. have ‘twelfth,’ but they give no ‘eleventh’ nor
‘thirteenth,’ though they have ‘fourteenth’ in § 29. These irre-


.
>


CHAPTER. XIV, 23-20. 5ai


species; first, the fish Ariz}, the Arzuva, the Ar-
zuka, the Marzuké, and other Avesta names ®.
.27. Afterwards, within each species, species within
species are created, so the total is two hundred and
eighty-two species *.

28. Of the dog they say that out of the star
station, that is, away from the direction of the con-
stellation Hapték-ring, was given to him further by
a stage (yégist)* than to men, on account of zs
protection of sheep, avd as associating with sheep
and men; for this the dog is purposely adapted °,
as three more kinds of advantage are given to him
than fo man, ke has his own boots, his own cloth-
ing*, and may wander about without self-exertion.


Cea)


29. The twelfth’? is the sharp-toothed beast of


gularities seem to indicate that part of this chapter has been omitted
by some old copyist. ;

1 See Chaps. XVIII, 5, and XXIV, 13.

2 None of these names are found in the portion of the Avesta
now extant.

8 Keo alone has 272 (see Chap. X, 3). The actual total
number of species mentioned is 186, leaving ninety-six for the
‘species within species.’ ZAd-sparam in his Selections, Chap. IX,
14, differs from the numbers given in the text merely in giving ten
species of ox, instead of fifteen; so the total of his details is 181,
leaving ror sub-species to make up his grand total of 282 (see
App. to Bund.)

4 A yégist (compare Sans. yogana) was probably from fifteen
to sixteen English miles, as it consisted of sixteen hasar, each
of one thousand steps of the two feet (see Chap. XXVI, 1). This
sentence seems to imply that on account of the useful qualities
of the dog he has a part of the lowermost grade of paradise
allotted to him, further from the demon-haunted north than that
allotted to the men whose inferior order of merit does not entitle
them to enter the higher grades of paradise.

6 Reading Ahang-hémand, ‘having a purpose.’

6 Compare Vend. XIII, 106.

7 All the MSS. have ‘ fourteenth,’ but they give no ‘ thirteenth.’

EK 2


‘a


52 BUNDAHIS.


which the leader of the flock is in such great fear,
for that flock of sheep is very badly maintained
which has no dog.

30. Atharmazd said when the bird Varesha? was
created by him, whzch is a bird of prey, thus: ‘Thou
art created by me, O bird Varesha! so that my vexa-
tion may be greater than my satisfaction with thee,
for thou doest the will of the evil spirit more than
that of me; like the wicked man who did not be-
come satiated with wealth, thou also dost not
become satiated with the slaughter of birds; but if
thou be not created by me, O bird Varesha! thou
wouldst be created by him, the evil spirit, as a
kite* with the body of a Varpa*, by which no
creature would be left alive.’

31. Many animals are created in all these species
for this reason, that when one shall be perishing
through the evil spirit, one shall remain.


CHAPTER XV.


1. On the nature of men it says in revelation,
that Gdyémard, in passing away‘, gave forth seed ;
that seed was thoroughly purified by the motion of


* No doubt ‘a hawk’ (Pers. vasah or basah), as mentioned by
Justi; Av. vare would become v4 or ba in Persian.

® Compare giirtk with Pers. varik, varka, varkak, varkak,
vargah, ‘an eagle, falcon, kite, or hawk.’

* Transcribing the Paz. varpa €yi into Pahlavi we have
varpak-aé, which is very nearly the same in form as vartkak-aé,
‘a hut or cottage’ (Pers. gurifah-€); so the formidable bird
which the evil spirit might have created was ‘a kite with a body
like a cottage.’

* See Chap. IV, 1.


CHAPTER XIV, 30-XV, 4. 53


the light of the sun, and Néryésang? kept charge of
two portions, and Spendarmad? received one por-
tion. 2. And zz forty years, with the shape of a
one-stemmed Rivas-p/ant*, and the fifteen years of
ats fifteen leaves, Matrd and Matrdya64 grew up
from the earth in such a manner that their arms_
rested behind on ¢he’y shoulders (désh), and one
joined to the other they were connected together
and both alike. 3. And the waists of both of them
were brought close aud so connected together that it
was not clear which is the male and which the female,
and which is the ove whose living soul (nism6) of
Atharmazd is not away® 4. As it is said thus:
‘Which is created before, the soul (nism6) or the
body? And Atharmazd said that the soul is
created before, and the body after, for him who was


1 Av. Nairyé-sangha of Yas. XVII, 68, LXX, 92, Vend. XIX,
III, 112, XXII, 22, &c.; the angel who is said to be Afharmazd’s
usual messenger to mankind.

2 The female archangel who is supposed to have special charge
of the earth (see Chap. I, 26).

5 A plant allied to the rhubarb, the shoots of which supply an.
acid juice used by the Persians for acidulating preserves and drinks.

4 These names are merely variants of the Mashya and Mashydt
of the latter part of this chapter (nom. dual, m. and f,, of Av.
mashya, ‘mortal’). This is shown by the Pandnamak-i Zaratfst,
saying: ‘and my human nature is from Matrdth and Matré-
yadth, from which first generation and seed from Gayémard I
have sprung.’ And the names are also found in the more Persian
forms Maharth and Mahartyaéyth (see the note to § 22). Windisch-
mann considered the meaning to be that ‘they grew up on the day
Mitrd of the month Mitré,’ that is, the sixteenth day of the seventh
month of the Parsi year; this is not confirmed, however, by Zad-
sparam in his Selections, Chap. X, 4 (see App. to Bund.)

5 That is, whether they had souls or not. That nism6 is the
Huzvaris for rab4n, ‘soul,’ appears clearly in § 4, where both
words are used for the same thing.


54 BUNDAHIS.


created; it is given into the body that it may pro-
duce activity, and the body is created only for
activity;’ hence the conclusion is this, that the soul
(raban) is created before and the body after.
5. And both of them changed from the shape of a
plant into the shape of man, azd the breath (nism6)
went spiritually into them, which is the soul (riban);
and now, moreover, in that similitude a tree had
grown up whose fruit was the ten varieties of
man’,

6. Attharmazd spoke to Mashya and Mashyédi
thus: ‘You are man, you are the ancestry of the
world, and you are created perfect in devotion? by

e; perform devotedly the duty of the law, think
good thoughts, speak good words, do good deeds,
and worship no demons!’ 7. Both of them first
thought this, that one of them should please the
other, as he is a man for him; and the first deed
done by them was this, when they went out they
washed* themselves thoroughly; and the first
words spoken by them were these, that Atharmazd
created the water and earth, plants and animals, the
stars, moon, and sun, and all prosperity whose
origin and effect are from the manifestation of
righteousness’, 8, And, afterwards, antagonism
rushed into their minds, and their minds were


* This evidently refers to another tree, which is supposed to have
produced the ten varieties of human monstrosities (see § 31).

? This would be a translation of the Avesta phrase, ‘the best of
Armaiti (the spirit of the earth),

* Comparing mégid with Pers. magtd; but the verb is very am-
biguots, as it may mean, ‘they feasted themselves,’ or ‘they made
water,’

* The last phrase appears to be quoted from the Pahlavi Had6kht
Nask, I, 2.


CHAPTER XV, 5-13. gs


thoroughly corrupted, and they exclaimed that the
evil spirit created the water and earth, plants and
animals, azd the other things as aforesaid. 9. That
false speech was spoken through the will of the
demons, azd the evil spirit possessed himself of this
first enjoyment from them; through that false
speech they both became wicked, and their souls
are in hell until the future existence.

to, And they had gone thirty days without food’,
covered with clothing of herbage (giyah); aud after
the thirty days they went forth into the wilderness,
came to a white-haired goat, and milked the milk
from the udder with their mouths. 11. When they
had devoured the milk Mashya sazd to Mashyédi
thus: ‘My delight was owing to it when I had not
devoured the milk, and my delight is more de-
lightful now when it is devoured by my vile body.’
12. That second false speech enhanced the power
of the demons, and the taste of the food was taken
away by them, so that out of a hundred parts one
part remained.

13. Afterwards, in another thirty days and nights
they came to a sheep, fat? azd white-jawed, and
they slaughtered 2¢; and fire was extracted by them
out of the wood of the lote-plum* and box-tree,
through the guidance of the heavenly angels, since
both woods were most productive of fire for them ;
nn ee


1 Reading akhfirisn instead of the khfrisn of all MSS. which
is hardly intelligible. Perhaps 4v-khfrisn, ‘drinking water,’ ought
to be read, as it is alluded to in Chap. XXX, 1.

2 Comparing gefar with Av. garewa and Pers. garb, but this
identification may not be correct.

8 The kfinar, a thorny tree, allied to the jujube, which bears a
small plum-like fruit.


56 BUNDAHIS.


and the fire was stimulated by their mouths; and
the first fuel kindled by them was dry grass, kendar,
lotos, date palm leaves, azd myrtle ; and they made
a roast of the sheep. 14. And they dropped three
handfuls of the meat into the fire, azd said: ‘This is
the share of the fire.’ One pieceof the rest they
tossed to the sky, azd said: ‘ This is the share of
the angels. A bird, the vulture, advanced and
carried some of it away from before ¢hem, as a dog
ate the first meat. 15. And, first, a clothing of
skins covered them; afterwards, it is said, woven
garments were prepared from a cloth woven? in the
wilderness. 16. And they dug out a pit in the
earth, and iron was obtained by them and beaten
out with a stone, and without a forge they beat out
a cutting edge*® from it; and they cut wood with
it, azd prepared a wooden shelter from the sun
(pés-khtr). ;

17. Owing to the gracelessness which they prac-
tised, the demons became more oppressive, and they
themselves carried on unnatural malice between
themselves ; they advanced one against the other,
and smote and tore ¢hezr hair and cheeks+.
18. Then the demons shouted out of the darkness


' Most of this sentence is omitted: in K2o by mistake.

* Reading khés-1-i tad, which Pahlavi words might be’ easily
misread ashabé tad, as given in PAzand in the text. That Paz.
tadha stands for Pahl. tadak (Pers. tadah, ‘spun, woven’) is
quite certain.

* Or ‘an axe,’ according as we read tékh or tash. The order
of the foregoing words, bara tapak-1, ‘ without a forge,’ appears
to have been reversed by mistake.

* Reading réd as equivalent to Pers. rf}, ‘face,’ but it ought
to be réd. Perhaps the word is lft, ‘bare,’ and the translation
should be, ‘ tore heer hair bare.’


CHAPTER XV, 14-24. 57


thus: ‘You are man; worship the demon! so that
your demon of malice may repose” 19. MAshya
went forth and milked a cow’s milk, and poured z¢
out towards the northern quarter; through that the
demons became more powerful, and owing to them
they both became so dry-backed that in fifty win-
ters they had no desire for intercourse, and though
they had had intercourse they would have had no
children. 20. And on the completion of fifty years
the source of desire arose, first zz MAshya and then
zz Mashydi, for Mashya said to MAashyéi thus:
‘When I see thy shame my desires arise. Then
Mashyéi spoke thus: ‘Brother Mashya! when I
see thy great desire I am also agitated’ 21. After-
wards, it became their mutual wish that the satis-
faction of their desires should be accomplished, as
they reflected thus: ‘Our duty even for those fifty
years was this.’

22. From them was born in nine months a pair,
male and female; azd owing to tenderness for off-
spring? the mother devoured one, and the father one.
23. And, afterwards, Atharmazd took tenderness
for offspring away from them, so that ove may
nourish a child, and the child may remain.

24. And from them arose seven pairs, male and


1 This is merely a paraphrase of the original.

2 Or, ‘the deliciousness of children’ (shfrinth-i farzand).
Justi has, ‘owing to an eruption on the children the mother de-
serted one,’ &c.; but the legend of devouring the first children is
still more clearly mentioned in the Pahlavi Rivayat, which forms
the first book of the D&distén-i Dinik (preceding the ninety-two
questions and answers to which that name is usually applied) as
follows: Maharth va Mahartyaéyth dfisharam rai nazdisté
farzand-i nafsman bara vastamfind, ‘Mashya and Mashydi,
through affection, at first ate up their own offspring.’


58 BUNDAHIS.


female, azd each was a brother and sister-wife; and
from every one of them, in fifty years, children were
born, and they themselves died in a hundred years.
25. Of those seven pairs one was Siydkmak, the
name of the man, and Nasak! of the woman; and
from them a pair was born, whose names were Fra-
vak of the man and Fravakain of the woman.
26. From them fifteen pairs were born, every single
pair of whom became a race (sardak); and from
them the constant continuance of the generations
of the world arose.

27. Owing to the increase (zAyisn) of the whole
fifteen races, nine races proceeded on the back of
the ox Sarsaok ?, through the wide-formed ocean,
to the other six regions (késhvar), and stayed
there; and six races of men remained in Khvaniras.
28. Of those six races the name of the man of one
pair was Taz and of the woman Tazak, and they
went Zo the plain of the Tazikan (Arabs); and of
one pair Héshyang * was the name of the man and
Gizak of the woman, and from them arose the
Airanakan (Iranians); and from one pair the Ma-
zendarans* have arisen. 29. Among the number
(pavan aé mar) were those who are in the coun-


* Or -* Vasak?

? See Chaps. XVII, 4, XIX, 13; the name is here written
Srisaok in the MSS., and is a Pazand reading in all three places.

® Av. Haoshyangha of Aban Vt. 21, Gos Vt. 3, Fravardin Yt.
137, Ram Yt. 7, Ashi Yt. 24, 26, Zamyad Yt. 26. His usual
epithet is paradhata (Pahl. pés-dad), which is thus explained in
the Pahlavi Vend. XX, 7: ‘this early law (pés-dadth) was this,
that he first set going the law of sovereignty.’ For this reason
he is considered to be the founder of the earliest, or PésdAdian,
dynasty, See Chaps, XXX], 1, XXXIV, 3, 4.

“ The people of the southern coast of the Caspian, the M4z-
ainya daéva, ‘ Mazainyan demons or idolators,’ of the Avesta.


CHAPTER XV, 25-31. 59


tries of Sfirak1, those who are in the country of
Anér ’, those who are in the countries of Tar, those
who are in the country of Salm which is Aram,
those who are in the country of Séni, that which is
‘inistan, those who are in the country of Dai, and
those who are in the country of Sind*, 30. Those,
indeed, throughout the seven regions are all from
the lineage of Fravak, son of Siyakmak, son of
Mashya.

31. As there were ten varieties of man®, and
fifteen races from Fravdk, there were twenty-five
races all from the seed of Gayémard; the varieties
ave such as those of the earth, of the water, the
breast-eared, the breast-eyed, the one-legged, those
also who have wings like a bat, hose of the forest,
with tails, aa who have hair on the body*.


* Not Syria (which is Sfristan, see Chap. XX, 10), but the
Sfirtk of the Pahlavi Vend. I, 14, which translates Av. Sughdha,
the land east of the Oxus (see Chap. XX, 8). Windischmann reads
it as Paz. Erak.

? Probably for Av. anairya, ‘non-Aryan,’ which seems specially
applied to the lands east of the Caspian.

§ The countries of Tar, Salm, Séni, and Da? are all mentioned
successively in Fravardin Yt. 143, 144, in their Avesta forms
Tdirya, Sairima, Saini, and Dahi. The country of Tar was part
of the present Turkistaén, that of Salm is rightly identified with
Artim (the eastern Roman Empire, or Asia Minor) in the text; the
country of Séni (miswritten Sénd), being identified with Ainistan,
was probably the territory of Samarkand, and may perhaps be
connected with Mount Aind (see Chap. XII, 2, 13); and the land
of Dai must be sought somewhere in the same neighbourhood.

* Bactria or any part of north-western India may be intended ;
wherever Brahmans and Buddhists existed (as they did in Bactria)
was considered a part of India in Sasanian times,

5 Grown on a separate tree (see § 5).

6 Only seven varieties of human monsters are here enumerated,


60 BUNDAHIS.


CHapTterR XVI.


t. On the nature of generation it says in revela-
tion, that a woman when she comes out from men-
struation, during ten days and nights, when they go
near unto her, soon becomes pregnant. 2. When
she is cleansed from her menstruation, azd when the
time for pregnancy has come, always when the seed
of the man is the more powerful a son arises from
it; when that of the woman is the more powerful, a
daughter; when both seeds are equal, twins and
triplets. 3. If the male seed comes the sooner, it
adds to the female, and she becomes robust; if the
female seed comes the sooner, it becomes blood, azd
the leanness of the female avzses therefrom.

4. The female seed is cold and moist, and z¢s
flow is from the loins, and the colour is white, red,
and yellow; and the male seed is hot and dry, z¢s
flow is from the brain of the head, azd the colour is
white and mud-coloured (hasgtin). 5. All? the
seed of the females whzch issues beforehand, takes a
place within the womb, and the seed of the males —
will remain above it, azd will fill the space of the
womb; whatever refrains therefrom becomes blood
again, enters into the veins of the females, azd at
the time any one is born it becomes milk and


for the last three details seem to refer to one variety, the monkeys.
The Parsi MS. of miscellaneous texts, My (fol. 120), says, ‘The
names of the ten species of men are the breast-eyed, the three-eyed,
the breast-eared, the elephant-eared, the one-legged, the web-
footed, the leopard-headed, the lion-headed, the camel-headed,
and the dog-headed.’

1 M6 has ‘always.’


CHAPTER XVI, I—XVII, I. 61


nourishes him, as all milk arises from the seed of
the males, azd the blood is that of the females.

6. These four things, they say, are male, and
these female: the sky, metal, wind, and fire are male,
and are never otherwise; the water, earth, plants,
and fish are female, azd are never otherwise; the
remaining creation consists of male and female.

7. As regards the fish! it says that, at the time of
excitement, they go forwards and come back in the
water, two avd two, the length of a mile (hdsar),
which is one-fourth of a league (parasang), in the
running water; in that coming and going they then:
tub ¢hetr bodies together, and a kind of sweat drops
out betwixt them, azd both become pregnant.


CHApiER. ov Llc


1. On the nature of fire it says in revelation, that
fire is produced of five kinds, namely, the fire
Berezi-savang ’, the fire which shoots up before At-
harmazd the lord; the fire Vohu-fryan ’, the fire
which is in the bodies of men and animals; the fire
Urvazist*, the fire which is in plants; the fire


1 K2o has ‘the male fish, which is inconsistent with the pre-
ceding sentence.

2 These Avesta names of the five kinds of fire are enumerated
in Yas. XVII, 63-67, and the Pahlavi translation of that passage
interchanges the attributes ascribed to the first and fifth in the text,
thus it calls the first ‘the fire of sublime benefit in connection with
Varahran (Bahram).’ See also Selections of Zad-sparam, XI, 1.

° <The fire of the good diffuser ( or offerer), that within the
bodies of men’ (Pahl. Yas. XVII, 64).

* «The fire of prosperous (or abundant) life, that within plants’
(Pahl. Yas. XVII, 65).


62 BUNDAHIS.


Vazist}, the fire which is in a cloud wich stands
opposed to Spéngargak in conflict; the fire Spénist’,
the fire which they keep in use in the world, like-
wise the fire of Vahram*. 2. Of those five fires one
consumes both water and food, as that which is in
the bodies of men; one consumes water and con-
sumes no food, as that which is in plants, which live
and grow through water; one consumes food anzd
consumes no water, as that which they keep ih use
in the world, and likewise the fire of Vahram; one
consumes no water and no food, as the fire VAzist.
3. The Berezi-savang is that in the earth and moun-
tains azd other things, which+ Attharmazd created,
zm the original creation, like three breathing souls
(nism6); through the watchfulness and protection
due to them the world ever develops (vakhshéa).
4. And in the reign of Takhmérup®, when men
continually passed, on the back of the ox Sarsaok °,
from Khvaniras to the other regions, one night


1 «The fire Vazist, that which smites the demon Spengarga’
(Pahl. Yas. XVII, 66). See Chap. VII, 12.

2 «The propitious fire which stands in heaven before Athar-
mazd in a spiritual state’ (Pahl. Yas. XVII, 67).

5 The Bahram fire, or sacred fire at places of worship.

* M6 has min, instead of mfin, which alters the translation,
but not the meaning. This appears to be a different account of
the fire Berezi-savang to that given in § 1, but it merely implies
that it is fire in its spiritual state, and the name can, therefore, be
applied to any natural fire which can be attributed to supernatural
agency, such as burning springs of petroleum, volcanic eruptions,
ignis fatuus, phosphorescence of the sea, &c.

° The second Pésdadian monarch (see Chaps. XXXI, 2, 3,
XXXIV, 4).

® Written Srisaok in the MSS. in Chap. XV, 27; where it also
appears that the sea was ‘the wide-formed ocean.’ See likewise
Chap. XIX, 13.


CHAPTER XVII, 2-7. 63°


amid the sea the wind rushed upon! the fireplace—
the fireplace in which the fire was, such as was pro-
vided in three places on the back of the ox—-which
the wind dropped with the fire into the sea; and all
those three fires, like three breathing souls, con-
- tinually shot up in the place and position of the fire.
on the back of the ox, so that it becomes quite
light, azd the men pass again through the sea.
5. And in the reign of Yim* every duty was per-
formed more fully through the assistance of all those
three fires; and the fire Frébak* was established by
him at the appointed place (dad-g4s) on the Gad-
man-hémand (‘glorious’) mountain in Khvarizem 4,
which Yim constructed for them; and the glory of
Yim saves the fire Frébak from the hand of Dahak®.
6. In the reign of King Vistasp, upon revelation
from the religion*, it was established, out of
Khvarizem, at the Réshan (‘shining’) mountain in
KAvulistan, the country of Kavul (Kabul), just as it
remains there even now.

7. The fire Gtisasp, until the reign of Kai-Khas-
rob", continually afforded the world protection in
the manner aforesaid® ; and when Kai-Khfisréb" was


1 Compare staft with Pers. sitaftan, ‘to hasten.’

2 The third Pésdadian monarch (see Chaps. XXXI, 3, 4,
XXXIV, 4).

8 Also written Frébé, Frdba, Frobak, or Frébag.

4 The Av. Avairizem of Mihir Yt. 14, a province east of the
Caspian.

5 Tt is doubtful whether va gadman, ‘and the glory,’ or nism6,
‘the soul, reason’ (see Chaps. XXIII, 1, XXXIV, 4), should be
read. And it may even be that ‘the fire Frébak saves the soul of
Yim,’ &c. For Dahak see Chaps. XXXI, 6, XXXIV, 5.

6 Or, ‘upon declaration from revelation.’

7 Here written Kaf-Khfsrdbi.

8 In § 3. The.‘ three breathing souls’ of spiritual fire are sup-


. 64 BUNDAHIS.


extirpating the idol-temples of Lake Aééast? it
settled upon the mane of zs horse, and drove away
the darkness and gloom, and made 2z¢ quite light, so
that they might extirpate the idol-temples; in the
same locality the fire Gtsasp was established at the
appointed place on the Asnavand mountain ?.

8. The fire Barzin-Mitré, until the reign of King
Vistasp, ever assisted®, zz like manner, in the world,
and continually afforded protection; azd when the
glorified * Zaratist was introduced to produce con-
fidence in the progress of the religion, King Vistasp
and /zs offspring were steadfast in the religion
of God’, and Vistasp established ¢hzs fire at the
appointed place on Mount Révand, where they say
the Ridge of Vistasp (pist-i Vistasp4n) is %

g. All those three fires are the whole body of the
fire of Vahram, together with the fire of the world,
and those breathing souls are lodged in them; a
counterpart of the body of man when it forms in the
womb of the mother, azd a soul from the spirit-
world settles within z¢, which controls the body while
living; when that body dies, the body mingles with
the earth, azd the soul goes back to the spirit.


posed to be incorporated in its three earthly representatives, the
fires Frobak, Gfisasp, and Bargin-Mitré respectively.

* That is, of the province around that lake (see Chap. XXII, 2).

* See Chap. XII, 26. Compare Selections of Zad-sparam, VI, 22.

* Taking vagtd as equivalent to Pers. guzid; but it may be
equivalent to Pers. vazid, ‘ grew, shot up.’

* The epithet andshak-rfiban (Pers. nédshirv4n) means lite-
rally ‘immortal-souled,’

* Or, ‘of the angels,’ which plural form is often used to express
‘ God.’

® See Chap. XII, 18, 34.


CHAPTER XVII, 8—XVIII, 5. 65


CHAPTER XVIII,


1. On the nature of the tree they call Gékard! it
says in revelation, that z¢ was the first day when the
tree they call Gékard grew in the deep mud? within
the wide-formed ocean ; amd it is necessary as a pro-
ducer of the renovation of the universe, for they pre-
pare its immortality therefrom. 2, The evil spirit
has formed therein, among those which enter as
opponents, a lizard* as an opponent in that deep
water, so that it may injure the H6m*. 3. And for
keeping away that lizard, Atharmazd has created
there ten Kar fish ® which, at all times, continually
circle around the Hém, so that the head of one of
those fish is continually towards the lizard. 4. And
together with the lizard those fish are spiritually
fed *, that is, no food is necessary for them; avd till
the renovation of the universe they remain in con-
tention. 5. There are places where that fish is


1 A corruption of the Av. gaokerena of Vend. XX, 17, Adhar-
mazd Yt. 30, Haptén Yt. 3, Siréz. 7. In the old MSS. of the
Bundahis the form gdkard occurs thrice, gdkarn once, and
gogrv once.

2 Reading gil, ‘mud. Windischmann and Justi prefer gar,
‘mountain,’ and have ‘depth of the mountain.’

8 That the writer of the Bundahis applies the term vazagh toa
lizard, rather than a frog, appears from the ‘log-like lizard’s body’
of Chap. III, 9.

4 That is, the Gdkard tree, which is the white Hém (see Chap.
XXVII, 4).

5 The Av. karé masy6 of Vend. XIX, 140, Bahram Yt. 29,
Din Yt. 7; see also Chap. XXIV, 13.

6 Windischmann and Justi prefer translating thus: ‘ Moreover,
the lizard is the spiritual food of those fish ;’ but this can hardly
be reconciled with the Pahlavi text.


[5] : F


66 _ BUNDAHIS.


written of as ‘the Ariz! of the water; as it says
that the greatest of the creatures of Afharmazd
is that fish, and the greatest of those proceeding
from the evil spirit is that lizard; with the jaws
of their bodies, moreover, they snap in two what-
ever of the creatures of both sfzrzts has entered
between them, except that one fish which is the
VAs of Pan#Asadvarin?. 6. This, too, is said, that
those fish are so serpent-like® in that deep water,
they know the scratch (malisn) of a needle’s point
by which the water shall increase, or by which it
is diminishing.

7. Regarding the Vas of Panéasadvaran it is
declared that it moves within the wide-formed
ocean, and its length is as much as what a man,
while in a swift race, will walk from dawn till
when the sun goes down; so much that it does
not itself move’ the length of the whole of its
great body. 8. This, too, is said, that the crea-
tures of the waters live also specially under its
guardianship.

9. The tree of many seeds has grown amid the
wide-formed ocean, and in its seed are all plants ;
some say z¢ zs the proper-curing, some the energetic-
curing, some the all-curing °.


* See Chaps. XIV, 26, and XXIV, 13.

* The Av. vasim yam pawkasadvarim of Yas. XLI, 24.

° Transcribing the Paz. marddu into Pahlavi we have m4r
Ayin, ‘snake’s manner.’ Compare the text with Bahram Yt. 29.

* K2o omits the words from ‘ walk’ to ‘ move.’

* This is the tree of the saéna or Simurgh, as described in
Rashnu Yt. 17, and these three epithets are translations of its three
titles, hubis, eredhw6-bis, and vitsp6-bis. See also Chap.
RXV IT, 2,3.


CHAPTER XVIII, 6—XIXx, I. 67


10. Between! these trees of such kinds? is formed
the mountain with cavities, 9999 thousand myriads
em number, each myriad being ten thousand,
11. Unto that mountain is given the protection
of the waters, so that water streams forth from
there, in the rivulet channels, to the land of the
seven regions, as the source of all the sea-water in
the land of the seven regions is from there’,


CHapTreR XIX,


1. Regarding the three-legged ass‘ they say, that
it stands amid the wide-formed ocean, and its feet
are three, eyes six, mouths? nine, ears two, and horn


* This must have been the original meaning of the Huz. dén
(bén in the Sasanian inscriptions) before it was used as a synonym
of Paz. andar, ‘ within.” The mountain is between the white-Hém
tree and the tree of many seeds.

2 Transcribing the Paz. ofnoh into Pahlavi we have 4n-gtinak,
‘that kind ;’ or the word may be a miswriting of Paz. 4né, ‘there.’

8 This description of the mountain seems to identify it with the
Afisindém mountain of Chaps. XII, 6, and XIII, 5.

4 The Av. khara, ‘which is righteous avd which stands in the
middle of the wide-shored ocean’ (Yas. XLI, 28). Darmesteter,
in his Ormazd et Ahriman (pp. 148-151), considers this mytho-
logical monster as a meteorological myth, a personification of
clouds and storm; and, no doubt, a vivid imagination may trace a
striking resemblance between some of the monster’s attributes and
certain fanciful ideas regarding the phenomena of nature; the
difficulty is to account for the remaining attributes, and to be sure
that these fanciful ideas were really held by Mazdayasnians of old.
Another plausible view is to consider such mythological beings as
foreign gods tolerated by the priesthood, from politic motives, as
objects worthy of reverence; even as the goddess Anahita was
tolerated in the form of the angel of water.

6 This is the traditional meaning of the word, which (if this


F 2


68 BUNDAHIS.


one, body white, food spiritual, azd it is righteous.
2, And two of its six eyes are in the position of
eyes, two on the top of the head, and two in the
position of the hump!; with the sharpness of those
Six eyes it overcomes azd destroys. 3. Of the nine
mouths three are in the head, three in the hump,
and three in the inner part of the flanks; and each
mouth is about the size of a cottage, and 2¢ zs itself
as large as Mount Alvand?. 4. Each one of the
three feet, when it is placed on the ground, is as
much as a flock (gird) of a thousand sheep comes
under when they repose together; aud each pas-
tern® is so great in its circuit that a thousand men
with a thousand horses may pass inside. 5. As for
the two ears z¢ zs Mazendaran which they will en-
compass. 6. The one horn is as it were of gold
and hollow, and a thousand éranch horns‘ have
grown upon it, some befitting > a camel, some be-
fitting a horse, some befitting an ox, some befitting
an ass, both great and small. 7. With that horn it
will vanquish azd dissipate all the vile corruption
due to the efforts of noxious creatures.


meaning be correct) ought probably to be read yéng, and be
traced to Av. eeaungh (Yas. XXVIII, rr). In the MSS. the
word is marked as if it were pronounced g tind, which means ‘a
testicle.’ ;

* The hump is probably supposed to be over the shoulders, as
in the Indian ox, and not like that of the camel.

* Near Hamadan, rising 11,000 feet above the sea, or 6000
above Hamadan. It may be one of the Av. Aurvamté of ZamyAd
Yt. 3. The Pazand MSS. read Hunavand.

* Literally, ‘ the small of the foot,’ khtirdak-i ragelman.

* Or, ‘a thousand cavities (srfibd, Pers. surub, ‘cavern ”) have
grown in it.’

© Reading ztyak; compare Pers. ziyfdan, ‘to suit, befit’


CHAPTER XIX, 2-13. 69


8. When that ass shall hold z¢s neck in the ocean
eds ears will terrify (asahméd), and all the water
of the wide-formed ocean will shake with agitation,
and the side of Ganavad? will tremble (shivanéd),
9. When it utters a cry all female water-creatures,
of the creatures of Atharmazd, will become preg-
nant; and all pregnant noxious water-creatures,
when they hear that cry, will cast ther young.
10, When it stales in the ocean all the sea-water
will become purified, which is in the seven regions
of the earth—z¢ zs even on that account when all
asses which come into water stale in the water—as
it says thus: ‘If, O three-legged ass! you were not
created for the water, all the water in the sea would
have perished from the contamination which the
poison of the evil spirit has brought into its water,
through the death of the creatures of Aftharmazd.’

11, Tistar seizes the water? more completely from
the ocean with the assistance of the three-legged
ass. 12. Of ambergris also (ambar-iz) z¢ is de-
clared, that it is the dung of the three-legged ass;
for if it has much spirit food, then also the moisture
of the liquid nourishment goes through the veins
pertaining to the body into the urine, avd the dung
is cast away.

13. Of the ox Hadhayés*, which they call Sar-
saok‘, it says, that in the original creation men
passed from region to region wpon zt, and in the


1 A mountain (see Chap. XII, 29, 34).

2 See Chap. VII, 11.

8 Written Hadaydvs in the MSS. in Chap, XXX, 25, and Ha-
dhayas in the DAdistan-i Dintk, Part II, reply 89; it is a Pazand
reading in all three places.

* See Chaps. XV, 27, XVI, 4.


70 ’  BUNDAHIS.


renovation of the universe they prepare Hish (the
beverage producing immortality) from it. 14. It is
said, that life is in the hand of that foremost man, at
the end of 4zs years!, who has constructed the most
defences around this earth, until the renovation of
the universe is requisite.

15. Regarding the bird Aamrés? it says, that z¢
zs on the summit of Mount Albtirz; azd every three
years many come from the non-Iranian districts for
booty (gird) *, by going to bring damage (ziyan) on
the Iranian districts, and to effect the devastation of
the world; then the angel Barg +, aveng come up
from the low country of Lake Arag®, arouses that
very bird Kamrés, and it flies upon the loftiest of
all the lofty mountains, azd picks up all those non-
Iranian districts as a bird does corn.

16. Regarding Karsipt® they say, that it knew
how to speak words, avd brought the religion to
the enclosure which Yim made, and circulated 2¢ ;
there they utter the Avesta in the language of
birds.


* Transcribing the Paz. svadyi into Pahlavi we have snatih,
‘term of years.’ The whole sentence is very obscure.

2 Written Kamrés in Chap. XXIV, 29. It is the Av. Kamraos
(gen. of Kamru) of Fravardin Yt. 109. See also Chap. XXVII, 3.

* Or, ‘to an assembly.’

* The Av. Beregya of Yas. I, 21, IJ, 27, II, 35, ‘a spirit co-
operating with the Ushahina Gah, who causes the increase of
herds and corn.’

° Or, ‘of the district of Arag’ (see the note on Chap. XII, 2 3).
Although no Lake Arag is described in Chap. XXII, some of the
epithets referring to its Avesta equivalent Rangha are more appli-
cable to a lake than to a river, as in Bahram Yt. 29. Possibly the
low lands between the Caspian and Aral, or on the shores of the
Caspian, are meant. ;

® The Av. vis karsipta of Vend. II, 139, where, however, vis


CHAPTER XIX, 14-23. 71


17. Regarding the ox-fish they say, that it exists
in all seas; when it utters a cry all fish become
pregnant, and all noxious water-creatures cast their
young.

18. The griffon bird?, which is a bat, is noticed
(kar@) twice in another chapter (baba).

19. Regarding the bird Ashdézust *, which is the
bird Zobara*-vahman azd also the bird Sdk 4, they
say that it has given an Avesta with z¢s tongue; when
it speaks the demons tremble at it avd take nothing
away there; a nail-barzmg, when it is not prayed
over (afsid), the demons and wizards seize, and
like an arrow it shoots at and kills that bird.
20. On this account the bird seizes aud devours
a nail-paving when it is prayed over, so that the
demons may not control z#s use; when it is not
prayed over it does not devour z¢, and the demons
are able to commit an offence with it.

21. Also other beasts and birds are created all in
opposition to noxious creatures, as it says, that when
the birds azd beasts are all in opposition to noxious
creatures and wizards, Gc.° 22. This, too, it says,
that of all precious® birds the crow (valagh) is the
most precious. 23. Regarding the white falcon it


does not mean ‘bird,’ and the Pahlavi translator calls it ‘a
quadruped.’ In the Pahl. Visp. I, 1, ‘ the Karsipt is the chief of
flying creatures,’ and the Bundahis also takes it as a bird (see
Chaps. XIV, 23, XXIV, 11).

1 See Chaps. XIV, 11, 23, 24, XXIV, 11, 29.

2 The Av. Ashé-zusta of Vend. XVII, 26, 28.

8 Compare Pers. zflah, ‘a sparrow or lark.’

4 Compare Pers. sak, ‘a magpie.’

’ This quotation is evidently left incomplete.

6 The Pahlavi word is ambiguous; it may be read zil, ‘cheap,
common,’ or it may be zagar = yakar, ‘dear, precious,’ but the


72 BUNDAHIS.


says, that it kills the serpent with wings. 24. The
magpie (kaskinak) bird kills the locust, avd is
created in opposition to it. 25. The Kahrkas’,
dwelling in decay, which is the vulture, is created
for devouring dead matter (nas4i); so also are the
crow (valak)? and the mountain kite.

26. The mountain ox, the mountain goat, the
deer, the wild ass, azd other beasts devour all
snakes, 27. Sq also, of other axzmals, dogs are
created in opposition to the wolf species, azd for
securing the protection of sheep; the fox is created
in opposition to the demon Khava ; the ichneumon
is created in opposition to the venomous snake
(garzak) avd other noxious creatures in burrows ;
so also the great musk-azzmal is created in opposi-
tion® to ravenous intestinal worms (kadik-danak
garzak). 28. The hedgehog is created in opposi-
tion to the ant which carries off grain+, as it says,
that the hedgehog, every time that it voids urine
into an ant’s nest, will destroy a thousand ants;
when the grain-carrier travels over the earth it pro-


latter seems most probable, although the crow is perhaps as
‘common’ as it is ‘precious,’ as a scavenger in the East. Singu-
larly enough Pers. arzan is a synonym to both words, as it means
both ‘cheap’ and ‘ worthy.’

1 The Av. kahrk4sa of Vend. III, 66, IX, 181, Aban Yt. 61,
Mihir Yt. 129; its epithet zarman-manisn, ‘ dwelling in decay,’
is evidently intended as a translation of the Av. zarenumainis,
applied to it in Bahram Yt. 33, Din Yt. 13.

® The text should probably be valak-i styak va sar-i gar, ‘the
black crow and the mountain kite,’ which are given as different
birds in Shayast-la-shayast, II, 5.

8 K2o0 omits the words from this ‘ opposition’ to the next one.

* The m6r-i danak-kash is the Av. maoiris dané-karshé of
Vend, XIV, 14, XVI, 28, XVIII, 146,


CHAPTER XIX, 24-34. 04


duces a hollow track1!; when the hedgehog travels
over it the track goes away from it, and it becomes
level. 29. The water-beaver is created in opposition
to the demon which is in the water. 30. The con-
clusion is this, that, of all beasts and birds and
fishes, every one is created in opposition to some
noxious creature.

31. Regarding the vulture (kark4s) it says, that,
even from his highest flight, he sees when flesh the
size of a fist is on the ground; and the scent of
musk is created under his wing, so that if, in de-
vouring dead matter, the stench of the dead matter
comes owt from it, he puts #zs head back under the
wing avd is comfortable again. 32. Regarding the
Arab horse they say, that if, in a dark night, a single
hair occurs on the ground, he sees 2¢.

33. The cock is created in opposition to demons
and wizards, co-operating with the dog; as it says
in revelation, that, of the creatures of the world,
those which are co-operating with Srésh%, in de-
stroying the fiends, are the cock and the dog.
34. This, too, it says, that it would not have deen
managed if I had not created the shepherd’s dog,
which is the Pasus-haurva®, azd the house watch-
dog, the Vis-haurva*; for it says in revelation, that
the dog is a destroyer of such a fiend as covetous-


1 Comparing sfirak with Pers. suragh in preference to sfrakh
or sailakh, ‘a hole.’

2 Ay. Sraosha, the angel who is said specially to protect the
world from demons at night; he is usually styled ‘the righteous,’
and is the special opponent of the demon Aéshm, ‘ Wrath’ (see
Chap, XXX, 29).

8 These are the Avesta names of those two kinds of dog (see
Chap. XIV, 19).


oe


74 BUNDAHIS.


ness, among those which are in the nature (aitih) of
man and of animals. 35. Moreover it says, that, in-
asmuch as it will destroy all the disobedient, when
it barks it will destroy pain’; and its flesh and fat
are remedies for driving away decay and pain from
men ’.

36. Atharmazd created nothing useless whatever,
for all these (kola aé) are created for advantage ;
when one does not understand the reason of them,
it is necessary to ask the Dastir (‘high-priest’), for
his five dispositions (khfik)* are created in this
way that he may continually destroy the fiend (or
deceit).


CHAPTER XX.


1, On the nature of rivers it says in revelation,
that these two rivers flow forth from the north, part
from Albtrz and part’ from the Albfirz of Athar-


* Or it may be thus: ‘For it says thus: Wherewith will it de-
stroy? When it barks it will destroy the assembly (gird) of all the
disobedient.’

* This is the most obvious meaning, but Spiegel (in a note to
Windischmann’s Zoroastrische Studien, p. 98) translates both this
sentence and the next very differently, so as to harmonize with
Vend. XIII, 78, 99.

* The five dispositions (khim) of priests are thus detailed in old
Pahlavi MSS.: ‘ First, innocence; second, discreetness of thoughts,
words, and deeds; third, holding the priestly office as that of a very
wise and very true-speaking master, who has learned religion atten-
tively and teaches 7 truly ; fourth, celebrating the worship of God
(yazdan) with a ritual (nfrang) of rightly spoken words and.
scriptures known by heart (narm naskth4); fifth, remaining day
and night propitiatingly in zs vocation, struggling with his own
resistance (haméstar), and, al/ life long, not turning away from
steadfastness in religion, and being energetic in 47s vocation. -


CHAPTER XIX, 35—xx, 4. 75


mazd'; one towards the west, that is the Arag?;
and one towards the east, that is the Véh river.
2. After them eighteen rivers flowed forth from
the same source, just as the remaining waters have
flowed forth from them in great multitude; as they
_ say that they flowed out so very fast, one from the
other, as when a man recites one Ashem-voht 3 of a
series (padisdr). 3. All of those, with the same
water, are again mingled with these rivers, that is,
the Arag river and Véh river. 4. Both of them
continually circulate through the two extremities of
the earth, and pass into the sea; and all the regions
feast owing to the discharge (zah4k) of both, which,
after both arrive together at the wide-formed ocean,
returns to the sources whence they flowed out; as
it says in revelation, that just as the light comes in


through Albirz azd goes out through Albirz4, the


1 So in K2o, and if correct (being only partially confirmed by
the fragment of this chapter found in all MSS. between Chaps. XIII
and XIV) this reading implies that the rivers are derived partly
from the mountains of Albfirz, and partly from the celestial Albfirz,
or the clouds in the sky. M6 has ‘ flow forth from the north part
of the eastern Albfirsz.’

* For further details regarding these two semi-mythical rivers
see §$ 8, 9.

8 The sacred formula most frequently recited by the Parsis, and
often several times in succession, like the Pater-noster of some
Christians ; it is not, however, a prayer, but a declaratory formula
in ‘praise of righteousness’ (which phrase is often used as its
name in Pahlavi). It consists of twelve Avesta words, as follows:

Ashem vohfi vahistem astt,

usta astt; usta ahmai

hyad ashai vahistai ashem.
And it may be translated in the following manner: ‘ Righteousness
is the best good, a blessing it is; a blessing be to that which is
righteousness to perfect rectitude’ (Asha-vahista the archangel).


4 See Chap.Vy 5.


76 : BUNDAHIS.


water also comes out through Albfirz and goes away
through Albfrz, 5. This, too, it says, that the
spirit of the Arag begged of Atiharmazd thus; ‘O
first omniscient creative power!! from whom the
Véh river begged for the welfare that thou mightest
grant, do thou then grant z¢ in my quantity!’ 6.
The spirit of the Véh river similarly begged of
Atharmazd for the Arag river; azd on account of
loving assistance, one towards the other, they flowed
forth with equal strength, as before the coming of
the destroyer they proceeded without rapids, and
when the fiend shall be destroyed? they wz// again
be without rapids.

7, Of those eighteen principal rivers, distinct
from the Arag river avd Véh river, and the other
rivers which flow out from them, I wz// mention the
more famous: the Arag river, the Véh river; the
Diglat* river they call also again the Véh river®,
the Frat river, the Daitik river, the Dargd4m river,
the Zéndak river, the Haréi river, the Marv river,
the Hétimand river, the Akhéshir river, the Navada®
river, the Zismand river, the Khvegand river, the
Balkh river, the Mehrva river they call the Hendva
river, the Spéd’ river, the Rad ® river which they call
also the Koir, the Khvaraé river which they call


* So in M6, but K20 has, ‘ First is the propitiation of all kinds,’

® Literally, ‘when they shall destroy the fiend.’

* For details regarding these rivers see the sequel.

* The Paz. Deyrid is evidently a misreading of Pahl. Diglat or
Digrat, which occurs in § r2.

* So in K2o, but M6 (omitting two words) has, ‘they call also
the Didgar.’

® No further details are given, in this chapter, about this river,
but it seems to be the river Nahvtak of Chap. XXI, 6, the Natvtak
of Chap. XXIX, 4, 5.

7 K20 has ‘ Spend.’ ®* Called Tort in § a4,


CHAPTER XX, 5-9. vy


also the Mesrgan, the Harhaz! river, the Teremet
river, the Khvanaidis? river, the Daraga river, the
Kasik river, the Séd* (‘shining’) river Péda-meyan
or Katru-meyan river of Mokarstan.

8. I wzlZ mention them also a second time: the
_Arag* river is that of which it is said that it comes
out from Albfirz in the land of Sftrdk®, zz which
they call it also the Ami; it passes on through the
land of Spétos, which they also call Mesr, and they
call it there the river Niv® 9. The Véh? river


* Miswritten Araz in Pazand, both here and in § 27.
? M6 has Khvanatnidis, but in K2o0 it is doubtful whether the
_ extra syllable (which is interlined) is intended to be inserted or
substituted; the shortet form is, however, more reconcilable with
the Pahlavi form of Vendeses in § 29.
®* As there is no description of any S€d river it is probably only
an epithet of the Péda-meyan or Xatru-meyan (pédak being the
usual Pahlavi equivalent of Av. fithré). Justi suggests that Mo-
karstan (Mokarsta rfid in M6) stands for Pers. Moghulst4n, ‘ the
country of the Moghuls,’ but this is doubtful.
* Sometimes written Arang or Aréng, but the nasal is usually
omitted; it is the Av. Rangha of Aban Yt. 63, Rashnu Yt. 18,
Ram Yt. 27, which is described more like a lake or sea in Vend. -
I, 77, Bahram Yt. 29. This semi-mythical river is supposed to
encompass a great part of the known world (see Chap. VII, 16),
and the Bundahis probably means to trace its course down the Ama
(Oxus) from Sogdiana, across the Caspian, up the Aras (Araxes)
or the Kur (Cyrus), through the Euxine and Mediterranean, and
up the Nile to the Indian Ocean. The Am& (Oxus) is also some-
times considered a part of the Véh river or Indus (see §§ 22, 28).
5 Sogdiana (see Chap. XV, 29), the country of the Ama river.
® The combination of the three names in this clause, as Justi
observes, renders it probable that we should read, ‘the land of
Egypt, which is called Misr, and where the river is the Nile.
- The letter S in Paz. Spétos is very like an obsalete form of Av. g,
or it may be read as Pahl. tk or tg, so the name may originally
have been Gpétos or Ikpétos ; and the Paz. Niv, if transcribed into
Pahlavi, can also be read Nil.

~7 The ‘good’ river, which, with the Arag and the ocean, completes


78 BUNDAHIS.


passes on in the east, goes through the land of
Sind 1, ad flows to the sea in Hinddstan, and they
call it there the Mehra? river. 10. The sources of
the Frat® river are from the frontier of Aram, they
feed upon zt in Sdristan, and it flows to the Diglat
river; and of this Frat z¢ zs* that they produce irri-
gation over the land. 11. It is declared that Mant-
skithar excavated the sources, avd cast back the
water all to one place, as it says thus: ‘I reverence
the Frat, full of fish, which Manfs4ihar excavated
for the benefit of his own soul, and he seized the
water and gave to drink’, 12. The Diglat® river
comes out from Salman’, azd flows to the sea in
Khigistan. 13. The Ddaitik*-river is the river


the circuit of the known world, and is evidently identified with the
Indus ; sometimes it seems also to include the Am (Oxus), as
Bactria was considered a part of India; thus we find the Balkh and
Teremet rivers flowing into the Véh (see §§ 22, 28).

7 See § 30,

2 No doubt the Mehrva or Hendva river Of § 7, and the Mihran
of Ouseley’s Oriental Geography of the pseudo Ibn ‘Hafiqal,
pp. 148-155, which appears to combine the Satlig and lower Indus.
The final n is usually omitted by the Bundahis after 4 in Pazand
words. ‘This river is also called Kasak (see § 30).

* The Euphrates, which rises in Armenia (part of the eastern
empire of the Romans), traverses Syria, and joins the Tigris.

* Or, ‘and its convenience is this ;’ a play upon the words
farhat and FrAt, which are identical in Pahlavi.

° Referring probably to canals for irrigation along the course of
the Euphrates.

° The Tigris (Arabic Diglat), Hiddekel of Gen. ii. 14, Dan.
x. 4, and perhaps the Av. tighris of Tistar Yt. 6, 37; misread
Déirid in Pazand.

* The country of Salm (see Chap. XV, eee son of Frédtin (see
Chap. XXXI, 9, 10). The name can also be read Dilman, which
is the name of:a place in the same neighbourhood.

® The Av. Daitya of Vend. XIX, 5, AGharmazd Yt. 21, Aban
Yt. 112, Gds Yt. 29. The‘ good daitya of Airyana-vaég6’ is also


CHAPTER XX, IO-19, 79


which comes out from Airan-vég, asd goes out
through the hill-country!; of all rivers the noxious
creatures in it are most, as it says, that the Daitik
river is full of noxious creatures. 14. The Dargam
river is in Side. 15. The Zend? river passes
through the mountains of Pangistan, and flows away
_ to the Haro river. 16, The Haro ® river flows out
from the Apdarsén range* 17. The Hétimand®
river is in Sagastan, and its sources are from the
Aparsén range; this is distinct from that which
Frasiyav conducted away*. 18. The river Akhdéshir
is in Kimis’. 19. The Zismand® river, in the direc-


mentioned in Vend. I, 6, II, 42, 43, Aban Yt. 17, 104, Ram Yt. 2,
but this may not be a river, though the phrase has, no doubt, led to
locating the river Daittk in Airan-vég.

1 Paz. gopestan in K2o, which is evidently Pahl. kéfistan, but
not the Kéhistén of southern Persia. M6 has ‘the mountain of
Pangistan, which must be incorrect, as according to §§ 15, 16, this is
in north-east Khuras4n, and too far from Atran-vég in Atar6-patakan
(Adar-bigan), see Chap. XXIX, 12. Justi proposes to read Gur-
gistan (Georgia), and identifies the Dattik with the Araxes. But,
adhering to the text of K2o, the Daittk rises in Adar-big4n and
departs through a hill-country, a description applicable, not only
to the Araxes, but also more particularly to the Saféd Rfid or
white river; although this river seems to be mentioned again as
the Spéd or Spend river in § 23.

2 Written Zondak in § 7. This can hardly be the Zendah river
of Ispahan, but is probably the Tegend river, which flows past
Meshhed into the Heri river.

§ This is the Heri, which flows past Herat.

* See Chap. XII, 9.

5 The Etymander of classical writers, now the Hélmand in Af-
ghanistan. The Av. Haétumat of Vend. I, 50, XIX, 130, Zamyad
Yt. 66, is the name of the country through which it flows.

6 See § 34 and Chap. XXI, 6.

7 The district about Damaghan.

§ Perhaps the Zarafsan.


80 BUNDAHIS.


tion of Soghd, flows away towards the Khvegand
river. 20. The Khvegand! river goes on through
the midst of Samarkand azd Pargana, and they call
it also the river Ashard. 21..The Marv? river, a
glorious river in the east, flows out from the Apar-
sén range. 22. The Balkh river comes out from
the Aparsén mountain of Bamikan‘, azd flows on to
the Véh' river. 23. The Spéd® river is in Ataré-
patakan; they say that Dahak begged a favour’
here from Aharman and the demons. 24. The Tort
river, which they call also the Koir, comes out from


1 This is evidently not the small affluent now called the Khugand,
but the great Syr-darya or laxartes, which flows through the pro-
vinces of Farghanah and Samarkand, past Kokand, Khugand, and
Tashkand, into the Aral. The Paz. Ashard represents Pahl.
Khshart, or Ashart (laxartes).

2 The Murghab.

> Or, ‘in Kharasan/’

4 Bamian, near which the river of Balkh has its source.

® Justi observes that it should be ‘the Arag river;’ but accord-
ing to an Armenian writer of the seventh century the Persians
called the Oxus the Véh river, and considered it to be in India,
because Buddhists occupied the country on its banks (see Garrez
in Journal Asiatique for 1869, pp. 161-198). It would seem,
therefore, that the Oxus was sometimes (or in early times) con-
sidered a part of the Arag (Araxes), and sometimes (or in later
times) a part of the Véh (Indus).

* So in M6, but K2o has ‘ Spend, both here and in§ 7. The
name of this river corresponds with that of the Saféd Rfd, although
the position of that river agrees best with the account given of the
Daitik in § 13.

_ ™ Compare Ram Yt. 19, 20. K2o has ‘ there,’ instead of ‘here.’

* Called Rad in § 7 (by the loss of the first letter of the original
Pahlavi name); by its alternative name, Koir, Justi identifies it as
the Kfr in Georgia, flowing into the Caspian, or sea of Vergan,
the Av. Vehrkana (Hyrcania) of Vend. I, 42, which is Girgan in
Pahlavi.


CHAPTER XX, 20-30. Si


the sea of Giklan', and flows to the sea of Vergan”.
25. The Zahavayi*® is the river whzch comes out
from Atar6-patakan, avd flows to the sea in Pars.
26. The sources of the Khvaraé‘ river are from
Spahan®; it passes on through Khigistan, flows forth
to the Diglat® river, and in Spahan they call it the
-Mesrkan’ river. 27. The Harhaz® river is in Tapa-
ristan, and its sources are from Mount Dimdvand.
28. The Teremet’ river flows away to the Véh river.
29. The Vendeses?? river is in that part of Pars
which they call Sagastan. 30. The Kadsak™ river
comes out through a ravine (kaf) in the province of
Tis }*, and they call it there the Kasp river; more-


7 M6 has Pz. Keydseh, but this is in Sagastan (see Chap.
XIII, 16).

2 The MSS. have Verga, but the final nasal after 4 is often
omitted in Pazand readings in the Bundahis.

3 Not mentioned in § 7. Possibly one of the rivers Zab, which
rise on the borders of Adarbig4n, flow into the Tigris, and so reach
the Persian Gulf, the sea on the coast of Pars. Or it may be the
Shirvan, another affluent of the Tigris, which flows through the
district of Zohab.

4 The Kuran, upon which the town of Shfistar was founded by
one of the early Sasanian kings, who also dug a canal, east of the
town, so as to form a loop branch of the river; this canal was
called Nahr-i Masrfigan by Oriental geographers (see Rawlinson,
Journal Roy. Geogr. Soc. vol. ix. pp. 73-75):

5 Ispahan in Persian.

6 Miswritten Dayrid in Pazand (see § 12).

7 Written in Pazand without the final n, as usual. ‘This is the
old name of the canal forming the eastern branch of the Kuran at
Shistar; it is now called Ab-i Gargar.

8 Flows into the Caspian near Amal,

® Probably the river which flows into the Am@ (Oxus) at Tar-
maz; but, in that case, the Oxus is here again identified with the
Véh (Indus) as in § 22, instead of the Arag (Araxes) as in § 8.

10 Called Khvanaidis, or Khvanainidis, in § 7.

11 Called Kasik in § 7. 12 Close to Meshhed.


[5] G


$2 BUNDAHIS.

SEE oO EN SD OO ne Se ed eg ee
over, the river, which is there the Véh, they call the
KAsak!; even in Sind they call z¢ the Kasak. 31.
The Péd4k-miyan 2, which is the river Katru-miyan,
is that which is in Kangdez*. 32. The Daraga
river is in Afran-vég, on the bank (bar) of which
was the dwelling of Pérdshasp, the father of Zara-
tist* 33. The other innumerable waters and rivers,
springs avd channels are one in origin with those ®;
so in various districts avd various places they call
them by various names.

34. Regarding Frdsiyav® they say, that a thou-
sand springs were conducted away by him into the
sea KyAdnsih’, suitable for horses, suitable for
camels, suitable for oxen, suitable for asses, both
great and small*; and he conducted the spring
Zarinmand (or golden source), which is the Hétd-
mand® river they say, into the same sea; and he
conducted the seven navigable waters of the source
of the Vazaéni?!® river into the same sea, axd made
men settle there.


1 Or, ‘this same Véh river they call there the Kasak; even in
Sént they call z# the Kasak;’ Sént is apt to be miswritten Sénd
or Sind (see Chap. XV, 29).

2 See § 7. The latter half of both names can also be read
mahan, mahd, or mahdn. Péshydtan, son of Vistasp, seems to
have taken a surname from this river (see Chap. XXIX, 5).

§ See Chap: XXIX, 10.

* See Chaps. XXIV, 18, XXXH, 2,2.

° Or, ‘are from those as a source,’

° The MSS. have ‘Pérfishasp,’ but compare § 17 and Chap.
XXI, 6. The two names are somewhat alike in Pahlavi writing.

q See Chap. XIII, 16.

J Compal Chap. XIX, 6. K2o omits the words ‘suitable for
asses’ here.

® Another Hétfimand according to § ry. Possibly a dried-up
bed of that river.

© Kao has Vataéni; & and t being much alike in Pazand. The


CHAPTER XX, 31-—XXI, 2. $3
eee eee ee


CHAPTER X XI},


1. In revelation they mention seventeen ? species
of liquid (maya), as one liquid resides in plants ?;
second, that which is flowing from the mountains,
that is, the rivers; third, that which is rain-water;
fourth, that of tanks azd other special constructions ;
fifth, the semen of animals and men; sixth, the urine
of animals and men‘; seventh, the sweat of animals
and men; the eighth liquid is that in the skin of
animals and men; ninth, the tears of animals and
men; tenth, the blood of animals and men; eleventh,
the oil in animals and men, a necessary in both
worlds*®; twelfth, the saliva of animals and men,
with which they nourish the embryo®; the thirteenth
is that which is under the bark? of plants, as it is
said that every bark has a liquid, through which a
drop appears on a twig (tékh) when placed four
finger-breadths before a fire’; fourteenth, the milk of
animals and men. 2. All these, through growth, or


‘navigable (nadvtak) waters’ may be ‘the Navada river’ of § 7,
‘the river N&hvtak’ of Chap. XXI, 6, and Naivték of Chap.
XXIX, 4, 5.

1 This chapter is evidently a continuation of the preceding one,

2 Only fourteen are mentioned in the details which follow.

3 Most of these details are derived from the Pahl. Yas. XXX VIII,
4-9, 13, 143; and several varieties of water are also described in
Vas, EXVII, 15.

* This sixth liquid is omitted by K2o.

5 Departed souls are said to be fed with oil in paradise.

6 K20 omits the word pfis, ‘ embryo.’

7 The meaning ‘bark’ for Paz. ayvan is merely a guess; An-
queti] has ‘sap’ (compare Pers. Avin4, ‘juice’), but this is hardly
consistent with the rest of the sentence.

® See Chap. XXVII, 25.

Cag


84 BUNDAHIs.


the body which is formed, mingle again with the
rivers, for the body which is formed and the growth
are both one.

3. This, too, they say, that of these three rivers,
that is, the Arag river, the Marv river, avd the
Veh! river, the spirits were dissatisfied, so that they
would not flow into the world, owing to the defile-
ment of stagnant water (armést) which they beheld,
so that they were in tribulation through it until Zara-
tast was exhibited to them, whom I (Adharmazd)
will create, who wz/7 pour sixfold holy-water (zér)
into it avd make z¢ again wholesome; he will preach
carefulness?, 4. This, too, it says, that, of water
whose holy-water is more and pollution less, the
holy-water has come in excess, azd in three years it
goes back to the sources?; ¢ha¢ of which the pollu-
tion and holy-water have both become equal, arrives
back in six years; ¢hat of which the pollution is
more and holy-water less, arrives back in nine years.
5. So, also, the growth of plants is connected, in this
manner, strongly with the root‘; so, likewise, the
blessings (afrin) which the righteous utter, come
back, in this proportion, to themselves,

6. Regarding the river Nahvtak® it says, that
Frasiyav of Tar conducted it away; azd when ®


* Kzo has ‘ Héttimand,’ but M6 has ‘ Sapir,’ the Huz. equiva-
lent of ‘ Véh,’ which is more probable,

? Or, ‘abstinence from impurity.

* The source Arédvivstir (see Chap. XIII, 3, 10).

* That is, by the sap circulating like the waters of the earth.
The greater part of this sentence is omitted in K20.

° Probably ‘the Navada’ and ‘navigable waters’ of Chap. XX,
4, 34,and Naivtak of Chap. XXIX, 4, 5.


* Reading amat, ‘when,’ instead of mfin, ‘which’ (see note
to Chap. I, 7).


CHAPTER XXI, 3—XXII, 3. 85


Hiishédar!? comes it we// flow again suitable for
horses; so, also, wz// the fountains of the sea
Kyansih*. 7. Kyansth? is the one where the home
(ginak) of the Kayan race is,


CHAPTER XXII.


1. On the nature of lakes it says in revelation,
that thus many fountains of waters have come into
notice, which they call lakes (var); counterparts of
the eyes (£ashm) of men are those fountains (£ash-
mak) of waters; such as Lake Kéfast, Lake Sévbar,
Lake Khvarizem?, Lake Frazdan, Lake Zarinmand,
Lake Asvast, Lake Husru, Lake Satavés, Lake
Urvis.

2. I wzl7 mention them also a second time: Lake
Aékast * is in Ataré-patakan, warm is the water azd
opposed to harm, so that nothing whatever is living
in z¢; and its source is connected with the wide-
formed ocean®. 3. Lake Sévbar is in the upper
district and country on the summit of the mountain
of Tiis*; as it says, that the Sid-bahar 7 (‘share of
benefit’) is propitious and good from which abound-


1 Written Khfarshédar, as usual in Bundahis (see Chap. XXXII, 8).

2 Written Kayaseh in Pazand (see Chap. XIII, 16).

8 P4z. Khvarazm both here and in § 4.

4 Ay, Kathasta of Abn Yt. 49, Gds Vt. 18, 21, 22, Ashi
Yt. 38, 41, Stréz. 9. The present Lake Urumiyah in Adarbigan,
which is called Khegest, or Kegest, by ‘Hamdu-l-lah Mustafifi.

> Implying that the water is salt.

6 The Kéndrasp mountain (see Chap. XII, 24). This lake is
probably a small sheet of water on the mountains near Meshhed.

7 Evidently a pynning etymology of the name of this lake.


86 BUNDAHIS.


ing liberality is produced. 4. Regarding Lake Khva-
rizem! it says that excellent benefit is produced
from it, that zs, Arshisang? the rich in wealth, the
well-portioned wth abounding pleasure. 5. Lake
Frazdan®* is in Sagastan; they say, where a generous
man, who zs righteous, throws anything into it, it
receives 727; when not righteous, it throws 2¢ out
again; its source also is connected with the wide-
formed ocean. 6. Lake Zarinmand is in Hamadan‘.
7. Regarding Lake Asvast it is declared that the
undefiled® water which it contains is always con-
stantly flowing into the sea, so bright and copious °
that ove might say that the sun had come into it and
looked at Lake Asvast, into that water which is
requisite for restoring the dead in the renovation
of the universe. 8. Lake Husru’ is within fifty ®


* The province of Khvarizem was between the Aral and Cas-
pian, along the ancient course of the Oxus (see Chap. XVII, 5).
This lake has been identified with the Aral.

® Av. ashis vanguhi, ‘ good rectitude,’ personified as a female
angel whose praises are celebrated in the Ashi Yast; in later
times she has been considered as the angel dispensing wealth and
possessions. She is also called Ard (Av. areta, which is synony-
mous with asha), see Chap. XXVII, 24.

® The ‘ Frazdanava water’ of Abén Yt. 108 and Farhang-i Ofm-
khadfik, p. 17. Justi identifies it with the Ab-ist4dah (: standing
water’) lake, south of Ghazni. It is here represented as a salt
lake.

* Keo adds, ‘they say.’ This lake cannot be the spring Zarin-
mand of Chap. XX, 34.

> Paz. avnasti transcribed into Pahlavi is avinastag, ‘unspoiled,’
the equivalent of Av. anahita in Yas. LXIV,. 1:46, Visp/ 1, 1:

° Kzo has ‘glorious’ as a gloss to ‘copious.’

" The Av. Haosravangha of Siroz. 9, ‘the lake which is named
Husravau’ of Zamyad Yt. 56. It may be either Lake Van or
Lake Sevan, which are nearly equidistant from Lake Urumiyah.

* M6 has ‘ four leagues,’


CHAPTER XXII, 4—XXIII, 3. 87


leagues (parasang) of Lake Kéfast. 9. Lake (or,
rather, Gulf) Satavés? is that already written about,
between the wide-formed ocean and the Patik. 10.
It is said that in Kamindan is an abyss (zafar),
from which everything they throw in always comes
back, and it wz// not receive it unless alive ( ganvar);
when they throw a living creature into it, it carries
2¢ down; men say that a fountain from hell is in it.
11. Lake Urvis is on Hfigar the lofty?,


Carter X XJH.


1. On the nature of the ape azd the bear they
say, that Yim, when reason (nism6) departed from
him *, for fear of the demons took a demoness as
wife, and gave Yimak, who was Azs sister, to a
demon as wife; and from them have originated
the tailed ape and bear azd other species of
degeneracy.

2. This, too, they say, that in the reign of Azi
Dahak* a young woman was admitted to a demon,
and a young man was admitted to a witch (parik),
and on seeing them they had intercourse; owing to
that one intercourse the black-skinned negro arose
from them. 3. When Fréadtin® came to them they
fled from the country of Iran, azd settled upon the
sea-coast ; now, through the invasion of the Arabs,
they are again diffused through the country of Iran.


1 See Chap. XIII, 9-13.

assee Chaps; XUy aoMITL, 4.

5 See Chap. XXXIV, 4. This is the Jamshéd of the Shah-
namah. Perhaps for ‘reason’ we should read ‘glory.’

4 See Chaps. XXXI, 6, XXXIV, 5.

5 See Chap. XXXIV, 6.


88 BUNDAHIS.


CHAPTER XXIV.


1. On the chieftainship of men and animals and
every single thing it says in revelation, that first of
the human species Gayémard was produced, brilliant
and white, with eyes which looked out for the great
one, him who was here the Zarattstréttim (chief
high-priest); the chieftainship of all things was from
Zaratist?. 2. The white ass-goat ?, which holds zés
head down, is the chief of goats, the first of those
species created*, 3. The black sheep which is fat
and white-jawed is the chief of sheep; it was the
first of those species created*, 4. The camel with
white-haired knees azd two humps is the chief of
camels. 5. First the black-haired ox with yellow
knees was created; he is the chief of oxen. 6,
First the dazzling white (arts) horse, with yellow
ears, glossy hair, avd white eyes, was produced; he
is the chief of horses. 7. The white, cat-footed 4
ass is the chief of asses. 8. First of dogs the fair
(ards) dog with yellow hair was produced; he is the
chief of dogs. 9. The hare was produced brown


* So in all MSS., but by reading min, ‘who,’ instead of min,
‘from,’ we should have, ‘him, who was here the chief high-priest
and chieftainship of all things, who was Zarattist.’ The Pahlavi
Visp. I, 1, gives the following list of chiefs: ‘ The chief of spirits is
Afiharmazd, the chief of worldly existences is Zaratist, the chief of
water-creatures is the Kar-fish, the chief of /amd-animals is the
ermine, the chief of flying-creatures is the Karsipt, the chief of the
wide-travellers is the ..., the chief of those suitable for grazing
is the ass-goat.’

See Chap. XIV, 14.

* It is doubtful whether the phrase, ‘the first of those species
created,’ belongs to this sentence or the following one.

* Or, ‘cat-legged.’


CHAPTER XXIV, I-17. 89


(bir); he is the chief of the wide-travellers. ro.
Those beasts which have no dread whatever of the
hand are evil. 11. First of birds the griffon of three
natures’ was created, not for here (this world), for
the Karsipt ? is the chief, which they call the falcon
(Aark), that which revelation says was brought to
the enclosure formed by Yim. 12. First of fur
animals the white ermine was produced; he is the
chief of fur animals; as it says that 27 zs the white
ermine which came unto the assembly of the arch-
angels. 13. The Kar-fish, ov Ariz?, is the chief of
the water-creatures, 14. The Daitik* river is the
chief of streams. 15. The Déaraga® river is the .
chief of exalted rivers, for the dwelling of the father
of Zaratist was on its banks*, avd Zarattist was
born there. 16. The hoary forest’ is the chief of
forests. 17. Hagar the lofty*®, on which the water
of Arédvivstr flows aud leaps, is the chief of sum-
’ mits, since 2f zs that above which’ is the revolution
of the constellation Satavés®, the chief of reser-


1 The Simurgh (see § 29 and Chap. XIV, 11, 23, 24). In Mkh.
LXII, 37-39, it is mentioned as follows: ‘ And Sinamrt’s resting-
place is on the tree which is opposed to harm, of all seeds; and
always when he rises aloft a thousand twigs will shoot forth from
that tree; and when he alights he will break off the thousand twigs,
and he sheds their seed therefrom.’

2 See Chap. XIX, 16. In § 29 Kamrés is said to be the chief.

& See Chaps. XIV, 12, 26, XVIIT 3-6.

moce Chap. AX, 53.

5 See Chap. XX, 32.

6 The MSS. have ‘in Balkh’ instead of ‘on the banks,’

7 The arfis-i razur is the Av. spaétitem razurem of Ram
Wins 30%

8 See Chap. XII, 5.

® ‘See Chap. It, 7.


90 BUNDAHIS.


voirs!, 18. The Hém which is out-squeezed is the
chief of medicinal plants?, 19. Wheat is the chief
of large-seeded® grains. 20. The desert wormwood
is the chief of unmedicinal? plants. 21. The sum-
mer vetch, which they also call ‘pag’ (g4virs), is
the chief of small-seeded grains®. 22. The Kastik
(sacred thread-girdle) is the chief of clothes. 23.
The Bazdyvana® is the chief of seas. 24. Of two
men, when they come forward together, the wiser
and more truthful is chief.

25. This, too, it says in revelation, that Adhar-
mazd created the whole material world one abode,
so that all may be one; for there is much splendour
and glory of industry in the world. 26. Whatsoever
he performs, who practises that which is good, is
the value of the water of life’; since water is not
created alike * in value, for the undefiled water of
Arédvivstr is worth the whole water of the sky and
earth of Khvaniras®, except the Arag river?®, created
by Atharmazd. 27. Of trees the myrtle axzd date,


* The meaning of Paz. gobara is doubtful, but it is here taken
as standing for Pahl. gdbalan, equivalent to the plural of Pers.
g6l or kdl, ‘areservoir ;’ Satavés being a specially ‘watery’ con-
stellation (see Tistar Yt. 0). Justi traces gobardn to Av. gufra,
and translates it by ‘protecting s/ars,’

* Paz. khvad and bakaga evidently stand for Pahl. htid (Av.
huta) and begashk.

* Compare Av. as-danunim-fa yavananim (Tistar Yt. 29).

* Paz. abakaga stands for Pahl. abezashk.

° Compare Av. kasu-danunim-#a vastranaim (Tistar Yt. 29).

° Justi identifies this with Lake Van, but perhaps Lake Sevan
may be meant.

7 Or, ‘its value is water.’ K20 omits the word ‘ water,’

* Reading ham instead of ham4k, ‘all.’

® See Chap. XI, 2-6.

20 ‘See ‘Chap. XX, 8;


CHAPTER XXIV, 18—xxv, 3. QI


on which model, it is said, trees were formed, are
worth all the trees of Khvaniras, except the Gdkard
tree’ with which they restore the dead.

28. Of mountains Mount Aparsén’s beginning is
wm Sagastan and end in Khiigistan, some’ say 2¢ zs all
the mountains of Pars, and is chief of all mountains
except Albirz. 29. Of birds Kamrés? is chief, who
is worth all the birds in Khvaniras, except the grif-
fon of three natures. 30. The conclusion is this,
that every one who performs a great duty has then
much value.


CHAPTER XXV,


1. On matters of religion® it says in revelation
thus: ‘The creatures of the world were created by
me complete in three hundred and sixty-five days,’
that is, the six periods of the Gahanbdars which are
completed ina year. 2. It is always necessary first
to count the day azd afterwards the night, for first
the day goes off, azd then the night comes on*.
3. And from the season (gas) of Méddk-shém®,


1 See Chap. XVIII, 1-4.

2 See Chap. XIX, 15, where it is written KAmrés. This § is at
variance with § 11, which gives the chieftainship to Karsipt.

> That is, ‘on the periods for observance of religious duties.’

* The Jewish and Muhammadan practice is just the contrary.

P’the Av. maidhy6-shema of Yas. Ij 27, Il, 36, TT 42,
‘Gi Ca ieee ian © Oe Afringan Gahanbar 2, 8. It is the second
season-festival, held on the five days ending with the ro5th day of
the Parsi year, which formerly corresponded approximately to mid-
summer, according to the Bundahis. Later writings assert that it
commemorates the creation of water.


Q2 BUNDAHIS.


which is the auspicious! day Khir of the month
Tir?, to the season of Médiydrém?*, which is the


1 A dispute as to the meaning of this word formed no small
part of the Kabisah controversy, carried on between the leaders of
the two rival ‘sects of Parsis in Bombay about fifty years ago.
Dastur Edalji Darabji, the high-priest of the predominant sect (who
adhered to the traditional calendar of the Indian Parsis), insisted
that it meant ‘solar,’ or ‘belonging to the calendar rectified for
solar time by the intercalation of a month every 120 years;’ Mulla
Firfiz, the high-priest of the new sect (who had adopted the calendar
of the Persian Parsis, which is one menth in advance of the other),
asserted that the word had no connection with intercalation, but
meant ‘commencing,’ or ‘pertaining to New-year’s day,’ as trans-
lated into Sanskrit, by Néryésang, in Mkh. XLIX, 27. Anquetil
translates it either as ‘inclusive’ or ‘complete ;’ Windischmann
simply skips it over; and Justi translates it everywhere as ‘in-
clusive” Dastur Edalji reads the word vehigakt or vehigak;
Néryésang has vahega; Mulla Ffrfiz reads nai#akik in the Bun-
dahis, but véhigakik in the Dinkard, where the word also occurs;
Justi has natkakik.. The meaning ‘inclusive’ suits the context in
nearly all cases in the Bundahis, but not elsewhere; if it had that
meaning the most probable reading would be vikhégaktk or
nikhégakik, ‘arising, leaping over, including.’ It is nearly always
used in connection with dates or periods of time, and must be some
epithet of a very general character, not only applicable to inter-
calary periods, but also to New-year’s day and dates in general;
something like the Arabic epithet mubarak, ‘fortunate, so com-
monly used in Persian dates. Dastur Edalji compares it with Pers.
bihrak or bihtarak, ‘intercalary month,’ which is probably a corrup-
tion of it; and this suggests veh, ‘good,’ as one component of the
epithet. The word may be read veh-yazakik, ‘for reverencing
the good,’ but as veh, ‘good,’ is an adjective, this would be an
irregular form; a more probable reading is veh-tkaktk, ‘for
anything good,’ which, when applied to a day, or any period of
time, would imply that it is suitable for anything good, that is, it is
‘auspicious.’ Sometimes the word is written vehtkak, véhizak¢k,
or véhi#6; and epithets of similar forms in Pahlavi are applied by
the writers of colophons to themselves, but these should be read
vakhézak or nistvak, ‘lowly, abject.’


* The eleventh day of the fourth month, when the festival
commences.


* The Av. maidhy@irya of Yas. I, 30, II, 39, III, 44, Visp. I,


CHAPTER XXV, 4-6. 93


auspicious day Vahram of the month Din!—the
shortes¢ day—the night increases; and from the sea-
son of Médiyarém to the season of Médék-shém the
night decreases avd the day increases. 4. The
summer day is as much as two of the shortest?
winter days, azd the winter night is as much as two
of the shortest summer nights?. 5. The summer
day is twelve Hasars, the night six Hadsars; the
winter night is twelve HAsars, the day six; a Hasar
being a measure of time and, in like manner, of land‘,
6. In the season of Haméspamadayém *, that is, the


6, II, 1, Af. Gahan. 2, 11. It is the fifth season-festival, held on
the five days ending with the 2goth day of the Parsi year, which
formerly corresponded approximately to midwinter, according to
the Bundahis. Later writings assert that it commemorates the
creation of animals.

1 The twentieth day of the tenth month, when the festival ends.

2 The word kah-ait is merely a hybrid Huzvaris form of kahist,
‘ shortest,’ which occurs in the next phrase.

’ This statement must be considered merely as an approxima-
tion. The longest day is twice the length of the shortest one in
latitude 49°, that is, north of Paris, Vienna, and Odessa, if the
length of the day be computed from sunrise to sunset; and, if
twilight be included, it is necessary to go still further north. In
Adarbigan, the northern province of Persia, the longest day is
about 144 hours from sunrise to sunset, and the shortest is about
9% hours.

* According to this passage a hAsar of time is one hour and
twenty minutes; itis the Av. hathra of the Farhang-i Oim-khadik
(p. 43, ed. Hoshangji), which says, ‘of twelve Hasars is the longest
day, and the day and night in which is the longest day are twelve
of the longest HAsars, eighteen of the medium, and twenty-four of
the least—an enumeration of the several measures of the Hasar.’
For the hasar measure of land, see Chap. XXVI.

> So in K2o, but this name is rarely written twice alike; it is
the Av. hamaspathmaédaya of Yas. I, 31, IJ, 40, III, 45, Visp.
hy We Af. Gahan. 2,12. It is the sixth season-festival, held
on the five Gatha, days which conclude the Parsi year, just before


94 BUNDAHIs.


five supplementary days at the end of the month
Spendarmad, the day avd night are again equal.
7. As from the auspicious day Atharmazd of the
month Fravardin to the auspicious day Aniran of
the month Mitr6! is the summer of seven months,
so from the auspicious day Atharmazd of the month
Avan to the auspicious month Spendarmad, on to
the end of the five supplementary days?, is the
winter of five months. 8. The priest fulfils the
regulation (vaar) about a corpse azd other things,
by this calculation as to summer and winter. 9g. In
those seven months® of summer the periods (g4s)
of the days and nights are five—since oxe cele-
brates the Rapitvin—namely, the period of day-
break is Havan, the period of midday is Rapitvin,
the period of afternoon is Atizérin, when the ap-
pearance of the stars Zas come into the sky* until
midnight is the period of Aibisritém, from mid-
night until the stars become imperceptible is the
period of Atishahin®. 10. In winter are four periods,
for from daybreak till Afizérin is all HAvan, azd the
rest as I fave said; and the reason of it is this, that
the appearance ® of winter is in the direction of the


the vernal equinox, according to the Bundahis. Later writings
assert that it commemorates the creation of man.

* That is, from the first day of the first month to the last day of
the seventh month.

* That is, from the first day of the eighth month to the last of
the five Gatha days, which are added to the twelfth month to com-
plete the year of 365 days.

° All MSS. have ‘ five months’ here.

* K2zo has ‘when the stars fave come into sight.’

° The Avesta names of the five Gahs are Havani, Rapithwina,
Uzayéirina, Aiwisrfithrema, and Ushahina.

* Paz. asharis is evidently a misreading of Pahl. Ashkarth.


CHAPTER XXV, 7-I4. 95


north, where the regions Vérfbarst! and Vérigarst
are; the original dwelling of summer, too, is in the
south, where the regions Fradadafsh azd Vidadafsh
are; on the day Atharmazd of the auspicious month
Avan the winter acquires strength azd enters into

the world, azd the spirit of Rapitvin goes from
_ above-ground to below-ground, where the spring
(khant) of waters is, azd diffuses? warmth and
moisture in the water, azd so many roots of trees do
not wither with cold and drought. 11. And oz the
auspicious day Ataré of the month Din? the winter
arrives, with much cold, at Airan-vég; avd until the
end, in the auspicious month Spendarmad, winter
advances through the whole world; on this account
they kindle a fire everywhere on the day Ataréd of
the month Din, azd it forms an indication that
winter “as come. 12. In those five months the
water of springs azd conduits is all warm*, for Ra-
pitvin keeps warmth azd moisture there, and one
does not celebrate the period of Rapitvin. 13. As
the day Atharmazd of the month Fravardin ad-
vances it diminishes the strength which winter
possesses, azd summer comes in from its own
original dwelling, azd receives strength and do-
minion. 14. Rapitvin comes up from below-ground,
and ripens the fruit of the trees; on this account


1 See Chaps. V, 8, XI, 3. The north, being opposed to the
south or midday quarter, is opposed to the midday period of
Rapitvin, which, therefore, disappears as winter approaches from
the north.

2 If, instead of khant for khAnitk, ‘spring,’ we read ahf-i,
‘lord of, the translation will be, ‘so that the angel of waters may
diffuse,’ &c.

8 The ninth day of the tenth month.

* That is, warmer than the air, as it is cooler in summer.


4


96 BUNDAHIs.


the water of springs is cold in summer’, for Rapitvin
is not there; azd those seven? months oxe celebrates
the Rapitvin, azd summer advances through the
whole earth. 15. And yet in the direction of Hin-
distan, there where the original dwelling of summer
is nearer, it is always neither cold nor hot; for in the
season which is the dominion of summer, the rain
always dispels most of the heat, avd it does not
become perceptible; in the winter rain does not fall,
and the cold does not become very perceptible ®.
16. In the northern direction, where the preparation
of winter is, z¢ zs always cold#; for in the summer
mostly, on account of the more oppressive winter
there, it is not possible so to dispel the cold that
one might make z¢ quite warm. 17. In the middle
localities the cold of winter avd heat of summer
both come on vehemently.

18. Again, the year dependent on the revolving
moon is not equal to the computed year on this
account, for the moon? returns one time in twenty-
nine, azd one time in thirty days, and there are four


1 K2o has ‘winter’ by mistake.

2 Kzo has ‘ six,’ and M6 ‘five,’ instead of ‘ seven.’

* This is a fairly accurate account of the effect of the monsoons
over the greater part of India, as understood by a foreigner unac-
quainted with the different state of matters in a large portion of
the Madras provinces.

- * M6 has khirdsan instead of Arayisn, ‘ preparation, which
alters the sense into ‘ that is, Khfirasan, of which the winter is always
cold.’

° The MSS. have the Huzvaris term for ‘month,’ which is
sometimes used, by mistake, for ‘moon.’ It is doubtful which
word the author intended to use here, but it is usual to count the
days of a lunar month from the first actual appearance of the new
moon, which usually occurs a full day after the change of the
moon,


CHAPTER XXV, 15-22. 97


hours (zaman) more than such a one of its years!;
as it says, that every one deceives where they speak
about the moon (or month), except when they say
that it comes twice in sixty days. 19. Whoever
keeps the year by the revolution of the moon
mingles summer with winter azd winter with
summer ?,

20. This, 400, z¢ says, that the auspicious month
Fravardin, the month Ardavahist, azd the month
Horvadad? are spring; the month Tir, the month
Amerédad, and the month Shatvaird are summer;
the month Mitré, the month Avan, avd the month
Ataré are autumn; the month Din, the month
Vohdman, avd the month Spendarmad are winter +.
21. And the sun comes from the sign (khardak) of
Aries, into which it proceeded in the beginning,
back to that same place in three hundred and sixty-
five days and six short times (hours), which are one
year. 22. As every three months it (the sun) ad-
vances through three constellations, more or less,
the moon comes, in a hundred and eighty days,
back to the place out of which it travelled in the
beginning °.


* Meaning, probably, that the lunar year is four hours more
than twelve months of 29 and 30 days each, alternately. It should
be 8 hours, 48 minutes, and 37 seconds. The sentence seems
defective, but it is evident from § 21 that zaman means ‘hour.’

2 That is, the lunar year being eleven days shorter than the
solar one, its months are constantly retrograding through the
seasons.

8 Generally written Avard4d in Pazand, and Khurd4d in Persian.

* The names of the months are selected from the names of the
days of the month (see Chap. XXVII, 24), but are arranged in a
totally different order.

’ Probably meaning, that the new moon next the autumnal


[5] H


98 BUNDAHIS.


CHAPTER XXVI.


1. A Hasar! on the ground is a Parasang of one
thousand steps of the two feet. 2. A Parasang? is
a measure as much as a far-seeing man may look
out, see a beast of burden, and make known that 2¢
is black or white. 3. And the measure of a man is
eight medium spans °.


equinox is to be looked for in the same quarter as the new moon
nearest the vernal equinox, the moon’s declination being nearly
the same in both cases.

1 Av. hAthra of Vend. II, 65, VIII, 280, 287, 291, Tistar Yt.
23, 29. The statements regarding the length of a H4sar are
rather perplexing, for we are told that it ‘is like a Parasang’
(Chap. XIV, 4), that ‘the length of a Hasar is one-fourth of a Para-
sang’ (Chap. XVI, 7), and that ‘a medium H4sar on the ground,
which they also call a Parasang, is a thousand steps of the two
feet when walking with propriety’ (Farhang-i Otm-khadfk, ed.
Hosh. p. 42). To reconcile these statements we must conclude
that the Hasar is like a Parasang merely in the sense of being
along measure of distance, that it is really the mille passus or
mile of the Romans, and that it is a quarter of the actual Parasang.
At the same time, as it was usual to call a Hasar by the name of a
Parasang, we are often left in doubt whether a mile or a league is
meant, when a Hasar or Parasang is mentioned. The Farhang-i
Oim-khadfik (p. 41) also mentions other measures of distance,
such as the takar (Av. takara) of two Hasars, the asvast (or
aéast) of four Hasars, the dashmést (Av. dakhshmaiti) of eight
HAsars, and the yégést (Av. yigaiasti or yugaiasti) of sixteen
Hasars.

* A Parasang is usually from 3} to 4 English miles, but perhaps
a Hasar is meant here.

° Reading vitast-i miya4nak instead of vitast dam4nak,
The Farhang-i Oim-khadfik (p. 41) mentions three kinds of spans,
the Av. vitasti (Vend. VIII, 243, 245, XVII, 13) of twelve finger-
breadths (ang fist), or about 9 inches, which is a full span between
the thumb and little finger (the one mentioned in the text); the Av,
disti (Vend. XVII, 13) of ten finger-breadths, or about 7} inches,
which is a span between the thumb and middle finger ; and the


CHAPTER XXVI, I—XXVII, 2. 99


CHAPTER X XVII.


1. On the nature of plants it says in revelation,
that, before the coming of the destroyer, vegetation
had no thorn and bark about it; and, afterwards,
when the destroyer came, it became coated with |
bark ad thorny, for antagonism mingled with
every single thing; owing to that cause vegetation
is also much mixed with poison, like Bis the height
of hemp (kand)?, that is poisonous, for men when
they eat z¢ die.

2. In like manner even as the animals, with grain
of fifty and five species azd twelve species of medi-
cinal plants, have arisen from the primeval ox, ten
thousand* species among the species of principal


Av. uzasti (Pahl. 141a-ast) of eight finger-breadths, or about 6
inches, which is a span between the thumb and fore-finger. Other
measures mentioned by the same authority are the pai (Av. padha,
Vend. IX, 15, 20, 29), ‘foot,’ of fourteen finger-breadths, or about
se) inches; the gam (Av. gaya, Vend. III, 57, &c.), ‘ step,’ which

‘in the Vendidad i is three pai,’ or about 2 feet 74 inches, ‘and in
other places is said fo de two frarast’ (Av. frarathni in Vend.
VII, 76, 79,87); so the frarast, which is probably the distance
from the neck to the extended elbow, is half a gam, or from 15 to
16 inches. ‘Two other measures are mentioned in Vend. VII, 79,
87, 90, IX, 8, the Av. frab4zu, ‘fore-arm or cubit’ from elbow to
finger-ends, which is about 18 inches (or it may be a half fathom) ;
and Av. vib4zu, which is probably the ‘fathom,’ or extent of the
two arms out-stretched, from 54 to 6 feet.

1 M6 has ‘ poisonous,’ but is evidently copied from an prieital
almost illegible in some places.

2 Perhaps ‘hemp the height of Bis’ would better express the
Pahlavi words, but Bis (Napellus Moysis) is often mentioned as a
poisonous plant. The phrase may also be translated ‘like Bis and
tall hemp.’

8 See Chap. XIV, 1.

4 M6 has ‘a thousand,’ but marks an omission. See Chap. IX, 4.


H 2


I0O BUNDAHIS.


plants, avd a hundred thousand species among
ordinary plants have grown from all these seeds of
the tree opposed to harm}, the many-seeded, whzch
has grown in the wide-formed ocean. 3. When the
seeds of all these plants, with those from the pri-
meval ox, have arisen upon it, every year the bird?
strips that tree azd mingles all the seeds in the
water; Tistar seizes hem with the rain-water and
rains them on to all regions. 4. Near to that tree
the white Hém, the healing and undefiled, has
grown at the source of the water of Arédvivsir ?;
every one who eats z¢ becomes immortal, and they
call it the Gdkard* tree, as it is said that Hém is
expelling death®; also in the renovation of the unt-
verse they prepare its immortality therefrom°; and
it is the chief of plants’.

5. These are as many genera of plants as exist:
trees and shrubs, fruit-tvees, corn, flowers, aromatic
herbs, salads, spices, grass, wild plants, medicinal


+ See Chaps, [X, 5) XVIII, 90, X XIX, g;

® The apparently contradictory account in Chap. IX, 2, refers
only to the first production of material plants from their spiritual
or ideal representative. ‘The bird here mentioned is Xamrdés (see
Chaps. XIX, 15, XXIV, 29), as appears from the following
passage (Mkh. LXII, 40-42): ‘And the bird Aamrés for ever
sits ez that vicinity; and his work is this, that he collects that seed
which sheds from the tree of all seeds, which is opposed to harm,
and conveys z¢ there where Tistar seizes the water, so that Tistar
may seize the water with that seed of all kinds, and may rain 7? on
the world with the rain.’

*See ‘Chaps. Xi, #, XIT 3—-.

* Here written Gdkarn in all MSS. See Chaps. IX, 6, XVIII,
ie.

5 That is, in Yas. IX, where Haoma is entitled dfiraosha,

§ ‘See Chap. XXIV,, 27.

™ See Chap. XXIV, 18.


CHAPTER XXVII, 3-11. IOI


plants, gum plants, and all producing ! oil, dyes, and
clothing. 6. I wzl7 mention them also a second
time: all whose fruit is not welcome as food of men,
and are perennial (sAlv4r), as the cypress, the plane,
the white poplar, the box, and others of this genus,
they call trees and shrubs (dar va dirakht). 7,
The produce of everything welcome as food of men,
that is perennial, as the date, the myrtle, the lote-
plum?, the grape, the quince, the apple, the citron,
the pomegranate, the peach, the fig, the walnut, the
almond, azd others in this: genus, they call fruit
(mivak). 8. Whatever requires labour with the
spade*, avd is perennial, they call a shrub (dirakht).
g. Whatever requires that they take its crop
through labour, azd zts root withers away, such as
wheat, barley, grain, various kinds* of pulse, vetches,
and others of this genus, they call corn (gtirdak).,
10. Every plant with fragrant leaves, which is culti-
vated by the hand-labour of men, amd is perennial
(hamvar), they call an aromatic herb (siparam). 11.
Whatever sweet-scented blossom arises a¢ various
seasons through the hand-labour of men, or has
a perennial root azd blossoms in z¢s season wth
new shoots azd sweet-scented blossoms, as the rose,
the narcissus, the jasmine, the dog-rose (néstartin),


1 Comparing this list with the subsequent repetition it appears
probable that ham4&k bard is a corruption of aesam bdéd (see
§§ 19, 21), and that we ought to read ‘ gum Alanis, woods, scents,
and plants for oil, dyes, and clothing.’ M6 has ‘oil anzd dyes for
clothing.’

* The kfinar (see Chap. XV, 13).

8 The Paz. péhani (which is omitted in K20) is evidently a mis-
reading of Pahl. pashang, ‘a hoe-like spade.’

* M6 adds Paz. gavina (Pahl. gfinak) to gvid gvid mungaén,
without altering the meaning materially.


Waeaversity of southern Califerias


102 BUNDAHIS.


the tulip, the colocynth (kavastik), the pandanus
(kédi), the 2amba, the ox-eye (héri), the crocus,
the swallow-wort (zarda), the violet, the karda,
and others of this genus, they call a flower (g dl).
12, Everything whose sweet-scented fruit, or sweet-
scented blossom, arises in zés season, without the
hand-labour of men, they call a wild plant (vahar
or nihal). 13. Whatever is welcome as food of
cattle and beasts of burden they call grass (giyah).
14. Whatever enters into cakes (pés-pdarakiha)
they call spices (Avzariha). 15. Whatever is wel-
come in eating of bread, as torn shoots! of the cori-
ander, water-cress (kakig), the leek, axd others of
this genus, they call salad (térak)*, 16. Whatever
is like spinning*® cotton, azd others of this genus,
they call clothing plants (gAmak). 17. Whatever
lentil* is greasy, as sesame, dishdang, hemp,
zandak®, and others of this genus, they call an
oil-seed (rékané). 18. Whatever one can dye
clothing with, as saffron, sapan-wood, zakava,
vaha, and others of this genus, they call a dye-
plant (rag). 19. Whatever root, or gum, or wood


* Reading stak darid; Justi has ‘ baked shoots ;’ Anquetil has
‘the three following ;’ M6 has stak va karafs, ‘shoots and
parsley.’

® Or tarak in $ 5, Pers. tarah.

* Reading Huz. neskhunan, ‘twisting,’ but the word is doubtful ;
Justi has ‘ sitting om ‘he plant, which is a rather singular description
for cotton.

* Reading makag; Anquetil, Windischmann, and Justi read
mazg, ‘marrow,’ but this is usually written otherwise.

* Perhaps for zét6, ‘olive,’ as Anquetil supposes, and Justi
assumes.

* Reading taf (compare Pers. tuf, ‘ saliva’).


CHAPTER XXVII, 12-24. 103


is scented, as frankincense 1, varast?, kust, sandal-
wood, cardamom *, camphor, orange-scented mint,
and others of this genus, they call a scent (bdd).
20. Whatever stickiness comes out from plants +
they call gummy (zadak). 21, The timber which
- proceeds from the trees, when it is either dry or wet,
they call wood (£iba). 22. Every one of all these
plants which is so, they call medicinal (darftik)®.

23. The principal fruits are of thirty kinds (kha-
dtiinak), and ten species (sardak) of them are fit
to eat inside and outside, as the fig, the apple, the
quince, the citron, the grape, the mulberry, the pear,
and others of this kind; ten are fit to eat outside,
but not fit to eat inside, as the date, the peach, the
white apricot, azd others of this kind; those which
are fit to eat inside, du¢ not fit to eat outside, are
the walnut, the almond, the pomegranate, the cocoa-
nut ®, the filbert’, the chesnut °, the pistachio nut,
the vargdn, avd whatever else of this description
are very remarkable.

24°. This, too, it says, that every single flower is
appropriate to an angel (ameshdéspend)", as the


d


1 Paz. kendri for Pahl. kundur probably.

2 Justi compares Pers. barghast.

8 Paz. kakura may be equivalent to Pers. qaqulah, ‘ carda-
moms, or to Pers. kakul or kak fil, ‘ marjoram.’

4 K20 omits a line, from here to the word ‘ either.’

5 The line which contained this sentence is torn off in K2o.

6 P4z. anarsar is a misreading of Pahl. anargfl (Pers. nargil,
‘ cocoa-nut’).

7 Paz. pendak, a misreading of Pahl. funduk.

® Paz. shahbréd, a misreading of Pahl. shahbalft; omitted
in M6.

® M6 begins a new chapter here.

10 These are the thirty archangels and angels whose names are
applied to the thirty days of the Parsi month, in the order in


104 BUNDAHIS.


white! jasmine (saman) is for Vohdman, the myrtle
and jasmine (yAsmin) are Attharmazd’s own, the
mouse-ear (or sweet marjoram) is Ashavahist’s? own,
the basil-royal is Shatvairé’s own, the musk flower
is Spendarmad’s, the lily is Horvadad’s, the Zamba
is Amerdédaa’s, Din-pavan-A tard has the orange-
scented mint (vadrang-béd), Atard has the mari-
gold* (Adargun), the water-lily is Avan’s, the white
marv is Khifirshéd’s, the ranges* is Mah’s, the
violet is Tir’s, the méren® is Gés’s, the karda is
Din-pavan-Mitrdé’s, all violets are Mitré’s, the red
chrysanthemum (khér) is Srédsh’s, the dog-rose
(nestran) is Rashni’s, the cockscomb is Fravar-
din’s, the sisebar is Vahram’s, the yellow chrysan-
themum is Ram’s, the orange-scented mint is Vaa’s®,
the trigonella is Din-pavan-Din’s, the hundred-
petalled rose is Din’s, all kinds of wild flowers
(vah4r) are Ara’s?, Astad has all the white Hém 8,
the bread-baker’s basil/is Asman’s, Zamyad has the
crocus, Maraspend as the flower® of Ardashir,


which they are mentioned here, except that Adharmazd is the first
day, and Vohiiman is the second.

1 M6 has ‘ yellow.’

Synonymous with the Ardavahist of Chap. I, 26.

Anquetil, Windischmann, and Justi have ‘ the poppy.’

M6 has Paz. lg as only the first part of the word, and Justi
translates it by ‘red lac,’ which is not a plant. Transcribing
the Pazand into Pahlavi, perhaps the nearest probable word is
rand, ‘laurel.’

° M6 has Paz. ménr; Anquetil has ‘vine blossom,’ and is
followed by Windischmann and Justi, but the word is very
uncertain.

° The remainder of this chapter is lost from K2o0.

" This female angel is also called Arshisang (see Chap. XXII, 4).

eee Od.

* M6 leaves a blank space for the name of the flower; perhaps
it is the marv-i Ardashtran,


2
3
4


CHAPTER XXVIII, 25—XXVIII, 2. IO5


Aniran has this Hém of the angel Hém!, of three
kinds.

25. It is concerning plants that every single kind
with a drop of water on a twig (teh) they should
hold four finger-breadths in front of the fire?; most
of all it is the lotos (kindr) they speak of.


CuHapTrer XXVIIL3.


[1. On the evil-doing of Aharman avd the demons
it says in revelation, that the evil which the evil
spirit has produced for the creation of Atharmazd it
is possible to tell by this winter*; and his body is
that of a lizard (vazagh)* whose place is filth (kalZ).
2. He does not think, nor speak, nor act for the
welfare (naddkih) of the creatures of Atharmazd;
and his business is unmercifulness and the destruc-
tion of this welfare, so that the creatures which
Atharmazd shall increase he will destroy; and “es
eyesight (dashm mifisn)® does not refrain from
doing the creatures harm. 3. As it says that, ‘ever


1 Reading, in Pahlavi; HOm yédat6 aé hém.

2 See Chap. XXI, 1. Referring to the necessity of drying fire-
wood before putting it on the fire. The ktin4r is specially men-
tioned, as one of the first fire-woods used by mankind, in Chap.
ove TS,

§ Chaps. XXVIII, XXIX, and XXXI are omitted in M6 and
all MSS. descended from it, whether Pahlavi or Pazand; and,
owing to the loss of a folio from Kzo before any of its extant
copies were written, the first quarter of Chap. XXVIII has hitherto
been missing, but is here supplied (enclosed in brackets) from TD,
a MS. belonging to Mobad Tahmuras Dinshaw (see Introduction).

* Winter being one of the primary evils brought upon creation
by Angra-mainyu (see Vend. I, 8-12).

® See Chap. III, 9. ° Referring to ‘ the evil eye.’


106 BUNDAHIS.


since a creature was created by us, I, who am
Atharmazd, have not rested at ease, on account of
providing protection for my own creatures; and
likewise not even he, the evil spirit, on account of
contriving evil for the creatures.’ 4. And by cher
devotion to witchcraft (yattik-dinéih) he seduces
mankind into affection for himself and disaffection
to Atharmazd', so that they forsake the religion
of Atharmazd, and practise that of Aharman. 5.
He casts this into the thoughts of men, that this
religion of Aftharmazd is nought, and it is not
necessary to be steadfast in it. 6. Whoever gives
that man anything, in whose law (dad) this saying
is established, then the evil spirit is propitiated by
him, that is, he has acted by his pleasure.

7. The business of Akéman? is this, that he gave
vile thoughts and discord to the creatures. 8. The
business of the demon Andar is this, that he con-
strains the thoughts of the creatures from deeds of
virtue, just like a leader who as well-constrained
(sardar-i khfip afsardd); and he casts this into
the thoughts of men, that it is not necessary to
have the sacred shirt and thread- girdle. 9. The
business of the demon Savar?, that is a leader of
the demons, is this, that is, misgovernment, oppres-
sive anarchy, and drunkenness. to. The business of
the demon Naikiyas* is this, that he gives discon-
tent to the creatures; as it says, that should this ove


? Compare Chap. I, 14.

® The six arch-fiends of this paragraph are those mentioned in
Chaps. I, 27, XXX, 29.

§ Written Sdvar in Chap. I, 27.

* Written Nakahéd in Chap. I, 27, Naikiyas when repeated in
this sentence, and Paz. Natinghas in Chap. XXX, 29.


CHAPTER XXVIII, 3-15. 107


give anything to those men whose opinion (dad) is
this, that it is not necessary to have the sacred shirt
and thread-girdle, then Andar, Savar, and Naikiyas
are propitiated by him. 11. The demon Taprév! is
he who mingles poison with plants and creatures;
_as it says thus: ‘ Taprév the frustrater, and ZAtrizé
the maker of poison” 12. All those six, it is said,
are arch-fiends? of the demons; the rest are co-
operating and confederate with them. 13. This,
too, it says, that]? should ove give [anything to] a
man who says [that it is proper to have one boot],
and in his law walking with one boot [is established,
then]* the fiend Tapréz is propitiated [by him].

14. The demon Tarémat® [is he who] produces
disobedience ; the demon Mitdkht ® is the liar (dr6-
gan) of the evil spirit’; the demon Arask$ (‘malice’)
is the spiteful fiend of the evil eye. 15. Theirs are
the same® appliances as the demon Aeshm’s”, as it


AALA


* Written Tairév in Chap. I, 27. 2 See Chap. Ill, 2:

* From this point the Pahlavi text is extant in K2o, except some
illegible words, the translation of which (supplied from TD) is here
enclosed in brackets.

* Anquetil, misled by the lacuna in his MS., thought that there
was a change of subject here, and began a new chapter at this
point. On this account the numbers of his chapters are hence-
forth one in excess of those in this translation.

- § Written Tardkmaté6 in TD, and identified with Ndatinghas
(Naikiyas) in Chap. XXX, 29; a personification of the Av. taré-
maiti, ‘ disobedience,’ of Yas. XXXIII, 4, LIX, 8.

6 A personification of the Av. mithaokhta, ‘false-spoken,’ of
Yas. LIX, 8, Vend. XIX, 146, Visp. XXIII, 9, Zamyad Yt. 96.

7 TD has drig gaim4nikih, ‘the fiend of scepticism.’

8 Av. araska of Yas. IX, 18, Ram Yt. 16, personified.

- * The word h6manam in K2o is a false Huzvaris reading of
ham, owing to the copyist reading am, ‘I am;’ TD has ham-
afzar, ‘having like means.’

1 Or Khashm, ‘wrath;’ so written in K2o, but it is usually


108 BUNDAHIS.


says that seven powers are given Zo Aeshm’, that
he may utterly destroy the creatures therewith ;
with those seven powers he will destroy seven? of
the Kaydn heroes in his own time, dz¢ one will
remain. 16, There where Mitdkht (‘falsehood’)
arrives, Arask (‘malice’) becomes welcome, [and
there where Arask is welcome]? Aeshm lays a
foundation *, and there where Aeshm has a founda-
tion® many creatures perish, azd he causes much
non-Iranianism®. 17. Aeshm mostly contrives all
evil for the creatures of Attharmazd, azd the evil
deeds of those Kay4n heroes have been more com-
plete through Aeshm, as it says, that Aeshm, the
impetuous assailant, causes them most’.

18. The demon Vizarésh* is he who struggles
with the souls of men which save departed, those


Aéshm elsewhere; the Av. aéshma of Vend. IX, 37, X, 23, 27, &c.
The Asmodeus of the Book of Tobit appears to be the Av. Aéshm6
daévé, ‘demon of wrath.’

* TD has ‘there were seven powers of Aéshm.’

* TD has ‘ six,’ which looks like an unlucky attempt to amend
a correct text. ‘Tradition tells us that only five Kayans reigned
(see Chap. XXXIV, 7), and the Shahndmah also mentions Siy4-
wush (Pahl. Kaf-Siyavakhsh), who did not reign; but eight Kay4ns,
besides Loharasp and Vistasp, who were of collateral descent (see
Chap. XXXI, 28), are mentioned in the Avesta, whence the author
of the Bundahis would obtain much of his information (see Fra-
vardin Yt. 132, ZamyAd Yt. 71, 74).

° The phrase in brackets occurs only in TD.
Reading bunak as in TD; K2o has ‘sends down a root.’

* Soin TD; Kao has ‘ where Aeshm keeps on.’

° That is, ‘many foreign customs.’

* The word vésh, ‘most,’ is only in TD.

®§ So in TD; K2zo has Vigésh. He is the Av. Vizaresha of
Vend. XIX, 94, who is said to convey the souls of the departed to
the Kinvad bridge,


4


CHAPTER XXVIII, 16-22, 109
ce eT Sa
days and nights! when ¢hey remain in the world:
he carries them on, terror-stricken, azd sits at the
gate of hell. 19. The demon Uda? is he who, when
a man sits in a private place, or when he eats at
meals, strikes 42s knee spiritually on zs back, so
that he bawls out [avd looks out, that Chatteris
he may eat, chattering] he may evacuate (riéd), and
chattering he may make water (mézéd), so that he
may not attain [unto the] best existence ‘4.

[20. The demon Akatash * is the fiend of perver-
sion (nikirayih), who makes the creatures averse
(nikirat) from proper things; as it says, that who-
ever fas given anything to that person (tant)
whose opinion (dad) is this, that it is not necessary
to have a high-priest (dastébar), then the demon
Aeshm is propitiated by him. 21. Whoever “as
given anything to that person whose opinion is this,
and who says, that it is not necessary to have a
snake-killer (mar-van), then Aharman, with the
foregoing demons, is propitiated by him; this is
said of him who, when he sees a noxious creature,
does not kill 2¢. 22. A snake-killer (mar6-gné)°®
is a stick on the end of which a leathern ¢hong is


* TD has ‘those three nights,’ referring to the period that the
soul is said to remain hovering about the body after death (see
Hadékht Nask, ed. Haug, II, 1-18, III, 1-17).

2 So in K20; TD has Afidak (see Pahl.Vend. XVIII, 70).

’ TD has merely ‘strikes a slipper (padin-pdsh) spiritually,’
that is, invisibly, for the purpose of startling the man.

* The short phrases in brackets are taken from TD to supply
words torn off from Kz2o, which passes on to Chap. XXIX at this
point, but TD supplies a continuation of Chap. XXVIII, which is
added here, and enclosed in brackets. °

5 The Av. Akatasha of Vend. X, 23 Sp., XIX, 43 W.

6 See Pahlavi Vend. VOL BO


IIo BUNDAHIS.


provided ; and it is declared that every one of the
good religion must possess one, that they may
strike avd kill noxious creatures avd sinners more
meritoriously with it.

23. Zarman! is the demon who makes decrepit
(dispad), whom they call old age (pirth). 24.
Kishmak? is he who makes disastrous (vazandak),
and also causes the whirlwind® whzch passes over
for disturbance. 25. The demon Varend‘ is he
who causes illicit intercourse, as it says thus:
‘Varendé the defiling (41ai).’ © 26. The demon Bash-
Asp® is she who causes slothfulness; Ség is the
fiend (drfig) who causes annihilation; and the
demon Niydz is he who causes distress.

27. The demon Az® (‘greediness’) is he who
swallows everything, and when, through destitution,
nothing has come he eats himself; he is that
fiendishness which, although the whole wealth of
the world be given up to it, does not fill up and is
not satisfied; as it says, that the eye of the covetous
is a noose (gamand), and zz it the world is nought.
28. Ptis™ is the demon who makes a hoard, and


1 A personification of the Av. zaurva of Vend. XIX, 43 W.,
Yas. IX, 18 Sp., G6s Yt. ro, Ram Yt. 16.

* The reading of this name is uncertain.

* The small whirlwinds, which usually precede a change of wind
in India, are commonly known by the name of shatran, which
indicates that such whirling columns of dust are popularly attri-
buted to demoniacal agency.

* A personification of Av. varena, ‘ desire,’ in an evil sense.

> Av. Bashyasta of Vend. XI, 28, 29, 36, 37, XVIII, 38, &c.
The names of the three demons in this sentence are Persian words
for ‘sloth,’ ‘trouble,’ and ‘ want.’

_° Av. Azi of Vend. XVIII, 45, 50, Yas. XVII, 46, LXVII, 22,
Astad Yt 1.

7 Compare Pers. payfis, ‘covetous,’ and piy fis, ‘avarice.’ Pts

is evidently the demon of misers, and Az that of the selfish.


CHAPTER XXVIII, 23-35. Teed


does not consume z/, aud does not give to any one;
as it says, that the power of the demon Az is owing
to that person who, not content with his own wife,
snatches away even those of others.

29. The demon Nas? is he who causes the pollu-
tion and contamination (nisrfstih), which they call
nasai (‘dead matter’). 30. The demon Friftdr
(‘deceiver’) is he who seduces mankind. 31. The
demon Spazg? (‘slander’) is he who brings and
conveys discourse (milaya), aud it is nothing in
appearance such as he says; and he shows that
mankind fights azd apologizes (avakhshinéa), indi-
vidual with individual. 32. The demon Ardst? (‘un-
true’) is he who speaks falsehood. 33. The demon
Aighash * is the malignant-eyed fiend who smites
mankind with Azs eye. 34. The demon Bat® is he
whom they worship among the Hinds, and his
growth is lodged in idols, as one worships the horse
asan idol’. 35. Asté-vidad’" is the evil flyer (vaé-i
saritar) who seizes the life; as it says that, when


1 Av. Nasu of Vend. V, 85-106, VI, 65,72, 74, 79, VII, 2-27,
yo, VIII, 46, 48, 132-228, IX, 49-117, &c.

2 Av. spazga of Ardabahist Yt. 8, 11, 15.

8 Always written like anast.

* Av. aghashi of Vend. XX, 14, 20, 24, which appears to be
“the evil eye ;’ but see § 36.

5 Av. Biiti of Vend. XIX, 4, 6, 140, who must be identified with
Pers. but, ‘ an idol,’ Sans. bhfita, ‘a goblin, and not with Buddha.

6 Reading afas vakhsh pavan bittha mahmano, étgin
bfit asp parastéd6, which evidently admits of many variations,
but the meaning is rather obscure.

7 Here written Asti-vidad (see Chap. HI, 21). Vend. V, 25, 31
says, ‘Asté-vidhétu binds him (the dying man); Vayé (the flying
demon) conveys him bound ;’ from which it would appear that
Ast6-vidad and ‘the evil flyer’ were originally considered as dis-
tinct demons.


112 ~ BUNDAHIS.


Ais hand strokes a man z¢ zs lethargy, when he casts
zt on the sick ove zt zs fever, when he looks in his
eyes he drives away the life, and they call it death.
36. The demon of the malignant eye (str-Zashmih)
is he who will spoil anything which men see, when
they do not say ‘in the name of God’ (yazdan).

37. With every one of them are many demons
and fiends co-operating, to specify whom a second
time would be tedious; demons, too, who are furies
(khashmak4n), are in great multitude it is said.
38. They are demons of ruin, pain, and growing old
(zvaran), producers of vexation and bile, revivers of
grief (nivagih), the progeny of gloom, and bringers
of stench, decay, and vileness, who are many, very
numerous, and very notorious; and a portion of all
of them is mingled in the bodies of men, and their
characteristics are glaring in mankind.

39. The demon Apadsh! and the demon Aspen-
gargak ? are those who remain in contest with the
rain. 40. Of the evil spirit ? are the law of vileness,
the religion of sorcery, the weapons of fiendishness,
and the perversion (khamih) of God’s works; and


* Av. Apaosha of Tistar Yt. 21, 22, 27, 28, Astad Vt. 2,63 see
also Chap. VII, 8, 10, 12.

* Here written Aspengardga, but see Chaps. VII, 12, XVII, 1.
He is the Av. Spengaghra of Vend. XIX, 135, and, being a demon,
is not to be confounded with the demon-worshipper, Spizgauruska,
of Gos Yt. 31, Ashi Yt. 51,

° The ‘ evil spirit,’ Ganrak-matnék, seems to be here treated as
a demon distinct from Aharman, which is inconsistent with what
is stated in §§ 1-6, and is contrary to general opinion. This
inconsistency would indicate the possibility of this continuation of
Chap. XXVIII in TD, or a portion of it, having been added by
an editor in later times (although it is difficult to discover any
difference of style in the language), if we did not find a similar con-
fusion of the two names in Chap. XXX, 29, 30.


CHAPTER XXVIII, 36-44. FIs


his wish is this, that is: ‘Do not ask aéout me, and
do not understand me! for if ye ask adou¢ and
understand me, ye wz// not come after me” 41.
‘Phis, too, it says, that the evil spirit remains at the
distance of a cry, even at the ery of a three-year-old
_cock (kfiléng), even at the cry of an ass, even at-
the cry of a righteous man when owe strikes him
involuntarily avd he utters a cry®% 42. The de-
mon Kiindak* is he who is the steed (barak) of
wizards,

43. Various new demons arise from the various
new sins the creatures may commit, avd are pro-
duced for such purposes; who make even those
planets rush oz which are in the celestial sphere, and
they stand very numerously in the conflict. 44.
Their ringleaders (kamarikan) are those seven
planets, the head and tail of Gésihar, and Maspar *


* Compare Mkh. XL, 24-28: ‘The one wish that Hérmezd,
the lord, desires from men is this, that “ye shall understand me
(Hérmezd), since every one who shall understand me comes after
me, and strives for my satisfaction.” And the one wish that Ahar-
man desires from men is this, that “ye shall not understand me
(Aharman), since whoever shall understand me wicked, Azs actions
proceed not after me, and, moreover, no advantage and friendship
come to me from that man,”’

2 The sentence is rather obscure, but it seems to imply that such
cries keep the evil spirit at a distance; it is, however, just possible
that it means that the cry of the evil spirit can be heard as far as
such cries,

8 Av. Kunda of Vend. XI, 28, 36, XIX, 138.

4 TD has Gok-Aihar and Mfs-partk here, but see Chap. V, 1,
where these beings are included among the seven planetary leaders,
and not counted in addition to them. ‘This is another inconsis-
tency which leads to the suspicion that this continuation of the
chapter may have been written by a later hand. According to
this later view, the sun and moon must be included among those
malevolent orbs, the planets.


[5] I


II4 BUNDAHIS.


provided with a tail, which are ten. 45. And by
them these ten worldly creations, ¢haz is, the sky,
water, earth, vegetation, animals, metals, wind, light,
fire, and mankind, are corrupted with all this vile-
ness; and from them calamity, captivity, disease,
death, and other evils and corruptions ever come to
water, vegetation, and the other creations which
exist zz the world, owing to the fiendishness of
those ten. 46. They whom I 4ave enumerated are
furnished with the assistance and crafty (afzar-
hémand) nature of Aharman. ax
47. Regarding the cold, dry, stony, and; dark
interior of mysterious (tarik dén afrag-pédak)
hell it says, that the darkness is fit to grasp with
the hand!, and the stench is fit to cut with a knife;
and if they inflict the punishment of a thousand
men within a single span, they (the men) think in
this way, that they are alone; azd the loneliness is
worse than its punishment?, 48. And its connec-
tion (band) is with the seven planets, be it through
much cold like Saturn? (Kév4n), be it through
much heat like Aharman; and their food is brim-
stone (gandak), and of succulents the lizard (va-
zagh), and other evil axd wretchedness (paty4n). |


* Compare Mkh. VII, 31: ‘and always their darkness is such-
like as though it be possible to grasp with the hand,’

* Compare Arda-Viraf-ndmak (LIV, 5-8): ‘As close as the ear
to the eye, and as many as the hairs on the mane of a horse, so
close and many in number, the souls of the wicked stand, but they
see not, and hear no sound, one from the other; every one thinks
thus, “I am alone.”’

> Or, ‘with more cold than Saturn,’


CHAPTER XXVIII, 45—XXIX, 2. IIs


CHAPTER XXIX1,


1. On [the sfzvzdwal chieftainship? of the regions
of the earth| it says in revelation, that every one of
those six chieftainships* has one sfzrztual chief;
as the chief of Arzah is Ashashagahaa-é Hvandhin+,
the chief of Savah is Hoazarédathhri-hana Parést-
yaro°, the chief of Fradadafsh is Spitdid-i Atspé-
sinan °, [the chief of Vidadafsh is Airiz-rasp Atispé-
sinadn’,| the chief of Vérftbarst is Huvdsp®, the
chief of Vérdgarst is Kakhravak®. 2. Zaratdst is


1 For this chapter, which is numbered XXX by previous trans-
lators, we have to depend only on K2o and TD (see the note on
the heading of Chap. XXVIII) ; and the words enclosed in brackets
are supplied from TD, being either illegible or omitted in K2o.

2 Perhaps ‘patriarchate’ or ‘episcopate’ would be a better
translation of radth, and ‘ patriarch’ or ‘bishop’ of rad, in this
chapter, as the chief high-priest (dastfr-i dastfiran) and his office
are evidently meant by these words. ©

8 Of the six other regions, distinct from this one of Khvaniras,
see Chap. XI, 2-4.

* TD has Ashashag,hd-é atgh Névandin; both MSS. giving
these names: in a barbarous Pazand form which cannot be relied
on. Perhaps this Dastfr is the Av. Ashavanghu Bivamdangha of

Fravardin Yt. rro.

5 TD has Héazardkakhhr-han4 Paréstyré, all in Pazand in both
MSS., except Huz. hana, which stands for Paz. é, here used for
the idh4fat i. Perhaps this Dastfir is the Av. Gar6-danghu Pairis-
tira of Fravardin Yt. 110.

®@ So in TD; Kzo has Paz. Spaitanid-i Huspasnyan. This
Dastir is, no doubt, the Av. (gen.) Spitéis Uspasnaos of Fravardin
Yt. 121.

7 Omitted in Kzo, but, no doubt, this Dastir is the Av, Erez-
raspa Uspasnu of Fravardin Yt. 121.

8 Av. Hvaspa of Fravardin Yt. 122.

® So in both MSS. As in the case of each of the preceding two
pair of regions, two consecutive names of Dasttrs have been taken
from the Fravardin Yast, it may be supposed that the names


12


116 BUNDAHIS,


spiritual chief of the region of Khvaniras, and also
of all the regions; e zs chief of the world of the
righteous, azd it is said that the whole religion was
received by them from Zarattist 1.

3. In the region of Khvaniras are many places,
from which, in this evil time of violent struggling
with the adversary, a passage (vidarg) is con-
structed by the power of the spiritual world
(maindkih), anxd one calls them the beaten tracks ?
of Khvaniras,

4. Counterparts of those other regions*® are such
places as Kangdez, the land of Saukavastan; the
plain of the Arabs (T4zikan), the plain of Pésydansai,
the river Naivtak‘, Airan-vég, the enclosure (var)
formed by Yim, avd Kasmir in India® 5. And
one immortal chief acts in the government of each


taken for this third pair of regions will also be consecutive, and
this Dasttir must, therefore, bé identified with the Av. Kathwaraspa
of Fravardin Yt. 122.

' TD has ‘ Zarattist is chief of this region of Khvaniras, and also
of the whole world of the righteous; all chieftainship, also, is from
Zaratist, so that the whole religion, &c,

® Justi has ‘ zones, climates ;’ but transcribing Paz. habavanh&
back into Pahlavi we have a word which may be read khabanoha,
pl. of khab4an, ‘a trampling-place’ (comp. Pers. khabidan). TD
has khvabisné-gas, which has the same meaning.

° Meaning, probably, that they resemble the six smaller regions
in being isolated and difficult of access; in other words, either
mythical, or independent of Iranian rule.

* Soin TD, which also omits the second, third, and fourth of
these isolated territories. In Kzo we might read rad va khadak,
‘chief and lord,’ as an epithet of Airan-vég. This river must be
the Nahvtak of Chap, XXI, 6.

® Reading Kasmfr-i andar Hindf, but TD has Kasmir-i
andariin6; perhaps the last word was originally antranak, in
which case we should read ‘ the non-Iranian Kasmir,’


CHAP TEREX XIX; 3—5, i
a ee
of them; as it says, that Péshydtant! son of Vis-
tasp, whom they call Aitré-maind%, is in the country
of Kangdez*; Aghrérad* sox of Pashang is in the
land of Saukavastén®, and they call him Gépat-
shah*®; Parsadga? H/vembya is in the plain of


* The Av. Peshdtanu of Vishtasp Yt. 4, where he is described
as free from disease and death. TD has Péshydk-tant. See also
Chaps. XXXI, 29, XXXII, 5. ,

* TD has Kitrd-ma6n6, and it may be doubted whether the
latter portion of the name be derived from Av. mainyu, ‘spirit,’
or maungh6, ‘moon.’ The Dadistan-i Dinik (Reply 89) calls him
‘Patshaydtanti who is called from the Kitrék-mahan6 (or mfy4n6),’
the Katru-miyan river of Chap. XX, 7, 31.

* See § 10. TD has Kangdez-i bamtk, ‘Kangdez the
splendid.’

* The Av. Aghraératha Narava of Gés Yt. 18, 22, Fravardin
Yt. 131, Ashi Yt. 38, Zamyad Yt. 77; he is Aghrirath, brother of
Afrasiyab, in the Shahnamah ; see also Chap. XXXI, rg.

° TD has Pahl. Sakikstan here, but Sdkapastén in § 13 (the
letters tk and p being-often much alike in Pahlavi writing). Kz2o
has Paz. Savkavatan, Seukavasta, and Savkavastin.

° TD has Gépat-malka, ‘king of Gdépat;’ and Dad. (Reply 89)
states that ‘the reign of Gépatshah is over the country of Gépatd,
coterminous with Afran-vég, on the bank of the water of the Datttk ;
and he keeps watch over the ox Hadhay&s, on whom occurred the
various emigrations of men of old.’ Mkh. (LXII, 31-36) says,
‘ Gépatshah remains in Afran-vég, within the region of Khvanfras ;
from foot to mid-body 4e zs a bull, and from mid-body to top he zs
a man; at all times he stays on the sea-shore, and always performs
the worship of God, and always pours holy-water into the sea;
through the pouring of that holy-water innumerable noxious
creatures in the sea will die; for if he should not mostly perform
that ceremonial, and should not pour that holy-water into the sea,
and those innumerable noxious creatures should not perish, then
always when rain falls the noxious creatures would fall like rain.’
In Chap. XXXI, 20, he is said to be a son of Aghrérad.

7 So in K2o0; and Av. Parshadgau occurs in Fravardin Yt. 96,
127; but TD has Fradakhstar Khfmbikan, and Dad. (Reply 89)
mentions ‘Fradhakhst6 son of Khfimbikan’ as one of the seven


118 BUNDAHIS.


PésyAnsat}, and he is Hvembya for this reason, be-
cause they brought Am up in a fvemb (‘jar’) for
fear of Khashm (‘ Wrath’); [As4m-i? Yamahust is
in the place which they call the River Naivtak];
the tree opposed to harm? is in Airan-vég; Urvatad-
nar‘ soz of Zarattist is in the enclosure formed by
Yim. 6, Regarding them it says, they are ¢hose
who are immortal, as are Narsih® soz of Vivanghat,
Tts*® soz of Néddar", Giw ® son of Gidarz, Ibairaz°®
the causer of strife, azd Ashavazd son of Pouru-
dhakhst?°; and they will all?! come forth, to the


immortal lords of Khvaniras, which name corresponds with the
Av. Fradhakhsti Khuzbya of Fravardin Yt. 138.

1 TD has always Pahl. Pésansih. No doubt the Pisin valley is
meant (see § 11).

2 Or it may be read Aéshm-i. This phrase occurs only in TD,
but Dad. (Reply 89) mentions ‘the Avesta YakhmAytsad, son of the
same Fry4né,’ as one of the seven immortal lords of Khvantras.

® See Chap. XXVII, 2.

4 See Chap. XXXII, 5.

* Or Narsde in TD; Kzo has Paz. Naréi, but see Chap. XXXI,
3, 5


® Ay. Tusa of Abén Yt. 53, 58, and an Iranian warrior in the


Shahnémah.

7 Ay. Naotara, whose descendants are mentioned in Ab4n Yt.
76, 98, Fravardin Yt. 102, Ram Yt. 35.

® Av. Gaévani of Fravardin Yt. 115 is something like this name
of one of the Iranian warriors in the Shahnamah.

* TD has Paz. Bairazd. Perhaps it is not a name, but a Pazand
corruption of Pahl. aévarz, ‘warrior, trooper’ (traditionally) ; in
which case we should have to read ‘ the warrior who was a causer
of strife.’

#0 So in TD; K2o has ‘Ashavand son of Porudakhst,’ and Dad.
(Reply 89) mentions ‘ Ashavazang son of Pérfidakhst6th’ as one
of the seven immortal lords of Khvaniras. He is the Av. ‘ Asha-
vazdangh the Pourudhakhstiyan’ of Aban Yt. 72, Fravardin Vt.
112.

4 So in TD, but K2o has ‘always.’


CHAPTER XXIX, 6—IO. 119


assistance of Sdéshyans, on the production of the
renovation of the universe.

7. Regarding Sam! it says, that he became im-
mortal, du¢ owing to his disregard of the Mazda-
yasnian religion, a Tirk whom they call Nihag?
_ wounded zm with an arrow, when he was asleep
there, in the plain of PésyAnsat ; and it had brought
upon him the unnatural lethargy (bishasp) which
overcame zm im the midst of the heat®. 8. And
the glory (far) of heaven stands over him* for the
purpose that, when Az-i Dahak® becomes unfettered
(arazak), he may arise and slay him; and a myriad
guardian spirits of the righteous are as a protection
to him. 9. Of Dahak, whom they call Bévardsp,
this, too, it says, that Frédtn when he captured
Dahak was not able to kill Az, and afterwards
confined him in Mount Dimavand*; when he be-
comes unfettered, Sam arises, and smites and slays
him. .

10. As to Kangdeg, z¢ zs in the direction of the
east, at many leagues from the bed (var)” of the


1 This is not S4m the grandfather of Rustam, but the Av. Sama,
who appears to have been an ancestor of Keresaspa (see Yas. IX,
30), called Sam, grandfather of Garsdsp, in a passage interpolated
in some copies of the Shahnaémah (compare Chap. XXXI, 26, 27).
Here, however, it appears from the Bahman Yast (III, 59, 60)
that Keresaspa himself is meant, he being called Sama Keresadspa
in Fravardin Yt. 61, 136.

2 It can also be read Nihav or Ntyag in K2o, and Nihav or
Nihan in TD.

’ TD has ‘as he lay 2” the midst of the heat.’

4 TD has ‘and the snow (vafar) has settled (nishast) over
him.’

5 See Chaps. XXXI, 6, XXXIV, 5.

6 See Chap. XII, 31.

7 TD has agvar, ‘above,’ instead of min var, ‘from the bed.’


MC PXO) BUNDAHIS.


wide-formed ocean towards that side. 11. The plain
of PésyAnsai is in KAvulistan, as it says, that the
most remarkable upland (balist) in Kavulistan is
where PésyAnsai is; there it is hotter, on the more
lofty elevations there is no heat!, 12, Airan-vég is
in the direction of Ataré-patakan?, 13. The land
of Saukavastan is on the way from Tirkistan to
Kinistan, in the direction of the north. 14. [The
enclosure]* formed by Yim is zz the middle of PArs,
in Sruva‘; thus, they say, that what Yim formed
(Yim-kard) is below Mount Yimakan®. 15. Kasmir
is in Hinddstan.


CHAPTER XXX 4,


1. On the nature of the resurrection and future
existence it says in revelation, that, whereas Mashya
and Mashydi, who grew up from the earth’, first
fed upon water, then plants, then milk, avd then
meat, men also, when their time of death as come,
first desist from eating meat, then milk, then from


* Or, ‘the hottest there, through the very lofty elevation, is not
heat.’


2 Pers, Adarbigan.

° The word var is omitted in K20.

* TD has Pahl. Srfibak.

° Or it may be read Damakan, but TD has Kamak4n. It can
hardly be Damaghan, as that is a town and district in Khurdsan ;
Justi also Sugeest the district of Gamagn in Pars, and chins
Sruva means ‘cypress wood,’ there being a Salvast4n between
Shiraz and Fasa.

* This chapter is found in all MSS., and has been numbered
XXXI by former translators.

7 See Chaps. XV, 2-16, XXXIV, 3.


CHAPTER XXIX, II—XXxX, 5. I21


bread, till when! they shall die they always feed
upon water. 2. So, likewise, in the millennium of
Hishédar-mah’, the strength of appetite (4z) will
thus diminish, when men wz// remain three days
and nights in superabundance (sirih) through one
taste of consecrated food. 3. Then they will desist
from meat food, and eat vegetables avd milk; after-
wards, they abstain from milk food azd abstain from
vegetable food, avd are feeding on water; and for
ten years before Sdéshyans? comes they remain
without food, azd do not die.

4. After Sdshyans comes they prepare the raising
of the dead, as it says, that Zarattst asked of Adhar-
mazd thus: ‘Whence does a body form again,
which the wind Zas carried aud the water conveyed
(vazid)*? and how does the resurrection occur ?’
5. Atharmazd answered thus: ‘When through me
the sky arose from the substance of the ruby®, with-
out columns, on the spiritual support of far-com-
passed light; when through me the earth arose,
which* bore the material life, azd there is no


1 Reading amat, ‘when,’ instead of min, ‘ which’ (see the note
on Chap. I, 7).

2 Written Khfrshédar-mah, or Khfrshéd-mah, in the Bundahis ;
see Chap. XXXII, 8, and Bahman Yt. III, 52, 53.

$ See Chaps. XI, 6, XXXII, 8, Bahman Yt. III, 62.

4 Compare (Vend. V, 26) ‘the water carries 4im up, the water
carries 47m down, the water casts 47m away.’

5 Compare Mkh, IX, 7.

6 All MSS. have min, ‘out of, but translators generally suppose
it should be mfin, ‘which,’ as the meaning of ‘brought out of
material life’ is by no means clear. Perhaps the two phrases
might be construed together, thus: ‘there is no o/her maintainer
of the worldly creation, brought from the material life, than ihe
Windischmann refers to Fravardin Yt. 9.


SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA SCHOOL
OF THEOLOGY LIBRARY


T22 BUNDAHIS.


maintainer of the worldly creation but it; when by
me the sun and moon ad stars are conducted in
the firmament (andarvai) of luminous bodies; when
by me corn was created so that, scattered about in
the earth, it grew again azd returned with increase ;
when by me colour! of various kinds was created in
plants; when by me fire was created in plants aud
other things? without combustion; when éy me a
son was created azd fashioned? in the womb of a
mother, avd the structure (pisak) severally of the
skin, nails, blood, feet, eyes, ears, and other things
was produced; when by me legs were created for
the water, so that it flows away, azd the cloud was
created which carries the water of the world and
rains there where it has a purpose; when by me
the air was created which conveys zz one’s eyesight,
through the strength of the wind, the lowermost
upwards according to z¢s will, azd one is not able to
grasp z¢ with the hand out-stretched; each one of
them, when created by me, was herein more difficult
than causing the resurrection, for + z¢ zs an assistance
to me in the resurrection that they exist, dv¢ when
they were formed it was not forming the future out
of the past®. 6. Observe that when that which was
not was then produced, why is it not possible to


* Former translators all read rag, ‘vein, pore ;’ but it probably
stands for rang, ‘colour, dye,’ as in Chap. XXVII, 5, 18.

2 See Chap. XVII, 7; 2.

* Paz. srahttd is evidently a misreading of Pahl. sristtd,
‘formed, shaped.’ Windischmann compares Fravardin Yt. 11,
24, PASI

* Here kim is the Pazand of Huz. mamanam, ‘for to me;’
being a different word from the interrogative &tm, ‘why?’ of the
next §.

° Literally, ‘zehat becomes out of what was,’


CHAPTER XXX, 6-II. 123


produce again that which was ? for at that time one
well demand the bone from the spirit of earth, the
blood from the water, the hair from the plants, ad
the life from fire, since ¢ey were delivered to them
in the original creation.’

7. First, the bones of Gayémard are roused up,
then those of Mashya avd MAashydi, then those of
the rest of mankind; in the fifty-seven years of
Séshyans* they prepare all the dead, aud all men
stand up; whoever is righteous avd whoever is
wicked, every human creature, they rouse up from
the spot where its life departs. 8. Afterwards, when
all material living beings assume again their bodies
and forms, then they assign (bard yehabtind) them
a single class. 9. Of the light accompanying
(levatman) the sun, one half will de for Gayémard,
and one half will give enlightenment among the rest
of men, so that the soul azd body will know that
this is my father, and this is my mother, and this is
my brother, and this is my wife, and these are some
other of my nearest relations.

10. Then is the assembly of the SadvAstardan °,
where all mankind will stand at this time; in that
assembly every one sees his own good deeds and
his own evil deeds; avd then, in that assembly, a
wicked man becomes as conspicuous as a white
sheep among those which are black. 11. In that


1 K2o omits ‘ Sdéshyans.’

2 The phrase is obscure, and K2o omits the numeral ‘one’
(the idhafat of unity); but the meaning is probably that all former
distinctions of class, or caste, are abolished.

® Windischmann suggests that it may be ‘the assembly of Isad-
vastar,’ the eldest son of Zaratfist (see Chap. XXXII, 5); perhaps
supposed to be presided over by him as the first supreme high-
priest after Zarattist’s death,


Ton BUNDAHIS.


assembly whatever righteous maz was friend of a
wicked ove in the world, aud the wicked man com-
plains of him who is righteous, thus: ‘Why did he
not make me acquainted, when in the world, with
the good deeds which he practised himself?’ if he
who is righteous did not inform him, then it is
necessary for him to suffer shame accordingly in
that assembly?

12. Afterwards, they set the righteous maz apart
from the wicked; azd then. the righteous is for
heaven (garédmA4n), and they cast the wicked back
to hell. 13. Three days and nights they inflict
punishment bodily in hell, azad then he beholds
bodily those three days’ happiness in heaven?. 14.
As it says that, on the day when the righteous maz
is parted from the wicked, the tears of every one,
thereupon, run down unto Azs legs. 15. When,
after they set apart a father from his consort (ham-
bAz), a brother from his brother, and a friend from


* In the Arda-Viraf-namak (Chap. LXVIII) it is related that
Arda-Viraf saw the souls of a husband and wife, that of the husband
destined for heaven, and that of the wife for hell; but the wife
clung to her husband and asked why they should be separated,
and he told her it was on account of her neglect of religious duties ;
whereupon she reproached him for not teaching and chastising her.
‘And, afterwards, the man went to heaven and the woman to hell.
And owing to the repentance of that woman she was in no other
affliction in hell but darkness and stench. And that man sat in
the midst of the righteous of heaven in shame, from not converting
and not teaching the woman, who might have become virtuous in
his keeping.’

? As an aggravation of his punishment in hell. It has generally
_-been supposed that this last phrase refers to the reward of the
righteous man, but this cannot be the case unless akhar be taken
in the sense of ‘other,’ which is unlikely ; besides, beholding the
happiness of others would be no reward to an Oriental mind.


CHAPTER XXX, 12-19. I25


his friend, they suffer, every one for his own deeds,
and weep, the righteous for the wicked, and the
wicked about himself; for there may be a father
who is righteous axd a son wicked, and there may
be one brother who is righteous aud one wicked.
16. Those for whose peculiar deeds it is appointed,
such as Dahak and Frasiyav of Tar, avd others of
this sort, as those deserving death (marg-argAn4n),
undergo a punishment no other men undergo; they
call z¢ ‘the punishment of the three nights 1’

17. Among his producers of the renovation of the
universe, those righteous men of whom it is written?
that they are living, fifteen men and fifteen damsels,
will come to the assistance of Sdéshyans, 18. As
Godsihar?® falls in the celestzal sphere from a moon-
beam on to the earth, the distress of the earth
becomes such-like as that of a sheep when a wolf
falls upon zt. 19. Afterwards, the fire and halo‘
melt the metal of Shatvairé, in the hills azd moun-
tains, azd it remains on this earth like a river.


1 According to the Pahlavi Vend. VII, 136 (p. 96, Sp.) it appears
that a person who has committed a marg-argan or mortal sin,
without performing patft or renunciation of sin thereafter, remains
in hell till the future existence, when he is brought out, beheaded
three times for each mortal sin unrepented of, and then cast back
into hell to undergo the punishment tishram khshafnam (‘of the
three nights’) before he becomes righteous ; some say, however,
that this punishment is not inflicted for a single mortal sin. This
period of three nights’ punishment is quite a different matter from
the three nights’ hovering of the soul about the body after death.

2 See Chap. XXIX, 5, 6. As the text stands in the MSS. it is
uncertain whether the fifteen men and fifteen damsels are a portion
of these righteous immortals, or an addition to them.

3 Probably a meteor (see Chap. V, 1).

* Reading khirman; M6 has ‘the fire and angel Airman (Av.
Airyaman) melt the metal in the hills, &c,


126 BUNDAHIS.


20. Then all men will pass into that melted metal
and will become pure; when ome is righteous, then it
seems to him just as though he walks continually in
warm milk; d«¢ when wicked, then it seems to him
in such manner as though, in the world, he walks
continually in melted metal.

21. Afterwards, with the greatest affection, all
men come together, father and son and brother and
friend ask one another thus: ‘Where has it? been
these many years, and what was the judgment upon
thy soul? hast thou been righteous or wicked ?’
22. The first soul the body sees, it enquires of it
with those words (gift). 23. All men become of
one voice avd administer loud praise to he
and the archangels.

24. Atharmazd completes Zzs work at that time,
and the creatures become so that it is not necessary
to make any effort about them; azd among those
by whom the dead are prepared, it is not necessary
that any effort be made. 25. Sdshyans, with his
assistants, performs a Yazisn ceremony in preparing
the dead, and they slaughter the ox Hadhayés? in
that Yazisn ; from the fat of that ox and the white
Hém * they prepare Hish, avd give z¢ to all men,
and all men become immortal for ever and ever-
lasting. 26. This, too, it says, that whoever has
been the size of a man, they restore him then with
an age of forty years; they who have been little
when not dead, they restore then with an age of
fifteen years; and they give every one /7s wife, and


* K2o has ‘have I;’ probably hémanih, ‘hast thou, was the
original reading.

2 See Chap. XIX, 13.

§ See Chap. XXVII, 4,


CHAPTER XXX, 20-28. r27


show him his children with the wife; so they act as
now in the world, but there is no begetting of
children,

27. Afterwards, Séshyans and his assistants, by
order of the creator Attharmazd, give every man
the reward and recompense suitable to 47s deeds ;
_ this is even the righteous existence (ait) where it is
said that they convey 42m to paradise (vahist), and
the heaven (garddm4n) of Atharmazd takes up
the body (kerp) as itself requires; with that assist-
ance he continually advances for ever and ever-
lasting. 28. This, too, it says, that whoever has
performed no worship (yast), and has ordered no
Géti-kharid}, and has bestowed no clothes as a
righteous gift, is naked there; and he performs the
worship (yast) of Atharmazd, and the heavenly
angels? provide him the use of his clothing.


* The Sad-dar Bundahis says that by Géti-kharid ‘heaven is
purchased in the world, and one’s own place brought to hand in
heaven.’ The Rivayat of Dasttir Barzfi (as quoted in MS. 29 of
Bombay University Parsi Collection) gives the following details in
Persian : ‘To celebrate Géti-kharid it is necessary that two hér-
bads (priests) perform the Nabar, and with each khshntiman
which they pray it is fit and necessary that both hérbads have
had the Nabar; and the first day they recite the Nonabar yast,
and consecrate the Nénabar drén and the Ndénabar afringan
which they recite in each G&h; in the Havan Gah it is necessary
to recite fravarané (as in Yas. III, 24 W. to end), ahurahé
mazdau raévaté (asin Afharmazd Yt. 0, to) frasastayaéa, then
Yas. III, 25 W., XVII, 1-55 Sp., ashem vohti thrice, afrinadmi
khshathryan (as in Afring4n I, 14, to end). The second day
the Srésh yast and Srésh drén and 4fringan are to be recited ;
and the third day it is necessary to recite the Strézah yast, the
Sirézah drén and 4fring4n dahm4n; and it is needful to recite
the second and third Afring4ns in each Gah, and each day to
consecrate the barsom and drén afresh with seven twigs, so that
it may not be ineffective.’

2 Paz. gehan jis probably a misreading of Pahl. yazdan, as


128 BUNDAHIS,


set


29. Afterwards, Atharmazd seizes on? the evil
spirit, Vohiman oz Akéman?, Ashavahist oz Andar®,
Shatvair6 on Savar, Spendarmad on ‘Tardémat
who is Nadtnghas*, Horvadad and Amerddad on
‘Tairév and Zairik®, true-speaking oz what is evil-
speaking, Srésh* oz Aeshm’™, 30. Then two fiends
remain at large, Aharman® and Az®; Adharmazd
comes to the world, himself the Zéta and Srdésh
the Raspi!®, and holds the Kistit in zs hand;


neither ‘the spirit of the world, nor ‘the spirit of the Gahs’ is a
likely phrase. It is possible, however, that mafndék gehan is
a misreading of min aivyahan, ‘from the girdle,’ and we should
translate as follows: ‘and out of its girdle (that is, the kistt of
the barsom used in the ceremony) he produces the effect of his
clothing.’

1 Instead of vakhdtind, ‘seize on,’ we should probably read
vanend, ‘smite,’ as in the parallel passages mentioned below.

2 Compare Zamydd Yt. 96. Each archangel (see Chap. I, 25,
26) here seizes the arch-fiend (see Chaps. I, 27, XXVIII, 7-12)
who is his special opponent.

° Here written Paz. Inder’ Compare Pahlavi Yas. XLVII, 1:
‘When among the creation, in the future existence, righteousness
smites the fiend, Ashavahist safes Indar,’

* Written Nakahéd in Chap. I, 27, and Naikiyas in Chap.
XXVIII, 10, where he is described as a distinct demon from
Tarémat in XXVIII, 14.

> Here written Tarév and Zartf.

° Av. Sraosha, a personification of attentive hearing and obe-
dience, who is said to watch over the world and defend it from
the demons, especially at night; see Vend. XVIII, 48, 51, 70, &c.,
Yas. LVI, Srésh Yt. Hadékht, &c.

7 See Chap. XXVIII, 15-174.

* Comparing § 29 with § 30 it is not very clear whether the
author of the Bundahis considered Aharman and the evil spirit as
the same or different demons; compare also Chap. XXVIII, 1-6
with 40, 41.

® See Chap. XXVIII, 27.

© The Zéta is the chief officiating priest in all ceremonies, and
the Raspt is the assistant priest.


CHAPTER XXX, 29-33. 129


defeated by the Kfsti! formula the resources of the
evil spirit and Az act most impotently, axd by the
passage through which he rushed into the sky? he
runs back to gloom amd darkness. 31. Gédfihar*
burns the serpent (mar) in the melted metal, and
the stench and pollution whzch were in hell are
burned in that metal, aud it (hell) becomes quite
pure. 32. He (Adharmazd) sets the vault® into
which the evil spirit fled, in that metal ; he brings the
land of hell back for the enlargement of the world °;
the renovation arises in the universe by /zs will, and
the world is immortal for ever and everlasting.

33. This, too, it says, that this earth decomes an
iceless’, slopeless plain*; even the mountain ®,


1 The words zak g,hani, for 4n geh4ni, are probably a mis-
reading of atvyah4n, ‘the kfisti or sacred thread-girdle,’ which is
tied round the waist in a peculiar manner, during the recital of a
particular formula, in which Afharmazd is blessed and Aharman
and the demons are cursed.

2 See Chap. III, 10-12. 8 See §18 and Chap. V, 1.

* Probably referring to Az, which means both ‘ greediness’ and
‘serpent.’ It is, however, possible to read ‘Gdéithar the serpent
burns in’ &c., and there can be no doubt that Gdéthar is repre-
sented as a malevolent being.

5 Or, perhaps, ‘ hiding-place.’” Comparing K20 and M6 together
the word seems to be além, which may be compared with Heb.
DOIN a vault, or Chald. NIDDIN ‘a porch;’ it may, however, be
valém, which may be traced to nby ‘to conceal.’ In the old
MSS. it is certainly not shélman, ‘hell,’ which is an emendation
due to the modern copy in Paris.

6 Or, ‘to the prosperity of the world.’

7 Former translators read anhikhar, ‘ undefiled,’ but this does
not suit the Pahlavi orthography so well as anhas4r, ‘iceless ’
(compare Pers, hasar, khasar, or khasar, ‘ice ’); cold and ice,
being produced by the evil spirit, will disappear with him.

. 8 P4z, AmAvan is a misreading of Pahl. hamiin, so the reading
is ansip (compare Pers. sib) hamfin. Mountains, being the work
of the evil spirit, disappear with him.

9 Kakad-i-Daitik, see Chap. XII, 7.

[5] K


130 BUNDABIS.


whose summit is the support of the Kinvar d7zdge,
they keep down, and it wll not exist.


CHAPTER XXXI}.


o. On the race and genealogy of the Kayans.

1. Héshyang? was son of Fravak, sow of Siyak-
al 8 son of Mashya4, son of Gayémard. [2. Takh-
morup * was son of Vivanghaa °, soz of Yanghad", son
of Héshyang. 3. Yim,]® Takhmérup, Spitdr®, and
Narsih”, whom they also call ‘the Rashnt of Xiné",


1 For this chapter, which is numbered XXXII by previous trans-
lators, we have to depend only on K20, TD, and K2ob (a fragment
evidently derived from the same original as Kzo and M6, but
through some independent line of descent).

a ik in Kzo, but usually Héshang (see Chaps. XV, 28, XXXIV,
3, 4

See Chap. XV, 25, 30.

* See Chaps. XV, 2-24, 30, XXXIV, 3.

5 Av. Takhmé-urupa of Ram Yt. 11, ZamyAd Yt. 28, Afrin Zarat.
2; written Takhmérup in TD, which is the only MS. in which the
passage enclosed in brackets is found, the omission of which by
K20 was suspected by Windischmann (Zoroastriche Studien, p. 199).
This king is the Tahmfras of the Shahnamah. See also Chaps.
XVII, 4, XXXIV, 4.

° Av. Vivanghau of Yas. IX, 11, 20, XXXII, 8, Vend. II, 8, 28,
94, Fravardin Yt. 130, Zamyad Yt. 35.

" As this Pazand name or title begins with a medza/ y, its initial
vowel is probably omitted (see p. 141, note 8).

* Av. Yima or Yima khshaéta of Vend. II, &c., the Jamshéd of
the Shahnamah (see Chaps. XVII, 5, XXXIV, 4).

® Av. Spityura of Zamyad Yt. 46.

* Here written Narst in K2o and Kzob, and Nésth in TD; but
see § 5 and Chap. XXIX,6. Windischmann suggests that fe may
be the Av. Aoshnara pouru-gfra of Fravardin Vt. 131, Af. Zarat. 2.

“ An epithet equivalent to ‘the Minos of China ;’ Rashnti being
the angel of justice, who is said to weigh the meritorious deeds of


CHAPTER XXXI, 1-6. 131


were all brothers. 4. From Yim and Yimak1, who
was 47s sister, was born a pair, man azd woman, and
they became husband aud wife together; Mirak the
Aspiyan? and Ziyanak Zardahim were ¢#er names,
and the lineage went on. 5. Spittir was he who,
_ with Dahak, cut up Yim *; Narsih‘ lived then® also,
whom they call Nésr-gyAvan*; they say that such
destiny (gadman) is allotted to him’, that he shall
pass every day in troubles, and shall make all food
purified azd pure.

6. Dahak* was son of Khritasp, son of Zainigav


>


the departed soul against its sins. Neither word is, however, quite
certain, as rashnfik may stand for rasnfk, ‘spear,’ and has also
been translated by ‘light’ and ‘hero;’ Aind, moreover, was probably
not China, but Samarkand (see Chaps. XII, 13, 22, XV, 29).

1 See Chap. XXIII, 1.

2 Av. Athwyana of Aban Yt. 33, Gés Vt. 13, Fravardin Yt. 131,
Zamyad Yt. 36, &c., where it is the family name of Thraétaona, who
is said to be a son of Athwya in Yas. IX, 23, 24. In the text this
name seems to be used rather as a title than a patronymic, and in
§ 7 it appears to be a family surname.

5 As stated in Zamyad Yt. 46.

¢ Here written Narsak in K20 and Kzob, and Nosth in TD.

5 TD has ‘together,’ instead of ‘then.’

6 So in K20, but Kzob has Narst-gydvan, and TD has Nésth-
viyavanik (or ntyazantk). Perhaps we may assume the epithet to
have been nfgtr-viyavanitk (or nfyazanik), ‘one with a bewil-
dering (or longing) glance.’

7 Justi supposes this clause of the sentence refers to Yim and
the disease which attacked his hand. If this be the case it may be
translated as follows: ‘they say atghash is produced on his hand
(yadman), so that,’ &c.; aighash being a disease, or evil, men-
tioned in Vend. XX, 14, 20, 24; compare Chap. XXVITJI, 33.

® Or Az-i Dahak, the Av. Azi Dahaka, ‘destructive serpent,’ of
Yas. IX, 25, Vend. I, 69, Aban Yt. 29, 34, Bahram Yt. 40, Zamy4d
Yt. 46-50. A name applied to a foreign dynasty (probably Semitic)
personified as a single king, which conquered the dominions of
Yim (see Chap. XXXIV, 5).

IK


132 BUNDAHIS.


son of Virafsang, son of Taz, sow of Fravak, soz of
Siyéakmak1!; by 42s mother Dahak was of Udat?, son
of Bayak, son of Tambayak, sox of Owokhm®, son of
Pairi-urvaésm 4, soz of Gadhwithw®, soz of Drigas-
kan °, sow of the evil spirit.

7. Frédin the Aspiyan™ was son of Ptir-tora® the
Aspiyan, son of Sok-t6ra® the Aspiyan, son of Boér-
tora the AspiyAn, sow of Styak-t6ra the Aspiyan, soz
of Spéd-t6ra the Aspiyan, sow of Gefar-tora the
Aspiyan, son of Ramak-téra the Aspiyan, son of


* For the last three names, see Chap. XV, 25, 28.

* Pahl. Afidin TD; compare ‘the demon Uda’ of Chap. XXVIII,
19. The following two names look like ‘fear’ and ‘ gloom-fear,’
both appropriate names for demons.

° TD has Paz. Owéikh ; compare Av. aoiwra, ‘a species of night-
mare,’ observing that r and 6 are often written alike in Pahlavi.

* TD and Kzob have Paz. Pairi-urva-urvaésm, and Kzo has
Pai-urvaésm.

5 TD has Paz. Gawithw.

° So in TD, but K2o0 has Paz. Druz-i ayaska, and Kzob has
Drug-i ayaska. It corresponds to Av. drugaska in Vend. XIX, 1309,
Vistasp Yt. 26. This genealogy appears to trace Dahak’s maternal
descent through a series of demons.

7 Av. Thraétaona, son of Athwya, but generally called ‘the Athwy4-
nian,’ who slew the destructive serpent (azi dahaka), see Yas. IX,
24, 25, Vend. I, 69, Aban Yt. 33, 61, Gos Yt. 13, Fravardin Yt. 131,
Bahram Yt. 40, Ram Yt. 23, Ashi Yt. 33, Zamy4d Yt. 36, 92, Af.
Zarat. 2. In the Shahndmah he is. called Ferfdfin son of Abtin.

* This name is omitted in K2o, but occurs in the other two MSS. ;
it is a Huzvaris hybrid equivalent to Paz. Par-gau and Av. Poune
gau, which is a title of an AthwyAnian in Af. Zarat. 4, Vistasp Yt.
2. This genealogy consists almost entirely of such hybrid names,
which have a very artificial appearance, though suitable enough for
a race of herdsmen, meaning, as they severally do, ‘one with abun-
dant oxen, with useful oxen, with the brown ox, with the black ox,
with the white ox, with the fat ox, and with a herd of oxen,’

® So in TD, but the other two MSS. have Styak-téra, which is
probably wrong, as the same name occurs again in this genealogy.


CHAPTER XXXI, 7—IT. 133


Vanfraghesn! the AspiyAn, son of Yim, soz of
Vivanghat ; as these, apart from the Aspiyan Pfr-
tora, were ten generations, they every one lived a
hundred years, which becomes one thousand years;
those thousand years were the evil reign of Dahak.
8. By the Aspiyan Pfir-t6ra was begotten Frétn,
who exacted vengeance for Yim; together w7th him?
also were the sons BarmAdytin aud Katdydn, du¢
Frédin was fuller of glory than they.

9. By Frédiin three sons were begotten, Salm and
Tig and Airi£*; and by Aitrié one son and one
pair* were begotten; the names of the couple of
sons were Vanidar axd Anastokh *°, azd the name of
the daughter was Giizak*. 10. Salm and Tig slew
them all, Airié and zs happy sons, dwt Frédin kept
the daughter in concealment, azd from that daughter
a daughter was born’; they became aware of zz,
and the mother was slain by them. 11. Frédin
provided for the daughter °, also in concealment, for


1 In TD this name can be read Vanfrdkisn or Vanfrdkg4n.

2 TD has ‘as well as hzm.’ Kzob omits most of this sentence
by mistake.

$ These sons, as Windischmann observes, are not mentioned in the
extant Avesta, but their Avesta names, Sairima, Tfirya or Tfira, and
Airya or Airyu, may be gathered from the names of the countries over
which they are supposed to have ruled (see Fravardin Yt. 143).

* TD has ‘two sons and one daughter.’

> TD has Anidar and Anastabo.

® Or Gfigak, in TD; the other MSS. have Paz. Ganga here, but
Guzak in § 14; it is identical with the name of Hdshyang’s sister
and wife in Chap. XV, 28. In the Pazand G&masp-namah the
~ name of Frédfin’s daughter is written Virak.

7 Reading min zak dikht dfikht-1 24d, as in K2ob and TD;
some uncertainty arises here from the words dfikht, ‘daughter,’
and dvad, ‘ pair,’ being written alike in Pahlavi.

® TD has bartman, ‘ daughter,’ indicating that the word in K2o0
must be read dikht, and not dvad, ‘ pair.’


134 BUNDAHIS.


ten generations, when Mants-i Khirshéd-vinik was
born from zs mother, [so called because, as he was
born, some of |! the light of the sun (khirshéq@) fell
upon zs nose (vinik). 12. From Mands-i Khfr-
shéa-vinik and his sister? was MAants-khirnar, axd
from Mantis-khtrnar [azd his sister] was Mantiséihar
born’, by whom Salm and Tig were slain in revenge
for Airié4. 13. By MAntséihar were Fris, Nédar ®,
and Ditrdsréb * begotten.

14. Just as Mantséihar was of Mants-khdrnar, of
Méants-khfrnak’?, who was Mam-sozak 8, of Airak, of
Thritak, of Bitak, of Fraztisak, of Zdsak®, of Fragt-
zak, of Gtizak, of AiriZ, of Frédtin, so Frasiyav! was


1 The phrase in brackets occurs only in TD; and the whole
passage from ‘vinik’ to ‘sun’ is omitted in K2o, evidently by
mistake.

2 TD has ‘from Mantis and Azs sister,’ and Kzob has ‘from
MAntis-hi#thar and Mants-khtirshéd.’

5 The words in brackets occur only in TD, and K2ob has ‘from
Mantis-khfrnar also was Manfis-khfrnak, from Mantis-khtirnak was
Mantiséthar born,’ but this introduction of an extra generation is
not confirmed by the list of names in § 14. The term khfirnak (or
khfirnak) seems to be merely a transcript of the Avesta word of
which khfirshéd-vintk, ‘sun-nose,’ is a translation. The other
term khfirnar can also be read khfirvar, but K2o has Paz. hvar-
nar. Manitssihar is the Av. Manusfithra of Fravardin Yt. 131,
where he is styled the Airyavan, or descendant of Airyu (Airi).

* TD has ‘and vengeance exacted for Airtf.’

> See Chap. XXIX, 6.

° Paz. Durdsro, but the Pahlavi form, given in the text, occurs
in § 31 and Chap. XXXII, 1 in TD, which MS. omits this § by
mistake.

7 The same as Mants-i kharshéd-vintk, as noted above.

* This Pazand epithet seems to mean ‘mother-burning,’ and
may have some connection with the legend mentioned in § rr.
TD has mtin am Gigak, ‘whose mother was Gfigak,’

* Kzob omits the five names from Afrak to Zfisak.

© Ay. Frangrasyan, the Tfryan, of Yas. XI, 21, Aban Yt. 41,


CHAPTER XXXI, 12-21. 135


of Pashang, of Zaésm’, of Tarak, of Spaényasp, of
Diréshasp, of Tig, of Frédtin. 15. He (Frastydz)
as well as Karsévaz?, whom they call Kadan?, axd
Aghrérad* were all three brothers.

[16°. Pashang and Visak were both brothers. 17.
By Visak were Piran®, Hamdan, San’, and other
brothers begotten. 18. By Frdsiyav were Frasp-i
Air, San, Shédak ®, and other sons begotten; and
Vispan-fry4 °, from whom Kai-Khisréb was born,
was daughter of Frasiyav, and was of the same
mother with Frasp-i Atr. 19. From Frasp-i A‘ir
were Strak, Astrik, and other children ; axd by them
were KhvAst-airikht, Yazdan-airikht, Yazdan-sarad,
Fréh-khiard, La-vahak", and others begotten, a recital
of whom would be tedious.

20. By Aghrérad was Gépatshah" begotten. 21.
When Frdasiyav made MAantiséihar, with the Iranians,
captive in the mountain-range (gar) of Padashkh-


Gos Yt. 18, 22, Ashi Yt. 38, 42, Zamyad Yt. 56-63, 82, 93; called
Afrasiyab in the Shahnamah.

1 ZAdsam in the Shahnamah.

2 Garsivaz in the Shahnamah.

5 TD has Pahl. Kidan.

* See Chap. XXIX, 5.

5 The remainder of this chapter is found only in TD.

° Pir4n Visah is Afrasiyab’s chief general in the Shahnamah,
and Hfimén and Pilsam are his brothers.

7 This name is very ambiguous in Pahlavi, as it can be read
many other ways.

§ Shédah in the Shahnamah.

9 She is called Farangts in the Shahnamah.

10 The reading of several of these names is more or less uncer-
tain, but the object of the author is evidently to apply opprobrious
epithets to all the male descendants of Afrasiyab.

1 TD has Gépat-malk4 here, as also in Chap. XXIX, 5, where
it is said to be a title of Aghrérad (always written Agrérad in TD).


¥ 36 BUNDAHIS.


var}, and scattered ruin avd want among them,
Aghrérad begged a favour of God (yazdan), and
he obtained the benefit that the army and cham-
pions of the Iranians were saved by him from that
distress. 22. Frastyav slew Aghrérad for that
fault; azd Aghrérad, as his recompense, begat
such a son as Gédpatshah.

23. Atizéb6 the Tthmaspian?, Kanak-i Barzist,
Arawisanasp, and Vaétand-i Raghindid were the
three sons and the daughter of Agdimasvak 3, the sou
of Nédar, son of Mandskihar, who begat Atizdbéd.
24. Kavad* was a child in a waist-cloth (kuspid);
they abandoned 4zm on a river, azd he froze upon
the door-sills (kavadakaAn); Atizdbé perceived and
took Azm, brought 47m up, and settled the name of
the trembling child.

25. By Kavad was Kai-Apivéh begotten; by
Kai-Apivéh weve Kai-Arsh, Kai-Vyarsh, Kai-Pis4n,
and Kai-Kats begotten; by Kai-Katis was Stya-
vakhsh begotten ; by SiyAvakhsh was Kai-Khiisréb®


* The mountains south of the Caspian (see Chap. XII, 17).

* Av. Uzava Timaspana of Fravardin Yt. 131, called Zav, or
Zab, son of Tahmasp, in the Sh4hn4amah.

* None of these names, which TD gives in Pazand, are to be
found in the portion of the Avesta yet extant.

* Av. Kavi Kavata of Fravardin Yt. 132, Zamyad Yt. 71, called
Kai-Qubad in the Shadhnamah. There appears to be an attempt,
in the text, to derive his name from the ‘ door-sill’ on which he is
said to have been found.

* The Avesta names of these seven other Kay4ns are, respectively,
Kavi Aipi-vanghu, Kavi Arshan, Kavi Bydrshan, Kavi Pisanangh,
Kavi Usadhan, Kavi Syavarshan, and Kavi Husravangh (see Fra-
vardin Yt. 132, ZamyAd Yt. 71, 74); omitting the third, they are
called, respectively, Armin, Aris, Pasin, Kai-KAviis, Siyavush, and
Kai-Khusr6 in the Shahnamah. TD, omitting the first letter, has
Sano for Pisan ; it also writes Kai-Kaytiks and Kai-Khiisrovt,


CHAPTER XXXI, 22-30. 137


begotten. 26. Keresdsp! azd Atirvakhsh? were
both brothers. 27. Athrat® was son of Sahm, sox
of Tirak, sox of Spaényasp, soz of Dardshasp 4, soz
of Tig, sow of Frédin. 28. Léhardsp® was son of
Atizav °, sow of Mantis, son of Kai-Pisin”, son of
Kai-Apivéh, soz of Kat-Kavad. 29. By Kai-
Léharasp were Vistasp, Zarir’, aud other brothers
begotten ; by Vistasp were Spend-dad@® and Péshyé-
tani’ begotten; and by Spend-dad were Vohtiman",
Ataré-tarsah, Mitré-tarsah, azd others begotten.

30. Artakhshatar descendant of Papak—of whom
his mother was daughter—was son of Sasdn™, son of


1 Av. Keresadspa of Yas. IX, 31, 36, 39, Vend. I, 36, Aban Yt.
37, Fravardin Yt. 61, 136, Ram Yt. 27, Zamyad Yt. 38-44, “AE,
Zarat. 3; he is called Garsdsp in the Shahnamah.

2 Av. Urvakhshaya of Yas. IX, 31, Ram Yt. 28, Af. Zarat. 3. These
brothers were sons of Thrita or Athrat, mentioned in the next §.

5 Av. Thrita of the Sama race (see Yas. IX, 30, Vend. XX, rr)
and father of Keresdspa, whose genealogy is given in a passage
interpolated in some copies of the Shahnamah as follows: Garsasp,
Atrat, Sam, Tfrag, Stdasb, Tir, Jamshéd.

* Written Dfirdéshap in TD, both here and in § 14.

5 Av. Aurvad-aspa of Aban Yt. 105, Vistasp Yt. 34, 46, called
Luhrasp in the Shahnamah.

§ Reading doubtful.

7 Written Ka-Pisin here, but he is the same person as Kai-
Pisdn of § 25 ; the latter part of the name is written both Pisanangh
and Pisina in the Avesta.

8 Probably Zargar (being Av. Zairivairi of Abn Yt. rr2, 117,
Fravardin Yt. ror), -but called Zarir in the Shahnamah.

® Ay. Spent6-data of Fravardin Yt. 103, Vistasp Yt. 25, called
Isfendiyar in the Shahnamah.

10 See Chaps. XXIX, 5, XXXH, 5.

1 Called Bahman in the Shahnamah, and Ardashir the Kaydnian
in Bahman Yt. II, 17; the successor of his grandfather Vistasp (see
Chap. XXXIV, 8).

2 The text is rather obscure, but the Karnamak of Ardashir-i
PApakan states clearly that Ardashir was son of Sasan by the


138 BUNDAHIS.


Véh-Afrid and?! Zartr, soz of SAsdn, soz of Artakhsha-
tar who was the said Vohtiman soz of Spend-dad.
31. The mother of Kai-Apivéh was Farhank ?,
daughter of him who ts exalted on the heavenly
path®, Urvad-gai-frast*, son of Rak, sow of Ditrdsrob,
son of Mantiséihar. 32. This, too, it says, that the
glory® of Frédin settled on the root of a reed
(kany4) in the wide-formed ocean; and Noktarga®,
through sorcery, formed a cow for tillage, and begat
children there; three years -he carried the reeds
there, axd gave them to the cow, until the glory
went on to the cow; he brought the cow, milked her
milk, azd gave zt to his three sons; as ¢heiy walking
was on hoofs, the glory did not go to the sons, but
to Farhank. 33. Ndoktarga wished to injure’ Far-
hank, du¢ Farhank went with the glory away from


daughter of Papak, a tributary ruler of Pars under Ardav4n, the
last of the Askaniydn monarchs.

1 So in the Pahlavi text, which therefore makes Véh-afrid a
woman’s name (like Pers. Beh-afrin) ; but this is doubtful, as the
MSS. often confound va, ‘and,’ and i, ‘ son of’

2 In the Shahnamah Farhang is mother of Kat-Kavis. The
Pahlavi name can also be read Faradnak, the name of the mother
of Ferfdtin in the Shahnamah.

* Paz. vidharg-afrastaka, which looks more like an epithet
than a name.

4 Or, perhaps, ‘ Urvad-g4 son of Frast,’

* The divine glory which was supposed to accompany all legiti-
mate sovereigns of Iran, from the time of Héshyang even to that
of the Sasanian dynasty ; it is the Av. Aoarenangh of the Zamyad
Yast, and is said to have fled to the ocean for refuge during the
reign of foreign dynasties and wicked ne (see Abén Yt. 42,
Zamyad Yt. 51, 56, 59, 62).

° The last syllable is so written, in ee im $39.

" Reading hangtdané, ‘to injure,’ instead of khungdané,
which may mean ‘to embrace;’ the difference between the two
words being merely the letter 4.


CHAPTER XXXI, 31-38. 139


the fierce (tib) father, and made a vow (patyastak)
thus: ‘I will give my first son to Atshbam'’ 34.
Then Adshbam saved her from the father; and the
first son, Kai-Apivéh, she bore and gave to Atish-
bam, was a hero associating with Atishbdm, and
_ travelled in Atishbam’s company.

35. The mother of Afizébé was the daughter
of Namidn the wizard, when NAamak2 was with
Frasiyav.

36. And, moreover, together with those begotten
by Sam?* were six children in pairs, male and female;
the name of one was Damnak, of one Khisrév, and
of one Margandak, and the name of each man and
woman together was one. 37. And the name of one
destdes them was Dastan‘; he was considered more
eminent than they, and Sagdnsih® and the southern
quarter were given to him; and Avar-shatré® and
the governorship were given by him to Avarnak.
38. Of Avar-shatré this is said, that z¢ zs the district
of Avarnak, axd they offered blessings 4o Srésh and
Ardavahist in succession; on this account is their
possession of horses and possession of arms; and
on account of firm religion, purity, and manifest joy,
good estimation and extensive fame are greatly


1 This name means ‘the dawn;’ perhaps it may be identified
with Av. Usinemangh or Usenemangh of Fravardin Yt. 113, 140,
whose wife Freni may possibly be the Farhank (or Franak) of the
text.

2 So in TD, but it is probably only a variant of Namfin.

® The grandfather of Rustam (see § 41). In the Avesta he is
usually called SAma Keresdspa with the title Nairimanau ; while
in the Shahnamah Sam is son of Nariman.

4 Another name for ZAl, the father of Rustam, in the Shahnamah.

5 The same as Sagastan.

® Or, perhaps, ‘the upper district,’


140 - BUNDAHIS.


among them. 39. To Damnak the governorship of
Astiristan was given; sovereignty and arranging the
law of sovereignty, wilfulness and the stubborn de-
fects they would bring, were among them. 40. To
Sparnak! the governorship of Spahan? was given;
to Khasrév the governorship of Rai* was given; to
Margandak the kingdom, forest settlements, and
mountain settlements of Padashkhvargar were
given; where they travel nomadically, and ‘there
ave the forming of sheep-folds, prolificness, easy
procreation, and continual triumph over enemies.
41. From Dastan proceeded Ridastam * and Hiiza-
varak °.]


CHAPTER XXXII 4&,


1. On the kindred of Pérfishasp*, son of Paiti-
rasp§, sox of Aurvadasp®, son of HaékadAsp™, son of


* He would seem not to have been a son of SAm, as he is not
mentioned before. The reading of all these names is uncertain.

® The Pahlavi form of Ispahan.

° Av. Ragha of Yas. XIX, 51, Vend. I, 60, whose ruins are near
the modern Teher4n.

* The usual Pahlavi form of Rustam.

> Or Afizvaérak; Rustam’s brother is called Zav4rah in the
Shahnamah.

* This chapter, which is numbered XXXIII by previous trans-
lators, is found in all MSS., but in TD it forms a continuation of
the preceding chapter, beginning with the name Pérfishasp.

‘ ” Av. Pourushaspa of Yas. EX, 42, 43, Vend. XIX, 15, 22, 143,
Aban Yt. 18, &c.

* K2o has Paz. Spitarsp, and M6 has Paéz. Pirtrasp (see note on
Chap. XXXIII, 1), The reading in the text is doubtful.

* Omitted in K2o and TD.

* Av. Haékadaspa of Yas. XLV, 15, LI, 3


CHAPTER XXXI, 39 —XXXII, 3. 141


Kakhshnis', soz of Paitirasp, son of Hardarsn 2, son
of Hardar?, son of Spitaman 4, soz of Vidast 5, son of
_Ayazem, son of Ragan®, sow of Dirdsréb’, son of
Mantséihar*®. 2. As Paitirasp Aad two sons, one
Pérdshasp and one ArAsti , by Pérdshasp was Za-
ratist begotten for a sanctuary of good religion ¥,
and by ArAsti was Médyék-mah"! begotten. 3. Zara-
tast, when he brought the religion, first celebrated


as Windischmann suggests Av. Kakhshnéis (gen.) of Fravardin
to1t4,


® K2o has Paz. Harsn and TD has Harakidarsnd.

3 TD has Haratdar, or Ardidar. —

* Or Spitdm (as the last syllable is the patronymical suffix), Av.
Spitama, the usual patronymic of Zarattist.

® May be read Vadist in TD.

® Possibly the same person as Rak in Chap. XXXI, 31; but
see XXXIII, 3.

7 So in TD, but Paz. Durdsrun in K20, M6.

* This genealogy is somewhat differently given in the Vagarkara-i
Dintk (pp. 28, 29),as published in Bombay by Dastur Peshotanji Beh-
ramji Sanjana in 1848; and is extended back, through the genera-
tions mentioned in Chap. XXXI, 1, 2,7,14,to Gaydmard, as follows :
‘Périshaspé son of Paitirasp, and Araspd son of Paittrasp, Urvaz-
dasp, Haékadasp, Xikhshnus, Paétirasp, Hardrsn, Haridar, Spita-
mano, Vaédist, Nayazem, Ragisn, Dirasrdb, Maniséthar sovereign
of Iran, Manus-khfrnar, Manus-khfimak, Néryésang, Varztd-din,
Vizak, Airyak, Aithritak, Ibitak, Frazitsak, Zisak, Frasizak, Izak,
Airig, Fréddn lord of Khvaniras, Pir-tora the Aspikan, Névak-t6ra
the Asptkan, Sdg-t6ra the Asptkan, Géfar-tora the Asptkan, Vané-
i-fravisn the Asptkan, Yim lord of the seven regions, Vivanghat,
Ayanghad, Ananghad, Takhmérup, Hdshang the Pésdad, lord of
the seven regions, Fravak, Styamak, Mashyé whose wife was
Mashyak, Gayékmard the first man, and father of all mankind in
the material world.’ i

® Av, Ardstaya of Fravardin Vt. 98 ; TD has ArAstih.

10 The Pazand words darga hidainis appear to be merely a
misreading of Pahl. dargas-i hfidindth.

11 Ay, Maidhy6-maungha of Yas. L, 19, Fravardin Yt. 95, 106.
He is said to have been Zarattst’s first disciple.


142 BUNDAHIS.


worship! aud expounded in Afran-vég, and Médy6k-
mah received the religion from him. 4. The
Mobads? of Pars are all ¢vaced back to this race_
of Manfséihar.

5. Again, I say, by Zarattist * were begotten three
sons and three daughters‘; one soz was Isadvastar’?,
one Atirvatad-nar*, avd one Khirshéa-fihar’; as
Isadvastar was chief of the priests he became the
Mébad of Mébads, aud passed away in the hun-
dredth year of the religion; Adrvatad-nar was an
agriculturist, azd the chief of the enclosure formed
by Yim’, which is below the earth; Khirshéa@-fihar
was a warrior, commander of the army of Péshyo-
tantl, sow of Vistasp, and dwells in Kangdez*; and
of the three daughters the name of one was Frén, of
one Srit, azd of one Porufist®. 6. Adrvatad-nar and
Khfrshéa@-éthar were from a serving (£akar) wife,
the rest were from a privileged (padakhshah) wife.


1 Reading frag yast; but it may be frag gast, ‘wandered
forth.’ .

® The class of priests whose special duty i is to perform all reli-
gious rites and ceremonies.

* This paragraph is quoted, with a few alterations, in the Vagar-
kard-i Dintk, pp. 21-23.

* K2o omits the ‘three daughters’ here, by mistake.

® Av. Isad-vastra of Yas. XXIII, 4, XXVI, 17, Fravardin Yt. 98.

° Av. Urvatad-nara of Vend. II, 143, Fravardin Yt, 98. Kzo
and M6 have Afirvartad-nar, and TD has Afirvatad-nar.

" Av. Hvare-Aithra of Fravardin Yt. 98; TD has Khfr-Athar.

* See Chap. XXIX, 5. Windischmann and Justi consider the
clause about Péshydtanti as inserted by mistake, and it is omitted
in the Vagarkard-i Dinik (p. 21); it is found, however, in all MSS.
of the Bundahis.

* These daughters are the Av. Freni, Thriti, and Pouru-Aista of
Fravardin Yt. 139 ; the last is also mentioned in Yas. LII, 3.

*° The following is asummary of the Persian descriptions of the
five kinds of marriage, as given in the Rivayats :—

A padshah (‘ruling, or privileged’) wife is when aman marries,


CHAPTER XXXII, 4-7. 143


7*. By Isadvastar was begotten a son whose name
was Ururviga?, and they call him Arang-i Biradan®
(‘fore-arm of brothers’) for this reason, that, as they


with the parents’ consent, an unbetrothed maiden out of a family,
and she and her children remain his in both worlds.

A ytikan or aytk (‘only child’) wife is an only child, married
with the parents’ consent, and her first child belongs to them;
after its birth she becomes a pAdsh4h wife. She is entitled to one-
third of her parents’ property for giving up the child.

A satar (‘adopted’) wife is when a man over fifteen years of
age dies childless and unmarried, and his relatives provide a maiden
with a dowry, and marry her to another man; when half her chil-
dren belong to the dead man, and half to the living, and she herself
is the dead man’s wife in the other world.

A kakar or kakar (‘serving’) wife is a widow who marries
again ; if she had no children by her first husband she is acting as
a satar wife, and half her children by her second husband belong
to her first one; and she herself, in any case, belongs to her first
husband in the other world.

A khfid-sara? or khfid-saratf (‘self-disposing’) wife is one
who marries without her parents’ consent; she inherits no property
from her parents until her eldest son has given her as a padshah
wife to his father.

1 Instead of this sentence the Vagarkard-i Dink (pp. 21, 22) has
the following, which appears to rest upon a misinterpretation of
the text :—

‘And Zarattist the righteous had three wives; all three were in
the lifetime of Zarattist, and all three wives were living throughout
the lifetime of Zaratist; the name of one was Hvév, of the second
Urvig, of the third Arnig-bareda. And from Urvig, who was a
privileged wife, four children were born; one was the son Isad-
vastar, and the three daughters, namely, Frén, Sritak, and Pérusist ;
these four were from Urvig. And from the wife Arnig-bareda two —
sons were born, one Afirvart-nar, and the second Khiirshéd-Athar ;
and Arnig-bareda was a serving wife, and the name of the former
husband of Arnig-bareda was Mitré-ayar. And from Hvév, who
was a privileged wife, were three sons, namely, Hfishédar, Hfsh-
édar-mah, and Sdésh4ns, as it says,’ &c. (as in § 8).

2 TD has Pahl. Afirvarvigak or Khférfirfipak.

go in DD:


144 BUNDAHIS.


were from a serving wife, se then delivered them
over to Isadvastar through adoption. 8. This, too,
one knows, that three sons of Zarattst, namely,
Hfishédar, Hishédar-mah1, and Sdéshyans?, were
from Hvév?; as it says, that Zaratist went near
unto Hvév three times, azd each time the seed went
to the ground; the angel Néryédsang* received the
brilliance and strength of that seed, delivered z¢
with care to the angel Andhid®, and in time will
blend z¢ with a mother. 9: Nine thousand, nine
hundred, and ninety-nine, and nine myriads® of
the guardian spirits of the righteous are intrusted
with z¢s protection, so that the demons may not
injure 22",

10. The name of the mother of Zaratist was
Dughda *, avd the name of the father of the mother
of Zaratist was Frahimrava °.


1 Av. Ukhshyad-ereta and Ukhshyad-nemangh of Fravardin
Yt. 128.

2 Av. Saoshyads of Vend. XIX, 18, Fravardin Yt. 129, &c. See
Chaps, XL 6, A XTX,'6, XXX, 3.40 Ty eR a7.

5 Av. Hvévi of Fravardin Yt. 139, Din Yt. 15; the Pahlavi form
of the name, as given once in TD, is Hfiivadbd.

4 See Chap. 2V, 1.

5 Ay. andhita of Aban Yt. 1, &c.; a female personification of
‘unsullied’ water, known generally by the epithet ardv? sfira
(the Arédvivstr of Chap. XIII), and whose name is also applied
to the planet Venus (see Chap. V, 1).

° So in M6; other MSS. have ‘9,999 myriads,’ but see Fra-
vardin Yt. 62.

™ This last phrase, about the demons, is omitted in TD and the
Vagarkard-i Dintk.

® The Avesta word for ‘ daughter.’

* TD has Paz. Fereahimruvana.


CHAPTER XXXII, 8—XxXXIII, 3. 145


[CuarteR XXXIII+4


o. The family of the Mébads (‘ priests’).


1. Bahak? was son of Httbakht, son of Ataré=
bondak, soz of Mahdad, son of Médyék-mah, sox
of Frah-vakhsh-vindad®, son of Médyék-mah, son of
Kad +, son of Médyék-mah, son of ArAstih, son of
Paitirdsp® 2. As Bahak was Mébad of Mébads
(high-priest) unto Sh4hpthar®, son of Atharmazd,
so Kad was the great preceptor (farmaddar) unto
erat

3. Ataré-pad * was son of Maraspend, son of Dad-
ardA, son of Dadirad, son of Hidind, son of Ataréd-
dad, son of Mantis&thar, soz of Vohiman-Athar, son of
Fryané°, sow of Bahak ?°, sow of Frédtn, sox of Fra-


1 This chapter is found only in TD, where it forms a continua-
tion of the preceding, and affords a means (see §§ 10, 11) for
determining the age of the recension of the text contained in that
MS. As nearly all the names are written in Pahlavi letters, the
pronunciation of many of them is merely a matter of guess.

2 Here written Béhak, but it is Bahak or Bak in § 2; compare

Bahak in § 3, and Av. Baungha of Fravardin Yt. 124.
~ 8 Compare Av. Frashavakhsha of Fravardin Yt. 109.

* Compare Av. Kata of Fravardin Yt. 124.

5 See Chap. XXXII, 2, for the last three generations ; TD has
Pirtarasp here, like the variant of M6 in Chap. XXXII, 1.

6 The Sasanian king Shapfir II, who reigned a.p. 309-379.

7 According to the chronology of the Bundahis (Chap. XXXIV,
8, 9), Darat lived only some four centuries before Shapfr II, for
which period only seven generations of priests are here provided.
This period, moreover, is certainly about three centuries less than
the truth.

@ This priest was prime minister of Shapfir II.

® Compare Av. Fryana of Yas. XLV, 12.

10 This name is repeated in TD, probably by mistake (compare
Bahak in §§ 1, 2).


[5] L


146 BUNDAHIS.


shaitar1, sow of Pérushasp, som of Vindsp, son of
Nivar, soz of Vakhsh, soz of Vahidhrés, soz of Frast,
son of Gak?, son of Vakhsh, soz of Fry&n, son of
Ragan, soz of Dirasréb, sow of Mantséihar °.

4. Mitré-variz was son of Nigds-afztd-dak, son of
Shirtashdésp, soz of Parstva, sow of Urvad-ga, son of
Taham, soz of Zarir, soz of Dirasréb, soz of Mantis4.
5. Darnamik was sox of Zagh, sou of Masvak, son of
Nédar ®, son of Mantsfihar.

6. Mitrd-akavid zs sow of Mardin-véh %, soz of
Afrébag-vindad, sow of Vindad-i-pédak, son of Vaé-
bikht’, son of Bahak, soz of Vaé-bOkht. 7. The
mother from whom I was born is Himat, daughter
of Freh-mah, who also was the righteous daughter ®


* This is probably a semi-Huzvaris form of Frashdstar.

? Perhaps this name should be read along with the next one, so:
as to give the single Pazand name Skinas or Skivas.

* See Chap. XXXII, r, for the last three generations. According
to this genealogy Atardp4d-i Maraspend4n was the twenty-third in
descent from Manfissthar, whereas his contemporary, Bahak (§ 1),
was twenty-second in descent from the same.

* No doubt Manftiséthar is meant; if not, we must read Mants-
darnamik in connection with § 5.

> Here written Nidar, but see Chaps. XXIX, 6, XXXI, 13.

° Here written Mard-véh, but see § 8.

* Here written Aé-vakht, but see § 8; it may be Vis-bikht, or
Vés-bikht.

* The text is amfdar mfinas li agas zerkhfind Htimé?
dikht-i Freh-mah-if aharéb vikht (dakht?). We might
perhaps read ‘ Freh-mah sow of Kahardb-bikht,’ but it seems more
probable that §§ 7, 8 should be connected, and that the meaning
intended is that Hfmat was daughter of Freh-mah (of a certain
family) and of Pfyisn-shad (of another family); she was also the
mother of the editor of that recension of the Bundahis which is con-
tained in TD ; but who was his father? The singularly unnecessary
repetition of the genealogy of the two brothers, Mitré6-akavitd and
Payisn-shad, in §§ 6, 8, leads to the suspicion that if the latter


CHAPTER XXXIII, 4-11. 147


of Mah-ayar sow of M&h-béndak, soz of M&h-bikht.
8. Piyisn-shad zs son of Mardan-veéh, son of Afrdbag-
vindad, son of Vindad-i-pédak, son of Vaé-bikht, sox
of Bahak, soz of Vié-bakht.

9. All the other Mébads who have been renowned
in the empire (khfidayth) were from the same
family it is said, ad were of this race of MAnts-
Aimar, 10. Those Mébads, likewise, who now
exist are all from the same family they assert, and
I, too, they boast, whom they call ? ‘the administra-
tion of perfect rectitude’ (D&dakth-i Ashdvahist6)*.
11. Yidén-Yim soz of Vahrim-shad, son of Zaratist,
Ataré-pad son of M&raspend, soz of Zad-sparham ‘+,


were his mother’s father, the former was probably his own father
or grandfather. Unfortunately the text makes no clear statement
on the subject, and § ro affords further material for guessing
otherwise at his name and connections.

™ Compare Chap. XXXII, 4.

® Reading va lf% laband-i karitfind.

° This looks more like a complimentary title than a name, and
if the editor of the TD recension of the Bundahis were the son or
grandson of Mitré-akavid (§ 6) we have no means of ascertaining
his name; but if he were not descended from Mitré-ak4vid it is
possible that §§ 10, rr should be read together, and that he was
the son of Yidan-Yim. Now we know, from the heading and
colophon of the ninety-two questions and answers on religious
subjects which are usually called the Dadistan-i Dinik, and from
the colophons of other writings which usually accompany that
work, that those answers were composed and certain epistles were
written by Manfiséthar, son of Yfidan-Yim, who was high-priest of
Pars and Kirman in a.y. 250 (a.p. 881), and apparently a more
important personage than his (probably younger) brother Zad-
sparham, who is mentioned in § 11 as one of the priests contem-
porary with the editor of the TD recension. If this editor, therefore,
were a son of Yfidan-Yim (which is a possible interpretation of the
text) he was most probably this same MAntiséthar, author of the
DAdistan-i Dintk (see the Introduction, § 4).

4 The last name is very probably superfluous, Zad-sparham


1G,


148 BUNDAHIS.


-ZAd-sparham son of Yidan-Yim?, Atard-pAd son of
Hamid?, Ashdvahist soz of Freh-Srésh, and the
other Mébads have sprung from the same family.

12. This, too, it says, that ‘in one winter I wed
locate (g4kinam) the religion of the Mazdayasnians,
which came out into the other six regions.’]


having been written twice most likely by mistake. This Atar6-pad
son of Maraspend was probably the one mentioned in the following
- extract from the old Persian Rivayat MS., No. 8 of the collection
in the Indian Office Library at London (fol. 142 a) :—

‘The book Dfnkard which the dasttirs of the religion and the
ancients have compiled, likewise the blessed Adarbad son of Mah-
rasfend, son of Asavahist of the people of the good religion, in the
year three hundred of Yazdagard Shahryar, collected some of the
more essential mysteries of the religion as instruction, and of these
he formed this book.’ That is, he was the last editor of the Dinkard,
which seems to have remained unrevised since his time, as the
present copies have descended from the MS. preserved by his
family and first copied in a.y. 369.

1 Zad-sparham was brother of the author of the Dadistan-i Dinik ;
he was high-priest at Sirkan in the south, and evidently had access
to the Bundahis, of part of which he wrote a paraphrase (see
Appendix). His name is usually written Zad-sparam.

2 In the history of the Dinkard, given at the end of its third
book (see Introd. to Farhang-i Oim-khadtik, p. xxxiv), we are told
as follows :—

‘After that, the well-meaning Atar6-pad son of Hémid, who
was the leader of the people of the good religion, compiled, with
the assistance of God, through inquiry, investigation, and much
trouble, a new means of producing remembrance of the Maz-
dayasnian religion.’ He did this, we are further told, by collecting
all the decaying literature and perishing traditions into a work
‘like the great original Dinkard, of a thousand chapters’ (m4n4k-i
zak raba bin Din6é-kart6 1o00-darakdé). We thus learn from
external sources that the group of contemporary priests, mentioned
in the text, was actively employed (about a.p. goo) in an attempted
revival of the religious literature of the Mazdayasnians, to which we
owe either the revision or compilation of such works as the Dtn-
kard, Dadistan-i Dintk, and Bundahis.


CHAPTER XXXIII, I12—XXXIV, 4. IAQ


Cuarpter XXXIV}


o. On the reckoning of the years ?.

1. Time was for twelve thousand years; and it
says in revelation, that three thousand years was the
duration of the spiritual s¢aze, where the creatures
were unthinking, unmoving, azd intangible*; and
three thousand years* was the duration of GAyémard,
with the ox, in the world. 2. As ¢hzs was six thou-
sand years the series of millennium reigns® of
Cancer, Leo, and Virgo had elapsed, because it was
six thousand years when the millennium reign came
to Libra, the adversary rushed in, and Gayémard
lived thirty years in tribulation®. 3. After the thirty
years’ Mashya avd Mashyéi grew up; it was fifty
years while they were not wife azd husband 8, and
they were ninety-three years together as wife and
husband till the me when Héshyang® came.

4. Héshyang was forty years’, Takhmérup# thirty
years, Yim till Zzs glory" departed six hundred and


1 This chapter is found in all the MSS.

2 TD adds ‘of the Arabs (Taztkan).’

*-See Chap. I, 8. * See-Chaps,-I, 22,1112:

> This system of a millennium reign for each constellation of the
zodiac can hardly have any connection with the precession of the
equinoxes, as the equinoxes travel backwards through the zodiac,
whereas these millennium reigns travel forwards.

e See Chap, IT, 21=23.

7 That is, forty years after the thirty (see Chap. XV, 2).

te oce Chap. XV, to, 20. ®.See: Chaps: XV, 28, XXXI, 1.

10 Kz2o omits, by mistake, from ‘together’ in § 3 to this point.

pee Chap. XXXL, 3:

12 So in Kz2o, but M6 has nismé, ‘soul, reason,’ as in Chap.
XXIII, 1; the word ‘glory’ would refer to the supposed divine
glory of the Iranian monarchs (see Chap. XXXI, 32).


150 BUNDAHBIS.


sixteen years and six months, azd after that he
was a hundred years in concealment. 5. Then the
millennium! reign came to Scorpio, and Dahak #
ruled a thousand years. 6. After the millennium
reign came to Sagittarius, Frédtin * reigned five hun-
dred years; in the same five hundred years of
Frédtin were the twelve years of Airig; Manfs#thar*
was a hundred and twenty years, azd in the same
reign of Mandséihar, when he was in the mountain
fastness (dshkhvar-gar) 5, were the twelve years
of Frasiyav; Zéb*® the TthmAaspian was five years.

7. Kai-Kabad"™ was fifteen years; Kai-Kats, till
he went to the sky, seventy-five years, azd seventy-
five years after that, altogether a hundred and fifty
years; Kai-Khisrév sixty years; Kai-Lérésp® a
hundred and twenty years; Kai-Vistdsp, till the
coming of the religion, thirty years °, altogether a
hundred and twenty years.

8. Vohiman soz of Spend-dad a hundred and


* The seventh millennium, ruled by Libra, is computed by Wind-
ischmann as follows: 30+ 40$+50+93+40+ 30+ 6163+ 100=
rooo. The eighth millennium, ruled by Scorpio, is the thousand
years of Dahak.

# See Chap. XXXI, 6. * See Chap. XXXI, 7-11.

* See Chap. XXXI, 12-14. * See Chap. XXXL, a1.

§ Written Afiz6b6 in Chap. XXXI, 23, 24.

" Usually written Kat-Kavad in Pahlavi (see Chap. XXXI, 24, 25).

* Also written Kat-Léharasp (see Chap. XXXI, 28, 29).

®* This is the end of the ninth millennium, ruled by Sagittarius,
which is computed by Windischmann as follows: 500+ 120+4+5+4
15+150+60+120+ 30=1000.

10 See Chap. XXXI, 29, 30, where he is said to have been also
called Artakhshatar, which seems to identify him with Artaxerxes
Longimanus and his successors down to Artaxerxes Mnemon; so
that Hfimat may perhaps be identified with Parysatis, and Dara?
Athar-azadan with Artaxerxes Ochus, as Darai Dardyan must be


CHAPTER XXXIV, 5-9. 151


twelve years; Hfiimai, who was daughter of Voht-
man, thirty years; Dart son of Aihar-dzdd1, that
is, of the daughter of Vohtiman, twelve years; Darai
son of Darai fourteen years ; Alexander the Riman?
fourteen years.

9. The Askanians bore the title in an uninter-
rupted (a-arfibak) sovereignty two hundred and
eighty-four years*, Ardashir son of Papak and the
number of the Sdsdnians four hundred and sixty
years‘, and then it went to the Arabs.


Darius Codomannus, while the reign of Kat-Vistasp seems intended
to cover the period from Cyrus to Xerxes.

1 A surname of Himat.

2 Sikandar-i Arfimak, that is, Alexander the Roman (of the
eastern or Greek empire), as Pahlavi writers assume.

8 This period is nearly two centuries too short.

4 The actual period of Sasanian rule was 425 years (A.D. 226-
6g1). According to the figures given in the text, the tenth millen-
nium, ruled by Capricornus, must have terminated in the fourth
year of the last king, Yazdakard. This agrees substantially with the
Bahman Yast, which makes the millennium of Zaratfst expire
some time after the reign of Khfisr6 Néshirvan; probably in
the time of Khfisrd Parviz, or some forty years earlier than the
fourth year of Yazdakard. According to the text we must now
be near the end of the first quarter of the twelfth and last mil-
lennium.


APPENDIX, TO- THE BUNDAHIS.


SELECTIONS OF ZAD-SPARAM,


BROTHER OF THE DASTUOR OF


PARS AND KIRMAN,


A.D. 2887.


Part I, Cuapters I-XI.


(PARAPHRASE OF BUNDAHIS, I- XVII.)


OBSERVATIONS.


1-5. (The same as on p. 2.)

6. Abbreviations used are:—Av. for Avesta. Bund. for Bun-
dahis, as translated in this volume. B. Yt. for Bahman Yast, as
translated in this volume. Haug’s Essays, for Essays on the Sacred
Language, Writings, and Religion of the Parsis, by Martin Haug,
and edition. Mkh. for Mainyé-i-khard, ed. West. Pers. for
Persian. Vend. for Vendidad, ed. Spiegel. Yas. for Yasna, ed.
Spiegel. Yt. for Yast, ed. Westergaard.

7. The MS. mentioned in the notes is K35 (written probably
A.D. 1572), No. 35 in the University Library at Kopenhagen.


Seer LON S


OF


LAUD SOP AR AM.


TuHEY call these memoranda and writings the
Selections (Aidakiha) of Zad-sparam, son of Yadan-
Yim.

Cuapter I,


o. In propitiation of the creator Afttharmazd and
all the angels—who are the whole of the heavenly
and earthly sacred beings (yazd4n)—ave the sayings
of Herbad Zad-sparam, son of Yad4n-Yim, who is of
the south!, about the meeting of the beneficent spirit
and the evil spirit.

1. It is in scripture thus declared, that light was
above and darkness below, and between those two
was open space. 2. Attharmazd was in the light,
and Aharman in the darkness?; Atharmazd was
aware of the existence of Aharman and of jes
coming for strife; Aharman was not aware of the
existence of light azd of Atharmazd*. 3. It hap-
pened to Aharman, in the gloom and darkness, that


1 Zad-sparam appears to have been dastfr of Sirkan, about
thirty parasangs south of Kirman, and one of the most southern
districts in Persia (see Ouseley’s Oriental Geography, pp. 138, 139,
141, 143-145).

2 See Bund. I, 2—4.

5 Or ‘of the light of Afharmazd’ (compare Bund. I, 8, 9).


156 APPENDIX TO THE BUNDAHIS.


he was walking humbly (fré-tanf) on the borders,
and meditating other ¢kéngs he came up to the top,
and a ray of light was seen by him; and because of 2¢s
antagonistic nature to him he strove that he might
reach it, so that it might also be within his absolute
power. 4. And as he came forth to the boundary,
accompanied by certain others?, Attharmazd came
forth to the struggle for keeping Aharman away
from His territory; and He did it through pure
words, confounding witchcraft, and cast him back to
the gloom.

5. For protection from the fiend (dri) the spirits
rushed in, the spirits of the sky, water, earth, plants,
animals, mankind, and fire He ad appointed, and
they maintained it (the protection) three thousand
years. 6. Aharman, also, ever collected means in
the gloom; and at the end of the three thousand
years he came back to the boundary, blustered
(patistad), and exclaimed thus: ‘I we// smite thee,
I well smite the creatures which thou thinkest Lave
produced fame for thee—thee who art the beneficent
spirit—I will destroy everything about them.’

7. Attharmazd answered thus: ‘Thou art not a
doer of everything, O fiend?!’

8. And, again, Aharman retorted thus: ‘I will
seduce all material life into disaffection to thee and
affection to myself 3,

9. Atharmazd perceived, through the spirit of
wisdom, thus: ‘Even the blustering of Aharman is
capable of performance, if I do not allow disunion


* Reading pavan satarand ham-tana, but the phrase is
somewhat doubtful, and rather inconsistent with Bund. I, 10.
” Bund. I, 16. > Bund. I, 14.


SELECTIONS OF ZAD-SPARAM, Aaah A 157


(la barininam) during a period of struggle.’ ro.
And he demanded of him a period for friendship 1,
for it was seen by him that Aharman does not rely
upon the intervention of any vigorous ones, avd the
existence of a period is obtaining the benefit of the
mutual friendship azd just arrangement of both;
and he formed it into three periods, each period
being three millenniums. 11. Aharman relied upon
zt, and Atharmazd perceived that, though it is not
possible to have Aharman sent down, ever when he
wants he goes back to his own requisite, which is
darkness; aud from the poison which is much
diffused endless strife arises”.

12. And after the period was appointed by him,
he brought forward the Ahtnavar formula*; and in
his Ahtinavar these‘ kinds of benefit were shown :—
13. The first is that, of all things, that is proper
which is something declared as the will of Athar-
mazd; so that, whereas that is proper which is
declared the will of Atharmazd, where anything
exists which is not within the will of Adharmazd, it
is created injurious from the beginning, a sin of a
distinct nature. 14. The second is this, that who-
ever shall do that which is the will of Adtharmazd,
his reward aud recompense are his own; and of him
who shall not do that which is the will of Adhar-
-mazd, the punishment at the bridge ® owing thereto


Bund. 1217, 18.

2 Or ‘ the poison of the serpent, which is much diffused, becomes
endless strife.’

Seis und ales 20%

* The word 4n, ‘those,’ however, is probably a miswriting of
the cipher for ‘three.’

’ The Kinvad or Kinvar bridge (see Bund. XII, 7).


. »


153 APPENDIX TO THE BUNDAHIS.


is his own; which is shown from this* formula; and
the reward of doers of good works, the punishment
of sinners, and the tales of heaven azd hell are from
it. 15. Thirdly, z¢ zs shown that the sovereignty of
Atharmazd increases that which is for the poor, and
adversity is removed; by which z¢ is shown that
there are treasures for the needy ome, and treasures
are to be Azs friends; as the intelligent creations ave
to the unintelligent, so also ave the treasures of a
wealthy ferson to a needy ome, treasures liberally
given which are his own. 16. And the creatures of
the trained hand of Attharmazd are contending aud
angry (ardik), one with the other, as the renovation
of the universe must occur through these three
things. 17. That is, first, true religiousness in one-
self, and reliance upon a man’s original hold on the
truly glad tidings (nav-barham), that Atharmazd
is all goodness without vileness, and his will is a
will altogether excellent; ad Aharman is all vile-
ness without goodness. 18. Secondly, hope of the
reward azd recompense of good works, serious fear
of the bridge azd the punishment of crime, strenuous
perseverance in good works, azd abstaining from
sin. 19. Thirdly, the existence of the mutual assist-
ance of the creatures, or along with and owing to
mutual assistance, ¢hezr collective warfare; it is the
triumph of warfare over the enemy which is one’s .
own renovation?.


* The MS. has hfiiman, ‘ well-meditating,’ instead of denman,
‘this ;’ but the two words are much alike in Pahlavi writing.

* This commentary on the Ahfinavar, or Yath4-ahfi-vairyé
formula, is rather clumsily interpolated by ZAd-sparam, and is
much more elaborate than the usual Pahlavi translation and expla-
nation of this formula, which may be translated as follows :—


SELECTIONS OF ZAD-SPARAM, I, I5—24. 159


20. By this formula he (Aharman) was con-
founded, and he fell back to the gloom}; azd Athar-
mazd produced the creatures bodily for the world;
first, the sky; the second, water; the third, earth;
the fourth, plants; the fifth, animals; the sixth,
mankind*. 21. Fire was in all, diffused originally
through the six substances, of which it was as much
the confiner of each single substance in which it was
established, it is said, as an eyelid when they lay one
down upon the other.

22. Three thousand years the creatures were
possessed of bodies and not walking on ¢hezy navels;
and the sun, moon, azd stars stood still. 23. In the
mischievous incursion, at the end of the period,
Atiharmazd observed thus: ‘What advantage is
there from the creation of a creature, although
thirstless, which is unmoving ov mischievous?’ 24.


‘ As is the will of the living spirit (as is the will of Aftharmazd)
so should be the pastor (so excellent should he be) owing to
whatsoever are the duties and good works of righteousness (the
duties and good works should be as excellent as the will of Afhar-
mazd). Whose is the gift of good thought (that is, the reward
and recompense good thought gives, it gives also unto him) which
among living spirits is the work of Afharmazd (that is, they would
do that which Aftharmazd requires); there are some who say it is
thus: Whose gift is through good thought (that is, the reward and
recompense which they will give to good thought, they would give
also unto him); Atar6-p4d son of Zaratist said that by the gift of
good thought, when among living spirits, they comprehend the
doing of deeds. The sovereignty is for Aflharmazd (that is, the
sovereignty which is his, Atharmazd has kept with advantage)
who gives necessaries [or comfort, or clothing] to the poor (that
is, they would make intercession for them).’

Additional phrases are sometimes inserted, and some words
altered, but the above is the usual form of this commentary.

2 bund. 1, 22." 2 Bund: I, 28.


160 APPENDIX TO THE BUNDAHIS.


And in aid of the celestzal sphere he produced the
creature Time (zérv4n)!; and Time is unrestricted,
so that he made the creatures of Afharmazd moving,
distinct from the motion of Aharman’s creatures, for
the shedders of perfume (bdi-d4dan) were standing
one opposite to the other while emitting z#, 25. And,
observantly of the end, he brought forward to
Aharman a means out of himself, the property of
darkness, with which the extreme limits (virtinak6d)
of Time were connected by him, an envelope (pést6)
of the black-pated and ash-coloured kind. 26. And
in bringing it forward he spoke thus: ‘Through
their weapons the co-operation of the serpent (az6)
dies away, and this which is thine, indeed thy own
daughter, azes through religion; and if at the end of
nine thousand years, as it is said azd written, is a
time of upheaval (madam kardan6), she zs up-
heaved, not ended.’

27. At the same time Aharman came from accom-
panying Time out to the front, out to the star
Station; the connection of the sky with the star
station was open, which showed, since it hung down
into empty space, the strong communication of the
lights and glooms, the place of strife in which is the
pursuit of both. 28. And having darkness with him-
self he brought it into the sky, azd left the sky so
to gloom that the internal deficiency in the sky
extends as much as one-third ? over the star station.


* This is the Av. zrvana akarana, ‘boundless time or antiquity,’
of Vend. XIX, 33, 44. He is a personification of duration and
age, and is here distinctly stated to be a creature of Aftharmazd.
This throws some doubt upon the statements of Armenian writers,
who assert that the two spirits sprang from Zrvana.

* Compare Bund. III, rr.


SELECTIONS OF ZAD-SPARAM, I, 25-Il, 6. 161


Cuapter II,


1. On the coming in of Aharman to the creatures
it is thus declared in revelation, that zz the month
Fravardin amd the day Atharmazd, at noon}, he
came forth to the frontier of the sky. 2. The sky
sees Aim and, on account of 47s nature, fears as
much as a sheep trembles at a wolf; awd Aharman
came on, scorching aud burning into it. 3. Then he
came to the water which was arranged below the
earth *, and darkness without an eyelid was brought
on by him; and he came on, through the middle of
the earth, as a snake all-leaping comes on out of a
hole; and he stayed within the whole earth. 4.
The passage where he came on is his own, the way
to hell, through which the demons make the wicked
run.

5. Afterwards, he came to a tree, such as was of a
single root, the height of which was several feet, and
zt was without branches and without bark, juicy axd
sweet; and to keep the strength of all kinds of trees
in its race, it was in the vicinity of the middle of the
earth; and at the self-same time z¢ became quite
withered °.

6. Afterwards, he came to the ox, the sole-
created‘, as it stood as high as Gaydmard on the


1. Bund. Ill, 12. 2 Bund lille rs,

Eepund. Lil TA. 16,

4 The primeval ox, or first-created representative of animals, as
Gayémard was of mankind; from which two representatives all
mankind and animals are said to have been afterwards developed.
There seems to have been some doubt as to the sex of this mytho-
logical ox ; here it is distinctly stated to have been a female, but from
Bund. X, 1, 2, XIV, 3, it would appear to have been a male, and this
seems to be admitted by Dad-sparam himself, in Chap. IX, 7.


[5] M


162 APPENDIX TO THE BUNDAHIS.


bank of the water of Daitih! zz the middle of the
earth; and its distance from Gayémard being as
much as its own height, it was also distant from the
bank of the water of Daitih by the same measure ;
and it was a female, white azd brilliant as the moon.
7. As the adversary came upon z¢ Atharmazd gave
z¢ a narcotic, which is also called ‘bang,’ to eat, and
to rub the ‘bang’ before the eye”, so that the
annoyance from the assault of crimes may be less ;
it became lean and ill, avd fell upon its right breast®
trembling.

8. Before the advance to Gayédmard, who was
then about one-third the height of Zarattist, aad was
brilliant as the sun, Atharmazd forms, from the
sweat ‘ on the man, a figure of fifteen years, radiant
and tall, and sends it on to Gayémard; and he also
brings his sweat® on to him as long as one Yatha-
ahi-vairy6°® is dezmg recited. 9. When he issued
from the sweat, and/raised his eyes, he saw the
world when it was dark as night’; on the whole
earth were the snake, the scorpion, the lizard
(vazak), and noxious creatures of many kinds; and.
so the other kinds of quadrupeds stood among the


* The Daittk river (see Bund. XX, 13).

® This is a misunderstanding of the corresponding phrase in
Bund. III, 18. The narcotic here mentioned is usually prepared
from the hemp plant, and is well known in India and the neigh-
bouring countries.

8 See Bund. IV, 1.

* The word which, as it stands in the MS., looks like h6man4e,
is here taken as a transposition of min khv4e, in accordance with
Bund. III, 19; but it may be a variant of anumae, ‘embryo,’ in
which case the translation should be, ‘forms an embryo into the
shape of a man of fifteen years.’

° Or it may be ‘sleep,’ both here and in § 9.

* See Bund. I, 21. 7 Bund. III, 20.


SELECTIONS OF ZAD-SPARAM, II, 7-IV, I. 163


reptiles ; every approach of the whole earth was as
though not as much as a needle’s point remained, in
which there was no rush of noxious creatures. 10.
Lhere were the coming of a planetary star into
planetary conjunction, and the moon and planets at
_ sixes and sevens!; many dark forms with the face
and curls of Az-i Dahak suffered punishment in com-
pany with certain non-Iranians; aud he was amazed
at calling the wicked out from the righteous.

11. Lastly, he (Aharman) came up to the fire, and
mingled darkness and smoke with it *.


CuarrTer III.


tr. And Gésfirvan, as she was herself the soul of
the primeval ox, when the ox passed away, came out
from the ox, even as the soul from the body of the
dead, and kept up the clamour of a cry to Athar-
mazd in such fashion as that of an army, a thousand
strong, when they cry out together® 2. And At-
harmazd, in order to be much more able to keep
watch over the mingled creatures than in front of
Gayémard, went from the earth up to the sky. 3.
And Gésfirvan continually went after him crying,
and she kept up the cry thus: ‘With whom may the
guardianship over the creatures be left by thee?’


CHAPTER IV,


1. This was the highest predominance of Ahar-
man, for he came on, with all the strength which he


1 Literally, ‘in fours and fives.’
2 Bund. III, 2%. 8 Bund. IV, 2.
M 2


164 APPENDIX TO THE BUNDAHIS.


had, for the disfigurement of the creatures; and he
took as much as one-third of the base of the sky’,
in a downward direction, into a confined and captive
state, so that it was all dark avd apart from the
light, for it was itself, at the coming of the adversary,
his enemy among the struggles for creation. 2. And
this is opposing the renovation of the universe, for
the greatest of all the other means of the fiend,
when he as come in, are of like origin and strength
this day, in the sleep? of the renovation, as oz that
when the enemy, who is fettered on coming in, is
kept back.

3. Amid all this struggling were mingled the in-
stigations of Aharman, cvyemg thus: ‘My victory
has come completely, for the sky is split and dis-
figured by me with gloom and darkness, and taken
by me as a stronghold; water is disfigured by me,
and the earth, injured by darkness, is pierced by me;
vegetation is withered by me, the ox is put to death
by me, Gayémard is made ill by me, and opposed to
those revolving® are the glooms and planets ar-
ranged by me; no one /as remained for me to take
and pervert in combat except Adharmazd, and of
the earth ¢Zere is only one man, who is alone, what
is he able to do?’

4, And he sends Asté-vidéd* upon him with the
thousand decrepitudes (atizvardn6d) and diseases


* Compare Bund. II, 11. The involved style of ZAd-sparam is
particularly conspicuous in this chapter.

® The word seems to be khvapisné.

* Meaning probably the zodiacal signs, but the word is doubtful,
being spelt vardisnan6é instead of vardisnand. A very small
alteration would change it into vardisn4né, ‘ believers,’ but there
were no earthly believers at the time alluded to.:

* See Bund. III, 21, and XXVIII, 35..


SELECTIONS OF ZAD-SPARAM, IV, 2-8. 165
as EES SE
which are his own, sicknesses of various kinds, so that
they may make him ill azd cause death. 5. Gayé-
mard was not secured by them, and the reason
“was because it was a decree of appointing Time
(z6rvan6) in the beginning of the coming in of
_Aharman, that: ‘Up to thirty winters I appoint
Gayémard unto brilliance and preservation of life.’
6. And his manifestation in the celestial sphere was
through the forgiveness of criminals and instigators
of confusion by 42s good works, and for that reason
nO opportunity was obtained by them during the
extent of thirty years.

7. For in the beginning it was so appointed that
the star Jupiter (Aftharmazd) was life towards the
creatures, not through its own nature, but on
account of zés being within the control (band) of
the luminaries!; and Saturn (Kévan) was death
towards the creatures. 8. Both were in their
supremacy (balist)? at the beginning of the crea-


1 These luminaries are the fixed stars, especially the signs of the
zodiac, to whose protection the good creation is committed (see
Bund. II, o—4); whereas Jupiter and all other planets are supposed
to be, by nature, disturbers of the ereation, being employed by
Aharman for that purpose (see Mkh. VIII, 17-21, XII, 7-10,
XXIV, 8, XXXVIII, 5).

2 The most obvious meaning of balist is ‘greatest altitude,’
and this is quite applicable to Jupiter when it attains its highest
northern declination on entering Cancer, but it is not applicable
to Saturn in Libra, when it has only its mean altitude. At the
vernal equinox, however, which was the time of the beginning
mentioned in the text, when Aharman invaded the creation (see
Chap. II, 1), Libra is in opposition to the sun, and Saturn in Libra
would be at its nearest approach to the earth, and would, therefore,
attain its maximum brightness; while Jupiter in Cancer would be
at its greatest altitude and shining with four-fifths of its maximum
brightness. Both planets, therefore, were near their most con-
spicuous position (which would seem to be the meaning of balfst


,


166 APPENDIX TO THE BUNDAHIS.


tures, as Jupiter was in Cancer on rising, that which
is also called Givan (‘living’)!, for it is the place in
which life is bestowed upon it; azd Saturn was in
Libra, in the great subterranean, so that its own
venom and deadliness decame more evident and
more dominant thereby. 9. And it was when both
shall not be supreme ¢hat Gayémard was to com-
plete his own life, which is the thirty years? Saturn
came not again to supremacy, that is, 4o Libra. Io.
And at the time when Saturn came into Libra,
Jupiter was in Capricornus*, on account of whose
own lowness‘, and the victory of Saturn over
Jupiter, Gayémard suffered through those very
defects which came and are to continue advancing,
the continuance of that disfigurement which Ahar-
man can bring upon the creatures of Atharmazd.


here), and might each be supposed to be exercising its maximum
astrological influence, so thatthe presumed deadly power of Saturn
would be neutralised by the supposed reviving influence of Jupiter.

1 This reading suits the context best, but the name can also be
read Snahan, and in many other ways. It may possibly be the
tenth lunar mansion, whose name is read Nahn in Bund. II, 3,
by Pazand writers, and which corresponds to the latter part of
Cancer.

* Saturn revolves round the sun in about 29 years and 167
days, so it cannot return into opposition to the sun (or to its
maximum brightness), at or near the vernal equinox, in less than
thirty years.

* That is, while Saturn performs one revolution round the sun,
Jupiter performs two and a half, which is very nearly correct, as
Jupiter revolves round the sun in about 11 years and 315 days.
Therefore, when the supposed deadly influence of Saturn has
returned to its maximum, the supposed reviving influence of Jupiter
is at its minimum, owing to the small altitude of Capricornus, and
no longer counterbalances the destructive power of Saturn.

* There seems to be no other reasonable translation, but the
MS. has 14 instead of rai, and niskasp instead of nistz.


SELECTIONS OF ZAD-SPARAM, IV, 9-V, 4. 167


CHAPTER V.


1. When in like manner, and equally oppressively,
as his (Atharmazd’s) creatures were disfigured, then
through that same deterioration his own great glory
was exhibited; for as he came within the sky! he
maintains the spirit of the sky, like an intrepid war-
rior who has put on metal armour?; and the sky in
its fortress? spoke these hasty, deceitful words to
Aharman, thus: ‘ Now when thou shalt have come
in I wll not let thee back;’ axd it obstructed Zim
until Afiharmazd prepared another rampart, that is
stronger, around the sky, wzch is called ‘righteous
understanding’ (ash6k 4k4sih). 2. And he ar-
ranged the guardian spirits* of the righteous who
are warriors around that rampart, mounted on horses
and spear in hand, in such manner as the hair on
the head; and they acquired the appearance of
prison guards who watch a prison from outside, and
would not surrender the outer boundaries ¢o an
enemy descended from the inside.

3. Immediately, Aharman endeavours that he
may go back to his own complete darkness, but
he found no passage; and he recapitulated, with
seeming misgiving, his fears of the worthiness
which is to arise at the appearance of the renova-
tion of the universe at the end of the nine thousand


years.
4. As it is said in the Gathas, thus®: ‘So also


1 See Chap. III, 2. 2 Compare Bund. VI, 2.
8 Or ‘zodiacal signs,’ for bfirgd means both.
4 Bund, VE 3, -4-


5 This quotation from the Gathas is from the Pahlavi Yas.
XXX, 4, and agrees with the Pahlavi text, given in Dastir Jam-


168 APPENDIX TO THE BUNDAHIS.


both those spirits have approached together unto
that which was the first creation—that is, both
spirits have come to the body of Gayémard. What-
ever is in life zs so through this purpose of Adhar-
mazd, that is: So that I may keep it alive; what-
ever is in lifelessness zs so through this purpose?! of
the evil spirit, that is: So that I may utterly destroy
it; and whatever is thus, is so until the last in
the world, so that they (both spirits) come also on
to the rest of mankind. And on account of the
utter depravity of the wicked ¢hezr destruction is
fully seen, azd so is the perfect meditation of him
who is righteous, the hope of the eternity of
Atharmazd,’

5. And this was the first contest *, that of the sky
with Aharman.


.


CHAPTER Wile


1. And as he (Aharman) came secondly to the
water, together with him rushed in, 0” the horse
Cancer, he who is the most watery Tistar; the
equally watery owe, that is. called Avrak?, gave
forth a cloud azd went down in the day; that is


Aspji’s old MS. of the Yasna in Bombay, very nearly as closely as
Spiegel’s edition does. It appears, therefore, that Dad-sparam
used the same Pahlavi translation of the Yasna as the Parsis do
at the present day.

* The MS. here omits the words ‘through this purpose,’ by
mistake.

* The word Ardtk, which D&ad-sparam uses instead of the
kharah, ‘conflict,’ of Bund. V,. 6, VI, 1, &c., may be connected
with Pers. ard, ‘ anger.’

* The ninth lunar mansion: (see-Bund. IJ, 3, VII, 1).


SELECTIONS OF ZAD-SPARAM, V, 5—VI, 7. 569


declared as the movement of the first-comers of the
creatures. 2. Cancer became a zodiacal constella-
tion (akhtar); it is the fourth constellation of the
zodtac for this reason, because the month Tir is the
fourth month of the year.

3. And as Tistar begged for assistance, Voht-
man and H6ém are therefore co-operating with him
in command, Burg of the waters and the water in
mutual aid, and the righteous guardian spirits in
keeping the peace. 4. He was converted into three
forms, which are the form of a man, the form of a
bull, azd the form of a horse; and each form was
distinguished in brilliance for ten nights, and lets its
rain fall on the night for the destruction of noxious
creatures. 5. The drops became each separately
hike a great bowl in which water is drawn; and as
to that on whzch they are driven, they kill all the
noxious creatures except the reptiles”, who entered
into the muddiness of the earth.

6. Afterwards, the wind spirit, in the form of a
man, became manifest on the earth; radiant azd tall
he had a kind of wooden boot (mikv6-aé-i darin6d)
on fzs feet ; azd as when the life shall stir the body,
the body is advancing with like vigour, so that spirit
of the wind stirs forth the inner nature of the atmo-
spheric wind, the wind pertaining to the whole earth
is forth, and the water in its grasp is flung out from
it to the sides of the earth, and its wide-formed
ocean arose therefrom.

7. It (the ocean) keeps one-third of this earth %,


1 Bund. VII, 2-6 is paraphrased in §§ 2-6.

2 Reading neksfind bara min khasandak4én6 instead of
the MS. bara nastind min khasandak4and,

3 Compare Bund, XIII, 1, 2. _


170 APPENDIX TO THE BUNDAHIS.


and among its contents are a thousand sources and
fountains, such as are called lakes (var); a thousand
water-fountains, whose water is from the ocean,
come up from the lakes avd are poured forth into
it. 8. And the size of some of all the lakes and all
the fountains of water is as much as a fast rider on
an Arab horse, wo continually compasses axzd can-
ters around ¢hem, will attain in forty days, which is
19001 long leagues (parasang-i akarik), each
league dezng at least 20,000 feet.

g. And after the noxious creatures died *, and the
poison therefrom was mixed up in the earth, in
order to utterly destroy that poison Tistar went
down into the ocean; and Apadsh, the demon,
hastened to meet him, and az the alarm of the first
contest Tistar was in terror (pard). 10. And he
applied unto Atharmazd, who brought such power
unto Tistar as arises through propitiation and praise
and invoking by name®, and they call forth such
power unto Tistar as ¢hat of ten vigorous horses,
ten vigorous camels, ten vigorous bulls, ten moun-
tains when hurled, and ten single-stream rivers
when together. 11. And without alarm he drove
out Apadsh, the demon, and kept him away from
the sources of the ocean.

12, And with a cup and measuring bowl, which
possessed the diligence even of a guardian spirit
(fravahar), he seized many more handfuls of water,


* Bund. XIII, 2 has 1700, but as neither number is a multiple of
forty in round numbers, it is probable that both are wrong, and
that we ought to read 1600.

> Bund. VU, 7-14 is paraphrased in §§ 9-14.

* The Av. aokht6-ndmama yasna of Tistar Yt. FI, 23,08.


SELECTIONS OF ZAD-SPARAM, VI, 8-17. 171


and made z¢ rain down! much more prodigiously,
for destruction, drops as large as men’s heads and
bulls’ heads, great and small. 13. And in that cloud
and rain were the chastisement avd beating which
Tistar and the fire Vazist zu/licted on the opposition
of Apaésh; the all-deciding (vispé-vi fir) fire Vazist
struck down with a club of fire, all-deciding among
the malevolent (kébaran6).

14. Ten days avd nights there was rain, and its
darting * was the shooting of the noxious creatures ;
afterwards, the wind drove z¢ to the shore of the
wide-formed ocean, and it is portioned out into
three, and three seas arose from it; they are called
the Piitik, the Kamirid, and the Géhan-bfin®. 15.
Of these the Ptitik itself is salt water, in which is
a flow azd ebb*; and the control of its flow and
ebb is connected with the moon, and by its con-
tinual rotation, in coming up azd going down, that
of the moon is manifested. 16. The wide-formed
ocean stands forth on the south side as to (pavan)
Albifrz®, and the Pditik stands contiguous to it, and
amidst it is the gulf (var) of Satavés, whose con-
nection is with. Satavés, which is the southern
quarter. 17. In the activity of the sea, and in the
increase and decrease of the moon, whose circuit
is the whole of Iran, are the flow azd ebb; of the


1 Or perhaps ‘made the cloud rain,’ if madam varaninid
stands for avar varanintd.

2 Reading partav instead of the MS. pattitaz, ‘ powerful fury.’

’ This is a variant of the Saht-bfin or Gahf-bain of Bund. XIII,
7,15; the other two names differ but little from those given in
Bund. XIII. In the MS. Pfitttk occurs once, and Puitik twice.

* Compare §§ 15-18 with Bund. XIII, 8-14.

> Compare Bund. XIII, 1.


172 APPENDIX TO THE BUNDAHIS.


curving tails in front of the moon two issue forth,
and have an abode in Satavés; one is the up-
drag and one the down-drag; through the up-drag
occurs the flood, azd through the down-drag occurs
the ebb. 18. And Satavés itself is a gulf (var)
and side arm of the wide-formed ocean, for it drives
back the impurity azd turbidness which come from
the salt sea, when they are continually going into
the wide-formed ocean, with a mighty high wind’,
while that which is clear through purity goes into
the Arédvisir sources of the wide-formed ocean.
19. Besides these four ® there are the small seas +.
20. And, afterwards, there were made to flow from
Albdrz, out of its northern border, two rivers®, which
were the Arvand '—that is, the Diglit, azd the flow


1 This is even a more mechanieal theory of the tides than that
detailed in Bund. XIII, 13, Whether the ‘curving tails’ (gagak
dunbak) are the ‘ horns’ of the crescent moon is uncertain.

® By an accidental transposition of letters the MS. has ataré,
‘fire,’ instead of vaté, ‘ wind.’

* The ocean and three principal seas.

* Said to be twenty-three in number in Bund. XIII, 6.

Papund: VEL SiG) LO. ss Te

° This appears to be a later identification of the Arag, Arang,
or Aréng river of Bund. XX with the Tigris, under its name Arvand,
which is also found in the Bahman Yast (III, 21, 38) and the
Afrin of the Seven Ameshaspends ($9). The Buadahn (XX, 8)
seems to connect the Arag (Araxes?) with the Oxus and Nile, and
describes the Diglat or Tigris as a distinct river (Bund. XX, 12).
This difference is one of the indications of the Bundahis having
been so old a book in the time of ZAd-sparam that he sometimes
misunderstood its meaning, which could hardly have been the case
if it had been written by one of his contemporaries. As the Persian
empire has several times included part of Egypt, the Nile must
have then been well known to the Persians as the great western
river of their world, The last time they had possession of part
of Egypt was, for about half a century, in the reigns of Khusré


SELECTIONS OF ZAD-SPARAM, VI, £8—VII, I. 173


of that river was to those of the setting sun (val
frod-yehevundan6)—and the Véh! was the river
of the first-comers to the sun; formed as two horns
they went on to the ocean. 21. After them eigh-
teen’ great rivers came out from the same Albarz;
_ and these twenty rivers, whose source is in Albirz,
go down into the earth, and arrive in Khvaniras.

22. Afterwards, two fountains of the sea are
opened out for the earth®, which are called the
kKékast*—a lake which has no cold wind, azd on
whose shore rests the triumphant fire Gdsnasp°—
and, secondly, the Sévar® which casts on z¢s shores
all turbidness, and keeps its own salt lake clear and
pure, for it is like the semblance of an eye which
casts out to z¢s edges every ache and every im-
purity ; and on account of its depth it is not reached
to the bottom, for it goes into the ocean; and in its
vicinity rests the beneficial fire Barzin-Mitré ’.

23. And this was the second contest, which was
with the water. ©


CyapTer VII.


1. And as he (Aharman) came thirdly to the
earth, which arrayed the whole earth against him—


Noshirvan, Afharmazd IV, and Khusr6é Parviz; but since the
early part of the seventh century the Tigris has practically been
their extreme western limit; hence the change of the old Arag or
Arang into the very similarly written Arvand, a name of the
Tigris.

1 See Bund. XX, 9. 2° Bund, XX, 2, 7.

$ Bund. VII, 14. * Bund. XXII, 2.

’ Written Gisasp in Bund. XVII, 7, and Gfisnasp in B. Yt. III,
30, 40, while the older form Visnasp occurs in B.Yt. III, 10.

6 The Sévbar of Bund. VII, 14, XII, 24, XXII, 3.

* Bund. XVII, 8,


174 APPENDIX TO THE BUNDAHIS.


since there was an animation of the earth through
the shattering — Albdrz grew up?, which is the
boundary of the earth, azd the other? mountains,
which are amid the circuit of the earth, come up
2244 in number*®. 2. And by them the earth was
bound together and arranged, and on them was the
sprouting azd growth of plants, wherefrom was the
nourishment of cattle, and therefrom was the great
advantage of assistance to men.

3. Even so it is declared that before the coming
of the destroyer to the creatures, for a thousand
years the substance of mountains was created in the
earth—especially as antagonism came on the earth,
_ and settled on z¢ with injury—and it came up over
the earth just like a tree whose branch has grown at
the top, and its root at the bottom. 4. The root of
the mountains is passed on from one to the other,
and is arranged in connection wz¢h them, and through
it is produced the path and passage of water from
below to above, so that the water may flow in it in
such manner as blood in the veins, from all parts of
the body to the heart, the latent vigour which they
possess. 5. And, moreover, in six hundred years 4,
at first, all the mountains apart from Albirz were
completed. 6. Albirz was growing during eight
hundred years*; in two hundred years it grew up to


* Bund. VIII, 1-4 is paraphrased in §§ 1=4.

° The MS. has 4v4n6, ‘waters,’ instead of avarik, ‘other,’
which alters the meaning into, ‘which is the boundary of the
waters of the earth, avd the mountains,’ &c.

© Burd. X11, 2,

* Bund. VIII, 5, and XII, 1, have ‘eighteen years.’ As both
numbers are written in ciphers it would be easy for either to be
corrupted into the other.

® Bund. XII, 1.


SELECTIONS OF ZAD-SPARAM, VII, 2-12. 175


the star station, in two hundred years up to the
moon station, two hundred years up to the sun
station, and two hundred years up to the sky. 7.
After Albdrz the Aparsén mountain? is the greatest,
as it is also called the Avar-réyisn? (‘up-growth’)
mountain, whose beginning is in Sagastdn and its
end unto Pars aud to Kinistan®.

8. This, too, is declared, that after the great rain
in the beginning of the creation’, azd the wind’s
sweeping away the water to the ocean, the earth is
in seven portions® a little above z¢, as the compact
earth, after the rain, is torn up by the noise and
wind zz various places. 9. One portion, moreover,
as much as one-half the whole earth, is in the middle,
and in each of the six portions around is as much as
Sagastan; moreover, as much as Sagastan is the
measure of what is called a késhvar (‘region’) for
the reason that one was defined from the other by a
késh (‘furrow’).: 10. The middle ove is Khvantras,
of which Pars is the centre, and those six regions
are like a coronet (avisar) avound zt. 11. One part
of the wide-formed ocean wound around it, among
those six regions; the sea and forest seized upon
the south side, azd a lofty mountain grew up on the
north, so that they might become separate, one from
the other, azd imperceptible.

12. This is the third contest, about the earth.


1 The Aparsén of Bund. XII, 9.

2 Written Apfi-réyisn, as if it were an Arabic hybrid meaning
‘father of growth,

§ Bund. XII, 9, XXIV, 28, have Khiigtstan instead of Ainistan ;
the latter appears to be an old name of the territory of Samarkand
(see note to Bund. XII, 13).

4 Literally, ‘creature.’

5 Bund. XI, 2-4 is paraphrased in §§ 8-11.


176 ' APPENDIX TO THE BUNDAHIS.


Cyapter VIII,


1. As he (Aharman) came fourthly to the plants—
which have struggled (kikhshi-aitd) against him
with the whole vegetation—because the vegetation
was quite dry 1, Amerédad, by whom the essence of
the world’s vegetation? was seized upon, pounded it
up small, and mixed z¢ up with the rain-water of
Tistar. 2. After the rain the whole earth is discerned
sprouting, and ten thousand® special species and a
hundred thousand‘ additional species (levatman
sardak6) so grew as if there were a species of every
kind; and those ten thousand species are provided
for’ keeping away the ten thousand ® diseases.

3. Afterwards, the seed was taken up from those
hundred thousand species of plants, azd from the
colléction of seed the tree of all germs, amid the
wide-formed ocean, was produced, from which all
species of plants continually grow. 4. And the
griffon bird (séné mdrtivé) has his resting-place
upon it; when he wanders forth /vom within it, he
scatters the dry seed into the water, avd it is rained
back to the earth with the rain.

5. And in its vicinity the tree was produced whzch
zs the white Hém, the counteractor of decrepitude,


1 This chapter is a paraphrase of Bund. IX.

* Or, perhaps, ‘the worldly characteristics of vegetation.’

a Written like ‘one thousand,’ but see the context and Bund.

> 4.

* In Bund. IX, 4, the MSS. have ‘ 120,000,’ which is probably
wrong, as Bund. XXVII, 2, agrees with the text above,

5 The MS. has bara instead of pavan, a blunder due probably
to some copyist reading the Huzvaris in Persian, in which language
bih (= bara) and bah (= pavan) are written alike. In Pazand
they are usually written be and pa, respectively.


SELECTIONS OF ZAD-SPARAM, VIII, I-IX, 2. 177


the reviver of the dead, azd the immortalizer of the
living.
6. This was the fourth contest, about the plants.


CHAPTER IX,


1. As he (Aharman) came fifthly to cattle—which
struggled against him with all the animals—and_
likewise as the primeval ox! passed away, from the
nature of the vegetable principle it possessed, fifty-
five? species of grain and twelve species of medi-
cinal plants grew from z¢s various members; and
forasmuch as they should see from which member
each one proceeds, it is declared in the Damdad
Nask*, 2. And every plant grown from a member


1 See Chaps. II, 6, III, 1, and Bund. IV, 1, X, 1, XIV, 1.

2 The MS. has ‘ fifty-seven’ in ciphers, but Bund. X, 1, XIV, 1,
XXVII, 2, have ‘ fifty-five’ in words.

8 This was the fourth nask or ‘book’ of the complete Mazda-
yasnian literature, according to the Dinkard, which gives a very
short and superficial account of its contents. But, according to
the Dini-vagarkard and the Rivadyats of Kamah Bahrah, Nariman
Héshang, and Barzti Qiyamu-d-din, it was the fifth nask, and was
called Dvazdah-hamAst (or homast). For its contents, as given by
the Dtnt-vagarkard, see Haug’s Essays, p. 127. The Rivayat of
KAmah Bahrah, which has a few more words than the other
Rivayats, gives the following account (for the Persian text of which,
see ‘Fragmens relatifs & la religion de Zoroastre,’ par Olshausen
et Jules Mohl) :—

‘Of the fifth the name is Dvazdah-homast, and the interpreta-
tion of this is “the book about help” (dar imdad, but this is
probably a corruption of dimdad). And this book has thirty-two
sections (kardah) that the divine and omnipotent creator sent
down, in remembrance of the beginning of the creatures of the
superior world and inferior world, and 7¢ ¢s a description of the
whole of them and of that which God, the most holy and omnipo-
tent, mentioned about the sky, earth, and water, vegetation and


[5] N


178 APPENDIX TO THE BUNDAHIs.


promotes that member, as it is said that there where
the ox scattered z/s marrow! on to the earth, grain
afterwards grew up, corn? and sesame, vetches* azd
peas; so sesame, on account of * zés marrow quality,
is itself a great thing for developing marrow. 3.
And it is also said that from the blood is the vine®,
a great vegetable thing—as wine itself is blood—
for more befriending the sound quality of the blood.
4. And it is said that from the nose is the pulse
(mAys or masah) which is called dénak, and was a
variety of sesame (samaga)®, and zt 7s for other noses.


fire, man and quadrupeds, grazing and flying ammals, and what
he produced for their advantage and use, and the like. Secondly,
the resurrection and heavenly path, the gathering and dispersion,
and the nature of the circumstances of the resurrection, as regards
the virtuous and evil-doers, through the weight of every action they
perform for good and evil.’

This description corresponds very closely with what the Bun-
dahis must have been, before the addition of the genealogical and
chronological chapters at thé end; and Dad-sparam mentions in
his text here, and again in § 16, particulars regarding the Damdad
which also occur in the Bundahis (XIV, 2, 14-18, 21-24). There
can be very little doubt, therefore, that the Bundahis was originally
a translation of the Damdad, though probably abridged; and the
text translated in this volume is certainly a further abridgment of
the original Bundahis, or Zand-4kas. Whether the Avesta text of
the Damdad was still in existence in the time of D&d-sparam is
uncertain, as he would apply the name to the Pahlavi text. At the
present time it is very unusual for a copyist to write the Pahlavi
text without its Avesta, when the latter exists, but this may not
always have been the case.

1 Or ‘brains.’

* Supposing the MS. galélag is a corruption of gallak (Pers.
ghallah).

* Assuming the MS. alfind or arvand to be a corruption of
alfim or argand,

-* Reading rat instead of 14. 5 Compare Bund. XIV, 2.

° Either this sentence is very corrupt in the MS. or it cannot be


SELECTIONS OF ZAD-SPARAM, IX, 3—I0. 179


5. And it is also said that from the lungs are the rue-
like herbs? whzch heal, and are for the lung-disease
of cattle. 6. This, rooted amid the heart, is thyme,
from which is Vohtiman’s thorough withstanding of
the stench of Akéman’, and 2 ds for that which
proceeds from the sick ane yawners.

7. Afterwards, the brilliance of the seed, seized
upon, by strength, from the seed whch was the ox’s,
they would carry of from it, ad the brilliance was
intrusted to the angel of the moon’; in a place
therein that seed was thoroughly purified by the
light of the moon, and was restored in its many
qualities, and made fully infused with life (gAnvar-
hémand). 8. Forth from there it produced for
Airan-vég, first, two oxen, a pair, male and female 4,
and, afterwards, other species, until the completion
of the 282 species®; and they were discernible as
far as two long leagues oz the earth. 9. Quadrupeds
walked forth on.the land, fish swam in the water,
and birds flew zz the atmosphere; 27 every two, at
the time good eating is enjoyed, a longing (Av-
dah4n) arose therefrom, and pregnancy and birth.

10. Secondly, their subdivision is thus :—First,
they are divided into three, that is, quadrupeds
walking on the earth, fish swimming in the water,


reconciled with the corresponding clause of Bund. XIV, 2.
Altering dénak and gfiinak into gandanak, and samaga into
samasdar, we might read, ‘from the nose is mays, which is
called the leek, and the leek was an onion;’ but this is doubtful,
and leaves the word mays unexplained.
~ 1 The MS. has géspend4néd, ‘cattle,’ instead of sipandané,
‘rue herbs.’

2 See Bund. I, 24, 27, XXVIII, 7, XXX, 29,

8 Bund. X, 2, XIV, 3. 4 Bund. X, 3, XIV, 4.

5 Bund. X, 3, XIV, 13.


180 APPENDIX TO THE BUNDAHIS.


and birds flying in the atmosphere. 11. Then, into
five classes}, that is, the quadruped which is round-
hoofed, the double-hoofed, the five-clawed, the bird,
and the fish, whose dwellings are in five places, and
which are called aquatic, burrowing, oviparous, wide-
travelling, axd suitable for grazing. 12. The aquatic
are fish azd every beast of burden, cattle, wild
beast, dog, azd bird which enters the water; the
burrowing are the marten (samdr) and musk amz-
mats, and all other dwellers and movers in holes ;
the oviparous are birds of every kind; the wide-
travelling sprang away for help, and are also those
of a like kind; those suitable for grazing are what-
ever are kept grazing in a flock.

13. And, afterwards, they were divided into
genera, as the round-hoofed are one, whzch is all
called ‘horse;’ the double-hoofed are many, as the
camel and ox, the sheep and goat, and others
double-hoofed; the five-clawed are the dog, hare,
musk animals, marten, and others; then are the
birds, and then the fish. 14. And then they were
divided into species?, as eight species of horse, two
species of camel, ten® species of ox, five species of
sheep, five species of goat, ten of the dog, five of the
hare, eight of the marten, eight of the musk azzmals,
119 of the birds, and ten of the fish; some are
counted for the pigs, and with all those declared and
all those undeclared ¢here were, at first, 282 species 4;
and with the species within species ¢here were a
thousand varieties.


1 Bund. XIV, 8-12,

2 Bund. XIV, 13-23, 26, 27.

® Bund. XIV, 17 says ‘ fifteen,’ which is probably correct,
* Only 181 species are detailed or ‘ declared’ here,


SELECTIONS OF ZAL-SPARAM, IX, II-19. 181


15. The birds are distributed? into eight groups
(ristak6), and from that which is largest to that
which is smallest ¢4ey are so spread about as when a
man, who is sowing grain, first scatters abroad ¢hat
of heavy weight, then that which is middling, and
afterwards that which is small.

16. And of the whole of the species, as enume-
rated a second time in the Damdad MNask?2, and
written by me in the manuscript (nipik) of ‘the
summary enumeration of races*’—this is a lordly*
summary—the matter which is shown is, about the
species of horses, the first is the Arab, and the chief
of them ® is white azd yellow-eared, and secondly
the Persian, the mule, the ass, the wild ass, the
water-horse, azd others. 17. Of the camel there are
specially two, ¢hat for the plain, avd the mountain
one which is double-humped. 18. Among the species
of ox are the white, mud-coloured, red, yellow, black,
and dappled, the elk, the buffalo, the camel-leopard®,
the ox-fish, azd others. 19. Among sheep are those
having tails and those which are tailless, also the
wether and the Kirisk whzch, because of its tram-
pling the hills, z¢s great horn, and also being suitable


1 Bund. XIV, 25.

2 See § 1; the particulars which follow are also found in Bund.
XIV, 14-18, 21-24, showing that the Bundahis must be derived
from the Damdad.

8 The title of this work, in Pahlavi, is Tékhm-atismaris-
nth-i hangardik6, but it is not known to be extant.

# Reading mardk (Chaldee N71), but this is doubtful, though
the Iranian final k is often added to Semitic Huzvaris forms ending
with 4. It may be min4k, ‘thinking, thoughtful,’ or a corruption
of mantk, ‘mine,’ in which last case we should translate, ‘ this is
a summary of mine.’

5 Bund. XXIV, 6.

6 Literally, ‘camel-ox-leopard.’


182 “APPENDIX TO THE BUNDAHIS.
ee ee


for ambling, became the steed of Mants#ihar. 20.
Among goats are the ass-goat, the Arab, the fawn
(varikd), the roe, and the mountain goat. 21.
Among martens are the white ermine, the black
marten, the squirrel, the beaver (khaz), and others.
22. Of musk animals with a bag, one is the Bish-
musk—which eats the Bish poison and does not die
through it, and it is created for the great advantage
that it should eat the Bish, ad less of z¢ should
succeed in poisoning the creatures—and one is a
musk axzimal of a black colour which they desired
(ay Aftd) who were bitten dy the fanged serpent—
as the serpent of the mountain water-courses (mak6)
is called—which is numerous on the river-banks ;
one throws the same unto it for food, which it eats,
and then the serpent enters its body, when his?
serpent, at the time ¢/zs happens, feeds upon the
same belly in which the serpent is, and he will
become clear from that malady. 23. Among birds
two were produced of a different character from the
rest, and those are the griffon bird and the bat,
which have teeth zz the mouth, azd suckle ther
young with animal milk from the teat.
24. This is the fifth contest, as to animals.


CHAPTER X.


1. As he (Aharman) came sixthly 4o Gayémard
there was arrayed against Azm, with Gayémard, the


1 This appears to be the meaning here of amat zak gargaké,
but the whole sentence is a fair sample of Dad-sparam’s most
involved style of writing. By feeding the black musk animal with
snakes the effect of a snake-bite, experienced by the feeder, is
supposed to be neutralized,


SELECTIONS OF ZAD-SPARAM, IX, 20-x, 5. 183


pure propitious liturgy (mansarspend), as heard
from Gayémard; and Atharmazd, in pure medita-
tion, considered that which is good and righteous-
ness as destruction of the fiend (drfigd). 2. And
when he (Gayémard) passed away eight kinds of
mineral of a metallic character arose from hes
various members; they are gold, silver, iron, brass,
tin, lead, quicksilver (Avginak6), and adamant; and
on account of the perfection of gold it is produced
from the life and seed.

3. Spendarmad received the gold of the je
Gayomard?, and it was forty years in the earth. 4.
At the end of the forty years, 7z the manner of a
Rivasplant, Mashya and Mashydi? came up, and,
one joined to the other, were of like stature and
mutually adapted?; and its middle, on which a glory
came, through their like stature‘, was such that it
was not clear which is the male and which the
female, and which is the one with the glory which
Atharmazd created. 5. This is that glory for which
man is, indeed, created, as it is thus said in revela-


1 Compare Bund. XV, 1.

2 The MS. has Masha? Mashayé, but see Bund. XV, 6. The
Avesta forms were probably mashya mashy4i (or mashyé), which
are regular nominatives dual, masculine and feminine, of mashya,
‘mortal,’ and indicate that they were usually coupled together in
some part of the Avesta which is no longer extant. Pazand
writers have found it easy to read Mashyani instead of Mashyé?.

° Reading ham-basn6 ham-dakhik, but whether this is more
likely to be the original reading than the ham-badisn va ham-
dasak of Bund. XV, 2, is doubtful. The last epithet here might
also be read ham-sabfk, ‘having the same shirt,’ but this is an
improbable meaning.

4 It is evident that ham-bandisnth, ‘mutual connection,’ in
accordance with Bund. XV, 3, would be preferable to the ham-
basnoth, ‘like stature,’ of this text.


184 APPENDIX TO THE BUNDAHIS.


tion: ‘Which existed before, the glory’ or the
body?’ And Atharmazd spoke thus: ‘The glory
was created by me before; afterwards, for him who
is created, the glory is given a body so that it may
produce activity, and its body is created only for
activity. 6. And, afterwards, they changed from
the shape of a plant into the shape of man’, azd the
glory went spiritually into them.


| CHAPTER XI.


1. As he (Aharman) came seventhly to fire, which
was all together agazust him, the fire separated into
five kinds?, which are called the Propitious, the
Good diffuser, the Atirvazist, the VAzist, azd the
Supremely-denefiting. 2. And it produced the Pro-
pitious fire itself in heaven (garédm4n); its mani-
festation is in the fire which is burning on the
earth, and its propitiousness is this, that all the
kinds are of its nature. 3. Ze Good diffuser is that
which is in men and animals‘, and its business coz-
sists in the digestion of the food, the sleeping of the


. 1 The old word nism6, ‘soul’ (see Bund. XV, 3, 4), has become
corrupted here (by the omission of the initial stroke) into gadman,
‘glory. This corruption may be due either to Dad-sparam not
understanding the word (in which case the Bundahis must have
been an old book in his time), or else to some later copyist con-
founding the old word for ‘soul’ with the better-known ‘glory’
of the Iranian sovereigns.

2 Bund. XV, 5.

3 Bund. XVII, 1. Three of the Avesta names are here trans-
lated, the first two being the Spénist and Vohu-fryan, which are
the fifth and second in the Bundahis, and the fifth being the Berezi-
savang, which is the first in the Bundahis,

* See Bund. XVII, 2.


SELECTIONS OF ZAD-SPARAM, X, 6—XI, 7. 185


body, azd the brightening of the eyes. 4. The
Airvazist is that which is in plants, in whose seed
2 is formed, and its business consists in piercing the
earth, warming the chilled water? and producing the
qualities and fragrance of plants and blossoms there-
from, and elaborating the ripened produce into
many fruits. 5. And the Vazist’is that which has
its motion in a cloud, and its business conszs¢s in
destroying the atmospheric gloom and darkness, and
making the thickness of the atmosphere fine and
propitious in quality, sifting the hail, moderately
warming the water which the cloud holds, anzd
making sultry weather showery. 6. The Supremely-
benefiting, like the sky, is that glory whose lodg-
ment is in the Behram fire?, as the master of the
house is over the house, azd whose propitious
power arises from the growing brightness of the
fire, the blazing forth in* the purity of the place, the
praise of God (yazdan6), azd the practice of good
works. 7. And its business is hat it struggles with
the spiritual fiend, it watches the forms of the
witches—who walk up from the river *, wear woven
clothing, disturb the luminaries by the concealment
of stench, axd by witchcraft injure the creatures—
and the occurrences of destruction, burning, and cele-
bration of witchcraft, especially at night; being an
assistant of Srésh the righteous.


1 Reading may4-i afsardintdé taftano instead of the seem-
ingly unmeaning may4 asardinid6 4ftand of the MS.

2 The Verehrand 4tash, or sacred fire of the fire-temples.

® Reading pavan instead of bard (see p. 176, note 5).

* Or ‘sea’ (darty4v6). This long-winded sentence is more
involved and obscure in the original than in the translation,


186 - APPENDIX TO THE BUNDAHIS.


8. And in the beginning of the creation! the whole
earth was delivered over into the guardianship of
the sublime Frébak fire, the mighty Gfsnasp fire,
and the beneficial Barzin-Mitré fire 2, whzch are like
priest, warrior, and husbandman. 9g. The place of
the fire Frébak was formed oz the Gadman-hémand
(‘glorious’) mountain in Khvarizem®, the fire Gis-
nasp was on the Asnavand mountain in Atar6-patakan,
and the fire Birzin-Mitré on the Révand mountain
which is in the Ridge of VistAsp, and its material
manifestation in the world was the most complete.

10. In the reign of Héshang*, when men were
continually going forth to the other regions (késh-
var) on the ox Srfvé®, one night, half-way, while
admiring the fires, the fire-stands which were pre-
pared in three places on the back of the ox, avd in
which the fire was, fell into the sea, and the sub-
stance of that one great fire whch was manifest, is
divided into three, avd they established z¢ on the
three fire-stands, and it became itself three glories
whose lodgments are in the Frébak fire, the
Gisnasp fire, and the Barzin-Mitr6 *.


' Literally, ‘ creature.’

* The epithets of these three sacred fires are, respectively,
vargan, tagik6, and pfir-sfidé in Pahlavi.

® See Bund. XVII, 5, 7, 8.

* Bund. XVII, 4 says, ‘in the reign of Takhmérup, his
successor.

° Sarsaok or Srisaok in the Bundahis.

* The remainder of ‘the sayings of. ZAd-sparam, about the
meeting of the beneficent spirit and the evil spirit have no
special reference to the Bundahis. They treat of the following
matters :—

The coming of the religion, beginning in the time of Fré-
styav and MantisAthar, with an anecdote of K4i-fis and the hero
Srito (Av. Thrita). The manifestation of the glory of Zarattist


SELECTIONS OF ZAD-SPARAM, XI, 8—I0. 187


before his birth. The begetting of Zaratfist through the drinking
of hém-juice and cow’s milk infused, respectively, with his guardian
spirit and glory, as declared in the manuscript on ‘the guidance
of worship.’ The connection of Zarattist with Afttharmazd, traced
back through his genealogy as far as Gayémard. The persistent
endeavours of the fiends to destroy Zarattst at the time of his birth,
and how they were frustrated. His receiving the religion from
Atharmazd, with another anecdote of K4i-tis and Srtt6, and of
Zaratist’s exclamation on coming into the world. The enmity
borne to him by five brothers of the Karapan family, and how it
was frustrated; his own four brothers, and some of his wonderful
deeds. The worthiness of his righteousness; his compassionate
and liberal nature; his giving up worldly desires; his pity; his
good selection of a wife; and what is most edifying for the soul.
What occurred when he was thirty years old, and his being con-
ducted by the archangel Vohfiman to the assembly of the spirits.
The questions asked by Zarattist, and Attharmazd’s replies thereto.
The seven questions he asked of the seven archangels in seven
different places, in the course of one winter. [Westergaard’s MS.
K35 ends in the middle of the second of these questions.] The
five dispositions of priests, and the ten admonitions. The three
preservatives of religion, with particulars about the Gathas and the
connection of the Ahunavar with the Nasks. Zarattst’s obtaining
one disciple, Mé¢ydk-ma4h, in the first ten years, and the acceptance
of the religion by Vistasp two years afterwards.

The second of the writings of Zad-sparam consists of his ‘ say-
ings about the formation of men out of body, life, and soul ;’ and
the third (which is imperfect in all known MSS.) contains his
‘sayings about producing the renovation of the universe.’


BAHMAN YAST,


OR
ZAND-I VOHUMAN YASNO,


OF WHICH ZAND, OR COMMENTARY,


SEIS WORK SEEMS 20 BE AN EPITOME,


OBSERVATIONS.


1-5. (The same as on p. 2.)

6. Abbreviations used are:—Av. for Avesta. Bund. for Bun-
dahis, as translated in this volume. Dad. for Dadistan-i Dintk.
Gr. for Greek. Haug’s Essays, for Essays on the Sacred Language,
Writings, and Religion of the Parsis, by Martin Haug, 2nd edition.
Huz. for Huzvaris. Pahl. for Pahlavi. Paz. for Pazand. Pers.
for Persian. Sans. for Sanskrit. Sls. for Shayast l4-shdyast, as
translated in this volume. SZS. for Selections of Zad-sparam, as
translated in this volume. Vend. for Vendidad, ed. Spiegel. Yas.
for Yasna, ed. Spiegel. Yt. for Yast, ed. Westergaard.

7. The manuscripts mentioned in the notes are :—

K20 (about g00 years old), No. 20 in the University Library at
Kopenhagen.

Paz. MSS. (modern), No. 22 of the Haug Collection in the State
Library at Munich, and a copy of one in the library of the high-
priest of the Parsis at Bombay.

Pers. version (composed a.p. 1496, copied a.D. 1679) in a
Rivayat MS., No. 29 of the University Library at Bombay.


BAHMAN YAST,.


CHAPTER I.


o. May the gratification of the creator Athar-
mazd, the beneficent, the developer, the splendid,
and glorious, and the benediction of the archangels,
which constztute the pure, good religion of the Maz-
dayasnians, de vigour of body, long life, and pros-
perous wealth for him whose writing I am 1.


1. As? it is declared by the Stdidgar Masé? that


? Or, possibly, ‘for whom I am written,’ the meaning of mfin
yektibtinthém being not quite clear. In fact, the construction
of the whole of this initial benediction is rather obscure.

2 It is possible that this is to be read in connection with Chap.
II, 1, with the meaning that ‘as it is declared by the Stiidgar Mask
that Zaratfist asked for immortality from Afiharmazd, so in the
Vohiiman Yast commentary it is declared that he asked for it a
second time.’ This introductory chapter is altogether omitted in
both the Paz. MSS. which have been examined, but it is given in
the Pers. version. It is also omitted in the epitome of the Bahman
Yast contained in the Dabistén (see Shea’s translation, vol. i.
pp. 264-271).

8 This was the first nask or ‘book’ of the complete Mazdayas-
nian literature, according to the Dinkard, which calls it Sidkar;
but according to the Dini-vagarkard and the Rivayats it was the
second nask, called Stfidgar or Istfidgar. For its contents, as
given by the Dint-vagarkard (which agrees with the account in the
Rivayats), see Haug’s Essays, p. 126. In the Dinkard, besides
a short description of this Nask, given in the eighth book, there is
also a detailed account of the contents of each of its fargards, or
chapters, occupying twenty-five quarto pages of twenty-two lines
each, in the ninth book. From this detailed statement it appears


192 BAHMAN YAST.


Zarattst asked for immortality from Atharmazd,
then Atharmazd displayed the omniscient wisdom
to Zarattist, and through it he beheld the root of a
tree, on which were four branches, one golden, one
of silver, one of steel, and one was mixed up with
iron. 2. Thereupon he reflected in this way, that
this was seen in a dream, and when he arose from
sleep Zaratiist spoke thus: ‘Lord of the spirits and
earthly existences! it appears that I saw the root of
a tree, on which were four branches.’

3. Attharmazd spoke to Zaratist the Spitaman?
thus: ‘That root of a tree which thou sawest, and
those four branches, are the four periods which wd¢


that the passage mentioned here, in the text, constituted the
seventh fargard of the Nask, the contents of which are detailed as
follows :—

‘The seventh fargard, Ta-ve-rat6 (Av. ta ve urvata, Yas. XXXI,
1), is about the exhibition to Zaratist of the nature of the four
periods in the Zaratistian millennium (hazangrdék zim, “thousand
winters”). First, the golden, that in which Aflharmazd displayed
the religion to Zarattst. Second, the silver, that in which Vistasp
received the religion from Zaratist. Third, the steel, the period
within which the organizer of righteousness, Ataré-pad son of Mar-
spend, was born. Fourth, the period mingled with iron is this,
in which is much propagation of the authority of the apostate and
other villains (sarttardnd), along with destruction of the reign
of religion, the weakening of every kind of goodness and virtue,
and the departure of honour avd wisdom from the countries of
Iran. In the same period is a recital of the many perplexities and
torments of the period for that desire (girAyth) of the life of the
good which consists in seemliness. Perfect is the excellence of
righteousness (Av. ashem vohfi vahistem ast}, Yas. XXVII,
14, W.).

If this be a correct account of the contents of this fargard, the
writer was evidently consulting a Pahlavi version of the Nask,
composed during the later Sasanian times.

* Generally understood to mean ‘descendant of Spitama,’ who
was his ancestor in the ninth generation (see Bund. XXXII, 1).


CHAPTER I, 2-6. 193


come. 4. That of gold is when I and thou con-
verse, and King Vistasp shall accept the religion,
and shall demolish the figures of the demons, du¢
they c¢hemselves remain for! . . . concealed pro-
ceedings. 5. And that ‘of silver is the reign of
Ardakhshir? the Kayan king (Kai shah), and that
of steel is the reign of the glorified (andshak-
riban) Khisré son of Kévad*, and that which -was
mixed with iron is the evil sovereignty of the de-
mons with dishevelled hair* of the race of Wrath 5,
and when it is the end of the tenth hundredth
winter (sat6 zim) of thy millennium, O Zaratdst
the Spitéman!’

6. It is declared in the commentary (zand)® of
the Vohtiman Yast, Horvadad Yast, and Astdd Yast


* A word is lost here in Kzo and does not occur in the other
copies and versions, nor can it be supplied from the similar phrase
in Chap. II, 16. The meaning of the sentence appears to be
- that Vistasp destroyed the idols, but the demons they represented
still remained, in a spiritual state, to produce evil.

2 See Chap. II, 17.

8 Khusr6é Néshirvan son of Qubad, in modern Persian, who
reigned in a.p. 531-579. Kévad is usually written Kavad.

‘ The epithet vigard-vars may also mean ‘dressed-hair,’ but
the term in the text is the more probable, as the Persian version
translates it by kushadah mui, ‘ uncovered hair.’ That it is not
a name, as assumed by Spiegel, appears clearly from the further
details given in Chap. II, 25.

® Or, ‘the progeny of Aéshm,’ the demon, Wrath is not to be
understood here in its abstract sense, but is personified as a demon.
It is uncertain whether the remainder of this sentence belongs to
this § or the next.

° If there were any doubt about zand meaning the Pahlavi
translation, this passage would be important, as the Avesta of the
Horvadad (Khordad) and Ast4d Yasts is still extant, but contains
nothing about the heretic Mazdik or Mazdak (see Chap. II, 21),
No Avesta of the Vohiman Yast is now known.


[5] O


194 BAHMAN YAST.


that, during this time, the accursed Mazdik son of
Bamdad, who is opposed to the religion, comes into
notice, and is to cause disturbance among those in
the religion of God (yazdan). 7. And he, the
glorified ove}, summoned Khisr6é son of Mah-dad
and Dad-Atharmazd of Nishaptr, who were high-
priests of Ataré-patakAn, and Ataré-frébag the un-
deceitful (akadba), Atard-pad, Ataréd-Mitré, and
Bakht-Afrid to Azs presence, and he demanded of
them a promise’, thus: ‘Do not keep these Yasts
in concealment, azd do not teach the commentary
except among your relations?’ 8. Aud they made
the promise unto Khisré.


Cuapter II.


1.:In the Vohfiman Yast commentary (zand) it is
declared‘ that Zaratist asked for immortality from


’ That is, Khusr6 Néshirvan. As the names of his priests and
councillors stand in Kzo they can hardly be otherwise distributed
than they are in the text, but the correctness of the MS. is open to
suspicion. Dad-Atharmazd was a commentator who is quoted in
Chap. III, 16, and in the Pahl. Yas. XI, 22; Ataré-frébag was
another commentator mentioned in Sls. I, 3; and Atar6-pad and
Bakht-Afrid are names well known in Pahlavi literature, the former
having been borne by more than one individual (see Sls. I, 3, 4).

* The Pers. version says nothing about this promise, but states
that Khfisr6 sent a message to the accursed Mazdak, requiring
him to reply to the questions of this priestly assembly on pain of
death, to which he assented, and he was asked ten religious
questions, but was unable to answer one; so the king put him
to death immediately.

* A similar prohibition, addressed to Zaratfist, as regards the
Avesta text, is actually found in the Horvadad Yt. 10.

* This seems to imply that this text is not the commentary


CHAPTER I, 7—II, 3. 195


Adharmazd a second time, azd spoke thus: ‘I am
Zaratist, more righteous and more efficient among
these thy creatures, O creator! when /ou shalt
make me* immortal, as the tree opposed to harm 2,
and Gdpatshah, Gést-i Fry&n, avd Kitroék-miydn
son of Vistasp, who is Péshyétant, were made’. 2.
When thou shalt make me immortal they in thy
good religion wz believe that the upholder of
religion, who receives from Attharmazd his pure and
good religion of the Mazdayasnians, will become
immortal; then those men w7// believe in thy good
religion.’

3. Adharmazd spoke‘ thus: ‘When I shall make
thee immortal, O Zarattist the Spitaman! then Tir-i
Bradarvash the Karap® will become immortal, and


itself, but merely an epitome of it. The Paz. MSS. which have been
examined, begin with this chapter.


1 Or, ‘when I shall decome;’ the verb is omitted by mistake in
Kao.


2 Three of these immortals are mentioned in Bund. XXIX, 5,
and Gdost-i Fryan is included in a similar enumeration in DAd.
(Reply 89). The tale of Gdst-i Fryan (Av. Yéisté yo Fryananaim,
of Aban Yt. 81 and Fravardin Yt. r20) has been published with
‘The Book of Arda-Viraf,’ ed. Hoshangji and Haug.

’ Or, ‘became;’ most of this verb is torn off in K2o.

* The verb is placed before its nominative in the Pahlavi text,
both here and in most similar sentences, which is an imitation of
the Avesta, due probably to the text being originally translated
from an Avesta book now lost, or, at any rate, to its author’s wish
that it might appear to be so translated. In such cases of inverted
construction, when the verb is in a past tense, the Pahlavi idiom
often requires a pronominal suffix, corresponding to the nominative,
to be added to the first word in the sentence; thus, giftos Afhar-
mazd, or afas gift Afharmazd, does not mean ‘ Atharmazd
spoke to him (or said it),’ but merely ‘Afharmazd spoke’ (lit. ‘it was
said by him, Afhharmazd’).

5 According to an untranslated passage in the Selections of
Zad-sparam, mentioned in the note on p. 187, this is the name of

© 2


196 BAHMAN YAST.


when Tar-i Bradarvash the Karap shall become
immortal the resurrection avd future existence are
not possible.’

4. Zaratist seemed uneasy about 2¢ in 4zs mind’;
and Atharmazd, through the wisdom of omniscience,
knew what was thought by Zaratist the Spitaman
with the righteous spirit, and he? took hold of
Zaratists hand. 5. And he, Adharmazd the pro-
pitious spirit, creator of the material world, the
righteous oze, even he put the omniscient wisdom,
in the shape of water, on the hand of Zaratist, and
said to him thus: ‘ Devour it.’


one of the five brothers in the Karapan family of sorcerers, who
were enemies of Zaratfist during his childhood. ‘Their names, as
written in SZS., may be read as follows, ‘Bradarvakhsh, Bradréyisno,
Tir Brégrésh, Azand, and Nasm,’ and the first is also called ‘ Tfr-i
Bradarvakhsh ;’ they are described as descendants of the sister of
Mantiséthar. In the seventh book of the Dinkard a wizard, who
endeavours to injure Zarattist in his childhood, is called ‘ Tar-i
Brédrék-résh, the Karapé, and was probably the third brother,
whose name (thus corrected) indicates brathr6-raésha as its Avesta
form. Karap or Karapan in all these passages is evidently the
name of a family or caste, probably the Av. karapané which Haug
translates by ‘ performers of (idolatrous) sacrificial rites,’ in connec-
tion with Sans, kalpa, ‘ceremonial ritual’ (see Haug’s Essays,
pp. 289-291).

* K2zo has ‘among the spirits ;’ the word mfnisn having become
maindk4n by the insertion of an extra stroke.

® Reading afas instead of minas (Huz. of agas, ‘from or by
him,’ which is written with the same letters as afas, ‘and by him’),
not only here, but also in §§ 5, 7,9. The copyist of K2o was evi-
dently not aware that afas is a conjunctive form, but confounded °
it with the prepositional form agas, as most Parsis and some Euro-
pean scholars do still. The Sasanian inscriptions confirm the
reading afas for the conjunctive form; and Nérydsang, the learned
Parsi translator of Pahlavi texts into Pazand and Sanskrit some
four centuries ago, was aware of the difference between the two
forms, as he transcribes them correctly into Paz. vas and azas.


CHAPTER II, 4—I2. 197


6. And Zarattist devoured some of it; thereby the
omniscient wisdom was intermingled with Zaratist,
and seven days and nights Zarattst was in the
wisdom of Attharmazd. 7. And Zaratdst beheld the
men and cattle in the seven regions of the earth,
where the many fibres of hair of every one are, and
whereunto the end of each fibre holds on the back.
8. And he beheld whatever trees and shrubs ¢here
were, and how many roots of plants were in the
earth of Spendarmad, where and how they had
grown, azd where they were mingled.

g. And the seventh day and night he (Athar-
mazd) took back the omniscient wisdom from
Zaratist, and Zaratist reflected in this way, that
I have seen z¢ in a pleasant dream produced by
Attharmazd, azd I am not surfeited with the dream.
ro. And he took both hands, rubbed his body
(kerp) again, axd spoke! thus: ‘I have slept a long
time, avd am not surfeited with this pleasant dream
produced by Atharmazd,

11. Attharmazd said to the righteous Zaratist
thus: ‘What was seen in the pleasant dream pro-
duced by Atharmazd ?’

12. Zaratiist spoke thus: ‘O Atharmazd, propi-
tious spirit! creator of the material world, righteous
creator! I have seen a celebrity (khunid) with
much wealth, whose soul, infamous in the body, was
hungry (gurs)? and jaundiced and in hell, and he did
not seem to me exalted; and I saw a beggar with
no wealth and helpless, and his soul was thriving
(farpih) in paradise, and* he seemed to me exalted.


1 This verb is omitted in K2o by mistake.
2 Or else ‘dirty.’
’ Reading afam instead of minam, both here and in § 14; the


198 BAHMAN YAST.


13. [And I saw a wealthy maz without children, and
he did not seem to me exalted;]+ and I saw a
pauper with many children, and he seemed to me
exalted. 14. And I saw a tree on which were seven
branches, one golden, one of silver, one brazen, one
of copper, [one of tin]*, one of steel, and one was
mixed up with iron.’

15. Attharmazd spoke thus: ‘O Zaratdist the
Spitaman! this is what I say beforehand, the one
tree which thou sawest is the world which I, Adhar-
mazd, created; and those seven branches thou
sawest are the seven periods which we// come.
16. And that which was golden is the reign of King
Vistasp, when I and thou converse about religion,
and Vistasp shall accept that religion and shall
demolish the figures of the demons, and the demons
desist from demonstration into concealed proceed-
ings; Aharman and the demons rush back to dark-
ness, and care for water, fire, plants, and the earth
of Spendarmad* becomes apparent. 17. And that
which was of silver‘ is the reign of Ardashir® the


copyist of Kzo having confounded these two words, like those
mentioned in the note on § 4.

* The passage in brackets is omitted in K2o0, but is supplied
from the Paz. MSS., being evidently necessary to complete the
contrast. It occurs also in the Pers. version.

» Supplied from the Paz. and Pers. versions, being omitted here
in K2o0, though occurring in § 20. '

* The female archangel who has charge of the earth (see Bund.
1,26).

* The Paz. MSS. omit the description of the silver age.

> Usually identified with Artaxerxes Longimanus, but his long
reign of 112 years may include most of the Acheemenian sovereigns
down to Artaxerxes Mnemon, several of whom are called Aha-
suerus or Artaxerxes in the biblical books of Ezra and Esther. See
Bund. XXXI, 30, XXXIV, 8.


CHAPTER II, 13-19. 199


Kayan (Kai), whom! they call Vohiman son of
Spend-dad*, who is he who separates the demons
from men, scatters ¢Zem about, and makes the reli-
gion current zz the whole world. 18. And that
which was brazen® is the reign of Ardakhshir 4, the
arranger and restorer of the world, and that of King
Shahpfr, when he arranges the world which I,
Atiharmazd, created ; he makes happiness (bikhta-
kih)® prevalent in the boundaries of the world, and
goodness shall become manifest; and Ataré-pAd of
triumphant destiny, the restorer of the true religion,
with the prepared brass°, brings this religion, to-
gether with the transgressors, back to. the truth. -
19. And that which was of copper is the reign of
the Askanian’ king’, who removes from the world


1 Reading mfin, ‘whom,’ instead of amat, ‘ when’ (see the note
on Bund. I, 7).

2 Contracted here into Spendad, as it is also in Bund. XXXIV, 8
in the old MSS. This name of the king is corrupted into Bahman
son of Isfendiyar in the Shahnamah.

8 This brazen age is evidently out of its proper chronological
order. The Pazand and Persian versions correct this blunder by
describing the copper age before the brazen one here, but they
place the brazen branch before the copper one in § 14, so it is
doubtful how the text stood originally.

4 Artakhshatar son of Papakit and Shahpthart son of Artakh-
shatar are the Sasanian forms of the names of the first two
monarchs (A.D. 226-271) of the Sasanian dynasty, whose reigns
constitute this brazen age.

5 Literally, ‘deliverance from sin’ or ‘salvation’ by one’s own
good works, and, therefore, not in a Christian sense.

° Referring to the ordeal of pouring molten brass on his chest,
undergone by Atar6-pAd son of Méraspend, high-priest and prime
minister of Shapfir I, for the purpose of proving the truth of his
religion to those who doubted it.

7 It is uncertain which of the Askdnian sovereigns is meant, or
whether several of the dynasty may not be referred to. The Greek


200 BAHMAN YAST.


the heterodoxy (gavid-rastakih) which existed,
and the wicked Akandgar-i Kilisyakih! is utterly
destroyed by this religion, azd goes unseen and
unknown from the world. 20. And that which was
of tin is the reign of King Vahram Gér?, when he


successors of Alexander were subdued in Persia by Ask (Arsaces I),
who defeated Seleucus Callinicus about B.c. 236. But the third
book of the Dinkard(in a passage quoted by Haug in his Essay on
the Pahlavi Language) mentions Valkhas (Vologeses) the Askanian
as collecting the Avesta and Zand,.and encouraging the Mazda-
yasnian religion. This Valkhas was probably Vologeses I, a con-
temporary of Nero, as shown by Darmesteter in the introduction
to his translation of the Vendidad.

* I am indebted to Professor J. Darmesteter for pointing out
that Nérydsang, in his Sanskrit translation of Yas. IX, 75, explains
Kalasiyakas as ‘those whose faith is the Christian religion ;’ the
original Pahlavi word in the oldest MSS. is Kilisayatk, altogether
a misunderstanding of the Avesta name Keresani, which it trans-
lates, but sufficiently near the name in our text to warrant the
assumption that Néryésang would have translated Kilisyakth by
‘Christianity ;’ literally it means ‘ecclesiasticism, or the church
religion’ (from Pers. kilisy4, Gr. éxkAyoia), Akandgar is probably
a miswriting of Alaksandar or Sikandar; though Darmesteter
suggests that Skandgar (Av. skewd6-kara, Pers. sikandgar),
‘causer of destruction,’ would be an appropriate punning title for
Alexander from a Persian point of view. The anachronisms
involved in making Alexander the Great a Christian, conquered by
an Askanian king, are not more startling than the usual Pahlavi
statement that he was a Roman. ‘To a Persian in Sasanian times
Alexander was the representative of an invading enemy which had
come from the countries occupied, in those times, by the eastern
empire of the Christian Romans, which enemy had been subdued
in Persia by the Askanian dynasty ; and such information would
naturally lead to the anachronisms just mentioned. The name
Kilisyakth is again used, in Chap. III, 3, 5, 8, to denote some
Christian enemy.

2 This Sasanian monarch (A.D. 420-439), after considerable
provocation, revived the persecution of the heretics and foreign
creeds which had been tolerated by his predecessor, and_ this
conduct naturally endeared him to. the priesthood.


CHAPTER II, 20-24. 201


makes the sight! of the spirit of pleasure manifest,
and Aharman with the wizards rushes back to dark-

ness azd gloom. 21. And that which was of steel is
the reign of King Khisré son of Kévad?2, when he
keeps away from this religion the accursed Mazdik?,
son of Bamdad, who remains opposed to the religion
along with the heterodox. 22. And that which was
mixed with iron [is the reign of the demons with
dishevelled hair* of the race of Wrath, when it is
the end of the tenth hundredth winter of thy mil-
lennium], O Zarattist the Spit&aman !’

23. Zarattist said thus: ‘ Creator of the material
world! O propitious spirit! what token would you
give of the tenth hundredth winter ?’

24. Atharmazd spoke thus: ‘Righteous Zarattist!
I wll make z¢ clear: the token that it is the end of
thy millennium, and the most evil period is coming,
is that a hundred _kinds, a thousand kinds, a myriad
of kinds of demons with dishevelled hair, of the


* Reading vénap (Pers. binab), but it may be va davag, in
which case the phrase must be translated as follows: ‘when he
makes the spirit of pleasure and joy manifest.’

* See Chap. I, 5. The characteristic of the steel age, like that
of the tin one, was the persecution of heretics who had been
tolerated by the reigning monarch’s predecessor.

* Generally written Mazdak, a heretic whose teaching was very
popular in the time of King Kévad (or Kavad, a.p. 487-531).
His doctrine appears to have been extreme socialism built upon a
Mazdayasnian foundation. He was put to death by Khiisré I, as
hinted in the text. It is remarkable that none of the successors of
Khfisré6 Néshirvan are mentioned in the Bahman Yast, so that a
Parsi, who even did not believe in the verbal inspiration of the book,
might possibly consider the remainder of it as strictly prophetical.

* The passage in brackets is omitted in K20 by mistake, and is
here supplied from Chap. I, 5, in accordance with the Paz. and
Pers. versions.


202 BAHMAN YAST.


race of Wrath, rush into the country of Iran (Airan
shatr6) from the direction of the east 1, which as
an inferior race and race of Wrath. 25. They have
uplifted banners, they slay those living in the world?,
they have ¢her hair dishevelled on the back, and
they are mostly a small and inferior (nitim) race,
forward in destroying the strong doer; O Zaratast
the Spitaman! the race of Wrath is miscreated (vi-
shid@) and its origin is not manifest. 26. Through
witchcraft they rush into these countries of Iran
which I, Attharmazd, created, since they burn and
damage many things; and the house of the house-
owner, the land of the land-digger, prosperity, nobi-
lity, sovereignty, religion’, truth, agreement, security,
enjoyment, and every characteristic which I, Adhar-
-mazd, created, this pure religion of the Mazda-
yasnians, and the fire of Vahr4m, which is set in
the appointed place, encounter annihilation, and the
direst destruction and‘trouble will come into notice.
27. And that which is a great district will become
a town; that which is a great town, a village; that


* Or ‘of Khfrasan.’ It is difficult to identify these demons
with the Arabs, who came from the west, though a dweller in
Kirman might imagine that they came from Khfrasan. In fact,
hardly any of the numerous details which follow, except their long-
continued rule, apply exclusively to Muhammadans. It appears,
moreover, from § 50 and Chap. III, 8, that these demons are
intended for Tfrks, that is, invaders from Turkistan, who would
naturally come from the east into Persia.

* Reading géhan-zivo zektelfind, but the beginning of the
latter word is torn off in K2o, and the other versions have no
equivalent phrase. The Pazand substitutes the phrase ‘black
banners and black garments.’

* This word, being torn off in K2o, is supplied from the Paz.
MSS.


CHAPTER I, 25-31. 203


which is a great village, a family; and that which is
a [great]! family, a single threshold. 28. O Zaratist
the Spitaman! they will lead these Iranian countries
of Adharmazd into a desire for evil, zzéo tyranny
and misgovernment, those demons with dishevelled
hair who are deceivers, so that what they say they
do not do, and they are of a vile religion, so that
what they do not say they do. 29. And their assist-
ance and promise have no sincerity, there is no
law, they preserve no security, and on the support
they provide no one relies; with deceit, rapacity,
and misgovernment they will devastate these my
Iranian’ countries, who am Atharmazd.

30. ‘And at that time, O Zaratist the Spitaman!
all men will become deceivers, great friends will
become of different parties, and respect, affection,
hope?, and regard for the soul will depart from the
world; the affection of the father will depart from
the son; and ¢hat of the brother from 4zs brother ;
the son-in-law will become a beggar (kidyak or
kasik) from his father-in-law *, and the mother will
be parted and estranged from the daughter.

31. ‘When it is the end of thy tenth hundredth
winter, O Zaratist the Spitaman! the sun is more
unseen and more spotted (vasangtar); the year,
month, and day are shorter; and the earth of Spen-
darmad is more barren, and fuller of highway-


1 This word is omitted in K2o0, but supplied from the Pazand.
The whole section is omitted in the Pers. version.

2 This word, being torn off in K20, is doubtfully supplied from
the Pers. paraphrase. The Paz. MSS. omit §§ 30-32.

8 Or, perhaps, ‘ parents-in-law;’ the original is khfisriné,
‘followed by some word (probably nafsman) which is torn off in
Keo. The Pers: version gives no equivalent phrase.


204 BAHMAN YAST.


men‘; and the crop will not yield the seed, so that
of the crop of the corn-fields in ten cases seven will
diminish and three? will increase, and that which
increases does not become ripe*; and vegetation,
trees, and shrubs will diminish ; when one shall take
a hundred, ninety will diminish and ten will increase,
and that which increases gives no pleasure and
flavour. 32. And men are born smaller, and their
skill and strength are less; they become more de-
ceitful and more given to vile practices; they have
no gratitude and respect for bread and salt, and they
have no affection for their country (désak).

33. ‘And in that most evil time a boundary has
most disrespect* where it is the property of a suf-
fering man of religion; gifts are few among their
deeds, and duties and good works proceed but little
from their hands; and sectarians of all kinds are
seeking mischief for them®. 34. And all the world
will be burying azd clothing the dead, and burying
the dead axd washing the dead wz// de by law; the
burning, bringing to water and fire, and eating of
dead matter they practise by law and do not abstain
from. 35. They recount largely about duties and
good works, and pursue wickedness and the road to
hell; and through the iniquity, cajolery, and craving
of wrath and avarice they rush to hell.

36. ‘And in that perplexing time, O Zaratdst the


* Or, ‘tax-collectors;’ Pahl. tangtar va ras-vanagtar.

* In K2o ‘va 3’ is corrupted into the very similar va vai,
‘and a portion.’

* Literally, ‘ white.’

* Reading anagzarm instead of hana Agarm.

-° That is, for the Iranians in general, who are the ‘they’ in
§§ 32-35.


CHAPTER 1, 32-36. 205


Spitaman!—the reign of Wrath with infuriate spear?
and the demon with dishevelled hair, of the race of
Wrath,—the meanest slaves walk forth with the
authority of nobles of the land; and the religious,
who wear sacred thread-girdles on the waist, are
then not able ¢o perform their ablution (padiyavih),
for in those last times dead matter and bodily refuse
become so abundant, that oxe who shall set step to
step walks upon dead matter; or when he washes
in the barashniim ceremony, and puts down a foot
from the stone seat (magh)?, he walks on dead
matter; or when he arranges the sacred twigs (bare-
sém) and consecrates the sacred cakes (dr6n6) in
their corpse-chamber (nas4i katak)® it is allowable.


1 The Av. Aéshmé6 khrvidrus, ‘Aéshma the impetuous
assailant’ (see Bund. XXVIII, 15-17); this demon’s Pahlavi
epithet is partly a transcription, and partly a paraphrase of the
Avesta term.

2 According to Dasttir Hoshangji (Zand-Pahlavi Glossary, p. 65)
the term magh is now applied to the stones on which the person
undergoing purification has to squat during ablution m the barash-
nim ceremony. Originally, however, Av. magha appears to have
meant a shallow hole dug in the earth, near or over which the
person squatted upon a seat, either of stone or some other hard
material (see Vend. IX). The term for the hole was probably
extended to the whole arrangement, including the seat, which
latter has thus acquired the name of magh, although magh and
magh4k still mean ‘a channel or pit’ in Persian.

3 The Ay. kata of Vend.V, 36-40; a special chamber for the
temporary reception of the corpse, when it was impossible to
remove it at once to the dakhma, owing to the inclemency of
the weather. It should be large enough for standing upright, and
for stretching out the feet and hands, without touching either walls
or ceiling; that is, not less than six feet cube. The text means
that those times will be so distressing, that it will be considered
lawful to perform the sacred ceremonies even in a place of such
concentrated impurity as a dead-house not actually occupied by
a corpse. :


206 BAHMAN YAST.


37. Or, in those last times, it becomes allowable to
perform a ceremonial (yazisn) with two men, so that
this religion may not come to nothing and collapse’;
there wzd/ be only one in a hundred, in a thousand,
in a myriad, who believes in this religion, and even
he does nothing of it though z¢ ée a duty?; and the
fire of Vahram, which will come to nothing and
collapse, fads off from a thousand to one care-taker,
and even he does not supply it properly with fire-
wood and incense; or when a man, who has per-
formed worship and does not know the Nirangistan *
(‘code of religious formulas’), shall kindle z¢ with
good intentions, it is allowable.

38. ‘ Honourable‘ wealth will all proceed to those
of perverted faith (kévid-késh4n); it comes to the
transgressors, and virtuous doers of good works,
from the families of noblemen even unto the priests
(még-mard4n), remain running about uncovered ;
the lower orders take in marriage the daughters
of nobles, grandees, azd priests; and the nobles,
grandees, and priests come to destitution azd bon-
dage. 39. The misfortunes of the ignoble will over-
take greatness and authority, and the helpless and
ignoble will come to the foremost place azd advance-
ment; the words of the upholders of religion, and
the seal and decision of a just judge will become the


* The Paz. MSS. add, ‘ and helplessness.’

® The Paz. MSS. add, ‘and the prayers and ceremonies that
he orders of priests and disciples they do not fulfil.’

* The name of a work which treats of various ceremonial details,
and appears to be a portion of the Pahlavi translation of the seven-
teenth or Htisparam Nask, containing many Avesta quotations
which are not now to be found elsewhere.


* The Paz. MSS. have misread aztr damfk, ‘ underground,’
instead of 4garmik.


CHAPTER Il, 37-41. 207
Oo ee es
words of random speakers (andéz6-g6kAn) among
the just azd even the righteous; and the words of
the ignoble and slanderers, of the disreputable and
mockers, and of those of divers opinions they con-
sider true and credible, about which they take! an
oath, although with falsehood, and thereby give
false evidence, and speak falsely and irreverently —
about me, Attharmazd. 40. They: who bear the
title of priest and disciples wish evil concerning ?
one another; he speaks vice and they look upon
vice; and the antagonism of Aharman and the
demons is much brought on by them; of the sin
which men commit, out of five® sins the priests and
disciples commit three sins, and they become ene-
mies of the good, so that they may thereby speak of
bad faults relating to one another; the ceremonies
they undertake they do not perform, and they have
no fear of hell.

41. ‘And in that tenth hundredth winter, whzch is
the end of thy millennium, O righteous Zarattst!
all mankind will bind torn hair, disregarding reve-
lation’, so that a willingly-disposed cloud and a


* Literally, ‘devour an oath,’ which Persian idiom was occasioned
by the original form of oath consisting in drinking water prepared
in a particular manner, after having invoked all the heavenly
powers to bear witness to the truth of what had been asserted
(see the Safigand-namah).

2 Reading rai instead of 14, ‘not.’ The whole section is omitted
by the Paz. MSS., possibly from politic motives, as the language is
plain enough.

5 The Persian paraphrase has ‘ eight.’

* Referring probably to the injunctions regarding cutting the
hair and paring the nails, with all the proper precautions for pre-
venting any fragments of the hair or nails from lying about, as given
in Vend. XVII. One of the penalties for neglecting such precau-
tions is supposed to be a failure of the necessary rains. The


208 BAHMAN YAST.


righteous wind are not able to produce rain in its
proper time and season. 42. And a dark cloud
makes the whole sky night, and the hot wind and
the cold wind arrive, and bring along fruit and seed
of corn, even the rain in its proper time; and it does
not rain, azd that which rains also rains more
noxious creatures than water; and the water of
rivers and springs will diminish, and there will be
no increase. 43. And the beast of durden and ox
and sheep bring forth more painfully? and awk-
wardly, and acquire less fruitfulness ; and ¢hezr hair
is coarser azd skin thinner; the milk does not in-
crease and has less cream (£arbist); the strength
of the labouring ox is less, and the agility of the
swift horse is less, and it carries less in a race.
44. ‘And on the men in that perplexing time,
O Zaratist the Spitam4n! who wear the sacred
thread-girdle on the waist, the evil-seeking of mis-
government and much of its false judgment have
come as a wind in which their living is not possible,
and they seek death as a boon; and youths and
children will be apprehensive, and gossiping chitchat
and gladness of heart do not arise among them.
45. And they practise the appointed feasts (gasné)
of ¢heir ancestors, the propitiation (atsdéfrid) of
angels, and the prayers and ceremonies of the season
festivals and guardian spirits, in various places, yet
that which they practise they do not believe in un-
hesitatingly ; they do not give rewards lawfully, and


words anastak diné can also be translated by ‘despising the
religion,’

* The word appears to be dardaktar, but is almost illegible in
K20; it may possibly be kftaktar, ‘more scantily,’ as the Paz.
MSS. have kédaktar bahdd, ‘become smaller’


CHAPTER II, 42-49. 209
ao ee ee ae eee
bestow no gifts and alms, and even those [they
bestow] they repent of again. 46. And even those
men of the good religion, who have reverenced the
good religion of the Mazdayasnians, proceed in con-
formity with (bar-hamak6 rabisn) those ways and
customs’, and do not believe their own religion.
47. And the noble, great, and charitable 3, who are
the virtuous of their own country and locality, will
depart from their own original place and family‘ as
idolatrous ; through want they beg something from
the ignoble and vile, and come to poverty and help-
lessness ; through them® nine in ten of these men
will perish in the northern quarter.

48.‘ Through their way of misrule everything
comes to nothingness and destitution, levity and
infirmity; and the earth of Spendarmad opens zés
mouth wide, aud every jewel and metal becomes
exposed, such as gold and silver, brass, tin, and
lead. 49. And rule and sovereignty come to slaves,
such as the Tirk and non-Taranian (Atdr) of the
army®, and are turbulent as among the moun-


? This verb is omitted in K2o.

2 Tt is rather doubtful whether their own customs are meant, or
those of their conquerors.

> Or dahakan may mean ‘the skilful.’

* Reading dfidak instead of rfiidak. At first sight the mis-
writing of r for d seems to indicate copying from a text in the
modern Persian character, in which those two letters are often
much alike; but it happens that the compounds df and rf also
resemble one another in some Pahlavi handwriting.

5 Whether through poverty and helplessness, or through the
conquerors, is not quite clear.

® Very little reliance can be placed upon the details of this sen-
tence, but it is difficult to make any other complete and consistent
translation. Darmesteter suggests the reading héné, ‘army,’ but
another possible réading is Khyén (Av. Hvyaona), the old name


[5] P


210 BAHMAN YAST.


taineers!; and the Kini2, the KAzilt, the Sédfti, the
Raman (Arfimayak), and the white-clothed Kar-
mak? then attain sovereignty in my countries of Iran,
and their will and pleasure will become current in the
world. 50. The sovereignty will come from those
leathern-belted ones* and Arabs (T4azigan) and
Riimans to them, avd they will be so misgoverning
that when they kill a righteous man who is virtuous
and a fly, it is all one® in their eyes. 51. And the
security, fame, and prosperity, the country and
families, the wealth and handiwork, the streams,
rivers, and springs of Iran, and of those of the good
religion, come to those non-Iranians; and the army
and standards of the frontiers come to them, and a
rule with a craving for wrath advances in the world.
52. And their eyes of avarice are not sated with
wealth, and they form hoards of the world’s wealth,
and conceal ¢em underground; and through wicked-
ness they commit sodomy, hold much intercourse
with menstruous women, and practise many unna-
tural lusts.


of some country probably in Turkistan, as Argdsp, the opponent of
Vistasp, is called ‘lord or king of Khyén’ in the Yadkér-i Zariran
(see also Gés Yt. 30, 31, Ashi Yt. 50, 51, Zamy4d Yt. 87).

* Or, ‘as the mountain-holding Khfdarak.’ Darmesteter suggests
that Khfadarak may be an ‘inhabitant of Khazar.’

* Probably the people of Samarkand, which place was formerly
called Kin according to a passage in some MSS. of Tabari’s
Chronicle, quoted in Ouseley’s Oriental Geography, p. 298. See
also Bund. XII, 22.

* The Kabul and Byzantine Raman are plain enough; not so
* the Softt and Karmak (Kalmak or Krimak),

* That is, the Tarks, as appears more clearly from Chap. III,
8,9. The Arabs are mentioned here, incidently, for the first time,
and again in Chap. III, 9, 51.

® Literally, ‘ both are one,’


CHAPTER II, 50-57. 211


53. ‘And in that perplexing time the night is
brighter, and the year, month, and day will di-
minish one-third; the earth of Spendarmad arises,
and suffering, death, and destitution become more
severe in the world.’

54. Adharmazd said to Zarattst the Spitaman :
‘This is what I foretell: that wicked evil spirit,
when it shall be necessary for him to perish, be-
comes more oppressive and more tyrannical.’

55. So Adharmazd spoke to Zaratdst the Spitd-
man thus: ‘Enquire fully and learn by heart?
thoroughly! teach z¢ by Zand, Pazand, and explana-
tion! tell 2¢ to the priests and disciples who speak
forth in the world, azd those who are not aware of
the hundred winters, tell z¢ then to them! so that,
for the hope of a future existence, azd for the pre-
servation of their own souls, they may remove the
trouble, evil, and oppression which those of other
religions cause in the ceremonies of religion (dinéd
yésnan). 56. And, moreover, I tell thee this, O
Zaratist the Spitaman! that whoever, in that time,
appeals for the body is not able to save the soul,
for he zs as it were fat, and zs soul is hungry and
lean in hell; whoever appeals for the soul, 42s body
is hungry azd lean through the misery of the world,
and destitute, and his soul is fat in heaven.’

57. Zaratist enquired of Atharmazd thus: ‘O
Atharmazd, propitious spirit! creator of the mate-
rial world who art righteous !'—He is Atharmazd
through righteous invocation, and the rest through


1 The Paz. version adds, ‘the motion of the sun is quicker.’
2 Literally, ‘make easy.’


ae


py. BAHMAN YAST.


praise; some say ‘righteous creator!!’—‘O creator !
in that perplexing time are they righteous? and are
there religious people who wear the sacred thread-
girdle (ktistik) on the waist, and celebrate religious
rites (dind)? with the sacred twigs (baresém)? and
does the religious practice of next-of-kin marriage
(khvétik-das) continue in their families ?’

58. Aftharmazd said to Zaratist thus: ‘Of the
best men is he who, in that perplexing time, wears
the sacred thread-girdle on the waist, and celebrates
religious rites with the sacred twigs, ‘hough not as in
the reign of King Vistasp. 59. Whoever in that
perplexing time recites It4-4d-yazam (Av. itha ad
yazamaidé, Yas. Vand XX XVII)? azd one Ashem-
vohti*, aud has learned z¢ by heart, is as though,
in the reign of King Vistasp, z¢ were a Dvazdah-
hémast® with holy-water (zShar) 60. And by


' This interpolated commentary is a pretty clear indication that
the writer is translating from an Avesta text.

® Both Paz. and Pers. have dréné, ‘ sacred cakes.’

® The third ha or chapter of the Yasna of seven chapters. It
worships Atharmazd as the creator ofall good things.

* See Bund. XX, 2.

® For the following explanation of the various kinds of h6mast
I am indebted to Dasttir Jamaspji Minochiharji Jameel of
Bombay :—

There are four kinds of h6mast recited by priests for the atone-
ment of any sin that may have been committed by a woman during
alia after her purification :—

. Hémast consists of prayers recited for 144 days, in honour
of ae twelve following angels: Atharmazd, Tistar, Khfrshéd,
M&h, Aban, Adar, Khurdad, Amerdad, Spendarmad, Bad, Srdésh,
and Arda-fravash. Each angel, in turn, is reverenced for twelve
days successively, with one Yasna each day.

2, Khadik-hémast, ‘ one hdmast,’ differs from the last merely
in adding a Vendidad every twelfth day, to be recited in the Ush-


CHAPTER II, 58-62. oh


whomever prayer is offered up, azd the Gatha-
hymns are chanted, z¢ 7s as though the whole ritual
had been recited, and the Gatha-hymus consecrated
by him zz the reign of King Vist4sp. 61. The most
perfectly righteous of the righteous is he who
remains in the good religion of the Mazdayasnians,
and continues the religious practice of next-of-kin
marriage in his family.’

62. Atharmazd said to the righteous Zaratdst:
‘In these nine thousand years which I, Atharmazd,
created, mankind become most perplexed in that
perplexing time; for in the evil reigns of Az-i
Dahak and Frdstyav of Ttr mankind, in those per-
plexing times, were living better and living more


ahin Gah (12 P.M. to 6 a.m.) in honour of the angel whose propi-
tiation ends that day.

3- Dah-hémast,‘ ten hémasts, differs from the preceding merely
in having a Vendidad, in addition to the Yasna, every day.

4. Dvazdah-hémAst, ‘ twelve hémAsts,’ are prayers recited for
264 days in honour of twenty-two angels, namely, the twelve afore-
said and the following ten: Bahman, Ardibahist, Shahrivar, Mihir,
Bahram, Ram, Din, Rashnf, Gés, and Astad. Each angel, in
turn, is reverenced as in the last.

The celebration of h6m4st costs 350 ripts, that of khadfik-
hémast 422 rfipis, that of dah-hémast r1ooo rtipis, and that of
dvazdah-hémast 2000 rfipts ; but the first and third are now no
longer used. The merit obtained by having such recitations per-
formed is equivalent to 1000 tanapfihars for each Yasna, 10,000
for each Visparad, and 70,000 for each Vendidad recited. A tana-
pihar is now considered as a weight of 1200 dirhams, with
which serious sins and works of considerable merit are estimated ;
originally it must have meant a sin which was ‘inexpiable’ by
ordinary good works, and, conversely, any extraordinary good
work which was just sufficient to efface such a sin.

The amount of merit attaching to such recitations is variously
stated in different books, and when recited with holy-water (that is,
with all their ceremonial rites) they are said to be usually a
hundred times as ‘meritorious as when recited without it.


214 BAHMAN YAST.

numerously, and their disturbance by Aharman and
the demons was less. 63. For in their evil reigns,
within the countries of Iran, there were not seven!
towns which were desolate as they we// de when it is
the end of thy millennium, O Zaratést the Spita-
man! for all the towns of Iran wz// be ploughed up
by their horses’ hoofs, and their banners wz// reach
unto Padashkhvargar*, and they wz// carry away
the sovereignty of the seat of the religion I approve
from there; and their destruction comes from that
place, O Zarattist the Spitaman! this is what I
foretell.’

64. Whoever ? of those existing, thus, with rever-
ence unto the good, performs much worship for
Atharmazd, Atharmazd, aware of z¢ through right-
eousness, gives 4zm whatsoever Aftharmazd is aware
of through righteousness, as remuneration azd re-
ward of duty azd good works, and such members of


* So in the Pazand, but ‘seventeen’ in Persian; in K2o the
word is partly illegible, but can be no other number than sib4,
‘seven.’

* The mountainous region south of the Caspian (see Bund.
IT, 3300 7):

* This section is the Pahlavi version of an Avesta formula which
is appended to nearly two-thirds of the hag or chapters of the
Yasna, and, therefore, indicates the close of the chapter at this
point. The version here given contains a few verbal deviations
from that given in the Yasna, but none of any importance. The
Avesta text of this formula is as follows :—

Yéwhé hat&m aad, yésné paitt,

vangh6 mazdau ahuré vaétha, ashad haa,

yaunghaiméa, tiskd tauska yazamaidé,
And it may be translated in the following manner :—

‘Of whatever male of the existences, therefore, Ahuramazda was
better cognizant, through righteousness in worship, and of what-
ever females, both those males and those females we reverence.’


CHAPTER I, 63-111, 3, 215


the congregation, males and females, I reverence ;
and the archangels, who are also male and female,
they are good.


Cuaprer III.


1. Zarattist enquired of Atharmazd thus: ‘O
Atharmazd, propitious spirit! creator of the mate-
rial world, righteous oze/ whence do they restore
this good religion of the Mazdayasnians? and by
what means will they destroy these demons with
dishevelled hair1!, of the race of Wrath? 2. O
creator! grant me death! and grant my favoured
ones death! that they may not live in that per-
plexing time; grant them exemplary living! that
they may not prepare wickedness and the way to
hell.’

3. Atharmazd spoke thus: ‘O Zaratdst the Spita-
man! after the illomened? sovereignty of those of
the race of Wrath® there is a fiend, ShédAspih * of
the Kilisyakih, from the countries of Salman®;’ Mah-


1 The Paz. MSS. insert, ‘and black clothing’ here.

2 Literally, ‘black-marked,’ or possibly, ‘ black standard.’

® The Paz. MSS. add, ‘ the leathern-belted Tiirks,’ that is, people
of Turkistan.

4 This fiend appears to be a personification of Christianity or
‘ecclesiasticism’ (Kilisyakih, see Chap. II, rg), and the writer
seems to place his appearance some time in the middle ages,
probably before the end of the thirteenth century (see the note on
§ 44). Darmesteter suggests that Shédasp may have been intended
as a modern counterpart of Bévarasp (Az-i Dahak), the ancient
tyrant; and that this Christian invasion may be a reminiscence of
the crusades.

5 IT have formerly read Mfisulm4n instead of min Salman,
and hence concluded that the text must have been written long


216 BAHMAN YAST.


vand-dad said that these people are Roman (Art-
mayik), and Réshan?} said that they have red
weapons, red banners, avd red hats(klah). 4. ‘It is
when a symptom of them appears, as they advance,
O Zaratist the Spitaman! the sun and the dark
show signs, and the moon becomes manifest of
various colours; earthquakes (bim-guzand), too,
become numerous, and the wind comes more vio-
lently ; in the world want, distress, and discomfort
come more into view; and Mercury and Jupiter
advance the sovereignty for the vile’, awd they are
zm hundreds and thousands and myriads. 5. They
have the red banner of the fiend Shéd4spih of Kili-
syakih, and they hasten much their progress to these
countries of Iran whzch I, Atharmazd, created, up
to the bank of the Arvand3, some have said# the
Frat® river, ‘unto the Greeks (Yf'ndn) dwelling in
Astristan;’ they are Greeks by strict reckoning °,


after the Muhammadan conquest of Persia; but this reading is
irreconcileable with the context. The position of Salman (Av.
Sairima) is defined by Bund. XX, 12, which places the sources of
the Tigris in that country.

* The name of a commentator, or commentary, often quoted
in the Pahlavi Vendidad, and other texts. Mahvand-dad is men-
tioned in the Pahlavi Yasna (see Sls. I, 4).

® The Paz. MSS. state that ‘Mercury and Jupiter beat down the
strength of Venus.’

* Here written Arang, Arand, or Arvad, but as it. is Arvand in
§§ 21, 38, that reading seems preferable, the difference between
the two names in Pahlavi being merely a single stroke. The
Arvand is the Tigris, and the Arang probably the Araxes (see
SZS. VI, 20, Bund. XX, 8).

* Literally, ‘there are and were some who said;’ this phrase
occurs several times in the latter part of this text.

> The Euphrates.

® Or, ‘of strict reckoning, reading sAkht amar, but both
reading and meaning are very uncertain. As it stands in K2o it


CHAPTER III, 4-9. 917


and their Assyrian dwelling is this, that they slay the
Assyrian people therein, and thus they will destroy
their abode, some have said the /urking-holes
(gréstak) of the demons.

6. ‘ They turn back those of the race of Wrath? in
hundreds and thousands and myriads; azd the ban-
ners, standards, and an innumerable army of those
demons with dishevelled hair will come to these
countries of Iran which I, Attharmazd, created. 7.
And the army of the invader? is an extending enemy
of the Tark? and even the Karm+4, be it with ban-
ners aloft when he shall set up a banner, be it
through the excessive multitude which will remain—
like haivs zx the mane of a horse—in the countries
of Iran which I, Adtharmazd, created.

8. ‘The leathern-belted Tark azd the Rdman
Shéd@aspith of Kilisyakth come forth with simul-
taneous movement®, and in three places, with
similar strife, there was and wz// be three times
a great contest-(Ardih), O Zaratist the Spitaman!
9g. One in the reign of Kai-Kats*, when through


———


may be sAakht gumAl, ‘ extreme beauty,’ or Sakhttmar (the name
of a place), or this may stand for sakht timar, ‘severe misfor-
tune ;’ and other readings are possible.

1 It is not quite clear which party will turn the other back.

? Literally, ‘extender,’ that is, one engaged in extending his
own dominions.

* The remainder of this § (except the verb ‘remain’) is Pazand
written in Persian characters in K2o.

* Possibly the Karmak of Chap. II, 49. In § 20 the Kurd and
Karman (or Karms) may refer to the Tark and Karm of this §, so
it is doubtful whether Tfrk or Kurd is meant. /

5 Or, ‘ for the encounter,’ pavan ham-rasisnth..

6 See Bund. XXXI, 25, XXXIV, 7. The letters are here joined
together, so as to become Kat-gatis, and this form of the name is


218 BAHMAN VAST:


the assistance of demons z¢ was with the archangels;
and the second when thou, O Zaratist the Spita-
man! receivedst the religion and ads¢ thy con-
ference, and King Vistasp and Argdsp1, miscreated
by wrath, were, through the war of the religion, in
the combat of Spéd-razir (“the hoary forest?”),’
some have said z¢ was in Pars; ‘and the third when
it is the end of thy millennium, O Zarattist the Spita-
man! when all the three, Tork, Arab, and Raman,
come to this? place,’ some:have said the plain of
NisAnak*. 10. ‘And all ¢hose of the countries of
Iran, which I, Attharmazd, created, come from their
own place unto Padashkhvargar*®, owing to those
of the race of Wrath, O Zaratdst the Spitaman! so
that a report of something of the cave dwellings,
mountain dwellings, and river dwellings of these
people will remain at Padashkhvargar and Pars;
some have sazd the fire Visnasp®, on the deep Lake
Aékast which has medicinal water opposed to the
demons, is there (in Padashkhvargar ?) as it were
conspicuous, some have said ‘originating’, ‘so that


often read Kahfs or Kahés in Pazand (see Mkh. VIII, 27, XXVII,
54, LVII, 21). The Paz. MSS. omit § 9.

1 see Bund. XIE.g2; 93.

2 See Bund. XXIV, 16.

* Perhaps ‘one’ is meant, as hana, ‘this,’ is sometimes substi-
tuted for aé, ‘one,’ both being read e in Pazand.

* The reading of this name is quite uncertain.

° See Chap. II, 63. The whole of the final clause of this
section, about the fire Visnasp, is inserted parenthetically at this
point in the Pahlavi text.

* Elsewhere called Giisnasp, Gisnasp, or Gtisasp (see SZS.
VI, 22).

* The most obvious reading of this word is mahfk, ‘ fish,’ which
can hardly be reconciled with the context. The view here taken
is that the writer was translating from an Avesta text, and met


CHAPTER III, 10, II. 219


they may use z¢ anew, and the fire may become
shining in these countries of Iran which I, Athar-
mazd, created. 11. For when one shall be able to
save his own life, he has then no recollection of
_ wife, child, and wealth, that they may not live, zz
that perplexing time, O Zarattist! yet the day when
the hundredth winter becomes the end of thy mil-
lennium, which is ¢hat of Zaratist, is so that
nothing wicked may go from this millennium into
that millennium 1.’


with the word Aithra, which means both pédak, ‘clear, and
tokhmak, ‘originating,’ but to express the latter meaning he used
the synonym mayakik, which can be written exactly like mahtk.
Owing to the involved character of this section it is not very clear
in English, but it is still more obscure in the Pahlavi text, in which
the whole of this clause about the fire is inserted parenthetically
after the first mention of Padashkhvargar.

' This last clause may be read several ways, and it is by no
means easy to ascertain clearly the chronological order of the
events which are jumbled together in this last chapter. But it
would appear that Zaratist’s millennium was to end at a time
when the religion was undisturbed, and just before the incursion
of the demons or idolators, the details of which have been given
in Chap. I, 22-III, 11, and which is the first event of Hfishédar’s
millennium (see § 13). Now according to Bund. XXXIV, 7-9,
the interval from ‘the coming of the religion,’ in the reign of Kait-
Vistasp, to the end of the Sasanian monarchy was 90+ 112+30
+12+14+14+284+460=1016 years. If by ‘the coming of
the religion’ be meant the time when Zaratist received it, as he
was then thirty years old, he must have been born 1046 years
before the end of the Sasanian monarchy (a.p. 651), and the end
of his millennium must have been in a. D. 605, the sixteenth year
of Khfsré Parviz, when the Sasanian power was near its maximum,
and only a score of years before it began suddenly to collapse.
This close coincidence indicates that the writer of the Bahman
Yast must have adopted the same incorrect chronology as is found
in the Bundahis. If, however, ‘the coming of the religion’ mean
its acceptance by Vistdsp, which occurred in Zarattist’s fortieth or


220 BAHMAN YAST.


12. Zaratdst enquired of Aftharmazd thus: ‘O
Atiharmazd, propitious spirit! creator of the material
world, righteous oze/ when they are so many in
number, by what means will they be able to
perish 1?’

13. Atharmazd spoke thus: ‘O Zarattist the Spi-
taman! when the demon with dishevelled hair of
the race of Wrath comes into notice in the eastern
quarter, first a black token becomes manifest, and
Hashédar soz of Zarattist is born on Lake Frazdan?’.
14. It is when he comes to his conference wzth me,
Atharmazd, O Zarattist the Spitaman!’ ¢Zat zz the
direction of Ainistan‘, z¢ is said—some have said
among the Hindus—‘is born a prince (kai); it is his
father, a prince of the Kay4n race, approaches the


forty-second year, his birth must have been tenor twelve years
earlier, and his millennium must have ended a.p. 593-595. But
according to the imperfect chronology of Bund. XXXIV the tenth
millennium of the world, that of Capricornus, commenced with ‘the
coming of the religion,’ and ended, therefore, in a.p. 635, the
fourth year of Yazdakard, the last Sasanian king, when the Muham-
madans were just preparing for their first invasion ; so the millen-
nium of Aquarius is very nearly coincident with that of Hfishédar,
and may probably be intended to represent it. It appears, there-
fore, that the millennium of Hfshédar is altogether past, having
extended from a. D. 593-635 to A.D. 1593-1635.

* The Paz. MSS. omit§ 12. The writer having detailed the evils
of the iron age, now returns to its commencement in order to describe
the means adopted for partially counteracting those evils.

? See Bund, XXII, 5, XXXII, 8. The Paz. MSS. add, ‘they
bring him up in Zavulistan and Kévulist&n ;’ and the Pers. version
says, ‘on the frontier of Kabulistan.’ With regard to the time of
Hfshédar’s birth, see § 44. His name is always written Khfr-
shédar in K20.

* The Paz. and Pers. versions say, ‘at thirty years of age,’ as in
§ 44.

* Possibly Samarkand (see Chap, II, 49, note 2).


CHEM ME RT ae Ie2 1 777. 227


women, and a religious prince is born to him; he calls
fis name Vahram the VargAvand1, some have said
Shahpfér. 15. ‘That a sign may come to the earth,
the night when that prince is born, a star falls from
the sky; when that prince is born the star shows a
signal.’ 16. It is Dad-Atharmazd? who said that
the month Avan and day Vad? is his father’s end;
‘they rear zm with the damsels of the king, aud a
woman becomes ruler.

17. ‘That prince when he is thirty years old’—
some have told the time—‘ comes with innumerable
banners azd divers armies, Hindu and Xini‘*, hav-
ing uplifted banners—for they set up ¢hezr banners
—having exalted banners, and having exalted
weapons; they hasten up with speed as far as the
Véh river’—some have said the country of Bamb6*—
‘as far as Bukhar and the Bukharans within z¢s bank,


? Bahram the illustrious or splendid (Av. varefanghand, com-
pare Pers. varg), an epithet applied, in the Avesta, to the moon,
Tistrya, the scriptures, the royal glory of the Kayanians, the Ka-
yanians themselves, and the hero Thrita. This personage may
possibly be an incarnation of the angel Bahram, mingled with some
reminiscences of the celebrated Persian general Bahram Opin ;
but see §$ 32, 49.

2 A commentator who is quoted in the Pahlavi Yas. XI, 22; see
also Chap. I, 7.

8 The 22nd day of the eighth month of the Parsi year, corres-
ponding to October 7th when the year began at the vernal equinox,
as the Bundahis (XXV, 6, 7, 20, 21) describes.

4 That is, Bactrian and Samarkandian.

5 Or, ‘light up with glitter,’ according as we read tagend or
tavend. The Paz. MSS. omit §§ 17-44, except one or two iso-
lated phrases.

6 Spiegel was inclined to identify this name with Bombay, but
this is impossible, as the MS. K20 (in which the name occurs) was
written some two centuries before the Portuguese invented the
name of Bombay, Its original name, by which it is still called by


222 BAHMAN YAST.


O Zaratist the Spitaman! 18. When the star Jupi-
ter comes up to zés culminating point (balist)! and
casts Venus down, the sovereignty comes to the
prince. 19. Quite innumerable are the champions,
furnished with arms azd with banners displayed,
some have said from Sagastan, Pars, and Khidrasan,
some have said from the lake of Padashkhvargar ?,
some have said from the Hiratis? and Kéhistan,
some have said from Taparistén*; and from those
directions ‘ every supplicant for a child® comes into ®
view. 20. It is concerning the displayed banners
and very numerous army, which were the armed
men, champions, and soldiers from the countries of
Iran at Padashkhvargar—whom J/ told thee’ that
they call both Kurd and Karman—it is declared


its native inhabitants, being Mumbai. The locality mentioned in
the text is evidently to be sought on the banks of the Oxus near
Bukhara ; the Oxus having been sometimes considered the upper
course of the Arag, and sometimes that of the Veh (see Bund. XX,
22, note 5). It is hardly probable that either Bam? (Balkh) or
Bamiyan would be changed into Bambé, and the only exact repre-
sentative of this name appears to be Bamm, a town about 120
miles S. E. of Kirman; this is quite a different locality from that
mentioned in the text, but it is hazardous to set bounds to the
want of geographical knowledge displayed by some of the Pahlavi
commentators.

* Compare SZS.IV,8. Here the triumph of Jupiter over Venus
appears to be symbolical of the displacement of the queen dowager
by her son.

* That is, from the southern shore of the Caspian.

* Reading Hiriyan, but this is doubtful, as it may be ‘from the
citadels (arig4nd6), or defiles (khalak4n5), of K6histan.’

syoee Bund. X11, 17, ere

° That is, every man able to bear arms. :

* Reading pavan, ‘into, instead of bar, ‘besides’ (see SZS.
VIN, 2, note 5).

" See § 10, but as nothing is said there about Kurd or Karm4n,
it is possible that the writer meant to say, ‘of whom I told thee,


CHAPTER Ill, 18-22. Bap


that they will slay an excessive number, in com-
panionship aud under the same banner, for these
countries of Iran.

21. ‘ Those of the race of Wrath and the extensive
army! of Shéd@aspih, whose names are the two-legged
wolf and the leathern-belted demon on the bank of
the Arvand ?, wage three battles, one in Spéd-raztir?
and one in the plain of Nisdnak ;’ some have said
that zf was on the lake of the three races, some
have said that z¢ was in Marfiv‘ the brilliant, avd -
some have said in Pars. 22. ‘ For the support of
the countries of Iran is the innumerable army of the
east; its having exalted banners’ is that they have a
banner of tiger skin (bépar pést),; and their wind
banner is white cotton®; innumerable are the mounted
troops, and they ride up to the /ur£zng-holes’ of the
demons; they will slay so that a thousand women
can afterwards see and kiss du¢ one man.


and whom they call both Kurd and Karman.’ It is more probable,
however, that he is referring to § 7.

1 Compare § 7. The ‘extensive army’ and ‘two-legged wolf’
are terms borrowed apparently from Yas. IX, 62, 63.

2 That is, ‘the rapid’ (Av. aurvand). The other names of
this river, Tigris and Hiddekel, have the same meaning. See
§$ 5, 38.

® See § 9, of which this is a recapitulation, but the first of the
three battles is here omitted by mistake.

4 Marv in the present Turkistan.

5 Referring to § 17.

® Supposing that bandék may be equivalent to Pers. bandak,
but the usual Pahlavi term for ‘cotton’ is pumbak (Pers. punbah).

7 Reading grestak as in § 5, but the word can also be read
dar didak, ‘gate watch-tower.’ It is possible that the drugé
geredha, ‘ pit of the fiend,’ of Vend. III, 24, may be here meant;
the gate of hell, whence the demons congregate upon the Arezir
ridge (Bund. XII; 8).


224 BAHMAN YAST.


23. ‘When it is the end of the time’, O Zaratist
the Spitaman! those enemies will be as much de-
stroyed as the root of a shrub when 2¢7zs in the night
on which a cold winter arrives, and in this night it
sheds z¢s leaves; and they wzd/ reinstate these
countries of Iran which I, Atharmazd, created ?.

24. ‘And with speed rushes the evil spirit, with
the vilest races: of demons and Wrath with infuriate
spear *, and comes on to the support and assistance
of those demon-worshippers and miscreations of
wrath, O Zarattist the Spitam4n! 25. And I, the
creator Attharmazd, send Néryésang the angel and
Srésh the righteous* unto Kangdez*, which the
illustrious Siyavakhsh * formed, axd to Kitré-miyan?
son of Vistasp, the glory of the Kaydns, the just
restorer of the religion, Zo speak thus: “‘ Walk forth,
O illustrious Péshyétanti! to these countries of Iran
which I, Atharmazd, created; consecrate the fire
and waters for the Had6kht* aud Dvazdah-hémast!


* Compare, ‘and at the time of the end’ (Dan. xi. 40). The
writer appears to be here finally passing from a description of the
past into speculations as to the future, which he has hitherto only
casually indulged in.

° The supernatural means supposed to be employed for the
destruction of the wicked and the restoration of the good are
detailed in the following paragraphs.

® See Chap. II, 36.

* The two angels who are the special messengers of Athar-
mazd to mankind (see Bund. XV, 1, XXX, 29). This message
was expected to be sent to Péshydtanfi near the end of Htishédar’s
millennium (see § 51).

° See Bund. XXIX, 10.

® See Bund. XXXI, 25.

7 A title of Péshydtand, written Xitrd-mainé in Bund. XXIX, 5.

* This was the twentieth nask or ‘ book’ of the complete Maz-
dayasnian literature, according to the Dinkard; but the Dtni-
vagarkard and the Rivayats make it the twenty-first, and say very


CHAPTER III, 23-25. ‘205
a ee
that is, celebrate ¢hem with the fire and waters, and


such as is appointed about the fire and waters!”
ae ce
woe about its contents (see Haug’s Essays, pp. 133, 1 34). The
Dinkard, in its eighth book, gives the following account of this
Nask :—

“The Hadokht as it exists Aas three divisions among its 133
sections. The first as thirteen (twelve?) sections, treatises upon
the nature of the recital of the Ahunavar, which is the. spiritual
benefit from chanting it aloud, and whatever is on the same
subject. Admonition about selecting avd keeping a spiritual and
worldly high-priest, performing every duty as to the high-priest,
and maintaining even those of various high-priests. On the twenty-
one chieftainships of the spirits in Adharmazd, and of the worldly
existences in Zarattist, among which are the worship of God and
the management of the devout. On the duty regudsd# in each of
the five different periods of the day and night, and #e fate af the
celestial bridge of him who shall be zealous in the celebration of
the season-festivals ; he who does not provide the preparations for
the feast of the season-festivals, and who is yet efficient in the other
worship of God. On how to consider, azd what to do with, a leader
of the high-priest class avd a man of the z#/ferdor classes ; he who
atones for unimportant sin, and he who does not atone even for
that which is important, avd whatever is on the same subject. On
the apparatus with which ploughed land (?) is prepared. On the
manifestation of virtuous manhood, and the merit and advantage
from uttering good words /or dlessing the eating and drinking of
food and drink, and rebuking the inward talk of the demons.. On
the recitations at the five periods of the day, and the ceremonial
invocation by name of many angels, each separately, and great
information on the same subject; the worthiness of a man re-
strained by authority, the giving of life and body to the angels, the
good rulers, and their examination and satisfaction; the blessing
and winning words which are most successful in carrying off the
affliction which proceeds from a fiend. On all-pleasing creative-
ness and omniscience, and all precedence (?), leadership, foresight(?),
worthy liberality, virtue (?), and every proper cause and effect of
righteousness; the individuality of righteousness, the opposition to
the demons of Afharmazd’s opinion, and also much other informa-
tion in the same section.

‘The middle division has 102 sections, treatises on spiritual and
worldly diligence, the leadership of the diligent, and their mighty


[5] Q


226 BAHMAN YAST.


26. ‘And Néryésang proceeds, wth Srdsh the
righteous, from the good Kakad-i-Daitik! to Kang-
dez, which the illustrious Siyavakhsh formed, and
cries out from it thus: “Walk forth, O illustrious
Péshyétant ! O Aitrd-miy4n son of Vistasp, glory of
the Kay4ns, just restorer of the religion! walk forth
to these countries of Iran which I, Atharmazd,
created! restore again the throne of sovereignty of
the religion !”

27. ‘Those spirits move.on, and they propitiate
them; with holy-water the illustrious Péshydétant
celebrates the Dvazdah-hémast, with a hundred and
fifty righteous who are disciples of Péshyétand, in
black marten fur, and they have garments as it
were of the good spirit. 28. They walk up with
the words: “Htmat, hikht, havarst?,” and consecrate


means, all former deeds of righteousness; righteousness kindling
the resolution is the reward/of merit, each for each, and is adapted
by it for that of which it is said that ¢# zs the Haddkht which is the
maintaining of righteousness, so that they may make righteous-
ness more abiding in the body of a man.

‘The last dvzszon has nineteen sections of trusty remedies, that
is, remedies whose utterance aloud by the faithful is a chief resource
among the creatures of God; also the nature of sayings full of
humility, well-favoured, most select, avd adapted for that 0f which
it is said that I reverence that chief, the excellent and eminent
Had6kht, of which they trust in the sustaining strength of every
word of Zarattist. Perfect is the excellence of righteousness (Av.
ashem vohti vahistem ast?).’

According to tradition three chapters of this Nask are still extant,
being the Yast fragments XXI, XXII of Westergaard’s edition of
the Avesta Texts; but they do not correspond to any part of the
description in the Dinkard. For a description of Dvazdah-hémast
see Chap. II, 59.

1 See Bund. XII, 7.

? That is, ‘good thoughts, good words, and good deeds,’ a
formula often uttered when commencing an important action.


CHAPTER Ill, 26=31. 227


the fire of the waters; wz¢h the illustrious Haddkht
they bless me, Attharmazd, with the archangels ;
and after that it demolishes one-third of the opposi-
tion. 29. And the illustrious Péshyétand walks
forth, with the hundred and fifty men who wear
black marten fur, and they celebrate the rituals
(yasnan) of the Gadman-hémand (“glorious”) fire,
which they call the Réshané-kerp (“luminous
form”), which is established at the appointed place
(dat6-g4s), the triumphant ritual of the Fréba fire,
Horvadad, axd Amerédad, and the ceremonial (ya-
zisn) with his priestly co-operation; they arrange
and pray over the sacred twigs; and the ritual of
Horvadad aud Amerédad, in the chapter of the
code of religious formulas (nirangistan)? demo-
lishes three-thirds of the opposition. 30. Péshyé-
tani son of Vistasp walks forth, with the assistance
of the Fréba je, the fire Gtsndsp, and the fire
Birzin-Mitré *, to the great idol-temples, the abode
of the demons‘; and the wicked evil spirit, Wrath
with infuriate spear®, and all demons and fiends,
evil races and wizards, arrive at the deepest adyss
of hell; azd those idol-temples are extirpated by the
exertions of the illustrious Péshydtand.

31. ‘And I, the creator. Atharmazd, come to
Mount Haikairyd4d®* with the archangels, and I issue


1 See Bund. XVII, 5, 6. This appears to be an allusion to the
removal of the sacred fire by Vistasp, from the ‘ glorious ’ moun-
tain in Khvarizem to the ‘ shining’ mountain in Kavulistan.

aesee ap, 11.37.

.§ Regarding these three manifestations of the sacred fire, see
Bund. XVII, 3-9, SZS. XI, 8-10.

* Supplying the word séd44n, ‘the demons,’ in accordance with
§§ 36, 37; there being clearly some word omitted in K2o0.

® See Chap. II, 36. 6 Hiigar the lofty in Bund. XII, 2, 5.


Q 2


228 BAHMAN YAST.


orders to the archangels that they should speak to
the angels of the spiritual existences thus: “Proceed
to the assistance of the illustrious Péshydtant! eee:
Mitré of the vast cattle-pastures, Srdésh the vigorous,
Rashn the just, Vahram? the mighty, Astad the vic-
torious, avd the glory of the religion of the Mazda-
yasnians, the stimulator of religious formulas (ni-
rang), the arranger of the world, proceed? to the
assistance of the illustrious Péshyétand, through the
order of which I, the creator, have just written °.

33. ‘Out of the demons of gloomy race the evil
spirit cries to Mitré of the vast cattle-pastures thus:
“Stay above in truth 4, thou Mitré of the vast cattle-
pastures!”

34. ‘And then Mitrd of the vast cattle- posttees
cries thus: “ Of these nine thousand years’ support,
which during its beginning produced Dahak of evil
religion, Frastyav of Tar, avd Alexander® the Ra-
man, the period of one thousand years of those
leathern-belted demons with dishevelled hair is a
more than moderate reign to produce ®,”

35. ‘The wicked evil spirit becomes confounded
when he heard this; Mitré of the vast cattle-pas-
tures will smite Wrath of the infuriate spear with


* The fact that the angel Vahram goes in his spiritual form to
the assistance of Péshydtanfi, rather militates against the idea that
he also goes in the form of Vahram the Vargavand.

* This verb is omitted by mistake in K2o.

> Literally, ‘arrive at the writing.’

* Or, ‘stand up with honesty !’

° The latter two names are here written Frasav and Alasandar.

* From this it appears that the writer expected the evil reign of
the unbelievers to last a thousand years, that is, till the end of
Hfishédar’s millennium, about a. p. 1393-1635, which corresponds
very closely with the reign of the great Shah ’Abbas.


CHAPTER III, 32-39. 220:


stupefaction; avd the wicked evil spirit flees, with
the miscreations and evil progeny he flees back to
the darkest recess of hell. 36. And Mitréd of the
vast cattle-pastures cries to the illustrious Péshyé-
tand thus: “Extirpate azd utterly destroy the idol-
temples, the abode of the demons! proceed to these
countries of Iran which I, Atharmazd, created!
restore again the throne of sovereignty of the
religion over the wicked! when they see thee they
will be terrified.”

37. ‘And the illustrious Péshyétanfi advances, and
the fire Frdéba, the fire Gdsnasp, and the triumphant
fire Barzin-Mitré will smite the fiend of excessive
strength ; he will extirpate the idol-temples that are
the abode of demons; and they celebrate the cere-
monial (yazisn), arrange the sacred twigs, solemnize
the Dvazdah-hémast, and praise me, Atharmazd,
with the archangels; this is what I foretell’, 38.
The illustrious Péshyétanti walks forth to these
countries of Iran which I, Athharmazd, created, to
the Arvand and Véh river?; when the wicked see
him they will be terrified, those of the progeny of
gloom and those not worthy.

39. ‘And regarding that Vahram the Vargavand it
is declared that he comes forth in full glory, fixes
upon Vandid-khim ? (‘a curbed temper”), and Zaveng
intrusted zm with the seat of mobadship of the


1 Or, perhaps, ‘what I said before,’ being already narrated in
§ 29 as performed by Péshydtanti before advancing far into Iran.

2 The Tigris and the Oxus—Indus (see §§ 5, 21).

8 Probably a title of Péshyétanfi; a more obvious translation
would be, ‘restrains a curbed temper, and is intrusted,’ &c., but
it is hardly probable that the warrior prince Vahram could become
a priest. It is Vahram’s business to restore the empire, leaving
Péshyétanti to restore the religion.


230 ~ BAHMAN VAST.


mobads?, and the seat of true explanation of the
religion, he restores again these countries of Iran
which I, Atharmazd, created; and he drives? away
from the world covetousness, want, hatred, wrath,
lust, envy, and wickedness. 40. And the wolf
period goessaway, and the sheep period comes on;
they establish the fire Fréba, the fire Gtisndsp, and
the fire Barzin-Mitré again at their proper places,
and they will properly supply the firewood and
incense ; and the wicked evil spirit becomes con-
founded and unconscious, with the demons and the
progeny of gloom. 41. And so the illustrious Péshyé6-
tani speaks thus: “Let the demon be destroyed,
and the witch be destroyed! let the fiendishness
and vileness of the demons be destroyed! and let
the gloomy progeny of the demons be destroyed!
The glory* of the religion of the Mazdayasnians
prospers, and let it prosper! let the family* of the
liberal and just, who are doers of good deeds,
prosper! and let the throne of the religion and
sovereignty have a good restorer!” 42. Forth
comes the illustrious Péshyétand, forth he comes
with a hundred and fifty men of the disciples who
wear black marten fur, and they take the throne of
their own religion and sovereignty.’

43. Atharmazd said to Zarattst the Spitdman:
‘This is what I foretell, when it is the end of thy
millennium it is the beginning of ¢Aat of Hishédar 5,


ee
* The supreme high-priesthood, or primacy.
? Merely a guess, as the verb varafséd is difficult to understand.
’ K2o has nismé, ‘soul,’ but the very-similarly written gadman,
‘glory,’ is a more likely reading here (see § 32).
* Reading didak instead of rfidak, as in Chap. II, 47.
° The writer having detailed the supernatural means employed
for restoring the religion, now returns to the birth of Hashédar


CHAPTER III, 40-46. 227


44. Regarding Hishédar it is declared that he will
be born in 1600}, and at thirty years of age he
comes to a conference with me, Aftharmazd, and
receives the religion. 45. When he comes away
from the conference he cries to the sun with the
swift horse?, thus: “Stand still!”

46. ‘The sun with the swift horse stands still ten


(§ 13) for the purpose of mentioning some of his actions, and
making the chronology of his millennium rather more clear.
Nothing is said here about his miraculous birth, the details of
which are given in the seventh book of the Dinkard very much
as they are found in the Persian Rivayats. The Dinkard states
that thirty years before the end of Zarattist’s millennium a young
maiden bathing in certain water, and drinking it, becomes preg-
nant through the long-preserved seed of Zarattist (see Bund.
XXXII, 8, 9), and subsequently gives birth to Hfishédar.

1 There seems to be no other rational way of understanding this
number than by supposing that it represents the date of Hfashé-
dar’s birth, counting from the beginning of Zaratfst’s millennium.
According to this view Hfishédar was to be born in the six hun-
dredth year of his own millennium, and not at its beginning, as
§ 13 seems to imply, nor nearly thirty years earlier, as the Dinkard
asserts. As the beginning of his millennium may be fixed about
A.D. 593-635 (see note on § rr), the writer must have expected
him to be born about a.p. 1193-1235; a time which was probably
far in the future when he was writing. And as Vahraém the Var-
gavand was to be born when Hfishédar was thirty years of age
(compare §§ 14, 44), and was to march into Iran at the age of
thirty (§ 17), the great conflict of the nations (§§ 8, 19-22) was
expected to begin about a.p. 1253-1295, and to continue till near
the end of the millennium, about a.p. 1593-1635, when Péshy6-
tanfi was expected to appear (§ 51) and to restore the ‘good’
religion (§§ 26, 37, 42). An enthusiastic Parsi interpreter of
prophecy might urge that though this period did not witness*any
revival of his religion, it did witness a restoration of the Persian
empire under Shah ’Abbds, and also the first beginning of British
power in India, which has been so great a benefit to the scanty
remnant of his fellow-countrymen.

2 The usual epithet of the sun in the Avesta.


232 BAHMAN YAST. S


days and nights; and when this happens all the
people of the world abide by the good religion of
the Mazdayasnians. 47. Mitr6 of the vast cattle-
pastures cries to Htshédar, sow of Zarattist, thus :
“© Hiishédar, restorer of the true religion! cry to
the sun with the swift horse thus: ‘Move on!’ for it
is dark in the regions of Arzdh and Savah, Frada-
dafsh and Vidadafsh, Vorttbarst and Vortgarst, and
the illustrious Khvaniras 1.”

48. ‘Hashédar son of Zarattst cries, to the sun he
cries, thus: “Move on!” 49. The sun with the swift
horse moves on, avd Vargavand? and all mankind
fully believe in the good religion of the Mazda-
yasnians.’ |

50. Attharmazd spoke thus: ‘O Zaratist the
Spitaman! this is what I foretell, that this one
brings the creatures back to their proper state.
51. When it is near the end of the millennium
Péshyétant *® son of Vistasp comes into notice, who
is a Kayan that advances triumphantly; and those
enemies who relied upon fiendishness, such as the
Tiark, Arab, and Rdman, and the vile ones who
control* the Iranian sovereign with insolence and
oppression and enmity to the sovereignty, destroy
the fire and make the religion weak; and they con-
vey their power and success to him and every one
who accepts the law and religion willingly; if he


1 The seven regions of the earth (see Bund. XI, 2, 3).

2 It is just possible to read, ‘the sun with the swift horse, the
splendid, moves on, and all mankind fully believe, &c. But if the
reading in the text be correct it effectually disposes of the idea of
Vahram being an incarnation of the angel, as an angel would
require no miracle to make him believe in the religion.

5 See §§ 25-30.

* This verb is doubtful, as most of the word is torn off in K20.


CHAPTER III, 47-55. 233


accept it unwillingly the law and religion ever destroy
hime* till it is the end of the whole millennium.

52. ‘And, afterwards, when the millennium of
Hiashédar-mah comes, through Hishédar-m4h ? the
creatures become more progressive, and he utterly
destroys the fiend of serpent origin ?; azd Péshyé-
tand son of Vistasp becomes, in like manner, high-
priest and primate (rad) of the world4. 53. In that
millennium of Hiashédar-mah mankind become so
versed in medicine, and keep and bring physic and
remedies so much in use, that when they are con-
fessedly at the point of death they do not thereupon
die, nor when they smite and slay ¢hem with the
sword and knife®.

54. ‘Afterwards, one begs a gift of azy description
out of the allowance of heretics, axd owing to
depravity and heresy they do not give z#, 55. And
Aharman rises through that spite ° on to the moun-


1 This appears to be the meaning, but the latter part of the.
sentence is not very clear.

2 See Bund. XXXII, 8. The name is written Khfiirshéd-mah
in Keo. The Dinkard gives the same account of the miraculous
birth of Hfishédar-mah as of the first Hfishédar (see note on § 43);
it also repeats the legend of the sun standing still, but for the
longer period of twenty days; all which details are also found in
the Persian Rivayats.

8 Av. azgifithra; such creatures are mentioned in Ardavahist
Yt. 8, 10, 11, 15; but Azg-i Dahak, ‘the destructive serpent,’ is
probably meant here (see §§ 56-61).

* As in the previous millennium, According to the chronology
deduced from § 44 the millennium of Hfishédar-m4h, which corres-
ponds to the twelfth and last millennium of Bund. XXXIV, is now
near the middle of its third century.

5 The sentence is either defective or obscure, but this appears
to be its meaning.

6 The evil spirit is encouraged, by an act of religious toleration,
apparently, to recommence his manceuvres for injuring mankind.


234 BAHMAN YAST.


tain of Dimavand?, which is the direction of Béva-
rasp, and shouts thus: “ Now it is nine thousand
years, and Frédtin is not living; why do you not
rise up, although these thy fetters are not re-
moved, when? this world is full of people, and they
have brought them from the enclosure which Yim
formed 3?”

56. ‘After that apostate shouts like this, axd be-
cause of it, Az-i Dahak* stands up before zm, dut,
through fear of the likeness’ of Frédin in the body
of Frédfin, he does not first remove those fetters
_and stake from zs trunk until Aharman removes
them. 57. And the vigour of Az-i Dahak increases,
the fetters being removed from zs trunk, and his
impetuosity remains; he swallows down the apos-
tate on the spot®, and rushing into the world to
perpetrate sin, he commits innumerable grievous
sins; he swallows down one-third of mankind,
cattle, sheep, and other creatures of Atharmazd; he
smites the water, fire, and vegetation, and commits
grievous sin.

58. ‘And, afterwards, the water, fire, and vegeta-
tion stand before Atharmazd the lord in lamenta-
tion, and make this complaint: “Make Frédin alive
again! so that he may destroy Az-i Dahak; for if
thou, O Attharmazd! dost not do this, we cannot


* Here written Dimbhavand (see Bund. XI, 31).

* Reading amat, ‘ when,’ instead of ye which’ (see the note
on Bund. I, 7).

* The var-i Yim kard (see Bund. XXIX, 14). The men and
creatures who are supposed to be preserved in this enclosure are
expected to replenish the world whenever it has been desolated by
wars and oppression.

* Whose surname is Bévardsp (see Bund. XXIX, 9).

° The Paz. MSS. end here.


CHAPTER III, 56-63. De


exist in the world; the fire says thus: I wz// not
heat; and the water says thus: I w// not flow.”

59. ‘And then I, Atharmazd the creator, say to

Srésh and Nérydésang the angel: “Shake the body
of Keresasp the SAman, till he rises up!”
60. ‘Then Srésh and Nérydésang the angel go to
Keresadsp1; three times they utter a cry, and the
fourth time Sam rises up with triumph, and goes to
meet Az-i Dahak. 61. And? SAém does not listen
to his words, and the triumphant club strikes him
on the head, and smites and‘kills Az; afterwards,
desolation and adversity depart from this world,
while I make a beginning of the millennium *. 62,
Then Sdéshyans* makes the creatures again pure,
and the resurrection and future existence occur.’

63. May the end be in peace, pleasure, and joy,
by the will of God (yazd4n6)! so may it be! even
more so may it be!


1 Also called Sam in this same section; he was lying in a trance
in the plain of Pésyansai (see Bund. XXIX, 7-9).

2 Reading afas instead of minas (see Chap. II, 4, note 2).

3 The thirteenth millennium, or first of the future existence,
when Sdshyans appears. The Dinkard and the Persian Riva-
yats recount the same legends regarding the miraculous birth of
Sdshyans, and of the sun standing still (for thirty days), as they do
with regard to Htishédar (see note on § 43).

# See Bund. XXXIL 8.


SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST


OR


trie PROPER AND “IMPROPER.


AN OLD


PAREAY LC ORIVAVAL


OR


MISCELLANY OF TRADITIONAL MEMORANDA.


OBSERVATIONS.


1-5. (The same as on p. 2.)

6. Abbreviations used are :—Af. for Afring4n. Av. for Avesta.
AV. for the Book of Arda-Viraf, ed. Hoshangji and Haug. Bund.
for Bundahis, as translated in this volume. B. Yt. for Bahman
Yast, as translated in this volume: Chald. for Chaldee. Farh.
Okh. for Farhang-i Ofm-khadfk, ed. Hoshangji and Haug. Haug’s
Essays, for Essays on the Sacred Language, Writings, and Reli-
gion of the Parsis, by Martin Haug, 2nd edition. Huz. for Huz-
_varis. Lev. for Leviticus. Mkh. for Mainyé-i-khard, ed. West.
Nir. for Ntrangistan. Pahl. for Pahlavi. Paz. for Pazand. Pers.
for Persian. Sls. for Shayast la-shayast, as here translated. SZS.
for Selections of Zad-sparam, as translated in this volume. W. for
Westergaard. Vend. for Vendidad, ed. Spiegel. Visp. for Vispa-
rad, ed. Spiegel. Yas. for Yasna, ed. Spiegel. Yt. for Yast, ed.
Westergaard.

4. The manuscripts mentioned in the notes are :—

Bag (written a.p. 1679), a Rivayat MS., No. 29 of the Univer-
sity Library at Bombay.

K2o (about 500 years old), No. 20 in the University Library at
Kopenhagen.

Ly, Lig, L22, &c. are MSS. No. 7; 15, 22, &c. in the India
Office Library at London.

Ms (written a.p. 1723), No. 5 of the Haug Collection in the
State Library at Munich.

M6 (written a. p. 1397), No. 6 of the same Collection.

Mg (modern), No. 9 of the same Collection.

TD (written about a.p. 1530), a MS. of the Bundahis belonging
to Mobad Tehmuras Dinshawji Anklesaria at Bombay.


SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


Part I1—The Original Treatise.


Cuapter I.


o. In the name of God (yazdan) and the good
creation may there be the good health, long life,
and abundant wealth of all the good and the right-
doers specially for him whose writing I am}.

1. As revealed by the Avesta, it is said in the
Vendidad? that these seven degrees (pAyak) of sin


1 See the note on B. Yt. I, o.

2 Referring to Vend. IV, 54-114, where seven classes of assault
and their respective punishments are detailed. In our text eight
classes of sin are named, although only seven degrees are men-
tioned; the second and third classes being apparently arranged
together, as one degree of sin in§ 2. Or the inconsistency may
have arisen from the addition of the Farm4n, a class of sin or crime
not mentioned in the Vendidad, unless, indeed, it be the farman
spokhtan6, ‘neglect of commandment’ (referring probably to
priest's commands), of Pahl. Vend. VI, 15. The other seven
classes are thus described in Pahl. Vend. IV, 54-57, 79, 85, 93,
99, 106 :—

‘By the man whose weapon (or blow) is upraised for striking
a man, that which is his Agerept i is thus implanted in Azm. When
it has moved forward—that is, he makes 2# advance—7z is thus his
Avéirist, that is, Avdirfst is implanted in him and the Agerept
merges into it, some say that it does not exist. When he comes
on to him wth thoughts of malice—that is, he places a hand upon
him—7‘ is thus his Ared(is, that is, Aredfs is implanted in him and
the Avdirist merges into it, some say that it does not exist. dé
the fifth Aredas the man even becomes a Tanapthar ; /hings at


240 SHAVAST LA-SHAYAST.


are mentioned in revelation, whzch are Farman,
Agerept, Avodirist!, Aredtis, Khor, Bazi, Yat, and
Tandpthar®, 2. A Farm4n is the weight of four


sunrise (avar-khfirshédith) and in the forenoon (£aitth = £astth)
are no more apart. . . . Whoever inflicts the Aredtis blow on a
man 7 zs one-fifth of a wound (résh). . . . Whoever inflicts that
which is a cruel Khér (‘hurt’) on a man 7 zs one-fourth of a
wound. . . . Whoever inflicts that which is a bleeding Khér on
a man 7 zs one-third of a wound. . . . Whoever shall give a
man a bone-breaking Khér 77 zs half a wound. . . . Whoever strikes
aman the blow which puts him out of consciousness shall give a
whole wound.’

This description does not mention Bazét and Yat, unless they
be the two severer kinds of Khér; but Baza? occurs in Pahl.Vend.
IV, 115, V, 107, XIII, 38, though Yat seems not to be mentioned
in the Vendidad. Aredfs occurs again in Pahl. Vend. III, 151,
and Khéor-in Pahl. Vend. III, 48, XIII, 38, and Yas. LVI, iv, 2.

1 Also written avOtrist, avirist, aivirist, avékirist, and avakGrist in
other places.

* Five of these names are merely slight alterations of the Av.
agerepta, avaoirista, aredus, vara, and tanuperetha (pere-
tétanu or peshétanu). The last seven degrees are also noticed
in a very obscure passage in Farh. Okh. pp. 36, 37 (correcting the
text from the old MSS. M6 and K2o) as follows :—

‘Agerept, “seized,” is that when they shall take up a weapon
for smiting an innocent person ; Avdirist, “turning,” is that when
one turns the weapon upon an innocent ferson ; when through
sinfulness ove lays the weapon ona sinner the name is Aredts;
for whatever reaches the source of life the name is Khér; ome
explains Bazat as “smiting,” and YAt as “ going to,” and the soul
of man ought to be withstanding, as a counterstroke is the penalty
for a Yat when it Aas been so much away from the abode of life.
Ln like manner Agerept, Av6irist, Aredis, Khér, Bazat, and Yat
are also called good works, zwh7ch are performed in like propor-
tions, and are called by the names of weights and measures 2” the
same manner. Of peshdtanus tanfim pairyéité the meaning is
a Tanaptihar; as they call a good work of three hundred a Tan4-
pthar, on account of the three hundred like proportions of the
same kind, the meaning of its name, Tan4ptlhar, thereupon enters
into sin, . . . A Khér is just that description of wound from which


CHAPTER 1; 3, ° 241


stirs, and each stir is four dirhams (gdgan)? ; of
Agerept and Avédirist that which is least is a
scourging (taz4n6), and the amount of them which
was specially ¢hat which is most is said éo de one
dirham?; an Aredds is thirty s¢évs*; a Khér is
sixty stirs; a Bazai is ninety stirs; a Yat is a hun-
dred and eighty stirs; and a Tandapthar is three
hundred stirs‘,


the blood comes, irrespective of where, how, how much, azd where-
with it is inflicted ; c# 7s that which is a wound from the beginning,
and that which will result therefrom.’

The application of this scale of offences is, however, not con-
fined to these particular forms of assault, but has been extended
(since the Avesta was compiled) to all classes of sins, and also to
the good works which are supposed to counterbalance them.

’ The dirham has been variously estimated, at different times,
as a weight of forty-five to sixty-seven grains, but perhaps fifty
grains may be taken as the meaning of the text, and the stir may,
therefore, be estimated at 200 grains. The Greeks used both these
weights, which they called dpayun and orarnp.

2 The amounts of these first three degrees of sin are differently
stated in other places (see Chaps. XI, 2, XVI, 1-3, 5). It is diffi-
cult to understand why the amounts of Agerept and Avdirist should
here be stated as less than that of Farman, and some Parsis, there-
fore, read vihast (as an irregular form of vist, ‘ twenty’) instead
of vés-ast, ‘is most,’ so that they may translate the amount as
‘twenty dirhams ;’ but to obtain this result they would have to
make further alterations in the Pahlavi text. In a passage quoted
by Spiegel (in his Traditionelle Literatur der Parsen, p. 88) from
the Rivayat MS. Pra, in the Bibliotheque Nationale at Paris, it is
stated that Farman is seven stirs, Agerept twelve stirs, and Avdi-
rist fifteen stirs, Another Rivayat makes the Farman eight stirs.

§ All MSS. have Aredfis si 30, ‘an Aredts is thiity (30),’ leaving
it doubtful whether dirhams or stirs are meant; and the same
mode of writing is adopted in Chap. XI, 2.

4 All authorities agree about the amounts of the last five degrees
of sin. These amounts are the supposed weights of the several
sins in the golden scales of the angel Rashnfi (see AV. V, 5), when
the soul is called to account, for its actions during life, after the


[5] R


242 SHAVAST LA-SHAYAST.


on ee ee ae


3. In the administration of the primitive faith !
there are some who have been of different opinions


third night after death (see Mkh. I, 114-122). Its sins are sup-
posed to be then weighed against its good works, which are esti-
mated by the same scale of degrees (see the passage already quoted
from Farh. Okh. in p. 240, note 2), and it is sent direct to heaven, or
hell, or an intermediate place, according as the good works or sins
preponderate, or are both equal. In the Avesta of the Vendidad,
however, whence these degrees are derived, we find them forming
merely a graduated scale of assaults, extending from first lifting
the hand to smite even unto manslaughter ; and for each of these
seven degrees of assault a scale of temporal punishments is pre-
scribed, according to the number of times the offence has been
committed. ‘These punishments consist of a uniform series of
lashes with a horse-whip or scourge, extending from a minimum
of five lashes to a maximum of two hundred (see Vend. IV,
58-114); each degree of assault commencing at a different point
on the scale of punishments for the first offence, and gradually
rising through the scale with each repetition of the offence, so that
the more aggravated assaults attain the maximum punishment by
means of a smaller number of repetitions. Thus, the punishments
prescribed for Agerepta, from the first to the eighth offence, are z,
10, 15, 30, 50, 70, 90, and 200 lashes respectively; those for Ava-
Oirista, from the first to the seventh offence, extend on the same
scale from 10 to 200 lashes; those for Aredus, from the first to
the sixth offence, are from 15 to 200 lashes; those for a bruised
hurt (Zvara), from the first to the fifth offence, are from 30 to 200
lashes; those for a bleeding hurt, from the first to the fourth
offence, are from 50 to 200 lashes; those for a bone-breaking
hurt, from the first to the third offence, are from 70 to 200 lashes ;
and those for a hurt depriving of consciousness or life, for the
first and second offences, are 90 and 200 lashes. The maximum
punishment of 200 lashes is prescribed only when the previous
offences have not been atoned for, and it is to be inflicted in all
such cases, however few or trifling the previous assaults have
been.

1 In M6 pérydédkéshth, but pdryédkésh4n, ‘ of those of the
primitive faith, in K2o0; from the Av. paoiryédkaésha of Yas,
I, 47, Ill, 65, IV, 53, XXII, 33, Fravardin Yt. 0, 90, 156, Af.
Rapithwin, 2. It is a term applied to what is considered as the


CHAPTER I, 3. 243


about it, for Gdgésasp! spoke otherwise than the
teaching ? (£4stak) of Ataré-A tharmazd3, and Sésh-
yans * otherwise than the teaching of Ataré-frobag
Nosai®, and Méadék-m4h ® otherwise than the teaching
of Gdgésasp’, and Afarg® otherwise than the teaching


true Mazdayasnian religion in all ages, both before and after the
time of Zarattist.

* One of the old commentators whose opinions are frequently
quoted in Pahlavi books, as in Chap. II, 74, 82, 119, Pahl. Vend. III,
48, 138, 151, 1V, 35, V, 14, 121, VI, 9, 64, VII, 6, 136, VIII, 64,
236, XV, 35, 48, 56, 67, XVI, 5, XVIII, 98, 124, and thirteen
times in the Nirangistan. His name is sometimes written Gésasp
(as it is here both in M6 and Kzo) and sometimes Gégésdsp.

? Probably a written exposition or commentary is meant.

° This commentator is mentioned once in the Nirangistan as
| Atard Atharmazdan.

* This commentator is mentioned in Chaps. II, 56, 74, 80, 118,
119, III, 13, VI, 4, 5; also in Pahl. Vend. III, 64, 69, 151, IV, 6,
Ness, 60, 107, £22,146, 153,VL, 15, 64;-73, VIL, 4, 136,168,
N28) 66, 303, 1X, 184, XL 20, XVI,.7, 10, 17, 20-22, 27;
XVIII, 98, and forty-six times in the Nirangistan. He was a name-
sake of the last of the future apostles and sons of Zarattist (see
Bund. XXXII, 8), and his name is often written Sdshans and read
Saoshyés or Sdsyds by Pazand writers.

5 This commentator is mentioned once in the Nirangistan, and
may probably be the Atar6-frébag of B. Yt. I, 7; compare also
Nésai Barg-Mitré, the name of another commentator, in Chap.
VIII, 18.

6 This commentator is mentioned in Chaps. II, 1, 11, 12, 89, V,
5, 6; also in Pahl. Vend. III, 151, V, 6, 58, 107, VIII, 48, 110,
IX, 132, XIII, 99, XIV, 37, and four times in the Nirangistan.
His name is sometimes written Médyék-mah or Maidék-mah, and
he was a namesake of Zarattist’s cousin and first disciple (see
Bund. XXXII, 2, 3). The Vagarkard-i Dintk professes to have
been compiled by Médydk-m4h, but there appear to have been
several priests of this name (see Bund. XXXIII, 1).

7 Gésasp in M6.

8 This commentator is mentioned in Chaps. II, 2, 64, 73, 88,
115, V, 5, 6; also jn Pahl. Vend. III, 48, 115, WV, 0, 14, 22503

Re


244 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


of Séshyans. 4. And all those of the primitive
faith rely upon these six’ teachings, and there are
some who rely more weakly and some more strongly
upon some of them. .


146, VI, 9, VII, 6, 61, 93, 136, VIII, 48, 64, 110, 250, IX, 132,
XIII, 99, XIV, 14, 37, XIX, 84, Pahl. Yas. LXIV, 37, once in
Farh. Okh., and thirty-eight times in the Nirangistan.

* Both MSS. have ‘three,’ although four teachings and six
commentators are mentioned in the previous section, and a fifth
‘teaching’ is mentioned in Chap. II, 2. The original reading
was, more probably ‘six’ than ‘four, as a Pahlavi ‘six’ requires
merely the omission of a cipher to become ‘ three,’ whereas a Pah-
lavi ‘four’ must be altered to produce the same blunder.

Several other commentators are mentioned in Pahlavi books, such
as Ataré-p4d, son of Dad-farukh, twice in the Nirangistan; Azdd-
mard nine times in Nir.; Baréshand AGharmazd once in Nir.; Dad
Attharmazd in B. Yt. I, 7, III, 16, Pahl. Yas. X, 57, XI, 22; Dad-
farukh in Pahl. Vend. V, 112, VI, 64, and twice in Nir.; Dadi-véh
seventeen times in Nir.; Farukhé thrice in Nir.; Kiratand-bigéd
in Pahl. Vend. V, 80, VI, 15, IX, 184, XIII, 20, he is called the Kir-
mAanik in Pahl. Vend. IV, 35, and Dasttir Hoshangji thinks his name
is merely a variant of the next; Kfishtand-bfigéd in Sls. II, 57, 81,
118, VI, 6, VIII, 17, Pahl. Vend. III, 64, 69, IV, 6, V, 48, VI, 53,
64, 73, VIII, 28, XVI, 17, 21, 22, 27, and twenty-two times in
Nir. ; Mah-Atharmazd in Pahl. Vend. VII, 82 ; Mah-gésaspd, Mah-
gdsdspo, Mah-géspé, or Mah-vasp in Pahl. Yas. IX, 33, Pahl. Vend.
III, 138, and ten times in Nir.; Mahvand-d4d or M4h-vindad in’
BY (1M, 3, Pahl: Yas. IX, 33, X57, XI, 22,00) 27; Mard-bid
in Sls, II, 86, and twice in Nir., where he is called the son of DAd-
gun; Nérydsang in Sls. VIII, 13, Pahl. Vend. V, 22; Nikhsha-
pihar, or Nishapfihar in Pahl. Vend. III, rg1, V, 112, ee
VIII, 64, XVI, ‘10, 17, AV.I, 35, and twenty-four times in Nir. ;
Nosai Barz-Mitré in Sls. VIII, 18; Partk or Pirtk in Pahl. Vend.
III, 138, V, 14, 134, VII, 82, 93, VIII, 64, and once in Nir, ;
Réshan or Réshand. (which, as the Sikand-gfim4ni states, was the
name of a commentary written by Réshan son of Atar6-frébag) in
Sls. II, 39, 86, 107, B. Yt. III, 3, Pahl. Yas. IX, 5,14, Pahl. Vend.
Ill, 48, V, 112, 134, 176, VII, 93, XVII, 11, and eleven times in
Nir.; disciples of Vakht-afrtdé (possibly the Bakht-Afrtd of Sls. XX,
11, B. Yt. I, 7) are mentioned once in Nir.; Vand-Afiharmazd in Sls.
Il, 2, 6, 44, XIV, 5, Pahl. Vend. VI, 73; and Véh-dést once in


CHAPTERS I, 4—II, 2. 245


CuHarrTer II.


1. For in the third fargard (‘chapter’) of the Ven-
didad of Méadék-mah ! z¢ is declared that when life is
resigned without effort ?, at the time when the life
departs, when a dog is tied to his foot, even then
the Nasfs* rushes upon it, and afterwards, when
seen by it, the Nastis is destroyed by it. 2. This is
~ where z¢ zs stated which is the dog which destroys
the Nasis*, the shepherd’s dog, the village-dog, the
blood-hound, the slender hound®, and the riktnik®;


the Nirangistan. It must, however, be observed that the reading
of some of these names is very uncertain,

1 Alluding probably to Méd6ék-mah’s complete commentary on
the Vendidad (now no longer extant), as the commentary on Pahl.
Vend. III, 48, which treats of Sag-did or dog-gaze, does not men-
tion Méd6k-mah or any of the details described here in the text ;
these details, however, are to be found in Pahl. Vend. VII, 4.

? Reading amat bard zér gan dad. This phrase occurs
only in M6 (as a marginal note) and in the text of its descendants.
Assuming that bara may be a miswriting of pavan (see p. 176,
note 5), we might read amat pavan zor shfyad, ‘when he shall
wash with holy-water.’

° The ‘corruption’ which is supposed to enter a corpse shortly
after death, whence it issues in the form of a fiend and seizes upon
any one who touches the corpse, unless it has been destroyed, or
driven away, by the gaze of a dog, as mentioned in the text (com-
pare Vend. VIII, 38-48). The carcase of a dog is considered
equally contagious with the corpse of a human being, and when
the fiend of corruption (Nastis or Nas of Bund. XXVIII, 29) has
seized upon any one, it can be driven out only by a long and
troublesome form of purification described in Vend. VIII, r11-
228, IX, 4-117.

4 This statement is now to be found in Pahl. Vend. VII, 4.

5 See Bund. XIV, 19. The Persian Rivayats of Kamah Bahrah
and KAts Kaman (quoted in Bzg) describe these dogs as ‘the
shepherd’s dog, the house-dog, the strange or tame (gharib) dog,


and the puppy.’ *
® Probably the Av. sukuruna of Vend. V, 100, XIII, 48, which


246 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.
and as to the rikdinik there have been divers
opinions, as Vand-Atharmazd! asserted, from the
teaching of Afarg, that it does not destroy 74. 3.
The dog destroys the Nasds at the time when it
sees the flesh, and when it sees the hair or nails it
does not destroy z#%. 4. A blind dog also destroys
zt at the time when it places a paw ® on the corpse ;
and when it places z# upon the hair or nails it does
not destroy 7#*. 5. The birds which destroy the
Nastis are three: the mountain kite, the black crow,
and the vulture®; the bird, moreover, destroys z¢ at
the time when z¢s shadow falls upon it; when it sees
it in the water, a mirror, or a looking-glass, it does
not destroy z/°,


is translated by hfikar or hfikfr in the Pahlavi version. This
fifth kind of dog is called ‘the blind (kfr) dog’ in the Persian
Rivadyats; but Pahl. Vend. VII, 4 asserts that ‘Sdéshans said the
riikunik also destroys it, and then speaks of the blind dog as
in § 4.

* See the note on Chap. I, 4.

* This is also stated in Pahl. Vend. III, 138.

® See Pahl. Vend. VII, 4.

* The Persian Rivayats say this is because the Nastis is con-
cealed beneath the hair and nails (compare Vend. VII, 70).

° These are the birds ‘created for devouring dead matter’
(see Bund. XIX, 25). Pahl. Vend. VII, 4 substitutes an eagle
(dalman) for the vulture.

* This sentence is probably defective, as the last clause evi-
dently refers to the dog’s gaze (see Pahl. Vend. III, 138), and not
to the bird’s shadow; the rule, however, is applicable to both.
Thus the Persian Rivayats state that if the bird’s shadow falls upon
the hair or the nails of the corpse, or if the bird’s shadow, or the
dog's gaze falls upon a corpse in the water, or upon its reflection
ina mirror, the Nastts is not destroyed. Dastfir Jamaspji is of
opinion that the utility of the bird’s shadow is intended to apply
only to cases of death in uninhabited places, where a dog is not
procurable. As all three birds are such as feed upon corpses, it
seems probable that the rule as to their utility was intended to pre-


CHAPTER II, 3-7. 247


6. Vand-Atharmazd said, where a pregnant woman
is to be carried by two men}, both are to be cleansed
by the Bareshnim ceremony?, and the head of the
corpse, when they carry it away, is to be set towards
the Dakhma*. 7. And on account of contamination


vent any neglect of corpses found in wild places, where some of
these birds would be sure to approach and let their shadows fall
upon the dead, after which the finder of the corpse would suppose
that the Nasfis was destroyed or driven away, and the corpse safer
to approach.

1 This is an exceptional case, when not more than two men
are available; the usual custom (see Chap. X, 10) is to employ
four men and two dogs (double the usual number) in disposing of
the corpse of a pregnant woman, on account of the double risk
of contamination, owing to the Nasfis, or fiend of corruption,
having seized upon two corpses at once. In consequence of the
exceptional nature of the case, the mode of purification is also
exceptional.

2 A long purification ceremony lasting nine nights, and described
in Vend. IX, 1-145. Its name, according to Dastir Hoshangji,
is derived from the first word of the instructions for sprinkling the
unclean person, which commence (Vend. IX, 48) as follows: Bare-
shnaim hé vaghdhanem paourum paiti-hiwAdis, ‘sprinkle in
front on the top of his head.’ As it is usual to quote chapters by
their initial words, the initial word of these instructions for the cere-
mony became a name for the ceremony itself.

8 The building in which the dead are finally deposited; here
called by its Huzvaris name, khazan. The Dakhmas used by the
Parsis in India are like low circular towers in external appearance,
and consist of a high wall enclosing a larger or smaller circular
space which is open to the sky. The only opening in the wall is
a small doorway, closed with an iron door. In the centre of the
circular area is a circular well a few feet in depth, and the space
around it is paved so as to slope gently downwards from the
enclosing wall to the brink of the well. This paved annular area
is divided (by shallow gutters grooved into its surface) into spaces,
each large enough for one corpse to be laid upon it, with the head
towards the wall and the feet towards the well. These spaces are
arranged in two ‘or more concentric rings around the well, and the
gutters (which isolate each space on all four sides) drain into the


248 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


(padvishak)! two are not to be carried at one time,
and two by one person are not proper; one dog and
one person are proper’. 8. Every one who under-
stands the care of a corpse is proper; two boys of
eight years old, who understand the care, are proper;
a woman free from menstruation, or free from dead


well. After a sufficient time has elapsed the dry bones are said to
be thrown into the well, and when the well is full the Dakhma
ought to be finally closed, and another one brought into use.
These Dakhmas are erected upon some dry and barren spot,
remote from habitations and water; upon the summit of a hill,
if possible, as prescribed in Vend. VI, 93, and usually more than
a mile from the town. In Bombay the town has gradually
approached the Dakhmas, and to some extent surrounded them,
but has been kept away from their immediate vicinity by the
judicious measures of influential Parsis, who have acquired all the
neighbouring land, and refrain from building on it. The reason
for thus exposing their dead to the sun and carnivorous birds is
that the Parsis consider fire, water, and earth too sacred to be
defiled by corpses; and they have less consideration for the air.
Next to burning, the Parsi mode of disposing of the dead is the
most rapid and effectual, as it avoids most of the concentrated
evils which must accumulate in crowded cemeteries in the course
of time, and which require ages to dissipate. As it is, most of the
offensive effluvium in the immediate vicinity of a Dakhma arises
not from direct contamination of the air, but indirectly through
the ground, which becomes polluted, in the course of time, by
impure filtrations.

* Dastfir Jamaspji prefers reading patdshak, and thinks it
means ‘necessity,’ as in cases where two deaths occur nearly
simultaneously in the same house, when both corpses cannot be
removed the same day. Such a meaning might suit this passage,
but the word occurs again, in § 33 and Chap. IX, 7, where it can
refer only to ‘contamination, and the etymology of padvtshak
(Av. paiti+ vish) is plain enough.

* That is, when two persons cannot be found to carry a corpse,
one can do it alone, provided he holds a dog by a string. This
course is adopted, Dasttir JamAspji says, when a person happens
to die in a place where only one Parsi is available.


CHAPTER II, 8-IT. 249


matter’, or a man, with a woman or a child of eight
years old, is proper.

O: It is not- to be carried all covered up*, for
that is burying the corpse; to carry z¢ in the rain
is worthy of death®. 10, When clouds have been
around *, it is allowable to carry 7¢ away from the
house; and when rain sets in upon the road it is not
allowable to carry z¢ back to the house; éa¢ when it
is before a veranda (dahliz) ove should put z¢ down
there; that is allowable when he who owns the
veranda is apprehensive, azd when he does not
allow z¢ inside; and, afterwards, it is to be carried
away to its place, and when the water stands the
height of a javelin (nizak) inside®, ove puts 2¢ down
and brings z7¢ away yet again. 11. Méd6k-mah®
says that there should be a shelter (var)’ oxe should


1 In the terms avi-dasht4n6 and avf-nas4f the compound
av is written in an obsolete manner, both in M6 and K2o0. The
meaning of the text is that either or both of the corpse-carriers
may be any Parsi man, woman, or child who understands the
proper precautions. Compare Pahl. Vend. VIII, 28.

2 K2o has ‘ when curved it is not to be carried.’

’ That is, it is a mortal sin to allow rain to fall upon a corpse
before it is deposited in the Dakhma.

* Or ‘withheld,’ or ‘continuous,’ according as we compare
hamfin with Pers. 4mfin (Aman), aman, or haman.

5 Inside the Dakhma apparently. The meaning seems to be,
that when the Dakhma is flooded the corpse is to be laid down
in some dry place in its vicinity until the flood has abated. But
according to Pahl. Vend. VIII, 17, it is allowable to throw the
corpse in when the Dakhma is full of water.

® See Chaps. I, 3, Il, 1. Here, again, the quotation must be
from his complete commentary, as it is not extant in the present
Pahlavi Vendidad. j

7 From Av. var, ‘to cover, to shelter ;’ compare Pers. gullah,
‘a bower or shéd.’ Nowadays the Parsis have a permanent
shelter near the Dakhma. Pahl. Vend. VIII, 17 says, ‘to carry


>


250 SHAVAST LA-SHAYAST.


fasten above that place, azd it would make z¢ dry
below!; owe should place the corpse under that
shelter, and they may take the shelter azd bring 2¢
away.

12. From the fifth fargard of the Vendidad of
Médék-mah? they state thus, that at the place
where one’s life goes forth, when he shall die upon
a cloth, and a hair or a limb remains upon the bed-
place and the ground, the ground conveys the pollu-
tion, even not originating with z¢se/f (ahambiiniZ),
in like manner down unto the water’. 13. And when
he ts on a bedstead, and z¢s legs are not connected
with the ground, when a hair or a limb remains
behind on the bedstead, it does not convey ¢he fol-
lution down. 14. When he shall die on a plastered
floor the plaster is polluted, and when they dig up
that plaster and spread z¢ again afterwards, it is
clean. 15. When he shall die on a stone, and the
stone is connected with the ground, the stone will
become clean, a/ong with the ground, in the length
of a year; and when they dig up the place, the
stone deg polluted is to be washed at the time.
16. When a stone is connected with the ground, or
is separated, and one shall die upon it, so much space
of the stone as the corpse occupied is polluted;


an umbrella (avargash) from behind, or to hold up a shelter, is of
no use.’
* Or, ‘it would make zz very dry,’ if we read avir, ‘very,’ instead
of agtr, ‘below;’ these two words being written alike in Pahlavi.
* Quoting again from his lost commentary.
* Or, perhaps, ‘ floor’
* This translation is somewhat doubtful, but the text seems to
imply that the ground is polluted as deep as it contains no water.
* Kao has had, ‘ the stone is all polluted, and will become clean
at the time when they dig if up, the stone is all polluted, in so


CHAPTER II, 12—19. 255


when they shall leave it, in the length of a year it
will become clean a/ong with the ground; and when
they dig z¢ up, the stone is all polluted, azd is to be
washed at the time; when the stone is not made
even with the ground, above the ground the stone is
all polluted, azd is to be washed at the time.

17. Dung-fuel azd ashes, when the limbs of a
menstruous woman come upon them, are both pol-
luted ; and the salt and lime for washing “er shift
(kartak-shti) are ¢o de treated just like stone}.

18. If ove shall die on a terrace roof (ba4n)’, when
one of his limbs, or a hair, remains behind at the
edge of the roof, the roof is polluted for the size of
the body as far as the water; and they should carry
down all the sacred twigs (baresém) ? in the house,
from the place where the pollution is, until there are
thirty steps of three feet* to the sacred twigs, so
that the sacred twigs may not be polluted; and
when his hair or limb has not come to the eaves
(parakAn) the roof is polluted to the bottom (téhik).
19. And when ove shall die on a rita® z¢ is polluted


much space as the corpse occupied 7/ 7zs polluted;’ but the addi-
tional matter seems to be struck out. Something analogous to the
details in this paragraph will be found in Pahl. Vend. VI, 9.

1 This section would be more appropriate in Chap. III.

2 Or ‘an upper floor;’ Pahl. Vend. VI, 9 has, ‘when he shall
die on an upper floor, when nothing of him remains behind at the
partitions (pardak4n), the floor is polluted as far as the balcony
(Askiip) and the balcony alone is clean; when anything of him
remains behind at the partitions, the floor is polluted as far as the
balcony, the ground is polluted as far as the water, adou/ the balcony
alone it is not clear.’

8 See note on Chap. III, 32.

* The gam, ‘step,’ being 2 feet 71 inches (see note on Bund.
XXVI, 3) these thirty steps are about 79 English feet.

5 Meaning uncertain; the word looks like Huzvaris, but it is
possible to read rid-aé instead of rita-r.


252 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


for the size of the body as far as the water; zz the
length of a year it will become clean along with the
ground. 20. A built bridge is Zad/e just like a
terrace roof. 21. When oze shall die on the terrace
roof of a trellised apartment (varam), that is also
fable just like a terrace roof. 22. When he shall
die in a trellised apartment, when one of his limbs,
or a hair, does not remain on the borders (parakAn),
it does not convey the pollution down, but when azy
of him remains behind it conveys z¢ down; it is
allowable when they dig z¢ up?, and oxe also spreads
2¢ again afterwards, and zz is clean.

23. When one shall die by strangulation and a
rope in a crowd, when ¢here is no fear of his falling
down they should not carry 42m down; and when
there is a fear of his falling down, when that fear is
as regards one side of him, they should carry Am
down on that side; and when fe has fallen down
they should carry Am down in such place as he has
fallen. 24. When one is seated upright axzd shall
die, when ¢here is fear of his falling on one side they
should carry 42m down on that one side, and when
there is fear on all four sides, ¢hen on all four sides ;
and when e as fallen down they should carry hime
down zz such place as he has fallen ®.

25. And when ome shall die on a tree, when its


* That is, the floor of the apartment ; which would probably be
formed of earth beaten down, which, in India, is nearly always
overspread with diluted cow-dung to hinder cracks in the smooth
surface. A better class of floor is spread with lime plaster on
a stony surface.

* The object of these rules is evidently to avoid disturbing the
corpse more than is absolutely necessary, provided there be no
fear of its polluting more of the ground by falling upon it.


CHARTER I, 20-32. 253


bark is green and /Zere is no fear of falling off, they
should not carry 42m down; and when ¢here is fear
of it, they should carry down the whole of the body
(tant masai). 26. And when the bark of the tree
is withered, when ¢eve is fear of it and when ¢here is
no fear of it, they should carry z¢ down. 27. When
he shall die on a branch of a tree which is green,
when ¢here is no fear of his falling off they should
not carry 42m down. 28. And when ¢here is fear of
it, or z¢ zs a branch of a withered tree, when also, a
hair originating with him, or a limb, remains behind
on the particular tree, they should carry down the
whole of the body. 29. And when it does not re-
main behind him on the particular tree, but when
there is fear of its falling off, they should not carry it
below (vad fré@)?.

30. When a corpse (nasAi-1)*, from outside of it,
remains behind. on a jar (khimbS) in which ¢éhere
may be wine, the jar is polluted, azd the wine is
clean, 31. And when oxze shall die inside, in the
wine in the jar, if not even a hair or a curl originat- _
ing with him remains behind on the jar, the wine is
polluted and the jar not polluted*. 32. When 27 zs


1 Keo has a portion of § 30 inserted here by mistake.

2 The object of these rules is likewise to prevent the risk of the
corpse defiling more of the ground than is absolutely necessary by
falling upon it, as it might do by the breaking of a dead branch.
8 Nas4i (Av. nasu) means not only a corpse or carcase of
a human being, dog, or other animal of the good creation, but
also any portion of such corpse or carcase ; that is, sod¢d ‘ dead
matter’ in general, as distinguished from dirt or refuse from the
living body, or any liquid exudation from a corpse or carcase,
which is called hikhar (Ay. hikhra).

4 Pahl. Vend. VI, 9 states, that ‘when ove shall die on a jar of
wine, the jar is useless, and the wine becomes just as though 7s


254 SHAVAST LA-SHAYAST.


a jar in which ¢here is oil 1, and dead matter (nasi),
from outside of it, remains behind on it, this is even
as though it remains inside it, because the oil comes
outside and goes back to the inside, azd both are
polluted, the jar and the oil; and even on making
the jar dry? it is not fit to put anything in.

33. When a serpent (garzak) is in a jar in which
there is wine, both are useless and polluted, for it
makes ¢hem contaminated (padvishak). 34. And
when corn shall be in z¢, the jar is polluted and the
corn clean; and when nothing originating with Zhe
serpent inside the jar remains behind on the jar, so
much of the corn as includes the serpent, and upon
which the touch (m4lisn) of the serpent has gone—
because the touch of the serpent’s seed might be
the death of one —is to be taken out and to be
thrown away. 35. And when hair or dead matter,
even not originating with the serpent, remains be-
hind on the jar, the jar is polluted, but is service-
able (shayad) on making 2z¢ dry®.

36. Brick, earth, and mortar are separated by


course (ravisn) had been within three steps of the corpse. And
when he shall die in the wine, when nothing of him remains behind
on the jar, the jar is proper on making 2/ dry’ (or, perhaps, ‘ the
jar is fit for bran-flour’).

* Or ‘clarified butter ;’ in this case the ‘jar’ is probably a
globular vessel, or carboy, made of hide, through which the oil,
or liquid butter, penetrates so far as to keep the outer surface
greasy, which accounts for the remark about the oil passing in and
out. Such vessels, called dabar, are commonly used for oil and
liquid butter in India.

* Assuming that khfiskar stands for khfisk-kar, as it does in
Pahl. Vend. VI, 71; otherwise we should have to read thus: ‘and
the jar is not even fit to put any bran-flour in,’

* Again assuming as in § 32; otherwise we must read thus:
“but is fit for bran-flour (khfiskar),’ .


CHAPTER II, 33-38. 255


their own substance (pavan mindavam-i nafs-
man), and are connected with the ground ; being
separated by their own substance is this, that so
much space as dead matter’ comes upon is pol-
luted ; being connected with the ground is this, that
they would convey the pollution down unto the
water. 37. Dung-fuel, ashes, flour, and other pow-
dered things are connected with their own sub-
stance, and are separated from the ground; being
connected with their own substance is this, that
when dead matter comes upon them the whole of
them is polluted; and being separated from the
ground is this, that when dead matter comes upon
them it does not make the ground polluted *.

a8. Az a “house iz which the sacred ceremony
(yazisn) is prepared, and a dog or a person passes *
away in it, the first business to be done is this, that
the fire is to be preserved from harm; moreover, if
it be only possible to carry the fire so that they
would carry z¢ away within three steps of the
corpse *, even then it is to be carried away, ad the


1 Or ‘a corpse ;’ Kz2o has ‘stands upon.’ The meaning is that
these substances do not communicate the contamination throughout
their own substance, but only downwards to the ground, which con-
veys it farther down, so far as it contains no water.

2 That is, these substances communicate the contamination
throughout their own substance, but not down to the ground.

® The verb vidardanod (Huz. vabrfintan6), ‘to cross over, to
pass away’ (Av. vit+tar, Pers. gupHastan), can only be used
when referring to the death of good people or animals; but the
verb mfirdand (Huz. yemittintand), ‘to die, to expire’ (Av.
mar, Pers. murdan), can be used generally, though usually applied
to the wicked and to evil creatures. Pahl. Vend. V, 134 contains
nearly the same text as §§ 38, 39.

4 Under ordinary circumstances fire must not be brought within
thirty steps, or about 79 English feet, of a corpse (see Vend. VIII,


256 SHAVAST LA-SHAYAST.


wall is not to be cut. 39. Réshan? said that an
earthen ove is to be cut into, du¢ a mortar one is
not to be cut; below and above no account zs taken
of damaging (béd6zédih)? the wall®. 40. To bring
the fire within ‘+ the three steps from the corpse is a
Tanapthar sin; and when exudation happens to the
corpse, it is worthy of death®, 41. The prepared
food in that house is all useless, and that which is
not prepared is usable in the length of nine nights


17). But the spirit of the Mazdayasnian law is reasonable, and,
although strict, it allows for practical difficulties and chooses the
least of two evils in a more judicious manner than might be
expected (a fact which it would be well for Parsis and others to
observe in doubtful cases). Here, breaking through the wall of a
house is considered a greater evil than the possible pollution of
the fire by passing at a distance of three steps, or eight English
feet, from a corpse.

* The name of a commentator, or commentary, often quoted in
Pahlavi translations (see the note on Chap. I, 4).

® Literally, ‘destroying the consciousness,’ or ‘injuring the
existence.” Bdddzéd or bédyézad is a particular kind of sin
which appears to consist chiefly of the ill-treatment of animals and ©
injury of useful property. It is mentioned in Pahl. Yas. XXIX,
tb, Pahl. Vend. V, 107, XIII, 38, Farh. Okh. pp. 32, 33; and in
some editions of the Khurdah Avesta it is defined as selling stolen
men or animals into misery, or one’s own domestic cattle to the
butcher, also spoiling and tearing up good clothing, or wasting
and spoiling good food.

* The meaning is, that if it became necessary to break through
the wall in order to remove the fire unpolluted, the sin committed
through damaging the wall will not be punished either in this
world or the next.

* That is, nearer than three steps, which is considered to be
the minimum distance at which any degree of purity can be
maintained.

* A marg-arg4n sin, on committing which the sinner is required
to place his life at the disposal of the high-priest (see Chap. VIII,
2,5, 6, 21). It is usually considered equivalent to fifteen Tan4-
ptihars (see Chap. I, 1, 2).


CHAPTER I, 39-45. 257


or amonth'. 42, Clothing also zz like manner, ex-
cept that which ove wears on the body; that, even
in that time, is not clean, since it remains in use.
43. And the holy-water (zéhar)2, too, which is
taken and remains zz that place, is to be carried
away immediately to the water; also the sacred
milk (giv)® azd butter (gum)‘ zz like manner. 44.
Of the prayer® clothing Vand-Adharmazd ® said that
it is usable in the length of nine nights ov a month ;
the writer’ (dapir) said that it is when they perform
the washing of hands, and wash z¢ thoroughly, it
will become clean at the time.

45. If in a house there are three rooms (gungt-
nak), and oe shall die in the entrance place
(dargas), if 2¢ de so that they may set the door
open, and the corpse comes to this side, only this


1 According to the season of the year, the period of uncleanness
being nine nights in the five winter months, and a month in the
seven summer months (see Vend. V, 129).

2 Av. zaothra; this holy-water is consecrated by the priest
reciting certain prayers while holding the empty metal cups in his
hands, while filling them with water, and after filling them (see
Haug’s Essays, p. 397). -

8 The Av. gaus givya, ‘product of the living cow,’ which is
kept in a metal saucer during the ceremonies, and used for
sprinkling the sacred twigs (baresdém), and for mixing with the
holy-water and Hém-juice in the mortar (see Haug’s Essays,
Pp. 403, 405, 406).

4 Compare Pers. Afim, ‘fat;’ it is the Av. gaus hudhau, ‘fro-
duct of the well-yielding cow,’ a small piece of which is placed
upon one of the sacred pancakes, or wafers (drén), during the
ceremonies (see Haug’s Essays, pp. 396, 407).

5 Reading yast; but it may be gast, ‘ changed.’

® See the note on Chap. I, 4.

7 There appear to be, as yet, no means of ascertaining the
name of the writer of the Shayast l4-shayast, who gives his own
opinion here.


[5] s


258 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


side is polluted; and if the corpse comes to that
side, only that side is polluted; when it comes to
both sides at once (aév4&), only the entrance place
is polluted alone, both the dwelling-rooms (kh4nak)
are clean.

46. And the vault of the sacred fires! alone does
not become polluted.

47. If one shall die in a wild spot (vaskar), pre-
pared food which is within three steps is all useless,
and beyond four steps it is not polluted. 48. Pre-
pared food is this, such as bread, boiled and roast
meat, and prepared broth 2.

49. And the ashes (var) of the sacred fire® be-
come in a measure polluted.

50. Should they carry in the fire into that house
in which the length of nine nights ov a month is
requisite for becoming clean, ¢here is a sin of one
Tandpthar* through carrying z¢ in, and one Tana-
pthar through kindling 2; and every trifling crea-
ture (khdr or khal) which shall die and shall remain
causes a sin of one Tanapthar. 51. Also through
carrying water in, ¢#ere is a sin of one Farman; and
to pour water on the place where azy one’s life
departs is a sin of one Tandpthar, and to pour 7
on a different place is a sin of one Yat. 52. And to


* Literally, ‘the vault of the fires of Vahram. Pahl. Vend.
V, 134 says ‘the vault of the fires is Zable just like an empty
house.’ Both this section and § 49 seem out of place.

a See Pahl Vend. V, 034,

* Literally, ‘the produce of the fire of Vahram,’ a term for
‘ashes,’ which is used in Pahl. Vend. V, 150 along with the
equivalent phrase, ‘clothing of the fire’ (see Chap. III, 27),

* See Chap. I, 1, 2 for the degrees of sin mentioned in §§ 50,
51, §3-


CHAPTER II, 46-56. 259


undergo ablution! inside che unclean house is all non-
ablution. 53. And whoever goes into it needlessly,
his body and clothes are to be every time thoroughly
washed, and his sin is one Tandpthar; and when he
goes in needfully z¢ is neither good work nor sin2.
54. And this pollution is all in the sharp account
(tikhak amar) when the life departs?; the only
thing which amounts to polluting is contact with the
flesh, and even with the hair and nails. 55. Of the
contact which is stated in the Avesta‘, the account
is that zt zs from one side, and it ever cleaves to
one; the curse (gazisn)*® which is stated in the
Avesta advances from all four sides. 56. Sédshyans¢
said it is, until its exhibition to a dog, just as it be-
comes at the time when its life departs’; a priest, a


1 That is, the ceremonial ablution (padtyavth), or ‘ washing,
with water, the hands and arms up to the elbows, the face as far
as behind the ears, and the feet up to the ankles,’ whilst a certain
form of prayer is recited (see AV. p. 148, note).

2 Here again, as in § 38, the strict letter of the law is relaxed in
case of necessity.

§ Meaning, apparently, that any pollution is taken into account,
as a sin, in the investigation the soul has to undergo upon entering
the other world. Much of this paragraph will be found in Pahl.
Vend. V, 107.

4 Referring to Vend. V, 82-107, which gives an account of the
number of persons through whom the pollution of a corpse or
carcase will pass, which is in proportion to the importance of the
dead individual. The statement here made is that the infection,
passing from one to the other, enters each person only on one
side, but the demon of corruption attacks them on all sides.

6 Meaning, probably, the Nastis, or demon of corruption (see § 1),
who is said to rush upon all those polluted as detailed in Vend. V,
82-107.

6 See Chap. I, 3.

7 That is, until seen by the dog the corpse remains pervaded
by the demon of, corruption and hazardous to approach (see


§§ 1-4).
S 2


260 SHAVAST LA-SHAYAST.


warrior, and a husbandman are no use, for merely
a dog is stated. 57. Kashtanéd-bigéd! said the
account is at the time when its life departs; and
that which Kfshtané-biigéd specially said is, ‘when
anything is inside it (the place) the pollution is as
far as to the place where that thing stands.’ 58.
When a dog, or a goat, or a pig is requisite
(darv4i)? it is proper, for the pollutcon does not
attack further there ; and the pollution of a child in
the womb is a/ong with the mother.

59. The direct pollution of a hedgehog ® cleaves
to one, and not the indirect pollution. 60. Direct
pollution (hamréd) * is that when the body is in
contact with a corpse, and indirect pollution (pait-


¥ See Chap. I, 4, note. This name is nearly always written
Kushtano-biigéd in Sls. in Kzo and M6; it is not mentioned in
Pahl. Vend. V, 107, although the details here quoted are there
given in part. ;

2 The meaning is not quite clear, but this sentence is probably
to be read in connection with the preceding one, as implying that
where such domestic animals are kept they can be used for stopping
the infection, as effectually as any inanimate object. The pig is
here mentioned as a common domestic animal, but Parsis have
long since adopted the prejudices of Hindus and Muhammadans
as regards the uncleanness of the pig.

® As Vend. V, ro8-112 says the same of the dog urupi, it
would seem that the writer of our text considered the urupi to be
a hedgehog (ztizak); the Pahlavi translation of the Vendidad
renders it by rapuk or ripfik, which appears to be merely an
approximate transcript of the Avesta word; traditionally, this is
read raspfik and compared with Pers. ras(, ‘ichneumon;’ its
identification with the hedgehog is certainly doubtful, although it
appears to be admitted in Pahl. Vend,V, 112, where the same
words are used as in this section.

* The technical terms hamréd and paftréd, for contagion and
infection, are merely corruptions of Av. him-raéthwayéiti and
paiti-raéthwayéiti, The definition of the latter one is omitted
in Kzo by mistake.


CHAPTER II, 57-63. 261


réd) is that when? ove is in contact with him who
touched the corpse; and from contact with him who
is the eleventh ? indirect pollution cleaves to one zz
the same manner. 61. The indirect pollution of an
ape ® and a menstruous woman, not acting the same
way, remains. 62. The shepherd’s dog, and like-
wise the village-dog, and others also of the like kind
catry contamination to eight*; and when they shall
carry the carcase down on the ground ¢he place® is
clean immediately; and that, too, which dies on a
balcony (Askfip), until they shall carry z¢ down to
the bottom, is polluted for the length of a year.

63. Whoever brings dead matter (nasai) on any
person is worthy of death; he is thrice worthy of


1 Reading amat, ‘when,’ instead of mfin, ‘ which’ (see note to
Bund: I, 4).

2 Vend. V, 86, 87 limits the pollution to the eleventh person
infected, in the extreme case of the corpse having been a priest;
but Pahl. Vend. V, 107 quotes the opinion of Sdshans that until
a dog has gazed at the corpse the pollution extends to the twelfth,
but only the first ten require the ceremonial purification of the
bareshnfim, the others being cleansed by ordinary washing with
bull’s urine and water.

8 Pahl. Vend. V, 107 states, however, that ‘everything of th
ape (kapik) is just like mankind.’ The meaning of § 61 is very
uncertain, as the text can be both read and translated several ways,
and none of them are very satisfactory.

4 Thatis, in the case of the shepherd’s dog (see Vend. V, 92, 93);
the carcases of other dogs occasion the indirect pollution of fewer
persons, in proportion to their inferior importance; but Pahl. Vend.
V, 107 states, with regard to this importance, that when ‘in doubt,
every man is to be considered as a priest, and every dog as a shep-
herd’s dog,’ so as to be on the safe side, by exacting the maximum
amount of purification in all doubtful cases.

5 The Pahlavi text leaves it doubtful whether the place, the
people, or the carcase becomes clean, but the first is the most


probable.


262 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


death} at the time when a dog Aas not seen the
corpse (nasai); and 2f through negligence of ap-
pliances and means (£4r va tban36) he disturbs 27,
and disturbs z¢ by touching it, he knows that z¢ zs a
sin worthy of death; and for a corpse that a dog
has seen, and one that a dog has not seen, the ac-
countability is to be understood ¢o de as much’, and
for the death and sickness? of a feeble man and a
powerful ove. 64. Afarg has said there is no ac-
count of appliances and means’, for z¢ is not allow-
able to commit a sin worthy of death in cases of
death and sickness.

65. When they move a corpse which a dog “as
not seen with a thousand men, even then the bodies
of the whole xuméer are polluted®, and are to be
washed for them with ceremony (pisak)*®. 66. And
for that which a dog as seen, except that one only
when a man shall move 7/ all’ by touching 7¢, his
washing is then not ¢o de with ceremony. 67. And
when he is in contact azd does not move 2¢, he is to
be washed with bull’s urine azd water. 68. And


* That is, he has committed a sin equivalent to three mortal
sins (marg-argan).

® Reading ves as equivalent to vés.

* Reading rakhtakth (compare Pers. rakhtah, ‘sick, wounded’),


* This opinion of Afarg (see Chap. I, 3) is also quoted in Pahl.
Vend. III, 48.


° This statement is repeated in Chap. X, 33.

° That is, with the Bareshnim ceremony,

* This exception (which is repeated in §§ 68, 71) seems to imply
that §§ 66, 68, 71 refer to the collection of any fragments of
a corpse found in the wilderness, or in water; and the exemption
from the troublesome purification ceremony in such cases, is pro-


bably intended to encourage people to undertake the disagreeable
duty of attending to such fragments.


CHAPTER It, 64-71. 263


when he shall move with a stake (ddr)! a corpse
which a dog Aas not seen, except that one only
when he shall move 7¢ all, the washing for him is
not zo de with ceremony. _

69. And when a man shall move a corpse, which
a dog 4as not seen, by the hand of another man, Ze
who moves it by the hand of a man, avd he also
whose own hand’s strength does 7¢ are polluted in
the bodies of both; and it is the root of a Tandpa-
har? sez for him himself and of a Tandpthar for the
other one, for this 7eason, because his own body and
that also of the other are both made polluted
through sinfulness. 70. And when there is not in
him, nor even originating with 42m (ahambtniA),
the strength of him whose own hand Z¢ 7s, it is just
as though he would move it (the corpse) with a
stake *; and he who held z¢ in the way of contact
with his hand is to be washed with ceremony ; and
it is the root of a Tanapfthar sin for him whose
own hand z¢ zs, and of a Khér‘ for himself. 7x.
When he shall move a corpse by the hand of a man,
and the corpse is of those which a dog as seen—
except that one only when he shall move it all '—
the washing for him is not ¢o de with ceremony.


1 The interposition of the stake, or piece of wood, prevents the
direct attack of the Nasfis, or demon of corruption, which has not
been driven away bya dog. That inanimate objects are supposed
to stop the progress of the pollution appears from § 57.

® See Chap. I, 1, 2. A sin is figuratively said to take root in
the body, when it has to be eradicated, or figuratively dug up.

$ See § 68. If he employs another man to move the corpse
merely because he is physically unable to do it himself, he escapes
with less pollution than when he is able to do the work himself;
but the man employed suffers the same in both cases.

4 See Chap. I, 1, 2. 5 See §$ 66.


264 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


72, When one is going dy a place at night, and
comes. back there oz the morrow, and a corpse
lies, there, and he does not know whether the evil
(dis) was there when he came by’, or not, it is to
be considered by him that it was not there.

73. Of a flock in which is a sheep by whom dead
matter is eaten, of a forest in which is a tree with
which dead matter is mingled, and of a firewood-
stand (aesamdan) in which is a stick of firewood
with which grease is mingled, Afarg said that it is
not proper to make the flock and the forest fruitful,
and the firewood is useless”:

74. About a door on which a corpse impinges; as
to the door of a town and city they have been of the
same opinion, that z¢ is to be discarded by zs com-
rades (hamk4r)*; as to a door which is mostly closed
(badtim)* they have been of different opinions,


1 Literally, ‘ when I came’ by ;’ the usual Persian idiom in such
phrases.

2 This statement of Afarg’s, so far as it relates to greasy fire-
wood, will be found in Pahli Vend. V, 14.

* Or, ‘by the community,’ The same rule is mentioned in Pahl. |
Vend. V, £4.

* There is some uncertainty about this word. It is not the
Pers. badtum, ‘worst, vilest,’ because that is written vadtim or
vattim in Pahlavi; besides, the rule must apply to other than the
vilest doors, otherwise it would not harmonize with § 75. It is not
a miswriting of nfttim, ‘lowest, most debased,’ for the same reason,
and because it occurs elsewhere. It is not a miswriting of bétman,
a possible variant of béta, ‘a house’ (although ‘a house-door’
would suit the context very well), because it occurs also in Pahl.
Vend. V, 14, XI, 10, in which latter place it is clearly an adjective
partially translating Av. bendvé. And it would be hazardous to
connect it with Pers. bidtin, ‘outside,’ which seems merely a cor-
ruption or misreading of birfin. The view taken here is that
badtfim stands for bandttim, ‘most shut up,’ the nasal being
often dropped in Pahlavi, as in sag for sang, ‘stone,’ &c.


CHAPTER UI, 72-98, 265


Gégésasp! said that discarding z¢ by zs comrades
is likewise proper, and Séshyans said that it is not
proper; and as to other doors they have been
of the same opinion, that it is not proper. 75.
The door of one’s own chief apartment (shah-gas)
is fit for that of the place for menstruation (dastan-
istan), and that of the place for menstruation is fit
for that of the depository for the dead (khazan6)?,
and that of the depository of the dead is not fit for
any purpose whatever?; that of the more pleasant
is fit for that of the more grievous.

76. Any one who, through sinfulness, throws a
corpse into the water, is worthy of death on the
spot ¢; when he throws only one z¢ zs one szz worthy
of death, azd when he throws ten at one time z¢ zs
then one szz worthy of death; when he throws ¢hem
separately z¢ zs a s¢z worthy of death for each one.
74, Of the water, into which ove throws dead matter,
the extent of pollution is three steps of three feet 2
the water advancing, nine steps of three feet zz the
water passed over, and six steps of three feet zz the
water alongside *; six steps of three feet in the depth
of the water, and three steps of three feet in the
water pouring over the dead matter are polluted as
regards the depth*®. 78. When it is thrown zvéo the
midst of a great standing water, in like manner, the
proportion it comes is ever as much as it goes, and


tSee Chap. 1, 3.

2 The Huz. equivalent of Paz. dakhmak (see § 6).

8 See Pahl. Vend. V, 14.

4 Compare Pahl. Vend. VII, 66. 5 See Vend. VI, 80.

6 That is, the pollution extends about eight English feet up-stream
and upwards, sixteen feet sideways and downwards, and twenty-
four feet down-stream. Some of the latter part of the sentence is
omitted in K2o by mistake.


266 SHAYVAST LA-SHAYAST.


zs the proportion of it they should always carry
away with the dead matter’.

79. And when a man comes forth, and a corpse
lies in the water, when he is able to bring it out,
and it is not an injury to him, it is not allowable to
abandon z¢ except when he brings z¢ out”. 80.
Séshyans® said that, when it is an injury, it is allow-
able when # he does not bring z# out; and when it is
not an injury, and he does not bring 27, his sin isa
Tandpthar®, 81. Kdshtand-bfigéd® said that even
in case of injury it is not allowable to abandon 2/,
except when he brings z¢ out; when he does not
bring z¢ fe is worthy of death. 82. And Gégésasp’
said that it is even in case of injury not allowable,
except when he brings z¢ out; and when, in case of
injury, he does not bring z¢ out his sin is a Tana-
ptihar; and when it is no injury to him, and he does
not bring z¢, 4e is worthy of death.

83. And when he shall wish to bring z¢ his cloth-
ing is to be laid aside *, for it makes the clothing


1 The sentence is obscure, but this seems to be the meaning;
that is, when a corpse or any dead matter is thrown into a pond
or tank, the pollution extends sixteen feet from it in all directions;
and that quantity of water ought to be drawn off, in order to
purify the tank (see Vend. VI, 65-71). As the corpse, in nearly
all cases, must be either at the bottom or on the surface, the quan-
tity of polluted water to be drawn off must be a hemispherical
mass sixteen feet in radius, or about forty-eight tons of water.

® See Pahl. Vend. VI, 64, where it states that bringing it out
is a good work of one Tanapthar, and leaving it is a sin of the
same amount.

Spee Chap. E, 3:

* Reading amat, ‘when,’ instead of mfin, ‘which’ (see Bund.
I, 7, note).

5 See Chap. I, 1, 2. ® See Chap. I, 4, note.

© See Chapr i 3. 8 See Pahl. Vend. VI, 64.


CHAPTER II, 79-87. 267


polluted, and whatever “e is first able aud best able
to bring is to be brought out by him. 84. When, too,
he is able to bring z¢ out through the breadth of the
water, then also it is to be brought out so!; and
when he is not able, it is to be brought out through
the length of the water; and showing 7¢ éo a dog
and the two men are not to be waited for *,

85. And it is to be carried by him so much away
from the neighbourhood of the water that, when he
puts z¢ down, the water which comes out dropping
from the corpse does not reach back to the water ;
for when the water which comes out from the corpse
reaches continuously back to the water 4e is worthy
of death; and after that (min zak frag) it is to be
shown Zo a dog, and it is to be carried away by two
men. 86. And when he wishes to throw z¢ out from
the water, Mara-btid? said it is allowable to throw z¢
out thus, so that the water of the dripping corpse
does not reach continuously back to the water;
Roéshan said it would be allowable to throw z¢ out
far.

87. To drag z¢ over the water is allowable, to
grasp and relinquish z¢ is not allowable *; and when
it is possible to act so that he may convey z¢ from
a great water to a small water, when the water is


1 So that less water may be polluted by the corpse taking the
shortest route through it; but if that be impossible it must come
out quickly, at any rate.

* That is, the otherwise indispensable dog’s gaze and two
bearers must be dispensed with, if not at hand, in order to save
time, until the corpse is out of the water (see § 85).

3 It might be, ‘ there was a man wo said,’ but Mard-biid occurs
in the Nirangistan as the name of a commentator (see Chap. I, 4,
note). ;

4 See Pahl. Vend. VI, 64 for this prohibition.


268 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


connected z¢ is allowable, and when separated 2¢ is
not allowable. 88. Afarg! said it is allowable to
drag z/ below through the water, but to drag 2¢ over
is not allowable, for this has come ow the water as a
danger 2, and that has not come on z as a danger.
89. Méddk-mah? said it is allowable to drag 2¢
above, dwt to drag z¢ below is not allowable, for the
danger has gone out across the water, and the
danger is not now to be brought upon it; and on
that which is below, oz which the danger has not
come, the danger will at last arrive.

90. When he goes into the water he is to go into
it with this idea, that ‘should there be many below,
then I will even bring all;’ for whoever goes in not
with this idea, and shall disturb any other one which
lies there, will become polluted*. 91. And if the
corpse be heavy ad it is not possible to bring z¢ out
by one person, avd he goes out with this idea, that
‘I well go and prepare means, and bring this corpse
out of the water ;’ and when through sinfulness* he
does not go back his body is polluted azd worthy of


* sce Chap: I, 3.

Or ‘fear.’ The difference of opinion between the two com-
mentators on this question in casuistry, appears to have arisen from
Afarg regarding the water merely as the representative of a spirit,
who might be endangered or frightened by the source of impurity
becoming more visible when above the water, while Médék-mah
considered the water in its material aspect, and wished to save it
from the further pollution consequent upon drawing the corpse
through more of it.

3 See Pahl. Vend. VI, 64. ,

* These rules generally distinguish clearly between offences
committed ‘through sinfulness,’ that is, wilfully, and those arising
from accidental inability; more stress being laid upon the inten-
tion than upon the action,


CHAPTER II, 88-95, 269


death, and when he is unable to go back he is not
polluted.

92. When the corpse is so decomposed (ptidak),
when z¢ is thus necessary to bring it out, that he
must cut off various fragments, even after he cuts
them off they are to be brought out; and for every
fragment his hands and knife are to be washed with
bull’s urine (g6méz), and with dust and moisture
(nambo) ¢hey are clean’. 93. And ¢hey are to be
torn off? by him, and for every single fragment which
he brings out his good work is one Tanapthar.

94. And when rain is falling the corpse lies in the
water ; to take z¢ from the water to deposit z¢ in the
rain is not ® allowable.

95. Clothing which is useless 4, this is that in which
they should carry a corpse, and that even when very
much or altogether useless; of that on which they
shall decompose® (bara vishtipénd), and of that on
which the excretions (hikhar) of the dead come, so
much space is to be cut away °, and the rest is to be


1 See Pahl. Vend. VI, 64 for §§ 92, 93.

2 Or ‘ twisted off;’ the Huz. neskhfintano must be traced to
Chald. "D3 ‘to pluck out, to tear away,’ and seems to have a similar
meaning in Pahlavi; its Paz. equivalent vikhtano6 (Av. vig) ought
to be compared rather with Pers. kikhtan, ‘to bruise or break,’
than with békhtan or pékhtan, ‘to twist.

3 This negative is omitted in M6 by mistake.

* Compare Pahl. Vend. VII, 32.

5 Or ‘go to pieces;’ that this is the meaning of vishipénd
appears clearly from Pahl. Vend. VII, 123, but a Persian gloss in
the modern MS. Mg explains it as ‘deposit fragments from the
beak of a bird,’ meaning, of course, fragments of dead matter
dropped by a carrion bird.

6 As useless, being incapable of purification; such cuttings are
to be buried, according to the Avesta of Vend. VII, 32, though the
Pahlavi commentary explains that they are to be thrown away.


270 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


thoroughly washed for the six-months’ pevzod?. 96.
That which a menstruous woman has in wear (mah-
manth)? is to be discarded in like fashion.

97. The clothing which is to be washed for the
six-months’ feviod is such as is declared in the
Avesta®, 98. If the clothing be leathern it is to
be thoroughly washed three times with bull’s urine
(gdméz), every time to be made quite dry with dust,
and to be thoroughly washed three times with water,
and to be laid out three months in a place to be
viewed by the sun‘; and then it is proper for an
unclean person (armést)* who has not performed


1 Khshvas-matig6k is merely a corruption of the Av. khshvas
maunghé, ‘six months,’ of Vend. VII, 36, where this form of
cleansing is thus described: ‘If (the clothing) be woven, they
should wash z/ out six times with bull’s urine, they should scour
7# six times with earth, they should wash z¢ out six times with
water, they should fumigate z# six months at the window of the
house.’

epee rail, Vend, Vil; 32:

* That is, woven clothing, as declared in Vend. VII, 36 (quoted
above in note 1).

* See Vend. VII, 35.

* A Persian gloss defines armést as ‘a woman who has brought
forth a dead child,’ and this is the general opinion ; but that seems
to be only a particular example of an unclean person who would
be included under the general term armést, for according to Pahl,
Vend. IX, 133, 137, 141 a man when only partially purified must
remain apart in the place for the armést (Av. airima, compare
Sans. il or rf) for a certain time. Nérydsang, in his Sanskrit
translation of Mkh. (XXXVI, 36, XXXIX, 40, LI, 7), explains
armést as ‘lame, crippled, immobility ;’ it also means ‘stagnant,’
when applied to water; andits primitive signification was, probably,
‘most stationary,’ an appropriate term for such unclean persons as
are required to remain in a particular place apart from all others,
as well as for helpless cripples, and insane persons under restraint
(see Chap. VI, 1). The meaning ‘most polluted’ would hardly
apply to tank water.


CHAPTER II, 96-104. 27


worship, or it is proper fora menstruous woman. 99.
Other clothing, when hair is on 2¢1, is Zad/e just like
woven cloth (tadak); all the washing of wool, floss
silk, silk, hair, and camel’s hair is just like that of
woven cloth; and woven clothing is to be washed
six times”.

100. Wool which is connected together, when one
part is twisted over another, and a corpse rests?
upon it, is all polluted on account of the connection ;
and when fleece (mésh) rests upon fleece, then so
much space as the corpse rests upon is polluted.
101. When oze shall die upon a rich carpet (bap)
when the carpet is on a coarse rug (namad) aud
is made connected, the rug and carpet are both pol-
luted, and when separated the rug is clean. 102.
When several cushions are heaped (nizid) one
upon the other, and are not made connected, and
dead matter comes upon them, they have been
unanimous that only that one is polluted on which
the dead matter came. 103. A cushion ‘/ogether
with wool? is 4ad/e just like a carpet with a rug®.
104. Of several cushions which are tied down to-
gether, when dead matter comes to the tie, both are
polluted, the cord avd the cushions; and when the
dead matter comes to a cushion, and does not come
to the tie, the cushions are all polluted on account
of the connection, and the tie is clean °.


1 Pahl. Vend. VII, 35 says ‘ when a single hair is on it.’

2 As mentioned in a note on § 95.

> Literally, ‘impinges.’ Here, as in many other places, ‘ dead
matter’ may be read instead of ‘corpse,’ as nasat means both or

either of them.

4 That is, laid upon wool.

uSeS. NEON. 2

® See Pahl. Vend. VII, 27.


272 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


105. A pregnant woman who devours dead matter
through sinfulness is polluted azd worthy of death,
and there is no washing for her!; and as for the
child, when it Zas become acquainted with duties
(pisak-shin4ds), ashes? and bull’s urine are for its
eating and for its washing. 106. 4s for a child who
is born of solitary carriers of the dead *, although its
father and mother may both have devoured dead
matter through sinfulness, that which is born is
clean on the spot, for it does not become polluted
éy birth.

107. Réshan* said that every one, who, through
sinfulness, has become polluted by means of dead
matter, is worthy of death, and his polluted body
never becomes clean; for this ove is more wretched
than the fox which oze throws into the water living,
and in the water it will die. 108. Oxe worthy of
death never becomes clean; aud a solitary carrier of
the dead is to be kept at thirty steps from ceremonial
ablution (padiyazth).

109. Whichsoever of the animal species has eaten
their dead matter, its milk, dung, hair, azd wool are
polluted the length of a year; and zf pregnant when
it has eaten z¢, the young one has also eaten 2, and
the young one is clean after the length of a year
from being born of the mother. 110. When a male
which has eaten z¢ mounts a female, the female is
not polluted. 111, When dead matter is eaten by it,


1 That is, she cannot be purified.

* Reading var (see note on § 49).

* Carrying a corpse by a single person being prohibited (see
§§ 7, 8); but why he is supposed to devour it is not clear,

* See Chap. I, 4, note.

* Compare Pahl. Vend. VII, rg2.


CHAPTER II, 105-116. eae)


and even while it is not digested it shall die, it is
fable just like a leathern bag (anban) in which is
dead matter.

112. Gold, when dead matter comes upon it, is to
be once thoroughly washed with bull’s urine (¢6-
- méz), to be once.made quite dry with dust, and to
be once thoroughly washed with water, and 7¢ zs
clean’. 113. Silver is to be twice thoroughly washed
with bull’s urine, and to be made quite dry with
dust, and is to be twice thoroughly washed with |
water, and z¢ zs clean? 114. And iron, zz ike man-
ney, three times, steel four times, and stone six
times®, 115. Afarg said: ‘Should it be quicksilver
(avginak)* it is ad/e just like gold, and amber
(kahrupai) just like stone, and all jewels just like
ifon.. 116, [he pear] -(mirv4rid) 5, amber, the


1 The purification here detailed is prescribed for golden vessels
in Vend. VII, 186.

2 This is the purification prescribed for silver vessels in Vend.
VII, 74 W.; it is found in the Vendidad Sadah, but is omitted
(evidently by mistake) in the Vendidad with Pahlavi translation,
and has, therefore, been omitted in Spiegel’s edition of the texts.
By this accidental omission in the MSS. silver is connected with
the purification for stone (see § 114).

8 See Vend. VII, 75 W., much of which is omitted in the Ven-
didad with Pahlavi translation, and in Spiegel’s edition (see the
preceding note), the sixfold washing of stone being erroneously
applied to silver (see Vend. VII, 187 Sp.), owing to this omission
of the intervening text. It appears from this section that the Av.
haosafna, which has usually been translated as ‘copper,’ was
understood to be pfilazd, ‘steel, by the Pahlavi translators.

4 Or ‘a mirror’ (Pers. 4bginah), but the word is evidently used
for a metal in SZS. X, 2, and very likely here also.

5 Most of the substances mentioned in §§ 115, 116 are detailed
in ‘Pahl. Vend. VII, 188, where it is stated that ‘as to the pearl
there have been different opinions, some say that it is /zadle just
like gold, some” say that it is just like the other jewels, avd some
say that there is no washing for zi.’


[5] x


#


274 SHAVAST LA-SHAYAST.


ruby (yAkand) gem, the turquoise’, the agate (sha-
pak), coral-stone (vasadin sag), bone, and other
substances (géhar) which are not particularly men-
tioned, are to be washed just like wood *; and when
they are taken into use there is no washing ®, and
when they are not taken their washing is once. 117.
Of earthen and horny articles there is no washing;
and of other substances which are not taken for
use the washing is once, and ¢hey are declared out
of use.

118, Firewood, when green, is to be cut off the
length of a span (vitast), one by one, as many
sticks as there are—and when dry one span and two
finger-dveadths*— and is to be deposited zz some
place the length of a year, and water is not to be
dropped upon z¢; and z¢ zs drawn out after the
length of a year; Sdédshyans® said that it is proper
as firewood for ordinary fires, and Kishtand-bigéd*®
said that z¢ zs just as/declared in the Avesta: ‘ The


? This is doubtful ; the word can be read pirtnak, and has the
Pers. gloss pirdiizah, ‘turquoise,’ in some MSS. If read pilfnak it
might perhaps be taken for ‘ivory.’ But in Pahl. Vend. VII, 188
it is vafarind, ‘snowy, and the reading there seems to be ‘jet-
black and snow-white stone-coral ;’ so here the original meaning
may have been ‘snow-white and jet-black coral-stone.’

> Vend. VII, 188 says that ‘earthen or wooden or porcelain
vessels are impure for everlasting.’

* Meaning, apparently, that they cannot be purified for imme-
diate use.

* That is, one-sixth longer than when green, the vitast being
twelve finger-dreadths, or nine inches (see Bund. XXVI, 3, note).
The purification of firewood, here prescribed, is simply drying it
for a year in short lengths; but Vend. VII, 72-82 requires it also
to be sprinkled once with water, and to be cut into longer pieces.

* “See*Chap. ‘I, 3.

° See Chap. I, 4, note.


CHAPTER II, 117-122. 275


washed one, even then, is proper in dried clothing ¥’
119. About corn? they have been unanimous that
so much space is polluted as the dead matter comes
upon; and of that which is lowered into pits*, or
is wanted ¢o Je so, and of that which is scattered
(afsid) at such a place ¢here are different opinions ;
Sdéshyans said: ‘Should it be of such a place 7¢ is
polluted as much as the dead matter Zas come upon
it;’ and Gégésasp* said: ‘Should it be so z¢ is
all polluted, azd the straw is all polluted.’

120. A walnut ®, through z¢s mode of connection,
is all polluted, and the washing of both its shell and
kernel (pédst va mazg) is just like ¢hat of wood.
121. A pomegranate also is of such nature as.a
walnut. 122. As éo the date, when its stalk ® is not
connected the date is polluted and the stalk and
stone (Astak) are clean; the washing of the date is
just like ¢ha¢ of corn; and when it is touched upon
the stalk, when the stalk, stone, and date are con-
nected, the whole is polluted; as ¢o the date when
not connected with the stalk, azd touched at the


1 Something similar is said in Pahl. Vend. VI, 71.

4 According to Vend. VII, 83-93 polluted corn and fodder are
to be treated like polluted firewood, but to be cut into pieces of
about double the length.

8 Reading dén gép4n fardstak; the practice of storing corn
in dry pits underground is common in the East and in some parts
of Europe. In Pahl. Vend. VII, 93 it is dén gépan vist, ‘ con-
. cealed in pits.’

4 See:Chap.:I, 3.

5 Pahl. Vend. VII, 93 classes the almond with the walnut as
a connected fruit, and the date with the pomegranate as a sepa-
rated one.

6 The word is kfirapak or kfiradzak, but its meaning is
doubtful.

ay ne:


276 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


stalk, the date is clean, and the washing of the
stone is just like ¢hat of wood. 123. The pome-
granate, citron, quince, apple, pear, and other fruit,
when in bearing and the rind (pazAvisn6) is per-
ceptible on it, when dead matter comes upon it ¢here
is no pollution of it; and when the rind (paza-
misn6) is not perceptible on it, its washing is just
like chat of corn; and rind is ever with the citron’.
124. For meat, butter, milk, cheese, and preserves
(ri#ar) there is no washing 2.


CuaptTer III.


1. The clothing of a menstruous woman which
they shall take new for her use is polluted, and that
which is in use is not polluted*, 2. When a bed-
chamber (shad-atirvan) is overspread, and a carpet
(biip) is laid upon it and a cushion oz the two4, aud


* Pahl. Vend. VII, 93 says, ‘ fruit whose rind (pazav) exists is
also just like that in a pod (kfivak), and /or that which does not
remain in a rind, when pod/ution shall come upon it, there is no
cleansing whatever. Afarg said that ¢here is ever a rind (paza-
visn6) with the citron.’

® Pahl. Vend. VII, 93 says, ‘for everything separated here is
a washing, except meat avd milk.’ Articles for which there is no
washing cannot be purified.

* Pahl. Vend. XVI, 5 says, ‘when in the place she remains in
for the purpose, she does not make the clothing she wears on her
body polluted, it remains for use within the place.’ The meaning
is, probably, that clothing already set apart for the purpose does not
become further polluted, so as to be unfit for her use. It appears
also (Pahl. Vend. XVI, 5) that on the spot where menstruation
first appears, not even the twigs uplifted in the sacred ceremony
are polluted, unless the circumstances are abnormal.

* This phrase, about the carpet and cushion, is omitted in K20
by mistake,


CHAPTER II, 123-—Iill, 6. 277


a woman sits upon z¢ and menstruation occurs, when
she puts a foot from the cushion on to the carpet,
and from the carpet out into the bed-chamber, the
carpet and bed-chamber are both polluted, for ¢hey
are taken newly for her use, é¢ of the cushion ¢here
is no pollution for this reason, because z¢ zs in use.
3. And when she sits on the cushion so that she
shall have both the carpet and cushion in use, the
bed-chamber is polluted by itself; and when all three
shall be in use ¢here is no pollution whatever ?.

4. Just as she knows that z¢ zs menstruation, in the
place she zs in for the purpose *, first the necklace,
then the ear-rings, then the head-fillet (4ambar),
and then the oder garments (gamak) are to be put
off by her. 5. When in the place she remains in
for the purpose, even though she may remain a very
long time for that purpose, yet then the ower gar-
ments are clean, aud there is no need of leather
covering and leather shoes *.

6. When she knows for certain (aévar) that z¢ zs
menstruation, until the complete changing (gdhari-
dan) of all fer garments, and she shall ave sat
down in the place for menstruation *, a prayer is to


1 §§ 2, 3 are merely corollaries from § 1.°

2 Or, possibly, ‘on the spot she zs in on the occasion ;’ although
it would appear from § 5 that the place referred to is the dashtan-
istAn, or place of retirement for the unclean.

8 Reading mask va salmfha, but both reading and meaning
are doubtful. The first word may be musk6, ‘musk,’ and the
other can be read sharmg4h, but, if so, the construction of the
sentence is defective, as it stands in the MSS.

4 The dashtAnistan, a comfortless room or cell provided in
every Parsi house for unclean persons to retire to, where they
can see neither sun, moon, stars, fire, water, sacred vessels, nor


righteous men; it ought to be fifteen steps (394 feet) from fire,


278 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


be retained zawardly}. 7. When worship is cele-
brated a prayer is to be retained? zawardly, and
should menstruation occur the prayer is to be
spoken out by her. 8. When in speaking oud the
prayer should menstruation occur, both afterwards,
when the time was certain (avigim4n), and now
she is certain®. 9. When she retains a prayer z#-
wardly, and a call of nature arises, there is no need
for her to speak ou¢ the prayer, for the formula for
the call is to be spoken by her ¢.

10. Hands sprinkled in ceremonial ablution (padi-
yav), when a menstruous woman sees hem, become
quite unclean (apadiydv) by her look 5, and even
when she looks hastily, and does not see the sacred
twigs (baresém), it is the same. 11. And om the
subject of a house (khanak-1 baba), when a men-
struous woman is above 7m it, and the sacred twigs


i ene eas Lo


water, and the sacred twigs, and three steps (8 feet) from righteous
men (see § 33 and Vend. XVI, I-I0).

* This kind of prayer (Av. v4, ‘a word or phrase,’ Pahl. vag,
Pers. baz) is a short formula, the beginning of which is to be
muttered in a kind of whisper, or (according to the Pahlavi idiom)
it ‘is to be taken’ and ‘retained’ inwardly (as a protection while
eating, praying, or performing other necessary acts) by strictly
abstaining from all conversation, until the completion of the act,
when the prayer or vag ‘is to be spoken out,’ that is, the conclusion
of the formula is to be uttered aloud, and the person is then free
to speak as he likes. Different formulas are used on different
occasions.

* Kao has, ‘ she retains a prayer.’ See Pahl. Vend. XVI, 6.

* The meaning is, however, uncertain.

* The Pahlavi text is as follows: Amat vag yakhsenunéd, pé-
sinkar (Pers. pésydr) bara yAttnéd, as vag gfiftand kar ltt
mamanas nask-i pavan samisn yemalelunisnd. Compare Pahl.
Vend. XVI, 5.

®° See Pahl. Vend. XVI, ro.


CHAPTER III, 7-14. 279
stand right below, if even fully fifteen steps below,
even then the sacred twigs are unclean (apAdityAv)!;
but when not right de/ow fifteen steps are plenty.

12. Prepared food which is within three steps of a
menstruous woman is polluted by her, and food which
she delivers up (bara pardazéqa) from her morning”
meal (£asht) is not fit for the evening meal (s4m),
nor that which she delivers up from her evening
meal for the morning meal; it is not fit even for the
same woman?; and water which is within three
steps of her, when they shall put z¢ into a pail
(dabal) or ablution-vessel (pAdiyavdan), and shall
do z¢ without handling (ayadman), is 7 for the
hands in ceremonial ablution. 13. When she touches
the bedding*® and garments of any one, Sédshyans 4
said that so much space is to be washed with bull’s
urine (gédméz) and water; her bedding which touches
the bedding of any one does not make z¢ polluted.

14. A menstruous woman who becomes clean in
three nights is not to be washed till the fifth day;
from the fifth day onwards to the ninth day, when-


1 Pahl. Vend. XVI, 10 says, ‘everything, when at the right dis-
tance, is proper, except only that one case, when uncleanness is
above and cleanness also right below; although it be even much
below, yet it is not proper.’ In such a case the prescribed distance
of fifteen steps is not sufficient; therefore, the dashtanistan
should be on the ground floor, not over an underground water-
tank, nor within fifteen steps of the water in such a tank.

2 Or, possibly, ham nésman may mean ‘a companion woman,’
when two or more are secluded at the same time. Pahl. Vend.
XVI, 17 says, ‘food delivered up by a menstruous woman is of no
use whatever, it is not proper; in far/s free from pollution (gavid-
vasno), in those likewise it is not proper;’ the reading gavid-
vasnod (proposed by Dastir Hoshangji) is, however, doubtful.

’ Or ‘clothing,’ vistarg.

* See Chap. I, 3.


280 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


ever she becomes clean, she is to sit down in cleanli-
ness one day for the sake of her depletion (tihik),
and then she is.fi¢ for washing; and after nine nights
the depletion is no matter’.

15, A woman who Aas brought forth or miscarried
(nasAi), during forty days sees whenever ste is pol-
luted; but when she knows for certain that she is
free from menstruation she is, thereupon, to be asso-
ciated with meanwhile (vadas), from the forty days?
onward; but when she knows for certain that ¢here
2s something of it, she is to be considered meanwhile
as menstruous.

16. A menstruous woman when she 4as sat one
month as menstruous, and becomes clean on the
thirtieth day, when at the very same time she be-
came quite clean she also becomes again men-
struous, her depletion (tihik) is from z¢s beginning,
and till the fifth day washing is not allowable. 17.
And when she is washed from the menstruation,
and has sat three days in cleanliness, and again be-
comes menstruous as from the beginning, four days
are to be watched through by her, and the fifth day
is for washing*®. 18. When she Zas become /vee


1 See Pahl. Vend. XVI, 22. The Hebrew law (Lev. xv. 19) pre-
scribes a fixed period’ of seven days, except in abnormal cases.

* The same period of seclusion as appointed by the Hebrew
law, after the birth of a man child (see Lev. xii. 2-4). The Avesta
law (Vend. V, 135-159) prescribes only twelve nights’ seclusion,
divided into two periods of three and nine nights respectively, as
the Hebrew woman’s seclusion is divided into periods of seven and
thirty-three days.

° The substance of §§ 16, 17 is given in Pahl. Vend. XVI, 22,
but in language even more obscure than here. The washing men-
tioned here is merely for the first menstruation; that for the second
one being prescribed in $ 18. -


CHAPTER III, 15-22. 281


from the second menstruation she is not in cleanli-
ness for nine days anzd nights,—these days and
nights are for watching,—azd then she is to be
washed; when the nine days axd nights are com-
pleted, on the same day washing is good.

19. Of leucorrhcea (Aiharak)?, when it Zas quite
changed colour, that which comes on before and
also that which is after menstruation, the pollution
is just like ¢hat of menstruation.

20. When she as become so completely clean
from menstruation that her washing may be as
usual (dastébarag hae), she does not make the
sacred twigs (baresém), zor even other things,
polluted when beyond three steps.

21. On account of severe cold it is allowable for
her to sit out towards® the fire; and while she
washes a prayer (v4g) is to be taken zmwardly by
her‘, and the washing of her hands, except with
bull’s urine. (gdméz), is not proper till ‘Aen; and
when ¢hey ave washed by her, two hundred noxious
creatures are to be destroyed by her as atonement
for sin.

22, A woman who goes beyond the period of
menstruation °, and, afterwards, sees she is polluted,
when her pregnancy is certain—except when her


1 In such abnormal cases the Hebrew law (Lev. xv. 25-28)
prescribes seven days’ seclusion after recovery.

2 Ay. kithra, see explanation of kiharak-hémand (Av. dithra-
vand@) in Pahl. Vend. XVI, 1, 34.

® Dastir Jamaspji reads val bavan-i atash, ‘to the part of the
fire.’ From what follows it would seem doubtful whether this
distant approach to the fire is allowable until she is ready for
washing.

4 See § 6, note.

> Or, ‘goes up from the place of menstruation.’


282 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


miscarriage (nasAf yehevtintand) is evident—is
then to be washed with bull’s urine and water;
when her pregnancy is not certain she is to be con- |
sidered as menstruous. 23. Some say?, moreover,
that when miscarriage is certainly manifest she is,
meanwhile, to be considered as menstruous. 24.
Some say that when se is doubtful about the mis-
carriage she is to be washed with ceremony *.

25. And for any one* who comes in contact with a
menstruous woman, or with the person whom it is
necessary to wash with water and bull's urine, z¢ is
the root of a sin of sixty stirs‘, 26. And for whom-
ever knowingly has sexual intercourse with a men-
struous woman 2z¢ is the root of a sin of fifteen
Tanapthars and sixty stirs ®

27. Of a menstruous woman who sees a fire the
sin is one Farm4n °, and when she goes within three
steps z¢ is one Tandptihar, and when she puts a
hand on the fire itself’ z¢ is a sin of fifteen Tana-
pthars; and zz like manner as ¢o the ashes*® and
water goblet®. 28. When she looks at water z¢ is a


* Literally, ‘there is ove who says thus.’


? See Chap. II, 65.

* Reading afs instead of adfnas, ‘then for him,’

* That is, the sin is a Khér (see Chap. I, 2).

® According to the Avesta (Vend. XV, 23, 24) he becomes a
peshotanu (Pahl. tanapfhar). The Hebrew law (Lev. xv. 24)
makes him unclean for seven days.

* See Chap. I, 2. That it was sinful for her to look at fire,
even in Avesta times, appears from Vend. XVI, 8.

” Literally, ‘on the body of the fire.’

* That libfisya means ‘ashes’ appears from Pahl. Vend. V, 150;
literally it is Huzvaris for ‘clothing or covering,’ and is so used
in Pahl. Vend. VI, 106, VII, 122. Metaphorically, ashes are the
clothing of the fire.

° Reading daibalak; but the word is doubtful. Possibly it


CHAPTER III, 23-32. 283


sin of one Farman; when she sits in water z¢ is a sin
of fifteen Tanapfhars; and when through disobe-
dience she walks out in the rain every single drop
is a sin of fifteen Tandptthars for her. 29. And the
sun and other luminaries are not to be looked at by
her, and animals and plants are not to be looked at
by her, and conversation with a righteous man is
not to be held by her; for a fiend so violent is that
fiend of menstruation!, ¢Zaz, where another fiend
does not smite anything with a look (akhsh), it
smites with a look.

30. As to a house? in which is a menstruous
woman, the fire of that house is not to be kindled;
food which is delivered up from before a men-
struous woman is not proper for the same woman *.
31. A tray-cloth (khvA4né gamak) which stands
before er, when it is not in contact with her, is not
polluted; a table-napkin (pataskhtr) when apart
from her thigh, azd contact does not occur, is
proper +.

32. When one® wishes to consecrate the sacred
cakes (drén)*, when one holds up the sacred twigs


should be read gébarak for gav-bar, ‘ bull’s produce,’ referring
to the bull’s urine which, with ashes, is prescribed (Vend. V, 148).
as the first food for a woman after miscarriage.

1 The demoness Géh (see Bund. III, 3-9).

2 By khanak, ‘house, abode,’ must here be understood merely
the woman’s place of seclusion. Kzo inserts atas dén after
mfin, which renders it possible (by assuming another preposition)
to translate as follows: ‘As /o a house in which is a fire, the fire
in that house is not to be kindled by a menstruous woman.’

* See § £2.

4 Fit to use again.

> Perhaps we should read ‘she’ throughout this section, as a
woman can perform these rites among women (see Chap. X, 35).

6 The drén (Av. draona, corrupted into drfin or darfn by


234 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


(baresém)! from the twig-stand (bares 6m-dan),
and menstruation occurs, and just as it came to
one’s knowledge one puts down the sacred twigs and
goes out, the sacred twigs are not polluted.


Paz. writers) is a small round pancake or wafer of unleavened
bread, about the size of the palm of the hand. It is made of
wheaten flour and water, with a little clarified butter, and is flexible.
A drén is converted into a frasast by marking it on one side,
before frying, with nine superficial cuts (in three rows of three
each) made with a finger-nail while thrice repeating the words
humat hakht huvarst, ‘ well-thought, well-said, well-done, one
word to each of the nine cuts. Any dr6én or frasast that is torn
must not be used in any ceremony. In the drén ceremony two
dréns are placed separately by the priest upon a very low table
before him, on its left side, the nearer one having a small piece of
butter (gdus hudhau) upon it; two frasasts are similarly placed
upon its right-hand side, the farther one having a pomegranate
twig (urvaraém) upon it; and between this and the farther drén
an egg is placed. The sacred twigs (baresém) must also be
present on their stand to the left of the priest, and a fire or lamp
must stand opposite him, 6n the other side of the table. The
priest recites a certain formula of consecration (chiefly Yas. III,
1-VIII, 9), during which he uplifts the sacred twigs, and mentions
the name of the angel, or of the guardian spirit of a deceased
person, in whose honour the ceremony is performed. After con-
secration, pieces are broken off the dréns by the officiating priest,
and are eaten by himself and those present, beginning with the
priests (see Haug’s Essays, pp. 396, 407, 408, AV. p. 147).

1 The baresém (Av. baresma) consists of a number of slender
rods or taf (Pahl. tak), formerly twigs of some particular trees,
but now thin metal wires are generally used. The number of these
twigs varies according to the nature of the ceremony, but is usually
from five to thirty-three. ‘These twigs are laid upon the crescent-
shaped tops of two adjacent metal stands, each called a m4h-rf,
‘moon-face,’ and both together forming the baresOm-d4n or
‘twig-stand” The baresém is prepared for the sacred rites by
the recital of certain prayers by the officiating priest, during which
he washes the twigs with water, and ties them together with a
kdstik or girdle formed of six thread-like ribbons split out of
a leaflet of the date-palm and twisted together; this girdle, being


CHAPTER III, 33-IV, I. 285
33. And during her menstruation she is to be so
seated that, from her body, ¢Here are fifteen steps of
three feet to water, fifteen steps to fire, fifteen steps
to the sacred twigs, and three steps toa righteous
man’. 34. And her food is to be carried forth in
iron or leaden vessels; and the person (valman)
who shall carry forth the food stands at three steps
away from her®. 35. When worship is celebrated,
every time at the dedication (shnimané)® of the
consecration of sacred cakes (drén yast) z¢ is to
be uttered aloud éy her; some say the Itha and
Ashem-voht +,


CHAPTER IV.


1. A sacred thread-girdle (kistik), should it be
made of silk (parvand), is not proper; the hair
(pashm) of a hairy goat and a hairy camel is


passed twice round the twigs, is secured with a right-handed and
left-handed knot on one side, and is then passed round a third
time and secured with a similar double knot on the other side,
exactly as the kfist?k or sacred thread-girdle is secured round the
waist of a Parsi man or woman (see Haug’s Essays, pp. 396-399).

1 See Vend. XVI,9, 10. All the ceremonial apparatus must be
kept as far removed as the sacred twigs.

2 See Vend. XVI, 11-14, which states that the food is to be
carried forth on iron, lead, or the basest metal.

8 This is the time when the name of the angel or spirit is men-
tioned, in whose honour the cakes are consecrated (see § 32, note
on drén, and Chap. VII, 8).

* The Itha is Yas. V (so called from its first word), which forms
a part of the drén yast or formula of consecration (see § 32, note
on dr6én). The Ashem-voha is probably that in Yas. VIII, 9,
which concludes the consecration. The same details are given in
Pahl. Vend. XVI, 17. These prayers also form a portion of all
ceremonial worship, including the Yazisn.


286 SHAVAST LA-SHAYAS'.


proper, and from other hairy creatures (mtyind) it
is proper among the lowly (nakhézik). 2. The
least fulness! necessary for z¢ is exactly three
finger-bveadths ; when z¢ is exactly three finger-
breadths altogether? from one side, axd when the
rest is cut off, it is proper. 3. When oze retains the
prayer zxwardly*® and has tied his girdle, and ties
2z¢ anew once again, he will untie that which he has
tied, avd it is not proper ¢.

4. Cloth of thick silk - brocade (dipAk6) and
figured silk (parnikan6) is not good for girdling ;
and cloth of hide when the hair is stripped from it,
of wool, of hair, of cotton, of dyed silk, and of wood*
is proper for shirting (sapikth). 5. Four finger-
breadths of shirt’ is the measure of z¢s width away


* Literally, ‘width ;’ that is, ex/ra width, or slackness round the
waist, as the girdle sits very loosely over a loose shirt; or, as the
text implies, the slackness ought to admit three fingers together,
projecting edgeways from the waist. After tying it so loosely, any
unnecessary length of string may be cut off, when the girdle is
put on for the first time. The necessary looseness is again men-
tioned in Chap. X, 1.

* Literally, ‘extreme to extreme;’ r6ésman-4-réésman being
Huzvaris for sarasar.

* That is, has begun the prayer formula (requisite while tying
on the girdle) with a baz or muttered prayer (see Chap. III, 6,
note).

* The meaning appears to be that he must not tie the girdle
a second time without recommencing the prayer formula.

* This word, ayfby4ég,hanth, is chiefly a transcript from the
Avesta name of the kfstik or girdle, aiwyaunghana. Probably
garments in general are meant.

* Perhaps darfn may mean cloth of bark, hemp, or flax here.

* The sacred shirt, worn by Parsis of both sexes (young children
excepted) in India, is a very loose tunic of white muslin, with very
short loose sleeves covering part of the upper arm. It is called
sadaro (Pers. sudarah) in Gugarati, and shaptk (Pers. shabf)
in Pahlavi.


CHAPTER IV, 2-9. 287


from each side, from the neck to the skirt (partk);
and as ¢o the length before and behind, as much as
is proper to cover up is good. 6. So much length
and breadth, when it is double or thickened}, are
not proper; when on the separation (ddr m4nak) of
the two folds oze remains clothed on one side, both
when he wears the girdle (kfstik), azd when he
does not wear the girdle, even then it is not undress
(vishadakith)?.

7. When a shirt of one fold is put on, and the
skirt has concealed both sides, the girdle is tied over
it, avd it is proper. 8. When two shirts are put on,
and they shall tie the girdle over that which is
above, then z¢ is for him a root of the sin owing
to® running about uncovered 4.

9. By a man and woman, until fifteen years. of
age, there is no committal of ¢he sex of running
about uncovered*®; azd the sin of unseasonable


1 Assuming that aftabarfd stands for astabarid; the Huz.
ait being substituted for the Paz. ast. The text appears to refer
to lined or stuffed shirts, such as would be very suitable for the
cold winters of Persia, like the clothing padded with cotton wool
used by natives of the cooler parts of India in the cold season.

® That is, the degree of nakedness which is sinful (see §§ 8-10).

8 K2o has 14, ‘not,’ instead of raf, ‘owing to;’ this would
reverse the meaning of the sentence, but it is not the usual place
for the negative particle.

4 This sin is called vishad-dfibarisnth ; it is mentioned in”
Pahl. Vend. V, 167, VII, 48, but not described there. The usual
definition of the sin is ‘walking about without the sacred thread-
girdle;’ and it is generally classed with the two other Parsi sins of
‘walking with one boot’ and ‘making water on foot’ (see AV.
XXV, 5, 6); sometimes a fourth Parsi sin, ‘ unseasonable chatter,’
is associated with them, as in the text, but this is supposed to be
punished in a different manner in hell (see AV. XXIII).

° Indicating that it is not absolutely necessary to wear the sacred
thread-girdle till 6ne is fifteen years old (see Chap. X, 13).


288 SHAVAST LA-SHAYAST.


chatter! arises after fifteen years of age®. 10. The
sin of running about uncovered, as far as three
steps, is a Farman each step; at the fourth step z¢
is a Tandpthar ® szz.

11. A girdle to which ¢here is no fringe is proper ;
and when they shall tie a woman’s ringlet (gurs)* 2¢
is not proper.

12. Walking with one boot® as far as four steps is


1 This sin is called drayan-gtryisnih, literally, ‘eagerness for
chattering,’ and consists in talking while eating, praying, or at any
other time when a prayer (vag) has been taken inwardly and is not
yet spoken out; many details regarding it are given in the next
chapter. The sin consists in breaking the spell, or destroying the
effect, of the vag.

2 This is modified by Chap. V, 1, 2.

* See Chap. I, 1, 2. These particulars are deduced by the
Pahlavi commentator from Vend. XVIII, 115, which refers, how-
ever, to a special case of going without girdle and shirt. He says
(Pahl. Vend. XVIII, 116), ‘so that as far as the fourth step it is
not more than (ai) a Srdéshé-farandm, and at the fourth step it
amounts to the root of a Tanapthar within him; some say that he
is within what is allowed him in going three s/eps.. When he walks
on very many steps it is also not more than a Tanapfhar, and
when he stops again 7/ zs counied from the starting-point’ (com-
pare § 12),

* Probably referring to the possibility of tying the girdle over
a woman’s hair, when hanging loose down to her waist. The
present custom among Parsi women in India is to cover up the
whole of their hair with a white handkerchief tied closely over the
head; but whether this is an ancient custom is uncertain.

* This sin, which is mentioned in Bund. XXVIII, 13, is called

-aé-mik-déb4risnth or khadfi-m@k-dabérisnth, literally, ‘run-
ning in one boot,’ and is usually so understood, but how there
can be any risk of the committal of so inconvenient an offence is
not explained. Dastir Hoshangji thinks that aé-m{ik, ‘one boot,’
was formerly written avi-mfik, ‘ without boots;’ and no doubt
avi is sometimes written exactly like khadt, ‘one, (indicating,
possibly, a phonetic change of av? into agvi). Perhaps, however,
the word alludes to the Persian practice of wearing an outer boot


CHAPTER IV, 10-14, 289


a Tanapthar szz, when with one} movement; and
after the fourth step as much as ome shall walk is a
Tanapdhar; and when he sits down and walks on
the sin is the same that z¢ wow/d de from his starting-
point (binih); and ¢here were some who said zt is a
Tanapthar for each league (parasang).

13. At night, when they lie down, the shirt and
girdle are to be worn, for they are more protecting
for the body, and good for the soul. 14. When
they lie down with the shirt and girdle, before sleep
one shall utter one Ashem-vohfi?, and with every
coming and going of the breath (vayé) is a good
work of three Sréshé-Zarandms’; and if in that


(miik) over an inner one of thinner leather, when walking out of
doors ; so that the sin of ‘running in one pair of boots’ would be
something equivalent to walking out in one’s stockings; and this
seems all the more probable from the separate account of walking
‘without boots or stockings,’ avimfigak, given in Chap. X, 12.
But whatever may have been the original meaning of the word,
Parsis nowadays understand that it forbids their walking without
shoes; this should be recollected by any European official in
India who fancies that Parsis ought to take off their shoes in his
presence, as by insisting on such a practice he is compelling them
to commit what they believe to be a serious sin.

1 Assuming that hané, ‘this,’ stands for aé, ‘one’ (see p. 218,
note 3).. The amount of sinfulness in walking improperly shod
appears to be deduced from that incurred by walking improperly
dressed (see § 10).

2 See Bund. XX, 2. The same details are given in Chap.
X, 24.

8 The Av. sraoshé6-arana appears to have been a scourge
with which offenders were lashed by the assistant priests (see Vend.
II, 125, 129, IV, 38, &c.), and a Sréshé6-arandm was, therefore,
originally one lash with a scourge. As the gravity of an offence
was measured by the number of lashes administered, when this
term was transferred from the temporal to the spiritual gravity of
sin, it was considered as the unit of weight by which sins were
estimated ; and, by a further process of reasoning, the good works


(5] U


290 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


sleep decease occurs, his renunciation of st is
accomplished !.


CHAPTER V.


1, Of unseasonable chatter? that of children of
five years of age has no root; and from five years
till seven years, when ove is under the tuition of his


necessary for counterbalancing sins. were estimated by the same
unit of weight. Regarding the amount of a Sréshé-Zarandm there
is much uncertainty; according to Chap. XVI, 5 and Pahl. Vend.
VI, 15 it is the same as a Farman, and this appears to be the case
also from a comparison of § 10 with Pahl. Vend. XVIII, 116 (see
note on § 10); but according to Chap: XI, 2 it is half a Farman,
and the Farman is also probably the degree meant by the frequent
mention of three Sréshé-farandms as the least weight of sin or good
works that will turn the scale in which the soul’s actions are weighed
after death (see Chap. VI, 3). This uncertainty may perhaps have:
arisen from aé, ‘one,’ and the cipher 3 being often written alike in
Pahlavi. But, besides this uncertainty, there is some discordance
between the various accounts of the actual weight of a Srdéshé-
karanam, as may be seen in Chaps. X, 24, XI, 2, XVI, 5. Asa
weight the Sréshé-4arandm is not often mentioned in the Pahlavi
Vendidad, for wherever it translates the Av. sraosh6-Aarana it
means ‘lashes with a scourge;’ but the weight of one Sréshé-
karanam is mentioned in Pahl. Vend. VI, 15, three Srésh6-aranams
in IV, 142, VII, 136, XVII, 11, XVIII, 55, 116, and five Sréshé-
karanams in XVI, 8.

* Patitikth, ‘the dropping’ or renunciation of sin, is effected
by confessing serious offences to a high-priest, and also by the
recitation of a particular formula called the Patit, in which every
imaginable sin is mentioned with a declaration of repentance of
any such sins as the reciter may have committed. The priest
ordains such atonement as he thinks necessary, but the remission
of the sins depends upon the after performance of the atone-
ment and the effectual determination to avoid. such sins in future
(see Chap. VIII, 1, 2, 8).

* See Chap. IV, 9.


CHAPTER V, I-5. « 291


father aud innocent1, it has no root zz him, and
when sinful it has root zz the father®. 2. And from
eight years till ‘hey are man and woman of fifteen
years, if even ove is innocent during the performance
of the ritual (yasté), but is able to say.its Itha and
_Ashem-vohti’, and does not say chem, zt is the root
of unseasonable chatter for him‘+; and when Ze is
able to perform 7s ritual by heart (narm), and says
only the IthA axd Ashem-voht, some ave said that
such is as when his ritual is not performed and there
is no offering (yastéfrid), and some have said that
it is not unseasonable chatter.

3. Unseasonable chatter may occur at every cere-
monial (yazisn6); for him who has performed the
ritual z¢ is a Tandpthar szz*; for him who has not
performed the ritual z¢ is less, some Zave said three
Sréshé-éaranams*. 4. The measure of unseasonable
chatter is a Tandpthar sez; this is where every
ceremony, or every morsel, or every drop of urine is
not completed’. 5. Of the unseasonable chatter of


+ That is, intending no harm, as contrasted with sinful or wilful
chatter in defiance of instruction.

* Because the father is supposed to be Se eeahie in the next
world, for the sins of the child, even as he will profit by its goed
works (see Chaps. X, 22, XII, 15).

# See Chap. III, 35.

4 Inattention to prayers evinced by improper silence is thus put
upon the same footing as inattention evinced by improper talking.
This portion of the sentence is omitted in K2o.

& See Chap. I, 1, 2. It is a greater sin in the officiating priests
than in the other persons present at the ceremony. _

6 Probably a Farm4n sin (see Chap. IV, 14, note).

7 Referring to the three principal occasions when a prayer (vag)
is taken inwardly and retained until the completion of the action ;
during which time it is unlawful to say anything but the prescribed
prayers (see Chap. HII, 6, note).

U2


292 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


him who has not performed the ritual Afarg? said
this degree is slighter; Méddk-m4h? said both are
alike, and he spoke further of this, since for him
who has not performed the ritual, and does not
attend to® saying its Itha and Ashem-vohi, it is
more severe than for him who has performed the
ritual, and does not attend to consecrating its sacred
cake (drén), 6. Méd6k-m4h said that it (the cere-
monial)* does not become Gété-kharid*; Afarg
said that it amounts to an-offering (yastéfrid) ® for
every one, except for that person who £uzows the
ritual by heart, and through sinfulness will not per-
form z/; and it becomes 4zs at the time when,
during his life azd by his command, it is recited
with this intention, namely: ‘I wish to do z¢, my
faith (astébanth) is in the religion °’

7. The deaf and dumb when it is not possible for
him to say an Ashem does not commit unseasonable
chatter*; and when it:is possible for him to say an
Ashem he shall three times say of it, ‘Ashem,
ashem, ashem;’ and if it be possible for him to say


1 See Chap. I, 3.

* Literally, ‘ believe or trust to.’

§ During which unseasonable chatter occurs.

* Generally written Géti-kharid (see Bund. XXX, 28); but, per-
haps, we should here read yast6frfd, ‘offering,’ though géték-
khartd occurs in Chap. XII, 30.

5 The MSS. have merely st6frid, which differs from the fore-
going gét6-kharid only in one Pahlavi letter, so we should
probably read the same word in both cases, but which of them it
ought to be is uncertain, 3

* Meaning, apparently, that he can obtain the benefit of any
past ceremony, forfeited by wilful negligence, by repentance and ~
a repetition of the ceremony during his lifetime. :

™ By omitting to say it (see § 2). This clause of the sentence:
is omitted in Kao.


‘CHAPTER V, 6—VI, 2. 203
Fie Se ES
‘ith’ and ‘ashem-vohi’ it is well, and when it is
only possible for him to say ‘itha’ it matters not},


CuaptTer VI,


1. The deaf and dumb and helpless (armést)?,
though of unblemished conduct and proper disposi-
tion, is incapable of doing good works, and from
the ¢me when he is born till the 4¢e when he shall
die, all the duty and good works which they may
perform in the world become his property (nafs-
man) as much as his even by whom Zfey are per-
formed; some say that it is thus: as much as they
belong to Zaratdst*, 2. Though he does not do
the good works not really originating with (aham-
btini£) him, and does not commit the sin not really
originating with zm, z¢ is better than though fe
were able to do the good works not really origin-
ating with him, azd should not do them; but should
commit the sin not really originating with him;
when, afterwards, he passes away, and then also
comes to #zs account as to sin and good works,
when the good works not really originating with
him are more Ze zs in heaven (vahist), when the sin


1 That is, any one barely able to speak must repeat so much of
the indispensable prayers as he is able to pronounce, otherwise he
will commit sin.

2 That is, any one compelled to remain stationary or secluded,
owing to bodily or mental infirmity (see Chap. II, 98); an idiot,
or insane person, is probably meant here.

8 This comment seems to imply that its writer was translating
from an Avesta text, and here met with a word which some persons
thought contained a reference to Zaratist, but which he first trans-
lated so as to suit the context; perhaps Av. zarazdaiti may be
suggested.


294. SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


not really originating with 42m is more he zs in hell,
and when both are equal 4e zs among the ever-
stationary (hamistakan)?. 3. When the good works
are three Sréshé-Zarandms? more than the sins he
zs in heaven (vahist), when the good works are one
Tandpthar more he attains to the best existence
(pahladm ahvan)’, when his ceremony (yast) is per-


' That is, he is treated, with regard to the actions merely
imputed to him, precisely as all others are with regard to their
own actions. With reference to the hamistakan, Ard4-Viraf
states (AV.VI, 2, 5-12) that on his journey to the other world he
‘saw the souls of several people who remain in the same position,’
and he was informed that ‘they call this the place of the Hamis-
takan (‘those ever-stationary”), and these souls remain 27 this
place till the future existence; and shey are the souls of those
people whose good works and sin were equal. Speak out to the
worldlings thus: ‘Consider not the easier good works with avarice
and vexation! for every one whose good works are three Sréshé-
karanams more than fzs sin is for heaven, ‘hey whose sin is more
are for hell, they 2% whom both are equal remain among these
Hamistak4n till the future existence.” And their punishment is
cold or heat from the changing of the atmosphere ; and they have
no other adversity.’

* Probably equivalent to a Farman sin (see Chaps, 1) 102.
IV, 14, note).

* This appears to be another name for Garédmén, ‘ the abode
of song,’ which is the highest heaven, or dwelling of Atharmazd.
The lower heaven is here called Vahist, which is a general term
for heaven in general. AV.VII-X, XVII, 247, and Mkh. VII, 9-12,
20, 21 describe four grades in heaven and four in hell, besides
the intermediate neutral position of the Hamistakan (AV. VI, Mkh.
VII, 18, 19). The four grades of heaven, proceeding upwards,
are Hfimat for good thoughts in the station of the stars, Hikht
for good words in the station of the moon, Hiivarst for good
deeds in the station of the sun, and Gardédm4n where Atharmazd
dwells (Vend. XIX, 121). And the four grades of hell, proceeding
downwards, are Dis-hfimat for evil thoughts, Das-hakht for evil
words, Dfis-hiivarst for evil deeds, and the darkest hell (Vend.
XIX, 147) where the evil spirit dwells. The pahlim ahvan of


CHAPTER VI, 3-6. 295


formed’. 4. Sdshyans® said that to come into that
best existence it is not necessary to perform the
ceremony, for when his good works are one* Tan4-
puhar more than the sin he attains to the best
existence, and no account is ¢aken of performing his
_ ceremony; because in the heavenly existence (ga-
rodmanikih) it is not necessary to perform a
ceremony, for an excess of good works must attain
Garédman*. 5. As Sdshyans said, in heaven
(vahist) he who is below is elevated to him who is
above; aud it says thus: ‘ Happy indeed art thou,
O man! who art in any way near unto that im-
perishable existence 5.’

6. Kfishtand-bigéd*® said that an infidel (ak-
diné)", when zs good works are one Tandptdhar
more than 4zs sin, is saved from hell.


the text is merely the Pahlavi form of Av. vahistem ahfim
(Vend. VII, 133, XVIII, 69, XIX, 120, Yas. IX, 64), whence the
term vahist (Pers. bahist) is also derived.

1 That is, when his surviving relatives have performed the proper
religious ceremonies after his death.

® See Chap. I, 3.

8 Reading aé, ‘one,’ and supposing that this Paz. form has beer
substituted for an original Huz. khadtk, ‘one.’ This supposition
being necessary to account for the aé preceding its noun, instead
of following it; and without it we ought to read ‘three’ instead of
‘one,’ which seems, however, hardly reconcileable with the context
(but compare Pahl. Vend. VU, 136). This is an instance of the
ambiguity occasioned by a6, ‘one,’ and the cipher 3 being often
written alike in Pahlavi, as already noticed in p. 289, note 3. The
word might also be taken as the conditional verbal form aé, ‘ shall
be,’ but in that case it is likewise misplaced.

4 See note on pahlfiim ahv4n in § 3.

_ 5 A somewhat similar exclamation to that in Vend. VII, 136.

® See Chap. I, 4, note.

7 That is, one of another religion; not an apostate, nor an
atheist. ier


296 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


7. Of a pure law (dad) are we of the good reli-
gion, and we are of the primitive faith; of a mixed
law are those of the Sinitk congregation’; of a vile


1 It is not easy to identify this Sintk vaskardth, but Professor
J. Darmesteter suggests that the term may have been applied to the
Manicheans settled in eastern Turkistan and western China, whence
they may have been called Sintk (the country of the Sént, Av.
SAini, being identified with Ainistén or China in Bund. XV, 29,
because ZSin is the Arabic name of the latter). This is con-
firmed, to some extent, by a passage in the Dinkard (see Dastr
Péshétan’s edition of the Pahlavi text, p. 27), where three foreign
religions are mentioned, that of the Jews from Arfim, that of the
Messiah from the west, and that of M4nih from Turkistan. Dar-
mesteter further points out the following passages in Barbier de
Meynard’s French translation of Mas’afidf, which show that the
Manicheans had considerable influence in eastern Turkistan as late
as A.D. 944 :—

(Meynard, I, 268): ‘... the Turks, the Khuzlug, and the Ta-
ghazghaz, who occupy the town of Kfisan, situated between
Khuras4n and China, and who are now (a.p. 944) the most
valiant, most powerful, and best governed of all the Turkish races
and tribes. Their kings bear the title of irkhan (“sub-khan?”),
and they alone, among all these nations, profess the religion of
Mani.’

Again, after stating that the Chinese were at first Samanians
(Buddhists), it is added (Meynard, H, 258): ‘Their kingdom is
contiguous to that of the Taghazghaz, who, as we have said above,
are Manicheans, and proclaim the simultaneous existence of the
two principles of light and darkness. These people were living
in simplicity, and in a faith like that of the Turkish races, when
there turned up among them a demon of the dualist sect, who
showed them, in tempting language, two opposing principles in
everything that exists in the world, such as life and death, health
and sickness, riches and poverty, light and darkness, union and
separation, connection and severance, rising and setting, existence
and non-existence, night and day, &c. Then, he spoke to them of
the various ailments which afflict rational beings, animals, children,
idiots, and madmen; and he added that God could not be te-
sponsible for this evil, which was in distressing contradiction to
the excellence which distinguishes his works, and that he was


CHAPTER VI, 7—VII, I. 297


law are the Zandik}, the Christian (Tarsak), the
Jew (Yahda), and others of this sort (sand)


Cuarter VII,


1. The morning sun it is necessary to reverence
(yastan6) till midday, and that of midday it is
necessary to reverence till the afternoon time, and
that of the afternoon time it is necessary to re-
verence till night*; whenever oze is quite prepared


above any such imputation. By these quibbles, and others like
them, he carried away their minds, and made them adopt his
errors.’

The tenets of the Manicheans ought, no doubt, to have been
considered by the Zoroastrians as a mixture of truth and error,
just as those of the Sintk congregation are represented to be in
our text; but such tenets being an heretical offshoot of Zoroas-
trianism, it argues unusual liberality in the priests if they preferred
Manicheans to Christians, that is, heretics to infidels.

K2o has altered stntk vaskardih into nisinik (or vidinik)
sikaftth, which appears to be an attempt to bring the words
within the limits of the writer’s knowledge, without paying much
attention to their collective meaning.

1 A sect which (according to its name) probably adhered to a
certain heretical interpretation (zand) in preference to the orthodox
Avesta and Zand. Nérydésang, in his Sanskrit version of Mkh.
XXXVI, 16, explains a Zandik as one who ‘thinks well of Ahar-
man and the demons.’

2 Unless this paragraph be a continuation of the quotation from
KAfshtand-biigéd’s commentary, which seems unlikely, its contents
have an important bearing upon the age of the Shayast 14-shayast.
As it does not mention Muhammadanism by name it could hardly
have been written after the fall of the Sasanian dynasty, when that
new faith had become much more important, in Persia, than those
of the Christians and Jews.

8 Referring to the recitation of the Khirshéd Nyéyis, or ‘ saluta-
tion of the sun,’ which should be performed thrice a day, in the
H4van, Rapitvin, ‘and Afzérin G&hs, or periods of the day (see


298 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


for activity (khvésk4rih), and shall then do rever-
ence, it is proper. 2. And when anything of that
happens which zzdzcates when it is not proper to
wash the hands, and about this he considers that
when he does not reverence the sun it will stop’, a¢
the time previous Zo ¢at in which it occurs the sun
is to be fully reverenced by him, and, afterwards,
when zs hands are washed, it is to be reverenced
again; and when he does not reverence 2¢, except
when innocent through not reverencing z¢”, then it
becomes irreverence (14 yast) of the sun for him’®.

3. As fo the sun it is better when ove reverences
z¢ every time at the proper period (pavan g4s-i
nafsman); when he does not reverence z¢ for once
2¢ is a sin of thirty stirs. 4. Reverencing the sun is
every time a good work of one Tanapfhar®; and so
of the moon and fire zz like manner ®. 5. When on
account of cloudiness the sun is not visible (pé@ak),
and one shall reverence z¢, it is proper,


Bund. XXV, 9); a few sentences in the Nydyis, or formula of
salutation, are altered to suit the particular Gah in which it is
recited.

* K2o has, ‘it will protect z/,’ having read netrfinéd instead of
ketrfinéd in its original. To pray with unwashed hands would
be sinful (see Pahl. Vend. XIX, 84).

* That is, except when the omission is to avoid a worse evil, as
in the instance just mentioned.

* Or, perhaps, ‘it does not become a Khfirshéd Yast (“a formula
of praise in honour of the sun”) for him.’ This Yast forms a
part of the Nyayis.


* That is, an Aredfis sin (see Chap. I, 2). M6 has, ‘when he
does not reverence 7/ again,’

° That is, a good work sufficient to counterbalance a Tanapthar
sin, which puts the performance of a Nydayis on the same footing
as the consecration of a sacred cake or drén (see Chap. XVI, 6).

- * The moon and fire have each a separate Nyéayis.


CHAPTER VII, 2-8, 299


6. And while oze does not reverence the sun, the
good works which they do that day are not their
own ; some say that of the good works which they
do within the law (d4@) of the good religion he has
no share. 7. While they do not wash dirty hands
any good work which they do is not their own, for
while oxe does not utterly destroy corruption (na-
sts)! there is no coming of the angels to his body,
and when ¢here is no coming of the angels to his
body he has no steadfastness in the religion, and
when he has no steadfastness in the religion no
good work whatever reaches unto him.

8. When one wishes to perform the propitiation
(shnaiman)? of fire, it is allowable to perform one
athré’ by itself, and, when two and the ‘mad vis-
paéiby6 aterebyé, these three are thus the pro-
pitiation everywhere*; some say that it would be
proper to perform z¢ while allowable, except that of
the heterodox.


1 That is, the demon of corruption, who is supposed to enter
and reside in all filth of the nature of dead matter, until expelled or
destroyed by cleansing.

2 A shnfiman or khshnfimané (Av. khshnfiman) is a short
formula of praise, reciting all the usual titles of the spirit intended
to be propitiated by it, and is used for dedicating the prayers or
ceremony specially to his service (see Chaps. III, 35, X, 2, XIV,
3). The propitiatory formulas for the thirty angels and arch-
angels who preside over the days of the month constitute the
Strézah, or form of prayer ‘relating to the thirty days.’

® The propitiation of fire (as given in Sir6z. I, 9, Atas Nydyis
5, 6) consists of five sentences, each beginning with the word
athr6, ‘of the fire,’ and the last sentence also contains the words
mad vispaéiby6 Atereby6, ‘ with all fires.’ The meaning of the
text appears to be that it is allowable to use only one of these
sentences (probably the last), but if two are used besides the last
they are amply sufficient for practical purposes.


300 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


a a ee a ae


9. Whoever shall extinguish’ a fire, by him ten
fires are to be gathered together, by him ten punish-
ments are to be endured, by him ten ants are to be
destroyed ?, and by him holy-water (zéhar) is to be
presented to the sacred fire (Atas-i Vahram).


CHAPTER VIII.


1. Sin which affects accusers * is to be atoned for
(vigarisn) among the accusers, and that relating to


1 Literally, ‘kill.’

* The ant being a creature of the evil spirit, on account of its
carrying away corn.

8 Vinds-i haméma4lan, ‘sin relating to adversaries.’ Sins
appear to be divided into two great classes, hamém4l and
ribanik. A hamémal sin seems to be any secular offence
which injures some person or animal who, thereupon, becomes a
hamémal, ‘accuser’ (Av. hameretha, ‘opponent,’ Yas. LVI, x,
10), and who must first be satisfied by atonement, before con-
fession to the high-priest, or renunciation of sin, can be of any
avail for removing the sin (compare Matthew v. 23-26), The
Rivayats assert that if a person dies without atoning for a
hamém Al sin, his soul will be stopped at the Xinvad bridge (see
Bund. XII, 7) on its way to the other world, and kept in a state of
torment until the arrival of the ‘accuser,’ and after he is satisfied
the sinner’s soul will be disposed of, in the usual manner, accord-
ing to the balance of its good and bad actions. It is also probable
that only a man of ‘the good religion,’ or an animal of the good
creation, can be an ‘accuser.’ A rfibanik sin, on the other hand,
seems to be one which affects only the sinner’s own soul, and for
which the high-priest can prescribe a sufficient atonement. It is
doubtful, however, whether the Parsis nowadays have any very
clear notions of the exact distinction between these two classes of
sins, although aware of their names, which are mentioned in their
Patit, or renunciation of sin. The explanations given in some
editions of their Khurdah Avesta, or prayer-book, are confined to
mentioning certain special instances of each class of sin ; thus,


CHAPTER VII, 9—VIII, 3. 301


the soul is to be atoned for among the high-priests
(radan), and when they do whatever the high-
priests of the religion command the sin will depart,
and the good works which they may thenceforth do
will attain completion (avaspérik). 2. The sin of
him who is worthy of death (marg-argAn) is to be
confessed (garzisn6) unto the high-priests, and he
is to deliver up 4zs body; except ¢o the high-priests
he is not to deliver up zs body.

3. On account of the dexterity (farhang) of
horsemen it is not ¢#ezr business to hunt (nakh4ir
kardan6); and it is not allowable for any one else
to hunt for game, except for zm whose wealth is
less than three hundred stirs *,


murder, seduction, unnecessary slaughter of cattle, embezzlement,
slander, seizing land by force, and a few other evil deeds are stated
to be hamém4l sins; while unnatural offences and intercourse
with women of another race and religion are said to be rfibantk
sins. In the Pahlavi Vendidad these classes of sins are rarely
mentioned, but hamém4lan occurs in Pahl. Vend. III, 151, IV,
23, XIII, 38; hamémAlth in III, rr9; and rfibantk in XIII,
38 ; although, perhaps, not always in the sense of sin.

1 By committing a marg-argan or mortal sin, that is, a sin
worthy of death, he has forfeited his life, and ought to place it at
the disposal of the rad, or high-priest.

2 This section, intended to preserve game for the poor, is evi-
dently out of place here, as it has no connection with the context.
With reference to the property qualification for hunting, it appears,
from a passage in the Persian MS. M5 about the proper dowry for
a privileged wife, that 2000 cea of silver were worth 2300
ripis, and that 2 dirhams were 23 tolas; this was written in a.p.
1723, when neither the rap? nor the tola were of uniform amount,
though now the rfipt is exactly a tola weight of silver. As the stir
was four dirhams (see Chap. I, 2), three hundred stirs would have
been 1380 rfipis or 130 tolas of silver, according to the standards
mentioned in M5; so that hunting was intended to be confined
to those whose property was less than 1350-1380 rfipis ; but how


302 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


4. The ceremonial worship (yazisn) of those
worthy of death, which they do not perform by way
of renunciation of szz',is the ceremonial whzch is
demon worship; and when the officzating priest
(aérpat) does not know z¢ the merit (kirfak) of the
ceremonial goes to the store (gang) of the angels,
and they give the enjoyment which avrzses from that
merit in the spiritual exzstence to the soul of that
person who Zas at once (aévaz) become righteous
in mind,

5. When the mortal sinner (marg-argAn6) has
delivered his body and wealth at once to the high-
priests, and engages mentally in renunciation as to
the sin which as occurred, and the high-priests give
him ¢kety decision (dastébarih) as to duty and
good works, the duty and good works which were
before performed by him come back fo him; and
when they inflict punishment for three nights 2, he
does not enter hell. _ 6. And if the high-priest
orders the cutting off of 47s head Ae is righteous on
the spot’, and the three zzghts’ (sattih) ceremony is
to be celebrated for 42m, and the account of the
eee nea aver nemeen mre
this limitation is to be reconciled with the fact that hunting was a:
favourite pursuit of kings and nobles does not appear, unless it be
considered as a sacerdotal protest against that practice.

” That is, in those cases when they do not have the yazisn per-


formed as an atonement for sin, by order of the high-priest after
confession.


* This appears to refer to temporal punishment, inflicted by
order of the high-priest, for the purpose of saving him from the
‘punishment of the three nights’ in the other world, mentioned in
Bund. XXX, 16.

* Reading pavan gtnak; but M6 marks the phrase as pavan


dinak (for din4), ‘through the decree,’ which is probably an
error,


CHAPTER VIII, 4-9. 303


three zights (satfith) does not affect him’. 7. And
if he does not engage in renunciation Ze zs in hell till
the future existence; and in 4s future body they
will bring 42m from hell, and for every mortal szz
they will cut off 42s head once, and the last time
they wll make zm alive again, and will inflict
(numdayend) three nights’ severe punishment”.

8. However a man engages in renunciation of sin
the duty of his state of renunciation (patitih) is to
be engaged therein openly and mentally in renuncia-
tion; the duty of openness is. this, that the sin which
he knows fas assailed him, is to be specially con-
fessed (bara gébisnd) by him; azd the mental
duty is this, that he engages in renunciation with
this thought, that ‘henceforth I w7/7 not commit
sin. 9. And that which occurs before the renuncia-
tion, except pious alms, it is well for him not to be
overlooked * by him, azd not to be kept® secret by
him; for when he shall overlook®, or shall keep
secret, about sin committed, it becomes for him as


1 That is, the usual ceremonies after death are not to be with-
held in this world, and his soul is able to pass through the usual
investigation, as to his sins and good works, on its way to the
other world, without delay. This period of three nights (satfih,
‘the triplet’), which Pazand writers miscall sed6s or sadis, is the
time during which the soul is supposed to hover about the body,
before finally departing for the other world (see Mkh. II, 114, 158-
160, AV. IV, 9-14, XVII, 2-9).

2 The same statement is made in nearly the same words in
Pahl. Vend. VII, 136. This is the future three nights’ punishment
for impenitent sinners, mentioned in Bund. XXX, 16.

8 Literally, ‘which he knows thus: “It assailed me.”’

4 Reading avénisné, but the word can also be read khunin-
isnd, ‘to be made celebrated, to be boasted of.’

> Literally, ‘carried on, borne away.’

° Reading avénéd, but it may be khuninéd, ‘ boast of’


304 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


much, some say, as three Sréshé-4arandms’; some
say that when. he keeps secret about a sin of three
Sréshé-zarandms he is worthy of death; some say
much otherwise2. 10. Ataré-pad son of Zaratist*
had remarked (pédakinid) do a disciple, about this
duty, thus: ‘Conform to the renunciation of szz/’
and one* time a secret was kept by him, and he
ordered him thus: ‘Henceforth be thou never appa-
rent in this duty!’ and after that he looked upon
the supplication (avakhshih) and much repentance
of that disciple, and even then he did not become
the high-priest (dastébar) over him.

11. Zhe rule zs* this, that of those who would be
proper for this priestly duty (dastébarih), that
person is proper who is perfect in (narm) the com-
mentary (zand) of the law, and the punishment of
sin is easy for him, and he has controlled himself;
some say thus: ‘By whom a course of priestly
studies (aérpatastan) is performed.’ 12. And the
punishment of sin decug easy for him, and his having
controlled himself are proper; and when, in danger
before a menstruous woman, he engages in renun-
ciation it is proper.


" Probably the same as a Farman sin (see Chaps. I, 1, 2, IV, 14).

2 Or ‘many other ¢hings.’

* This Atar6-pad-i Zaratfist4n is mentioned in a manuscript
about 500 years old, belonging to Dasttr JamAspji, in Bombay, as
having lived for 160 years, and having been supreme high-priest
for ninety years: he is also mentioned in the sixth book of the
Dinkard. He may, possibly, have been the Atar6-pad mentioned
in B. Yt. I, 7, but it is hazardous to identify an individual by a
single name so common as Ataré-pad used to be.

* Reading aé, ‘ one,’ instead of hané, ‘this’ (see p. 218, note 3).

* Assuming that the word 4fnak has been omitted at the begin-
ning of this section (see Chap. X, 1).


CHAPTER VIII, 10-14. 305


13. Néryésang? said thus: ‘Thou deemest 2¢
most surprising that, of the renunciation of sim with
energy, whatever may be its efficacy, they have
been so much of the same? opinion, so that when-
ever they perform renunciation, however they per-
form 2, and before whomever they perform 77,
whenever @ séz is not even mentally originating
with one® a renunciation should be performed by
him; and when very many mortal sins (marg-
argan) are committed by him, and he engages
mentally in renunciation of every one separately, he
is not on* the way to hell, owing to his renuncia-
tion; and if there be one of which he is not in
renunciation the way to hell is not closed to him,
for he does not rely upon the beneficence (std) of
Attharmazd, and it is allowable to appoint a priestly
retribution (rad tégisn) to fully atone for it, and
when thou appointest a priestly retribution for it,
and dost not fully atone, it is allowable to inflict z¢
justly and strongly (drfibd).’

14. When his sin is committed against (dén)


1 This cannot be the learned Parsi translator of several Pahlavi
texts into Sanskrit, who bore the same name, and is supposed to
have lived in the fifteenth century. Being quoted in the Pahlavi
Vendidad (see Chap. I, 4, note) he must have been one of the
old commentators.

2 K2o has hOmanam, ‘I am,’ instead of ham, ‘the same;’ a
mistake arising from reading am, ‘I am,’ for ham.

8 This applies to all cases of merely imputed sin, such as those
committed by children, which are imputed to the father, and for
which he is spiritually, as well as temporally, responsible.

4 Reading pavan, ‘on,’ instead of bara, ‘out of’ (see p. 176,
note 5).

’ Most of this clause is omitted in K20 by mistake.


[5] x


306 SHAYVAST LA-SHAYAST.


accusers‘ it will be necessary to act so that the head
of the family (mirak) shall not become evil-minded?,
and shall not divorce the wife from matrimony, and
they shall not bring * 42 on unto him; before his
accusers e is to be engaged in renunciation, and
when not, #e is to be engaged in renunciation of the
stn before the high-priests (radAn), and it will
become debts, and debt does not make a man
wicked *; its effect is this, that in the future exist-
ence they may quite forsake him, and this becomes
a great shame, and they disturb (k4vénd) his enjoy-
ment. 15. 4s ¢o the sin which affects the accusers,
when the female as atoned for it, its stem (payak)
is atoned for; some say that the stem (pAyakghth)
has no root; some say that z¢ zs just like a tree
whose leaves wither away.

16. Sin relating to the soul ®, when one engages in
renunciation, stays away from him; when it shall be
fully atoned for z¢ is well, and when he does not
fully atone they will make him righteous by the
three mzghts’ (sathih) punishment. 17. Kashtandé-
bigéd® said that even that which affects accusers,
when ove engages in renunciation, stays away from
him.


* Hamémalan (see § 1); the particular instance of hamém4l
sin here referred to is seduction.

* Reading dfisminan instead of the unmeaning dismtyan of
the MSS.

* Reading yaityfina instead of the unmeaning yaitam of the
MSS. ; & being often written very much like m in Pahlavi.

* This clause about the hamém4] sin becoming a debt, to be
settled with the ‘accuser,’ either here or hereafter, is taken from
Pahl. Vend. III, 151.

* That is, ribanik sin (see § 1, note).

§ See Chap. I, 4, note.


CHAPTER VIII, 15~22. 307


_ 18. Nésai Burz-Mitré1 spoke these three sayings,
that is, ‘ Next-of-kin marriage will extirpate mortal
sins (marg-argandn), and the sacred twigs when
their ablution is swch as renders them improper for
firewood, and a man when his wife decomes pregnan
by him.’

19. Whoever commits a sin against (dén) water,
and kills a lizard, or other noxious water-creature,
has atoned for it; also when thou atonest to (dén)
fire for that agazust water it is proper?, axd when
thou atonest to water for that agaznst fire it is
proper; some say that even a scorpion is proper Zo
be killed, 20. And when a sin of one Tandpthar
is committed by him, and he shall consecrate a
sacred cake (drén), or shall accomplish a good work
of one Tandpthar ¢, it has atoned for it.

21. When he has committed a mortal sez (marg-
argan), and engages mentally in renunciation, and
the high-priest (rad) knows that, though he ought
to give up his body, he wzd/ not give z¢ up, it is
allowable when he shall kill him; that is, because
he relies upon the beneficence (sid) of Atharmazd.
22. Moreover, from the rule (mank) ‘ yazemna® kad
na hakaa’ (‘through being worshipped what then at


? See Chap. I, 4, note.

2 A blank space is left for this verb in M6, indicating that that
MS. was copied from an original already old and not very legible.

2 See Chap-A, a2.

* Consecrating a sacred cake is a Tanaptihar good work (see
Chap. XVI, 6). The theory of counterbalancing sins by good
works of the same weight is here clearly enunciated.

5 Written izimn in the MSS, This quotation appears to be,
from some part of the Avesta, no longer extant, and being only the
first words of the passage its exact meaning is very uncertain. The
section, generally, seems to refer to the beneficence of Afharmazd.


X 2


308 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


once,’ &c.) it is evident, and it becomes his through
ceremonial ablution of the hands; it amounts to a
whole quarry (k4n3) of good works, and the worship
of God (yazisn-i yazd4né6) is to be performed for
him?! 23. Atard-pad? son of Maraspend said that
it is always necessary to be more diligent in per-
forming one’s worship of God a¢ the time that many
mortal s2zs are committed; all sins de¢xg admissible
into renunciation, when thou shalt atone by com-
plete self-sacrifice (par-gAn-dadiha), and when one
engages in renunciation of the sin from és root, he
becomes free from the sin in renunciation of which
sin he engaged; for Attharmazd will not leave his
own creatures unto the evil spirit, unless on the
path of non-renunciation.


CuaptTer IX.


1, The greater HAasar is one part in twelve parts
of the day and night, and the lesser H4sar is one
part in eighteen parts’.


1 It seems that the execution of the sinner after repentance
is here considered as furnishing him with a store of good works, so
that it is allowable to perform such ceremonies for him, after death, _
as are usually performed for righteous men; the reason being
given in § 23. The end of this section and beginning of the next
are omitted in K2o.

2 Whether the prime minister of Shapfir I, or the last editor of
the Dinkard (see Bund. XXXIII, 3, 11), is not clear.

* The Hasar is not only a measure of distance (see Bund.
XXVI, 1), but also a measure of time (see Bund. XXV, B).
According to the text here the greater H4sar must be two hours,
and the lesser Hasar (which is not mentioned in M6) must be one
hour and twenty minutes. But Farh. Okh. (p. 43) says, ‘dvada-
sang-hathrem asti aghrem ayare, ‘of twelve Hasars is the


CHAPTER VIII, 23—IX, 4. 309


2. The priest (4srak) who passes away in idola-
try? (aiizdayakih) thou hast considered as desolate
(viran)?; and there is a high-priest (dastébar) who
is of a different opinion, there is ove who says he
zs as a non-Iranian (anairAn) country*®, 3. It is
declared that, when a supreme high-priest (zara-
tiistrottim) passes away in idolatry, an apostate
(aharm6ék) will be born in that dwelling, and a
rumour of this calamity is uttered* by that supreme
high-priest.

4. In order to be steadfast'in the good religion it
is to be discussed with priests azd high-priests, and
when oze does not discuss it is proper that he do
not teach it.


longest day;” the day and night in which is the longest day are
twelve of the greatest HAsars, eighteen of the medium, and twenty-
four of the least;’ according to which statement there are three
kinds of Hasar, that are respectively equivalent to two hours, one
hour and twenty minutes, and one hour. As the longest day is
said (Bund. XXV, 4) to be twice the length of the shortest day,
and the greatest Hasar is twice the length of the least one, it may
be conjectured that the H4sar varied with the-length of the day,
being a subdivision (one-eighth) of the time the sun was above the
horizon; this would account for the greatest and least Hasars,
which are one-eighth of the longest and shortest days, respectively ;
but it does not account for the medium Hasar, which is not a
mean between the two extremes, but one-ninth (instead of one-
eighth) of the mean day of twelve hours. If the Hasar of distance
were really a Parasang, as is sometimes stated, the connection
between it and the Hasar of time would be obvious, as the average
HAsar of one hour and twenty minutes is just the time requisite for
walking a Parasang, which seems indeed to be stated in Farh. Okh.
p. 42.

1 Or it may be ‘ passes over into idolatry.’

2 Keo has gir4n, ‘ grievous.’

° That is, he reads anAfran instead of virdn in the foregoing
statement.

4 Or, perhaps, ‘this calamity is at once announced.’


310 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


oe Pe eS See


s. The ceremonial worship (yazisn) which they
perform in a fire-temple?, when not done aright, does
not reach unto the demons; éu¢ that which they
perform zz other places, when they do not perform
zt aright, does reach unto the demons; for there is
no medium in worship, it reaches either unto the
angels or unto the demons. 6. Of a man who has
relinquished a dad habit, and through his good
capabilities exgages in renunciation of s7z”, the good
work advances unto the future existence.

7. Any one who shall die in a vessel (kastik) it is
allowable, for fear of contamination (padvishak), to
throw into the water; some say that the water itself
is the receptacle for the dead (khazanih).

8. This, too, zs declared: ‘When in the dark it is
not allowable to eat food ; for the demons and fiends
seize upon one-third of the wisdom and glory of him
who eats food in the dark;’ and it is declared by
that passage (gindk) which Atharmazd spoke to
Zaratist, thus: ‘After the departure of the light let
him not devour, with unwashed hands, the water
and vegetables of Horvadad and Amerédad?; for if
after the departure of the light thou devourest, with
unwashed hands, the water and vegetables of Hor-
vadad and Amerédad, the fiend seizes away from
thee two-thirds of the existing original wisdom


_ * Literally, ‘in the dwelling of fires.’ The fire must always be
sheltered from the sun’s rays, and in a fire-temple it is kept in a
vaulted cell, with a door and one or two windows opening into the
larger closed chamber which surrounds it.

* K2o has, ‘ and it shall happen through his good capabilities.’

* The two archangels whose chief duties are the protection of


water and plants, respectively (see Chap. XV, 5, 25-29, Bund.
IX, 2).


CHAPTER IX, 5—9. 311


which, when he seizes z¢ away, is the glory and
religion which are auspicious for thee that day, so
that diligence becomes a vexation this day1.’

9. In a passage of the fifth fargard of the Pazén
Nask? it is declared that ove mentions these charac-


1 This passage does not appear to be now extant in the Avesta.

* This was the sixth nask or ‘book’ of the complete Mazda-
yasnian literature, according to the Dinkard, which calls it Past or
Pazag; but according to the Dini-vagarkard and the Rivayats it
was the seventh nask, called Pagam. For its contents, as given by
the Dini-vagarkard, see Haug’s Essays, pp. 128, 129. The follow-
ing is a short summary of the account of it given in the eighth book
of the Dinkard (that published in the Pahl.-Paz. Glossary, pp. 184,
185, being taken from the fifteenth nask, whose contents were
mixed up with those of the seventh through the abstraction of
several folios from the Iranian MS. of the Dinkard before M13, or
any other copy, was written in India) :—

The Pazt (or Pazag) is about the lawful slaughtering of animals
in the ceremonial rites of fire and water at the season-festivals ;
also where, when, and how the festivals are to be celebrated, their
advantages, and the duties of the officiating priests. The rotation
of days, months, and years, summer and winter, the ten days at the
end of the winter, when the guardian spirits visit the world, and the
ceremonies to be then performed. The time for gathering medicinal
plants. The retribution necessary for the various sins affecting the
soul, the advantage of providing for such retribution, and the harm
from not providing it. The thirty-three principal chiefs of the
spiritual and worldly existences. The miracles of great good works,
and the heinous sinfulness of apostasy. How far a wife can give
away her husband’s property, and when it is lawful for him to
recover it. Whither winter flees when summer comes on, and
where summer goes when winter comes on. The amount of
disaster (v6ighn) in one century, and the duration of everything
connected with such disaster. The summer and winter months,
the names of the twelve months, their meaning, and the angels they
are devoted to; also the thirty days of the month, and the five
GAtha days at the end of the year, when the guardian spirits are to
be reverenced.

The fifth fargard, quoted in the text, was probably that portion
of the Nask which described the duties of the officiating priests.


312 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


teristics of four kinds of worship of the celestial
beings (yazd4n) :—one is that whose Avesta is cor-
rect, du¢ the man is bad; the second is that whose
Avesta is faulty (zifan6)1, du¢ the man is good; the
third is that whose Avesta is correct, azd the man is
good; and the fourth is that whose Avesta is faulty
and the man is bad. 10, Zhat whose Avesta is
correct, du¢ the man bad, the archangels will ap-
proach and will listen to, du¢ do not accept; ¢hat
whose Avesta is faulty, év¢ the man good, the arch-
angels and angels’ will approach, du¢ do not listen
to, and will accept; that whose Avesta is correct,
and the man good, the archangels and angels will
approach, will come to, will listen to, and will ac-
cept; ¢hat whose Avesta is faulty, azd the man bad,
they do not approach, do not listen to, and do not
accept.

11, In every ceremonial (yazisn6), at the begin-
ning of the ceremony*, and the beginning of the
sacred-cake consecration (drén)*, the angels and
guardian spirits of the righteous are to be invited to
the ceremony. 12. When they invoke the angels
they will accept the ceremony, and when they do


* K2o has hfizvan, ‘tongue, speech,’ for zifan, ‘faulty’ (com-
pare Pers. zif, ‘ sin’), in all occurrences of the word.

* K2o omits from this word to ‘will approach’ in the next
clause of the sentence.

* That is, shortly before beginning the regular recitation of the
Yasna, the angels, in whose honour the ceremony is being per-
formed, are invited to approach by reciting their proper Khshn@-
mans, or propitiatory formulas (see Chap. VII, 8, and Haug’s
Essays, p. 404).

* This begins with Yas. III, 1, and the spirits are to be invited
by adding their proper Khshnfmans to those contained in Yas.
III, 3-20 (see Haug’s Essays, p. 408),


CHARTERS ix, LO—1 2. ei


not invoke them, all the guardian spirits of the
righteous are to be invoked at the beginning of
‘staomi!;’ and when not, they watch until re words
‘frashé-farethram saoshyaztim, and when they
shall invoke them there they will accept the cere-
mony ; and when not, they will watch until he words
‘vispau fravashay6 ashaonim yazamaidé®, and
when they shall invoke ¢em there they will accept 4
the ceremony; and when not, they will watch until
the words ‘tauska yazamaidé*;’ and when they in-
voke them® az the threefold ‘ashem vohf’ and ¢he
word damanim",’ at the twice-¢o/d ‘aokhté-ndmané 8,
the ‘ashad haa 9, or the ‘yatumanahé gasaiti?®,


1 This may be at the ‘staomi’ of Yas. XII, 6, which is recited
before the Yasna is commenced; but K2o0 alters the meaning (by
inserting the relative particle) into ‘they are to be invoked at
“staomi,” the beginning of “all the guardian spirits of the
righteous ” (Yas. XXVI, r).’

ee Vas, XXV L, 20:

* Yas. XXVI, 34.

4 K20 has, ‘shall not invoke,’ and ‘ will not accept.’

5 The concluding words of the yénhé hat&m formula, probably
of that one at the end of Yas. XXVII, just preceding the recital
of the Gathas, up to which time the spirits wait, but, if not invoked,
they are then supposed to ascend, away from the ceremony, as
mentioned in the text.

® K20 has, ‘ when they do not invoke them.’

7 Yas. VIII, 10; which is preceded by a thrice-told ‘ashem
voht,’ at which the officiating priest tastes the sacred cake, being
the end of the Drén ceremony (see Haug’s Essays, pp. 404, 408).

® Yas. XXII, 33 (§§ 14-33 being recited twice). At this point
the officiating priest brings out the mortar for pounding the Hém
twigs (see Haug’s Essays, p. 405); Yas. XXII being called the
beginning of the Hémst in the Vistasp Yast Sadah.

9 Yas. XXIV, 30, when the officiating priest turns the mortar
right side upwards.

0 Yas. VIII, 9,, which is practically the same place as the three-
fold ‘ashem vohti’ before mentioned.


314 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


they will accept’; and when not, they go up the
height of a spear (nizak) and will remain. 13. And
they speak thus: ‘This man does not understand
that it will be necessary even for him? to go from
the world, and our prayer (apistan) is for reminding
men; it is not ¢Zaf our uneasiness avzses from this,
that we are in want of their ceremony, but our un-
easiness arzses from this, that when they do not
reverence and do not invoke us, when evil comes
upon them it is not possible for us to keep z¢ away.’

14. ‘O creator! how much is the duration in life
of him who is dead?’ And Aftiharmazd spoke thus:
‘As much as the wing of a fly, O Zarattst the Spita-
man! or as much as the hearing a wing unto a sight-
less one >,’


CHAPTER X.


1. The rule* is this, that a sacred thread-girdle
(kastik) be three finger-dreadths loose transversely


* Kao has, ‘they will not accept.’

® Literally, ‘for me,’ which seems to refer to the man, and not
to the spirits,

* This appears to be the complete translation of the Avesta sen-
tence partially quoted in Pahl. Vend. VIII, 64: ‘yatha makhshyau
perenem, yatha va perenahé,’ &c. The last clause is doubtful;
the reading adopted here is Aand zak-i shinavak-7 par andarg
avénak, as nothing more satisfactory suggests itself; it might
also be translated by ‘as much as the sound of a wing in the
invisible,’

* Reading ainak; Pazand writers convert it into yak, which
can, however, have the same meaning, though they evidently take
the word to be Huz. khadtik, ‘one,’ which is written precisely like
ainak in Pahlavi characters. Most of the miscellaneous state-
ments, contained in the latter part of Sls, commence with this
phrase.


CHAPTER IX, 13—X, 3. 315


(pavan targtin)’, as is said in every teaching
(kastak)?, and when it is less it is not proper.

2. The rule is this, that the sacred cake (drén),
set aside at the dedication formula (shnimané) on
the days devoted to the guardian spirits*, is to be used
aé the season-festivals, the Ndénabar‘, the three
nights ceremony®, the Hém-drén, and other rzées of
the righteous guardian spirits; and when they shall
not do so, according to some teachings, it is not
proper.

3. In the exposition (£4stak) of the Nihadim
Nask® it says that a man is going to commit rob-


1 That is, round the waist (see Chap. IV, 1).

2 That is, ‘interpretation or exposition’ (see Chap. I, 3, 4).
Ka2o has, ‘ and by every teaching it is proper.’

® These fravardik4n are, strictly speaking, the five supple-
mentary days at the end of the Parsi year, but the last five days of
the last month are usually added to them, so as to make a period
of ten days at the end of the year, during which the guardian
spirits of the departed are supposed to revisit their old homes, and
for whom the sacred cake is set aside.

* The initiatory ceremony of a young priest (see Chap. XIII, 2).

5 The ceremonies performed by the survivors for three nights
after a death (see Chaps. VIII, 6, XVII, 3, 4).

6 This was the fifteenth nask or ‘ book’ of the complete Maz-
dayasnian literature, according to the Dinkard, which calls it Nika-
dim; but according to the Dinf-vagarkard and the Rivayats it was
the sixteenth nask, called Niyarum. For its contents, as given by
the Dini-vagarkard, see Haug’s Essays, p. 132. The following
is a brief summary of the account of it given in the eighth book
of the Dinkard, where it occupies twenty-five quarto pages of that
work :—

The beginning of the law (dad) is the Nfkadtim of thirty far-
gards. The section Patk4r-radist4n (‘the arbitrator's code’) is
about umpires and arbitration, contracts by words of four kinds
and by signs of six kinds; and twelve sorts of arbitrators are
described in four sub-sections, according as they decide by hearing
or seeing, and with regard to women and children, foreigners and


316 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


bery, avd a wall falls in upon him, z¢ zs his destroyer ;
when a man strikes at him e zs his adversary, and
both are in sinfulness; when he is going to perform
the worship of God (yazisn6-i yazdan6) both of
them are in innocence.

4. The rule is this, that when a woman becomes
pregnant, as long as it is possible, the fire is to be
maintained most carefully in the dwelling, because
it is declared in the Spend Mask! that towards


those worthy of death. The second section, Zadamistan (‘the
assault code’), is a treatise on assault and the consequences of
assault, pain, blood, and unconsciousness ; on blows and conflicts,
man with man, women with women, and child with child, with
their proper penalties; also the murder of slaves and children.
The third section, Réshistan (‘the wound code’), is a treatise on
various kinds of wounds and their characteristics. The fourth
section, Hamémalistan (‘the accuser’s code’), is a treatise on
accusation and false accusation of various specified crimes, on
lying and slander, the care of pregnant women, impenitence and
various offences against priests and disciples, remitting penalties,
abetting and assisting criminals, mediation, punishment of children,
smiting foreigners, murder, medical treatment, and many other
things (see Pahl.-Paz. Glossary, p. 184, where they are errone-
ously ascribed to the Pagén Nask, owing to the defective text of
the MS. M13). The fifth section contained twenty-four treatises
on miscellaneous subjects connected with crime and sin (see Pahl.-
Paz. Glossary, pp. 184, 183).

The passage mentioned in the text cannot be recognised in any
of the details supplied by the Dinkard,

* This was the thirteenth nask or ‘ book’ of the complete Maz-
dayasnian literature, according to all authorities, but is called Sfend
in the Rivayats. For its contents, as given by the Dini-vagarkard,
see Haug’s Essays, pp. 131, 132. The following is a summary
of the short account of it given in the eighth book of the
Dinkard :—

The Spend is a treatise on the origin and combination of the
existence, guardian spirit, and glory of Zarattist; on his generation
and birth; on the coming of the two spirits, the good one to sus-
tain, and the bad one to destroy him, and the victory of the good


CHAPTER X, 4, 5. 97


Dakdav', the mother of Zarattist, when she was
pregnant with Zaratist, for three nights, every
night a leader (khfida)? with a hundred and fifty®
demons rushed for the destruction of Zarattist, du¢
owing to the existence of the fire in the dwelling
they knew no means of accomplishing 77.

5. The rule is this, that they have a tank (még)
for the disciples, when they are going to perform
the worship of God, and are sprinkling the stone
seat (magdk)*; and lest they should make a wet
place by that sprinkling through taking wader out
from it, it is to be done sitting; for in the Vendi-
dad® the high-priests “ave taught, about making


spirit ; on his going, at thirty years of age, to confer with Athar-
mazd, and his seven conferences in ten years; on the seven
questions he proposed to the archangels on those occasions ;
on the conveyance of the omniscient wisdom into him, showing
him heaven and hell, and the intermediate place of those ‘ ever-
stationary,’ the account taken of sin and good works, the future
existence, and the fate of the religion on earth till the renovation
of the universe, with the coming of his future sons, the last three
apostles. i

1 The Paz. Dughda of Bund. XXXII, ro would indicate Pahl.
Dikdan, but the Dinkard has Dikdafibo and Dikdatbag
(pointing to Av. Dughdhavan), and the Persian forms are
Dughdf and Dughdavth. Here the name is Dikdavé, which
is transposed into Didkav in Chap. XII, 11; it must have meant
either ‘ milk-maid’ or ‘suckler’ originally.

2 K2o has séd4, ‘a demon, and in Chap. XII, 11, where this
section is repeated, the word can be read either séda, ‘a demon,’
or shah, ‘a king or ruler;’ of course ‘an arch-fiend’ is meant.

8 M6 appears to have ‘sixty,’ instead of ‘ fifty,’ but see Chap.
Sour:

4 Or magh, on which they squat in the purification ceremony
(see B. Yt. II, 36).

° Referring probably to Pahl. Vend. XVIII, 98; the ground is
not to be wetted further than the length of the fore-part of the foot
beyond the toes, that is, not more than a hand’s breadth; this


318 SHAVAST LA-SHAYAST.


water when standing on foot, that the measure it
refers to applies to everything else, not even of a
like origin; by him who makes water the Avesta?
for making water is to be uttered, azd then z¢ is the
root of a Tandpthar sin® for 42m, and when he does
not utter 2¢ Ze is more grievously sinful.

6. The rule is this, that to recite the Gathas
over those passed away is not to be considered
as beneficial, since it is not proper to recite the
three Has‘ which are the beginning of the Atstivat
GAtha whenever ove zs on the road; whenever one
recites ¢hem over a man in the house ¢hey are
healing.

7. The rule is this, that in the night wine and
aromatic herbs (sparam) and anything like food are
not to be cast away towards the north quarter, be-
cause a fiend’ wz/7 become pregnant; and when one
casts them away one Yatha-aht-vairy6*® is to be
uttered.


measure is here extended to washing water, hence the necessity of
squatting during such ablutions.

* This is a sin which is usually classed with ‘running about
uncovered’ and ‘walking with one boot’ (see Chap. IV, 8, note).

* This Avesta is prescribed in Vend. XVIII, 97, and is still in
constant use; it consists of three Ashem-vohis (see Bund. XX, 2),
two Humatanims (Yas. XXXV, 4-6), three Hukhshathrétemais
(Yas. XXXV, 13-15), four Ahunavars (see Bund. I, 21), and one
Yéwhé-hatim (see B.Yt. II, 64).

§ See Chap. I, 1, 2.

* The three chapters (Yas. XLII-XIIV) which begin the Usta-
vaiti Gatha (Yas. XLII-XLV).

> A driig, or fiend, is usually considered as a female demon
(see Vend. XVIII, 70-77); and the demons are supposed to come
from the north, where they congregate on the summit of Aregir,
at the gates of hell (see Vend. XIX, 1, 140, 142, Bund. XII, 8).

° See Bund.J, 21. This statement is repeated in Chap. XII, 18.


CHAPTER X, 6—I1. 219


8. The rule is this, that reverential should be
the abstinence from unlawfully slaughtering of any
species of animals; for in the Stddgar Mask! it is
said, concerning those who fave unlawfully slaugh-
tered animals, the punishment is such that each hair
of those animals becomes like a sharp dagger (tékh),
and he who is unlawfully a slaughterer is slain. 9.
Of animals, the slaughtering of the lamb, the goat
(vahik), the ploughing ox, the war-horse, the hare,
the bat (£ihar4z), the cock or bird of Vohdman,
and the magpie (kaskinak) bird, and of birds ¢hat
of the kite, eagle (hXmAi), and swallow is most to
be abstained from.

10. A pregnant woman who passes away is not to
be carried away by less than four men?, who are at
it constantly with united strength; for w7¢h other
corpses, after a dog’s gaze, when they carry chem
along by two men with united strength, they do not
become polluted; du¢ for a pregnant woman two
dogs are necessary, to whose united power she is to
be exposed ; avd they carry her along by four men
with united strength, azd they do not become pol-
luted ; dw¢ when they carry er along by two men
they are to be washed with ceremony (pisak)*.

11. The rule is this, that when they beg forgive-
ness for a person (mardtim) who as passed away,


1 See B.Yt. I, 1. The passage here referred to is probably one
in the middle of the seventeenth fargard of this Nask, which is
mentioned as follows, in the ninth book of the Dinkard: ‘ And
this too, namely, those who unlawfully slay sheep and cattle, which
diminishes their life and glory.’

"2 This is the usual custom, while that mentioned in Chap. II, 6
is the exceptional case, mentioned at the end of this section, which
necessitates extraordinary purification.

8 That is, with the Bareshnfm ceremony (see Chap. I, 6).


320 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


such a prayer is more significant when oxe says thus :
‘Whenever a trespass (vinds) of mine 4as occurred
against him, you will take account of z¢ along with
those of his which have occurred against me, and
the trespasses “ave passed away one through the
other; azy further trespasses of his whzch have oc-
curred against me are then made a righteous gift
by me’’

12. The rule is this, that oze should not walk
without boots?; and his advantage therefrom is
even this, that when a boot (mfigak) is on Azs foot,
and he puts the foot upon dead matter, and does
not disturb the dead matter, he does not become
polluted; when a boot is not on 4zs foot, and he puts
the foot upon dead matter, and does not disturb 27,
he is polluted*, except when he knows for certain
(aévar) that a dog das seen 774, or 2f not it is to be
considered as not seen by a dog *.

13. The rule is this, as revealed zz the Ddbdasrt-
géd Nask*, where a day in the year is indicated,


That is, I pardon them in charity.

? Or, perhaps, ‘without stockings,’ avimfiigak; this seems to
be something different from the sin of aé-mfik-dtbarisnth,
‘running in one boot’ (see Chap. IV, 12).

* Without these words, which do not exist in the MSS., the sen-
tence seems to have no clear meaning.

* And, therefore, still containing the Nastis, or fiend of corrup-
tion, who will enter into any one who merely touches the dead
matter, without disturbing it, and can be driven out only by the
tedious and troublesome Bareshnfim ceremony.

° This was the sixteenth nask or ‘ book’ of the complete Maz-
dayasnian literature, according to the Dtnkard, which calls it
Dabasrfigd or Dabasrid; but according to the Dini-vagarkard,
which calls it Dvasrfizd, and the Rivayats, which call it Dvasrigad,
Dvasrfingad, or Dvasrtib, it was the eighteenth nask. For its con-
tents, as given by the Dint-vagarkard, see Haug’s Essays, pp. 132,
133. The following is a brief summary of the account of it given


CHAPTER X, 12-14. 221


that the sacred thread-girdle of every one who shall
be one day more than fourteen years and three
months o/d is to be tied on—z¢ zs better so than
when he remains unto fifteen years, azd then ties on
the girdle—who is more cared for, that way, than a
five-months’ child’, on whom they should put 2¢ in
the womb of z¢s mother.

14. The rule is this, that when ome retains a
prayer zxwardly*, and wind shall come from below,
or wind shall come from the mouth, it is all one 3.


in the eighth book of the Dinkard, which occupies ten quarto pages
of that work :—

Of the first eighteen sections of the Dfibasrfigd the first is a
treatise on thieves, their arrest, imprisonment, and punishment,
with the various kinds of robbery ; the second section is about the
irresponsibility of a father for the crimes of a grown-up son, and
of a husband for those of a separated wife, about the time for
instructing children, and when they first become responsible for
sin, the crime of giving weapons to women, children, and foreigners,
about warriors plundering, the various kinds of judges and their
duties, and offences against accusers. Of the twelve next sections
one, called Pasfis-hérvistan (‘the shepherd’s dog code’), is about
shepherd’s dogs, their duties and rights. Of the last thirty-five
sections the first, called St6ristan (‘the beast of burden code’), is
about the sin, affecting the soul, of unlawfully beating and wounding
cattle and beasts of burden, birds and fish; the second section,
Argistan (‘the value code’), is a treatise on the value of animate
and inanimate objects; the third section, Aratéstaristan (‘the
warrior code’), is a treatise on warriors, arms, armies, generals,
battles, plunder, &c.; the fourth section is about warm baths, fires,
clothing, winter stores, reaping fodder and corn, &c.

The passage mentioned in the text was probably in that part of
the second section which referred to the responsibility of children.
The words from ‘as revealed’ to ‘indicated’ are omitted in K20.

1 K2o has ‘ nine-months’ child.’

2 See Chap. III, 6.

$ Literally, ‘both are one;’ that is, in either case the spell of


the vag or prayer is broken.
[5] ¥


329 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


15. Also this, that ten women are necessary for
affording assistance éo a woman who is in labour:
five women for directing the making of the cradle
(gavArak), one woman should be opposite the left
shoulder, and one to hold the right shoulder, one
woman to throw a hand on her neck, one woman to
hold her waist, and one woman, when the infant
shall be born, to take z¢ up and cut the navel cord,
and to make the fire blaze’. 16. Three days and
three nights no one is to pass between the fire and
the child, nor to show the child to a sinful man or
woman; ¢hey are to triturate a little sulphur in the
sap (maya) of a plant, azd to smear it over the
child; azd the first food to give z¢ is Hém-juice
(parahém) and aloes (shapy4r).

17. The rule is this, that in case any one shall
beat an innocent man, until the pain shall cease it
becomes every day the root of a Tanapdhar sin”
for him. F

18. The rule is this, that when in a country they
trust a false judge, and keep zm among ¢hezr su-
periors, owing to the sin and breach of faith which
that judge commits, the clouds azd rain, in that
country, are deficient, a portion (bavan) of the deli-
ciousness, fatness, wholesomeness, and milk of the
cattle and goats diminishes*, and many children be-
come destroyed in the mother’s womb.

19. The rule is this, that a man, when he does
not wed a wife, does not become worthy of death;
éut when a woman does not wed a husband it


1 Literally, ‘make the fire high.’

2 See Chap. I,-1, 2.

* Most of these evils are also ascribed (see B. Yt. I, 41-43) to
neglect of the precautions prescribed with regard to hair-cuttings,


CHAPTER -X, 75-27, > 323


amounts to @ siz worthy of death; because for a
woman ¢here is no offspring except by intercourse
with men, and no lineage proceeds from her; dué
for a man without a wife, when he shall recite the
Avesta, as it is mentioned in the Vendidad}, here
may be a lineage which proceeds onwards ¢o the
future existence.

20. The rule is this, that a toothpick is to be cut
out clear of bark (pést pak)*, for the high-priests
fave taught that when one’s toothpick—made for
the mouth with the bark—shall fall, and when a
pregnant woman puts a foot upon it, she is appre-
hensive about zés being dead matter ®.

21. The rule is this, that in accepting the child of
a handmaid (£akar)* discrimination is to be exer-
cised; for in the fourteenth of the Nask Hfasparam ®


* This reference is probably to the circumstances detailed in
Vend. XVIII, 99-112, but the Pahlavi commentary on §§ 111, 112
of that passage is missing in all MSS. The Avesta to be recited
in such cases is precisely the same as that detailed in a note
On 65,

* This translation is in accordance with the seventeenth chapter
of the prose Sad-dar Biindahis, or ‘ Baindahis of a hundred chapters,’
a Pazand work of later times; but the text here might be translated
‘cut out of clean skin, and in Chap. XII, 13, where the statement
is repeated, the word used is also ambiguous.

5 The Sad-dar Bindahis says, ‘the fear arises that the infant
may come to harm.’ This section and the three which follow are
repeated in Chap. XII, 13-16.

4 This might mean a fakar, or ‘serving’ wife (see Bund.
XXXII, 6), but the further details given in Chap. XII, 14, where
this statement is repeated, make it more probable that a concubine
is meant.

5 As this was the seventeenth nask or ‘book’ of the complete
Mazdayasnian literature, according to all authorities, it is probable
that the word ‘fourteenth,’ in the text here, refers to some parti-
cular chapter or fargard, most likely to the last group of fourteen


YZ


324 SHAVAST LA-SHAYAST.


the high-priests Zave taught thus: ‘My son is suit-
able also as thy son, 6u¢ my daughter is not suitable
also as thy daughter.’


sections, mentioned below, in the summary of its contents; and
this is confirmed by another reference in Chap. XII, 7. This
nask is called Asparam in the Rivayats, and Asparim in the
Dint-vagarkard; for its contents, as given by the latter, see Haug’s
Essays, p. 133. The following is a brief summary of the account
of it given in the eighth book of the Dinkard, where it occupies
sixteen quarto pages of that work :—

Of the first thirty sections of the Hasparam, one is the Aérpa-
tistan (‘the priest’s code’), a treatise on priestly studies, priests,
disciples, and their five dispositions. One section is the Niran-
gistdn (‘religious formula code’), a treatise on the formulas of
worship, the Avesta to be recited by the officiating priests twice,
thrice, and four times, the five periods of the day and their proper
ceremonies, the season-festivals, the sacred girdle and shirt, cutting
the sacred twigs, reverencing water, the families of Zarattist, Hvdvy,
and Vistasp, &c. One section is the Géhartkistan (‘ quality
code’), a treatise on nobility and superiority, buying and selling,
cattle, slaves, servants, and’other property, houses where men or
dogs have been sick, dealings with foreigners, &c. And other
sections are about appropriating the property of others, obedient
and disobedient wives, foreign wives, advantages of male and
female offspring, breeding of cattle, treatment of labourers and
children, the evil eye, judges, the origin and cultivation of corn, the
degrees of crime and punishment, &c. Of the next twenty sec-
tions, one is about the treatment of furious cattle and mad dogs,
and the damage they may do. One section on the means of
accumulating wealth, the giving of sons and daughters in marriage,
the goodness of charity and evil of waste, the five best actions
and the five worst, unlawful felling of trees, the sin of burying the
dead, &c. And one section on the begetting, birth, and treatment
of children. Of the last fourteen sections, one is a treatise, in six
fargards, on. the ownership of property and disputes about it,
on one’s own family, acquiring wife and children, adoption, &c.
And a section of seven fargards, at the end, is a treatise on the
sufferings of men, women, children, and dogs, on the connection
of owner and herds, priest and disciple, on various offences and
‘sins, spiritual and worldly healing, physic and physicians, astrology,


CHAPTER—X,° 22-24, 325


22. The rule is this, that ove perseveres much in
the begetting of offspring, for the acquisition of
abundance of good works at once; because, in the
Nihadtim Nask?, the high-priests ave taught that
the duty and good works which a son performs are
as much the father’s as though they had been done
by his own hand; and in the Damdad WVask? it is
revealed thus: ‘ Likewise, too, the good works, zz
like measure, which come into the father’s pos-
session.

23. The rule is this, that they shall give to th
worthy as much of anything as is proper for eating
and accumulating ; because in the Nihadtim Wask?*
the high-priests Zave taught thus: ‘A man gives a
hungry ove bread, and zt is too much, yet all the
good works, which he shall perform through that
superabundance, become as much his who gave 2t.as
though they had been done by his own hand.’

24. The rule is this, where ove lies down, in cir-
cumstances of propriety and innocence, one Ashem-
vohti is to be uttered4, and zz like manner when he


the proper feeding of cattle, horses, sheep, goats, and pigs, the
duty of a frontier governor during a foreign invasion, &c.

The passage mentioned in the text was probably in that portion
of the last group of fourteen sections which treated of wives,
children, and adoption.

1 See § 3; the passage mentioned here cannot be traced in the
account of this Nask given in the Dinkard.

2 See SZS. 1X, 1. The passage here quoted cannot be traced
in any of the short accounts of the contents of this Nask. This
section is repeated, with a few verbal alterations, in Chap. XII, 15.

3 See § 3; the passage here quoted is also not to be traced in
the account of this Nask given in the Dinkard, This section
is repeated, with a few verbal alterations, in Chap. X10;

4 Compare Chap. IV, 14, where much the same is stated ag
what occurs in this section.


326 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


gets up well; when he does so, every single draw-_
ing of the breath (vay6) becomes a good work of
three Sréshé-4arandms, that is, a weight of ten
dirhams of the full weight of four mads1.

25. The rule is this, that when an action or an
opinion comes forward, and onze does not know
whether z¢ de a sin or a good work, when possible
it is to be abandoned azd not executed by him;
as it says in the Sakaddm WVask? that Zaratdst has


1 Reading i mad-4, instead of va maz-4; the word mad (see
Pahl.-Paz. Glossary, p. 21) being Huz. for the dang or quarter-
dirham. The amount of the Sréshé-faraném, as deduced from
this statement, differs from those given in Chaps. XI, 2, XVI, 5,
and must be awkwardly fractional, unless the sentence be altered
into ro gigan sang ném zis ptr sang yeheviinéd, ‘a weight
of ten dirhams avd a half, which is its full weight;’ in which case
one Srésh6-4aranam would be 3 dirhams, as in Chap. XVI, 5.

* This was the eighteenth nask or ‘book’ of the complete
Mazdayasnian literature, according to the Dinkard; but according
to the Dint-vagarkard and the Rivayats it was the nineteenth nask,
called Askarfim or Askaram. For its contents, as given by the
Dini-vagarkard, see Haug’s Essays, p.133. The following is a
brief summary of the account of it given in the eighth book of the
Dinkard, where it occupies twenty quarto pages of that work :-—

Of the first thirty sections of the Sakadtim one is a treatise
on the necessity of obedience and understanding the laws, on new-
born infants and their proper treatment, on the care of fire and
sharp-pointed things, on race-coursés, the use of water, salt and
sweet, warm and cold, flowing and stagnant, &c. One section is
the Haktdakanistan (‘annoyances code’), a treatise on irritating
words and ill-treatment of living creatures and trees, the finding of
buried treasure at various depths and in different places, &c. And
one section is the Ziyanakistan (‘damage code’), a treatise on
damage to animate and inanimate objects. Of the last twenty-two
sections, one is the Vakhshistan (‘increase code’), a treatise on
the progress of growth, breeding of cattle and other animals, plead-
ings regarding debts, growth of corn, &c. One section is the
Varistan (‘ordeal code’), a treatise on the detection of witchcraft
by ordeal, by heat and cold, &c. One-section on asking assistance


CHAPTER X, 25, 26. 327


not provided about everything whatever, but three
times z¢ has been done by Zarattst about this duty,
that is, so that the Avesta azd Zand, when one has
learned it thoroughly by heart?, is for recitation, azd
is not to be mumbled? (gtiyisn6), for in mumbling
(gidan6é) the parts of the Ahunavar® are more
chattering*, 26. As it says in the Bagh Wask®


and rewarding it, on the unjust judge and the sagacious one, on
daughters given in marriage by mothers and brothers, on the dis-
obedient son, &c. ~And one section on the spirits of the earthly
existences, the merit of killing noxious water-creatures, the animal
world proceeding from the primeval ox, the evil spirit not to be
worshipped, and much other advice.

The passage mentioned in the text appears to have been in the
first section of this Nask, as the Dinkard says it treated, among
other matters, ‘about a man’s examining an action before doing it,
and when he does not know whether z¢ de a sin or a good work,
when possible, e is to set it aside avd not to do z#’ But nothing
is said there about Zarattist, and what is said here seems to have
very little connection with the ‘rule’ laid down in this section.

1 Literally, ‘made it quite easy.’

2 Literally, ‘not to be devoured or gnawed.’

8 The formula commencing with the words Yatha ah vairyé
(see Bund. I, 21); its parts or bagha are the phrases into which
it may be divided (see Yas. XIX, 4, 6, 9, 12).

* Reading drAftar, ‘more clamourous or chattering;’ but the
word is ambiguous, as it may be daraktar, ‘more rending,’ or
girAttar, ‘more weighty, more threatening,’ &c.

5 M6 has Bak. This was the third nask or ‘book’ of the
complete Mazdayasnian literature, according to the Dinkard,
which calls it Bak6; but according to the Dini-vagarkard
and the Rivdyats it was the fourth nask. For its contents, as
given by the Dini-vagarkard, see Haug’s Essays, p. 127. In
the Dinkard, besides a very brief account of it, in the eighth
book, which states that it was a treatise on the recitation of the
revealed texts, there is, in the ninth book, a long description of
the contents of each of its twenty-two fargards, occupying fifty
quarto pages in the MSS. of the Dinkard. From this it appears
that the passage ‘quoted in our text probably occurred in the first


328 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.

thus: ‘Whoever shall mutter, O Zaratfst! my allot-
ment of the Ahunavar —that is, shall softly take 2¢
inwaraly—and shall let i¢ escape? again—that 1S,
shall utter z¢ aloud—so much as a half, or one-third,
or one-fourth, or one-fifth, his soul will I shield,
I who am Atharmazd, from the best existence—
that is, I w// keep it away—by so much of an
interval as the width of this earth.’

27. The rule is this, that ove is to proceed with
great deliberation when he does not know whether
zt be a sin or a good work, that is, it is not to be
done.

28. The rule is this, that an opinion (andazak)
of anything is to be formed through consultation


fargard. It also occurs, in nearly the same words, in Pahl. Yas,
XIX, 12-15, and as Yas. XIX is called ‘the beginning of the
Bakan’ in some MSS., it is possible that the three Has (Yas,
XIX-XXI) which relate to the three short Avesta formulas are
really the first three fargards of the Bagh Nask, which are said to
have treated of the same subjects.

1 The text is corrupted into min zak-ili, Zarataist! béstarth-i
min Ahunavar drfigist, which might be translated, in connection
with the following phrase, thus: ‘ Of my vexation, O Zarattist ! from
the Ahunavar, the most fiendish is that ove shall softly take 27, &c.
But very slight alterations of the Pahlavi letters (in accordance with
Pahl. Yas. XIX, 12) convert min into mfin, béstArth into bakh-
tarth, and driigist into drengad, Instead of ‘allotment of the
Ahunavar’ we might read ‘ predestination, or providence, from the
Ahunavar;’ because the Pahlavi translator, by using the word
bakhtarih or bakhtarth, appears to have understood the Av.
bagha in its sense of ‘ divinity, providence,’ rather than in that of
‘ part, portion.’

* Reading rdninéd or rahdinéd. The Pahlavi translator
seems to think the sin consists in breaking the spell of the vag or
inward prayer (see Chap. III, 6) by speaking part of it aloud; but
the original Avesta of this passage attributes the sin to obscuring
the meaning by imperfect recitation.


CHAPTER—X, 27, 29; 329


with the good; even so it is revealed in the Kidrast
Nask* that Spendarmad spoke to Mantséihar thus:
‘Even the swiftest horse requires the whip (taza-


' This was the twelfth nask or ‘book’ of the complete Maz-
- dayasnian literature, according to the Dinkard, which calls it
Kidrast6 or Kidrdst6; but according to the Dini-vagarkard and
the Rivayats it was the fourteenth nask called Girast. For its
contents, as given by the Dini-vagarkard, see Haug’s Essays, p. 131.
The following is a summary of the short account of it given in
the eighth book of the Dinkard :—

The Xidréstd is a treatise on the race of man; how Aftharmazd
produced the first man, Gaydémard, how the first pair, Mashya and
Mashy®4t, arose, with their progeny, till the region of Khvantras was
full, when they supplied the six surrounding regions, till they filled
and cultivated the whole world, The Pésdadian dynasty of H6-
shang, Takhmérupo, and Yim, the evil reign of Dahak, descended
from Taz, the brother of Héshang and father of the Arabs, then
Frédin who divided Khvaniras between his three sons, Salm, Tig,
and Afri, who married the daughters of Patsrdb6 (compare Pahl.
Vend. XX, 4) king of the Arabs, then MAantsfthar, descendant
(n4p6) of Afrig, the penal reign of Frastyav ruler of Taran, then
Afizéb6 the TfmAaspian, descendant of Mantiskihar, then Kai-
Kavad and the penal reign of Karsaspé. The Kayanian dynasty
of K4éi-Us, Kai-Khiisréb son of Styavakhsh, with many tales of the
specially famous races of Iran, Tfiran, and Salman, even to the
reigns of Kai-Léhar4sp and Kai-Vistasp. The apostle Zaratist,
and the progress of time and events from the reign of Frédfn till
Zarattist’s conference with Afharmazd. The race of Mantséthar,
Nédar, and others. Avarethrabau’s (see Fravardin Yt. 106) father,
Ataré-p4d son of Maraspend. On future events and the reign of
the renovation of the universe; the origin of the knowledge of
occupation, and the care and industry of the period; the great
acquaintance of mankind with the putting aside of injury from the
adversary, the preservation of the body, and the deliverance of the
soul, both before and after the time of Zarattist.

As MAantissthar is several times mentioned there are several
places in this Nask where the statement, quoted in the text as
a saying of Spendarmad, the female archangel who has special
charge of the earth (see Chap. XV, 5, 20-24, and Bund. I, 26),
may have occurred.


330 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


nak), the sharpest steel knife requires the whetstone
(afsdn), and the wisest man requires counsel (ham-
pairsith),

29. The rule is this, that when oze laughs outright
(bara khandéd) the Avesta and Zand are not to
be mumbled, for the wisdom of Attharmazd is omni-
scient, awd good works are a great exercise of
liberality, but an extreme abstinence from producing
irritation (hangtdAr-dahisnih) ; because in the Ra-
tiistditth Mask! many harsh things are said about
the severe punishment of producers of irritation, in
the spiritual evestence.

30. The rule is this, that as there may be some
even of those of the good religion who, through
unacquaintance with the religion, when a female
fowl crows in the manner of a cock, will kill the


' This was the seventh nask or ‘book’ of the complete Maz-
dayasnian literature, according to the Dinkard, which calls it
Ratistattt ; but according to the Dini-vagarkard and the Rivayats
it was the eighth nask called Ratustat. For its contents, as given
by the Dini-vagarkard, see Haug’s Essays, p. 129. The following
is a summary of the short account of it given in the eighth book
of the Dinkard:—

The Ratistait? is a treatise on indispensable religious practices,
the reason of the worthiness and superexcellence in a purifying
priest, and how to distinguish worthiness and superexcellence from
unworthiness, in the priesthood of each of the seven regions of the
earth; on the indication and manifestation of an assemblage of the
archangels, the formulas and means to be employed in reverencing
the angels, the position and duties of the two officiating priests in
the ceremonies, and all the business of the orderers of ceremonies,
with their various duties; on the greatness and voluntariness of
good works, the kinds of voluntariness, and the proximity of
Atiharmazd to the thoughts, words, and deeds of the material
world,

It is uncertain under which of these heads the passage mentioned
in the text may have occurred.


CHAPTER X, 29=32. 331


fowl, so those of the primitive faith* ave said that
there may be mischief (vinast4rih) from wizards in
that dwelling, whzch the cock is incapable of keeping
away, and the female fowl makes that noise for the
assistance of the cock”, especially when the bringing
of another cock into that dwelling is necessary.

31. The rule is this, that when ove sees a hedge-
hog, then adong with it? a place in the plain, free
from danger, is to be preserved; for in the Ven-
didad * the high-priests Zave taught that it is when
the hedgehog every day voids urine into an ant’s
nest that a thousand ants will die.

32. The rule is this, that in the Vendidad® seven
kinds of things are mentioned, azd when they are
the cause of a man’s death, until the forthcoming
period of the day (g4s-i levin) comes on, contami-


epee Chap. I, 3.

2 The cock is considered to be an opponent of demons and
wizards (see Bund. XIX, 33), and to warn men against the seduc-
tions of the demoness of lethargy (see Vend. XVIII, 33-42, 52).

’ Assuming that levatman val means levatman valman, but
the reading ‘he takes z# back to (lakhvar val) the plain,’ which
occurs in the repetition of this section in Chap. XII, 20, seems
preferable.

4 The details which follow are to be found in Bund. XIX, 28,
but they appear to be no longer extant in the Pahlavi Vendidad ;
though the hedgehog is called ‘ the slayer of the thousands of the
evil spirit,’ in Vend. XIII, 5, of which passage the statement in our
text seems to be an illustration. The ant is considered noxious.

5 Vend.VII, 5, 6, where, however, eight modes of death are
mentioned, which delay the arrival of the Nasts, or fiend of corrup-
tion, till the next period of the day; these are when the person
has been killed by a dog, a wolf, a wizard, anxiety, falling into
a pit, the hand of man as sentenced by law, illegal violence, or
strangulation. In all other cases it is supposed that the fiend of
corruption enters the corpse immediately after death (see Vend.’
VII, 2-4).


$32 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


———


nation (nisrfist)! does not rush upon him; and for
this reason, this, too, is well for the good, that is, to
show a dog rightly again a previous corpse in the
forthcoming period of the day”.

33. The rule is this, that by those who attend to
a corpse among the pure z¢ is then to be shown 70 a
dog very observant of the corpse ; for when even a
thousand persons shall carry away a corpse which
a dog as not seen, they are all polluted *

34. The rule is this, that meat, when there is
stench or decomposition not even originating with
zt, is not to be prayed over *; and the sacred cake
(drén) and butter (gA4ts-dak) which are hairy are
also not to be prayed over °.

35. A woman is fit for priestly duty (zétih) among
women °, and when she is consecrating” the sacred


* See Bund. XXVIII, 29/

> In order that there may be no risk of the fiend of corruption
having entered the corpse after it was first exhibited to a dog.

° This statement has been already made in Chap. II, 65.

* That is, it is not to be used in any religious ceremony. Small
pieces of meat are consecrated, along with the sacred cakes, in the
Drén and Afring4n ceremonies at certain festivals.

5 So in K20; but M6 has, ‘the sacred cake they present, even
that is not to be prayed over.’ Although M6 is more carefully
written than K20, it seems to have been copied from an original
which was hardly legible in some places, of which this is one.
The presence of a hair in the cake or butter would render it use-
less for religious purposes.

® But only for some of the minor priestly offices, such as conse-
crating the sacred cake. According to Avesta passages, quoted in
the Nirangistan, any man who is not a Tanapfhar sinner can per-
form certain priestly duties for virtuous men, and any woman who
is not feeble-minded (kasu-khrathwa) can perform them for
children,


7 M6 has, ‘when she does not consecrate,’


CHAPTER X, 33-40. 333


cake (drén), and one Ashem-vohii! is uttered by
her, she puts the sacred twigs (baresém) back on
the twig-stand, brings them away, and the utterance
of another one is good; when she says it is not
expedient to do z¢ with attention before a meal, it
is proper. 36. The sacred cake of a disreputable
woman is not to be consecrated, but is to be ren-
dered ineligible (aviginakS).

37. When one places a thing before the fire ob-
sevandy, and does not see the splendour itself,
‘tava athr6?’ is not to be said. .

38. At night, when® oze lies down, the hands are
to be thoroughly washed. 39. That which comes
from a menstruous woman to any one, or to any-
thing, is all to be thoroughly washed with bull’s
urine (g6méz) and water +.

[40. The rule is this, as Ataré-pAd son of Mara-
spend® said when every one passed away:—‘ The
mouth-veil® and also the clothing are to be well


1 See Bund. XX, 2; it is rather doubtful whether we should
read ‘ one’ or ‘two.’

2 These Avesta words, meaning ‘for thee, the fire,’ are used
when presenting anything to the fire, such as firewood and incense
(see Yas. VII, 3, XXII, 10, 22, &c.)

® Reading amat, ‘when,’ instead of mtin, ‘who’ (see Bund.
I, 7, note).

4 Here ends the original Shayast la-shayast. § 40 is found only
in M6, and is evidently a later addition to that MS. by another
hand. Then follows the Farhang-i Otm-khadak, both in M6 and
K2o; this is an old Avesta-Pahlavi Glossary which has no connec-
tion with Sls., although it may be of the same age, as it quotes
many Avesta sentences which are no longer extant elsewhere, and
amongst others passages from the Nihadtim Nask (see Sls. X, 3)
and the commentary of Afarg (see Sls. I, 3).

5 See Bund. XXXII], 3.

® The padam’‘ (Av. paitidana, Paz. pendm) ‘ consists of two


334 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


set apart from the gifts (dasardn), so that his
soul may become easier. Completed in peace and
pleasure. |


Part I].—A Supplementary Treatzse’.


CHAPTER XI.


1. The degrees of sin are these ?, such as a Far-
man, Sréshé-£arandm, Agerept, Aivirist, Aredis,
Khor, Bazdi, Yat, and Tandpfhar, and I wzd/ men-
tion each of them a second time. 2. A Farman is
the weight of three dirhams of four mads*; a


pieces of white cotton cloth, hanging loosely from the bridge of
the nose to at least two inches below the mouth, and tied with two
strings at the back of the head. It must be worn by a priest
whenever he approaches the sacred fire, so as to prevent his breath
from contaminating the fire. On certain occasions a layman has
to use a substitute for the pendm by screening his mouth and nose
with a portion of his muslin shirt.’ (Haug’s Essays, p. 243, note 1;
see also Pahl. Vend. XVIII, 1-4.)

1 This second part is evidently by another writer, for he not
only repeats several passages (Chaps. XI, 1, 2, XII, 11x, 13-16, 18,
20), which are given in the first part, but he also writes generally
in a less simple style. In some MSS. of Sls. alone, such as Mg,
the second part immediately follows the first, as in this translation;
indicating that it has been accepted as a part of the same work.
But in M6 the two parts are separated by the Farh. Okh., occupy-
ing twenty folios; and in Kz2o there is an interval of ninety-two
folios, containing the Farh. Okh., Bund., B. Yt., and several other
texts.

 §§ 1, 2 are a repetition of Chap. I, 1, 2, with a few variations.
The number of degrees is here raised to nine by the addition of
the Srésh6-4aranam (see Chap. X, 24), which is written Sréshafara-
nam in both these sections.

* Reading i mad-4, instead of va m-4; the mad being a
quarter-dirham (see Chap. X, 24, note); or we can read ‘weight and
quantity (mayah) of three dirhams,” The amount of the Farman


CHAPTER XI, I-4. Aes


Sréshé-£arandm is one dirham and two mads; three
Srésh6-aranams are the weight of four dirhams
and two mads!}; an Agerept is thirty-three stirs?; an
Aivirist is the weight of thirty-three dirhams; an
Aredis is thirty séévs*; a Khér is sixty stirs; a
 Bazai is ninety stirs; a Yat is a hundred and eighty
stirs, and a Tandapthar is three hundred stirs.

3. Every one ought to be unhesitating azd una-
nimous about this, that righteousness is the one
thing, and heaven (garéddm4n)* the one _ place,
which is good, and contentment the one thing
more comfortable.

4. When a sheep? is slaughtered and divided, its
meat-offering (gaviis-dak)® is to be thus pre-
sented :—the tongue, jaw, and left eye are the


here given appears to agree with that stated in Chap. XVI, 1, but
differs very much from the sixteen dirhams mentioned in Chap. I, 2,
and the twenty-eight dirhams quoted by Spiegel.

1 That is, one Srdshé-faranadm is one dirham and a half, and
three of them, therefore, are four dirhams and a half; the mad
being a quarter-dirham. This computation differs considerably
from the amounts stated in Chaps. X, 24, XVI, 5, but corresponds
better with the supposition (see Chap. IV, 14, note) that a Srdshé-
Aaranam is one-third of a Farman.

? Both this amount and the next are evidently wrong, and no
doubt the Pahlavi ciphers have been corrupted. Chap. XVI, 5
gives ‘ sixteen’ and ‘ twenty-five’ stirs, which are probably correct,
though the computation in Chap. I, 2 is very different.

3 Written Aredtis 30 si, ‘an Aredis is 30 (thirty),’ as in Chap.
I, 2; with which also all the remaining amounts correspond.

* See note on pahitim ahvan in Chap. VI, 3.

Oy {coaty

6 Av. gaus hudhau, which is generally represented by a small
piece of butter placed upon one of the sacred cakes; but on
certain occasions small pieces of meat are used. The object of
this section is to point out what part of the animal is suitable for
use in a ceremony dedicated to any one of the angels, or spirits,
mentioned. :


536 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


angel Hém’s! own; the neck is Ashavahist’s? own ;
the head is the angel Vaé’s® own; the right shoulder
(arm). is -Ardvistris#, thevlett. 1s tie so te
right thigh (hakht) is for the guardian spirit® of
Vistasp, and the left for the guardian spirit of Ga-
masp"; the back is for the supreme chief®; the loin
is the spirits’ own; the belly is Spendarmada’s®; the
testicles!° are for the star Vanand"; the kidneys are


? Av. haoma, the angel of the Hém plant (see Yas. IX—XI,
Bund. XVIII, 1-3, XXVII, 4, 24), the juice of which is used
in ceremonial worship by the Parsis.

® The same as Ardavahist (see Bund. I, 26).

* M6 has ‘Ram’ as a gloss; he is the Vayd of the Ram Yt.
‘the good Vaé’ of Mkh. II, 115, who assists the righteous souls in
their progress to the other world; his name, R4m, is given to the
twenty-first day of the Parsi month (see Chap. XXII, 21).

* Av. Ardvi? sfira of the Abn Yt. a title of An@bita, the female
angel of the waters (see Bund. XXXII, 8). This title is written
Arédvivstr in the Bundahis, and applied to the source of pure
water (Bund. XIII); while the name AvA4n, ‘waters,’ is given
to the eighth month and the tenth day of each month in the Parsi
year.

° Av. Drvaspa of the Gés Yt., the name of the female angel of
cattle, called Gésirvan in Bund. IV; her alternative name, Gés,
is given to the fourteenth day of the Parsi month.

* The word fravash-i, ‘the guardian spirit of, is evidently
omitted here, as it occurs with the next name. For Vistasp, see
Bund. XXXI, 29, XXXIV, 7.

" Av. Gamaspa of Yas. XIII, 24, XLV, 17, XLVIII, 9, L, 18,
Aban Yt. 68, &c., the prime minister of VistAsp.

: Ratpok bea stands for the Av. rathw6 berezatd of
Yas. I, 46, &c., a ‘supreme chief’ who is often associated with
the chiefs of the various subdivisions of time, and seems to be
Attharmazd himself (see Yas. LVI, i, 10).

* The female archangel who has charge of the earth (see Chap.
XV, 5, 20-24, and Bund. I, 26).

* The word gfind has here, in most MSS., the usual Persian
gloss dahan, ‘mouth’ (see Bund. XIX, 1), which is a very im:
probable meaning in this place.

” Probably Fomalhaut (see Bund. II, 7, note).


CHAPTER XI, 4, 5. 3o7


Haptéiring’s*; the ventricle (naskadak5)? is for
the guardian spirit of priests; the lungs are for the
guardian spirit of warriors; the liver is for com-
passion and sustenance’ of the poor; the spleen is
Mansarspend’s*; the fore-legs (b4zait) are for the
waters; the heart is for the fires; the entrail fat is
Ardai-fravard’s®; the tail-bone (dunb-gazak5) is for
the guardian spirit of Zaratdst the Spitaman®; the
tail (dunbak) is for Vad’ the righteous; the right
eye is in the share of the moon’; and any® ¢hat
may be left over from those is for the other arch-
angels. 5. Zhere have been ¢hose who may have
spoken about protection, and ¢here have been those
who may have done so about meat-offerings; who-
ever “as spoken about protection is such as has


1 Ursa Major, called Hapték-ring in Bund. II, 7.

® Translating in accordance with the Persian gloss fustah,
given in the modern MS. Mg; but nas-kadako may perhaps
mean ‘the womb.’

§ Reading sar-@yisn6, ‘ maturity,’ the usual equivalent of Av.
thraosta (see Yas. XXXIV, 3), and not srayisno, ‘chanting.’

* Av. m&thra spezta, ‘the beneficent sayings, or holy word,’
of which this angel is a personification; his name is often cor-
rupted into Mahraspend or Maraspend, and is given to the twenty-
ninth day of the Parsi month (see Chap. XXII, 29).

’ A personification of the Av. ashaonam fravashayé, ‘ guar-
dian angels of the righteous’ (see Fravardin Yt. 1, &c.), whence
the first month, and the nineteenth day of each month, in the Parsi
year, are called Fravardin.

6 This clause and the next are omitted in K2o.

7 The angel of the wind, whose name is given to the twenty-
second day of the Parsi month (see Chap. XXII, 22).

8 Or its angel, M4h, whose name is given to the twelfth day of
the Parsi month.

‘9 M6-has va aé-maman=va aé& (Pers. 14, ‘any’); Kzo has
kol4 maman, ‘whatever,’ and omits the words ‘ may be left over’
and ‘ other.’


[5] Z


~


338 SHAVAST LA-SHAVAST.


spoken well, and whoever 4as spoken about meat-
offerings has not spoken everything which is note-
worthy!. 6. When oze shall offer up’ whaz pertains
to one (khadfikag) on account of another it is
proper; except the tongue, jaw, and left eye, for
that those are the angel Hém’s own is manifest
from the passage: ‘ Hizvém frerenaod*, Ge.


CuarTer XII.


y. The rule is this, that when one’s form of wor-
ship (yast)* is performed, and it is not possible for
him to prepare z¢, the practice of those of the primi-
tive faith® is, when the girdle (aipiyadng) is twined
about a sacred twig-bundle (baresém)® of seven
twigs (tak), to consecrate a sacred cake (drdén6)
thrice, which becomes his form of worship that is
performed one degree better through the sacred
cake; and of the merit of a threefold consecration


* Meaning, apparently, that to pray for protection as a favour is
better than to pray for it as a return for an offering.

? K2o has ‘shall give up.’

® It is doubtful if this passage can be found in the extant
Avesta; but a passage of similar meaning, and containing the
words frerenaod and hizvé, occurs in Yas. XI, 16, which states
that ‘ the righteous father, Ahuramazda, produced for me, Haoma,
as a Draona, the two jaws, with the tongue and the left eye;’ and
it then proceeds. (Yas. XI, 17-19) to curse any one ‘who shall
deprive me of that Draona, or shall himself enjoy, or shall give
away what the righteous Ahuramazda gave me, the two jaws, with
the tongue and the left eye.’

* A Yast is a formula of praise in honour of the sun, moon,
water, fire, or some other angel, as well as a term for prayers and
worship in general.


5 Sée Chap. I, 3. ° See Chap. III, 32, note.


CHAPTER XI, 6—XII, 3. 339


of the sacred cake the high-priests ave specially
taught, in the Haisparam Vass’, that 2¢ is as much
as that of a lesser form of worship.

2. The rule is this, that he who is himself more
acquainted with religion is he who considers him
who is more acquainted with religion than himself
as high-priest, and considers 42 as high-priest” so
that he may not destroy the bridge of the soul?; as
it says in the Sakadtim /Vask* that no one of them,
that is an inattentive (asrfishdar) man who has
no high-priest, attains to the best existence’, not
though his recitations should be so many that they
have made his duty and good works as much as the
verdure (sapdak) of the plants when it shoots
forth in spring, the verdure which Adharmazd as
given abundantly.

3. The rule is this, that they keep a fire * in the
house, because, from not keeping the fire properly,
there arise less pregnancy of women and a weeping
(Av-didand) for the loss of strength (tant) of
men’; and the chilled charcoal (angist) and the
rest which are without advantage-(bar) are to be


ee


1 See Chap. X, 21. The passage mentioned in the text was
probably in the section called Nirangistan.

2 Kz2o omits this repetition.

8 That is, may not render the passage of his soul to heaven,
over the Kinvad bridge (see Bund. XII, 7), impossible, owing to
the sin of arrogance in this world.

4 See Chap. X, 25; the passage alluded to was probably at
the beginning of the Nask, which treated of ‘the reward of the
precepts of religion, and the bridge of the destroyers of good
preceptors, adapted to their destruction.’

5 See Chap. VI, 3.

6 Ko has ‘that a fire is to be properly kept.’

7 Keo has ‘and a logs of the strength and wealth of men.’


Z2


340 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


carried away from the fire; and in the Spend Mask?
tt is revealed that a fire, when they shall make it
quite clean from its chilled charcoal, as as much
comfort as a man whose clothing they should make
clean.

4. The rule is this, that when any one passes
away it is proper to render useless? as much as the
smallest mouth-veil*,' for it says in the Vendidad*
that ‘if even those Mazdayasnians should leave on
him who is dead, in parting with him, as much as
that which a damsel would leave in parting with the
food-bowl] (padmanak6)—that is, a bag (anba-
nak6-handa)*’—the decree is this, that z¢ is a Tana-


* See Chap. X, 4; the passage mentioned was probably in that
part of the Nask which described the protection afforded by the
fire to the new-born Zaratist. :

2 Probably a negative is omitted, or akarintdand should be
translated ‘ to make no use of.’

° See Chap. X, 40. Kzo has ‘ garment.’

* Always written Vadikdad in this second part of Sls., except
in Chap. XIII, 7; whereas in the first part it is written in its un-
corrupted form Gavid-déf-dad or Gavid-séd4-dad, ‘the law
opposed to the demons.’ The passage here quoted is Pahl. Vend.
V, 171, 172, with one or two verbal variations.

_° Standing for anbanak-aé, which is corrupted in the Vendidad
MSS. into the unintelligible form andanak6-1, so that this old
quotation throws a rather unexpected light upon a passage in the
Vendidad which translators would be almost certain to misunder-
stand. The allusion is to the bags used by a menstruous woman,
when eating, to prevent contamination of the food. The Persian
Rivayats state that three bags (kisah) are made of two thicknesses
of strong linen, one bag to wear on each hand, and the third, which
is larger, to hold the metal food-bowl and water-goblet. After
thoroughly washing her hands and face, she puts the two bags on
her hands, taking care that they do not touch her food, or clothes,
or any other part of her body: She then feeds herself with a
metal spoon, which must not touch her nose; and when the meal


CHAPTER XII, 4, 5. 341
eee ee ee
pthar szz? at root, which is hell; avd in the Vendi-
dad* it says that the clothing of the charitable
(dahisn-hémand) soul, and even the clothing
which they will give 7¢¢, are out of almsgivings
(dasaran) *,

_ 5. The rule is this, that when any one passes
away, after keeping fasting the three zighds‘, still
the presentation of holy-water (zéhar) to the fire is
to be performed, which is the presenting of the
holy-water to the nearest fire; for in the Damdad
Nask* zt is revealed that when they sever (te-
britind) the consciousness of men it goes out to the
nearest fire, then out to the stars, then out to the


is finished the food-bowl and water-goblet are placed on the large
bag, and the two smaller bags inside it, till wanted again.

gaaee Chap. Lt, 2.

2 This passage does not appear to be now extant in the
Vendidad, and it is possible to read Nask Dad instead of Vaditkdad.
The Dadt or Dadak Nask was the eleventh nask or ‘book’ of
the complete Mazdayasnian literature, according to the Dinkard,
which merely says that its ‘ Avesta and Zand are not communicated
to us by the high-priest.’ According to the Dint-vagarkard, which
calls it Khfist6, and the Rivayats, which call it Khast, it was the
twelfth Nask, and they give its contents in more detail than usual
(see Haug’s Essays, pp. 130, 131).

8 Meaning that the dead require no clothing, as their future
bodies will be clothed out of the garments they have given away
in charity. The resemblance of this statement to that contained
in Bund. XXX, 28, which must have been abridged from the
Damdad Nask (see SZS. IX, 1), renders it possible that it may
have been taken from that Nask.

4 No fresh meat is to be cooked or eaten for the first three days
after a death in the house, according to the Sad-dar Bundahis,
LXXVIII (compare Chap. XVII, 1-3).

5 See SZS. IX, 1. The passage here quoted may perhaps be
found in the complete text of the Bundahis, as given in TD (Chap.
347; see Introduction, p. xxxvii).


342 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


moon, and then out to the sun!; and z¢ is needful
that the nearest fire, which is that to which it as
come out, should become stronger (z6r-hé6mand-
tar)”.

6. The rule is this, that they should not leave a
nail-paring unprayed over (anafstidak), for if it be
not prayed over (afsdnd)* it turns into the arms
and equipments of the Mazanan demons‘; ¢hzs is
explicitly shown in the Vendidad ®.

7, The rule is this, that the labour of child-birth ®
is not to be accomplished at night, except while
with the light of a fire, or the stars and moon, upon
zt; for great opposition is connected with it, and in
the twentieth of the Hisparam JVask’ it is shown
that over the soul of him who works in the dark
there 7s more predominance of the evil spirit.

8. The rule is this, that they should allow the egg
and other food® for those gifts axd favours of the


1 A righteous soul is supposed to step out first to the star
station, then to the moon station, and then to the sun station, on
its way to Garddman, the highest heaven; but if its righteousness is
imperfect it has to stop at one of these three stations, which are
the three lower grades of heaven (see note on pahiiim ahvan,
Chap. VI, 3).

2 Or ‘more provided with zr,’ which may mean ‘ holy-water,’ as
the two words zér and z6har are occasionally confounded.

® Or, perhaps, ‘if they shall not pray over 7#’

* See Bund. III, 20, XIX, 19, 20.

5 Vend. XVII, 29.

° Barman-zerkhfinisnth may also mean ‘begetting a son.’

* See Chap. X, 21. The word ‘twentieth’ appears to refer to
the second group of twenty sections, one of which treated of the
begetting, birth, and treatment of children.

* Referring to the egg, dréns, frasasts, and gaus hudhau or
‘meat-offering’ (which may be either butter or meat, see Chap.
XI, 4) that are used in the drén ceremony, or consecration of the
sacred cakes (see note on drén, Chap. III, 32). The object of


CHAPTER XII, 6-11. BAe
ee eee ee
sovereign moon (mah-i khfd@ai) and the other
angels ; if so, it is to be allowed by them thus: ‘I
will consecrate so much food for such an angel,’ and
not thus: ‘One sacred cake (dr6n6) in so much
food.’ g. And the reason of it is this, that they who
shall allow thus: ‘One sacred cake out of so much
food,’ and of which zis one thing less, even though
one shall consecrate z¢ many times, still then he Aas
not repaid; and ¢hey who should allow thus: ‘I will
consecrate so much food for such an angel,’ though
one shall reverence Aim with many sacred cakes, it is
proper. 1o. And in the twenty-two sections of the
Sakddim Mask? grievous things are shown about
those who do not make offerings (atistéfrid) unto
the angels.

11. The rule is this, that when a woman becomes
pregnant, as long as it is possible, a fire ove cares
for well is to be maintained in the house, because it
is revealed? in the Spend Nask that ¢o Dakdav ?,
the mother of Zarattist, when she was pregnant with
Zaratist, for three nights, every night a leader
(shah)* with a hundred and fifty demons came for
the destruction of Zaratist, and yet, owing to the
existence of the fire in the dwelling, they knew no
means for zt.


this paragraph is, evidently, to reprove niggardliness in such offer-
ings, and to prevent their being mere pretexts for feasting.

1 See Chap. X, 25. The passage alluded to here was probably
in that section, of the last twenty-two, which treated of the spirits
of the earthly existences, one portion of which was ‘ about prepar-
ing offerings (afistéfritd) to the angels.’

2 M6 has ‘the fire of Aflharmazd is to be fully maintained, and
it is revealed,’ &c. ‘This section is a repetition of Chap. X, 4, with
a few variations.

8 Here written Didkav.

* Or it may be read séd4, ‘a demon,’ meaning ‘an arch-fiend.’


344 SHAVAST LA-SHAYAST.


12, The rule is this, where a child is born, during
three days, for protection from demons, wizards, and
witches, a fire is to be made at night until dayZght,
and is to be maintained there in the day, and pure
incense is. to be put upon it, as is revealed in the
thirtieth of the Sakadaim WVask’.

13. The rule is this?, that from a toothpick the
bark*® is to be well cut off, for there are some of
those of the primitive faitht who ave said that,
when‘ they shall make it for the teeth wz¢# the bark
on, and they throw z¢ away, a pregnant woman,
who puts a foot upon it, is doubtful about z¢s being
dead matter.

14. The rule is this, that z¢ is well zf any one of
those who have their handmaid (£akar) in coha-
bitation (zanih), and offspring is born of her, shall
accept all those who are male as sons; du¢ those
who are female are no advantage, because an
adopted soz (satér)/is requisite, and in the four-
teenth of the Hfisparam JVask® the high-priests


+ That is, in the first thirty sections of the Nask (see Chap. X,
25); the passage alluded to: must have been in that portion which
treated of new-born infants and their proper treatment.

2 §§ 13-16 are a repetition of Chap. X, 20-23, with a few varia-
tions.

’ The word appears to be t6p6 or tafd, which would rather
mean ‘scum’ or ‘gum’ (see Bund. XXVII, 19), unless it be con-
sidered a miswriting of t6g6 or t6z6, which would mean ‘thin
bark’ or ‘bast.’ It can also be read tfipar, ‘a leather bag,’ and
the sentence can be so translated as to imply that a toothpick should
be cut out of a leather bag, an alternative similar to that suggested
by the text of Chap. X, 20.

frsee Chaps. 3.

* Reading amat, ‘when,’ instead of mfin, ‘who’ (see Bund.
I,,7, note).

® See Chap. X, 21.


CHAPTER XII, 12-17. 345
wee re a


have taught thus: ‘My son is suitable also as thy
son, éwé my daughter is not suitable also as thy
daughter;’ and ¢here are many who! do not appoint
an adopted sox with this idea, that: ‘The child of
a handmaid may be accepted by us as a son.’

15. The rule is this, that ove zs to persevere much
in the begetting of offspring, since 2# zs for the acqui-
sition? of many good works at once; because in the
Spend* and Nihadtim Nasks?* the high-priests have
taught that the duty and good works which a son
performs are as much the father’s as though they
had been done by his own hand; and in the
Damdad Nas ®* it is revealed thus: ‘ Likewise, too,
the good works, zz like manner, which come Zo the
father as his own.’

16. The rule is this, that what they shall give to
the worthy is as much as is proper and beyond, for
eating and accumulating; because in the Nihddtim
Nask* the high-priests Zave taught thus: ‘When a
man gives bread to a man, even though that man
has too much bread, all the good works, which he
shall perform through that superabundance, become
as much his who gave zt as though they had been
done by his own hand’

17. The rule is this, that in the night water is


' The writer of M6 evidently found his original illegible at this
place, as he wrote . . . maman instead of mfin denman.

2 M6 has ‘performance,’ which is probably a misreading, due to
the original of that MS. being partially illegible.

8 See Chap. X, 4. This Nask is not mentioned in Chap. X,
22, and the passage here alluded to is not to be traced in any of
the short accounts of its contents.

4 See Chap. X, 3, 22.

5 See SZS. IX, 1, and Chap. X, 22.

® See Chap. X; 3, 23.


346 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


not to be drawn! from a well, as in the Bag-yasn6’
notice is given about the uncleanness (ayosdasarih)
of well-water at night. —

18, The rule is this, that in the night anything
eatable is not to be cast away to the north, because
a fiend wz/Z become pregnant; and when it is cast
away one Yatha-ahit-vairy63 is to be uttered. 19.
Those of the primitive faith* who used to act more
orthodoxically (hi-rastakihatar), when food was
eaten by them in the night, for the sake of preserva-
tion from sin owing to the coming of strainings azd
sprinklings oz to the ground, directed a man to chant
the Ahunavar> from the beginning of the feast


* K2o has ‘that water is not to be drawn on foot.’

* Probably the Bakan-yast6 is meant, which was the-fourteenth
nask or ‘book’ of the complete Mazdayasnian literature, according
to the Dinkard; but according to the Dtni-vagarkard and the
Rivayats it was the fifteenth nask, called Baghan-yast. For its con-
tents, as given by the Dini-vagarkard, see Haug’s Essays, p. 132.
The following is the account of it given in the eighth book of the
Dinkard :—

‘The Bakan-yasté is a treatise, first, on the worship (yast6) of ©
Atharmazd, the most pre-eminent of divinities (bakan avartim),
and, secondly, the worship of the angels of the other invisible and
visible worldly existences, out of whom are even the names of the
days, and the glory, power, triumph, and miraculousness of their
life also is extreme; the angels who are invoked by name in their
worship, and the attention avd salutation due to them; the worthi-
ness and dispensation of favour for worshippers, avd the business
of their many separate recitations unto the angels; the business of
unlimited acquaintance with knowledge about the promoters of the
treasures of the period, unto whom the-creator Aftharmazd 7s to
intrust them, avd they remain to cause industry. Perfect is the
excellence of righteousness,’

* See Bund. I, 21. This section is a repetition of Chap. X, 7,
with a few variations.

* See Chapa 73.

° That is, the Yatha-ahf-vairyé (see Bund. I, 21).


CHAPTER XII, 18-22. a47


(myazd) unto the end, more especially at the feast
of the season-festivals; as it says in the Haddkht
Nask', that of the sayings which are spoken out the
Ahunavar is that whzch ¢s most triumphant.

20. The rule is this, that when one sees a hedge-
hog he takes z¢ back to the plain, and its own place
is to be preserved free from danger; for in the Ven-
didad the high-priests Zave taught, that every day,
when the hedgehog voids urine into an ant’s nest, a
thousand ants will die”.

21. The rule is this, that some who are of the
good religion say, where one is washing 47s face, one
Ashem-voht® is always to be uttered, ad that
Ashem-vohti is to be uttered before the washing ;
for when he utters z¢ while washing 47s face, he is
doubtful (var-hémand) about the water coming to
his mouth.

22. The rule is this, that they select from the
purifiers*—when their business (mindavam) is as
important (raba) as purity and impurity—Azm with
whom the control’ of ablution (padiyavih)® and
non-ablution is connected ; they select 42m especially


1 See B. Yt. III, 25. The passage here quoted must have been
in the first division of the Nask.

2 This section is a repetition of Chap. X, 31.

5 See Bund. XX, 2.

* The yésdasar4n, ‘purifiers’ (Av. yaogdathrya), are those
priests who retain so much of the purifying effect of the Bareshnim
ceremony (see Chap. II, 6) as to be able to assist in purifying
others by means of the same ceremony. When that effect has
passed away a priest can no longer perform the sacred rites, until
he has again undergone the nine nights’ purification of the
Bareshnim.

® Reading band, but it may be bdd, ‘vitality, essence.’

® See Chap. Ih 5a:


348 sHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


with regard to the good disposition and truthful
speaking of the man, and ¢o the particular work;
and on account of Azs being in innocence Ze is to be
considered more righteous. 23. As in the Vendi-
dad! it says, about the two shares of righteousness,
how one should tell that Ze zs ‘a righteous man, O
Zarattst the Spitaman ! who is a purifier, who should
be a speaker that speaks truly, an enquirer of the
sacred texts—that is, he has performed his ritual
(yast)—a righteous oze who specially understands
purification from the religion of the Mazdayas-
nians, that is, he understands its religious formulas
(nirang).’ 24. When z¢ is so that the control of
their ablution is connected with him, so that they
consider what pertains to the purzfying bowl (zak-i
tastik) as his, and ever abstain from it, though the
angels hear and consider ¢hem as clean, and they
select for him those who consecrate the water and
bull’s urine (gé6méz) on account of ¢hezy control of
purification (yésdasarkarih), and zt is to be per-
formed very observantly by the consecrators at the
place which is to be measured with a measure and
very exactly (khaiptar)*. 25. And the purifier is so
much the better when washed again, and when 7¢
zs by some one through whose periodic (zamAnik)


' The passage here quoted is from Pahl. Vend. IX, 4-6.

* Referring to the Bareshnim-gah, or place prepared for the
Bareshntim ceremony of purification with bull’s urine and water,
which are handed to the person undergoing purification by an
officiating priest (see Chap. II, 6). The place is marked out with
furrows in the ground, and furnished with stones (magh) to squat
upon during the ablutions (see B. Yt. II, 36). The construction
of this paragraph is very obscure in many places, and its proper
division into sentences is, therefore, uncertain.


CHAPTER XII, 23-28, 349


care fe is thus done; for in the periodic interval
many secret’ kinds of pollution are produced. 26.
Of the celebrators of the Vendidad the good are
they who shall again perform the Navashadar rite?;
for, on account of the same nicety (naztkih) which
_ is written above by me, azd on account of much also
that zs secret, which has happened azd mostly
arises about it, ¢Aeve is no harm from performing 27.
27. And amy one of those who shall receive the
water and bull’s urine z¢ is very important to wash
beforehand (pavan pés)*; because, if ¢here be im-
purity about him*, and he puts a hand to the cup
(gamak), the water, azd the bull’s urine, ¢Aey are
unclean (ap4d4v6)*; when z¢ zs so that there be
some one, when so, z¢ is better ¢at they always
wash his eyelids (méyak gas), avd to wash them
by the clean is good.

28. The rule is this, that thou shouldst not con-
sider even any one hopeless (andiméd) of heaven,


' Reading nihan, but we might perhaps read ‘ causes (vahan)
of pollution of many kinds.’ The meaning of the section is, that
it is necessary for the purifying priest to maintain his own purity
by frequently undergoing the Bareshnfim ceremony himself.

2 Yast-i Navashadar in all MSS., but the latter word is most
probably a corruption of Av. navakhshapara, ‘a period of nine
nights,’ for which length of time the Bareshnfim ceremony must be
continued (see Vend. IX, 144, XIX, 80). The ‘ Navashadar rite’
is, therefore, ‘the ceremony of the nine nights,’ which should be
frequently undergone by the priests who celebrate the Vendidad
ceremonial.

* M6 has pavan pisak, ‘with ceremony,’

* M6 has ‘them.’

5 M6 has ‘one knows it is unto the cup and bull’s urine ;’ but
as M6 was evidently copied from a MS. already nearly illegible in
some places, it is generally safer to follow K2o0, except when M6
supplies words omitted by the more careless writer of K2o.


350 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


and they should not set ¢Zecr minds steadfastly on
hell; thereby much sinfulness for which ¢here is a
desire would be undesirable, because ¢here is nothing
which is a sin zz my religion for which ¢here is no
retribution, as it says in the Gathas? thus:—‘ Of
those who are aware that thou art, O Atharmazd! is
even he who is infamous (raspak6); and they know
the punishment of him even who is very sinful.’ 29.
And as ¢to-him even who is a very sinful person,
through the desire? of good works which is enter-
tained by him, ¢Zeve then comes more fully to him
the joy of a soul newly worthy (nuk shdyad); as
in the Spend JVask? zt was shown to. Zaratist about
one man, that all Zzs limbs were in torment, and one
foot was outside; avd Zaratist enquired of Athar-
mazd about the reason of zt; and Attharmazd said
that he was a man, Davans‘ by name; he was ruler
over thirty-three® districts, and he never practised


1 The passage here quoted from the GAathas will be found in
Pahl. Yas. XXXII, 7:

? M6 has merely ‘through the good works which are practised
by him ;’ but K2o0 has ‘1 hamak’ inserted at this point, which
seems to indicate the existence of the nearly identical Pahlavi
letters kdmak, ‘desire,’ in the original from which it was copied.

® See Chap. X, 4. The passage here quoted was no doubt con-

tained in that part of the: Nask which treated of the exhibition of
heaven and hell to Zaratfist, which must have been very similar to
the Arda-Viraf-nadmak, in which most of the details of this story
about Davans are given (see AV. XXXII).
, * This is, no doubt, the Av. davis of Yas. XXXI, 10, which
may be translated ‘hypocrite.’ The Pahlavi translation of the line
in which the word occurs is thus rendered in Haug’s Essays (p. 351):
‘ Afharmazd does not allot to him who is an idler, the infidel who
is any hypocrite (davas) in the sacred recitations. In the good
religion it is asserted that even as much reward as they give to the
hypocrite they do not give to the infidel.’

® K2o has ‘thirty-four.’


CHAPTER XII, 29-31. B51


any good work, except one time when fodder was
conveyed by him to a sheep with that one foot.

30. The rule is this, that when a man has per-
formed his form of worship (yast), and his wife has
not performed z¢, z¢ is extremely necessary to per-
form the suitable form of worship, or to order a
Gété-kharid*, so that they may becomie such as are
dwelling more closely ¢ogether in the spiritual exzst-
ence than in the world; and in the HAdékht Nash?
it says that a woman: (nairik) who shall be reverent
(tarsak) is to be considered as much as she who is.
suitable (ziy4k).

31. The rule is this, that these five ceremonies,
(yazisn), when they shall perform ¢hem, are good
works *; when oze does not perform them, and the
- time is manifest to him, and when he shall set them:
aside to perform ¢hem out of the proper time, they
shall go to the bridge * as sin; the ceremonies which
go to the bridge are these, and in the Htsparam
Nask® it says that ¢hey are the non-celebration of
the rites (l4 yastand) of the season-festivals®, the


1 Here written gét6ék-kharfd, but see Chap. V, 6, and Bund.
XXX, 28.

2 See B. Yt. III, 25; but the passage here quoted is not clearly
indicated in the accounts we have of the contents of this Nask.

8 The distinction between these ceremonies and those whose
values as good works are given in Chap. XVI, 6, appears to be
that any omission in performing these five at their proper times
amounts to an absolute sin, whereas the others are not so indis-
pensable.

4 That is, they will be taken into account at the judgment on the
soul’s actions at the Kinvad bridge (see Bund. XII, 7).

5 See Chap. X, 21. The passage here quoted was probably in
the section called Nirangistan.

6 The GasAnbars or Gahanbars (see Bund. XXV, 1-6).


352 -  gHAVAST LA-SHAYAST.

eae ae Ns a
Rapitvin}, the three zzghts? after a death, the days
devoted to the guardian spirits*, and the sun and
moon *.

32. The rule is this, that at every one of these
three things, which come through hungry living, that
is, sneezing, yawning, and sighing, ove is to speak
out a Yatha-aht-vairyd and one Ashem-voht*; and
also when ove hears the sneezing of any one, to
speak zz like manner is so considered as an action of
the good*; and in the Stidgar Nask" it says thus:
‘“« What prepares sneezing? that is, through what
process (kar) does it come?” And Atharmazd said
thus: “Hungry living, O Zaratdst! because the re-
medy for its existence is the Ahunavar, O Zarattist!
and righteousness *.”’


Cuarter XIII.


o. The signification of the Gathas®.
1. These three Ashem-vohitis (Yas. XI, end) which


1 The midday period (see Bund. IJ, 8, 9, XXV, 9-14).

2 See Chap. VIII, 6. 5 See Chap. X, 2.

* See Chap. VII, 1-5. 5 See Bund. I, 21, XX, 2.

° That is, it is commendable, though not obligatory. The
practice of uttering a blessing on hearing a sneeze is still common
in many parts of Europe.

* See B. Yt. 1, 1. The passage here quoted is not to be traced
in any of the accounts of this Nask.

® «The Ahunavar and praise of righteousness’ would be a
Pahlavi equivalent for ‘the Yatha-ahf-vairy6 and Ashem-voht..’

* That is, the mystical meaning or influence supposed to attach
to various parts of the ancient hymns, or to the manner in which
they are chanted. The term Gatha or ‘hymn’ (Pahl. gas) is
applied, in this chapter, not only to the five Gathas properly so
called, but also to the Yasna of seven chapters, and apparently to


CHAPTER XII, 32—XIII, 2. 353


represent’ the Fravardné (Yas. XI, end) of the
preliminary ritual (pés nirang) and the rotation
of these three Has (‘chapters’), the Fravarané,
Frastuyé, and Astuyé—fravarané beng the begin-
ning of the Fravarané? which extends as far as fras-
astayaééa*, frastuyé‘, the beginning of the Fras-
tuyé (Yas. XII, 1-XIII, 26) which extends up to the
Astuyé, and. Astuyé®, the beginning of the Astaoth-
wanem ° (Yas. XIII, 27—XI1V, end) which extends as
far as Astaothwanemé#é daénayau Mazdayas-
nois—also represent the Visdi-ve-ameshd-spenta
(Yas. XV), which zs the beginning of the Stétdn-
yasndé (‘the ritual of praisers’)’, and these three
Has of the Baghim (Yas. XIX-X XI).

2. In the exposition (Zashidak) and through the


other portions of the Yasna written in the GAtha dialect of the
Avesta.

1 This appears to be the meaning, but the construction of this
section is altogether very obscure, and the text is more or less
corrupt in all MSS. In the celebration of the Yasna or Yagisn the
officiating priest tastes the Hém juice during the recitation of Yas.
XI (see Haug’s Essays, p. 404), and shortly afterwards he com-
mences the preliminary prayers mentioned in the text.

? Both Kzo and M6 have Freran in Pazand.

® Both Kzo and M6 omit the initial f.

* M6 has astuyé.

> M6 omits this word,

6 This is the Avesta name of the HA or chapter consisting of
Yas. XIII, 27-XIV, 19 ; as Fraoreti is the name of the preceding
Ha, consisting of Yas. XII, 1-XIII, 26.

* Probably consisting of the three Has, Yas. XV-XVII; in
which case, the meaning seems to be that the three Ashem-vohtis,
at the beginning of this preliminary ritual, are symbolical of each
of the three triplets of chapters which follow them; first, of the
Fravarané, Fraoreti, and Astaothwanem chapters ; secondly, of
the three chapters of the StOtan-yasn6 ; and thirdly, of those of the
Baghan Yast.


[5] Aa


354 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


evidence of revelation (diné) the wise of those of
the primitive faith! Zave thus said, that a man of
fifteen years’, and a son and brother of Mazdayas-
nians—when he confesses zs failings (mandak) to
the high-priests (rad4n), and they shall bring him
the whip and scourge’, and these five Gathas* are
chanted and the good waters consecrated by him,
and the whole of the renewed-birth ceremony (navid-
zAdth)® is performed by him— decomes a mature
youth and not a child, and a share of the prayers of
initiation (nApar) and of the fires is to be given
over to him*; and when thus much: is not performed
by him, a share is not to be given. 3. These five’
Gathas are made up from the body of a righteous
man.


+ See Chap. I, 3.

* Referring to one about to become.a priest.

® The Av. astra and sraoshé-farana of Vend. IV, 38-114,
&c., which were formerly“used for the temporal punishment of
sinners. Whether they are here brought to the neophyte as a token
of his admission to the priesthood, or are administered to him as a —
punishment for his offences, is not quite clear.

* The five Gathas are the Ahunavaiti (Yas. XXVII-XXXIV),
the Ustavaiti (Yas. XLII-XLV), the Spemta-mainyfi (Yas. XLVI-
XLIX), the Vohf-khshathra (Yas. L), and the Vahistdisti (Yas.
LIT) ; these collections of hymns are thus. named from the words
with which each of them commences, excepting the first, which
derives its. name from the Ahunavar (see Bund. I, 21) which is
written in the same metre.

5 This is the Pahlavi form of the Parsi navazfidt, a term
applied to. the whole initiatory ceremonial of a nén4bar, or newly
initiated priest; the term evidently implies that the ceremony is
considered somewhat in the light of ‘ regeneration.’

® That is, he can take his part in the regular priestly duties,
including the initiation of other neophytes.

” Both K2o and M6 have four in ciphers, which can hardly be
right; the sentence is clear enough, but the idea of its writer is
rather obscure.


CHAPTER XIII, 3-5. 355


4. Ahya-yasa (Yas. XXVIII), Khshmaibya (Yas.
XXIX), and Ad-ta-vakhshyA (Yas. XXX) have,
severally, eleven stanzas (va#ést), because eleven
things move spiritually within the bodies of men,
as life, consciousness, religion, soul, guardian spirit,
thought, word, deed, seeing, smelling, and hearing ;
and the bodies of men and other creatures are
formed of water, fire, and wind'.

5. Ashem-Ahurem-mazdim (Visp. XV) is / ¢
vecited® three times before the coming of Hiashédar,
Hfishédar-mah, and Séshyans; and when they also
recite the chapter (had) well, and by line (gAs)
and stanza, those afostles are present*®, and the


’ These first three chapters of the Ahunavaiti collection of hymns
are here supposed to symbolize the three material elements, whose
union distinguishes a man’s body from inorganic substances; while
the eleven stanzas, which each of these chapters contains, symbolize
the eleven immaterial existences said to be contained in the same
body.

2 This is doubtful, as no verb is expressed, and the word bar,
‘time,’ is struck out in M6, so it is possible to read ‘the “ three
foremost” of the Ashem-Ahurem-mazdam are the coming of Hfish-
dar,’ &c. The ‘three foremost’ (3 levindg) would be a possible
Pahlavi translation of the Av. tisré paoiryé and tisra paoirya of
Visp. XV, 4-6, instead of the actual ‘three first’ (3-i fratfim), as
may be seen from Pahl. Visp. VIII, 17, 20, where both pés (=
levind) and fratfim are used indifferently for Av. paoiryd. At
any rate the idea embodied in the text is that these ‘three first’
have some reference to the three future apostles of the Parsi
religion (see Bund. XXXII. 8, B. Yt. III, 13, 44, 52, 62). In fact,
however, they seem to refer to the first three chapters of the
Ahunavaiti Gatha, immediately after which this chapter (Visp. XV)
is recited in the full Parsi ritual ; the phrase being rendered in the
Pahlavi translation thus :—‘ I reverence the three first by not speak-
ing out, that is, I do not say anything during them, and not wearing
out, that is, I do not doze away during them.’

3 Kao has ‘arrivé early.’

Aa 2


356 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


country becomes more flourishing and more do-
minant in the world.

6. The twenty-two stanzas of TA-ve-urvata (Yas.
XX XI) are the twenty-two judgments (dadistan)
of which it speaks in the Hadékht Vask? thus :—
‘Anaomé mananghé daya vispai kva, kva
par6?’ (‘where are ¢hey to be produced beyond
every thought ? azd where before ?’) ‘Lodging in
the judge, that while Ze “as twenty-two judgments
he may be more just ;’—so that when they pray the
Ta-ve-urvata chapter well, and recite z¢ by line and
stanza, the judges possess those twenty-two judg-
ments more correctly, and judiciousness is more
lodging zz them.

7. The sixteen stanzas of the Wvaétumaithi chap-
tery (Yas. XXXII)? are lodging in warriors, so that
it becomes possible, during their good protection, to
force the enemy away from those sixteen countries
which the Vendidad*® mentions in z¢s first fargard.


* See B. Yt. III, 25. Both the Avesta text here quoted and the
translation suggested must be received with caution, as the MSS. do
not agree in the three central words; Kzo has mananhé dya
vispai kaua, and M6 has manawhé kya visdi kaia. The
former reading has been adopted, with very slight correction, as it
seems the more intelligible; but the meaning of the preceding
word, anaomd, is far from certain. The writer seems to have been
quoting from a Pahlavi version of the Nask which contained this
Avesta quotation.

* This Ha, which begins with the words ahvyAk4 hvaétus, is
not called by its initial words, as the preceding chapters are, but
has this special name (see the prayers at the end of it) derived
from its second word, and which is corrupted in Pahlavi into
Khvétmano.

* Here written Gavid-séda-dad as in Sls. Part I, and not Va-
dikdad as in other parts of Sls. Part II (see § 19 and Chap. XII,
4, 6, 20, 23, 26). Wend. I contains an account of the sixteen


CHAPTER XIII, 6-9. eyé


8. The fourteen stanzas of Yatha-dis (Yas.
XX XIII) are for this reason, because seven arch-
angels are more diligent in activity for the spirit,
and seven archangels! for the world, so that they
may attain ‘to heaven, the home (méhén6) of At-
harmazd, the home of the archangels, the home of
those righteous ones, avi garéd-nmdnem, maé-
thanem Ahurahé mazdau, maéthanem ame-
shaném speztanam, maéthanem anyaéshim
ashaonédm* 9. The three repetitions (dAnar) of
Ye-sevistd (Yas. XX XIII, 11) *, avd the holding up
of the holy-water (zéhar) at these refetetions, are
for the four classes‘, and for this veason at Ahurdai
mazdai aud ashem&a fradad® the holy-water is


‘best of regions and countries’ where the Iranian power and
religion extended at an early date. |

1 The seven archangels besides their spiritual duties have
severally charge of the seven worldly existences, man, animals, fire,
metal, earth, water, and plants (see § 14 and Chap. XV). But
perhaps we should read ‘angels,’ as they are often mentioned as
‘the angels of the spiritual and worldly existences.’

2 This quotation, of which the Pahlavi translation is first given,
and then the Avesta text, is from Vend. XIX, 107.

3 This stanza is recited thrice, and about the same time the
officiating priest strains the Hém juice, and prepares to pour holy-
water into the mortar in which the Hém twigs were pounded (see
Haug’s Essays, pp. 402, 406).

* Or ‘ professions’ of the community, of which there were ori-
ginally only three, the priest, warrior, and husbandman ; but at
a later date the artizan was added. Both Kzo and M6 have ‘ four
classes,’ but this is inconsistent with the ‘three repetitions.’ The
Avesta generally knows only three classes, but four are mentioned
in the Baghan Vast (Yas. XIX, 46).

5 That is, probably, at the words Ahuré mazdausfa in the
first line, and ashem&A fradad in the second line of the stanza ;
but this is doubtful, as the MSS. give the words corruptly, in a
mixture of Av. and Pahl., as follows: pavan Ahurai mazdai


aharayih-i dadoth.


358 sHAvAST LA-SHAYAST.


to be held level with the heart of him who is the
officiating priest (z6t), and at sraota! 7 is to be
held level with the arm of him who is the officiating
priest, so that while the warriors are in battle with
foreigners (andiran) they may be fuller of breath
(vay6-girtar), and the husbandmen stronger-armed
in the tillage and cultivation of the world.

10. The fifteen stanzas of Ya-skyaothand (Yas.
XXXIV) are for this reason, because it is given”
for the destruction of those fifteen fiends who are dis-
closed in the medical part (béshaz) of the Hadokht
Nask*. 11. The four repetitions (bar) of Mazda-ad-
moi (Yas. XXXIV, 15)‘ are for the right coming
on of the share of these five chieftainships (radih),
the house-ruler, the village-ruler, the tribe-ruler, the
province-ruler, and the supreme Zarattst ®.

12. The two repetitions of Ahy4d-y4sa (Yas.
XXVIII, 1)® are for this reason, that the sovereign
(dahytipat) may not at once seize body, conscious-


1 The first word in the third line of the stanza ; but this, again,
has to be guessed from a Pahlavi version in the MSS. which may
be read va va-srédéan.

2 Or ‘ produced.’

* In the last division of that Nask (see B. Yt. III, 25, note).

* This last stanza of the Ahunavaiti Gatha is recited four
times.

5 See Yas. XIX, 50-52. The last of these rulers must have been
the supreme pontiff or patriarch of the province, and in the pro-
vince of Ragha (Rages or Rai, near Teheran) he was both temporal
and spiritual ruler.

° This first stanza of the Ahunavaiti Gatha is recited twice, not
only in its proper place (as the first stanza of each chapter is, in
the Gathas), but also at the end of every chapter of the Ahunavaiti
Gatha, while the officiating priest sprinkles the sacred twigs with
the sacred milk or gaus givya, ‘living-cow produce’ (see Haug’s
Essays, pp. 405, 406).


CHAPTER Xia, LO=15. 359


ness, and soul. 13. Those four Yatha-aht-vairyés
of the first GétZa! are for this reason, that is, so
that inferiors may become more tolerant of the
commands of superiors, and good thoughts, good
words, and good deeds be more domesticated (m4h-
mantar) in the world, and the fiend more powerless
(apadakhshahtar).

14. In short (aé-mar)*, Ahy4-y4sa is as (pavan) ®
Atharmazd and the righteous man, Khshmaibya as
Vohtiman and cattle, Ad-ta-vakhshya as Ardavahist
and fire, Ta-ve-urvata as Shatvaird‘ and metal, the
Ffvaétumaithi as the Gatha of Spendarmad and the
earth, Yatha-dis as Horvadad and water, and Y4a-
skyaothana as Amerédad and plants.

15. The progress which is in® the Ahunavaiti
GAtha the house-rulers should carry on; that which
is in the Ustavaiti Gatha the village-rulers should
carry on; that, which is in the Spewtad-mainy(®
Gatha the tribe-rulers should carry on; that which
is in the Voht-khshathra Gatha the province-rulers
should carry on; that which is in the Vahistd-isti
Gatha the supreme Zaratists should carry on; and


1 After the two Ahy4-yds4s, at the end of each chapter of the
Ahunavaiti GAtha, the Yath4-ahfi-vairy6 formula (see Bund. I, 21)
is recited four times.

2 Or ‘to sum up.’

8 It is not quite clear how pavan, ‘in, on, with, by, through, as,
for, &c., should be translated in each clause of this section; but
the intention is evidently to compare the seven chapters of the
Ahunavaiti Gatha with the seven archangels and the seven earthly
creations which they severally protect (see Chap. XV).

4 Here written Shatrivar.

5 Meaning probably ‘the prosperity which is occastoned by ;’
but the exact signification of the word frak-shaém or freh-
kasham (or however it may be read) is uncertain.

6 Spenddmat or Spendamat in Pahlavi.


360 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


that which is in. the Yasna, which is the place of
righteous blessing!, these four classes themselves
should carry on.

16, Of the Yasna of seven chapters (Yas. XX XV-—
XLI, 17) the beginning section (kardak6) has nine
stanzas; and its beginning? is Humatanim (Yas.
XXXV, 4), and its end is Humatanim (Yas. XLI,
17 supl.)

17. The six stanzas of Ahyd-thw4-athré (Yas.
XXXVI) are owing to the six hot ordeals (var)
which, in the Hfisparam (Vas*, are effected by £a-
thrayAim Athraiam +

18. The five stanzas of Ithd-Ad-yazamaidé (Yas.
XX XVII) are thanksgiving and praise for the pro-
duction of the good creations by Attharmazd.

19. The five stanzas of Im&m-Aad-zim (Yas.
XX XVIII) are owing to those five comforts and
five discomforts of the earth, which, it is declared in
the third fargard in the Vendidad 5, are accomplished


1 That is, the Yasna of seven chapters (Yas. XXXV-XLI),
which is called simply ‘the Yasna’ in this chapter. This last
clause, which is omitted in M6, connects these later hymns with
the four classes of the community (see § 9), just as the five older
hymns are connected with the five chiefs of the community (see ,
§ 11) in the former clauses. This section may be a translation
from the Avesta, as the verbs precede their nominatives.

? That is, the beginning of the Yasna of seven chapters.

* See Chap. X, 21; but the SakadGm Nask (see Chap. X, 25)
is probably meant, as it contained a section on ordeals by heat
and cold.

* These Avesta words are evidently corrupt, but perhaps ‘ a quad-
ruple fire’ is meant. K2zo has kathraydaim Athraiam.

° Here written Vandikdad (see § 7). The passage here cited is
not a quotation, but only a brief summary of Vend. III, 1-37;
and appears to have been derived direct from the Avesta, without
the assistance of the Pahlavi version, as several words differ from
that translation.


CHAPTER XIII, 16-22, 261


thus :—‘ The first comfort of the earth is from the
land on which a righteous man walks forth; the
second is when they shall make the dwelling of the
good and fires upon it; the third is when they sow
corn upon it, and shall take heed of dead matter ;
the fourth is when all beasts of édurden are born
upon it; the fifth is when every beast of durden is
on it!; and its first discomfort is from the Areztr
ridge? and the gate of hell; the second is when
they dig * it up for a dead Jody ; the third is when
one constructs a depository for the dead (khazAn) *
upon it; the fourth is from the holes of its noxious
creatures ; the fifth is when they shall forsake a man
in affliction (vardakih) upon it, who is righteous.’

20. The five stanzas of Itha (Yas. XX XIX) are
just as those which go before.

21. The four stanzas of Aht-ad-paiti (Yas. XL)
are about the benefit (arg-hémandih) which is on
account of water, earth, plants, and animals.

22. The six stanzas of Stdité-gard (Yas. XLI,
I-17), the two repetitions of Humatanim (Yas.
XX XV, 4-6), and the three repetitions of Hukhsh-
athrétemai (Yas. XX XV, 13-15) are on. account of
the existence of the sons of Zaratist ®.


1 The verb is probably omitted by mistake, and we ought to
read ‘ voids urine upon it,’ in accordance with Vend. III, 20.

2 See Bund. XII, 8.

3 Reading kaléndend (Pers. kalandand), as Vend. III, 27
refers to burial of the dead, and the same idea might be obtained,
more fancifully, by reading kilinénd, ‘ they turn to clay’ (compare
Pers. gil, ‘clay’); but the most obvious reading is karfnénd,
‘they cut, and as the sentence stands it would imply that ‘they
cut up its dead.’

4 See Chap. II, 6.

5 The three apostles expected in the future (see § 5 and Bund.
XXXII, 8). It is doubtful whether these three passages in the


362 SHAVAST LA-SHAYAST.


23. The two repetitions of Ashahyd-dad-sairi *
(Yas. XXXV, 22, 23) are for the laudation of right-
eousness and the destruction of the fiend. 24. The
two repetitions of Yénhé-hat&m? are for the lau-

dation of Atharmazd and the archangels, and the
destruction of the evil spirit and the miscreations
(vishtdakan). 25. The two repetitions of * Thwoi-
staotaras#a (Yas. XLI, 12-14) are for the laudation
of ceremonial worship (yazisn 5) and the sacred
feast (mazd).

26. The two repetitions of Atareméa (Visp. XIX,
1-8) * are for the laudation of the Frébak fire and
the fire Vazist°.

27. Of the sixteen stanzas of the Ustavaiti chapter
(Yas. XLII)° it is related just as about the //vaétu-
maithi chapter".


Yasna are here intended all to refer to the same subject, but no
other subject is mentioned for the two former. Having completed
the enumeration of the Sections of the Yasna of seven chapters,
the writer is now proceeding to notice those passages which are
recited more than once in the performance of the ritual.

* M6 has gairi, ‘in a song,’ with the obsolete g, which is very
like s, and is also used in the word garé in § 22; this is a variant
well worth consideration by translators of the Avesta. Kz2o has
only Ashahya.

* This formula (see B. Yt. II, 64) is recited after every chapter
of the Gathas, but does not appear to be anywhere recited twice ;
so the words 2 danar, ‘two repetitions, may perhaps be inserted
here in the wrong place, as they are wanting in § 25.

* These words are omitted in the Pahlavi text, evidently through
mistake.

* Visp. XIX, XX follow Yas. XLI in the full Parsi ritual, and
the first of them is recited twice.

5 The Frdébak is the oldest sacred fire on earth, and the VAzist
is the lightning (see Bund. XVII, 1, 5, SZS. XI, 5, 8-10).

° The first chapter of the Ustavaiti Gatha (see § 2, note 4), so
called from its first word usta.

1 Sée.$-7.


CHAPTER XIII, 23-29. 363


28. The twenty stanzas of Tad-thwa-peresa (Yas. |
XLIII) are the twenty judgments (dadistan) be-
tween the beneficent spirit and the evil spirit; and
for this reason they should every time utter Tad-
thw4-peresa again’, because they should utter the
original judgment again, and the twentieth time the
evil spirit becomes confounded.

29. The eleven stanzas of Ad-fravakhshya (Yas.
XLIV) are made up from the six chieftainships *
and the five accomplishments (farhang) owing to
religion; one is thus, not to do unto others ® all that
which is not well for one’s self; the second is to under-
stand fully waz is well-done and not well-done; the
third is to turn from the vile and their conversation
(andarag-gfiftand); the fourth is to confess one’s
failings to the high-priests, and let them bring the
whip; the fifth is not to neglect the season-festivals
at their proper hour (dén hAasar), wor the other
things which go to the bridge‘; and the six chief-
tainships are not his property who has not these


1 That is, the first line (tad thwa peresa eres mdi vaoka
Ahura! ‘that I shall ask thee, tell 27 me right, O Ahura!’) is
repeated at the beginning of each of the first nineteen stanzas, and
the first stanza being recited twice (as in all chapters of the Gathas)
these words are recited twenty times before the last stanza is
reached. The phrases ‘and for this reason’ and ‘because they
should utter the original judgment again’ are omitted in M6.

2 These cannot be the same ‘chieftainships’ (radth) as those
mentioned in § 11, of which there are only five; but perhaps they
are the spiritual chieftainships, or primacies, of the six other regions
of the earth (see Bund. XXIX, 1).

’ Assuming that afsan stands for afsan.

4 The Kinvad bridge, or route of the soul to the other world (see
Chap. XII, 31)., Part of these fourth and fifth clauses is omitted
in Kzo by mistake.


364 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


five accomplishments, and he is not fit even for
teaching.

30. The nineteen stanzas of K&m-neméi-zim (Yas.
XLV) are for this reason, that every one may so
persevere in his own duty (khvésak4nih)', that
while those are our nineteen propitiations (atis6-
frid)?, which it says in the Sakadim Mask* should
be my own, the strength and power of the angels
shall become more considerable, and the destroyer
more perishable.

31. The Ustavaiti Gatha is a Gatha (gas) of four
chapters +, and each stanza of five lines (g4s), except
Haééad-asp4-vakhshyé (Yas. XLV, 15)% 32. The
two repetitions of Usté-ahmai (Yas. XLII,1)® are, one
as a retention azd embrace of Atharmazd, and one
as a destruction of the fiends ; azd Usta-Ahurem-
mazdim (Visp. X XI, 1-5) 7 zz like manner.

33. Spezta-mainyti (Yas. XLVI) Zas six stanzas,
Yézi-adais (Yas. XLVII) twelve stanzas, Ad-ma-
yava (Yas. XLVIII) twelve stanzas, axd Kad-méi-
urva (Yas. XLIX) eleven stanzas. 34. The Spemta-
mainyii Gatha is a Gatha of four chapters*, and


* Or, it may be, ‘through his own intellect (khvésak hfsh),’ or
merely another mode of writing khvésk4rth, ‘ industry.’

? Considering each of the stanzas as an offering to, or propiti-
ation of, (Av. usefriti) the angels.

easee ‘Chap, 4) 25.

* Those detailed in §§ 27-30.

* Which stanza has only four lines. Pahl. g4s means both the
whole hymn and also each line of the hymn.

° The first stanza of the Ustavaiti Gatha, which is recited twice,
both in its proper place and at the end of each chapter of that
Gatha (see § 12, note).

7 Visp. XXI follows Yas. XLV in the full Parsi ritual, and is
recited twice.

* Those detailed in § 33.


CHAPTER XIII, 30—40. 365


each stanza of four lines; it is made up from the
five chieftainships and four classes. 35. The two
repetitions of Speta-mainyi (Yas. XLVI, 1)? are,
one for the laudation of the beneficent spirit (spen-
damat), and one for that of the earth®.

36. One Spextem-Ahurem-mazdim (Visp. X XII,
I-11) * is the laudation of the creatures of the bene-
ficent spirit, and one is the destruction of the crea-
tures of the evil spirit.


37. The twenty-two stanzas of the Voht-khshathra
Gatha (Yas. L) are those twenty-two judgments
which are lodging within judges, as written above’.
38. The two repetitions of Vohi-khshathrem (Yas.
L, 1)* are, one the laudation of living (zindakih),
and one of the supreme Zaratist.

39. One Vohii-khshathrem yazamaidé (Visp.
XXIII, 1-9)" is for the laudation of Shatvairé 8,
and one of metal. 4o. The two repetitions of Avi-


PeSee $9.0, 11.

® The first stanza of the Spezta-mainyfi Gatha, which is recited
twice, both in its proper place and at the end of each chapter
of that Gatha (see § 12, note).

5 It seems probable that the Pahlavi writer has here confounded
Spendamat, ‘the beneficent spirit,’ with the archangel Spendarmad
who has special charge of the earth; their names being even more
alike in Pahlavi than in English, though corrupted from the distinct
Avesta forms spezta mainyu and spemta Armaiti, respectively.

4 Visp. XXII follows Yas. XLUX in the full Parsi ritual, and is
recited twice.

5 See $ 6,

6 The first stanza of the Vohti-khshathra Gatha, which is recited
twice, both at the beginning and end of the chapter (see § 12,
note).

7 Visp. XXIII, 1-9 follows Yas. L in the full Parsi ritual, and
is recited twice.

® The archangel who has special charge of metal (see § 14,
Chap. XV, 5, 124-19, and Bund. I, 26, XXX, 19); the name
is here written Shatrivar.


366 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


apim (Visp. XXIV, 1-12)? are, one for the lauda-
tion of waters, and one of plants.

41. The nine stanzas of the Vahistéisti (Yas. LIT)
are on account of those nine things which are”... .
the supreme Zarattistship lodging in the supreme
Zarattists, the source of fountains, the bridge over
waters, and even the navigable river, the righteous
man, and the righteous woman. 42. And zt za
GAatha of one chapter, azd each stanza of four lines,
except Ith4-i-haithya-naré. (Yas. LII, 6)*, for chere is
always one lord and sovereign. in the world. 43.
And those four lines are for this ~eason, because z¢
is declared: £athrus hamayau khshapé dahma-
yad paré Afritdid*, ‘four times every night is the
“blessing of the holy” (Yas. LIX), and three ¢cmes
Srésh®, twice Baishasp®, and once Aéshm? will come


1 After the two recitations of Visp. XXIII, 1-9 there follow
Vend. XV, XVI, and Visp. XXIII, 10, and then Visp. XXIV, 1-12
is recited twice, in the full/Parsi ritual, followed by Visp. XXV.

? Some words are evidently lost here ; M6 has m followed by a
blank space, and K2o: has madam, ‘on.’ It is not quite certain
whether the things mentioned are to be reckoned as four, five,
or six; but assuming they are five, it is possible that the four
things missing in the text are the four remaining chieftainships
(see § 11), the rulerships of the house, village, tribe, and province
lodged in the rulers of the same, respectively.

* Which stanza has five lines, and is, therefore, here considered
symbolical of the ruling monarch, or pontiff.

* This Avesta passage does not appear to be extant elsewhere,
and its Pahlavi translation, given in the text, is not quite correct ;
it would be better thus: ‘through the “blessing of the holy”
four times every night ;’ dahma 4friti (Pahl. dahm4n 4friné,
‘blessing of the holy’) is the technical name of Yas. LIX.

* See Bund. XIX, 33, XXX, 29. This angel, invoked by the
‘blessing’ (Yas. LIX, 8), comes to defend mankind against the
wiles of Bishasp and Aéshm.

* The demoness of sloth (see Bund. XXVIII, 26).

” The demon of wrath (see Bund, XXVIII, 15-17, 20).


CHAPTER XIII, 41-49. 367


to the material world. 44. And the five /mes of that
one stanza (Yas. LII, 6) are for this reason, because
the assistants of the supreme Zarattst are five, the
house-ruler, the village-ruler, the tribe-ruler, the
province-ruler, and she even who is his own wife
(narik)*. 45. The two repetitions of Vahista-istis
(Yas. LII, 1)? are, one for the laudation of sove-
reigns, and one for the laudation of peace (pad-
man).

46. The two repetitions of Vahistem -Ahurem-
mazdim (Visp. X XVI)? are; one foxy the laudation
of Atharmazd and the archangels, and one for the
destruction of the fiends. 47. The four repetitions of
the Airyamana (Yas. LIII)* are for the existence
of more submission (airmanih) in the house, vil-
lage, tribe, and province. 48. The four repetitions
of Avad-mizdem (Visp. X XVII) are for the healing
of those® who dwell in the house, village, tribe, and
province.

Ag. The section (kardak6) whose beginning is
Tad-sdidhis (Yas. LVII, 1-9)° is, for the completion


1 Though bound to be strictly obedient to her husband or
guardian, a Mazdayasnian woman occupied a more honourable
position in the community than was sanctioned by any other
oriental religion.

2 The first stanza of the Vahistdisti Gatha, which is recited
twice, both at the beginning and end of the chapter (see $ 12,
note).

8 Visp. XXVI follows Yas. LII in the full Parsi ritual, and
is recited twice, followed by Vend. XIX, XX.

* So called from its first words 4 airyem4; it is recited four
times after Vend. XX, and shortly afterwards Visp. XXVII is also
recited four times, as mentioned in § 48.

5 M6 has ‘of the soul,’ which is, no doubt, a blunder due to the
illegibility of the MS. from which it was copied.

° This is the FshQsh6-mathra (‘a spell or prayer for prosperity ’)


368 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


of the Gathas, taught as pertaining to the Gathas
(gasAnik £4st).

50. The beginning of the Gathas is Ahya-yasa
(Yas. XXVIII, 1), and their end is drigavé vahy6
(Yas. LII, 9, end); and ¢here are 278 stanzas, 1016
lines, 5567 words (vaZak), 9999 marik, and 16,554
khirdak!, 51. For the lines and stanzas of the
GAthas were collected by us, and were :—one hundred
stanzas of the Ahunavaiti Gatha (Yas. XXVIII-
XXXIV), of which each stanza is three lines; forty
stanzas of the Yasna of seven chapters (Yas. XX XV-


of Visp. I, 28, II, 30, Yas- LVI, ix,.6, LVIII, 13. “Whether the
remainder of Yas. LVII is to be considered as pertaining to the
GAathas is uncertain ; it is recited in seven sections by the assistant
priest, each section from a different position ; these seven positions
being the stations of the seven assistant priests who are sup-
posed to be present spiritually, and to be arranged three on each
side, and one ai the south end, of the ceremonial area, while the
chief officiating priest occupies the north end (see Haug’s Essays,
Pp. 332).

1 The numbers of the stanzas and lines are correct, as may
be seen from the details given in § 51. Regarding the words
there is the uncertainty as to what constitutes a compound word,
but, taking each compound in Westergaard’s edition of the texts
as a single word, the total number of words in the ror6 lines
is about 6147; and this could be reduced to 5567 only by omit-
ting the Yasna of seven chapters, and somewhat relaxing the rule
as to compound words. ‘The meaning of the last two terms,
marik and khfirdak, is doubtful, but they are certainly not
syllables and letters, as the number of syllables exceeds 13,000.
In other places (see Bund. I, 21) marfk usually means ‘a word,’
but that meaning is expressed by the term vasak here. If the
number 9999 be correct, martk must signify some particular class
of syllable which would include about three-fourths of the whole
number of syllables. It may be noted, however, that ZAd-sparam,
in the particulars he gives about the Gathas (see SZS. XI, 10, note 6),
states the number of marik at 6666. The khfrdak or ‘ small’
things are probably the consonants.


CHAPTER XIII, 50—XIV, I. 369


XLI, 17), of which each stanza is three lines; sixty-
six stanzas of the Ustavaiti Gatha (Yas. XLII-
XLV), of which each stanza is five lines, except
Haé£ad-aspa (Yas. XLV, 15), for that one is four
lines; forty-one stanzas of the Spewta-mainytti Gatha
(Yas. XLVI-XLIX), of which each stanza is four
lines; twenty-two stanzas of the Voht-khshathra
(Yas. L), of which each stanza is three! lines; and
nine stanzas of the Vahistéisti (Yas. LI), of which
each stanza is four lines, except Itha-i (Yas. LII, 6),
for that one is a stanza of five;—the amount of the
foregoing # is 278 stanzas *.


CHAPTER XIV 4,


o. May it be in the name of God (yazd4n) and
the good creation !

1, When they consecrate a sacred cake (drén6),
and it becomes demon worship*®, what and how
“many ¢hings are not proper?


1 All MSS. have ‘four,’ and then add the exception about
Itha-t to the account of this Gatha, instead of mentioning it in the
details of the Vahistdisti; which blunder is here corrected.

2 Reading kadmon yehevfinisn6, but the latter word, with
part of the ciphers which follow, is torn away in Kao, and in M6
it is written so as to resemble the Avesta letters gnn gnn, which .
are unintelligible, though something like Pahl. yehevinisn6;
there can, however, be little doubt as to the general meaning
of the phrase.

8 The number of lines is easily computed from the same details,
as follows :—300 + 120 + 329 + 164+ 66 + 37 =1016 lines, as
stated in § 50, and as they still exist in the Gatha texts.

4 This chapter is also found in Lip, fols. 1-4, and a Pazand
version of §§ 1-3 exists in L22, fols.126, 127, and L7, fols. 78, 79.

5 That is, it becomes desecrated through some fault in the cere-


[is]. Bb


370 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST. ©


2. The decision is this: —Whoever knowingly
consecrates a sacred cake with unpurified sacred
twigs (baresém-i apadiyav)', or with a twig-
bundle the number of whose twigs (tak) is oo many
or too few, or of another plant not proper for sacred
twigs; or holds the end of the twig-bundle to the
north? azd utters the Avesta attentively; or who-
ever consecrates with efficacy unawares, z¢ is not to
be considered as uttered by him. 3. Mor by him
who advertently or inadvertently takes a taste
(£4shnik), not from the sacred cake with the butter
(gatis-daé)%, du¢ from the frasast; or takes the
prayer (vag) zxwardly regarding that cake (drén6)
before the officiating priest (z6t) takes a taste from
the same cake; or shall utter the length of a stanza
im excess, and does not again make a beginning of
the consecration of the sacred cake; or takes up the


f
mony, for any ceremony, which is too imperfect for acceptance
by the celestial beings, is supposed to be appropriated by the
demons, as performed for their benefit (see Chap. IX, 5). Demon
worship is a term also applied to many other evil actions which
are supposed to give the demons special power over the perpetrator
of them.

1 See Chap. III, 32, note.

* The supposed direction of the demons (see Chaps. X, 7, XII,
18). When praying, a Parsi must face either the sun, or a fire or
lamp ; and when the direction of the sun is doubtful, or when it is
nearly overhead, he must face to the south, even when he is in so
low a latitude that the sun may be somewhat to the north of him,

* Which usually takes the place of the meat-offering mentioned
in Chap. XI, 4-6, and is placed upon one of the cakes on the left
side of the table during consecration, while the frasasts are the
cakes on the right-hand side of the table (see Chap. III, 32, note).

* That is, prepares for eating by muttering the portion of the
grace which is to be recited in a low murmur before eating (see
Chap. III, 6, note). This clause is omitted in Kzo.


CHAPTER XIv, 2-6. 371


dedication formula (shntiman6)’ Zoo soon or too
late; or does not utter the Avesta for the fire when
he sees the fire.

4. This is how it is when the period of the day
(gas)* is retained, and how it should be when one
may relinquish z¢; that is, when even one of the
stars created by Atharmazd is apparent, z¢ is re-
tained, axd when not z¢ is relinquished. 5. It is
Vand-Attharmazd* who said that when, besides
Tistar, Vanand, ov Satavés*, one of the zodiacal
stars (akhtarik) is apparent, z¢ is retained, and
when not z¢ is relinquished. 6. Zhere have been
some who said that when, besides one of those three,
three zodiacal stars are apparent, z¢ is retained, and
when not z¢ is relinquished’.


1 See Chaps. IIT, 35, VII, 8.

2 See Bund. XXV, 9. The text appears to refer to the transi-
tion from the Ushahina to the Havani Gah at daybreak ; and
as certain portions of the prayers are varied according to the
period of the day, it is very necessary to know precisely when each
period commences, so as to avoid vitiating the whole ceremonial
by the use of a wrong prayer.

5 See Chap. I, 4, note.

* Three of the leading stars, probably Sirius, Fomalhaut, and
Antares (see Bund. II, 7).

5 This chapter is followed (in both the old MSS. M6 and Eeoy
by the Pahlavi text of the Patit-i Khfd, or renunciation of one’s
own sin, a translation of which will be found in Bleeck’s English
version of the Avesta, London, 1864, III, pp. 159-162, derived
from Spiegel’s German translation of the Pazand text. This trans-
lation is fairly correct on the whole, although some passages might
be improved, thus (p. 162), instead of ‘all sins which may attack
the character of man [or] have attacked my character, if I, on
account af much death, have not recognised the death,’ &c., we
should read ‘of all sins which may become the lot of men, and
have become my lot, on account of whose excessive number I
do not know the number,’ &c.


Bb2


372 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


Part IIl].—Appendrx?.


CHAPTER XV 2.


1. /¢ is revealed by a passage of the Avesta that
Zarattist, seated before Atharmazd, always wanted
information (va) from him; and he spoke to Aft-
harmazd thus: ‘Thy head, hands, feet, hair, face,
and tongue .are in my eyes just like those even
which are my own, and you have the clothing men
have; give me a hand, so that I may grasp thy
hand.’

2. Atharmazd said thus: ‘I am an intangible
spirit; z¢ is not possible to grasp my hand.’

3. Zaratist spoke thus: ‘Thou art intangible, and
Vohtiman, Ardavahist, Shatvairé*, Spendarmad, Hor-
vadad, and Amerdédad are intangible, and when I
depart from thy presence, and do not see thee zor
even them—since of the person whom‘ I see and
worship ¢herve is something—shou/d thou and the
seven archangels be worshipped by me, or not ®?’


1 This Appendix consists of a number of fragments found in the
old MS. M6, and of somewhat the same character as the Shayast
la-shayast, but they have no claim to be considered as a por-
tion of that work. Excepting Chaps. XVIII, XIX, XXI, they are
not found in the other old MS. K20, and beyond the fact that they
must be more than five centuries old their age is quite uncertain,
though some of them are probably older than others.

? This chapter follows the Patit-i Khad in M6, and is also found
in Lr5, fols. 16-28; for a Pazand version of it, see L2a, fols,
_ 113-122, and Ly, fols. 70-76.

* Written Shatrdivar throughout this chapter; these six (see
Bund. I, 26) with Atharmazd himself, are the seven archangels.

* Reading min, ‘whom,’ instead of amat, ‘ when’ (see Bund.
I, 7, note).

* Zaratfist is doubtful whether he ought to worship beings of


CHAPTER: XV, I-7. 373


4. Atharmazd said thus: ‘ They should be; | tell
thee, O Zaratist the Spitaman! that each individual
of us has produced his own one creation (dayak)
for the world, by means of which they may set
going in its body, in the world, that activity which
they would exercise in the spiritual existence. 5. Zz
the world that which is mine, who am Aftharmazd,
is the righteous man, of Vohtiman are the cattle, of
Ardavahist is the fire, of Shatvairé is the metal, of
Spendarmad are the earth and virtuous woman, of
Horvadad is the water, azd of Amerddad is the
vegetation. 6. Whoever has learned! the care of
all these seven, acts and pleases well, his soul never
comes into the possession of Aharman and the
demons; when he 4as exercised his care of them, he
has exercised his care of the seven archangels, and
ought to teach all mankind in the world.

7. ‘Whoever wishes to propitiate Adharmazd in
the world, wishes to promote the things of Athar-
mazd; azad whoever he be, with whom Atharmazd ©
ever is in every place (gAs)?, it is necessary chat he
should ® propitiate the righteous man, in whatever


whose existence he had had no tangible evidence, when he no
longer saw them; fearing, perhaps, that they might have been
mere dreams or optical illusions. But he is told that each of these
spiritual beings is the protector of one class of worldly existences,
and that the proper treatment of these existences is a man’s
best means of reverencing the spiritual beings interested in their
welfare.

1 Or ‘taught,’ for the verb has both meanings.

2 Or ‘at all times;’ it is always doubtful whether gas means
‘time’ or ‘ place.’

8 Throughout this chapter a conditional meaning is given to the
verbs by prefixing hana, aé, or 1 (all representing Paz. aé or e) to
the present tense; instead of affixing it.


374 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


has happened avd whatever occurs to him, and
should act for his happiness, and afford him protec-
tion from the vile. 8. Since the righteous man is a
counterpart of Atharmazd the lord, azd when the
righteous man acts it is caused by him who is
Atiharmazd, whoever propitiates the righteous man,
his fame and welfare exist a long time in the world,
and the splendour of Atharmazd and pleasure and
joy become his own zz heaven (vahist).

9. ‘Whoever wishes to.propitiate Vohiman in the
world, azd wishes to act for Azs happiness, is Ze who
wishes to promote the things of Vohiman; and it
is necessary for him, so that Vohiman may be ever
with him, ¢Za¢ he should propitiate, at every place
(gs) and time, the well-yielding (hidhak) cattle, in
whatever has happened azd whatever occurs, and
should act for ¢ker happiness; and in the terrible
days and the hurried times (g4s) which defa// them,
he should afford them protection from the oppres-
sive and idle. 10. He should not give them as a
bribe to a man who is a wicked tyrant, du¢ should
keep ¢em in a pleasant and warm locality and place
(gas); and in summer he should provide them a
store of straw and corn, so that it be not necessary
to keep ¢hem on the pastures (£arak) in winter;
and he should not deliver them wp for this pur-
pose, that is, “So that I may give them up to the
vile,’ because it is necessary to give to the good;
and he should not drive them apart from ¢her
young, and should not put the young apart from
their milk. 11. Since they are counterparts of him
(Vohfiman) himself in the world, the well-yielding
cattle, whoever propitiates those which age well-
yielding cattle his fame subsists in the world, and


CHAPTER XV, 8-15. 375


the splendour of Atharmazd becomes his own 7 the
best existence !.

12. ‘ Whoever wishes to propitiate Ardavahist in
the world is 4e who wishes to promote his things;
and it is necessary for him, so that Ardavahist may
be with “zm at every place (gds) and time, ¢hat he
should propitiate the fire of Atharmazd, in what-
ever has happened and whatever occurs, azd should
act for z¢s happiness; he should not put upon z¢
wood, incense, and holy-water? which are stolen and
extorted, and he should not cook at it a ration (ba-
har) which is violently extorted from men. 13. For
it is a counterpart of him (Ardavahist) himself in
the world, the fire of Atharmazd; and whoever
propitiates those which are fires of Atharmazd his
fame subsists in the world, and the splendour of
Atharmazd becomes his own zz heaven.

14. ‘Whoever wishes to propitiate Shatvairé in
the world, and wishes to act for 42s happiness, is Ze
who wishes to promote the things of Shatvairé; and
whoever he be, it is necessary, so that Shatvairé
may be with him at every place and time, ¢Aa¢ he
should propitiate melted metal* at every place and
time. 15. And the propitiation of melted metal is
this, that he shall practise habits (Adiyind) of the


tessee, Chap. VI, 3:

2 Holy-water is not put upon the fire, for that would be sinful,
but it is presented to the fire, and the outside of the fire-place is
sprinkled or washed with it (see Haug’s Essays, p. 403). The
‘fire of Afharmazd’ means any fire, whether sacred or used for
household purposes.

8 The word may be read either afyén or asin (Av. ayangh,
Pers. Ayan, 4han, or ahin), which is usually translated ‘iron,’ but
also means ‘ metal’ generally, as it certainly does here, and very
probably likewise'in B. Yt. I, 1, 5, II, 14, 22.


376 ‘SHAVAST LA-SHAYAST.


heart so unsullied and pure that, when they shall
drop melted metal upon z/, it does not burn. 16.
And Atarépad son of Maraspend? even acted in this
priestly fashion (dastébarih), so that the melted
metal, when they drop z¢ upon the region (khan6)
of is pure heart, becomes as pleasant to him as
though? they were milking milk upon it. 17. When
they drop z¢ upon the region of the heart of the
wicked and sinners, it burns, and they die. 18. And
one should not commit sin with metal, and with its
burning ; and should not give gold and silver to the
vile. 19. For it is a counterpart of Shatvairé him-
self in the world for him, azd since he propitiates
those which are melted metals, his fame subsists in
the world, and the splendour of Aflharmazd becomes
his own zz heaven.

20. ‘Whoever wishes to propitiate Spendarmad in
the world, wishes to promote the things of Spend-
armad; and whoever he be, it is necessary, so that
Spendarmad may be with him, ¢Za¢ he should pro-
pitiate, at every place and time, the earth and
virtuous woman, in whatever has happened and in
whatever occurs, avd should act for cheer happiness.
21. For when he does not spread out (bara 14
véshéd) this earth, and it does not separate one
puece from another, his body also w2d/ not be always


‘ The primate and prime minister of Shapfir IT (a.p.. 309-379),
who is said to have undergone the ordeal of having melted metal
poured upon his chest, in order to prove the truth of the Mazda-
yasnian religion, The metal used is generally called rfii, ‘ brass,’
but here it is afyén, ‘iron, though a more fusible metal than
either was, no doubt, used.

* Reading amat, ‘though,’ instead of mfin, ‘which’ (see Bund.
iy, note):


CHAPTER XV, 16-25. 374


living upon z¢ at every place and time. 22. On
account of the lodgment of Spendarmad in the earth,
when a robber, violent and worthy of death, and
wives who are disrespectful to ¢Aezx husbands walk
about in sinfulness in the world, and their husbands
are active azd virtuous, it becomes much distressed
(zandik). 23. This, too, is declared, that, whenever
this earth becomes distressed (zanik), it is most so
at the time when sinners worthy of death are most ;
for z¢ is declared, when sinners worthy of death walk
upon z¢, zfs pain and uneasiness become as dis-
tressing (diskhvar) to it as the dead son on her
bosom ¢o a mother; aud the lodgment of Spend-
armad in the earth is little zz that place whereon
sinners worthy of death walk. 24. And her? happi-
ness arises from that place when they shall perform
tillage and cultivation on it, and a virtuous son is
born upon it, and they rear cattle upon it; and it
is so one’s fame subsists in the world, and the
splendour of Atharmazd becomes one’s own 7%
heaven.

25. ‘Whoever wishes to propitiate Horvadad and
Amerddad in the world, whereas that is necessary
which promotes their things, whoever he be it is
necessary that he should propitiate, at every place
and time, the water and vegetation of Horvadad
and Amerédad, in whatever has happened and in


1 Meaning that the earth must be tilled in order to support its
inhabitants, but there is some doubt as to the exact wording of the
translation.

2 Spendarmad is a female archangel; perhaps, however, the
earth is meant here, as it is said to be most pleased by the exist-
ence of fire-temples, dwellings of righteous people, cultivation,
stables, and pastures (see Vend. III, 1-20).


378 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


whatever occurs, azd@ should seize upon those who
consume azd steal water and vegetation'. 26. And
he should not act oppressively, he should not walk
the world in sinfulness, and should not bring bodily
refuse (hikhar), dead matter (nasAi)’, ov any other
pollution to water; he should not destroy vegetation
unlawfully, and should not give fruit to the idle and
vile.. 27. For when he commits sin against water
and vegetation, even when it is committed against
merely a single twig of it, and he has not atoned for
it, when® he departs from the world the spirits of all
the plants in the world stand up high in front of that
man, and do not let him go to heaven. 28, And
when he has committed sin against water, even
when it is committed against a single drop of it, and
he has not atoned for z¢, that also stands up as high
as the plants stood, and does not let him go to
heaven. 29. Since they are counterparts of Hor-
vadad and Amerdéddad themselves, the water and
vegetation, whoever propitiates those which be water
and vegetation, his fame subsists in the world, and a
share of the splendour of Atharmazd becomes his
zm heaven.’

30. Attharmazd said this also to Zarattst, namely:


* Reading mfin, ‘ who,’ instead of amat, ‘ when,’ and digend,
‘they steal,’ instead of digd (perhaps for dfigak, ‘thievish’);
and supposing the verb to be vakhdtinéd, ‘takes, seizes,’ and not
vadtinéd, ‘ makes, acts.” If the reverse be assumed, the transla-
tion would be thus: ‘should act for their happeness. When they
consume water and vegetation he should not act thievishly and
oppressively,’

® For the meaning of htkhar and nas4f, see note on Chap.
II, 30.

* Reading amat, ‘when,’ instead of mfin, ‘who’ (see Bund. I,
7, note).


CHAPTER XV, 26—XVI, 2. 379


‘My will and pleasure is ¢ha¢ the observance and
propitiation of these seven archangels shall be as J
have told thee; and do thou, too, speak thus unto
men, so that they may commit no sin and may not
become wicked, and the splendour of Atharmazd
may become their own zz heaven.’

31. Completed in peace, pleasure, and joy’.


CHAPTER XVI,


o. In the name of God (yazd4n) I write a para-
graph (baba) where the sins which are as it were
small are mentioned one by one. |

1. The least sin is a Farman; avd a Farman ‘is
three coins of five annas *, some say three coins. 2.
An Agerept is, as regards whatever weapon (snés)
men strike with in the world, whenever the weapon
is taken in hand; and taken up by azy one four
finger-bread‘hs from the ground z¢ zs the root? of an


1 This is the most-usual concluding phrase of short Pahlavi
texts, and indicates that this account of the best mode of propiti-
ating the archangels is to be considered as a separate text. It is
followed in M6 by the paragraphs which constitute the next two
chapters.

2 Reading 3 nfimai-i 5 anak, but this is uncertain, and if
correct must have been written in India, as the anna is an Indian
coin worth nearly three halfpence. The coin of five annas was
probably a dirham, as the dirham being about fifty grains of silver
(see note on gfigan in Chap. I, 2), and the ripf having formerly
been less than 180 grains in Gugarat, the former would be nearly
five-sixteenths of the latter, that is, five annas. It may, therefore,
be assumed that the amount of the Farman is here taken at three
dirhams, as in Chap. XI, 2; but in § 5 it appears to be 34 dirhams,
and in Chap. I, 2 as much as sixteen dirhams.

8 See Chap. II, 69, note.


380 SHAYAST LA-SHAVAST.


Agerept for him; ad the retribution and manent
ment for an Agerept should be fifty-three dirhams
(gagan)?, 3. When the weapon turns downwards
zt ¢s the root of an Avédirist for him, and his sen-
tence (din4) is to be changed; his retribution avd
punishment should be seventy-three dirhams’, which
is when anything further occurs. 4. When he shall
lay the weapon on amy one 2z¢ zs the root of an
Aredtis for Aém, and his retribution azd punishment
are thirty stirs; if the wound thereby made by him
be one-fifth of a span (dist)? z# zs no root of an
Aredtis for him, and his retribution azd punishment
are the same thirty stirs.

5. I write the degrees of sin:—A Sréshé-£aranam*
is three coins and a half, a Farman is a Sréshé-
faranam, an Agerept is sixteen stirs, an Avéirist is
twenty-five stirs, an Aredfs is thirty, a Khér is
sixty, a Bazdi is ninety, a Yat is a hundred and
eighty, axd a Tanapthar is three hundred®.

6. The good works which are in the ceremonzal


' § 5 says sixteen stirs, which, if equivalent to these fifty-three

dirhams, would imply 33, dirhams to the stir, instead of four as
usually stated (see Chap. I, 2). The amounts mentioned in
Chaps. I, 2, XI, 2 are very different.
- 2 $5 says twenty-five stirs, which, at 37%, dirhams to the stir (as
in the case of Agerept), would be very neaey eighty-three dirhams,
which is probably the number we ought to read in the text, and
also, possibly, in Chap. XI, 2.

° The dist is a span of ten finger-breadths (about 74 inches)
between the thumb and middle finger (see Bund. XXYVI, 3, note).

* See Chap. IV, 14, note. Comparing the amount here men-
tioned with that of the Farman in § 1, the Sréshé6-farandm, which
is here made equal to the Farman, appears to amount to 32 dir-
hams, which agrees very nearly with the statement in Chap. X, 24,
but differs from that in Chap. XI, 2.

° For similar scales of degrees, see Chaps. I, 2, XI, 2.


CHAPTER XVI, 3-6. 381


worship of the sacred beings (yazisn-i yazdan):—
Consecrating a sacred cake (drén)! is a good work
of one Tanapthar ?; a form of worship (yast)? is a
hundred Tandpthars; a Visparad‘ is a thousand
Tanapthars; a Dé-hémdst® is ten thousand; a
Dvazdah-hémast is a hundred thousand, avd the
merit (kirfak) of every one which is performed with
holy-water is said ¢o de a hundred to one; a HAad-
dkht* is two thousand Tanapthars, avd with holy-
water it becomes a hundred to one’.


1 See Chap. III, 32. The Persian Rivayats explain that this is
when the proper ritual is merely recited, without using the sacred
twigs and other ceremonial apparatus; when the twigs are used
the merit is ten times as great.

2 That is, sufficient to counterbalance a Tandptihar sin (see
Chap. I, 1, 2).

8 A Yast is a formula of praise in honour of some particular
angel; when recited with all the accessories of sacred twigs and
other ceremonial apparatus, the merit is ten times as great as is
mentioned in the text.

* The Visparad service includes the Yasna, and when performed
with the use of the sacred twigs, holy-water, and other ceremonial
apparatus the merit is ten times as great as here stated; some
authorities say it is a hundred times as great.

5 This kind of HémAst is not mentioned in Dastfir Jamaspji’s
explanation of this species of religious service (see B. Yt. II, 59,
note); it occurs, however, in the Nirangistan as a distinct kind,
though called merely HémAst in the Persian Rivayats.

eepee Bayt. IEE an:

7 The merits of other prayers and ceremonies are detailed in the
Persian Rivayats; thus, that of the ordinary recital of a Vendidad
(which includes both Yasna and Visparad) is sixty thousand Tana-
pdhars, and when with sacred twigs and holy-water it is a hundred
thousand ; that of the recital of any Nydyis (see Chap. VII, 4), or
of taking and retaining a prayer (vag, see Chap. III, 6) inwardly,
is one Tanapthar.


382 sHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


CHAPTER XVII.


1. This, too, Zaratist asked of Afttharmazd, that
is: ‘Which is the time when oxze must not eat
meat ?’

2. Attharmazd gave a reply thus: ‘In a house
when a person shall die, until three nights are com-
pleted, nothing whatever of meat is to be placed on
a sacred cake (drén) therein and in 2¢s vicinity’ ;
but these, such as milk, cheese, fruit, eggs, and pre-
serves, are to be placed; azd nothing whatever of
meat is to be eaten dy his relations”. 3. In all the
three days it is necessary to perform the ceremonial
(yazisn) of Srésh for this veason, because Srésh will
be able to save his soul from the hands of the
demons for the three days*; and when ove con-


* Reading va hamgéshak, the latter word being apparently
used in a parallel passage in Pahl. Vend. VIII, 64 in old MSS.;
this reading is, however, somewhat doubtful here, and perhaps we
ought to read ‘on a sacred cake in that roofed place (pavan zak
vamktnth) ;’ the last word being a possible term for ‘roofing’
as it stands, though it may be a miswriting of vampds (Pers.
bampds, ‘ roofing’).

2 The Parsis, nowadays (Dastfir Hoshangji says), do not cook
for three days under a roof where a death has occurred, but obtain
food from their neighbours and friends; but if the cookroom be
under a separate roof, as often happens in India, they have no
objection to cooking there.

$ The soul is supposed to hover about the body for the first
three nights after death, during which time it has to rely upon the
angel Srésh (see Bund. XXX, 29) for protection from the demons,
which the angel, it is presumed, will afford more efficiently if
properly propitiated by the surviving relatives. At the third dawn
after death (that is, the dawn of the fourth day inclusive of the day
of death) the soul is supposed to depart finally for the other world
(see AV. IV, 8-36, XVII, 5-27).


CHAPTER XVII, I-6. 383


stantly performs a ceremonial a¢ every period
(gas)’ in the three days z¢ is as good as though
they should celebrate the whole religious ritual
(hamak dinéd) at one time. 4. And after the third
night, af dawn, ome is to consecrate three sacred
cakes (drén), one for Rashniti and Astdd, the second
Jor Vaé the good’, and the third for the righteous
guardian spirit (ardai fravard); and clothing? is
to be placed upon the sacred cake of the righteous
guardian spirit. 5. For the fourth day it is allow-
able to slaughter a sheep‘, avd the fourth day the
ceremonial (yazisn) of the righteous guardian spirit
is to be performed; and afterwards are the tenth-
day, the monthly, and, then, the annual ceremonies ;
and the first monthly is exactly on the thirtieth day,
and the annual on the particular day®. 6. When he


1 These periods of the day are five in summer, and four in
winter (see Bund. XXV, g, ro).

® The usual name of the angel Ram (the Vayu of Ram Yt.)
who, with the angels Rashn& and Astdd, is supposed to be sta-
tioned at the Ainvad bridge, where the soul has to give an account
of its actions during life shortly after the dawn following the third
night after death (see AV. V, 3, CI, 21, note, Mkh. II, 115).

5 This clothing must be new and good, and is supposed to be
supplied to the spirit to prevent its appearing unclothed in the
other world, where the clothing of the soul is said to be formed
‘out of almsgivings’ (Chap. XII, 4); to fulfil which condition the
clothes provided are presented. to the officiating priests (see Sad-
dar Bundahis LXXXVII).

* Or ‘goat.’

5 That is, on the exact anniversary of the death; the sentence
is rather obscure, but this appears to be the meaning. With
regard to the ceremonies after a death, the Persian Rivayats give
more details, which may be summarized as follows :—On each of
the first three days a Srésh ‘Yast is performed and a Srésh Drén
consecrated (see Chap. III, 32, note). On the third night, in the
middle of the Aiwisrfithrem Gah (dusk to midnight), a renuncia-


384 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


shall die af a place distant from that where the
information arrives, when the three days’ ceremonies
(sattith) are celebrated a¢ that place where he shall
die z¢ is well, when not; their celebration is 40 de at
this place, axd from the ¢me when the information
arrives, until three nights are completed, it is neces-
sary to perform the ceremonial of Srésh, ad after
three days and nights it is necessary to perform the
ceremonial of the righteous guardian spirit.’

7. In one place zz is declared, that of him whose
begetting is owing to the demons, of him who com-
mits sodomy, and of him who performs the religious
rites (dind) of apostasy, of none of the three do


tion of sin is performed in the house of the deceased; and in the
Ushahin Gah (midnight to dawn) four Dréns are consecrated,
one dedicated to the good Vaé (N4-i veh), one to Rashn and
~ Astad, one to Srdsh, and one to the righteous (ash64n), and in
front of the last are placed new and clean clothes with fruit, but
without an egg. On the fourth day, at sunrise, the Dahman
Afring4n (Yas. LIX) is recited, and then the Kharshéd and Mihir
NyAyis, after which the people in the house can first eat fresh-
cooked meat. During the fourth day also the Yast of the righteous
is performed, and the Drén of the righteous is consecrated; and
the same again on the tenth day, together with the recitation of
the Dahman Afring4n. On the thirtieth day the Strézah (praise
of the thirty days) is to be celebrated, with the dedication to the
thirty days; thirty-three beans (lfvak) and thirty-three eggs, with
fruit, being placed in front of the Dr6én, which is consecrated in
the presence of fire; and, afterwards, the assistant priest conse-
crates a Drén for Srésh. The next day the chief priest consecrates
a Drén for the righteous; a suit of clothes and fruit being placed
in front of the Drén. And each day a Yast of the righteous is
performed, a Drén of the righteous is consecrated, and an Afringan
recited. On the same day every month the same Yast, Dron, and
Afringén are celebrated ; a priest also undergoes the Bareshnfim
for the deceased, a Géti-kharid (see Bund. XXX, 28) is per-
formed, and three Vendidads dedicated to Srésh. On each day
at the end of a year the Sirézah Yast is performed, and a Drén


CHAPTER XVII, 7-9. 385
she ce SSN Sa te OO a
they restore the dead!, for this reason, because he
‘whose begetting is owing to the demons is himself a
demon *, and the soul of him who commits sodomy
will become a demon?, and the soul of him who
performs the religious rites of apostasy will become
a darting snake +.

8. This, too, is revealed by the Avesta®, that
Attharmazd spoke thus: ‘Give ye up the persons
of all men, with the submissiveness of worshippers,
to that man 4o whom the whole Avesta and Zand is
easy °, so that he may make you acquainted with
duties and good works; because men go to hell for
this eason, when they do not submit ¢her persons
to priestly control (aérpatistan), and do not be-
come acquainted with duties and good works.’

9. Query :—There is an action which, according
to the Avesta’, is not good for a person to do, axd
the sentence of ‘worthy of death’ is set upon z¢; for
one's better preservation is ove not to do that action,


dedicated to the thirty days is consecrated, thirty-three beans being
placed, with one Drén, one Frasast (see Chap. III, 32, note), one
pentagonal Drdén as the sun, one crescent-shaped as the moon,
thirty-three eggs, and fruit, in front of the Drén, which is conse-
crated in the presence of fire; afterwards, the assistant priest
consecrates a Dron for Srésh, and recites the Dahman Afring4n,
and the next day the chief priest consecrates a Drén for the
righteous, a suit of clothes being placed before the Drén, and
recites the Dahman Afring4n.

1 That is, there is no resurrection for them.

2 And, therefore, not immortal according to the Parsi faith.

* Compare Vend. VIII, 98-106.

* Which being a creature of the evil spirit is doomed to de-
struction.

5 But it is doubtful if the passage be extant.

6 That is, the man who knows the whole scripture and com-
mentary by heart. ©

7 Reading pavan Avistak, instead of Avistak pavan.


[5] eee


386 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


or to accomplish azd urge z¢ on, for the advance of
religion in a state of uncertainty (var-hémandih)?
10. The answer is this, that when they act well for
they better preservation ¢here is no fear, on account
of acting well, but ove is not to forsake that’, too,
though z¢ be not goodness; a forsaken duty is very
bad, for a contempt of it enters into one.

11. This, too, is declared, that Zaratist enquired
of Atharmazd thus: ‘From what place do these
people rise again ? from that place where they first
went into ¢heir mothers, or from that place where -
the mothers have given ¢hem birth, or from that
place where ¢hezr bodies happen Zo de (atiftéd) ?’
12, Adharmazd gave a reply thus: ‘ Not from that
place where they have gone into ¢#ezr mothers, nor
from that place where they have been born from
they mothers, nor from that place where ¢her
bodies and flesh happen ¢o ée, for they rise from
that place where ‘the life went out from their
bodies.’ 13. And this, too, he asked, that is;
‘Whence do they raise? 42m again who is sus-
pended from anything, azd shall die in the air?’
14. The reply was: ‘From that place where his
bones and flesh first fall to the ground; hence, ex-
cept when he shall die on a divan (gas) or a bed
(vistarg), before they carry him away, whatever z¢


+ The religion in a position of difficulty appears to be the
meaning, but the reply to this question of casuistry is by no means
clear.

Literally, ‘they rise,’ both here and in the next section, but
the change to the plural number is perplexing, unless it refers to
those who prepare the resurrection of the dead (Bund. XXX, 4;
7, 17), as here assumed by reading ‘they raise.’


CHAPTER XVII, IO—XVIII, 3. 387


7s, a fragment ' is to be taken and to be laid across
his limbs; for when the usage is not so, they raise
him again from that place where his body arrives at
the ground,’


15. Completed in peace, pleasure, and joy®.


CHAPTER XVIII.


1. It is said in revelation that Aéshm* rushed
into the presence of Aharman®, and exclaimed thus:
‘I will not go into the world, because Atharmazd,
the lord, has produced three things in the world,
to which it is not possible for me to do anything
whatever.’

2. Aharman exclaimed thus: ‘Say which are
those three things.’

3. Aéshm exclaimed thus: ‘ The season-festival


' Apparently a fragment of the place whereon the death took
place is meant by kadam-1 parak.

2 The miscellaneous passages which follow Sls. in M6 terminate
at this point, which is the end of the first volume of that MS. The
next three chapters are taken from the latter end of the other
volume of M6.

® Both this chapter and the next are also found in Kao, the
first being placed before the first part of Sls., and the second
before the second part. Chap. XVIII also occurs in Dasttir
Jamaspji’s MS. of the Bundahis, just after Chap. XXXIV of that
text (see Introduction, p. xxx), and a Pazand version of it occu-
pies the same position in L7 and Lz2z2, and is translated by Justi
as the last chapter of the Bundahis, in his German translation of
that work (see Introduction, p. xxvi).

4 The demon of wrath (see Bund. XXVIII, 15-17).

5 See Bund. I, 3. Aéshm, as the chief agent of the evil spirit
in his machinations against mankind, rushes into his master’s
presence in hell to complain of the difficulties he encounters,


Cres 2


388 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


(gasdnbar)!, the sacred feast (myazd), and next-
of-kin marriage (khvétik-das).’


1 See Bund. XXV, 1, 3, 6. The six Gahanbars or season-
festivals are held, respectively, on the 45th, to5th, 180th, 21oth,
2goth, and 365th days of the Parsi year. An explanation of the
cause of the inequality of these intervals has been proposed by
Mr. Khurshedji Rustamji Cama, which is well worthy of attention,
and appears to have been first published in 1867 in Nos. 7 and 8 of
his Zartosti Abhyas. His view is that the medieval Zoroastrians,
beginning their year at the vernal equinox (Bund. XXV, 6, 13, 21),
‘recognised originally only two seasons, a summer of seven months
and a winter of five (Bund. XXV, 7), and they held a festival, not
only at the end of each season, that is, on the z1oth and 365th
days of their year, but also in the middle of each season, that is,
on the rosth and 2goth days of their year. That these two latter
were mid-season festivals is proved by their Avesta names, Maidhy6-
shema and Maidhydirya, beginning with the word maidhya,
‘middle.’ Later on, the Zoroastrians divided their year into four
equal seasons, spring, summer, autumn, and winter (Bund. XXV,
20), and without interfering with their old festivals, they would, no
doubt, have wished to celebrate the end and middle of each of
their new seasons. The ends of these four seasons occur on the
goth, 180th, 27oth, and 365th days of the year, and their mid-
points are the 45th, 135th, 225th, and 320th days; but the Zoro-
astrians already held a festival on the 365th day, and celebrated
midsummer and midwinter (the 135th and 320th days of their new
calendar) on the rosth and 2goth days of their year, and they
would consider the goth, 225th, and 270th days too close to their
old festivals of the ro5th, 210th, and zgoth days to allow of the
former being held as new festivals; so that they would have only
_the midspring festival, on the 45th day, and that of the end of
summer, on the r8oth day, to add to their old festivals. It may
be objected that the end of summer was already celebrated on the
210th day, and, for this reason, it is more probable that the festi-
vals were intended to celebrate the beginnings and mid-points of
the seasons, rather than their ends and mid-points. According
to this view, the six season-festivals were intended, respectively, to
celebrate midspring, midsummer, the beginning of autumn, the
‘beginning of winter, midwinter, and the beginning of spring.
That they were also intended to commemorate, respectively, the


CHAPTER XVIII, 4. 389


4. Aharman exclaimed thus: ‘Enter into the
season-festival! if one of those present shall steal
a single thing the season-festival is violated, and the
affair is 2 accordance with! thy wish; enter into the
sacred feast! if only one of those fresent shall chatter
the sacred feast is violated, and the affair is zz
accordance with thy wish; du¢ avoid next-of-kin mar-
riage*! because I do not know a remedy for it; for
whoever as gone four times near to z¢ wz/d not
become parted from the possession of Adharmazd
and the archangels *.’


creations of the sky, water, earth, vegetation, animals, and man, is
a belief of later times, derived probably from a foreign source.

* Reading pavan, ‘ with, instead of bara, ‘beyond,’ as in the
next clause of the sentence (see p. 176, note 5).

2 By the sacred feast is meant the consecration of sacred cakes,
with meat-offerings and the recital of the Afringdns or blessings
(see Chaps. III, 32, XI, 4).

8 By next-of-kin marriage Parsis nowadays understand the
marriage of first cousins, which they consider a specially righteous
act; and the passages in Pahlavi texts, which appear to approve of
marriages between brother and sister, father and daughter, and
mother and son, they explain as referring to the practices of here-
tics (see Dasttir Péshétan’s English translation of the Dinkard,
p. 96, note). How far this explanation may be correct has not
been ascertained, for the passages in question are rather obscure,
and have not been thoroughly examined. But it is quite con-
ceivable that the Parsi priesthood, about the time of the Muham-
madan conquest (when the practice of next-of-kin marriage was
most extolled), were anxious to prevent marriages with strangers,
in order to hinder conversions to the foreign faith; and that they
may, therefore, have extended the range of marriage among near
relations beyond the limits now approved by their descendants.

* The object of this chapter is evidently to extol the religious
merit of next-of-kin marriage. A Persian version of the passage,
contained in Ms, fols. 54, 55, adds the following details: ‘ There-
fore it is necessary to understand, that the chief next-of-kin mar-
riage is that of ‘a sister's daughter and brother’s son; a medium


390 SHAVAST LA-SHAYAST.


aE 2 Se Me TN ee ees


CHAPTER XIX.


1. The Yathd-aht-vairyé ' formulas that are
“necessary in each place, and how ¢hey are to be
spoken in performing anything *.

2. One dy him who goes forth to an assembly,
or before grandees aud chieftains, or on any busi-
ness; or when he goes to ask for what he wants
(val khvahisnd); also when he quits any business;
in each of these situations he is to say only one
formula, so that his business may proceed more
promptly °.


next-of-kin marriage is that of a brother’s son and a younger(digar)
brother’s daughter, or of a sister’s son and a younger sister’s daughter;
and inferior to a medium next-of-kin marriage is that of a sister's
son and a younger brother’s daughter. It is necessary to know
that any person who contracts a next-of-kin marriage, if Azs soul
be fit for hell, will arrive Among the ever-stationary (see Chap.
VI, 2), if it is one of the” ever-stationary it will arrive at heaven.
Another particular is to be added; if any one, in departing, settles
and strives for the next-of-kin marriage betrothal (paivand) of
a next brother it is a good work of a thousand Tanapthars; if


any one strives to break off a next-of-kin marriage betrothal he is
worthy of death.’


1 See Bund. I, 21.

® Tt appears from the ninth book of the Dinkard, that the con-
tents of this chapter are derived from the first fargard of the
Stidkar Nask (see B. Yt. I, 1, note). The account given by the
Dinkard contains fewer details, but, so far as it goes, it is in accord-
ance with our text, except that it seems to transfer the object of
§ 10 to § 12, and removes the objects of §§ 12, 13 one step onwards ;
it also adds ‘going on a bridge*to § 2. The Persian Rivayat of
Bahman Paingyah gives further details, as will be mentioned in the
notes below.

* The Persian Rivayat adds to these occasions, when he goes
on the water, or a river, or goes to borrow, or to ask repayment —
of a loan, or goes out from his house, or comes into it.


CHAPTER XIX, I-6. 391


3. Lhat a blessing (Afriné) may be more benedic-
tory, for this reason one utters two formulas; for
there are two kinds of blessing, one is that which
is in the thoughts!, and one is that_ which is in
words,


4. Four are for coming out more thankfully when
at a season-festival *.

5. Five éy dim who goes to atone for sin, in order
to expel the fiend; because it is necessary to un-
dergo punishment by the decision (dastébarth) of
these five persons, the house-ruler, the village-ruler,
the tribe-ruler*, the province-ruler, and the supreme
Zarattist ; and five Ashem-vohts * are to be uttered
by him at the end.

6. Six dy him who goes to seek power, and to
battle, so that he may be more successful.


1 The words pavan minisn are guessed, for this first clause is
omitted by mistake in M6, and these two words are illegible in
K2o0, except part of the last letter.

2 Keo substitutes for val, ‘at,’ the following mutilated phrase :
[....anhau khshap6 kadarkat pavan kadarkat] madam
vazltinéd radth-i; the portion in brackets being evidently a frag-
ment from the Haddkht Srésh Yt..5 with Pahlavi translation
(a passage which treats of the efficacy of reciting the Yatha-ahf-
vairyO). If this fragment be not merely a marginal gloss, which
has crept into the text by mistake, we must translate the whole
section as follows: ‘Four are for the more thankful coming out
of the liberality of a season-festival, when the passage, “ on that day
nor on that night comes ¢here anything whatever on any one,” goes
on. The Dinkard has merely: ‘Four by hzm who is at the
invocation of the chiefs of creation and the celebration of a season-
festival.’ The Persian Rivayats omit the section altogether.

8 This person is omitted both in M6 and K20, but he is wanted
to make up the five. This section is omitted by the Persian
Rivayats.

4 See Bund. XX, 2. These are to be recited after the punish-
ment is over.


392 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


7. Seven dy him who goes to perform the worship
of God (yazdan), so that the archangels may come
more forward! at the worship.

8. Eight 4y 47m who goes to perform the cere-
monial of the righteous guardian spirit.

9. Nine dy kim who goes to sow corn; these he
utters for this reason, because the corn will ripen
(raséd) in nine months, azd so that the corn may
come forward he will make the mischief of the
noxious creatures less”.

10. Ten dy kim who goes to seek a wife, so that
the presents may be favourable for the purpose.
11. Ten dy 4zm who wishes to allow the male access
to beasts of burden and cattle, so that it may be
more procreative *.

12. Eleven éy fim who goes to the lofty moun-
tains, so that the glory of mountains and hills may
bless him axd be friendly *.

13. Twelve dy kim who goes to the low districts,
so that the glory of that country and district may
bless him and be friendly *

14. Thirteen dy 42m who shall become pathless ;
at that same place he shall utter them; or by him


1 Or ‘may arrive earlier;’ there being seven archangels has
suggested the number seven. This section and the next are
omitted by the Persian Rivayats.

® The Persian Rivayats add general cultivation, planting trees,
and cohabitation with one’s wife.

° Instead of §§ 10, 11 the Persian Rivayats have buying quadru-
peds, and driving pegs into the ground for picketing them.

* The Persian Rivayats substitute conference with a maiden,
seeking a wife, giving one’s children in marriage, and obtaining
anything from another.

° The Persian Rivayats add going up hills, mounting anything
lofty, going on a bridge, and losing one’s way.


; CHAPTER: XIX, 9— XX, 1. 393


who shall pass over a bridge and a river, so that
the spirit of that water may bless him’; because
the Yath4-ahf-vairy6 is greater and more successful
than everything in the Avesta as to-all rivers, all
wholesomeness, and all protection.

15. Religion is as connected with the Yatha-aht-
vairy6 as the hair is more connected with the glory
of the face; any one, indeed, would dread (sama@)
to separate hairiness ad the glory of the face.


CHAPTER XX ?:


1. Zw one place it is declared that it is said by
revelation (dindé) that a man is to go as much as
possible (and vés-ast) to the abode of fires*, and
the salutation (niyAyisnd) of fire* is to be per-
formed wzth reverence ; because three times every
day the archangels form an assembly in the abode
of fires, and shed good works and righteousness
there; and then the good works and righteousness,
which are shed there, become more lodged in the
body of 42m who goes much thither, and performs
many salutations of fire wz/k reverence.


oo

1 The Persian Rivayats substitute going to and entering a city
or town; they also add twenty-one recitations on setting out on
a journey, so that the angel Bahram may grant a safe arrival.

2 The contents of this chapter conclude the MS. M6; a few
lines even having been lost at the end of that MS., though pre-
served in some of its older copies. A more modern copy, in the
MS. No. 121 of the Ouseley collection in the Bodleian Library at
Oxford, contains §§ 4-17, appended to the Bundahis. Complete
P4zand versions, derived from M6, occur in Ly and L22, immedi-
ately following the Pazand of Chap. XVIII.

® The fire-temple.

4 That is, the-Atas Nydyis is to be recited.


394. SHAVAST LA-SHAYAST.


2. This, too, that the nature of wisdom is just like
fire; for, in this world, there is nothing which shall
become so complete as that thing which is made
with wisdom; and every fire, too, that they kindle
and one sees from far, makes manifest what zs safe
and uninjured (airakht); whatever is safe in fire is
safe for ever, and whatever is uninjured in fire is
uninjured for ever.

3. This, too, that a disposition in which is no
wisdom is such-like as a clear, unsullied (anahtk)
fountain which is choked (bast6) and never goes
into use; and the disposition with which ¢here is
wisdom is such-like as a clear, unsullied fountain,
over which an industrious man stands amd takes z¢
into use; cultivation restrains z/, and it gives crops
(bar) to the world.

4. This, too, that these three things are to be
done by men, to force the demon of corruption
(nastis)! far away from the body, to be steadfast
in the religion, and to perform good works. 5. To
force the demon of corruption far away from the
body is this, that before the sun as come up one is
to wash the hands? and face with bull’s urine and
water; to be steadfast in the religion is this, that
one is to reverence the sun*; and to perform good
works is this, that ove is to destroy several noxious
creatures.

6. This, too, that the three greatest concerns of
men are these, to make him who is an enemy a
friend, to make him who is wicked righteous, and to
make him who is ignorant learned. 7. To make


* ‘See Chap: Ii. 2 See Chap: VIL) #
§ See Chap. VII, 1-6.


CHAPTER XX, 2—II. 395


an enemy a friend is this, that out of the worldly
wealth oze has before him he keeps a friend in
mind; to make a wicked oe righteous is this, that
from the sin, whereby he becomes wicked, oe turns
him away; and to make an ignorant ome learned is
this, that ove is to manage himself so that he who is
ignorant may learn of him.

8. This, too, that the walks of men are to be
directed chiefly to these three places, to the abode
of the well-informed, to the abode of the good, and
to the abode of fires?. 9. °To the abode of the
well-informed, that so oze may become wiser, and
religion be more lodged in ome’s person; to the
abode of the good for this reason, that so, among
good and evil, he may thereby renounce the evil
and carry home ¢he good”; and to the abode of fires
for this reason, that so the spiritual fiend may turn
away from him. |

10. This, too, that Ze whose actions are for the
soul, the world is then his own, and the spiritual
existence more his own; and 4e whose actions are
for the body, the spiritual evzstence has hem at
pleasure, axd they snatch the world from him
compulsorily.

11. This, too, that Bakht-afrid*® said, that every
GAtha (g4s4n)* of Adharmazd has been an opposi-


1 The fire-temple.
2 Assuming that the word sapfrth, ‘the good,’ has been omitted
by mistake; the sentence appearing to be unintelligible without it.
a1See.B.Yt: 17.
4 The word g4s4n being plural, Gatha must be taken in its
collective sense as an assemblage of hymns. The word can also
be read dahisn, ‘creation, but this meaning seems improbable
here.


306 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


tion of the one adversary, and the renunciation of sez
(patitik)+ for the opposition of every fiend.

12. This, too, that, regarding the world, anxiety
is not to be suffered, it is not to be considered as
anything whatever, and is not to be let slip from the
hand. 13. Anxiety is not to be suffered for this
veason, because that which is ordained will happen ;
it is not to be considered as anything whatever for
this reason, because should it be expedient it is
necessary to abandon 2z¢; -and it is not to be let slip
from the hand for this reason, because it is proper,
in the world, to provide a spiritual evestence for
oneself.

14. This, too, that the best thing is truth, and the
worst thing is deceit; and ¢heve is he who speaks
true and thereby becomes wicked, and ¢here is he
who speaks false avd thereby becomes righteous.

15. This, too, that fire is not to be extinguished 2,
for thzs is a sin; ahd ¢heve is he who extinguishes
zt, and is good,

16. This, too, is declared, that nothing is to be
given to the vile; and ¢here is he by whom the best
and most pleasant ragout (khairdik) is to be given
to the vile.

17. On these, too, is the attention of men Zo de
fixed, because there is a remedy for everything but
death, a hope for everything but wickedness, every-
thing will lapse * except righteousness, it is possible


* That is, the Patit or formula of renunciation (see Chap.
IV, 14).

2 Literally, ‘ killed,’

* M6 ends at this point, the next folio being lost. The re-
mainder of the chapter has been recovered from a copy in Bombay,
checked by the Paz. MSS. L7 and Lz2z, all of which must have


CHAPTER XX, I'2—XxXi, 2. 397


to manage everything but temper (g¢éhar), and it is
possible for everything to change but divine pro-
vidence (baké-bakht6),

18. This, too, is declared, that Fréa@tin! wished
to slay Az-i Dahak*, dv¢ Atharmazd spoke thus:
‘Do not slay em now, for the earth will become
full of noxious creatures.’


CHAPTER XXI3,


1. | write the indication of the midday shadow;
may it be fortunate!

2. Should the sun come* into Cancer the shadow
is one foot of the man, a¢ the fifteenth degree of
Cancer z¢ is one foot; when the sun is at Leo z¢ is


been derived from M6 before it lost its last folio; whereas the MS.
No. 121 of the Ouseley collection at Oxford, which ends at the
same point, must have been written after the folio was lost.

1 See Bund. XXXI, 7.

2 See Bund. XXIX, 9, XXXI, 6, B. Yt. III, 55-61. '

® The contents of this chapter, regarding the lengths of midday
and afternoon shadows, immediately follow a tale of Gést-i Fryané,
which is appended to the book of Arda-Viraf’s journey to the
other world, both in M6 and K2o. As will be seen from the
notes, these details about shadows were probably compiled at
Yazd in Persia, as they are suitable only for that latitude.

* Reading Ayad-ae (a very rare form), or it may be intended
for h6man4e, ‘should it be,’ but it is written in both MSS. exactly
like the two ciphers for the numeral 5. Mulla Firfiz in his Avigeh
Din, p. 279 seq., takes 5 khaddk pai as implying that the shadow
is under the sole of the foot, or the sun overhead; but neither this
reading, nor the more literal ‘ one-fifth of a foot,’ can be recon-
ciled with the other measures; though if we take 5 as standing
for pangak, ‘the five ‘es or sole,’ we might translate as follows:
‘When the sun is at Cancer, the shadow is the sole of one foot of
the man.’


398 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


one foot and a half, a¢ the fifteenth of Leo z¢ is two
feet; when the sun is at Virgo z¢ is two feet and a
half, a¢ the fifteenth of Virgo z¢ is three feet and
a half; a¢ Libra z¢ is four! feet and a half, a¢ the fif-
teenth of Libra z¢ is five feet and a half?; a¢ Scorpio
7¢ is six feet and a half, a¢ the fifteenth of Scorpio 2¢
is seven® feet and a half; a¢ Sagittarius z¢ is eight
feet and a half, a¢ the fifteenth of Sagittarius 2¢ is
nine feet and a half; af Capricornus z¢ is ten feet,
at the fifteenth of Capricornus 2z¢ is nine * feet and a
half; a¢ Aquarius z¢ is eight ® feet and a half, a¢ the
fifteenth of Aquarius z¢ is seven feet and a half; a¢
Pisces z/ is six feet and a half, a¢ the fifteenth of
Pisces z¢ is five feet and a half; af Aries z¢ is four
feet and a half, af the fifteenth of Aries z¢ is three
feet and a half; af Taurus z¢ is two feet and a half,
at the fifteenth of Taurus z¢ is two feet; at Gemini
zt is one foot and a half, a¢ the fifteenth of Gemini
ZES> One 100k".


Kzo has ‘three’ by mistake.
M6 omits ‘ and a half’ by mistake.
K2o has ‘ six’ by mistake.
Both MSS. omit one cipher, and have only ‘six,’ but the
shadow must be the same here as at the fifteenth of Sagittarius,

> Both MSS. have ‘seven,’ which is clearly wrong.

® It is obvious that, as the length of a man’s shadow depends
upon the height of the sun, each of these observations of his
noonday shadow determines the altitude of the sun at noon, and
is, therefore, a rude observation for finding the latitude of the
place, provided we know the ratio of a man’s foot to his stature.
According to Bund. XXVI, 3 a man’s stature is eight spans
(vitast), and according to Farh. Okh. p. 41 a vitast is twelve
finger-breadths, and a foot is fourteen (see Bund, XXVI, 3, note),
so that a man’s stature of eight spans is equivalent to 6% feet,
Assuming this to have been the ratio adopted by the observer,
supposing the obliquity of the ecliptic to have been 23° 39’ (as it


1
2
3
4


CHAPTER XXI, 3-6. 399


3. The midday shadow is written1, may z¢s end be
good !

4. I write the indication of the Afizérin (sitet
noon)? period of the day; may it be well and
fortunate by the help of God (yazdan)!

5. When the day is at a maximum (pavan
afztind), avd the sun comes unto the head* of
Cancer, azd one’s shadow becomes six feet and two
parts *, he makes z¢ the Afizérin period (gas). 6.


was about a.p. 1000), and calculating the latitude from each of
the thirteen different lengths of shadow, the mean result is 32° 1’
north latitude, which is precisely the position assigned to Yazd
(the head-quarters of the small remnant of Zoroastrians in Persia)
on some English maps, though some foreign maps place it 15’ or 20°
farther south. With regard to the rough nature of this mode of
observation it may be remarked that, as the lengths of the shadows
are noted only to half a foot, there is a possible error of a quarter-
foot in any of them; this would produce a possible error of
2° 4’ in the midsummer observation of latitude, and of 39’ in the
midwinter one; or a mean possible error of 1° 22’ in any of the
observations; so that the possible error in the mean of thirteen
observations is probably not more than 6’, and the probable error
is even less, provided the data have been assumed correctly.

1 Reading nipist, but only the first and last letters are legible
in M6, and the middle letter is omitted in K2o.

2 See Bund. XXV, 9g.

8 The word sar, ‘ head,’ usually means ‘the end,’ but it must
be here taken as ‘the beginning ;’ perhaps, because the zodiacal
signs are supposed to come head-foremost.

4 What portion of a foot is meant by bahar, ‘ part,’ is doubtful,
It can hardly be a quarter, because ‘two quarters’ would be too
clumsy a term for ‘a half.’ But it appears from §§ 5-7 that the
shadow, necessary to constitute the Afizérin period, is taken
as increasing uniformly from six feet and two parts to fourteen
feet and two parts, an increase of eight feet in six months, or
exactly one foot and one-third per month, as stated in the text.
And, deducting this monthly increase of one foot and one-third
from the seven and a half feet shadow at the end of the first month,
we have six feet and one-sixth remaining for the shadow at the


400 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


Every thirty days it always increases one foot and
one-third, therefore about every ten days the reckon-
ing is always half a foot’, axd when the sun is at the
head of Leo the shadow is seven? feet and a half.
7. In this series every zodzacal constellation is
treated alike, and the months alike, until the sun
comes unto the head of Capricornus, aud the
shadow becomes fourteen feet and two parts. 8.
In Capricornus it diminishes again a foot anzd one-
third?; azd from there where it turns back, because
of the decrease of the night and increase of the day,
it always diminishes one foot azd one-third every
one of the months, azd about every ten days the
reckoning is always half a foot, until it comes back
to six feet and two parts; every zodzaca/ constella-
tion deng treated alike, and the months alike ¢.


beginning of the month. Hence we may conclude that the ‘ two
parts’ are equal to one-sixth, and each ‘ part’ is one-twelfth of
a foot.

‘ Meaning that the increase of shadow is to be taken into
account as soon as it amounts to half a foot, that is, about every
ten days. Practically, half a foot would be added on the tenth
and twentieth days, and the remaining one-third of a foot at the
end of the month.

* Both MSS. have ‘eight,’ but this would be inconsistent with
the context, as it is impossible that ‘six feet and two parts’ can
become ‘eight feet and a half’ by the addition of ‘one foot and
one-third, whatever may be the value of the ‘two parts’ of a
foot. '

'* Both MSS. have 3 yak-r pai, instead of pat 3 yak-r.

* This mode of determining the beginning of the afternoon
period. is not so clumsy as it appears, as it keeps the length of
that period exceedingly uniform for the six winter months with
some increase in the summer time. In latitude 32° north, where
the longest day is about 13 hours 56 minutes, and the shortest is
10 hours 4 minutes, these observations of a man’s shadow make
the afternoon period begin about 32 hours before sunset at- mid-


CHAPTER XXI, 7—XXII, 7. 401


CuHAPTER XXII}


1. May Attharmazd give ¢hee the august rank and
throne of a champion?!

2. May Vohiman give thee wisdom!’ may the
benefit of knowing Vohiman* be good thought,
and mayest thou be acting well, that is, saving the
soul!

3. May Ardavahist, the beautiful, give thee un-
derstanding and intellect!

4. May Shatvairé grant thee wealth from every
generous one!

5. May Spendarmad grant thee praise through
the seed of ¢#y body! may she give. thee as wife
a woman from the race of the great!

6. May Horvadad grant thee plenty and pros- -
perity !

7. May Amerédad grant thee herds of four-footed
beasts ! ze


summer, diminishing to 22 hours at the autumnal equinox, and
then remaining very nearly constant till the vernal equinox.

1 These last two chapters are found written upon some folios
which have been added to the beginning of M6; but, though not
belonging to that MS. originally, they are still very old. The first
of these two chapters has not been found elsewhere ; it is an ela-
borate benediction, in which the writer calls down, upon some one,
a series of blessings from each of the thirty archangels and angels
whose names are given to the days of the Parsi month in the order
in which they here stand (compare the same names in Bund.
XXVII, 24).

2 The meaning of the word padrég or padrang (which occurs
also in §§ 12, 26, and appears to be a title) may be guessed from

‘the following passage in the YAdk4r-i Zarfrén, or Vistasp-shah-
namak: Pavan har ragm va padrazm-i lak pirdg va véh padrdg
sem yAityfini-ae, ‘in every attack and counter-attack of thine mayest
thou bring away the title of conqueror and good champion!’

8 The reading:is uncertain.


[3] pd


402 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.


8. May Dinéd always secure! chee the support of
the creator Atharmazd!

9. May the light of the sublime Atar6? hold thy
throne in heaven!

10. May Avan grant thee wealth from every
generous one!

tr. May Khftr hold thee without mystery and
doubt among the great and ¢Zy compeers (ham-
budikan)!

12. May Mah give thee an assistant, who is the
assistant of champions!

13. May Tistar hold thee a traveller in the
countries of the seven regions!

14. Géstirvan the archangel ® is the aaa of
four-footed Jdeasts.

15. May Diné always remain for thee as the sup-
port of the creator Atharmazd! .

16. May Mitré be thy judge, who shall wish thy
existence Zo de vigorous!

17. May Srésh the righteous, the smiter of de-
mons, keep greed, wrath, and want‘ far from thee!
may he destroy ¢hem, and may he not seize thee as
unjust !

18. May Rashnii be thy conductor® to the re-
splendent heaven!


1 This verb is doubtful ; here and in § 23 it is netrfinad, ‘ may
she guard,’ but in § 15 it is ketrfinad, ‘ may she remain.’

2 Birzg ataré, ‘the sublime fire,’ seems to be a personification
of the fire Berezi-savang of Bund. XVII, 1, 3, the Supremely-
benefiting of SZS. XI, 1, 6.

* She is usually called an angel. Lither the verb is omitted in
this section, or it is not a blessing ; and the same may be said of
§§ 20, 25.

* These are the three fiends, Az, Aeshm, and Niy4z (see Bund.
XXVIII, 15-17, 26, 27).

° It is very possible that the verb should be yehabfinad,


4


CHAPTER XX, 3=2 7. 403


19. May Fravardin give thee offspring, which
may bear the name of ¢hy race!

20. Vahram the victorious is the stimulator of the
warlike.

21. May Ram, applauding the life of a praiser of
the persistent! lord, keep thee perfect (aspar), that
is, living three hundred years, undying and unde-
caying unto the end of ¢hy days!

22. May Vad bring thee peace* from the re-
splendent heaven!

23. May Dind always secure ¢hee the support of
the creator Aftharmazd !

24. May Diné become thy guest in thy home and
dwelling!

25. Arshisang, the beautiful, is the resplendent
glory of the Kaydans.

26. May Astad be thy helper, who is the assistant
of champions !

27. May Asman bless thee with all skill and
wealth !


instead of yehevfinad, in which case we should have ‘ give thee
a passport.’

1 The meaning of khvapar (Av. Av4para) is by no means
certain; it is an epithet of Atharmazd, angels, and spirits, and is
then often assumed to mean ‘protecting ;’ but it is also a term
applied to the earth and offspring ; perhaps ‘self-sustaining ’ would
suit both its etymology and its various applications best, but the root
par has many other meanings.

2 That is, two great cycles. It is usual for the copyists of
Pahlavi MSS. to wish, in their colophons, that the persons for
whom the MSS. are written, whether themselves or others, may
retain the MSS. for a hundred and fifty years before leaving them
to their children; which period is mentioned because it is supposed
to constitute a great cycle of the moon and planets.

3 Written drid instead of drfd.

pd 2


404 SHAYAST LA-SHAYAST.

28. May Zamydad destroy for thee the demon and
fiend out of thy dwelling!

29. May Maraspend hold thee a throne in the
resplendent heaven!

30. May Aniran the immortal, with every kind of
all wealth, become thy desire! the horses of God
(yazd4n)! who shall come that he may go, and thou
mayest obtain a victory.

31. May destiny give thee a helper! he is the
guardian of the celestial sphere for all these arch-
angels whose names I have brought forward; may
he be thy helper a¢ all times, in every good work
and duty !

32. Homage to Srit® the teacher! may he live
long! may he be prosperous zz the land! may “es
be every pleasure and joy, azd every glory of the
KayAns, through the will of the persistent Ath-
armazd !

eee iam: eet!


CHAPTER XXIII.


o. In the name of God and the good creation be
health *!


1. Adharmazd is more creative, Vohiman is more


* Both nouns are in the plural, and both verbs in the singular.
Aniran is a personification of Av. anaghra raofau, ‘the begin-
ningless lights,’ or fixed stars (which, however, are said to have
been created by Atiharmazd in Bund. II, 1), and these stars appear
to have been considered as horses of the angels (Bund. VI, 3,
SZS. VI, 1). There are several uncertain phrases in §§ 30-32.

* This would appear to be the name of the person to whom the
benediction is addressed, as it can hardly be meant for the ancient
hero Thrita, the Athrat of Bund. XXXI, 27, and the Srité of SZS.
XI, 10, note.

° Two versions of this chapter, detailing the qualities of the


CHAPTER XXII, 28—XxXII, 4. 405


embellished 1, Ardavahist is more brilliant?, Shat-
vairé is more exalted*, Spendarmad is more fruit-
ful*, Horvadad is moister ®, Amerddad is fatter ¢
2. Din-pa-Ataré is just like Atharmazd?, Ataré is
hotter *, Avan is more golden®, Khir is more obser-
vant!®, Mah is more protective ", Tir is more liberal,
Gos is swifter!?. 3. Din??-pa-Mitré is just like Atth-
armazd, Mitrd is more judicial, Srésh is more
vigorous, Rashn is more just, Fravardin is more
powerful, Vahram is more victorious, Ram is more
pleasing, Vad is more fragrant. 4. Din-pa-Déné is
just like Adharmazd, Diné is more valuable, Ard
is more beautiful, Ast4d is purer, Asm4n is more
lofty, Zamyad is more conclusive, Maraspend is more


thirty angels and archangels, are extant; one in M6, which has
lost §§ 3-5, and the other in a very old MS. in the library of the
high-priest of the Parsis at Bombay. This latter, being complete,
is here taken as the text, while the variations of M6, which occur
in nearly every epithet, are given in the notes. Which version is
the oldest can hardly be ascertained with certainty from the state
of the MSS. M6 omits this opening benediction.

1 M6 has ‘more nimble.’

2 M6 has ‘more discriminative.’

8 M6 has ‘more active.’

* M6 has ‘more complete.’

5 M6 has ‘ fatter.’

6 M6 has ‘more fruitful.’

7 M6 has ‘ Diné is more desirous.’

® M6 has ‘more heating.’

® Referring perhaps to the golden channels (Bund. XIII, 4, 5)
through which the water of Arédvivsfr (a title of the angel Avan,
‘waters ’) is supposed to flow. M6 has ‘more glittering.’

10 M6 has ‘more embellished.’

1 M6 has varpantar, the meaning of which is uncertain.

2 M6 has ‘ more listening.’

18 The version in M6 ends here; the next folio being lost.

1% The same as Arshisang (see Bund. XXII, 4).


406 SHAYAST LA-SHAVAST,


conveying the religion, Aniran is the extreme of
exertion avd listening }.
5. May it be completed in peace and pleasure !


1 The reading of both these nouns is uncertain. The days of
the Parsi month, which bear the names of these thirty angels, are
divided, it will be observed, into four nearly equal divisions, re-
sembling weeks, which are here separated in §§ 1-4. The first
weekly period begins with a day dedicated to Attharmazd, and
called by his own name ; and each of the three other weekly periods
also begins with a day dedicated to Atharmazd, but called by the
name of Din, ‘ religion,’ with the name of the following day added
as a cognomen. The first week, therefore, consists of the day
Attharmazd followed by six days named after the six archangels
respectively (see Bund. I, 23, 26). The second week consists of
the day Din-with-Ataré followed by six days named after the
angels of fire, waters, the sun, the moon, Mercury, and the primeval
ox. The third week consists of the day Din-with-Mitrd fol-
lowed by seven days named after the angels of solar light, obe-
dience, and justice, the guardian spirits, and the angels of victory,
pleasure, and wind. And the fourth week consists of the day Din-
- with-Dind followed by seven days named after the angels of religion,
righteousness, rectitude, the sky, the earth, the liturgy, and the
fixed stars.


eNMetne ©


OBSERVATIONS.


1. The references in this index are to the pages of the introduction,
and to the chapters and sections of the translations; the chapters being
denoted by the Jarger ciphers.

2. References to passages which contain special information are given
in parentheses. /

3. Though different forms of the same name may occur in the trans-
lations, only one form is usually given in the index, to which the refer-
ences to all forms are attached; except when the forms differ so much
as to require to be widely separated in the index.

4. Pahlavi forms are always given in preference to Pazand and Per-
sian, when only one is mentioned; but where only a Pazand form occurs
it is printed in italics, as Pazand orthography is usually corrupt. In all
such italicised names any letters, which would elsewhere be italic, are
printed in roman type.

5. Abbreviations used ares—Av. for Avesta word; Bd. for Bundahis;
Byt. for Bahman Yast; ch. for chapter of Visparad; com. for com-
mentator and commentary; Gug. for Gugarati; Huz. for Huzvaris ;
Int. for Introduction ; lun. man. for lunar mansion; m. for mountain ;
meas. for measure; n for foot-note; Pahl. for Pahlavi; Paz. for
Pazand ; Pers. for Persian; r. for river; Sl. for Shayast l4-shayast ;
trans. for translation ; wt. for weight ; zod. for zodiacal constellation ;
Zs. for Selections of Zad-sparam.


PINGD EOS,


Asan, angel, See
Avan.

Ab-istadah lake, Bd. 22, 5n.

Ablution, Byt. 2, 36; Sl. 2, (52,)
108; 3, 10, 12; 8, 18, 22; 12,
iy 2A

— seat, Byt. 2, (36;) Sl.10,5. —
tank, Sl. 10, 5. — vessel, Sl.
8, 12.

Abode of fires, SI. 9, 5; 20, 1, 8, 9.

Abtin, man, Bd. 81, 7 n.

Achemenians, Byt. 2, 17n.

Adar, angel, Byt.2,59n. See Ataré.
Adarbigan, land, Bd. 20, 13 n, 250;
22, 2n; 25, 40; 29, I2n.

Ad-fravakhshyi ha, Sl. 18, 29.
Ad-ma-yava ha, $1.18, 33.
Adopted son, Sl. 12, 14.
Ad-ta-vakhshya ha, Sl. 18, 4, 14.
Aéshm, demon, Bd. 19, 33n; 28,
(15-17,) 20; 80, 29; Byt.1, 5n;
2, 26n* Sl. 4S; 43° 18,1, 3:
Afarg, com., Sl. 1, (33) 2, 2, 64, 73,
88,115, 123n; 5,5,6; 10, 39n.
Afghanistan, Bd. 12, 22 n; 20,17n.
Afrasiyab, king, Bd. 31, 14n, 17 n,


Byt. 2, 59n.


ign

Afrin, ritual, S$]. 13, 43 n; 19, 3.

Afring4n, rte, Sl. 10, 3403 17, 5;
18, 4

Afrobag-vind&d, man, Bd. 33, 6, 8.

Agdimasvak, tee Bd. 81, 23.

Agerept sin, Sl: 1, 1, 23 11,1, 2;
165-2, 5.

Batra, man, Bd. 29, 5; 31, 15,
20-22.

Aharman, origin of evil, Bd. 1, 3, 7,
8520, 23, 273 2,403 Zs. 1, 2-4,
6, 8-11, 17, 20, 24, 253 WOr-
shipped by Dahak, Bd. 20, 23;
nature of, Bd. 28, 1-6, 46, 48;
by whom served, Bd. 28, 21;
differs sometimes from the evil
spirit, Bd. 28, 4on; 30, 30;
his attack on creation, Zs. 1,
27; 2, 1-6, 17; 4, 1-5, 10; 5,
I, 3, 53 6, 1, 235 7, 1,12; 8,


Ey POp i Onn t ys 2A yl Ose seol Ieeare
defeated by religion, Byt. 2, 16,
20; Sl. 15, 6; his future evil-
doings, Byt. 2, 40, 62; 8, 55,
56; his advice, Sl. 18, 1, 2, 4.
See Evil spirit.

Ahasuerus, Byt. 2, 17 n.

Ahfi-ad-paiti ha, Sl. 13, 21.

Ahunayaiti gatha, SL. 18, 2n, 4, 6-15,


51.
Ahunavar, Bd. 1, 21, 22; Zs. 1, 12;
i roa SS LOS ny 25 20


12, 19, 32n; 18, 2n; text and
trans., Bd. 1, 21n; com., Zs.
1, 13-19.
Ahya-thw4-athré ha, S]. 18, 17.
Ahya-y4sa ha, Sl. 18, 4, 12, 14, 50.
Atbisrfitém gah, Bd. 25, o.
Aighash, demon, Bd. 28, 33; 81,


5n.

Aitrak, man, Bd. 31, 14.

Airak m., Bd. 12, 2, 12.

Alran-vég, land, Bd. 12, 25; 14, 4;
20, 13, 32; 25, 113; 29, (4, 5,
125) 32; 3); Zs. 9, 8.

Airif, prince, Bd. 31, (9, 10,) 12, 14;
82, 1n; 34, 6; SI. 10, 28n.

Airiz-rasp, chief, Bd. 29, 1.

Airman, angel, Bd. 80, 19 n.

Airya, tribe, Bd. 31, 9 n.

Airyak, roan, Bd. 32, 10.

Airyamana ha, SI. 13, 47.

Aithritak, man, Bd. 32, 1 n.

Aiwisrfithrema gah, Bd. 25, 9n; Sl.
17, 5 n.

Akandgar, king, Byt. 2, 19.

Akatash, demon, Bd. 28, 20.

Akhéshir r.. Bd. 20, 7, 18.

Ak6man, demon, Bd. 1, 24, 27; 28,
7: 80, 29; Zs. 9, 6.

Albfrz m., Bd. 5, 3-5; Le 15n; 8,

2,53 12, (1-4,) 70, 8, 93 13, T,
4; 19,15; 20,1, 4, 8; 24, 28;
Zs. 6, 16, 20, 21 5 Ty ly 5-7

Alexander the Great, Int. 9, 11, 12,
16; Bd. 84, 8; Byt. 2, 19n;
3, 34.


410


PAHLAVI TEXTS.


Almsgiving never excessive, SI. 10,
2 2e OO.

Alvand m., Bd. 19, 3.

Ambergris, origin of, Bd. 19, 12.

Amerdad, angel, Byt. 2, 59 n.

Amerédad, angel, Bd. 1, 26; 9, 2;
27, 243 80, 29; Zs. 8, 1; Byt.
3,293 Sl. 9 8's 13, 145 15, 3;
5, 25,29; 22,7; 23,1; month,
Bd. 25, 20.

Amir., Bd. 90, Si,

Ami r, Bd. 20, 8n, 28n.

Ami, town, Bd. 20, 27n.

Anahi, pap Bd. 5, I angel, Bd.
32, 8. See Abin, Avan.

Anahita, angel, Bd. 19, rn; SI. 11,


4n.

Ananghad, man, Bd. 32, rn.

Anastokh, man, Bd. 81, 9.

Andar, demon, Bd. 1, 27; 28, (8,)
10; 30, 29. See Indar.

Anér, land, Bd. 15, 29.

Angels, Bd. 15, 13; 80, 28; Zs, 1, 03
ye Be ene SIkYG aie thie ee
243 18, 8n, 30; fight with de-
mons, Bd. 3, 26; 6, 1; their
flowers, Bd. 27, 24; prayers
and offerings to them, SI. 9, 10-
12; 11, 4; 12, 8-10; their gifts,
S]. 22, 8-30; their eu Sl.
23, 2-4

Angra- -mainyu, Bd. 1, rn, 3A: 28,
Tn.

Animals, origin and classes, Bd. 10,
33, 14, 3-315 Zs. 9,1, 7-24;
chiefs of, Bd. 24, 2-13; eating
dead matter, Sl. 2, tog-111;
not to be killed, SI. 10, 8, 9.

Aniran, angel, Bd. 27, 243 Sl. 22,
303 28, 4; day, Bd. 25, 7.

Anquetil Duperron, Int. 24, 25, 28.

Antares, star, Bd. 2, 7n; Sl. 14,
5n.

Aoiwra, Av., Bd. 81, 6n.

Aoshnara, man, Bd. 81, 3n.

Apaésh, demon, Bd. 7, 8, 10, 123 28,
(393) Zs. 6, 9, 11, 13.

Aparsén m., Bd. 12, 2, (9,) 12-14,
21, 22, 29, 30, 31n3 2O, 16, 17,
21,22; 24, 28; Zs. seve

Ape, origin of, Bd. 28, 1; pollutes,
Sl. 2, 61.

Apostasy, Sl. 17, 7.

Apostate, Byt. 3, 56, 57; SI. 9, 3.

Aguarius, Bd, 2, 2; Byt. 3, 11n;
Sl. 21, 2.


: Aristi, man, Bd. 82, 2;


Arabic, Int. 14.

Arabs, Bd. 15, 28; 28, 3; 29, 4;
34, on, 9; Byt. 3, 9, 51.

Arag lake, Bd. 19, 15.

—r., Bd. 7, 15, 173 20, (1, 3-8,)
gn, 22n, 28n; 21, 3; 24, 26;
Zs. 6, 20n3 Byt. 38, 170.

Araidar, man, Bd. 32, In.

ae Bd. 19, 15n; 20, 20n; 22,


AC Bd. 20, 8n; Zs.
Byt. 3, 5 n.
Arang-i Biradin, man, Bd. 32, 7.
Arask, demon, Bd. 28, 14, 16.
Arast, ’ demon, Bd. 28, 32.
33, I.
Arawisanasp, man, Ba. Sl, 23.
Araxes r., Bd. 20, 8n, 13n, 22n,
28n; Zs. 6, 20n; Byt. 3, 5n.
Archangels, Bd. 1, (26n;) 2, 9; 3, 2,
4; 80, 23; Byt.1,0; 2, 64; 38,
9, 31; SI. 18, 8, 24, 46; 18, 4;
22, 31; their flowers, Bd. 27, 24;
subdue demons, Bd. 30, 29;
prayers and offerings to them,
Byt. 3, 28, 373 SI. 9, 10; 11, 4;
19,7; 20,1; means of serving
them, SI]. 15, 1-30; their gifts,
Sl. 2 1-7; their qualities, Sl.
23,
Arch- ciedas Bd. 3, 2; 28, 1-13; 30,
293 Sl. 10, 4n: 12, mn.
Ard, angel, Bd. 22, 4n; 27, 24; Sl.
23, 4. See Arshisang.
Arda-fravash, angel, Byt. 2, 59n.
Ardii-fravard, angel, Sl. 11, 4.
Ardakhshir-i Kal, king, Bd. 31, zon;
Byt. 1, 5; 2, 17.
Ardakhshir-i P4pak4n, Int: -17Sr9%
Bd. 81, 30n; Byt. 2, 18.
Ardavahist, angel, Bd. 1, 26: 31, 38;
Sl. ul, 4n; 138,14; 15, EEG Oe,
13; 22,3; 28, 1; month, Bd.
25, 20. See Ashavahist.
Ardavan, king, Bd. 31, 30n.
Arda-Viraf, man, Sl. 21, on.
Ardibahist, angel, Byt. 2, 59n. See
Ardavahist.
Aredh6é-manusha m., Bd. 12, ron.
a sin, Sl. Z a, 2 relies ed Bs sr,


6, 20n;


; 16, 4
Arédvivetr, ae Sl. 11, 4; 23, 2n;
water, Bd. 7, 15n; 12, 5; 13,
I, 3, 10; Qi, 4n; 24,17, 26;
Zs. 6, 18.


Areztir m., Bd. 3, ans 12,5985)


INDEX.


Byt. 3, 22n; Sl. 10, 7n; 183,


19.

Areztir-bfiim m., Bd. 12, 2, 16.

Argasp, king, Bd. 12, 32; Byt. 2,

ING 3, 9»

‘Aries, Bd. 25°25, 5, 63°7,.23 25, 21;
SI. 21, 2.

Aris, prince, Bd. 81, 25n.

_ Ariz, fish, Bd. 14, 26; 18, 5; 24, 13.

Armaiti, angel, Bd. 15, 6n. See
Spendarmad.

Armenia, Bd. 20, 10n.

Armést, Sl. 2, (98n;) 6,1.

Armin, prince, Bd. 31, 25n.

Arnig-bLaredd, woman, Bd. 82, 7n.

Arsaces I, Byt. 2, rgn.

Arsacidans, Int. 11. See Askanians.

Arshisang, angel, Bd. 22, 4; 27,
24n; Sl. 22, 25; 238, 4n. See
Ard.

Artakhshatar son of Papak, Bd. 81,
30; Byt.2, 18n; — the Kayan,
Bd. 81, 30; 34,8n. See Ar-
dakhshir.

Artaxerxes Longimanus, Bd. 84, 8n;
Byt. 2, 17n.

— Mnemon, Bd. 84, 8n; Byt. 2,
17n.

— Ochus, Bd. 34, 8n.

Ariim, land, Bd. 12, 16;.18, 15; 15,
293 20, 10; SI. 6, 7n.

Arvand r., Zs. 6, (20;) Byt. 3, 5, 21,


Bh)
Arzah, region, Bd. 5, 8,9; 11, 3;
29,1; Byt. 3, 47.
Asam, man, Bd. 29, 5.
Ashdard r., Bd. 20, 20.
Ashashagahad, man, Bd. 29, t.
Ashavahist, angel, Bd. 27, 24; 30,
29; SJ. 11,4. See Ardavahist.
Ashavanghu, man, Bd. 29, rn.
Ashavazd, man, Bd. 29, 6.
Ashem -Ahurem -mazdam ch., Sl.


13, 5.

Ashem-vohii, Byt. 2,59; Sl. 8, 353
4,14; 5, 2, 5,73 10, 5n, 24,
35; 12, 21, 32; 18,1; 19,5;
text and trans., Bd. 20, 2.

Ashévahist, man, Bd. 33, 11.

Ashézust, bird, Bd. 19, 19.

Asia Minor, Bd. 13, 15n.

Ask, king, Byt. 2, r9n.

Ask4nians, Bd. 81, 30n; 34,9; Byt.
2,19. See Arsacidans.

Askartim nask, Sl. 10, 25n.
Sakadim. 4


See


ATI

Asman, angel, Bd. 27, 24; Sl. 22,
27; 23, 4. i

Asnavand m., Bd. 12, 2, (26;) 17, 73
Fo oy


Asparég m., Bd. 12, 29, 36.

Asparfim nask, Sl. 10, 21n.
Hiisparam.

Aspengargak, demon, Bd. 7, 12; 28,

. .39- See Spéngargak.

Aspikan, Bd. 32, rn.

Aspiyan, Bd. 31, 4, 7, 8.

Assaults, Sl. 1, 1n, 2n.

Assyrians, Int. 12, 13; Byt. 3, 5.

Astad, angel, Bd. 27, 24; Byt. 2,
59n; 3, 32; S117, 4,5n; 22,
26; 23, 4.

— yast, Byt. 1, 6.

Astaothwanem hf, SI. 18, 1.

Astarabad, town, Bd. 12, 32n.

Asté-vidad, demon, Bd. 3, 21, 22;

. 28, 355 Zs. 4, 4.

Astuyé ha, SI. 13, 1.

Asfirik, man, Bd. 31, 19.

Asfristan, land, Bd. 81, 39; Byt.


See


. 35:

Asvast lake, Bd. 22, 1, 7.

Asvini, lun, man., Bd. 2, 3n.

Atareméa ch., Sl. 13, 26.

Ataré, angel, Bd. 27, 24; Sl. 22, 9;
23, 2; day, Bd. 25, 11.

— Aiiharmazd, com., Sl. 1, 3.

— bdndak, man, Bd. 38, 1.

— dad, man, Bd. 383, 3.

— frdbag, man, Byt.1, 7; Sl. 1, 3n.

— — nosai, com., Sl. 1, 3.

— Mitré, man, Byt. 1, 7.

— pad, man, Byt. 1, 7.

— — j Dad-farukh, com., SI. 1, 4n.

— — j Maraspendan, priest, Bd. 338, -
3, s03 Byt. 2, 1m; 2) 1847 ol:
8, 23; 10, 28n, 40; 15, 16.

— — j Zaratistan, priest, Zs. 1, 19n;
Sl. 8, (10.)

— patakan, land, Bd. 12, 26; 20,
Ai, Pes BAR Se BP Avo lee
FSA Gee Dy ted ize

— tarsah, man, Bd. 31, 29.

Atas nyayis, SI.7, 4n; 20, rn.

— i Vahram, see Vahram fire.

Athrat, man, Bd. 81, 27; Sl. 22,


32n.

Athwya, man, Bd. 31, 4n.

Atonement for sin, Sl. 8, rn, 4N, 13,
15, 16, 19, 20, 23.

Atrat, man, Bd. 31, 27n.

Afharmazd, Zs. 6,10; Byt. 2, 64;


412


PAHLAVI TEXTS.


Sl. 8, 13, 21, 23; 10, 293 12,
28; 13, 8; 18,4; 20, 11, 18;
22, 32; the creator, Bd. 1, 0-3,
6-12, 23, 25, 28; 2,1; 7, 153
18, 5; 16, 3, 4, 6, 7, 233 17, 1,
3; 18, 3, 5; 15, 9, 10, 36; 20,
T, 5,65; 21, 3; 24, 25, 26; 28,
1-3,173 Zs.1, 0, 20, 23, 243 2,
75 83°10, 4, 53 Byt. 1,:0; Sl.
10, 28n; 12, 2; 14,4; 18,1;
22, 8, 15, 23; contends with
Aharman, Bd. 1, 13, 15-18,
20-22; 3, 2, 4,6, 18,19, 21; 4,
2-4; 6, 2,4; 7,9; Zs. 1, 2, 4,
7, 9,11; 3,1, 2; 4, 3,10; 5,


1; instituted rites, Bd. 2, 9;~


chief of spirits, Bd. 24, rn; SI.
11, 4n; archangel, Bd. 27, 24;
SiS, 145 1555700 ay kee
23, 1; religion of, Bd. 28, 4, 5;
talks with Zarattist, Bd. 30, 4,
5; Zs. 11, ron; Byt. 1, 1-5;
2, 1-635 3, 1-62; S19, 8,174;
10, 26; 12, 29, 32; 15, 1-30;
17, 1-6, 8, 11-14; worshipped,
Bd. 30, ©23,-28: “Zs. 10,75
Byt. 2, 645 3, 28, 375 sl. 13,
18, 24, 32, 46; arranges the fu-
ture existence, Bd. 30, 24, 27,
29, 30, 323 his nature, Zs. 1,
13-173 5, 4; Sl. 28, 1-4/: fore-
tells future events, Byt. 1, 3-5;
2, 15-22, 24-63; 8, 1-62.

Atharmazd day, Bd. 8, 12;
Tike py eh /Aay ON Bi

— king, Bd. 33, 2.

— planet, Bd. 5,1; Zs. 4, 7.

Aurvadasp, man, Bd. 32, 1.

Aurvad-aspa, king, Bd. 81, 28n.

Afirvakhsh, man, Bd. 81, ae

Afrvatad-nar, man, Bd. 32, 5, 6,7n.

Afirvazist fire, Zs. 11, 1, 4. See
Urvazist.

Afishahin gah, Bd. 25, 9.

Afishbam, man, Bd. 81, 33, 34.

Atishdastar m., Bd. 12, 2, 15.

Atisind6m m., ” Bd. a Piao GIS bis
18, 110.

EO rite, Byt. 2, 45; Sl. 18,


25, 7,


Adsposin, man, Bd. 29, 1.


Afistfivat gatha, Sl. 10, 6. See
Ustavaiti.
Atistéfrid, rite, Sl. 12, 10. See


Yast6frid.
Afizav, man, Bd. 81, 28.


Afizérin gah, Bd. 25, 9, 10; SI. 7,
EMAL, A505.

Atiz6bé, king, Bd. 31, 23, 24, 353
84, 6n; SI. 10, 28n,

Afizvarak, man, Bd. 81, 410.

Avad-mizdem ch., Sl. 18, 48.

Avan, angel, Bd. 27, 245 Sl. 22) 10;
23, 2; day, SI. 11, 4n; month,
Bd. 25, 7, 10, 203 ‘Byt. 3, 165


Siw b 4meoee Aban.
Avardad, month, Bd. 25, zon. See
Horyadad.


Avarethrabau, man, Sl. 10, 28n.
Avarnak, man, Bd. 81, 37, 38.
Avar-shatré, land, Bd. 31, 37, 38.
Avdem, lun. man., Bd. 2, 3.

Avésar, lun. man., Bd. 2, 3.

Avesta, Int. 9, (10,) 54, 55, 58,
70-72; Bd.14, 26; 19, 16, 19;
Byt. 3, 45n; SI. 18, 15n;
— texts, Int. 10, 11, 22, 24, 43,
47, 52, 53, 67, 68; Sl. 6, rn;
—and Zand, Int. 10; Sl. 10,
25, 29; — letters, Int. 15, 16,
31, 66; —MSS., Int.21, 27-29,
48, 57, 66; referred to, Bd. 14,
23 SIT, 13 25155, 97, n2o 500s
8; 15, 15 17,°8, (oy) words
quoted, Sl5,92555 75) ions
12; 10, 37; 18, 1, 4-14, 16-26,
28-36, 38-40, 42, 45-515 pas-
sages quoted, Sl. 8, 22; 11, 6;
13, 6, 8, 433; prayers, SI. 9, 9,
10; 10, 5, 19, 26n; 14, 2, 3;
19, 14.

Avi-apam ch., SI. 18, 40.

Avoirist sin, Sl.1, 1,2; 11, 1, 2; 16,


35 Be

Avrak, lun. man., Bd. 2, 3; 7, 13
Zs. 6, I.

Ayanghad, man, Bd. 32, rn.

Ayazem, man, Bd. 32, 1.

Az, demon, Bd. 28, 27, 28; 80, 30;
Sl. 22, 17n.

AzAd-mard, com., Sl. 4n.

Azan6, man, Byt. 2,

Az-i Dahak, king, Bd. 23, 2520 78e
81, (6n,) Tie Zoe 2, 10; Byt.
2, 62; 3, 52n, 56- 58, 60; Sl.
20, 18. See Bévarasp "and
Dahak.


Bactria, Bd. 15, 29n; 20, gn.
Bactrian, Byt. 3, I7n.

Bad, angel, Byt. 2, 59n. See Vad.
BAdghés, land, Bd. 12, ron,


INDEX.


413


Bagh nask, SI. 10, 26.
Baghan yast, Sl. 18, rn, gn.
Bagh.
Bag-yasné6 nask, Sl. 12, 17.
Bahak, man, Bd. 88, 1, 2, 6, 8.
Bahak, man, Bd. 88, 3.
Bahman, angel, Byt. 2, 59n; king,
Bd. 31, 29n; Byt.2,17n. See
Vohfiman.
'— Pfingyah, Sl. 19, rn.
— yast, Byt. 3, 11n3; contents, Int.
50-52; age, Int. 53-56; MSS.,
Int. 56; Paz. version, Int. 57;
Pers. version, Int. 57-59; Ger-
man trans., Int. 59.
Bahram, angel, Byt. 2, 59n; king,
Byt. 8, 14n; — fire, Zs. 11, 6.
See Vahram.
— K6pin, man, Byt. 3, 14n.
Bak&n yast6 nask, Sl. 12, 17n.
Bag-yasn6.
Bakht-afrid, com., Byt. 1, 7; SI. 1,
4n; 20, 11.
Bakhtiyari m., Bd. 12, gon.
Bakht-tan m., Bd. 12, 40.
Baké nask, SI. 10, 26n. See Bagh.
Bakyir m., Bd. 12, 2, 20.
Balkh, town, Bd. 24, 15n; Byt. 38,
17n3; river, Bd. 12, 9n; 20, 7,
gn, 22.
Bambé, land, Byt. 3, 17.
Bamdad, man, Byt. 1, 6; 2, 21.
Bamt, town, Byt. 3, 17n.
Bamikan, town, Bd. 20, 22.
Bamiyan, Bd. 20, 22n; Byt. 3, 17n.
Bamm, town, Byt. 3, 17n.
Bareshnim, rite, Byt. 2, 36; Sl. 2,
(6,) 60n, 65n, 70; 8, 24; 10,
Ion, 12n; 12, 22n, 24n, 25n,
26n; 17, 5n.
Baresém, see Sacred twigs.
BaresOmdan, see Sacred twig-stand.
Barmayfin, man, Bd. 31, 8.
Baréshand Atiharmazd, com., Sl. 1,


See


See


4n.

Barz Qiyamu-d-din, Zs. 9, rn.

Baungha,-man, Bd. 33, 1 n.

Bayak, demon, Bd. 31, 6.

Baz, SI. 8, 6n. See Inward prayer.

Bazai sin, Sl. 1,1, 2; 11,1, 2; 16, 5.

Bazdyvdna sea, Bd. 24, 23.

Bear, origin of, Bd. 23, 1.

Beating the innocent, Sl. 10, 17.

Beh-4frin, woman, Bd. 31, 30n.

Beneficent spirit, Zs. 1, 0; Sl. 13,
28, 35,36. *


Berezi-savang fire, Bd. 17, 1,3; Zs.
UG ty Si
Besn, lun. man., Bd. 2, 3.
Best existence, Sl. 6, 3; 10, 26’; 12,
2; 15,11. See Garddman.
Bévarasp, Bd. 12, 31; 29, 9; Byt.
8, 30,55, 56n. See Az-i Dahak.

Birds, classification, Bd. 10, 4; 14,
II, 23-25; Zs. 9, 9-15, 23;
— of prey, Bd. 14, 30; chiefs
of, Bd. 24, 11, 29; destroy Na-
sfis, Sl. 2,5; not to be killed,
Sl. 10, 9.

Bis herb, Bd. 14, 22; 27,1; Zs. 9,
22.

Bisan, Bd. 12, 35.

Bitak, man, Bd. 81, 14.

Bivandangha, man, Bd. 29, rn.

Bodily refuse, Byt. 2, 36; Sl. 2,
(30n;) 15, 26.

Béd6zéd sin, Sl. 2, 39n.

Bombay, Byt. 8, 17 n; SI. 2, 6n.

Boér-t6ra, man, Bd. 31, 7.

Bradarvakhsh, man, Byt. 2, 3 n.

Bradr6ék-résh, man, Byt. 2, 3 n.

Bradr6yisn6, man, Byt. 2, 3 n.

Brazen age, Byt. 2, 18.

Buddha, Bd. 28, 34n.

Buddhists, Bd. 20, 22 n.

Bukhar, land, Byt. 8, 17.

Bukharans, Byt. 3, 17.

Bull’s urine (g6méz), Sl. 2, 67, 92,
93; 10s, mite, P13) a. s eon.
22, 25; 10, 39; 12, 24, 27.

Bumy6 m., Bd. 12, 16n.

Bunda, lun. man., Bd. 2, 3.

Bundahis, Int. 22; contents, Int.
23, 24; MSS., Int. 24-41; Av.
original, Int. 24, 43; Zs. 9, rn,
16n; French trans., Int. 24,
25; German trans., Int. 25, 26;
Gug. trans., Int. 43-45; Paz.
version, Int. 30, 31; longer text,
Int. 32-41; contents of long
text, Int. 35-37; extent of
texts, Int. 34, 35, 413 age, Int.
41-43; Zs. 10, 5n. See also
Sad-dar.

Birg, angel, Bd. 7, 3; 19, 15; Zs.


Gis

Burying the dead, SI. 2, 9; 18, 19.

Birzin-Mitr6 fire, Bd. 12, 18, 34;
17, 7n; 8; Zs. 6, 225 11, 8-10;
Byt. 8, 30, 37; 49.

Biishasp, demoness, Bd. 28, 26; SI.
13, 43.


414


Bit, demon, Bd. 28, 34.
Butter, see Sacred butter.


Cake, see Sacred cake.
Cancer Bd 2525) OO ty 120
34,2; Zs. 4,8; 6, 1,2; Sl. 21,


es Ws

Capricornus, Bd. 2,-2; 5, 6; 84,
gn; Zs. 4, 10; Byt. 8, 11n;
ea a ce

Carriers of the dead, single, Sl. 2,
84, 106, 108; one with a dog,
Sl. 2, 7; two, SI. 2, 6-8, 84, 85;
four, SI. 2, 6n; 10, ro.

Caspian sea, Bd. 18, 15n; 15, 28n,


Zon, 17, sn sO ern e205.


8n, 24n, 27n; 22, 4n; 81, 21
n; Byt. 2, 63n; 3, 19n.

Ceremonial (yazisn), Byt. 2, 37; 8,
37; Sl. 8, 35n; 5, 3; 8,4; 9,
Rei h 2 5e LO Se

Ceremonies, S]. 2, 38; 12, 31; —
after a death, SI. 6, 3, 4; 8, 6n;
12, 5, 31; 17, 2-6; —of nine
nights, S$]. 12, 26 n; see Baresh-
niim.

Ch in Oriental words is printed K.

Chaldzo-Pahlavi, Int. 19-21.

Chaldee, Int. 14, 19.

Chapter (ha), Sl. 10, 6n; 18, 1, 5, 6,


31, 34. /

Chiefs of creation, Bd. 24, 1-24, 28,
29; Spiritual, Bd. 29, 1, 2, 5.

Chieftainships, spiritual, Bd. 29, 1;
Sl. 13, 29 ; temporal, Sl. 18, 11,
15, 34, 41N, 44; 19, 5.

Childbirth, Sl. 10, 15; 12, 7.

Children, advantage of, Sl. 10, 22;
12, 15; illegitimate, Sl. 10, 21;
12, 14.

China, Bd. 81, 3 n.

Christian, Byt. 2, 19n; 8, 3n; SI.
6, 7.

Christianity, Byt. 2, 19n; 8, 3n.

Chronology of Iran, Bd. 84, 1-9.

Classes of people, SI. 18, 9, 15, 34.

Clothing corpses, Sl. 2, 9, 95; 10,
40; 12,4; —for spirits, Bd.
80, 28; SI.17, 4,5 n; purifying,
Sl. 2, 95, 97-99.

Commentary, see Zand.

Commentators, Sl. 1, 3, 43; quoted,


Byt. 1, 7:5 3,3, 263, Sl. 2,3, 2,


6, II, 12, 39, 44, 56, 57, 64, 73,
74, 80-82, 86, 88, 89, 107, 115,
118, 119; 3, 13; 5, 5,6; 6,


PAHLAVI TEXTS.


4-6; 8, 13, 17, 18, 23; 10, 40; |
14, 5; 20, 11.

Confession of sin, SI. 8, 2, 4.n, (8-10.)

Conflicts of evil, with the sky, Bd.
6, 1-4; Zs. 5, 1-5; with water,
Bd. 7, 1-13; Zs. 6, 1-233 with
the earth, Bd. 8, 1-5; Zs. 7, 1-
12; with plants, Bd. 9, 1-6;
Zs. 8, 1-6; with animals, Bd.
10, 1-4; Zs. 9, 1-24; with man,
Zs. 10, 1-65 with fire, Zs. 11,
I-10.

Constantinople, Int. 12.

Consulting the good, Sl. 10, 28.

Contagion, SI. 2, 59, (60.)

Copper age, Byt. 2, 19.

Corpse, carrying, SI. 2, 6-11, 83-95;
10, 10, 33; lowering, Sl. 2, 23-

' 29; moving, SI. 2, 63, 65, 66,

68-71; thrown into water, Sl.
2, 76-78; 9, 7; bringing out of
water, Sl. 2, 79-94; in rain, SI.
2, 9, 10, 94; clothing for, SI.
2, 9, 953 10, 40; 12,4. See
also Pollution.

Corpse chamber, Byt. 2, 36.

Creation of prototypes, Bd. 1, 8;
Zs. 1, 5; of archangels, Bd.
1, 23, 26; of the world, Bd. 1,
25, 28; Zs. 1, 20; of demons,
Bd. 1, 10, 24, 27; of time, Zs.
1, 24.

Crowing of a hen, Sl. 10, 30.

Cyrus, Int. 9; Bd. 84, $n.


Dabistan, book, Byt. 1, 1 n.

Dadak nask, Sl. 12, 4n.

Dadakih-i Ashévahisté, man, Bd. 88,
Io.

Dad-arda, man, Bd. 88, 3.

Dad-Atiharmazd, com., Byt. 1, 7; 8,
16; Sl.1,4n.

Dad-farukh, com., Sl. 1, 4 n.

Dadgun, man, SL1,4n. ~

Dadirad, man, Bd. 33, 3. =

Dadistan-i dinik, book, Int. 32, 33,
46, 47; Bd. 15, 22n; 29, .5n,
6n; author of, Bd. 38, ron,
Iin. :

Dad-i veh, com., SI. 1, 4n.

Dahak, king, Bd. 17, 5; 20, 23;
29, 9; 30, 16; 31, 5-7; 34, 5;
Byt. 3, 34; SL 10, 28n. See
Az-i Dahak.

Dah-hémist, rite, Byt. 2, 59 n.

Dahman afring4n, $1.18, 43; 17, 5n.


INDEX. 415
eR eee rhein i


Dai, land, Bd. 15, 29.
Daitik m., see Kakad-i Daittk.


—r., Bd. 20) 7,13; 23n; 24, 143


29, 5n; Zs. Q, 6.

Dakhma, Byt. 2, 36n; Sl. 2, (6,)
gn, ron, 11n, 75n. See De-
pository for the dead.

Damaghan, town, Bd. 20, 18n; 29,

140.

Damdad nask, Int. 24, 48; Zs. 9,
(1,) 16; SI. 10, 22; 12, 5.

Damnak, man, Bd. ’B1, 36, 39.

Daraga r., Bd. 20, 7, 32; 24, 15.

Darai, king, Bd. 88, 2; 34, 8.

Dargam r., Bd. 20, 7, 14.

Darius Codomannus, Int. 24; Bd.
34, 8n.

— Hystaspes, Int. 9.

D4rspét m., Bd. 12, 2, 20 n.

Dashtanistan, Sl. 2,75; 8, 4 n, (6 n,)
‘tans

Dastan, man, Bd. 81, 37.

Dastir, Bd. 19, 36. See High-
priest.

Davad m., Bd. 12, 29, 30.

Davans, man, SI. 12, 29.

Dayrid r., Bd. 20, 26 n.

Days, lengths of, Bd. 25, 3-6 ; names
of angels applied to them, Bd.
27, 243 Sl. 22, 1-30; 23, 1-4.

Dead matter, Byt. 2, 36; Sl. 2,
(30 ,) 32, 35, 63, 73, 775 78;
192, 104-107, 109-112; 10, 12,
2012 12) 13.

Deaf and dumb, Sl. 5, 7; 6, 1.

Deana m., Bd. 12, 30 nN.

Death, accidental, Sl. 10, 32; on a
bedstead, Sl. 2, 13; 17, 14; on
a bridge, SI. 2,20; on a carpet,
Sl. 2, ror; on a cloth, SI. 2, 12;
on the ground, Sl. 2, 14-16; in
a hall, Sl. 2, 45; in a house, SI.
2, 38-443 in a jar, Sl. 2,31; on
a roof, S]. 2,18, 21; in a room,
Sl. 2, 22; when seated, Sl. 2,
24; by strangulation, Si. 2, 23;
17, 13; on a tree, Sl. 2, 25-29;
in a vessel, S]. 9, 7; in.a wilder-
ness, Sl. 2, 47.

Demonized men, SI. 17, 7.

Demons, Bd. 5, 7; Zs. 2, 4; Byt.
2, 40, 62; 8, 9, 21, 33; SI.9, 5,
8; 12, 12; 15, 6; 17, 3; origin,
Bativro- end, Bde Ii 21, 22);

6, 45 ’30, 29-32; names, Bd. 1,
24, 275 3, 3, 6-9, 213 7, 8, 10,


12; 28, 7-20, 23-36, 39, 40,
42; 30, 29, 30; Zs. 4, 4; 6,9,
11,13; council, Bd. 3, 1-9; 12,
8; incursion, Bd. 8, 10, 21, 25,
26; 7, 8,12; mislead men, Bd.
15, 9, 12, 17, 18; use nail-par-
ings as weapons, Bd. 19, 19, 20;
Sl. 12, 6; opposed by cock, Bd.
19, 33; Sl. 10, 30n; . beget the
ape, bear, and negro, Bd. 23, 1,
2; described, Bd. 28, 1- 46;
figures of, Byt. Ae ayatOxs
with dishevelled hair, Byt.1 nes
, 2, 22, 24-29, 36; 3,1, 6, 13, 34;
discomfited, Byt. 2, 16, 17; 8,
40, 413 reside in idol-temples,
Byt. 3, 30, 36, 373; attack Zara-
tiist, Sl. 10, 4; 12,11; in the
north, S].10, 7; 12,18; 14, 2n.

Demon worship, Sl. 8, 4; 14, 1.

— worshippers, Byt. 8, 24.

Depository for the dead, SI. 2, 75;
13, 19. See Dakhma and Re-
ceptacle.

Destroyer, Bd. 2, 4,8; 3,1, 233-1,
TAO NG Ago teLS ei eoepole
10, 3; 18, 30.

Development of animals, Bd. 10, 2,
33 14, 3-73; Zs. 9, 7-95 fire,
Zs. 11, 1-103 lakes, Zs. 6, 7, 8
223 land, Bd.11,2; Zs. '7, 8-11;
man, Bd. 15, 1-5; Zs, 10, 3-6;
minerals, Zs. 10, 2; mountains,
Bd. 8, 1-5, 12, 1, 2, 11, 28,413
Zs. 7, 1-7; plants, Bd. 9, 2-6;
10, 1; 14, 1, 2; Zs. 8, 1-5; 9,
1-6; rivers, Bd. 7, 15-17; Zs.
6, 20, 21; seas, Bd. -7, 6, 143
Zs. 6, 6-8, 14-19.

Deyrid r., Bd. 20, 7n, 12n.

Diglat r., Bd. 20, 7, 10, 12, 26; Zs.
6, 20n.

Dillman town, Bd. 20, 12 n.

Dimavand m., Bd. 12, 29, 31; 20,
27; 29, 9; Byt. 3, 55.

Din, angel, Bd. 27, 24; Byt. 2, 59
n; month, Bd. 25, 3, 11, 20.
See Diné.

Dini-vagarkard, book, Zs. 9, 1n;
Byt. dj pns) 3; 25 ns. Sl. Ooms
10, 3n, 4n, 13 N, 21 n, 25n, 26
Nn; 28n, 29 n> 12, 4:n, 07 ne

Dinkard, book, Sl. 10, 22n, 23n;
last editor of, Int. 64; Bd. 33,
(t1n;) Sl. 8, 23n; quoted,
Zs. 9,1n; Byt.1,1n; 2,3n,


PAHLAVI TEXTS.


Ton; 8, 25, 430, 52n, 6rn;
Sl]. 6,7n; 9,9n; 10, 3n,4n,
8n, 13.0, 2PA, 25 n, 26n, 28 n,
gons- 124 n, 1703) 10; 10;


4n.

Dind, angel, Sl. 22, 8, 15, 23, 243 23,
4. See Din.

Din-pavan-Atar6, angel, Bd. 27, 24 ;
$l. 23, 2, 4n.

Din-pavan-Diné, angel, Bd. 27, 24;
Sl. 28, 4.

Din-pavan-Mitré, angel, Bd. 27, 24;
Sivas, 3, 4.0.

Dirham, Sl. 1, (23) 8, (3 n;) 10, 24;
IE oO IG aya}. 2

Dist, span, Bd. 26, 3 n; Sl. 16, 4.

Dog’s gaze, Sl. 2, 1-3, 56, 63, 66, 71,
84, 85; 10, 10, 12, 32, 33.

D6-hémast, rite, Sl. 16, 6.

D6-patkar, zod., Bd. 2, 2.

Doubtful actions, Sl. 10, 25, 27.

Dréné, see Sacred cake.

Drigdskan, demon, Bd. 31, 6.

Drvasp, angel, Sl. 11, 4.

Dualism, Int. 68-70.

Dabisriigéd nask, SI. 10, 13.

Dughdd or Diikdav, woman, Bd. 82,
10° Sl. 10) 45 12,17.

Diil, zod., Bd. 2, 2.

Dirasréb, man, Bd. 81, 13, 31; 82,
1; 38, 3, 4.

Dirnamik, man, Bd. 88, 5.

Diréshasp, man, Bd. 81, 14, 27.

Dyasrtib or Dvisrfigad nask, see
Diibasriigéd.

Dvazdah-hémast nask, Zs. 9, 1n;
rite, Byt. 2, (593) 8, 25, 27, 373
Sl. 16, 6.


Eating in the dark, Sl. 9, 8.

Egypt, Int. 21; Bd. 20, 8n; Zs. 6,
20 1.

Erezish6 m., Bd. 12, r2 n.

Erezraspa, man, Bd. 29, rn.

Erezuré m., Bd. 12, 16 n.

Esther, book, Byt. 2, 17 n.

Etymander r., Bd. 20, 17 n.

Euphrates r., Bd. 20, ron, 11n;
Byt. 3, 5 n.

Euxine, Bd. 18, 15n; 20, 8 n.

Ever-stationary, S]. 6, 2; 18, 4n.

Evil eye, Bd. 28, 2n, 14, 36.

Evil spirit, Zs. 1, 0; Sl. 8, 23; 12,
7; 18, 28; like the devil, Int.
69, 703 origin of evil, Bd. 1, 1,
9-22, 243 cast down, Bd. 8, 1-


5; 11, 6; 30, 29, 30, 32; Byt.
8, 35, 403 SI. 13, 24, 36; com-
forted, Bd. 8, 6-8; described,
Bd. 8, 9; 28, 40, 41; attacks
creation, Bd. 3, 10-17, 21, 24-
27; 6, 1-4; 8, 1; ll, 5; 18,
2,5; 19,10; 28,1, 3; misleads
men, Bd. 15, 8,9; 28,6; an-
cestor of Dahak, Bd. 81, 6; his
future evil-doings, Byt. 2, 54;
8, 24, 33. See Aharman.

Extinguishing fire, Sl. 7, 9; 20, 15.

Extirpation of sin, Sl. 8, 18.

Ezra, book, Byt. 2, 17 n.


. Faranak, woman, Bd. 31, 31n.


Farangis, woman, Bd. 31, 18n.

Farghanah, land, Bd. 20, 20n.

Farhank, woman, Bd. 81, 31-33.

Farman sin, Sl. 1, (1, 2;) 2,51; 3,
27, 28; 4, 10, 14n; 5, 3n;
6, 3n; 8, 9n; 11,71, .@3)) As;

Ly) 5s

Farukho, com., Sl. 1, 4n.

Fasa, town, Bd. 29, 14n.

Faytim, land, Int. 21. .

Feast, Byt. 2, 45. See Sacred feast.

Female things, Bd. 16, 6.

Feridién, king, Bd.31,7n,31n. See
Frédiin.

Fiends, Bd. 2, 113 30, 303 -Zs.1, 5;
4,2; Byt. 3, 30, 37; SI. 9, 8;
13, 10,13; 19,5; 20, 9, 11;
origin, Bd. 1, 10; destroyed,
Bd. 2, 10; 19, 33, 34, 36; 20,
6; Zs. 10, 1; S1.18, 23, 32, 46;
described, Bd. 28, 13, 14, 20,
33, 37; Christians, Byt. 8, 3, 5;
serpents, Byt. 8, 52; of men-
struation, Sl. 3, 29; become
pregnant, $1.10, 7; 12, 18. See
Arch-fiends.

Finger-breadth, meas., Bd. 21, 1;
26, (3n;) 27,25; Sl. 2,118;
4, 2,5; 10,1.

Fire, injured, Bd. 3, 24; described,
Bd. 17, 1-9; Zs. 11, 1-10;
reverence, Sl. 7, 45 10) 37° to
be kept up, Sl. 12,3, 12. See
Sacred fire.

Fire-temple, see Abode of fires.

Fish, classification, Bd. 10, 4; 14,
12, 26; Zs. 9, 9-14; genera-
tion, Bd. 16, 7; chief, Bd. 24,


13
Flowers, Bd, 27, 11, 24.


INDEX.


417


Fomalhaut, star, Bd. 2, 7n; SI. 11,
4n; 14, 5n.

Food not to be cast to the north at
night, Sl. 10, 7; 12, 18.

Foot, meas., Bd. 26, 3n; Sl. 2, 18,
77> 7803 3, 335 21, 2, 5-8.
Forgiveness of trespasses, S]. 10, 11.

Frabazu, meas., Bd. 26, 3n.

_ Fradadafsh, region, Bd. 5, 8, 9; 11,
3; 25, 10; 29,1; Byt. 3, 47.

Fradhakhsti, man, Bd. 29, 5n.

Fragizak, woman, Bd. 81, 14.

Frahimrava, man, Bd. 82, ro.

Frah-vakhsh-vindad, man, Bd. 88, 1.

Frangrasyan, king, Bd. 31, 14n.

Fraoreti ha, SI. 18, rn.

Frarast, meas., Bd. 26, 3n.

- Frasast, cake, Sl. 3, (32n;) 14, 3; 17,
Bis

Frashaitar, man, Bd. 88, 3.

Frashakard, see Renovation.

Frashavakhsha, man, Bd. 83, 1n.

Frashéstar, man, Bd. 88, 3n.

Frasiyav, king, Bd. 12, 20; 20, 17,
34; 21,6; 30, 16; 31, (14,) 15,
Ho eels 22, 35° 2S. dd TOR;
Byt. 2, 62; 3, 343; SI. 10, 28n.

Frasizak, woman, Bd. 82, 1n.

Frasp-i Kir, man, Bd. 81, 18, 19.

Frast, man, Bd. 38, 3. .See next.

Frast, man, Bd. 81, 31n.

Frastuyé ha, SI. 18, 1.

Frat r., Bd. 20, 7,10, 11; Byt.3, 5.

Fravahar, see Guardian spirits.

Fravak, man, Bd. 15, 25, 30, 31; 81,
1,63 32, 1n.

Fravakain, woman, Bd. 15, 25.

Fravarané ha, Sl. 18, 1.

Fravardikan, see Guardian spirits’
days.

Fravardin, angel, Bd. 27, 24; Sl. 22,
19; 23, 3; day, Sl. 11, 4n;
month, Bd. 8, 12; 25, 7, 13, 20;
Zs 2.1; Sl.11; 4m.

Fravashis, Bd. 1, 8n; 2, ron.
Guardian spirits.

Frazdan lake, Bd. 22, 1,5; Byt. 3,
13

Frazisak, man, Bd. 82, rn.

Frazfisak, man, Bd. 81, 14.

Frédfin, king, Bd. 20, 12n; 28, 3;
29, 9; 31, (7-11,) 14, 27, 323
82, 1n; 34,6; Byt. 3, 55, 56,
58; Sl]. 10, 28n; 20, 18; man,
Bd. 33, 3.

Fréh-khiird, man, Bd. 31, 19.


[5]


See


Freh-mah, woman, Bd. 38, 7.

Freh-Srésh, man, Bd. 38, 11.

Frén, woman, Bd. 82, 5, 7n.

Freni, woman, Bd. 81, 33n; 32, 5n.

Friftar, demon, Bd. 28, 30.

Fris, man, Bd. 3], 13.

Frébak fire, Bd. 17, 5,7n; Zs. 11,
8-10; Byt. 8, 29, 30, 37, 405
S$]. 13, 26.

Fruits, Bd. 27, 7, 23.

Fry4né, man, Bd. 83,3.

Fshfish6-mathra, ritual, SI]. 18, 49n.

Future existence, Bd.1, 1, 7, 213; 2,
Pr HLL 65 2150) 5 80,cn3) Byte
2,55; 8,62; Sl. 8,7, 14; 9,
6; 10, 19.


Gadhwithw, demon, Bd. 31, 6.

Gadman-hémand m., Bd. 17, 5; Zs.
11, 9; Byt. 3, 29.

Gaévani, man, Bd. 29, 6n.

Gah, Bd. 2,8; 25,9n; SI. 7, 10;
14, 4n. See Period.

Gahanbars, Bd. 25, 1; SI. 12, 310;
18, (3n.) See Season-festivals.

Gak, man, Bd. 33, 3.

Gam, meas., Bd. 26, 3n.

Ganavad m., Bd. 12, 29, 34; 19, 8.

Ganrak mainok, Bd. 1, rn, 3n. See
Evil spirit.

Garafsa, lun. man., Bd. 2, 3.

Garédman, Bd. 80, 12, 13, 27; SI.
6, (3n,) 4; 11, 3. See Heaven.

Garsasp, man, Bd. 29, 7n; 31, 26n,
27n.

Garsivaz, man, Bd. 31, r5n.

Gdsanbar, see Season-festivals.

Gatha days, Bd. 5, 7; 25, 7n.

Gathas, hymns, Bd. 12, 7n; Zs. 11,
ton; Byt. 2, 60; SI. 9, 12n;
10, 6; quoted, Zs. 5, 4; SI. 12,
28; mystic meaning, SI. 18, 1-
49; extent, Sl. 13, 50, 51.

Gau, lun. man., Bd. 2, 3.
Gaus givya, Av., SI. 2, 43n; 18, r2n.
— hudhau, Av., SI. 2, 43n; 38, 320;
11, 4n. See Sacred butter.
Gayémard, man, Bd. 8, rn, 14, 17,
19-23; 4,1; 15, 1, 31; 24,1;
80, 7,9; 81,1; 82, 1n; 84, 1,
2; Zs. 2, 6, 8; 8, 23 4, 3, 5,95
10; 5, 4; 10, 1-3; 11, ron;
Sl. 10, 28n.

Gazdtim, zod., Bd. 2, 2.

Gefar-t6ra, man, Bd. 31, 7; 82, 1n.

Géhan-biin sea, Zs. 6, 14.


E€


418


PAHLAVI TEXTS.


i


Gél, lun. man., Bd. 2, 3.

Gemini, Bd. 2, 2; Sl. 21, 2.

Genealogies, Bd. 15, 24-30;
41; 82, 1-103; 33, I-11.

Generation, Bd. 16, 1-7.

Georgia, Bd. 20, 13n.

Gésbakht m., Bd. 12, 29.

Géti-kharid, rite, Bd. 80, (285) SI.
5, 6; 12, 303 17, 5n.

Ghazni, town, Bd. 22, 5n.

Giklan sea, Bd. 20, 24.

Gilan, land, Bd. 12, 17.

Giw, man, Bd. 29, 6.

Glory, royal, Bd. 31, 32, 33; 34, 4.

Glossary, Av.-Pahl., Sl. 10, 39 n.

== Muz-Paz., dnt. 16,07.


81, I-


God (‘celestial beings’), Bd. 17, 8;
Lise Vie 63) Sl; 03:8, 22;, 23 5:


10, 3, 5; 14,0; 19,7; 21,4;
22, 30.
Gégésasp, com., Sl. 1, 3; 2, 74, 82,


119g.

Goi, lun. man., Bd. 2, 3.

Gokard tree, Bd. 9, 6; 18, 1; 24,
2735 27, 4.

Géfihar, meteor, Bd. 5, 1; 28, 44;
30, 18, 31.

Golden age, Byt. 1, 1n, 4; 2, 16.

Goméz, see Bull’s urine.

Good works, Zs. 1, 14, 18; 4, 6;
11, 6; Byt. 2, 33, 38, 644 Sl.2,
53, 933 6, 3, 4, 6; 7, 4, 6,75
Si, 5, 20,.22510; 565 10) 25,
27, 29; 12,1, 2, 29; 17, 8; 20,
I, 4, 53 imputed, SI. 4, 1435 6,
1, 25 7, 6; 8, 4; 10, 22-24;
12, 15, 16; 31; 16; 6.

Gépaté, land, Bd. 29, 5n.

G6patshah, chief, Bd. 29, 5; 81, 20,
2a ee Bytw ay ls

GOs, angel, Bd. 4, 4n; 27, 24; Byt.
2, 59n; SI. 11, 4n; 28, 2.

G6sasp, com., Sl. 1, 3n.

G6st-i Fryan6, man, Byt. 2, 1; tale
of, Sl. 21, on.

Géstirvan, angel, Bd. 4, 2-5; Zs. 3,
Teese Sl Lean B25 14,

Greek inscriptions, Int. 19.

Greeks, Byt. 3, 5.

Griffon, Bd. 14, 11, 23; 19, 18; 24,
11, 29; Zs. 8, 4.

Guardian spirits, Bd. 1, (8n;) 2, 10,
It; 4,45 6, 3; 29,8; 32, 9;
Sh. 9; 11s) Lagi Os O),
8; days devoted to, Byt. 2, 45;
SI]. 10, 2; 12, 31.


Gidarz, man, Bd. 29, 6.

Girg4n, land, Bd. 20, 24n.

Gurgistan, land, Bd. 20, 13n.

Giisasp fire, Bd. 17, 7; Zs. 6, 220};
Byt. 8, ron. See Visnasp.

Giisnasp fire, Zs. 6, 22; 11, 8-10;
Byt. 3, ron, 37, 40.

Gizak, princess, Bd. 31, 9, 14.

—, woman, Bd. 15, 28.


Gamagin, land, Bd. 29, 14n.

Gamisp, priest, Sl. 11, 4.

Gar6é-danghu, man, Bd. 29, rn.

Gasn6, Byt. 2, 45. See Feast.

Géh, fiend, Bd. 3, 3, 6-9; SI. 3, 29n.

Girast nask, Sl.10, 28n. See Kid-
rast.

Givan, lun. man., Zs. 4, 8.

Gumin, town, Bd. 12, 34n.


Hadhayés, ox, Bd. 19, 13; 29, 5 n;


30, 25.

Hadékht nask, Bd. 15, 7n; Byt. 3,
(25,) 28; Sl. 12, 19, 30; 18, 6,
10; 16, 6. :

Haékadasp, man, Bd. 82, 1.

Hagiabad inscriptions, Int. zon.

Hamadan, town, Bd.12, 12; 19, 3n;
22, 6.

Hamémil, see Sin affecting accusers.

Haméspamadayém, season, Bd.25,6.

Hamid, man, Bd. 88, 11.

Hamistakan, Sl. 6, 2.
stationary.

Hamréd, see Contagion.

Hamiin, lake, Bd. 18, 16n.

Hapték-ring, stars, Bd. 2, 7; 5, 1;
13, 12; 14, 28; Sl. 11, 4.

Harddr, man, Bd. 82, 1.

Hardarsn, man, Bd. 82, 1.

Harhaz r., Bd. 20, 7, 27.

Haro r., Bd. 12, 9n; 20, 7, 15, 16.

Has, $l.10, 6; 18,1. See Chapter.

Hasar of distance, Bd. 14, 4; 16, 7;
26, (1,) 2n; SI.9, 1n3; —of
time, Bd. 25, 5; Sl. 9, (1.)

Hathra, meas., Bd. 7, 8n; 26, 1n;
SI. 9, rn.

Haug, Professor, Int. 12, 25,26, 29.

Havan gah, Bd. 25, 9, 10; SI.7, rn;
14, qn.

Heaven, grades in, Bd. 12, 1; SI. 6,
3n; garddman, Bd. 80, 12, 13,
273 Zs. Ul, 23 SINGy an eaadl,
3; 18,8; vahist, Bd. 30, 27;
Zs. 1, 14; Sl, 6, 2, 3, 53 12, 28;


See Ever-


INDEX.


419


15, 8, 13, 19, 24, 29, 30; 18, 4n;
22, 9,18, 22,29 See also Best


existence.

Heaven, not to be despaired of, SI.
25285) 29.

Hebrew laws, Sl. 3, 14n, 15n, 18n,
26n,


Hedgehog, Bd. 14, 19; 19, 28; Sl.
2,59; 10, 31; 12, 20.

Hell, Bd. 15, 9; 22,10; Zs. 1,.143
Sl. 6,.2,.6; 8, 5, 7,13; 12, 4, 28 ;
18, 4n; described, Bd. 3,. 27;
28, 47, 48; abode of demons,
Bd. 8, 26; Byt. 8, 30, 35; for
the wicked, Bd. 30,12,13; gate
of, Bd. 12,8; 28, 18; Zs. 2,
4; Sl. 10, 7n; 18, 19; purified,
Bd. 30, 31, 32; grades in, Sl.
6, 3n.

Hélmand r., Bd. 20, 17n.

Hendva r., Bd. 20,7, 9n.

Heri r., Bd. 20, 15n, 16n.

Héttimand r., Bd. 12, 9n; 20, 7, 17,
345 21, 3n.

Hiddekel r., Bd. 20, 12n; Byt. 3,
2In.

High-priest, dastfir, Bd. 19, 36; 28,
20; Byt. 8, 52; Sl. 8, 103 9,
2, 4; 10, 5, 20-23, 31; 12, 2,
14-16; rad, Bd. 29,1n3 Byt.
3,52; Sl. 8, 1, 2, 5, 6, 14, 21;
18, 2, 29; supreme, Bd. 24, 1;
Sl. 9, 3; see Supreme Zarattist.

Hikhar, SI. 2, (30n,) 95. See Bodily
refuse.

Hindfs, Bd. 28, 34; Byt. 8, 14, 17;
SL. 2, 58n.

Hindfistan, Bd. 20, 9; 25, 15; 29,15.

Hindva m., Bd. 12, 6n.

Hirat, town, Bd. 20, 16n.

Hiratis, men, Byt. 3, 19.

Hiriyan, men, Byt. 3, 19n..

Hoazarédathhri, chief, Bd..29, t..

Holy-water, Bd. 21, 3, 4; Byt. 2,
59; Sl. 2, (43;) 7, 93; 12, 5;
18, 9; 15,12; 16,6.

Hém, angel, Bd. 7, 3; 27,24; Zs.
6, 3; Sl.11, 4,6; — drdn, SI.
10, 2; — juice, SI. 10, 16; 13,
In, 9n; —mortar, Sl. 9, 12n;
18, 9n; —tree, Bd. 9,6n; 18,
2,3; 24, 18; 27, 4, 24; 30, 25;
Zs. 8,5; — twigs, SI. 9, 12n;
13, gn.

Hoémiast, rite, Byt. 2, (59n;) SI. 9,
12n; 16, 6n. *


Horvadad, angel, Bd. 1, (26;) 27,
243 380, 29; Byt. 3, 29; SI. 9,
8; 13, 14; 15, 3, 5, 25, 29; 22,
6; 23,1; month,. Bd. 25,. 20.

— yast,.Byt. 1, 6.

Hoshyang, king, Bd. 15, (28;) 81, 1,
2,-9N, 32n; 32, 1n; 34, 3, 4;
Zs. 11, 10; Sl. 10, 28n.

House-ruler, Sl]. 18, 11, 15, 41n, 443
19, 5.

Htibakht, man, Bd. 83, 1.

Hiidiné, man, Bd. 88, 3.

Hfigar.m.,. Bd. 7, r5n; 12, 2, (5,)
6; 18, 4; 22,11; 24,17; Byt.
3, 31Nn.

Hfikairyad m., Byt. 8, 31.

Hukhshathrétemdai, prayer, SI. 10,
5n; 18, 22.

Himat, woman, Bd. 83, 7; queen,
Bd, 34, 8.

Hfiman, man, Bd. 81, 17:

Human monstrosities, Bd. 15, 5, 31.

Humatanam, prayer, $1.10, 5n; 13,
16, 22.

Hunting, SI. 8, 3.

Hiish, beverage, Bd. 19, 13; 30, 25..

Hiishédar, apostle, Bd. 21, 6; 32,
7n, (83) Byt. 8, rr, 13, 34m,
(43, 44,) 47, 48, 6rn;. SI. 18, 5.

Hiishédar-mah, apostle, Bd. 80, 2;
82, 7n, (8;) Byt. 3, 52, 53; Sl.
18,5.

Hisparam nask, Byt. 2, 37n; SI. 10,
(215) 12, 1, 7, 14, 313 18, 17.

Husru, lun. man., Bd. 2, 3; lake, Bd.


22, 1, 8.
Huvasp, chief, Bd. 29, 1.
Hizavarak, man, Bd. 81, 41.
Huzvaris logograms, Int. 14-20.
Hvaétumaithi ha, Sl. 18, 7, 14, 27.
Hvandkdn, man, Bd. 29, r.
Hvara, Av., Sl. 1, rn.
Hyvare-Aithra, man, Bd. 82, 5 n.
Hvyembya, man, Bd. 29, 5.
Hvév, woman, Bd. 32,.7n, 8; SI.
10, 21n.
Hvyaona, land, Byt. 2, 49n.
Hyrcania, Bd. 20, 24n.


laxartes r., Bd. 20, 20n.

Ibairaz, man, Bd, 29,6.

Ibitak, man, Bd. 32, rn.

Idolators, Int. 50, 51; Bd. 3, 20n;
15,.28n; Byt. 3, 11n.

Idolatry, SI. 9, 2, 3.

Idols, Bd. 28, 34; Byt.1,4n.


E€ 2


420


Idol-temples, Bd. 17, 7; Byt. 3, 30,
36, 37.

Imam-dad-zam ha, SI. 18, t9.

Immortal men, Bd. 29, 5-9; 30, 17.

Incursion of the evil spirit, Bd. 3,
10-26; Zs. 2, 1-113; 4, 1-6.

Indar, demon, Bd. 30, 2gn.
Andar.

India, Bd. 15, 29n; 20, 9n; 29, 4;
Byt. 3, 44n; Sl. 2, 6n, 22n,
32n; 4,5n, 6n, 11n, 12n; 9,
gn; 16,1n; 17, 2n.

Indian ocean, Bd. 20, 8n.

Indra, god, Bd. 1, 27n.

Indus r., Bd. 20, 8n, gn, 22n, 28n;
Byt. 3, 38n.

Infant, treatment, Sl. 10, 16; pro-
tected by fire, Sl. 12, 12.

Infection, Sl. 2, 55, 59, (60-)62. See
Paitréd.

Infidel, Sl. 6, 6.

Invoking angels, SI. 9, 11-13.

Inward prayer, Sl. 3, (6-)9, 21; 4,
3,9n; 5,4n; 10, 14, 26; 14,
3. See Baz, Vag.

Iran, Bd. 12, 9n; Zs. 6, 17; Byt.2,
51,63; 8, 37n, 44n; SI.10, 28n;
countries of, Bd. 28, 3; Byt.1,
In; 2, 24, 26, 49; 8, 5-7, 10,
20, 22, 23, 25, 26, 36, 38, 39;
kings of, Bd. 81, 32n; 32, 1n.

Iranian, countries, Bd. 19, 15; Byt.
2, 28, 29; kings, Bd. 84, 4n;
Byt. 3, 51; logograms, Int. 14,
18, 19; rule, Bd. 29, 4n; Sl.
13, 7 n.

Iranians, Bd. 12, 33; 15, 28; 81,
are Byt. 2igan:

Iron age, Byt. 1, 1n, 5; 2, 22; 8


See


12 n. i
Isadvastar, man, Bd. 80, 10n; 82,


Lea

Isfendiyar, prince, Bd. 81, 29n; Byt.
2,17n.

Ispahan, Bd. 12, 4on; 20, 15n, 26n;
31, gon.

Istfidgar nask, Byt.1,1n. See Stfid-


gar.

Itha ha, $1.18, 20; prayer, Sl. 8, 35;
5, 2, 5, 73 see the next,

Itha-dd-yazamaidé ha, Sl. 18, 18.

Izak, princess, Bd, 32, 1n.


J in Oriental words is printed G.
jamshéd, Bd. 28, 1n; 81, 27n.
Jew, Sl. 6, 7.


PAHLAVI TEXTS.


Judge, unjust, Sl. 10, 18.

Jupiter, planet, Bd. 5,1; Zs. 4, 7,
8, 10; Byt. 3, 4, 18.

Justi, Professor, Int, 26, 66n.


Kabed-sikaft m., Bd. 12, 2, 21.
Kabtsah dispute, Bd. 25, 3n.
Kabulistan, Byt. 8, 13n.

Kad, priest, Bd. 88, 1, 2.

Kadan, title, Bd. 81, 15.
Kad-m6i-urva ha, SI. 18, 33.
Kafm., Bd. 12; 2, 145.

Kahrkas, bird, Bd. 14, 23; 19, 25,


ie
Kah, lun. man., Bd. 2, 3.


- Kahtsar, lan. man., Bd. 2, 3.


Kahtis, Byt. 8, 9n. See Kai-Kaiis.

Kai-Aptveh, prince, Bd. 81, 25, 28,
Bi, 34;

— Arsh, prince, Bd. 81, 25.

— Kabad, king, Bd. 34, 7.

— Kats, king, Bd. 81, 25, 31n; 34,
7; Byt. 8, 9.

— Kavad, king, Bd. 81, 28; 84, 7n;
Sl. 10, 28n. See Kavad.

— Khisréb, king, Bd. 17, 7; 81, 18,
25; 34, 7; SI. 10, 28n.

— Loharasp, king, Bd. 81, 29; 34,
7; Sl. 10, 28n.

— Pisan (or Pisin), prince, Bd. 31,
25, 28.

— Qubad, king, Bd. 81, 24n.

— Us, king, Zs. 11, sony Shei0s
28n.

— Vistasp, king, Bd. 84, 7; Byt. 3,
11n; Sl. 10, 28n.

— Vyarsh, prince, Bd. 81, 25.

Kalak, town, Bd. 12, 35.

Kalagang, zod., Bd. 2, 2; 5, 6. ;

Kamah Bahrah, Zs. 9, 1n; SI. 2, 2n.

Kamindan, land, Bd. 22, ro.

Kam-neméi-zam ha, Sl. 18, 30.

Kamrfd sea, Bd. 18, 7,15; Zs. 6,


14.

Kanabad, town, Bd. 12, 34n.

Kanak-i Barzist, man, Bd. 31, 23.

Kangdez, land, Bd. 12, 2; 20, ors
ae 4, 5, 10; 82, 5; Byt. 3, 25,
2


Kaoirisa m., Bd. 12, 25n.

Kar fish, Bd. 14, 12; 24, rn, 13.

Karap, title, Byt. 2, 3.

Karapan, title, Zs. 11, ron; Byt. 2,
3n.

Karm, tribe, Byt. 3, 7.

Karmak, tribe, Byt. 2, 49.


INDEX.


421


Karman, tribe, Byt. 8, 20.

Karsaspé, king, SI. 10, 28n.

Karsévaz, prince, Bd. 81, 15.

Karsipt, bird, Bd. 14, 23; 19, 16;
24, In, 11, 29n.

Kasak or Kastk r., Bd. 20, 7, 9n,


30.

Kaski-zard, town, Bd. 12, 30n.

Kasmir, land, Bd. 29, 4, 15.

Kasp r., Bd. 20, 30.

Katayfin, man, Bd. 31, 8.

Kats Kaman, SI. 2, 2n.

Kavad, king, Bd. 81, 24, 25; Byt. 1,
5n; 2,21n. See Kai-Kavad.

Kavi Aipi-vanghu, prince, Bd. 81,
25n.

— Arshan, prince, Bd. 81, 25n.

— Byarshan, prince, Bd. 31, 25n.

— Husravangh, king, Bd. 31, 25n.

— Pisanangh, prince, Bd. 31, 25n.

— Syavarshan, prince, Bd. 31, 25n.

— Usadhan, king, Bd. 31, 25n.

Kavial, town, Bd. 12, 22; 17, 6.

Kawvill, tribe, Byt. 2, 49.

Kavulistan, land, Bd. 17, 6; 29, 11;
Byt. 3, 13n, 29n.

Kayan, Bd. 21,7; 28, 15,17; 31,
0, 25n; Byt.1,5; 2,17; 3, 14,


Bae

Kaydanians, Bd. 11, 6;. Byt. 8, 14n;
Sl. 10, 28n.

Kay4ans, Byt. 3, 25, 26; Sl. 22, 32.

Keresani, king, Byt. 2, 19n.

Keresasp, man, Bd. 29, 7n; 31, 26,
27n, 36n; Byt. 3, 59, 60.

Késhvars, regions, Bd. 5, 8,9; 11,
(2-6 ;) 15, 27; 17,43 Zs. 7, (8-
113) Byt.8, 473; SI. 10, 28n.

Kévad, king, Byt. 1, 5; 2, 21.

Kéyan, planet, Bd. 5, 1; 28, 48; Zs.


4,7.
Khashm, demon, Bd. 29, 5. See
Aéshm.
Khast nask, S1.12,4n. See Dadak.
Khava, demon, Bd. 19, 27.
Khazar, land, Byt. 2, 49n.
Khor sin, Sl.1,1, 2; 2,70; 3, 250;
11, 1, 2; 16, 5.
Khritasp, man, Bd. 31, 6.
Khshmaibya ha, SI. 18, 4, 14.
Khshnitiman, ritual, see Shntiman.
Khfidarak, tribe, Byt. 2, 49n.
Khugand, town, Bd. 20, zon. |
Khiigistan, land, Bd. 12, 9, 30; 20,
12, 26; 24, 28; Zs. 7, 7n.
Khunbya, title, Bd. 29, 5n.


Khfir, angel, Sl. 22, 11; 28, 2; day,
Bd. 25, 3. See Khiirshed.
Khfrdasan, land, Bd. 12, 18, 37; 20,

13N, 21n; 25,16n; Byt. 2, 24n;
3, 19.
Khurdad, angel, Byt. 2, 59n; month,
Bd. 25, zon. See Horvadad.
Khurdah Avesta, SI. 8, rn.
Khiirshéd, angel, Bd. 27, 24; Byt.
2,59n. See Khir.
— thar, man, Bd. 82,5, 6, 7n.
— mah, apostle, Byt. 3, 52n.
— nyayis, ritual, Sl. 7, rn; 17, 5n.
— yast, ritual, Sl. 7, 2n.
Khiirshédar, apostle, Byt. 3, 13n.
Khiisak, zod., Bd. 2, 2.
Khiisr6, king, Byt. 1, 5, 7n, 8; 2,


20,

— Mahdadan, priest, Byt. 1, 7.

— N6shirvan, king, Bd. 34, gn; Zs.
6, zon; Byt.1, 5n, 7n; 2, 210.

— Parviz, king, Bd. 34, 9n; Zs. 6,
20n; Byt. 3, 11n.

Khifisrév, man, Bd. 81, 36, 40.

Khfist6. nask, $1.12, 4n. See Dadak.

Khvanaidis r., Bd. 20, 7, 29n.

Khyaniras, region, Bd. 5, 9; 11, (2-
6;) 15, 27; 17, 4; 24, 26, 27,
29; 29, 2,3, 5n; 82, 1n; Zs.
6) 2137, (108) Byts3,-473 Sl.
10, 28n.

Khvaraé r., Bd. 20, 7, 26.

Khvarih, Bd. 12, 2.

Khvarizem, land, Bd. 12, 12; 17, 5,
6; Zs.11, 9; Byt. 8, 29n; lake,
Bd. 22, 1, 4.

Khyast-airikht, man, Bd. 31, 19.

Khvegand r., Bd. 20, 7, 19, 20.

Khvétman6 ha, S$]. 13, 7n.

Khyéték-das, see Next-of-kin mar-
riage.

Khy6n, land, Byt. 2, 49n.

Kilisyakih (Christianity), Byt. 2, 19;
8, 3, 5, 8.

Kiratan6-btigéd, com., Sl. 1, 4n.

Kirfak, see Good works.

Kirman, land, Bd. 12, 35n; 38, 10on;
Byt. 2, 24n; town, Zs.1, on;
Byt. 3, 170,

Ké6histan, land, Bd. 20, 13n; Byt.
3, 19.

Koir r., Bd. 20, 7, 24.

Kokand, town, Bd. 20, 20n.

K6ndras m., Bd. 12, 2, 25.

K6ndrasp m., Bd. 12, 2,24; 22, 3n.

Krittika, lun. man., Bd. 2, 3n.


422


Kiimis m., Bd. 12, 323 land, Bd.
20, 78.

Ktindak, demon, Bd. 28, 42.

Kir r., Bd. 20, 8n, 24n.

Kuran r., Bd. 20, 26n.

Kurd, tribe, Byt. 3, 7n, 20.

Kirisk sheep, Bd. 14,15; Zs. 9, 19.

Kishtan6-biigéd, com., S].1, 4n; 2,
57, 81, 118; 6, 6, 7n3 8, 17.

Kiistik, Bd. 24, 22; 80, 30n. See

‘ Sacred thread-girdle.

Kydnsih sea, Bd. 18, 16; 20, 34;

21, 6, 7.


Kakad-i Daitik m., Bd. 12, 2,7; 80,
33n; Byt. 38, 26. ;

Kakbravak, chief, Bd. 29, r.

Kakhshntis, man, Bd. 82, 1.

Kamros, bird, Bd. 19, 15; 24, 11n,
29; 27, 3n.

Kathwaraspa, man, Bd. 29, rn.

Katru-miyan r., Bd. 20,°7, 31.

Kékast lake, Bd. 7, 143 12, 36; 17,
12a; 15.2, 835 Zs, 6, 220 byt.
3, 10.

Kidrast nask, Sl. 10, 28.

Kihar-azad, queen, Bd. 84, 8.

Kin or Kind m., Bd. 12, 2, 13; 15,
29n; land, Bd. 12, 13n, 22;
15, 29n; 31, 3; Byt. 2, 49n.

Kini, tribe, Byt. 2, 49; 8, 17. /

Kinistan, land, Bd. 12, 9n,13n; 15,
20), AO. 3 sss 1,07 we Dyin.
a4; SI.6, 7n.

Kinvad or Kinvar bridge, Bd. 12, 7;
28, 18n; 30, 33; SI.8,1n; 12,
2n, 31n; 18, 29n; 17, 4n.

Kishmak, demon, Bd. 28, 24.

Kitr6-main6, prince, Bd, 29, 5; Byt.
3, 25n.

Kitrd-mtyan, prince, Byt. 2, 1; 8
25, 26.


*)


Lakes, Bd. 18, 1-4; 22, 1-11; Zs.
G; 7; 8, 22.

Laran, land, Bd. 12, 38.

Laristan, land, Bd. 12, 38n.

Laughter at prayer, Sl. 10, 29.

La-vahak, man, Bd. 81, r9.

Leo, Bd. 2, 2; 84, 2; SI. 21, 2,6.

Leucorrheea, SI. 8, 19.

Libra, Bd. 2, 2; 5, 6; 84,2; Zs.4,
8-10; SI. 21, 2.

Life, duration of, Sl. 9, 14.

Liquids, Bd. 21, r.

Logograms, Int. 13-17, 20.


PAHLAVI TEXTS.


Loharasp, king, Bd. 28, 15n; 31,
28. See Kai-Léharasp.

Luminaries, Bd. 2, 1-8.

Lunar mansions, Bd. 2, 3.


Madéfryad m., Bd. 12, 32.

Magh (ablution-seat), Byt. 2, (365)
Sl. 10, 5n.

Mah, angel, Bd. 27, 24; Byt.2, 59n;
SI. 11, 4n; 12, 8; 22, 12; 23, 2.

— Atharmazd, com., Sl. 1, 4n.

— ayar, man, Bd. 38, 7.

— boéndak, man, Bd. 38, 7.

— bfikht, man, Bd. 38, 7.

— dad, man, Bd. 33, 1.


- — gdsaspo, com., SI. 1, 4n.


— nyayis, ritual, SI.'7, 4 n.

—=Vasp, COM. Sl. Ly -qulls

Mahik, zod., Bd. 2, 2.

Mahvand-dad, com., Byt. 8, 3; Sl.
1, 4n.

Maidhydairya, season, Bd. 25, 3n;
Sl. 18, (3 n.)

Maidhy6-shema, season, Bd. 25, 3n;
Sl. 18, (3 n.)

Male things, Bd. 16, 6.

Mam-sozak, title, Bd. 31, 14.

‘Manicheans, Sl. 6, 7 n.

Manih, heretic, Sl. 6, 7 n.

Mansarspend, angel, Sl. 11, 4.
Maraspend.

Manis m., Bd. 12, 2, 10; king, Bd.
338, 4; man, Bd. 81, 28.

— ikhfirshéd-vintk, man, Bd. 81, 11,


See


Iz.

— khirnak, man, Bd. 81, 14; 32,1n.

— kharnar, man, Bd. 81, 12, 14;
32, In.

Manuscripts, oldest Pahl. and P4z.,
Int. 21; of Bd., Int. 24-41; of
Zs., Int. 48-50; of Byt., Int.
56-593 of Sl., Int. 65, 66.

Mantiséihar, king, Bd. 12, 10; 14,
155 20, 11; dl, 12-14, any 235
31; 32,1, 4; 33, 3, 4n, 5,9;
34, 6; Zs. 9, 19; 11, 10n;
Byt. 2, 3n; Sl. 10, 28; man,
Bd. 38, 3.

—son of Yiidin-Yim, priest, Int.
46, 47; Bd. 88, ron,

Marak m., Bd. 12, 29, 38.

Maraspend, angel, Bd. 27, 24; SI.
11, 4n; 22,29; 28,4; man,
Bd. 38, 3, 11; Byt. 2, r8n.

Mardan-véh, man, Bd, 38, 6, 8.

Mard-biid, com., Sl.1, 4n; 2, 86.


INDEX.


Margandak, man, Bd. 81, 36, 40.
Marg-argan, see Worthy of death.
Marriage, refraining from, SI. 10, 19.
See also Next-of-kin.
Mars, planet, Bd. 5, 1.
Mariy or Marv, land, Byt. 3, 21.
Marvr., Bd.12, 9 n; 20, 7, 21; 21,3.
Mashaba, \un. man., Bd, 2, 3.
Mashya, man, Bd. 15, 6, 11, 19, 20,
30; 30,1, 7; 31,1; 32, 1n;
34, 3; Zs. 10, 4; Sl. 10, 28n.
Mashy6t, woman, Bd. 15, 6, 11, 20;
30, 1,7; 32,1n; 34,3; Zs.
10, 4; Sl. 10, 28n.
Masvak, man, Bd. 88, 5.
Matré, man, Bd. 15, 2.
Matréya6, woman, Bd. 15, 2.
Mazanan demons, Sl. 12, 6.
Mazinikan.
Mazda-ad-mdi ha, Sl. 18, 11.
Mazdayasnian literature, Zs. 9, 1;
Byt. 3, 25n; SI. 9, 9n; 10,
Siw Alle Lsmy 20 Ny 25/n, 260,
28n, 29n; 12, 17n; — reli-
gion, Bd. 29, 7; 33, 11n.
Mazdayasnians, Sl. 12, 4; 18, 2;
religion of, Int.9; Bd.1, 2, 25;
11, 6; 12, 413 33, 12; Byt.1,
©; 2, 2, 26, 46, 61; 38, I, 32,
41, 46, 495 Sl. 12; 23.

Mazdik, heretic, Byt. 1, 6; 2, 21.
Mazendar4n, land, Bd. 8, 20n; 18,
15n; 15, 28; 19, 5.
Mazinikan demons, Bd. 3, 20.

Mazanan.
Measures, linear, Bd. 26, 1-3.
Meat, unfit for rites, Sl. 10, 34;
when not to be eaten, Sl. 17,
Eye
Meat-offerings, Sl. 10, 34; 11, 4-6;
12, 8-10; 18, 4n.
Mediterranean sea, Bd. 18, 15n;
20, 8n.
Médiyarém, season, Bd. 25, 3.
Méd6k-mah, com., Sl.1, 3; 2, 1, 11,
12, 89; 5, 5, 6,
— shém, season, Bd. 25, 3.
Médyék-mah, man, Bd. 82, 2, 3;
Soares il, roms ol. 4, 130.
Mehré or Mehrvd r., Bd. 20, 7, 9.
Menstruation, see Woman.
Mercury, planet, Bd. 5,1; Byt. 3, 4.
Merkhinah m., Bd. 12, 38 n.
Meshhed, town, Bd. 20, 15 n, 30n;


See


See


22, 3n.
Mesr, land, Bd. 26, 8.


423


Mesrkdan r., Bd. 20, 7, 26.

Metal, melted, Bd. 80, 19, 20, 31,
323 origin of, Zs. 10, 2.

Mezinan, town, Bd. 12, 32 n.

Migin m., Bd. 12, 29, 32 n.

Mihir, angel, Byt. 2, 59n. See Mi-
tro.

—nyayis, ritual, Sl. 17, 5n.

Mihran r., Bd. 20, 9 n.

Milk, see Sacred milk.

Millennium, Int. 40;~Bd. 30, 2;
SAF 15 2,15 65°70, ons Zs.1,
10; Byt.1, 5; 2, 22,24, 41, 63;
3,9, 11, 43, 440, 51-53, 61.

Minos, man, Bd. 31, 3 n.

Mirak, man, Bd. 31, 4.

Mitékht, demon, Bd. 1, 24; 28, 14,
16.

Mitré, angel, Bd. 27, 24; Byt. 3,
32-36, 47; Sl. 22, 16; 23, 3;
month, Bd. 25, 7,20. See Mihir.

— akavid, man, Bd. 38, 6.

— ayar, man, Bd. 32, 7 n.

— tarsah, man, Bd. 31, 29.

— varaz, man, Bd. 33, 4.

Miyan, lun. man., Bd, 2, 3.

Miyan-i dast m., Bd. 12, 32.

Mébad of mébads, Bd. 32, 5; 33, 2.

Mébads (priests), Bd. 32, 4; 33, 0,
Q-I1.

Mobadship of mdbads, Byt. 38, 39.

Mokarstan, land, Bd. 20, 7.

Monstrosities, human, Bd. 15, 5, 31.

Months, names of, Bd. 25, 20.

Moon reverence, SI. 7, 4; 12, 31.

Mortal sin, see Worthy of death.

Mountains, Bd. 8, 1-5; 11, 4; 12,
1-41; 18, 10, 11; 24, 17, 28;
Zs. 1, 1-7.

Mouth-veil, Sl. 10, 40; 12, 4.

Muhammadanism, Sl. 6, 7 n.

Muhammadans, Byt.2, 24n; 3, 11
Ty bola nS Gare

Mulla Firfiz, Sl. 21, 2n.

Mumbat (Bombay), Byt. 3, 17 n.

Murghab r., Bd. 20, 21 n.

Muru, lun. man., Bd. 2, 3.

Miispar, comet, Bd. 5, 1, 2; 28,


44.
Miisulman, Byt. 3, 3 n.
Myazd, see Sacred feast.
Myths, how treated, Int. 71, 72.
Nabn, lun. man., Bd. 2, 3; Zs. 4,


8n.
Nahvtak r., Bd. 20, 34n; 21, 6.


424 -


PAHLAVI TEXTS.


Naikiyas, demon, Bd. 28, 10; 30,
29n.

Nail-parings to be prayed over, SI.
12, 6


A oy:

Natvtak r., Bd. 29, 4, 5.

Nakahéd, demon, Bd. 1, 27; 28,
1on; 30, 29n.

Namak or Namfin, man, Bd. 31, 35.

Naotara, man, Bd. 29, 6n.

Nags-i Rustam, Int. zon.

Nariman, man, Bd. 81, 36n.

— Héshang, Zs. 9, 1n.

Narsih, prince, Bd. 29, 6; 31, 3, 5.

Nas, demon, Bd. 28, 29.

Nasai, see Corpse and Dead matter.

Nasak, woman, Bd. 15, 25.

Nasatyas, Bd. 1, 27n.

Nasks, Zs. 11, ron; quoted in Sl.,
Int. 63, 64; described, Zs. 9,
PUY. Ul sO, 125 Ol eo, Ole
10, 3, 4, 13, 21, 25, 26, 28, 29;
12, 4n, 17n; referred to, Zs. 9,
16; Sl. 10, 22, 23; 12, 1-3, 5,
7, 10-12, 14-16, 19, 29-32; 18,
6, 10, 30.

Nasm, man, Byt. 2, 3n.

Nastis, demon, Sl. 2, 1-5, 6n, 55n,
68n; 7, 7; 10, 12n, 32n; 20,


4, 5-
Ndinghas, demon, Bd. 80, 29.
Navadé r., Bd. 20, 7, 34n; 2Y, 6n.
Navashadar rite, Sl. 12, 26.
Navazfidi rite, SI. 18, 2n.
Naydzem, man, Bd. 82, 1n.
Negro, origin of, Bd. 28, 2.
Néryésang, angel, Bd. 15,1; 32, 8;
Byt. 8, 25, 26, 59, 60; com., SI.
1, 4n; 8, 13; man, Bd. 382,
rn; translator, Byt. 2, 4n; Sl.
6, 7n. :
Nésr-gyavan, title, Bd..81, 5.
Névak-t6ra, man, Bd. 82, rn.
Next-of-kin marriage, Byt. 2, 57, 61;
__ SI. 8, 185 18, 3, (4.)
Nigds-afztid-dak, man, Bd. 88, 4.
Night, length of, Bd. 25, 3-6.
Nihadfim nask, SI. 10, (3,) 22, 23,
39n; 12, 15, 16.
Nihag, man, Bd. 29, 7.
Nikadim nask, Sl. 10, 3n.
Nihadim.
Nikhshaptihar, com., SI. 1, 4n.
Nile r., Bd. 20, 8n; Zs. 6, 20n.
Nimasp, zod., Bd. 2, 2.
Nirang, ritual, Sl, 12, 23; 18, 1.
Nirangistan, book, Int. 32; Byt. 2,


See


37; 8, 29; Sl 1, 3n, 4n; 2, ©
86n; 10, 35n; 12, 1m, 39D
16, 6n.

Nisanak, place, Byt. 3, 9, 21.

Nishaptihar, com., SI]. 1, 4n.

Nishapfr, town, Bd. 12, ran, 32n;
IBytaeleazs

Niv r., Bd. 20, 8.

Nivar, man, Bd. 33, 3.

Niyarum nask, Sl. 10, 3n.
Nihadim.

Niyadz, demon, Bd. 8,17; 28, 26.

Nédar, man, Bd. 29, 6; 31, 13, 23;
88,5; SI.10, 28n.

Noktarga, man, Bd. 81, 32, 33.


See


. N6énabar, rite, S]. 10, 2; 13, 2n.


Non-Iranian, Bd. 19, 15; 29, 4n;
Zs. 2,10; Byt. 2, 51.

Non-Turanian, Byt. 2, 49.

Nésai Birz-Mitr6, com., Sl. 1, 3n,
4n; 8, 18.

Noxious creatures, Bd. 8, 15, 20; 7,
5, 7,13; 18, 16; 19, 7, 9, 17,
21, 27,.805, 20) 13502 Senamor
6, 4, 5,9, 14; Sl. 8, 215 8,19;
13,19; 19,9; 20, 5, 18.

Nur, lun. man., Bd. 2, 3.

Nyayis, ritual, SI. 7, tn, 2n, 4n; 16,
6n; 17, 5n; 20, 1n.


Ocean, Bd> 7; (6;) 7316s eo .ecrmle
4; 12, 6; 13,1, 5, 8-10; 15,
27; 18,1, 7,9; 19,1, 8, 11;
20, 45 22, 2, 5,9; 27, 2; 29,
103-31, 32; Zs. 6,6, 73\%;/85.00.

Ordeals, $1.10, 25 n; 18,17; 15, 15-17.

Orthography, Pahl., Int. 74.

Owokhm, demon, Bd. 81, 6.

Oxus r., Bd. 15, 29n; 20, 8n, 9n,
22n, 28n; 22,4n; Zs. 6, 20n;
Byt. 8, 17n, 38n.


Padashkhvargar m., Bd. 12, 2, (17,)
31n, 323 81, 21, 40; Byt. 2,
63; 3,19, 20.

Padévar, lun, man., Bd. 2, 3.

Padiyavih, see Ablution.

Pagam nask, Sl. 9,9n. See PAzén.

Paha, lun. man., Bd. 2, 3.

Pahargar m., Bd. 12, 29, 37.

Pahlavas, tribe, Int. 12.

Pahlavi alphabets, Int. 16, 17, 20.

— language, Int.11.

— literature, extent, Int. 22.

— manuscripts, Int. 21, 22.

— (meaning of), Int. 12.


INDEX,


Pahlavi papyri, Int. 21.

— texts, three kinds here translated,
Int. 67, 68; proportion un-
translated, Int. 68; value of,
Int. 74.

— writings, Int. 9-22.

Pai Kfill, place, Int. r9, 20n.

Pairistira, man, Bd. 29, rn.

Pairi-urvaésm, demon, Bd. 81, 6.

Paitirasp, man, Bd. 82, 1.

Paitirasp, man, Bd. 32, 1, 2; 88, 1.
See Pirtardsp.

Paitréd, see Infection.

Pandnamak-i Zaratéist, Bd. 15, 2n.

Pangistan, land, Bd. 20, 13n, 15.

Papak, man, Int. 19; Bd. 31, 30;
34,9; Byt. 2, 18n.

Parahém, see Hém juice.

Parasang, meas., Bd. 7, 8; 13, 2;
14, 4; 16,75; 22,8; 26,1, 2;
S14, 12; 9,10.

Paréstyar6, man, Bd. 29, t.

Pargdna, \and, Bd. 20, 20.

Parik, com., Sl. 1, 4n.

Pars, land, Bd. 12, 2, 9, 21, 36; 20,
25, 29; 24, 28; 29, 14; 31,
30n; 82, 4; 33,10n; Zs. 7,7,
10; Byt.3, 9, 10, 19, 21.

Parsadgd, chief, Bd. 29, 5.

Parsi religion most detailed in Pahl.
texts, Int. 9; not fully ex-
plained here, Int. 68.

- Parstva, man, Bd. 38, 4.

Parthians, Int. 12.

Parthva, land, Int. 12.

Parviz, lun. man., Bd. 2, 3.

Parysatis, queen, Bd. 34, 8n.

Pashang, king, Bd. 29, 5 ; 31, 14, 16.

Pasin, prince, Bd. 81, 25n.

Pasus-haurva, dog, Bd. 14, 19n; 19,


34.

Patit, see Renunciation of sin.

— i khiid, ritual, Sl. 14, 6n.

Patsrébé, king, SI. 10, 28n.

Pazand, Int. (12,) 14, (15)-17; Byt.
2, 55.

— Bahman Yast, Int. 57.

— Bundahis, Int. 30, 31.

— Sl., in part, Int. 66.

Paz6n or Pazi nask, SI. 9, 9.

Pédak-miyan r., Bd. 20, 7, 31.

Peném, see Mouth-veil.

Periods of day, Bd. 25, (9,103) SI.
7,1; 10, 32; 14, 4-6; 17, 3.
See Gah. ,

Persepolis, Int, 19, 20n.


425


Persian, ancient, Int. 11; medieval,
Int. 11, 12; modern, Int. 11, 145
version of Byt., Int. 57-59. See
also Rivayats.

Persian Gulf, Bd. 18, 8n,13n; 20,
250.

Pésdad, title, Bd. 82, rn.

Pésdadian, Bd. 15, (28n;) 17, 4n;
Sl. 10, 28 n.

Pésh-Parviz, lun. man., Bd. 2, 3.

Péshyétant, priest, Bd. 20, 31 n;
29, 5; 31, 29; 32, 5; Byt. 2,
1; 8, 25-27, 29-32, 36-38, 39 n,
41, 42, 51, 52.

Pésyansai, land, Bd. 29, 4, 5, 7, 113
Byt. 3, 60n.

Pig, domesticated, SI. 2, 58.

Piran, man, Bd. 81, 17.

Pirik, com., Sl. 1, 4 n.

Pirtarasp, man, Bd. 82, 1n; $8, 1n.

Pisces, Bd. 2, 2; Sl. 21, 2.

Pisin valley, Bd. 29, 5 n.

Planets, Bd. 3, 253; 5, (1,) 5; 28,
44; Zs. 2,10; 4, 3, 7-10.
Plants, origin, Bd. 9, 1-6; 27, 1-3;

Zs. 8, 1-6; 9, 1-6; chiefs of,
Bd. 24, 18-21, 273; 27, 4; classi-
fication, Bd. 27, 5-23; devoted
to angels, Bd. 27, 24; dried

before burning, Bd. 27, 25.

Pleiades, stars, Bd. 2, 3 n.

Pollution from dead apes, Sl. 2, 615
dead bodies, Sl. 2, 12-16, 18-22,
30-32, 35-124; 10, 12; dead
dogs, SI. 2,62; dead hedgehog,
Sl. 2, 59; dead menstruous
woman, SI. 2, 61; dead priests,
Sl. 2, 60 n; from menstruation,
Sl. 2,17, 96; 8, 1-3, 10-20, 22-
34; from serpents, SI. 2, 33-35.

— of animals, Sl. 2, 109-1113 build-
ings, Sl. 2, 18-22, 453 38, 2, 35
carpets, Sl. 2, 101; 3, 2, 3;
clothing, Sl. 2, 42, 44, 83; 3, 1,
13; cushions, Sl. 2, 102-104 5
8, 2, 3; doors, Sl. 2, 74; earth
and masonry, Sl. 2, 36; fire,
Sl. 2, 38-40, 46, 49; food, Sl.
2, 41, 47, 119-1245 8, 12, 30}
ground, Sl. 2, 12-163; jars, Sl.
2, 30-35; powdered things, Sl.
2, 37; unborn child, Sl. 2, 58;
105, 106; water, Sl. 2, 77-943
wool, Sl. 2, 100.

— stopped by objects, Sl. 2, 57, 58,

Portuguese, Byt. 3, 17 n.


426


PAHLAVI TEXTS.


Porufist, woman, Bd. 82, 5, 7n.

Pérfishasp, man, Bd. 20, 32, 34n;
82, 1, 23 83, 3.

Poéryédkéshih. See Primitive faith.

Pourudhakhst, man, Bd. 29, 6.

Pouru-gau, man, Bd. 31, 7 n.

Prayer before and after sleep, Sl.
10, 24. See also Inward prayer.

Precautions where death occurs, SI.
2, 38-44.

Pregnant woman, carrying her
corpse, Sl. 2, 6; 10, 10; eating
dead matter, Sl. 2, 105; pro-
tected by fire, SJ. 10, 4; 12, 11;
stepping on toothpick, Sl. 10,
20>) 12, 13.

Priests, Bd. 30, 30n; 82, 4n; 33,
O,2an, 30; 2.01 Zs lly roms
Byt. 1,7n; 2, 38, 40, 55; SI.2,
56, 60n, 62n; 5, 3n; 8, 4,11;
9, 2, 4,12n; 18, 9, 49n; 14,
3; their five dispositions, Bd.
19, 36n. See Dastifir, High-
priest, Mébads, Purifying, Ras-
pi, Supreme, Zéta.

Primeval ox, Bd. 8,14, 17,183 4,1,
2 LOO, baa Teese auily, 20
34,1; Zs. 2,6; 9, 1-7.

Primitive faith, $].1, 3, 4; 6,7; 10,
303 12,1, 13,195 18, 2.

Professions, see Classes,

Providence, Sl. 20, 17.

Province-ruler, Sl. 18, 11, 15, 41 n,
44; 19,5.

Purification, modes of, Sl. 2, 6, 14-
17,19, 22, 41, 42, 44, 53, 65-
68, 92, 95-99, 112-118, 120-123;
8, 14, 16-18, 20, 21.

Purifying priest, Sl. 12, 22-27.

Pir-t6ra, man, Bd. 81, 7, 8; 82,
iat.

Ptis, demon, Bd. 28, 28.

Pitik sea, Bd. 18, 7-11; 22, 9; Zs.
6, 14-16.

Piiyisn-shad, man, Bd. 38, 8.


Qubad, king, Byt. 1, 5 n.


Rad r., Bd. 20, 7, 24 n.

Ragan, man, Bd. 82,1; 88, 3.

Ragha, town, Bd. 81, 40n; SI. 18,
Tin,

Rai, town, Bd. 81, 40; SI. 18, 11 n.

Rak, man, Bd. 81, 31; 82, rn.

Rakbvad, lun. man., Bd. 2, 3.

Ram, angel, Bd. 27, 24; Byt. 2,


sons Slot, ane. a eee.
21; 23, 3.
Ramak-t6ra, man, Bd. 31, 7.
Rangha r. or lake, Bd. 19, 15 n; 20,
$n.
Raoidhit6 m., Bd. 12, 27 n.
Rapitvin gah, Bd. 2, 8, 9; 25, 9g, 10,
12,145 (Slip, phew ois
Rashn@, angel, Bd. 27, 24; 31, 3;
Byt.-2; 59 n¢ 3, 326 slodeeme
17, 4,5n3; 22,18; 23, 3.

Rask, Professor, Int. 25, 27.

RAspi, priest, Bd. 30, 30.

Rathwé berezaté, Av., SI. 11, 4n.

Ratdstaitih nask, Sl. 10, 29.

Ravak m., Bd. 12, 29, 35.

Receptacle for the dead, SI. 9, 7.
See Depository.

Regulus, star, Bd. 2, 8 n.

Renovation of the universe, Bd. 1,
25; 6, 4; 18,17; 18, 4; 19,
13,143 22, 7; 27, 43 29, 6;
30, 17, 32; Zs. 1, 16, 19; 4, 23
B37

Renunciation of sin, Sl. 4, 14; 8,
IN, 4, 5, (7-10,) 12-14, 16, 17,
21, (235) 9,6; 20, 11.

Resurrection, Bd. 1, 21; 11, 6; ac-
count of, Bd. 80, 1-33; not for
some, Sl. 17, 7; where, SI. 17,
II-14.

Révand m., Bd. 12, 2, 18, 23, 34n;
17, 8 = 25. U9.

Revolving of luminaries, Bd. 5, 3-9.

Ridge of Vistasp, m., Bd. 12, 18 n,
SAULT S seLSe Lege

Ritual, SI. 5, 2, 3, 5, 6; 12, 23.

Rivas-plant, Bd. 15, 2; Zs. 10, 4.

Rivayats, Pahlavi, Int. 60; Persian,
Int. 57,67; Zs. 9,1n;3 Byt. 1,
In; 3, 25n, 43n, 52n, 61n;
SL. 1, 2h; 2, 20, on, Gus,
rn; 9, on; 10; 3n, 4nr 13m)
21n, 25n, 26n, 28n, 29n; 12,
40, 17n; 16,6n; 17, 5n; 19,
In, 2n, 4, 5N, 7, 9n-14n.

Rivers, Bd. 7, 15-17; 20, 1-34; 21,
2-4,6; 24,114,153 Zs. 6, 20, 21.

Romans, Byt. 2, 19 n.

Roshan, com., Byt. 8, 3; Sl.1,4n;
2, 39, 86, 107.

—m., Bd. 17, 6.

Réshané-kerp, fire, Byt. 8, 29.

Réyisn-hémand m., Bd. 12, 2, 27.

ale sin, see Sin affecting the
soul,


INDEX.


Riidastam, man, Bd. 31, 41.
Rulers, the five, Sl. 18, 11, 15, 41n,


44; 19, 5.
Rfiman, Bd. 34, 8; Byt. 2, 49; 3,
- 8, 9, 34, 51.
Riimans, Byt. 2, 50.
Rustam, man, Bd. 29, 7n; 31,
36n, 410.


Sacred butter, Sl. 2, (433) 8, 32n;
10, 34; 11, 4n; 14, 3.

— cake, Byt.2, 36,57n; SI. 2, 43n;
8, (32,) 353 5,55 7,405 8, 20;
9, 11, 12n; 10, 2, 34-36; 12,1,
8,9; 14, 1-3; 16,6; 17, 2, 4,
5n; 18, 4n.

— feast, Sl]. 12,19; 18, 25; 18, 3, (4.)

= fire, Sl, 2;°46, 49; 7,9. See Va-
hram fire.

— milk, Sl. 2, (43;) 18, ran.

— shirt, Bd. 28, 8, 10; Sl. 4, 2n,
(5-8,) 13, 14.

— thread-girdle, Bd. 28, 8, 10; 30,
30n; Byt. 2, 36, 44,57, 58; Sl.
8, 32n3 4, (1-4,) 6-8, 11, 13,
14; TORT iS.

— twigs, Byt. 2, 36, 57, 58; 3, 29,
37; Sl. 2, 18; 38, 10, I1, 20,
(32,) 33; 8, 18; 10, 35; 12,1;


Wi ran; 14-2. -
— twig-stand, Sl. 8, 32; 10, 35.
Sadaro, Sl. 4, 5n. See Sacred
shirt.


Sad-dar Bundahis, Int. 22n, 45,590;
Sl. 10, zon; 12, 5n; 17, 4n.

Sadis, SI. 8, 6n. See Three nights.

Sadvastaran, Bd. 30, ro.

Saféd kéh, m., Bd. 12, 22n.

Saféd riid, r., Bd. 20, 13n, 23n.

Sagansih, land, Bd. 81, 37.

Sagastan, land, Bd. 12, 9, 15; 18,
16; 20,17, 24n, 29; 22,5; 24,
28; 31,37n; Zs. 7, 7,9; Byt.
3, 19.

Sag-did, see Dog’s gaze.

Sagittarius, Bd. 2, 2; 34, 6; SI.
21, 2.

Sahm, man, Bd. 31, 27.

Sairima, land, Bd. 15, 29n; 31, 9n;
Byt. 3, 3n.

Sakadtim nask, Sl. 10, (25;) 12, 2,
10, 12; 13, r7N, 30.

Salm, prince, Bd. 15, 29; 20, 12n;
31, 9, 10, 12; SI. 10, 28n.
Salman, land, Bd. 20, 12; Byt. 3,3;

S$], 10, 28n.


427


Sam, man, Bd. 29, 7, 9; 81, 36;
Byt. 3, 60, 61.

SAmn, title, Byt. 3, 59.

Samarkand, land, Bd. 12, 13n; 15,
29n; 20, 20; Zs. 7, 7n; Byt.
2, 49n; 3, 14n. E

Samarkandian, Byt. 3, 17n.

Sarak, land, Bd. 12, 35.

Sarsaok, ox, Bd. 15, 27; 17, 4; 19,
13; Zs. 11, ron.

Sasdn, man, Int. 19n+ Bd. 81, 30.

Sasanian inscriptions, Int. 19, 20;
Byt. 2, qn.

— Pahlavi, Int. 19-21.

Sasanians, Int. 11, 15, 19, 21; Bd.
31, 32n; 88, 2n; 34, 9; Byt.
2, 18n, 20n; 3, 110.

Satan, Bd. 3, gn.

Satavés, gulf or lake, Bd. 18, 9, 10,
12,13; 22, 1,9; Zs. 6, 16-18;
star, Bd. 2,7; 5,1; 18, 9n,
12; 24,17; Zs.6, 16; S].14, 5.

Satlig r., Bd. 20, gn.

Satfith, Sl. 8,6n. See Three nights.

Saturn, planet, Bd. 5, 1; 28, 48;
Zs. 4, 7-10.

Saukavastdn, land, Bd. 29, 4, 5, 13.

Savah, region, Bd. 5, 8, 9; 11, 3;
29, 1; Byt. 3, 47.

Savar, demon, Bd. 28, 9, 10; 30,
29. See Sovar.

Scorpio, Bd. 2, 2; 84,5; Sl. 21, 2.

Seas, Bd. 7, 6, 143 11, 2, 4; 19; 1,
5-17 5 24, 23; Zs. 6, 6,7, 14-19.

Season-festivals, Bd. 25, 1, 3, 6;
Byt. 2, 45; Sl. 10, 2; 12, 19,
31; 18, 29; 18, (3,) 4; 19, 4.

Seasons, Bd. 25, 3-17, 19, 20.

Ség, demon, Bd. 28, 26.

Selections of ZAd-sparam, where
found, Int. 46; age, Int. 47;
contents, Int. 48; MSS., Int.
48-50.

Seleucus Callinicus, Byt. 2, 19n.

Semitic words in Pahlavi, Int. 13,
14, 17, 18; in modern Persian,
Inte

Séni, land, Bd.12, 13n; 15, 29; 20,
3on; SI. 6, 7n.

Sén6 bird, Bd. 14, 11n, 23n; 18,
gn; Zs. 8, 4. See Griffon.

Serosh, see Srésh.

Serpent, Bd. 30, 31.

Sevan lake, Bd. 22, 8n; 24, 23n.

Sfend nask, Sl. 10, 4n. See
Spend.


428


PAHLAVI TEXTS.


Shadows, midday, Sl. 21, 1-3; —
afternoon, Sl. 21, 4-8.

Shah ’Abbas, Byt. 8, 34n, 44n.

Shahpthar, king, Int. 19; Bd. 33,
2; Byt. 2, 18n.

Shahpir, king, Byt. 2, 18; 8, 14.

Shahrivar, angel, Byt.2,59n. See
Shatvairé.

Shapik, see Sacred shirt.

Shaptr II, Bd. 33, 2n, 3n; Byt. 2,
18n; Sl. 8, 23n; 15, 16n.

Shatré-ram, man, Bd. 12, 2on.

Shatvairé, angel, Bd. 1, 26; 27, 24;
30, 19, 29; Sl. 18, 14, 39; 15,
3, 5) 14-19; 22, 4; 23, 1;
month, Bd. 25, 20.

Shayast la-shayast, why so called,
Int. 59, 603 extent, Int. 60;
contents, Int. 60-62; age, Int.
63-65 ; com. mentioned, Int. 63,
64; nasks mentioned, Int. 64;
MSS., Int. 65, 66 ; Paz. version,
Int. 66 ; not hitherto translated,
Int. 66, 67.

Shédak, man, Bd. 31, 18.

Shédaspth, fiend, Byt. 8, 3, 5, 8, 21.

Shiraz, town, Bd. 29, 14n.

Shirt, see Sacred shirt.

Shirtashésp, man, Bd. 88, 4.

Shirvan r., Bd. 20, 25n.

Shniiman, ritual, Sl. 8, 35; 7, (83) 9,
11n; 10, 2; 14, 3.

Shiistar, town, Bd. 20, 26n.

Sighing, cause of, Sl. 12, 32.

Sikandar, king, Bd. 84, 8n; Byt. 2,
19n.

Sikidav m., Bd. 12, 2.

Silver age, Byt. 1, 1n, 5; 2, 17.

Simurgh, bird, Bd.14, 11n; 18, 9n;
24, 110.

Sin, Zs.1, 13,18; Byt.2, 403 8,57;
SI. 2, 53,91, 106; 5,6; 6, 4,6;
8,19; 10, 3, 18, 25, 27; 12, 315
15, 22, 26-28, 30; 20,15; af-
fecting accusers, Sl. 8, (1,) 14,
15,175 affecting the soul, SI. 8,
(1,) 16.5 degrees.of,Sl..1, 1, 2%
ll, 1, 2; 16, 1-5; harm, Bd. 5,
2; 19, 20; imputed, Sl, 5, 1;
6,2; 8,13; making water on
foot, Sl. 4, 8n; 10, 5; mortal,
Sl. 8, 7, 18,.21, 233 running
about uncovered, Bd. 28, 8, 10;
Byt. 2, 38; Sl. 4, (8)-10; un-
seasonable chatter, Bd. 28, 19;
Sl. 4, (9 ;) 5,1-73; walking with


one boot, Bd. 28, 13; SI. 4;
8n,(12.) See Aredfis, Farman,
Khér, Renunciation, Tanapi-
har, Worthy of death, Yat.

Sinamrd, bird, Bd. 24, r1n.

Sind, land, Bd. 15, 29; 20, 9, 30.

Sinik congregation, Sl. 6, 7.

Sinners, S]. 15, 17; mortal, SI. 8, 5 ;
put to death, SI. 8, 6, 7, 21, 22n.

Sirlus, ‘star, Bd. 2, 703 7%; tmeesls
14, 5n.

Sirkan, town, Bd. 38, 11n; Zs. 1, on.

Sirézah, ritual, $1.7, 8n; 17, 5n.

Sistan, land, Bd. 12, 9n. See Sagas-
tan.

Siyah kéh, m., Bd. 12, 22n.

Siyak-h6mand m., Bd. 12, 22.

— miil-mand m., Bd. 12, 2.

— tora, man, Bd. 81, 7.

Styakmak, man, Bd. 15, 25, 30; 31,
1,6; 32, In.

Styavakhsh, prince, Bd. 28, 15n;
81, 25; Byt. 3, 25, 26; Sl. 10,
28n.

Snake-killer, Bd. 28, 22.

Sneezing, cause of, SI]. 12, 32.

Sdfti, tribe, Byt. 2, 49.

Sogdiana, land, Bd, 20, 8n.

Soghd, land, Bd. 20, 19.

Sé6k-t6ra, man, Bd. 81, 7; 82, 1n.

Sdshyans, apostle, Bd. 11, 6; 29, 6;
30, 3, 4, 7,17, 25, 273 32, 7n,
8; SByt. 8, 61n, 62; Sl) 1s.55
com., Sl.1, 3; 2, 2n, 56, 74, 80,
118, 119; 8,13; 8, 4, 5.

Sévar, demon, Bd. 1, 27; 28, gn.
See SAvar.

— lake, Bd.12, 24n; Zs.6,22. See
next.

Sdvbar lake, Bd. 7,143 12,24; 22,
Tg Suu ZSuG yeas

Spaényasp, man, Bd. 81, 14, 27.

Spahan, land, Bd. 12, 40; 20, 26;
31, 40.

Spans, Bd. 26, 3; Sl.16, 4; 21, an.

Sparnak, man, Bd. 81, 40.

Spazg, demon, Bd. 28, 31.

Spéd r., Bd. 20, 7, 13n, 23.

Spéd-raztir, forest, Bd. 24, 16n;
Byt. 3, 9, 21.

— tora, man, Bd. 31, 7.

Spénak-mainék, Bd. 1, rn.
Beneficent spirit.

Spend nask, Sl. 10, (43) 12, 3, 11,
15, 29.

—r., Bd. 20, 7n, 13n, 23n,


See


INDEX.


429


Spendarmad, angel, Bd. 1, 26; 15,
1; 27, 24; 30, 29; Zs. 10, 3;
Byt. 2, 8, 16, 31, 48, 53, 59n;
SiO, 28:9 US 4S, 14s 15,
3) 5) 20-24; 22, 5; 28, 1;
month, Bd. 25, 6, 7, 11, 20.

Spend-dad, prince, Bd. 81, 29, 303
34,8; Byt.2,17.

Spendyad m., Bd. 12, 2, 23.

Spéngargak, demon, Bd.17, 1. See
Aspengargak.

Spénist fire, Bd. 17,1; Zs. 11, 1n.

Spezta-mainyu, Av., Bd. 1, rn.

Speta-mainyfi gatha, SI. 18, 2n, 15,
33-35) 51.

— — ha, SI. 18, 33.

Speztem-Ahurem-mazdam ch., Sl.


13, 36.

Spétos, land, Bd. 20, 8.

Spiegel, Professor, Int. 25, 59, 71.

Spitaman, man, Bd. 32, 1; title, see
Zarattist.

Spitdid, chief, Bd. 29, 1.

Spitfr, prince, Bd. 31, 3, 5.

Spar, lun. man., Bd. 2, 3.

Srit, man, Sl. 22, 32; woman, Bd,
32, 5.

Sritak, woman, Bd. 82, 7n.

Srit6, man, Zs. 11, ron.

Srod, lun. man., Bd. 2, 3.

Srésh; angel, Bd. 19, (33;) 27, 243
80, (29,) 30; 81,38; Zs. 11, 7;
Byt. 2, 59n3 3, 25, 26, 32, 59;
S1. 18, 43; 17,3, 5n, 6; 22, 17;
23, 3. %

Srésh6-Aaranam, wt., Sl. 4, ron, (145)
5, 33 6,3; 8,9; 10, 24; 11,1,
a; 16, 5.

Sruvd, place, Bd. 29, 14.

Srtivd, ox, Zs. 11, ro.

Steel age, Byt. 1, 1n, 53 2, 21.

Step, meas., Bd. 26, 3n.

Stir, wt., Sl. 1, (25) 8, 25, 263 7, 33
11, 2; 16, 2n, 3n, 4, 5.

$+dtan yasn6, ritual, Sl. 13, 1.

Stfidgar nask, Byt. 1, (1;) SI. 10, 8;
ies ip

Stfitd-garé ha, $1.13, 22.

Side, land, Bd. 20, 14.

Sfidkar nask, Byt.1,1n; Sl. 19, rn.
See Sttidgar.

Sughdha, land, Bd. 15, 29n.

Summer, Bd. 25, 4, 5, 7-10, 13-17,
19, 20.

Sun reverence, Sl. 7, 1-6; 12,
Bible :


Supreme high-priest, Bd. 24, 1; Sl.
9, 3.
— Zaratiist, Sl. 18, 11, 15, 38, 41,


. 443 19, 5.
Sfrak, land, Bd. 15, 29; 20, 8; man,
Bd. 31, 19.
Stristan, land, Bd. 15, 29n; 20, ro.
Syr-darya, r., Bd. 20, 20n.
Syria, Bd. 15, 29n; 20, ron.


Sahi-biin sea, Bd. 18-7, 15.
Sam, man, Bd. 31, 27n.
San, man, Bd. 81, 17, 18.
Sarva, god, Bd. 1, 27n.
Séd, r., Bd. 20, 7.

Sér, zod., Bd. 2, 2.

Sidasb, man, Bd. 81, 27n.
Skinds, man, Bd. 88, 3n.
S6k, bird, Bd. 19, 19.


Tad-séidhis ha, S1. 18, 49.
Tad-thw4-peresa ha, SI. 18, 28.
Taham, man, Bd. 88, 4.

Tahmasp, man, Bd. 81, 23n.

Tairév, demon, Bd. 1, 27; 28, 110;
30, 29.

Takhmérup, king, Bd. 17, 4; $1, 2,
3; 32, 1n; 34,4; Zs.11,10n;
Sl. 10, 28n.

Tambayak, demon, Bd. 81, 6.

Tanapthar good work, SI. 1, (1n;)
2,790, 933 6,3, 4,63 7, 43 8,
20; 16, 6; 18, 4n.

— sin, Sl. 1, 1, (25) 2, 40, 50, 51, 53,
69,70, 79N, 80, 82; 8, 26-28; 4,
10,12; 5, 3, 4; 8, 20; 10,5,
17,353 1l1,1,2; 12,4; 16,5.

Tanuperetha, Av., Sl. 1, rn.

Taparistan, land, Bd. 12, 17; 18,
15; 20, 27; Byt. 3, 19.

Taprév, demon, Bd. 28, 11,13. See
Tairév.

Taraha, lun. man., Bd. 2, 3.

Taraztik, zod., Bd. 2, 2; 5, 6.

Tarmaz, town, Bd. 20, 28n.

Tarémat, demon, Bd. 28, 14; 30,


29.

Tashkand, town, Bd. 20, 2on.

Taurus, zod., Bd. 2, 2; SI. 21, 2.

Ta-ve-urvata ha, Sl. 13, 6, 14.

Taz, man, Bd. 15, 28; 81, 6; Sl.
10, 28n.

Tazak, woman, Bd. 15, 28.

Tegend r., Bd. 20, 15n.

Teheran, town, Bd. 12, 31n; 31,
4on; Sl.13,11n. ©


430


Térak m., Bd. 5, 3, 43 12, 2, 4.

Teremet r., Bd. 20, 7, 9n, 28.

Thraétaona, king, Bd. 81, 4n, 7n.

Three-legged ass, Bd. 19, 1-12.

Three-nights’ ceremony, Sl. 8, 6;
1O; 23 12; 5, 32.

—  — punishment, Bd, 30, 13, 16;
Sl. 8, 5, 7, 16.

Thrita, man, Bd. 31, 26n, 27n; Zs.
11, ron; Byt. 3,14n; Sl. 22,
32n.

Thritak, man, Bd. 31, 14.

Thriti, woman, Bd. 82, 5n.

Tides, Bd. 18, 8, 11, 13, 14; Zs. 6,
17.

Tigris r.. Bd. 20, 10n, r2n, 25n;
Zs. 6, 20n; Byt. 3, 3n, 5n, 210,
38n.

Time personified, Int. 70; Zs, 1,
24-27; 4, 5.

Tin age, Byt. 2, 20.

Tir, angel (for Tistar), Bd. 27, 24;
Sl. 23, 2; month, Bd. 7,2; 25,
3,020" Zs, 6, 2: “planet, Bd.


5, I.

Tistar, angel, Bd. '7, 2-4, 7-103; 9,
2 A zee Osh S215 3 esa Gy
Mey Oo LOn tors oy Ban yt. es
59n; 8, 14n; Sl. 22, 13; see
Tire star, Bd. 2, ys Syne Fv


?


Sl. 14, 5. Jf
Toothpick, how to be cut, S]. 10, 20;
12, 13.


To6ra, zod., Bd. 2, 2.

Tort r., Bd. 20, 7n, 24.

Translations of Bd., Int. 24-26,
43-45; of Byt., Int. 57,593; of
Sl., Int. 66, 67; plan of these,
Int. 70-74.
Tree of all germs, Bd. 9, 5, 6; 18,
9; 27,2; 29,5; Zs. 8, 3.-
Tribe-ruler, Sl. 18, 11, 15, 41n, 44;
19, 5.

Tiig, prince, Bd. 81, 9, 10, 12, 14,
27; Sl. 10, 28n.

Tabmaspian, title, Bd. 81, 23; 84,
6; Sl. 10, 28n.

Tfirya, tribe, Bd. 15, 29n; 81, on.

Tr, land, Bd. 12, 20; 15, 29; 21,
6; 80, 16; 81, 27n; Byt. 2,
62; 3, 34.

— Bragrésh, Byt. 2, 3n.

— i Bradarvash, Byt. 2, 3.

Tfirak, man, Bd, 31, 14, 27.

Tfiran, land, Sl. 10, 28n.

Turanian syllabary, Int. 13.


PAHLAVI “TEXTS.


Tirk, tribe, Bd. 29, 7; Byt. 2, 49;


8, 7-9, 51>

Tirkistan, land, Bd. 12, 13, 39; 15,
29n; 29,13; Byt.2, 24n, 49n;
3, 20n,; Sl, 65 7n-

Tirks, Byt. 2, 24n, 50n.

Tis m., Bd. 22, 3; land, Bd. 12, 24;
20, 30; man, Bd. 29, 6.


Uda, demon, Bd. 28, 19; 81, 6n.
Udai, demon, Bd. 81, 6.
Ukhshyad-ereta, apostle, Bd. 82, 8n.
— nemangh, apostle, Bd. 82, 8n.
’Uman gulf, Bd. 18, gn.
Uncleanness, period of, SI. 2, 41, 42,
; 44, 62, 105-109; 38, 14-18.
Unseasonable chatter, see Sin.

Ursa major, Bd. 2, 7n; SI. 11, 4n.
Urumiyah lake, Bd. 22, 2n, 8n.
Urupi dog, SI. 2, 59n.

Ururviga, man, Bd. 82, 7.
Urvad-ga, man, Bd. 81, 31n; 388, 4.
Urvad-gdi-frdst, man, Bd. 81, 31.
Urvakhshaya, man, Bd. 81, 26n.
Urvandasp, man, Bd. 82, 1n.
Urvaram, twig, Sl. 8, 32n.
Urvatad-nar, man, Bd. 29, 5; 32,


5n.
Urvdzist fire, Bd. 17,1. See Afir-
vazist.
Urvig, woman, Bd. 82, 7n.
Urvis lake, Bd. 18, 4n; 22, 1, 11.
Usefriti, Av., SI. 13, 30n.
Ushahina gah, Bd. 19, 15n; 25, 9n;
Byt. 2, 59n; Sl.14, 4n; 17, 5n.
Ushidarena m., Bd. 12, 6n.
Ushidhau m., Bd. 12, 6n.
Usinemangh, man, Bd. 81, 33n.
Uspasnu, title, Bd. 29, rn.
Usta-Ahurem-mazdaim ch., SI. 18,


oe 1328
Ustavaiti gatha, $1.18, 2n, 15, 27-31,


51.
— ha, Sl. 13, 27.
Uzasti, span, Bd. 26, 3n.
Uzava, king, Bd. 31, 23n.


Vad, angel, Bd. 27, 243; SI. 11, 4;
22,22; 23, 3; day, Byt.3, 16.

Vadgés m., Bd. 12, 2, 19.

Vadgésians, Bd. 12, 19.

Vaé the bad, demon, Bd. 28, 35.

— the good, angel, Sl. 11, 4; 17, 4,


5n.
Vaé-biikht, man, Bd. 38, 6, 8.
Vaédist, man, Bd. 82, 1n.


INDEX.


Vaétand-i Raéghinéid, woman, Bd. 31,


Be

Vafar-hémand m., Bd. 12, 2, 22.

Vag, Sl. 3, 6n; 16,6n. See Inward
prayer.

Vagarkard-i Dintk, quoted, Bd. 32,
1n,5n, 7N; its author, Sl. 1, 3n.

Vahidbroés, man, Bd. 88, 3.

Vahik, zod., Bd. 2, 2; 5, 6.

Vahist, see Heaven.

Vahistem-Ahurem-mazdam ch., Sl.


3, 46.
Vahist6isti gatha, $1.13, 2n,15, 41-45,


Sit

Vahram, angel, Bd. 27, 24; Byt. 3,
323 SI. 22, 20; 23, 3; day, Bd.
25, 3; planet, Bd. 5,1.

— fire, Bd. 17, 1, 2, 9; Byt. 2, 26,
373 Sl22,46n, 49n. See Sacred
fire.

— Gor, king, Byt. 2, 20.

— iVargavand, king, Byt. 3,14, 32n,
39, 441, 49.

— shad, man, Bd. 38, 11.

Vabht, \an. man., Bd. 2, 3.

Vakaéni r., Bd. 20, 34.

Vakhsh, man, Bd. 33, 3.

Vakht-atrid, com., Sl. 1, 4n.

Valkhas, king, Byt. 2, 19n.

Van lake, Bd. 22, 8n; 24, 23n.

Vanand, star, Bd. 2, 7; 5,1; SI. 11,
43 14, 5.

Vand-Atiharmazd, com., Sl. 1, 4n;

_— -B, 2, 6, 445 14, 5.

Vandid-khim, priest, Byt. 3, 39.

Vanfraghesn, man, Bd. 31, 7.

Vanidar, man, Bd. 31, 9.

Van6o-i-fravisn, man, Bd. 32, En.

Varak, zod., Bd. 2, 2;, 5, 6, 7.

Varaut, lun. man., Bd. 2, 3.

Varend, demon, Bd. 8, 17; 28, (25-)

Véresha bird, Bd. 14, 30.

Varzid-din, man, Bd. 82, rn.

Vas-i panAdsadvaran, fish, Bd. 18,


5) 7:

Vay6, demon, Bd. 28, 35n.

" Vazist fire, Bd. 7, 123; 17,1, 25 Zs.

6,13; 11,1, 5; Sl. 18, 26.

Véh r., Bd. 7, 15, 17; 20,1, 3, 5-7;
8n, 9, 22, 28, 30; 21, 3; Zs. 6,
20% Byt. 3, 17, 38.

Véh-afrid, woman, Bd. 31, 30.

Véh-dést, com., Sl. 1, 4n.

Vendeses r., Bd. 20, 29.

Vendidad, ritual, Byt. 2, 59n; SI.
12, 26; 16,6n; 17,5n; oldest


431


MSS. of, Int. 21; referred to,
Sl.1,1; 2,1, 12, 55n,118n; 10,
5,19, 31, 32; 12, 6, 20; 18, 7;
quoted, SI. 12, 4, 23; 18, 8, 19;
Av. passage translated, Sl. 2,
95n; Pahl. do. do., Sl. 1, 1n;
2, 18n,31N,123n,124n; 38,1n,
IIn, 12n; 4, 10on.

Venus, planet, Bd. 5,1; Byt. 3, 4n,

8


18,
Vergan sea, Bd. 20, 24.

Vibazu, meas., Bd. 26, 3n.
Vidadafsh, region, Bd. 5, 8,9; 11, 3;
25, 10; 29,13; Byt. 3, 47.

Vidast, man, Bd. 82, 1.

Village-ruler, SI. 18, 11,15, 41n, 445
19, 5.

Vinasp, man, Bd. 38, 3.

Vindad-i-pédak, man, Bd. 38, 6, 8.

Virafsang, man, Bd. 31, 6.

Virak, princess, Bd. 31, 9 n.

Virgo, Bd. 2, 2; 34, 2; SI. 21, 2.

Visak, man, Bd. 81, 16, 17.

Vis-haurva dog, Bd. 14, 19n; 19,


34.

Visnasp fire, Zs. 6, 22n; Byt. 3, 10,
See Gtisasp.

Vispan-frya, woman, Bd. 31, 18.

Visparad, ritual, Byt. 2, 59n; SI. 16,
6; chapters cited, Sl. 18, 5, 26,
32, 36, 39, 40, 46, 48.

Vistasp, king, Bd. 12, 32; 17, 6, 8;
20, 31n; 28, 15n; 29,5; 31,
29; 82, 53 Zs. 11, ron; Byt.
1, 1n, 43 2,1, 16, 49n, 58-60;
3,9, 25, 26, 29M, 30, 51, 523
Sl. 10, 21n; 11, 4. See Kai-
Vistasp.

Vitast, span, Bd. 26, 3 n; SJ. 21, 2 n.

Vivanghaa, man, Bd. 29, 6; 31, 2,
7; 32, 1n.

Vizak, man, Bd. 32, 1n.

Vizarésh, demon, Bd. 28, 18.

Vohu-frydn fire, Bd. 17,1; Zs. 11,


In.

Vohti-khshathra gatha, $1.13, 2n, 15,
37, 38n, 51. :

Vohti-khshathrem-yazamaidé ch.,
$1. 13, 39.

Vohtiman, angel, Bd. 1, 23, 25,
(26n5) 7, 35 27, 24; 30, 29;
Zs. 6, 33 9, 63 1l,10n; SL.
13, 14; 15, 3, 5, 9-11; 22, 2;
23, 1; his bird, SI. 10, 9; king,
Bd. 31, 29, 30; 34, 8; Byt. 2,
17; month, Bd, 25, 20.


432


PAHLAVI TEXTS.


Vohfiman-/thar, man, Bd. 33, 3.

— yast, ritual, Byt.1, rn, 6; 2,1.

Vologeses I, Byt. 2, 19 n.

Vorifibarst, region, Bd. 5, 8, 9; 11,
3, 43 25, 10; 29,1; Byt. 3,


47

Vortigarst, region, Bd. 5, 8, 9; 11,
3, 4G) 20; 10 e 20 tse byt.
476


Walking with one boot, Bd. 28, 13;
Sl. 4, 8 n, (12.)
— without boots, Sl. 4, 12n; 10,


12.
Washing the face, SI. 12, 21.
—the hands, Sl. 7, 2, 7; before
sleep, Sl]. 10, 38.
Weeks, SI. 23, 4 n.
Well-water unclean at night, Sl. 12,


sie

Westergaard, Professor, Int. 20n,
25, 28N, 37-39, 41, 48, 71.

Wife to worship with her husband,
Sl. 12, 30.

Windischmann, Int. 25, 26.

Winter, Bd. 25, 4, 5, 7, 8, 10-13,
15-17, 19, 20; 28, 1.

Wisdom, like fire, Sl. 20, 2; effect
on the mind, Sl. 20, 3.

Wives, five kinds, Bd. 82, 6n.

Woman, after child-birth, Sl. 3y15;
menstruous, SI. 2, 17, 96; 8,
I-14, 16-22, 25-35; 8, 12; 10,
39; 12, 4n; miscarriage, SI. 3,
15, 22, 23; pregnant, Sl. 2, 6,
1053; 8, 22; 10, 4, 10, 20; 12,
Il, 133 priest, Sl. 10, 35.

Worship, four kinds, Sl. 9, 9, 10; of
God, Sl. 8, 22, 23; 10, 3, 5;
19, 7; form of, Sl; 12, 1.

Worthy of death, Bd. 80, 16; SI. 2,
9, (40,) 63, 64, 76, 81, 82, 85,
105, 107, 108; 8, 2, 4, 5,7, 9,
13, 18, 21, 235 10, 19; 15, 22,
22 el eal

Wrath, race of, Byt. 2, 22, 24, 25,
36; 3, 1, 6, 10,13, 213. — with
infuriate spear, Byt. 2, 36; 3,
24, 30,35. See Aéshm, Khashm.


Xerxes, Bd. 34, 8 n.


Yadkar-i Zartran, book, Byt. 2, 49n.

Yamdabust, man, Bd. 29, 5.

Yanghad, man, Bd, 31, 2. See Ayan-
ghad.


Ya-skyaothana ha, Sl. 18, 10, 14.

Yasna, ritual, Byt. 2, 59n; SI. 9,
PIN, Tans 13) ry IE Gare
oldest MSS. of, Int. 21; chap-
ters cited, SI]. 13, 1, 2n, 4, 6-
12, 16-23, 25, 27-33, 35 375 38,
41-45, 47, 49-51; of seven ch.,
Sl. 18, on, 15-25, 50N, 51.

Yast, ritual, Sl. 12, 1, 30; 16, (63)
17, 5.n.

Yast6frid, rite, Sl. 5, 2, 6. See
Afst6frid.

Yat''sin, Slol, 1, 23 2y sry ieee
16, 5.

Yatha-ahti-vairy6 formula, Bd. 1,
(21;) Zs. 1, (19 n;) 2, 8; S110,
73 12, 18, 32; 18,235 recita-
tions of, Sl. 19, 1-15.

Yatha-dis ha, SI. 18, 8, 14.

Yawning, cause of, SI]. 12, 32.

Yazd, town, SI. 21, on, 2n.

Yazdakard, king, Int. 42; Bd. 33, -
tin; 34,9n; Byt. 3, 11n.

Yazdan, see Angels, God.

— airikht, man, Bd. 81, 19.

— sarad, man, Bd. 81, 19.

Yazisn, rite, Bd. 2, 9; 30, 25; SI.
8, 35n; 138,1n; 17, 3,5. See
also Ceremonial.

Year, solar, Bd. 25, 1, 21; lunar,
Bd. 25, 18, 19.

Yénhé-hatam formula, Byt.2, (64n;)
SI. 10, 5n; 18, 24.

Yézi-adais ha, Sl. 18, 33. :

Yim, king, Bd. 12, 20; 17,5; 23,
1; 31, 3-5, 6n, 7, 8; 82,10;
34, 4; Sl. 10, 28n; his en-
closure, Bd. 19, 16; 24, 11;
29, 4, 5,14; 32,5; Byt. 3,


55.

Yimak, queen, Bd. 28,1; 31, 4.

Yimakan m., Bd. 29, 14.

Ydgést, meas., Bd. 14, 28; 26, (rn.)

Yfidan-Yim, man, Int. 42, 46, 47,
64; Bd. 38, ron, 11; Zs. 1, 0.

Ytinan, see Greeks,


Zab, king, Bd. 81, 23 n.

—r., Bd. 20, 25 n.

Zadsam, man, Bd. 31, r4n.

Zad-sparam, priest, Int. 38, 42, 46-
49; Bd. 38, 10n, 11; Zs. 1, 0,
19n; 2,6n; 4,1n; 5, 4n,
5n; 6, 20n; 9,1n, 22n; 10,
5n; 11, 10n; Byt. 2, 3n; SI.
13, 50n.


INDEX.


433


rec eT Re An a eg ST RS ee a eg i


Zaésm, man, Bd. 31, 14.

Zagh, man, Bd. 33, 5

Zagros m., Bd. 12, cre

Zahdvayi r., Bd. 20, 25.

Zainigav, man, Bd, 31, 6.

Zairis, eo Bdmelwe2 7s 26.1 i
30, 29

Zairivairi, prince, ee ae, 29.

Zal, man, Bd. 31,

ae angel, Be 1, 243 Sl. 22,
2


Wee
on (com), ae (Fo) er) Byti 1,


Eoin

Zand aks book. Int. 2o°-bd. 1, 1:
Zs, 9, 1n.

Zandik, sect, Sl. 6, 7.

Zaothra, Ay., Sl. 2,43n. See Holy-
water.

Zarafsan r., Bd. 20, r9n.

Zarah sea, Bd. 18, 16 n.

Zaratist, apostle, Bd. 4, 2n; 17, 8;
21,3; 24, 1,15; Zs. 11, ton;
Byt. 1, 7n; 2, 4-7, 9; SI. 1,
ans) 6, 15 10; 25, 28ns chief,
Bd. 29, 2; his family, Bd. 20,

2; 29, 5; 32, 1-10; Byt. 3,
13, 47, 48; Sl. 10, 4, 21n; 18,
22; his guardian spirit, Bd. 4,
4; Sl. 11, 4; his millennium,
Bd. 34, 9n; Byt. 1,5; 2, 22,
24, 31, 41; 8,11, 43N, 440;
attacked by demons, Sl. 10, 4;
12, 3n, 11; addresses Atihar-
mazd, Bd. 30, 4; Byt. 1, 1, 2;
2, 1,12, 23, 573 3, 1,12; Sl.
125/29; 15; 1,33 17,1, 153 ad=
dressed by Aéharmazd, Byt. 2,
5Semoy its) ol O, 5 >) LO; 20);


[5]


12, 32; 15, 30; called righteous,
Byt. 2, 11, 24, 41, 62; called
the Spitaman, Byt. 1, 3,5; 2,
3, 4, 15, 22, 25, 28, 30, 31, 36,
44, 54-56, 63; 3, 3, 4, 8-10, 13,
14, 23, 24, 43, 50; SI.9,14; 1,
4; 12, 23; 15, 4.

Zarattst, man, Bd. 33, 11.

Zaratistréttim, Bd. 24,1. See also
Supreme high-priest or Zara-
tiist.

Zardahim, title, Bd. 31, 4.

Zarid m., Bd. 12, 2, 10n.

Zarin m., Bd. 12, 29, 39-

Zarinmand lake, Bd. 22,1, 6; spring,
Bd. 20, 34.

Zarir, man, Bd. 81, 30;
prince, Bd. 31, 29.
Zarman, demon, Bd. 28, 23.

Zav, king, Bd. 31, 23 n.
Zavarah, man, Bd. 31, 41n.
ZAavulistan, land, Byt. 3, 13 n.

Zend r., Bd. 20, 15.

Zendah r., Bd. 20, 15 n.

Zisak, man, Bd. 32, rn.

Zismand r., Bd. 20, 7, 19.

Ziyanak, woman, Bd. 31, 4.

Zob, king, Bd. 34, 6. See Afiz6bd.
Zobara- vahman, bird, Bd. 19, 19.
Zodiacal signs, Bd. 2, 2; Sl. 21, 2 2a Tie
Zohab, land, Bd. 20, 25 n.

Zohar, see Holy-water.

Zondak r., Bd. 20, 7, 15 n.

Zota (priest), Bd. 30, 30.

Zravad, place, Bd. 12, 35.
Zravakad, place, Bd. 12, 35.
Zrvana, Av., Zs. 1, 24 n.

Ziisak, man, Bd. 31, 14.


33, 4;


Ft


ERRATA.


P. 133, note 6, for ‘daughter’ read ‘ grand-daughter.’

P. 161, note 4, for ‘Dad-sparam’ read ‘ Zad-sparam;’ also in p. 167,
note 5; p. 168, note 2; p.177, note 3; p. 182, note 1; p. 184,
note 1.

P. 199, note 6, for ‘ Shapiir I’ read ‘Shapar II.’


435


OF ORIENTAL ALPHABETS.


TRANSLITERATION


¢


° oeee @ ST[VSB NT os 21
On iter) oF yb GO 4,0 6 00 0 Oo mnie 6 ol


kK
va
rr) R bk Sap OL0 b uae [oe eee ss Faker = UINaTT Gl
° SB i ioe to yy ee vier |) © 6 (9) (ove = © eyeatdse 6G TI
milecesl gy fecclec ccs ee © smuay, eT
(‘O29 ‘sote}eTed)
eeieoyIpoul seyeimyyny


ee e : e oe eo ome: oa etae eo, 0; an 6 oe @ ee ee Y, oo @ eo 8 8 snyeouly STU9T 66 ZI
° u = 2 Sue nrot iemopkoke reel |e tttetarstl |teqnon (elt 1, - + +] +++ © gngeouy radse 66 Il
et ig ne a 2 eee CA ects ee eo | of eee oe | oe 8 U, + 9 © sifgoney stuey 6 Ol
oho ye U =) > eo 8 6 oe ee oe « oe © eo eo 8 q, Ca te sljeoney godse 6é 6
ee @ x \ | 2 e@ eo 0© @ © oe 6 e- & o © oe e@ é SS We Neat * cee us TULOT 66 8
sy ‘Y uu g Q ie (ayA)@ PY SOs a Goo 6 y see ee + godse snquidg 2


Se OS0n eae a ee ‘S Suess eas cate SU), Sete tt etch een eee Nag


Sa gik d ra OQ frre] rece fers ]eceeden. b ss se 2 2 strerqei-ommyyny G
Co SM Fea fs ea |e mea ata nn TN (0h ate -


bh
a) le Sf 9218 85) Fe wy re & act SE ce ten ee eee Se BIS TNS
is) a ee acre ay Crees 11 wEej16) a0 (eh ene eyerdse 66 Z
G Yo


>| Cc @ @ Geo Oo caliec feo Y DeE ESD COTS Oto Sten py a
“soTeiInigny
“sSeID IIT } “SSRI IL | “SSFID I
‘asouryD | “Morqay | ‘oIqeay | ‘ueIsIOg | ‘TAdTYOd “pueZ “yaysueg | © ———______-_—________1 ‘SLNVNOSNOD


“LOaVHdT¥Y AUNVNOISSIN


Fi2


“LSVY AHL 40 SMOOG GaAyOVS AHL 4O
SNOLLVISNVY], HHL YO GALMOGV SLAIVHdATVY TVINAIYQ) 40 NOILVUALIISNVY T,


TRANSLITERATION OF ORIENTAL ALPHABETS


436


K
Z 4 G 5 eee re ee Zz ee
eee a eee e ° ‘eee oe © rene: SP) S oe © 2 Sly 8! e718
8 Q a) (py co a BR oe eoelee o s $i 9
eee oe e o ee ee eee > e© 8 © eee 1 oe Cdicall eae
oe © eo 8 8 oe e eo ee ee oe 8 @ ce oo ee i] Le Sie
I G 0 CG VEC fe Tec (2) rete yh oe e I oe
u in ‘ei mo ( f b oO eFemie arene. ae U PO
eee Cy ea ¢ . eo e oe ee oo e Ha oe @ oo # On
eo @ ic e 8 © ee @ oo @ > R oe e 6 oe @ up sigs
chenis t ec e C¢ Gar d» at wares li ease mre p oe
t Tok Wie ee @ Oo Oa eee oe @ @ eo @ © HL ie), 8) 6 oee KM
uy :


Z ol € ce oe (G ) op eee eee Zz olen ye oe
carene, ‘kab oD a O- Ow b ce ee s ee 8 oe
eo ee ee Oy ee eee eee ee ee e 0. 18 ee @ © (4) oe o


init.


: 3 4 G xy bk oe eelorve Kk oe


‘sSeID III | ‘SSeID IL] “SSPIDT


‘gsauryd | ‘moaqayy | ‘aqery | ‘ueistog | "M2a1qed “pueZ ‘yaysues | © —$—__—_—"
x *“LHAVHd1IV AUVNOISSIN


‘+ gsnummodse pe


] snutuodse “ 9g
Ce De) ea sIuoy ce GE
DORON aden 1s (31a £E
see e+ 7 aodse snquidg ¢¢


* °° 2 sijou . a
‘+ T siqjour ss 1é
cee eee SITBDOATUIGG OS
toe eee ee + osreseN 6S
c++ + + eneriqisse “ 92
ose conpndes %' 7¢
sete eee ees arpa 92
+e + + eqerigisse “ 6g
OOO TO Oteiiaatlse 2 aa


'


pe Nene ens re mch SStULO eG


*‘sopejued
SNYRIIGISSe SIUST We Zs
snyertqisse tadse $6 LZ
oo ef @ @ @ study iT7 0Z


wsaeee [reer [wes | (#). [°° * see ee ee © sodse snqaidg 6


coeeeees STI[BOOATUIOS, 8st


“(panuzzuor)
SLNVNOSNOOD


(ead ie een ies el eRe eS A ae


437


FOR THE SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST.


orci
oo 8
Bs
A
w
eaten


te
CG?
aba


i


oo e@ © @


oeoeee


°
°
.
e


sees + eSrestA Bo
*o° * *ereasnuy gg
er oeree ae At)G
°° gadse snyidg 9¢


eqyeudse <6 cc


“+ * SsiITBOOATUIEg FG
see + + siesen eg
°° *eullssinuay, ZS
* eqordse ce TS
reese amon og
* eyerdse  ‘ 6P
sss se smuay, gp
*‘SOTCIQ BT


ee eo STUOT ce LP
°° sadse snyiadg oF


VOUYLLOBIP the CP
* * eqvoldy ce PP


“°° si7eooAIMIEg EF
oee ee @ ST[BSe NT oV
*-ewadse “ [FP
coe eo eo eIpefy OP
Cr AEGIS, = OFT ae
eo ee o9 sinua], 8s


(‘029 ‘soyensutt)
OV}VOUIpou soTeyuog


TRANSLITERATION OF ORIENTAL ALPHABETS.


38


<O cm


3


20


*asauly


"MO1G3H


=
CR
“9


‘oiqeay


Go x)
=
a)
enieine
eo ee
(To at
aon)
-o
ehreie
——
6
Et


“URISIO


(
eG
(
&
vr
glut or
“ag (
Ws[UIed


“puss


RY ch


BOR wor iP Rm &


G 450
eile se
‘yaysues


loader eoxte 0
a Cortef com eames n
5. 6 a |pues-0 I
ov rotteiten| me emeace ra
ree eles + I(ng)no
se ee} ee © |(ng) na


sel (m) 1
cere! (a) | (te) 9
eer sy, 6) vets Peres! te: 9
ee e@ « (2) n
qa
Pee: een ba
eseolecacee to
eRe eines 7
rene nan See
eal le I
EE PEO | ae
gare ey See
eRe ea eee sala
eaten atl a's
ere ees


eo eo ce oe @ 0


ejoedy SITerqel-ornzyny) 1Z


* eBjoedy SITRIqey


‘9 + ejoeaz sITeqeleg


“ * eloely sijeinggnsy


ce


66


ce


6s


siverqet-oinyjns snsuoyyydiq


at ele ie ‘esuoy “6


* °° © stAodq SITBIqe[-01n4ynx


(73


66


ce


ce


sipeyered-oanqyns snSuoyyydiq


52, a eSU0}
sTAomq sipeyeed-oinyqyny
eee ee eSU0T «<6


°


"SSUID LIT | ‘sseID IT | “SSeID I
——E ——J
“LAGVHd1V AUVNOISSIN


6e


6 AEA ts AAS |
esUuol is
staodq sIpensury
OS etuia, A
* SIAorq sIpejuaqg
* @S5u0, ra
* slAdIq SITeye[eq
eSU0T .
STAOIQ STTeINgyN4)
SUREMEST | és
sreyeped-osusieT
so °° sipeqqnony


“STHMOA


96
G6
vG
&6
6G
16
06
6I
8I
21
9I
on
Fl
&T
ait


SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST


TRANSLATED BY VARIOUS ORIENTAL SCHOLARS


AND EDITED BY


HE RIGH b.HON,


F. MAX MULLER.


x's This Series ts published with the sanction and co-operation of the Secretary of
State for India in Council.


REPORT presented to the ACADEMIE DES INSCRIPTIONS, May 11,
1883, by M. ERNEST RENAN.


‘M. Renan présente trois nouveaux
volumes de la grande collection des
“Livres sacrés de l’Orient” (Sacred
Books of the East), que dirige 4 Oxford,
avec une si vaste érudition et une critique
si sfire, le savant associé de l’Académie
des Inscriptions, M. Max Miiller.... La
premiére série de ce beau recueil, com-
posée de 24 volumes, est presque achevée.
M. Max Miiller se propose d’en publier


une seconde, dont Vintérét historique et
religieux ne sera pas moindre. M. Max
Miiller a su se procurer la collaboration
des savans les plus éminens d’Europe et
d’Asie. L’Université d’Oxford, que cette
grande publication honore au plus haut
degré, doit tenir 4 continuer dans les plus
larges proportions une ceuvre aussi philo-
sophiquement con¢cue que savamment
exécutée.’


EXTRACT from the QUARTERLY REVIEW.


“We rejoice to notice that a second
series of these translations has been an-
nounced and has actually begun to appear.
The stones, at least, out of which a stately
edifice may hereafter arise, are here being
brought together. Prof. Max Miiller has
deserved well of scientific history. Not
a few minds owe to his enticing words
their first attraction to this branch of
study. But no work of his, not even the


great edition of the Rig-Veda, can com-
pare in importance or in usefulness with
this English translation of the Sacred
Books of the East, which has been devised
by his foresight, successfully brought so
far by his persuasive and organising
power, and will, we trust, by the assist-
ance of the distinguished scholars he has
gathered round him, be carried in due
time to a happy completion.’


Professor E. HARDY, Inaugural Lecture in the University of Freiburg, 1887.


‘Die allgemeine vergleichende Reli-
gionswissenschaft datirt von jenem gross-
artigen, in seiner Art einzig dastehenden
Unternehmen, zu welchem auf Anregung
Max Miillers im Jahre 1874 auf dem


internationalen Orientalistencongress in
London der Grundstein gelegt worden
war, die Ubersetzung der heiligen Biicher
des Ostens’ (the Sacred Books of the
Last).


The Hon. ALBERT S. G. CANNING, ‘Words on Existing Religions.’


‘The recent publication of the “ Sacred
Books of the East” in English is surely


a great event in the annals of theological
literature.’


Orford


pie tHE CLARENDON


PRESS


LONDON: HENRY FROWDE
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS WAREHOUSE, AMEN CORNER, E.C,


’


2 SACREDY BOOKS (OF THE. LAS Is


POURS TT <S Hn:


vou. I. The Upanishads.


Translated by F. Max Mirrer. Part I. The AAandogya-
upanishad, The Talavakara-upanishad, The Aitareya-drazyaka,
The Kaushitaki-brahmava-upanishad, and The Vagasaneyi-
samhita-upanishad. Second Edition. 8vo, cloth, 1os. 6d.


The Upanishads contain the philosophy of the Veda. They have
become the foundation of the later Veddénta doctrines, and indirectly
of Buddhism. Schopenhauer, speaking of the Upanishads, says:
‘In the whole world there ts no study so beneficial and so elevating
as that of the Upanishads. It has been the solace of my life, tt will
be the solace of my death.


[See also Vol. XV.]


von. 1. The Sacred Laws of the Aryas,
As taught in the Schools of Apastamba, Gautama, VAsish¢ha,
and Baudhayana. Translated by Grore Biurer. Part I.
Apastamba and Gautama. Second Edition. 8vo, cloth, 10s. 6d.
The Sacred Laws of thé Aryas contain the original treatises on
which the Laws of Manu and other lawgivers were founded.


[See also Vol. XIV.]


Vou. 111. The Sacred Books of China.
The Texts of Confucianism. Translated by James Lxcor.
Part I. The Sh King, The Religious Portions of the Shih
King, and The Hsiao King. 8vo, cloth, 12s. 6d.
Confucius was a collector of ancient traditions, not the founder of
a new religion. As he lived in the sixth and fifth centuries B.C.
his works are of unique interest for the study of LE thology.
[See also Vols. XVI, XXVII, XXVIII, XXXIX, and XL.]


Vou. Iv. The Zend-Avesta.


Translated by James DarmesteTER. Part I.. The Vendidad.
Second Edition. 8vo, cloth, 14s.


Lhe Zend-Avesta contains the relics of what was the religion of
Cyrus, Darius, and Xerxes, and, but for the battle of Marathon,


EDITED BY F. MAX MULLER. 3


might have become the religion of Europe. It forms to the present
day the sacred book of the Parsts, the so-called fire-worshippers.


[See also Vols. XXIII and XXXI1.]


von. V. Pahlavi Texts.
Translated by E. W. Wust. Part I. The Bundahis, Bahman
Yast, and Shayast la-shayast. 8v¥vo, cloth, 12s. 6d.


The Pahlavt Texts comprise the theological literature of the revival
of Zoroaster’s religion, beginning with the Sassanian dynasty. They
are important for a study of Gnosticism.

[See also Vols. XVIII, XXIV, XXXVII, and XLVIL]


Vous. VI awn IX. The Qur’én.
Parts land II. Translated by E.H. Parmer. 8vo, cloth, 21s.


This translation, carried out according to his own peculiar views
of the origin of the Qur'an, was the last great work of F. H. Palmer,
before he was murdered in Egypt.


vou. VII, The Institutes of Vishzu.
Translated by Jutius JoLty. 8vo, cloth, ros. 6d.


A collection of legal aphorisms, closely connected with one of the
oldest Vedic schools, the Kathas, but considerably added to tn later
time. Of importance for a critical study of the Laws of Manu. —


Vou. VitI. The Bhagavadgita, with The Sanatsugatiya,
and The Anugita.
Translated by KAsninArH Trimpax Tetane. Second Edzition.
8vo, cloth, ros. 6d,
The earliest philosophical and religious poem of India. It has been
paraphrased in Arnold’s ‘Song Celestial.’


vou. X. The Dhammapada,
Translated from Pali by F. Max Murer; and


The Sutta-Nipata,
Translated from Pali by V. Faussétt ; being Canonical Books
of the Buddhists. Second Edition. 8vo, cloth, 1os. 6d.


The Dhammapada contains the quintessence of Buddhist morality.
The Sutta-Nipdia gives the authentic teaching of Buddha on some
of the fundamental principles of religion.


4 SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST:


vou. XI. Buddhist Suttas.
Translated from Pali by T. W. Ruys Davins. 1. The Maha-
parinibbana Suttanta; 2. The Dhamma-Aakka-ppavattana
Sutta. 3. The Tevigga Suttanta; 4. The Akankheyya Sutta ;
5. The Ketokhila Sutta; 6. The Maha-sudassana Suttanta ;
7. The Sabbasava Sutta. 8vo, cloth, ros. 6d.


A collection of the most important religious, moral, and philosophical
discourses taken from the sacred canon of the Buddhisis.


Von. XII. The Satapatha-Brahmamza, according to the
Text of the MAdhyandina School.


Translated by Jutius Eecriine. Part I. Books I and H.
8vo, cloth, 12s. 6d.


A minute account of the sacrifictal ceremonies of the Vedic age.
It contains the earliest account of the Deluge in India.
[See also Vols. XXVI, XLI, XLIII, and XLIV.]


Vou. XIII. Vinaya Texts.
Translated from the Pali by T. W. Ruys Davips and HERMANN
OxpenBerG. Part I. The Patimokkha. The Mahavagga, I-IV.
8vo, cloth, ros. 6d.
The Vinaya Texts give for the first time a translation of the moral
code of the Buddhist religion as setiled tn the third century B.C.


[See also Vols. XVII and XX.]


vou. XIv. The Sacred Laws of the Aryas,
As taught in the Schools of Apastamba, Gautama, Vasish/ha,
and Baudhayana. ‘Translated by Grorc Biurer. Part I.
VAasishzha and Baudhayana. 8vo, cloth, ros. 6d.


vou. Xv. The Upanishads.
Translated by F. Max Murer. Part II. The Ka/fa-upanishad,
The Mumdaka-upanishad, The Taittirtyaka-upanishad, The
Brzhadaramyaka-upanishad, The Svet@svatara-upanishad, The


Pras#a-upanishad, and The Maitrayava-brahmava-upanishad.
8vo, cloth, ros. 6d.


vou. XvI. The Sacred Books of China.


The Texts of Confucianism. Translated by James Lrecr.
Part II. The Yi King. 8vo, cloth, ros. 6d.


[See also Vols. XX VII, XXVIII.]
Vou. XVII. Vinaya Texts.


Translated from the Pali by T. W. Ruys Davins and Herrmann
OxpenserG. PartII. The Mahavagga, V-X. The Kullavagga,
I-III. 8vo. cloth. ros. 6d.


EDITED BY F. MAX MULLER. 5


Vou. xviir. Pahlavi Texts.


Translated by E. W. West. Part II. The DA&distan-t Dtntk
and The Epistles of Manfiskthar. 8vo, cloth, 12s. 6d.


vou, XIX. The Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.
A Life of Buddha by Asvaghosha Bodhisattva, translated from
Sanskrit into Chinese by Dharmaraksha, a.p. 420, and from
Chinese into English by Samurt Brat. 8vo, cloth, ros. 6d.
This life of Buddha was translated from Sanskrit into Chinese,
A.D.420. It contains many legends, some of which show a certain
similarity to the Evangelium tnfantiae, &c.


Vou. XX. Vinaya Texts.


Translated from the Pali by T. W. Ruys Davips and Hermann


OrpenBerc. Part III. The Xullavagga, 1V-XII. 8vo, cloth,
ros. 6d,


Vou, XXI. The Saddharma-puzdarika ; or, The Lotus
of the True Law.


Translated by H. Kern. 8vo, cloth, ras. 6d.
‘ The Lotus of the true Law, a canonical book of the Northern
Buddhists, translated from Sanskrit. There ts a Chinese transla-
tion of this book which was finished as early as the year 286 A.D.


Vou, XXII. Gaina-Sitras.
Translated from Prakrit by Hermann Jacozr. Part I. The
Akaranhga-Stitra and The Kalpa-Sfitra. 8vo, cloth, ros. 6d.


The religion of the Gainas was founded by a contemporary of Buddha.
It still counts numerous adherents tn India, while there are no
Buddhists left in India proper.


[See Vol. XLV.]


Vou. Xx11I. The Zend-Avesta.


Translated by James DarmesTeTER. Part II. The Sirézahs,
Yasts, and Nyayis. 8vo, cloth, 10s. 6d.


Vou. XxIv. Pahlavi Texts.


Translated by E. W. West. Part III. Dtna-f Maindg-
Khirad, Sikand-gfimanik Vig4r, and Sad Dar. 8vo, cloth,
10s. 6d.


6 SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST:


SECOND SERIES.


vou, XXV. Manu.
Translated by Grore Bunter. 8vo, cloth, 21s.
This translation is founded on that. of Sir William Jones, which
has been carefully revised and corrected with the help of seven native
Commentaries. An Appendix contains all the quotations from Manu
which are found in the Hindu Law-books, translated for the use of
the Law Courts in India. Another Appendix gives a synopsis of
parallel passages from the six Dharma-sitras, the other Smriits,
the Upanishads, the Mahdbhdrata, §c.

Vou. Xxvi. The Satapatha-Brahmama.

Translated by Jutius Eccerine. Part Il. Books II and IV.
8vo, cloth, 12s. 6d.

Vous. XXVII anp XXVIII. The Sacred Books of China.
The Texts of Confucianism. Translated by James Lecce. Parts
IllandIV. The Li £7, or Collection of Treatises on the Rules
of Propriety, or Ceremonial Usages. 8vo, cloth, 25s.

Vou. xxix. The Gvzhya-Sitras, Rules of Vedic

Domestic Ceremonies.
Part I. Sankhayana, Asvalayana, Paraskara, Khadira. Trans-
lated by Hermann OLpDENBERG. 8vo, cloth, 12s. 6d.

von. xxx. The Gvhya-Sitras, Rules of Vedic

Domestic Ceremonies. ”
Part Il. Gobhila, Hirazyakesin, Apastamba. ‘Translated by
HERMANN OLDENBERG. Apastamba, Yag#ia-paribhash4-sfttras.
Translated by F. Max Mitier. 8vo, cloth, 12s. 6d.
These rules of Domestic Ceremonies describe the home life of the
ancient Aryas with a completeness and accuracy unmatched in any
other literature. Some of these rules have been incorporated in the
ancient Law-books.

Vou. XXxI. The Zend-Avesta.

Part I]. The Yasna, Visparad, Afrinagan, Gahs, and
Miscellaneous Fragments. ‘Translated by L. H. Mitrs. 8vo,
cloth, 12s. 6d.

vou, XXxII. Vedic Hymns.

Translated by F. Max Miter. Part I. 8vo, cloth, 18s. 6d.
[See also Vol. XLVI.]
vou. Xxx1II. The Minor Law-books.


Translated by Jurius Jorry. Part I. Né&rada, Brzhaspati.
8vo, cloth, ros. 6d.


EDITED BY F. MAX MULLER. ii


Vou. XXXIV. The Vedanta-Sitras, with the Com-
mentary by Sankara#arya. Part I.
Translated by G. TursautT. 8vo, cloth, 12s. 6d,
[See also Vol. XX XVIII. ]


Vous. XXXV anp XXXVI. The Questions of King
Milinda.
Translated from the Pali by T. W. Ruys— Davips.
Part I. 8vo, cloth, ros. 6d. Part II. 8vo, cloth, 12s. 6d.

Vou. XXXviI, Pahlavi Texts.

Translated by E. W. Wzst. Part IV. The Contents of the
Nasks, as stated in the Eighth and Ninth Books of the
Dinkard. 15s.

Vou. XXxvit1, The Vedanta-Sitras. Part II. 8vo,
cloth, with full Index to both Parts, ras. 6d.

VoLs. XXXIX awn XL. The Sacred Books of China.
The Texts of Taoism. Translated by James Lucer. 8vo,
cloth, 21s. :

Vou. XLI. The Satapatha- Brahmawa. Part III.
Translated by Jutius Eccetine. 8vo, cloth, 12s. 6d.


Vou. XLII. Hymns of the Atharva-veda.
Translated by M. Broomrietp. 8vo, cloth, 215.


VOL. XLII. The Satapatha-Brahmaza.
Translated by Jutrus Eccerinc. Part IV. Books VIII,
Xrand Deere Od:


vou. XLIv. The Satapatha-Brahmaza. Part V.
[Ln the Press.|


vou. XLV. The Gaina-Sitras.
Translated from Prakrzt, by Hermann Jacozr. Part Hl. The
Uttaradhyayana Sftra, The Sfitrakr7tanga Sfitra. 8vo, cloth,
12s. 6d.


Von. XLVI. Vedic Hymns. Part II. 8vo, cloth, 14s.


Vou. XLVII. Pahlavi Texts.
Translated by E. W. Wesr. Part V. Marvels of Zoroas-
trianism. 8s. 6d.


Vou. XLVIII. RamAanuga’s Sribhashya.
Translated by G. Turpaut. [Ln preparation.| —

Vou. XLIX. Buddhist Mahayana Texts. Buddha-
farita, translated by E. B. Cowetr. Sukhavatt-vytha, Vagrakkhe-
dika, &c., translated by F. Max Miirer. Amitayur-Dhyana-
Sfitra, translated by J. Taxaxusu. 8vo, cloth, 125. 6d.


8 RECENT ORIENTAL WORKS.


Anecdota Pvrontensta.
ARYAN SERIES.


Buddhist Texts from Fapan. 1, Vagrakkhedika ; The


Diamond-Cutter,
Edited by F. Max Mitrer, M.A. Small 4to, 35. 6d.
One of the most famous metaphysical treatises of the Mahayana Buddhists.
Buddhist Texts from Fapan. 1. Sukhavati-Vytha :
Description of Sukhévatt, the Land of Bliss.
Edited by F. Max Mtitrer, M.A., and Bunyiu Nanjio. With
two Appendices: (1) Text and Translation of Sanghavarman’s
Chinese Version of the Poetical Portions of the Sukhavatt-
Vytha ; (2) Sanskrit Text of the Smaller Sukhavati-Vyfha.
Small 4to, 7s. 6d.
The editio princeps of the Sacred Book of one of the largest and most


influential sects of Buddhism, numbering more than ten millions of followers
in Japan alone.


Buddhist Texts from Fapan. W1. The Ancient Palm-
Leaves containing the Prag#a-Paramita-Hrzdaya-
Sitra and the Ushnisha-Vigaya-Dharazi.

Edited by F. Max Miier, M.A., and Bunyru Nanjro, M.A.
With an Appendix by G. Biurer, C.1.E. With many Plates.
Small 4to, ros.

Contains facsimiles of the oldest Sanskrit MS, at present known.


Dharma-Samegraha, an Anczent Collection of Buddhist
Technical Terms.
Prepared for publication by Kenjru Kasawara, a Buddhist
Priest from Japan, and, after his death, edited by F. Max
Miier and H. Wenzer. Small 4to, 7s. 6d.
Katyayana’s Sarvanukramami of the Azgveda.
With “Extracts from Shadgurusishya’s Commentary entitled
Vedarthadipika. Edited by A. A. Macponetz, M.A., Ph.D. 16s.
The Mantrapatha, or the Prayer Book of the Apa-
stambins.


Edited, together with the Commentary of Haradatta, and
translated by M. Winternitz, Ph.D. rst Part. Introduc-
tion, Sanskrit Text, Varietas Lectionis, and Appendices.
Small quarto, ros. 6d.


Orford
AT THE CLARENDON PRESS


LONDON: HENRY FROWDE
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS WAREHOUSE, AMEN CORNER, E.C.


Gaiversiry gf pouthern Califesnds


< AT,
"3 ;
Lety i 7
a E 4 27
a
: A
2) ’
Ly = : -
5 on A
~ A fs
. ny - ~
;
ay
a,
Ti : a oo ah 1 '
= i .
1 ‘ : av ‘
0 4 3
: ~ ;
7
= ; 2
7: a . ¥
aa ats 6


—_— ET
BL


- 1ol
fe, Do.
ef


iy


e


a


THEOLOGY LIBRARY
SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY AT CLAREMONT
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA


AMIE Sap eS. <


mere vig genie permeate nt Malan san
y rere °
Nanton Gane venta eoa anos


cae
