Pahlavi Texts, Vol. 2 (SBE 18)
==============================
Pahlavi Texts, Vol. 2 (Sacred Books of the East 18), translated by E. W. West (Oxford, 1882), public domain. West's rendering of the Dadistan-i Dinik and the Epistles of Manushchihar. Scan via Internet Archive.

ogy at


iui


rit


011436941


The Library


SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY
AT CLAREMONT


WEST FOOTHILL AT COLLEGE AVENUE
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA


LIBRARY
SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA SCHOOL


OF THEOLOGY
CLAREMONT, CALIF.


THE


pack eED- BOOKS OF THE. EAST


[18] a


London


HENRY FROWDE


OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS WAREHOUSE


7 PATERNOSTER ROW


THE


SACRED BOUKS.OF THE EASE


TRANSLATED
BY VARIOUS ORIENTAL SCHOLARS


AND EDITED BY


F. MAX MULLER


VOL. XVIII


Orford
AT THE CLARENDON PRESS


1882


[ All rights reserved |


Poeteavi TRXTS


TRANSLATED BY \ Ne


SA WW SE


PART II


THE DADISTAN-f DINiK AND THE EPISTLES
OF MANUSKIHAR


@rford
AT THE CLARENDON PRESS


1882


[ Al rights reserved |


University ot doutnern Caliternis


Ree. 290 Si2*
Vt


SENSE NALS.


INTRODUCTION.


. General Remarks .
. The Dadistan-? Dinik 5
. The Epistles of Manfiséthar .


. The Appendix 5 ; : : 2 « - REV
bbreviations used in this reer


TRANSLATIONS.


DApiIsTAn-? Dinix


1. Introductory


no


Or AN Pw


Io.
II.


12.


ES.


14.


15.


16.


. Why a righteous man is better en all ees apeonal


or worldly


. Why a righteous man is Baad. ae Boy he snoald act .


Why a righteous man is great


. How temporal distress is to be regarded


Why the good suffer more than the bad in this mond
Why we are created, and what we ought to do


. Whether good works done for the dead differ in steer


from those ordered or done by themselves


. How far they differ


The growth of good works aang life

Whether the growth of a good work be as eoumondable
as the original good work

Whether it eradicates sin equally well

Whether one is made responsible for all his sins ae
good works separately at the last account, or only for
their balance

The angels who take account bE sin fae good aatke: ead
how sinners are punished . : : ‘

The exposure of a corpse does not occasion the Gifal
departure of life, andis mefitorious

Whether the soul be aware of, or disturbed by, hee cor Se
being gnawed . ; ; 3 3 3 3 F


PAGE

Xili
XXil
XXV


1 XK


II


T5
20
22


23
25


26
28


29
30
30
31
32
34


36


Vill


CHAP.
14.
18,


IQ.
20,
21.


22.
23.
24.
25.
26.


2m:
28,


29.
30.


aur
2,


33:
34:


36.
37°
33.
39-


40.


Al.
42.


CONTENTS.


The good works of him who saves others from apostasy


PAGE


Reasons for the exposure of corpses 38
How the corpse and bones are to be disposed of 43
Whether departed souls can see Atharmagdand Aharman 44
Where the souls of the righteous and wicked go 46
The Daitih peak, the Xinvad bridge, and the two pat
of departed souls 47
Whether the spirits are distressed aha a righteous: man dies 50
How the life departs from the body 5I
Where a righteous soul stays for the first dives nies
after death, and what it does next ; 53
Where a wicked soul stays for the first three ve ae
death, and what it) does next 55
The nature of heaven and its pleasures . 56
The nature of hell and its punishments . By
Why ceremonies in honour of Srdésh are oma for
the three days after a death 58
Why Srdésh must be reverenced separately from ethos apes 60
Why three sacred cakes are consecrated at dawn after the
third night from a death 61
How a righteous soul goes to heaven, and what it fae
and does there 63
How a wicked soul goes to hell, aaa what it fina ae
suffers there ‘ 70
The position and subdivigions of hell 44
The two ways from the Daitih peak ; that of the ighteou
to heaven, and that of the wicked to hell 16
. The continuance of mankind in the world till the resur-
rection 76
The preparers of the renovation oe the universe 17
The contest of the good and evil spirits from the freshen
till the resurrection, and the condition of creation after
the resurrection : 7 60
The effect of doing more oecd oie then are eee
for attaining to the supreme heaven . . 120
Reasons for wearing the sacred thread-girdle . 522
On the sacred shirt and thread-girdle, grace before and
_ after eating, and cleansing the mouth before the after-
grace 133
The sin of apostasy, and hoy to atone fe it - 136


139


CONTENTS. 1x
CHAP, PAGE
43. The distance at which the fire can be addressed, the use
of a lamp, and the proper order of the propitiatory
dedications, when consecrating a sacred cake . Pag ss
44. Whether a skilful priest who is employed to perform
ceremonies, but is not officially the priest of the dis-
trict, should be paid a regular stipend. ; ees
45. The separate duties of priests and disciples . i 151
46. When a priest can abandon the gales to obtain a
livelihood = ' 4 153
47. Whether a priest who ars the Ayests or one aie
understands the commentary, be more entitled to the
foremost place at a sacred feast 155
48. The advantage and proper mode of celebrating the
ceremonial . : . 159
49. Whether it be lawful to bon com and ve it fone so as
to raise the price for the sake of profit . 174
50. Whether it be lawful to sell wine to foreigners and infidels 176
51. The sin of drunkenness, and what constitutes immoderate
drinking ; : 178
52. Whether a man who poe to aces arheat ina ont
and takes a deposit, is bound to deliver the wheat if
its market-price has risen enormously . - 180
53. Whether it be lawful to sell cattle to those of a different
religion . : 2 : , : 182
54. Whether a man without a son can give away his pro-
perty to one daughter on his death-bed; the laws of
inheritance, and when an sis a son must be ap-
pointed, in such acase . 5 Ving Bie:
55. Whose duty it is to order the ceremonies ater a aie 187
56. The laws of adoption and family-guardianship 188
57. Those who are fit, or unfit, for eae 190
58. The three kinds of adoption Igl
59. The least amount of property that Peatces the peti
ment of an adopted son : ° ° Preah Gp
60. The sin of not appointing an adopted son, or of saaiak:
ing a dishonest one : ‘ 192
61. The merit and demerit of family- Sater esthip 193
62. The laws of inheritance : - 194
63. Whether it be lawful to seize Biepeny Nee foreigners
and infidels . . : : . : . « 196


x


CONTENTS.


ate ee a es ee ee eee


CHAP.


64.


65.
66.


67.
68.
69.
40.
Vee


42.


73.
14:
15.


76;
77:
78.


79:


8o.
81.
82.


83.


8a.
86.


Sy.
88.


89.
go.


gl.
92.


The origin of Gdyémard, Mashy4ih, and Mashyayéih .

The origin of next-of-kin marriage -

Regarding the cost of religious rites, and wtedies a sckest S
fees can be reduced when others will take less .

The cause of the rainbow ;

The cause of the phases of the moon .

The cause of eclipses

The causes of river-beds

What things ——— through destiny, aad had dead
exertion . :

The seven heinous sinners, an the ecemiy of avoiding
him who commits unnatural intercourse . :

Whether the stench of such intercourse reaches the a 5

Whether that stench disturbs the archangels

Whether the angels raise such a sinner from the dead at
the resurrection

Whether it be a good notes to kill San a sinner

Why such intercourse is a heinous sin .

Why adultery is heinous, and how one can atone fos bie

The sin of not repeating the full grace before drinking
(when one is able to do so), and how one can atone
for it : ; : :

Regarding him who ae not order ceremonies

About the ceremonies for the living soul

About him who pays for ceremonies and him who ile:
the money without performing them :

Whether a priest must undertake all religious rites


. Whether gifts to the priesthood for ceremonies can be


diminished or increased .

The advantages of increasing such gifts

The harm of diminishing such gifts

Why it is good to give such gifts

About the cost of religious rites in Pars

Whether when a man has once resolved to go into
Pars, with gifts for the priesthood, it be lawful for
him to send another man with the gifts


The seven immortal rulers in the region of Kiwanteas


before the coming of the good religion
The nature and material of the sky é
The course and benefit of the water of Arocasean


PAGE
197
199


201
210
210
212
213


214


216
220
221


g22
223
224
227


233
237
237


242
244


245
246
248
249
250


254
255


259
262


\
\


CONTENTS. X1
aes PAGE
93- Tisare s seizing of water from the ocean to rain it upon
the earth, and his conflict with Apaésh 264
94. Conclusion ‘: 269 _
Epistles oF MAnOskigaR «wwe
Epistte I. To the good people of Sirkan.

1. Introductory compliments, acknowledging oe of a
complaining epistle . . ; : 279

2. Deploring the false opinions in circulation, owing to the
fiend, about the purification ceremonies . : =. 202

3. Excusing any defects in this epistle for various reasons
detailed : - : : . 286

‘4. Deprecating the disuse of dh Bareehnitih ceremony, as

decreed by his brother; such disuse being contrary
to scripture and the commentaries . : - 202

5. Alluding to the one-sided view of the opinions of the
commentators adopted by the decree they had sent . 298

6. Discussing the different statements of the commentators
as to the number of purifiers and washings. AwSOr

4. Discussing the proper quantities of a to be used,
and the 300 pebbles . ° ° 304

8. Regarding the stirring up of the bull’s urine when Bae
as mentioned in the Sakadim Nask 309

g. Deciding that the commentary which teaches the most

efficient mode of purification is to be followed, when
there are no special reasons for acting otherwise . 312

10. Reserving other matters for special instructions to the

priests, but warning them not to obey the decree now
denounced . - “ ° eg kG

11. Arranging for the Satrceeaent oi his decision, an he

can write further, or come himself; and concluding
with benediction and date ‘ : 4 : 320

EpistLe II. To his brother, Zad-sparam.

1. Acknowledging receipt of a former epistle, and announc-

ing the arrival of complaints about his brother’s
reprehensible decree. ‘ . - 324

2. Disapproving of the decree and its ode of eens with

the commentaries, whose exact agreement is as un-

likely as the simultaneous occurrence of several
particular conjunctions of the planets . : 1° SSF


CONTENTS.


. Exhorting him not to seek for new rules, but to adhere


strictly to the old customs ° : :


. Reasserting his opinions, and protesting setae the


notion that the decree was in accordance with the
practice of all the purifiers in Iran . i :


. Commenting upon the secrecy with which the seca


had been prepared, and the evil consequences re-
sulting from it . : . °


. Persuading him to remain vende in the faith, arid


threatening him if he should not . : : :


. Explaining that he had previously written to Sirkan, and


would shortly come there himself; but ordering the
appointment of proper purifiers . ° °


. Mentioning his general epistle to all of the good eligi


in Iran, and describing the evil consequences of
continued disobedience, including the possibility of
his own retreat to foreign lands : : °


. Giving further instructions for satisfying the discontented,


and opposing the heterodox; and concluding with-
out date :


Eristie III. To all of the good religion in Iran. For-
bidding the substitution of a fifteenfold washing for the


Bareshnim ceremony; and dated a.y. 250 (A.D. 881) .


I,
II.
III.
IV.
V.


APPENDIX ~ 4% oe ek
Legends relating to KeresAsp
The Nirang-i Kustt : : :
The meaning of Khvétttk-das °. :
The Bareshnfim ceremony .

Finding a corpse in the wilderness


INDEX : : 2
CORRECTIONS . : "|


Transliteration of Oriental Alphabets adopted for the


Translations of the Sacred Books of the East a


PAGE


336


341


343


348


35°


352


354


359


367
369
383
389
431
455


459
479


481


INTRODUCTION.


I. GENERAL REMARKS.


THE Pahlavi texts selected for translation in this volume
are distinguished from all others by the peculiarity that both
the name and station of their author and the time in which
he lived are distinctly recorded.

His name, Mantskihar, son of Yida4n-Yim (or Gdsn-
dam), is mentioned in each of the headings and colophons
to the Dadistan-i Dinitk and the three Epistles attributed to
him. He is styled simply aérpat, or ‘priest,’ in the head-
ings of Eps. I and II, and aérpat khtd4i, or ‘priestly
lordship, in that of Ep. III; but he is called the rad,
‘pontiff, or executive high-priest, of Pars and Kirmdan,
and the farmadar, ‘director,’ of the profession of priests,
in the colophons to Dd. and Ep. II; and we learn from
Dd. XLV, 5 that the farm4dar was also the pes fp4i, or
‘leader’ of the religion, the supreme high-priest of the
Mazda-worshipping faith.

Regarding his family we learn, from Ep. I, iii, 10, vii, 5,
that his father, Yidan-Yim, son of Shahpthar, had been
the leader of the religion before him; and his own suc-
cession to this dignity indicates that he was the eldest
surviving son of his father, who, in his declining years,
seems to have been assisted by his advice (Ep. I, iii, 11).
We also learn, from the heading of his second epistle, that
Zad-sparam was his brother, and this is confirmed by the
language used in Ep. II, vi, 1, ix, 6, and by Zad-sparam
being a son of the same father (Eps. I, heading, III, 2);
that he was a younger brother appears from the general
tone of authority over him adopted by Manfsfihar in his
epistles. Shortly before these epistles were written, Zad-
sparam appears to have been at Sarakhs (Ep. II, v, 3), in


XIV PAHLAVI TEXTS.

EE ce es et Tp hg ee ee eee
the extreme north-east of Khurdsan, where he probably _
came in contact with the Tughazghuz (Ep. II, i, 12) and
adopted some of their heretical opinions, and whence he
may have travelled through Nivshahpthar (Ep. II, i, 2,
note) and Shiraz (Ep. II, v, 3, 4) on his way to Sirkan to
take up his appointment as high-priest of the south (Eps. I,
heading, II, i, 4, v, 9, vii, 1, viii, 1, Zs. I, 0). Soon after his
arrival at Sirkan he issued a decree, regarding the cere-
monies of purification, which led to complaints from the
people of that place, and compelled his brother to interfere
by writing epistles, threatening him with deprivation of
office (Ep. I, xi, 7) and the fate of a heretic (Eps. I, viii, 2, 3,
III, 17-19). That Zad-sparam finally submitted, so far as
not to be deprived of his office, appears from his still
retaining his position in the south while writing his Selec-
tions (Zs. I, 0), which must have béen compiled at some
later period, free from the excitement of active and
hazardous controversy.

The age in which Mantsihar lived is decided by the
date attached to his third epistle, or public notification, to
the Mazda-worshippers of Iran; which date is the third
month of the year 250 of Yasdakard (Ep. III, 21), cor-
responding to the interval between the 14th June and 13th
July a.D. 881; at which time, we learn, he was an old man
(Ep. II, ix, 1), but not too old to travel (Eps. I, iii, 13, xi, 4,
II, v, 5, vi, 4, 6, vii, 3, viii, 4, 5):

His writings, therefore, represent the state of the Zoroas-
trian religion a thousand years ago; and it may be presumed,
from the importance and influentialness of his position, that
his representations can be implicitly relied upon. To detect
any differences there may be between the tenets and reli-
gious customs he describes, and those upheld by Zoroas-
trians of the present time, would require all the learning
and experience of a Parsi priest; but, so far as a European
can judge, from these writings and his own limited know-
ledge of existing religious customs among the Parsis, the
change has been less than in any other Ee of religion
during the same period.


The manuscripts containing the writings of Mants#har


INTRODUCTION. XV
nan ese as
are of two classes, one represented in Europe by the codex
No. 35 of the collection of Avesta and Pahlavi manuscripts
in the University Library at Kopenhagen, the other repre-
sented by No. 14 of the Haug Collection of similar
manuscripts in the State Library at Munich, which two
manuscripts are called K35 and Mia, respectively, in this
volume. In the former of these classes, represented « by
K35, the Dadistan-i Dinik occupies the central third of the
codex ; being preceded by a nearly equal extent of other
miscellaneous religious writings of rather later date, resem-
bling a Pahlavi Rivayat; and being followed by a third
series of similar writings of about the same age and extent
as the Dadistan-i Dinik, which includes the Epistles of
Mantsfihar and the Selections of Zad-sparam. In the
latter class of manuscripts, from which M14 is descended,
the text of the Dadistan-i Dinik contains many variations
from that in the former class, as if it had been revised by
some one whose knowledge of Pahlavi was insufficient to
decipher difficult passages, and who had freely exercised
his editorial license in altering and mutilating the text to
suit his own limited comprehension of it.

The codex K35, which was brought from Persia by the
late Professor Westergaard in 1843, is one of the most impor-
tant manuscripts of the former class, and now consists of |
181 folios; but it is incomplete at both ends, having lost
seventy-one folios at the beginning and about thirty-five at
the end. It still includes, however, the whole of the
Dadistan-i Dinik and the Epistles of Mantiskihar; though
its date has been lost with its last folios. But this date can
be recovered from an old copy of this codex existing in India
(here called BK) and still containing a colophon, probably
copied from K351, which states that the manuscript was


1 One reason for supposing that this colophon was so copied is that K35
does not seem older than the date mentioned in it. Another reason is that
the loss of the end of this colophon in BK allows us to assume that it was .
followed by another colophon, as is often the case in copies of old MSS. A
colophon that extends to the end of the last folio of a manuscript can never be
safely assumed to belong to that manuscript, because it may have been followed
by others on further folios.


XV1 PAHLAVI TEXTS.


completed by Marzapan Frédtin Vahrém Ristim Bondar
Malka-mardan Din-ay4r, on the day Asman of the month
Amerédad A.Y. 941 (19th March, 1572), in the district of
the Dahikan in the land of Kirman. The end of this colo-
phon is lost with the last folio of BK, which renders it
possible that the last folio contained the further colophon
of this copy.

That BK is descended from K35 is proved by its con-
taining several false readings, which are clearly due to
mis-shapen letters and accidental marks in K35. And that
it was copied direct from that codex is proved by the last
words of thirty-two of its pages being marked with inter-
lined circles in K35, which circles must have been the
copyist’s marks for finding his place, when beginning a
fresh page after turning over his folios. This copy of K35
has lost many of its folios, in various parts, but most of the
missing text has been recently restored from the modern
manuscript J, mentioned below; there are still, however,
eleven folios of text missing, near the end of the codex,
part of which can be hereafter recovered from TK, de-
scribed below. The independent value of BK is that it
supplies the contents of the seventy-one folios lost at the
beginning of K35, and of about nineteen of the folios
missing at the end of that codex.

A third manuscript of the first class, which may be even
more important than K35, was brought to Bombay from
Persia about fifteen years ago, and belongs to Mr. Teh-
muras Dinshawji Anklesaria, of Bombay, but it has not
been available for settling the texts translated in this
volume. It is here called TK, and is described as still
consisting of 227 folios, though seventy folios are missing
at the beginning and about fourteen at the end. In its
present state, therefore, it must begin very near the same
place as K35, but it extends much further, so as even to
supply nearly half the contents of the eleven folios missing
from BK; it does not, however, include the contents of the
last three folios of BK. According to a colophon appended
in this manuscript to the ‘Sayings of Zad-sparam, son of
Yadan-Yim, about the formation of men out of body, life,


INTRODUCTION. XVil


and soul’ (see Zs. XI, 10, note), some copy of these ‘sayings’
was written by Gépatshah Ristém Bandar MalkA-mardan
in the land of Kirman. This Gopatshah was evidently a
brother of Vahrém, the grandfather of the Marzgapan who
wrote the colophon found in BK and supposed to have
been copied from K35 (see pp. xv, xvi). If, therefore, this
colophon in TK has not been copied from some older
MS., it would indicate that TK is two generations older
than K35.

A recent copy of TK exists in the library of the high-
priest of the Parsis in Bombay, to whom I am indebted for
the information that its text does not differ from that of
K35, at the two points (Dd. XCIII, 17 and Ep. III, 11)
where some omission of text may be suspected.

The manuscripts of the second class appear to be all
descended from an old, undated codex brought to Bombay
from Persia about sixty-five years ago!, and recently in
the library of Mr. Dhanjibhai Framji Patel of Bombay.
From what is stated, concerning the contents of this codex,
it appears to commence with about three-fourths of the
miscellaneous religious writings, found at the beginning of
BK; and these are followed by the altered text of the
Dadistan-i Dinik, as appears from the copies described
below, but how the codex concludes is not stated. It may,


-however, be supposed that it contains as much of the third


series of writings as is found in the manuscript J, a copy of
this codex which ends in Ep. II, vi, 2.

This manuscript J belongs to the library of Dastir
Jamaspji Minochiharji in Bombay; it commenced originally
at the same point as the codex just described, and, so far
as it has been examined, it contains the same altered text of
the Dadistan-i Dinik. There is, therefore little doubt that
it was originally copied from that codex, but a considerable


1 There is some doubt about this period. Dasttir Peshotanji mentions thirty
or forty years. but in the MS. J, which appears to have been copied chiefly from
this codex in Bombay, the date noted by the copyist of the older part of that
MS. is ‘the day Rashn of the month Khfirdad, a.y. 1188’ (21st December
1818, according to the calendar of the Indian Parsis), showing that the codex
must have been at least sixty-four years in Bombay,


[18] b


XVIiil PAHLAVI TEXTS.


portion of the additional matter at the beginning of BK
has been prefixed to it at a later date. The oldest portion
of this copy, extending to Ep. I, vii, 4, bears a date corres-
ponding to 21st December 1818; the date of a further
portion, extending to Ep. II, vi, 2, corresponds to 12th
February 1841; and a third portion copied from BK, at the
beginning of the manuscript, is still more recent.

Another copy of this codex, or of the Dadistan-i Dinik
contained in it, exists in the library of the high-priest of
the Parsis in Bombay; and from this copy the text of the
Dadistan-i Dinik contained in M14 was transcribed.

This latter manuscript consists of two volumes, written
in 1865 and 1868, respectively ; the first volume containing
Chaps. I, 1-XX XVII, 9, and the second volume Chaps.
XXXVI, 1-XCIV, 15 of the altered text of the Dadistan-i
Dinik.

Other copies of the Dadistan-i Dinik, which have not
been examined, are to be found in India, but, unless de-
scended from other manuscripts than K35 and the above-
mentioned codex recently belonging to Mr. Dhanjibhai
Framji, they would be of no further use for settling the
TEXC.

Of the manuscripts above described the following have
been available for the translations in this volume :—K35
for the whole of the Dadistan-i Dinik and the Epistles ;
M14 for the whole of the Dadistan-i Dinik alone; BK for
Dd. 1, 1-VI, 31, X, 2+XIV, 3%, LXXXVIL 9-XCIyi ae
the whole of the Epistles, the legend about the soul of Kere-
sasp (see pp. 373-381), and the extracts from the Pahlavi
Rivayat in these codices relating to Khvétik-das (see pp.
415-423); and J for Dd. I, 1-XX XIX, 108; LXX XVIII, 9-
LXXXIX, 14, XCI, 7-XCIV, 15, Ep. I, i, 1-II, ix, 75, the


ee es


* The text of Chaps. VI, 3-X, 2 has been lost, and recently supplied from J.

? No copy of the intermediate chapters obtained by the present translator,
and several of the original folios have been lost.

* No copy of the intermediate chapters taken by the present translator.

* Chaps. LXXXIX, 1-XCI, 7 omitted.

° Ep. II, vi, 2-ix, 7 being copied from BK and wrongly inserted in Dd.
XXXVII, 33 (see p. 89, note 5).


INTRODUCTION. xix
ee ee Oe ee
legend about Keresdsp, and the extracts relating to
Khvétik-das. Other manuscripts, used for the remaining
extracts translated in the Appendix, will be mentioned in
§ 4 of this introduction.

The existence of two versions of the text of the Dadis-
tan-i Dinik would have been a source of much perplexity
to the translator, had it not been soon apparent that the
version represented by M14 was merely a revision of that
in K35, attempted by some editor who had found much
difficulty in understanding the involved phraseology of
Mantiskihar. There are, undoubtedly, some corrupt words
and passages in K35, where the revised version may be
followed with advantage, but nine-tenths of the alterations,
introduced by the reviser, are wholly unnecessary, and in
many cases they are quite inconsistent with the context.

Under these circumstances it has been the duty of the
translator to follow the text given in K35, wherever it is
not wholly unintelligible after prolonged study, to note all
deviations of the translation from that text (which are
usually small), and merely to mention the variations of the
revised text, so far as they are intelligible, in the notes.

The writings of Mantskihar are certainly difficult to
translate, not only from the involved and obscure style he
affects, but also from the numerous compound epithets he
uses, which are not easy either to understand with certainty,
or to express clearly in English. The only other Pahlavi
writings that approach them in difficulty are those of his
brother, Zad-sparam, and those of the author of the third
book of the Dinkard, who seems to have also been a con-
temporary writer. Toa certain extent, therefore, an involved
style of writing may have been a failing of the age in which
he lived; and his works, being of an epistolary and hor-
tatory character, would naturally be more abstruse and
idiomatic than simple narrative; but much of the obscurity
of his style must still be attributed to his own want of clear
arrangement of thought and inadequate, though wordy,
expression of ideas, the usual sources of all obscure and
rambling writing.

When to the difficulty of tracing the thread ofan argument

be


XX PAHLAVI TEXTS.


through the involved obscurity of the text is added the
perplexity occasioned by the ambiguity of many Pahlavi
words, it can be readily understood that no translation is
likely to be even approximately accurate, unless it be as
literal as possible. The translator has to avoid enough
pitfals, in the shape of false constructions and incorrect
readings, without risking the innumerable sources of error
offered by the alluring by-paths of free translation. If,
therefore, the reader should sometimes meet with strange
idioms, or uncouth phrases, he must attribute them to a
straining after correctness of translation, however little that
correctness may be really attained.

For the purpose of more effectually keeping a curb upon
the imagination of the translator, and indicating where he
has been compelled to introduce his own ideas, all words
not expressed or fully understood in the original text are
italicised in the translation. Occasionally, also, the
original word is appended to its translation, where either
the reading or meaning adopted is unusual, or where a
scholar might wish to know the particular Pahlavi word
translated.

Some endeavour has likewise been made to introduce
greater precision than has hitherto been attempted, in the
transliteration of Pahlavi words and names, by taking
advantage of the italic system, adopted for this series of
Sacred Books of the East, not only for distinguishing
variations of sound (as in the use of g, , and s for the
sounds of j, soft ch, and sh, respectively, in English), but
also to indicate the use of particular Pahlavi letters, when
there are more than one of nearly the same sound. Thus,
d is used where its sound is represented by wt; Zand x
where they are represented by ) n, v, &, or by ‘4 Ayoog
v and z where they are represented by ¢ &; and zd where
those letters are represented by » 4. If, in addition to
these particulars, the Pahlavi scholar will remember that
the uncircumflexed vowels are not expressed in Pahlavi
characters, and the vowel 6 is expressed, he will find no
particular difficulty in restoring any of the transliterated
words to their original character, by merely following the


INTRODUCTION. XXi


ordinary rules of Pahlavi writing. Without some such
mode? of distinguishing the different Pahlavi letters used
for the same sound, it would be practically impossible to
restore the transliteration of any word, new to the reader,
to its original Pahlavi form. And even the system here
adopted requires the addition of a and 4 to represent the
vowel ») a, 4 when one of its turns is omitted in writing
(as in ey ap, dv, used for QJ ap, af; WY adin used for
ry adin, &c.), and of j or 7 to represent 5 y when it has
the sound of g or English j, in order to distinguish it from
C. &, g.

The general reader should, however, observe that these
niceties of transliteration are merely matters of writing, as
the exact pronunciation of Pahlavi cannot now be fully
ascertained in all its details. There is every reason to
suppose that the Semitic portion of the Pahlavi was never
pronounced by the Persians as it was written (unless, indeed,
in the earliest times); but to transliterate these Semitic
words by their Persian equivalents, as the Persians ‘certainly
pronounced them, would produce a Pazand text, instead of
a Pahlavi one. If, therefore, we really want the trans-
literation to represent the Pahlavi text correctly, we must
transliterate the Semitic words as they are written, without
reference to the mode in which we suppose that the
Persians used to read them. With regard to the Persian
words, if we call to mind the fact that Pahlavi was the
immediate parent of modern Persian, we shall naturally
accept the modern Persian pronunciation (stripped of its
Arabic corruptions) as a guide, so far as Pahlavi orthogra-
phy permits, in preference to tracing the sounds of these
words downwards from their remote ancestors in ancient
Persian or the Avesta. But the pronunciation of words
evidently derived directly from the Avesta, as is the case
with many religious terms, must clearly depend upon the


1 Dotted letters might be used, if available, instead of italics; but they are
liable to the objection that, independent of the usual blunders due to the
ordinary fallibility of human eyesight, it has been found by the translator that
a dot, which was invisible on the proofs, will sometimes appear under a wrong
letter in the course of printing. _


Xxil PAHLAVI TEXTS.

Be PTE Ss eS SS a ee
Avesta orthography, so far as the alteration in spelling
permits. These are the general rules here adopted, but
many uncertainties arise in their practical application, which
have to be settled in a somewhat arbitrary manner.


2. THE DADISTAN-! DiNiK.


The term Daédistan-1 Dinik, ‘religious opinions or de-
cisions, is a comparatively modern name applied to
ninety-two questions, on religious subjects, put to the high-
priest MAndsihar, and his answers to the same. These
questions appear to have been sent in an epistle from
Mit7é-khirshéd, son of Attrvd-mahan, and other Mazda-
worshippers (Dd. heading and I, 2), and were received by
MAaniszihar, who was the leader of the religion (Dd. I, 10,
note), in the month of July or August (Dd. I, 17); but it
was not till September or October, after he had returned
to Shiraz from a tour in the provinces, that he found time
to begin his reply which, when completed, was sent by
a courier (Dd. I, 26) to his correspondents, but at what
date is not recorded.

Regarding the residence of these correspondents, and the
year in which these transactions took place, we have no
positive information. The correspondents seem to have
thanked Mantsfthar for sending them one of his disciples
(Dd. I, 3, 4) to act probably as their high-priest ; and, from
the mode in which the land of Pars is mentioned in Dd.
LXVI, 28, LXXXIX, 1, it seems likely that they were not
inhabitants of that province; but this conclusion is hardly
confirmed, though not altogether contradicted, by the fur-
ther allusions to Pars in Dd. LXVI, 3, 15, 21, LXXXVIIL, 1.
With regard to the date of this correspondence we may
conclude, from the less authoritative tone assumed by
Manisfthar in his reply (Dd. I, 5-7, 11), as compared with
that adopted in his epistles (Ep. III, 17-19), that he was
a younger man when he composed the Dadist4n-i Dinik
than when he wrote his epistles; we may, therefore, pro-
bably assume that the Dadistan-f Dinik was written several
-years before A.D. 881,


INTRODUCTION. XXIll


Although the subjects discussed in the Dadistan-i Dinitk
cover a wide range of religious doctrines, legends, and
duties, they cannot be expected to give a complete view of
the Mazda-worshipping religion, as they are merely those
matters on which Mitré-kharshéd and his friends enter-
tained doubts, or wished for further information. It is also
somewhat doubtful whether the whole of the questions have
been preserved, on account of the abrupt transition from
the last reply, at the end of Dd. XCIII, to the peroration
in Dd. XCIV, and also from the fact that a chapter is
alluded to, in Dd. XVII, 20, XVIII, 2, which is no longer
extant in the text.

The questions, although very miscellaneous in their
character, are arranged, to some extent, according to the
subjects they refer to, which are taken in the following
order :—The righteous and their characteristics; the tem-
poral distress of the good; why mankind was created;
good works and their effects; the account of sin and good
works to be rendered; the exposure of corpses and reasons
for it; the paths, destinations, and fate of departed souls,
with the ceremonies to be performed after a death; the
contributors to the renovation of the universe; the contest
between the good and evil spirits from the creation till the
resurrection ; works of supererogation ; the sacred shirt and
thread-girdle ; apostasy and its prevention; the use of fire
at ceremonies, and other details; duties, payment, and
position of priests; details regarding ceremonies; lawful
and unlawful trading in corn, wine, and cattle, with a
definition of drunkenness; adoption, guardianship, and
inheritance; rights of foreigners and infidels; the origin of
mankind and next-of-kin marriage; the cost of religious
rites; the causes of the rainbow, phases of the moon,
eclipses, and river-beds; things acquired through destiny
and exertion; the sins of unnatural intercourse and adultery;
imperfect prayer before drinking ; ceremonies and payments
for them; the seven immortal rulers before Zaratist ; the
sky, the source of pure water, and the cause of rain and
storms.

In his replies to these questions Mantstihar displays


XxiV PAHLAVI TEXTS.

eee ae a a ee
much intelligence and wisdom, the morality he teaches is
of a high standard for the age in which he lived, and, while
anxious to uphold the power and privileges of the priest-
hood, he is widely tolerant of all deficiencies in the conduct
of the laity that do not arise from wilful persistence in sin.
The reader will search in vain for any confirmation of the
foreign notion that Mazda-worship is decidedly more dual-
istic than Christianity is usually shown to be by orthodox
writers, or for any allusion to the descent of the good and
evil spirits from a personification of ‘boundless time,’ as
asserted by strangers to the faith. No attempt is made
to account for the origin of either spirit, but the temporary
character of the power of the evil one, and of the punish-
ment in hell, is distinctly asserted.

Although Mantsfihar does not mention, in his writings,
any of the lost Nasks or sacred books of the Mazda-wor-
shippers, except the Hisparim (Dd. LXI, 3) and the
Sakadim (Ep. I, viii, 1, 6, 7), he certainly had access to
many Pahlavi books which are now no longer extant ; hence
he is able to give us more information than we find else-
where regarding some of the legendary personages mentioned
in Dd. Il, ro, XXXVE, 4, 5, XLVIUIT, 33, XC, 95. hethines
that the second month of the year (April-May) was called
Zaremaya in the Avesta (Dd. XXXI, 14); and he mentions
two places, instead of one, intermediate between heaven
and hell, one for the souls of those not quite good enough
for heaven, and one for those not quite bad enough for hell
(Dd. XXIV, 6; XXXITI, 2).

The present translation of this work is not the first that
has been attempted. Shortly before the late Professor Haug
left India he delivered a lecture on the Parsi religion to a
large assemblage of Parsis in Bombay, at their request, and
at his desire the sum of goo ripis, out of the net proceeds of
the entrance-tickets sold, was offered as a prize for an edition
of the Pahlavi text of the Dadistan-i Dinik with a Gugarati
translation and glossary. Some years afterwards this prize
was awarded to Mr. Shehriarji Dadabhoy and Mr. Teh-
muras Dinshawji Anklesaria, for their joint Gugarati trans-
lation of the work, which still, however, remains unpublished


INTRODUCTION. XXV


for want of funds, and has, therefore, been inaccessible to
the present translator.


3. THE EPISTLES OF MANUSKIHAR.


It has been already stated (see pp. xiii, xiv) that Zad-
sparam, a younger brother of Manisfihar, after having been
at Sarakhs, in the extreme north-east of Khuradsan, where
he seems to have associated with the heretical Tughazghuz,
was appointed high-priest of Sirkan, south or south-west of
Kirman?. Shortly after his arrival there he issued a decree,
regarding the ceremonies of purification and other matters,
which was so unpalatable to the Mazda-worshippers of that
place that they wrote an epistle to Mandskihar, complaining
of the conduct of his brother (Ep. I, i, 2, ii, 1).

In reply to this complaint, which was sent by a special
courier (Ep. I, i, 2), and after going to Shiraz and holding
a general assembly of the priests and elders (Ep. II, i, 11),
MAntiséihar wrote his first epistle, completed on the 15th
March 881 (Ep. I, xi, 12), in which he condemned the
practices decreed by ZAd-sparam, to whom he sent a
confidential agent, named Yazdan-panak (Ep. I, xi, 1, 2, 6,
10, II, vii, 2), with a copy of this epistle and a further one
to himself, which has not been preserved, for the purpose
of inducing his brother to withdraw his decree and conform
to the usual customs.

It would appear that Yazdan-pdnak was not very suc-
cessful in his mission, as we find Mantsihar writing a
general epistle (Ep. III) to all the Mazda-worshippers in
Iran, in the following June or July (Ep. III, 21), denouncing
as heretical the mode of purification decreed by Zad-
sparam, and ordering an immediate return to former
customs. At the same time (Ep. II, vii, 2, viii, 1) he wrote
a second epistle (Ep. II) to his brother, as he had already


1 The city of Kirman was itself called Sirgan, or Strgan, in the middle ages,
and is evidently mentioned by that name in Ouseley’s Oriental Geography,
pp- 139, 143, though the Sirgan of pp. 138, 141 of the same work was clearly
further south. - Which of these two towns was the Sirkan of these epistles, may,
therefore, be doubtful.


XXVI PAHLAVI TEXTS.


promised in Ep. I, xi, 2, and, after referring to an epistle
(now lost) which he had received from Zad-sparam in the
previous November or December, he proceeded to enforce
his views by a judicious intermingling of argument,
entreaty, and threats. He also contemplated making
preparations (Ep. I, xi, 4, II, vii, 3) for travelling himself
to Sirkdn, notwithstanding his age (Ep. II, ix, 1), to
arrange the matters in dispute upon a satisfactory basis.
Whether he actually undertook this journey is unknown,
but that his brother must have finally submitted to his
authority appears from. Zad-sparam retaining his position
in the south, as has been already noticed (p. xiv).

The matter in dispute between Zad-sparam and the
orthodox Mazda-worshippers may seem a trivial one to
people of other religions, but, inasmuch as the ceremonial
uncleanness of a person insufficiently purified after contact
with the dead would contaminate every one he associated
with, the sufficiency of the mode of purification was quite
as important to the community, both priests and laity, as
avoidance of breach of caste-rules is to the Hindd, or
refraining from sacrifices to heathen gods was to the Jew,
the early Christian, or the Muhammadan. And much
more important than any disputes about sacraments,
infallibility, apostolic succession, ritual, or observance of
the Sabbath can possibly be to any modern Romanist or
Protestant.

In his mode of dealing with this matter MAntskihar
displays at once the moderation and tact of a statesman
accustomed to responsibility, the learning, and zeal of a
well-informed priest, and the kindly affection of a brother.
That he was not without rivals and enemies appears from
his casual allusions to Zaratist, the club-footed, and Att75-
pad in Ep. II, i, 13, v, 14, ix,11; but in all such allusions, as
well as in his denunciation of heretical opinions, he refrains
from coarse invective, and avoids the use of exaggerated
language, such as too often disfigures and weakens the
arguments in polemical discussions.

Indirectly these epistles throw some light. upon the con-
dition of the Mazda-worshippers after more than two .


INTRODUCTION. XXVil


centuries of ceaseless struggle with the ever-advancing
flood of Muhammadanism which was destined to submerge
them. Shiraz, Sirkan, Kirman, Rai, and Sarakhs are still
mentioned as head-quarters of the old faith; and we are
told of assemblies at Shiraz and among’ the Tughazghuz,
the former of which appears to have had the chief control
of religious matters in Pars, Kirman, and the south, acting
as a council to the high-priest of Pars and Kirman, who was
recognised as the leader of the religion (Dd. XLV, 5). We
also learn, from Ep. I, iii, 11, II, v, 14, that the leaders of
the Mazda-worshippers, if not their high-priests, were still
in the habit of maintaining troops; and, from Ep. II, i, 9,
that when a high-priest became very old his worldly duties
were performed by four of the most learned priests, forming
a committee, which had full authority to deliberate and act
for him in all worldly matters. Mdntskihar even speaks of
emigrating by sea to China, or by land to Asia .Minor
(Ep. II, viii, 5), in order to escape from the annoyances of
his position.

But the statements which are most important to the
Pahlavi scholar, in these epistles, are the date attached to
the third epistle, corresponding to A.D. 881, and the men-
tion of Nishahpthar in Ep. I, iv, 15,17 as the supreme
officiating priest and councillor of king Khdsré Néshirvan
(A.D. 531-579), engaged apparently in writing commen-
taries on the Avesta. The date of these epistles not only
limits that of the Dadistan-i Dinik to the latter half of the
ninth century, but also fixes those of the larger recension of
the Bundahis and of the latest revision of the Dinkard
within the same period, because it is stated in Bd. XX XIII,
Io, 11 that the writer of that chapter was a contemporary
of Zad-sparam, son of Yaidan-Yim, and Attr-pad, son of
Hémid, the former of whom was evidently the brother of
MAntsfihar, and the latter is mentioned in Dinkard III,
ccccxiii as the latest editor of that work. The actual com-
piler of a great part of the Dinkard (especially of the fourth
and fifth books) was, however, the somewhat earlier writer
Atir-frébag, son of Farukhtizad (Dd. LXX XVIII, 8, Ep. I,
iii, 9). The name of Nishahpthar is also mentioned as that


XXVIii : PAHLAVI TEXTS.


of a commentator in the Pahlavi Vendidad and Nirangistan,
which works must, therefore, have been revised since the
middle of the sixth century. And as we are informed in
the book of Arda-Viraf (I, 35) that ‘there are some who call
him by the name of Nikhshahpir,’ we ought probably to
refer that book to the same age. These epistles, therefore,
enable us, for the first time, to fix the probable dates of the
latest extensive revisions of six of the most important Pah-
lavi works that are still extant; and from the relationship
of these to others we can readily arrive at safer conclusions,
regarding the age of Pahlavi literature in general, than have
been hitherto possible.


4. THE APPENDIX.


For the sake of elucidating certain matters, mentioned in
the writings of Mantiséihar, further information than could
be given in the foot-notes has been added in the shape of
an appendix.

To a brief summary of the Avesta legends, relating to
the ancient hero Keresdsp, has been added a translation of
a Pahlavi legend regarding the fate of his soul, in which
several of his more famous exploits are detailed. This
legend is found in the Pahlavi Rivdyat preceding the
Dadistan-i Dinik in the manuscripts BK and J, and is
evidently derived from the fourteenth fargard of the Stdkar
Nask, whose contents, as described in the ninth book of
the Dinkard, are also given. It is likewise found in the
later Persian Rivayats, with several modifications which
are duly noticed.

The Nirang-i Kusti, or ceremony of tying the sacred
thread-girdle, is also described in detail, with a translation
of the ritual accompanying it, partly from actual observa-
tion, and partly from Gugarati accounts of the rite.

It having become necessary to ascertain with certainty
whether the term ‘next-of-kin marriage’ was a justifiable
translation of khvétik-das, as used by Pahlavi writers,
an extensive examination of all accessible passages, which
throw any light upon the meaning of the word, has been


INTRODUCTION. XxXix


made. The result of this enquiry can be best understood
from the details collected, but it may be stated in general
terms that, though ‘marriage among kinsfolk’ might fairly
represent the varying meaning of khvétdik-das in dif-
ferent ages, its usual signification in Pahlavi literature is
more accurately indicated by ‘next-of-kin marriage.’

Some apology is perhaps due to the Parsi community for
directing attention to a subject which they consider dis-
agreeable. But, by the publication of a portion of the
Dinkard, they have themselves placed the most important
passage, bearing on the subject, within the reach of every
European Orientalist; thus rendering it easy for any pre-
judiced translator to represent the practice of such mar-
riages as having been general, instead of their being so
distasteful to the laity as to require a constant exertion of
all the influence that the priesthood possessed, in order to
recommend them, even in the darkest ages of the faith.
To avoid such one-sided views of the matter, as well as to
hinder them in others, has been the special aim of the
present translator in trying to ascertain the exact meaning
of the obscure texts he had to deal with.

The translations from the Pahlavi Vendidad, regarding
the Bareshntiim ceremony and the purifications requisite
after finding a corpse in the wilderness, will be found neces-
sary for explaining many allusions and assertions in the
Epistles of Mantsfthar.

The text followed in all passages translated from the
Dinkavd is that contained in the manuscript now in the
library of Dastir Sohrabji Rustamji, the high-priest of the
Kadmi sect of Parsis in Bombay. It was written A. D. 1669,
and was brought from Persia to Surat by Mulla Bahman in
1783. Allother known copies of the Dinkard are descended
from this manuscript, except a codex, brought from Persia
by the late Professor Westergaard in 1843, which contains
one-fifth of the Dinkavd mostly written in 1574, and is now
in the University Library at Kopenhagen.

For translations from the Pahlavi Vendidad the text
adopted, wherever available and not evidently defective,
has been that of L4, a manuscript of the Vendidad with


XXX PAHLAVI TEXTS.


Pahlavi, Z. and P. IV, in the India Office Library in London.
The date of this manuscript has been lost with its last
folio, but its text is in the same handwriting as that of three
others, in Kopenhagen and Bombay, which were written
A.D. 1323-4. A considerable portion of the beginning of
this manuscript has also been lost, and is replaced by
modern folios of no particular value.

_In conclusion, the translator must take the opportunity
of thankfully acknowledging the kindness and readiness
with which Dastir Peshotanji Behramji Sanjana, the high-
priest of the Parsis in Bombay, and Dastir Jamaspji Mino-
chiharji Jamasp-As4-na, of the same city, have always
furnished him with any information he applied for, not
only on those matters specially mentioned in the foot-
notes, but also on many other occasions,


E. We WESE.,


MunIcH,
September, 1882.


ABBREVIATIONS USED IN THIS VOLUME.


Acc. for accusative case ; Af. Zarat. for Afringan-i Zarattist ; anc.
Pers. for ancient Persian; App. for Appendix to this volume SATs
for Arabic; AV. for the Book of Ard4-Viraf, ed. Hoshangji and
Haug; Av. for Avesta; B2g for Persian Rivayat MS. No. 29 of
the University Library in Bombay ; Bd. and Byt. for Bundahis and
Bahman Yast, as translated in vol. v of this series; BK for an old
imperfect copy of K35 written in Kirm4n, but now in Bombay;
Chald. for Chaldee ; comp. for compare ; Dd. for Dadist4n-t Dinik,
as translated in this volume ; Dk. for Dinkard; Ep. for Epistles of
Mantiséthar, as translated in this volume; Farh. Okh. for Farhang-i
Oim-khadtk, ed. Hoshangji and Haug ; Gen. for Genesis ; Haug’s
Essays for Essays on the Sacred Language, Writings, and Religion
of the Parsis, by M. Haug, 2nd edition; Hn. for Hadékht Nask,
as published with AV.; Huz. for Huzvaris; Introd. for Introduc-
tion; J. for Dd. MS. belonging to Dastir Jamaspji Minochiharji
in Bombay; K35 for Dd. MS. No. 35 of the University Library in
Kopenhagen; L4 for Vend. MS. No. 4 of the India Office Library
in London; Lev. for Leviticus; M5, M7, Mio, Mr4 for MSS.
Nos. 5, 7, 10, 14 of the Haug Collection in the State Library in
Munich; Mkh. for Mainyé-i-khard, ed. West; n. for foot-note;
nom. for nominative case; p. for page; Pahl. for Pahlavi; Paz. for
Pazand; Pers. for Persian; p. p. for past participle; Sir. for
Sirozah, ed. Westergaard; Sls. for Shayast-l4-shayast, as trans-
lated in vol. v of this series; TD for Bd. MS. belonging to
Mr. Tehmuras Dinshawji in Bombay ; TK for Dd. MS. belonging
to the same; trans. D. for translated by Darmesteter, in vol. iv of
this series; Vend., Visp., and Yas. for Vendidad, Visparad, and
Yasna, ed. Spiegel; Yt. for Yast, ed. Westergaard; Z.D.M.G. for
Zeitschrift der deutschen morgenlandischen Gesellschaft; Zs. for
Selections of ZAd-sparam, as translated in vol. v of this series.


A A


PA OS hA Neo N he


THE RELIGIOUS: OPINIONS


OF
MANUSKIHAR, SON OF YUDAN-YIM,


DASTUR OF


PARS AND KIRMAN,


A.D. 881.


[18] P


OBSERVATIONS.


1. For all divisions into chapters and sections the translator is
responsible, as the manuscripts merely indicate the beginning of
each question and reply.

2. Italics are used for any English words which are not expressed,
or fully understood, in the original text, but are added to complete
the sense of the translation.

3. Italics occurring in Oriental words, or names, represent
certain peculiar Oriental letters (see the ‘ Transliteration of Oriental
Alphabets’ at the end of this volume). The italic d, Z, x, r, v may
be pronounced as in English; but g should be sounded like j, hv
like wh, & like ch in ‘church,’ s like sh, and g like French i

4. In Pahlavi words the only vowels expressed in the original
text are those circumflexed, initial a, and the letter 6; italic d is
written like t, y and / like n or the Avesta o, v and g like g, and zd
like 4 in the Pahlavi character (see the latter part of § 1 of the
Introduction).

5. In the translation, words in parentheses are merely explanatory
of those which precede them.

6. For the meaning of the abbreviations used in the notes, see
the end of the Introduction.

7. The manuscripts mentioned are :—

BK, an old imperfect copy of K35 written in Kirman, but now
in Bombay.

J (about 60 years old), belonging to Dastfir Jamaspji Minochi-
harji in Bombay.

K35 (probably written a.p. 1572), No. 35 in the University
Library at Kopenhagen; upon the text of which this translation
is based.

M5 (written a.p. 1723), a MS. of miscellaneous texts in Persian
letters, No. 5 of the Haug Collection in the State Library at
Munich,

Mr4 (a modern copy of a MS. in the library of the Parsi Hone
priest in Bombay), No. 14 in the same Collection.

TD, a MS. of the Bundahis belonging to Mébad Tehmuras
Dinshawji in Bombay.


A A


Peers tAN-| DINTR:


SomE chapters of the enquiries which Mitré-
kharshéd, son of Atdvd-mahan ‘and others of the
good religion made of the glorified (anoshaké-
riban) MAantiséihar?, son of Yddan-Yim, and the
replies given by him in explanation.


CHAPTER JI,


o. Through the name and power and assistance
of the creator Atharmazd and all good Jeings,
all the heavenly and earthly angels, and every
creature and creation that Afthaymazd set going
for his own angels and all pertaining to the celestial
spheres.


1 The name Atfir-m4h4n occurs in a Pahlavi inscription,
dated a.y. 378 (A.D. 1009), in one of the Kanheri caves, near
Bombay (see Indian Antiquary, vol. ix, pp. 266, 267), and
Adharm4h is mentioned in Hoffmann’s Ausziige aus syrischen
Akten persischer Martyrer (Leipzig, 1880), p. 203; so that this
name must have been commonly used by Parsis in former times,
though unknown now.

2 He calls himself pontiff and director of the priests of Pars
and Kirman in a.y. 250=<.D. 881, and was, therefore, the leader
of the religion (see Chaps. XLV, 5, XCIV, 13, and Ep. III, 21).
Besides these titles of péstip4i, ‘leader,’ farmad4r, ‘director,’ and
rad, ‘pontiff or executive high-priest, he is also called aérpat
khfid4i, ‘ priestly lordship,’ in the heading to Ep. III, and has the
general title aérpat, ‘ priest,’ in those of Ep. land II. The reading
of the name of his father, Yfid4n-Yim (Pers. Guvan-Gam, ‘the
youthful Gamshéd’), is merely a guess; the Parsis read either
Géshna-gam or G6d4n-dam; and, perhaps, Gfishna-dam, ‘breathing
virility,’ is a likely alternative reading.

mee


4 DADISTAN-f DIN?K.


1. Zo those of the good religion, who are these
enquirers owing to devout force of demeanour and
strength of character, the type of wisdom and
standard of ability—and of whom, moreover, the
questions, seeking wisdom, contemplating good
works, and investigating religion, are specified—the
blessing and reply of Mantsfihar, son of Yfdan-
Yim, are these:—2. That is, forasmuch as with
full affection, great dignity, and grandeur you have
blessed me in this enquiring epistle!, so much as
you have blessed, and just as you have blessed, with
full measure and perfect profusion, may it happen
fully likewise unto you, in the first place, and Zo your
connections, separately for yourselves and depen-
dents; may it come upon you for a long period, and
may it be connected with a happy end.

3. As to that which you ordered to write about
wishes for an interview and conversation w7th me,
and the friendliness and regard for religion of your-
selves and our former aisczp/e? (lanmanak kadmén)
—who is a servant of the sacred beings (yazd4nd)?
and a fellow-soldier in struggling with the fiend,
alike persistent in reliance upon the good religion
of Mazda-worship—I am equally desirous of that
one path of righteousness when z¢s extension is to
a place in the best existence 4, and equally hopeful


* Regarding this epistle, nothing further is known that can be
gathered from the text of this reply to it, which gives the substance
of the questions it contained.

* This disciple appears to have been previously sent by Mant-
skihar to the community he is addressing, most probably to serve
as their high-priest.

* The word is plural, like Elohim in the book of Genesis, but
it means ‘God’ in Persian.

* Another name for Garédman, the highest heaven, or dwelling
of Atharmagd (see Sls. VI, 3, 4).


CHAPTER I, I-6. 5


of resurrection (Akhezisn6) at the renovation of
the best existence. 4. As fo the interview and
important conversation of that disciple of ours
(manak), and his going, and that also which he
expounded of the religion—that of him who is
intimate in interview and conversation with him who
is wise and righteous the stunted 2 good works are
then more developing’—and as ¢o the degree of
praise which you ordered to write concerning me,
much greater than reason, and the important state-
ments full of the observations of friendship as to
kind regards, my course about these is also “hat
which /eads to gratitude.

5. That which you ordered to write about the
way of knowing and understanding not being for
any one else but for your servant, was owing to your
affection, and for the sake of kind regard; but on
account of the importance of truth z¢ is more
expressly to be regarded as being proper to write
also to other spiritual + men, as to the learning which
is more fully studied by them. 6. For even with
the perplexing struggle of the fiend, azd the grievous
devastation and collapse (nizérih) which have hap-
pened to religious people, after all, through the
persistence (khvaparih) of the sacred beings even


1 That is, when this transitory world is purified and made
permanent, so as to form a part of heaven, which is expected
to take place at the resurrection.

2 Pahl. kazd, which may be compared with Pers. kag, ‘distorted,’
or may be a miswriting of Pahl. kas, ‘small.’

8 The modern MSS., M14 and J, add ‘and those which are
great are more attainable.’

4 The word is maindk (minavad), but the omission of one
stroke would make it magég, ‘priestly, which was probably the
original reading.


6 pApISTAN-? DINIK.


now there are pontiffs (rad4nd), priests, high-priests,
judges, and also other religious leaders of those of
the religion in various quarters. 7. Moreover, the
other priests and spiritual! men “ere enumerated
have well considered the commentary (zand) of the
text (mAnsar) which is muttered, are acquainted
with opinions explaining the religion, avd are, in
many places, the cause of preferring good works;
with whom also, on account of ¢#ezr understanding
and knowing about such opinions, the sacred beings
are pleased.

8. The desires expressed, and the good wishes
as to what is mine and as happened Zo me, which
you ordered to write, are likewise marks of friend-
ship and kind regard, and owing to them a like
measure of friendship and kind regard becomes
your” own.

9. As ¢o that which you ordered to write in much
friendship aza@ commendation and profusely about
me—as regards the administration of the realm
(késhvar dastdbarih), of the unity without coun-
terpart (dadigarih), and the singleness co-extensive
with any duality—if the writing of that, too, were
owing to your friendship, even then it seemed Zo
me disquieting, owing to this dezzg so much praise.
to. If in these times and countries ¢here be an
understanding of the time and a boasting about any
one, if 2¢ de graceful as regards him who is a leader
of the religion (dindé péstpai) of long-continued faith,
I consider it not suitable for myself?. 11. Though


1 See p. 5, note 4. 2 All MSS. have ‘ thy,’

* Although he was himself the ‘director of the profession of
priests’ of Pars (see Chap. XCIV, 13), an office. which was then
equivalent to that of ‘leader of the religion’ (see Chap. XLV, 5).


CHAPTER I, 7—16, 7


the praise of a leader (sav dar), raised by agreeable
voices’, is uttered about me, yet I am not pleased
when they extol my greatness more than that of
their own leader; for my wish is for that praise
which is dwe to my own rank and similar limits, and
seems suitable to me; and humility in oneself is as
correct as grandeur among inferiors.

12. That which is about the lengthy writing of
questions, as Zo your worldly circumstances (stiha-
niha) and worldly affairs, Zas also shown -this, that
I should write a reply at a time in which I have
leisure. 13. That is more important on account of
your well-expressed questions azd boldness about
ambiguous answers, and your ardent desire for the
setting aside of time; for the setting aside, or not
beginning, of a reply is implied. 14. Bud owing to
the perplexing? struggle on account of the fiend
there is little leisure for quick and searching thought,
and owing to that which is undecided® ¢here zs Little
for indispensable (frézvanikS) work.

15. As to a reply a¢ a period of leisure time, the
occurrence of the time appointed is manifested in
everything, apart even from the kind regards of
friendship, and the collection of information whereby,
owing to my little leisure, it is declared unto you.
16. And I have, too, this confidence, that your
questions are written with religious faith and desiring
religious decision; avd in the reply the statement
of reasons from revelation (dind) is manifold, for


1 This translation of mané-adv4zik6-akhegako is somewhat
doubtful.

2 Or ‘ prodigious.’

8 That is, awaiting the high-priest’s judicial and ecclesiastical
decision.


8 DADISTAN-1 DINIK.


guidance which is not destitute of wisdom and whzch
is without risk from every kind of importunity’.

17. And ¢hzs same epistle? came in the month
Tir®, at such season as, owing to entreaties for three
years from the country-folk (désikand), and the
burden of troubles of the offspring (sarak6) of those
of the good religion, the much importunity for
arranging what was undecided among them—which,
inasmuch as I had no power about investigating that
trouble and suffering, was the more indispensable—
the arrangements for the preservation and education
of disciples *, avd many private matters which had
accumulated, I obtained no opportunity for properly
looking over these same questions till the month
Shatvaiv6®, when I came to Shirdz* and had aé
various times a little leisure.

18. And I looked over these same questions; and
when I saw the compact writing (ham-dadakiha-
yektibdnisnih) it then seemed to me more impor-
tant to make each chapter of the questions separate
and more explanatory. 19. And I gave the ques-
tions to a writer, in the same copy which you ordered
to write, azd instructed 2m to write the various
chapters, every single question in one chapter; and
the several opinions, both due to my acquaintance
with the religion and my remembrance in perfection,


* Or ‘ over-persuasion.’ 2 See § 2,

* The fourth month of the Parsi year, which corresponded to
July-August in the time of MAntishthar.

* That is, candidates for the priesthood and young priests.

° The sixth month of the Parsi year, which then corresponded
to September—October.

* From this it would appear that the DAdist4n-? Dintk was
written at Shiraz which, being the principal city of Pars, was
probably the high-priest’s usual residence.


CHAPTER I, 17-23. 9


both of the decisions (dastébarth) of the ancients
and as regards wisdom, are the replies I intend to
write below the questions.

20. When there is nothing in such as you ask,
concerning which I consider such otherwise, as I
write, than what is like that which was once advisedly
our different opinion from those high-priests of the
ancients who were better and wiser, and have become
our lord (ahvé), master (rad6), and high-priest, I
have written that!, even though the wsuwa/ decision
on the same subject is such as our high-priests, who
are of our family, Zave maintained in particular.
21. Afterwards, moreover, about the sayings of that
high-priest whose custom is otherwise there is no
difference of opinion expressed’; and if there be any
one for whose opinion I ave acquired perfect rever-
ence, a priestly man acquainted with the religion,
who understands azd who manages intelligently, by
holding in reverence the ancient treatises and truth,
and the sayings of the high-priests, whatever of hes
is to the purpose, as regards the reply, this also is
written as successful illustration.

22. If owing to such cause it be not fully perceived,
or regarding the decision z¢ de moé clear, ¢¢ is chiefly
not owing to the incompleteness of the decision of
revelation in clearness of demonstration and correct-
ness of meaning, but owing to our incomplete attain-
ment to understanding the authoritative decrees
(nikézak fragdftd)? of the religion. 23. From the


1 That is, his own different opinion apparently, but the writer’s
sentences are often so involved as to confuse the reader.

2 Meaning, apparently, that he does not propose to mention the
opinions of others unless he approves of them.

3 The MSS. have frag fitd, possibly Pers. farg fd, ‘miracle.’


10 DADISTAN-! DINIK.


NG Bt ee


imperfection (avéhih) of that also which is asked
of us the hasty thinking, notably therein, owing to
the grievousness of the times, is even till now
devoid of a distinct knowledge, interpreting the
texts about the compassion of the good spirits, and
regarding a clearer demonstration of the exposition
of revelation which is thereby’ more fully declared,
as regards religious practice, from two sources, one
is from the treatises which are an exposition of the
rules azd wisdom of the leader of the religion, and
one—which is more descriptively expressed (madi-
gAnotar hankhettnt6d)—is the writings (vutak6)
of various glorified ancients, those who were the
great leaders of those of the primitive faith’
24. Owing to that®, as their writings (nipikan)
about the demonstration of reasons, on account of
depth axd minute wording, are not well known, even
to minute observers azd penetrative (véhramak6)
understandings, and through the little diffusion
(f7A.¢6-padikhtih), likewise, of difficult words,
there may be doubts among the less intelligent, so,
about the purport of ¢hese same questions, if there
be anything which is wanted by you more clear and
more plain in meaning, ov a nearer way to a true
interpretation, not without clearness, of azy decision
of a learned leader of the religion, I wll give
a reply, whenever you ask and I am able, so far as
my knowledge and want of power permit.

25. When one has to observe the nature of the
attributes (géh4rdnd) of the sacred beings the


} That is, revelation is declared by the exposition.


® The true Mazda-worshipping religion in all ages, both before
and after the time of Zaratist (see Sls. I, 3).


* Want of knowledge referred to in § 23.


CHAPTERS 1) 24 iy 3. It


investigator's great advantage is the perfection,
peace, equipment with righteousness, and fiend-
destroying power of his own people; aud since you
are made aware of the result of wishes and actions,
and are directed by me, many new blessings also
arise from you.

26. That which is written to you yourselves and
unto all, in the beginning and even the end, is com-
pletely adapted to your own several wants; may it
have an exalted end, with one courier (aé-baridé)
and continuously from beginning to end, and also
perpetually!

27. A fair copy (birzisnikd pa#ind) of the
questions, as well as the replies, is this; so thae
when there is nothing in it which owing to that
cause! is different, I am of opinion as is here
written.


CuapTer II.


r. First you ask thus: Why is a righteous man
created better than the stars and moon and sun
and fire of Athaymazd, and is called in revelation
greater and better than the spiritual creation, avd
also than that which is worldly?

2. The reply is this, that the greatness and
goodness of advance in wisdom and just judgment
over the creatures arise from proficiency (hfinar).
3. Justice is the one good proficiency over the
creatures, the means of wisdom are great, and
praise bestowed is the most effectual performance


1 Owing to the copying. The sentence is equivalent to the
modern phrase, ‘errors excepted.’


12 DADISTAN-1 DINIK.


of what is desirable (kAmisn-karith). 4. For all
three are mutually connected together; since the
manifestation of justice is through wisdom, and its
advantage is the performance of what is desirable
for the creator; wisdom is the performance of
what is desirable for the requirements of the
creator, and its weapon (zén6) is justice; and the
desire of the creator, which is progress, is in
wisdom with justice. 5. All three are great among
the creatures, and their lodgment in the superior
beings and righteous men is spiritual, in the spirit
which is the pure guardian angel}, zz the under-
standing for encountering, averting, smiting, and
prostrating (khvadpak) the fiend, zz the army of
angels, and zz the sovereignty of the far-seeing
(diir-vénak6)? spirit, Atharymazd; and, materially,
in the worldly equipment and mutual connection
of body and life. 6. And their appliances are the
wisdom and worldly efficacy of treatises on the
wise adoption of good thoughts, good words, and
good deeds, azd the relinquishment aud discon-
tinuance of evil thoughts, evil words, axzd evil
deeds. 7. And their acquirer is the worldly ruler
who is providing for Adharmazd, and approving
and stimulating the pure religion, a praiser of the
good and pure creator, and a director of persistence
in destruction of the fiend. 8. And in the pro-


* The fravahar or fravashi, which is the prototype or spiritual
counterpart supposed to have been created in the beginning for
each good creature and creation afterwards produced, whether
material or immaterial, and whose duty is to represent the creature
and watch over its interests in the spiritual world.

* This word is badly written in K35, so that it has become


zOrinak in later MSS., which might perhaps mean ‘strength-
exerting.’


CHAPTER II, 4—I0. 13


mulgation (rfibaké-dahisnih) of the good and
religious liturgy (mansar), the coming of the good
cause of the resurrection, and the production of
the renovation of the universe are jis cOoperation
and his own thanksgiving; and over the creatures
of ¢hzs prior world he is a guardian, defender, and
manager.

9. And such rulers are great and pre-eminent;
yet every man is not for that greatness, but it is
mentioned as to superior beings azd concerning
righteous men, in whom it Zas arisen, and the best
are the three who are the beginning, middle, axd
end of the creation. 10. One is the pure man,
Gayémard, who was its first rational praiser; he
in whose keeping was the whole creation of the
sacred beings, from z¢s beginning and immaturity
unto the final completion of the worldly creatures,
over which was the exercise of goodness of his
well-destined progeny, such as Héshang, Takh-
mérup, Yim, and Frédin?, such as the apostles
of the religion, like Zaratist, Hishédar, and Htishé-
dar-mah *, and the producers of the renovation of
the universe, like Sdshans*, Réshandé-zashm, and


1 Which is expected to take place about the time of the resur-
rection (see Bd. XXX, 32).

2 The first four rulers .of the world (omitting the usurper
Dahak) after Gayémard (see Bd. XXXI, 1-3, 7). The five names
of these primeval sovereigns are corruptions of the Avesta names,
Gaya-maretan, Haoshyangha, Takhmé-urupa, Yima, and Thraé-
taona. The third name is always written Takhmédrido in Dd.

’ Corruptions of Av. Zarathustra, Ukhshyad-ereta, and
Ukhshyad-nemangh. The last two are future apostles still
expected by the Parsis to restore their religion to its original
_ purity, in preparation for the resurrection (see Bd. XXXII, 2-10,
Byt. III, 13, 43-48, 52, 53)

4 Ay. Saoshyas. The last of the future apostles, in whose


14 pApISTAN-? DiNik.


Khir-Zashm}?, 11. The approver® of the enter-
prises (ribak-dahisniha) of cdoperators, the
purely-praising and just worshipper of the sacred
beings through the strength of the spirit, the dis-
abler of the worldly activity of the fiend as regards
worldly bodies, and the one of pure religion—which
is his charge (spér)3, the revelation of the place
of the beneficent spirit and of the destruction of
the depravity of the evil spirit‘, the subjugation
(khvapisnd) of the fiend, the completion of the
triumph of the creator, and the unlimited progress
of the creatures—is the upholder of Mazda-worship.
12. And likewise through the goodness of Gdayé-
mard, which is the begetting of Zarattst, he is also
just; likewise through the goodness of Sdshans,
by which he is the progeny of Zarattist, Ze is also
progressive in every good thought, good word, and
good deed, more than the creatures which are
produced with a hope of the religion, and equally
thankful. 13. And one is the producer of bodies ®,


time the universe is expected to be renovated and the resurrection
to take place (see Bd. XXX, 4-27, XXXII, 8, Byt. III, 62).

* These two names, which mean ‘bright-eyed’ and ‘sunny-
eyed,’ are the Av. Raokas-kaéshman and Hvare-faéshman
of Fravardin Yt. 128 (see also Chap. XXXVI, 4).

® This is Zarattist (see § 12), the righteous apostle of the middle
portion of the history of creation referred to in § 9.

§ Or ‘which is wholly his.’

* These two spirits are supposed to be the authors of all the
good and evil, respectively, that exists in creation. They appear,
originally, to have been both supposed to spring from Atharmagd,
who speaks of ‘the more beneficent of my two spirits’ in Yas.
XIX, 21; but in later times, and throughout the Pahlavi literature,
the beneficent spirit is identified with Atharmagd, and the origin
of the evil spirit is left in obscurity.

> The renovated bodies of the future existence which are pre-
pared for mankind at the resurrection (see Bd. XXX, 4, 7, 25-27).


CHARTER] Ih Ei =i, 2. 15


the renovator (frashagar) Séshans, who is the
putter down, with complete subjugation from the
world, of the glorification of fiends azd demons,
and of the contention with angels in apostasy and
heterodoxy of various kinds and unatoned for;
and the completer of the renovation through the
full continuance of the glorification of the angels,
and the perfect continuance of the pure religion.

14. And through that excellent, unblemished,
brotherly work! such a ruler may be seen above
the sun with swift horses, the primeval luminaries,
and all removal of darkness, the advance of illumi-
nation which is the display (t6égisn6) of the days
and nights of the world?. 15. Regarding the same
completion of the renovation of the universe it is
said in the revelation of the Mazda-worshippers,
that this great light is the vesture of the like
righteous men.


Cuapter III.


1. The second is that which you ask thus: For
what purpose is a righteous man created for the
world, and ia what manner is it necessary for him
to exist in the world? :

2. The reply is this, that the creator created
the creatures for progress, which is his wish; and


1 Mentioned in §§ 7, 8.

2 M14 and J have ‘such rulers’ own praise is above the sun
with swift horses, the primeval luminaries, and all good creatures ;
for that, too, which may be seen when the light of the sun is
owing to the removal of darkness, and the removal is the advance
of illumination of the world, is the display of days and nights.’


16 DApISTAN-{ DINIK.


it is necessary for us to promote whatever is his _
wish, so that we may obtain whatever is our wish.
3. And, since that persistent creator is powerful,
whatever is our wish, and so far as we remain
very faithful, such is as 2¢ were deserving of his
wish, which is for our obtainment of whatever is
our wish’.

4. The miracle of these creatures was fully
achieved (Avéridd) not unequally, and the gain
(giaftak6) also from the achievement of the same .
miracle is manifest; that is, achieving, and know-
ing? that his achievement is with design (im)
and his desire is goodness, when the designed
achievement, which is his creature, and also the
goodness, which is his wish, are certain, and like-
wise, owing to the perfect ability which is due to
the creator, the wish is achieved, z¢ is manifest.
5. And, afterwards, it is decided by wisdom that
he has achieved it, and the creatures, as perfected
for the complete progress which is his wish, lapse
into evil; and since when evil exists good becomes
the subjugation of evil—for when evil is not com-
plete, and after it is expressly said that his creatures
are created for his own will, the progress due to
subjugations of evil is on account of the good
completed—it is similarly testified, zz accordance
with the will aforesaid, that it? is achieved.

6. The creatures are for the performance of
what is desirable for the creator, and the perform-
ance of what is desirable for the creator is necessary


* Reading kamak6 instead of the dA4maké of the MSS., which
was, no doubt, originally gAmako,

® Mrgq has ‘knowing perfectly.’

* The subjugation of evil apparently.


CHAPTER III, 3-9. 17


for two purposes, which are the practice of worship
and contention. 7. As the worship is that of the
persistent creator, who isa friend to his own
creatures, azd the contention is that with the fiend
—the contender who is an enemy to the creation
of the creator—that great worship is a pledge, most
intimate to one’s self, of the utmost contention
also, and a pledge for the prosperity owing to the
friend subjugating by a look which is a contender
with the enemy, the great endeavour of the ac-
quirers of reliance upon any mortals whatever?
8. For when the persistent ove accomplished that
most perfect and wholly miraculous creation of the
lord, and his unwavering look—which was upon
the coming on of the wandering evil spirit, the
erratic, unobservant spirit—was unmingled with the
sight of an eye*, he made a spirit of observant
temperament, which was the necessary soul, the
virtuous lord of the body moving into the world.
9. And the animating life, the preserving guardian
spirit, the acquiring intellect, the protecting under-
standing, the deciding wisdom, the demeanour which
is itself a physician, the impelling strength, the
eye for what is seen, the ear for what is heard,
the nose for what is smelt, the mouth for recog-
nising flavour, the body for approaching the as-
sembly (pidram) of the righteous, the heart for


1 Referring probably to the strong influence of a steady eye
upon all living creatures.

2 This appears to be the meaning of agimégisno-i val
vén4ftakd didag; which phrase is followed by the conjunction
‘and,’ so that the original text means that when the creator had
done as in §§ 8, 9, he proceeded to act as in § Io. This conjunction,
for the sake of clearness, is here transferred to the beginning of
§ 10.


[x8] Cc


18 DApDISTAN-? DIN?IK.


thinking, the tongue for speaking, the hand for
working, the foot for walking, these which make
life comfortable, these which are developments in
creating, these which are to join the body, these
which are to be considered perfected, are urged
on by him continuously, and the means of in-
dustry of the original body are arranged advisedly.
10. And by proper regulation, and the recompense
of good thoughts, good words, and good deeds,
he announced and adorned conspicuous, patient,
and virtuous conduct; avd that procurer of the
indispensable did not forget to keep men zz his
own true service and proper bounds, the supreme
sovereignty of the creator.

11, And man became a pure glorifier and pure
praiser of that all-good friend, through the progress
which is his wish. 12. Because pure friendship
is owing to sure meditation on every virtue, and
from its existence no harm whatever arose; pure
glorifying is owing to glorifying every goodness,
and from its existence no vileness whatever arose;
and pure praising is owing to all prosperity, and
from its existence no distress whatever arose.
13. And pronouncing the benedictions he is stead-
fast zz the same pure friendship, just glorifying,
and expressive praising, which are performed even
as though Vohtiman were. kept lodging in the
thoughts, Srésh in the words, and Ard in the
actions’. 14. That, moreover, which is owing to
the lodgment of Vohiman in the thoughts is virtu-


* These three angels are personifications of the Avesta terms
voht-mané, ‘good thought,’ sraosha, ‘listening, obedience, and
areta, ‘righteous.’ The coming of Vohtiman (‘the good spirit’ of
§ 17) and of Srésh is mentioned in the Gathas (Yas. XLII, 16, d).


CHAPTER III, IO-I9Q. 19


ously rushing unto true propitiation from the heart,
and keeping selfishness away from the desires;
the lodgment of Srésh in the words is owing to
him who is intelligent dezmg a true speaker, and
him who is unintelligent being a listener to what
zs true and Zo the high-priests; azd the lodgment
of Ard in the actions is declared to be owing to
promoting that which is known as goodness, and
abstaining fvom that which ove does not know.
15. And these three benefits! which fave deen
recited are sent down (fardstak6) in two ways
that the ancients ave mentioned, which are that
deliberately taken and ¢hat they should deliber-
ately leave 2, whose means are wisdom and proper
exertion.

16. And his (man’s) high-priest is he whose
instigation is to keep him truly zm accordance with
the revelation (dind) of the sacred beings, and is
the origin of his pure meditation which is truly
through goodness like Vohiman’s. 17. As the
religious of the ancients Zave religiously said, that
of him who keeps the goodness of Vohtman lodg-
ing in the thoughts the true way is then that of
the good spirit. 18. The Mazda-worshipper under-
stands the will of the creator in the true way, and
grows and acquires by performing what is desirable
for the creator, which obtains the benefit of the
renovation.

19. A more concise reply is this, that a righteous
man is the creature by whom is accepted that
occupation which is provided for him, and is fully


1 The lodgments of the three angels.
2 Meaning, probably, the deliberate adoption of good conduct
and relinquishment of evil (compare Chap. VII, 7).
Cue


€


20 DADISTAN-i DINIK.


watchful in the world as to his not being deceived
by the rapacious fiend. 20. And as a determiner,
by wisdom, of the will of the creator—one who is
himself a propitiator and ‘understander, and a pro-
moter of the understanding of goodness—and of
whatever pertains to him (the creator), 4e is a giver
of heed thereto; and it is necessary for him to be
thus, so that such greatness axd goodness may also
be his more securely in the spiritual ex¢stence.


CuaptTer IV.


1. The third question is that you ask thus: For
what reason does this greatness’ of a righteous
man exist?

2. The reply is this, that 2¢ is for the performance
of what is desirable for the creator by the Mazda-
worshipper; because he strives unhesitatingly that
the way for the performance of what is desirable
for the creator may be the propitiation? which is
his desire, and that desired propitiation? becomes
perfect through sound wisdom. 3. The wisdom by
which he understands about the desire of the
heavenly angels is not appointed (vakht), but is
the true, pure religion which is knowledge of? the
spirits, the science of sciences, the teacher of the


* Referring to Chap. II, 1, and not to Chap. III, 20; otherwise
it might be supposed that the questions were contrived to suit
the replies.

? Or, perhaps, ‘ understanding.’

* K35 has ‘obedience to’ by inserting a medial stroke in
danisné, which converts it into sinvisnd, but is probably a
mistake.


CHAPTER III, 20—IV, 6. aI


teaching of the angels, and the source of all
knowledge.

4. And the progress, too, of the pure religion
of the Mazda-worshippers is through the righteous
man, as is shown of him in revelation thus: ‘I
created, O Zaratiist the Spitaman! the righteous
man who is very active', and I will guard his
hands from evil deeds; I wzd/ also have him con-
veyed unto those who are afterwards righteous
and more actively wise?. 5. And a¢ the same
time the religion of me who created him is his
desire, and it is the obtainment of a ruler which
is to be changed by the well-organised renovation
of the universe *,’

6. As through wisdom is created the world of
righteousness, through wisdom is subjugated every
evil, and through wisdom is perfected every good;
and the best wisdom is the pure religion whose
progress is that achieved by the upholders of
religion, the greatness of the best men of the
righteous, in whose destiny z¢ zs, such as that
which was shown about Gayémard, Zarattist, and
Séshans 4.


1 Mr4 and J here insert ‘I will guard his mind from evil
thoughts, 47s tongue from evil-speaking.’

2 In the future existence.

8 Mx4 and J have ‘and it is the obtainment of a ruler who is
a wise upholder of religion, from time to time, even unto the
change of the last existences by the well-organised renovation
of the universe’ But the additional words appear to have been
suggested by the word ‘ruler’ being taken literally, whereas it
seems to have been figuratively applied to the religion which is
to rule the righteous till the future existence.

4 In Chap. II, 9-13.


22 DADISTAN-i DINIK.


CHAPTER V.


1. The fourth question is that which you ask
thus: Of this destruction (zadam) and terror which
ever happen to us from the retribution! of the
period, and are a cause of the other evils and
defects of the good religion, what kind of opinion
exists? And is there a good opinion of us among
the spirits, or not?

2. The reply is this, that it is said in the revela-
tion of the Mazda-worshippers that the impediments
(ras-bandth), through which ¢heve is vexation in
righteousness, are because its doctrine is this, that,
regarding the difficulty, anxiety, and discomfort
which occur through good works set going, it is
not desirable to account ¢kem as much difficulty,
trouble, and discomfort. 3. Whereas it is not
desirable to account ¢kem as anxiety and difficulty,
it is then declared by it? thereof, that, as its
recompense, so much comfort axzd pleasure will
come to the soul, as that no one is to think of that
difficulty and discomfort which came upon him
through so many such good works, because he is
steadfast to maintain the good religion, and utters
thanksgivings (va stayedd). 4. And as regards
the discomfort *, which the same good religion of


ours fas had, it comes on from the opponents of
the religion.


* Reading padasan, but by a slight alteration Mz4 and J have
padakhshah4n, ‘monarchs,’ which is equally suitable.

2 By revelation.

° Mr4 and J have ‘and he remains thereby certain that his good
works are in the statement (madig4n6) of good works, and as
regards all that terror, anxiety (vay4d6), and discomfort, &c.


CHAPTER V, I-VI, 3. 23


5. Through the coming of religion we have full
enjoyment (bav4 gfikarém), and owing to religion,
unlike bondsmen (abtirdégdnvar), we do not
become changeable among the angels; our spiritual
life (ahvdih) of praise then arrives in readiness,
and owing to the angels ¢here are joyous salutation,
spiritual life, and glory for the soul.


CuaPtTer VI.


1. The fifth question is that you ask thus: Why
does evil always happen more éo the good than to
the bad ?

2. The reply is this, that not a@¢ every time
and every place, and not Zo all the good, does evil
happen more—for the spiritual welfare of the good
is certainly more—but in the world it is very much
more manifest!. 3. And the reasons for it are many;
one which is conclusive is even this, that the modes


1 Mr4 and J have ‘but the worldly evil and bondage are in-
calculably more manifest about the good, much more in the
season (zém4nih) of Srésh.’ The ‘season of Srésh’ may per-
haps mean the night-time, or the three nights after death,
when the protection of the angel Srésh is most wanted; but
Dastir Peshotanji Behramji, the high-priest of the Parsis in
Bombay, prefers reading zimAnash (with a double pronominal
suffix), and has favoured me with the following free translation
of the whole passage :—‘At every time and every place much
evil does not happen 4 all the good ; for the good, after having
been separated from this world, receive (as a reward for their
suffering evil) much goodness in the next world, which goodness
is (regarded as) of a very high degree in religious doctrines


(srésh).’ Perhaps, after all, Srésh is a miswriting of sarya,
‘bad, evil.’


24 DADISTAN-{ DINIK.


and causes of zfs occurrence are more; for the
occurrence of evil is more particularly appointed
(vakhtd) by two modes, one by the demons, the
appointers of evil, azd one by the vile, the doers
of evil; even to the vileness of creation and the
vile they cause vexation. 4. Moreover, incalculable
is the evil which happens to the vile from the
demons, and that to the good from the demons
and also from the vile, and the mode of its occur-
rence is in the same way without a demon.

5. This, too, is more particularly such as the
ancients ave said, that the labour and trouble of -
the good are much more in the world, and their
reward aud recompense are more certain in the
spiritual evzstence; and the comfort and pleasure
of the vile are more in the world, and their pain
and punishment in the spiritual exzstence are more
severe. 6. And this, too, is ¢he case, that the good,
through fear of the pain and punishment of hell,
should forsake the comfort and ease in the world,
and should not think, speak, ov do anything im-
proper whatever. 7. And through hope for the
comfort and pleasure in heaven they should accept
willingly, for the neck?, much trouble azd fear in
the practice of virtue in thought, word, azd deed.

8. The vile, through provision with temporary
enjoyment*—even that enjoyment of improprieties
for which eventually there is hell—then enjoy them-


* The word can be read either garévan, ‘collar, or gardfin
‘neck,’ and is the usual PAz. of the Huz. Aavarman (Chald. NB),
‘the neck,’ though ‘neck’ is often expressed by gardtin. The
meaning is that the yoke of trouble and fear should be accepted.

* Mr4 and J have ‘through provision with the enjoyment of
improprieties which is temporarily theirs,’


CHAPTER VI, 4—VII, 3. 25


selves therein temporarily, and lustfully on account
of selfishness; those various actions also, through
which ¢here would be a way to heaven, they do not
trouble themselves with.

9. And in this way, in the world, the comfort
and pleasure of the vile are more, and the anxiety,
vexation, despondency, and distress of the good
have become more; the reason is revealed by
the stars.


Cuapter VII.


1. The sixth question is that which you ask thus:
Why are we men produced for the world, and what
is it necessary for us to do therein?

2. The reply is this, that even in the reply to an
accompanying question? z¢ is written that the crea-
tures are achieved for* justice and the performance
of what is desirable for the creator; and to prepare
thoroughly well that which is unlimited and the
virtuous progress of the creatures, whose distress
is like fear, there is the unparalleled (abradarvat6)
renovation of the universe.

3. And that preparation arises from the complete
predominance of the creator azd the non-predomi-
nance of the fiend, as is said of it in revelation
thus: ‘In that time I become completely predomi-
nant, I who am Atthaymazd; in nothing whatever


1 That is, it is dependent upon destiny.

a-see Chap: III.

8 Reading pavan instead of bara, two words which are often
confounded by the copyists of MSS. because their Persian equiva-
lents are nearly identical.


26 DADISTAN-! DIN?K.


is the evil spirit predominant.’ 4. And also about
the good procedure of the creature-creation 2¢ is
recounted thus: *Happy am I when the creatures
are so created by me, and according to any wish
whatever of mine they give the sovereignty to me,
and also come ¢o the sovereignty when I have
created z¢ for the performance of what is desirable
for the expression of what sovereignty is.

5. And it is necessary for us to become so in the
world as that the supreme sovereignty of the creator
may be kept more friendly to us, its own true ser-
vants. 6. The way to that true service is known
through wisdom, is believed (vavari-aitd) through
truth, avd is utilized through goodness; and the
path of excellence more particularly “ads {to it.
7. And to set the good spirit rightly in the place
of thought z¢ zs deliberately taken azd they should
deliberately leave z¢1, as it is said in revelation that
Athaymazd spoke out to Zaratist thus: ‘Thou
shouldst assist Vohiman with thy pure spiritual
faculties (ahv6), so that they may make him fully
welcome; for when thou assistest Vohtiman with
thy pure spiritual faculties, so that they make him
fully welcome, thou shalt thus fully understand the
two ways, ¢hat which is good conduct, and ¢haé also
which is bad conduct.’


Cuapter VIII.


1. The seventh question is that you ask thus:
When a man is passing away, and after the occur-
rence of his passing away, how does the good work


" Compare Chap. III, 15. The ‘good spirit’ is Vohfiman.


CHAPTER VII, 4—VIII, 5. 27


then go to him amd assist him, which any others
may do for him who has gone out from the world,
on the third night in the dawn!, a¢ which he goes
out to the balance?? And zs zts greatness such as
though it be done by his own hand, or otherwise?

2. The reply is this:—When any others do a
good work for him who “as passed away, after the
passing away, and if he who as passed away did
not order that good work in /zs lifetime, and did
not bequeath it, nor was z¢s originator, and it was
not even his by design (d4d6), then it does not go
and does not reach him out at the balance. 3. Even
at the time for being proceeded with, when that
good work does not assist it is not appropriated,
for that which is appropriated as the design of some
one is appropriated by acceptance from some one;
when it is not his by design it is then not accepted
as his.

4. If he who has passed away did not order that
good work, and did not even bequeath zz, but was
consenting to it by design, that which shall be done
in has life¢zme then reaches out in the three mzghts
(satiih) for the aggrandizement of his position ; dz
that which shall be done after 42s passing away is
not in the account of the three mghts and the
balance, but reaches out, at the time the good work
is proceeded with, for the enjoyment of the soul.

5. And if he who as passed away ordered that


1 The soul of a dead person is supposed to hover about the
corpse for three nights, and not to depart for the other world
till the dawn after the third night; that is, at dawn of the fourth
day, including the day of death (see Chap. XX, 2, 3, Sls. XVII,
2-6).

rio the soul’s good works are balanced against its sins,
to determine its fate till the resurrection.


28 DADISTAN-1 DINIK.


good work in his own lifeézme, or bequeathed it, or
was the originator and cause of the soul’s employ-
ment, although it is proceeded with after /zs passing
away, it then reaches out to him for the happiness
of his soul, since the origin of the thanksgiving
(sipas)!, and the orderer and ownership of the good
work are certain. :

6. Any good work whatever which is proceeded
with is clearly a like good work as regards those
who account for z¢ as with him who is the doer of
zt; also in the account of his soul the good work is
as much with him who did 2z¢, but the soul of him
by whom the good work is done by his own hand,
is handsomer and stronger than of him by whom it
is ordered. 7. And its similitude is such as when
a man’s handsome and seemly suit of clothes is his
own, and he wears z¢ on zs body anzd is handsomer,
more splendid, and more seemly ¢hazx another man
who wears a suit of clothes, zz like manner, which is
his own by theft.


CuarTer IX.


1. The eighth question is that which you ask
thus: Of him who, out of his ow wealth, himself
directed others thus: ‘Let them act advantageously
(khanginakS) for my soul, is it so that what others
may do for him out of that wealth azd ¢hat done by


his own toil are very different, one from the other,
or not?


* The good works mentioned in this chapter would chiefly
consist of prayers and ceremonies for which priests have to be
remunerated, and gifts to holy men and the poor; such actions
as are most highly appreciated by priests.


CHAPTER VIII, 6—X, 2. 29


2. The reply is this, that ¢#ey are very different,
one from the other; for that which he orders out of
his own wealth is more effectual than that which
others may do for him without order. 3. And
among the kinds of good work, that is more effec-
tual which ove practises himself and with his own
toil; then that whzch one sets going out of what-
ever is his own by his own order, regarding which
he! afterwards bequeaths azd orders out of his own
property and it comes into progress ; and, lastly, that
which others may do for him.

4. Since thus his own azd that which is his by
design, when any one manages for him and in his
lifezzme, aggrandize his position then, azd fis soul
is preserved, when he manages for him thereafter
the enjoyment then reaches unto his soul. 5. When
not consenting as to the good work, and zt 7s not
his by design, even though others may do 7 for
him it does not then come into his possession.


CHAPTER X.


1. The ninth question is that which you ask thus:
How much does the growth? of his good works
increase, from the ¢ime when the good works are
done, so long as fe is living?

2, The reply is this, that from the “me when a
good work comes into progress 7és growth remains
on the increase so long as fe is living; moreover,


1 Mr4 and J make this an additional kind of good work by
reading ‘after which is that regarding which he himself,’ &c.
2 Reading vakhsh instead of the vés, ‘more,’ of the MSS.


30 DApISTAN-! DiNiK.


when he is distressed by that good work, while the
increase does not desist from increase, it grows just as
a child becomes enlarged in the womb of a mother.


CHAPTER XI.


1. The tenth question is that which you ask thus:
Does the growth which increases become as com-
mendable in the fourth night? as the original good
work® in 4zs possession, or does it become otherwise ?

2. The reply is this, that z¢ is otherwise; for the
original good work stands up opposing sin, and the
growing good work * stands up opposed to the growth
of sin.


CuarTer XII.


1. The eleventh question is that you ask thus:
Does the growth of a good work eradicate sin just
like the original good work, or not ?

2. The reply is this, that the growth does eradi-
cate 2, as happens w7¢h the good work which is for
atonement for sin; it shall be done as retribution for
sin, avd it eradicates the sin, which is specially men-
tioned in revelation®. 3. ‘Then the place of his


" The good work being more meritorious when more trouble-
some.

* After death, when all the immediate ceremonies for the dead
have been completed (see Sls. XVII, 5 note).

* Literally ‘the good work of the beginning.” That bfin
kirfak6 does not here stand for bain-t kirfaké, ‘the origin or


root of the good work,’ appears from Chap. XII, 1, where it is
written kivfak6-i bitin.


* Literally ‘the good work of growth’
* See Pahl. Vend. VII, 136, where the matter is mentioned, but


CHAPTER XI, I—XIII, 3. 31


other good work is evidently the soul ; and, in order
to be with the sin at z¢s origin, it remains and is
taken into account.’ 4. ‘Through good works and
the growth of good works is the recompense of the
soul, so that they should do those good works in
atonement for sin. 5. And concerning the sin
eradicated it is said: ‘An original good work era-
dicates original sin', and the growth of a good
work evadicates the growth of a sin.’


CuHaPTeR XIII.


1. The twelfth question is that which you ask
thus: In the fourth night do they score off (bara
angdrénd) the sin by the good works, and does
he go by the residue (bén); or do they inflict
punishment on him for the sin which “as happened
to him, and give reward and recompense for the
good works which he as done?

2. The reply is this, that at dawn of the third
night the account is prepared it is said, and about
the sin which he as atoned for, and the good work
which is its equivalent (Avar) here is no need for
account, since the account is about the good works
which may be appropriated by him as his own, and
about the sin which may remain zz him as zés
origin. 3. Because the origin of it (the sin atoned
for) «remains distinct, and it is cancelled (astard6)


the passages which seem to be quoted here must be from some
other source.

1 Literally ‘ sinning of the beginning’ (b fin-vinasth). It must
mean the first commission of any particular sin, and has no con-
‘nection with the ‘original sin’ of Christian writers.


32 DApISTAN-f DINIK.


by it (the good work), they balance it therewith ;
and they weigh the excess and deficiency, as it may
be, of the other good works and sin.

4. Of those living, at the just, impartial (aZafsisn6)
balance the man of proper habits (dad6), whose
good works are more, when sin Aas happened to
him, undergoes a temporary (vidandaik) punishment
and becomes eternally cleansed by the good works ;
and he of improper habits, of much sin and little
good works, attains temporary enjoyment by those
good works, éw¢ through the sin which they per-
ceive zz him he is suffering punishment unto the
resurrection.


CHAPTER XIV.


1. The thirteenth question is that which you ask
thus: Who should prepare the account of the soul
as to sin and good works, and in what place should
they make it up? Azd when punishment is inflicted
by them, where is their place then?

2. The reply is this, that the account about the
doers of actions, as to good works and sin, three
times every day whilst the doer of the actions is
living, Vohtiman the archangel should prepare;
because taking account of the thoughts, words, and
deeds of all material existences is among his duties.
3. And about the sin which affects accusers1, which


1 Sins are divided into two classes, hamém4l4n or those which
affect ‘accusers,’ and rfibantk or those which affect only one’s
own soul. In the first class are included all evil actions which
injure our fellow-creatures or any good animal or thing, and for
which the injured party (the ‘ accuser’) must receive satisfaction
before the sinner can be pardoned (see Sls. VIII, 1).


CHAPTER XIII, 4—XIV, 6. 32


is committed by (va/) breakers of promises, even
in the world Mitr6! is said zo de over the bodies,
words, and fortunes (hi-bakhtak3) of the promise-
breakers; avd as to the amount, and also as to
beng more than the stipulation when ¢here zs a
period of time?, Mitvé is the account-keeper. 4. In
-the three wzghts’ account (sattih) Srésh the righteous
and Rashni the just® are over the estimate of the
limits of the good works azd sin of righteousness
and wickedness. 5. In the future existence, on the
completion of every account, the creator Atthaymazd
himself takes account*, by whom both the former
account of the three zzghk¢s and all the thoughts,
words, and deeds of the creatures are known
through his omniscient wisdom.

6. The punishment for a soul of the sinners
comes from that spirit® with whom the sin, which
was committed by it, is connected; fostered by the
iniquity practised, that punishment comes upon the
souls of the sinful and wicked, first on earth, after-
wards in hell, avd lastly at the organisation of the


1 The angel of the sun’s light; he is a personification of friend-
ship and good faith, and is, therefore, specially aggrieved by
breaches of promise and fraudulent debtors, but assists righteous
souls in their passage to the other world (see AV.V, 3, Mkh.
II, 118).

2 Referring to debts and promises to pay.

8 The angels of obedience and justice; the duty of the former
is to protect the righteous, and that of the latter is to weigh
the good works and sins in his golden scales, when the soul’s
account is balanced after the third night after death (see AV. V,
a—5, Mkh. II, 115-122).

* Referring, perhaps, to the future temporary separation of the
wicked from the righteous, after the assembly of the Sadvastaran
(see Bd. XXX, 10-16).

5 The demon who is supposed to have occasioned the sin.


[18] D


34 pApIsTAN-1 DINK.


future existence’. 7. When the punishment of the
three nights is undergone? the soul of the righteous
attains to heaven aud the best existence, avd the
soul of the wicked to hell and the worst existence.
8. When they have undergone their punishment at
the renovation of the universe they attain, by com-
plete purification from every sin, unto the everlasting
progress, happy progress, azd perfect progress of the
best azd undisturbed existence.


CHAPTER XV.


1. The fourteenth question is that which you ask
thus: Is the eradication of life the gnawing of dogs
and birds upon the corpse? And does the sin of
those who suppose z¢* a sin proceed from ¢aé origin,
or not?

2. The reply is this, that the decrease of sin and
increase of good works, owing to good thoughts,
good words, azd good deeds, arise really from the
effort and disquietude which come on by means of
the religion the soul practises, azd through the
strength in effort, steadfastness of religion, and


1 The three days and nights of final punishment, after the
resurrection and before the final purification in melted metal (see
Bd. XXX, 13, 16, 20), which is mentioned again in § 8.

* This does not refer to the final punishment of §§ 6 and 8, but
to the previous three nights’ tribulation just after death, and to the
fate of the soul before the resurrection (see Chaps. XXIV, XXV).

° The exposure of the dead, apparently; but the construction
of this question and its relation to the reply are by no means clear
at first sight. From §§ 2, 5, 6 we have to infer that the exposure
is a meritorious action rather than a sin; and from §§ 3, 4 we have
to gather that as loss of life occurs to every one, and exposure of the
corpse only to some, the former cannot be caused by the latter.


CHAPTER XIV, 7—XvV, 6. 35


protection of soul wzch the faithful possess. 3. That
evil which occurs when doing good works, which
is the one (hana) when doing iniquity, and when
one strives z¢ is the one when he does not strive,
the one when content and the one when not content,
and after z¢ zs undesired, and no cause of good
works is with it, it occurs just as undesired, for the
sake of favour and reward, is the certain eradication
of life. 4. It happens once only (aétim) unto the
righteous and the wicked, every one who may have
received the reward—that reward is living until the
time of passing away—but the gnawing of dogs and
birds does not happen unto every one and every
body. 5. It is necessary for those to act very
differently? whose understanding of good works is
owing to proper heed of dead matter; and, on
account of the rapid change (vardi-hastan6) of
that pollution, and a desire of atonement for sin,
they should carry the body of ove passed away out
to a mountain-spur (k6f vakhsh), or a place of
that description, enjoining unanimously that the
dogs and birds may gnaw it, owing to the position
of the appointed place”. 6. Therefore, as owing to
that fear’, the commands of religion, and progressive


1 Differently from others.

2 The dead must be deposited upon some dry and barren spot,
remote from habitations and water, and, if possible, upon the
summit of a hill (see Chap. XVII, 17, and Vend.VI, 93). From
the mention of dogs gnawing the corpse it would appear that the
depositories for the dead were less enclosed when this work was
written than they are at present; and in ancient times both enclosed
and unenclosed depositories seem to have been used (see Vend. VI,
92-106). For a description of the present form of such depositories
see Sls. II, 6, note.

§ Fear of pollution from the dead.

10) 2


36 pApIsvANn-f DINiK.


desire 74 is accepted strenuously for the wicked him-
self, his own recompense is therein, and it happens
to him in that way for the removal (narafsisn6)
of sin and for the gratification of zs soul.


CHaPTeR XVI.


1. The fifteenth question is that which you ask
thus: When the dogs and birds tear it (the corpse)
does the soul know 7z/, and does it occur uncom-
fortably for it, or how is it?

2. The reply is this, that the pain occaszoned by
the tearing and gnawing so galls (maléd6) the body
of men that, though the soul weve abiding with the
body, such soul, which oze knows is happy and
immortal, wodd then depart from the body, along
with the animating life, the informing (sindyinak6)
consciousness, azd the remaining resources of life.
3. The body is inert, unmoving, and not to be
galled; and at last no pain whatever galls z¢, nor
is it perceived; and the soul, with the life, is outside
of the body, and is not unsafe as regards its gnaw-
ing, but through the spiritual perception? it sees and
knows 27.

4. That which is wicked is then again desirous
of its bodily existence”, when it sees them thus:
the wonderfully-constructed body which was _ its


1 Supposing that sinasno stands for sindyisnd; otherwise we
must read ‘in the spiritual places (divag4n6),’

* This section is made still more complicated in the Pahlavi
text by the division of this first phrase; half of it being placed


at the beginning, and the other half at the extreme end of the
sentence. .


CHAPTER XVI, I-7.


7


iss)


vesture, avd is dispersed, and that spiritual life
(hdk6) which was with its heart, and is even on
account of this—that is: ‘Because in my bodily
existence and worldly progress ¢here was no atone-
ment for sin and no accumulation of righteousness’—
also in mourning about it thus: ‘In the prosperity
which this body of mine had, it would have been
possible for me to atone for sin aud to save the
soul, 6v¢ now I am separated from every one and
from the joy of the world, which is great hope of
spiritual fe; and I have attained to the perplexing
account and more serious danger.’ 5. And the
gnawing becomes as grievous to it, on account of
that body, as a closely-shut arsenal (afzar béta-i
badttim) and a concealed innermost garment are
useless among those with limbs provzded with weapons
and accoutrements, and are destroyed.

6. And of that, too, which is righteous and jd/ed
with the great joy that arises from deing really
certain of the best existence, then also the spiritual
life which was with its body, on account of the great
righteousness, /¢ for the exalted (firakhtaganik),
which was ever accumulated by it with the body,
is well developed (madam hfi-tashid6), and the
wonderfully-constructed body is destroyed in the
manner of a garment, particularly when its dispersion
(apAsisn6) occurs thereby.

7. And the consciousness of men, as it sits three
nights outside of the body, in the vicinity of the
body, Zas to remember and expect that which is
truly fear and trouble (kh4r) unto the demons, and
reward, peace, and glad tidings (névik) unto the
spirits of the good ; and, on account of the dispersion
and injuring of the body, it utters a cry spiritually,


95.4 DADISTAN-I DINIK.


thus: ‘Why do the dogs and birds gnaw this
organised body, when still at last the body and life
unite together at the raising of the dead?’ 8. And
this is the reminding of the resurrection avd libera-
tion, and it becomes the happiness and hope of the
spirit of the body and the other good spirits, and
the fear azd vexation of the demons and fiends.


CuHapTer XVII.


1. The sixteenth question is that which you ask
thus: What is the purpose! of giving up a corpse
to the birds?

2. The reply is this, that the construction of the
body of those passed away is so wonderful that two
co-existences have come together for 2¢, one which
is to occasion endurance (dér padayinidan6d) and
one which is to cause conflict (nipérdinidand), and
their natures are these, for watching the angels and
averting the demons. 3. After appertaining Zo z¢
the life—so long as z¢ zs in the locality of the place
of the body—and the demons of dull intellects, wo
are frightened by the body, are just like a sheep
startled by wolves when they shall further frighten
zt by a wolf?. 4. The spirit of the body, on
account of being the spiritual life (hOk6) for the
heart in the body, is indestructible; so is the will
which resided therein, even when they shall release
it from zts abode.


5. In the same way the body of those who are


* Assuming that dhan stands for hang.


* This last clause is a quotation, slightly altered, from Pahl.
Vend. XIX, 108, rog.


CHAPTER XVI, 8—Xxvil, 8. 39


passed away is so much the more innocently worthy
of the rights (sAn6) of oze properly passed away,
and what zt is therein provided with, as it has
uttered thanksgivings, 6. For those guardian spirits
who keep watch over the body of Keresdsp1 the
SAman are also such praises from the life and body,
for that reason, moreover, when they unite.

7. The injury of the destroyer to the body of those
passed away is contaminating; the Nastis (‘corrup-
tion’)? rushes on it and, owing to its violence when
it becomes triumphant over the life of the righteous
man, and frightens it from the place of the cata-
strophe (hankavdikih), and puts itself into the place
of the body, that body is then, for that reason, called
Nasai (‘dead matter’). 8. And, on account of the
co-existence of rapid changing and the mode of
attacking of the same Nastis, even when it is neces-
sary for the disintegration of the body, this is also
then to lie and change sanatorily.


1 An ancient hero, mentioned both in the Avesta and Shahnamah,
who, owing to his disregard of religion, is said to be lying asleep
on the plain of PésyAnsai (probably the Pistn valley near Qandahar),
watched by a myriad guardian spirits of the righteous, until he
shall be hereafter aroused by the angels to kill the revived usurper
Az-i Dahak (see Bd. XXIX, 7, 8, Byt. HI, 59-61). Regarding his
soul a legend is related in the Pahlavi tracts which precede Dd. in
some MSS., of which a translation will be found in Appendix I.

2 Supposed to be a fiend who enters and pervades every corpse
immediately after death, except in certain cases of violent death,
when its arrival is delayed till the next period of the day (see
Sls. X, 32). This exception is made in Vend. VII, 5, 6, and was
probably intended, in most cases, to prevent a person who had
met with a serious accident being left to perish, through fear of
his death contaminating any one coming to his relief; not from any
idea of the fiend being taken unawares by the suddenness of the
death. This fiend is the Ay. nasu (nom. nasus).


40 DApISTAN-1 DiNik.


9. Hence, as the body of men is formed out of
hard bone and soft fat, that whzch is established is
the expulsion of the bone from the fat. 10. For
the bone-through its hardness, when no damp fat is
with it, and it does not become a holder of its damp,
is itself essentially dry; and it becomes unconsum-
able and attaining durability, through dryness, out
of the dead matter even for perpetuity. 11. And
the sun is provided to make rotten, dispersed, and
useless the fat that is around the bone, which on the
decay of the animating life is to become increasingly
damp, and, after the departure of life through terror
and disgust (adéstih), it comes to rottenness and
stench; and the noxious creatures in z¢ alike afflict
it and the hard ferz such as bone.

12. As regards the shrinking away of those who
are sinners, the nearer way to a remedy is the
gnawer away from men'; the fat becomes separate
from the bone, and is seized and digested, as by the
separation of the fat from the dead matter for diges-
tion, moreover, the permanent matter (asarih) and
bone attain more fully unto their own nature (san6),
and the body (kalptid6) to emptiness. 13. Because
there is no other way to consume that fat of men,
since 7¢ is most grievous to them (the sinners), and
the pollution and contamination are made a blessing
unto it (the gnawer). 14. The dispersers (astard6-
gardan) completely disperse from it?; they are ap-


" That is, in the case of those who neglect the proper exposure
of corpses, there is a natural remedy in the worms produced for
consuming them. Perhaps the word khast4r, ‘cutter or gnawer,
stands for khastar, ‘ noxious creature.’

* The consumers of the corpse disperse when their work is-
done, and carry contamination with them unless purified by the
sun’s heat, as described in § 15.


CHAPTER XVII, 9-18. 41


pointed and produced, a production not worthy, for
its defilement of those purified azd animals is con-
taminating, through contact again with men. 15.
The crow (galag) and such-like, through scorching
away by the fire of the luminaries, become worthy ;
moreover, the affliction of that which is completely
pure fire arises therefrom, as it is not able itself to
come unto the scorched one, for then the defilement
(darvakh) of the scorcher by the most grievous
gnawer would be possible.

16. But it is not proper to recount (ang4stan6)
the devouring of the noxious creatures, for the spirit
of the body is troubled when it observes the alarmed
(vazid) spirituality which was in the body of those
destroyed, the noxious creatures upon the goodly
forms, and the mode and strangeness of ¢her dis-
integration and spoliation. 17. And so it then
becomes the more remedial way! when, as it is
ordered in revelation’, the body fraught with cor-
ruption is placed on the ground of a clear mountain-
spur (k6f vakhsh); and, in order not to convey z¢
to the water, plants, and men of the plain, it is
fastened? in the customary manner, so that the
corpse-eating dogs and corpse-eating birds, which
are not subject to the hand (dast6-4mfik6) of men,
and are likewise not entertained as food, shall yet
not drag any of it away for man’s eating of dead
matter.

18. For streams and waters go themselves * and


1 That is, it is better to adopt the customary mode of removing
the corpse.

2 See Vend. VI, 93-97.

8 This is ordered only when the corpse is not placed in any
enclosure.

4 Or, as Vend. V, 49-62 describes it, the water is rained down by


A2 pDApISTAN-{ DINIK.


consume that fat, and are digested by the vital fire’
which is in the life of the creatures of Atthavmazd;
and from fat the corpses and dead matter are re-
duced unto dregs of clay? and permanent matter,
even with the dust they are mingled azd become
scattered about. 19. Likewise to those dogs, flying
creatures, and birds they themselves (the waters)
have given the corpse-eating quality azd habit®, and
on account of dull intellect they (the creatures) are
not overwhelmed even by that sin.

20. From that fat which is mingled with the
living body of a creature of Atharymazd then avzses
also the assault * of the demons, as is shown in the
chapter ® on the reason for showing a dog to a dead
person, so that the body of those passed away, when
the gnawers away are mingled with the living body
of a creature of Athaymazd, exhibits a partial resur-
rection and the tokens of z¢, and thereby the demons
keep in it (the living body), and give pain® by the
will of the sacred beings.


—


Attharmagd, purified in the Patik sea, and conveyed through the
wide-formed ocean to the well-watered tree of all seeds, whence the
falling seeds are brought back, with the misty clouds, and rained
upon the earth, to grow there and yield food for cattle and men.

* The vital heat, or Vohu-fryan fire (see Bd. XVII, 1, 2).

* Reading gil-valigih (compare Pers. kaliz, ‘sediment,’ or
galtz, ‘saliva’).

* Which they have imbibed by contact with dead matter.

* Or ‘weapon.’ ;

° No such chapter is now extant in Dd., and, therefore, this
remark favours the supposition that some chapters are lost between
Chaps. XCHI and XCIV. A corpse must be shown to a dog in
order that the demon, Nastis, may be driven out of it by the look,
or touch, of the dog (see Sls. I, 1-4, X, 33).

* A recognition of the fact that the drinking of impure water, or
eating of tainted food, is apt to produce disease.


CHAPTER XVII, I9Q—XVIII, 4. 43


CuarTer XVIII.


1. The seventeenth question is that you ask thus:
Is it better when they give z¢ to the birds, or what
mode is better ?

2. The reply is this, that after showing the dog—
the reason of which is as declared? in its own chapter
—they shall carry the corpse at once to the hills and
rising ground (vakhsh bam); and, for the reason that
the dogs and birds should not bring that dead matter
away to a watered, cultivated, ov inhabited place, one
is to fasten z¢ zz the manner of athief%. 3. When the
corpse-eating birds have eaten the fat, that fat
which, when it is not possible to eat z¢, becomes
rotten, offensive, and fraught with noxious creatures,
then men shall properly convey the bones away to
the bone-receptacle (ast6d4n6), which*® one is to
elevate so from the ground, azd over which * a roof
(Askfip8) so stands, that in no way does the rain fall
upon the dead matter, nor the water reach up to it
therein, nor the damp make up to it therein, nor are
the dog and fox able to go to it, and for the sake of
light coming to it a hole is made therein.

4. More authoritatively (dastébariha) it is said
that bone-receptacle is a vault (kadak6) of solid
stone’, and its covering (nihimbak6) ove is to


1 Literally ‘as the reason of it is declared.’ This is another
allusion to the missing chapter mentioned in Chap. XVII, 20.

2 Reading 4hfin khadfiné, but this is very likely a corruption
of khadfiind khadfiin6, ‘zz various modes.’

8 The MSS. have mfinam, ‘ which by me.’

4 The MSS. have min madam, ‘from above.’

6 Whether khadfiké-sagak6 means ‘solid rock’ or ‘solid
ashlar’ is doubtful.


44 pApISTAN-I DINik.


construct also of a single stone which is cut perfo-
rated (stl4k-hémand), and around it owe is to fill in
with stone and mortar’.


CHAPTER XIX.


1. The eighteenth question is that which you ask
thus: When the souls of the righteous ad the souls
of the wicked go out to the spirits, will it then be
possible for them to see Atharmazd and Aharman?,
or not?

2. The reply is this, that concerning Aharman it
is said that his is no material existence (stis); and
Atharmazd, as a spirit among the spirits, is to be
heard by those who are material and those also who
are spiritual, du¢ Ais form (kerp6) is not completely
visible except through wisdom. 3. And a sem-
blance of 42s power is seen, as was told unto Zara-
tfist the Spitamdn when he saw the result (zah) of
his handiwork, and he (Athaymazd) spoke thus:
‘Grasp the hand of a righteous man! for the kindly
operation of my religion through® thee thyself is as


' Perhaps the single stone is not to cover the whole space, but
merely to contain the opening for light, and to be set in a vaulted
roof of ashlar or rubble; otherwise it is not clear where the filling
with stone and mortar is to be placed. This bone-receptacle was
to be provided for the bones of those corpses which were deposited
on the open ground. In the enclosed depositories, used in India,
the bone-receptacle is a circular well in the centre, from which the
rain does not appear to be excluded (see Sls. II, 6, note).

* The evil spirit (see Chap. I, 11), whose nature and powers
differ very little from those ascribed to the devil by most Christian
writers.


* Or ‘on;’ or, perhaps, it ‘is as much as he shall grasp at thee
thyself’


CHAPTER XIX, I-7. 45


much as he shall grasp, and thou mayst see him
whose reception (mahmAanth) of my wisdom and
glory is the most.’

4. And about the souls of the righteous and
wicked, in the spiritual places they see the throne
(gas), which they deem a sight of Atthhaymazd. 5.
And so also those who are domiciled with (ham-
neman) Aharman, through that wisdom with refer-
ence to whose creator they shall suffer, will under-
stand minutely as regards Atthaymazd and the
nature of Aharman (Aharmanith). 6. And he who
is of the righteous is delighted at escaping from
Aharman and coming to the existence pertaining to
Attharmazd; and they shall offer homage to the
glory! of Atharmazd. 7. And he who is wicked,
through being deceived by Aharman, and turning
from the direction (pe/ag) of Athaymazd, becomes
more vexed avd more penitent; the hope (zahisn6)
and forgiveness which he possesses, and the retribu-
tion avd manacling which are his among the fiends
and spirits through his own handiwork, are dy the
permission which comes from the most persistent of
the persistent ? at the period of the resurrection.


1 The word ‘glory’ is always to be understood in its material
sense of ‘radiance, effulgence.’

2 That is, from Aflharmazd. The epithet khvapar, here trans-
lated ‘persistent,’ appears to mean ‘self-sustaining’ in the Avesta
(see Sls. XXII, 21); traditionally it is supposed to mean ‘pro-
tecting, cherishing,’ but this is merely a guess, though it seems
related to Pers. khapArah, ‘active,’ and may, therefore, often
mean ‘ persevering.’


46 pADISTAN-1 DINIK.


CHAPTER XX.


1. The nineteenth question is that you ask thus:
To what place do the righteous and wicked’ go ?

2. The reply is this, that it is thus said that the
souls of those passed away and of the dead? are
three nights on earth; and the first night satisfaction
comes to them from ¢hezr good thoughts azd vexa-
tion from ¢hezr evil thoughts, the second night come
pleasure from ¢heiy good words and discomfort and
punishment*® from ¢hecr evil words, avd the third
night come exaltation from ¢hezr good deeds and
punishment from ¢hezr evil deeds*. 3. And that
third night, in the dawn, they go to the place of
account oz Albirz®; the account dezzg rendered they
proceed to the bridge*, and he who is righteous


1 As K35 inserts the relative i here, some such phrase as ‘ who
are dead’ has probably dropped out of the Pahlavi text.

? The Parsi books speak of the righteous dead as ‘ departed,’
a term very rarely applied to the wicked (see Chap. XXXII, 4),
who are nearly always said ‘to die;’ the latter verb is, however,
occasionally used when speaking of the righteous. This distinc-
tion is made even in the Huzvaris logograms, which express the
death of the righteous by forms allied to Chald. 12 ‘he passed
over, and the death of the wicked by forms allied to Chald. Nn
‘he died.’

* So in all MSS., but the ‘ punishment’ seems superfluous here.

* The Avesta merely states that the soul remains three nights
near the body, chanting a particular hymn, and experiencing as
much pleasure or uneasiness as it had in the world (see Hn. II,
3-17, III, 3-16); and much the same account is given in AV.
IV, 9-14, XVII, 2-9, Mkh. II, 114, 158-160.

> The mountain chain which is supposed to surround the world
(see Bd. XII, 3); the Av. Hara-berezaiti.

° The Kinvad bridge (see Chap. XXI, 2-7), which is said to


CHAPTER XX, I—XXI, I. 47


passes over the bridge on the ascent (lalaih), and
if belonging to the ever-stationary (hamistanikd)!
he goes thither where their place is, if along with
an excess of good works fzs habits are correct
(fraran-dad) he goes even unto heaven (vahisté),
and if adong with an excess of good works and
correct habits Ze has chanted the sacred hymns
(gasan6) he goes even unto the supreme heaven
(garddman6). 4. He who is of the wicked falls
from the lower end (tih) of the bridge, or from the
middle of the bridge; he falls head-foremost to hell,
and is precipitated (nikfint-aitd) unto that grade?
which is saz¢able for his wickedness.


CHAPTER X XI.


1. The twentieth question is that which you ask
thus: How are the Kinvad bridge, the Daitih peak
(kakad), and the path of the righteous and wicked ;


rest upon the Daitih (‘judicial’) peak, and to pass over to Albfirz
(see Bd. XII, 7). According to the Avesta (Vend. XIX, 100, ror,
trans. D.) his conscience, in the form of a maiden, ‘makes the soul
of the righteous one go up above the Hara-berezaiti (Albfirz) ;
above the Kinvad bridge she places it in the presence ‘of the
heavenly gods (angels) themselves.’ See also AV.V,1, 2, Mkh.
II, 115.

1 The intermediate place for those not good enough for heaven
and not bad enough for hell, where such souls remain in a passive,
immovable state till the resurrection (see Sls. VI, 2). It is divided
into two parts, according to the author, one for those nearly
righteous (see Chap. XXIV, 6), and one for those nearly wicked
(see Chap. XXXIII, 2).

2 Four grades of heaven and four of hell are mentioned in AV.
and Mkh. (see Sls. VI, 3, note).


48 DADISTAN-f DINfK.


how ave they when one is righteous, and how when
one is wicked ?

2. The reply is this, that thus the high-priests
have said, that the Daitih peak! is in Airan-vég?, in
the middle of the world; reaching unto the vicinity
of that peak is that beam-shaped (dar-kerp6) spirit,
the Kinvad bridge*, which is thrown across from
the Albfirz enclosure (var) back to the Daitih peak.
3. As 2¢ were that bridge is like a beam of many
sides, of whose edges (pést6) there are some which
are broad, and there are some which are thin and
sharp; its broad sides (sikiha) are so large that
its width is twenty-seven reeds (n4i), and its sharp
sides are so contracted (tang) that in thinness z¢ is
just like the edge of a razor. 4. And when the
souls of the righteous and wicked arrive it turns to
that side which is swz¢ad/e ¢o their necessities, through
the great glory of the creator and the command of
him who Zakes the just account ¢.

5. Moreover, the bridge becomes a broad bridge
for the righteous, as much as the height of nine
spears (nizak6)—and the length of those which
they carry is each separately three reeds°—; and


* The Kakad-i Daitik of Bd. XI, 4.

* The primeval home of Mazda-worship (see Vend. I, 5, 6),
which the Bundahis places ‘in the direction of Adarbigan ae
also stated to contain the Daittk or Daitih river (which must not
be confounded with the Daitih peak) and the Daraga river (on
whose bank Zarattist’s father is said to have dwelt), and to have
been the scene of Zarattist’s first promulgation of the religion (Bd.
XX, 13, 32, XXIX, 12, XXXII, 3). Its winter is likewise described
as both long and cold (Vend. I, 8-12, Bd. XXV, 11,16), which is
the case in Adarbig4n.

® See Chap. XX, 3. * The angel Rashnt.

® The nine spears of three reeds each, in length, making up the


CHAPTER XXI, 2—9. 49


it becomes a narrow bridge for the wicked, even
unto a resemblance to the edge of a razor. 6. And
he who is of the righteous passes over the bridge,
and a worldly similitude of the pleasantness of his
path upon it is when thou shalt eagerly and un-
weariedly walk in the golden-coloured spring, and
with the gallant (hdi-£ir') body and sweet-scented
blossom in the pleasant skin of that maiden? spirit,
the price of goodness. 7. He who is of the wicked,
as he places a footstep oz to the bridge, on account
of affliction (siparih) and z¢s sharpness, falls from
the middle of the bridge, and rolls over head-
foremost. 8. And the unpleasantness of his path
to hell is in similitude such as the worldly ove in the
midst of that stinking azd dying existence (hast4n),
there where numbers of the sharp-pointed darts
(téz6 mfitk dtgd) are planted*® out inverted
and point upwards, and they come unwillingly
running; they shall not allow chem to stay behind,
or to make delay. 9. So much greater than the
worldly similitude is that pleasantness and unplea-
santness unto the souls, as such as is fit for the


spirit is greater than ¢/adé fit for the world.
unre pair. # bt eS ee ee
twenty-seven reeds mentioned in § 3. As the reed appears to
have been about 4 feet 8 inches (see Chap. XLIII, 5, note), the
width of the bridge is supposed to be about 126 feet, and the
length of a spear is taken as 14 feet.

1 So in the MSS., but hfi-Zihar, ‘handsome,’ is more probable.

2 Reading kaniké, instead of the kan4ké of the MSS., as there
can be no allusion to the evil spirit here. The reference is to a
good conscience, which is symbolised by the handsome maiden
who is supposed to meet the righteous soul on its way to heaven
(see Chap. XXIV, 5).

8 Assuming that 4gzast is equivalent to Pers. agast. The
allusion seems to be to a form of torturing punishment (running
upon ground studded with sharp points) well known to the author.


[18] E


50 pApISTAN-? DINIK.


aaa geome cee at


CHAPTER XXII.


1. The twenty-first question is that which you
ask thus: When he who is righteous passes away,
who has performed much worship of the sacred
beings, and many duties and good works, do the
spirit of creation, the spirit of the sacred ceremony
(yazisnd) and religion of the Mazda-worshippers,
the water, earth, plants, and animals, make complaint
unto Atharymazd, owing to the passing away of him
who is righteous, and is it distressing to them when
he goes out from the world, or how is it ?

2, The reply is this, that as ¢o him who is of the
righteous, in As transit of worldly pain in passing
away, and also after passing away to the passage
onwards! which is his limit (star) still in the per-
plexing account, and, after the account, in his own
joy, and in what occurs when his gossips (ham-
vakAn) in the world—by whom the spiritual beings
are also not unrecognised, ov his position unknown
—are in worldly demeanour downcast and grieving,
on all these occasions® his thoughts, procuring for-
giveness, are about the sacred beings. 3. And the
spirit of creation, azd the good spirit of the religion
of the Mazda-worshippers, which are in the worldly
existence—of which? also, in the world, that righteous
one is a praiser, an employer, a manager, a protection,
and a forbearing friend—shall make an outcry to


1 The Ainvad bridge, near which the soul’s account is rendered.

2 The sentence is clear enough in Pahlavi, but too involved to
be readily understood in English without these extra words.

* The worldly existences which those spirits represent.


CHAPTER XXII, I—XXIII, 2. 51
pee Ae ee ae
the creator about him who is righteous, who is away
from worldly protection, a/so for the granting of
a promoter of forbearance, and for a restorer
(avérdar) of what is extorted!; Likewise a petition
about the compensatory concomitants as to his new
protection and disposer.

4. And the almighty creator responds, and allots
a teacher? for smiting the fiend, for the satisfaction
of the righteous, azd for the protection of the good
creatures. 5. As it is said, that in every age a high-
priest of the religion and zs managing of the
creatures are made manifest, in whom, in that age,
the protection of the creatures and the will of the
sacred beings are progressing.


CuaPTeR XXIII.


1. The twenty-second question is that which you
ask thus: When they shall snatch forth the life from
the body of man how does it depart ?

2 the reply is this, that 2¢ is said. 4o de in
resemblance such as when the redness is drawn up
out of a fire; for when the inflammable material of
a fire is burnt, azd has remained without glowing °,


' These latter clauses of the outcry refer to their own wants,
and the necessity of providing some one to take the place of the
deceased; but the final petition seems to be for the deceased
himself.

2 The word may be either farhakht4k6, ‘ preparing, educating,’
or firistak6, ‘sending, deputing,’ and must be used as a sub-
stantive.

® Reading abaris (compare Pers. barz, ‘splendour’), or it may
be abarakh, ‘sparkless,’ if barkh, ‘a spark,’ be a pure Persian
word, which is doubtful.

1D,


AS


52 DADISTAN-f DINIK.


and when it does not obtain new inflammable mate-
vial, or extinguishing matter (nizayisnik) comes
upon z¢, its redness avd heat then depart from it?;
the life, too, on the departure of the breath (vad6
vasakih), does not stay in the body, du¢ zu like
manner departs.

3. Zo alike purport the high-priests of the religion
have also said this, that mortals ad men by listening?
perceive the time when the spirits shall put a noose
(band) on the neck*; when his time Zas fully come
one then conducts him with a companion (pavan
ham-bar)*, and at his falling are the place of
death® and cause of death ; and having made lethargy
(biishasp) deliver him up, and terrified his fever
(tapd), death (adsh) seizes decrepitude (zarman)
away from him ®*.

4. The strength in those intrusted w7zth him, and
the good proceedings azd pursuit of means which
remain behind’, giving them strength, are the deter-


* Mr4 and J omit the remainder of the sentence.

* Reading sinvisn6, but by omitting a stroke we should have
danisn06, ‘knowledge.’

* Of a person at the point of death. The demon of death, Asté-
vidad, is supposed to cast a noose around the necks of the dead to
drag them to hell, which only the righteous can throw off (see
Ba: IIt er, 22).

* That is, the dying man must be conveyed by more than one
person, for fear of such contamination by the demon of corrup-
tion (at the time of death) as would require the tedious Bareshnfiim
ceremonial of purification (see Sls. II, 1, 6-8).

* And, therefore, the place where his body will rise again at the
resurrection (see Sls. XVII, 11-14).

® Lethargy, fever, and decrepitude are considered as fiends, but
are dispossessed by the mightier demon of death. Mr4 and J
mention ‘lethargy,’ but omit the after part of the sentence.

" Alluding probably to the ceremonies to be ordered and per-
formed by the survivors (see Chap. XXVIII, 6, Sls. XVII, 2-6).


CHAPTER XXIII, 3—XXIV, 2. 53


mination (vifir) which is their own inward physician.
5. And should it be a passing away (vidarg) which
obtains no light, and on account of their disquietudes
they have gone to the understanders of remedies for
strength for the remedial duties, and the way is
closed, he proceeds with insufficiency of means}.
6. And the soul of the body, which is the master
of z¢s house (kadak khtidAi), along with the ani-
mating life, goes out of the impotent body to the
immortal souls*, as a wise master of a house goes
out of a foreign (anirand) house to a residence of
the good worship.

7, I¢ was also told to the ancient learned that life
(khay4) is where there is a living spirit within the ©
soul’s body, which is connected with the soul’, as
much as a development (saritfintan6) of the body,
and is the life (zivandakih) of the soul of a body
of one passed away.


CHAPTER XXIV.


1. The twenty-third question is that which you
ask thus: When he who is righteous passes away,
where is the place the soul sits the first night, the
second, and the third; and what does it do?

2. The reply is this, that thus it is said, that the


1 That is, when there are doubts about the fate of the soul, and
the survivors can obtain no satisfactory assurances from the priest-
hood, the soul has to proceed to the other world without suitable
provision for its happiness.

2 The MSS. have ‘soul.’

8 Mr4 and J have ‘which is the soul,’ and omit the remainder


of the sentence.


54 DADISTAN-f DINIK.


soul of man, itself the spirit of the body’, after
passing away, is three nights upon earth, doubtful
about its.own position (gas)?, and in fear of the
account; and it experiences terror, distress (dah-
yak6), and fear through anxiety about the Kinvad
bridge*; and as it sits it notices about its own good
works avd sin. 3. And the soul, which in a manner
belongs to that same spirit of the body which is alike
experiencing and alike touching it, becomes ac-
quainted by sight with the sin which it Zas com-
mitted, and the good works which it as scantily
done. =

4. And the first night from its own good thoughts,
the second night from z¢s good words, and the third
night from z¢s good deeds it obtains pleasure for the
soul; and if also, with the righteousness, there be
sin which remains zz z¢ as its origin, the first punish-
ment in retribution for the evil deed occurs ¢had¢
same third night. 5. The same third night, on
the fresh arrival of a dawn‘, the treasurer of good
works, like a handsome maiden (kanik6)®, comes
out to meet z¢ with the store of its own good works ;
and, collected by witches (pariké-ind), the sin
and crime unatoned for (atékhtd) come on to the
account azd are justly accounted for °


* The ‘spirit of the body’ which is to some extent distinguished
from the ‘soul, both in this chapter and the next, is probably the
life, as described in Chap. XXIII, 7.

* That is, its future position, or ‘ destination,’

° See Chap. XXI, 2-7.

* Reading dén bam-1 nuk ayafté.

Fully described in Hn. I, 22-32, AV. IV, 18-35, Mkh. II,
125-139.

° The author is more practical than most other writers on the
same subject, as he assumes that the righteous soul is not abso-
lutely righteous, nor the wicked soul absolutely wicked.


r


o


CHAPTER XXIV, 3—XxXvV, 4. 55


6. For the remaining (ketrind) sin it undergoes
punishment a the bridge, and the evil thoughts, evil
words, and evil deeds are atoned for; and with the
good thoughts, good words, and good deeds of its
own commendable and pleasing spirit it steps for-
ward unto the supreme heaven (garédm4n6)}, or to
heaven (vahist6), or to the ever-stationary (hami-
stanagan6) of the righteous’, there where there is
a place for it in righteousness.


CHAPTER XXV.


1, The twenty-fourth question is that which you
ask thus: When he who is wicked shall die, where
is the place the soul sits the first night, the second,
and the third; and what does it say and do?

2, The reply is this, that those three nights the
soul is upon earth, avd notices about the thoughts,
words, and deeds of its own body; 7¢ is doubtful —
about its own position, and experiences grievous fear
of the account, great terror of the bridge, and per-
plexing fear on account of hell. 3. Thought is
oppressive as an indicator of fear, and the soul, ina
manner the spirit of the body, is a computer * and
acquirer of acquaintance by sight about the good
works which it Aas not done, and the sin which it
has committed.

4. And the first night z¢ is hastening away from


1 See Chap. XX, 3.

@ There is another place for the ever-stationary of the wicked
(see Chap. XXXUI, 2).

? Assuming that angraidar stands for ang aridar.


56 '  pAnIsSTAN-i DINIK.


its own evil thoughts, the second night from its own
evil words, and the third night from its own evil
deeds; but, owing to the good works which it has
done in the world, the first night the spirit of z¢s
good thoughts, the second night the spirit of z¢s
good words, and the third night the spirit of zs good
deeds, come unto the soul, and become pleasing and
commendable to it.

5. And the third night, on the fresh arrival of a
dawn, its sin, in the frightful, polluted shape of a
maiden (£aratik) who is an injurer, comes to meet
2¢ with the store of its sin; and a stinking northerly!
wind comes out to meet z¢, and it comes on shud-
deringly, quiveringly 2, and unwillingly running to
the account. 6. And through being deceived and
"deceiving, heresy (avartin-dindih), unrelenting and
false* accusation of constant companions, and the
wide-spread sinfulness of a fiend-like existence
(drig-stihih) it is ruined, falls from the bridge,
and is precipitated to hell.


CHAPTER XXVI..


1. The twenty-fifth question is that which you
ask thus : How are the nature of heaven (vahistd),
and the comfort and pleasure which are in heaven ?

2. The reply is this, that z¢ zs lofty, exalted, and
SS eee


* The demons are supposed to come from the north, where the
gates of hell are situated (see Sls. X, “oe

> Reading asté-ststiha nafo-gumdaniha, which may be,
literally, ‘with bones started and with shaking navel;’ but the
reading is doubtful.


* Literally ‘not allowing to hear and false-speaking.’


CHAPTER XXV, 5 —XXVII, 2. bait


supreme, most brilliant, most fragrant, and most
pure, most supplied with beautiful existences, most
desirable, and most good, and the place azd abode
of the sacred beings (yazd4n6). 3. And in it are
all comfort, pleasure, joy, happiness (vasidagih),
and welfare, more avd better even than the greatest
and supremest welfare avd pleasure in the world;
and there is no want, pain, distress, 07 discomfort
whatever zz it; and its pleasantness and the welfare
of the angels are from that constantly-beneficial place
(gAs), the full avd undiminishable space (ging)',
the good and boundless world.

4. And the freedom of the heavenly from danger
from evil in heaven is like unto ther freedom from
disturbance, and the coming of the good angels is
like unto the heavenly ones’ own good works pro-
vided. 5. This prosperity (freh-hast6) and welfare
of the spiritual existence is more than that of the
world, as much as that which is unlimited azd ever-
lasting is more than that which is limited and
demoniacal (sédanik6).


CuapTeR XXVII.


1. The twenty-sixth question is that which you
ask thus: How are the nature of hell, avd the pain,
discomfort *, punishment, and stench of hell ?

2. The reply is this, that 2¢ zs sunken, deep, and
descending, most dark, most stinking, and most
terrible, most supphed with wretched existences


(andzidantim), and most bad, the place and cave
_./) SS | eee ee ee


1 See Chap. XXXI, 24. 2 Or ‘ingloriousness.’


58 pDApISTAN-I DiNiIK.


gréstak6) of the demons and fiends. 3. And in it
is no comfort, pleasantness, ov joy whatever ; dz in
it are all stench, filth, pain, punishment, distress,
profound evil, and discomfort; and ¢here is no re-
semblance of it whatever fo worldly stench, filthi-
ness, pain, and evil. 4. And since ¢here is no
resemblance of the mixed evil of the world to that
which is its sole-indicating (aé-num4i) good, ¢here
is also a deviation (gumisn6) of it from the origin
and abode of evil?.

5. And so much more grievous is the evil in hell
than even the most grievous evil on earth, as the
greatness of the spiritual exzstence is more than that
of the world ; and more grievous is the terror of the
punishment on the soul than that of the vileness of
the demons on the body. 6. And the punishment
on the soul is from those whose abode z¢ has be-
come’, from the demons and darkness—a likeness
of that evil to hell—the head (kamArak6) of whom
is Aharman the deadly.

7. And the words of the expressive utterance of
the high-priests are these, that where ¢here is a fear
of every other thing z¢# is more than the thing itself,
éwt hell is a thing worse than the fear of 7z.


CHaprer X XVITI.


1. The twenty-seventh question is that which
you ask thus: Why and what is Zhe ceremony of


' Meaning, probably, that the mixture of good and evil in the
world is as far removed from heaven as it is from hell. But the
words aé-num4i and gumisn®6 are doubtful both in reading and
meaning.

* That is, hell has become ; reading mn gasto.


CHAPTER XXVIII, 3—XXVIII, 5. 59


the three wzghts (satdih), when during three days
they order and perform the sacred-cake ceremony
(yazisn6d drén6) of Srésh??

2. The reply is this, that the life and soul, when
from the realm of the spirit of air? they attain unto
worldly attire, and have passed into its pain and
misfortune, are more sensitive (naziktar); owing
to their nurture, birth, azd mission, protection and
defence are more desirable and more suitable for
the discreet (hi-4iraganiktar); and milk food,
and renewed (navagtinak) and constant attention
to the fire are requisite*. 3. So also when they
are ousted from bodily existence, and pain and the
eradication of life have come upon them, éhey are
in like manner more sensitive, and sending them
protection and defence from spirits and worldly
existences is more desirable. 4. And on account
of their spiritual character the offering (firistisn6)
of gifts for the angels, fit for the ritual of a spirit
(mainok nirangik), is more presentable; and also
a fire newly tended (négénd) is that which is more
the custom in the sacred ceremony (yazisn6).

5, For the same reason 2 the three days when
in connection with the soul the sacred ceremony,
the burning of fire, z¢s cleanly clearance (gdndisn6),


1 See Chap. XIV, 4.

2 Reading min mainOdk vayih, and assuming that ‘the good
Vae’ (the Vayé of the Ram Yt.), who is often called the angel
RAm, is alluded to (see Chap. RX kay ols. pd VIL 4). The
life and soul are treated as one being in this chapter, as all the
verbs and pronouns referring to them are in the singular number
in the Pahlavi text.

8 Referring to the proper care of new-born infants, for whose
protection from the demons a bright fire is to be kept constantly
burning for three days (see Sls. Xilh ex, 22).


60 DADISTAN-1 DINIK.


and other religious and ritualistic defence, feeding
on milk and eating with a spoon! are ordered,
because—as the sacred ceremony, the defence and
protection of the worldly existences, is, by order of
the creator, the business of Srdsh the righteous %,
and fe is also one of ¢hose taking the account in the
three nzghts*—Srdsh the righteous gives the soul,
for three days and nights, the place of the spirit of
air in the world, and protection. 6. And because
of the protectiveness of Srdsh, and Z¢hat one is
assisted likewise by Srésh’s taking the account, and
for that purpose, are the manifest reasons for per-
forming azd ordering the ceremony of Srésh for
three days and nights ‘+.

7- And the fourth day the ordering and perform-
ing the ceremony of the righteous guardian spirit
(ardai fravardd)* are for the same soul and the
remaining righteous guardian spirits of those who
are and were and will be, from GAéydmard the
propitious to Séshans the triumphant °,


CHAPTER XXX:


1. The twenty-eighth question is that you ask .
thus: For what reason is it not allowable to perform


* No meat is to be eaten by the survivors until the third night
has passed away (see Sls. XVI)

* The angel Srésh is said to have been the first creature who
performed the sacred ceremony (see Yas. LVI, i, 2-7, il, 2—4, iii,
2-4), of which the spiritual counterpart was produced by Afihar-
mazd during the creation (see Bd. II, 9).

PCCC RAD. oC LVs ae * See Sis. XVID 3.

° See Sls. XVIL, 5:

* That is, from the first man to the last ; the phrase is quoted
from Yas. XXVI, 33.


CHAPTER XXVIII, 6—XxxX, 2. 61


the ceremony of Srésh, the living spirit (ahv6)},
along with other propitiations (shnimand)2, when
they reverence him separately?

2. The reply is this, that the lord of all ¢hzngs is
the creator who is persistent over his own creatures,
and a precious work is his own true service * which
is given by him to Srésh the righteous whom, for
this reason, ove is to reverence separately when even
his name is not frequently mentioned, and ove is not
even to reverence the names of the archangels with
him.


CHAPTER XXX.


1. The twenty-ninth question is that which you
ask thus: The third night, in the light of dawn,
what is the reason for consecrating separately the
three sacred cakes‘ with three dedications (shnt-
man)?

2.- The reply is this, that one sacred cake, whose
dedication is o Rashnti and Astad®, is for ° satisfying


1 Probably a miswriting of ashdék, ‘righteous,’

2 Short formulas of praise, reciting all the usual titles of the
spirits intended to be propitiated by them, which are introduced
into a particular part of the liturgy to dedicate the ceremony to the
particular spirit in whose honour it is being performed (see Sls.
VII, 8).

® Reading béndakih; but it may be baindakih, ‘ complete-
ness, perfection.’

4 The dr6n, or sacred cake, is a small flexible pancake which
is consecrated in the ceremonies, and dedicated to some particular
spirit by means of the shnfman, or propitiatory dedication (see Sls.
TES 32).

° See Sls. XVII, 4. These two angels are supposed to be
present when the soul renders its account; Rashnii weighs its
actions in his golden balance, and Astad assists it (see AV. V, 3, 5):

° Reading rai, instead of 14, ‘ not.’


jae a


62 DADISTAN-1 DINIK.


the light of dawn and the period of Adshahin’,
because the mountain Atishdéstar? is mentioned
in the propitiation of the angel Astdd. 3. With
AstAd is the propitiation of the period of Atishahin ®,
and she is the ruler of glory* of that time when the
account occurs; the souls are in the light of the
dawn of Atishahin when they go to the account;
their passage (vid@ar) is through the bright dawn.

4. One sacred cake, which is in propitiation of
the good Vaé5, is, moreover, on this account:
whereas the bad Vaé° is a despoiler and destroyer,
even so the good V4é is a resister (kikhshidar),
and likewise encountering the bad Vaé; e is also
a diminisher (viztidd4r) of his abstraction of life,


* One of the five periods of the day and night, extending from
midnight until the stars disappear in the dawn, or, as some say,
until all the fixed stars disappear except four of the first magnitude
(see Bd. XXV, 9, Sls. XIV, 4-6).

» Called Ushi-darena in the Avesta, and identified with some
mountain in Sagastan in Bd, XII,15. It is mentioned in the
dedicatory formula of Astdd (see Sir. 26), and its name is evidently
here supposed to mean ‘the holder of dawn, an appropriate term
for a lofty mountain to the eastward.

® Both Rashnd and Astdd are blessed in the prayers appointed
for the Afishahin period of the day.

* The ‘glory of the Aryans’ is lauded in the Ast4d Vast.

° The spirit of air, or angel Ram, who receives and protects the
good soul on its way to the other world (see Chap. XXVIII, 2, 5).

* Identified with Asté-vidad, the demon of death, in Bd. XXVIII,
35, but Pahl. Vend. V, 25, 31 makes him a separate demon, who
conveys away the bound soul, which would identify him with the
demon Vizarésh of Vend. XIX, 94, Bd. XXVIII, 18. There is
very little doubt, however, that the Pahlavi translator of Vend. V
misunderstood the Avesta, which merely says that ‘ Asté-vidhétu
binds him, Vayé conveys him bound,’ referring probably to the
good Vaé who receives the parting soul; and Pahl. Vend. Mo
admits that this was the opinion of some.


CHAPTER XXX, 3~XXXI, 3. 6


(SS)


and a receiver and protection of life, on account of
the sacred cake},


Cuarrer XX XI-


1. The thirtieth question is that which you ask
thus: When a soul of the righteous goes on to
heaven, in what manner does it go; also, who
receives it, who leads? z¢,and who makes it a house-
hold attendant * of Adhaymazd? Also, does any one
of the righteous in heaven come out to meet it, and
shall any thereof make enquiry of it, or how?
2. Shall they also make up an account as to its sin
and good works, and how is the comfort and
pleasantness in heaven shown to it; also, what is
its food? 3. Zs zt also their assistance which


* Nothing is here said about the third sacred cake, but Sls.
XVII, 4 states that this is to be dedicated to the righteous guardian
spirit (see Chap. XXVIII, 7).

® It is doubtful whether the verb be yezrfin (a corruption of
yezdertin) or dezrin (a corruption of dedrfin), but both forms
are traceable to the same Semitic root (124), one with and the
other without the prefix ‘ye,’ and both, therefore, have nearly the
same meaning.

§ Reading khavag-t-m4n, ‘servant of the house’ (see also §§ 5,8,
Chaps. XXXII, 7, XXXVII, 16, 47, 21, XLIII, 1, XLVIII, 41).
This word occurs in Pahl. Vend. XIX, 102, in a compound which
is doubtfully read avidamankar 4n6, ‘those acting without time,
eternal ones,’ in Haug’s Essays, p. 388 (it should be ‘ those acting
as household attendants’). It also occurs in the Pazand tract called
AogemadaéAé, from its initial word (see Geiger’s ed. p. 23, § 11),
where it is read axdim4ni, and translated by Sans. pratthara,
‘ doorkeeper ;’ but in a Pahlavi version of this tract (which seems
to form part of the Afrin-i Dahm4n, and differs considerably from
the Pazand text) this word is replaced by béndak manik-1,
‘a household servant,’ which confirms the reading adopted here.


64 DADISTAN-? DiNik.


reaches unto the world, or not? And is the limit
(sAm4n6) of heaven manifest, or what way zs 72?

4. The reply is this, that a soul of the righteous
steps forth unto heaven through the strength of the
spirit of good works, along with the good spirit?
which is the escort (parvanak6) of the soul, into
its allotted station and the uppermost (tayik6) which
is for its own good works; adong with the spiritual
good works, without ¢hose for the world, and a crown
and coronet?, a turban-sash and a fourfold fillet-
pendant *, a decorated robe (gamak6) and suitable
equipments, spiritually flying unto heaven (vahist6),
or to the supreme heaven (garédm4n), there where
its place is. 5. And Vohtiman‘, the archangel,
makes it a household attendant (khavag-i-mdani-
néd5) to Atharvmazd the creator, azd by order of
Athaymazd announces z¢s position (g 4s) and reward;
and it becomes glad to beg for the position of
household attendant of No tere nee. Chore what
it sees and knows.

6. Atharmazd the creator of good producers


1 Probably the good V4é, the spirit of air (see Chaps. XXVIII,
2, 5, SXIX, 4).

> Reading rukho vardivand6, which words also occur in AV.
XII, 16, XIV, 9. A most elaborate account of heaven and hell
will be found in the Book of Arda Viraf with an English Transla-
tion, ed. Héshangji and Haug, 1872.

> Reading vas va kaharako balak.

* Vend. XIX, 102-104 (trans. D.) states as follows: ‘ Up rises
Vohu-man6 from his golden seat; Vohu-mané exclaims: “How
hast thou come to us, thou holy one, from that decaying world into
this undecaying one?” Gladly pass the souls of the righteous to
the golden seat of Ahura Mazda, to the golden seat of the Ame-
sha-spemtas, to the Gardé-nmanem, the abode of Ahura Mazda,
the abode of the Amesha-spemtas, the abode of all the other holy
beings.’


CHAPTER XXXI, 4-9. 65
Cae eek ele LE a eid
(dahak&n) is a spirit even among spirits, and Spirits
even ave looked for a sight of him; which Spirits
are manifestly above worldly existences’. 7. But
when, through the majesty? of the creator, spirits
_ put on worldly appearances (vénisnéih4), or are
attending (sinayanik5) to the world and spirit, and
put away appearance (vénisnd apadégénd), then
he whose patron spirit (ahv6)? is in the world is
able to see the attending spirits, in such similitude
as when they see bodies in which is a soul‘, or
when they see a fire in which is Varahran®, or see
water in which is its own spirit®. 8. Moreover, in
that household attendance, ¢Lat Atharmazd has seen
the soul is certain, for Atharmazd sees all ¢hings ;
and many even of the fiend’s souls’, who are put
away from those of Afthaymazd in spiritual under-
_ standing, are delighted by the appearance (numt-
dan6) of those of Atharymazd.
9. And the righteous in heaven, who have been


* Implying that Aflharmazd can hardly be considered visible,
except by the eye of faith (see Chap. XIX, 2).

? Assuming that rab4-vanagih is equivalent to Pers. buzur-
ganagi, ‘ magnificence.’

* The ahvé (Av. ahf) seems to be a spiritual protector, some-
what similar to a patron saint; as, according to the Ahunavar, the
most sacred formula of the Parsis (see Bd. I, 21, Zs. I, 12-109),
both an ahfi and a ratu are to be chosen, that is, both a patron
spirit and a high-priest.

‘ That is, he sees the spirits by means of their material mani-
festations.

5 The old Pahl. form of Vahram, the angel whose name is
applied to the sacred fire (see Bd. XVII,1, 2,9); he is the Av.
Verethraghna of the Bahram Yt.

6 The female angel of water is the Av. ardvi sfitra Andhita of
the Aban Yt.

7 The souls in hell.


[18] F


66 pApIsTAN-t DINIK.


his intimate friends, of the same religion and like
goodness, speak to him of the display of affection,
the courteous enquiry, and the suitable eminence
from coming to heaven, and his everlasting well-
being in heaven.

10. And the account as to sin and good works
does not occur unto the heavenly oves ; 7¢ zs itself
among the perplexing questions of this treatise, for
the taking of the account and the atonement for the
sins of a soul of those passed away and appointed
unto heaven happen so}, although its place (gas) is
there? until the renovation of the universe, and z
has no need for a new account. 11. And that
account is at the time the account occurs; ‘those
taking the account are Attharmazd, Vohtiman, Mitré,
Srésh, and Rashna, and they shall make up the
account of all with justice, each one at his own time,
as the reply is written in its own chapter *.

12. As to that which you ask concerning food,
the meals of the world are ¢akex in two ways:
one is the distribution of water in haste, and one
is with enjoyment (atirvazisnd) to the end; du¢
in heaven there is no haste as to water, and re-
joicing with much delight ¢Zzy are like unto those
who, as worldly beings, make an end of a meal
of luxury (afirvazisnikih). 13. To that also whch
is the spiritual completion of the soul’s pleasure
7f is attaining in like proportion’, and in its ap-
pearance to worldly beings z¢ is a butter of the
name of Maidyék-zarem®, 14. And the reason of


1 Asin Chap. XXIV, 5, 6. 2 In heaven.

5’ See Chap. XIV, 2-5.

* This sentence is rather ambiguous in the original.

5 Said to be the food of the souls in heaven (see Hn, II, 38,


CHAPTER XXXI, IO-I5. 67


that name of it is this, that of the ‘material food
in the world that which is the product of cattle
is said ¢o Je the best (pashtim), among the pro-
ducts of cattle zz wse as food is the butter of milk,
and among butters that is extolled as to goodness
which they shall make zz the second month of
the year?, and when Mitré? is in the constellation
Taurus; as that month is scripturally (dindikd)
called ZareméyA*, the explanation of the name to
be accounted for is this, that its worldly repre-
sentative (andazak6é) is the best food in the
world.

15. And ¢here is no giving out of assistance dy
the soul of the righteous from heaven and the
supreme heaven‘; for, as ¢o that existence full


Mkh. II, 152) ; it is to be distinguished from the draught of immor-
tality, called Hfsh, which is prepared from the fat of the ox
Hadhayés and the white Hém at the time of the resurrection (see
Bd. XXX, 25).

? If the writer refers to the correct solar year of Bd. XXV, 21,
beginning at the vernal equinox, the second month would be~
tgth April—19th May when the sun is in the conventional sign of
Taurus ; but the ordinary Parsi year in his time commenced in the
middle of April, and its second month would be May—June when
the sun (about a.p. 880) would be in the actual constellation of
Taurus. So that the statements in the text afford no certain indi-
cation of the particular calendar used by the author.

2 The angel of the sun’s light, here used for the sun itself.

$ The fifteenth day of the second month of the Parsi year is the
season festival called Maidhy6-zaremaya, ‘ mid-verdure,’ in the
Avesta; being also the middle of the second month, the author
assumes that the name of that month was originally Zaremaya.
The Pahl. word can also be read Zar-mah, ‘the month of gold, or
the green month,’

4 That is, there is no intercession of saints for those still in the
world. The only interceders are the angels and guardian spirits,
and they go no further than to obtain strict justice for every one
according to his worldly merits.

F 2


68 pApIsTAN-f DINIK.

i aa ge ee
of joy, chere is then no deserving of it for any
one unless each one is fully worthy of it. 16. But
the soul has a remembrance of the world and
worldly people, z¢s relations azd gossips ; and he
who is unremembered and unexpecting (abarmar-
vad) is undisturbed, and enjoys in his own time
all the pleasure of the world as it occurs in the
renovation of the universe, and wishes to attain to
it. 17. And, in like manner, of the comfort, plea-
sure, and joy of the soul, which, dezzg attained in
proportion, they cause to produce in heaven and
the supreme heaven, its own good works of every
kind are a comfort and pleasure such as ¢here are
in the world from a man who is a wise friend—
he who is a reverent worshipper—and other edu-
cated men, to her who is a beautiful, modest, and
husband-loving woman—she who is a manager
(arAst4r) under protection—and other women who
are clever producers of advantage. 18. This’, too,
which arises from beasts of burden, cattle, wild
beasts, birds, fish, and other species of animals;
this, too, from luminaries, fires, streams (hd-tagis-
n4n), winds, decorations, metals, and coloured
earths; this, too, which is from the fences (par-
dakand) of grounds, houses, avd the primitive
lands of the well-yielding cattle; this*, too, which
is from rivers, fountains, wells, azd the primary
species of water; this, too, which is from trees
and shrubs, fruits, grain, and fodder, salads, aro-
matic herbs, azd other plants; this, too, which is


1 Reading sid 4z kar4n6, and identifying the second word with
Pers. 42.

2 That is, the pleasure.

* This clause is omitted in M14 and J. _


CHAPTER XXXI, 16-22. 69


the preparation of the land for these! creatures
and primitive creations; this, too, from the species
of pleasant tastes, smells, and colours of all natures,
the producers of protections’, the patron spirits
(ahdan), and the appliances of the patron spirits,
can come unto mortals.

19. And what the spirit of good works is in
similitude is expressly a likeness of stars and males,
females and cattle, fires and sacred fires, metals
of every kind, dogs, lands, waters, end plants?
20. The spiritual good works are attached (ava-
yakhté) to the soul, and in the degree and pro-
portion which are their strength, due to the
advancement of good works by him who is right-
eous, they are suitable as enjoyment for him who is
righteous. 21. He obtains durability thereby * and
necessarily preparation, conjointly wz constant
pleasure and without a single day’s vexation (ayém-
aé-béshiha).

22. There is also an abundant joyfulness, of
which no example is appointed (vakht6) in the
world from the beginning, but it comes thus to
those who are heavenly ones aud those of the
supreme heaven; and of which even the highest
worldly happiness and pleasure are no similitude,
except through the possession of knowledge which
is said fo de a sample of z¢ for worldly beings.


1 [It is doubtful whether we should read le-denmanshand,
a rare plural form of denman, ‘this,’ or whether it should be
le-denman yazgd4nd; in the latter case the translation would be
‘for these creatures of the sacred beings.’

2 Assuming that zinhar4n6 stands for zinharano, otherwise
we must read z6har4n6, ‘holy-waters.’

8 The chief objects benefited by good works.

¢ Reading hang4mth-ash, but the construction is unusual.


70 _ pApisTAN-f DINIK.


23. And of zs indications by the world the limited
with the unlimited, the imperishable with perish-
ableness, the consumable with inconsumableness
are then no equivalent similitudes of it. 24. And
7¢ zs the limited, perishable, and consumable ¢hzngs
of the world’s existence which are the imperishable
and inconsumable ones of the existence of endless
light*, the indestructible oves of the all-beneficial
and ever-beneficial space (gfing)*, and the all-
joyful oxes—without a single day’s vexation—of
the radiant supreme heaven (garédm4n6). 25. And
the throne (g4s) of the righteous in heaven and
the supreme heaven is the reward he obtains first,
and is his until the resurrection, when even the
world becomes pure azd undisturbed; he is himself
unchangeable thereby, duv¢ through the resurrec-
tion he obtains what is great and good and perfect,
and is eternally glorious.


CHAPTER XXXII.


1. The thirty-first question is that which you ask
thus: When he who is wicked goes to hell, how


* Meaning that no adequate conception can be obtained of the
enjoyments of heaven by contrasting the earthly objects which
most resemble it with those most opposed to it.

* The place of Atharmazd, or heaven in general (see Bd. I, 2),
where things which are perishable on earth become everlasting.

* The ‘constantly-beneficial place’ of Pahl. Vend. XIX, 122,
‘which is self-sustained, (its constant beneficialness is this, that,
when it once became sq, all of it became thereby ever-beneficial).’
The Avesta version (trans. D.) merely calls it ‘ the sovereign place
of eternal weal ;’ and it appears from Chap. XXXVI, 22, 24 that
it is here understood as the unlimited space of heaven, contained
in the ‘endless light. .


CHAPTER XXXI, 23—XXXII, 5. 71


does he go, avd in what manner does he go; also,
who comes to meet him, and who leads him! to
hell; also, does any one of the infernal ones (dtisa-
hdiikand) come to meet him, or how is it?
2. Shall they also inflict punishment upon him,
for the sin which he Zas committed, at once, or is
his punishment the same until the future existence ?
3. Also, what is their food in hell, and of what
description are their pain axzd discomfort; and is
the limit of hell manifest, or how is it ?

4. The reply is this, that a soul of the wicked,
the fourth night after passing away’, z¢s account
being rendered, rolls head-foremost and _totters
(kapinédd) from the Kinvad bridge*; and Viza-
rash ‘4, the demon, conveys (ndyedd)*® him cruelly
bound therefrom, and leads him unto hell. 5. And
with him are the spirits azd demons connected
with the sin of that sow/, watching in many guises,
resembling the very producers of doubt (viman-
dadaran-if), the wounders, slayers, destroyers,
deadly ones, monsters (das-gerp4n6), and criminals,
ee ee ee ee een oes


1 Mrq and J omit the words from ‘also’ to ‘leads him.’

2 The term ‘passing away’ is here used with reference to the
death of a wicked person, contrary to the general rule (see
Chap. XX, 2).

8 See Chap. XX, 3.

4 «Then the fiend, named Vizaresha, carries off in bonds the
souls of the wicked Daéva-worshippers who live in sin’ (Vend. XIX,
94, trans. D.); see also Bd. XXVIII, 18, where the name is Viza-
résh, but it is always Vizarash in Dd. Here it has been first
miswritten in K35, and afterwards corrected, so that later copyists
have read Virdsh, as in Mr4 and J. :

5 Identifying the verb with Av. nayéiti of Vend. V, 25, 31; OF
it may be read vayedo, and identified with Av. vayéiti of Vend.
XV, 17, or Av. vadhayéiti of Vend. XIX, 94, without much
change of meaning.


72 '  pApistAn-f pinik.


those who are unseemly, those, too, who are dis-
eased and polluted, biters and tearers, noxious
creatures, windy stenches, glooms, fiery stenches,
thirsty ones, those of evil habits, disturbers of sleep
(khvap-khardan), and other special causers of sin
and kinds of perverting, with whom, in worldly
semblance, are the spiritual causers of distress.
6. And proportional zo the strength azd power
which ave become theirs, owing to his sin, they
surround him. uncomfortably, and make him ex-
perience vexation, even unto the time of the reno-
vation of the universe, 7. And through the leading
of Vizarash? he comes unwillingly unto hell, becomes
a household attendant (khavag-i-mAandi-aitd) of
the fiend and evil oze, is repentant of the delusion
of a desire for fables (vardakiha), is a longer
for getting away from hell to the world, and has
a wonderful desire for good works.

8. And his food is as a sample of those which
are among the most fetid, most putrid, most pol-
luted, and most thoroughly unpleasant; and there
is no enjoyment and completeness zz his eating,
but he shall devour (ga/4d) with a craving which
keeps him hungry and thirsty, due to water which
is hastily s¢pped*. 9. Owing to that vicious habit
there is no satisfaction therefrom, but it increases
his haste and the punishment, rapidity, and tedious-
ness of his anguish.

to. The locality* in hell is not limited (sAmAni-


eee
1 See § 4.
* Referring to the fact that a person who is both hungry and
thirsty cannot quench his thirst, for more than a few minutes, by
drinking water without eating.


* Or, perhaps, ‘his position,’ if we read divAk-as instead of


CHAPTER XXXII, 6-13. vies


ait) before the resurrection, avd until the time of
the renovation of the universe heis inhell. 11. Also
out of his sin is the punishment connected wth zz,
and that punishment comes upon him, from the
fiend azd spirit of his own sin, in that manner and
proportion with which he as harassed and vexed
others*, and has reverenced, praised, and served that
which is vile.

12. And at the time of the renovation, when the
fiend perishes, the souls of the wicked pass into
melted metal (ayén6)? for three days; and all fiends
and evil thoughts, which are owing to their sin, have
anguish effectually, and are hurried away by the
cutting and breaking away of the accumulation
(ham-dadakih) of sin of the wicked souls. 13.
And by that pre-eminent (avartim) ablution in the
melted metal they are thoroughly purified from guilt
and infamy (dasté va raspaké6), and through the
perseverance (khvaparih)* and mercifulness of the
pre-eminent persistent ones they are pardoned, and
become most saintly (mégttim) pure ones; as it is
said in metaphor that the pure are of two kinds, one
which is glorious (khvarvaté), avd one which is
metallic (ayénavaté)*.


divakth, but the former reading would be more of a modern
Persian idiom than a Pahlavi one.

1 Or, ‘the good,’ the word is not expressed in the Pahlavi text.

2 Bd. XXX, 20 states that both the righteous and wicked are
finally purified by melted metal which is a torment to the latter,
but only like a bath in warm milk to the former.

8 See Chap. XIX, 7 n.

4 This is probably a misapplication of a Pahlavi phrase which
contained the word 4snavato, ‘indestructible,’ and was the trans-
lation of an Avesta passage containing the words Av athravand,
‘brilliant, glorious, and 4sna, ‘stony, indestructible, enduring’ (often
translated ‘heavenly’), which words are sometimes used together,


74 pApisTAN-f DINIK.


14. And after that purification there are no de-
mons, no punishment, azd no hell as regards the
wicked, and their disposal (virdstak6) also is just;
they become righteous, painless, deathless, fearless,
and free from harm. 15. And with them comes the
spirit of the good works which were done ad insti-
gated by them in the world, and procures them
pleasure and joy in the degree and proportion of
those good works. 16. But the recompense of a


soul of the righteous is a better formation (véh-
dadih) and more’.


CHAPTER XXXIII.


1. As ¢o the thirty-second question and reply,
that which you ask is thus: In which direction and
which land is hell, and how is it?

2. The reply is this, that the place of a soul of
the wicked, after the dying off? of the body, is in
three districts (vimand): one of them is called ¢hat
of the ever-stationary® of the wicked, and it is a


as in Yas. LIX, 14. As the Pahl. Asnavaté and ayénavaté are
written alike they are easily confounded, but that ‘metal’ is meant
here appears from Yas. L, 9, b, Bd. XXX, 20.

* Mrq has ‘and the position of more good works is better, the
rank is greater, and the pleasure avd delight more.’

? Literally ‘dying down.’

* Assuming that ham-hastak4n, ‘co-existences, associates,’ is
meant for hamfstak4n (see the hamfst4niké of Chap. XX, a):
From this it would appear that the place of the Hamistak4n, inter-
mediate between heaven and h Il, was itself supposed by the author
to be divided into two widely separated regions, one for the slightly
righteous (see Chap. XXIV, 6), and one for the slightly wicked,
as here described. No such separation is mentioned in AV. and
Mkh., and the passage is omitted in M14.


CHAPTER XXXII, 14—XXXIII, 5. 75


chaos (g¢timézak5), but the evil is abundantly and
considerably more than the good; and the place is
terrible, dark, stinking, and grievous wz¢h evil. 3.
And one is that which is called the worst existence,
and it is there the first tormentors (vikhrunigdn6)
and demons have ¢hezy abode; it is full of evil and
punishment, and there is no comfort and pleasure
whatever. 4. And one is called Drigdskan!, and is
at the bottom of the gloomy existence, where the
head (kamarak5d) of the demons rushes; there is
the populous abode of all darkness and all evil.

5. These three places, collectively, are called hell,
which is northerly, descending, and underneath this
earth, even unto the utmost declivity of the sky;
and its gate is in the earth, a place of the northern
quarter, and is called the Areztir ridge’, a mountain
which, among its fellow mountains of the name of
Areztr® that are amid the rugged (kéfik) mountains,
is said in revelation‘ zo have a great fame with the
demons, and the rushing together and assembly of
the demons in the world are on the summit of that
mountain, ov as it is called ‘the head of Areztir.’


1 The Av. drugaskanam of Vend. XIX. 139, which is trans-
lated ‘the slothful ones of the Drug’ by Darmesteter, ‘the servants
of the Drug’ by Harlez, and ‘ wizards’ in Haug’s Essays, p. 336.
Drfigdsk4n is said to be a son of the evil spirit in Bd. XXXI, 6.

2 See Bd. XII, 8.

8 Bd. XII, 16 mentions another Arezfir ‘in the direction of
Arfim,

4 Vend. XIX, 142 (trans. D.) says ‘they run away casting the
evil eye, the wicked, evil-doing Datvas: “ Let us gather together
at the head of Areztira!”’


76 DADISTAN-f DINIK.


CHAPTER XXXIV.


1. As ¢o the thirty-third question and reply, that
which you ask is thus: In what manner is there one
way of the righteous from the Daitih peak! to
heaven, and one of the wicked to hell; and whaz zs
their nature ?

2. The reply is this, that one is for ascent, and
one for descent; and on account of both being of
one appearance I write thus much for understanding |
and full explanation, that is to say :—3. The right-
eous souls pass over on the Kinvad bridge? by
spiritual flight and the power of good works; and
they step forth up to the star, or to the moon, or to
the sun station, or to the endless light* 4. The
soul of the wicked, owing to z¢s falling from the
bridge, its lying demon, and the pollution collected
by its sin, they shall lead therefrom to the descent
into the earth, as both ways dead from that bridge
on the Daitih peak.


CuapTter XXXYV.


1. The thirty-fourth question is that which you
ask thus: Does this world become quite without
men *, so that ¢here is no bodily existence in 7¢ what-


* See Chap. XXI, 2. * See Chap. XXI, 2-¥.

° These are the four grades of heaven, as described in AV.
VII-X, Mkh. VII, 9-11.

* Reading avtk (or avih) anshtita, but it may possibly be
avi-r anshfita, ‘ without a single man.’


CHAPTER XXXIV, I-XXXVI, 2. 77


ever, and then shall they produce the resurrection,
or how is it?

2. The reply is this, that this world, continuously
from z¢s immaturity even unto z¢s pure renovation,
has never been, and also wzd/ not be, without men;
and zz the evil spirit, the worthless (asapir), no
stirring desire of this arises. 3. And near to the
time of the renovation the bodily existences desist
from eating, and live without food (pavan akhtris-
nih)!; and the offspring who are born from them
are those of an immortal, for they possess durable
and blood-exhausted (khtin-girai) bodies. 4. Such
are they who are the bodily-existing men that are in
the world when there are men, passed away, who
rise again and live again.


CHAPTER XXXVI.


1. The thirty-fifth question is that which you ask
thus: Who are they who are requisite in producing
the renovation of the universe, who were they, and
how are they?

2. The reply is this, that of those assignable for
that most perfect work the statements recited are
lengthy, for even Gayémard, Yim the splendid,
Zarattist the Spitaman?, the sfzvitual chief (rad@5)
of the righteous, and many great thanksgivers were


1 Bd. XXX, 3 states that men first abstain from meat, after-
wards from vegetables and milk, and, finally, from water.

2 See Chap. II, 10. His title, which is nearly always written
Spitaman in K35 (rarely Spitaman), is Av. spitama or spitama,
but is usually understood to mean ‘descendant of Spitama,’ his
ancestor in the ninth generation (see Bd. XXXII, I).


78 DApISTAN-f DINIK.


appointed for completing the appliances of the reno-
vation; and their great miracles and_ successful
(avakiraganik) management “ave moved on, which
works for the production of the renovation’. 3.
Likewise, on the approach of the renovation, Kere-
sdsp? the SAman who smites Dahak, Kai-Khtsrdi *
who was made to pass away by Vaé the long-con-
tinuing lord+, Tas and Vévan* the allies (avakan6),
and many other mighty doers are aiding the produc-
tion of the renovation.

4. But those who are the producers of the reno-
vation more vexowned throughout the spheres (v4s-
poharakdaniktar) are said Zo de seven, whose names
are Rdshandé-£ashm °, Khir-£ashm, Fradad-gadman,


' That is, even these ancient rulers and legislators have contri-
buted to the final renovation of the universe by their wise actions
and laws.

2 See Chap. XVII, 6.

* Av. Kavi Husravangh, the third king of the Kayanian dynasty
(see Bd. XXXI, 25, XXXIV, 7), whose mysterious disappearance,
as related in the Shahnamah, is evidently alluded to here.

* The Av. vayim dareghé-Avadhaitim of Khirshéd Ny4-
yish, 1, that seems to be identified here with the good Vaé (see
Chap. XXX, 4), who conducts the soul to the other world.

° The Tfs and Giw of Bd. XXIX, 6 and the Shahn4mah, where
they are said to have been frozen in the mountain snow, with other
warriors, after the disappearance of Kai-Khfsréi. They are the
Av. Tusa of Aban Yt. 53, 58, and, perhaps, Gaévani of Frav-
ardin Yt.115, but the Pahlavi form Vévan (or Viv6) of our text
is inconsistent with the latter identification; the form Giw of Bd.
XXIX, 6 is merely Pazand.

* These names are the Av. Raofkas-kaéshman, Hvare-aéshman,
Fradad-hvaren6, Varedad-Avarend, Vouru-neméd, Vouru-savé, and
Saoshyas of Fravardin Yt. 128, 129, partly transcribed, partly trans-
lated, and partly corrupted into Pahlavi. The corruptions are easily
explained thus: Av. vouru, ‘wide,’ when written in Pahlavi is
often identical with varen, ‘desire,’ and has been so read by a
later copyist and then translated by its synonym kamak; Av,


CHAPTER XXXVI, 3-7. 79


Varedad-gadman, Kamak-vakhshisn, Kamak-stid, and
Séshans. 5. As it is said that in the fifty-seven
years’, which are the period of the raising of the dead,
Réshané-éashm in Arzah?, Khir-Zashm in Savah,
Fradad-gadman in Fradadafsh, Varedad-gadman in
Vidadafsh, Kamak-vakhshisn in Vortbarst, and
Kamak-std in Vortgarst, while Séshans in the
illustrious azd pure Khvaniras is connected with
them, are immortal. 6. The completely good sense,
perfect hearing, and full glory of those seven pro-
ducers of the renovation are so miraculous that they
converse from region unto region, every one to-
gether with the six others, just as now men at an
interview utter words of conference and co-operation
with the tongue, one to the other, and can hold a
conversation *.

7. The same perfect deeds for six? years in the
six other regions, and for fifty years in the illustrious
Khvaniras®, prepare immortality, and set going ever-


nem6 is translated by Pahl. ntyayisn, ‘homage, praise,’ which is
written very much like vakhshisn, ‘increase,’ and has been so
read by a later copyist. For the first two names and the last see
Chap. II, ro.

1 The same period is mentioned in Bd. XXX, 7,

2 That is, there is one of the seven producers of the renovation
in each of the seven Késhvars, or regions of the earth, of which
Arzah is the western, Savah the eastern, Fradadafsh and Vidadafsh
the two southern, Vérfibarst and Vértigarst the two northern, and
Khvantras the central one (see Bd. V, 8, 9, XI, 2-4).

8 If this passage were found in the Christian scriptures, it would
very probably be considered as a prophetical allusion to the electric
telegraph and telephone.

4 So in all MSS., but one would expect it to be ‘seven,’ so as to
complete the fifty-seven years of § 5. The number being written
in ciphers the difference between ‘six’ and ‘seven’ is very slight,

6 This central region of the earth is that which contains Iran
and all lands well known to the Iranians.


80 DADISTAN-1 DINIK.


lasting life and everlasting weal (stidih) through the
help and power and glory of the omniscient and
beneficent spirit, the creator Atharmazd.


CHAPTER XXXVII.


1. As do the thirty-sixth question and reply, that
which you ask is thus: How shall they produce the
resurrection, how do they prepare the dead, and
when the dead are prepared by them, how are they?
2. When it is produced by them, is an increase in
the brilliance of the stars, moon, and sun necessary,
and does it arise, or not? are ¢here seas, rivers, and
mountains, or not? and is the world just as large as
this, or does it become more so and wider?

3. The reply is this, that the preparation and
production of the resurrection are an achievement
connected with miracle, a sublimity (rabaih), and,
afterwards, also a wondrous appearance unto the
creatures who are uninformed. 4. The secrets and
affairs of the persistent creator are like every
mystery and secret; excepting himself—he who is
capable of all knowledge, the fully-informed, and
all in all (visp4n6 vispé)—no one of the worldly
beings and imperfect spirits Zas known them.

5. A true proverb (gébisn6-g6) of the intelligent
and worldly, which is obvious, is that as it is easier
in teaching to teach again learning al/veady taught
and forgotten than that which was untaught, and
easier to repair again a well-built house, given
gratuitously, than that whzch is not so given, so
also the formation agazz of that which was formed
is more excellent (hunirtar), and the wonder is


CHAPTER XXXVII, I—IO. 8I


less, than the creation of creatures. 6. And through
the wisdom and glory of the omniscient and omni-
potent creator, by whom the saddened (Alikhtd)
creatures were created, that which was to perish is
produced again anew, and that which was not to
perish, except a little, is produced handsome even
for a creation of the creator’.

7. He who is a pure, spiritual creature is made
unblemished; he, also, who is a worldly creature is
immortal and undecaying, hungerless and thirstless,
undistressed and painless; while, though he moves
(gundéd6) in a gloomy, evil existence, the fiend is
rightly judging from z¢s arrangement (min nivard6)
that 7t is not the place of a beneficent Jdezug, but
the place of an existence whzch is deadly, ignorant,
deceiving, full of malice, seducing, destroying, caus-
--ing disgrace, making unobservant (atibéngar), and
full of envy. 8. And his existence is so full of
malice, deceit, seductiveness, unobservance, destruc-
tiveness, and destruction that Ze as no voice except
for accomplices (ham-bddikan) and antagonists,
except also for his own creatures and gossips when
their hearts are desirous of evil, seducing, destroy-
ing, making unobservant, causing malice, avd bear-
ing envy. 9. And fe is disclosed (vishad) from
his own origin and abyss full of darkness, unto the
limits of darkness azd confines of the luminaries ;
and in his terribleness and demoniacal deliberation
he gazes at the unblemished light and creatures
of the beneficent Atharmazd. 10. And through
abundant envy and complete maliciousness is his
lying; and he mounts (stibaréq6) to seize, destroy,


1 This last clause is omitted in Mr4 and J.
[18] G


82 DADISTAN-I DINIK.


render unobservant, and cause to perish these same
well-formed creatures of the sacred beings. 11. And
owing to his observance of falsehood he directed
falsehood and lies with avidity (varené), which
were necessary for obtaining his success in his own
rendering others unobservant (atibén6); even in the
nine thousand winters (hazangrék zim)! of false-
hood that which is disregarded therein is his own
falsity.

12. He who is the most lordly of the lords of
the pre-eminent luminaries, and the most spiritual
of spirits, and all the beings of Atharmazd the
creator—who was himself capable of an effectual
(taban6d) gain for every scheme of his?—do not
allow that fiend into the interior, into the radiance
(fardégid) of the luminaries. 13. And they? under-
stood through zhezr own universal wisdom that fiend’s
thoughts‘ of vileness, azd meditation of falsehood


* The interval between the first appearance and the final disap-
pearance of the evil spirit. Twelve thousand years are supposed
to elapse between the first creation and the resurrection ; during
the first three (about B.c. 8400-5400) the creation remains undis-
turbed in a spiritual state, during the next three (B.C. 5400-2400)
the evil spirit appears, but flies back to hell in confusion, during
the next three (B.c. 2400-a.D. 600) he attacks the creation and
keeps it in a constant state of tribulation, and during the last three
(A.D. 600-3600) his power, having attained its maximum, is gra-
dually weakened till it is finally destroyed at the resurrection (see
Bd. I, 8, 18, 20, 22, II], 1, XXXIV, 1—9, Byt. Itt 544,08 2
61, 62).

* Probably ‘ the fiend,’ but the sentence is by no means clear.

° As the verbs ‘allow’ in § 12 and ‘accept’ in § 13 are both
plural we must understand that the opposition to the fiend arises
from the spiritual creatures of Atharmazd, and not from Afhar-
mazd alone.

* Reading minishno instead of maindg4né, ‘spirits ;’ the dif-
ference between these words in Pahlavi being only a single stroke.


CHAPTER XXXVII, II-17. 83


and lies, and became aware of ¢hem by themselves
and through their own intuition, and shall not accept
the perdition (aédshih) of the fiend, dw¢ are to be
rightly listening to the commands of him! who is
worthy. 14. For his? is not the nature of him who
is good, zor the wisdom of him who is propitious ;
and he does not turn from the confines of the shining
ones, and the developments pertaining to those of
the good deng*, until he arrives at the creatures;
and he struggles in an attempt (aiizm4n6), spreads
forth into the sky, is mobbed (garéhagi-ait) in
combats, is completely surrounded, and is tested
with perfect appliances. 15. His resources, also,
are destroyed, zs internal* vigour is subdued, Azs
weapons of falsehood are disregarded, and fis
means of deceiving shall perish; and with complete-
ness of experience, thorough painfulness, routed
troops, broken battle-array, and disarranged means
he enjoys on the outside the radiance of the lumi-
naries with the impotence (anaiyy4ragih) of a
desire which again returns to him.

16. And the same well-shining light of all kinds
of the creator, when they shall not let in him who
is Aharman, shall remain an unlimited time, whzle
the fiend is in household attendance on those of
the frontier through not being let in, avd constantly
troubled at the everlasting creatures. 17. The
household attendance of the fiend seemed to it®
perpetually afflicting; and also the previous struggle


1 Afharmazd. 2 The fiend’s.
§ Reading véhikanak6o vakhshisno.
4 Assuming that andarmfinih is a form analogous to pira-
mfinih, and with the meaning of andarfanith.
5 The light.
G2


84 DADISTAN-{ D{NiK.


of the fiend when the celestial spirit (ah v6) pertaen-
ing to the luminaries was not contended with by
him, As defeat (makhittintand) when the lumi-
naries were not defeated by him, zs infliction of
punishment before sin, and 47s causing hatred before
hatred exists are all recounted by it to the justice
and judiciousness whose unchangeableness, will, per-
sistence, and freedom from hatred—which is the
character of its faithful ones—are not so1, to him
who is the primeval (pésak6) creator.

18. The fiend, after zs falsity, the struggle—on
account of the fighting of the shining ones avd the
decreed keeping 42m awaywhich was due to the fighter
for the luminaries—azd the ill-success of the struggle
of himself and army, ordered the beating back of
the worthy fighter agazzs¢ destruction, the malicious
avenging again of the causer of hatred, azd the de-
stroyer’s internal vileness and disorganisation anew of
his own place. 19. He saw the beneficent actions by
which, through the wisdom of Athavmazd, the spiri-
tual wisdom?, within the allotted (burin-héménd)
time, the limited space, the restricted conflict, the
moderate trouble, avd the definite (farg4m-h6mand)
labour exzsteng, struggles against the fiend, who is the
unlawful establisher of the wizard; and he returned
inside to fall disarmed (asAman6d) and alive, and
until he shall be fully tormented (pfir-dardag-hae)
and shall be thoroughly experienced, they shall not?
let 42m out again in the allotted time that the fiend
ordered for the success of falsehood and lies. 20.


* That is, they are altogether different from the faults of the
fiend, just recounted.

® Perhaps the same as ‘the spirit of wisdom’ of Mkh.

* Reading 14, ‘not,’ instead of rai, ‘ on account of,’


CHAPTER XXXVII, 18-22. 85


And the same fiend azd the primeval (kadmén)
demons are cast out confusedly, irreverently, sor-
rowfully, disconcertedly, fully afflicting ¢her friends,
thoroughly experienced, even with their falsehoods
and not inordinate means?!, with lengthy slumbers,
with broken-down (avasist) deceits and dissipated
resources, confounded and impotent, into the per-
dition of Aharman, the disappearance of the fiend,
the annihilation of the demons, and the non-exist-
ence of antagonism.

21. To make the good creatures again fresh and
pure, azd to keep ¢hem constant and forward in pure
and virtuous conduct is to render ¢em immortal;
and the-not letting in of the co-existent ove*, owing
to the many new assaults (padgastdih) that occur
in his perpetual household attendance * of falsity—
through which ¢here would have been a constant
terror of light for the creatures of the sacred
beings—is to maintain a greater advantage. 22. And
his (Athaymaza’s) means are not the not letting in
of the fiend, but the triumph arranged for himself
in the end—the endless‘, unlimited light dezug also
produced by him, and the constantly-beneficial space ®


1 The words va avigaftd afz4riha are omitted in M14 and J.

2 The evil spirit. As the co-existent spirits of good and evil are
antagonistic the word ham-buaikd, ‘co-existent,’ is often supposed
to mean ‘ antagonistic.’

3 See §16. M14 and J have only ‘that occur through his falsity
and the constant terror of light whch would have arisen from him.’

‘ That the term asar has only its etymological meaning “end-
less,’ and not the wider sense of ‘ eternal,’ is clear from this phrase.
The ‘endless light’ is the phrase used in Pahlavi to express
Ay. anaghra raofau, a term implying ‘ the fixed stars,’ so the
passage in the text is very suggestive of the phrase, he made the


stars also’ (Gen. i. 16).
® Instead of gung, ‘space,’ we might read gang, ‘treasury,


86 DADISTAN-I DINIK.


that is self-sustained—which (triumph) is the resource
of all natures, races, characters, powers, azd duties
from the beginning and maturing of those of the
good religion and the rushing of the liar and
destroyer on to the creatures, which are requisite
for the final, legitimate triumph of the well-directing
creator, and for the termination of the struggles of
all by the protection and recompense of the praises
and propitiation performed, which are the healing
of the righteous avd the restoration of the wicked
aé the renovation. 23. Even these developments,
even these established habits (dad-sAdniha), even
these emissions of strength, even these births, even
these races, even these townspeople (dihikdiha),
even these characters, even these sciences!, even
these manageable and managing ones?, and even
these other, many, special species and manners which
at various periods (anban®) of time are in the hope
that the quantity and nature of their auxiliaries may
ée complete, and their coming accomplished and not
deficient in success (vakhtd), are distributed and
made happy by him.

24. The sky is in three thirds, of which the one
at the top is joined to the endless light, in which
is the constantly-beneficial space; the one at the


Se ee OS BT te a
but it is written ging in Chap. XXXI, 24, according to K35, and
the meaning ‘space’ is more appropriate to the gAtus Avadhaté,
‘self-sustained place,’ of Vend. XIX, 122. The epithet ‘ constantly-
beneficial’ is a Pahl. translation of Av. misvan a, and is evidently
applied here to the unlimited heavenly space contained in the
‘endless light’ (see § 24) and including the supreme heaven, as
appears from the order in which these three existences (the earliest
creations of Atharmazd) are mentioned in Chap. XXXI, 24.

* Mrq and J have ‘separate doers.’

* Mr4 and J have ‘doers at different times,


CHAPTER XXXVII, 23-28. 87


bottom reached to the gloomy abyss, in which is
the fiend full of evil; and one is between those two
thirds which are below and above. 25. And the
uppermost third, whzch is called ‘the rampart of the
supreme heaven’ (garddm4né druptstd)1, was
made by him with purity, all splendour, and every
pleasure, and no access to it for the fiend. 26. And
he provided that third for undisturbedly convoking
the pure, the archangels, azd the righteous ¢hat have
offered praises who, as z¢ weve unarmed (azen4avar),
struggle unprepared avd thoroughly in contest wzéh
the champions of the co-existent oe, and they smite
the co-existent ove and his own progeny (géharak6)
already described, and afford support to the im-
perishable state 2, through the help of the archangels
and the glory of the creator. 27. And, again also,
in their * fearlessness they seek for the destruction
of the demons and for the perfection of the creatures
of the good dengs; as one who is fearless, owing to
some rampart which is inaccessible ¢o arrows and
blows, and shoots arrows at the expanse below, is
troubled (bakhséd6) for friends below.

28. And he made a distinction in the prescribed
splendour and glory for the lowermost third of the
sky; and the difference is ¢hat it is liable to injury
(pavan resh), so that the fiend, who is void of
goodness, comes and makes that third full of dark-
ness and full of demons, avd shall be able to perplex
in that difficulty when the thousand winters occur,
and the five detested (lakhsidak6) kinds of the


1 Bd. IL, 26 says that ‘the rampart of the sky was formed so
that the adversary should not be able to mingle with it.’

2 Reading A4gfirazénd val aseg gin.

8 Assuming that vad stands for valman or valmansan.


88 DADISTAN-I1 DINIK.


demons of life’ have also overwhelmed with sin
those of the wicked who are deceived by the demons
and have fled from the contest. 29. But they shall
not let the fiend fully in, owing to the luminaries of
the resplendent ome, during the allotted time when
the demons’ punishing and the repentance of the
wicked are accomplished.

30. And he appointed for the middle third the
creatures of the world separated? from the world
and the spiritual existence; and among those crea-
tures*® were produced for them the managing man
as a guardian of the creatures, and the deciding
wisdom as an appliance of man; azd the true
religion, the best of knowledge was prepared by
“him. 31. And that third is for the place of combat
and the contest of the two different natures‘; and
in the uppermost part of the same third is stationed
by him the light of the brilliant sun and moon and
glorious stars, and ¢key are provided by him that
they may watch® the coming of the adversary, and
revolve around the creatures. 32. All the sacred
ceremonies of the distant earth (bam), the light,
the abundant rains, and the good angels vanquish


* Probably referring to the five fiends, or demonesses, which
are the special embodiments of each man’s evil passions, and are
thus detailed in Mkh. XLI, 9-11:—‘ That man is the stronger who
is able to contend with his own fiends, and who keeps these five
fiends, in particular, far from fzs body, which are such as avarice,
wrath, lust, disgrace, and discontent.’

” Reading fisardak6, but the word is doubtful. This central
region of the sky would seem to be the place of the ‘ever-stationary,’
if it do not include the earth itself, which is not quite clear, owing
to the obscure style of the author.

* While in the world.

* The beneficent and evil spirits.

* Reading ven4pénd, but the word is doubtful.


CHAPTER XXXVII, 29-35. 89


and smite the wizards azd witches who rush adout
below them!?, azd struggle to perplex by injury
to the creatures; they make all such assailants
become fugitives. 33. And through their revolu-
tion the ascents and descents, the increase and
diminution (narafsisnd), of the creatures® shall
occur, the flow and ebb of the seas, and the increase
of the dye-like* blood of the inferior creatures >;
also owing to them and through ¢hem have elapsed
' the divisions of the days, nights, months, years,
periods, azd all the millenniums (hazagrék ziman)
of time.

34. He also appointed unto our forefathers the
equipment which is their own, a material vesture,
a sturdy bravery, and the guardian spirits of the
righteous; and he provided that they shou/d remain
aft various times in their own nature®, and come
into worldly vesture. 35. And those for great hosts
and many slaves are born, for the duties of the
period, into some tribe; he who has plenty of off-
spring is like Fravak’, he who is of the early law


1 Below the sun, moon, and stars which protect the creatures.

2 Literally ‘springers back.’

3 Reading damik6, but the word is unusual; it might be read
dahmik6, ‘of the holy man,’ or be considered a corruption of
damik6, ‘earth.’ : ‘

4 Reading rangm4né, but the word is doubtful.

5 Five folios of text are here interpolated in J, of which four
contain the passage (Ep. II, vi, 4—ix, 7) omitted at the end of that
MS., and the fifth contains a passage on the same subject as Ep, IH,
and which may possibly be part of the text missing in Ep. Ilyat.

® Meaning that the unembodied spirits of men should enter
upon their worldly existence.

7 The great-grandson of the primeval man, Gaéyémard, and the
forefather of the fifteen races of undeformed human beings (see
Bd. XV, 25-31, XXXI, 1).


90 DApISTAN-? DINiK.


(pésdadd) like Héshang!, he who is a smiter of
the demon like Takhmérup?, he who is full of glory
like Yim %, he who is full of healing like Fréddn, he
who has both wisdoms‘ like the righteous Mant-
skihar °, he who is full of strength like Keresdsp®,
he who is of a glorious race like Kai-Kavad’, he
who is full of wisdom like Adéshanar*. 36. He who
is noble is like Siyavash®, he who is an eminent
doer (avarkAr) like Kai-Khisréi”, he who is exalted
like Kai-Vistasp™, he who is completely good like
the righteous Zaratdst?, he who arranges the world
like Peshyétanti?®, he who is over the religion (din6é-


* See Chap. II, ro for this and the following three names.

” He is said to have kept the evil spirit thirty years as a steed
(see Ram Yt. 12, Zamyad Vt. 29, Mkh. XXVII, 22),

° Here written Gtm.

* Instinctive wisdom and that acquired by experience (see
Chap. XL, 3).

° Av. Manuskithra; the descendant of Frédfin, in the eleventh
generation, who overthrew the usurpation of the collateral branches
of his family, and restored the Iranian line of the Pésdddian dynasty
in his own person (see Bd. XXXI, 12-14, XXXIV, 6).

*-See Chap: X VIL, 6.

" Av. Kavi Kavata; the first king of the Kayanian dynasty
(see\Bd: XXXI, 24) 25, KXXIV, 7).

* Probably the Av. Aoshnara, mentioned in Af Zarat., along
with several of the other names, in a passage somewhat similar to
that in our text. The name here can also be read Afish-khar.

° Av. Kavi Sy&varsh4n; the son of king Kai-Kafis and
father of king Kat-Khtisrd?, but he did not reign himself. He
is said to have formed the settlement of Kangdez (see Chap. XC, 5,
Bd. XXXI, 25, Byt. III, 25, 26).

*° See Chap. XXXVI, 3.”

4 Av. Kavi Vistaspa, Pers. Gustasp; the fifth king of the’
Kayanian dynasty, who received the religion from Zaratfist. His
father, the fourth king, was of collateral descent from the first king
(see Bd. XXXI, 28, 29, XXXIV, 2).

* The great apostle of the Parsis (see Chap. II, ro).

* Av. Peshétanu; a son of Kai-Vistasp, who is said to be


CHAPTER XXXVII, 36-40. gI


avarag) like Attrd-pad 1, he who is liturgical like
Hashédar 2, he who is legal like Hfishédar-mah, and
he who is metrical and concluding like Sdshdns.
37. Among them are many illustrious ones, glo-
rious doers, supporters of the religion, and good
managers, who are completely (Aptir) for the smiting
of the fiend and the will of the creator.

38. He also produced the creatures as contenders,
and granted assistance (védvarih), through the
great, in the struggle for the perfect happiness from
heaven at the renovation of the universe; and he made
them universally (vAspéharakaniha) contented.
39. A vitiated thought of a living, well-disposed
being is a stumble (nisivd) which is owing to evil;
and these are even those‘ contented with death,
because they know their limit, azd it shall be definite
(burindé-héménd) and terminable; the evil of the
world, in life, is definite, and they shall not make
one exist unlimitedly and indefinitely in the evil of
the world, through an eternal life with pain.

4o. And through a great mystery, wholly mira-
culous, he produced a durable immortality for the
living ; a perplexity so long as the best and utmost
of it is such an immortality of adversity, for z¢ is


immortal and to live in Kangdez, whence he is to come to restore
the religion in the millennium of Hfishédar (see Chap. XC, 3, 5,
Bd. XXIX, 5, Byt. III, 25-32, 36-38, 41, 42).

1 Probably the supreme high-priest and prime minister of the
ninth Sasanian king, Sh4pfr II (a.p. 309-379 ; see Bd. XXXIUL, 3).

2 See Chap. II, 10 for these last three names. The terms

mAansarik, ‘liturgical,’ dadtk, ‘legal,’ and gasantk, ‘metrical,’
are those applied to the three divisions of the twenty-one Nasks,
or books of the complete literature of the Mazda-worshippers.

8 Mr4 and J have merely ‘granted assistance in the struggle at
the renovation.’

* Assuming that gha/ stands for valman, as it sometimes does.


92 DADISTAN-{ DINIK.


ever living molested and eternally suffering. 41. And
their development, the strength of lineage obtained,
is ever young in succession, and the tender, well-
destined ones, who are good, are in adversity and
perpetuity of life, so that there is a succession of
life through their own well-destined offspring ?.
42. They become eternally famous, so that they
obtain, every one, an old age which is renewed, /vee
from sickness and decay, visibly in their own off-
spring and family (gdharak6) whenever they become
complete; and any one of the combative, whose
struggle is through the smiting that his fellow-
combatant obtains, is of a comfortable disposition
at the balance*. 43. This one, too, is for stepping
forth to heaven, even as that pre-eminent ove of the
righteous, the greatest of the apostles and the most
fortunate of those born, the chief of worldly beings,
the righteous Zaratist the Spitamdn, when the
omniscient wisdom, as a trance (gip), came upon
him from Afhaymazd, and he saw him who was
immortal azd childless, and also him who was mortal
and provided with children; that perpetual life of
the childless then seemed to him terrible, and that
succession of mortals seemed commendable’: so that


d


* Mr4 and J have merely: ‘are a succession in adversity and
perpetuity of life.’ ‘ 7

* Assuming that taraz stands for tarazik. The meaning is
that any one who has successfully struggled with sin in the world,
and leaves offspring behind him, goes to his account, at the balance
of the angel Rashn4, with cheerfulness.

* This seems to be a variation of the statement in Byt. II, r3,
where Zarattist, after asking for immortality, and having had the
omniscient wisdom infused into him for a week, describes what he
had seen, and amongst other things says: ‘I saw a wealthy man
without children, and it did not seem to me commendable; and I


CHAPTER XXXVII, 41-45. 93


the coming of zs assured offspring 1, Htishédar,
Hashédar-mah, axd Séshans*, became more longed
for and more desired, ad death more than the per-
petual life of his own body.

44. And when he?® who is all-watchful and all-
knowing had arranged the means of opposing the
fiend, ¢herve came for destroying, like a general
leader (vispvar), that fiend of deceiving nature, the
harassing, rushing, evil-wishing, primeval (pés) con-
tender, fogether with the demons Akémané. (‘evil
thought’)4, Aéshm (‘wrath’), Zarman (‘decrepitude’),
Bishasp (‘lethargy’), craving distress, bygone luck °,
Vaé*, Varend (‘lust’)’, Asté-vidad®, and Vizarash °,
and the original, innumerable demons and fiends of
Mazendaran”, 45. And his darkness azd gloom,
scorpions (kadzfin6), porcupines, and vermin, poison


saw a pauper with many children, and it seemed to me com-
mendable.’

1 The Av. 4sna frazaiztis, ‘inherent or natural offspring,’ of
Yas. LIX, 14, &c. The Pahl. equivalents 4sniidak and asnidak
can hardly be mere transliterations of 4sna, but are more probably
translations, formed of 4+sunudak and sinidak, with some such
meaning as ‘assured.’

2 These three future apostles (see Chap. II, 10) are considered
to be sons of Zarattist (see Bd. XXXII, 8).

8 Atharmazd.

4 These first four demons are described in Bd, XXVIII, 7,
15-17, 23, 26.

5 The words nfydzinaké tangih bidd bakhto, here trans-
lated, may possibly be a miswriting of five names of demons.

6 The bad Vaé (see Chap. XXX, 4).

7 See Bd. XXVIII, 25.

@ A demon of death (see Chap. XXIII, 3, note, Bd. XXVIII, 35).

® Another demon of death (see Chap. XXXII, 4, 7).

10 The mountainous country south of the Caspian, said to be full
of demons, the Mazainya daéva of the Avesta (see Bd. ILI, 20,
XV, 28). These demons were, no doubt, merely idolators.


94 DADISTAN-{ DINIK.


and venom, and the mischief originally in the lower-
most third of the sky}, issue upwards, astute in evil,
into the middle third, in which are the agreeable?
creatures: which Athaymazd created.

46. And he smote the ox*, he made Gayémard
mortal, and he shook the earth; and the land was
shattered, creation became dark, and the demons
rushed below, above, azd on all sides, and they
mounted even to the uppermost third of the sky +.
47. And there the barricade (band) and rampart
fortifying (vakhshikd) the spiritual world is
approached, for which the safeguard (nigas) of all
barricades °, that is itself the great glory of the pure
religion, solving doubts—which is the safeguard of
all barricades—is arrayed. 48. And the splendid,
belt-bearing Pleiades®, like the star-studded girdle
of the spirit-fashioned, good religion of the Mazda-
worshippers, are so arrayed as luminaries of the
fully-glorious ones. 49. And there was no possibility
(aitokih) of any demon or fiend, nor yet even of
eT ae el, ye

1 See § 28.

* By omitting a stroke nds, ‘agreeable,’ would become véh,
‘good.’

* The sole-created, or primeval ox, whence all animals are said
to have sprung. For an account of this incursion of the fiend, see
Bd. III, 12-20, VIII, 1, Zs. II, 1-11.

* Mr4q and J have ‘even to the upper sky of the middle third,’
which means the same thing, as the author’s words imply that the
demons did not enter the upper third, but only reached its borders
(see § 49).

* M14 and J conclude the sentence as follows: ‘the pure religion,
solving doubts, is arrayed.’

* Reading vandvar Pérvaké. The author seems to have been
thinking of Yas. IX, 81: ‘Mazda brought to thee the star-studded,
spirit-fashioned girdle (the belt of Orion) leading the Pleiades; the
good Mazda-worshipping religion’ (Haug’s Essays, p. 182)


CHAPTER XXXVII, 46-52, 95


the demon of demons, the mightiest (mazvanttm)
in valour, rushing up across that boundary; they
are beaten back now, when ¢hey have not reached
at from the gloom, at once and finally (yak-vayé
akhazv).

50. And the fiend of gloomy race, accustomed to
destruction (adsh-ayin), changed into causes of
death the position (g4s) of the brilliant, supreme
heaven of the pure, heavenly angels—which he
ordained through the power of! Mitdkht (‘false-
hood’)—and the triumph of the glory of the world’s
creatures, as ordained through two decrees (zik6d):—
one, the destruction of the living by the power? of
death; and one causing the manacling of souls by
a course of wickedness. 51. And he made as lead-
ers therein that ove astute in evil who is alveady
named *, and Asté-vidad* who is explained as ‘the
disintegration of material beings ;’ he also intrusted
the demon Biishasp (‘lethargy’) * with the weakening
of the breath, the demon Tap (‘fever’)> with
stupefying and disordering the understanding, and
the demon Az (‘greediness’)* with suggesting
cravings and causing drinking before faving the
thirst of a dog’. 52. Also the demon Zarmdan
(‘decrepitude’)*® for injuring the body and abstract-


2 Or, zOharak6 may mean ‘venomous.’ Mitdkht was the first
demon produced by the evil spirit (see Bd. I, 24, XXVIII, 14, 16)
who is supposed to be as much ‘the father of lies’ as his counter-
part, the devil of the Christians.

2 Or, zOhar may mean ‘venom.’

8 Mitdkht. * See § 44.

5 See Chap. XXIII, 3. ® See Bd. XXVIII, 27.

7 Reading pés tisn6d-i sagak ndésAnintdano, but we might
read pés tisndg sedkainisnintdané, ‘causing gnawing before
being thirsty.’

8 See § 44 for this demon and the next two.


Ana


96 DADISTAN-I DINIK.


ing the strength; the bad Vaé’s tearing away the
life by stupefying the body; the demon Aéshm
(‘wrath’) for occasioning trouble by contests, and
causing an increase of slaughter; the noxious
creatures of gloomy flaces for producing stinging
and causing injury; the demon Zairi£1 for poisoning
eatables and producing causes of death; with Niyaz
(‘want’)? the stealthily-moving and dreading the
light’, the fearfulness of Nihiv (‘terror’) chilling
the warmth, and many injurious powers and demons
of the destroyers were made by him constant assist-
ants of Asté-vidad in causing death.

53. Also, for rendering wicked axd making /¢ for
hell those whose souls are under the sway of? false-
hood (kadb4), which in religious language is called
Mitékht—since it is said in revelation that that is
as much an evil as all the demons with the demons
of demons— here is Akémané (‘evil thought’)®, who
is with the evil spirit owing to the speaking of
Mitékht (‘falsehood’)® 54. And for his doctrine
(dinéih) of falsehood, and winning the creatures,
slander the deceiver, lust the selfish, hatred, and
envy, besides the overpowering progress of disgrace
(nang), the improper desires of the creatures,
indolence in seeking wisdom, quarrelling about that


* One of the seven arch-fiends, the Av. Zairifa, which probably
means ‘decay,’ but from the resemblance of his name to zahar,


‘poison,’ he is called ‘the maker of poison’ (see Bd. I, 27,
XXVIII, 11).


“See Bd. XXVIII, 206.

* Reading gadman bim, but it may be yadman bim, ‘ dread-
ing the hand;’ and it is doubtful whether the epithet be applied to
Niy4z, or to Nihtv,

* Reading i instead of the va, ‘and,’ of the MSS.

* See $ aa See S56,


CHAPTER XXXVII, 53-57. 97


which is no indication of learning, disputing (sitég)
about the nature of a righteous ove, and many other
seductive powers avd demons helping to win, were
made auxiliary to the doctrine of falsehood in
deceiving the creatures.

55. Also, to turn his disturbance! to creatures
of even other kinds, there are demons and fiends
of further descriptions (freh-aitan); and for the
assistance of those combatants he established also
those afflictions (nivakan) of many, the witches of
natures for gloomy //aces, whose vesture is the
radiance of the lights? that fall, azd rush, and turn
below the luminaries which have to soar (vAzisnt-
kan6) in stopping the way of avy little conceal-
ment of the spirits axd worldly deings*. 56. And
they (the witches) overspread the light and glory
of those luminaries, of whose bestowal of glory and
their own diminution of z¢, moreover, for seizing
the creatures, consist the pain, death, and original
evil of the abode for the demon of demons ‘.

57. And those demons azd original fiends, who
are the heads and mighty ones of the demons,
injudiciously, prematurely moving, prematurely
speaking, not for their own disciplined advantage,


1 Reading paitiy4rak6, but K35 and J have paitazdraké,
which, if it be a real word, would have nearly the same meaning.

* Shooting stars, meteors, and comets, the last of which are
apparently intended by the term Mfispar (Av. Mtis pairika, ‘ the
Mis witch’) of Bd. V, 1, XXVIII, 44.

8 That is, the luminaries which have to prevent these beings
from becoming obscured by the darkness produced by the evil
spirits.

4 By the omission of one loop the MSS. have yazdano,
‘angels,’ instead of shéd4nd, ‘demons;’ the difference between
the two words being very slight in Pahlavi characters.


[x8] H


98 DADISTAN-! DINiK.
eee ee
but with unbecoming hatred, lawless manner’, envy,
and spears exposing the body *, undesirably struggle
together—a perplexing contention of troublers—
about the destruction of the luminaries. 58. The
army of angels, judiciously and leisurely fighting
for the good creatures of the sacred beings, not with
premature hatred and forward spears (pés-nizahih),
but by keeping harm away from themselves—the
champions’ customary mode? of wounding—valiantly,
strongly, properly, and completely triumphantly
struggle for a victory triumphantly fought. 59. For
Aharman the demons are procurers (vashikan6) of
success 27 the contests till the end, when the fiend
becomes invisible azd the creatures become pure.

60. Since worldly dezgs observe, explain, axzd
declare among worldly dezzgs the work of the spirits
and knowledge of customs (ristak6), by true observa-
tion, through wisdom, ‘had that life (zik) is proper
when 7z/ zs in the similitude of the true power of
wisdom, azd the visible life is undiscerning of that
which is to come azd that which is provided, so
also the evidence of a. knowledge of the end of the
contention is certain azd clearly visible. 61. And
tokens are discernible and signs apparent which, to
the wisdom of the ancients—if it extended, indeed,
to a knowledge about this pre-eminent subject —
were hidden by the fiends, who are concealers of
them from the perception (hazisn6d) of worldly
berugs, and also from ¢hecy coming to the perception
of worldly deznzs.


1 Reading an-Aayin gun, but this is uncertain.

* Reading Aihar-tana nfzah; the last word is usually spelt
nizak, but occurs in $58 in the same form as here.

® Reading nivikan mank gfin, but this is uncertain.


CHAPTER XXXVII, 58-65. 99
coe eS oe
62. The learned high-priests who were founders
(payintkand) of the religion knew tt (the evidence),
and those portions of it were transmitted by them
to the ancients which the successive realisers of iG
for the ages before me (levinam), have possessed.
63. The deceivers! of the transmitters, who have
existed a¢ various times, even among those who are
blessed 2, ave remained a mass of knowledge for
me, by dcng my reminder of the mature and proper
duty of those truly wise (hd-#iragAnik6), through
the directions issuable by even worldly decision, and
of so many of which I have a remembrance?, for
the writing of which ¢here would be no end.
64. Then the manifest power of the fiend among
us below, and the way provided by the creator for
his becoming invisible and his impotence are clear;
so also the full power of the creator of the army of
angels, assuredly the procurers of success zz the end,
and* the accomplishment all-powerfully—which is
his own advantage—of the completely-happy
progress, for ever, of all creations which are his
creatures, are thereby visible azd manifest; and
many tokens and signs ¢hercof are manifestly clear.
65. One is this, that the creator is zz his own
predestined (bagdAdak6) abode, and the fiend is


* The unorthodox, or those holding erroneous views regarding
the traditions handed down by them.

? Reading afrinidd, which K 35 has converted into afgénéd6,
‘casts,’ by inverting the order of the two central characters.

° Mrq4 and J omit the words from ‘through’ to ‘remembrance.’
The author means that he has acquired much information on the
subject even from the opinions of the unorthodox judiciously
studied.

4 Mrq4 has merely the words: ‘and the completely-happy
progress,’ &c.

iB 4


100 DApDISTAN-1 DINIK.


advancing and has rushed in, and his advancing is
for the subjugation of the creation’.

66. One, that the creatures of Atharymazd are
spiritual axa also worldly, and that is no world of
the fiend, but he gathers an evil spiritual state into
the world; azd as among so many the greed of suc-
cess is ovly in one®, so the triumph is manifest of the
good spirits axd worldly beings over the evil spirits.

67. One is this, that Azs defeat in the end is
manifest from his contention and aggression (pés-
zadarth); for the fiend is an aggressor zz an
unlawful struggle, and leaving the army of Athav-
mazd—subsequently the lawful defender (lakhvar-
zadar)—the fiend of violence is a cause of power
among those wholly unrequiting the creator zw the
world*. 68. If, also, every time that he smites the
creatures he is equally azd lawfully beaten once
again, it is assuredly evident therefrom that, when
their beating avd being beaten are oz an equality
together, a¢ first he whose hand was foremost was
the smiter, and the backward fighter was beaten ; du¢
at last that backward fighter is the smiter, and the
foremost fighter becomes beaten; for when he is


* K35 has altered dakhshaké, ‘token,’ into dahisné, ‘creation,’
by changing one letter, and Mr4 and J have adopted the wrong
reading.

* Reading Aigfin dén havandth étr 4g dén khadtikd. The
drift of these two first reasons seems to be that the fiend, being
an invader and outnumbered, must be vanquished in the end.

* Reading zak-t z6r drfigé dén-3 dadar bara-atégigané-i
stfis vahand-i nirfk6é-hémandih. This phrase seems to
have been generally misunderstood by copyists, as both M 14 and
J have altered it into something like: ‘when the violence of the
fiend is in the hand of the creator, yet even if the motive of
the army is so much power.’


* Mrq and J omit this clause, from ‘dwt’ to,‘ beaten.’


CHAPTER XXXVII, 66-71, IOI


beaten zz the former combat, ¢here is then a combat
again, and his enemy is beaten.

69. One is this, that when the supply of weapons},
the fighting, and the ability of the contenders are
equal, the supply of weapons of him who is the
beginner (pésidar) has always sooner disappeared,
and, a¢ last, he is unarmed and his opponent re-
mains armed; azd an armed man is known fo bc2
victorious over him who zs unarmed, just as one
fighting is triumphant over one not fighting®. 70.
And a similitude of it, which is derdved from the
world, is even such as when each one of two furious
ones (Ard) of equal strength, in a fight together,
has an arrow, and each one is in fear of the other’s
possession of an arrow; aud one of them alone
shoots Azs arrow, and makes 7¢ reach 47s opponent ;
then he is without an arrow, and his opponent,
fully mindful of z¢, has an arrow, and becomes
fearless through possession of the arrow, his own
intrepidity, azd the lack of arrows and complete
terror of that earlier shooter. 71. And as regards
mighty deeds he is successful; azd though ¢here be
as much strength for the earlier fighter a successful
termination is undiscoverable for fim; despoiled of
possession 4y him who is later, azd ruined in that
which is all-powerful, 22s end and disappearance are
undoubted, clear, azd manifest.


1 The term zén6 afz4r evidently refers here to the warrior’s
stock of arrows and other missiles which were to be expended in
battle, so that it is analogous to the modern term ‘ammunition.’

2 Mr4 has yehevtinéd, ‘becomes, instead of dandst6, ‘known.’

® M14 and J omit these last four words.

4 The argument, both in this case and the preceding one, is
that even when two combatants are equal in power and resources
the hasty aggressor is likely to be beaten in the end, and, therefore,


University of southern Calitorndks


A__A


102 DADISTAN-! DINIK.


72, One is this, that owing to the previous non-
appearance of the fiend, the coming forward of sick-
ness and death unto the creatures of the sacred beings
occurred when the fiend rushed zz, and he rendered
the existence of men sickly; he also destroyed and
put to death the progeny of animals. 73. After-
wards, through lawfully driving 4zm away, sickness
and death come in turn (barikiha) unto the demons,
and the healthiness! of the righteous axd perfect
life unto the creatures of the sacred beings, as its
counterpart is the great healthiness whzch comes,
more rightly rising, unto the creatures advised by
the sacred beings, through united arrangement”
74. And, in the end, a worldly similitude of the
sickness and grievous, complete death for the
fiends*, and of the healthiness azd intrinsic (benaf-
sman-igtinth) life for the creatures of the sacred
beings, is that which occurs when one of two liti-
gants (ham-patk4r), prematurely revengeful, gives
to Azs fellow-litigant an irritating poison, azd himself
eats wholesome flour before the later litigant gives
a poison, as an antidote, to the earlier litigant, and
himself eats the poison-subduing flour; after which
he is cured dy the poison, and his enemy is dead
through the poison of the later flour +.


the inferiority of the fiend is still more likely to lead to his final
defeat.

* Mrq begins a fresh argument here, owing to some misunder-
standing of the meaning of the sentence,

* That is, the advantage of driving away the fiend in this life is
a counterpart of the blessings attained at the resurrection.

* The word dragané, ‘fiends,’ is omitted in K3s, but is evi-
dently necessary to complete the sentence.

* This appears to be a description of ordeal by poison and
the two usual modes of evading its operation. The hasty evader
relies upon deceitfully substituting a wholesome powder for the


CHAPTER XXXVII, 72-78. 103


75. One is this, that Adharvmazd, the creator, is
a manager with omniscient wisdom, azd the conten-
tion of the fiend of scornful looks (tar nigirisn) is
through lust of defilement; of united power is the
management of that creator, as existing with (ham-
zik)1 all the vigilance in the wisdom which is in
everything; and that united power is the strength
of the management of heaven. 76. And of much
power is the contention of the fiend, as zs manifold
changing of will—which is hostile to the will of even
his own creatures, and is through the weakness
and exhausted? strength of an evil nature—is the
contending power which forms his visible strength®.

77. One is this, that is, on account of the fiend’s
contending ill-advisedly, however strongly the contest
is adapted for the damage of his own fiendishness,
and regret and bad consequences therefrom are
perceptible. 78. Such as the very paralyzing *
affliction which was appointed (nihad6) by him


poison he has to take; while the more cautious evader trusts to
recognising his adversary’s poison by its taste, and selecting another
poison as an antidote for both to take, so that the hasty evader
suffers through his own deceit in not taking the first poison.
Similarly, the fiend is supposed to suffer in the end from the death
and destruction which he was the first to introduce into the
world.

1 By omitting a phrase Mrq4 and J have: ‘and the management
of the fiend of scornful looks is as z/ were existing with,’ &c.

2 This is little more than a guess at the meaning of a word
which can be read vashaktd6 (compare Pers. gas and kasidan).
The whole sentence is rather uncertain.

8 The argument is that this unstable power of the fiend cannot
permanently stand against the consolidated strength of the creator.

4 Adopting J’s reading samakgfntar, but K35 has vasmak-
gtintar, which may be ‘very troublesome,’ and Mr4 has sam-
kintar, probably for sahmgintar, ‘very terrible.’


1O4 DADISTAN-I DINIK.


for the creatures of the world in putting the living
to death, which he ordered with violence and the
hope that it would be his greatest triumph. 79.
Even that is what is so self-damaging to the same
fiend that, when he puts to death him who is wicked,
and he who is wicked, who is performing what is
desirable for him (the fiend)—that performance of
what is desirable decug the practice of sin—is useless
and goes thither where he is penitent of that seduc-
tion, the spirit’ of the owner (shah) of the sin, whose
soul is wicked 2, is righteous, in whose worldly body
exist the fetters of pain and darkness; and owing to
the unfettering of zs hands from that pain it (the
spirit) is far away, and goes to heaven, which is the
most fortified of fortresses. 80. Fearlessly it fights
for it, even as the guardian spirit of Yim the splen-
did® kept away all trouble (vésam), the guardian
spirit of Frédtin kept away even those active in
vexing*, and other guardian spirits of those passed
away are enumerated as engaged in the defeat of
many fiends,


* That is, the guardian spirit (see Chap. II, 5) which is not
rendered wicked by the sin of the soul.

* The phrase mfin raban-f zak darvand is ambiguous, as it
might mean ‘ which is the soul of that wicked one,’ but this is not
reconcileable with the context.

* See Chap. II, ro. Yim-f shéd6 is the Yimd khshaété of
Vend. II, 43, 45, the Jamshéd of the Shahnamah. The legends
here referred to are mentioned in Fravardin Yt. 1 30-138, where
the guardian spirit of Yima is said to withstand the misfortune
brought on by the demons, while that of Thraétaona (Frédin)
withstands various diseases, and those of other heroes withstand
various other evils and demons,

* Reading pavan bésh-ik kardardn, but for jf we ought
probably to read ag, so as to make the phrase correspond to the
Ay. azi-karstah€ dbaéshanghé of Fravardin Vt. toi.


CHAPTER XXXVII, 79-83. 105


81. One is this, that the most grievous severance
that is owing to him (the fiend)! is the production of
the mortality of the creatures, in which the afflicting
(nizgtin) demon Astd-vidaa? is the head of the many
Mazinikan demons*. 82. And the propitious crea-
tor’s developers weve thus unprovoked (anargénd)
when the only person, who is called Gayémara’*, was
destroyed by him, and came back to the world as
a man and a woman whose names were Marhaya
and Marhiydih®; and the propagation and connec-
tion of races were through their next-of-kin mar-
riage of a sister. 83. The unlucky’ fiend, while he


1 Instead of zts madam, ‘that is owing to him,’ we ought
probably to read zis bar, ‘that is his production;’ the Huz.
madam, which is the proper equivalent of the preposition bar, ‘on,
according to,’ being wrongly used for the noun bar, ‘produce.’

2 See § 44.

$ The Mazainya daéva of the Avesta (see § 44, note).

4 The sole-created, or primeval, man from whom the whole
human race is said to have sprung (see Chap. II, 10, Bd. IU, 14,
17, 19-23, XV, I, 31).

° The progenitors of the undeformed human race, who are
said to have grown up, in the manner of a plant, from the seed
of the dead Gdyémard (see Bd. XV, 2-5). Their names are
derived from Av. mashya mashy4i, ‘the man and woman,’ but
the latter form is no longer extant in the Avesta. From Av.
mashya we have the Mashya of Bd. XV, 6, and the Mashya
of Bd. XV, 11, 19, 20, 30. From its dialectical variant martiya
in ancient Pers., which would be marethya in the Avesta (com-
pare Av. mareta, Pers. mard), we have the Marhaya of our
text. And by transposition of the letters rt=reth=rha in these
latter forms, we have the Matré of Bd. XV, 2 and the Maharth
or Mahary4 of Bd. XV, 22, note. Other forms of these names
also occur (see Chaps. LXIV, 2, LXV, 2, LXXVII, 4).

6 Mzxzq4 has ‘of brother and sister,’ but the insertion of the extra
word is unnecessary. Regarding khvétudad, or next-of-kin


marriage, see Chap. LXV.
7 Reading 14-khagast6; the fiend is certainly ‘ unlucky’ here,


Ae


106 DADISTAN-I DINIK.


increased offspring and fortune for them through
death, so uplifted zs voice in ¢hezr presence, about
the death of the living omes of their offspring and
lineage, that ¢ogether with the unmeasured destruc-
tiveness of the deadly evil spirit, and the unjust
contention of his through death and the conveyer
of death!, the sting also of birth was owing to
death. 84. The repetitions of the cry were many,
so that the issue (bar) of thousands and thousands
of myriads from those two persons, and the multi-
tude passed away, from a number whzch is limited
and a counterpart (aédtindih) of the living people
in the world, are apparent; and for the annihilation
of many fiends, through death, the propitiousness
of the contending power of the creator is clear and
manifest.

85. One is this, that the most steadfast quality
of the demon himself is darkness, the evil of which
is so complete that they shall call the demons also
those of a gloomy race. 86, But such is the power
in the arms and resources of the angels, that even
the first gloomy darkness in the world is perpetually
subdued by the one power really originating with
the sun axd suitable thereto, and the world is illu-
minated?.

87. One is this, that the most mischievous weapon
of the demons is the habit of self-deception which,


as by introducing death into the world he merely increases the
number of beings who pass into the other world to join his
opponents in the end; but the text probably means that he is
‘inauspicious’ and wishes to bring misfortune on mankind.

* Ast6-vidad (see § 81).

* The argument is that, as the sun is able to subdue darkness,
the most constant quality of the fiend, every day, it is probable
that the fiend himself will be entirely subdued in the end.


CHAPTER XXXVII, 84—90. 107


on account of rendering the soul wicked thereby,
seemed to them as the greatest triumph for them-
selves, and a complete disaster for the angels.
88. In the great glory of the pure, true religion
of the sacred beings is as much strength as is
adapted to the full power of the lawlessness and
much opposition of falsehood, azd also to the fully
accurate (arsidd) speaking which is in itself an
evidence of the true speaking of every proper
truth; and no truth whatever is perverted by it.
89. And the false sayings are many, and good say-
ings—their opponents through good statement—
do not escape from their imperfect truth; since a
similitude of them is that which occurs when, con-
cerning that which is white-coloured, the whole of
the truthful speak about z¢s white colour, du¢ as ¢o
the liars there are some who speak of its black
colour, some of z¢s mud colour, some of z¢s blue
colour, some of z/s bran? colour, some of z¢s red
colour, and some of z¢és yellow colour. 90. And
every single statement of each of the truthful is as
much evidence, about those several colours of those
who are liars, as even the compiled sayings of the
Abraham of the Christians’, which are the word
of 47m who is also called their Messiah‘, about the


1 Assuming that apfirdstth stands for apfir rastih; it may,
however, be intended for avi-rastth, ‘want of truth. The meaning
is that even true statements become perverted by inaccurate
speakers.

2 Perhaps sapfisag, ‘bran,’ may have originally been sapzag,
Soreen,”

® Written Abréh4m-i Tarsakig4an.

4 The letter s in Masikha is here written like 41, but the word
is correctly written in § 91.


108 DADISTAN-1 DINIK.


Son of the Supreme Being?; thus, they recount that
the Son, who is not less than the Father, is himself
He, the Being whom they consider undying. 91.
One falsehood they tell about the same Messiah
is that he died, and one falsehood they tell is that
he did not die; it is a falsehood for those who say
he did not die, azd for those who say he did die;
wherefore did he not die, when fe zs not dead?
and wherefore is it said he did not die, when he
is mentioned as dead?? 92. Even the compilation
itself is an opponent to its own words, for, though
it said he is dead, it spoke unto one not dead; and
though fe is not dead, it spoke unto ome dead.
93. The proper office (g4s) of a compiler and
mutilator’—through whose complete attainments
the demons of like power as to the force of truth
are strengthened, and the pure, good religion of the
Mazda-worshippers is itself dissipated and rendered
useless for itself—is a habit (dad5) growing with


* The phrase is barmané-t dad, literally ‘son of the created
one,’ unless we assume that dAd is taken as a name of God. It is,
however, quite conceivable that a priest would be reluctant to
admit that a strange god could be anything better than a created
being. That dad is here used as a noun, and not with the
meaning of ‘gift’ or ‘law,’ appears from the subsequent phrase
dadé-$ amfrakd yakhsenund, ‘the created ome whom they
consider undying.’

” Owing to the frequent repetitions of the same words in these
phrases they are specially liable to corruption by copyists, but as
they stand in K35 they can hardly be translated otherwise than
as questions. Mr4 and J have an altered text which may be
translated as follows :—‘ for whomever he did not die, when dead,
he ts as dead; for whomever it is said he died, he 7s so when
he is mentioned as dead;’ but this seems no improvement of
the text.

* Referring to those who compile commentaries and mutilate
texts to suit their own views.


CHAPTER XXXVII, 9I-95. 109


ie fend; and, asi he'is seen /o é¢ victorious who
overturns reliance on changeableness and similar
powers, the final disruption of forces is a disruption
of peculiarities (khidih vishdépisnd)}

94. One is this, that is, even that prodigious
devastation of which it is declared that it happens
through the rain of Malkés2, when, through snow,
immoderate cold, avd the unproductiveness of the
world, most mortals die; avd even the ¢hings attain-
able by mortals are attended with threatenings of
scarcity. 95. Afterwards—as among the all-wise,
preconcerted remedies (pés #4rith) of the bene-
ficent spirit® such a remedy was established (and
nihad ar) that ¢here zs one of the species of
lands, that is called ‘the enclosure formed by


* The argument is that even heterodoxy, ‘the most mischievous
weapon’ of the fiend (see § 87), must fail in the end, because,
like other revolutions, it relies on constant change, which implies
want of permanency.

* Malkésané, ‘of Malkés,’ is a denominative adjective derived
from Chald. wiphd ‘autumnal rain. The deluging rain of Malkés
is supposed to usher in the dreadful winter foretold to Yima in
Vend. II, 46-56, when all, or nearly all, living creatures were to
perish, a truly glacial epoch. In a Persian paraphrase of the
Bahman Yast (see Byt. Introd. p. lix) this period of Malkdés is
‘described as follows:—‘As three hundred years have elapsed
from the time of Hfishédar (Byt. III, 44-49), the period of Malkés
comes on; and the winter of Malkds is such that, owing to the
cold and snow which occur, out of a myriad of men in the world
only one will remain, and the trees and shrubs all become
withered, and the quadrupeds, whether carrying, walking, leaping,
or grazing, will all utterly die. Then, by command of God, they
will come from the enclosure formed by Yim, and the men and
quadrupeds from that place spread over Iran, and make the
world populous a second time, and it is the beginning of the
millennium of Hfishédar(-mah).’

8 The formation of the enclosure was ordered, as a precaution,
by Atharmazd (see Vend. II, 61-92).


110 DADISTAN-1 DINIK.


Yim}, through which, by orders issued by Yim the
splendid and rich in flocks, the son of Vivangha?,
the world is again filled—men of the best races,
animals of good breeds, the loftiest trees, azad most
savoury (kharegistan6) foods, zz that manner
came back miraculously for the restoration of the
world; which new men are sadstituted for the former
created beings, which is an upraising of the dead®.
96. Likewise from that miracle is manifested the non-
attainment of the evil spirit to the universal control
of the glory of the creator for every purpose.

97. One is this, that—when the heterodox (dis-
diné) Dahak*, on whom most powerful demons and
fiends in the shape of serpents are winged’, escapes
from the fetters of Frédtin, and, through witch-
craft, remains a demon even to the demons® and


* Reading Yim-kard var, but these words are corrupted in
three different ways in the three MSS. consulted. This enclosure
is said to have been in the middle of Pars in Bd. XXIX, 14.

” Av. Vivanghau (see Bd. XXXI, 2).

* That is, a type of the resurrection.

* The Av. Azi Dah&ka, ‘destructive serpent,’ slain by Thraé-
taona. In later times he was converted into a usurping king, or
dynasty, the Dha‘h‘hak of the Shahnamah, who conquered Yim
(Jamshéd) and, after a reign of a thousand years, was defeated by
Frédin (Thraétaona) and fettered under Mount Dimavand ; whence
he is to escape during the millennium of Hfishé@dar-m4h to devas-
tate the world, till he is finally slain by the hero Keresasp, who is
revived for the purpose (see Bd. XXIX, 8, 9, XXXI, 6, Byt. III,
56-61).

> That is, attached to the shoulders like wings; referring to the
serpents said to have grown from the shoulders of Dah4k.

* Mrq alters shéd4n, ‘demons,’ into géh4n, ‘ world,’ so as to
read ‘through the demon of witchcraft remains a destroyer unto
the world.’ The alteration in the Pahlavi text is small, but seems
unnecessary.


CHAPTER XXXVII, 96-100, TILT


a destroyer—a mighty man wo is roused! up
beforehand from the dead, and is called Keresdsp
the SAman?2, crushes that fiendishness with a club
consisting of a cypress tree, and brings that Dahak
through wholesome fear to the just law of the sacred
beings®.

98. One is this, that these, which are azstenct
from those born avd the men who have laboured
together, Asté-vidad* has not obtained, nor even
wll obtain, for death; and through the power of
immortals, and the action of the good discourses
(hdi-sakhunagAdnih)®, they urge on to the sacred
beings ¢hose who are inquiring (kav-hémand),
even to the immortality which is the renovation
of the other creatures. 99. One, which zs where
the mingled conflict of the meeting of good and
evil occurs®, is the glorious good-yielding one of
the creator which is guarded by purity, so that
the fiend as not attained to injuring 2z¢, since
it is pronounced ¢o de the uninjured ox which is


called Hadhay’s’. 100. Also the long life which


1 Reading angéz6i-ait6, instead of the unintelligible angidi-
aitd.

2 See Chap. XVII, 6.

8 Dahak and all other heinous offenders are said to undergo
a special punishment for three nights at the resurrection, and are
then finally purified by passing through molten metal like the rest
of mankind (see Bd. XXX, 16, 20).

4 See § 44.

5 Perhaps referring to the liturgical recitations.

® In the atmosphere apparently (see Bad. I, 4).

7 Written Hadhayam here, but Hadhayas in § 119, Chaps.
XLVIII, 34, XC, 4, and Hadhayds or HadhayA4vs in Bd. XIX,
13, XXX, 25, though always in P4zand. It is also called Sar-
saok, or Srisaok, in Bd. XV, 27, XVII, 4, XIX, 13, always in
Pazand, and this name is converted into Pahl. Srfivé in Zs. XI, 10.


112 DApISTAN-? DINIK.


is through its all-controlling power’ until they cause
the end to occur, and the devourers of fires are
subdued by it —deszdes the whole strength of the
unboasting (a#im) creatures of the beneficent
spirit, after they live even without eating?—is
because of the Hém that is white* and the pro-
moter (frashm) of perfect glory, which possesses
the wholesomeness of the elixir of immortality, and
through it the living become ever-living. 1o1. And
also as many more specially pure glorious oxes whose
enumeration would be tedious *.

102. One is this, that the struggle of the evil
one and the demons wh the creatures is not pre-
cisely the existence of varzous kinds of contest, but


It is said to be an ox which never dies till it is slaughtered at
the resurrection, so that its fat may form one of the ingredients
of the elixir of immortality which all men have then to taste; it is
also said that mankind, in ancient times, crossed the ocean on its
back, when going to settle in the other regions of the earth. From
what is stated in the text it may be supposed to be some form of
cloud myth, but it is not mentioned in the extant portion of the
Avesta, unless ‘the ox Hadhayés’ be taken as a corruption of
gaus hudhau, ‘the well-yielding ox,’ and Sarsaok as connected
with Pers. srisk,‘a drop,’ and referring to showers of rain; but
this is very uncertain.

1 The power of the white Hé6m mentioned below.

2 As, it is said, they will do for ten years before Sdshans, the
last apostle, appears to prepare for the resurrection (see Chap.
XXXV, 3, Bd. XXX, 3).

* A tree said to grow in the ocean, the juice of which is the
other ingredient of the elixir of immortality; it is also called
Goékarn, or Gokard, Av. gaokerena, and is guarded by ten
enormous fish (see Bd. XVIII, 1-3, XXVII, 4, XXX, 25).

* The existence of such immortal creatures, said to be intended
for special use at the resurrection, is here taken as a proof of the
reality of the resurrection itself. Whether the seven immortals
described in Chap. XC are to be included among them is uncertain.


CHAPTER XXXVII, IOI-106, ris
a EC ees
by natural operation and through desire of deceit}.
103. And the demon of slander (spazg), whose
nature it is to make the indignation (zdhar) of the
creatures pour out, one upon the other, about
nothing, as he does not succeed in making z¢ pour
out among the righteous’, he makes the wicked
even pour z¢ out upon the wicked; azd as he does
not succeed even in making z¢# pour out among
the wicked, he makes a demon pour 7¢ out upon
a demon. 104. The impetuous assailant, Wrath
(Aeshm), as he does not succeed in causing strife
among the righteous, flings discord and strife amid
the wicked ; azd when he does not succeed as to the
strife even of the wicked, he makes the demons and
fiends fight together. 105. So also the demon of
greediness (426), when he does not attain, in
devouring, to that of the good, mounts’ by his
own nature unto devouring that of the demons.
106. So also the deadly Asté-vid4d* is ever an
antagonistic operator; when ¢here is no righteous
one who is mortal, nor any creatures in the world,
the wicked dying ome (mirak) rides to the fiends
through a death which is an antagonism of himself®.


1 ‘That is, the demons do not come into personal conflict with
material creatures, but are supposed to influence their evil passions
and to pervert the original laws of nature.

2 Mr4 omits the passage from this word to the same word in
§ 104.

8 The word sébarédé, #tides, mounts,’ both here and in § 106,
is possibly only a miswriting of the very similar word dfibarédé,
‘runs, rushes.’ Several words in this sentence are accidentally
omitted in Mr4,.

Sopee S44,

5 As it is uncertain whether the ‘ dying ome’ is a human being
or the demon himself, it is doubtful which of them‘is here supposed
to commit suicide. M14 and J have merely: ‘nor even among the


[18] [


)


114 pDApISTAN-1 DINIK.


107. The means of the united forces’ are means
such as the wise and the high-priests ave pro-
claimed, that is, at the time of the renovation of
the universe® being nigh, when completion as come
to generation—those who were provided beng born
—and after they occasion freedom from generation
(azerkhtinisnth), they cause men azd animals to
exist, though passed away and dead. 108. All men,
righteous and wicked, who continue in the world
become immortal, the men are righteous whom Asté-
vidad does not obtain for death by evil noosing
(das-vadisnd)*? from behind, and who have com-
pletely attained to the rules of the sacred beings
(yang-i yazdan); and the soul of the wicked,
which is repentant of deceit, turns back upon the
demons and fiends themselves all that previous
violence of destruction and perversion, contention
and blinding* which is natural to a demon, and
they fight, and strike, and tear, and cause to tear,
and destroy among themselves (benafsman vad


creatures of the sacred beings those which are an antagonism of
himself ;’ apparently connecting this section with the next. This
final argument is that, as the demons by their very nature must
injure their friends if they fail with their enemies, they contain
within themselves the source of their own final destruction. In
other words: ‘if Satan rise up against himself, and be divided, he
cannot stand, but hath an end’ (Mark iii. 26).

" The army of angels of §§ 58, 64. The author, having
exhausted his arguments in favour of the final triumph of the
good creation, now returns to his description of the issue of the
contest, which he was about to commence in § 64.

* Mr4 and J omit the following words as far as ‘ provided.’

* See Chap. XXIII, 3.

* Or, perhaps, ‘concealment,’ as there is some doubt whether
afibénidarih means ‘making unseeing, or making unseen,’


CHAPTER XXXVII, 107-112. eres


benafsman) so long as they are in hell and
numerous.

tog. The wicked who are penitent become cou-
rageous anew as to the demon who perverts, the living
occasion strength!, azd the retribution of the hellish
existence of the wicked is completed, because the
increase of sins?, owing to the sin which they com-
mitted, ceases. 110. They are let out from hell,
though their sins are thus accumulated by the de-
mons; they have also prepared® the spirit of sin
by the three days zz molten metal‘, which drives
away tears, as its name is owing to the lessening
of tears®, which is all® in that which occurs when all
the doers of actions for the demon of falsehood?
pass through that preparation. 111. And he who,
for three days, thus bathes (vushakéd6) his sins
which are owing to the fiend, and /as destroyed the
filth (Aakha) of the accumulated sins, is like chose
who have passed off azd turned over a burden.

112. And the impotence of sin is owing to the
destroyer of the fiend by the perception of light,


1 That is, the wicked who are still living, being penitent, rein-
force the host of the righteous.

2 Referring probably to the ‘ growth of sin’ mentioned in Chaps.
XI, 2, XII, 5.

3 That is, ‘ purified.’

4 All men are said to be purified, at the time of the resurrection,
by passing through melted metal, which seems like warm milk to
the righteous, but is a final torment to the wicked (see Chap.
XXXII, 12,13, Bd. XXX, 19, 20).

5 This would seem to allude to some Avesta name of this molten
metal, which is no longer extant.

® We should probably read ham4i, ‘ever, instead of hamak,
‘all.’

7 Reading zfir, but it may be zr, ‘violence.’

To


116 DADISTAN-1 DINIK.


who was their creator!; they (men) all see all, they
all forgive, and they all are powerful as regards all
things for the creator. 113. And, moreover, after
the three days, when they occur, all the creatures
of the good creator are purified avd pure by the
perfect washing passed through, by the most amaz-
ing preparation ordained (bakht6), azd by the most
complete account they render complete. 114. And
they are triumphant over the fiend through their own
weapons, through their own driving away of their
own littleness (kasviddrih), and the glory of the
creator and that of the angels; and since he becomes
exhausted in resources (dén £ar) they make zm
become extinct.

115. ut previously” they are attacked, and dis-
persed, and subdued, and this even fully painfully
and with complete experience; and they aid,
through backward goodness, in the antagonism of
means which are separated divergently, through
scattered resources and subdued strength, like the
life from the body of worldly mortals, and this,
moreover, confusedly, uselessly, and unmovingly.
116. Lut the abode® for the essential material
existence (sti-i Ziharikd), about which ¢here is a
seeking for interment’, is not powerless, and on
enquiring the wishes of such numbers® they have


* That is, the destroyer of the fiend was the creator of the men
mentioned in § 108. The reading sinAsné, ‘perception,’ is un-
certain; perhaps we ought to read ‘in the regions (div4g4n6)
of light.’

* That is, before the purification in molten metal.

* The ‘body,’ apparently, but this section is by no means clear.

* This must be on the part of the fiend, as burial is unlawful.

° Perhaps the meaning is that the fiend is at length overcome
by the constantly accumulating numbers of the penitent wicked.


CHAPTER XXXVII, 113-—II9Q. Lay,


cast Azm out; and no share whatever, zor fragment
of a share, of fiendishness, zor even so much as
some morsel of unpardonableness sent by fiendish-
ness, remains in this light.

117. Those who are righteous, intelligent through
their own glory of religion—which is a spirit! in
the form of light—are scattered (parvandag-aitd)
equally around the sky of skies, when from every
single side of it there arises, for the sake of margin,
three fzmes as much sface as the earth created by
Atharmazd, in the preparation of the creatures
which were created by him. 118. Through his
own will he again constructs the bodies of the
evil creation, unlaboriously, easily, and full-glori-
ously, though their construction is even from the
clay of Adshdastar?, and their moisture is from
the purified water of Arekdvistir? the undefiled.
119. And from that which is a good protector
through him, and which is also connected wth


1 The handsome maiden who is supposed to meet the departed
soul, and whose form is an embodiment of its own deeds and
religion (see Chaps. XXIV, 5, XLIV, 20). Or, perhaps, the angel
of religion (Din) itself, which is reverenced for its radiance and
glory in Din Yt. 4.

2 A mythical mountain (see Chap. XXX, 2).

8 The mythical source of pure water which is said to flow from
Mount Albfirz into Lake Urvis on the summit of Mount Hfgar,
and thence to Mount Afisindém in the wide-formed ocean, whence
it partly flows into the ocean, and partly rains upon the earth (see
Bd. XIII, 1, 3-5). Much the same account of it is given in Chap.
XCII, 5, only the lake is said to be on the summit of Mount
Afisindém. It is the Av. Ardvi sfira of the Abn Vt. and the
Pahl. form Arekdvistir = Aregdvisir may be explained as a trans-
oe of Aredgvistir, an ordinary mispronunciation of Ardvi
stira. Modern Parsis, who consider the Pahl. k as silent (or merely
a soft aspirate) after a vowel, would pronounce Aredvisar.


118 pApIsTAN-{ DINIK.


him, even from the Hadhayds ox, is the strength
of everlasting welfare (véhgarih) avd immortality ;
and the living are again produced for the body, they
have immortal life, azd they become hungerless and
thirstless, undecaying avd undying, undistressed and
undiseased, ever-living azd ever-beneficial.

120. After the renovation of the universe there is
no demon, because ¢heve is no deceit; and no fiend,
because there is no falsity; ¢here is no evil spirit
(angramin6), because there is no destruction ; there
is no hell, because there is no wickedness; ¢here is
no strife, because there is no anger; ¢here is no
hatred, because there is no ill-temper (dazih);
there is no pain, because there is no disease.
121. Zhere is also no Dahak?, because there is
no fear; ¢here is no want, because there is no
greediness ; ¢heve is no shame, because there is no
deformity; ¢here is no falsehood*, because there
is no desire of falsehood; ¢herve is no heterodoxy,
because there are no false statements; and ¢here is
no tardiness, because z¢ speaks of a dilatory (sustd)
race in that which is said thus: ‘ 7hey ave all those
of evil thoughts, of evil words, of evil deeds, a race
of all evils to be made to tear by the evil spirit.’

122, And on his (the demon’s) disappearance
every evil has disappeared, on the disappearance
of evil every good is perfected, and in the time of
complete goodness it is not possible to occasion
(andakhtan6) any pain or distress whatever, by
any means, to any creature. 123. Those who are
present (nunak) sufferers‘, when ¢here is a blow of


T See § 99. * See § 97.
* Mr4 and J omit what follows, as far as ‘ heterodoxy,’
* Literally ‘ attainers to endurance.’


CHAPTER XXXVII, 120-128. 119


a fist on the body, or the point of a nail (tékh
biirak) is driven into a limb, are pained on account
of the combination (ham-dadakih) of a different
nature for the purposes of the fiend in the body.
124. But at that time of no complication (aham-
yakhtih), when a limb is struck upon a limb, or
even such @ ¢hing as a knife, or sword, or club, or
stone, ov arrow reaches the body, ¢erve is no pain
or discomfort whatever corresponding to that pre-
sent pain, 125. And at that time one consideration
(vusid-aé) occurs, for now the pain from that beat-
ing and striking is always owing to that different
nature, and on account of ¢heer being suitable Zo 7t,
but at that time everything deg of like nature and
like formation ¢here is never amy distress.

126. And in that most happy time they let the
sun, moon, and luminaries exist, but ‘here is no
need for a return of the day and a removal of z¢s
going forth (frashm)', for the world is a dispenser
(vakhtar) of all light, and all creatures, too, are
brilliant; those luminaries also become as it were
perfectly splendid for them. 127. And every crea-
ture, too, is of like will and like power; which-
ever were mortals, unenvious of the welfare of all
creatures, are alike joyous, and that share of their
position and pleasure rejoices them which has come
to them from the glory of all the existences and capa-
bilities of him, the all-good, who is aware of all of
everything through his own perfect persistence and
complete resources.

128. And he allots, to the doers of good works


1 The ‘going forth’ of the day or the sun means its disappear-
ance or going away, and is an Avesta phrase. The sun is supposed
to be ‘forth’ when it is absent, not when it appears.


120 DADISTAN-1 DINIK.


and the suitable ranks, the power of a judge
(dadak6), wealthiness, goodness, and the director-
ship (radih) of what is intended. 129. He zs the
designer of what is intended, as it is said about
his creatures and capability that fire is producing
wind, fire is producing water, and fire is producing
earth; wind is producing fire, wind is producing water,
and wind is producing earth ; water is producing fire,
water is producing wind, and water is producing earth;
earth is producing fire, earth is producing wind, and
earth is producing water. 130. The spirit is both
the cause of spirit and the cause of matter (stis);
and the cause of matter, too, is also the cause of
spirit, through that perpetual capability.

131. And, moreover, all the angels, the souls, and
the guardian spirits are attending to the wishes of
the glory of the creator and the commands of the
creator, without trouble azd fully rejoicing, in like-
ness unto the forms of seas, rivers, mountains, trees,
and waters'; and they have comforted and deco-
rated the creation. 132. And the angels, souls, and
guardian spirits, themselves also the constituted
spirits of a former contact with life, are thereby
pleased and rejoiced; eternal and thoroughly pre-
pared they are naturalised in that complete joy.


CHAPTER XDCX A111.


1. As ¢éo the thirty-seventh question and reply,
that which you ask is thus: The measure that they
ee ee


* All objects being supposed to be represented by guardian
spirits in the other world.


CHAPTER XXXVII, I2Q—XXXVIII, 4. E20


measure good works wth bezng revealed', how is it
then wen there is more, or not, done by us?

2. The reply is this, that every thought, word,
and deed whose result is joy, happiness, and com-
mendable recompense—when a happy result is ob-
tainable, and the exuberance (afztin6d) of thought,
word, and deed is important—is well-thought, well-
said, and well-done®. 3. And for him the result of
whose wish for good works is conclusively joy and
exaltation of soul—which are his attainment of
recompense from the constantly-beneficial space,
the immortal avd unlimited, which shall never perish
—there is no measure of the multitude of good
works. 4. For every one by whom many are per-
formed, and who engages in still more, appropriates
the result more fully, and is more worthy; dézz¢ it is
not obtained for the completion of that which is a
definite measure, therefore he does not obtain still
more, and it is not necessary he should; and it is,
moreover, not obtained even for the completion of a
limit of unlimitedness*.


1 They are balanced against the sins committed (see Chaps. XIII,
2-4, XXIV, 5,6); if the good works exceed the sins by a very
small quantity the soul is supposed to go to the ordinary heaven
(vahist6), but if by a quantity sufficient to balance one unatonable
sin it goes to the best existence, or supreme heaven (garé6dmand,
see Sls. VI, 3, 4). Mz4 and J have merely: ‘The measure for
good works decng revealed.’

2 The three characteristics of good works.
~ 8 See Chaps. XXVI, 3, XXXI, 24, XXXVII, 22.

4 The good works in-excess of the quantity necessary for ad-
mitting the soul into the supreme heaven cannot affect the destina-
tion of the soul, but they add to its future enjoyment (see Chap.
VIII, 4), and no limit can be assigned to the quantity that can be
thus absorbed.


SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA SCHOOL


122 DADISTAN-{ DINIK.


CHAPTER XXXIX,


1. As ¢o the thirty-eighth question and reply, that
which you ask is thus: What are the reason and
cause of tying om the sacred threaa-girdle (kfistik6)}
which, when they shall tie z¢ on is said fo de so
greatly valuable, and when they shall not tie z¢ the
sin is So grievous?

2. The reply is this, that the all-good, most
spiritual of spirits, and most ruling of rulers is the
creator, and there is no need of troubles for men of
the poor as to any wealth oy anything, for all are
his own. 3. And through his will as ruler, and all-
powerful, he demands this of men, to remain properly


* The Kfisttk (Pers. kustt) consists of a string, about the size
of a stay-lace, which is first passed twice round the waist very
loosely, over the sacred shirt (see Chap. XL, 2), and tied in front
with a loose double knot (right-handed and left-handed), and the
long ends are then passed a third time round the waist and tied
again behind with a similar double knot. This string contains six
strands, each consisting of twelve very fine, white, woollen threads
twisted together, or seventy-two threads in all. Near each end the six
strands are braided together, instead of being twisted, and for the
last inch they are braided into three separate string-ends of two
strands each; these string-ends, therefore, contain twenty-four
threads each, and form a kind of fringed end to the string. This
fringe is a sort of remembrancer, as its six strands are supposed to
symbolize the six Gahanbars or season-festivals, the twelve threads
- in each strand symbolize the twelve months, the twenty-four threads
in each string-end symbolize the twenty-four kardaks or sections of
the Visparad, and the seventy-two threads in the whole string
symbolize the seventy-two has or chapters of the Yasna. The
girdle has to be re-tied every time the hands have been washed,
which, in order to comply with the ceremonial laws, occurs many
times in the day; and each time it has to be done with ceremony
and a particular formula of prayer (see § 27).


CHAPTER XXXIX, I-5. L2%


skirted! as a true servant not even bound—which is
due to that service, and also the indication of a
servant—as is seen avd clearly declared in the ever-
fixed (hamai-dad%) religion and belief.

4. Formerly men paid homage through the will
and worship, as z¢ were more effectually, more essen-
tially, avd more suitably for the discreet; and every
day spent in worship offered and homage paid they
account as of the greatest use, particularly for ob-
serving the world, and understanding z¢s character.
5. And as to him of whose offering of homage no
worldly advantage whatever is apparent—as fruit is
apparent from trees, flavour from foods, fragrance
from aromatic herbs, tint (bam) from colours, the
good quality of spears from the forest, health from
the patient (mélvarak4n), and decision from words
—but, audibly speaking, 42s head is lowered in sign
of humility—as though the head, which is uppermost
in the body and in the most pre-eminent foszézon,
and is lowered as far even as the sole of the foot,
which is lowermost in the body, salutes? and is
placed on the ground in thought about worship and
desire of paying homage—and the appearance which
exists as regards himself through ¢hat lowliest (ki-
hast) servitude is 2 accordance with that which is
apparent from trees, food, and the many other worldly
advantages before recited—whoever has offered hom-
age and such advantageous (vésisnak6) appearance


1 That is, fully clad, as going about uncovered is a sin (see
Chap. XL, 4). On occasions of ceremony, and for the purpose
of showing extraordinary respect, the Parsis wear an extra long-
skirted robe.

2 Reading drfiddéd, but the orthography is unusual and the
word, therefore, uncertain.


ay |


124 DApISTAN-{ DINIK.


is manifest—even then that sign of humility aud
servitude is what great multitudes consider the
offering of homage of a man more essential for
hypocrisy-(shéd6)}.

6. But owing to that which happens when they
plant a tree in the name of a sacred being? and eat
the produce, and practise other worldly labour of
worldly advantage, owing also to work of this kind
through the doing of which they preserve all the
growing crops of the whole world, and through tillage
and multitudinous cultivated plots (khfistakiha) z¢
is manifest that they should meditate inwardly (dén
mindyén)* 7. A token and sign of worship is of
great use, and a great assistance (bangisn6) therein
is this belt (band), which is called the Kdstik, that
is tied on the middle of the body.

8. The reasons of the assistance are numerous ;
and its first assistance is this, that as fo him who—
as a worshipper of the sacred beings, owing to the
undeceitful (akadb4) religion whose indication is
sagaciously propitiating with the purifying cup+—
wears upon the body that spiritual, customary, and


* The author is here adopting his most involved style of writing,
which, in the original Pahlavi, is often hardly intelligible, and
particularly apt to be misunderstood; but the object of this section
seems to be to deprecate the Muhammadan practice of frequent
prostrations during prayer, which are in marked contrast to the
slight obeisances made by the Parsis.

* Whether yédat6 means ‘an angel,’ or ‘God,’ is Here uncertain.

* The argument is that the growth of plants is so obviously
occasioned by some unseen power that it naturally leads to medi-
tation, and then to prayer.

* The words danisnikd levatman-tastik-shnayin seem to
refer to the Bareshnfim ceremony of purification, described in
Vend. IX, 1-145 (see App. IV), which is a rite eminently character-
istic of Magda-worship.


CHAPTER XXXIX, 6-I1. 125
os a
doctrinal indication of the sacred beings with a wis-
dom which is truly religion, 47s steadfastness and
religious service of the sacred beings are audibly
spoken thereby; even for the religious z¢ is com-
manded, because 2¢ is an assisting motive of beneficial
high-priests and such-like submitters ¢o the com-
mands of the religion of the sacred beings.

9g. One is this, that, as the lowliest servant and
greatest lord are steadily agreed, and z¢ zs beneficial?
when they (the servants) wear a belt upon the body
as a sign of service—because z¢ is not the custom
to grant that little at any time without guardianship
—the lapse of which service is also not a beneficial
lapse, then those unbound are without a token of the
lord’s service.

10. One is this, that it is commanded in revela-
tion to keep thought, word, and deed confined from
sin by a belt, and just like a servant; for the sake
of confinement of sins from purity of thought, whose
dwelling is the heart, oze is to wear the same belt,
which is the token of a servant, oz the middle of the
body and before the heart; and the periodical (han-
gamika4n6) sight of the token and sign of confined
sins, and of the constant reminder for ome’s own
mind, is the necessity of wearing z¢ as a belt which
is very restraining from the sin in thought, word,
and deed that is manifest even in experience ; which
wearing of the same belt is as a reason and cause of
much remembrance of much sin, that in the same
way is therefore a restraint of it.

t1. One is this, that the ancients acquainted with
religion ave communicated these tidings (srdb6)
ee

1 Reading spen4k, but it may be sazd4k, ‘seemly.’


T26 © DADISTAN-1 DINIK.


unto our ancestors avd to us :—‘ When the destroyer
came upon the creatures, the demons and witches
(parikd) especially rushed up in the earth and
atmosphere, and even to just below the position of
the stars; and they saw multitudes of luminaries,
and also the barricade avd rampart? of the glory of
the religion, and the girdle (parvand)? of the wishes
and good works of all, when® it is arrayed like a
brilliant ¢hvead-girdle (ktistik), and all its luminaries
are girded (parvastd) by the girdle as the girdle of
the omniscient wisdom has girded the all-intelligent
angels.’ 12. That great glory of the pure religion,
solving doubts, became as beautiful and far-adorning
as is stated in the liturgy (mansar) thus: ‘The
star-studded girdle (ayivyahang4n6) of the spirit-
fashioned, good religion of the Mazda-worshippers *,’
13. All the demons and fiends were terrified by the
great glory of the religion, avd z¢ zs said that, by the
recital, practice, azd promulgation of the whole
routine of the enlightened religion, all those fiends
are subdued, aud the renovation of the universe is
produced by the will of the patron spirits (ahvdn),
14. Likewise, on account of that terror, none of the
demons and fiends, who are the mightiest of the
demons, rushed upon the creatures of that upper-
most third of the sky®, who are in purity and inde-


* See Chap. XXXVII, 47.

* It is not certain that parvand signifies ‘a girdle,’ or that
parvastano means ‘to gird,’ but they seem to be used in that
sense here. The former word translates Av. paurvanim, ‘leading
the Pleiades’ (Haug’s Essays, p. 182), in Yas. IX, 81, an epithet
applied to the belt of Orion.

3 Mrq has ‘ which.’

* Quoted from Pahl. Yas. IX, 81 (see Chap. XXXVII, 48).

5 See Chap. XXXVII, 24-27.


*


CHAPTER XXXIX, 12-17%, 127
ee
structibility. 15. And it (the girdle) is commanded
in revelation for men, more particularly for upholders
of the religion, fo de within the middle third and
near to the uppermost third of the body?.

16. One zs this, that Yim the splendid, soz of
Vivangha*, who in zs worldly career was most
prosperous in worldly affairs, a keeper away of all
agitations of temper‘ and all death, and a provider
of freedom from decay avd exemption from death,
when he was deceived by the fiend was thereby
made eager for supreme sovereignty instead of the
service of Athaymazd. 17. And about his admi-
nistration (dadarih) of the creatures z¢ is said he
himself became cut® away from radiant glory by
that fiendishness*, and their cause of wandering


* Mr4 continues as follows :—‘ through that girdle (parvand)
of the religion, and a ¢hread-girdle (ktist?k6), from the region of
the world and religious 7 character, is put on within the middle
third,’ &c.

2 Some words are evidently here missing in the Pahl. text,
including the first word of the next section. The reason here
given for the girdle being worn round the waist, just below the
uppermost third of the body, is that the impregnable barrier of
heaven (of which the girdle is a counterpart) is said to be just
below the uppermost third of the sky.

5 See Chap. XXXVII, 80, 95.

* Reading vispd khdéi-séran, but we might perhaps read
vispoan sahér4n, ‘all oppressors, assuming that sahér stands
for Av. sathra, a term applied to some particular tribe of another
religion which was under the rule of Yim and his two predecessors
(see Zamyad Yt. 26, 28, 31). Another possible reading is vis-
poan yékhvaran, ‘all frosts.’

> Assuming that khvidak6 stands for khfidaké, but the word
is uncertain.

6 The particular kind of fiendishness that led Yim astray in his
old age (like Solomon) was lying, that is, denial of the truth of
his religion. In consequence of this apostasy the royal glory
departed from him, and he allied himself to the demons in the


128 pApISTAN-! DINIK.


(garinisn6) is the demon, and mankind perishes in
that wandering from plain and hill-side’. 18. And
his pardon originated from the fully-persistent
creator; therefore he spoke azd gave advice unto
his successors as to the retribution of those who shall
abandon the service of the creator; and therein is
explained about the fortress of the angels*, with
the many proper actions which are the strength of
the fortress, and about the proportional way it is
strengthened when a belt worn on the waist is or-
dered for men éy him—the fully glorious ruler who
was lord of the world, and also in gloriousness well-
betokening the good creation—and they?® likewise
order zz.

19. One is this, that just as through that reason‘,
which is an appointment (pad6-dahisn6) that the
sacred beings decreed, the sacred thread-girdle was
worn even before the coming of Zaratist the Spita-
man, so after the coming of that messenger (vakhsvar)
of the sacred beings, the righteous Zaratist—who
enjoined the commands of the good spirits azd the
exposition of the religion, with discourse praising
the sacred beings and scriptures (avistak6) about
steadfastness in the good religion—the same religious
girdle is put on, with a religious formula®, around


617th year of his reign, and remained in their power for most of
the remaining century of his life (see ZamyAd Yt. 31-38, Bd. XXIII,
1, XXXIV, 4).

* Assuming that dast6 stands for Pers. dast, and vartvakd
for Pers. garivah; otherwise, we may read ‘from dignity and the
hovel (varifak6), meaning that they perish from all ranks, instead
of all places.

® The rampart of heaven (see § 11).

’ His successors. * As detailed in § £8.

> The Nirang-i Kusti (see § 27).


CHAPTER XXXIX, 18-21. 129


the body, over the garment of Vohtiman’. 20. Be-
cause the same intimation, relative to girding (par-
vandisnik) is wisdom for which the race of the
religion is so justly famed that innumerable people,
with the same customs and equally proper girding,
wear the sacred thread-girdle, the ceremonial belt of
the religion and indication of the creator, on the
middle of the body; and it becomes more destructive
of the power of destruction’, more obstructive of the
way to sin, and more contesting (kastaktar) the
will of the demons.

21. One is this, that Ze is unwise that Zas not
worn 2¢ when that man has arrived in whose law no
belting and no girdling? are ordered, and more per-
plexing and more grievous destruction is so mani-
fested at the time, that z¢ is similar evidence to that
exposition of revelation, the purport (aév4z) of whose
question azd reply is spoken thus* :—‘“‘O creator!
in whom is the manifestation of secretly-progressing
destruction, that is, in whom is its progress®?” And
Atharmazd spoke thus: “In him who is the guide
of a vile religion; whoever it is who puts on a girdle


1 The sacred shirt (see Chap. XL, 2). The garment of a
purified man is called Vohfiman in Vend. XIX, 76-78, 81-83
(trans. D.).

2 The term seg or ség, used for ‘destruction’ here and in
§§ 21-23, is the name of ‘the fiend who causes annihilation’ (see
Bd. XXVIII, 26).

8 Tt is possible that an-ayivydganih may mean ‘no gar-
menting, and refer to the sacred shirt, as the previous term
avibandih, ‘no belting,’ refers to the sacred thread-girdle.

4 In Pahl. Vend. XVIII, 21-23, with some variations (see Haug’s
Essays, p. 367).

5 Instead of rfibakih, ‘progress,’ K35 has rfibanih, which
might mean ‘soul-state,’ but is probably a clerical blunder.


[18] xe


130 DApISTAN-{ DINIK.

RS es ee ae ee
at most thrice (3-tmak) in a year’, that is, he does
not wear a sacred shirt and ¢hyread-girdle, and his
law also is this, that it is not necessary to wear
them”’—and when the law of no belting is so
grievous that, when that law shall be accepted, it is
observed ¢haz destruction is strengthened.

22. The same belt, kept on after the command of
Yim, was the first token as regards which an annihi-
lator of destruction is mentioned and established by
law; and on both occasions? destruction is more
grievously manifest. 23. That which is more par-
ticularly important is such as the destroyer of de-
struction, Yim the splendid, advised, which the high-
priest of the good, Zarattist the Spitaman, mentioned
thus :—‘ The sacred threaa-girdle is as a sign of the
service of the sacred beings, a token of sin ended,
and a presage of beneficence; azd one is to put zt
on and to gird z¢, in the neighbourhood of the heart
and oz the middle of the body, with the religious
formula accompanying the glorious scripture.’ 24.
That is also betokened by z¢s equally-dividing (ham-
bdr) position and determining fashion ; for, as a wise
' man becomes a discriminator between benefit axd
injury, between good and evil, so also the place of
the sacred thread-girdle is between below and above.
25. With alow sacred girdle there is a passage for one’s
want of openness GAGS and secret ruin,
and also a shutting up® of life; with a high sacred


* In the Vendidad it is he who does not put one on for three
years.

® Both when ordered by Yim and when confirmed by Zarattist.

* Reading avar-vadisndih (the first nasal in bandisn=
vandisn being often omitted) ; it can hardly be afrandisndih,
‘magnificence,’ because the latter abstract suffix, -ih, would be


CHAPTER XXXIX, 22-28. 131


girdle there is a way for thought, word, and deed,
and no confinement (agirisndkarih) of life; and
tying the sacred girdle with a religious rite (ham-
din) is like a glory amid the glories of the angels,
for it is itself through the aid of the patron spirit
(ahv6). 26. And from the heart, which is the place
of thought and dwelling of life, on the upper side
(lalaih) are the eye, ear, tongue, azd brain, which
are the dwellings of sight, hearing, speech, under-
standing, and intellect ; and on its lower side (frédth)}
is the abode of a father’s generativeness.

27. When this sacred thread-girdle, whose token,
sign, and presage are such?, is tied, it is girded on
with this glorious rite* of the glorious ones, the
custom of the learned, the command of rulers, and
the decree of apostles.

28. That secretly-progressing destruction’, which
arzses from the fiend of insubordination (asavdarih)?®
who was much afraid of Yim, azd which is averse to
the labour of men azd the service of Adhavmazd,
is a demon and irreligious (dtis-din6), who is full
of fear of the girdles (parvandih4) of the glory of


ungrammatical after the former, -isn6,in an uncompounded verbal
noun. Some of the other words are also uncertain,

1 The MSS. have merely rédih. 2 As stated in § 23.

8 This is the Nirang-i Kusti, or girdle formula, that has to be
performed every time the girdle is re-tied, which happens several
times a day. It is fully detailed in Appendix II, at the end of
this volume.

4 See § 21; the first letter of nihan, ‘secretly,’ is omitted by
K35 in both places.

5 Ség, the fiend of destruction, is connected with the demon
Bat in Vend. XIX, 4, 6; but the characteristic of ‘insubordination ’
is more applicable to the demon Tarémat, ‘the disobedient’ (see
Bd. XXVIII, 14, 26, 34).

Kea


132 DApISTAN-I DINIK.


religion, w2¢h which both angels avd also worldlings
have become belted and diligent.

29. Then, because the glory for this belt of ours,
which is called the Kfistik and is worn on the middle
of the body, remains unreleased (avi-vGkht) from
the angels, who are givers of glory, and from men
who are glorious—which is explained as a similitude
and sample of fortunes (bAharak5iha) among world-
lings, even those who are actually primitive creatures
likewise1—it as, therefore, seemed comely and
desirable. 30. And their heart, will, knowledge,
and purpose are as much for it as that which is per-
ceptible where, even apart from those of the good
religion who shall tie the sacred thread-girdle with
the scripture formula, some of the faiths of all coun-
tries, except those who are unbelted, possess the
religious custom*. 31. Also outside the seat of the
existence of faith? all men have the waist, or the
palms of the hands‘, or similar joints for a girdle
(kistikd); axzd it is deemed comely, desirable, and
convenient for work to wear z¢, 32. And 2¢ is mani-
festly the lot (dak6) of the thoroughly-praising one
whose own desire is truth and the enjoyment of wel-
fare, 7¢ zs a token of the service of the sacred beings,
and a sign of walking zz the commands of religion,


‘ The precise meaning is not very clear.

* Alluding probably to the Brahmanical thread which is worn
by the higher castes of Hindus diagonally, over one shoulder and
below the other arm, and is so far analogous to the Parsi thread-
girdle that it is a religious symbol put on with a religious rite.

* Reading vardyisn6é aht gas, but K35 has réyisnd, ‘growth,’
instead of ‘ faith,’

* Reading kafiha, or kafagih. Perhaps the allusion is to a
rosary which is held in the hands, or worn on the wrists, by people
of many religions.


CHAPTER XXXIX, 29—XL, 3. ice
eee ee
which they shall tie on account of the superior beings
(pashdman) with the proper formula, more particu-
larly wth that which one utters when ¢here zs reliance
upon the scripture itself.


CHAPTER XL.


1. As to the thirty-ninth question axd reply, that
which you ask is thus: What kind of goodness and
want of goodness can there be zz the sacred threaa-
girdle and shirt; azd what are the sin of running
about uncovered, of prayer offered and prayer not
offered, and the purpose of cleansing (misn) ?

2. The reply is this, that it (the shirt)! is needful
to be perfectly pure white azd single, which one fold
is because Vohdiman also is thus the one creature
who was first®, and afterwards from him the gar-
ment which is innermost and concealed is called in
revelation’.

3. Proper girdling is double‘, which two folds are
because he also who is in the course of the twofold
religious wisdom is intelligent, and the duties due to
the sacred beings are themselves zz two divisions


1 The sacred shirt, constantly worn by Parsis of both sexes
(young children excepted), is a very loose tunic of white muslin,
with very short loose sleeves covering part of the upper arm (see
Sls. IV, 4-8).

2 The archangel Vohfiman (see Chap. III, 13) is said to have
been the first creation of the creator (see Bd. I, 23).

’ The garment of Vohfiman (see Chap. XXXIX, 19).

_ * That is, it is passed twice round the waist before it is tied the
first time, but then it is passed a third time round the waist (see
Chap. XXXIX, 1).


134 DADISTAN-1 DINIK.


which are called the instinctive azd that heard by
the ears}.

4. After a man is in the girding they shall tie on,
the symptoms of azy sins of the belted body are free
from sin which is condemned (vigirinidd); and
when he walks uncovered, or naked, or with a two-
fold garment, there is then no root of ¢he sin of
running about uncovered? in him. 5. Moreover, on
hymns dezng chanted during a meal an zxward prayer
is not also necessary®,

6. The purpose‘ of a cleansing (misn-aé) is this,
that the suitableness of men for eating is due to
worship of the sacred beings and glorification of the °
sacred beings. 7. And as ¢o their necessary recom-
mendation (siparih)® of any food for eating, the


' The twofold wisdom of the Avesta comprises the two intellects,
the 4sn6 khratus, ‘the durable or instinctive wisdom,’ and the
gaoshé-srfit6 khratus, ‘the ear-heard or acquired wisdom,
which are the terms used here.

2 The sin of vishad-daibarisnith, which would have been in-
curred in any of these cases if no girdle had been worn, is a venial
sin of one Farman for each of the three first steps, but becomes
a Tanapthar sin (equivalent to 75 or 400 Farmans) at the fourth
step (see Sls. IV, 8-10).

* This is mentioned as a further illustration of a greater religious
duty superseding a lesser one. When the Gathas, or hymns, are
being chanted, the reciter is already under the protection of the
inward prayer (vag) with which all acts of worship must
commence}; it is, therefore, unnecessary to take another prayer
inwardly before eating. Inward prayer is a short formula which
is said to be ‘taken’ and ‘retained’ inwardly, as a protective spell,
by muttering its commencement before certain necessary acts, and
after the completion of the act the remainder of the formula is
‘spoken out’ aloud, and the spell is dissipated, before the person
can converse (see Sls. III, 6).

* The MSS. have pém, ‘milk,’ instead of 4im, ‘purpose,’ but .
see §1; the Pahl. letters p and & are often much alike.

* Mrq has sip4sih, ‘praise ;’ but this and several other emenda-


CHAPTER XL, 4—-II. 135


glorifying of the sacred beings, and the true usages
about recounting 2¢, it is commanded, before eating,
when the mouth is not soiled with food, ‘hat the
mouth (dah4an) should proceed with the utterance of
the pure glorification’. 8. Being thereupon suitably
seated, and Zaving properly eaten the food, one is to
make the mouth clean with a tooth-pick and water ;
and after eating, before all words, the praise of the
sacred beings is glorified by the mouth cleansed by
washing. 9g. And between the glorifying before
eating and the after glorification ove is not? to speak
other words, and when during a meal a word is
spoken by the mouth, that kind of glorification which
zt is the custom to utter before and after eating is
offered by its own organ (andam)*.

1o. And every single organ Zas one function, du¢
two special functions are connected with the mouth,
which are speaking and eating; aud because ¢hey
are together ¢hey are mutually opposed, for speaking
connects that which is an inward possession with
outside teachings (k4shiha), azd through eating,
the outside food comes for the inward further vitality
of life. 11. As the ancients ave said, where one
operation is appointed unto two operators, z¢ zs more


tions in the same MS. are probably nothing but unsuccessful
attempts to render an obscure text intelligible, without taking the
trouble to understand it.

1 This glorification (stayisnd) must refer to the inward prayer
of § 5, which commences by praising Afharmazd (see Chap.
LXXIX, 2, note).

2 Reading 14, ‘not,’ instead of rai, ‘on account of.” M14 has
altered the passage.

8 That is, when the spell of the inward prayer is broken by
speaking before the proper time (see § 5, note), the spell must be
renewed before proceeding with the meal.


136 DApISTAN-f DINIK.


expressly so that during eating two operations may
not both at once (ayag-i#-gtin) be produced, by
speaking and by eating.

12. To. keep those two operations distinct, one
from the other, the custom of uttering the praise of
sacred beings and the glorification of sacred beings
when the mouth remains in the act of eating, until
the mouth becomes clean from food, is decreed as
inconsistent with goodness (aham-véhih). 13. And
that whch remains from the outpouring (rikh) at the
time of a cleansing is called ‘a cleansing (misn-aé),’

14. One means for the retention of knowledge is
through not having that retention of knowledge
exhausted, but when oze thus speaks during that
cleansing the words are really originating with the
mouth, for he does not retain ¢hem; and whenever
(maman) he does not speak anything whatever
with the tongue, that religious glorification which
zé is the custom to utter before and after eating
is then offered by him from his own limited resources
(sAman6-i viménd), and it will be offered from his
own limited resources.


CHarter XLI,


1. As ¢o the fortieth question and reply, that
which you ask is thus: Of those whose decision is
this, that it is not necessary to be steadfast in the
religion of the Mazda-worshippers—by which deci-
sion this is asserted, ¢hat they should abandon the
religion of the Mazda-worshippers—some one dis-
parages the religion and goes over to a foreign
faith (an-airih), then of what nature is his sin


CHAPTER XL, 12—XLI, 5. 137


owing thereto, azd what does the sin owing thereto,
as regards those of the same foreign religion,
amount to? 2. Or order some one then to tell us
clearly concerning it, how it is, and how is the
disobedience due to this sin.

3. The reply is this, that an adult is worthy of
death?! on account of the good religion they? would
abandon, on account also of the adopted law of the
foreign faith Ze is worthy of death, in whose reliance
upon the improper law is also the sin which they®
maintain azd practise by law, and through dang
in the same law Ze is equally sinful with them.
4. And also when any one is on that course, and
his wish is for the same protection, of which a
similitude is zz the enduring words of that good law
they would forsake, and he adopts that which is
vile*+, even through that impropriety 4e is equally
sinful.

5. When he dies, without renunciation® of ¢hat
stv and impenitently, in that improperly-constituted
law, the position of his soul is then in the worst


1 That is, he commits a mortal sin, for which he could have
formerly been condemned to death by the high-priest (see Sls.
VIL, 2, 5-7, 21).

2 The teachers of infidelity. 3 The foreigners.

4 The probable meaning is that if he conforms to the foreign
faith merely from politic motives, while retaining a belief in his own
religion, he is still equally sinful.

5 This renunciation is effected by the recitation of a particular
formula called the Patit, in which every imaginable sin is mentioned
with a declaration of repentance of any such sins as the reciter
may have committed. But this formal renunciation must be
accompanied by atonement and true repentance ; and in order to
ascertain the proper atonement all serious sins must be confessed
to the high-priest (see Sls. IV, 14, VHI, 1, 2, 8-1 0).


AL_A


138 DADISTAN-f DINIK.


existence!, and his punishment is that of many szxs
worthy of death; from the demons also ¢here come
grievously, hand in hand, pain and suffering, gnaw-
ing and stench of many kinds, stinging, tearing, and
lacerating, primary evil and discomfort. 6. And
through their? law and faith his distress in that
worst existence is thus until the last change of
existence, when the renovation of ¢he universe is
produced by will among living beings.

7. But reality (aitdith), as regards living, arises
from renunciation of that disobedience; it makes
those attract to the good law who seduced him to
that evil law, that which established him improperly
in the law it eradicates from 4s conduct (rfibakih),
advancing sins it again restrains, and whatever has
advanced it repairs again anew through the religion
of the Mazda-worshippers, aza he becomes thought-
ful, constant, and steadfast. 8. The sin which he
set going he restrains and atones for by wealth,
trouble, and authorising? commands; even in the
body he also undergoes punishment in the three
mights (sattiih)*; he then obtains forgiveness, and
his soul is saved.

g. And as z¢ is said in the persistent law of the
sacred beings®, that ‘the good religion of the sacred
beings, who are the Mazda-worshipping superiors,


* See Chap. XXXIII, 3. * The foreigners’.

* Or, tibankar may mean ‘lavish.’ The ordering of religious
ceremonies, as good works in atonement for sin, is probably in-
tended ; and these always imply a lavish expenditure upon the
priesthood.

* Referring to the three nights’ punishment after the resurrection
of the body, which is specially reserved for mortal sinners (see Bd,
XXX, 16).

° Quoting, with some alteration, from Pahl. Vend, LAGI Se


CHAPTER XLI, 6—XLU, I. 139


ordains z¢ as retribution,’ so that the sin it takes
away (spayéiti)' may not exist in him, his retri-
bution is declared by revelation. 10. And by the
same witness 2¢ is said, that all of the primitive faith
have been quite of the same opinion about this, that
from the good religion except by? the way of
renunciation of sez there is none unless to hell; but
that renunciation should be during life, for it is said
that ‘whoever when living does not become right-
eous, that is, does not fully atone for sin, for him
when dead there is no grant of? the best existence.’
11. To commit no sin is better than retribution and
renunciation of sin.


CHarter XLIT.


1. As ¢o the forty-first question and reply, that
which you ask is thus: As Zo him who remains in the
good religion of the Mazda-worshippers, whom men
shall make the protection and assistance of the good
religion‘, who shall save men from a foreign faith
and irreligion (akdindih), and then holds back some
of those who have the idea that they should go over
to a foreign faith and irreligion, azd they do not go
over to the foreign faith, du¢ become steadfast in the
religion of the Mazda-worshippers, what is then’ the


1 The Avesta verb spayéiti, here used as a technical term,
occurs frequently in Vend. ITI, 142-148.

2 Assuming that bar4, ‘indeed,’ stands for pavan, ‘by,’ (see
Chap. VII, 2 n.)

8 Reading bakhshisn-i, but it may be a corruption of bakh-—
shand, ‘they shall grant,’ as assumed in M14. This passage is
quoted from Pahl. Vend. V, 173.

4 Some one placed in authority, such as a high-priest or judge,
is evidently meant.

° Reading édinas, ‘then of him,’ instead of aydf, ‘or;’ the


I40 | DADISTAN-! DINIK.


nature of the decision of the angels a4out him, and
what is the nature of their (the men’s) good works
and sin?

2. The reply is this, that 4e is much extolled,
happy, exalted, of great good works avd abundant
recompense, and the path to the best existence, pre-
pared (frarast6) by his righteousness, is wide!; the
delight of zs soul becomes complete, azd zts hope?
is great. 3. And every good work that is manifested
in the good religion by those who are transferred by
him from a foreign faith and irreligion, and which
they shall do thereafter—when, through the perse-
verance and praise exercised by him who is protected
by the religion, they are saved from irreligion—be-
comes his as much as though it had been set going
by him himself, and he has the same praise and the
same good works with them. 4. Of the extent
(sAman6) azd amount of such good works ¢here is
no writing a second time, unless fzs acquaintance
with the full computation of the good works due to
ther number is continuous?; but when zz the same
way they are practising and steadfast in sin it shall
not be assigned ¢o dzm*. 5. Then his position in


two words being alike in Pahlavi except in the latter part of the
last letter.

* That is, his path to heaven over the Kinvad bridge is rendered
wide and easy by his good deeds (see Chap. XXI, 5).

* Reading aiméd; M14 has khim, ‘disposition, and K35 has
khiméad, which suggests ‘shall be greatly celebrated’ as a possible
- translation.

* The meaning appears to be that their good works are imputed
to him only so long as he continues to exercise some control over
them.

* That is, their sins will not be imputed to him in the same way
as their good works.


CHAPTER XLII, 2—XLII, 3. ee


righteousness’ is very grand, and in the world he
has himself great eminence, applause, avd dignity.

6. And as much as that which is an improper law
and a law worthy of death is a punishing of the soul,
and the disconnected? words and perversion (vas-
takih), due also to the perfidy (rangisn6) of the
fiend who has come, are such that in his time the
religious rites (din6) performed are rites of grievous
vexation and fear, so that which is a proper law, like.
the great glorification in spirit and the connected
words of the high-priests, is the arrival of the good
spirit as much as a virtue worthy of recompense and
full of hope. 7. Even as that which is said thus >
‘Of men who are practisers of good deeds the mani-
festation is then in their children.’


Cuapter XLITII.


1. As to the forty-second question and reply, that
which you ask is thus: Regarding a man who
is consecrating a sacred cake’, and the fire is his
household attendant (khavag-i m4n6) from afar,
when he sees z¢, at how many steps is it improper?
2, When they consecrate a sacred cake by Aght of a
lamp, why do they not say ¢he words ‘tava athré
(for thee, the fire), as dy another fire? 3. And of
the propitiatory dedications (shnfimandiha)* to the
period of the day (gah), the day, and the month of
the consecration of the sacred cake, which is that


1 Or, perhaps, aharfibdih may here mean ‘the righteous ex-
istence’ or heaven.

2 Reading apadvand, instead of va padvand,

§ See Chap. XXX, 1. 4 See Chap. XXIX, 1.


age DADISTAN-! DIN?K.


which when earlier ov later is also then not proper,
and which is that which is proper? 4. When they
shall accomplish the consecration of a sacred cake
with one more dedication than those of the thirty
days of the months in the year, how is it necessary
to act so that it may not enter foo early; and which
is the one more dedication which, when they shall
make z¢, is proper, which is that which is not proper,
and which is that which is earlier and later ?

5. The reply is this, that at forty-eight? feet from
the sacred twigs? to the fire—which would be about
nine reeds, 2f of a medium man—even though one


’ K35 has ‘forty-seven.’ Taking the foot at 10} English inches
(see Bd. XXVI, 3n) the 48 feet would be 42 English feet, and the
nat or reed would be 4 feet 8 inches.

® The baresém (Av. baresma), or bundle of sacred twigs, is
an indispensable part of the ceremonial apparatus; it is held in the
hand of the officiating priest while reciting many parts of the
liturgy, and is frequently washed with water and sprinkled with
milk. It consists of a number of slender rods, varying with the
nature of the ceremony, but usually from five to thirty-three. These
rods were formerly twigs cut from some particular trees, but now
thin metal wires are generally used; and when not in the hand of
the priest they are laid upon the crescent-shaped tops of two adja-
cent metal stands, each called a mah-rfi, ‘moon-face,’ and both
together forming the bares6m-dan or ‘twig-stand.’ The bare-
s6m is prepared for the sacred rites by the officiating priest while
reciting certain prayers (see Haug’s Essays, pp. 396-399), during
which he washes the twigs with water, and ties them together with
a kfistik, or girdle, formed of six thread-like ribbons split out of a
leaflet of the date-palm and twisted together. This girdle, being
passed twice round the middle of the bundle of twigs, is secured
with a right-handed and left-handed knot on one side of the bundle,
and is then passed round a third time and secured with a similar
double knot on the other side, exactly as the kfistik or sacred
thread-girdle is secured round the waist of a Parsi man or woman
(see Chap. XXXIX, 1).


CHAPTER XLIII, 4-8. 143


' sees the fire azd does not say ‘tava Athrd}, it is


proper. 6. And a lamp also has the same con-
tingency (ham-brah) as a fire; and by our teaching
they do not consecrate a sacred cake ata lamp on
which there is no burning of firewood, du¢ they
should cause a burning of firewood on that at which
they consecrate a sacred cake, and they say ‘tava
ethre*.

7. And there zs a propitiatory dedication for each
separate consecration of a sacred cake, and not again
from the first to the last®; and the first is the nearest
to the first day, Atharmazd, just as Atdr (‘fire’) and
Avan (‘waters’) are other days in the series; and
the last is the day Aniran, because in the same series
the day Aniran is the latest’. 8. When the seven


1 These Avesta words, meaning ‘for thee, the fire,’ are used
when addressing the fire, or presenting anything to it, such as fire-
wood and incense (see Yas. III, 52, VII, 3, XXII, 10, 22, &c.)
they are not to be used, however, when the fire is so far off, or so
feeble, that its light cannot be seen by the speaker (see Sls. X, 37).

2 Meaning that in his opinion a lamp is no proper substitute for
a sacred fire unless a little firewood is burnt in it.

In the liturgy for the consecration of the sacred cakes, which
consists chiefly of Yas. III, 1-VIII, 9 (see Haug’s Essays, p. 408),
the portion contained in Yas. III, IV, VI, VII is filled with propi-
tiatory formulas, some of which are fixed, but others vary according
to the hour, day, and month of the service. Some of the variable
propitiatory dedications for the day and month are, however, iden-
tical with some of the fixed ones, such as those for fire, waters, &c.
And in case of the day or month requiring the use of a variable
dedication of this description, the object of the text is to prohibit
the use of the corresponding fixed dedication, which would be an
unnecessary repetition of the same words. This appears to be the
meaning of the words va akhar min zak-i levind va/ akhar 1a
translated in the text; but it would be hardly possible to express
so simple a meaning in a more obscure fashion.

4 The series of propitiatory dedications for the thirty days of the


Re SA


I44 pApISTAN-1 DINIK.

archangels are in the propitiatory dedication it is
proper to put the seven archangels first in their
own order, then the period of the day’, then the day,
then the month of the consecration, and, afterwards,
the other dedications in such order as they are
written.

9. And as éo the earlier which they should put
later, one is when they shall put a dedication before
the seven archangels, one is that when they shall
put the day before the period of the day, one is
when they shall put the month before the day, and
one is that when a dedication, distinct from the seven
archangels, the period of the day, the day, azd the
month, on account of dezng before the archangels, or
before the period of the day, or before the day, or
before the month, is accounted as improper a dedi-


month (which are also used for months of the same names) consti-
tute the Sirézah, which is given in two forms, one in which the
names and titles are in the genitive case, and the other in which
they are in the accusative. From the first form of the Sirdzah the
proper dedications for the actual day and month are taken and
substituted for Yas. III, 50, 51, IV, 40, 41, VII, 41, 42 (which
passages, as they stand, are correct only for the first day, Aftharmazd,
of the first month, Fravardin); and from the second form of the
Strézah they are similarly taken and substituted for Yas. VI, 37, 38;


somewhat in the same way as the Collect, Epistle, and Gospel for —


the day are taken from the complete series of such writings, and
inserted in the Communion service of the Church of England.
The first -day is Afharmagzd, the ninth day and ninth month are
At@r, the tenth day and eighth month are Avan, and the last day is
Aniran. Following these variable dedications for the day and
month are the fixed dedications for Atar, ‘fire, and Avan, ‘ waters,’
unless they have been already recited for the day or month.

* The dedication for the g4h or period of the day occupies the
place of Yas. III, 21-37 (in which the formulas for all five gahs
are given); so that when the archangels are to be propitiated the
dedications for them must precede Yas. III, ar.


CHAPTER XLIII, 9-XLIV, I. 145


cation as ¢hat of yesterday, or the day before, is for
this day.

10. So that when z¢ zs the propitiatory dedication
for the day Khir of the month of consecration Avan},
the day avd month are such that their order and the
Atar (‘fire’) and Avan ( waters’) succeeding them
are thereby set in reverse order to the proper se-
quence*, 11. Then, too, when in the same month?
its propitiatory dedication for the day azd month
becomes alke for day and month 4, it is recited as
regards éo¢h the month and the ‘waters’ (Avan),
because ¢hey are not connected together and ave
again become non-inclusive; azd then one is to con-
sider them as proper.


CHAPTER XLIV.


1. As to the forty-third question azd reply, that
which you ask is thus: 7ere zs a man who is super-
intending (avar-mandakak®6) and skilful, in whom
great skill as regards religion is provided, and the
high-priest’s duty and officiating priest's duty (mag6-
patih) are performed by him; or they are not per-
formed by him, but in him great skill as regards


1 The eleventh day of the eighth month.

2The meaning is that in such a case the dedications for the day
and ‘month, and the fire and waters (Yas. III, 52, 53) which follow,
will stand in the following order :—Khfr, Avan, Atar (the second
Avan being omitted as directed by § 7), which is precisely the reverse
order of those names among the days of the month.

8 The eighth month, Avan.

* That is, on the tenth day of the eighth month, when both day
and month are Avan, in which case there would be three Avan
dedications, but only two are to be used as here directed.


fi 8] L


146 DADISTAN-! DINIK.


religion is provided. 2. In a place of chat district
there is no one who rightly knows the commentary
and ‘the proper azd improper}, so that he comes
forth into a place of such decay (sapakh4n); and
the people of the district—who constantly order all
the religious rites (din6”) of many sacred ceremonies
from any poor maz of the various persons from other
districts whose skill and superintending are not “ke
his, but they constantly come ¢o that district—shall
constantly receive from him all the many religious
rites and many sacred ceremonies. 3. Azd that
man, who is revered and skilful, proceeds not unde-
jectedly (14 anaskandiha) and bashfully Zo his own
superintending position, the position of the religion
and position of the skill which are his; he does not
demand any employment in the district or any award
(dina) from the district, and does not know ow to
pro ide any other employment or award, in which
there would be azy fitness for him. 4. Are the
people of the district—on account of the skill and
activity which that man has exercised in religion,
due to the performance of all the religious rites and
sacred ceremonies which they constantly order—


* From this it would appear that a treatise called ‘Shdyast La-
shayast’ existed a thousand years ago, which probably bore some
resemblance to Sls., the work which now bears the same name.

* The words hamak diné, translated ‘all the religious rites’
both here and elsewhere, are a technical term which (as I am
informed by Dastfir Peshotanji Behramji, the high-priest of the
Parsis in Bombay) is applied to ‘ those obligatory religious rites and
festivals that every Parsi is bound to observe by performing certain
ceremonies, in his or her name, with the assistance of priests
engaged for the purpose. These rites and festivals include the


Rapithvan, the Gahambrs, the Fravardigdn, the monthly festi-
vals, &¢,’


CHAPTER XLIV, 2-9. 147


thereupon to prepare that man a stipend (bahar)},
and is it necessary for them to give a stipend to
that man, or how is it necessary to act; and is it
necessary for them to collect z¢ for him, or not?
5. And of the much advantage of all the religious
rites and work is it necessary to speak thus: ‘ Until
the ¢zme that thou hadst come it was not possible
for us to order except of him who is inferior to thee,’
or how is z¢ to be done? 6. Is it necessary to col-
lect a stipend for him on account of the benefit and
reasoning thought (virmatd) on other subjects, of
which 4e was the means, or how is it necessary for
the superintendent of our people to collect such
stipend of skill, position, and religion ?

7. The reply is this, that a man of such descrip-
tion as written aéove, and superintending the exer-
cise of skill and provision of ability, is very worthy
of a stipend and courtesy (khfipih); also, through
good management of all religious rites and the cere-
mony of the sacred beings, Ae is very confident in
any uncertainty. 8. Therefore it is necessary to
consider that he manages more openly and _ better
than those whose skill and ability are not “ke his;
and also as regards stipend and reasoning thought,
owing to the worthiness of the ceremony of the
sacred beings, his are more whose skill, ability, and
activity in religion are greater. 9. And as ¢o a man
who is as written aéove—when all those religious
rites and ceremonies are well-managed by him, and
his repeated direction and right continuance of proper
duties are an accumulation of his own reasoning


1 Literally ‘a share’ of the produce of the district, analogous
to tithes.
Ib, 73


148 DADISTAN-i DINIK.


thought and great capability, and are ordered of him
with great solicitude—oze is also to consider him
a stipendiary? thereby, and a thriving acquirement
of ample reasoning thought. 1o. And as ¢o him,
moreover, who is less skilled than he, azd of inferior
position, by as much as he is not so worthy, zs
custom is therefore to produce a want of himself
again.

11. But he who as much skill should-have? a
great stipend, and he of medium ability should have?
a medium one, he having less means of benefiting
worthily, maturely, and necessarily. 12. And the
value is as it is said in revelation thus: ‘ The stipend
they should announce to him who is an upholder of
religion is two shares, aza@ to him who is mediocre
only one, to him whose lot is inferior.’

13. That man is a master azd high-priest? whose
usage also (Ain-i£6) is wise, and in ability, good-
ness, and skill is the best of those of the religion of
the Mazda-worshippers, which is the religion of wise
upholders. 14. And the exercise of his religious
disposition—originally possessing a religious sti-
pend—which they shall order of him in ¢hat place,
and that of the other worthy oes and applicants in
the place and coming applying to the place, as much


' Literally ‘a shareholder.’

* Assuming that the adverbial suffix -tha may be taken here
(as it can be probably in all cases) as the Pz. conditional form
haé of the verb ‘to be,’ equivalent to the more usual forms aé, de,
and the Huz. h6man@e (see Chap. XLVIII, 23).

* Or, rad dasté bar may mean ‘an awarding high-priest,’ as he
is called rad, ‘ master, chief, in virtue of his power of sentencing
sinners and governing the religious body, and he is called dasté-


bar, ‘upholder of customs,’ in virtue of his control over rites and
ceremonies.


CHAPTER XLIV, 10-19. 149


as it is worth azd happens ¢o de their own want, one
is to altogether thoroughly well consider for him.
15. Good destiny is not fulfilled by granting ¢o those
applying, dw¢ through forward ability, the forward,
kind-hearted!, azd extreme skill provided, azd grand
position he is worthy of much stipend, azd it is
important to make ¢hem stipendiary in their own
gradation of applying. 16. For the observance of
moderation azd the granting of applications are
mutually destructive, avd it is discriminatively said
that the high-priest Gamasp of the Hvévas? con-
sidered, in that mode, the much skill of that good
superintendent decng without a stipend as not dispro-
portionate, dv¢ most justly very moderate.

17. Moreover, to collect for all except for one
skilful san, and to provide a stipend /oy any other
applicants, is not right; and the limits should be?®
moderate, for each one really shares the moderate
apportionments according to his own want, apart
even from the sacred ceremony. 18. But to collect
for such a man, who as kind-heartedly superintended
by rule during reasoning thought, is a greater good
work than to approve even him wo is superintending
much more authoritatively. 19. And he who 4as
himself requested is to obtain everything last ; for,
except zz that case when a virtuous doer /as in any


1 Literally ‘ good-hearted.’

2 The Av. GAmAspa Hvégva (or Hvéva) of Yas. XLV, 17, EL, 18;
Fravardin Yt. 103. He was high-priest and prime minister of Kai-
VistAsp ; but probably the opinion of some much later Gamasp is
here erroneously attributed to him, much in the same way as the
comparatively modern Book of Enoch is attributed to Enoch, ‘the
seventh from Adam,’ in Jude, 14.

’ Reading haé instead of -fh4, as in § 11.


150 DADISTAN-? DINIK.


mode begged a livelihood! aud is not capable of
earning zt—so that something even of the righteous
gifts? of clothing is begged by him—to live in idle-
ness is not the way to be assisted; du¢ he who has
not himself requested, and is wise, is to beg a suit of
clothes (rakht-han4).

20. They give to the good provider of gifts much
praise, and for the preservation of the perfect giver
are many religious friends, azd the position of the
upholders of religion*; so it is necessary to give,
and to consider z¢ as provided for the great female
whom revelation greatly celebrates*, that patron
spirit (ah) connected with religion, as it is said
that zz the opinion of Hfiman ®, the high-priest, the
propitious religion is, as 2¢ were, the way of saving
their souls’.


1 Mrq has zivisnd, and K3s has zivand4an.

* Charitable donations given to the priesthood and poor for the
purpose of acquiring religious merit on certain solemn occasions :
they often consist of clothing, and are then supposed to furnish the
giver, or the person in whose name they are given, with garments
in the other world after the resurrection (see Bd. XXX, 28).

* The angels who assist his soul after death, such as Srésh,
Mitrd, Rashnd, Ast4d, and the good Vaé (see Chaps. XIV, 3, 4,
XXX, 2-4).

* That is, he will occupy the same grade in heaven as the
priesthood.

° Referring to the maiden spirit supposed to meet the good soul
after death and to conduct it over the Hinvad bridge to heaven
(see Chaps. XXIV, 5, XXXVI, 117). She is described in Vend.
XIX, 98-ro1, and more fully in Hn. II, 22-32 and the later Pahlavi
works, Her beauty is said to be proportional to the religious merit
of the soul, and she is here identified with the ahf or patron spirit.

* Probably some one nearly contemporary with the author, such
as Atir-pad son of Hémid (see Bd. XXXIII, 11), who is called
hfi-man4, ‘ well-meaning,’ and styled ‘the leader
the good religion’ in the Dinkard (III, ccccxiii).

" The maiden spirit, being developed by religious actions, is


of the people of


CHAPTER XLIV, 20-XLV, I. 151


21. About upholders of religion, and a more
particular rule how the lawful computation should
be for glorifying with moderation, a chief of the
priests! Zas spoken thus: ‘Shouldst thou be our
father in wealthiness, I am thy protector in body,
and thou becomest thy protector in soul?’

22. The same collection is the way of the friends
of religion for begging from the upholders of reli_ion
the preservation of the soul, avd for well considering,
extremely gracefully azd fully reverently, the advan-
tage and pleasure of the position‘ of the upholders
of religion, so that they shall properly collect for the
preservation of souls by the mode of going to collect
thoroughly with great gain.


CHAPTER XLV.


1. The forty-fourth question is that which you
ask thus: Of priesthood (aérpatih) or discipleship
(hAvistih) which is the priest's duty (aérpatih),
and which the disciple’s ; which is that which it is
necessary to have in priesthood, and which in


discipleship ?


called the soul’s ‘own religion’ in AV. IV, 23; it is, therefore, that
spirit’s assistance which is probably meant here, when speaking of
religion saving the soul.

1 A mébad of mébads.

2 Meaning that the wealthy man can easily protect his own soul
by a proper expenditure of his wealth on good works. The con-
nection of this with the first part of the sentence is rather obscure.

8 Mentioned in §$ 17, 18.

+ In heaven (see § 20). To induce the laity to collect ample
property for paying the priesthood they are promised a share of
the priest’s happiness in heaven.


152 DADISTAN-I DINiK.


2. The reply is this, that the priesthood and dis-
cipleship are connected together; the priests teach
the scriptures +, avd the disciples learn the knowledge
of the religion, that is, the Avesta and Zand?. 3. The
priests have been disciples; through the teaching
of his own priest they make the aroused existence #
of even a disciple become a priest, and in one body
with the learner are the priesthood and discipleship.
4. Through that which he has learned as a disciple
from the priest 4z is wiser, and owing to the priest-.
hood in his own person he teaches the disciple who
is a learner; the desire which is his craving for
learning is also owing to that in his own priest,
when 4e was a disciple unto his own priest.

5. And the disciple azd priest are even such as
is said thus: ‘The director (farmadar) of the
profession of priests (Asravdan) of Pars*, and
chieftain over the faithful and the officiating priests
(magépatan) of Pars, is the leader of the religion ;
and /zs disciple (ashakard6) is a disciple 2% a se-
lected foremost position among the priests of the reli-
gion, set up (madam agast) over those acquainted
with the commentary (zand-A4kasan6). 6. The


' The word madig4n means a treatise upon almost any subject,
but it is specially applied to the Nasks or books of the complete
ancient literature of the Mazda-worshippers, which are now nearly
all lost. It should be noted that ‘teaching’ and ‘learning’ are
expressed by the same word in Pahlavi.

* The Avesta is the religious literature in its original language,
erroneously called Zend by Europeans, and the Zand is the Pahlavi
translation of the same literature, with the Pahlavi commentary (see
Bd. Introd. p. x).

* Reading ham-vikht3 yehevanth and taking ham-vikhtd
as equivalent to Pers. angikht.


* This was the post held by the author himself (see Chap,
aCLV 123). .


CHAPTER XLV,.2—XLVI, I. 153


more infallible (asaktar) of these is the powerful
skill of the priest (aérpat6) put forth through the
ritual axd Visparad!, and fzs skill in the commen-
tary (zand); the skill of disciples in the Avesta
is, further, fully understood, azd sin recognised as
oppressive, through the formulas (nirang) of the
sacred ceremony, ablution and non-ablution, purity
and pollution.

7. And both professions are the indispensable
preservers of great decisions as ¢o that which the
priestly disposition Zas taught, done, and considered
about the perpetual existence of every being, the
complete goodness and final success of the non-
existent evil azd entire good of the sacred beings,
the annihilation of the demons?, azd the complete
understanding of the friends of the sacred beings.


Cuapter XLVI.


1. The forty-fifth question is that which you ask
thus: Is it allowable ¢Za¢ those of the priesthood,
when there is no daily livelihood for them from
the life of the priesthood, should abandon the priest-
hood, and ¢ha¢ other work de done, or not?


1 The term yasté, ‘ritual,’ means any form of prayer with
ceremony, and appears to include the Yasna or chief ceremonial
ritual. The Visparad (here written Visp6réd6) is a particular form
of ceremonial prayer, the various sections of which are interspersed
among those of the Yasna and Vendidad in the full liturgy of the
Mazda-worshippers ; it is called Visparad, ‘all chiefs,’ because it
commences with an invocation of all the spiritual chiefs of the
universe.

2 K3¢ has khasnd, which might stand for khas4né, ‘reptiles,’
but is more probably a slight alteration of sédAné, ‘demons,’ which
would correspond to the more modern form, sédaano, in Mr4.


154 pApIsTAN-f DINiK.


2. The reply is this, that there is no loss: of
reputation to priests from priestly duties (aérpatth),
which are themselves the acquired knowledge ¢hat
is accumulated éy the priestly disposition, care for
the soul, avd the requisite good works. 3. And
there is this advantage, that, through acquaintance
with the religion of the sacred beings, and certainty
as to the reward of the spirit, they make chem
become more contented in adversity, more intel-
ligent as regards stability of character in difficulty
and restriction, and more through knowledge the
abode of hope for those saved. 4. So that it is not
fit they should abandon the priesthood, which is
both harmless azd an employment wth advantages
that has required much trouble to learn.

5. But, indeed, when they do not obtain! a daily
livelihood from priestly duty, and the good do not
give them chosen righteous gifts? for it, and they
do not let ¢hem obtain any from next of kin or
the wicked even by begging, a livelihood may be
requested from the paid performance of ceremonies,
management of all religious rites (dinéd), and other
priestly disciple’s duty therein®. 6. When even by
that they do not obtain 7, they are to seek a
livelihood by agriculture, sheep-rearing, penmanship,
or other proper employment among priests; aud
when 7 is not possible for them to live even by
these, ¢hey are to seck tt by bearing arms, hunting,
or other proper employment in the profession of
a virtuous warrior. 7. And when even it is not
es ee ee Sy

* K35 has ‘beg,’ both here: and in § 6, the difference between
the two words in Pahlavi being only a stroke.

® See Chap. XLIV, 10.

* That is, from the general funds of the priesthood,


CHAPTER XLVI, 2—XLVII, I. 155


possible for them to maintain their own bodies,
which are in requisite control, by that which is
cravinely digested, they are to beg a righteous gift’
authorisedly (dastébarih4) as an effectual remedy ;
by living idly, or not expending strength, their own
bodies, which are in control, are without livelihood,
but not authorisedly *. |


(aaprer LV LL,


1. As ¢o the forty-sixth question azd reply, that
which you ask is thus: At a sacred feast (myazd)*
of those of the good religion, in which ¢here are
fifty or a hundred men, more or less, just as it
happens, and seven men who are engaged in the
performance of the religious rite (dind) which is
celebrated by them are feasting together with them,
of those seven men there are some who are easily *
able to pray five sections (vidak)®, and some six
subdivisions (vakhshisn6), of the Avesta, dv¢ no
chapter (fargard6)® of the commentary (zand) is


a a a ee

1 That is, charity.

2 That is, they are not authorised to beg charity for maintain-
ing themselves in idleness.

8 The sacred feast consists of the consecration of the sacred
cakes (see Chap. XXX, 1), followed by that of wine and fruit with
the recitation of the Afring4n or blessings (see Haug’s Essays,
p- 408), after which the consecrated food and drink are consumed
by those present, both priests and laymen.

4 That is, they know the prayers by heart, which is necessary in
reciting the Avesta.

5 Compare Pers. vai, vid, vida, ‘part, little,’ guz, ‘a portion, a
bundle of folios.’ Mr4 has nask, ‘book,’ but this is clearly an
unlucky guess.

° The chapters of the Vendidad are called fargar ds, as are also |


156 ~ pApisTAN-{ DINiK.


easy to them; and all seven of them are disputing
about the right (r4s) to the foremost places. 2. And
he to whom thirty chapters in! the commentary are
easy speaks thus: ‘The foremost place is mine,
and it became my place owing to great retentiveness
of memory, for I know the commentary well and
“the proper avd improper ?;” and my place must
be good, for whenever I do not indicate this as
the place of religion unto the people I am not in
the security of religion ; du¢ you should not dispute
about my place, for z¢ is not becoming to dispute zz,
because this neglect and outlandishness (an-airith),
which some one brings constantly into the religion,
is not due to me.’ 3. Those seven men, moreover,
speak constantly unto him thus: ‘Our place is more
important and must ever be so, for every man of
us is able to pray several sections in his own
officiating priestly duty (z6tih), and it is ever neces-
sary to consider who is more participating in sharing
a reward.’ 4. Then as zo those whose Avesta is
very easy, or him who knows the commentary axd
‘the proper axd improper’ well, and ¢heir goodness
and greatness, as asked by us in this chapter, direct
some one to make them clear unto us, for when he
demonstrates the littleness and greatness in this


those of the Vistasp Yast and many of the lost Nasks or books.
The text here applies the term specially to the chapters of some
scripture with commentary, and it may be noted that the thirty
fargards, subsequently mentioned, are the exact number contained
in the Vendidad and Vistasp Yast taken together, the learning of
which by heart (as the word ‘ easy’ implies) is a very serious task,
comparable with learning the whole Greek text of the four Gospels.

* Perhaps ‘with’ is meant, but the word used is pavan,

* See Chap. XLIV, 2. .


CHAPTER XLVII, 2-7. 157


subject his great religion is then completely an
advantage.

5. The reply is this, that, as to that which you
ask me to write, so that they may decide whether
thirty chapters in the commentary are easier, or
really the other, be they five ov be they six sections
of the Avesta, are easier, there is no deciding,
because which are the chapters and which the
sections? 6. For, as regards more cleverness and
less cleverness, it is not clear; there are some of the
sections greater than many sections, and there are
chapters as great as many chapters, but to under-
stand severally the divisions (buris) and enumeration
of him to whom five sections of the Avesta are
easy, avd also of him whose thirty chapters in the
commentary are easy, it is necessary for making the
calculation to consider every single division in the
commentary as eguzvalent to seven egual divisions
apart from the commentary’. 7. And it is thereby
thus manifest who as skill zz the one and who has
skill zz the other *, and whoever “as less, when there
is nothing in it regarding which 4e is otherwise ¢han
when the superintending command of rulers (khtda-
yAn) delivered over to him the place of duty—or
on account of a new officiating priestly duty or
directorship (radih) of the season festivals *, or the


1 The reason for this difference is that it is only necessary to
learn the words of the Avesta, without understanding them, whereas
a knowledge of the Zand, or commentary, implies understanding
both texts as well as knowing the Avesta by heart.

2 M14 omits the repetition of the words mfin afzar, but it
seems necessary for the completion of the idiomatic phrase.

3 The six Gdsdnbars or Gahambirs are festivals, each held for
five days, and severally ending on the 45th, rosth, 180th, 2roth,
2goth, and 365th days of the Parsi year. They were probably


158 DADISTAN-f DINIK.


foremost places ée¢zg occupied, or like causes he
becomes otherwise—is fit for all the great share and
very good estimation of the place of oxe much more
skilful, when their Jeng fitting and skilful, or their
excess ov deficiency, is not specially manifest from
their skill’, 8. And him to whom the commentary
is very easy, having prayed much, it as seemed
important to consider more thriving proportionable
to zs eating 2,

g. And great and ample respect for both their
ways of worthiness is an advantage and fully neces-
sary, skill in the commentary amd that in the Avesta
being together mutually assisting; for even the
solemnizers of the Avesta have need for information
from the commentary about the scattered (parvand)
‘proper and improper’ usages of the sacred ceremony.
10. The more efficient information from the com-
mentary is advantageous when the ceremonial is
proceeded with by them, and one of those two is
one of the skilful, azd a friend, provider, glorifier,
and aggrandizer for the other; and the friends of
religion are good friends and, therefore, also pro-
viders of fame for both of them.


intended originally to celebrate the periods of midspring, midsum-
mer, the beginning of autumn, the beginning of winter, midwinter,
and the beginning of spring (see Sls. XVII, 3), when the Parsi
year was fixed to begin at the vernal equinox. In later times they
were supposed to commemorate the creations of the sky, water,
earth, vegetation, animals, and man.

* The meaning seems to be that a priest once acknowledged as
pre-eminent is not to lose his right of precedence merely because
others become rather better qualified, so long as he himself does
not retrograde, or is not superseded in his Official duties. But if
through any accidental circumstance he be excluded fro
chief seat, he ought not to dispute the matter,

*-Or, perhaps, § through deme moderate in hrs eating,’


m the


CHAPTER XLVII, 8—XLVHI, 2. . 159


11. When, too, they are publishing accusing state-
ments, one about the other, from necessity, or from
the violence which is owing to the adversary}, z¢ is
important to become an excuser as regards them,
and not a diminisher of their share, zor a bringer
(Akhtar) of unhealthiness to ¢Aezy united strength.


Cyarrer XLVI.


1. The forty-seventh question is that which you
ask thus: How is a liking for the desirableness,
joy, and pleasure avzsemg from the sacred ceremony
(yazisn) friendly to Athavmazd, the archangels’,
and the guardian spirits of the righteous*; in what
manner is the perfection of him by whom the cere-
mony is ordered and the people of the country then
exalted by them; and how azd in what manner does
it become the vexation, defeat, anguish, ad dis-
comfort of the evil spirit, the demons, azd the
fiends? 2. How is the purpose of the ceremony,
what is the ceremony, where is the place* when
they shall perform z¢, what is good when they shall


1 The evil spirit.

2 The archangels are usually reckoned as seven in number, be-
cause Afiharmazd, their creator, is considered as presiding over the
six others, whose names are Vohtiman, Ardavahist, Shatvaird, Spen-
darmad, Horvadad, and Amerédad. These names are merely
corruptions of Avesta phrases meaning ‘good thought, perfect
rectitude, desirable dominion, bountiful devotion, health, and im-
mortality,’ respectively, and the archangels, or ‘ immortal benefactors,’
are personifications of these ideas. They are said to have been the
first creatures created, after the guardian spirits or prototypes of
creation, the light, and the sky (see Bd. I, 8, 23-26).

§ See Chap. II, 5. 4 Or g4s may mean ‘time.’


roo DADISTAN-f DINIK.


perform z¢, axd how zs z¢ good when they shall per-
form zt?

3. The reply is this, that the great satisfaction
of Athaymazd and the archangels avzseng from the
sacred ceremony is in the purity of its formulary
(nirang), azd also in this, that z¢ is completely
fulfilling his own blessed commands; because he
ordered that entire goodness for the complete pro-
cedure of those of the good religion (bindakd
hidinakanakih), as the recompense and full allot-
ment of the sure upholder of religion among those
who rightly recite z¢. 4. From the performance of
the ceremonial of the sacred beings are the propi-
tiation of the good spirits, the destruction (drigi-
snd) of violence, the increase of digestiveness, the
growth of plants, the prosperity of the world, azd
also the proper progress of living beings, even until
the movement of the renovation of the universe and
the immortality of the creatures arise therefrom. 5. It
became so, it is expressly said, because the sacred
beings are great; and unitedly opposing it the
demons are particularly undesirous of z¢, and owing
to it their defeat avd vexation are severe; its con-
secrated cup (tastikd)! also becomes the express
preservation of the ceremony.

6. And its purpose enquired about is this, that
religion is transmitted clearly to the intelligent, that
is, 2¢ 2s not the wisdom whose comprehension evésts
in worldly beings; and as, moreover, even that which
is not understood by worldly wisdom is really the

* Referring probably to the cup of Hém juice, the preparation,
consecration, and use of which are essentially characteristic of the


Yazisn or sacred ceremony, and are, therefore, supposed to be very
repulsive to the demons. °


CHAPTER XLVIII, 3-9. 161
ei cel Ee
creature of the spirits, that also which is the spiritual
formulary (nirang) is for making 7¢ intelligible to
worldly beings through the body! 7. That religion
which is comprehensible by the world azd authori-
tative (nikézak6) is rightly connected with that
which worldly beings are quite able to understand
through worldly wisdom; and the understanding
about its evidence as to that which is spiritual and
powerful, apart from the worldly evidence of supe-
riors (avarikan5), is the right way of the intelligent.
8. That proper (kAn6) purpose—in which, more-
over, the ceremonial, owing to timely memory for
its own completion, is unique—is this unique exhi-
bition of purity in the pure glorifying of the hea-
venly angels, as is commanded; just as the purpose
of the ceremonial of a season-festival decng before
the season-festival, azd of maintaining (d4rdn) the
exposure of the body of a jackal (sakhAl)? ov a
man, is to make the body clean from the corrupting
(nasfisikd) pollution®, ad also from outward con-
tamination.

9g. That also which might be written, as to the
much retribution appointed as regards washing
the limbs outside with clean moisture from clean


1 That is, the purpose of the ceremonial is to afford an outward
symbol of the spiritual mysteries of the religion.

2 This reading is uncertain, but the reference appears to be to
the exposure of the dead. Mrq has the sentence altered as fol-
lows :—‘ just as the ceremony of a season-festival is exhibited more
royally (or more joyously) before the season-festival, and a man
who is a judge is for the purpose of making the body clean from
the corrupting pollution, and also from LEONE which is
even outside the body, as much as is proper.’

’ That is, the pollution due to the Nasfs, or fiend of corruption,
who is supposed to seize upon all corpses (see Chap. XVII, 7).


[18] M


162 pApISTAN-t DINIK.

Cope EO
animals! avd plants, and then completely washing
the body with the purifying water streaming forth ;
as to the clean scents among those which they
rightly perceive, and making the body azd cloth-
ing? sweet-scented; avd as to the putting on of
the white and proper garment of Vohtiman’, and
supposing the power‘ of avarice 4o de the sight of
distress, is a// superfluous. 10. But zt is needful
still as regards these madters, that is, while engaged
in the ceremonial z¢ zs not to be hurried owing
to any hunger ov thirst, owing to liability of
punishment for religious practices’, ov even owing
to deficiency® of vacant space. 11. And before
the ceremonial ove is to eat at the appropriate
time, and such food, too, as is preparable and only
moderately troublesome (navds); and any of that
which oxe has to perform aloud in leaving the
heavenly-minded, yet moderate, duty in the abode
of fires'—which is perpetual light—is proper, per-
taining to good works, and good: for him, and
thereby lodging in zm. 12. And they, that is,


* Referring to ceremonial purification by washing with bull’s
urine.


® Or ‘the clothing of the body.’

* The sacred shirt (see Chaps. XXXIX, 19, XL, 2).

* Reading va zérih, but it may be nizérth, ‘ weakening.’

° This seems tobe the meaning of min p4dafrahth-3 dindikth.
At the time this was written the religion was often persecuted, and
its ceremonies were liable to interruption; but even when such
a misfortune was apprehended, they were not to be hurried over.

* The word is kamfh in the MSS., but it may possibly have
been kamth originally, in which case the meaning would be: ‘or
even owing to wishing for evacuation.’


" The fire temple, where the sacred fire is kept perpetually
burning.


CHAPTER XLVIII, 10-15, 163


the gloomy ones!, thereby see the service (yasdk)
for them themselves is short; axd good are they?
who come into the world glorified by praise.

13. The position of the ceremony-holders? them-
selves, that is, the position of the officiating priest
(z6t5) and his co-operators, is the Atrvés‘ place;
and, if z¢ de the precinct (dargasth) of prayers®, one
should wash z¢ over (madam pasdyAd) with the
water of purification, to make z¢ clean. 14. The
apparatus of the ceremonial, Zogether with its own
man, who is a solemnizer, and the two creatures
which are solid® out of these four: fire, metal,
water, and plants, just as one has to bring them
together in readiness, the stone Adrvés, the stone
and mortar Khan’, axd the Hém-mortar® (hava-
nih), cups, avd crescent-shaped (mah-rtipd) stands?
set upon 2, are a// ceremoniously washed (pAdy4-
vinid) with the water of purification. 15. The


1 The demons. In Mrgq the sentence, already obscure, is
altered so as to be unintelligible.

2 Theangels. The meaning is that, by the utterance of the proper
formulas at the proper times, the demons are discouraged, and the
angels are induced to come to the ceremony.

3 Perhaps we should read sAkhtar4n, ‘preparers,’ as in Mr4,
or else yastaran, ‘solemnizers,’ instead of dastAr4n, ‘holders.’

“ This is the name of the consecrated space within which the
ceremony is performed. It is often written Arvis, but is probably
to be traced to the Av. urvaésa, ‘ goal.’

5 ‘That is, when the place is about to be used for a ceremony.

6 Literally ‘material ;’ meaning the metallic and vegetable por-
tions of the ceremonial apparatus.

7 The slightly raised platform or table upon which all the
apparatus, except the fire and unconsecrated water, is placed.

® In which the twigs of Hém are pounded and mixed with
water. :

® For the Baresém or sacred twigs (see Chap. XLII, 5).


M 2


164 DADISTAN-{ DINIK.


bright fire on the clean fire-stand (Atistd)? is
increased by the dry firewood delivered Zo z¢ purt'
fied, and one is to put upon z¢ at appropriate times
the wholesome perfumes of various kinds of plants ;
and the water of purification, which is ritualistically
produced? by veczting the words of revelation, is in
the clean metal cups. 16. The well-grown Hém?®
through which the world is possessed of creatures’,
the Hém through which the production of Zarattist
occurred’, is a symbol of the white Gdkerané® as


* A small stone platform on which the fire vase is placed, now
usually called adést.

? Reading ntfrangiktha dad instead of the unintelligible
nirang ashayad of K35, which is very similarly written in Pah-
lavi; M14 has ‘ which ove is to keep pure by the ritual of words of
revelation.’

° A plant said to grow among the mountains in southern
Persia, which has not yet been botanically identified, but Anquetil
Duperron was told that it resembled a vine without fruit. Twigs
of this plant are brought to India ‘by traders and are, therefore,
considered impure until they have been purified, laid aside for a
year, and again purified’ (see Haug’s Essays, p. 399). A few
fragments of these twigs are pounded and mixed with water in the
H6m-mortar, and the juice is tasted by the priest who performs the
ceremony. The Avesta Hém and the Sanskrit Soma must have
been originally the same plant, but both Parsis and Hindus now
use plants which are no doubt mere substitutes for that original. In
southern and western India the Soma plant now used by the
Brahmans is the Sarcostemma Brevistigma, a leafless bush of green
succulent branches, growing upwards, with flowers like those of an
onion; when not in flower it can hardly be distinguished from the
Euphorbia Tirucalli, or thornless milk-bush, commonly used for
hedges in many parts of India.

* Reading dam-hémand; or it may be sem-hémand,
‘renowned.’

° Zarattist is said to have been begotten in consequence of his
parents drinking Hém-juice and cow’s milk infused, respectively,
with his guardian spirit and glory (see Zs. XI, 10 n). K35 has
héman, and Mr4 has h6man4d, instead of hém, in this clause.

* Av. gaokerena, sometimes called gdkard in Pahlavi, the


CHAPTER XLVIII, 16-19. 165


regards the immortality of the renovation of the
universe manifest therefrom, and the resting-places
of its vengeance? are the various demons; and with
it ove is to put attentively (sinvisnd-dahak) in zés
appropriate place the pomegranate (hadanapag)?
plant of the Afirvaram. 17. The vegetable® sacred
twigs carefully girded with the vegetable belt (par-
vand) and girdle, azd the metallic* crescent-shaped
stands—which are in the position of those who are
sovereigns of the worldly creatures who are inter-
preted as the sacred twigs’ of the treatises—are
prepared.

18. When arranged (stérdé) by the bringing
together of clean worldly productions, so much the
more purely as is possible, the arrival of the pure
renders all the symbols reliable. 19. Those cele-
brators of whom the outside of their own bodies is
defiled with their bodily refuse and in clean cloth-
ing, and ¢hetr disposition—if® in the religion of


mythic white Hém-tree which is said to grow in the wide-formed
ocean, and from which the draught of immortality is prepared for
mankind at the resurrection (see Vend, XX, 17, Bd. XVIII, 1-4,
XXVIU, 4, XXX, 25).

1 Reading ayéngth nisim, but this is uncertain.

2 Ay. hadha4naépata, to represent which the Parsis now use a
twig of the pomegranate bush, but it must originally have been
some sweet-scented plant (see Vend. VIII, 7). The Adrvaram
(Av. acc. urvaram) consists of this twig, a small fragment of which
is pounded with the Hém-twigs when preparing the Hém-juice.

8 From this it would appear that the practice of using metal
wires, instead of twigs of trees, for the baresém (see Chap.
XLIII, 5) was not in use a thousand years ago.

4 Literally ‘Shatvatrian ;’ the archangel Shatvairé (Av. khsha-
thra vairya, ‘desirable dominion’) having special charge of all
metals (see Bd. XXX, 19, Sls. XV, 14-19).

5 Reading baresom; K35 has basom and M14 bim-if.

6 Mrgq substitutes yOshdasartnidd for denman higarintdo,


166 pApIsTAN-t DINtK.


moderate eating in which is a thirst for lawfully
drinking—is customarily sleep avd lethargy through
the tendency (rfind) to falsehood of ¢hezr wisdom,
are to consider, even from ¢hezr innermost hearts
and minds, the retribution of the body of wrath,
the falsehood, and bad thoughts in that disposition
of infamy, avd the recompense of their own renun-
ciation of zt; they are to atone for ¢hezr sinfulness,
and to seek great purification of mind. 20. And
having acquired eyes speaking? forth, hands in @ state
of ablution, and every other member of the body—
especially there where well-accomplishable — free
from its bodily refuse and covered wth the clean
clothing, the tongue is preserved axd guarded from
falsehood azd the hand from sin, the mind is esta-
-blished dy little preparation with good consideration
for knowledge of the sacred beings, and even the
good are to recite by direction (radiha) the verbal
renunciation of szz*.

21. The officiating priest (z6t5), Lavzng directed
and purified the place* of the fire with liturgical
words *, is to go avd walk unto the place of the
officiating priests® while glorifying the sacred beings,


and padmfikht for va khim hat, so as to read ‘the outside of
their own bodies is purified and attired in clean clothing,’ but this
can hardly be reconciled with the context. The term hfgar or
hikhar (Av. hikhra), here translated ‘bodily refuse,’ is applied to
any refuse or dirt from the living body, or any guid exudation
from a dead one.

* Reading gdvak, but it may be ytivak, ‘wishing,’ or dfivak,
‘flowing.’ Mr4 alters it to vénak, ‘looking,’ which suits the eyes
well enough, but hardly seems to express the author’s idea.

* See Chap. XLI, 5.

M14 has ‘having purified around the place.’
The Atas Nyayis (see Haug’s Essays, p. 403).


3
4
* This place is at the end of the ceremonial area farthest from


CHAPTER XLVIII, 20-24. 167


and to consider invokable the glory given to the
luminaries azd the guardian spirits of the good. 22.
Of those! also who, co-operatively, conjointly, and in-
terspersed (ham-rés), Zave each separately remained
in their own places azd thought of the sacred beings,
with propitiation of Atharmazd and scornful notice
(tar dahisnd) of the evil spirit, the employment
stands forth prominently at the ceremonial. 23.
As to the position of others co-operating wzéh him
who is an officiating priest of good leadership, there
are some who are for the Avesta’, there is the
solitude (khadtidarih) by the fire, there are some
who are bringers* forward of water, there are some
who are for carriers away, there are some who are
solitary ones, there are some who are gregarious
ones, there are some who are directors of duties, and
their own needful arrangement in the place is ar-
ranged in the ceremony.

24. In cleanliness, purity, and truth, as much as
there is in this mingled existence‘, if ove has to
commence a ceremony glorifying the sacred beings,


Bee er at eg a ee a i


the fire. Here the priest first invokes the spirits in whose honour
the ceremony is about to be performed, by reciting their several
propitiatory formulas (see Chap. XXIX, 1).

1 Referring to any other priests who may be present.

2 Mx4 has ‘for carriers,’ omitting the three clauses about the
Avesta, fire, and bringing water.

8 Or, perhaps, ‘ there is e who may be a bringer ;’ and similarly
in the following clauses. The plural suffix -iha being identical in
form with the P4z. conditional form of the verb ‘to be,’ which
seems to be the origin of the adverbial suffix corresponding to -ly
in English when added to an adjective ; occasionally it is added to
a substantive, as is probably the case here, and can then be only
translated by ‘may, or would, be’ (see Chap. XLIV, II).

4 This first clause may belong to the preceding section.


168 DADISTAN-1 DINIK.


when the righteously-disposed temperament is puri-
fied along with the apparatus the abundant ritualism
(nirangakth) of the spirit is asymbol and reminder
of the will of the sacred beings, undesired by the
fiend’, and remains a blessing deservedly unto those
come together. 25. Then is explained the text
(avistak) of that great scripture (nask6) which is
called the HAadékht 2, chaz is itself the best of the
chiefs of the scriptures, azd of the sublime Dvazdah-
hdmast * ¢kat is not recited by any voice with false-
hood (akadb4) *, avd is called ‘the origin of every
truth 5’


26. The pure glorification of the sacred beings
is in the light, this is in the morning time (frayar
gas)°; and even until night the ritualistic and true


eee


* K35 has drén, ‘sacred cake,’ instead of drtig.

* The twentieth Nask, which is said to have chiefly treated of
religious ceremonies and texts (see Byt. III, 25). Two Avesta
fragments, published by Westergaard as Yt. XXI and XXII, are
traditionally ascribed to this Nask.

° Another name for the Damd4d Nask, from which the Bundahis
appears to have originated (see Zs. IX, 1). The name is also
applied to a particular series of ceremonies, continued for twelve
successive days in honour of each of the twenty-two sacred beings
whose names are given to the Ist-7th, 9th—-14th, 16th—-22nd, 24th,
and 26th days of the month; these ceremonies last, therefore, for
264 days (see Byt. II, 59).

* It can hardly be akadbé, as that would imply that it ‘is not
recited by any undeceitful voice. The use of the prefix 4- in the
sense of ‘with’ is rare, but it occurs in apdstant, ‘pregnant,’


(whence Pers. Abistan), and is noticed by Dastdr Jamaspji in his
Pahlavi Dictionary, p. 2.


° Reading bun-i ko/4 rastth, a
modern name Bundahis.

* The frayar period of the day corresponds to the Havan Gah
or morning (compare Farh. Okh. p. 42 with Bd. XXV, 9), at which
time the Yasna ceremonial should be performed when not accom-


pparently a forerunner of the


CHAPTER XLVIII, 25-29. 169


recitation of revelation (dind) is unchangeably pro-
ceeding, undivided and faultless. 27. This, too, is
in benediction of the angels; this, too, is producing
restraint of the fiends; this, too, is in praise of the
glorious ones, the mighty doers; this, too, is as an
admonition for creatures subject to command; this
is in the true words of the ancients who Zave passed
away; this, too, is as a suitable servant for the
righteous, these good doers; this, too, is to obtain
a permanence (patistA4n) of requisites; this, too, is
suitable for the discreet azd zs merciful; this, too, is
as another way zz which the promoters of good
(véh-yavk4r4n) are pardoned, as soon as the Hém-
juice (parahém) is digested, through not having
eaten from dawn till night during the pure utterance
of the pure glorification. 28. And, moreover, one
performs no work}, nor is even a word uttered; ove
does not go to sleep, nor should they allow any
pollution to the body; the sequence (patisarth) of
the religious formulas is, likewise, not changed from
that ordered, nor is even a detached thought away
from that truth aud purity; du¢ always wzth phrases
rightly consecutive and properly worded (hti-sakh-
unagAnoiha) the Avesta is uttered; and even the
manner of response of one’s co-operators is 7 modes
contributing to good (hti-padayak3), or they utter
the scripture (nask).

29. Since the production of stench is needing
something essentially purifying, many formulas in the
ceremonial are tokens and signs which, while they


panied by the Vendidad; or, according to the text, it must be
performed by daylight.
? During the ceremonial.


170 DApISTAN-I DINIK.


are strongly manifested, are terrifying avd vexing to
the demons, and inviting aud rejoicing to the angels.
30. Such as, indeed, the pure Hém, which is squeezed
out by four applications of holy-water (zérih)? with
religious formulas, is noted even as a similitude of
the understanding? and birth of the four apostles
bringing the good religion, who are ze who was the
blessed Zaratist and they who are to be Hishédar,
Hishédar-mah, and Sdédshans*. 31. As also the
metal mortar (hdvan) which is struck* during the
squeezing of the Hém, and its sound is evoked along
with the words of the Avesta, which becomes a re-
minder of the thoughts, words, and deeds on the
coming of those true apostles into the world. 32.
As also the proper rite as regards the water, that
they should perform three times®, which is showing
the world the glorious seizing of water® and formation


* In preparing the Hém-juice fresh holy-water (zdr) is added
four times to the Hém-twigs which are each time pounded anew,
while reciting the Ahunavar formula, and their liquor strained into
a cup (see Haug’s Essays, p. 402).

* There is no authority for translating sinvisnd by ‘conception,
otherwise that meaning would suit this sentence better. M14 has
yeheviinisné, ‘existence; which differs by only one extra stroke
of the pen in Pahlavi.

* See Chap. II, ro.

* The word sikavf-afté really means ‘is split.” During the
pounding of the Hém-twigs the pestle is struck several times
against the sides of the mortar, so as to produce a ringing sound
(see Haug’s Essays, p. 401).

° Reading vidanag, instead of gfin-aé, by transposing the
first two Pahlavi characters. After the first series of poundings of
the Hém-twigs holy-water is added to them three times while
reciting, each time, the Ashem-vohfi formula (ibid.).

* The evaporation from the ocean, said to be effected by Tistar
for the production of rain (see Chap. XCIII, 2, 3).


CHAPTER XLVIII, 30-34. r7%


of rain, avd the healthfulness of the production of
rain’, 33. And as the purification of the milk, by
the glorious ritualistic product (nirang)? taken from
the purifying cattle, is divided in two, by means of
which the token is that which is great, glorious, and
good; one dezmg for the daughter of Padrvagirya 3
the Mazda-worshipper, avd from her was Adshnér
full of wisdom; and one deng Farhank, daughter of
Vidhirisa +, and from her came Kai-Kavad*.

34. And, as to the high-priests of the glorious
religion, it is said many concomitants (padvandih4)
are obtained; such as, much discrimination of scrip-
ture (nask), the holy-water which is indispensable
as a remedy, the healthfulness which is given in
that ceremonial to the sacred fire* which the world
destroys, that pre-eminent strength which is given
at the end of the world from the ox Hadhayds* unto
the good people scattered about (fravaftan)—it is


1 The delightfulness of rain after an eight-months’ drought can-
not be adequately appreciated by-a dweller in-Europe. :

2 That is, bull’s urine. d

8 The reading of this name, as well as ‘that of Adshnér, is
doubtful; but if these names occur at all in the extant Avesta, they
may perhaps be found in the Aoshnara pouru-gira of Fravardin
Yt. 131, Af. Zarat. 2; the epithet pouru-gira, when it occurs
after the name, would naturally be considered a patronymic, whence
a father or grandfather could be easily created, if he did not exist
already in legendary history.

4 This name is written in Pazand, and is evidently meant for
the same person as the Paz. Vidharg-4frastaka of Bd. XXXI, 31,
where Farhank is said to have been the mother of Kat-Apivéh and,
therefore, the wife of Kai-Kavad.

5 M14 has ‘from him she came unto Kat-Kavad, which would
tally better with the statements in Bd. XXXI, 25, 31.

6 Literally ‘the fire of Varahran (Bahram).’

7 See Chap. XXXVI, 99.


£72 DADISTAN-i DiNtK.


mingled with the fire of men’s bodies}, and they,
therefore, become perfect and immortal through it—
and there are also other ¢Azugs. 35. There are also
in the ceremonial many tokens avd signs of spiritual
mysteries, glorious matters, and habitual practices of
which statements would be very tedious.

36. And if the wish (ayfipd) should be this, that
they should be engaged in a single ceremony of the
length of a day, a man who is righteous in purification,
inside and outside the body, should stay away from all
his relations and the worldly transaction of business,
from malicious actions and covetous practices, sepa-
rated from all lying azd falsehood of relatives; and
/us words are to be all those which are serving the
angels, glorifying, and begging favours. 37. Then,
indeed, the way of the spirit and the harmoniousness 2
of the sacred beings are manifest therefrom; and
those which are as much the means due to the
primitive good creations as is more purely possible
are strengthening as regards the utility (bdn) for
offering, encouraging for purity, confounding for the
confusers (gimégak4n), terrifying for the fiends, and
propitiating for the sacred beings.

38. The ceremonial which is good is when they
shall perform 7¢ for a pure disposition and assured
wisdom, a minder of the religion of the sacred beings
of the spheres, and w2¢h pure thoughts, just thoughts3,
wise deeds, a purified body, a tongue worthy of good


ne eee

* The vital heat or Vohu-fryan fire (see Bd. XVII, 1, 2).

* Reading 4hank4nakth, as in K35; Mr4 has khadfik4na-
kth, ‘unity,’ which is a much commoner word, nearly identical with
the other in its Pahlavi form.

* So in the MSS., but it was probably ‘true words’ originally,
so as to complete the triad of thought, word, and deed.


CHAPTER XLVIII, 35—4AI. re


(véh-sazak), a scripture (nask) made easy1,a true
text (avistak), ablutions performed, proper rites,
undivided, and faultless. 39. Near which fashion,
with like abilities, azd innumerable times, it is very
purely solemnized in the abode of the ever-growing
fire, then in the abode of the other sacred fires 2,
then in the abodes of Mazda-worshippers and other
good people, and then zu other places pronounced
clean. 40. That of the three days? is in the abode
of the fire-place which is nearest to that of the de-
parted; the ceremony of the guardian spirits of the
righteous * is solemnized in purity there where the
dwelling is which is nearest that of the departed
whose soul is honoured. 41. And that for victories
in war is then af its times of battle, the husbandry
of Sam * and other offenders (vindsag4n) who were
for keeping away husbandry, the household attend-
ant’s place for a warrior of another rank, the occasion
of the outcry of those not possessing (adarig4n) a
lodging, unto the rest of the same temperament
(mtin6k®), expressly to produce azd maintain a pro-
portional resemblance °.


1 That is, learnt by heart.

2 Literally ‘fires of Varahran.’

8 The three days after a death, during which ceremonies are
performed in honour of the angel Srésh, who is supposed to protect
the departed soul from the demons during that period, while it
is still hovering about the body (see Chap. XXVIII, 6).

4 On the fourth day after a death (see Chap. XXVIII, 7).

5 That is, Keresasp the Saman (see Chap. XVII, 6); having
been a famous warrior his husbandry is said to be battle, the
destruction of all ordinary husbandry.

6 That is, the ruin of people by war leads them to demand
a share of the property of those more fortunate, so as to produce
an equality, The whole section seems to be a bitter sarcasm upon
the effects of war, representing the generals as cultivators of


174 DApISTAN-f DINIK.


CHarrer -XEULX,


1. As ¢o the forty-eighth question and reply, that
which you ask is thus: As to them who shall buy
corn and keep z¢ in store until it shall become dear,
and shall then sell it at a high price (pavan gira-
nodih), what is the nature of the decision ?

2. The reply is this, that when there is nothing
therein on account of which I should so deem? z¢
otherwise than due to the eating of the requisite
amount (avayisn) of food for one’s self, that which
is his controlling impulse (savdarih), and not the
teachings of the worthy azd good, is the internal
instruction which a time of scarcity has taught by
means of the occurrences during that time?; but
clamorous worldly profit is want of diligence (akha-
parakanih), for they would buy to make people
distressed, and in order that they may sell again
dearer. 3. Moreover, the store one keeps, and keeps
as closed even unto the good as unto the bad—and
though it be necessary for a man of the good and
worthy, and they beg for some of the food, they shall
not sell at the price it is worth at that time, on
account of z¢s becoming dearer—one keeps in store
unauthorisedly and grievously sinfully, and every
calamity of those good people they shall suffer who
would not sell it at the price they beg.


rr
slaughter and rapine, with the soldiers as their domestic servants,
driving the people into social democracy.

* K35 has a blank space for this word, but it is given in Mra,
and also occurs in a similar phrase in Chap.. LIV, 6.

* That is, so long as one does not lay in a store more than


sufficient for one’s own requirements, it is only an act of prudence
taught by former experience.


CHAPTER XLIX, I-8, 175


4. On account of that non-obtainment of corn, or
that unlawfully heinous sin, and because of dearness
of price it is not proper to give z¢ for that non-dis-
tribution (an-afsandih) unto 42m himself, or those
under zs control, or the poor to whom it would be
given by him!; and the distribution (réshisnd) which
occurs is then retaliative upon him. 5. And if the
corn be spoiled’, through keeping too long a time
in store, #e is suffering assault from the hungry man
(gQrsn6) who is injured even by that damaging
(bédy6zédih)* of the corn; if through that un-
lawful want of preservation (adarisndih) noxious
creatures are associated with the corn, he is over-
whelmed also by that heinous sin; axd, through the
profit of improper diligence 4e is unworthy.

6. But if it be necessary for their own people who
are under their control, on account of the fear of
a time of scarcity, they should buy at their own
suitable time, and should afford protection. 7. Or,
because of the teachings of the good and worthy,
they should buy corn at a cheap price from a place
where the corn is more than the requirements of the
eaters, and they should bring z¢ unto there where
corn is scarce, provided (va hat6) the good and those
requiring corn are sufficient (vasan). 8. So that,
while their information of a scarcity of corn is even


1 That is, corn is not to be sold to a man who keeps it in store
for the purpose of raising the price, nor to his people, nor is it even
to be given to the poor whom he relieves, so that he may be com-
pelled to support them out of his own stores, as a penalty.

2 Reading tapahi-ait, as in Mr4.

8 Literally ‘destroying the consciousness, or ‘injuring the exist-
ence” Bédy6zéd is a technical name for sins whereby animals
are ill-treated, or useful property injured (see Sls. I, 39).


176 DADISTAN-f DINIK.


from him himself to whom the price would become
profit?, or zs the persistence of these same teachings
of the good—so that it may become more abundant
unto them than unto the bad, even in the time of
scarcity when it is very much raised in price ?—they
should buy corn a¢ a cheap price during an excess
of corn, so that ove may keep z¢ until the time of
a period of scarcity. 9. When Zhere occurs a
necessity for it among the good he sells z¢ at such
price as ove buys it at that time, that is, the market
price (arg-i shatrvdik)*; by that means, in a season
of scarcity, much more is obtained in price, and it
becomes more plentiful among the good; then a
more invigorating (padikhtiinagtar) praise of him
is commendable.

to. And, yet, as regards that which is suitable
profit—and also apart from the eating of corn, from
anything eatable for the maintenance of life, from
medicine and remedies for the healthfulness of life,
and from whatever is for the preservation of life—it
is allowable ¢ha¢ they shall buy azd shall sell dear ¢.


CuHapter L,


1. The forty-ninth question is that you ask thus:
ff they should sell wine unto foreigners and infidels
what is then the decision adous it ?


* And, therefore, likely to be correct, as it is given in opposition
to his own interest.

* M14 has ‘begged at a price,’ by inserting a stroke.

* Without holding it back for an exorbitant rise in prices.


* That is, there is no harm in speculating upon prices, except
in the case of necessaries of life.


CHAPTER XLIX, 9-L, 4. 177
ela


2. The reply is this, that ¢here is very vehement
danger of grievous sin, and it would be an evil
occupation. 3. But if through the operation of that
wine-selling of theirs the wine is kept more away
from those who become worse through immoderate
drinking of wine, azd comes to those who drink wine
in moderation '—whom they cause to become better
through drinking the wine—more than when they
shall not practise that selling of the wine, then through
that selling of theirs the power which is in the
wealth *, by their keeping away of which a man is
confirmed (padaytnidd) in the good religion and
diverted from going into infidelity, the progress of
sin is impeded azd good works are promoted, be-
comes the assistance of the good and protection of
religion, the hindrance of sin and aid of good works,
which, when they shall not practise that wine-selling,
do not arise, azd which are much more promoted
than the various sins that might have arisen from
the unlawfully drinking of wine. 4. Or, otherwise,
the greater decision—and great are the good works
which are assured therein—is thus: ‘They who
shall sell wine® to foreigners, infidels, and others
from whom unlawful conduct arises through drunken-
ness, act very sinfully and not authorisedly.’


1 That is, when the supply of wine is so limited that by selling
it to moderate drinkers they keep it away from drunkards.

2 The wealth they acquire by selling wine, which would have
produced evil in the hands of the buyers, and ought to produce
good in their own.

§ K35 has vinas, ‘sin,’ instead of 4s, ‘wine,’ which is clearly
wrong.


[18] N


178 DADISTAN-? DINIK.


CuHapTerR LI.


1. The fiftieth question is that which you ask
thus: As Zo one of the good religion who drinks wine
immoderately, and loss azd injury happen to him
owing to that immoderate drinking, what is then the
decision about him? 2. And how is the measure
of wine-drinking wzck when they drink is then
authorised for them ?

3. The reply is this, that whoever through the
influence of opportunity drinks wine immoderately,
and is adult and intelligent, through every loss and
injury which thereupon come to him from that im-
moderate drinking, or which occasion anything unto
any one, is then his causing such pollution to the
creatures, in his own pleasurably! varied modes, that
the shame owing to it is a help (dastakih) out of
that affliction. 4. And even he who gives wine
authorisedly? unto any one, and he is thereby in-
toxicated by it, is equally guilty of every sin which
that drunkard commits owing to that drunkenness.

5. And concerning that drunkenness, what is said
is that that is to be eaten through which, when one
eats zt, one thinks better, speaks better, and acts


ee eee


* K35 has a blank space here for a word, but no word seems
really necessary. Mrq4 fills up the blank by changing gvidé into
gardinid6, and reads ‘converted unto his own pleasure, and the
mode,’ &c.

” Mrq has ‘unauthorisedly,’ a very natural emendation of the
text as it stands in K35, but it does not appear that the author
intended to limit the responsibility of the person giving the wine


merely to those cases in which his action would be quite unjustifi-
able,


CHAPTER LI, I-9. 179


better ; and such even is the food éy which, through
having drunk wine, oxe becomes more virtuous, or
does not become more vicious, in thought, word, and
deed. 6. When an experiment as regards its deing
good is tried, so that Zavzng drunk it in that propor-
tion ome becomes better, or does not become worse,
then it is allowable to drink 7¢.

7- When an untried ferson, for the sake of becng
tried, Zas drunk a mingled portion, first of one drink-
ing-cup 1, secondly of two drinking-cups, azd thirdly
of three drinking-cups, avd through drinking z¢ he
becomes more virtuous, or does not become more
vicious, in thought ?, word, or deed, he is to increase
the drinking-cups, and the experiment is allowable
unto those tested just so far as the proportion is such
that he becomes better, or does not become worse.
8. To those tested z¢ is authorisedly ezvex to that
amount through which the experimenting that is
mentioned /as extended ; and to zm who z¢ is proved
will become worse through the drinking of wine, that
amount, through the drinking of which, when given ®
in the experiment, z¢ was seen that he became worse,
is not authorisedly given.

9. Ina case of doubt oxe is to consider hem who
zs orthodox (hfi-dind), who Aas chanted the sacred
hymns, and zs of good repute, whose drunkenness


1 Reading 4v gamak6, ‘water-cup;’ but it is written like av
stmak6o in the MSS.

2 K35 has man, M14 minisno.

8 Reading yehabfinto instead of the unintelligible gan bfidd
of K35, the alteration being merely lengthening the bottom stroke
of the Pahl. b. Mrq substitutes bara yeheviinéd for bfidd gan
biidd, which gives the following meaning: ‘through the drinking
of which, in the experiment, 2/ 7s seen that he becomes thoroughl
worse.’

N 2


180 DADISTAN-1 DINiK.


is not manifest, in this way, that he drinks as much
wine as was tried by him when he became no worse
éy drinking z¢. 10. It is necessary to consider Aim
whose religion is unseen, whose religion is wrong,
and him who is a child furnished even with the
realities of religion, in this way, that he becomes
worse through 4aviemg drunk wine. 11. When apart
from the decision there is no assignable (bangisnik)
reason as regards z¢, the share of wine which they
gave not authorisedly who themselves drank wine,
one considers as some of the wine on 2¢s dezmg given
more authorisedly 1.


CuaptTer LII.


1. As ¢o the fifty-first question azd reply, that
which you ask is thus: There zs a man who hands
over a dirham? as regards five bushels (kaftz) of


* The meaning appears to be that, when there is no special
reason to the contrary, the quantity of wine one may have already
drunk elsewhere is to be considered as part of one’s allowance.

* The dirham (dpaypn) is a weight, and also a silver coin of that
weight, but its amount is rather uncertain. According to the Pers.
MS. Ms (fol. 55), written a.p. 1723, the proper dowry for a ‘ privi-
leged’ wife is 2000 dirhams of white silver, or 2300 rfipts, and 2
dirhams of red gold, or 2} tolas. The rfipis formerly current in
Gugarat were less in value than the present Indian coinage, but the
tola, which is the weight of the present rfp, was probably much
the same as it is now, or 180 grains; the statement in Ms is, there-
fore, equivalent to saying that the dirham contained 202 grains of
pure silver. This isso much more than the amount deducible from
other authorities that it might be supposed that the stir (crarnp) or
tetradrachm was meant, if it were not confirmed, to some extent,
by the Pers. Rivayats, which state the dowry at 2000 dirhams of
“pure white silver and 2 dinars of red gold of the Nishapfr currency ;
the dinar being a gold coin containing a dirham weight of pure


CHAPTER LI, IO—LII, 4. 18


wheat, thus: ‘I give this to thee as an instalment
(bén-ae)! of five bushels of wheat at the end of
a month ;’ and during the month, avd at z¢s end,
those five bushels of wheat become five éemes the
price ; would they authorisedly seize the five bushels
of wheat when winnowed (pékhtd kav d6) by him,
through that instalment which he handed over, or
not?

2, The reply is this, that when they who shall
take his dirham ave to intrust the five bushels of
wheat, unsuspiciously azd by their own will, co hem
to winnow, even so as ¢hey are advisedly and un-
suspiciously winnowed by him they should take ¢hem
just as winnowed; ¢/zs is the decision authorisedly
given. 3. But when z¢ is winnowed by him on
account of very grievous necessity for payment, z¢
is more suitable for the soul to beg the giver of the
money, who is the purchasing payer’, for some of
that excess of undivided (ap4r) profit. 4. For he
has to consider the profit of 4zs successors as among
the profit of money on the spot *’—wen more than


gold. It is safer, however, to rely upon the average weight of the
Sasanian dirham coins, which, according to Dr. Mordtmann’s state-
ment in ZDMG. vol. xii, pp. 44, 45, is about 63 grains, or 52
annas’ worth of silver; so that the stir would be 252 grains or
222 annas. But the actual value of such coins of former times can
be ascertained only from the quantity of corn, or other well-defined
necessary of life, which they would purchase.

1 K35 has vaban twice in this sentence, but bénin§4. Mr4
alters this word and others, so as to make the chapter unintelligible.
The money is supposed to be given merely as a deposit, in acknow-
ledgment of a bargain to be carried out after the corn is ready for
delivery.

2 Reading zednunand dakhtér, but, perhaps, this is a corrup-
tion of zednfininid4r, ‘a causer of purchase, a broker.’

8 That is, ‘ready money.’


182 DADISTAN-f DIN?K.


such instalment demanded—auzd not as a fresh
carrying off of a gift?.


Cuapter LITI.


1. As to the fifty-second question azd reply, that
which you ask is thus: Z/ people of the good religion,
in ¢heiy country or out of their country, shall buy axd
sell with those of a different religion as regards
cattle, ov shall lay hold of traders (vanikgarAn) and
shall sell to them, what is then the decision about
it? 2. When Zhose of the good religion shall not
buy, as they have not come wf éo the price, but che
orthodox dealers shall sell to traders and those of
a different religion, what is then the decision about
it? 3. And about him, of whom the means of
existence (zivisnéd mindavam) are such, what is
then the decision ?

4. The reply is this, that it would be very grievously
sinful, and it would be an evil occupation to transact
such business through the influence of Opportunity,
and to seek profit unauthorisedly in that manner.
5. But if z¢ de the means of existence of those of
the good religion of whom you have written, and they
are not able to seek z¢ in any other business and
proper occupation which woz/d be a less sinful means
of existence, complete 2 purchasers who have acquired
ee eee


* That is, having made a bargain, he is not to be aggrieved
at any unexpected excess of profit made in good faith by the other
parties to the bargain; a rather high standard of commercial
morality.

* The word is pfir, but it may be suspected of being a blunder,
as tOr, ‘ox,’ would be a more likely word.


+
CHAPTER LIII, I—LIV, 3. 183


the good religion shall sell unto those of the good
religion!; because it is possible for him éo de less
sinful 4o whom 7 is allowable to beg the life of a
comrade, for still the rule ofa righteous man, with
the righteous who are in his guardianship, is to live.
6. So it is possible, when they shall sell cattle for
slaughter azd foreign eating, many cattle—amounting
even to a diminution of the maintenance of Iran—_
are more wretched than a righteous man forced to
kill chem through a living becoming unobtainable and
the fear of death.


' CuaptTer LIV.


1. As déo the fifty-third question and reply, that
which you ask is thus : A man whose wife, daughters,
sisters, and relations are many, and who is the master
of much wealth, becomes sick, avd during the sick-
ness as given this hoard of wealth unto one
daughter. 2. And his other sisters and daughters
are not contented therewith, avd speak thus: “Chis
wealth ought ¢o have been given during health and
consciousness, not during sickness ; and now it should
not be allowable to give anything whatever unto
any one during sickness, for if anything happens ?”
the wealth all comes back for division amongst ws.’
3. Would it be allowable to give anything whatever
of that wealth to any one, during sickness, or not?
ee ee


1 Who would not be likely to kill the animal, and with whom
they could come to an understanding as to its good treatment, so
as to avoid the sin of b6dy6zédih (see Chap. XLIX, 5 n).

2 Mrq has ‘if he gives anything.’


184 DADISTAN-1 DINIK.


4. Is it necessary! for one of such wife, daughters,
and sisters as ¢here happen éo de to appoint an adopted
son for that man, because of that wealth, or not?
5. Are the wife, daughters, and sisters who shall
take their share of the wealth responsible for? the
religious rites of every kind, and is it necessary for
them to order the annual ceremonies for that man
at the daily and yearly periods, or not ®? :

6. The reply is this, that, when there is nothing
therein on account of which I should so deem him
otherwise than a man in sickness and nearly passing
away, 2Z is not allowable to give z¢ up, except when 7¢
zs for his debts, or his wife and children, or an aged
Person (zarman) or father who is in hes guardian-
ship—whom it is indispensably necessary to main-
tain—and is such as, or as much as, is discreetly
requisite for payment of the debt, or for the food,
maintenance, azd protection of those that I ave
written about; then, however, zit is allowable to
give it up away (birdnd) from those of whom you
have written, as much as during his consciousness.
7. In other sickness, not while passing away, what-
ever is given up by him himself during conscious-
ness is allowable; when 4e zs not conscious 2¢ is not
allowable. 8. And on that which he says during
unconsciousness ove is not reliant and 7 js not
credible (vavar); du¢ that which he says during


* K35 has ‘is it not necessary,’ by using 14, ‘not, instead of
rai, ‘for,’ which latter reading is adopted in the text from Mig,
but it is doubtful which reading is the better one. The same
variation occurs in § 5,

* Literally ‘are the rites on their necks.’

* Ceremonies for the dead have to be performed on the first four
days, the tenth day, and then at the end of a month and a year
from the time of death (see Sls. ULAR):


CHAPTER LIV, 4-9. 185


np ES EO
consciousness, and that, too, which the same man
gave unto a daughter when he was ill, if given by
him consciously, are even then proceedings to be
granted ; if given by him during unconsciousness it
is just as though he died without an opportunity of
speaking (avang-pirtiz)}.

9. Of the property left by will?, one share is
needful for each separate daughter for whom a
husband is not provided, azd two shares for a wife
who may be a privileged one*; and so long as the
wife is living she exists as the house-mistress of the
family; moreover, it is not needful to appoint an


1 For this uncommon word Mrgq substitutes avik-andarg,
‘intestate ;” but the meaning is that the gift is as invalid as if he
had been unable to make a declaration of his intentions.

2 Levatman andarg in K35, but M14 has avik andarsg,
‘without a will,’ which, at first sight, appears the more plausible
reading (especially as azvik, ‘without,’ is written very much like
avak, ‘ with, the Paz. synonym of levatman). But on further con-
sideration it seems equally probable that this section is intended to
limit the power of a testator, so as to prevent him from dividing so
much of his property as he leaves to his family in any unfair
manner. The rule here laid down would, of course, also apply in
cases of intestacy when the testator has no son; and is that given
in the Persian Rivayats.

8 This does not imply that a man might have more wives than
one, but that wives are of five classes, according to the circum-
stances of the marriage. A padakhshah or ‘privileged’ wife is
one who was a maiden married with the consent of her parents
who have another child. A ytikan or ‘only-child’ wife differs
from the last merely by being an only child, and having, therefore,
to give up her first child to her parents. A satar or ‘adopted’
wife is one who was a maiden enabled to marry by receiving a
dowry from the relatives of a man who has died unmarried, on
condition that half of her children shall belong to the deceased.
A kakar or ‘serving’ wife is a widow who marries again. A
khfid-sar4i or ‘self-disposing’ wife is one who marries without
her parents’ consent (see Bd. XXXII, 6 n).


186 DADISTAN-1 DIN{K.


adopted son (satér), for the adopted son’s duty
(satérih) remains with her, azd she manages to
claim guardianship for the family from some man
out of the relatives most nearly allied. 10. Out of
the portion of the property for food and maintenance
the wife should provide the daughters with hus-
bands; and to keep going the necessities in the
guardianship, the nurture which the deceased man
afforded, and the ceremonies axd good works im-
posed upon the family, azd thereby become indis-
pensable, she herself is to take lapfuls and armfuls?
out of the income (bar).

11. As éo the sisters of that man, if they have
been necessarily in his guardianship, even as to
nourishment, and there is no property for them in
any other way, their food and maintenance are also
needful to be out of the income of the property,
unless* that man as otherwise devised, or the ap-
pointment of a husband is not provided on account
of the non-subjection (16it6 airth) zz which they
have been unto the guardianship of that man, or
anything else opposed to it, so that nothing whatever
of the property of that man is needful for them.

12. He who is a husband of ome of the daughters
is a leader in the management (dastébarith) of the
family, d¢ wth the concurrence of the house-mistress
of the family, and evex so when the action zs one
which they should not do, and his son is not born,
or becomes passing away?,


* Literally ‘the bosom size and arm size, a Pahlavi idiom for
‘plenty.’

* In the Pahlavi text this latter half of the section precedes the
foregoing provisional clauses.

* The meaning seems to be that so long as he has no son (who


CHAPTER LIV, IO-LYV, 2. 187


13. As ¢o a daughter not provided with a husband,
should the one whose husband is not provided be
an only chz/d}, to keep her subject also to the house-
mistress of the family it is needful for her ¢hat there
should be an adopted son in it; azd when they shall
appoint er husband unto the adopted-sonship the
property then comes over into his possession.

14. When the house-mistress of the family passes
away,and the daughters are provided with husbands,
the adopted-sonship is to be appointed.


CuaptTer LV.


1. As ¢o the fifty-fourth question and reply, that
which you ask is thus: What is the occupation and
capacity (giriftarih) of the person ¢hat has to pre-
serve those who are in their three nights’ ¢rza/s?,
and who is he?

2. The reply is this, that it is said a husband
(gabra) is indispensable for preservation through
the three nights’ ¢vza/s which shall be for a privileged
wife, a father for those of a child, avd a master for
those of a servant.


would be a member of the family in direct descent through his
mother) he can only assist and advise the widow, but on the birth
of his son he can act more authoritatively, as the representative of
the child.

1 Written a@vék-aé in Pazand. She becomes a yfikan or
‘only-child’ wife (see § 9 n) until she has given up her first child
to her mother, after which she is a ‘ privileged’ wife.

2 The three nights after death (see Chap. XXIV).


188 DADISTAN-I DIN?K,.


Cuapter LVI.


1. As ¢o the fifty-fifth question azd reply, that
which you ask is thus: What is this adopted-sonship
and guardianship of the family, and what does it
become ; zz what manner is it necessary to appoint
2t, whence is it necessary to provide food and clothing
for it, and how is it necessary to be for it?

2. The reply is this, that the adopted-sonship is
thus :—It is requisite whenever a man of the good
religion is passing away, while he zs a complete ruler
of a numerous household?, who has no wife and
child that may be privileged? and acknowledged,
nor associating brother, zor son by adoption, and
his property is sixty stirs* of income. 3. The con-
trolling (khfidayinag) of the property is to be
publicly provided owt of the kindred of the deceased,
and is called the adopted-sonship; and he is to be
appointed to it who is the nearest of the same lineage
(min ham-nafan), who w2// manage and keep the
property united in its entirety.


* Reading vad marak khan shah bundak6, but the phrase
can also be read vad malkAan shah bandak6, ‘while he zs a
servant of the king of kings (that is, a subject of the Iranian sove-
reign), which is evidently the reading adopted by Mrq in Chap.
LVII, 2, where it substitutes the Huz. synonym malka for shah,
but here the word shah is uncertain. This ambiguous phrase can
also be read vad mark-Ahangiha bundaké, ‘ while the agonies
of death are complete.’

? See Chap. LIV, 9.

* About 84 rfipis (see Chap. LII,1n); but the actual value of
such an income depends upon the value of silver at that time, or, in
other words, upon the prices of the necessaries of life.


CHAPTER LVI, I-9. 189


4. The guardianship of a family is that when a
guardian “as to be appointed in that manner over
the family of a man whose wife’, or daughter, or
infant son is not fit for their own guardianship, so
it is necessary to appoint some one. 5. And it is
necessary to appoint the adopted son and the family
guardianship at suck time as may be convenient to
them; and when the man passes away as I have
written it is necessary to appoint at such period as
I have written, and to neglect z# temporarily, even
the length of a year, would not be authorised.

6. fit for adoption is a grown-up sister who is
not adopted in another family’, then a brother's
daughter, then a brother’s son, azd then the other
nearest relatives. 7. /zt for the family guardian-
ship is first the father of the serving wz/e (kagar)*,
then a brother, then a daughter, and then the other
nearest relations; among brothers he who is the
eldest (mas) among ¢hem is the fittest.

8. The food and clothing of a wife that may be
privileged —who is the house-mistress of the family,
and is one kind of adopted son—of a living infant
son till he becomes grown up, azd of a daughter of
the family while she is in the guardianship of the
family guardians‘, are out of the property of the
family so long as it exists for the purpose.

9. It has become the custom ¢haé the lapfuls and


re ee


1 Because she is not a privileged wife, but a serving one (see
Chap. LIV, 9), as appears from § 7.

2 & woman or child cannot be adopted by more than one family
(see Chap. LVII, 3). The case under consideration is that men-
tioned in § 2, when the deceased leaves no wife, child, or brother.

8 Referring to the case assumed in $ 4.

* That is, till she is married.


190 DApDISTAN-? DINIK.


armfuls! of the family guardian are every month
four stirs of, it may be, sixteen *, which is the dis-
bursement (and4zisn6), for food, clothing, medicine,
and shelter, out of the income (bar), or out of the
capital (bin), of the property which remains in the
family, by a perfect * wife when she is capable—such
as the former house-mistress—so as want of nourish-
ment (atafdad6) may not come nakedly and unlaw-
fully upon them.


CuapTer LVII.


1. As ¢o the fifty-sixth question and reply, that
which you ask is thus: Who is suitable for adoption,
and who is not suitable ?

2. The reply is this, that a grown-up man of the
good religion who is intelligent, a complete ruler of a
numerous household‘, expecting offspring, azd not
having sins worthy of death is suitable for adoption ;
even when he has accepted either one adoption, or
many adoptions, he is then still suitable for another
adoption. 3. And a grown-up woman, oy evena child,
is suitable for one adoption, du¢ when adopted in
one family she is not suitable for another adoption.


* That is, an ample remuneration (see Chap. LIV, ro).

* So the sentence may be literally translated, but it is not quite
certain that this is the meaning intended, as the language used
is very involved. This would imply that the family guardian is
entitled to one-fourth of the family expenditure.

* It is doubtful what noun is to be connected with the adjective
ptr; perhaps we should read ‘ full disbursement’ in the foregoing
part of the sentence, and omit the word ‘perfect’ here.

* Mrq4 has malka4né malk4 béndak, ‘a servant of the king
of kings ;’ but see Chap. LVI, 2.


CHAPTER LVII, I-LVIII, 5. IQI


4. A woman requiring a husband—though a com-
plete worshipper—or a foreigner, or an infidel, or
one having szns worthy of death, is unfit for adoption ;
so also those who are demon-worshippers, she who
is a concubine (shtisar nésman) or courtezan, and
she who is menstruous are unfit.


CuaptTer LVIII.


1. The fifty-seventh question is that which you
ask thus: How many kinds of family guardianship
and adoption are there?

2. The reply is this, that it is said ¢heve are three
kinds, which are the existent, the provided, and the
appointed. 3. An adopted son who is existent is such
as a wife who may be privileged, ov an only daughter
is a kind of adopted son owing to confidence in her-
self, such as happens when there is no wife, and a
daughter for whom there is no husband, azd none is
provided, is the one hat has remained.

4. An adopted son who is provided is such as
a son that is acknowledged, who is accepted by
one’s self1, and free from deg appointed, or from
necessity”.

5. And an adopted son who is appointed is he
who is to be appointed among the relations who are
suitable for adoption—and are nearest to him who
is to be appointed as adopted son—and the ministers
(padan) of religion, azd he performs the duty of


1 That is, adopted during the man’s lifetime.
2 Reading ayff niy4z6, but it may be ay fif6 éyav6, ‘or from
discovery.’


192 DADISTAN-1 DINIK,


family guardianship!; he who is the appointed oe is
he who is appointed by the men who are the nearest |
relations (nabanazdist4n6) on account of proximity.


CuHapTer LIX.


1. As éo the fifty-eighth question and reply, that
which you ask-is thus: For how much property is
it then necessary to appoint an adopted son ?

2. The reply is this, that when the property which
has remained his for whom it is necessary to appoint
an adopted son is as much as sixty stirs? of income,
2¢ is then indispensable to appoint an adopted son
for him. 3. Even when 7¢ is less they should recog-
nise him whose adoption is needful, and who con-
ducts an adopted son’s duty; and, similarly, an
adoption is to be appointed for him, though it may
not come as a possession unto him who is fittest for
adoption.


Cuarter LX,


1. As éo the fifty-ninth question and reply, that
which you ask is thus: What is the sin owing to
not appointing ax adopted son ?

2. The reply is this, that for the man himself 7¢ is
allowable when he gives up all the property in


* Mrq has ‘an existent family guardianship is 7 the son of him
appointed, and a provided ove is that when he himself performs the
duty in the guardianship ;’ but the phrase interpolated is hardly
grammatical,


* About 84 rfipts (see Chap. LVI, 2).


CHAPTER LIX, I—LXI, 2: 193


righteous gifts, aza when he has no property they
should not provide an adopted-sonship for him, and
his relations are innocent as regards it. 3. But
should they recognise him who has the adopted-
sonship of the deceased, or has accepted the position
of his adopted-sonship !, ov should they have seized
the property for the adopted-sonship zz order to
appoint an acting adopted son (satérgar), and he
conducts the adopted-sonship, and throws away doth
the portion (bén) provided for disbursement (vi-
shép6) and the entirety, and quite destroys the
property, and thoroughly ruins the adopted-sonship,
though, on account of not restraining him, it is said
to 6¢ a sin worthy of death for every single dirham, it
is not said ¢hey are killed outright?.


CuHapTer LXI.


1. As to the sixtieth question aud reply, that
which you ask is thus: What is the propriety and
impropriety, the merit azd demerit, of family guar-
dianship ?

2. The reply is this, that the merit is the appoint-
ment azd recognition of him who accomplishes more
worthily the greater benefit; the demerit is as to


1 Mrq4 has ‘or any one who has accepted the adoption as an
adoption.’

2 The meaning appears to be that, though, owing to their mis-
placed confidence and neglect, they have been guilty of many
mortal sins, they are not liable to capital punishment. It is evident
that the writer had no apprehension that any property would lie
neglected through want of administration, but that he had consi-
derable doubts of the prudence and honesty of administrators.


(18] 4


194 DApISTAN-{ DINIK.


him who is unworthy, or him whose worthiness is
not appointed to avert a lesser benefit and the
ruining of a worthy adoption. 3. Nearer details
(khfirdak6) of the family guardianship which is
proper and which is not proper for an adopted son’s
duty, of the child of good religion with whose business
z¢ is connected, azd of the fathers for whom a family
guardian is to be appointed, are zz the recital of five
chapters (fragard6) of the Hisparim /Vasé}, and
zz the abstracts (giriftakdiha) of the good ideas
in various scriptures (nask6) in which many deci-
sions are together.


CuaprTer LXII.


1. As éo the sixty-first question azd reply, that
which you ask is thus: How stand the shares in the
inheritance (miraté) of property among those of the
good religion, and how is it necessary for them to
stand therein ?

2. The reply is this, that in the possession of
wealth the wealth reaches higher ov lower, just like
water when it goes in a stream on a declivity, but
when the passage shall be closed at the bottom it
goes back on the running water (pty-4v6), and then
it does not go to its after-course 2,

BS a


* The seventeenth book of the complete Mazda-worshipping
literature, whose sixty-four sections are described in detail in the
Dinkard (see Sls. X, 21). The five chapters here mentioned were
evidently in that one of the last fourteen sections which is said
to have consisted of six chapters on the ownership of property
and disputes about it, on one’s own family, acquiring wife and
children, adoption, &c.


* This metaphor seems to mean that property, like water, always


CHAPTER LXI, 3—LXII, 5. 195


3- When there is nothing otherwise in the will
and private’, property goes to a wife or daughter ?
who is privileged; if oe gives her anything by will
then she does not obtain the share (das) pertaining
to her*. 4. Whenever‘ a share for a son is not
provided by it, every one 4as so much and the wife
who may be a privileged one has twice as much ;
and the share of that ove of the sons®, ov even the
wife of a son, who is blind in both eyes, or crippled ®
in both feet, or maimed in both his hands, is twice
as much as that of oxe who is sound.

5. And 2z¢ is needful ¢Lat he who was in the father’s
guardianship sha// remain in guardianship, as when
a father or mother is decrepit and causing awe
(£agarin), or of a nurture different from that of the
guardian ’—or a child of his brother or sister, or.
a father, or ove* without nurture apart from him, is


descends until it meets with an obstruction to its downward pro-
gress in the shape of the nearest descendants, but, when once in
their possession, it can again ascend (like the dammed stream) for
the support of the survivors of an older generation (see § 5).

1 Or, it may be ‘in the provisions (vfiyag4n) of the will;’ or,
by omitting two strokes, we have simply ‘otherwise (han) in the
will.’

2 That is, they have a share of the property when there are other
next of kin. Mrq adds, ‘and they should provide a living son as
father and husband unless privileged, referring to the necessity of
adoption when there is no son and the wife is not a privileged one.

8 It being assumed that the will provides as much as is intended
for any one whom it mentions.

4 Reading amat, ‘when,’ instead of mfin, ‘who,’ which words
are often confounded because their Paz. equivalents are near!
identical.

5 Mrq has ‘ daughters.’

6 Armést probably means literally ‘most immovable.’

7 Mrg4 omits this last clause. § Mrgq has ‘ mother.’


OR


196 pDApISTAN-f DINiK.


without a guardian—the ready guardianship of a
capable man, and the shelter azd nourishment ¢hat
have become inadequate! are as indispensably forth-
coming * from the possessors of wealth, of those who
have taken the property, as that ¢aécug was indis-
pensable °.

6. If there be no son of that man, but there be
a daughter or wife of his, and if some of the affairs*
of the man are such as render a woman not suitable
for the guardianship, it is necessary to appoint a
family guardian; if there be, moreover, no wife or
daughter of his it is necessary to appoint an adopted
son. 7. This—that is, when it is necessary to ap-
point a family guardian azd who is the fittest, axd
when it is necessary to appoint an adopted son and
which is the fittest—is written in the chapters on
the question °.


CuHapTer LXIII.


1. The sixty-second question is that which you
ask thus: Would they authorisedly carry off any
property whatever from foreigners and infidels, or
not ?

2. The reply is this, that wealth and property and
anything that foreigners (an-afrand) possess and
is carried off by them from the good with violence,
and which through obstinacy they do not give back
2 Seer

* Literally ‘not issuing.’

* M14 has ‘are thus forthcoming?

* Mr4 has ‘or have become indispensable to it.’


* Or, it may be ‘dependenis;’ the text is merely va hat min
zak-t gabré.
® See Chaps. LVI-LIX.


CHAPTER LXII, 6—LXIV, 3. OZ


when it is proper, it is well allowable in that case
that they should seize from the foreigners. 3. So
long as z¢ is the lawful order of the procurator of its
owners’ z¢ is allowable for a just decider to consider
properly, and to demand authoritatively the sending
of interest (stiid6) thereon for himself. 4. But zf
they proceed in their obstinacy Ze is sent to come up
with them in obstinacy, not to dissemble with them *.
5. /¢ zs the custom to give an infidel (ak-dind),
who is not a foreigner, food, clothing, azd medicine,
when his renunciation (v4z) has come, for keeping
away matters (£is4n6) of death and sickness owing
to hunger azd thirst, cold and heat; but wealth,
horses, accoutrements, wine, azd land are not given
authorisedly, it is said, unto foreigners and idolators®.


CHAPTER LXIV.


1. As to the sixty-third question azd reply, that
which you ask is thus: Whence was the first crea-
tion of mankind, and how was the formation of the
original race of men? 2. What issued from Gayé-
mara‘, and what did it really become; avd from
what have Mashyaih axd Mashyaydih® arisen ?

3. The reply is this, that Adhaymazd, the all-


1 Reading vad zak amatas khfidaydn ayavi-aftar far-
m4n-t d4dtk. The form of ayAvi-aftar has not yet been met
with elsewhere, but it seems to mean ‘one who holds the obtain-
ment,’ though whether as agent or officer of justice is uncertain.

2 M14 has merely ‘ but should they proceed in their obstinacy,
to come with them is not to dissemble.’

$ Literally ‘ demon-worshippers.’ * See Chap. II, ro.

®’ The same as the Marhay4 and Marhtyéih of Chap. XXXVI, 82.


198 DADISTAN-f DINIK.


ruling, produced from the endless light the shape of
a fire-priest (Asrk6) whose name was that of Athaz-
mazd, and z¢s brilliance that of fire; z¢s incombusti-
bility was like ¢Za¢ inside the light, and z¢s expansion
like the western (kharbarag) land. 4. And in the
shape of the fire-priest was created by him the mate-
rial existence (stih) ‘Aad is called man, and for three
thousand years1, when it did not progress and did
not eat, it did not speak; likewise, it did not utter,
but it thought of, the righteousness of the perfect
and true religion, the desire for the pure glorifica-
tion of the creator.

5. Afterwards, the contentious promise-breaker?
injured the life of it, azad produced a burdensome
mortality ; and the mortality is clear from the appel-
lation, Gayémard?, of the nature produced. 6. The
seed which was the essence of the life of the leader
(mirak6) of life, who was Gayémard, flowed forth
on Azs passing away, came on to the earth of the
beneficent angel‘, avd is preserved in the earth until,
through the protection of the angels, a brother and


* This is the second of the four periods of three thousand years
of which time is said to be composed (see Chap. XXXVII, rr n).
The ‘shape of the fire-priest’ is one of the spiritual creations of the
first period, in which shape man was created during the second
period, and this primeval man became Gaydmard (that is, ‘a living
mortal’) through the persecution of the evil spirit (see § 5) at the
commencement of the third period. The first two steps of this
creation are not described in the text of the Bundahis known to
Europeans.

* The evil spirit, who is said to be the origin of falsehood (see
Chap. XXXVII, 11).

* Which means ‘the living mortal,’ or ‘the mortal living one.’

* The female archangel Spendarmad, who has special charge of
the earth. Or the phrase may be ‘came on to the earth which the
beneficent sfcrzt produced.’


CHAPTER LXIV, 4—LXV, I. 199


sister of mankind}, connected together, have grown
from it, ave attained to movement azd walking
upon the earth, azd have advanced even to inter-
course and also procreation.

7. The ground where the life of Gayémard de-
parted is gold, avd from the other land, where the
dissolution of zs various members occurred, as
many kinds of decorative metals flowed forth it is
said *,


Cuapter LXV.


1. As Zo the sixty-fourth question and reply, that
which you ask is thus: Where azd from what did
the origin of race, which they say was next-of-kin
marriage (khvétidad5)*, arise; and from what
place did it arise ?


1 The Mashydih and MashyAyéth, or man and woman, of § 2,
who are said to have grown up, in the course of forty years, con-
nected together in the shape of a plant; but, after a breathing soul
had entered them, they became human beings, and fifty years later
they began to be the progenitors of mankind (see Bd. XV, 1-30).

2 Zs. X, 2 states that eight kinds of metal arose from the various
members of the dead Gayémard, namely, gold, silver, iron, brass,
tin, lead, quicksilver, and adamant.

3 Usually written khvétfik-das (Av. Avaétvadatha, ‘a giving
of, or to, one’s own’). It is a term applied to marriages between
near relations, and is extolled as specially meritorious. For cen-
turies past the Parsis have understood it to refer to marriages
between first cousins, and all allusions to marriage between nearer
relations they attribute to the practices of heretics (see Sls. XVI,
4n); though, like the professors of all other religions, they must
admit the necessity of such a practice in the first family of mankind,
as detailed in the text. Translations of other passages relating to
the subject will be found in Appendix III, and it is also mentioned
in Chaps. XXXVII, 82, LXXVIL, 6, and LXXVHL, 19.


200 DADISTAN-1 DINIK.


2. The reply is this, that the first consummation
of next-of-kin marriage was owing to that which
Mashyaih aud Mashyayéih! did, who were brother
and sister together, and their consummation of inter-
course produced a son® as a consummation of the
first next-of-kin marriage. 3. So that they effected
the ‘first intercourse of man with woman, and the
entire progress of the races of every kind of lineage
of men arose from that, avd all the men of the world
are of that race.

4. It is truly said, that it was the joy of the lord
and creator after the creation of the creatures, and,
owing to that, its consummation, which was his
complete accomplishment of the existence of the
creatures (dAmanih), was owing to him. 5. And
its occurrence, too, is in evidence that the creator,
who is so with unflinching (atérAk) will, is as much
the cause of the begetting and entire progress of his
own perfect creatures’, in whom begetting is by
destiny, as Héshang* by whom two-thirds® of the
demons were smitten, Takhmérup® who overturned
Aharman through the power of the angels, Yim by


* See Chap. LXIV, 2. The names are here written Mashyéth
and Mashyéy6th. ;

* Twins, according to Bd. XV,.22, 24.

* That is, he is not only the original creator, but also the per-
petual promoter of the increase and progress of the creation, as
much as those who appear to be such promoters, though merely
acting as his agents.

* Here written Hoéshyang. For the Av. names of these four
primeval monarchs, see Chap. II, ron,

* K35 has ‘three-thirds,’ but see Aban Yt. 22, Ram Yt. 8, Zam-
yad Yt. 26.

* He is said to have subjugated the evil spirit, and to have used
him as a steed for thirty years (see Chaps. II, ro, XXXVII, 35).


CHAPTER LXV, 2—LXVI, 3. 201


whom order was arranged and death was driven
away (avaka4ld6)1, Frédin who fettered Az-t Da-
hak? and stripped his blaspheming (nirangAk) from
the world, and the many princes (kayAn) and high-
priests of grave spirit who were, and are, and will be.


CHaprer -LX VI,


1. As ¢o the sixty-fifth question and reply, that
which you ask is thus: Zere zs a man of wealth of
the good religion who fully intends to order a ce/e-
bration of all the rites of his religion; and a priest
of it, to whom the five chapters (fragard5) of the
Avesta (‘text’) of the correct law of the Nirangistan
(‘ religious-formula code’)? are easy through the
Zand (‘commentary’), is ever progressing in priestly
manhood (magéi-gabrvaih). 2. And he (the man)
goes unto him, and he (the priest) speaks thus: ‘All
the religious rites are performed for 350 adirhams',
as a gift always given beforehand by them who give
the order unto me, so that I may come to them,’

3. A man of the disciples’, to whom the five


1 He is said to have kept away cold and heat, decay and death,
and other evils from the earth (see Ram Yt. 16, Zamydad Yt. 33).

2 See Chap. XXXVII, 97.

3 This was the name of one of the first thirty sections of the
Hfisparfim Nask (see Chap. LXI, 3), and a portion of it, contain-
ing the Pahlavi commentary (or Zand) of three chapters, with
many Avesta quotations, is still extant.

* The word gfigan6, ‘dirham,’ is here omitted, but occurs in
§§ 16, 20. The sum of 350 dirhams would be about 122} rpis
(see Chap. LII, 1 n).

5 That is, those who are still learning their priestly duties (see
Chap. XLV).


202 DADISTAN-1 DINIK.


sections (vidag) of the Avesta are easy, and no-
thing whatever of its Zand is easy, then says unto
him—unto that man who intends to order all the
religious rites—thus: ‘For this gift I will conduct
all the religious rites for thee twice, with the appli-
ances in the land of Pars?, shouldst thou give the
order unto me. 4. For it is quite possible for me
to pray so many sections through my own exertion
(dast6), du¢ for him® it is necessary to order again
of an officiating priest (pavan zétak3), who is him-
self not able to pray any section, ov does not himself
pray; and it is not necessary for him to go for the
control (parvar)* of all the religious rites when a
stipend (bahar) is the one consideration within him,
and the matter is chat he® may receive again. 5. He
who 4as always himself prayed is better than he who
shall accept readily and orders the work again, and
is not able to pray it himself, when a fulfilment is
tedious to him; when 2¢ is I who® receive, I always
pray myself better than he who would accept readily
and orders again, and it brings on my business to a
closing point.’

6. The priestly man speaks thus : ‘ The considera-


* It being far easier to learn the Avesta by heart than to under-
stand its meaning by aid of the Pahlavi commentary ; a competent
knowledge of the latter being sought only by advanced disciples,
and rarely attained by any but the most learned priests.

* Reading pavan bfim-i Pars, as in § 15; K35 has here
pavan bin-fras, ‘for opening the beginning,’ which might be
understood to refer to the preliminary ceremonies for preparing
the ceremonial apparatus, if the phrase were not otherwise written
elsewhere. In § 21 K3g has pavan biin-i P4rs,

* K35 omits the last letter of valman.,

* Or, it may be ‘to the precincts,’ > Literally ‘1,

° Reading li mfn, instead of lanman, ‘we.’


CHAPTER LXVI, 4—IO. 203


tion of stipend is more necessary to arise wit me
than' other men, owing to the position of religion,
not the other portion (sdn6) of all religious rites ;
therefore, it is more authorisedly received and con-
ducted by me when I accept readily and again intrust
the work ; but I direct so that they pray thoroughly,
and it brings on much business to its closing point ;
moreover, 7/ I seize upon it, even then I should be
authorised, for this is the stipend of religion.’

7. Should they seize this that is authorisedly
theirs, or not? Ad is z7¢ the custom of a man who
is frequently ordering all the religious rites to reduce
his gift for the ceremonial, or not ?

8. Order some one to decide for us clearly, when
they do not dispute the gift for the ceremonial, or
when they do dispute z¢, how is then its great ad-
vantage; and the harmfulness that exists therein,
in many ways azd many modes, when they give an
insufficient gift for the ceremonial. 9. Is the pro-
perty which is given up as a gift for the ceremonial—
so long as it thus becomes the remuneration which
one gives to a receiver of remuneration (mozd6-
bar)—that property which they can seize? 1o. And
is the work which is done, ov deputed, and its great
advantage, more than they would perform when, in
the period of the evil millenniums *, they diminish the
gift for the ceremonial; ad in how many modes


1 Reading li min, instead of the imperfect word lanm.

2 Of the twelve millenniums of time,mentioned in Chap.XXXVII,
11 n, the most evil one is said to have been that in which the author
lived, the millennium of Hashédar (about a.p. 600-1600 according
to the chronology of Bund. and Byt.), for ‘mankind become most
perplexed in that perplexing time’ (see Byt. II, 62, 63), a period of
great tribulation for the religion of the Mazda-worshippers.


204 DADISTAN-I DINIK.


does its harm then proceed therefrom? 11. Of
whom are all the religious rites always more autho-
risedly ordered, of that priestly man, or of that dis-
ciple? 12. Jor what reason, also, is it proper to
diminish the gift for all the religious rites of him
who is a priestly man, or to give z¢ in excess? 13.
When they do not diminish the gift for the cere-
monial, and z¢ is given in excess, in what manner
does its great advantage then arise therefrom; and
why azd through what source (békh) is it possible
for advantage to arise therefrom? 14. When they
diminish the gift what harm to it (the ceremonial) is
then possible to arise therefrom, azd how is z¢ better
when they give the gift for the ceremonial ?

15. For when the family householders, with those
of the good religion of Iran, are early (pés) with
every single celebration of all the religious rites with
holy-water, in the land of Pars, unless they are in
distress, their gift is then 400 dirhams!; and we
have given more than this, evex 450 dirhams 2, for it.
16. And now should it be needful, when we diminish
anything from the 400 dirhams, or from the 4 508 dir-
hams, of their gift, they would then not accept z¢
from us, azd they speak thus: ‘For 400 dirhams,
or aZ least for 350 dirhams‘; nothing less do we


* About r4o rfipts (see Chap. LII, x n). Mr4 has 300 dirhams.
* About 157% rapts. Mr4 has 350 dirhams. The actual value


of all these sums depends upon the cost of the necessaries of life
in Pars in the ninth century.


5 Mrq has ‘350,’

* About 1223 rfipts. K35 has Angfn, ‘so,’ instead of gigand,
‘dirham’ (the two words being nearly alike in Pahl. letters) ; this
would alter the phrase as follows :—‘ or less ; as to 350, so paltry
a thing we do not accept.’ ;


CHAPTER LXVI, II—20. 205


accept. 17. But there are needy men! who always
come to us avd speak thus: ‘For 350 dirhams we
will twice conduct all the religious rites with holy-
water’, as you have always ordered us before for
400 dirhams; order z¢ only of us, for shouldst thou
have z¢ managed by priestly men, they always say
that they should always perform a curtailment (kAs-
tarih) of the religious rites and ceremonies of the
sacred beings, azd that all the religious rites are not
authorisedly ordered except of them.’

18. Although a priest (aérpatd) who becomes a
ruler of the ceremonial should be doubly a decider,
yet order some one to explain to us clearly concerning
these questions, as asked by us.

19. The reply is this, that the man of the good
religion who intended to order all the religious rites
is he whose desire is goodness, and he should be
a decider of questions about it.

20. As to the priest who spoke thus :—‘ Thou
shouldst order z¢ of me for 350° dirhams, as you have
always given before your business was arranged ;
and it becomes your own non-religious share of the
duty, to be authorisedly given, because you have pro-
ceeded with the alleged demeanour of the country
and for the purpose of intercession; and all the


1 The disciples, who are represented as applicants for employ-
ment.

2 That is, in the most solemn manner, and with all appliances.
It appears from Chap. LXXXVIII, g, that the religious rites without
holy-water were then performed for 120 to 150 dirhams, or little
more than one-third the fee demanded for those with holy-water ;
whereas the merit of some rites with holy-water is said to be a
hundred times as great as that of the same rites without holy-water
(see Sls. XVI, 6).

8 Mrq has ‘400’ here, but see § 2.


206 DADISTAN-I1 DINIK.


religious rites with holy-water are such as they
solemnize repeatedly (pavan dér), among which
there are many in which! I act and am very well
performing’—the gift of 350 dirhams is then not
excessive remuneration for him.

21. As ¢o the disciple who spoke thus :—‘ For
350 dirhams I will ¢wzce? conduct all the religious
rites in the land® of Pars’—such of them as they
then conduct repeatedly are not many in the aggre-
gate (kinak6), and they certainly damage his (the
man’s) property, and all the religious rites of fire,
through that deficiency. 22. And they would accept
it on this account, that through a love of righteous-
ness they might cause an advantage (khanginak6)
unto all those religious rites by their own inferior
eminence‘, 23. And he extends avd impels the
ceremonial of the sacred beings into much progress
who promotes it through that eminence which is
owing to his own wealth, avd which is thus more
possessed of a share (b6n) of the ceremonial of the
sacred beings and of the good work of praise—except,
indeed, a like good work of praise of his—when they
shall cause that manifestation of eminence®. 24. So
that the orderer of the good work understands that
that which is diminished by him® is the eminence
ne re


* Reading mifin, ‘which,’ instead of amat, ‘when’ (see Chap.
LXII, 4n).

* The cipher ‘2’ is omitted in the Pahl. text here, but see
$$ 3, 17.

* K35 has btin, instead of bfim (see § 3).

* Or, it may be ‘by the eminence of their own wealth,’ as afr,
‘inferior,’ and khél, ‘ wealth, property,’ are alike in Pahlavi; but
neither reading is quite satisfactory here.

° By a proper disbursement of wealth.

* When he diminishes his payment.


CHAPTER LXVI, 21-27. 207


of the disciple, which his own wealth as to order
for those who are not able to give wealth which is
their own property for it; azd he makes no curtail-
ment (bangisn6) of those scanty remunerations.

25. And if that disciple should accept as remu-
neration less than is the custom for all the religious
rites, the orderer is not undiminished in wealth 1, for
the reason that the good effect owing to the advan-
tage of holy-water is such as when they conduct
them repeatedly, unless it be necessary to conduct
them in a manner as zf unpaid (pavan agazid).
26. That curtailment of the good effect is not after-
wards demandable (pasin-sakhunikS), if it Zas to
be accepted by him; and if that acceptance of less
remuneration by him be an opposing of him to the
malice and ill-temper (vush4i) of the priests, this
also is not ¢he way that they should cause progress
as regards their own duszness.

27. And the proximity (nazdih) of a master of
the house? who keeps away from all the religious
rites requested anxd accepted—more particularly
when the accepter accepts all the religious rites of the
requester for that remuneration —‘is itself necessary ;
he may not be of a religious disposition, but it is
yet requisite for iim to be where this is requested


1 M14 has ‘7¢ is not eminence in wealth;’ but the meaning is
evidently that there is no real saving when the expenditure is re-
duced, because the good effect of the rites is also diminished when
they are insufficiently paid for.

2 Or, khAndpand may mean ‘a keeper of the sacred table,’ or
low stone platform on which the ceremonial vessels are placed,
which is often called khan. In either case the orderer of the
ceremony is meant, and the author evidently contemplates the
probability of the order being given as a mere formal matter of
duty, without any really religious feeling.


208 DADISTAN-{ DINIK.


and accepted for that scanty remuneration of his,
owing to the extent and impetus of 4s share of
the duty.

28. Moreover, it is perceived by us in Pars that
they who would accept the work for half the remu-
neration which was requisite as profit for it formerly —
would seize the remuneration. 29. And the reason
of it is this :—The peasants relied upon the corn of
the field (khAn6) whzch has not come, and they said:
‘We are hurried; we never obtain anything even on
a single one of various debts, and by this payment
we shall save our lives for the time; so we calculate
that whatever we seize in the manner of a debt or
two, when the corn arrives and we sell the corn, we
shall make as profit on that business!;’—and it
seemed to me very desirable for such a man.

30. If, also, they should approve that scanty re-
muneration of that disciple, it is an injury of all the
religious rites, of which the forgivers? Lave to cast
the consideration of the unequally-shared advantage
out of the body*. 31. All the religious rites ordered
of him who is a better performer, owing to not di-
" minishing the proper remuneration, Aaving proceeded
unaltered, the remuneration of righteousness ove
does not approve is important as regards such as
they solemnize and conduct in the period ¢


* This parable justifies the taking of religious stipends by force,
in cases of necessity, by a practical appeal to the sympathies of the
enquirers ; but it really evades the question proposed in § 7, which
refers to seizures not justified by necessity.

* Probably the priests who appoint atonements for sins con-
fessed and renounced (see Sls. VIII, 1, 2, 5, 6).

* Of those who have obtained a disproportionate share of the
profit of the good works by not paying properly for them.

* There are several doubtful points in the construction of this
section,


CHAPTER LXVI, 28-34. 209
2 eee 2 Se ea

32. Since, for the 350 dirhams, all the religious
rites which they conduct once with holy-water are,
it is affirmed, all the religious rites caused to be
conducted twice with holy-water in that same place
and with the same good effect, it is more important
to order of ¢hem who shall allow all the religious
rites twice; for, with as much wealth, as much effi-
ciency, and as much good effect, more ceremonial
is good.

33. The worthiness of the disciple, which is owing
to himself, is the preparation; and the priest is
worthy, of whose performance in the religion you
have spoken’; therefore, supreme worthiness is un-
attainable by either of them; so it is more significant
when the disciple is the preparer, avd the priest, as
director, becomes a demander of good effect; both
strive for good progress, avd through many kinds of
participation they may be worthy. 34. And both
of them, praising together—whereby the participation
is brought zo an end—may authorisedly seize”; but
that worthiness of theirs is owing to the duty and
the praise therein—this ove in preparing, and this
one in superintendence (avar-madih) of the recital—
and the after discourse and petitioning, azd other
good done.


4 See § 1.

2 Probably the remuneration, if it be withheld; provided always
they do their duty thoroughly, as mentioned in the concluding
clause.


[18] £


210 DADISTAN-1 DINIK.


CuapTeR LXVII.


1. As ¢o the sixty-sixth question and reply, that
which you ask is thus: What is this appearance?
which is girded on the sky ?

2. The reply is this, that z¢ zs a mingling of the
brilliance of the sun with mist and cloud that is seen,
of which z¢ is a¢ all times and seasons, moreover,
a characteristic appearance, whereby z¢ fas become
their sign above from spiritual to earthly beings.
3. That which is earthly is the water above to which
its brilliance is acceptable; and the many brilliant
colours (gunakan) which are formed from that much
mingling? of brilliance and water, and are depicted
(manaki-ait6), are the one portion for appearing *,


Cuarter LXVIII.


1. As to the sixty-seventh question and reply,
that which you ask is thus: What is this which, when
the sun and moon fave both come up, is something 4
et ee eee

' Reading dtdandth; but the word can also be read sad-vanth,
which might stand for sad- ginth, ‘a hundred-coloured existence,’
a possible term for the rainbow, but the Persian dictionaries give
no nearer term than sadkas, or sadkés,

» Mr4 has ‘ that mingling of many portions and few portions.’

* Reading dfdandké; but it can also be read sad-vanaké, a
similar alternative to that in § 1.

* The only probable reading for this word is mindavam, ‘a
thing ;” it occurs three times in this question, but is a very vague
term for the phases of the moon, probably referring to a supposed
body covering the dark part of the moon’s disc.


CHAPTER LXVII, I-LXVIII, 6. DIT
oe AS se
come, avd comes on as z¢ were anew when it (the
moon) becomes new, azd men want the thing to go
down from the place where zt is becoming apparent ?
2. When it Aas been several times, what is then
the thing wkzch comes up and exists, and how is its
motion by night and day ?

3. The reply is this, that the sun and moon are
always seen? there where they stand, and they exist
for men and the creatures. 4. The sun is swifter-
moving *® than the moon, azd every day becomes a
little in advance ; at the new moon the sun is shining,
and the moon owing to diminution backwards, on
account of the slenderness of the moon by much
travelling *, and on account of the brilliance of the
sun, is not apparent. 5. As the sun goes down a
light which is not very apparent is the moon, and
not Zaving gone down the moon is seen‘; and each
day the moon increases, comes up more behind the
sun, avd goes down more behind, azd is, therefore,
more seen. 6. When increased to the utmost, which
is approaching a likeness of the sun, it comes spheri-
cal (aspiharak6), and is seen the whole night; to
diminish anew it comes back to the companionship
of the sun, and goes into the splendour of the sun.


1 The MSS. have astt-hénd, ‘have remained,’ instead of
khadituni-hénd, ‘are seen;’ but the difference between these
words in Pahlavi letters is merely a medial stroke.

2 Apparently so, as the moon rises and sets about 48 minutes
later every day, on the average.

8 A very anthropomorphic mode of accounting for the waning
of the moon into a slender crescent.

4 Most Orientals consider the day of the new moon to be that
in the evening of which it is first possible to see the moon; this is
usually the first, but sometimes the second, day after the actual
change of the moon according to European ideas.

1)


212 ’  pApisTAN-? DINIK.


CuHapTeR LXIX.


1. As to the sixty-eighth question and reply, that
which you ask is thus: When something takes hold
of the moon oy sun what is then its residence
(khan6), and whence does it always seize upon z¢?

2. The reply is this, that two dark progeny of the
primeval ox! move and are made to revolve from
far below the sun and moon, and whenever, during
the revolution of the ce/estzal sphere, they make one
pass below the sun, or below the moon, it becomes
a covering which is spun (tad) over the sun, and it
is so when the sun or moon is not seen. 3. Of each
of those two progeny of the przmeval ox—one of
which is called ‘the head, and one ‘the tail’—the
motion is specified among astronomers?; but 27 re-
maining upon those luminaries, and producing that
covering, they do not attain unto those luminaries


* Supposing the reading should be 2-4n gdéfihar-i tar here,
and 2-a4n gdkthardn in§ 3. Gdsihar is a supposed planetary
(and, therefore, malevolent) body, connected with the sun and
moon and having a head and tail, which falls on to the earth at
the resurrection (see Bd. V, 1, XXVIII, 44, XXX, 18), and is here
‘described as the cause of eclipses. Its name implies that it sprang
from, or contained, the seed of the primeval ox, the supposed
source of animal life (see Bd. XIV, 3), and in its Av. form, gao-
Aithra, it is a common epithet of the moon; in Pers. it has become
gézihr or gavazihr. As the words stand in K35 they look more
like 2 anddég dalan-i tar, ‘two dark store-lobbies, or 2 andég
gal-i tar, ‘two clusters of dark spiders;’ and in § 3 the word
hanfino is substituted for the nearly synonymous andég. In
Mrq the words seem to be 2 angfin &tharan6-? tar, ‘two such
dark faces,’

® Mrq has ‘in the calculations of astronomers.’


CHAPTER LXIX, I-LXX, 3. oT?


within that covering. 4. Zhere occurs no difference
whatever of the descending rays! from those lumi-
naries into a place of purity and freedom from dis-
turbance far below those luminaries, except this, that
the light which they divert to the world, and their
activity as regards the celestial spheres are not com-
plete for so much time, zor the coming? of the light
to the earth.


CuHapTeR LXX.


1. As to the sixty-ninth question and reply, that
which you ask is thus: What are these river-beds?,
and what is the cause of them; whence do they
always arise, axd why is there not a river-bed every-
where and zn every place where ¢here is no mountain?

2. The reply is this, that any place where a moun-
tain is not discernible and a river-bed exists z¢ is a
fissure (askfip6); and it is declared as clear that,
even before the growth of the mountains, when the
earth was all a plain, dy the shaking of the world
the whole world became rent (zandak6)*. 3. Even


1 Literally ‘ fallers,’

2 Assuming that mAdarith stands for madarth. The meaning
is that an eclipse produces no harm beyond a short interruption of
the descent of the sun’s or moon’s rays to the earth.

3 There is some doubt as to whether the word should be read
z26gak6 (comp. Pers. z6gh, ‘a river’), or zandak6 (comp. Pers.
zandah, ‘ fissured’), but the meaning is tolerably certain from the
context.

4 When the evil spirit rushed into the earth it is said to have
shaken, and the mountains began to grow (see Bd. VIII, 1-5); and
at the resurrection it is expected that the earth will recover its
original perfect state of a level plain (see Bd, XXX, 33).


DTA DADISTAN-1 DINIK.

seid en aes EEA ae eee re
FrasiyAv of Tir} was specially mighty by causing
the construction of channels (vidarg) there where 2¢
is mountainous, azd also zz low-lands?, in which
there is no mountain, and the shaking in its crea-
tion was the formation of great sunken® springs and
river-beds. 4. And if it Zas been prepared zm, or if
it b¢ in a ravine (sikaftd) of, the mountains, the
cause, too, of the contraction, thundering, and tearing
of a river, if zfs confinement de in the earth, is the
resistance which it meets in seeking a passage; and
as it is a spring of the waters of the earth, so also it
is in the earth, whose contraction aud panting are
mighty avd full of strength. 5. And when 2¢ zs a
time that they would make a constructed channel at
the outside of its ravine, as regards the contraction
which is within it, the resistance by which it is con-
tracted at the outside of the ravine is the ground +.


CuHarpTerR LX XI.


1. As ¢o the seventieth question and reply, that
which you ask is thus: Is anything which happens


* Frangrasyan, the Tfiryan, in the Avesta; called Afrasiy4b in
the Shahnamah (see Bd. XXXI, 14). He is often mentioned as
constructing canals (see Bd. XX, 17, 34, XXI, 6), but being a
foreign conqueror he was considered as specially wicked by the
Tranians.

* Assuming that sitan is a miswriting of stpd4n, occasioned
by joining two of the letters, just as harvispd, ‘all,’ is often
written harvist.

* Or, perhaps, ‘ hidden,’

* That is, a watercourse which is confined by its natural rocky
channel in the mountains, when carried across the plain in a canal,
is confined only by softer soil.


CHAPTER LXX, 4—LXXI, 4. 215


unto men through fate or through action, is exertion
destiny or without destiny, avd does anything devoid
of destiny happen unto men, or what way is it?
2. As ¢o that which they say, that, when a man turns
unto sinfulness, they ordain anew a new death};
as to that which they say, ¢ha¢ anything which hap-
pens unto men is a work of the moon 2, and every
benefit is connected with the moon, and the moon
bestows z¢ upon worldly beings; and as ¢o what way
the moon does this, and bestows all benefits, order
some ong to decide the literal explanation of how and
what way it is, by the will of the sacred beings.

3. The reply is this, that the high-priests® have
said thus, that there are some things through destiny,
and there are some through action; and z¢ is thus
fully decided by them, that life, wife, and child,
authority and wealth are through destiny, and the
righteousness and wickedness of priesthood, war-
fare, and husbandry are through action. 4. And
this, too, is thus said by them, that that which is not


1 This reference is to a phrase in the Pahl. commentary on
Vend. V, 33, which commentary contains a good many of the
statements made in this chapter, excepting those relating to the
moon. ‘The reading adsh, ‘death,’ given by K35, is probably
more correct than afibas, ‘for him,’ given by our modern MSS. of
the Vendidad; but Mr4 has amended it, and states ‘then many
new ¢hings are ordained by it for him.’

2 Assuming that vidan4g, ‘time,’ stands for bidanag, the Huz.
of mah, which means both ‘month’ and ‘moon.’ In the following
phrases the word mah is used.

8 It may be noted that most Pahlavi writers, when quoting the
Pahlavi commentaries on the Vendidad (as the author is doing
here) or any other Nask, speak of them merely as the utterances
of the high-priests, and reserve the term din6, ‘revelation,’ for the
Avesta itself; thus showing that belief in the inspiration of the
Pahlavi translations of the Avesta is a very modern idea.


216 DADISTAN-1 DINiK.


destined for a man in the world does not happen;
and that which is destined, be it owing to exertion,
will come forward, be it through sinfulness or sloth-
fulness he is injured by it. 5. That which will
come forward owing to exertion is such as 4zs who
goes to a meeting of happiness, or the sickness of
a mortal who, owing to sickness, dies early!; azd he
who through sinfulness and slothfulness is thereby
injured is such as Ze who would wed no wife, and is
certain that no child of his is born, ov such as he
who gives #zs body unto slaughter, and life is injured
by his living.


Cuapter LX XII.


1. As éo the seventy-first question azd reply, that
which you ask is thus: What are the heinous sins
of committing unnatural intercourse, is it proper to
order or perform the sacred ceremony for him who
shall commit unnatural intercourse, avd is it then
proper to practise sitting together and eating together
with him who shall commit z¢, and shall commit 7#
weth a longing for it, or not ?

2. The reply is this, that of the evil Mazda-
worshippers*—who were the seven evil-doers of sin
of a heinous kind*, whose practice of Aharman’s
will was as much as an approximation to that of


* M14 has ‘which comes forward Owing to sickness,’
* M14 has ‘of a like evil practice, in inclination for sins, were
the very heinous in the religion of the Mazda-worshippers.’


5 : ; : : F
Reading giraf van vinds, and assuming that van is a mis-
writing of gfin,


CHAPTER LXXI, 5—LXXII, 6. 217


Aharman /imself—two are those whom you have
mentioned, who are defiled with mutual sin. 3. For,
of those seven evil-doers, one was Az-i Dahak!, by
whom witchcraft was first glorified; he exercised
the sovereignty of misgovernment, and desired a
life of the unintellectual (ahangdn khayA) for the
world. 4. One was Azi Sruvar?, by whom infesting
the highway zz terrible modes, frightful watchful-
ness (vimag-bidAarih)? of the road, and devouring
of horse and man were perpetrated. 5. One was
Vadak* the mother of Dahak, by whom adultery
was first committed, and by it all lineage is dis-
turbed, control is put an end to, and without the
authority of the husband an intermingling of son
with son® occurs. 6. One was the Viptak® (‘pathic’)


1 See Chap. XXXVII, 97.

? A personification of Av. azi srvara, a serpent or dragon thus
described in the Hém Yt. (Yas. IX, 34-39) :—‘(Keresdspa) who
slew the serpent Srvara which devoured horses and men, which was
poisonous and yellow, over which yellow poison flowed a hand’s-
breadth (spear’s-length?) high. On which Keresaspa cooked a
beverage in a caldron at the mid-day hour, and the serpent scorched,
hissed, sprang forth, away from the caldron, and upset the boiling
water; Keresaspa Naremanau fled aside frightened’ (see Haug’s
Essays, pp. 178,179). The same account is given in Zamyad Yt. 40.

® Mrgq has biminid4rth, ‘terrifying,’

4 See Chap. LXXVIII, 2. There is possibly some connection
between this name and the Av. epithet, Vadhaghana, which is thus
mentioned by the evil spirit, speaking to Zaratfist, in Vend. XIX,
23 :—‘ Curse the good Mazda-worshipping religion! and thou shalt
obtain fortune such as the Vadhaghana sovereign obtained ;’ and
Mkh. LVII, 25 calls him ‘the Vadagén sovereign Dahak.’ The
Pahlavi writers seem to have taken this epithet as a matronymic,
owing to its form, but whether the mother’s name be really tra-
ditional, or merely manufactured from the epithet, is doubtful.

’ Reading levatman barman barman, instead ily ee
bim barman. M14 omits biim.

® Ay, vipt6 (p.p. of vip, ‘to sow, to fecundate’), used in the


218 DADISTAN-1 DINIK.


zm the intercourse of males, the infecundity of which
is the desire of men; and by him the intercourse of
males aud the way of destroying the seed were first
shown unto males. 7. One was the Vipinidak?
(‘ peederast’), the male by whom the use of females
was first brought among the errors (khazdag) of
the male, and was despised (dikhtd) by him; he
who is a cherisher of seed is delivering z¢ to females,
and that which is destroying the seed is the flowing
of stenches into the prescribed vessels? for it, the
delivering z¢ to males by a demoniacal process, and
carrying on a practice which effaces (ahangéd6)
and conceals the race* of the living. 8. One was
Ttr-t Bradar-vakhsh‘, the Karap and heterodox
wizard, by whom the best of men was put to death.
g. And one was he by whom the religions of apos-
tates ° were preferred—through the deceitfulness of
the perverted text and interpretation ® which they
themselves utter—to the law which the righteous


sense of ‘a pathic’ in Vend. VIII, ro2, This name, as well as
the next one, is used here more as representing a class than an
individual.

* The p.p. of the causal form of viptand, ‘to fecundate,’ used
as an equivalent of the Av. vaépayé of Vend. VIII, roz.

° Assuming that pavan pavan miidragand stands for pavan
farmtid rag4né ; but there is some doubt as to the correct reading
of several words in this section.

* Or ‘seed.’

* The eldest of five brothers who were wizards of the Karap
race or caste, and deadly enemies of Zarattist (see Byt. II, 3). He
is said to have slain Zarattist in the end.

5 Aharméké, Av. ashemao gha, means literally ‘disturbing the
right,’ and is a term applied to an ungodly man specially under the


influence of the evil spirit, as an apostate is naturally supposed
to be.


° The Avesta and Zand,


CHAPTER LXXII, 7-12. 219


has praised, that existence whzch would have pro-
cured a complete remedy, azd would have become
the eternity of the records which bestow salvation,
through the good righteousness which is owing to
the pure religion, the best of knowledge.

10. And they who are defiled by a propensity to
stench are thereby welcoming the demons azd fiends’,
and are far from good thought? through vexing 2;
and a distance from them is fo be maintained of
necessity in sitting and eating with ¢hem, except so
far as 7¢ may be opportune for the giving of incite-
ment dy words for withdrawing (padalisn6) from
their sinfulness, while converting them from that
propensity. 11. Should one die, to order a ceremo-
nial for him is indecorous, and to perform z¢ would
be unauthorised; but if Ze were to do so penitently
one would then be authorised to perform his cere-
monial after the three zzgh¢s*, for it is the remedy
for atonement of sin. 12. And so long as he is
living Ae is in the contingencies (vakhtagand)
owing to the sickness through which e is in that
way an infamous ove (akhamidar), and ¢here are
no preventives (bOndag4n6) and medicinal powder
for it; these are teachings also for the duty and
good works of a ceremonial for the soul *.


1 Who are supposed to seize upon them and pervade them ; hence
the necessity of shunning such men, to avoid contamination from
the demons who possess them.

2 That is, from what is personified in the archangel Vohiman.

8 During which the soul is supposed to remain on earth, hovering
about the body, after death (see Chaps. XX, 2, XXIV, 2, XXV, 2),

¢ That is, they are warnings to him to repent.


220 DADISTAN-1 DINIK.


CuHaPTER LX XIII.


1. As to the seventy-second question azd reply,
that which you ask is thus: Does the stench of
him, stinking withal, who commits unnatural inter-
course proceed to the sky, or not; and to what
place does the wind of that stench go when it goes
anywhere ?

2, The reply is this, that the material stench goes
as far and in such proportion as there are filthiness
and fetidness in the stinking existences, and the
spiritual stench goes unto there where there are
appliances (sAman6) for acquiring stench, a misera-
ble place ; on account of the separation (gardih) of
the sky, everywhere where it goes in the direction
of the sky it does not reach to the undisturbed
existences', 3. Information about the stench is
manifest in the omniscient creator, whose omni-
science is among the luminaries, du¢ that persistent
creator and the primeval angels and archangels
are free from its attack; and fzs information
about the deception which is practised upon that
labourer for hell and mind added with the demons?
is certain.


ee ee ee eee


* The sky being divided into three parts, and the uppermost part
being inaccessible to evil (see Chap. XXXVII, 24, 25).

* Reading ava-séd4-minisndith, but it is possible that ava
may have originally been khavdak, for the Av. khavz6, ‘male
paramour,’ of Vend. VIII, 99, 103 (trans. D.\.


CHAPTER LXXIII, I-LXXIV, 3. 221


CuHapTerR LX XIV.


1. As to the seventy-third question and reply,
that which you ask is thus: Is ¢here any discom-
fiture (vanidarih) of the archangels from that
stench, or not?

2. The reply is this, that the archangels are im-

mortal and undistressed ; their place, also, is in that
best existence of light, all-glorious, all-delightful,
and undisturbed; and the strength of the stench
due to the demons! does not reach unto anything
pertaining to the archangels. 3. The archangels
are omniscient?, friendly to the creatures, persistent,
and procure forgiveness; they know that heinous
practice which is the heinous practice® of that
wretched dupe (friftak6) who as become defiled
in that most filthy manner (zisttQm 4rang), which
is like that which is provided and which is applied
to him even in the terrible punishment* that Aas
come upon him from the demons; and then, on
account of ¢hezr friendliness to the creatures, it Zas


1 Reading az-sédaik6, but it may be az-sédaik6, ‘of the
demon of greediness,’ or it may stand for khavdak-sédaik6, ‘of
a male paramour of the demons,’ as mentioned in the last note.

2 Omniscience with regard to what is taking place in the world
being an indispensable characteristic of any being to whom prayers
are addressed, or whose intercession is implored.

® These words are thus repeated in K35, and the repetition may
be correct.

4 Referring probably to the punishment of such a sinner, de-
tailed in AV. XIX, 1-3, as follows:—‘I saw the soul of a man,
through the fundament of which soul, as it were, a snake, like a
beam, went in, and came forth out of the mouth ; and many other
snakes ever seized all the limbs,’


222 DADISTAN-t DINIK.


re ee ee et ee se ee


seemed to them severe, and thereby arises their
forgiveness which is according to whatever anguish
is owing to the torment which galls him.


CuapTeR LXXV.


1. As to the seventy-fourth question azd reply,
that which you ask is thus: Do the angels have 4zs
dead dody restored, or not?

2. The reply is this, that ‘here was a high-priest
who said that the angels do not have zs dead body
restored, because of the sin of the mutually-pol-
luting, full of stench, and inglorious victims (khv4-
piddan)}, the terrible kind of means for the excul-
pation of creatures?, and that practice when males
keep specially imperfect in their duty; it decng then
suitable for mankind to become /vee from him who—
like Az-t Dahak*, who wanted many most powerful
demons—resists and struggles, and is not possessing
the perception to extract (patkasistand) a pardon,
owing to the course of many demoniacal causes.
3. But innumerable multitudes (amarakanthé),
happily persevering‘ in diligence, have with united
observation, unanimously, azd with mutual assist-
ance (ham-bangisniha) insisted upon this, that
they have the dead dJodzes of all men restored; for


* Victims of the deceptions practised by the demons (see Chaps.
LXXIII, 3, LXXIV, 3); but the reading is uncertain.

Probably the punishment of the wicked in hell.

® See Chap. XXXVII, 97.

4 easing farukhv6-tfishisn, but it may be perkhantd
dahisn, ‘having begged the boon;’ and M14 has poryddke-
shano, ‘of those of the primitive faith,


CHAPTER LXXV, I-LXXVI, 2. 223
ce Se Se ee
the good creator, granting forgiveness and full of
goodness, would not abandon any creature to the
fiend’. 4. In revelation (din6) it is said that every
dead ody is raised up, both of the righteous and of
the wicked?; there is none whom they shall abandon
to the fiend.

5. And this, also, is thus decided by them 3, that
even as Zo him who is most grievously sinful, when
he becomes mentally seeking pardon and repentant
of the sin, and, decng as much an atoner as Ze is well
able, Zas delivered up his body and wealth for retri-
bution azd punishment, in reliance upon the atone-
ment for sin of the good religion, then it is possible
for his soul, also, to come to the place of the
righteous 4.


Cpartr LX XV I.


1. As ¢o the seventy-fifth question and reply, that
which you ask is thus: As Zo him who shall slay
those who shall commit unnatural intercourse, how
is then his account as to good works and crime ?

2. The reply is this, that the high-priests, in ther
decision, Zave thus specially said, that all worthy
of death are so by the decision of judges and the


1 Except for temporary punishment in hell. All ideas of the
_ vindictiveness of implacable justice are foreign to the Mazda-
worshipper’s notion of the good creator.

2 Compare Bd. XXX, 7.

8 Probably by the ‘ multitudes’ of § 3.

4 By delivering up his body and wealth to the will of the high-
priest, as an atonement, and mentally renouncing his sins, he is
saved from hell, and the beneficial effect of any good works he
may have performed returns to him (see Sls, VIII, 5).


224 ~pApisTAN-f DINiK.


command of kings, whose business is execution. 3.
Whoever shall slay him who 4as heinous sins? after
controversies three times with him, about the deci-
sion of those acquainted with the religion aud about
the command of kings, when he as thus remained
in the sin in defiance of his own relations—and not
inimically to the man azd injuriously to the religion,
but inimically to the sin azd in order to keep away
intercourse with demons—is to consider z¢ as a great
good work. 4. No command is given about the
decision of what one is to do zz the same matter,
more heedfully and more authorisedly in cases of
doubtful attention, for the good work exists un-
doubtedly more azd more abundantly?.


CuapTerR LXXVII.


1. As ¢o the seventy-sixth question and reply,
that which you ask is thus: Will you direct some
one then to make the heinousness of this sin of
unnatural intercourse clear to us?

2. The reply is this, that the first material crea-
ture was the righteous man, the smiter of the fiend,
the righteous propitiator ; so, also, in the world e
is more recognising the sacred beings, more com-
pletely (hamaktar) for the production of creatures,


* Reading vinds4n6, as in Mrq, instead of the doubtful word
vashkisn, which might perhaps be compared with Pers. buzhis,
‘ opposition.’ ,

* The meaning is that no one is bound to put such sinners to
death until they are condemned by the authorities, but should one
do so upon his own responsibility, entirely for the good of the
faith, and certain of the impenitence of the sinners, he is not only
free from blame, but has done a meritorious deed.


CHAPTER LXXVI, 3—LXXVII, 7. 225
Oo oes See! os Ea


and with more provision for the creatures’. 3. And
with the manifestation of knowledge the best duty
is that which exs¢s in lawfully practising procrea-
tion, azd the complete progression of righteous men
arose therefrom.

4. In like manner he who is the omniscient crea-
tor formed mankind in the first pair, who were
brother and sister, azad became MashyAth and Mash-
yayéth *, and all races of material life exist by means
of acquiring sons and 42s omnisciently causing pro-
creation. 5. The man and woman were also made
to lust (gaminidé) by him, and thereby decame the
father and mother of material men; and he natura-
lized among primitive man the qualities of a desire
(alidané) for acquiring sons together through
glorifying. 6. And the law azd religion authorised
it as a proper wish, so long as ¢hey proceed from
those who are their own ve/ations, not from those
who are not their own; and with those whom next-
of-kin marriages%, original duties, and desires for
other sons have formed, complete progress in the
world is connected, and even unto the time of the
renovation of the universe*, it is to arise therefrom.
7. And the birth of many glorious practisers of the
religion, those confident in spirit, organizers of the
realm, arrangers of the country, azd even accom-


1 Reading va/-dam-nivarisndthatar; the syllables -Atar
being written separately M14 has va/ dam-nivarisnth alfyyad-
tar, ‘more remembering the provision for the creatures.’ Pro-
moting the increase of, and providing maintenance for, good
creatures are considered to be important good works.

2 Here written Mashya and Mashydyadith, but see Chaps.
XXXVII, 82, LXIV, 2.

"See Chap. LXV. 4 See Chap. II, 8.


[18] Q


226 DApDISTAN-1 DINIK.


plishers of the renovation of the universe, which
arises from those same to whom that practice shall
be law—and when it occurs lawfully—is a miracle
and benefit of the world, the will of the sacred
beings and the utmost good work discernible, be-
cause the complete progress of the righteous arises
therefrom, and the great female faculty (nekedih)
is manifested.

8. So when the opponent of the same, by whom
the source of seed and procreation is spoiled, is
intent upon a way for the death of progeny—and
the intention is certain—z¢s annihilation is owing to
him?!; and he is the devastating fiend?, whose will is
a desire of depopulation and ruin, and by the power
of his Niyaz (demon of ‘want’)* he turns imper-
ceptibly the esteem of the very indispensable pro-
duction of men from the position of wishing for sons
to a creature * who is opposed to it, through whom
have arisen its ruin azd corruption. 9. And the
nature and power which are his cherishing of pro-
geny are not suitable for receiving seed, and mis-
represented (drékinidd) by him is the accom-
panying evil intercourse, so that emitting the seed
(shidak), in delivering z¢ at that time into that
burning place, full of stench, is to produce z¢s death,
and no procreation occurs.

10. The dupes’ turn the living seed from mingling
with women and seeking for births, just as in the
like vice of any demon, connected with a longing


A free translation of agas 16itd, which phrase is placed at
the end of the section in the Pahl. original.


* The evil spirit. ° See Chap. XXXVII, 52.
* Mr4 has ‘to a member,’ 5 Of the fiend,


/


CHAPTER LXXVII, 8—LXXVIII, I. 224


for the dupes’, they shall abandon that advantage of
the world, the delights (vayagan6) of a son® rr,
He who is wasting seed makes a practice of causing
the death of progeny; when the custom is com-
pletely continuous, which produces an evil? stoppage
of the progress of the race, the creatures have be-
come annihilated; amd certainly, that action, from
which, when it is universally proceeding, the depopu-
lation of the world must arise, Zas become and
furthered (frarast5) the greatest wish of Aharman‘.
12. Such a practiser is the greatest wish of Ahar-
man, through the demon’s excretion® of doubt zx
the practice, owing to intercourse with the emitter,
which is most filthy and most fetid, and the emitting
member, which is causing death; and the demoniacal
practice® is perceptible even from the same practice,
and whatever is the heinousness of the sinfulness is
clear to observers of the dead dody.


CuapTer LXXVIII.


1. As Zo the seventy-seventh question and reply,
that which you ask is thus: As Zo the nature of the
heinousness avd sinfulness of committing adultery,
and the worldly retribution specified for z¢ in revela-


1 Such men are said to become paramours of the demons (see
Vend. VIII, 102-106), as further alluded to in § 12.

2 Mrq has ‘seeking a son.’

§ Reading dahéd vad, but Mr4 has y4ityfinté, ‘brought a,’
and may be right.

4 See Chap. XXXVII, ro.

5 Reading rikhih, but Mrq has rasth, ‘course.’

® Tn hell.


Oo) 2


228 DADISTAN-I1 DINIK.


tion, w2// you then direct some one to point out to us
the modes? of retribution for it?

2. The reply is this, that it is adultery, heinous
and vicious, which first Dahak used to commit, and
he.is known by the illicit intercourse whtich was his
desire with Vadak?, who was Ais mother, in the life-
time of AtirvadAsp?, who was his father, without‘
the authority of Afirvaddsp, who was the husband of
Vadak whose practising of sin, unauthorisedly and
injudiciously, was itself heinous azd very frequent.
3. And its modes of theft or spoliation are just as
much more heinous than other theft azd spoliation
as a man azd that which arises from his procreation
of man are greater than the position of property.

4. One is this, that z¢ is important to consider
with steadfastness the courtezan life of the adul-
teress and the bad disposition assuredly azd un-
doubtedly therein ; she causes pillage unauthorisedly,
and in fer practice, also, intercourse during menstru-
ation, owing to zs resembling the burning of seed,
is a frightful kind of handiwork (dast6).


1 Mrq has ‘the various modes.’

® This is evidently the name written Udat in Paz. in Bd. XXXI,
6, who was, therefore, the daughter of Bayak; the fact of her being
the mother of Dahak is more clearly expressed in the Pahlavi text
of Chap. LXXII, 5.

* This is the name written Khratasp in Bd. XXXI, 6, which is
a Paz. reading, though confirmed by the Pahl. form in TD (as Udat
is, to some extent, by the Pahl. Afid of TD). This Afirvaddsp,
whose name can also be read Khirdtasp, must be distinguished —
from his namesake, the father of Vistasp, whose name became cor-
rupted into Loharasp (see Bd. XXXI, 28, 29).

* K35 omits avtk, ‘ without,’ here, but has it in Chap. LXXII, g.
Without this particle the meaning would be ‘who was the high-
priest of his father, Afirrvadasp.’


CHAPTER EXXVITT,-2—L0. 229


5. One is this, that it may be ¢#at she becomes
pregnant by that intercourse, avd has to commit on
her child’ the murdering of progeny.

6. One is this, that it may be in pregnancy, dy
her coming to intercourse wth another man, that
the living child which is in her womb has died
through that intercourse.

7. One is this, that it may be that she becomes
pregnant by that intercourse, avd the pregnancy
having given indications, through shame or fear she
swallows a drug? [and seeks a remedy, and murders
the child in Zer womb.

8. One is this, that it may] be that a woman who
is foreign or infidel, and becomes pregnant by that
intercourse, gives birth to a child, avd it has grown
up with the child which is known éo delong ¢o the
husband of the woman, azd remains in foreign habits
(an-airih) or infidelity. 9. The committer of the
illicit intercourse is as unobservant and grievously
sinful as 4e who shall lead his own child from “es
native habits (airth) and the good religion into
foreign habits and infidelity; as to the sin which
that child may commit in childhood Ze is the sinner,
and as to that which it may commit in manhood he
is equally sinful with it. 10. Also, if that child be
put to death in childhood, and be passed through
water, rain, ov fire, ov be buried in the well-yielding
earth®, #e is an equally vicious murderer, and is
defiled thereby through decng the invisible causer.


1 Mrq has ‘and with the assistance of another man she has so
to commit on her child of that pregnancy.’ The interpolation is
clumsy, and does not make the sentence easier to translate.

2 The passage which follows, in brackets, is from Mr4; there
being evidently something omitted from K35 at this point.

8 The contamination of water, rain, fire, or earth, by contact with


A__A


220 DADISTAN-1 DINIK.


11. Likewise, if he who is a man of the good
religion aecustoms a woman to illicit intercourse, and
through adultery a child is born and grows up, even
then to practise undutifully that which undutifulness
committed is to make a wretched azd clandestine
connection. 12. On account of the birth having
occurred through illicit intercourse z¢ is grievously
sinful; through propriety z¢ is praiseworthy, and
through falsity z¢ is sinful!, azd it is said that a
bastard is not appointed in superintendence over
any one. 13. Lf it.be done so that pregnancy does
not occur, even then every single time—not to
mention the text (avistak) as ¢o the matter regarding
the destruction of his own living seed?—7¢ is a sin of
two Tanapihars, which are six hundred stirs?; and
regarding that emission 7z¢ is inexpiable (atan4-
pihar)*


a corpse, being considered a hejnous sin (see Sls. II, 9, 50, 76,
XIII, 19).

* That is, procuring the birth of a legitimate child is highly meri-
torious, but an illegitimate birth is sinful.

” Referring probably to Vend. VIII, 77-82, which states that the
voluntary waste of seed is an inexpiable sin, as mentioned at the
end of this section.

* A Tandaptihar (Av. tanuperetha) sin was originally one that
required the sinner to place his body at the disposal of the high-
priest, in order to atone for it; but it was not necessarily a sin
worthy of death, or mortal sin. At the time when the Vendidad
was written, such a sin was punished by two hundred lashes of a
horse-whip or scourge (see Vend. IV, 72). Subsequently, when the
Vendidad scale of punishments was converted into a scale of weights,
for estimating the amounts of sins and good works, a Tanapthar
sin was estimated at three hundred stirs (orarjp) of four dirhams
(Spaxpy) each (see Sls. I, 1, 2). The weight of 600 stirs was probably
about that of 840 rapfs, or 213 Ibs, (see Chap. LIT, rn).

* That is, a sin which cannot be atoned for even by giving up
one’s body for execution, An aptihar in Pahl. Vend. VIII, 82.


CHAPTER LXXVIII, 11-17. 231
’ 14. As much on account of the conversation as
on account of the companionship of the man who
goes unto various women, for the sake of a man’s
sin, and is unatoning, showld his own body be also
defiled with bodily refuse (higar-héménd)’, or
should those kinds of harm be not eft away from
another”, even then every single time of the bodily
refuse bringing harm to his own body is a@ sz of
sixty stirs ?, and through making his own body defiled
with bodily refuse is each ¢2me a sin of sixty stirs ;
and if he washes with water that defilement with
his own bodily refuse, or that which is harmed
thereby, every single time 2¢ is a sen of six hundred *
stirs.

15. And if it be a foreign or infidel woman, apart
from the sinfulness adout which J have written, z¢ is
a sin of sixty stirs on account of not controlling the
sins and vicious enjoyment of the foreign woman.
16. And, finally, the other various sins which are
owing to ¢Azs sin are very numerous, and grievous
to thousands of connections, and z¢ is thereby con-
taminating to them zz a fearful manner.

17. The retribution is renunciation of s¢z in pro-
curing pardon; and the renunciation in his turning
from equally grievous disobedience ®, every single


1 See Chap. XLVIII, 19.

2 Mr4 has ‘or he does not wash those harmful kinds of bodily
refuse, which is inconsistent with what follows.

8 This is the estimated weight of a Khér sin, originally the crime
of inflicting a severe hurt, ranging from a bruise to a wound or
broken bone not endangering life (see Sls. I, 1,2). The weight
was probably equal to that of 84 rfipis.

4 Mry has ‘three hundred.’ :

5 Reading asrfstth as in Mr4, instead of the aitrdéistoth of
K35. Possibly the latter word might be read 3-trdtstdth, ‘the


232 DADISTAN-1 DINIK.


time that e turns from similar viciousness, and as
an atonement for the sin, is to arrange, or order,
four (arba) marriages of the next of kin to his own
wife, lawfully, authorisedly, and most hopeful of off-
spring. 18. Through fear of the grievous sinfulness
which J ave recounted, zz case of a child of those
of the good religion who has no giver of shame},
and to keep lawfully in subjection a child who is
under control, he who is unnurtured is lawfully given
nurture, avd is nominated for lawfully bringing up.
19. And to turn a man ov woman of bad disposition,
by eulogy and entreaty, or 2 dy distress (fangim) and
fear and other representations, from that bad dis-
position and vicious habit; to order next-of-kin
mafriage * and all the religious rites (hamak din6),
the Dvazdah-homast ‘, the ceremony zz honour of
the waters*, and the presentation of holy-water to
the fires °; to remove the burden of offspring 7 which
is distressing those of the good religion, and to force
them from the infidelity acquired, which is a very
atoning atonement for such sins, are extremely proper
proceedings (avir-farhakhtikth).


passing away of the three nighis, referring to the Av. phrase
thrityau khshapé thraosta, ‘on the passing away of the third
night, in Hn. II, 18; the three nights are those immediately after
death, while the soul is Supposed to remain hovering about the
body, thinking over its sins, and dreading the approaching judg-
ment of the angel Rashnu; but previous renunciation of sin would
relieve it from much of this dread.

* That is, one not born in shame, but a legitimate child. Mr4
has shy, ‘milk,’ substituted for sh arm, ‘shame.’

” Mr4 has ‘woman of family with extending sins or bad
disposition.’

* See Chap. LXV. * See Chap. XLVIII, 25.

° Probably the Aban NyAyis. * Probably the Atas N yayis.

" By assisting in their support.


CHAPTER LXXVIII, I8—LXXIX, 3. on3


CuapTer LX XIX.


1. As to the seventy-eighth question and reply,
that which you ask is thus: What is the decision
about water with the word Itha! and him who shall
drink it? 2. When a man as performed his ritual
and does not take the prayer (v4g6) zxwardly, but
drinks water with the word Itha, what is the decision
about this efficacy? of which he takes up one half
and abandons one half, how is it necessary, or not, to
consider z¢, and what is the sin of it? 3. As to him
who performs half, ory less than half, of the efficacy,
and drinks water with the word Itha, what is the
retribution for this sin when he shall commit z¢
occasionally, azd what is good zz order that this sin,
when he shall commit z¢, may depart from z¢s source ?


1 The first word of Yas. V, 1, 2 which forms the first portion
(after the invocation) of the inward prayer, or grace, to be muttered
before eating or drinking. This first portion may be translated as
follows: ‘Here then we praise Ahura-mazda, who gave (or created)
both cattle and righteousness, he gave both water and good plants,
he gave both the luminaries and the earth, and everything good.’
This is followed by three Ashem-vohfis, each meaning as follows :
‘ Righteousness is the best good, a blessing it is; a blessing be to
that which is righteousness to the angel of perfect rectitude.’ After
muttering these formulas, or ‘taking’ them inwardly as a protective
spell, the mutterer can eat or drink, and after washing his mouth
he ‘speaks out’ the spell or vag by reciting certain other formulas
aloud. This chapter refers to those who mutilate the vag by
muttering only its first word or words, which matter is also treated
in Sls. V.

2 Supposing that this word, which may be twice read maanaé
and four times m4én4é, represents the Ar. ma’hni, but this is by
no means certain. :


234 DApISTAN-I DINIK.


4. As to him who has performed his Nabar? ritual,
and drinks water with the word Itha, not muttering
(andak6) the zxward prayer (v4g6), and performs
a ceremony (yasté), though he does not order a
ceremony of Gété-kharid? for himself, is the de-
cision then adout him anything better, or not; and
does the good work of this ceremony of Gété-kharid
become just the same as ¢/az of the Nabar ceremony,
or not? 5. As ¢o him who orders a ceremony of
Gété-kharid for *? himself, what is then his good work,
and what is the value‘ of his worthiness when he
does not himself perform because he orders that
they should perform for him? 6. And as to him
who has not performed his ceremony, and is fifteen
years o/d, what is then the decision about him ?

7. The reply is this:—When a man who has
chanted the Gathas (‘hymns’)* drinks water with the
word tha, if, moreover, deze preservable from suf-
fering *, he be not a righteous oxe overwhelmed by
impotence, it is thus said that, when zz order to con-
secrate the sacred cake (drén6)’ it is not possible


* The initiatory ceremony of a young priest, written nafbar or
nagbar in this chapter, and sometimes ndnabar (Pahl. navak
natbar).

® This ceremony, which means ‘the world-purchased,’ and by
which, according to the Sad-dar Bundahis, ‘ heaven is purchased in
the world, and one’s own place brought to hand in heaven,’ lasts
three days, and is performed by two priests; the first day’s cere-
monies are those of the Néndbar, those of the second are of the
angel Srésh, and those of the third are of the Strézah, or angels of
the thirty days of the month (see Bd. XXX, 28 n).

* Reading ra? instead of 14, ‘not?

* Reading varka, instead of va neked, ‘female,’ which is much
like it in Pahl. letters.

° And is, therefore, an initiated priest.

° Mr4 has ‘ from impotent suffering.’ * See Chap. XXX, 1.


CHAPTER LXXIX, 4-9. 235


to take the prayer zxwardly, and there are no pre-
sentations of it for the tasting of the virtuous wth
*nward prayer', or for the sake of relieving the
sickness of a righteous person, which has come
severely, when it is possible for him ¢o say ‘Itha’
and one ‘Ashem-voht2, or it is possible for him to
say ‘Ashem, 4e is to recite that which it is possible
for him to speak, and 4e is to drink or eat? the water,
or food, or medicine which is discreetly his, and may
be the custom of his body and life ‘.

8. But the sinfulness of 42m who has drunk water
with the word Itha, not owing to suffering, is much
the most sinful, except this efficacy of which you have
written that, Zaveng taken up® one half, they shall
abandon one half; for, when in eating the efficacy
is possessed in that manner, z¢ is then a chattering
meal which is a very grievous sin®. 9. Every single
drop (pashan)? which in that manner comes to the


1 Reading vag6 atéfdadagan-? nadfigand, which Mr4 has
altered to mean ‘and if in his state of hunger and thirst’

2 Merely the first words of the two formulas which constitute
the inward prayer, or vag (see § 1 n).

8 Mrgq has only ‘ Ae is to eat.’

4 Mrq has ‘and is authorisedly to preserve his own body.’

5 Reading frag, as in Mrq4 and § 2, instead of pavan, ‘in;’
though the reading ‘in taking up’ is quite possible.

6 The sin of drayan-gfyisnth, ‘eagerness for chattering,’
which arises from talking while eating, praying, or at any other
time when a prayer (vag) has been taken inwardly and is not yet
spoken out. The sin arises from breaking the spell of the inward
prayer (see Sls. V).

7 Comp. Av. parshuya and Pers. pashang, bashang. This
word has been misread yazisn, ‘ceremony,’ in Sls. V, 3, 4, which
ought to stand as follows:—‘It is unseasonable chatter for every
single drop; for him who has performed the ritual ¢/ is a Tana-
ptihar sé”; for him who has not performed the ritual 7 is less,


226 DApISTAN-{ DINIK.


mouth as a new taste is a stz of three stirs1, and
every single ¢hzmg which is spoken like that word ?
is a sin of three stirs, which is mentioned as the
minimum.

10. The retribution is that way well perfected
when, in renunciation of that sin which attacks, a
proper efficacy is prepared and becomes a vestige
(vinak6) of the sin of the performer. 11. Whoever
is not able to arrange it in this manner is to entreat
the prayers of three men with a donation of wealth,
and is to solemnize his Néndbar ceremony, or he is
to consecrate a sacred cake every day in the cere-
monial place, to eat food lawfully, azd to order the
proper maintenance of the efficacy. 12. The as-
sistance of performing the proper rituals through
ordering the Nabar ceremony, and the helping ex-
istence of discharging the burden of the trouble of
a populous household seem to me suitable for the


atonement of such-like sin, through the will of the
sacred beings.


————— se eee


some have said three Sréshé-zarandms. The measure of unseason-
able chatter is a Tanaptihar szz ; this is where every single drop,
or every single morsel, or every single taste is not completed.’

* The stir is evidently taken here as equivalent to the Sréshé-
karanam of Sls. V, 3 (see the last note). A sin of three Srdshé-
karanams, ‘lashes with a scourge,’ is called a Farman, and is usually
the least degree of sin of which notice is taken ; its amount is
variously estimated (see Sls. IV, 14, X, 24, XI, 2, XVI, 1, 5), but
the value given here, in the text, is very likely correct, and is
equivalent to about 42 rfipts, either in weight or amount (see
Chap. LII, 1 n).

* The word Itha. Mrq has “every single time it is spoken in


tasting with an efficacy like that word,’ but the meaning of this is
not clear.


ST DEES.


CHAPTER LXXIX, ITO—LXxXI, I. 237


CuHapTter LX XX.


1. As to the seventy-ninth question and reply,
that which you ask is thus: Concerning him who
does not order ceremonies what is then the decision ?

2. The reply is this, that, excepting those among
which is specially the selected religious rite (diné)
of him whose ceremony is not performed—who, even
though Zavzng many good works, does not afterwards
attain unto the supreme heaven, which is deter-
mined 1—this, moreover, is thus said, that he who
is not able to perform his ritual himself, when he
orders a Gété-kharid® ceremony and they shall per-
form z¢, can become /¢ for the supreme heaven
(garédmanik6); this is greatly to be commended.


CuarTeR LXXXI.
1. As ¢o the eightieth question and reply, that
which you ask is thus: What is the purpose of this
ceremony for the living soul*, azd why‘ is it necessary


1 Tt is the general opinion that if the proper ceremonies are not
performed during the three days after a death (see Chap. XXVIII)
the deceased cannot attain to the highest grade of heaven; this is,
however, denied by some of the commentators (see Sls. VI, 3-6).

2 See Chap. LXXIX, 4 n.

8 Dastfir Peshotanji Behramji, the high-priest of the Parsis in
Bombay, informs me that every Parsi is bound to perform, or get
performed, every year during his or her lifetime, ceremonies for
three days in honour of his or her soul, analogous to those per-
formed during the three days after a death. These Zindah-ravan,
or Srésh, ceremonies are generally ordered on the first three
Fravardigan holidays, extending from the twenty-sixth to the
twenty-eighth day of the last month of the Parsi year.

4 Reading maman rai, as in M14; K35 has 14 ‘not,’ instead
of ri, ‘for.’


238 DADISTAN-I DINIK.


to order 2#? 2. And, whenever ove orders it, how
is it necessary then to order it, how is it best when
they celebrate z¢, and what is its great advantage
as a good work?

3. The reply is this, that worship with the cere-
monial for those newly passed away, during the
three days which ¢hey spend in the account}, is suit-
able for the discreet, just as the protection with
nourishment of those newly born, in their infancy,
is also much more suitable for the discreet. 4. He
is a truly discreet man through whom (Zfere is cere-
monial for the three days, on account of his own
father, and privileged wife, and infant child, and
well-behaved servant, on ¢heir passing away; and
it is indispensable to order the triple ceremonial of
the three days.

5. This, too, is said: where it is not possible to
solemnize his three days, or they solemnize ¢hem
afterwards, when information of the death arrives ?,
three days are to be solemnized as a substitute for
those three. 6. For the good work of the ceremo-
nial which is ordered by him himself, or bequeathed
by him, or is his ¢krough consenting to it by design ’,
exists—even though it is thus possible that it will
be conducted afterwards—whenever it comes into:


progress ; therefore he is exalted for it at his account
a eee eee

* See Chaps. XXIV, XXV.

* M14 has ‘or they do not solemnize them, after which the in-
formation arrives,’ which is clearly inconsistent with the context.
When a person dies away from home, and the ceremonies are not
performed on the spot, they must be performed at his home
immediately after information of his death arrives, and the three
succeeding days are considered as Tepresenting the three days
after the death (see Sls. XVII, 6). :

* Comp. Chap. VIII, 5.


CHAPTER LXXXI, 2-TI. 229


in the three days, and it comes on for his de‘ng ex-
alted. 7. When that which is conducted afterwards
comes on for aiding hzs Jeng exalted in the three
days of the account, that which was conducted by
him himself beforehand is more hopeful azd more
certain of being exalted in that position.

8. On account of there being also a diminution
(aito-2 gahidarih) of risk about their own souls, in
the event of (min zak aigh hat) their children not
ordering the three days’ ceremonzal, or it not being
possible to solemnize z¢ at that time, it is desirable
to order, in their own lifetime and a/ their own con-
venience, ¢he ceremony for their own living souls,
advisedly, without doubt, and Zaving appointed the
mode of life of the three days, and also to appoint by
will him who is to conduct zf in the end. 9. And
when both are conducted, the increase of good works
and exaltation, though the end is not possible, or is
not proceeded wz/#—and the previous good works
are commendable, and, therefore, preservatory—as
reached even unto the most lordly wishes.

10. As ¢o the man wzth great and powerful chil-
dren, to whom the ceremonial of the three days for
himself a¢ the final day, azd also the progress of
many good works save seemed certain, dt on ac-
count of yet another way to freedom from doubt
effectually (frarastiha) existing, he Aas bequeathed
the conduct of the three days’ ceremonial, and also
other good works, unto zs children, in order that
the ceremony for the living soul may de conducted at
the final day, with him the angels are in triumph,
the glory of the religion in the most lordly glory,
and the solemnizers of ceremonial worship are many.
11. Then, moreover, owing to the contest of the


240 DADISTAN-I DINIK.


demons—so unjust that oz the day of his passing
away tt is due to the uncleanness (ap4dy4zih) which
has attained unto z¢s fud/ extent1—all the solemnizers
zm the country, of the acts of worship solemnized,
may have become thoroughly doubtful of the wor-
ship, and until it goes on to the disciples, and the
ceremony is prepared, it is not proper to perform
the whole ceremonial ; in that way is manifested the
great advantage azd commendableness which arzses
from that ceremony for his living soul.

12. The nature of the ceremony ordered for the
living soul is a counterpart of the three days, so 7¢ is
needful that @/ all times of the three days and nights,
successively emancipative (avadiginisnik), a cere-
monial zz honour of Srésh? de always conducted, and
that it proceed; and a fire is lighted in the cere-
monial, and the clean ligature of the limbs is to be
tied. 13. Asarule it is so considered that? in the
three days ¢here are fifteen* ceremonies (yastand)
2a honour of Srdsh, and three sacred cakes (drén)é
which are consecrated in each dawn (bam-r) with
various dedications; and the fourth day they solem-
nize the Visparad®, the portion’ of the righteous
guardian spirits (ardai fravardd). 14. And there


* The corpse being considered utterly unclean.

* See Chap. XIV, 4.

° The following clause, about the three days, is omitted in Mra,
which skips from ‘that’ to ‘the fourth day.’

* The Pers. Rivayats merely say that four priests are employed,
two at a time, so as to relieve each other in the continuous series
of ceremonies for three days and nights.

5 See Chap. XXX, 1.

* Here written Visparéd6 (see Chap. XLV, 6).

” Reading bdn, instead of nfib; Mr4 omits the word.


CHAPTER LXXXI, I12—I 7. 241


are fugitives of families of the period, avd other still
further diminishers! of good works, who save wished.
to produce the wealth which is necessary to perform
advantageously, as a custom of the soul in those
three days, one celebration of all the religious rites
(hamak din6d) 2 honour of Srdsh, and the consecra-
tion of three sacred cakes for Srésh every day; and
the third night, at dawn 2, the consecration of a sacred
cake dedicated im three modes. 15. In accomplish-
ing the consecration of the sacred cake specially for
the righteous guardian spirits, oz the fourth day, one
is supposed to order a Dvdzdah-hémast ? 2” honour
of the righteous guardian spirits, azd the rest of the
ceremonial.

16. And e who has intended much more laud-
ably is declared as the more devout and more
judicious of worshippers; and for the sake of the
ceremonial he is cleansed by the Bareshnim cere-
mony *, and is to practise other descriptions of clean-
liness as regards 4zs body and clothing. 17. While
in the performance of the ceremonial, bread made
from corn which is ground éy those of the good


1 Mrq4 has ‘there are ghostly observers of the families of the
period, avd many other teachers.’ But the original meaning was,
no doubt as in K35, that there were many persons at. that period
who would have been glad to possess the means of ordering even
a small portion of the proper rites for the dead.

2 That is, at dawn on the fourth day. The rites here mentioned
seem to have been considered as the minimum that could be
approved.

8 See Chap. XLVIII, 25.

4 A tedious ceremony of purification, lasting nine nights and
detailed in Vend. IX, 1-145 (see App. IV). Its name is the Av.
word which commences the instructions for sprinkling the unclean -
person (Vend. IX, 48), and means ‘the top’ of the head.


[18] R


242 pApIsTAN-! DINIK.


religion, wine from that made dy those of the good
_religion, and meat from the animal! which is slaugh-
tered in the ceremonial are eaten; ad one is to pro-
ceed into’the abode of fires ? and of the good, and to
abstain from the rest of the other places which are
dubious * avd food which is dubious. 18. And with
that thorough heedfulness ove is to conduct and
order that ceremonial in the abode of the ever-grow-
ing fire, or other fire of Varahran*; whereby his
numerous good works are effectual, azd the path of
good works® is very broad. 19.-Concerning® the
suffering of 42m whose capability in that which is
his preserving efficacy” is less, it is thus revealed,
that not he who is righteous is overwhelmed, as 2z¢
were unwilling, by incapability ®.


CuHaPTeER LX XXII.


1. As to the eighty-first question and reply, that
which you ask is thus: As ¢o a man who shall order
a ceremonial and shall give the money (diram),
and the man who shall undertake his ceremonial


1 A goat or sheep is meant by géspend here.

* The fire temple, in, or near, which the priests (‘the good’)
reside.

* Or, var-h6mand may mean ‘open to choice,’ but it is generally
used as the opposite of aévar, ‘certain,

* Sacred fire (see Chap. XXXI, 7).

> Over the Kinvad bridge (see Chap. XXI, 5). -

® Reading rai, instead of 14, ‘not,’ here, and vice versa further
on in the sentence, as in Mrq.

* That is, in good works. M14 omits the word ‘less.’

* The construction of this quotation is suggestive of its being a
literal translation from the Avesta.


CHAPTER LXXXI, 18—LXXXII, 5. 243
ce GE Lees he ee


and shall take his money, dw¢ has not performed the
ceremonial, what is then the decision; and what is
then the decision aéoué the man who ordered the
ceremonial ?

2. The reply is this, that the merit of a cere-
monial not performed is not set going, and does not
come to the soul of the undertaker who shall take
money for it, zor even ¢o that of the orderer who
gave money for it. 3. But, as to him who is the
orderer, since his mental meritoriousness is so stead-
fast that he gave his money, the efficacy (tQbAn) of
the good work, mentally his own, Aas not stayed
away from him, because he gave money authorisedly
for the good work; the decision, then, adou¢ him is
such as about him to whom harm occurs in perform-
ing a good work for the religion. 4. It is said that
the angels so recompense him that he does not con-
sider it as azy other harm; and as much as the good
money given? for the sacred feast ? awd ceremonial
is then the pleasure whzch comes unto his soul, as
much as would have been possible to arise in the
world from that money.

5. And he who shall take his money, and did not
perform his ceremonial, is just as though he had
abstracted from the angels * and the righteous guar-
dian spirits, avd destroyed, as much propitiation as
would have been possible from that ceremonial;
and he is, therefore, overwhelmed by it‘, and expi-
ates z¢ in the soul.


? Mrq has ‘the money given by him,’ which may be correct.

2 See Chap. XLVII, r.

8 K35 has ‘the good.’

* Or, we might perhaps read ‘thereby it is his overwhelming
(astarid6),’ supposing astartd6 to be a technical term implying a


1?


244 DApISTAN-{ DINIK.


CuHapterR LX XXIII.


1. As to the eighty-second question azd reply, that
which you ask is thus ** Is it necessary for a priestly
man? ¢hat he should undertake all the religious rites
and other ceremonials, or in what way is it?

2. The reply is this, that a priestly man should
necessarily undertake all the religious rites avd other
ceremonials, because the deciding and advising per-
formers of the ceremonial, ¢Aese same priestly men, well
understand the merit ov demerit, the propriety ov im-
propriety, of the ceremonial. 3. When the undertaker
and conductor of all the religious rites is a priestly
man, ove is more hopeful of ¢/ecr progress in merit.

4. As to the priestly man who shall undertake
all the religious rites, if Ze de living comfortably
(hfi-zivisnd) on a share of our house-rulership?,


flogging, as appears probable from a passage in Farh. Okh..p. 34,
ll. 1, 2, which, when restored to its form in the oldest MSS., runs as
follows:—Astaridan6é askarth astarasp4n snas pavan vinas,
which may be translated ‘the manifestation of “ overwhelming ” is
the blow of horsewhips for sin;’ assuming that astarasp is equiva-
lent to asp6 astar, the usual translation of Av. aspahé astraya,
‘with a horsewhip.’

* The term magavég-gabra probably means strictly ‘a man
of a priestly family,’ as distinguished from a priest appointed from
the laity, an appointment that seems to have been occasionally
made in former times (see Bd. Introd. p. xxxiii, note 1). According
to the Nirangistan any virtuous man or woman can perform certain
priestly duties under certain circumstances (see Sls. X, 35), but
would not, of course, be magavég, ‘priestly, or of priestly family.’

* Reading manpatth, instead of magépatth, ¢ priesthood,’ which
words are often confounded in Pahlavi, being written very nearly
alike. And assuming that hatém, ‘if my,’ stands for hat6m4n, ‘if
our;’ M14 has atakhsh, ‘without exertion,’ but hatos, ‘if his,’ would
be a more probable emendation, as it occurs. in the. next section.


CHAPTER LXXXII, I-LXXXIV, I. 245


village-rulership, tribe-rulership, and province-ruler-
ship, and his needful support of religion remain
the consideration as to his living comfortably, and
he have no need for the stipend of all the religious
rites, then the rule for him is to distribute properly
that recompense of the sacred feast!, which is to
be given for all the religious rites, among the solem-
nizers*%, 5. If z¢ de needful for him, the priestly
man, as he is suitable, is not changed— whereby
good management is not attained—and 7f zt de
needful even tor his consideration of all those
religious rites, his performance in the duty and
ministration is then an approval of worthiness and
management. 6. When they shall act so, all those
religious rites are more meritoriously managed;
and one day the solemnizers are brought from the
fag-end (sar) into the rank of priestly manhood,
which is the stipend for all the religious rites that
they shall expressly take authorisedly, and are,
therefore, worthy of it®%


Cuaprer LX XXIV.


1. As to the eighty-third question and reply,
that which you ask is thus: Is it desirable to give


1 See Chap. XLVII, 1.

2 That is, if the chief priest has already a sufficient income, he
is not to appropriate the fees for such occasional ceremonies,
but to distribute them among his assistants, who are the actual
solemnizers.

’ That is, when the chief priest requires the fees for his own
support, the reward of his assistants must be the fact that they are
rendering themselves competent to undertake the responsibility of
the chief priest at some future time.


246 pApIsTAN-f DINIK.


in excess the gift for the ceremonial whzch it is
not desirable to diminish ?

2. The reply is this, that z¢ is proper not to
diminish a gift where zt zs the gift! for a cere-
monial, and the reasons for it are many. 3. One
is this, that a gift is the money which in another
good work suffices for the accomplishment of the
good work, avd the good work of a righteous gift?
is a great good work, azd not to diminish 7z¢ is
sure worthiness among the explainers. 4. When
the sacred feast*® and the gift for the ceremonial are
supplied in excess, even that which is an excess of
gift is an excess of liberality to the performers of the
ceremonial, avd has realized (frarAst6) an excess of
good works that is commendable.


CuHapTterR LX XXV.


1. As zo the eighty-fourth question and reply,
that which you ask is thus: As éo a gift for the
ceremonial whzch they do not reduce, and while
they give z¢ in excess, in what manner is then its
great advantage, and how and in how many modes
is it possible to occur ?

2. The reply is this, that the advancement of the
ceremonial of the sacred beings is by so much as
the gift is more fully given; and the great advan-
tage of the good work is more, and its reasons many,
therefrom. 3. The desire of this wealth, which sas
come for the sake of the good work, is an experience


* Mr4 omits the repetition of the words atgh dahisnd-t,
* See Chap. XLIV, ro. * See Chap. XLVIE 1;


CHAPTER LXXXIV, 2—LXXXV, 7. 247


of the comfortable living of the angels, by whom the
solemnizers are aggrandized, and is proper apart from
2¢s great judiciousness ; to diminish z¢ is improper.

4. When the gift for the ceremonial is abundantly
given, the performers of the ceremonial, who, with
much trouble annoying them, Zave solemnized the
Avesta and chanted the hymns (GAthas), and obtain
the stipend of their solemnizing from the remunera-
tion of the solemnization, are living comfortably,
thriving, and blessed. 5. And also the undertakers
of all the religious rites who, by means of the hope
of rightful religion, render ove certain as to the way
fo the distant awful place!, and tempt the longers
for righteousness into the religion’, undertake all the
religious rites azd ceremonial of the sacred beings
for the sake of the stipend of proper diligence.

6. And reasoning thought is cognizant as regards
the advantageousness due to the undertakers and
solemnizers of all the religious rites, and a great
stipend is more obtained and observed for them
than for amy other profession. 7. The sons, too,
of priests and disciples strive for the words prayed’,
and are more eager for their prayers; and many,
likewise, shall engage for all the religious rites, and
become more diffusive of the religion (diné balis-
niktar); and, in like manner, the proper, more
attainable, avd more propitious path of the good
for saving the soul becomes wider*.


1 The place of account (see Chap. XX, 3). Or, it may be,
‘render one certain, in the course of time, regarding the awful
place (hell).’

2 Mrgq adds ‘and acquire good works.’

8 That is, they are more diligent in learning the prayers by


heart.
4 Referring to the Kinvad bridge (see Chap. XXI, 5).


AL A


248 DADISTAN-1 DINIK.


CuHaprer.L XXXVI.


1, As ¢o the eighty-fifth question and reply, that
which you ask is thus: What is possible to become
the harm of a gift ¢ha¢ is reduced ?

2. The reply is this, that since chose things are to
be properly given which are for the religious rites
of the ceremonial!, and are the consideration of the
undertakers of all the religious rites, and are also
the stipend of some solemnizers, both? are living
comfortably dy the ceremonial. 3. The sons of the
disciples wo wanted approval for the words prayed,
become so much the more to be ordered and to be
accepted; and the ceremonial of all the religious
rites becomes more progressive.

4. So, moreover, when they go to undertake
the well-opérating activity of the ceremonial for a
diminution of remuneration and gift, and owing to
undertaking azd ordering again, by way of routine
(pavan ddr ras), they do not request so much
stipend, 7¢ zs as though they should buy my linen
and should sell z¢ again for their own payment
(dadan6). 5. As ¢o the performers of the ceremonial,
likewise, who ave to acquire approval with much
trouble and words prayed, and obtain a remunera-
tion which, for the soul even, is as little for the
ceremonial as though one were annoyed— whereby


* Mr4 has merely ‘since the proper donation for the cere-
monial.’


> That is, both the undertakers and solemnizers, the chief priest
and his assistants.

* Referring to a priest who undertakes ceremonies and then
directs inferiors to perform them (see Chap. LXVI, 4, 6).


CHAPTER LXXXVI, I-LXXXVII, I. 249


living is difficult—they become sorry for enduring
the trouble, owing to lukewarmness (afsurdé-
minisnih) zz the same profession. 6. And even
the sons of the disciples shall sell linen for wages,
and they rejoice ¢hat it is possible to learn other
callings wzth less pains; and thus they make ¢hem
become lukewarm azd meditating retreat (avaz-
ahang) from the words of fresh paragraphs con-
tinually prayed’, from the approval requested of the
learned (4z4n), azd from all the religious rites they
should undertake for the contented.

7. As to those, moreover, who, through fervent-
minded undertaking of what is ordered, request less
for all the religious rites, axd have not obtained?
even that which is due Zo fhem, it is not even as
though they ordered of them for the fiends*. 8. And
the disgrace, too, of the orderers of good works of
lukewarmness is the exaltation of the profession of
the disciples; and its deficient progress becomes
the paralysation of the ceremonial of the sacred
beings for saving the souls of the good from the
_ deadly one (mar).


CuapTteR LXXXVIL.


1. As to the eighty-sixth question and reply, that
which you ask is thus: How is it good when they
give a gift for the ceremonial ?


1 Literally ‘ prayed and prayed.’

2 Reading ay4ft, instead of the unintelligible ayadt, as d has,
no doubt, been written for f.

8 Meaning that the orderers would act more liberally if they
wanted a ceremony even in honour of the fiends.


250 DADISTAN-f DINIK.


2. The reply is this, that as it is necessary, so
that the ceremonial of the sacred beings may be
more advanced, and such wealth may more come
on to the good work, for the proper stipends of the
undertakers azd solemnizers—that they may become
less lukewarm as regards the accompanying pro-
prieties, and thereby diligent zz performing them—
and there is not in z#! an express connection mani-
fested with different work, and with that which has
proceeded from so many previous good feople, I deem
the introduction of 2¢? more expressly better.


Coartmn LX X XVI


1. As to the eighty-seventh question and reply,
that which you ask is thus: As family householders
we of the good religion of Iran, before each celebra-
tion of all the religious rites with holy-water*® which
they have provided in the land‘ of Pars, have then
always given for it a gift of 400 dirhams, or 3 50
dirhams® af least. 2. And now if we should be
needy, when we deduct something from the 400
dirhams, or from the 350 dirhams, of the gift for
them, they would then not accept 7¢ from us, and
speak thus: ‘Less than 400, or than 350, dirhams
we do not® accept.” 3. Buz there are needy men


* The ceremonial. > The gift. * See Chap. LXVI, 17.

* Reading bfim, as in Mr4, instead of the barmané, ‘son,’
Of Kas:

®* About 140 or 1222 rfipts (see Chap. LII, 1 note). As in
Chap. LXVI, the actual value of these sums of money depended
upon the price of the necessaries of life in the ninth century.

* K35 repeats the negative, but whether this is a blunder, or
intended to intensify the negation, is uncertain.


CHAPTER LXXXVII, 2—LXXXVIII, 7. 251


who always come to us themselves and speak thus:
‘For 350 dirhams we will always twice conduct all
the religious rites avd ceremonial with holy-water
such as ¢hose which you have always ordered before
for 400; only order us. 4. Would a needy one,
apart from the priestly men who always say that
they are not, be authorised, or not?

5. The reply is this, that the priest 4o whom
your predecessors have given a gift of 400 or 350
dirhams, for all the religious rites with holy-water,
it is proper to consider particularly virtuous and
faithful, when there is nothing else adout him, on
account of which he is otherwise. 6. A celebration
of all the religious rites with holy-water, in which
they shall use four pure animals !—and just accord-
ing to the teaching of the high-priests they present
to every single fire from one animal azd one holy-
~ water—and the offering of holy-water unto the fire
whose holy-water 7¢ zs, and bringing it on to another
fire apart from that holy-water, and the ceremonial
cleansing of the holy-water they maintain by agree-
ment in thy name, the superiors solemnize with
approval, faithfully, and attentively; and the remu-
neration of 350 dirhams would be a balancing of
when they conduct the religious rite a¢ the place
of undertaking 72, and when zt is undertaken as
. regards a distant district *

7, In Avtakhshatar-gadman *, within my memory,


1 Sheep or goats. 2 That is, it is a fair average charge.

8 The Huz. form of Ardashir-khurrah, the name given by Arda-
shir son of Papak, the first Sasanian king, to the city and district
of Gér, subsequently called Pirfizabad (see Noldeke’s Geschichte
der Perser und Araber zur Zeit der Sasaniden, pp. 11, 19), about
seventy miles south of Shiraz.


252 DApISTAN+{ DINiK.


they who would accept less than 300 dirhams? for
it made a memorandum (farhang), to keep in
remembrance ¢a¢ 350 dirhams for all the religious
rites performed was to be the rule declared by those
of the religion zz Avtakhshatar-gadman. 8. Like-
wise, the glorified Attr-frébag 2, son of Farakhtizad,
who was the pre-eminent leader of those of the good
religion, decided zz the same manner.

9. And now, too, they always conduct those rz¢es
which are without holy-water for 150 dirhams, or
even for 120 dirhams?; and the reason of it is
the neediness of the disciples who, owing to that
need, and in hope of obtaining more employment,
always diminish their demands, and through deficient
remuneration always become more needy, more im-
portunate, and more moderate in desiring remune-
ration; and, in the course of the employment of
resources and requesting the charge of all the
religious rites, the labour and endurance of disciple-
ship are exhausted. -

10. And as fo him who undertakes to conduct all
the religious rites twice for 350 dirhams, if he de
properly working avd thoroughly reliable Jor the 350
dirhanis whch are always given him for the cere-
monial of all the religious rites—just like those who
would always undertake ‘hem once—and all the
religious rites are conducted and secured twice, on


* About 105 rfpis.

* The name of an early editor of the Dinkard, whose selections
from various religious writings form the fourth and fifth books of
that extensive work in its present form. He lived after the Muham-


madan conquest of Persia, and probably in the eighth century of
the Christian era.


* That is, 524 or 42 rfipts.


CHAPTER LXXxvill, 8-14. pce,


ee


account of the merit due to the continuous cere-
monial of the sacred beings it is more authorisedly
ordered of those who solemnize all the religious
rites twice, 11. But as to 42m who would under-
take all the religious rites twice for 350 dirhams,
but is not able to conduct them unless he puts to
it some of his own wealth, so that the progress may
be acceptable to him as they conduct ¢hem through
repetition, he should not undertake ¢hem owing to
the reasons written in another chapter of ours?,
since z¢ ¢ends much more to neediness.

12. And more like unto the ancient sceptics
(vimanak6) fave become the disciples, among
whom disagreement avd enmity are produced, as
is written in the same writing (khadd-gin na-
mak6)*; azd, owing to admonishing words, these
become enviousness and maliciousness unto the disci-
ples, azd trouble and disagreement less becoming
among you and more contentious about you.
13. And at the time zz which a great stipend
existed, ¢#ey contended with him through whose
greatness and abundance of stipend their conflict
was caused, one with the other, through envy; and
now, too, they aways squabble aéout his deficient
stipend, by which they will tempt them, on account
of zts inadequacy, for the sake of a way for preserv-
ing life, as was shown by my metaphor in the other
chapter#. 14. When those who, through need of
employment tn the rites of religion, or the recitations’


1 This is also stated in Chap. LXVI, 32,

2 See Chap. LXVI, 24-26. 3 Tbid.

4 See Chap. LXVI, 28, 29.

5 It is uncertain whether these are the correct technical meanings
of késh and dor. ,


© 254 DADISTAN-f DINiK.


which are its wisdom, would at once produce enmity,
and the friends of religion, are for each of two sides,
zt is important to look to the procuring of forgive-
ness, kind regards, and the progress of the elect
(pasandak4n6) in the duty of the faithful.


Cuapter LXXXIX.


1. As to the eighty-eighth question and reply,
that which you ask is thus: When a man resolves
within himself thus: ‘/z the summér! time I w2é/
go into Pars, and will give so much money for
the high-priesthood, on account of the fires and
other matters which are as greatly advantageous,’
though he himself does not come into Pars, dué
sends the money according to his intention, ov in
excess of it, unto the high-priests—so that he is like
the great who send in excess of that unto the high-
priests*—that, as the benefit is greater which is
more maintained, they may provide for the fires
of every kind and other matters, is then his pro-
ceeding of sending to Pars, for that purpose, a sin,
or not?

2. The reply is this, that if his coming be in-
dispensable for the design he would undertake, then
it is indispensable for him to accomplish his own
mental undertaking ; but in suffering which is excited
and not avoidable, when ¢here is really no possibility


Sn neeee


* Assuming that ham4n stands for h4minéo.
* M14 omits this phrase.


CHAPTER LXXXIX, I—XC, 2. 255


of his travelling himself, any one whom he sends in
his place, more particularly on ¢#a¢ account, is not

acceptable by the approval of the angels who have
realized the affliction in 22s good thought, but the
good work is to be eagerly well-considered. 3. Good.
gifts, and every office (g4s) about good works which
it is possible to perform, are what are commendable
em the well-housed man that is not able to work
himself*; they are avoidable by him when not of
good race, and are not indispensable for him when-
ever the good work is not announced. 4. When
able to manage z¢ himself z¢ is better; and when
otherwise, his appointment of a faithful Jerson over
zts preparation, and /zs accomplishment of the work
of selector are expedient.


CHAPTER XC.


1. As ¢o the eighty-ninth question avd reply, that
which you ask is thus: Who, and how many are they
who are without the religion (adindéth) dé are
made immortal, and for what purpose is their im-
mortality? 2. Where is the place they, each one,
possess sovereignty, and zz the place where they
possess sovereignty are ¢here people of the good
religion of every kind, or how are they; are ¢here
sacred fires? and appointed worship, or how is


1 M14 adds, ‘he longs for good giving and good consideration ;
important and virtuous is he when able to do it;’ but the sentence
is hardly grammatical.

2 Literally ‘fires of Varahran’ (see Chap. XXXI, a3


256 DADISTAN-1 DINIK.


it; and for what purpose is each one of their
sovereignties ?

3. The reply is this, that the immortal rulers of
the region of glory, Khvaniras1, are said Zo é¢
seven; one is Yést6, son of Fryén?; the Avesta
name of one is Yakhmaytsad*, son of the same
Fryan; the name of one is Fradhakhsté, son of the
Khumbiks*; the name of one is Ashavazang, son of
Péridakhstéih®; one is the tree opposed to harm °;


1 The central one of the seven regions of the earth, which is
supposed to contain all the countries best known to the Iranians,
and to be as large as the other six regions put together (see Bd.
XI, 2-6). The name is here corrupted into Khvanatras.

2 Ay. Y6istd y6 Fryananam of Abdn Yt. 81, Fravardin Yt. 120,
who had to explain ninety-nine enigmas propounded to him by the
evil Akhtya. In P&z. this name is corrupted into Gést-f Fryané,
whose explanation of thirty-three enigmas propounded by Akht
the wizard, and proposal of three enigmas in his turn form the
subject of a Pahlavi tale published with AV. He is not included
among the immortals mentioned in Bd. XXIX, 5, 6, and Dk.
(see § 8, note), but is one of those specified in Byt. II, 1.

* No doubt, the Av. Ashem-yahméai-usta (‘righteousness for
which be blessing’) who precedes Y6ist6 in Fravardin Yt. 120.
He is the Asdm-t Yamahust of Bd. XXIX, 5, who is said to reside
in the district of the river Natvtak; but he is not mentioned in Dk.
The names YakhmAytisad, Fradhakhstd, and Ashavazang are written
in Pazand, which accounts for their irregular spelling.

* Av. Fradhakhsti Khuzbya of Fravardin Yt. 138. In Dk.
he is said to be ruler on the Nafvtak waters, but in Bd. he is called
Parsadga Hvembya residing in the plain of Pésyansat.

® Av. Ashavazdang the Pourudhdkhstiyan of Abn Yt. 72,
Fravardin Yt.r12, He is the Ashavazd son of Pourudhakhst in
Bd., and is said to rule in the plain of Pésyansat in Dk,

° The many-seeded tree, said to grow in the wide-formed ocean,
and also in Airan-vég, on which the Saéna bird (simurgh) is sup-
posed to sit and shake off the seeds, which are then conveyed by
the bird Kamrés to the waters gathered by Tistar, who rains them
down on the earth with the water; hence the growth of fresh vege-
tation when the rainy season commences (see Rashnu Yt. 17, Bd.
XXVIII, 2, XXIX, 5, Mkh. LXII, 37-42).


CHAPTER XC, 3-6, poy
ee ee ee
one is Gépatshah'; and one is Peshydtand 2, who is
called after the Kitravokd-miyAndé

4. The reign of Gépatshah is over the land of
Gépatd 4, coterminous with Airan- -vég*, on the bank
(bar) of the water of the Déitth*®: and he keeps
watch over the ox Hadhayas’, through whom occurs
the complete perfection of primitive man’. 5. The
reign of Peshyétanti is in Kangdez®, and he resides
in the illustrious Kangdez which the noble Stya-
vash * formed through his glory, Ze who is called
the erratic youth™ of the illustrious KayAnians.
6. And through his powerful spirit arose increase
of cultivation and the ruler Kai-Khtsréi® among
the highest of the mountains in the countries of


* Either a title or son of Aghrérad, brother of FrastyAv of Tar
(see Bd. XXIX, 5, XXXI, 20-22). He is a ee minotaur
according to Mkh. LXII, 31-36.

* Here written Patshaydtanf, but he is the Peshyorant of Chap.
XXXVII, 36.

* The Xatru-miyan river in Kangdez (see Bd. XX, 31).

* Which is a non-Aryan country according to Dk., but Bd.
(XXIX, 5) calls it ‘the land of the Saukavast4n,’ and Mkh. (&LIV,
24-35, LXII, 31) places Gépatshah in Atfran-vée.

Pee Ghapr XXL, (2;

° Av. Daitya, a river which flows out of Afran-vég (see Bd.
BX, £3):

7 See Chap. XXXVII, 99.

® Referring either to the complete peopling of the earth by emi-
gration on the back of this ox in ancient times, or to the immor-
tality produced at the resurrection by tasting an elixir, of which
the fat of this ox is one of the ingredients.

* A settlement east of Persia formed, or fortified, by Siyavash
(see Bd. XXIX, ro, Byt. III, 25).

40 See Chap. XXXVII, 36.

1 Or kang-f raftar may mean ‘jaunty youth;’ but it is evi-
dently an attempt to account for the name Kangdeg as ‘the fortress
of the kang (“youth”),

”® The son of Stydvash (see Chap. XXXVI, 3, Bd. XXXI, 25).


[18] Ss


A__A


258 DApISTAN-{f DINIK.


a a ee es


Iran and Ttran; the purity of the sacred fire’ of
great glory and the recital of the liturgy exist there,
and the practice of religious rites (din6) is provided. |
7. The custom, also, of him (Peshyétani) and “zs
companions and coadjutors (ham-b4r), in the ap-
pointed millenniums, is the great advancement of
religion and good works in other quarters likewise *.

8. But, secondly, as ¢o the whereabouts of the
places which are theirs—just like his—of which
there is no disquisition by me, this also is even
owing to my not remembering *.


nT


1 Literally ‘ fire of Varahran.’

2 He is expected to be summoned by the angels to restore the
religious rites to the world, after the conflict of the nations in
a future age (see Byt. III, 25-42).

8 In the detailed account of the contents of the Sfidkar (or
Stidgar) Nask, given in the ninth book of the Dinkard, the latter
part of its fifteenth fargard is said to have been ‘on the seven
immortal rulers who are produced in the region of Khvaniras, and
also about the determination of their glory, and the goodness, too,
of therr assistants and living sovereignty in both worlds. The
tree opposed to harm is on Airan-vég in the place of most exca-
vations (fréh-niganan?). Gdk-patd is in the non-Aryan countries,
Peshyétanii son of Vistasp is in Kangdez of the hundred-ribbed
shape (sad-dandak6 kerpih?), in which a myriad of the exalted,
who wear black marten fur (mfin styah samfir yakhsenund), are
righteous listeners out of the retinue of Peshydtanfi son of Vistasp.
Fradakhst6 son of the mortal Khfimbiks, who is sovereign on the
water of Naivtak. Ashavazd son of Pérfidakhsté, who is sovereign
over the most manifest among uplands, the plain of Pésinds.
Barazd the causer of strife. And of the father-in-law’s race
(khast-tOmagag?) of the famous Vistasp is Ae who is called
Kai-Khtisréi, who produces even an advance of thy religion of the
Mazda-worshippers, avd also understands about 7, and who gives
my good practices further blessings, so that the world maintains my
doings with benedictions. Perfect is the excellence of righteousness.’

In this list of the immortal rulers of ancient times, the names of
Barazd and Kai-Khfsrdt are substituted for those of Yést6 and


CHAPTER XC, 7—XCI, 4. 259


CHAPTER XCI,


1. As fo the ninetieth question axzd reply, that
which you ask is thus: From what is the sky made,
and with what is it prepared ?

2. The reply is this, that the sky is a dome
(gardtin), wide azd lofty; its inside and whole
width and boundaries (akhyakiha), besides its
material existence, are the stone of light, of all
stones the hardest! azd most beautiful; and the
grandeur of its spirit azd even z¢s internal bow? are
like those of mighty warriors arrayed. 3. And that
material of the sky reached unto the place where
promise-breaking words exist*, awd was without
need of preparation; as it is said of places such as
those— where wisdom is a witness about ¢Hem—that
that which is not even itself place, and its place does
not yet exist, is without need of any preparing‘.

4. The light is for existing things, and they
cherish a faculty (niytih) of motion also of two


YakhmAyfisad in our text. Barazd is the Ibairaz of Bd. XXIX, 6,
and, possibly, the Av. Berezyarsti of Fravardin Yt. ror.

1 The same notion as that indicated in Genesis by the word
‘ firmament.’

2 ‘The rainbow.

$ Probably meaning that the sky extends downwards, below the
horizon, as far as the second grade of hell, that for ‘evil words,’
Dis-hfkht (see Sls. VI, 3, note).

4 The word divak, ‘place’ (zivak in the Sasanian inscription
of Naqs-i Rustam, but traditionally pronounced ginak), seems to
be here taken in the etymological sense of zivak, that is, ‘a living-
place.’ The text refers to the period, in the beginning, when the
sky was indefinite space unprepared for the residence of creatures
and merely a region of light (see Bd. I, 2), the light mentioned in
§ 4. Its preparation is referred to in §§ 8, 9.

Ss 2


260 DADISTAN-1 DINIK.


kinds, ¢ha¢ causing motion and that of movables!;
as mobility is mentioned about thought? and immo-
bility about material things. 5. Immovables are
not moved, while movables are moved by their
power of movement; and those movables, that
way causing motion, are afterwards themselves a
moving secret cause of motion, and then a cause of
motion is not moving the movable, since z¢ is not
incapable of causing motion secretly by movement
of itself. 6. Just as the force (kfinisn6) of a move-
ment exists azd does not become a force; only then
it is declared by wisdom, that the causers of motion
have been the causing of motion by force before
movement, azd, being unmoved, they are subse-
quently made to move by the force; later on, the
causers of motion ave to cause motion, by their
power of causing motion, zz the non-causers of
motion, from which it is certain though the force of
a movement exists it does not become a force ; but,
finally, that whzck zs prepared with a source of acti-
vity °, before force, becomes unmoved.

7. Natures without need of the trouble of a pre-
parer are distinguished from such; where movement
occurs through every force, the championship of a
position (gdh) not made to move—except, indeed,
of that whose force, when it is unmoved by other
force, is its own—is unmoving and thirstless*. 8. /¢


* Mrq has ‘movables avd immovables’ instead of this clause.

* Perhaps we should read ‘the spirits,’ by inserting an addi-
tional medial stroke in the Pahlavi word.

* Reading tikhshintkih4, instead of the unintelligible tikh-
shtikiha. The author has so nearly lost sight of his argument
in the mazes of his verbiage that there is some uncertainty about
the translation of this paragraph.


* That is, the guardians of a place exposed to all attacks (as


we


CHAPTER XCI, 5—I0. 261


was restored immovably when ¢here was an approach
to the sky of that actual contender for the place, the
fiend, and the sky was shaken by him; for connected
with the sky were arranged so many possessors of
all resources, dignified (afrankid) by their own all-
powerful position and that well-operating, mighty,
undrawn bow}, righteous azd well-discoursing (ht-
fravakhsh), and many good spirits, gloriously co-
operating for the preparation of the sky. 9. For
that which was not even itself a place?, when 7¢ is
thus henceforth really a place, is 7% want of pre-
paring; azd, in the preparation of that visible ®
place, with the material of the sky is mingled that
triumphing, powerful spirit who made its existence
a seeking for principle avd seeking for intention,
drawing up from below azd drawing down from
above, so that through that seeking for principle it
becomes a concord, the resting-place of united cham-
pions, and unadmonishable through that power of
seeking for intention; such as this z¢ zs if, indeed,
tt be the will of him, the creator of all goodness.

1o. And it is said summarily that the sky was
shaken in the ferzod of disturbance and restored
with trouble; and, if the guardian spirits are in
freedom from disturbance through the glory of the
creator, when there is not even a place for it pre-
pared by themselves‘, and ¢hezy nature and own


the sky is supposed to be), unless it is a stronghold in itself, must
be always on the alert.

1 The rainbow; reading atang darfin.

2 That is, ‘a living-place’ (see § 3 n).

3 Reading didé, ‘seen ;’ but it may be st6 for sti, ‘ material.’

4 That is, while the sky was still indefinite space, the region of
light, but no dwelling-place; although the guardian spirits had


262 DADISTAN-? DINIK.


strength are approving the trouble of preparation, it
is not moved}, except by the creatures of Azs will,
a will which is subduing.


CHAPTER XCII.


1. As to the ninety-first question azd reply, that
which you ask is thus: Of waters and rivers, and
whatever water is good, is Arekdvistir? the greatest
(mas), or some other water or good river; and,
again, where is the place of Arekdvistr ?

2. The reply is this, that z¢ zs the water of Arek-
dvistir; and what has gushed from Arekdvistir is as
large a mass as all the water in the world ® except
the Arvand‘; within the wide-formed ocean ® 7¢ is
dominant over the thousand cascades (pashan) and
thousand lakes * of the waters, and its place is most
renowned throughout the spheres. 3. There flows
the water of Arekdvistr in a forest, the source of
all seeds, whereby the species which plants possess
are assimilated (aédtinagidd) by it, axd healing
existences of all kinds are mingled with z¢ from
medicinal plants. 4. The abundant power of the


been created as representatives of the creatures, both spiritual and
material, which were to be afterwards produced (see Bd. I, 8).


* That is, when afterwards prepared as a dwelling-place the sky
remains unmoved by evil beings.


? See Chap. XXXVII, 118.

* Compare Yas. LXIV, 12, Aban Yt. 3.

* A name of the river Tigris (see Zs. VI, 20).

° As this ocean is supposed to encircle the world, the whole
earth is within it.

* Compare Yas. LXIV, 7, Aban Vt. 4, IOI.


CHAPTER XCI, 1-6. 263


coming of healing to the purifying water is like
the nature of the existences which it acquires, and
then the nature which it thus acquires for its own
the water draws up by the power which is drawing
water to itself.

5. The water of Arekdvistr is on Albfirz’, and
flows even to the summit of the star station during
the coming of the healing of purification, even unto
Hakhir the lofty 2, all-gorgeous avd brilliant ; thence
2¢és flowing is effected * into the lake of a summit to
Albarz, Mount Ads,hindim 4, which is in the middle
of the wide-formed ocean. 6. And from that flowing
of waters that destined river, the utter destruction of
every night, comes on in the light of a dawn; by
the sprinkling of spray (pash-pashan®6) it extends
through the seven regions of the earth, and from it
arise the growth of their plants avd the coming of
the healing of purification; that which is called a
drop (srisk) of the primeval creatures beng a particle
(aham) of water of the bulk of a horse’®.


ee SS


1 The chain of mountains supposed to surround the world and
reach to heaven (see Chap. XX, 3, Bd. XII, 1, 3); owing to its
height any water from its summit must flow downwards to reach
the lowermost grade of heaven, called the star station.

2 Ay, Hukairya berezé, the Hfigar of Bd. XU, 5, RLV, 195
probably a western summit of the mythic Albfirz.

8 Mrq4 and J have nikdnf-afto, ‘is precipitated,’ instead of
kfinf-ait.

4 The Av. us Hindvad,‘up the Hindva,’ of Tistar Yt. 32, a
mountain summit where the clouds gather; it is the Afisind6m
mountain of Bd. XII, 6, XI, g, said to be of the ruby material of
the sky. In Bd. XIII, 4 the lake is said to be on the summit
of Hfigar.

5 Referring to the term asp6-kehrpa applied to waters in
Haftan Yt. 13, Tistar Yt. 8, 46.


264 DADISTAN-1 DINIK.


CuapTer XCITI.


1. As-éo the ninety-second question and reply,
that which you ask is thus: From what place should
Tistar’ seize the water? How does it pass into a -
cloud, and how does he make the cloud move on? ©
How does it rain upon the world? How can he
carry on a struggle with demons, and with which
demon can he carry z# on? How does this always
happen with the hail and snow, whenever hail and
snow occur? And who can force away that hail
and snow ?

2. The reply is this, that the high-priests have
thus said, that Tistar seizes a place which is called
‘abysmal’ (varfinak)?, that is the last place of filtra-
tion in the ocean, avd there are no removal of any
kind and causing rain from any other place. 3. And
the cause of its (the rain’s) establishment is Spirit-
ually active, more particularly, however, through
two kinds of material agency: one is that which is
the rule (mang) in the atmosphere of the earth,
whereby it is drawn up in atoms similarly to smoke,
and in larger masses, well-soaring from the rivers;
and one is that which blows with the power of the
well-operating wind, and the blowing of the great
united breath (ham-vaé) and strength of the com-


* The angel who is supposed to produce rain, being a personifi-
cation of the star Tistar or Sirius. His production of rain and
conflict with the demons of drought and thunder are detailed in
Bd. VII, 1-13.

* Assuming that the word is meant as a translation of Av.
vairya, a term which is applied to the depths or depressed basing
of the ocean in Yas, LXIV, 17,18, Aban Yt. tor, Zamyad Yt. 51.


CHAPTER XCIII, I—7. 265


munity (£andig4ndih) of spirits!, from the fully
perfect distillation (p dr-hd-ztthigih) of the mighty
ocean to the upper vegzonvs, and thereby the clouds
are blown.

4. Afterwards, it (the rain) speeds in the cloud,
through the great strength of the mighty wind, to
where ¢here is a necessity for zz, to divert z¢ from
where ¢here is no necessity ; and so long as ¢here isa
necessity for z¢ it (the cloud) discharges. 5. And
when here is a necessity and it causes rain, and the
necessity is for no more acquisitions of water, and
the advantage is the effect of water upon the place,
and it distributes z¢ to the existing rivers for the use
_of the sea, and it causes rain agazn, it thereby pro-
duces even new water, new flowing, new coming of
healing to plants, new growth, new golden colouring
to lands, new purification to animals, new procre-
ation, new proper breathings for other creatures,
new dawn, and new ¢hings of that description.
6. The thriving of the world makes the advantage
and perfection of the good creation increase ; and,
apart from a great craving for the effect of the glory
of the spirits in the operations of cultivation and the
performance of spiritual mysteries, z¢ is said labours
are aided even for ome gloriously destined.

7. And Tistar in seizing the water should seize
upon the great strength of the wind of whirlwinds
(gardinakan), which is figuratively (minisntk) the
dragging and blowing that follow the whirling; and
the purified water is expanded avd carried up aloft
to the higher vegdons of the atmosphere, just as that
ee ee

1 Altering mfnisnd, ‘thought, into ‘spirits’ by inserting an
extra medial stroke, as in Mz4 and J.


266 DADISTAN-{ DINiK.


which is seen where it reaches up with the heavi-
ness and weight of earth, and then is discerned in
the plain! accompanied by the dragging of the
whirling -wind whzch would carry 7 afar to settle
like chat which is owing to dust ; it (the atmosphere)
is called Andarvaé (‘the intermediate air’), and the
wind isa whirlwind. 8. As the water is lighter, and
owing to the more strongly dragging wind on the
ocean than that which exists on the plain, so, also,
the water from the ocean is much more in proportion,
and transportable farther up than the dust? from the
plain. 9. And as in the midst of a plain a medium
whirlwind of wind is expanded into the wide plain
by a medium dragging of the wind, and plenty of
much buffeting is the violence of the dragging of
winds, a whirlwind of wind which is seen very lofty
and large is unknown; so, also, ove is ignorant of
what is spreading among the movements of the sea.
10. The water of that full and abundant flowing—
which is through the power and glory of the heavenly
angels and Tistar’s control of the work—is blown
up, both by the well-characterised water-drawing
power, and also by the force of varzous kinds, the
dragging, and upward blowing of the winds, into the
atmosphere ; and thence it rains the complete rain,
as they ave recounted from observation and much
full evidence.

11. The demon who resists the dozngs of Tistar—
and the glorious Tistar, meeting him, properly
drives back such improper resistance of his—is


* Referring to the frequent small whirlwinds, sweeping up the
dust, which accompany every complete change of wind in dry
climates.


* K35 omits the first two letters of afra, ‘ dust,’ by mistake,


CHAPTER XCIlI, 8-14. 267


a demon of the name of Apddsh!, which is inter-
preted as ‘the destruction of water’ (4p-adsh).
12. He contends, moreover, with the uppermost
and lowermost water ; and desirous of z¢s destruction
that demon contends at three periods: first, for the
non-existence of rain; secondly, for converting z¢
into a cause of damage to a place; and thirdly, at
the place of producing z¢ with advantage; and the
struggling is like a tree (vané) which is set moving.

13. The seizers of the feminine? pure water are
a benefit for the existences of the whole world; and
the formation of rain, and the triumph and ascen-
dancy of Tistar over the demon, through that
seizing (falanih) of water, are due to the creator
who strengthens him’, the archangels who have
him assisted+, the religious who reverence him,
and the worldly beings who glorify him. 14. Very
properly do the archangels propitiate 42m, and man-
kind promote the strength and power, which are
engaged about the business, by glorifying avd in-
voking the good spirit who increases them in conse-
quence of glorifying azd worship, avd through which


1 Ay. Apaosha, the demon of drought, who, in the form of a
black horse, is said in the Tistar Yast to fight with Tistar in the
ocean. Here his name is written Apahésh, but see Bd. VII, 8-12.

2 Reading madagtk. According to Bd. XVI, 6 the sky, metal,
wind, and fire are always male, while water, earth, plants, and fish
are always female, and all other creations.are of both sexes. Water
and earth are also personified as female angels.

® In his first encounter with Apadsh, Tistar is vanquished, and
attributes his defeat to his not being invoked by name in the cere-
monies, whereupon Afthaymazd invokes him by name so as to give
him enormous strength, when he returns to the conflict and con-
quers the demon (see Tistar Yt. 20-28, Bd. VII, 8-10).

4 Reading atyy4rinénd, as in Mr4 and J; in K35 it is written
like Ayénd rivénd, ‘they come and liberate.’


268 DADISTAN-f DINIK.


arises that advantageousness! of his—which owing
to that benefit is the benefit of every one else—for
this advantageous business.

15. And Tistar shall gradually (padmanikihé)
seize upon the water to distribute z¢ liberally, assidu-
ously a similitude of that which a learned ruler said,
in extolling a wise high-priest, that, ‘just as the
wind draws the up-flying water from rivers and
springs: avd from seas, Tistar, through his own
liberality, bestows the prepared apportionments of
the whole production for the advantage of the
creatures dy the will of the sacred beings, and makes
zt rain. 16, And through that which he shall pur-
posely seize to distribute suitably he distributes the
water purified, he moistens the pleasant existences
of animals avd plants and spares? the polluted, he
provides for the thirsty, he causes harm to the
dye-like bloody one, and he makes the world thrive..
17. When that wide-spvead liberality of his, the
production of rain, is from the pure, healing water
which he shall thus seize gradually and with just
apportionment, azd when through that acquiring of
water-seizings the rivers, springs, amd other existences
(shavandagan) are well-expanding, and even the
diminution which is owing to the wasting (atrikh-
tagih) of rivers and springs does not occur thereby,
zt zs thus, too, the lordly, by a law (dad 5) moderate
and varied—if the regulation (gin) is to reach away
from the region—are as much contributing, as


Se ee eee


* Reading s&dakih instead of ? yiidakth, ‘which is unity.’
Mrq has nadfikth, ‘ benefit,’

* Or ‘forgives’ (bakhshéd3).

* Mr4 and J have ‘he causes the thirsty to drink,’


CHAPTER XCIII, 15—XCIV, I. 269


Tistar is by causing rain for the region and the
good, to the aggrandizement of the many grades?
and the replenishment of the region and creatures ?.’


CHAPTER XCIYV.


1. And? those of the primitive faith, the ancients
of those acquainted with the religion’, thus con-
sidered, that in the spirit of life (ahv6)® there is


1 Or ‘to the great aggrandizement of the grades.’

2 Reading dam, as in Mr4 and J, instead of gadman, ‘glory.’
The chapter appears to break off here, without any reference to
the queries about hail and snow; but it is uncertain if any portion
of the work be here omitted (owing to loss of folios in some older
MS.) because the author does not always reply to all clauses of the
questions, as may be noticed in Chap. XXXVII. One reason,
however, for supposing that some of the text is here lost is the
allusion, in Chaps. XVII, 20, XVIII, 2, to a chapter no longer
extant in Dd.

8 The first eleven sections of this chapter are quoted from the
beginning of the sixth book of the Dinkard, which commences as
follows :—‘ The propitiation of the creator Aflharmazd is even in
the benedictions of the religion of Mazda-worship; this, too, was
the settled decision of those of the primitive faith. The sixth dook
is on a compendium (vasang) which was prepared by those of the
primitive faith to maintain about the sayings of the religion of
Mazgda-worship ;’ and then proceeds as in our text, with the varia-
tions and additional matter mentioned in the foot-notes. It is
hardly probable that these quotations were intended as a conclusion
to any reply, the beginning of which may be lost, as they refer to a
variety of subjects; but they may have been selected by the author
as authoritative opinions sufficiently comprehensive for his general
peroration. At any rate they show that the Dinkard must have
been in existence in its present form before the Dadistén-i Dinik
was written. All the MSS. have this peroration written con-
tinuously with the preceding chapter, without stop or break of any
kind to indicate a change of subject.

4 Dk. has ‘the ancients of the wise.’ 5 Dk, adds ‘ of men.’


270 DApISTAN-f DiNfK.


a thought and one appointed who’ holds the posi-
tion (gAs), aud there is a fiend who stops? the way ;
and in the thought there is a word appointed which
holds the position, azd there is a fiend who stops
the way®. 2. In the sfzrit of life* is a thought and
Spendaymad® (‘bountiful devotion’) holds the posi-
tion, avd the fiend Tarémat® (‘scornful thought’) stops
the way; in the thought is a word azd Ard’ (‘the
righteous’) holds the position, and Varené ® (‘lust’)
stops the way; in the word is a deed azd Diné ® (‘re-
ligion’), the good, holds the position, and self-conceit


? Dk. has ‘ which is appointed and,’ &c.

2 Literally ‘holds.’

° It is evident from the context that something is omitted here,
and Dk. supplies the following:—‘and in the word there is a
deed for the appointed position, avd there is a fiend who stops the
way. And in the sprit of life is a heart (valém) avd Vohtiman
(“good thought”) holds the position, and Akémané (“evil thought ””)
stops the way; and in the heart is a will avd Srésh (“attention”)
holds the position, and Aeshm (“wrath”) stops the way.’ It seems
probable that the author did not mean to quote the latter sentence
of this passage.

* Dk. has‘ and in the will.’

5 The female archangel, who is a personification of Av. spezta
armaiti, and has special charge of the earth and virtuous women
(see Bd. I, 26, Sls. XV, 20-24).

° Here written Tardkmaté (Av. tarémaiti); he is the arch-
demon of disobedience, also called Nafinghas (see Bd. XXVIII, 14,
XXX, 29).

" Av. areta, a title of the female angel Arshisang or Ashisang
(Av. ashis vanguhi, ‘good rectitude’), whose name is given to the
25th day of the Parsi month (see Bd. XXII, 4, XXVII, 24, Sls.
XXII, 25, XXIII, 4).


* Av. varena, ‘desire,’ personified as a demon (see Bd,
XXVIII, 25).

® Av. daéna personified as an angel whose name is given to
the tenth month and 24th day of the month of the Parsi year, and
is also coupled with the names of other angels to form appellations


CHAPTER XCIV, 2—5. 271


(khid-déshagih) stops the way. 3. We men of all
descriptions! have to become very®* cautious that,
while we do not desist from that way *, we do not
go on to the way of the demons ad fiends*.
4. For the struggling of men® is zz these three ®
ways and paths; azd whoever is saved in these
three ® ways and paths is saved from every place,
and whoever is misled there comes into the hands
of the demons azd fiends’, and is thenceforth not
master (salitd) of himself, except when he shall
do that which the fiends order him *.

5. And this, too, was thus considered by them,
that that nature only is good when it® shall not
do unto another whatever is not good for its own
self?°; and that wisdom only is good when it
thoroughly™ understands ow to utilize the advan-
tage? of that happiness which has occurred, and
shall #8 not suffer vexation oz account of harm which
has not occurred; and that intellect only is good which


for the 8th, rsth, and 23rd days (see Bd. XXV, 3, 11, 20, Sls.
XXII, 8, 15, 23, 24, XXIII, 4). Dk. omits the epithet ‘good.’

1 Dk. omits the words ‘of all descriptions ;’ it also places § 3
after § 4.

2 Dk. omits ‘very.’ 8 Dk. has ‘from the way of the angels.’

4 Dk. has ‘go after the fiends.’

5 Dk. has ‘and the struggling of the fiend with men,’ and places
this section after § 2.

6 Dk. has ‘such’ instead of ‘three’ in both places.

7 Dk. has ‘comes then to the hands of the fiends.’

® Dk. then proceeds with § 3, ‘and we men have to become
cautious, &c.

® Dk. has ‘which,’ instead of ‘when it,’ both here and in the
next clause.

10 Dk. has ‘ for itself,’ 11 Dk. omits ‘thoroughly.’

12 Literally ‘to eat the fruit,’ 18 Dk. has ‘does.’


272 DApISTAN-{ pDinikK.


understands that it does not understand that which
it does not understand.

6. And this, too, was thus considered by them,
that ove is to become! a friend of every one, and
this is thy nature?; also, bring them on into®
goodness, and this is thy wisdom; also, consider
them as thine own, and this is thy religion; also,
through them it shall produce‘ happiness, and this
is thy soul ®.

7. And this, too, was thus considered by them,
that, when ® ove shall do even that which he knows
to be sin’, that is disobedience, azd disobedience
is the nature of the adversary; when oze shall not
do even that which he knows to be a good work,
that is cupidity (varendikih), axd cupidity is the
wisdom of the adversary ®; azd when one shall do®
even that which he does not know Zo Je a good
work or a sin, until it comes fully to 47s knowledge,


* Dk. has ‘it is the becoming,’ 2 Dk. has ‘ wisdom?’

* Or ‘through.’ Dk. omits this clause, substituting ‘ and this, too,
was thus considered by them,’

* Dk. has ‘do thou produce.’

° Dk. continues as follows :—‘ And this, too, was thus considered
by them, that nature is that which deceives no one, wisdom is that
which does not deceive itself, and religion is that which is whatever
knows where ove should perform good works.’

° Reading amat, instead of miin, ‘which, in all three clauses
(see Chap. LXII, 4n); Dk. omits the word altogether.

” Dk. has ‘shall not do even that which he knows to be a good
work,’ as in the second clause which it omits.

* This clause is omitted by Mr4, J, BK, and the oldest MS. of
Dk. ; later MSS. of Dk. give it as follows: ‘should they do even


that they know to be a sin, that is lustful (varendétk), and lustful
is the wisdom of the adversary.’
® Dk. has ‘ does,’


*° Dk. has ‘before it comes unto,’


CHAPTER XCIV, 6-8. 273


that is self-conceit, and self-conceit is the religion of
the adversary}.

8. And this, too, was thus considered by them,
that Aharman? would do everything for the injury
of Adharmazd, du¢ when it is done by him® 7 is
then an injury of him himself, azd an advantage of
Atharmazd; and Adhaymazd would do everything
for his own advantage, azd when it is done by him
zt is then, indeed‘, an advantage of him himself, du¢
an injury of Aharman®.


* In Dk. the following is here inserted:—‘ And this, too, was
thus considered by them, that in ome’s nature there is no wisdom,
but in wisdom /here is nature, and in religion are both wisdom and
nature. It is known ow to manage the affairs of the spirit by the
nature, they are preserved by wisdom, and the soul is preserved by
aunion of both. And this, too, was thus considered by them, that
shame is that which should not allow ove to commit sin, and dis-
grace is that it would not allow to cause. And this, too, was thus
considered by them, that the essential thing of the primitive faith is
freedom from sin. And this, too, was thus considered by them,
that one becomes diligent about that wth which he is conversant.
And this, too, was thus considered by them, that the good thoughts
that are in the records of the religion of every kind one should
always put fully into practice, so far as he understands ¢hem. And
this, too, zas thus considered by them, that Aflharmazd, the lord,
produced these creatures through /zs nature, maintains ¢hem through
wisdom, and forces them back to himself through religion.’

2 The evil spirit (see Chaps. II, 11, XIX, 1).

8 Or ‘when he has done it,’ which would be expressed by the
same words.

4 Dk. omits ‘indeed’

® In Dk. the following is here inserted :—‘ And this, too, was
thus considered by them, that people are to keep an eye most
diligently on the world for these three things: that which is realis-
able dy a sinner through sin, a follower made famous, and to beg
the recompense of good works from the spirits: and keeping their
eye on the world is said /o e this, that 2/ 7s Ae who observes himself,
so that a part of whatever he really desires he should always per-
form. And this, too, was thus considered by them, that three


[18] i"


274 pApISTAN-? DINIK.


9. And this, too, was thus considered by them,
that a person of whatever description is to be kept?
in remembrance of the affairs of the spirit at every
period and time, and of the happiness of heaven and
misery of hell at that period when comfort, happi-
ness, and pleasure have come to him.

10. And this, too, was thus considered by them ’,
that happiness, indeed, would be there, in the
heaven of light*, when even here z¢ is so happy,
though, owing to many ¢hkugs*, Aharman—with
whom the happiness there is not connected—is
even here so happy at the time when distress,
vexation, and misery have come hereto; azd this,
too, was thus considered, that evils, indeed, would
be there, in hell, when here is such misery, though
even here much of the earthly happiness of Athar-


things which are very difficult to do are even such as these: one is
not to render the sinfulness famous by the sin; one is not to exalt
the opinions of the fiend, and the various sovereignties of the evil
one, for the sake of wealth; and one is to beg the recompense of
good works from the spirits, avd not from the world.’

* Dk. has merely ‘ keeps.’

* Dk. has ‘ this, too, is to be considered,’ as a continuation of the
preceding section.

° Dk. omits ‘ of light.’

* The oldest MS. of Dk. has ‘ though some of the much happiness
of Atharmazd, &c., as in the latter part of the section, omitting the
passage referring to Aharman and hell; later MSS., however, insert
a modified version of the omitted passage, and read as follows:
‘When even here 7f is so happy at the period when it should be
distressing and the mischievous vexation of much pain has come;
this, too, is to be considered, that misery, indeed, is the calamity
(afato) there, in hell, when even here 7 isso, though some of the
much happiness of Aflharmazd,’ &c., as before. This interpolation
in Dk. is evidently modern (as the word 4fatd is Arabic and not
Pahlavi), and was probably composed by a copyist in India who
was acquainted with the text of Dk.


#


CHAPTER XCIV, 9-13. 275


maz@d—with whom the misery there is not con-
nected—is here so evil.

11. And this, too, was thus considered by them,
that that person is the more fortunate!, in whom
are soundness of body, happiness, and energy
(rayinisnd)?; who has done those things about
which the last wish of him who departs from the
world is then thus: ‘I wd/ strive to do more;’ and
who shall have exercised much complete abstinence
from those things aéou¢ which his last wish, when
he departs from the world, is then such as ‘I wil/
strive to do less, and it would have occurred more
comfortably for my soul 4’

12. Do you good people of those of the good
religion of these countries of Iran keep in use the
laws appointed dy those of the primitive faith who
were high-priests, so that your bodies may become
more renowned, azd your souls more perfect, in
the radiant supreme heaven which‘ is the seat of
Atthaymazd and the archangels, of the angels and
all the guardian spirits of the righteous. 13. So these
are so many answers of the questions provided, and
are given explanatorily from the exposition of the
religion azd the statements of the high-priests of


1 Dk. has ‘that a person is most fortunate in that.’

2 Mr4 and J have ‘are the appearance of health of body and
pleasure ;’ Dk. has ‘is the appearance of perfection.’

8 Dk. concludes as follows: ‘who has done those things which
are done, about which on his last day—when the things of the
world depart—his wish is then thus, that ‘more endeavour should
be made by me;’ and has exercised much abstinence from those
things aout which his last day’s wish is this, that the endeavour made
should not be made.’ The quotations from Dk. end at this point.

4 Reading mfin, as in Mr4 and J, instead of amat, ‘ when,’ (see
Chap. LXII, 4 n.)


276 -pApISTAN-? DINIK.

Eo ee ee
those of the primitive faith, and ave the nature of
the teachings shat Mantiskihar, son of Yddan-Yim’,
pontiff (rad6) of Pars and Kirman?, and director
(farmad4r) * of the profession of priests, ordered to
write.

14. Steadfast in the propitiation and praise of the
creator Athaymazd is the righteousness of obtain-
ments of prayers, perfect is Zaratist, awd one only
is the way * which righteousness obtains, the others
are no ways; homage to the exalted pontiff sez¢ from
the creator Atthaymazd, the heavenly, most righteous
Zarattist the Spitaman.

15. Completed in peace and pleasure, joy and
delight; happy for him who reads, azd happier for
him who keeps z¢ in use and shall take his duty
therefrom 5, if they exist unto time eternal.


* See p. 3, note 2.

? The two southern provinces of Persia, bordering on the
Persian Gulf.

* This title seems to be always spelt in Pahlavi with 4 in the middle
syllable, so that the form framapuar in Ndéldeke’s Geschichte
der Perser und Araber zur Zeit der Sasaniden, p. 9, must be looked
upon as an Arabic corruption, and the idea that it means ‘a pre-
ceder or one who has precedence’ can hardly be maintained.
It probably stands for farmatdar, ‘a director or commander, not
in a military sense. It occurs also in Bd. XXXIII, 2, where the
title ‘great farmadar’ is evidently equivalent to ‘prime minister,
or grand vazfr,’ but applied to a priest, as farm4dar is here and
in Chap. XLV, 5.

* Reading ras, as in Mrq, instead of ra, which is merely an
imperfect word. This clause of the sentence is a slight modifica-
tion of a well-known quotation (said to be taken from the lost part
of the Had6kht Nask) which is often used in perorations.

* Or ‘who keeps to duty and shall do his duty thereby.’


Milos iE S


OF


MANUSKIHAR.


1 TO THE GOOD PEOPLE OF SIRKAN.
il. TO HIS BROTHER, ZAD-SPARAM.


tll. TO ALL OF THE GOOD RELIGION IN IRAN.


A.D. $81.


OBSERVATIONS.


1. For all divisions into chapters and sections the translator is
responsible, as the manuscripts are written continuously, with very
few stops marked, and even those are often misplaced.

2-6. (The same as on page 2.)

7. The manuscripts mentioned are :—

BK, an old imperfect copy of K35 written in Kirm4n, but now
in Bombay.

J (about 60 years old), belonging to Dastfr Jamaspji Minochi-
harji in Bombay.

K35 (probably written a.p. 1572), No. 35 in the University
Library at Kopenhagen; upon the text of which this translation
is based.

Mro (about 150 years old), a Persian Rivayat, No. ro of the
Haug Collection in the State Library at Munich.


-EPISTLES OF MANUSKIHAR.


BPIS? EL. 1:


TO THE GOOD PEOPLE OF siIRKAN,


Turoucu the name and assistance of the creator
Attharvmazd and the whole of the sacred beings,
all the angels of the spiritual avd the angels of the
worldly exzstences. :

A copy of the epistle of the priest Mantséihar },
son of Yidan-Yim, which was composed by him for
the good people of Sirkan*, on the contents of the
precepts (vigir-kavd6) which the priest Zad-
sparam *, son of Yidan-Yim, prepared.


CHAPTER I.


1. In the name of the sacred beings, who sent
you a soul with long life, with provision for proper
' progress, avd with the protection of increase of
righteousness and wisdom, may such works and
Wee nee eee

1 The high-priest of Pars and Kirmén (see the heading to Dd.,
p: 3):

2 Written Sirkan once, Sirkand twice, and Sirg4nd four times,
in these epistles. It was a town of considerable importance in
former times (see Ouseley’s Oriental Geography, pp. 138-145),
about thirty parasangs south of Kirman.

3 He was high-priest of Sirkan and brother of Manfsfihar (as
expressly stated in the heading to Ep. II), both being sons of the
same father.


280 EPISTLES OF MANUSK{HAR.


mysterious dignity, encompassed with! happiness,
now possess increasing prosperity and a complete
share of pre-eminent welfare and great exaltation in
both worlds.

2. The epistle* which was wisely, properly, and’
with religious demeanour ordered by you, and sent
by a courier (paikS), das come, and has enveloped
and assailed (gast5) me, indeed, with appalling
intelligence on other subjects; and if even a por-
tion* of the vast importance and great value, as
regards your heavenly concerns, arrangements, and
natural azd unpremeditated (avarik) prodigies 4,
which are for my knowledge, for the sake of
courteous (drfidik) information, é¢ owing to in-
telligence for which the courteousness and proper
courageousness are among you, special pleasure is
received therewith. 3. And praise is, thereupon,
recited by me to the sacred beings, as regards the
conflicting affairs even of this disordered (gimé
zisnik6) existence; worldly possessions, as much as
are suitable for the assistance of wisdom, are proper,
and the gift of virtuous pleasure is the gain of the
undeserving good work or prayer they (the sacred
beings) shall accept; it causes aggrandizement and
is as deserving as even that which the decision of


* Or, ‘sent down in,’ according as we read parvasté or fréstd,

* An epistle complaining of certain heretical teachings of their
high-priest, ZAd-sparam, which is no longer extant.

* Reading va hat vAhar-i£.

* The epistle which he had received from his brother, ZAd-
sparam, some time before, seems also to have mentioned. certain
omens (see Ep. II,i, 3).

* J omits shayeds, ‘are Proper,’ because it follows the other
shayed, ‘are suitable;’ but it is not always safe to assume that the
repetition of a word is a blunder,


EPISTLE I, CHAPTER I, 2-5. 281


the wise has said about 2z¢, that even from the
management of disordered possessions which are
impaired ¢here is advantage through the power of
wisdom; azd they (the sacred beings) select and
cleanse and uplift the good works zz such manner
as a precious stone (sag khél) from the water, and
gold brocade! from the dust.

4. My pleasure, also, is as much increased through
the information due to the same courtesy, and [
have a new and great desire for the arrival of
information, continuously from henceforth, about
the perfect courageousness, enduring humility, good
works, worshipping, favouring position, and eager-
ness of soul of you who ave recounted your great
thoughtfulness for religion ad have provided good
works.

s. On account of the universal renown (aspdéha-
rakAnih) of the good feople of Khvaniras?, which
is yours, owing to the favour that is your complete
happiness, ardently ad joyfully most desired, and
constantly so, when there are opportunities of seeing
you—though it is supposed éo de the advantage of
your own religion, joy of soul, courteousness, and
proper constancy—since my will veszdes among you,
you make known aud command my actions, through
the will of the sacred beings.
is ti

1 Reading dipaké-f zahaba.

2 The central region of the earth, containing all the lands best
known to the Iranians (see Dd. XC, 3).


282 EPISTLES OF MANUSKIHAR.


Cuapter II.


1. Then comes that itself! which is dictated zz
the middle of your epistle, azd, thereupon, it lays
hold of me, and, owing to its hellish gloom, pallid
appearance, and hellish effect, benediction is per-
plexedly dispensed by me in terror for my heart and
mind; I fave, also, grievously repented, as regards
my own former arrangements in my warfare of
violence—which were undeceptive in the balance
pertaining to Rashni?—of any real falsity of the
co-existent oze® I may have produced.

2. Lesponsible for the malice axd annoyance of
unjust kinds which are encountering ws is the fiend
of great strength, who is unobserving, seductive,
astute in evil, eager for causing annihilation (gastd-
ktin-varen), and full of deceit, so that z¢ is possible
for him to render doubtful, whex so deceived, even
him who is most a listener to essential righteous-
ness, most desirous of steadfast truth, most perform-
ing proper religious customs, most acquainted with
good ideas, most amazingly careful of As soul, most
approved in the most wounding hell-brought conflict,
and most at home (khAnagiktfm) in truth of all
kinds, avd to show him a semblance of reality in
unreality, azd of unreality in reality. 3. Just as
even that similitude which is mentioned in revela-
tion thus: ‘ He intends righteousness and considers |
Se Eee

* J has ‘the writing.’

? See Dd. XIV, 4.


* The evil spirit who is supposed to be, for a time, co-existent
with the beneficent spirit of Adharmazd.


EPISTLE I, CHAPTER II, I—5. 283


about it thus: “A good work is done by me,” and
he acquires fiendishness—that is, it becomes a
source of sin for him—who shall bring forth water
without holy-water to ome contaminated by dead
matter (nas-hémand), or who shall bring z¢ forth
without holy-water on a concealed oy dark place in
the night’’

4. And about this I Zave no doubt, that the wish
of that spirit is not coincident with righteousness,
for it is realised, understood, azd known that, as
regards his own creatures, he is not careful for the
proper movement of body and for the long living
of life; so that the furtherance avd continuance of
these, which are his original resources of body and
activities (khapdr4n6) of life, become, for him who
is among them (the fiend’s creatures), an increase
of the propitiation of the sacred beings, of the
practice of religion, and of the advancement and
benediction of the teachings of just high-priests ?.
5. /¢ is also manifest from the constantly-operating
arrangement of manuscripts and synodical state-
ments, about which Afarg? wrote without falsifying
the religion avd apart from controversies; because
among them (the fiend’s creatures) is “e who has
said they are like unto that which is now written


rt


1 Quoted from Pahl. Vend. VII, 194-196, with some slight varia-
tions from the existing text. The meaning is that it is quite
possible to commit sin by doing a good action in an improper
manner.

2 That is, even the wicked, when they seek welfare, have to take
to religious practices.

8 A commentator whose opinions are frequently quoted in the
Pahlavi translations of the Avesta (see Sls. I, 3). J has ‘about
which the splendour (afrand) of the religion is without falsehood.’


284 EPISTLES OF MANUOSKIHAR.


by him himself about it, and it has arranged much
deliverance from sin}.

6. Of this, too, I am aware, that, except there
where a purifier is in no way reached, his great
duty—which is just the purification zz which there
is a washer who is cleansed (masid6) in the reli-
gious mode for the profession of the priesthood—
is then a means which the high-priests should
allow, 7. A washing which is not religiously
ritualistic is ranked as an operation among the
useless ones; zt 7s vicious and grievously criminal,
because the special means which, by preserving the
soul *, is the perfect happiness of men, is the puri-


* That is, any one who explains the scriptures in a new fashion
to suit his own purposes, which he thereby represents as beneficial,
is merely carrying out the wishes of the fiend. The author is here,
referring to the heretical teachings of his brother, regarding purifi-
cation, which are further described in the sequel.

* That is, whenever a properly-qualified purifier is procurable,
the priests should require him to purify any one who happens to be
defiled by contact with dead matter by means of the Bareshnam
ceremony (see App. IV). It appears from the sequel, and from
Eps. II and III, that the heresy of Zad-sparam consisted chiefly of
a misinterpretation of Vend. VIII, 278-299 (see App. V), which
passage directs that a man in the fields, who has touched a corpse
not yet eaten by dogs or birds, shall wash himself fifteen times with
bull’s urine, that he shall then run to some village, asking three
different men on the way to cleanse him with the proper ceremony,
and if they decline they each take upon themselves a share of the
sin; when arrived at the village he shall ask a fourth time to bé
cleansed, and if no one will perform the ceremony he must wash
himself with bull’s urine and water in the ordinary manner, and
shall be clean. The erroneous teaching of Zad-sparam was that
the fifteen times’ washing was sufficient, without the subsequent
ceremonial cleansing ; and the object of these epistles was to com-
bat that view of the law.


* The ceremonial purification ig Supposed to cleanse the soul,


EPISTLE I, CHAPTER Il, 6-12. 285


fication of men. 8. /¢ is said!: ‘The purification
of men cleansingly is a something (aftS) for the
soul that should be after perfect birth; when they
have been fully born the purification of others is the
one thing which is good for the soul,’

9. And it is shown zz another place that it is
possible to obtain possession of purification also for
the soul through purification of the body, even as
it is said that a purifier is requested by him.
1o. And it is necessary for him to speak thus: ‘I
have thus stood close by the body of him who is
dead; I am no wisher for z¢ by thought, I am no
wisher for zt by word, I am no wisher for zt by
deed; which is the reason—that is, on account of
pollution—it is not possible to seek good works by
thought, word, or deed, avd it demands purification
for me, that is, wash me thoroughly?!’ 11. As it
is thereby declared that when he whose body is not
purified, until they thoroughly wash him, is not able
to seek good works by thought, word, ov deed, and
is not able to purify his soul, it is then a matter for
the truly wise ¢o seek even for purification of the
soul by the purification of the body, for whose
religious purification are those ¢hzmgs which are
unsubdued (asikand) in the religious ritual.

12. When these are thus the statements of former
upholders of the religion and high-priests of the
religion, he who is more intelligent ad more active


whereas ordinary washing cleanses the body only, and is spiritually
useless.

1 In Pahl. Vend. V, 65, X, 35, being a translation of a quotation
from the Gathas or sacred hymns (Yas. XLVII, 5, c)-

2 Quoted, with some variation, from Pahl. Vend, VUI, 283, 284
(see App. V).


286 EPISTLES OF MANUSKIHAR.


in the religion of the Mazda-worshippers in every
house, village, tribe, and province—and, very much
more the man who is righteous, of fluent speech,
speaking’ the truth, who as chanted the sacred
hymns, acquainted with the ritual, trained for the
work, of renowned disposition, and a friend of the
soul—is competent for the purification which 7¢ is
very important to prepare, to think of, and to
promote. .

13. When the period is so unworthy, the fiend
so abundantly contentious, and the hasty preparer
of holy-water of such base origin (dtis-vékh)!—
which Aappens, moreover, when the good are equally
low-minded (ham-bdst6-minisnd)—we strive for
what encourages the preparation of that even which
is a collectively virtuous profession. 14. Then, too,
there remains such rising in strength of many new
things from very many countries, which is particu-
larly grievous distress and danger to us; they
deliver tokens of them to us applaudingly, axd the
expansibility of the words of the delivering diffuser
of these and also other religious customs, as the
sacred beings’ own persistency and complete glory,
is a great and powerful capability.


Cuarter III.


1. This, too, I am begging of you, that you may
be desiring the truth, and ¢ha¢ Vohtman 2, who,


1 This seems to be an allusion to the unworthiness of some of
the priests of the period (compare Ep. 1h 1354a aa,
* The archangel personifying ‘good thought’ (see Dd, III, 13).


EPISTLE I, CHAPTER II, I3—III, 6. 287


when a ruler (shah) of yours, is an interpreter
(pa£0k8) about the writing which! I write, may as
regardfully azd accommodatingly observe and direct
as the variety of dispositions permits. 2. For you
are of like opinion with me, to inform again the
most initiated?; so that I am more steadfastly-
determined (afistikand-minisntar) thereon. 3. And
if there be anything that seems to you otherwise,
direct some one to point z¢ out again, with the reason
for maintaining z¢ which occurs to you, just as a
household companion is a responder azd has spoken
again for the sake of pointing out again; for there
are many reasons, on account of which your kindly-
regardful observation is needful, which are to be
written about.

4. The first is this, that the penmanship of the
spirits is not the profession of me and others*; and
as to him by whom a theory (farhang) not univer-
sally operating is disseminated, which is dzstenct
from his more indispensable occupation, ¢here is
then no command for his teaching and apostleship
therein. 5. On that account, too, the wise azd the
seekers for truth uphold the body of opinion about
the statements of the writing of the spirits *, and,
therefore, direct less of the ingenuity of preparing
again the penmanship of various tidings.

6. The second is this, that, in the distress
(dahyakd) of this grievous time, he to whom


1 Reading i instead of va, ‘and.’

2 That is, to severely admonish their high-priest, as he does in
Ep, IT:

3 That is, he disclaims all pretensions to inspiration on the part
of himself and his contemporaries.

* The inspired scriptures.


288 EPISTLES OF MANOSKIHAR.


adherence and much indebtedness even as to his
forefathers have remained, is well-lamenting, owing
to the proposals (dAdan6) of the unfriendly, and
much harm has occurred through the conflicting
(ardikS) offer of remedies azd lawful provision of
means, full of trouble, except, indeed, to the up-
holder of religion who is more worldly-managing ;
and investigation by opponents is grievous danger,
full of things inopportune azd unnecessary for
accomplishment}.

7. The third is this, that a wise max who is
a high-priest of the spirit-retaining? religion and
acquainted with opinions, when also himself pro-
perly humble, fearless, and benedictive in the world,
is then even, owing to his estimating? pardonings
and long-continued dexterity (dér zivakakih),
united with the good creations in affliction and
vexation. 8. And, on account of information about
the worldly azd spiritual misery of former evils
of many kinds—always as much in the religion,
and in the thoughts of others4, as ome delivers up
his heart to ingenious verbiage and for the prepara-
tion of phrases—he speaks as in the question 2
revelation, thus®: ‘“Who in the bodily existence


* Referring to the risk of unfriendly and destructive criticism of
the scriptures.

* J has ‘spirit-observing,’ by changing girisnd into nigtrisnd.

* Reading andasth; the reference being to the sympathy ac-
quired by a high-priest through performing his duty of appointing
atonements for sins confessed to him.

* Assuming that aisand stands for atsAnd.

® J has only ‘as one speaks out his heart for ingenious verbiage


and phrases, thus.’ The question and reply here quoted seem to
be no longer extant in the Avesta,


EPISTLE I, CHAPTER III, 7—I0. 289


is more quickly fortunate ?” azd it is answered thus:
“The youth.who is observant avd humble, O Zara-
tast! who, as regards both that which has happened
and that whzch happens, also sees that which is evil
and good with gratitude, just like that also which
happens unto another ;”’ because he knows this, that
from this is a benefit, for he knows happiness and
also misery’. 9. The glorified leader of those of
the good religion, Hér-Frévag?, son of Farukht-
zad, wrote: ‘It is he understands the consequence
of his own action; and z¢ is his great household
attendant, and the worldly desire provided at the
Kinvad bridge* becomes less watchful.’

10. The fourth is this, that I az more universally
hoping about the property of the profession azd the
much duty fit for the truly wise, zz such manner
as even that zz which the glorified and ‘greatly-
learned leader of those of the good religion, Yadan-
Yim 4, son of Shahpthar, always urged on a priestly
man with many sons avd equally clever ® discourse.


1 Tt is doubtful whether this last clause be a portion of the quota-
tion, or not.

2 This name is corrupted into Hé-Férvag in the MSS., but Atar-
Frébag is probably intended. He was the compiler of a great part
of the Dinkard, and is also mentioned in Dd. LXXXVIII, 8. The
names Ati and Hér are synonymous, both meaning ‘fire.’ The
passage quoted in the text has the same form (beginning with the
word h6mand, ‘it is’) as nearly all the sections of the third book
of the Dinkard, but it has not yet been discovered among them.

3 Here written Kis-vidarg (see Dd. XX, 3).

* So written in J, but K35 and BK have the syllable dan some-
what corrupted. The person meant, both here and in Chap. VII, 5,
was probably the author’s father, though Bd. XXXIII, 11 seems to
make Yfidan-Yim the son of Vahram-shad.

5 Reading ham-g6ké, but J has ham-dfidak6, ‘of the same
family ;’ it also omits several other words by mistake.


[18]


290 EPISTLES OF MANOSKIHAR.


11, That was through my instigation, alone and
with little assistance, in the beginning; and, on
account of the deficiency of warriors !, the abundance
of opporients, the very rapid arrival of disturbance,
and the fourfold supplication for keeping away the
ruin ov hasty unlawful maintenance of the fires of
the Mazda-worshippers, my constant distress is such
that most of my time speaks of the same subject *.
12, They may leave the abundance of despondency
and thoughtfulness of the bodily existence to such
remedial writing of his, unto whom the pleasantly
comfortable thought of an evaded (virikht6) seizure
is requisite, but ¢here is little worldly leisure for me
for writing more zz this direction (han4-runtar).
13. And specially in this passing ¢#e—when, alike
limited by the coming of the period of giving daily
supplies to the performers of worship, azd dy the
ever-triumphant fire and z¢s produce ®, it was neces-
sary for me to go to Shiraéz* on account of some
indispensable provision of means—the work was
much avd the leisure little.


* From this and Ep. I, v, r4 it would appear that the priests at
that time maintained a body of troops for the protection of their
followers.

* That is, regarding the proper maintenance of the priesthood,
which had already engaged his anxious attention during the life-
time of his father.

° The word var may either mean ‘ashes’ (see Sls. II, 49),
alluding to clearing out the fire, or it may mean ‘ordeal’ (see Sls.
oll, 7).

* See Dd. I, 17. This name is written Shirdzd once, SirAzd
thrice, and Sir4z6 four times in K35. MAntistihar appears to have
come to Shiraz on this occasion to hold a general assembly of the
priests and leading members of the community, and he wrote this
epistle from that city (see Ep. II, i, 11; v, Io).


EPISTLE I, CHAPTER III, 1I—I 7: 291


14. The fifth is this, that the custom of providing
for all the duties even of the sacred fire (A tir) by
me, and my own desire !, trained hand 2, unhardened
mind, and unhardened heart for Managing many
things should have become the joy of my mind.
15. Then, too, from having read such writing and
such news the healer of distress would be thoroughly
connected with my heart and mind, owing to which
my intellect would have become quickly fatigued
(ma ndak6) by a limited preparation of phrases.

16. The sixth is this, that even he who is a
rescued * and better-operating (hi-dagtar) man—
when, owing to the writing of a learned maz of the
realm who is desiring the truth, Ze is so perplexed +
on account of a doubt of increasing the after-tearing
of the same perplexity—as no doubt of the falsity
and little training existent in the worldly.

17. The seventh is this, that if none of these six
of which I ave written should exist, even then your
approved cleverness (sivagdarth), extolled freedom
from strife, hereafter-discerning and complete mind-


* Reading kamaké, instead of the unintelligible kAm fin.

? The MSS. omit the last letter of yadman.

’ That is, delivered from contamination or sin; vtrikhté is
probably to be traced to Av. vi+irikhta, rather than to vi+
rikhta (Pers. gurékht).

* K35 has a blank space here, and again a few words further on,
but it is doubtful if any words be missing. The spaces are filled
up in J and BK, apparently by guess, as follows: J has ‘he sees
so perplexing a chance, concerning which, owing to the increase
of after-tearing of the same perplexity and the arrival of evil, he is
doubtful, Zas no doubt,’ &c. And BK has ‘e is so perplexed on
account of no doubt of the falsity and little training /ka¢ existed in
the worldly for increasing the after-tearing of the same perplexity,
has no doubt, &c.’

UP 2


292 EPISTLES OF MANOSKIHAR.


fulness, practised! attention to the good, and much
affection ? for the faithful—so kindly regarding, truly
judging, avd with a liking for praising (sridan6), as
regards whatever I write truly azd with true con-
viction—are, I consider, to make provision, and have
realised a preparation striven for.


CHAPTER IV.


1. I fave also seen the spiritual life* in the writing
which is in such statements of incompleteness 4, avd
owing to the same reason they should not cease
from the operation® of washing you—whom may the
angels protect !—with the Bareshntim ceremony °.
2. Because the ancients have said that, when it
shall be discarded from use, every water, fire, plant,
righteous man, avd animal, and all the creatures of
Athaymazd are afflicted, diminished, and made to
leap away. 3. As it is said in revelation that, as to
him who stands dy a dead body upon which the
Nastis’ has rushed’, ‘anusé zi, Spitama Zara-
eT ee ee eS


* J has birztdaké, ‘extolled, instead ofva rzidaké, ‘practised.’
* Reading dakhsharmth as in J; the other MSS, have m instead
of fi.

* Reading did ahvéth; but it can also be read stihan6th, in
which case the translation would be:—‘And my worldly condition.’


* Meaning the incomplete kind of purification which their state-
ments complained of, or his referred to.


* K35 and BK omit the r in kardak®.

See App. IV.

The fiend of corruption (see Dd. XVII, 7).

The three Avesta passages here quoted, with their Zand (Pah-
lavi translation), are from Vend. IX, 161-163, and are freely trans-
lated (trans. D) thus:—‘It grieves the sun, indeed, O Spitama


6
7
8


EPISTLE I, CHAPTER IV, I-3. 293


thustra! aésha ya! paiti-irista avad? hvare
a-tapayéiti’,anus6é hau mau, anusé avé staré!
—discontentedly, moreover, O Zaratist the Spita-
man! does the sun shine upon him who has deen by
the dead, so discontentedly [does the moon]*, thus
discontentedly do the stars—khshnAavayé€iti 2},
Spitama Zarathustra! aéshé na yd yaozda-
thry6, yad aétem® paiti-iristem fra-nasim ke-
renaoiti—the man who is purifying propitiates
them, O Zarattst the Spitaman! when e operates
on him who has been by the dead, om whom the
Nasis is put forth, azd he has become farted from
the sacred twigs *—he propitiates fire, he propitiates


Zarathustra! to shine upon a man defiled by the dead; it grieves
the moon, it grieves the stars. That man delights them, O Spitama
Zarathustra! who cleanses from the Nasu those whom she has
defiled ; he delights the fire, he delights the water, he delights the
earth, he delights the cow, he delights the trees, he delights the
faithful, both men and women.’ The Avesta text is given according
to the standard edition of Westergaard (IX, 41, 42), and all variants
of any importance, in the three MSS. here used, are mentioned in
the notes. These passages are also referred to in Ep. II, iii, 5.

1 K35 and BK insert the last three words, anusé 4va staré,
here.

2 J inserts ya here.

8 J has 4-tapayaéta, but K35 and BK omit the word.

4 K35 and BK have khshathré-chinanghé, ‘of a desire of
authority ’ (which occurs in Fravardin Yt. 112 as the name of a
man) instead of avé staré, which they have inserted earlier. They
also leave a blank space for the words maman akhfirsandtha,
‘moreover, discontentedly’ (which begin the Pahlavi translation), as
if they were descended from a damaged original.

5 All three MSS. omit the words in brackets, which are neces-
sary to complete the Pahlavi version.

6 K35 and BK omit aétem.

7 J has ‘who has become polluted,’ which separation from the
sacred twigs (see Dd. XLIII, 5), or other ceremonial apparatus,
implies. The phrase is omitted in Pahl. Vend. IX, 162.


204 EPISTLES OF MANOsxiHAR.


water, he propitiates animals and plants}, he pro-
pitiates the righteous man*, he propitiates the
righteous woman, both of them,’ as zz the Avesta®
of it:—khshnavayéiti Atarem, &c.

4. When ¢here is no purifier all the angels of the
worldly existence become afflicted and dissatisfied ;
and religious purifiers who are intelligent are even
now not to keep backward the work of purification,
just as 2¢ has come to them by practice from those
of the primitive faith, and are not to diminish it.
5. To change a good work properly appointed they
shall not accept a law which is not right, a good
work not properly appointed‘; not to do the work
thereof is accounted very sagacious and perfectly
wise; and through your freedom from inferiority §
the glorifying, commendation, praise, and blessing
are your own. 6. For it is said that in all the work
of forming and maintaining the law (dadistand)
those of the primitive faith were very greatly parti-
cular about every single thing; and as zo the whole
operation of that proceeding into which they have
entered, those of the primitive faith have become
aware of the power which resides in true authority.
7. But, otherwise®, the routine which is brought out


* J has ‘he propitiates plants,’ as in Pahl. Vend. IX, 163.
* Literally ‘male.’


* The initial words of which here follow t
instead of preceding it.

* J omits these six words.

* Reading afrétarth, as in BK; K35 had originally avartarth,
‘pre-eminence,’ as in J, but the copyist wrote afré (=aparva)
over the avarta, as a correction, leaving it doubtful whether he
meant afrétarth or aparvarth, ‘want of education.’

° That is, unless confirmed by the decisions of the ancients.


heir Pahlavi translation,


EPISTLE I, CHAPTER IV, 4-9. 295


from revelation! and the teaching of the high-priests
is then not authorisedly changed by that priestly man
whose decree of the fifteen? washings is written in
your epistle?; because, on account of the whole and
any perversion (gastakih) of the same writing, not
of similar utterance with revelation, before which
the custom did not exist, I am without doubt as to
that decree.

8. And in it4, moreover, is written, declared, and
contained (vangidd) that once washing is men-
tioned®, until a purifier comes who is acquainted
with the ritual, who washes just as declared in reve-
lation. 9. Zo de so washed I consider just as a
thing for which he is even now as 7¢ were a purifier
who is a good washer®, that of which 2¢ is written
below and clearly realised that it should not be
decreed; and through the scanty deliverance written
therein’ zé is manifest it would not be the statement
above ®.


1 J has ‘which is brought out with knowledge of the purifying
cup (tastik), with preservation of faith, and with manifestation from
revelation.’

2 All three MSS. have ‘sixteen’ in ciphers, but it is evident that
ZAd-sparam and his erroneous teaching of the sufficiency of fifteen
washings (see Ep. III, 1, 2) are here referred to.

8 Reading semag, a Huz. hybrid for namak,

4 The decree of Zad-sparam, apparently.

5 Referring probably to Vend. VIII, 299, which provides a
washing for the polluted person by himself, if he can find no one
willing to purify him (see App.V).

6 That is, for such a purpose any ordinary washer would be
sufficient.

7 In Pahl. Vend. VIII, 299, which states that, although pure
enough for ordinary purposes, he must still abstain from engaging
in ceremonies for others (see App. V).

8 That is, itis very different from the propitiation mentioned in § 3.


206 EPISTLES OF MANUOSKIHAR.


10. If learned knowledge, ve/ating both to that
about inferior matters (agirtariha) and that about
superior matters, de true authority praised and de-
clared by the great primitive faith, former high-priests
and those newly arisen (navakgandak4an6) would
be and would have been similarly forward; then,
too, it would exist not so much with the priestly
men of the time as with the learned officiating
priests (magépatan) of Athharmazd who have been
before. 11. And when, moreover, all the Avesta
and Zand are easy Zo a priest, pre-eminently
acquainted with the liturgy azd a supreme Zaratist,
he has attained unto, and should remain with, Athav-
mazd and® the officiating priestship of Athavmazd,
and the supreme, world-managing, religion-observing
(h i-din-nikah) sovereignty as to religious trea-
tises*. 12. To change then their practice in the
law would be entirely an outcry apart from deliber-
ation, and a like violation of the unanimity of the
spirits who are the heads and guardians® of the
religion, and of the unanimity of the source of
opinion of the good themselves, for the sake of
what is not acceptable.

13. But the statement above ® is, was, aud will be
that which remains a good idea well considered by
them with the centre of thought, as to z¢s well-


* J has ‘because if even for that about superior matters, ac-
quaintance with religion, and learned knowledge here be,’ &c.


* That is, when he knows all the scriptures and commentaries by
heart.


* J omits ‘Atharmazd and.’

* That is, he has full authority to interpret the scriptures.

° Reading saran sary daran, but in K3- the two words overlap,
so that sar-sardar4n, ‘head guardians,’ might be intended.

* Probably referring to the quotation from the Vendid4d in § 3.


EPISTiico. CHAPTER IV, TO=17. 297


operating characteristics, just contention, and com-
plete powerfulness. 14. Also from the teaching of
just high-priests, through the preservation of much
evidence, and ascertained for the members of the
assemblies of various provinces (shat76 shatv6), are
shown the opinion azd experience of most priestly
men; and to make the various districts (kistak6
kaistak6) thrivingly steadfast, an unperverted one
should be set up in all four quarters (padkés) of
the same province.

15. And a semblance of it is apparent even from
that which the glorified Nishahpthar, the supreme
officiating priest!, and also other officiating priests
of Atharmazd have said, that one zs not to change
any teaching of theirs thereon after z¢ zs provided,
and not to render useless the statements of other
authority thereon. 16. But that which they should
accept from them asa certainty is to maintain the
statements of other high-priests as pre-eminent ; avd
not to change the operation of statements of another
description as appeared lawful. 17. Even so it
was as that same Nishahpthar, in the council of the


glorified (andédshakd rfibané) Khiasrd’, king of


1 This mdbad of mébads is mentioned in Pahl. Vend. IMJ, 151,
V, 112, VI, 71, VHI, 64, XVI, 10, 17, AV. I, 35, and twenty-four
times in the Ntrangist4n (see Sls. I, 4n). His name is spelt in
various ways.

2 King Khfsré, son of Kavad, who is best known by his title
Néshirvan, or Andshirvan, ‘immortal-soulled, reigned a.p. 531-
g479; and the statement that Nishahpflhar was one of his coun-
cillors (made little more than three centuries after his death, and,
therefore, probably correct) is of considerable importance for fixing
a limit to the age of those Pahlavi books in which he is mentioned.
These books are the Pahlavi Nirangist4n, a late recension of the
Pahlavi Vendidad, and the Book of Arda-Viraf, in which last it is


298 EPISTLES OF MANOsKTHAR.

a oe ee
kings and son of Kavadd,—by preserving old things
(lig4n6)—showed that way on whose thoughts they
are established, and wrote them unaltered, so that
such thoughts thereon became as z¢ were decided:
and their thoughts thereon, after such decree of his,
have so become unanimous. 18. Through the im-
portance of Aes assured rank, and the rest which
was said by him in the work of sustaining the
faithful, he maintains as much as the other state-
ments, one éy one, from the deliberative teaching
of those high-priests.


CHAPTER V.


1. That writing which comes amid the writing of
your epistle is a correct fragment? as regards the
nothing in which one is to change the operation pro-
perly maintainable, and it is becoming; because, if it
be even for him, by whom it is written from the


et eS ee eee


stated that Viraf was called by the name of Nikhshaptir by some,
From the statements made in our text it seems probable that the
council was employed in revising the Pahlavi Vendid4d, in which
they were careful not to erase the opinions of older commentators,
and thus confirmed their statements by their own authority. It is
possible that this council was that mentioned in Byt. I, 7, where the
name Nishaptir also Occurs, but whether it refers to a man or a
city is not quite certain, This council, which seems to have been
summoned for condemning the heresy of Mazdak, was held pro-
bably two or three years before Khasr6 came to the throne (see
Noldeke: Geschichte der Perser und Araber zur Zeit der Sasaniden,
Pp. 465).

* Reading bangisnth, but it may be biigisnth, ‘deliverance
Srom contamination? The reference is to the decree of Zad-sparam


mentioned in Chap. IV, 4, the ‘writing’ alluded to in Ep. II, ii, 1;
ill, I.


EPISTLE I, CHAPTER Iv, 18—V, 4. 299


statements of Médyék-mah, Afarg, and Séshans},
the several statements avd teachings of the same
high-priests, yet then the elaboration avd publica-
tion thereof are not such as that which is sent down
by his further elaboration® 2. And thereby it Zas
seemed manifest ¢/a¢ z¢ is sent so that a wish for the
Spirit may proceed from the truth of z¢s minister
(padd), or from his thought for the desired decision;
or his understanding may be of that kind which is
warped (vukist6), as though he believed it as other
than the exposition of the religion azd the teaching
of the high-priests. 3. But until the unparalleled
arrival of Séshans* any one not sharing in complete
knowledge is not appointed unto a patron spirit
(ahv6), and the fiend specially contends more ex-
perimentally with the thoughts of the high-priests
of the religion for a religious decision.

4. And even the recompense of community‘ of
property is that when owe gladly observes pure
thoughts; and the swift action of voluble (ptr)
speakers and kind regard of religious characters for
deliverance® and for the noticeable undeceitfulness
of the same spirit’—which is itself the desire of
settled observation that is in it for the sake of the


1 The names of three of the commentators whose opinions are
most frequently quoted in the Pahlavi Vendidad (see Sls. I, 3).
Each of them appears to have written a complete ‘teaching’ or
dissertation upon the ceremonial laws, from which the quotations
are taken (see § 6).

2 That is, in collecting the opinions of the ancients, he has
twisted them so as to suit his own views.

® The last of the future apostles (see Dd. II, ro), not the com-
mentator of the same name mentioned in § 1.

4 Literally ‘fraternity.’

5 From pollution or sin. * See § 2.


298 EPISTLES OF MANOSKIHAR.


kings avd son of Kavdd,—by preserving old things
(lig4n6)—showed that way on whose thoughts they
are established, and wrote them unaltered, so that
such thoughts thereon became as zt were decided;
and their thoughts thereon, after such decree of his,
have so become unanimous. 18. Through the im-
portance of fis assured rank, and the rest which
was said by him in the work of sustaining the
faithful, he maintains as much as the other state-
ments, one éy one, from the deliberative teaching
of those high-priests.


CHAPTER V.


1. That writing which comes amid the writing of
your epistle is a correct fragment? as regards the
nothing in which one is to change the operation pro-
perly maintainable, and it is becoming; because, if it
be even for him, by whom it is written from the
a a ee eee
stated that Viraf was called by the name of Nikhshaptir by some.
From the statements made in our text it seems probable that the
council was employed in revising the Pahlavi Vendidad, in which
they were careful not to erase the opinions of older commentators,
and thus confirmed their statements by their own authority. It is
possible that this council was that mentioned in Byt. I, 7, where the
name Nishapfir also occurs, but whether it refers to a man or a
city is not quite certain. This council, which seems to have been
summoned for condemning the heresy of Mazdak, was held pro-
bably two or three years before Khisr6 came to the throne (see
Néldeke: Geschichte der Perser und Araber zur Zeit der Sasaniden,
P: 465).

* Reading bangisnth, but it may be bigisnih, ‘deliverance
Srom contamination” The reference is to the decree of ZAd-sparam


mentioned in Chap, IV, 7, the ‘writing’ alluded to in Ep. II, ii, 2;
itl, 1


EPISTLE I, CHAPTER IV, 18—V, 4. 299


statements of Médyék-mah, Afarg, and Sdéshans?,
the several statements avd teachings of the same
high-priests, yet then the elaboration aud publica-
tion thereof are not such as that which is sent down
by his further elaboration®. 2. And thereby it Zas
seemed manifest ¢Aa¢ z¢ is sent so that a wish for the
spirit may proceed from the truth of z¢s minister
(padd), or from his thought for the desired decision;
or his understanding may be of that kind which is
warped (vukdst6), as though he believed it as other
than the exposition of the religion azd the teaching
of the high-priests. 3. But until the unparalleled
arrival of Sédshans* any one not sharing in complete
knowledge is not appointed unto a patron spirit
(ahv6), azd the fiend specially contends more ex-
perimentally with the thoughts of the high-priests
of the religion for a religious decision.

4. And even the recompense of community‘ of
property is that when ove gladly observes pure
thoughts; azd the swift action of voluble (ptr)
speakers and kind regard of religious characters for
deliverance*® and for the noticeable undeceitfulness
of the same spirit*—which is itself the desire of
settled observation that is in it for the sake of the


1 The names of three of the commentators whose opinions are
most frequently quoted in the Pahlavi Vendidad (see Sls. I, 3).
Each of them appears to have written a complete ‘teaching’ or
dissertation upon the ceremonial laws, from which the quotations
are taken (see § 6).

2 That is, in collecting the opinions of the ancients, he has
twisted them so as to suit his own views.

8 The last of the future apostles (see Dd. II, ro), not the com-
mentator of the same name mentioned in § 1.

4 Literally ‘fraternity.’

5 From pollution or sin. 8 pee-$-2.


300 EPISTLES OF MANUOSKIHAR.


same kind of full religious diffusion—are the swift
action of the patron spirit, which, for the sake of
preparing him for a deliverance that is not falsifying
revelation aud zs without disputants, is a kind regard
for the deliverance itself of 42m whose spiritual life
(hdkS) it is,

5. As ¢o that which is thought by him? of those
deliverances sent down, completed, avd announced,
I consider more particularly about the meaning of
one thing, which is their solemnized observance.
6. The solemnized observance of Médy6k-mah is in
the teaching? of Médyék-m4h, and those of Afarg
and Sdshans are each one meditated azd indicated
in a teaching; and the pointedly superior position
of each one of them is mentioned by him in Ais
statement of any teaching and of the decision set
up. 7. Also with a kind regard for his own choice
he as thought it (the former teaching) imperfect,
and, on account of what was not attained by it—
which was a re-explainer of the same good ideas
provided—z¢s dissimilarity to it is not unnoticed ,
8. But when one hears the re-explainers of a true
reply he is well protected (hti-zinharid6) by com-
plete mindfulness 4, avd is himself confident that the
teaching of Médyék-méh is not the whole statement
of Médyék-mah, for there are many opinions of


* Zad-sparam the writer of the decree mentioned in §1.

* The word £4staké means usually a written course of teaching
or exposition, a commentary, dissertation, or manual of instruction.

"* Implying that Zad-sparam had been more inclined to enforce
his own opinions than to examine those of the commentators.

* The Pahl. translation of Av. armaiti, ‘devotion, which is
usually personified as a female archangel protecting the earth.


EPISTLE I, CHAPTER V, 5—VI, I. 301


Méayék-mah! whch have decided zz another man-
ner; not ¢hat whatever Médyék-mah said is not
good, Juz in the teaching of Médyék-mah 2¢ is certain
that even wha¢ is not proper is mentioned many
times as a possibility %,


Cuapter VI,


1. As to that which is written in that epistle, that
in the teaching of Sdshans he thus states, that ‘of
both the purifiers necessary he is suitable by whom
the ritual is performed *, they have been similarly
very unanimous that when one is incapable (att) it
is the other ¢haz is suitable, who is written of in con-
nection with him; and that, moreover, because the
statement of Afarg is in a teaching of his®, and, on


1 J inserts ‘rules which are mentioned in the special teaching of
Médyék-mah.’ It appears probable that the author had access to
much more complete commentaries than the fragments now extant
in the Pahlavi version of the Vendidad.

2 Meaning, probably, that Mé¢yék-mah was disposed to relax
the rigid enforcement of the law in cases of doubt or difficulty, as
the Avesta itself does in several cases.

® Quoted from Pahl. Vend. IX, 132, 6, where it may be read
either as an opinion of Afarg (as mentioned in our text), or as a
statement of the Pahlavi translator, who would, therefore, appear to
have been Sdshans. A complete translation of the Pahlavi version
of Vend. IX, 1-145 and the commentaries relating to the Bare-
shnfim ceremony, which are frequently alluded to in these SDisics,
will be found in App. IV.

4 Perhaps ‘impotent,’ as the Rivayats (Mro, fol. 103 a) provide
that a purifier shall be neither aged nor youthful, not less than
thirty years of age.

5 See note 3, above; from this it appears that Afarg was the
earlier commentator.


302 EPISTLES OF MANOSKIHAR.


that account, that declaration of his seemed Zo de
from him, which is as though z¢ were decided by
him. 2. Then, when ove reaches the eulogistic
(afrdsinak®) reply of his re-explainer, owing to his
just will it is itself well perceived that Afarg comes
into account as one of the high-priests; and that
which is the special teaching of Sédshans as men-
tioned that they have been very unanimous that
when there is one he would be suitable1.

3. That evidence, too, which many high-priests,
and especially one teaching, are alike diffusing, is
stated also in the teaching of Médyék-mah, that
when he who is washing? understands the profes-
sion, then one purifier is plenty for him. 4. When
it is abundantly declared, in particular by two teach-
ings, hat when there is one he is suitable, z¢ is then
not to be rendered quite inoperative through the
solitary statement of Afarg; for Afarg only said, as
it appeared so to him himself, sat ‘two purifiers
are requisite*’ 5. The customs of another high-
priest are not declared to exist with like evidence ;
and this is set aside (spégidd) even by him himself,
that another custom is not suitable to exist, because
his own view is mentioned as it appeared to him.

6. Those of the primitive faith have been fully 4
of the custom that other one selected, as to this,
where z¢ is the performance of the Vikaya (‘exor-
cism’)*; because its explanation is this, that an


* See Pahl. Vend. IX, 132, 3, but the earlier part of the section
refers to statements no longer extant.

* That is, the person undergoing the purification.

* See Pahl. Vend. IX, 132, 2, Epo, iia

* J inserts ‘ of the same opinion,’

* That is, they have considered one purifier sufficient for reciting


Pe


EPISTLE 1, CHAPTER VI, 2-9. 303
ee es
opinion upon which the priests (magavég4n3) are
without dispute is that which he says is the custom
of a priest, azd the business of the two priests, of
whose other custom he speaks as much, is a per-
formance by those twp witnesses indicating the
same as the priest.

7. This, too, is evident, that, by confession of
Afarg, when there is oz/y one purifier Ze is to be
considered as being suitable1; avd an attainment Zo
more evidence is that which is written by you, that
Médyék-mah as said that every customary fart
(pisak6) is to be washed three times ?, and now the
purifiers do z¢ once. 8. That teaching remains zx
the same manner as written by him, but the three-
fold washing of Médyék-mah is not a washing to be
striven for, but oze to be well considered, of which
he spoke ; and this, too, is not said by him, that when
one shall not wash three times it is not proper®.
9. Afarg said that when one shall* wash once it is
proper, and about this once the opinion of Médyék-
mah is the after statement, and the opinion of Afarg
is the prior statement ; avd since in the life of man
the first ¢42ng to be considered is about purity, not
the indispensability of washing, and, further, the


the passages from the Avesta (see Vend. VIII, 49-62, IX, 118)
which are supposed to drive away the fiend (comp. Ep. II, ii, 7).

1 See Pahl. Vend. IX, 132, 3.

2 See Pahl. Vend. IX, 132,/, where, however, the statement as to
three times washing is attributed to Afarg, who is the prior authority
quoted (as mentioned in § 9), and that as to once washing is attri-
buted to Médyék-m4ah, who is the after authority.

? Reading 14 khalel@néd3-ae 14 shdyedd instead of 18
khalelfinédd a-la4 shayedo.

4 Reading aé instead of va a. This statement is attributed to
Médy6k-m4h in Pahl. Vend. (see note 2, above).


304. EPISTLES OF MANOsKIHAR.


pollution diminishes, about which it speaks in the
religious cleansing, during so many times ‘washing
as is declared, then the consideration of it is a con-
sideration about the one time which is the first com-
putation 1. 10, That which mentions more than once
washing is a contradiction of the prior deponent, not
a declaration; azd the consideration of that opera-
tion, so long as z¢ zs declared, is about the statement
of him who fas mentioned once washing with the
opinion of a prior deponent?, owing to the same
reasons. 1. But if it be even that much washing
which is the merit of the operation, then the state-
ment of Afarg about these times® is manifestly very
preservative, avd that of Médyék-mdh is a necessity
for declaration,


CrapTer VII.


1. And as zo that which is written ‘4, that ‘in the
teaching of Afarg z¢ is thus declared, that “for every
single person, at the least®, one cup of water and


* In Vend. IX, 48-117 the washings of the several parts of the

body are mentioned only once, which is ‘the first computation’
here mentioned.

_ # Reading pésm4l, as equivalent to the pésmal or péstmal
previously used; but the word can also be read pastmal, ‘after
deponent,’ which would be inconsistent with the context. The two
terms are very liable to be confounded in writing Pahlavi, and in
Ep. II, ii, 6 they are again written alike, though put in opposition
to each other. The ‘prior deponent’ is Afarg.

* That is, ‘about this one time,’ as J has it.

* In the epistle to which he is replying.

* The words pavan kamistth, both here and in §§ s, 6, would
be better translated ‘as a desideratum, or desired quantity;’ but in


EPISTLE I, CHAPTER VI, IO—VII, 4. 305
ee ee ee
one cup of bull’s urine, which are well alike (véh-
mal), are requisite ;” aud in the same manner it is
said in the teaching of Médyék-m4h, that “the water
and bull’s urine, when it is possible, are all to be
thoroughly consecrated; when not—and, at the
lowest, one cup of water and one cup of bull’s urine,
which are well alike, for every single person—dhey
are to be set down zz that place, and are afterwards
to be mingled together*.” 2. And since two teach-
ings have so stated, are we to perform the operation
more preservatively* and according to a more cor-
rect opinion than this ?’

3. Also, ‘a correct apportionment is not under-
stood by us, and clear reasons have not come to our
knowledge that a less measure of the thing is
proper.’ 4. But I well imagine (hfi-minam) this is
not the operation of the purifying cup (tastikd),
where a less thing is not proper, because the infor-
mation with which they have existed—owing to
that information of theirs, of which a former high-
priest and deliberator was the communicator—is
that which was heard by me, that there are some
who, for the sake of diminishing the measure of
water avd bull’s urine, speak of this apportionment
thus: ‘Vizithresid*, in everything the operation


Pahl. Vend. IX, 132, ¢ the phrase is pavan kamistth, which can
mean only ‘at the minimum, or least.’

1 In Pahl. Vend. IX, 132, c, where this statement occurs, the first
letter of this word is omitted, which converts it into shuma4r,
‘alike.’ Either word may be correct, but véh-m4l occurs twice in
this section.

* This statement of Médyék-mah seems no longer extant in the
Pahlavi Vendidad.

8 That is, in a way more delivering from pollution and sin.

¢ This word, which probably means ‘in whatever is varied,’ was


[18] xX


306 EPISTLES OF MANOSKIHAR.


which accomplishes this, that is, when ¢here zs as
much as is discernible from his body}, is proper.
5. And the saying is not perceived by me as a
correct apportioning, because the judgment of the
greatly-learned leader of those of the good religion,
the glorified Yddan-Yim?, and of other delibera-
tors, the opinion of good thinkers, was thus, that
that saying is spoken about that of which the measure
is not declared as the least by the high-priests’
teaching of revelation. 6. Finally, when it is really
of the same origin azd suitable, then less than the
least of that, of which the measure is declared as
the least, is not proper, if, owing to much evidence
in the teaching which has mentioned 2z¢ as suitable,
zt de more of a blessing, and the operation performed
thereby de more legitimate; because that teaching is
for confessing that the statements of high-priests are
most evidence of the practice.

7. This is that which is equally perpetual: it is
very important for the purifiers to keep the intellect
of life in operation, and for the good to become
mentally a powerful giver of aid to them; and now,
too, a purifier is ordered to keep in use his own most
universal equal measure. 8. That which is per-
ceived by me, and “as come to my knowledge, more
particularly when washed by myself, is the keeping
in use an equal measure*. 9. And even if there be
a purifier who does not completely keep in use the


evidently the beginning of an Avesta phrase whose Pahlavi transla-
tion concludes the sentence. The phrase does not appear to be
extant elsewhere.

* That is, just sufficient to wet the body.

® His father (see Chap. III, 10).

* That is, the two liquids should be provided in equal quantities,


EPISTLE I, CHAPTER VII, 5—II. 307


consecrated water and bull’s urine, still then z¢ is not
worse than when it does not really arise from the
same origin!, and its religious rite also does not
take place.

10. Also the words of both the solemnization of
the Vendidad and the recitation of the Avesta are
likewise to be uttered by him; because? ‘ Zaratist
enquired of Atharvmazd adout it thus: “ How shall
I purify? where he does not attain unto the Air-
yema *—there are some who say where everything is
anus6 (‘discontented’)®? 11. How as to the fire,
how as to the water, how as to the earth, how as to
animals, how as to plants, how as to the righteous
man, how as to the righteous woman, how as to the
stars, how as to the moon, how as to the sun, how
as to the endless light, how as to the independent
light®, how as to all the prosperity, created by


which differs from the present practice, as stated in the Persian
Rivayats ; thus, Mro, fol. 104 a, mentions 34 mans of water and
1% man of bull’s urine as suitable quantities to be provided. This
section is omitted in J, probably by mistake.

1 Apparently deprecating the use of mingled liquids derived from
various sources.

2 The passage quoted here is from Pahl. Vend. XI, 1-5, with a
few variations.

8 Pahl. Vend. inserts ‘as to the abode.’

4 The Airyem4 (written Airyémé in the MSS.) is Yas. LI,
which commences with the words ‘4 airyem4 ishyé, and is the
last of the Gatha spells mentioned, in Vend. X, 22, as having to be
recited four times in order to exorcise the fiend. The meaning of
the question in the text, therefore, is : how is the purification to be
effected when all the spells are not recited?

5 Referring to Vend. IX, 161-163 (see Chap. IV, 3).

6 This clause is omitted in Pahl. Vend., being merely a repetition
of the preceding one, the Av. anaghra raokau being first trans-
lated by asarag réshan6th, and then partially transliterated by


x6


308 EPISTLES OF MANOSKTHAR.


Athavmazd', which is a manifestation of righteous-
ness?” 12. And Atharmazd spoke to him thus:
“Thou shalt chant the purification Zturgy, O Zara-
tdst!—that is, fully solemnize a Vendidad servzce—
then he becomes purified, &c.,”’ as mentioned by me
above®. 13. Where they do not make ¢hem solem-
nize a Vendidad so that they keep in operation that
which is written of it as a rite, this does not drive
pollution from any one; and then, too, they should
abandon the commands of a decree of leaders who
are not over them ®,

14. Keep the Bareshnim ceremony* in operation,
so that the consecrated water and bull’s urine are in
the proportion whzch is taught by the high-priests of
the religion, unless a scarcity occurs as regards
these. 15. Then éogether with it, also, this is 40 de
observed, that what is mentioned in two teachings is
certainly more correct; afterwards, too, where a pos-
sibility for it is not obtained by them, ¢here is what
is mentioned as suitable by one teaching, and I do
not decide ¢hat z¢ is not an expediency.

16. And as ¢o that, also, which is written con-
cerning the three hundred pebbles ® that, sprinkled


anagragrdshano. As sar means ‘head, end’ in Pahlavi (hardly
ever ‘beginning’), the only meaning common to the two terms
asarag and anagrag seems to be ‘without a head or superior,
independent,’ that is, in this case, independent of the light of other
luminaries.

* K35 has ‘righteousness, created by Atharmazd, but this is
evidently a mistake, as ‘righteousness’ does not translate the
original Av. voha.

* That is, as to the fire, &c. mentioned in § rr.

* Referring to the heretical decree about which he is writing.

* See App. IV.


° See also Ep. II, iii, 12. The word generally used in these


EPISTLE I, CHAPTER VII, 12-VIII, I. 309


in ceremonial ablution (pady4v6), are cast into (va/)
the bull’s urine and water, that is taught even zz the
same manner; the zxward prayer (vag5)!, even for
when ove does not cast ¢hem, is in the existing
teaching, which is proper. 17. Then, too, on ac-
count of the cheapness? and harmlessness of the
pebbles the purifiers are less curtailing as to them,
and to drink the thing so is well-curative in per-
formance. 18. In the existing teaching of imperfect
purifiers it should be very advantageous to maintain
it as easy; moreover, it is not said of it ¢hat zt is not
suitable, and in the teaching of Afarg it is said that
it is proper.


Cuapter VIII.


1. As to that which is written *, that it is declared
in the Sakadim /Vask‘, that the consecrated bull’s


epistles is sang, ‘stone,’ but Chap. IX, 6 has sagt#ako, and Pahl.
Vend. IX, 132, ¢ mentions sagkak,‘a pebble,’ as being cast into
(dén) the consecrated water and bull’s urine, without specifying
any number. The practice appears not to be mentioned in the
Persian Rivayats, and seems now obsolete ; the addition of a small
quantity of the ashes of the sacred fire to the bull’s urine, which is
tasted at the beginning of the rite, is, however, mentioned in the
Rivayats.

1 See Dd. LXXIX, 2. The prayer or grace has to be taken in-
wardly, that is, murmured, before the drinking mentioned in § 17.
According to this text provision seems to have been made for not
using the pebbles, by means of a special prayer.

2 Or ‘value,’ as arganth means both.

$ In the epistle to which he is replying.

* This was the eighteenth of the lost books of the Mazda-wor-
shippers (see Sls. X, 25, note). It was one of the seven law books,
and treated of many legal matters. Among the contents of its first
thirty sections the following items are mentioned by the Dinkard,


310 EPISTLES OF MANOsSKTHAR.


urine, when it becomes fetid, is to be stirred up
(bara agarddinisnd), and they should not carry z¢
forth so to the fire, so that the stench extends to the
fire; because, if that stench extends to the fire, on
account of the moisture azd through carrying bodily
refuse (higar)! on and forth to the fire, it over-
whelms it ; that is taught zz like manner lest, and
owing to what is said, it then seemed to one that
the bodily refuse and pollution of fetid bull’s urine
is On account of the stench. 2. But it is proper to
observe it more fully mindfully, perfectly completely,
and with better understanding, because that which
is said by it, that the carrying of bodily refuse forth
to the fire overwhelms 7/, is not on account of the
pollution of the bull’s urine, but the proportion of
the sin through this; so that it becomes the origin
of as much sin for him as that pollution of the bull’s
urine; but the stench, on account of moisture, is
like 42m even who shall bring clean and purified
water into the fire, azd thereby becomes sinful?.


and one of these passages probably contained the statement quoted
in our text:—‘On carrying forth the holy-water and also the pot
(dig6-2) to the fire, that is, wh purified and thoroughly-washed
hands; and the sin of carrying ‘fem forth with unpurified and
imperfectly-washed hands. On preserving the pot and the other
things, whose use is with the fire, from defilement with bodily
refuse ; when, through want of care, defilement occurs, and any
one shall carry z¥ unawares to the fire, he who is careless over-
whelms 7 thereby. . . . On lawfully warming the bull’s urine on
the fire, and the sin when 7¢ is not done lawfully,’

* See Dd. XLVIII, 19, note.

* The argument is that the urine being a consecrated liquid, its
corruption is not contaminating (provided it be not occasioned by
foreign matter, as alluded to in § 7); but if the stench be sufficient
to extinguish or injure the fire, it is as sinful to expose the fire to
its influence as it would be’ to injure the fire with holy-water.


s


EPISTLE I, CHAPTER VIII, 2—6. ced


3. This, too, is a saying, that the proportion of
the sin is mentioned not on account of the pollution
of the bull’s urine; it is said Zo 6¢ a counterpart even
of that which'is declared of the care of the flesh of
the ass and pig, so that when they shall now carry
unto the fire more than the proportion which is
ordered, it overwhelms z¢ through carrying bodily
refuse forth to the fire, and even then that flesh,
investigated as to purity, is mentioned as a supply
for the season-festival!.

4. The fetid bull’s urine is itself likewise prepared,
so that on this account it is ordered that z¢ is to be
stirred up, that so long as z¢ is stirred up they may
thereupon order the use of it; if then z¢ is to be
rendered quite useless, ¢here is afterwards no neces-
sity for stirring it. 5. The stirring is declared a
purification as regards polluted ¢hzngs, where bodily
refuse is only such that z¢ is not endless, and so
pure that it purifies even that of another.

6. When 2é is written of it itself, that z¢ is thus
declared in the SakAdim asf, that consecrated
bull’s urine which is fetid is to be stirred up for the
fire, 2/ is afterwards declared that z¢ is not speaking
only of the bull’s urine which is provided those three
days?; but that, too, which is old anzd consecrated,


SEER TT


1 So the damage to the fire is not occasioned by any impurity of
the flesh of the ass or pig (which could be used for a sacred feast),
but by the excessive quantity brought to it. The pig was formerly
domesticated by the Parsis (see Sls. II, 58), but they have long
since adopted the prejudices of the Hindus and Muhammadans as
regards its uncleanness.

2 Referring probably to the times of the three washings, subsequent
to the chief ceremony, which take place after the third, sixth, and
ninth nights, respectively, (see Vend. IX, 136, 140, 144.)


312 EPISTLES OF MANUSK{HAR.


become fetid avd is stirred again, when they keep it
in use, is proper. 7. And that which the Sak4dim
has declared is, specially, that one of the high-priests
fas individually said: ‘That stench*is mentioned
with reference to the occascon when a stench reaches
it of a different kind from that which exists naturally
in it!


CuapTer IX.


1. And as fo that which is written, that ‘che
teachings of Médydk-mah, Afarg, and SéshAns? have
all three come and remained, and, on that account,
whoever as washed just as they always wash
therein is certain that he is worthy. 2. Also,
“should it have been as 7¢ were proper to them,
would Médyédk-mah have said that “not even the
purifier is single?”’ 3. And the rest as written on
that subject, which, on account of its acute observa-
tion, Aas seemed /o ée from their statements ; they,
however, fave not decided it so by the teaching
which is in their names, as was indicated by me
before 8,

4. But I do not so understand that ‘if those
should have been all the particulars of the pecu-
liarity of all three teachings, would the teachings of
Médydk-mah and Séshans have said, concerning
any one who should have so washed that the puri-
fier was single, that it is suitable, because the high-
priests have been thus very unanimous that when


* In the epistle to which he is replying.
> See Chap. V, 1, * See Chap. VI, 2-4.


EPISTLE I, CHAPTER VIII, 7—Ix, 7. 313


there is one he is unsuitable? 5. And when it
should be to them as z¢ were proper that, apart from
the hands, the other? customary parts (pisak6)
should be washed once by them, would Afarg have
said it is proper *, because washing them three times
is not mentioned in the Avesta? 6. And when it
would have been as z¢ were proper that the three
hundred pebbles (sang) should not be cast into the
water and bull’s urine, would Afarg’s teaching have
said that it is proper‘, because there is not a single
use for a pebble (sagiZak6)? 7. And when it
would be as z¢ were proper that he who is washed
at the ablution seats (mak) at which any one has
been washed during the length of a year, is not
injured thereby—only they shall take them away
and they are again deposited >—would Médyék-mah’s
teaching have said that it is proper, because, when
the stones (sagé) are again deposited by one, z¢
is to effect the cleansing (vistarisn6) of some one,


1 The writer says he does not understand this argument of his
correspondents, because it differs from the view he takes in Chap.
VI, 2, but it must be confessed that the meaning of the passage in
dispute (Pahl. Vend. IX, 132, 4) is not very clear, as the word
ashayed, ‘he is unsuitable,’ can also be read ae shayed, ‘he would
be suitable,’ both there and in our text.

2 K35 has one line blank here, but this was probably owing to
the state of the paper, or some inadvertence of the copyist; as it is
evident that none of the text is omitted.

8 Compare Chap. VI, 9-11.

4 Compare Chap. VII, 16-18.

5 This shows that the places for ablution during the Bareshnfim
ceremony were, a thousand years ago, the same as now, namely,
stones deposited on the ground, not holes dug in the ground, as
directed in Vend. IX, 13, 14,16. They are, in fact, the stones or
hard material directed to be deposited at the holes in Vend. IX, 29,
30, but they go by. the old name for the holes (magh).


314 EPISTLES OF MANOSKIHAR.


and when a shower of rain occurs thereon so that
the whole place shall be thoroughly wetted, inside
and outside, it is proper? 8. And if some one says
that this is the case of a rite by a teaching of
authority, and the rule is by a teaching of private
authority, is not the whole rite by any teaching
proper, that cowszsts in this washing which is
thoroughly preserved as they keep z¢ in practice?’
9. The reply is even this, that every rite (niréng)
is to be performed zz such manner as ¢hat which is
said ¢o de most preservative, and most connected
with the declaration of revelation azd the testimony
of the high-priests concerning it. 10. And not for
the reason that Médyék-mah’s ¢eaching is more
preservative? as to one rite, and after that some-
thing of Afarg is more preservative, is the operation
to be performed by the statement of Médyék-mah ;
6u¢ whatever is the more preservative of Médydék-
mah’s is collected from Médyék-mah, all the more
preservative of Afarg from Afarg, azd that which
is the more preservative of azy other high-priest
from that which “as the most preservative approval
of the high-priest. 11. That which those high-
priests ave said, which they decide by just au-
thority, is the commandment of the learned of the
realm, which has lawfully arisen over the provinces
(shéharan6d); but even that statement opposing
it whch is much testified axd manifestly more of
a deliverance, or which is declared as an exposition
2 ASE ees eae Sa RECT oe STS
* This string of arguments appears to be quoted from the epistle
to which the writer is replying, but as they are separated from their
context it is difficult to understand the exact line of argument, or to


be sure that they are translated correctly.
? From pollution or sin.


;
EPISTLE I, CHAPTER IX, 8-15. 315


of the teaching of high-priests of the religion in
a dissimilar case, they shall then? wholly accept,
and ¢hey are to perform the operation authorisedly
and preservatively thereby.

12. This, too, I so consider, ¢Aaf even if each
separate teaching should be as 7z¢ were proper, it
would then not be determined by them as te the
impropriety of the purifying cup, for Méadyédk-mah
has stated, only as z¢ was apparent to him, that
every single customary fart is to be washed for
three times?, axd has not specifically determined
that when all shall be so once it is not proper.
13. By the special teaching of Médyék-mah and
the washing which is in the law that says—con-
cerning those interpreting revelation —that whoever
becomes quite polluted shall thoroughly wash by
that law, so that his dezug washed is to be con-
sidered as de/ng washed, it (the rite) is not performed
by me if, also, that other high-priest Aas said, that
every one who becomes quite polluted, aad washes
not by the law of the primitive faith, is not to be
considered as washed. 14. Then, too, in the special
teaching of Médyék-mah 7 is not said, of that
washing which is washed by the law of those of
a portion of the religion (parak-din6an), that it is
not proper.

15. He who washes by the law of those of the
primitive faith, which many high-priests maintain
as excellent, because it is suitable, azd imagines
that regarding the threefold washing it should be
said that it is not proper, even he—when he also


1 That is, when the dissimilar case arises, or when it is manifestly


more efficient.
8 See Chap. VI, 7.


316 EPISTLES OF MANUOsKIHAR.


has become of the same opinion as to this, that the
statements of the high-priests are on an equality,
and the most evidence of the high-priests is the
vight course—would have attained to confidence
about this, that in a doubtful matter ¢herve should
be a high-priest1, and also that of which Afarg and
Séshans fave alike understood a similar thing is
proper.


CHAPTER X,


i, And as ¢o the many other maéters to which an
explicit reply is not written by me—be it the deter-
minableness of it, be it the flow of zxward prayer 2,
be it the pouring of the water, and likewise the rest
which is written #o me—the statements, when de-
liberation and conjecture about such arrangements
become needful, are not 40 de made unto the multi-
tude, but wzéo the priestly at once*. 2. And this
much, also, which is written by me is on this
account *, that when a writing has come to you
which is the purport of my re-explanation, and 7¢
has seemed that it is written after well-weighed
(sakhtak6) observations ®, even so they would cause
some of those of good desires to understand, who
are thoughtful friends of the soul azd observers of
a ee ee


* To consult about the matters in doubt.
* Reading vag-régisndih; but J omits the first letter, and
thereby converts the word into ap ardazisnth, ‘want of leisure.’
* J has merely ‘the statements are when deliberation and conjec-
ture become at once needful.’
_* Reading hané rf, as in J; the other MSS. have han4 14.


° Or, perhaps, ‘strict observations’ here, and ‘strict observers’
further on.


¥


EPISTLE 1, CHAPTER X, I-5. 319


well-weighed zdeas, in whose heart and mind, owing
to that other writing}, the existence of doubtfulness
may fully remain; and, owing to that, this much
re-explanation Aas, indeed, seemed to me good.

3- And then the desire? to sprinkle* in many
modes is also an incorrect presentation‘, on which
same subject there is this in consideration, that
afterwards, peradventure, the same priestly man®
by whom it is written may come—whose assured
wisdom ® may the angels make steadfast! and whom
my approaching causing a purifier to travel for
various quarters has occasioned to write it—so that
while they are, therefore, awed by him, and shall
provide more completely for use the full measure of
water avd bull’s urine, the complete words of the
Avesta, avd other proper rites, they shall proceed
more approvably. 4. And if 2¢ de even not auxiliary
for the same purpose (4han6) ¢hat zt was written
by him—except, indeed, through consideration of
its details—no reason for a writing of that kind is
to be assigned.

5. But if for the reason z¢ was written by him z¢
be manifest as an existence which is very little
threatening, then I consider his opinion, which is
in his decree, not so perplexing; and, till’ now, the
perplexing consideration was more particularly as


1 To which he is replying.

2 Reading adin gam, but this is doubtful.

$’ The Huz. verb zerfkfintané, ‘to sprinkle,’ is not found in the
glossaries, but is readily traceable to Chald. P17.

* Reading arashntk6-46-dahisnth.

5 Meaning his brother, Zad-sparam.

6 The usual Pahlavi phrase for the Av. 4sn6 khratus or in-
stinctive wisdom (see Dd. XL, 3).

7 Assuming that val stands for va/.


318 EPISTLES OF MANUSKIHAR.


to that, when, owing to the great learning thereof
to be seen by me, this was not doubtful, that as Zo
the great opinion of the world aéout the existing
law of the profession of the priesthood, azd the
practice of all those of the good religion of the
realm, they should make a decree only by the
deliberation of me and other priestly men and
religious observers’. 6. For if even he retorts a
further statement? as to the appointed observance,
ets origin is then also a propagation from the diverse
teachings of those great high-priests of those of the
primitive faith, wko were they who have been for-
merly great.

7, On account of the depth and much intricacy
of the religion they mention many opinions and
well-considered decrees which were likewise formed
devoid of uniformity, azd the utterance of the
different opinions of the priests is with the reciters
of the Nasks; but even among themselves the most
supremely just high-priests were of a different
opinion, different judgment, different teaching,
different interpretation, and different practice only
in the peace, mutual friendship, and affection which
they had together. 8. Just as that even which was
prominent about these chief priests (magépatand
magépatd), whose names were Atfré- -Frébag-
vindad and Attré-bigéd, who have been, each
separately, the high-priest of the realm of the true
religion and the scholar of the age.


* Implying that the more learning there is manifest in an erro-
neous teaching, the more necessary it is to submit it to careful
examination.

” Reading frag6 vak patd-yekavimfinéd, and assuming that
the last word stands for patd-fstéd,


#


EPISTLE I, CHAPTER X, 6-11. 319


9. To many, when an opinion is afterwards so
obtained, fertarning to the high-priests 2 the
Spiritual evestence1, 7¢ is as is said about Zarattist
the Spitaman, that ‘the first time when the arch-
angels are seen by him, the Spitam4n, z¢ is then
supposed by him that they are Aindar, Sard, Naki-
slyya, Tatirév, and Zairik?, who are most mighty *’
10. From such as those the decree and its original
perversity (bin-gastikdéith) and scanty preserva-
tiveness are so written avd prepared, and after-
wards, also, your opinion is that way irritated by
the habit of good thinking—of which there is so
much manifest* from those of the primitive faith
and the high-priests—because even its words and
those written with z¢, azd the completeness of will
and religion which is written, inclined the mind
away from the teaching of the high-priests.

tr. But as the same decree, oy that which is
resembling the same decree®, is appointed (vakht6)


1 That is, such as have passed away.

2 These are the last five of the arch-demons who are the special
opponents of the archangels, being corruptions of the Avesta names
Indra, Sauru, Naunghaithya, Tauru, and Zairiza (see Bd. 1,27). The
name of the first arch-demon, Akéman, is omitted here, probably
by the mistake of some copyist, as six names are wanted to make
up the number of the archangels exclusive of Atharmazd himself.

® J continues as follows:—‘“of the demons.” 10. Written
with the wretchedness (vakharith) and savageness of such as
those, the oppressiveness and disaster of a decree of that descrip-
tion, and its original perversity,’ &c. (as in the text).

4 In the decree, which was so written as to appear to be directly
derived from the teachings of the commentators, but, at the same
time, so warped their statements as to lead astray. Hence, it
might be compared to the conversion of an archangel into an arch-
fiend through a mental hallucination, as mentioned in § 9.

5 J omits these last eight words.


320 EPISTLES OF MANOsx{HAR.


and specially decided, and is not to be accepted
Jrom him, and the operation is not to be performed
thereby, its position is then to be considered, dy
those steadfast zz the practice of the pre-eminent
religion, with the most advanced understanding and
discernment, which are the thought of its true sta-
tion in the religion of the Mazda-worshippers. 12.
And other religious decrees, intelligently preserva-
tive of the soul, which are made known amd declared
from the teaching of truthful high-priests of the
religion of the Mazda-worshippers, are to be suitably
accepted and fulfilled. 13. And since this opinion
(dastak6) of mine is, moreover, from the writing
of Afarg, even about the preservation of different
interpretations and different teachings, not specially
owing to unobtainable statements of this shattered!
religion of the Mazda-worshippers, nor even Zo dis-
tress through simultaneous strife, but owing to the
desire of true opinions which as existed, there is
safety abundantly, but temporarily, from the scrib-
bling of the opposing, partial, and injurious writing
of that priestly man®.


Cuarter XI.


1. For completion little is observed by me; and
a man of my own, zz a position of authority (sng
gah), comes with a second epistle? for that priestly
man, opposing, disputing, showing the harm, making
Se es EP

* Reading hana giring, but it can also be read 4n adarog,
‘that undeceitful.’

® Zad-sparam.

* Not Ep. II, but one which preceded it (see § g, note).


EPISTLE I, CHAPTER X, I2—XI, 6. 221
a eee
aware of the deliverance !, and applying for arrange-
ment. 2. And the man Bhd comes as a co-operator
is announced by me, and the rite which is accom-
plished by him is so till further notice, which is for
my further epistle?; because a double elucidation
about that which it is necessary to arrange from afar
is a custom more suitable for the discreet.

3. If ¢hat same priestly man* should have been
in the vicinity, then interviews w7tk me, with a few
words, would have been more preservative than ¢ry-
eng to convert that wretchedness (vakh4r) into that
which is customary (pisaké) even by further writing
and much information. 4. And even now my pros-
pect is a well-considering demand for explanation, so
that, if the duties which are suitable for the discreet
be really disposable for it, it is proper so to arrange
what it is possible for me to complete for three
months; azd I may go myself into the presence of
that same priestly man for the arrangement of the
indispensable duties, and may diffuse this arrange-
ment properly*. 5. Aut there are many reasons
for private reflection (ndhidd) on account of which
a descent from position is an evil resource; and ¢hzs
once a temporary epistle is written by me to him,
and comes with this epistle’, 6. And Yazdan-


? From pollution, by means of the Bareshnfim ceremony.
? Probably referring to Ep. II, till the arrival of which (or that of
_ Ep, Il) they were to act as directed by the priest he sends with
this epistle.

3 His brother Zad-sparam.

* This intended visit to Sirkan is also mentioned in Ep. II, v, 5;
vi, 4, 6; vil, 3.

> Being apprehensive that personal interference might lead to
altercations derogatory to his dignity, he prefers trying the effect of
writing in the first place. The temporary epistle, here referred to,


[18] Y


322 EPISTLES OF MANOSKIHAR.


ee SS err


pdnak!, a man who is instructed2, shall come to him,
who is friendly to custom (Ainag-iy4r), and of like
rank with his own man who is faithful; avd I wll
write further avd more controversially to him, and
give the information advisedly with which I shall
acquaint him, so that zt may de more explanatory
to him.

7. But if through this which is written by me, or
through myself*, he should come immediately (di-
gandyts) unto Pars, I sha/Z then be seeking an
opportunity even for the retirement of him himself;
I do not abominate z# (madam 14 mansém) when
it is necessary for them azd private, as is better.

8. As to these other diffusions of arrangements
which are pre-eminently the resources of that priestly
man, and the acquaintance with revelation which is
sought by him, for the sake of the advantage of the
religion ¢hey should not be molested before +.

9. May the arrangement and restoration and
benediction of the revelation (din6d) of the Mazda-
worshipping religion reach a climax! azd may the


could not have been Ep. II, as that was written after Ep. III, and
was the further epistle promised in § 6.

? Or, perhaps, Yagdan-pahnak. This was a common Parsi name
in former times, as it is found in two of the Pahlavi inscriptions in
the Kanheri caves, dated a.p. roog (see Indian Antiquary, vol. ix,
pp. 266, 267), and the very similar name, Yazd-pan4h, occurs as the
name of a Parsi convert to Christianity who was put to death about |
A.D. 541 (see Hoffmann’s Ausziige aus syrischen Akten persischer
Martyrer, p. 87).

* Assuming that dinh4rdé stands for zinharidé.

* If I should come personally,

* Referring probably to further matters of complaint, which he
did not think it advisable to notice seriously until the present
controversy was settled,


EPISTLE I, CHAPTER XI, 7-12. Rex


eminence of you listeners! to the primeval religion
consist in long-continued, supreme prosperity, through
all happiness! then, through such thoughtful friends,
the acquaintance wth its difficult teaching and
mighty words, which is to increase that gratitude
of yours to me for my decisions, is made a blessing
to you, if you observe therein a good idea which
seems to you important, when it reaches your sight.

10. The correct writer and scribe is ordered that
he do not alter azy of * the words (marik), while he
writes a fair copy of this epistle of mine, which is
written by me to you, and he.orders some one to give
z¢ to that same man, YazdAn-panak, along with that
epistle, so that it may come to him, for there are
times when I seem aware that 7¢ is better so. 11. And
may the angels increase aud enlarge your many new
things with full measure and complete exaltation!
the pleasure, peace *, righteousness, prosperity, com-
mendation, avd happiness of the powerful® who are
all-controlling axd happy-ending.

12. MAantsfihar, son of Yidan-Yim, as written
zt iw the day aud month of Spendarmad’®, in the


* Reading nyédkhshfdarano, as in J, instead of avakhshi-
darand.

2 Reading min, instead of mifin, ‘ who,’

8 To Zad-sparam. This copy was that mentioned in Ep. II,
vii, I.

* Reading s/am, as in J; the other MSS. have shnuman, ‘pro-
pitiation,’ the two words being nearly alike in Pahlavi letters.

5 Reading patfig4nd; J has padvandané, ‘connections,’ by
inserting a stroke.

° The fifth day of the twelfth month of the Parsi year; and, as
Ep. III (which was evidently written after further consideration) is
dated in the third month of a. y. 250, this must have been written
in a.y. 249. The date of this epistle, therefore, corresponds to
the 15th March, 881.


Yer2


326 EPISTLES OF MANUSKiHAR.


and....by me from!....and...., would have
been quite desirable to increase my gratitude unto
the sacred beings for the health and salutation of
your priestly lordship, though it had been merely to
write intelligence of your own condition; for your
writing of the epistle is not such as ¢hat of the dis-
tant who write in duplicate, but like that of neigh-
bours who think that everything new should always
be really mutual information. 3. As Zo that, too,
which you ordered to write about omens azd such
occurrences—for which my form of words is not as
is twice specified within the epistle, and from hence-
forth onze should order to write intelligence more
clearly—moreover, on account of want of leisure
on many subjects, my heart is not disengaged even
for the understanding of omens.

4. I apprize your priestly lordship that in this


certain whether a man or a city is alluded to. The text, as it
stands in the MSS., is as follows:—‘Namakd zitand dén bidan4
Avand man Niyshahpthar nipistand farmidd va madd.’ This can
be translated as in our text, if the word va be omitted; but, if this
word be retained and mfin be changed into min, the translation
would be as follows :—‘ The epistle which some one was ordered by
you to write in the month Avan from Nivshahpthar, and which
came.’ Now it is evident from Ep. 1 that Z4d-sparam must have
been in Sirkan for some time previous to the date of that epistle,
15th March 881, and, therefore, probably in the previous Novem-
ber; but, at the same time, it must be noticed that there are allu-
sions in this second epistle (see Chaps. I, 12, V, 3) to his having
been formerly at Sarakhs and among the Tughazghuz, that is, in
the extreme east of Khuras4n; it is, therefore, just possible that he
may have been at Nivshahpfhar, on his way to SirkAn in the south,
in November.

* J and BK attempt to fill up the blank with the words késhvar
arg, ‘the value of the realm;’ but the original text probably stood
thus :—‘ and was rece’ved by me from so and so, the names having
been torn off in some intermediate MS.


EI


EPISTLE II, CHAPTER I, 3-8. 597


interval (tahikd)! a written s¢atement has come unto
me that the good people of Sirkan are, indeed, so
enveloped by you zm distress, despondency, and
trouble that its counterpart was when ¢here was a
liberation of ovr glorified fathers from the state of
material existence. 5. For such as the insufficiency
of the whole life of such was then to me, so even is
the wounding and damage which comes zow to my
understanding and intellect. 6. The whole life of
such is on the confines of the pure existence, a con-
test wth the complete incorrectness that remains
contaminating the liturgy by which the greatest
intelligence of the religion of the Mazda-worshippers
is aided; a little also, finally, of sagacity and observ-
ance of the apportionment of the more grievous
impostures and more frightful delusions.

7. And, first of all, as to when your completely
vile idea first destroyed your own enlightenment,
and quite subdued your seconding of me, is inoppor-
tune (avidan4) for me; and that ordinance ’, which
though it be also right, is then even grandeur, be-
cause 7¢ is a law of the realm and an opinion of the
world. 8. When even in the mansion of various
thoughts, the residence of the assembly of Pars, and
many other conventions to deliberate, and the united
opinions of a thousand priestly men (magavdg)
of the good religion thereon, it could remain unal-
tered, then, also, the various good thoughts and
opposing considerations that, along with me, the


bis eh te ees oh be ee ee
1 Since he heard from his correspondent. The word cannot
be tisgak6, ‘nine days,’ as that would not tally with the dates of


Eps. I and III.
2 Referring probably to the Bareshnfim ceremony which Zad-
gparam wished to dispense with in many cases.


328 EPISTLES OF MANUsKIHAR.


minds of other heads of the religion ave promoted,
and shaped or altered decisions thereon, and settled
and issued orders thereon, could not have seen a
grievance (seg) therein. 9. And this, too, should be
observed among your requirements}, that when the
fattiness? of the body is in wrinkles (Ain), so that four
perfect ones of the period are provided, even then
the opinion of a high-priest of the religion is greater
than every opinion, dv¢ the law of the realm of
various kinds* is only through the deliberation of
the same perfect ones; to make him decide then is
not proper‘.

10. And it would be desirable for you to take
account of that which is said thus: ‘ Thou shouldst
not practise that, O Zaratist! when thou and three
or four companions, in the village of a thanksgiver
of the assembly, shall say this: “Such is an evil
notion.”’ 11. These words of his are then not taken
into account by you; and ?¢ is firmly and w7¢h acute
observation determined by you, and thought preser-
vative for yourself, that even the sin be not privately
(andarg) declared by me unto the assembly which
has deliberated at Shirdz®. 12. You order this, and
ftp

? J omits this phrase.

* Reading mésakh or miskhé; but it may be ‘masagth,
‘ squeezing.’

* J has merely the words, ‘even then the opinion of the high-
priest for the realm,’ which gives a reverse meaning to the text.

* It appears from this, that when a supreme high-priest became
very old, his worldly duties were put in commission, by being
intrusted to a committee of four of the most learned priests ; but
the opinion of the superannuated high-priest was still supreme in
spiritual matters, though not to be trusted in worldly affairs.

» ° Whither Mantiskihar had specially gone to hold this assembly
before writing Ep. I (see Ep. IJ, iii, 13).


EPISTLE II, CHAPTER I, 9-4. 329
ee
zt is known that if it were a statement of yours in
the assembly of the Tughazghuz1, you would have
been still less a speaker in private.

13. I consider that you are as much under-hand
(air) about this, as regards yourself, as Zaratist? the
club-footed (apafrébd) when he arranged his gar-
ments (vakhshakih4é), and his club-foot is itself
overspread thereby even to himself, so that e was
then approved as good® by some of those of Kirman*
when they heard of z¢, and those of Rai® (RAzikan6d)
wrote a reply that, if Ze should be appointed by you
also at a distance, Ze would then be approved by
them likewise as good. 14. This idea of yours is
more heinous than that act of his, the reply from
various sides is more mischievous, the disgrace
among the people is more unslumberable, the load
upon the soul is more consumingly heavy, and the


‘1 ‘The MSS. have Tughzghuz in Pazand. Mas’audi states (a.p.
943) that the Zaghazghaz were a powerful Turkish tribe who
dwelt between Khurds4n and China, in and around the town of
Kiisan, and not very far from the supposed sources of the Ganges.
They had become Manicheans, having been converted from idolatry
to the heretical form of Mazda-worship taught by Mazdak (see
Mas’audi, ed. Barbier de Meynard, vol. i, pp. 214, 288, 299,
quoted at length in a note to Sls. VI, 7). It would seem from the
allusion in our text that Zad-sparam had recently been among these
Taghazghaz, and might have imbibed some of their heretical
opinions, so as to lead to this controversy with his brother and the
orthodox people of Sirkan. That he had recently been in the
extreme north-east of Khurasan is further shown by the allusion to
Sarakhs in Chap. V, 3.

2 Evidently some recent pretender to the supreme high-priest-
hood, who had endeavoured to conceal the deformity that disquali-
fied him for that office,

8 That is, fit for the dignity he aspired to.

4 Here written Girm4n (see Dd. XCIV, 13).

5 Near Teheran.


330 EPISTLES OF MANOSKIHAR.


severance from, and contest with, Atthayvmazd and
Zarattist become more incalculably perplexing. 15.
And this, too, is my summing up (khapir)!—when
your own acquaintance with the religion and salva-
tion of soul are zz such force—by the parable (an-
guni-aitak6d) of that physician of the body who,
when they asked about destroying the toothache,
thereupon gave his reply thus: ‘Dig z¢ out!’ and
they rejoined thus: ‘He is always wanted as our
physician, so that he may cure even a tooth which
is diseased ;’ I would extract its teeth? more plenti-
fully and wth more suspicion than he.

16. And if, also, those of the good religion in the
country of Iran be, therefore, always in want of the
learning and acquaintance with religion of Azs priestly
lordship, so that he disperses the profession and the
preparation azd management of the remedy? of many
diseases, then he throws it away as a profession, azd
there is not much of a necessity for the wisdom and
learning of fzs priestly lordship. 17. For ¢here are
some of the present time would never vouchsafe
approval of a presiding fire‘, which is in many
modes an advance of foreign habits; azd of many
things which are in writing, of a nature easier and
more comfortable in a worldly sewse, they offer and


* J converts the phrase into ‘very heinous to me,’ by reading
avir and adding gir4n. :

* That is, he would drive the morbid ideas from his brother’s
mind.

* Meaning the practice of the Bareshnim ceremony, for which
the priests were specially required.

* Probably because they saw no necessity for the presence of
the fire at the sacred ceremonies. He is warning his brother that
his heretical teachings would soon make the people imagine that
they could dispense with the priesthood altogether,


s


EPISTLE II, CHAPTER I, I5-IlI, 3. 331


always give more than he who is a priest; and, af
last, no one ever accepts azy except him who is
astute in evil and wicked}.


CHAPTER IT.


1. I fave also examined that writing? in detail,
and z¢ is very unprepared for the remarks of the
learned and those acquainted with the religion, for
the sentences concocted save to be divided, and the
slender demonstration is disconnected (aparvan-
did); so I consider that z¢ is not sent to be seen,
as regards which such a course would, indeed, de a
cause of terror to purifiers. 2. /¢ is so written that,
while on account of ¢Za¢ same terror they are very
much alarmed, and are thorough in maintaining the
duty of the continuance of care for water and bull’s
urine *, and of the formula of the operation, they
shall more fully perform z¢ as a duty provided for
high-priests; even from that I am more fully of
opinion that your like judgment and own concession
have produced this explanation.

3. When I saw in the decree, such as that which
you have written, that each time ove comes unto a
purifier who washes zz such manner as is declared


1 That is, some priest who teaches such heresies. These terms
are those applied to the demons themselves in Pahl. Vend. XIX,
140, 141, 147.

2 The decree of Z4d-sparam, a copy of which had been sent to
him by the people of Sirkan (see Ep. I, iv, 7).

3 The two liquids used in the purifying ceremony of the Bare-
shnfiim (see App. IV).


332 EPISTLES OF MANOSKIHAR,


in revelation—which is evident, indeed, from zs
existence when fe is a religious purifier, axd also
from your priestly lordship’s knowledge of the rite;
indeed, there is no use of ¢Za¢ same decree unless
the scripture of revelation, likewise, be so—Ze is to
do 2¢ with very strict observation, zow, since, owing
to the reception of terror by the purifiers, that pre-
paration is evidently to produce, as regards their
own disposition and movements, much harm azd ir-
regularity, azd perplexed thoughts among the people,
the discredit of the decreer is generated therefrom,
and it would have been more reasonable to consider
the terror and doubt of the purifiers in another way.

4. That which is so explained by you as though
it would remain accomplished azd would be in notice
—and this is written by you like as it were from
a teaching of some description—is not proper; be-
cause, thus, every rite in the performance of the
desired operation, even by one siugle teaching, is
suitable, whzch, like the preparation for the state-
ments of lying litigants, is very like, d¢ not correct.
5. For when there are some who have furthered
Médyék-mah' better than the teaching of Afarg},
2¢ is well when every single rite in the teaching is
right; and as ¢o his rite z¢ is not very clear that
deliverance? is promoted by maintaining z¢. 6. Even
on that occastcon when Médydk-mah has mentioned
threefold washing, ad Afarg once washing?, Méa-
yok-mah is the after deponent and Afarg the prior


* See Ep._t, v,is. ? From pollution.

* In Pahl. Vend. IX, 132,7 (see App. IV), where the threefold
washing is connected with the name of Afarg, and the once washing
with that of Médyék-mah ; but Ep. I, vi, 7-9 agrees with the state-
ment here.


EPISTLE Il, CHAPTER II, 4-9. 433


deponent?; and, on that account, the statement is to
be made as long as Médydk-mah is preserved, dut
as regards the opinion of the words of Afarg 7¢ is
to be maintained in a state of preservation.

7. As to that which Afarg as said?, that ‘two
purifiers are requisite, Médydk-mah fas also said
that one is plenty; amd, since the teaching of Sé-
shans? is similar evidence to his, as to that which is
said by him, they have thus been more unanimous
that when there is one it would be proper; azd as
several high-priests have announced just the same
evidence, axd Afarg himself azd other priests have
been of the same opinion where 2¢ is the performance
of the beginning of the Vikaya (‘exorcism’)*, Méa-
yok-mah is preserved, 8. Not on this account, that
Afarg is more preservative’ through once washing,
is the operation to be performed according to the
teaching of Afarg, but the once washing from Afarg
who is the prior deponent, azd the one purifier from
Médyék-mah who is the most corroborated are to be
accepted and to be conducted.

9. And even the computers of the stars would
make the position of the stars which exists when
that of the sun azd moon is from the direction (min
zik) of Satvahardn®, that of Saturn from the direc-


1 The words pastmal, ‘after deponent, and pésmAl, ‘prior
deponent, are here written alike (see Ep. I, vi, ro, note).

2 In Pahl. Vend. IX, 132, d (see App. IV and compare Ep. I,
vi, 1-4).

5 See Ep. I, v, 1. * See Ep. I, vi, 6.

5 From pollution (see § 6).

6 The high-priest of the Parsis in Bombay is of opinion that the
names of the three ‘directions’ mentioned in this section are the
Pahlavi forms of the names of three of the lunar mansions, whose


334 EPISTLES OF MANUSKIHAR.


tion of Avénak, and that of Mars from the direction
of Padramgés, a position which sends much good,
and is said ¢o be capable of undoubtedly (anarangak)
bringing on maturity of strength. ro. That this is
to be seen as an occurrence (gast6) is a conjunction
(nazdak6) which is not possible', because, if the
conjunction of Satvaharan de exact, yet, since Saturn
ana Mars are not at ¢hecr conjunctions(min nazdak),
its effect is not a good configuration (khaip tanf) ;
if the conjunction of Avénak de exact, yet, since the
sun, moon ?, azd Mars are not at their conjunctions,
its effect is not good; axzd if the conjunction of Pad-
ramgés de exact, yet, since the sun, moon, and
Saturn are not® at their conjunctions, the effect is


Pazand appellations are given in Bd. II, 3; and he identifies Satva-
haran with Kahtsar, Avénak with Avdem, and Padramgés with
Padévar. The reading of all these names is, however, very uncer-
tain. Satvaharan is written Satéharaén three times out of the five
occurrences of the name, and the first syllable might easily be
read Gaht=Kaht, so as to correspond with the Pazand; on the
other hand, the reading Sat corresponds with Sata-bhishag or
Sata-téraka, the Sanskrit name of the 25th lunar mansion, Kahtsar.
As Paz. Avdem seems to be merely Pahl. afdam, ‘last,’ I prefer
identifying Avénak (which can also be read Avérak) with the ninth
lunar mansion, Avra (Avrak in Bd. VII, 1, Avrak in Zs. VI, 1), the
Sans. Aslesha. Padramgés is also written Padramgés twice out of
the three occurrences of the name; its identification with Padévar
makes it the first lunar mansion, the Sans. Asvini. The aspect of
the heavens, therefore, which is here mentioned as very auspicious,
has the sun and new moon in the latter part of Aquarius, Saturn in
the first part of Aries, and Mars in the latter part of Cancer, that is,
twice as far from Saturn as the latter is from the sun and moon.

+ That is, it very rarely happens; as rarely as the exact agree-
ment of three different commentators, whom these three conjunc-
tions are intended to represent.

° Reading mitr6 m4h, instead of Médyék-m4h,

* The MSS. omit 14, ‘not,’ by mistake.


EPISTLE H, CHAPTER II, 10-12. 335


not good; on account of ! which, in any conjunction
which is not exact, they believe z¢ possible for a
firm mind also to accomplish this auspicious labour
(sukh-varzisn6), but they say the just and wise
should make the decision*. 11. So that this one is
a very good position, because that which is truly
issuing (rast-tag) through the conjunction of Satva-
haran is from that mighty Satvaharan*, ad that of
Satvaharan decug better through the conjunction of
Padramgés, that is done’.

12. You should understand that of the same kind
is the similitude of the three teachings, of which you
have written, with this similitude which I dave por-
trayed® and ordered to form aud scheme, so that
you may look at it more clearly, from a proper
regard for your own deliverance®, for the sharp


1 Reading r4i, as in J, instead of the 14, ‘not,’ of K35 and BK.

2 That is, the circumstances are too unpropitious for any one to
come to a decision without consulting those who are better qualified
to judge, as is also the case when commentators disagree.

$ Reading min zak raba Satvahar4n, but this is doubtful,
because K35 has min raba 4haran with zak Sat written above
min rab4; BK has min zak Saté (or d4d6) raba aharan (or
kh4r4n), which is merely reading the same characters in a different
order ; while J omits most of the doubtful phrase, having merely
min zak-i, which, with the alteration of rast-tag into rasttar,
changes the meaning into the following :—< because that which is
through the conjunction of Satvaharan is more correct than that
of Satvaharan, and that which is through the conjunction of Pad-
ramgos, that is done.’

4 Or ‘that remains the effect.’

5 Reading nisaninidd; K35 and BK omit the first letter so
as to convert the word into dfthantniddé, which might mean
‘presented.’

6 From pollution. There is some temptation to use the word
‘salvation’ for biigisn, but this would introduce ideas that were,
no doubt, foreign to the author’s mind.


336 EPISTLES OF MANOSKIHAR.


intellectuality of the re-explainers of what is not
well-considered zz connection with z¢s purpose (Ahan-
k6), and for the accumulation of ofznions that is
steadfast in the law of the ancients aud orders you
to heed z¢, 13. For, owing to the miraculousness
and pre-eminence of that?, he who thinks to restore
the good ideas of the ancients does not himself
understand the knowledge in that wisdom of the
ancients, azd does not keep his own presumption
(minth) lowly and teachable; much, too, which is
through his own learning is declared Zo de out of
it (the law), azd how he orders ws to understand z¢
is 6y his own opinion 2.


Cuapter III.


1. /é is disquieting about this, too, which is
declared in your writing *, as regards your vehement
desire and embarrassment (rdzdth) for a new law,
and your wish and longing for the establishment of
the law of the apostles‘; as also that which you
have done about the gathering of the details of
statements from the three teachings®, avd about


ee


=


* The ancient law, as contained in the difficult language of the
Avesta.

* That is, commentators are apt to attribute to the scriptures
many opinions which really originate in themselves,

* The decree mentioned in Chap. II, 1,

‘ That is, the new law which the future apostles, Hfshédar,
Hfishédar-mah, and Sdsh4ns (see Dd. II, ro) are expected to bring,
so as to restore the religion in preparation for the resurrection.

° Those of Médyék-méh, Afarg, and Séshans (see Ep. I, v, 1, 6),


EPISTLE II, CHAPTER II, I3—III, 4. 337
Se A Se ee
causing the rapid bringing of the new law. 2. And
on account of your embarrassment and wrong-doing
(vadag) they would give up the Frasnateé (‘wash-
ing upwards!) and Upasnateé (‘washing down-
wards’), to bring the fifteen ¢z7es which are without
ordinance (bara Ainak6), that are after it 2, back to
the fifteen which are a portion of the ordinance
(ainak6 vai).

3. As to the three times, each of which times one
runs a mile (hasar) even until he obtains a purifier’,
since peradventure thy mile (parasang), too, might
become more, all the good work is written purposely
(ag-kariha) of three miles and more‘ 4. And
that, too, which the high-priests have so appointed,
when Ze has striven in that manner for three per-
sons*, or that sin and retribution of his is appor-
tioned unto them azd brought to the balance
(sangag-dinidd), is because that commission and
retribution of sin might now, peradventure, be


* These terms are quoted from Vend. VIII, 276, 279 (see
App. V), and are thus explained in Pahlavi in Chap. IV, 2.

2 Referring, apparently, to the second mention of the fifteen
washings, in Pahl. Vend. VIII, 281, which does not occur in the
Avesta text (‘the ordinance’), but refers to its previous occurrence
in § 279 of the Avesta. But, perhaps, the author means that they
would confound the final washing appointed in Vend. VIII, 299
with the preliminary washing appointed in the previous § 279.

§ See Vend. VIII, 280, 287, 291 (compare App. V and Ep. I,
ii, 6, note).

* After the polluted person has thrice run a mile, he is to run
further (see Vend. VIII, 294) to some inhabited spot; from which
directions the author concludes that any excess of distance is
immaterial. K35 and BK have ‘four miles and more,’ but this
seems to be a copyist’s blunder.

5 To purify him, and, if they refuse, they each take a share of
his sin (see Vend. VIII, 280-293).


[18] Z


338 - . EpISTLES OF MANOSKIHAR,
Wi oe


allotted unto the priest!; for if he were impure
(palistd) there would be no one whatever who
would properly perform the purification as it is
necessary. i

5. Then it Aas become indispensable for you to
perform the purification, for that operation—so
suitable for the discreet where ‘he who has deen by
the dead#, so that he has become polluted, and
even ‘the stars and moon and sun shine upon his
life discontentedly’—is just as fit for the exalted
when there is great ‘propitiation of fire, water,
earth, cattle, righteous males, and righteous women’
thereby. 6. So great is z¢s value ¢hat where there
is no purification of the body z¢ is not possible to
purify the life ad soul; and when there is a man
in a realm who is able to perform it, that man is
not justifiable except when he shall perform 27.

7, Finally, when that pre-eminent operation is
being accomplished, over which ¢Aere is in revelation
and the perfect information due to revelation that
supreme * control which you are so disputing in the
religion—which even through your trifling (khar-
dak5) in the name of authority is becoming a
struggle (patkar-yehevin)—then, though it may
not be possible for you to perform z¢ yourself, it
should thereupon be the duty of some one of your
disciples to perform it in your sight, so that you may
be aware of the rite, even apart from the great
resources in ¢ha¢ most learned (Aztfim) acquaintance


1 Who is to purify him finally with the Bareshnfim ceremony.

2 Referring to Vend. IX, 161-163, quoted at length in Ep. I, iv, 3.

® Reading mahisté, but it can also be read Mazdayasté,
‘ Mazda-worshipping.’


EPISTLE IJ, CHAPTER III, 5—II. 339


with revelation which is associated with you}.
8. Also from that which is repeatedly written by
you with understanding of the rite, as regards all
three teachings’, z¢ is manifest those rites are
mentioned even as those which are more maintained,
and are not those which are unnecessary to perform.
g. You are a something therein that “ends to
preserve ® a little 0f what it is not possible for thee
to attain fully in any mode; when thou shalt obtain
the operations of the voice‘, and the water and
bull’s urine, as well as the three men, or thou
shalt give a man® to wash therein, the intellect of
those controlling is then, indeed, not preservative
therein.

10. It is proper also for you to consecrate the
water avd bull’s urine by that ritual which is in all
three teachings, to prepare your own ritualistic
liquid and other ¢hzngs which are approved among
you with mutual assistance, azd to appoint a purifier
who das performed fully acceptably azd been wanted.
11, Then, to give out properly to the country that
the purification is according to my order, I always


1 That is, even when not performing the ceremony himself, his
presence would be desirable, for the sake of securing due attention
to all the details, with which his superior knowledge must make
him better acquainted than his subordinates.

# See § 1.

5 Reading bikhtand; the MSS. divide the word, so as to con-
vert it into bava tanti,‘ without a body.’ The meaning is that by
his presence he is, at all events, able to secure some efficiency in
the ceremony, when he is compelled to intrust its performance to
subordinates who are not fully competent.

* In the prayers and exorcisms. 5 See § 4.

6 That is, one thoroughly qualified (the priest mentioned in § 4}
who requires no special supervision.


Z2


340 EPISTLES OF MANOsK{HAR.


eck poe paw ne ee a nn le A
perform z¢ more acceptably than that of other puri-
fiers. 12. For the water avd bull’s urine are all
consecrated by me, and the three hundred pebbles
(sang!) are cast into them (atbas) by me, just as
it is directed; the operation is also directed by me
in the three days 2 when it is performed, and all the
customary farts are washed three times by me®;
the ablution seats (mak6) are also arranged by me
anew for every single person, and the use of washed
seats is not ordered by me therein‘; every rite of
the washing by the purifier is also so performed by
me as all three teachings have mentioned as per-
fection. 13. You become the best of the district,
as regards the minutiae (barikiddan) of the puri-
fication that is within your duty, so long as they
excite the sight, d¢¢ which are curtailed (kazd) by
you in the way of washing disclosed to me®, while,
when it should be performed by you in this manner,
your performance would be equally constantly ex-
tolled axd your writing praised.

14. When, then, you write of it that they should
always perform it just as now, the falsity therein is


1 See Ep. I, vii, 16.

2 The ‘three washings’ mentioned in Pahl. Vend. IX, 132, 0 (see
App. IV); referring probably to those after the third, sixth, and
ninth nights (see Vend. IX, 136, 140, 144), that is, on the fourth,
seventh, and tenth days of the Bareshnfim ceremony. Most of
this clause is omitted in J.

° As said to have been directed by Médydk-mah (see Chap. II, 6,
Ep. I, vi, 7), though the extant Pahlavi Vendidad (IX, 132, 7) attri-
butes the order to Afarg.

* Compare Ep. I, ix, 7, Pahl. Vend. IX, 132, 9, s.

5 J has ‘so long as they advance the purification as much as
possible by a resemblance so approved.’

° In the heretical decree under consideration.


EPISTLE Ti, CHAPTER III, 12—IV, 2. 341


grievous (yagar), and I know none worse; for this
washing and professional purification which ome is
to keep in operation—as is declared by revelation,
the teaching of high-priests, and those of the primi-
tive faith who are esteemable'—you withdraw
(madam daréq@6) from the midst of ws. 15. That
which you understand yourself is that unto Athar-
mazd@ the confederate good creatures are as 7¢ were
defiled, avd in the eyes of the good and wise they
are as it were propitiatory towards the mischievous
Vaé*. 16. And your words about it are just as
they say concerning a beggar §, where a garment
is given to him, thus: ‘ Wash the dirt (alQg) on him
thoroughly clean ;’ avd that garment they shall take
is put upon the fire avd burnt; and he spoke thus:
‘My dirt was a comfort.’


CHAPTER IV.


1. J¢* is both explained again azd summarized
thus :—If the decree be from a law of Zarattst, is it
so decreed as he spoke it? and if they should never
perform by that, do not bring the Avesta and tts
exposition into the midst of zt, 2. For the fifteen
times of which you ave written, if from the reve-
lation of Zaratdst, are his mode of washing fifteen
times upwards and fifteen times downwards’, a rule


1 That is, by the Avesta and Zand.

2 Reading anakd V4é; he is the demon that carries off the soul
(see Dd. XXX, 4). Even the best creatures are imperfect in the
eyes of Afharmazd and the righteous.

8 Reading niy4zkar, instead of the niyazar of the MSS.

* His own line of argument. 5 See Chap. III, 2.


343 EPISTLES OF MANOUSKIHAR.
Gn poe eee eS


which is fulfilled. 3. /¢ is said, if one’s defilement be
owing to depositing any bodily refuse (higar-1),
then nothing of this is ever necessary for him, for
one reckoning (mar-1)! will smite that which he
takes hold of with a finger and 2¢ is clean, or it will
smite a golden yellow clean, or whatever? it shall
smite is clean; but nothing merely clean is purified,
unless a demon be clean *.

4. And this, too, is very amazing to me, that
when this is not taken into account by you, that
when there should be, azd one should obtain, no
purifier it would then be necessary for him to
operate himself*, how then is this knowledge ob-
tained by you, on which information (Agahih) has
reached you, that the purifying of all the purifiers
of the country of Iran is just as they should always
perform z¢. 5. When, as I consider, there is then
no complete acquaintance wzti the management of
a house in you, its own master, in what manner
then is our account of the gossip®, ad your infor-
mation, about all the purifiers of the country of Iran


1 That is, a single washing, which is sufficient for ordinary
defilements unconnected with the dead.

2 This is doubtful; the word seems to be £?ké in Pazand, but, as
the Av. f and 4 are much alike in Iranian MSS., it may be read
kik-€, and the phrase would then be ‘or it will smite a penis
clean.’

8 That is, cleanliness can no more be considered purification
than a demon, who is supposed to be an embodiment of impurity,
can be considered clean.

* J has ‘ when there should be no purifier it would be necessary
to beg the help of a chief of the religion, and when ome should not
obtain that.’

> As directed in Vend. VIII, 299 (see App. V).

® Reading vaé sakhfin, but this is uncertain.


EPISTLE II, CHAPTER IV, 3-V, 2. 343


obtained? 6. If your Acople should abandon that
which is most indispensable, and your account of
the gossip, as regards that which the whole realm
has done, be not according to the commands of reli-
gion and to sound wisdom; azd if it has not come
completely to your knowledge as the washing of the
purifiers of the country of Iran—because, when you
do not fix the number even of their footsteps’, 2¢ is
certain that your understanding of their disposition
and virtuous practice is even less—then it was
necessary for you to determine the reason that all
the purifiers in the country of Iran always wash that
way that is declared as improper, with whatever
certainty z¢ de uttered oy written.


CHAPTER V.


1. If this which is said by you be a knowledge
that is replete (avkar) with advantage, why was it
then necessary for you to keep z¢ as 7¢ were con-
cealed2 from me, when I thus consider that, if a
knowledge should be rightly obtained by you, it
should then have been needful for you to report
unto me on the first rumour* from every ove who
is well-enlightened (hi-bam)? 2. If this decree


Re ee

1 Referring probably either to the distance of the Bareshnim
place from pure objects, or to the distances between the holes or
ablution seats, and from them to the furrows, mentioned in Vend.
IX, 12, 14, 18, 22 (see App. IV).

2 Reading nih4n6, as in J, but K35 and BK omit the first
letter.

3 Assuming that mayag is a pseudo-Huzvaris equivalent of
Avag (Pers. Ava); maya being the true Huzvaris of 42, ‘water.’


344 EPISTLES OF MANOsKiHAR.


seemed so to you before, between when you have
been in Pars and this t#27e when in Sirkan, z¢ was
not well considered with those acquainted with the
religion, the wise avd the high-priests, azd not even
reported. 3. If not conceived by you before, then
what learned acquaintance with the religion was
acquired by you in Sarakhs! azd Shiraz, about
which you are enlightened? 4. And before it was
to be well considered amid observation axd medita-
tion ? what high-priest was obtained by you in ShirAz,
who, when it was well considered with him, in com-
pletely securing himself, kept you away from deli-
beration to be decided with me azd other priestly
men and high-priests ?

5. If not decided by you in P&rs on account of
breaking away from me, that is as though you your-
self understand that I am to keep, zz my own person,
not even in the rank of discipleship unto you, but
in that which is like servitude; and my coming’,
which is on your account, is even an accumulation
of harm avd distrust (tars) which you Lave amassed
for yourself by aving written and acted, and has
made me suffer sorrow (vidvarinidd) in my own
person, 6. If it had been shown to me by you ¢haé¢
it would be the preservation of the religion, it would
then have incited me to accept z¢ steadfastly. 7. If,


-s SSS


1 A town in the extreme north-east of Khurasan, between Nishah-
pihar and Marv, but nearer the latter city. When in this town
Zad-sparam probably came in contact with the Tughazghuz men-
tioned in Chap. I, 12.

* J inserts the words ‘by you, and through your good considera-
tion z/ was more properly undeceiving, if done, then.’

* Referring to his intended visit to Sirk4n, mentioned in Chaps.
VI, 4, 6, VII, 3, Ep. I, xi, 4.


EPISTLE II, CHAPTER V, 3-II. 345


for the sake of co-operation with me, a lawful decree
had been even more privately propagated by you,
and if the religious demonstration about it were con-
servative aud correct, it would then have been less
vexatious for you to explain zf to me than to others
who ave less acquaintance with the decrees and
declaration of revelation; and if a difference had
arisen thereon, a correct reply would then have
come to you more fully from me. 8. And if you
conceive that it is not necessary to demonstrate z¢ to
me through the declaration in revelation, that deli-
verance which it is not necessary to announce is not
to be so decreed, even in another place. 9. And,
just as even in Pars, if z¢ weve not decreed by you
in Sirk4n on that account, when your conception
was that they would not accept z¢ from you, it
was necessary for you to know that, because it was
not possible for you to provide much interval for
demonstration.

10. If zés purport de now considered by you, when
you are moving as to the writing from Shiraz *—
which writes fully of your acquirement and interpre-
tation of it, and of a mutilated deliverance*—the
arrangements for iniquity on this subject are many.
11. And one of them is the erroneous writing* which
is with me, for you conceive that they would accept
from me your view, as 7¢ were swearing (sOkandik6)
that it does not go to the filth accumulated for*


1 Referring probably to Ep. I, which appears to have been
written from Shiraz after holding a general assembly (see Chap. I,
11, Ep. I, iii, 13); but this epistle, judging from the remark in the
text, was probably written after Mantiséthar had left Shiraz, as was
also Ep. III (see Chap. VIII, 1).

2 From pollution. 8 See Chap. II, 1.

# Assuming that the Paz. pgsahu stands for paz sakh-i; but,


3.46 EPISTLES OF MANOSKIHAR.


Zaratist, and does not contend with him; and that
the opposition (hamémalih) does not strive for a
new law, avd does not increase the evil of the spirit
and the. world, since it labours for the hoard of
the soul.

12. And, persistently concealed, that was done by
thee, owing to which is the anguish of my life; for
z¢ is annoying when a wound of the soul is not actu-
ally realised by means of the decree; but if, too,
it should be really avoidable, z¢ is then even said
that ignorance itself would be regenerative (navazt-
daritha), since zf is not dubious to me, unless a
matured knowledge of creation and some of that
even of the angels should be in sight?. 13. Also
through their much talking, which is like Visaris?,
and much affliction, which is like the eradication
of life, ‘kere is a perpetual demonstration then zz
every place of the country of Iran, where this infor-
mation adout its religion shall arrive, ‘Aa¢ they then
consider thee as an apostate and an enemy of the
religion.

14. And through this eager procedure of yours
many troops in the provinces, who save to horse
(aspinidand) themselves, Zave joined Atdrd-pad*;


as Av. g and d are much alike, it may be pds&hu, which, when
written in Pahlavi letters, can also be read pad géhan, ‘ protector
of the world;’ or pdsahu may be merely a corruption of pad-
shah=padakhshah, ‘ sovereign.’

* Meaning that he should have preferred being ignorant of such
a decree, unless it exhibited far more knowledge of the truth than
it actually did.

* So written here in Pazand; but, no doubt, the demon Vizaresha
(the Vizarash of Dd. XXXII, 4, XXXVI, 44), who carries off the
souls of the wicked, is meant.


* The name, apparently, of some rival of his in authority, ie
is also mentioned in Chap. IX, 11.


EPISTLE IJ, CHAPTER V, 12-16. 347


for, inasmuch as those most mounted on horses! are
the washers? of Sirkaén, who would have always
thought about their abundance which is due to the
archangels, they have spoken with opponents about
this interpretation of the section of scripture (vidak)?,
and so become similarly testifying‘, thus: ‘We do
not conceive it is necessary to demand thy reason for
this most grievous disaster®, a thing which is more
complete through your elucidation of doubt and the
power of the enemy, owing to this way which is
appointed by thee. 15. And on that account, too,
zt is more disquieting unto me, when I am aware
both of the origin of this perplexity azd the sur-
passing contamination which is possible to arise
from it.

16. And you always so observe as not to leap
(lA atyydkhtan6) without looking before ; but tem-
porary observation is nothing really of that whzch,
by a well-stinging similitude, is what ove observes,
with the eyesight looking well forward, when dust of
many kinds is domesticated with the sight of the


1 Reading asp-varak4ntiim, and this meaning tallies well with
the previous mention of troops horsing themselves; but J, by pre-
fixing a stroke, changes the word into vaspoharakantim, ‘those
most renowned among the spheres.’

2 The ceremonial washers or priests.

8’ The term vidak is applied to sections or chapters of the
Avesta in Dd. XLVII, 1, 5, 6, LXVI, 4; and here it must be
applied to the Avesta of Vend. VIII or IX, to which the misinter-
pretations of Zad-sparam specially referred.

4 J has ‘and so given similar testimony, which is written by them
of a priest of your fame, and written by them to me.’

5 The diminution of their means of livelihood by the decrease of
ceremonial washing, more than their apprehension of the sinfulness


of such decrease.


348 EPISTLES OF MANUSKIHAR.


eye; and if his intellect be not judicious he is won-
derfully deceived by it; and should it be even when
he mentions the existence of two moons, has zt
become.more proved thereby? 17. /¢zs a custom
of the most provoking in itself, and presented dis-
quietingly when I, who believe with a fervent mind,
would have delivered the life even of my body over
to the perplexing bridge? for your happiness and
enjoyment. 18. Also, on account of my want of
leisure, even the information which is presented,
asking peace, is information I believe with a gene-
rous mind; and dezug aware regarding my want of
leisure is both an advantage and harmful, and the
heart to write of them? is, therefore, miraculous.
19. Then it is always necessary for me, who am in
want of leisure, to write unto you so much writing
of the harassing of annoyers azd against disputes, of
whose end there is no conception in my heart.


CuaptTer VI.


1. When at azy time I write more pleasantly, this
directs you to understand that still with the stead-
fast are my affection and natural lowly-mindedness ;
afterwards, too, that which happens when you have
kept me wide away from the way of brotherhood,
and higher even than a father, master, leader, ruler,
or high-priest, is due to the fame and happiness of


* The Kinvad bridge, or passage to heaven (see Dd. XX, 3);


meaning that he would have been ready to lose his life for the sake
of his brother.


* The heart to write of the ‘happiness and enjoyment’ of § 17.


EPISTLE II, CHAPTER V, 17—VI, 4. 349


my body avd life, not ¢o affection of character, but
the position of religion and the command of the
sacred beings. 2. On that account, when you have
seén the pure religiousnesé, the learned knowledge,
and the repose-promoting truth of the invisible
(avénapih) of which my? heart is leaping with evi-
dence, so that you are steadfast even unto the néid
asta-£a (‘not though the body’) of which Zaratist
the Spitaman spoke’—and, because, turned by me
to the religion which is thy passport (parvanakd)
to the best existence, you have understood Zfat it is
the organizer of the greatest protection, even that
is supposed by me—I undergo all the terror of the
period in hope of the supreme recompense.

3. And the position that that religion as given,
which on that account is mine, you have that way
considered as supremacy’; and if, sent from you or
another person, the opposition of one of the same
religion is seen Zo de the dispersion and disruption
of the appointed profession, I act against the con-
tinuance of the opposition, and as steadfastly as the
series (zarah) of submissiveness and gratification of
your priestly lordship Zas done tome. 4. And this
will be undoubtedly realised by you, that if you do
not turn away from this decree which is not pre-
servative, but, deg appointed, I reach out from


1 The MS. J ends at this point, but the continuation of the text,
as far as the word ‘important’ in Chap. IX, 7, is interpolated in
Dd. XXXVII, 33 in the same MS.

2 In Vend. XIX, 26, ‘not though the body, not though the life,
not though the consciousness should part asunder,’ would he curse
the good, Mazda-worshipping religion.

8 He now proceeds from persuasion to an assertion of his
authority, accompanied by threats.


350 _ EPISTLES OF MANUSKIHAR.


the country of Iran}, then I szad/ become its great-
est attacker of you. 5. And so I consider that
from my opposition it is possible for more harm to
happen unto you than from many accusers who ‘are
like the leader of those of the good religion, the
many who are as z¢ were of like fame with me.

6. And also from my departure, and the non-
existence of ove that is a friend of yours, who, like
me, is less able to be for your harm than he who is
one of the many accusers of whom it is I who am
the restrainer, you know this, that my coming is on
account of the affection of some and the reverence
of others. 7. From the exercise of religion I do
not at all fall away, and for the sake of the position
of the religion I am maintaining opposition? to any
one; even when he is a friend who is loved by me,
I am then his antagonist. 8. Fate (zik6)? is the
great truth of the vacant, the form (and4m) * which
has procured the light of life.


Cuapter VII.


1. A well-reflecting person, moreover, is able to
understand that which is written by me, in private,
in writing unto the good feople of Sirkan, as perhaps
a legitimate copy® of a writing of that kind from


* Referring to his intended visit to Sirkan (see Chaps. V, 5, VII, 3,
Ep. Jy xied)

2 J has ‘I am an opposition.’

§ Or ‘living,’ * Or ‘the time (hang4m),’

° The MSS. have pin6, instead of pakind. This copy of Ep. I
is mentioned in Ep. I, xi, ro.


7


EPISTLE II, CHAPTER VI, 5—VII, 4. ane


me may be near you; and it was like the production
of some one for the tearing and rending of his own
limbs, and for the purpose of bringing on that
remedy—the burning, torturing medicine that is
religious 1—whose purpose is to remain away from
the steadfast while adding by the commands of
religion. 2. This same epistle?, which was one of
very great incompleteness, and one as 7z¢ were
thinking very severely, was similar to the decision
(azad %) fo which I Zave come on the same subject,
which zs written of below and again; and accom-
panying this epistle was a man of my own with
a further epistle*, 3. I am discharging (vigarak6)
my own duty as regards it®, where I so arrange
affairs of every kind which z# is possible for me to
complete for a period of three months °, azd come
myself to where you are, and that mastery (£irih)
which is prepared is again arranged when it is
wanted by them’.

4.. You have already become a reserver (khamo-
sidar) and rapid preparer of the adaptation of words
in which cogency exists, and have clearly explained


1 Probably meaning ‘remorse.’ ? Epel:

8 Chald. T!8, referring to his general mandate (Ep. III) men-
tioned again in Chap. VIII, 1.

4 The temporary epistle to Z4d-sparam (mentioned in Ep. I, xi,
1, 8), of which no copy has been preserved.

5 J begins as follows:—‘And I wz// come later on and more
combatively, when it is requisite for the sacred beings (or for
them); I am also myself in possession of an opportunity as re-
gards it.’

6 This period for his visit to Sirkan is also mentioned in
Ep. I, xi, 4.

7 Or ‘dy the sacred beings;’ the words yazdan and san being
written alike.


352 EPISTLES OF MANUsKIHAR.


as much as is in sight about the reason of altering
that decree, concerning which your opinion is written
with great judiciousness. 5. But as éo the under-
standing which prompted you to write properly, and
not to alter the rites azd purifications of the Avesta,
and about the duty of purifying the purifiers1, such
as has entered into the practice of the good, the
propriety is declared in the teaching of the high-
priests; and to do z¢ better, so far as is possible, is
to strive forwards in goodness.

6. Also, as regards changing the law of the
fifteen times washing ?, just as z¢ zs for Iran zz which
purifiers are to be found, it is ordered for places to
be found without purifiers ; azd z¢ zs in the countries
of Irdn that the order is given regarding purifiers
not thus appointed for the work.


CuaptTer VIII.


1. To arrange again for approval the other
matters, of which a portion is written about by you,
an epistle* is again prepared in advance for Sirk4n,
Shiraz, and other laces, so as thus to make your
decree a writing of bygone offence. 2. Because,
if your despatch (firist) prepared this new pro-
ceeding, and you do not turn away from it, and do
not recede through opposition azd accumulation
of vexation, azd these others, too, like thee, shall


1 J has ‘and not to alter the purification zz the rites of the
Avesta.’


? See Chaps. III, 2, IX, 2, Ep. I, ii, 6, note.
° Ep. III, also mentioned as a ‘decision’ in Chap. VII, 2.


. EPISTLE I, CHAPTER VII, 5—VIII, 5. 25
2 eS eee
not now abandon routine of that kind, then your
children, your own precious ones who are beloved—
of whom I know that you make them love you,
and do not, moreover, diminish in your protection
of them—shall be your accusers; and they shall
abandon confidence zz me as refuge and guardian,
and in the sacred beings, through want of advice
and want of guardianship. 3. The fires of the
sacred fires whose manager is a guard and pro-
tection such as I, lest they should not obtain such
an officiating priest (z6t6), w7// have in defence and
guardianship of themselves to make back to ¢heir
Shiraz abode. 4. And J myself shall have to retire
(agvirazidan6) from the countries of Ir4n, and to
wander forth to far distant realms where I sha// not
hear a rumour about your evil deeds. 5. In my
occupation, moreover, my fortune (suktin) may be
to wander forth by water even to China, or by land
even to Arim?; but Zo ée carried off by Vaé2, that
uplifter, is much more my desire than when I am
there where, owing to you, I hear that, as regards
the glorifying of the sacred beings, which, because
of my reply obtained above, wou/d then de as much
as death to me; z¢ would also be the ending of that
internal strife, so distasteful (aparvarak6d) to me,
which is like 42s who has to struggle with his own
life.


* The eastern empire of the Romans, that is, Asia Minor and
the neighbouring regions.
® The bad Vaé, who carries off the soul (see Dd. XXX, 4).


[18] Aa


354 EPISTLES OF MANOsKIHAR.


Sse) 3 a Se


CuHapTER IX.


1. This, too, this aged ove (atizvard6’) orders,
that, as ¢o the polluted of the countries of Iran,
when they do not obtain another washer, their way
is then through thoroughly washing ¢hemselves =
2. For you who are understanding the rite and
capable of washing, avd are the most forward and
intelligent of the religious, so long as your previous
washing is a way of no assistance, there is this
tediously-worded epistle ; moreover, all their sin you
assign for your own affliction *, whose after-course
is thus for their Paz&adasa (‘ fifteenfo/d’) washing *,
at the time they shall abandon, as distasteful, that
sin which is a new development by way of Upas-
nateé (‘washing downwards’)*; and the sinfulness
is his who established that law for them.

3. And yours are truly creatures of a fetid pool
(gand-4v5), who, as regards my motive, always
speak about it just as they spoke thus to a priest *4
‘Why as the savoury meat-offering not become
forgotten by thee, w/z/e the firewood and incense,
because it is not possible to eat ‘em up, are quite


1 From this it appears clearly that Mandséthar was an aged
man when these epistles were written, though not too old to travel.
The previous allusion to old age, however, in Chap. I, 9, may not
have referred to himself.

2 As provided in Vend. VIII, 299 (see App. V).

8 J omits alag, ‘affliction ;’ and in Kp it is doubtful whether it
be struck out, or not.

* See Chap. III, 2 for both these terms.

5 Implying that the laity were inclined to attribute his own strict
enforcement of ceremonies, requiring the employment of the priest-
hood, to interested motives.


s


EPISTLE Il, CHAPTER IX, I-7. 355


forgotten?’ 4. Also, as a similitude of your affairs,
they are saying that z¢ zs as though the stipend of
guardianship were always to be demanded just zz
accordance with omissions of duty (avag mAni-
diha)?. 5. So that even while the trifle of trifles
which exists as an interval from the title of leader-
ship unto that of high-priestship—in which, except
a title that is no joy of the strictly religious, there
is nothing whatever—is, that way, to prepare a
source of dispute as to the work which you do
for the guardianship, it should, therefore, be a
sufficiency (khvar-b4r), where your own supreme
work is purification itself; and to do either what is
taught, or is advantageous, would be withdrawing
from the country a demand which 4as caused disturb-
ance (balfiibakinid5); to subdue z¢ thou shouldst
always so decide the daily allowances’.

6. And, to-day, I Zave, on that account, written
everything sternly, because that which another per-
son arranges and speaks so opposed zo me in evil
appearance—which is little fit zo de prepared—when
I write seasonably, and with friendly and brotherly
exaltation, you direct and persevere more expressly
in preparing, so that portion upon portion is thus
brought forth. 7. In good old age® the great law
of after-restoration is a harsh remedy, and, on that


1 That is, the laity attributed his brother’s laxity, on the other
hand, to sheer neglect of duty, and had, therefore, begun to consider
his supervision hardly worth paying for.

2 Meaning that by adherence to long-established custom, as
regards both priestly work and priestly allowances, the laity would
be better satisfied and more easily managed.

8 Reading hi-kahébanth; J has merely kahdbanfh, ‘old age,
antiquity.’ He appears to be referring rather to the antiquity of the
Avesta law, than to his own old age.

Aa 2


356 EPISTLES OF MANOSKIHAR.


supposition, where @ vz/e is shown to descend from
their three teachings?, avd is itself regarded as true,
and the wisdom of the period as impotent (an6z6-
harikS), you yourself fully imagine (hi-minéd6)*
that further restoration is not an important® and
foremost thing. 8. Those of different faiths of
various kinds ave many usages and perplexing
kinds of doubt, even about the accomplishment and
explanation of the statements of the high-priests %,
for on this subject, about old age (gtinanih), and
even about sprinkling and about yourself accom-
plishing the religious vz¢es, you are wisely for a
preservation of the equally wise experience of the
profession; and as to the heterodox, that writing
which realised that even now memory is opposing
you is itself evil-wishing®, and you know z¢ is your
own arrangement.

9. This, too, they® say that, if z¢ de on that account
that the purifiers shall not always so perform the
purification by all three teachings, or every rite
which is proper according to one teaching, it will be
necessary ¢ha¢ the purifiers shall abandon purifica-
tion. 10. Then about old age, the performance of
the ceremonial’, azd the many times of this which


1 See Chap. III, 1, Ep. I, v, 1, 6.

2 J has khavitfinéd, ‘you know. He deprecates all further
investigation into the meaning of the scriptures, which had already
been explained by three old commentators, as he doubted the
religious wisdom of the age in which he lived.

’ The continuation of the text in J ends at this point.

* The commentators.

5 That is, the decree of Zad-sparam, though itself objectionable,
was opposed to the heterodox who wished for further innovations.

° The heterodox.


™ Referring perhaps to the performance of the Vendidad service


EPISTLE 1, CHAPTER Ix, 8-15. 357


are mentioned as ¢hough this were proper, z¢ is stated
as regards how it is proper that, when on account of
those of the good religion they always proceed just
as is mentioned in the Zand teaching of the Avesta},
it will then be necessary ¢Za¢ they shall abandon the
religion. 11. And many other sayings of things like
unto these are scattered about (zerkhtini-aitd), and
are named near Atiré-pad? as hints from you ; for
this reason they are reckoned (khaprag-aitd) in
the thoughts of men.

12. And this much is written by me in distressing
haste; I consider z¢ complete, and may peace and
every happiness perpetually become hospitably at-
tainable and accomplishable for you thereby, through
the severe anguish axzd discomfort, avd the eternal
distress and despondency of the healer of affliction,
Mantsfihar, son of Yadan-Yim, director of the pro-
fession of priests of Pars and Kirman®.

13. Written in propitiation, praise, and benedic-
tion of the creator Adharmazd and the archangels,
all the angels of the spiritual and the angels of the
worldly existences, and every guardian spirit of the
righteous. 14. Homage to the exalted pontiff (rad6)
sent from the creator Aihavmazd, the most heavenly
of the heavenly, Zaratist the Spitaman. 15. The


(which includes the Yasna ceremonial) as directed in Pahl. Vend.
IX, 132, 4, o (see App. IV).

1 It is possible also to read ‘in the teaching of the Avesta and
Zand;’ but this would ignore the fact that the ‘teaching’ is the
Zand itself.

2 The same rival as is mentioned in Chap. V, 14.

8 According to Dd. XLV, 5 the farm4dAr or ‘director’ of the
profession of priests of Pars was the pésfp4i or ‘leader’ of the
religion.


358 EPISTLES OF MANOSKIHAR.
Won et) ee


most prayerful and gainful of things is righteous-

ness; great and good and perfect is Zaratist; and

one only is the way of righteousness, all the others

are no ways’.

Be ee
1 Compare Dd. XCIV, 14, Ep. Tit, 23.


Ee Pas. Pa Ee ait)


TO ALL OF THE GOOD RELIGION IN IRAN.


Jn the name of the sacred beings.


A copy of the notification (vish4dak6) of hes
priestly lordship Mandséihar, son of Yadan-Yim,
regarding the grievous sinfulness of assuming the
propriety of washing for fifteen times.


fn the name of the sacred beings.


1. It Zas come unto the ears (vasamm{finisnd)
of me, Mantiséihar, son of Ytid4n-Yim, pontiff (rad)
of Pars and Kirmdan}!, that, in some quarters of the
country of Iran, they whose chance happens Zo de so
much? pollution, such as is decreed unto so much
washing of the customary farts (pisak6), always
wash ¢hemselves fifteen times with bull’s urine and
once with water, consider themselves as clean ?, and
go to water, fire, and ceremonial ablution, the ablution


1 See Dd. XCIV, 13.

2 Reading havan; but it may be ‘pollution of the spiritual life
(ahv6),’ though this is hardly possible in the next phrase, where
the same word occurs.

8 By confounding the preliminary washing appointed in Vend.
VIII, 279 with the final washing appointed in Vend. VIII, 299 (see
App. V, and compare Ep. Il, iii, 2, ix, 2).


360 EPISTLES OF MANUsK{HAR. .


Sos ad ee a ee
of the sacred twigs. 2. Such—although? they say
that ZAd-sparam?, son of Yiidan-Yim, “as ordered,
and the high-priests Zave appointed, washing of this
kind—Aas appeared to my well-reflecting (hd-min)
opinion, apprehension, and appreciation very mar-
vellous and grave, and merely arumour. 3. And zz
is needful for me to keep those of the good religion
in adZ quarters of the country of Iran informed con-
cerning the placing reliance upon their washing with
the Bareshniim ceremony®, and to make my own
opinion clear also as regards the writings collected.

4. And, first of all, about the indispensability of
the Bareshntim ceremony I write several such copies
of a well-matured writing of mine* as may even be
new light to the intelligent. 5. That my opinion
of the information provided by revelation, the deci-
sions of high-priests, azd the teachings of those of
the primitive faith is thus, that washing by the pol-
luted with water is pollution for the life and spiritual
life (ahvé)*; they render the material dody clean
thereby, éu¢ that which is known as the handiwork ®
of the immortals, and is also professionally called the
Bareshniim, when Zhere zs the protection of a ritual
of various kinds, shall make the body clean from
endless worldly attacks.

6. It is in the nine ablution seats (magak3d)? and
the furrow®, even with prayer, bull’s urine, water,


+ Reading amat, instead of the very similar word ham}, ‘ ever,’

2 See the headings to Eps. I, II. ° See App. IV.

* Meaning this epistle.

5 Because it pollutes pure water, which is considered a sin.

° Reading yadman; but it may be gadman, ‘glory,’ which is
written in precisely the same manner,

T See Ep. I, ix, 3

® See Vend. IX, 21-28 (App. IV)


EPISTLE III, 2-11. 361


and other appliances, and the ritual which is such as
is declared in the teaching of revelation; and even
now the purifiers, who are just as written adout be-
low, keep z¢# in use. 7. When there is a washing
they wash just as in the well-teaching statements
which are known as ¢hose of Médyék-mah, of Afarg,
and of Séshans?, or zz the statement of one of those
three teachings, or in the statement of one of the
high-priests 6y whom those three teachings are de-
clared as propriety, or has come unto me as the
practice of those same three teachings dy those of
the primitive faith.

8. I deem ¢#zs deliverance? one wholly approv-

able, and the washer zz a washing of that kind, with
- the Bareshnim cevemony—which is lawfully of that
description—I consider as a purifier who is approv-
able. g. And the polluted of every description, as
above written, who /ave obtained, for any indispens-
able reason whatever, a purifier, as adove written,
whom even now various districts azd various places
have appointed aud approved, are able to wash with
the Bareshnim ceremony as adove written. 10. Then
their washing fifteen times is no deliverance in any
way, and to wash them quickly with the Bareshnim
ceremony as above written is indispensable.

11. Owing to a washing of the same kind through
the Bareshniim ceremony, as is intended, water, fire,
and other ¢/zugs, not to provide care for which is
BYE ie eae a a et? authorisedly is grievously sinful.


1 See Ep. L, v, I. 2 From pollution.

3 At this point there is a blank page in K35, and also in the
MS. belonging to Mr. Tehmuras Dinshawji, which is supposed to
be older; and one line is left blank in BK. It is not, however,


362 EPISTLES OF MANOsKIHAR.


12. When, on account of a cleansing through another
washing, distinct from the Bareshnfim ceremony,


quite certain that any text is really missing, as this section can be
read continuously and translated as follows, without much diffi-
culty: —‘Apar/ from a washing of the same kind through the
Bareshntim ceremony, as is intended, #here would be a grievous sin
against water, fire, and other ‘Azmgs, not to provide care for which
would be unauthorised.’

If some folios of text are missing, as seems quite possible from
the terms applied to this epistle in § 4, the question arises whether a
portion of the missing text may be contained in the following frag-
ment on the subject of the Bareshnim, which is appended to the
passage (Ep. II, vi, 2—-ix, 7) interpolated in Dd. XXXVII, 33 in
the MS. J :—

“As it is declared in revelation that, ifa man who Aas chanted
comes upon a corpse, whether a dog, or a fox, or a wolf, or a male,
or a female, or any crea/ure on whose corpse it is possible /hat he
may come, that good man becomes so that a man may become
defiled by him, and it is necessary to wash the polluted ome, so that
it may not make him a sinner. In order that they may act so to the
polluted one it is necessary to wash zm, it is necessary to perform
that Bareshniim ceremony of the nine nights. If the man that is
spoken of has worked about carrying the dead and contact with
dead matter (nds hama4lih), so that they know about his defile-
ment to whom he comes, then he who has done this work zn
contact with dead matter becomes afterwards disabled for that
worship of the sacred beings which they perform. So, also, some
one says (compare Vend. VIII, 271-299), where in a wilderness
(vyavan) are several priests (Asrfvé) and a man lies on the road,
there he who carries the dead dody of the man who passes away—
as those others remain avd stand away helpless, without offerings
of tnward prayer (vagd vakhtagan) over that person (kerpéd)
according to the religious way—having washed his body, comes
into the town and performs the nine nights’ Bareshnftm ceremony
twice; afterwards, his Gété-kharid ceremonies (see Dd. LXXIX, 4)
are performed, and he has acted well according to the religious
way; then he comes into the ceremonial of the sacred beings.
“How are those men purified, O righteous ove/ who shall stand up
by a corpse whzch 7s very dry and dead a year?” (See Pahl. Vend.
VIII, 107, 108.) The reply is this, that “those men are purified ;


EPISTLE. III, 12-15. 363


they consider themselves as clean 2¢ is more griev-
ously sinful; just as when they do not wash with
the Bareshnim, as adove written, dt consider them-
selves as clean through washing fifteen times, as
above written, or on account of any washing what-
ever distinct from the Bareshnim, z¢ is more griev-
ously sinful; because, when they do not wash with a
Bareshniim, as adove written, duv¢ wash for fifteen
times, as above written, or any washing whatever
distinct from the Bareshniim, as above written, they
do not become clean, through the professional wash-
ing which is decreed, from that pollution which
remains}.

13. When without similar trouble aud great judi-
ciousness they go unto water and fire, the sin is
grievous; and when they go to the bowl (padman6)
for ablution of the sacred twigs? z¢ is non-ablution
advisedly, and to perform the ceremonial therewith
would not be authorised. 14. And, zz like manner,
the washing of polluted Hém ¢wzgs’, for any indis-
pensable purpose, with the Bareshnfim ceremony, as
above written, is not possible.

15. Therefore, so that we may obtain as at were a
remedy for it, 1 wash with the Bareshnim ceremony,
as above written; to keep the mind steadfast and to
attain to a remedy I wash with the Bareshndm, as
above written; and to bestow the indispensable, com-
prehensive Bareshntim, as adove written, is indeed a
good work suitable for the discreet and liberated
2 I ee ee ee
for if 7s not #o the dry from that dryness—that is, it would not act
from this polluted #img—shat the existence of dry diffusion has


99?


arisen.
1 Even after the best ordinary washing.
2 See Dd. XLII, 5. 8 See Dd. XLVIII, 16.


264 EPISTLES OF MANOSKIHAR.


from bonds, and the purification of body azd soul is
connected with it.

16. These ¢hengs those of the primitive faith, who
provided for the moderns, Zave communicated, whose
position was above us moderns who are now the law
(gin) of others, and are teachers and rulers; our
station as regards them is the position (gasih) of
disciples ¢o spzrztual masters, that of listeners and
servitors to form azd hold the opinion, about the
same and other ¢hzugs, which those of the primi-
tive faith formed; aud the teaching of even one of
those high-priests is greater avd higher than our
sayings and decisions.

17. And as to every custom there may be in the
country of Iran, about casting away the Bareshnim
ceremony, as written by me, and about all the pol-
luted, as adove written—whom 7¢ is possible to wash,
for any indispensable reason whatever, with the
Bareshnim as written by me, axzd one does not
wash with the Bareshniim as wrzdten by me, dud is
ordered to wash for fifteen times, as written by me,
and to pronounce as clean—and wich is established
as a rule ove is urged to practise, if ZAd-sparam or
any one else fas ordered, said, or decided in the
name of authority ¢a¢ one is to do so, or has estab-
lished z¢ as a rule, or set 2¢ going, this is to give
authoritatively my opinion, decision, and enactment
upon it likewise, 18. That ¢hose same sayings are
short-sighted (aé-vénak5), ¢ha¢ same order is un-
lawfully geven, that same decision is false teaching,
that same rule is, vicious, ¢ha¢ same setting going is
grievously sinful, and ¢Za¢ same authority is not to
be accepted; z¢ is a practice, therefore, not to be
performed, azd whoever as performed it, is to


+


EPISTLE III, 16-22. 365


engage quickly zz renunciation of it. 19. And he
who as decreed in the country of Iran, in the name
of authority, washing of other kinds as all-remedial
for the polluted, as adove written, axd has established
a rule of that description is to be considered as a
heretic (aharm6ék6) deserving death.

20. So, when through his wilfulness that kind of
injury without enlightenment (bam) is decreed, and
a rule of that description is established, as adove
written, azd one rendered polluted is washed fif-
teen times with bull’s urine azd once with water, or
tm whatever other mode that is distinct from the
Bareshnim ceremony as written by me, though it is
possible to wash him, for any indispensable reason
whatever, with the Bareshntim as aéove written, then,
his renunciation of s¢x being accomplished, 4e is to
be washed again at the nine ablution seats (magh)*
with the Bareshnim as written by me; and until
washed again, as written by me, 4e is not to go to
water and fire and the bowl for ablution.

21. And this epistle is written by me, in my own
hand-writing, for the sake of a// members whatever
of the good religion of the country of Iran becoming
aware of the opinion, apprehension, avd apprecia-
tion of the commands of religion entertained by me,
MAnts4thar, son of Yadan-Yim; and several copies
are finished zz the month of the triumphant Hor-
vadad of the year 250 of Yazdakard’.

22. In trustfulness. and gratitude to the sacred
beings, avd homage to the exalted pontiff se¢ from®


OE 3 ee
1 See § 6. :
2 The third month of the Parsi year 250, which corresponded to
the interval between the 14th June and 13th July, 881.
8 Reading min, as in Ep. II, ix, 14, instead of mfin, ‘ who.’


366 EPISTLES OF MANOSKIHAR.
le ese eee ee ee


the creator Aftthaymazd, the heavenly, most right-
eous, and glorified Zarattist the Spitaman. 23. For
the sake of obtainments of prayers the one thing is
the righteousness of the Spitaman; great, good, and
perfect is Zarattist; one only is the way of perfect
righteousness, which is the way of those of the
primitive faith; all the others, appointed afresh, are
no ways’.


1 Compare Dd. XCIV, 14, Ep. Il, ix,15. This epistle is followed,
in K35, by the Selections of Zad-sparam, of which the first portion
is translated in the fifth volume of the Sacred Books of the East.


Il.
IEE
IV.


Ao kok Np DX.


LEGENDS RELATING TO KERESASP.

THE N{RANG-I KUSTL

THE MEANING OF KHVETUK-DAS.

THE BARESHNUM CEREMONY.

FINDING A CORPSE IN THE WILDERNESS.


OBSERVATIONS.


r. For all divisions of the translations into sentences or sections
the translator is responsible, as such divisions are rarely made in
the manuscripts.

2-6. (The same as on page 2.)

4. The manuscripts mentioned are :—

Bzg (written a.p. 1679), a Persian Rivayat, No. 29 in the
University Library at Bombay.

BK, J, K35, Mro (as described on page 278).

L4 (written about a.p. 1324), a Vendidad with Pahlavi, in the
India Office Library in London.

My (written a.p. 1809), miscellaneous Parsi-Persian writings,
No. 7 of the Haug Collection in the State Library at Munich.


Aula LIND Lk.


I. LEGENDS RELATING To KERESASP.


Tue Avesta informs us that KeresAspa was a son
of Thrita the SAman, and the brother of Urvakh-
shaya1. From the name of his father’s family he is
sometimes called SAma Keresdspa?, but his more
usual title is Naremanau or Nairimanau, ‘the manly-
minded®.’ He is described as ‘a youthful hero, wear-
ing side-locks and carrying a club*, to whom the
witch Kniathaiti® attached herself; she whom Zara-
tist promised to destroy by means of the apostle
Saoshyas, who is to be born hereafter®. And his
body is watched over by 99,999 guardian spirits’.


pepe ds. 1,30, 97;

2 See Fravardin Yt. 61,136. Hence he is often called Sam in
Pahlavi works (see Bd. XXIX, 7, 9, Byt. III, 60, 61); and, in a
passage interpolated in some manuscripts of the Shahnamah, we
are informed that Garsdsp was son of Atrat, son of Sam, which is
evidently a reminiscence of Keresasp being a son of Thrita the
Saman (see also Bd. XXXI, 26, 27).

8 See Abin Yt. 37, Ram Yt. 27, Zamyad Yt. 38, 40, 44. Hence
we have Sdm, son of Narim4n, as the grandfather of Rustam in the
Shahnamah,

4 See Yas. IX, 33. M. de Harlez converts the side-locks into
some weapon called gaésus, but this word still survives in Pers.
gés or gésf, ‘ringlet, side-lock.’

’> See Vend. I, 36. Or it may be‘ the witch whom one destroys,
or to whom one prays,’ if we translate the name.

6 See Vend. XIX, 18.

7 See Fravardin Yt. 61. For the reason of this watchfulness, see
Dd. XVII, 6n.


[18] Bb


370 APPENDIX.


WD ge SSS

Of his exploits we are told that he ‘slew the ser-
pent Srvara, which devoured horses and men, which
was poisonous and yellow, over which yellow poison
flowed a hand’s-breadth high. On which Keresaspa
cooked a beverage in a caldron at the midday hour,
and the serpent being scorched, hissed, sprang forth,
away from the caldron, and upset the boiling water ;
KeresAsp, the manly-minded, fled aside frightened’.
We are further told that he slew the golden-heeled
Gandarewa?; that he smote Hitaspa in revenge for
the murder of his brother, Urvakhshaya?; that he
smote the Hunus who are the nine highwaymen, and
those descended from Nivika and Dastayani*; also
Vareshava the DAnayan, Pitaona with the many
witches, Arez6-shamana, and Snavidhaka®; and that
he withstood many smiters or murderers’.

The details of these exploits, still extant in the
Avesta, are very scanty; but some of them appear
to have been more fully described in a legend about
the soul of Keresdspa which formerly constituted
the fourteenth fargard of the Stidkar Nask, the
contents of which are thus summarized in the ninth
book of the Dinkavd :—

‘The fourteenth fargard, Ad-fravakhshi’, is about


1 See Yas. IX, 34-39, Zamy4d Yt. 40 (translated in Haug’s
Essays, pp. 178, 179).

2 See Aban Yt. 38, Zamyad Yt: 41. A monster in the wide-
shored ocean, who is also mentioned in Ram Yt. 28.

8 See Ram Yt. 28, Zamyad Yt. 41.

* See Zamy4d Yt. 41. For ‘ Hunus’ some read ‘sons,’

5 See Zamyad Yt. 41-44. 6 See Fravardin Yt. 136.

7 The name of Yas. XLIV, being the first two words, ad
fravakhshy4, of that chapter of the Gathas. In the detailed
account of the contents of each fargard of the first three Nasks,
given in the ninth book of the Dinkard, each fargard is distinguished


+


I. LEGENDS RELATING TO KERESASP. 371


Atharmazd’s showing the terrible state of the soul
of Keresdsp! to Zaratfst; the dismay of Zaratist
owing to that terrible state; the sorrowful speaking
of Keresdsp as regards the slaying of multitudes, for
which mankind extol him, whereby abstentions from
sin occurred; and the recognition of him by the
creator, Atthaymazd, as extinguishing his fre. The
supplication of Keresdsp for the best existence from
Attharmazd for those exploits when the serpent
(gaz) Srébar? was slain by him, and the violence
of that adversary ; when Gandarep? with the golden
heels was smitten by him, avd the marvellousness
of that fiend; when the Hunus of Vesk6*, who are


by the name of some section of the Gathas. The names thus em-
ployed are composed of the first one, two, or three words of the
Yath4-aht-vairy6, the Ashem-voh(, the Yéwhé-hatam, Yas. XXVIII-
XXXIV, the Yasna haptanghiiti, Yas. XLII-L, LU, LMI, which
supply the twenty-two names required. When the Nask contains
twenty-three fargards, as in the case of the Varstmansar, the first
fargard remains unnamed. Whether these words were used merely
as names, or whether their insertion implies that the fargards of
these Nasks used to be recited (somewhat like those of the Ven-
did4d) alternately with the sections of the Gathas, can hardly be
determined from our present information. It may be noted that
the three Nasks (Sfidkar, Varstmansar, and Bak6), whose contents
_are thus detailed in the Dinkard, all belong to the so-called gasanik

or Gatha class of Nasks; but whether that term implies that they
were metrical, or merely that they were connected in some way with
the GAthas, is also uncertain.

1 Written Kerésdsp6, or Gerésdspéd, throughout the Pahlavi text
of this paragraph.

2 The Srvara of Yas. IX, 34, Zamyad Yt. 40.

8 The Gandarewa of Aban Yt. 38, Ram Yt. 28, Zamyad Yt. 41.

4 Reading Hunti Veské, but it is also possible to read khfino-
dAk8, ‘ blood-producing,’ which is fully applicable to these highway-
robbers. ‘The ‘Hunus in Vaéska’ are mentioned in Aban Yt. 54,
7 as opponents of the warrior Tusa, but the Hunus in Zamyad Yt.
41 have no country assigned to them.

Bb2


372 APPENDIX.


Te de eee ee ee


descendants of Nivik and Dastanik’, were slain by
him, and the grievous harm and disaster owing to
them; azd when the mighty wind? was appeased by
him, and brought back from damaging the world to
benefiting the creatures ; avd for that which happens
when, owing to confinement’, Dahak becomes eager,
rushes on for the destruction of the world, and
attempts the annihilation of the creatures; and his
being roused to smite him and to tame that powerful
fiend for the creatures of the world. The opposition
of fire to Keresdsp, through 47s causing distress to it
and keeping away from it, which were owing to his
seeking hell; the supplication of Zaratist to the fire
to have compassion upon 42m, which was owing to
his sin; the compliance of the fire wzth that request ;
and the departure of the soul of Keresasp to the
ever-stationary existence‘. Perfect is the excellence
of righteousness°®.’

Although the Sidkar Nask has long been lost,
the legend contained in this fourteenth fargard still
survives in its Pahlavi form, though probably some-
what abridged, and a Persian paraphrase of this
Pahlavi version is also to be found in the Persian


1 The Nivika and Déstayani of Zamyad Yt. 41.

2 The wind (v4d6), though an angel when moderate and useful,
is supposed to become a demon in a gale or hurricane ; and is men-
tioned as such in Vend. X, 24.

> In the volcano, Mount Dimavand (see Bd. XII, 31, XXIX, 9,
Byt. III, 55-61). This exploit is expected to be performed hereafter.

* The hamfstik6 ahvand, intermediate between heaven and
hell (see Dd. XX, 3).

> The Pahlavi equivalent of the Av. ashem vohf, here translated,
follows each summary of the contents of a fargard or Nask in the
Dinkard, in the same way as ashem vohfi follows each fargard of


the Vendidad and each section of the Gathas in the Vendidad sAdah
or liturgy.


I, LEGENDS RELATING TO KERESASP. Wa


Rivayats'. The Pahlavi legend is included among
a series of quotations, regarding the importance of
fire, contained in a Pahlavi Rivayat preceding the
Dadistan-i Dinik in some manuscripts?; and its
close correspondence with the above summary of
the fourteenth fargard of the Stidkar Nask will be
seen from the following translation of it :—

. .. ‘And z¢ is declared that fire is so precious
that Atthaymazd spoke unto Zaratist thus: “ Of
whose soul is it ¢#at the actions, position, con-
sciousness, and guardian spirit seem best when thou
shalt behold z¢?”

‘And Zaratist spoke thus: “Of him who is
Keresasp.”

‘Athaymazd summoned the soul of Keresdsp,
and the soul of Keresdsp saw‘ Zaratfist and, on
account of the misery which it had seen in hell, it
spoke unto 4zm thus: “I have been a priest of
KA4pdl®, which should be a power in support of me ;
and for the sake of begging life I have ever travelled
through the world, and the world would have become
hideous in my eyes, the world which should have
feared my splendour’.”


! In Bag, fols. 167-169, where it is quoted from a work called
the Sad-darband-i Hfish.

2 In BK and J; but in K35 this portion of the Rivayat has been
lost, with the first 71x folios of that MS.; it also appears to have
been similarly lost from the older MS. belonging to Mr. Tehmuras
Dinshawji Anklesaria.

5 J omits this word. 4 J omits the seeing.

5 KAbul. One of the three most sacred fires, the Frébak fire, is said
to have been removed by Vist4sp from Khvarizem to KAvulistan (see
Bd. XVII, 6). The Persian version has ‘would to God (kaské) I
were a priest!’ and alters the rest of the sentence to correspond.

®° Reading ré-f li; J has roo var, ‘a hundred lakes (or ordeals


or results).’


374 APPENDIX.


EA ee eee

‘And Atharmazad spoke thus: “Stand off, thou
soul of Keresdsp! for thou shouldst be hideous in
my eyes, because the fire, which is my son!, was
extinguished by thee, and no care of tt was pro-
vided by thee.”

‘And the soul of Keresdsp spoke thus: “ Forgive
me, O Atthavmazd! and grant me the best exist-
ence! grant me the supreme heaven! The serpent
(azd) Srévbar? is slain outright, which was swallow-
ing horses axd swallowing men, and its teeth were
as long as my arm, its ear was as large as fourteen
blankets (namad6), its eye was as large as a wheel,
and its horn was as much as Dahak? in height. And
I was running as much as half a day on z¢s back, till
its head was smitten by me at the neck wzth a club
made for my hand, and z¢ was slain outright by me*.
And if that serpent had not been slain by me, all thy
creatures would have dcex completely annihilated by
it, and thou wouldst never have known a remedy for
Aharman.”

‘Athaymaad spoke thus: “Stand off! for the fire,
which is my son, was extinguished by thee.”

‘Keresdsp spoke thus : “Grant me, O Adhaymazd!
that best existence, the supreme heaven! for by
me Gandarep® was slain outright, by whom twelve


1 Fire is often called ‘the son of Ahura-mazda’ in the Avesta, as
in Yas. II, 18, Vend. V, 9, &c.

2 The Srvara of Yas. IX, 34, Zamyad Yt. 40. The Persian
version has merely azdaha, ‘a dragon.’

§ Orit may be shak,‘a bough.’ The Persian version has ‘ eighty
cubits.’

¢ The Persian version adds ‘and as I looked into its mouth, men
were still hanging about its teeth;’ which was evidently suggested
by what is stated in the account of the next exploit.

5 See p. 371, note 3.


>


I. LEGENDS RELATING TO KERESASP. 2 wig


districts were devoured at once. When I looked
among the teeth of Gandarep, dead men!, were
sticking among his teeth; and my beard was seized
by him, and I dragged him out of the sea?; nine
days and nights the conflict was maintained by us
in the sea, and then I became more powerful than
Gandarep. The sole of Gandarep’s foot was also
seized by me, and the skin was flayed off up to zs
head, and with it the hands and feet of Gandarep
were bound; he was also dragged by me out to the
shore of the sea, and was delivered by me over Zo
Akhrtirag?; and he slaughtered avd ate my fifteen
horses. I also fell down in a dense thicket (aisak6),
and Gandarep carried off my friend Akhrarag, and
she who was my wife was carried off by him‘, and
my father avd nurse (dAyaks) were carried off by
him. And I took under my protection (dinhart-
ginidd) and raised all the people of our pleasant
place, and every single step I sprang forward a
thousand steps, and fire fell into everything which,
was struck by my foot as it sprang forward®; I went
out to the sea; and they were brought back by me,


1 The Persian version says ‘horses and asses.’

2 For this clause the Persian version substitutes ‘the sea was up
to his knee, and his head up to the sun.’

8 This is merely a guess. The word can also be read kharvarag,
‘thorny, or a thorny brake ;’ but it seems to be the name of some
person, being followed by the word déstd, ‘ friend,’ in the next sen-
tence. Akhrfra, son of Haosravangh, is mentioned in Fravardin
Yt. 137, next after Sama Keresdspa, as ‘ withstanding Hashi-dava
(or daéva), the wicked and covetous one destroying the world.’
The Persian version omits from the dragging out of the sea in
this sentence to the slaying in the next (p. 376, line 1).

4 BK has ‘by me,’ which must be a blunder.

5 J omits these last seven words,


376 APPENDIX.


and Gandarep was taken and slain by me’. And if
he had not been slain by me, Aharman would have
become predominant over thy creatures.”

‘Atthhaymazd spoke thus: “Stand off! for thou art
hideous in my eyes, because the fire, which is my
son, was extinguished by thee.”

‘Keresdsp spoke thus: “ Grant me, O Atharmazd!
heaven ov the supreme heaven! for I have slain the
highwaymen? who were so big in body that, when
they were walking, people considered in this way,
that ‘below them are the stars and moon, and below
them moves the sun af dawn, and the water of the
sea reaches up to their knees. And I reached up
to their legs, and they were smitten on the legs by
me; they fell, and the hills on the earth were shat-
tered by them*®. And if those fallen* highwaymen
had not been slain by me, Aharman would have
become predominant over thy creatures.”

‘Athaymazd spoke thus: “Stand off! for thou
shouldst be hideous in my eyes, because the fire,
which is my son, was extinguished by thee.”

‘Keresdasp spoke thus: “Grant me,O Atharmazd!
heaven ov the supreme heaven! When the wind
was weakened (rakht6) and paralysed by me, the


* The Persian version says, ‘I slew him, and as he fell down many
villages and places became desolate.’

* The ‘nine highwaymen’ of Zamy4d Yt. 41. The Persian
version says ‘seven.’ BK has ‘ walked,’ instead of ‘slain’

* Instead of this sentence the Persian version has ‘through fear
of them people could not go on any journey, and every one whom
they might see, on the road that he went, they would instantly eat
up; and in three years they reckoned three hundred thousand men


they had slain and destroyed. And I fought with them and slew all
the seven,’


* J omits the word ‘fallen.’


I. LEGENDS RELATING TO KERESASP. 377


demons deceived the wind, and they spoke unto
the wind thus: ‘He is more resisting thee than all
the creatures and creation, and thou shouldst think
of him thus, that “there is no one walks upon this
earth more resistant of me ¢han Keresdsp;” he
despises demons azd men, and thee, too, who
shouldst be the wind, even thee he despises. And
the wind, when those words were heard by it, came
on so strongly that every tree and shrub which was
in its path was uprooted, and the whole earth which
was in its path was reduced to powder (payangané6i-
ait6 kavdd), and darkness arose. And when it
came to me, who am Keresdsp, it was not possible
for it to lift my foot from the ground; and I arose
and sallied forth (bavA4 yehabtnd@) upon the earth,
and I stood won it, with both feet on an equality
(mirth), until a rampart (pdstd) of it was com-
pleted, so that 1 might go again below the earth;
that which Athaymazd ordered thus: ‘Should I
appoint a keeper of the earth and sky, they would
not forsake me.” And if that thing had not been
done by me, Aharman would have become predomi-
nant over thy creatures.”

‘Atharmazd spoke thus: “Stand off! for thou
shouldst be hideous in my eyes, because the fire,
which is my son, was smitten by thee.”

‘Keresdsp spoke thus: “Grant me, O Athar-
mazd! heaven or the supreme heaven! for z¢ is thus


1 The Persian version has ‘and as it arrived near me, it was not
able to bear my foot from the spot; and I seized the spirit of the
wind, and overthrew him with my own strength, until he made a
promise thus: “I zz// go again below the earth.” And I did not
keep back my hand from that work less than Aftharmazd and the
archangels ordered me.’


378 3 APPENDIX. ;


declared by revelation, that, when Dahak has escaped
from confinement}, no one is able to seek any other
remedy against him but me; on that account grant
me heaven oy the supreme heaven! And if it be
not possible to grant me heaven ov the supreme
heaven, give me again the strength and success
which were mine during life! for when thou shalt
give me again so much strength and success as were
mine when I was produced alive, I will slay Ahar-
man with the demons, I w7// eradicate darkness
from hell, I will complete the beautiful light, and
within its sole existence (tant-aé)? you shalZ sit
and move?.”

‘Adhavmazd spoke thus: “This I wz// not give
thee, ‘hou soul of Keresasp! because men shall
commit sin; and until men commit no more sin, it
is not possible to make thee alive again, and thou.
wouldst also not be able to make other men alive
again, for they produce the resurrection thus, when
all men become quite innocent. When men shall
die, and their souls are wicked, all comfort shall
forsake them, and all the misery and discomfort
occasioned by them sha// remain.”

‘When Keresdsp avd his exploits were spoken of
in this manner, the angels of the spiritual avd the
angels of the worldly existences wept aloud, and


1 See Byt. III, 55-61. The Persian version substitutes a legend
about the gigantic bird Kamak (also mentioned in Mkh. XXVII,
50) which overshadowed the earth, and kept off the rain till the
rivers dried up; it also ate up men and animals as if they were
grains of corn, until Keresasp killed it by shooting it with arrows
continuously for seven days and nights.

2 That is, when there is only light, and no darkness.

° J has ‘I wef sit and move alone within it;’ and the Persian
version has ‘I will sit alone in that place.’


I. LEGENDS RELATING TO KERESASP. 379


Zaratist the Spitaman wept aloud! azd spoke thus:
“Though ¢here should be no deceiver, I would be
the deceiver in thy eyes’,O Atharvmazd! as regards
the soul of Keresdsp ; for when Keresdsp should not
have existed as a bodily and living exzstence, there
would have been no remnant of anything whatever,
or of creature of thine, in the world?.”

‘When Zaratist had become silent therewith, the '
angel of fire* stood upon Ais feet®, and the sinfulness
of Keresdsp unto himself was fully mentioned by
him, and he spoke thus: “I shall not let him into
heaven.”

‘And the angel of fire, having spoken thus many


1 The Persian version does not mention the angels and the
weeping.

2 This can also be translated thus: ‘Though thou shouldst be
no deceiver, thou wouldst be a deceiver in my eyes; the words
hémandayé, ‘would be,’ and hémanés, ‘ thou wouldst be,’ being
. written alike.

8 The Persian version of this speech is, ‘O good creator! I know
that hatred and anger are not in thy path, and when any one
indulges in hatred of another, there is no acquiescence of thine
therein, yet now I see this matter as though some one maintained
hatred against another.’

4 The Persian version says ‘the archangel Ardibahist,’ who is the
protector of fire (see Sls. XV, 5, 12, 13):

5 The Persian version proceeds, and concludes the sentence, as
follows: ‘and Keres4sp groaned unto Zaratiist the Spitaman, and
Ardibahist, the archangel, said: “ O Zaratust | thou dost not know
what Keresdsp has done unto me; that in the world, formerly, my
custom and habit would have been so, that, as they would place
firewood under a caldron, I would send the fire, until that caldron
should be boiled, and their work should be completed, and then it
would have come back to its own place. As that serpent that he
speaks of was slain he became hungry, and because the fire fell one
moment later upon the firewood which he had placed below the
caldron, he smote the fire w/A a club and scattered the fire, and
now I wri/ not pass the soul of Keres4sp to heaven,” ’


380 APPENDIX.


words, desisted; and the angel Gés-afirvan’ stood
upon her feet, and spoke thus: “I shall not let zm
into hell, for the benefit produced by him for me
was manifold.”

‘Gés-atrvan, having spoken thus many words,
desisted?; and Zarattist stood upon zs feet, and
homage was offered by him unto the fire, and he
spoke thus: “I shall provide care for thee, and shall
speak of thy exploits in the world, and I shall speak
to Vistasp® and GamAasp ‘ thus: ‘ Observe fully that
a place is made for the fire as z¢ weve at once!’ when
Keresdsp as engaged in renunciation of szz, and
you shall forgive him®.’’’

The Pahlavi legend breaks off at this point, leaving


1 Av. geus urva, ‘the soul of the ox,’ that is, of the primeval
ox, from which all the lower animals are supposed to have been
developed. This angel, who is usually called Gés, is said to be a
female, and is the protectress of cattle (see Bd. IV, 2-5); in this
capacity she is supposed to be friendly to Keresasp, whose exploits
had chiefly consisted in slaying the destroyers of animal life.

* The Persian version omits these words, and the preceding para-
graph, proceeding in continuation of note 5, p. 379, as follows : ‘And
as Ardibahist, the archangel, spoke these words, the soul of KeresAsp
wept and said: “ Ardibahist, the archangel, speaks truly; I com-
mitted sin and I repent.” And he touched the skirt of Zaratiist wth
his hand, and said : “ Of mankind no one has obtained the eminence,
rank, and dignity that thou obtainedst; now, through this grandeur
and glory which is thine, do thou entreat and make intercession of
Ardibahist, the archangel, for me! so that it may be that I obtain
liberation from this distress and torment.”’

* See Dd. XXXVII, 36. * See D&.XLIV, 16:

> ‘The Persian version continues as follows : ‘ And as Zarattist the
Spitaman made intercession, Ardibahist, the archangel, said : “Thy
reputation is immense, and thy will is great.” And after that he
made no opposition to the soul of Keresasp, but pardoned 2¢ for
Zarattist the Spitaman ; and the soul of Keres4sp obtained liberation
from that discomfort.’ This version then concludes with an admo-
nition as to the necessity of treating fire with proper respect.


$


I, LEGENDS RELATING TO KERESASP. 381


the reader to infer that Zaratist’s request was granted.
It is succeeded, however, by the following further
remarks about Keresdsp, which are evidently con-
nected with the same legend :—

‘Zaratist enquired of Adharmazd thus: “ Whose
is the first dead dody thou shalt unite (varazés) ?”

‘And Atharvmazd spoke thus!: “zs who is
Keresdsp?.”

‘And it seemed grievous Zo Zaratist, and he
spoke unto Athaymazd thus: “ When the business
of Keresasp was the slaughter of men, why is his
the first dead dody thou wilt prepare ?”

‘Atharmazd spoke thus: “Let it not seem
grievous to thee, O Zaratist! for if Keresdsp had
not existed, and thus much work had not been
done by him, which Aas been stated, there would
have been no remains of thee, nor of any creature
of mine.”’

Besides the Persian paraphrase of this legend, in
prose, the Persian Rivayats contain another version
in metre, which consists of 173 couplets*, The
exploits of Keresdsp are also mentioned in the
Mainy6-i Khard (X XVII, 49-53) as follows :—

‘And from Sam the advantage was this, that by
him the serpent Sruvar, the wolf Kapéd which they
also call Pehan+, the water-demon Gazdarfi, the bird
Kamak®*, and the bewildering® demon weve slain.


1 J omits the following words as far as the next ‘thus.’

2 Referring to the revival of Keresdsp from his trance, in order
to destroy Dahak, which is expected to take place before the general
resurrection (see Bd. XXIX, 8, Byt. HI, 59-61).

® In Bao, fols. 169-171, it is quoted from ‘ the book of Bahiram
Firfiz.’

4 Written Péhind, or Pasind, in the Pahlavi text.

5 See p. 378, note I. ® Or ‘seducing,’ or ‘ desolating.’


382 APPENDIX.

Uc ee ee. ee
And also many other great actions, that were more
valuable, he performed; and he kept back much
disturbance from the world, of which, if one of those
special disturbances had remained behind, it would
not have been possible to effect the resurrection and
the future existence.’


4s


Il. THE NIRANG-I KusTt. 383


II]. Tue Ntranc-1 Kusti,


Tue Nirang-i Kusti, or girdle formula, isa religious
rite which a Parsi man or woman ought to perform
every time the hands have been washed, whether for
the sake of cleanliness, or in preparation for prayer ;
but it is not always strictly performed in all its
details.

The Kusti, or sacred thread-girdle, is a string
about the size of a stay-lace, and long enough to pass
three times very loosely round the waist, to be tied
twice in a double knot, and to leave the short ends
hanging behind. It is composed of seventy-two
very fine, white, woollen threads, as described in
Dd. XX XIX, 1, note, and is tied in the manner
there mentioned, but with the actions and ritual
detailed below’.

The ceremonial ablution having been performed,
and the Kusti taken off, the person stands facing the
sun by day, or a lamp or the moon at night; when
there is no light he should face the south, as he
should also at midday, even when the sun is
northerly2,. The Kustt is then doubled, and the loop
thus formed is held in the right hand, with the thumb
in the loop; while the left hand holds the two parts
of the string together, some twenty inches hori-
zontally from the other hand; and the ends hang
loosely from the left hand.
lo Se ee ee

1 For most of the details which follow I am indebted to Dasttr
JamAspji Minochiharji Jamasp-Asa-na.

2 As it is, in Bombay, for about two months in the summer.


384 APPENDIX.


Holding the Kusti in this fashion, the person
recites the following prayer in Pazand, bowing and
raising to his forehead the horizontal portion of the
string at the name of Athaymazd, dashing the string
loosely and sharply downwards towards the left when
mentioning Aharman, and repeating this downward
jerk to the left, less violently, as each of the other
evil beings is named :—‘ May Athaymazd be lord!
and Aharman unprevailing, keeping far away, smitten,
and defeated! May Aharman, the demons, the fiends,
the wizards, the wicked, the Kiks, the Karaps’, the
tyrants, the sinners, the apostates, the impious, the
enemies, avd the witches be smitten azd defeated!
May evil sovereigns be unprevailing! May the
enemies be confounded! May the enemies be
unprevailing !’

Bending forwards and holding the doubled Kusti
up, horizontally, as before, he continues: ‘Athay-
mazd zs the lord; of all sin I am zz renunciation and
penitent, of all kinds of evil thoughts, evil words,
and evil deeds, whatever was thought by me, and
spoken by me, and done by me, and happened
through me, and has originated through me in the
world.’

Then, holding the Kusti single with both hands
near the middle of the string, but as far apart as
before, while the loose ends of the string are short-


* These two Pahlavi names are merely transliterations of the Av.
Kavi and Karapan, the names of certain classes of evil-doers,
traceable back to the earliest times, and, probably, to the Vedic
kavi and kalpa, which would naturally be used in a bad sense in
the Avesta (see Haug’s Essays, p. 289). The Pahlavi translators of
the Yasna explain these names by the words k fir, ‘ blind,’ and kar,
‘deaf,’ which are merely guesses.


¥
II, THE NIRANG-I KUSTI. 385


ened (to prevent their touching the ground) by being
partially gathered up in a large loop hanging under
each hand, like a pair of spectacles, he proceeds:
‘For those sins of thought, word, azd deed, of body
and soul, worldly azd spiritual, do thou pardon this
one!! I am penitent avd in renunciation through the
three words?’

He then continues to recite the following Avesta
phrases: ‘Satisfaction for Ahura-mazda!’ bowing
and raising the Kusti to the forehead; ‘scorn for
Angra-mainyu!’ jerking the Kusti to the left, with-
out altering the mode of holding it; ‘which is the
most forward of actual exertions through the will.
Righteousness is the best good, a blessing it is; a
blessing Je to that which zs righteousness to perfect
rectitude*.’ Applying the middle of the Kusti to
the front of the waist at the first word, ‘ righteous-
ness,’ of the last sentence, it is passed twice round
the waist during the remainder of the sentence, by
the hands meeting behind, exchanging ends, and
bringing them round again to the front.

The following Avesta formula is then recited:
‘Asa patron spirit is to be chosen, so is an earthly
master, for the sake of righteousness, éo de a giver of
good thought of the actions of life towards Mazda ;
and the dominion is for the lord whom he has given


1 The PAzand word is ukhé or aokhé, which the Gugarati
Khurdah Avesta translates by khudataela, ‘most high God;’ but
it seems more probably a misreading of Pahl. hana-r, ‘this one.’
These phrases are a portion of the Patit or renunciation of sin.

2 That is, in thought, word, and deed. So far the phrases are
recited in Pazand, but the following recitations are in the Avesta
language.

8 This last sentence is the Ashem-vohtt formula (see Bd. XX, 2).


[18] ce


386 APPENDIX.

Oe ee
as a protector for the poor’’ At the first word the
long ends of the Kusti, hanging in front, are loosely
twisted round each other at the waist, with a right-
handed. turn (that is, with the sun), and the reciter,
holding his hands together, should think that Athar-
mazd is the sole creator of the good creation, until he
comes to the word ‘actions,’ after which the twist is
drawn closer to the waist during the remainder of
the recitation.

The same Avesta formula is then repeated. At
the first word the second half of the knot is formed,
by twisting the long ends of the Kusti loosely round
each other with a left-handed turn (that is, against
the sun), so as to complete a loose reef-knot, and the
reciter, holding his hands together, should think that
Mazda-worship is the true faith, until he comes to
the word ‘actions,’ after which the complete double
knot is drawn close during the remainder of the
recitation.

Then, passing the long ends of the Kusti round
the waist for the third time, from front to back, the
previous Avesta formula, ‘Righteousness is the best
good,’ &c., is recited. At the first word the ends
of the Kusti are loosely twisted round each other
behind the waist, with a right-handed turn as before,
and the reciter should think that Zarattst was the
true apostle, until he comes to the first occurrence of
the word ‘blessing,’ when the twist is drawn close.
During the remainder of the formula the second half
of the knot is formed, with a left-handed twist as
before, while the reciter thinks that he must practise


* This is the Ahunavar, or Yatha-aht-vairy6 formula (see Bd.
I; 21, Zs, I, 12-19).


*


Il. THE NIRANG-I KUSTI. 387


good thoughts, good words, and good deeds, and
avoid all evil thoughts, evil words, and evil deeds;
the double knot being completed behind as the last
word of the formula is uttered.

Afterwards, bending forward and holding the
front knot of the Kusti with both hands, the person
recites the following Avesta formula: ‘Come for my
protection, O Mazda!! A Mazda-worshipper am I,
a Zarathustrian Mazda-worshipper will I profess my-
se/f, both praising and preferring z¢. I praise a well-
considered thought, I praise a well-spoken word, I
praise a well-performed deed. I praise the Mazda-
worshipping religion, expelling controversy? and
putting down attack, avd the righteous union of
kinsfolk?, which is the greatest and best and most
excellent of things that exist and will exist, which is
Ahurian and Zarathustrian. I ascribe all good to
Ahura-mazda. Let this be the eulogy of the Mazda-
worshipping religion.’ And the reciter then repeats
the formula, ‘ Righteousness is the best good,’ SC.,
as before, bowing reverently, which completes the
rite.


1 What follows is from Yas. XIII, 25-29, and is the conclusion
of the Mazda-worshipper’s creed.

2 The meaning of the original term fraspayaokhedhram is
rather uncertain, and the Pahlavi version is not easy to understand
clearly ; it translates this sentence, as far as the next epithet, as
follows : ‘I praise the good religion of the Mazda-worshippers, from
which the disunion cast forth and the assault put down are manifest
(this is manifest from it, that it is not desirable to go to others without
controversy, and with that which arises without controversy it is
quite requisite to occasion controversy).’

3 This is one of the earliest references to Avaétvadatha, or
marriage among next-of-kin ; the passage being written in the later
GAatha dialect.

(Ons


388 APPENDIX. .
ty ee ee eee


During the rite the person performing it must .
remain standing on the same spot, without stepping _
either backwards or forwards, and must speak to no—
one. Should anything compel him to speak, he must
re-commence the rite after the interruption.


III. MEANING OF KHVETOK-DAS, 389


III. Tue Meaninc or KuviéttK-pas or KuvittpAp.


THAT the term Khvétik-das is applied to mar-
riages between kinsfolk is admitted by the Parsis,
but they consider that such marriages were never
contracted by their ancestors within the first degree
of relationship, because they are not so permitted
among themselves at the present day. Any state-
ments of Greek, or other foreign, writers, regarding
the marriage of Persians with their mothers, sisters,
or daughters, they believe to be simply calumnies due
to ignorance, which it is discreditable to Europeans to
quote, Such statements, they consider, may have
referred to the practices of certain heretical sects,
but never to those of the orthodox faith.

The Parsis are, no doubt, fully justified in
receiving the statements of foreign writers, re-
garding the customs of their ancestors, with proper
caution; a caution which is quite as necessary when
the statements are agreeable as when they are
disagreeable to present notions. The Greeks,
especially, had such a thorough contempt for all
foreign customs that differed from their own, that
they must have found it quite as difficult to obtain
correct information, or to form an impartial opinion,
about oriental habits as the average European finds
it at the present time. On the other hand, the
Parsis have to consider that the ancient Greek
writers, whose statements they repudiate, were neither
priests nor zealots, whose accounts of religious cus-


1 See Dasttir Peshotanji’s translation of the Dinkard, p. 96, note.


390 APPENDIX.


toms might be distorted by religious prejudices, but
historians accustomed to describe facts as impartially
as their information and nationality. would permit.
It is quite possible that these writers may have
assumed that such marriages were common among
the Persians, merely because they had sometimes
occurred among the Persian rulers; but such an
assumption would be as erroneous as supposing that
the marriage practices of the Israelites were similar
to those of their most famous kings, David and
Solomon, forgetting that an oriental sovereign is
usually considered to be above the law and not
subject to it.

Rejecting all statements of foreigners, as liable to
suspicion, unless confirmed by better evidence, it
seems desirable to ascertain what information can
be obtained, on this subject, from the religious books
of the Parsis themselves. This matter has hitherto
been too much neglected by those best acquainted
with the original texts, and must be considered as
only partially exhausted in the following pages.

The term Khvétik-das? is a Pahlavi transcription
of the Avesta word Avaétvadatha, ‘a giving of,
to, or by, one’s own,’ and is sometimes partially
translated into the form Khvétik-dad, or Khvétt-
dad, in which the syllable dad, ‘what is given, a
gift, is merely a translation of the syllable das
(Av. datha).

The Avesta word Zvaétvadatha is not found in
any of the GAathas, or sacred hymns, that are still
extant and are usually considered the oldest portion


* Occasionally written Khvétix-dat, as in Pahl. Vend. VIII, 36
(see p. 392).


é
Ill MEANING OF KHVE£TOK-DAS. 391


of the Avesta. But its former component, Zvaétu,
occurs several times therein, with the meaning ‘ one’s
own, or kinsman,’ as distinguished from ‘friends’
and ‘slaves.’

The earliest occurrence of the complete word is
probably in Yas. XIII, 281, where it is mentioned
as follows :—‘I praise.... the righteous vaétva-
datha, which is the greatest and best and most
excellent of things that exist and will exist, which
is Ahurian avd Zarathustrian. This merely implies
that A/vaétvadatha was a good work of much im-
portance, which is also shown by Visp. III, 18, Gah
IV, 8, and Vistasp Yt. 17, where the FTvaétvadatha
(meaning the man who has accomplished that good
work) is associated with youths who are specially
righteous for other reasons. But there is nothing
in any of these passages to indicate the nature of
the good work.

In Vend. VIII, 35, 36 we are told that those who
carry the dead must afterwards wash their hair and
bodies with the urine ‘of cattle or draught oxen,
not of men or women, except the two who are
Hvattvadatha and //vaétvadathi,’ that is, male and .
female performers of {7 vaétvadatha. This passage,
therefore, proves that the good work might be
accomplished by both men and women, but it does
not absolutely imply that it had any connection with
marriage.

Turning to the Pahlavi translations of these pas-
sages we find the transcription Khvétik-das, Khve-
tik-dat, or Khvéttk-dasth, with explanations which
add very little to our knowledge of the nature of
OA SE A ee

1 See p. 387, note 3.


392 APPENDIX.


Bie is Sh eB Si rw Ae ee oe


the good work. Thus, Pahl. Yas. XIII, 28 merely
states that it is ‘declared about it that it is requisite
to do z#;’ Pahl. Vistasp Yt. 171 asserts that ‘the
duty of: Khvétak-das is said ¢o de the greatest good
work in the religion, that, owing to it, Aharman, the
demon of demons, is becoming hopeless, so that the
dissolution of Khvétik-das is worthy of death ;’ and
Pahl. Vend. VIII, 36 speaks of ‘the two who are
a Khvéttk-dat man azd woman ®, that is, it is done
by them.’

Another reference to Khvétik-das in the Pahlavi
translations of the Avesta occurs in Pahl. Yas.
XLIV, 4, as follows:—‘Thus I proclaim in the
world that [which he who is Adhaymazd made his
own] best [Khvétik-das]*. By aid of righteousness
Atiharmazd is aware, who created this oze*[to perform


1 The age of this Pahlavi version of the Vistasp Yast is doubtful,
and it is even possible that it may have been composed in India.
The only MS. of it that I have seen belongs to Dasttir Jamaspji
Minochiharji, who kindly gave me a copy of it, but seemed doubtful
about the age of the translation. He was aware that his MS. was
written some forty years ago, but he did not know from what MS.
it was copied. ‘This version is, however, mentioned in the list of
Pahlavi works given in the introduction to Dasttir Peshotanji’s
Pahlavi Grammar, pp. 18, 31, so that another MS. of the Pahlavi
text probably exists in the library of the high-priest of the Parsis
in Bombay.

° Or, perhaps, ‘man and wife ;’ as gabr4, ‘man,’ is occasionally
used for ‘husband,’ though shfi is the usual word, and nésman
means both ‘woman’ and ‘ wife.’

* Written Khvétvadas or Khvétfidas in the very old MS. of
Dasttr Jamaspji Minochiharji, the text of which is followed in this
translation. The phrases in brackets have no equivalents in the
original Avesta text, and, therefore, merely represent the opinions
of the Pahlavi translators.


* Spendarmad apparently, as indicated by the sequel.


+


III. MEANING OF KHV&TOK-DAS. 393


Khvétik-das}, And through fatherhood Vohiman ?
was cultivated by him, [that is, for the sake of the
proper nurture of the creatures Khvéttk-das was
performed by him.] So she who is 4zs daughter is
acting well, [who is the fully-mindful] Spendaymaq@?,
[that is, she did not shrink from the act of Khvéttk-
das.| She? was not deceived, [that is, se did not
shrink from the act of Khvéttik-das, because she is]
an observer of everything [as regards that which is]
Atharmaza’s, [that is, through the religion of At-
haymazd ‘she attains to all duty and law.]’ The
allusions to Khvétik-das in this passage are mere
interpolations introduced by the Pahlavi translators,
for the sake of recommending the practice ; they have
no existence in the Avesta text, but they show that
the Pahlavi translators understood Khvétik-das to


1 The Pahlavi translator seems here to understand Vohfiman not
as the archangel (see Dd. III, 13), but as a title (‘ good-minded’) of
the primeval man, Gayémard, who is supposed to have been pro-
duced by Atiharmazd out of the earth (compare Gen. ii. 7), repre-
sented by the female archangel Spendarmad. The term vohu-
man6 is used in Vend. XIX, 69, 76-84 for both a well-intentioned
man and his clothing.

2 The female archangel, a personification of the Avesta phrase
spenta Armaiti, ‘bountiful devotion ;’ she has special charge of
the earth and virtuous women (see Bd. I, 26, Sls. XV, 20-24).
She is called the daughter of Afiharmazd, even as the fire and
Vohtiman are called his sons, because devotion (representing the
earth), fire, and good thought are considered to be his most im-
portant creations. And, as the earth is also, metaphorically, the
mother of man, and the creator Aflharmazd is figuratively his
father, this unfortunate combination of anthropomorphisms has
induced later superstition to take these statements literally, and
to quote them as a justification of marriage between father and
daughter.

3 This seems the most probable nominative to the verbs in this
sentence, but it is by no means certain.


394 APPENDIX.


refer to such relationship as that of father and
daughter, as will appear more clearly from further
allusions to the same circumstances in passages to
be quoted hereafter’. Regarding the age of the
Pahlavi translation of the Yasna we only know for
certain that it existed in its present form a thousand
years ago, because a passage is quoted from it by
Zad-sparam, brother of the author of the Dadistan-t
Dinik and Epistles of MAntis#ihar, in his Selections’,
and we know that he was living in a.p. 881%. But
it was probably revised for the last time as early as
the reign of Khiisré Néshirvan (A. D. 531-579), when
the Pahlavi Vendidad was also finally revised‘.

The Pahlavi versions of the lost Nasks must have
been nearly of the same age as those of the extant
Avesta, but of the contents of these versions we
possess only certain statements of later writers. —
According to some of the modern Persian state-
ments the Dibdsraged Nask contained many details
about Khvéttik-das, but this is contradicted by the
long account of its contents given in the eighth
book of the Dinkarvd, which was written more than
a thousand years ago®, and in which Khvétttk-das
is not once noticed. The practice is, however, men-
tioned several times in the Dinkavd, as an important
good work noticed in the Nasks, but no details are
given, except in the following passages from the
ninth book :—


First, regarding the latter part of the eighteenth


fargard of the Varastmansar Nask :—‘ And this, too,
1 See pp. 396, 401, 416. Pe Sei Z Sayers
See Ep: Nia any, ox, * See Ep. I, iv, 17, note.


° This is proved by the long quotation from Dk. VI contained
in Dd. XCIV, 1-11,


Ill. MEANING OF KHVETOK-DAS. SO


that thereupon they shall excite a brother and sister
with mutual desire, so that they shall perform
Khvétik-das with unanimity, and before midday are
generated a radiance which is sublime, centred in
the face, and peeping glances (vénik6 Altis); and
they make the radiance, whch is openly manifest,
grow up in altitude the height of three spears of a
length of three reeds each’; and after midday they
have learned expulsion (ranakih’), and shall re-
nounce the fiend who is before the destroyer.’ This
is clearly an allusion to the Khvéttik-das of brother
and sister, as it can hardly be considered as merely
referring to the arrangement of marriages between
their children.

Second, regarding the earlier part of the fourteenth
fargard of the Baké Nask :—‘ And this, too, that the
performance of whatever would be a causer of pro-
creation for the doers of actions is extolled as the
perfect custom of the first Khvétik-das; because
causing the procreation of the doers of actions is the
fatherhood of mankind, the proper fatherhood of
mankind is through the proper production of pro-
geny, the proper production of progeny is the culti-
vation of progeny in one’s own with the inclinations
(khimiha) of a first wish, and the cultivation of
progeny in one’s own is Khvétik-das. And he who
extols the fatherhood of mankind, when zt7s a causer
of the procreation of the doers of actions, has also
extolled Khvéttk-das. And this, too, that the proper
nurture for the creatures, by him whose wish is for


1 A height of about 42 English feet (see Dd. XLIII, 5).
2 That is, the capability of expelling the fiends that try to take


possession of man.
8 Reading gdm (=k4m), but it may be dam, ‘creature.’


306 - APPENDIX.


virtue, has taught 22m to perform Khvéttk-das.
Virtue is its virtue even for this reason, because, for
the sake of maintaining a creature with propriety,
he reckons upon the proper disposition of the
multitude, that which is generated in the race by
innumerable Khvétik-dases!. And this, too, that
Spendaymad is taught as éeimg in daughterhood to
Atharmazd by him whose wisdom comszsts in com-
plete mindfulness. Even on this account, because
wisdom azd complete mindfulness? are within the
limits of Adhaymazd and Spendaymad; wisdom is
that which is Athaymaza’s, complete mindfulness
is that which is Spendaymaa’s, and complete mind-
fulness is the progeny of wisdom, just as Spendaz-
mad is of Atharvmazd. And from this is expressly
the announcement that, by him who as connected
complete mindfulness with wisdom, Spendaymad is
taught as deng in daughterhood to Athaymazd.
And this, too, the existence of the formation of that
daughterhood, is taught by him whose righteousness
consists in complete mindfulness.’ This quotation
merely shows that Khvéttk-das referred to con-
nections between near relations, but whether the
subsequent allusions to the daughterhood of Spen-
daymad had reference to the Khvétik-das of father
and daughter is less certain than in the case of Pahl.
Yas. XLIV, 4, previously quoted’.

Third, regarding the middle of the twenty-first


* That is, the useful peculiarities ofa particular breed of domestic
animals are maintained and intensified by keeping up the purity of
the race.

* “Complete mindfulness’ is the usual Pahlavi explanation of Av.
Armaiti, ‘devotion,’ the latter component of the name Spendarmad.

* See pp. 392, 393.


pi
III. MEANING OF KHVETOK-DAS. 307


fargard of the Baké Nask:—‘ And this, too, that
a daughter is given in marriage (nésmanth) to a
father, even so as a woman to another man, by him
who teaches the daughter and the other woman the
reverence due unto father and husband.’ The refer-
ence here to the marriage of father and daughter
is too clear to admit of mistake, though the term
Khvétik-das is not mentioned.

Next in age to the Pahlavi versions of the Avesta
we ought perhaps to place the Book of Arda-Viraf,
because we are told (AV. I, 35), regarding Viraf, that
‘there are some who call hem dy the name of Nikh-
shahptr,’ and this may have been the celebrated
commentator of that name, who was a councillor of
king Khifisr6é Néshirvan!, so that we cannot safely
assume that this book was written earlier than the
end of the sixth century. It gives an account of
heaven and hell, which Ard4-Viraf is supposed to have
visited during the period of a week, while he seemed
to be inatrance. In the second grade of heaven,
counting upwards, he found the souls of those who
had ‘performed no ceremonies, chanted no sacred
hymns, and practised no Khvétik-das,’ but had come
there ‘through other good works;’ and it may be
noted that the two upper grades of heaven appear
to have been reserved for good sovereigns, chief-
tains, high-priests, and others specially famous. In
hell, also, he saw the soul of a woman suffering |
grievous punishment because she had ‘violated
Khvéttik-das ;’ but this passage occurs in one MS.
only. We are also told (AV. II, 1-3, 7-10) that
‘Viraf had seven sisters, and all? those seven sisters


1 See Ep. I, iv, 17.
2 The word translated ‘all’ is the ordinary Huz. ko/4, equivalent


398 APPENDIX.
WE ee ee


were as wives of Viraf; revelation, also, was easy to
them, and the ritual had deez performed .. . . they
stood up and bowed, and spoke thus: “ Do not
this thing, ye Mazda-worshippers! for we are seven
sisters, and he is an only brother, and we are, all
seven sisters, as wives? of that brother.”’ This
passage, supposing that it really refers to marriage,
seems to attribute an exaggerated form of the Khve-
tik-das of brother and sister to Viraf, as a proof of
his extraordinary sanctity; but it can hardly be con-
sidered as a literal statement of facts, any more than
the supposed case of a woman having married seven
brothers successively, mentioned in Mark xii. 20-22,
Luke xx. 29-32. j .

In another Pahlavi book of about the same age,
which is best known by its Pazand name, Mainyé-i


Khard2, we find Khvétik-das placed second among


to Pers. har, but a Parsi critic has suggested that it ought to be read
kantk, ‘virgin, so as to get rid of the idea that the sisters were
married to Viraf. This suggestion is ingenious, because the dif-
ference between ko/4 and kanik is very slight, when written in
Pahlavi characters; but it is not very ingenuous, because the substi-
tution of kantk for ko/a, both here and in the similar phrase at
the end of the passage quoted in our text, would render the sentences
quite ungrammatical, as would be easily seen by any well-educated
Parsi who would translate the phrases literally into modern Persian
words, which would give him the following text: an har haft
‘hvaharan Viraf &fin zan bid and for the first phrase, and har
haft ‘Avahar an birddar zant ém for the second. To substitute
any Persian word for ‘ virgin’ in place of the pronoun har, in these
two phrases, would evidently produce nonsense. The really doubtful
point in these phrases is whether zan and zani are to be understood
as ‘wife’ and ‘ wifehood,’ or merely as ‘ woman’ and ‘ womankind ;’
but it would be unusual to use such terms for the unmarried female
members of a family.

1? Or ‘the womankind.’

2 From a facsimile of the only known MS. of the original Pahlavi


4


Ill. MEANING OF KHVETOK-DAS. 399


seven classes of good works (Mkh. IV, 4), and
ninth among thirty-three classes of the same (Mkh.
XX XVII, 12); and the dissolution of Khvéttk-das
is mentioned as the fourth in point of heinousness
among thirty classes of sin (Mkh. XXXVI, 7).

In the Bahman Yast, which may have existed in
its original Pahlavi form before the Muhammadan
conquest of Persia!, it is stated that, even in the
perplexing time of foreign conquest, the righteous
man ‘continues the religious practice of Khvétik-das
in his family2.’

The third book of the Dinkard, which appears to
have been compiled by the last editor® of that work,
contains a long defence of the practice of Khvéttik-
das, forming its eighty-second* chapter, which may
be translated as follows :—

‘On a grave attack (hd-giradyisn6) of a Jew upon


text of this work, recently published by Dr. Andreas, it appears that
its Pahlavi name was Dina-i Minavad-i Khard (or Mainég-i Khird),
‘the opinions of the spirit of wisdom,’

1 See Sacred Books of the East, vol. v, pp. liii-lvi.

e See Byt. Il, 57, 61.

8 The name of this editor was Attiv-pad, son of Hémid, as appears
from the last chapter (chap. 413) of the same book. He was a
contemporary of the author of the Dadistan-i Dinitk (see Bd.
XXXIII, 11).

4 Chap. 80 in the recent edition of Dastfr Peshotanji Behramji,
because his numbers do not commence at the beginning of the book.
His translation of this chapter (see pp. 90-102 of the English trans-
lation of his edition) differs considerably from that given in our text.
This difference may be partly owing to its being translated from the
GugarAti translation, and not direct from the original Pahlavi; but
it is chiefly due to the inevitable result of attempting a free transla-
tion of difficult Pahlavi, without preparing a literal version in the first
place. The translation here given is as literal as possible, but the
Pahlavi text is too obscure to be yet understood with absolute cer-
tainty in some places,


400 ‘ APPENDIX.


a priest, which was owing to asking the reason of
the custom (Ahanké) as to Khvétfik-das; and the
reply of the priest to him from the exposition of the
Mazda-worshipping religion.

‘That is, as ome complaining about wounds,
damage, and distress comes on, 2¢ is lawful to dis-
pute with him in defence begirt with legal opinion
(dadistand parvand), and the consummation of
the accusation of an innocent man is averted; so
of the creatures, the invisible connection of their
own power to fellow-creations azd their own race,
through the propitiousness of the protection azd
preserving zzfluence of the sacred beings, is a girdle,
and the consummation of the mutual assistance of
men is Khvétik-das. The name is Khvéttk-das,
which is zsed when 7¢ zs “a giving of one’s own”
(khvés-dahisnih), and its office (gds) is a strong
connection with one’s own vace and fellow-creations,
through the protection axzd preserving zzfluence of
the sacred beings, which is, according to the treatises,
the union of males azd females of mankind of one’s
own race in preparation for, and connection with,
the renovation of the universe. ‘That union, for the
sake of proceeding incalculably more correctly, is,
among the innumerable similar races of mankind,
that with near kinsfolk (nabanazdist4n6), and,
among near kinsfolk, that with those next of kin
(nazd-padvandan6); azd the mutual connection
of the three kinds of nearest of kin (nazd-pad-
vandtar)—which are father and daughter, son and
she who bore 421, and brother and sister—is the
most complete (avirtar) that I have considered.


1 Literally ‘bearer’ (bfirdar), which is not the usual word for
‘mother,’ but equivalent to the Av. baretar that is used in that sense.


s
III. MEANING OF KHVETOK-DAS. 401


‘On the same subject the exposition of the ob-
scure statements of the good religion, by a wise
high-priest of the religion, is this :—“I assert that
God (yédatd) is the being, as regards the creatures,
who created azy of the creatures there are which
are male, and azy there are which are female; and
that which is male is a son, and, similarly, a daughter
is that which is female. The daughter of himself,
the father of all, was Spendarmad'’, the earth, a
female being of the creation; and from her he
created the male Gayémard@?, which is explained as
the name for him who was specially the first man,
since it is Gayémard living who is speaking and
mortal, a limitation which was specially his, because
of these three words—which are ‘living, speaking,
and mortal’—two of the limitations, which are ‘living
and speaking, were through the provision of 4zs
father, the creator, and one, which is ‘mortal,’ was
proceeding from the destroyer; the same limitation
is upon all mankind, who are connected with that
man’s lineage, until the renovation of the universe.
And now I say, if the aid of the father Zas produced
a male from the daughter, it is named a Khvétik-das
of father azd daughter *.”

‘This, too, is from the exposition of the religion,
that the semen of GAyémard—which is called seed—
when he passed away, fell o Spendaymad‘, the earth,
which was his own mother; and, from its being united


ee


1 See p. 393, note 2.

2 See Dd. II, 10, XXXVII, 82, LXIV, 5.

8 Tt is uncertain whether the high-priest’s statement continues
beyond this point, or not.

4 See Bd. XV, 1, 2, Dd. LXIV, 6.


[18] pd


402 APPENDIX.


therewith, Mashya and Mashiy6i! were the son and
daughter of Gayémard and Spendaymad, and it is
named the Khvétik-das of son and mother. And
Mashya and Mashtydt, as male and female, practised
the quest of offspring, one with the other, and it is
named the Khvétik-das of brother and sister. And
many couples weve begotten by them, azd the couples
became continually? wife and husband?; and all men,
who fave been, are, and w// be, are from origin the
seed of Khvétfik-das. And this is the reason which
is essential for z¢s fulfilment by law, that where z¢s
contemplation (andagisn6) exists zf is manifest
from the increase of the people of all regions.

‘And I assert that the demons are enemies of
man, and a non-existence of desire for them consists
wm striving for it when Khvétik-das is practised ; it
then becomes their * reminder of that original prac-
tice of contemplation which is the complete gratitude
of men, and Zas become his® who is inimical to them.
Grievous fear, distress, and anguish also come upon
them, ¢hezr power diminishes, and they less under-
stand the purpose of causing the disturbance and
ruin of men, And 7¢ is certain that making the
demons distressed, suffering, frightened, axd weak-
ened is thus a good work, and this way of having
reward and of recompense is the property of the
practisers of such good works.

‘And I assert that the goodness of appearance
and growth of body, the display of wisdom, temper,


1 See Dd. XXXVII, 82, LXIV, 2, LXV, 2, LXXVII, 4, where
these names are spelt differently.

2 Literally ‘have become and have become’

8 See Bd. XV, 22, 24-26. * The demons’.

5 Aftharmazd’s, 7


Ill. MEANING OF KHVETOK-DAS. 403


and modesty, the excellence of skill azd strength,
and also the other qualities of children are so much
the more as they are nearer to the original race of
the begetter, and they shall receive ¢hem more per-
fectly azd more gladly. An example is seen zz
those who sfvimg from a religious woman who is
gentle, believing the spiritual evis¢ence, acting mo-
destly, of scanty strength, who is a forgiver and
reverential, axd from a mail-clad (gapar) warrior of
worldly religion, who is large-bodied azd possessing
strength which is stimulating (4g4r) Azs stout heart
while he begets. They? are not completely for war—
which is a continuance of lamentation (n4s-ravan-
dih)—and not for carefulness and affection for the
soul; as from the dog aud wolf—and not the ruin
(sez) of the sheep—arises the fox, like the wolf, dué
not wth the strength of the wolf like the dog, and it
does not even possess z¢s perfect shape, nor that of
the dog. And ¢hey are like those which are born
from a swift Arab horse and a native dam, and are
not galloping like the Arab, and not kicking (pada-
yak) like the native. And ¢hey have not even the
same perfect characteristics’, just as the mule that
springs from the horse and the ass, which is not like
unto either of them, and even zs seed is cut off
thereby, azd zs lineage is not propagated forwards.
‘And this is the advantage from the pure preser-
vation of race. I assert that there are three® species


1 The offspring of such a match, which the apologist evidently
considers an ill-assorted one, as tending to deteriorate the warlike
qualities of the warrior’s descendants, although he himself is no
advocate for war.

2 As their parents.

8 Dastfir Peshotanji has ‘four,’ because the Pahlavi text seems


Dd2


404 APPENDIX.


(vag) and kinds of affection of sister azd brother for
that which shall be born of them :—one is this, where
zt zs the offspring of brother and brother; one is
this, where the offspring is that of! brothers? and
their sister ; and one is this, where z¢ zs the offspring
of sisters*, And as ¢o the one of these where the
offspring is that of* a brother, and for the same
reason as applies to all three® species of them, the
love, desire, and effort, which arise for the nurture of
‘ offspring of the three species, are zz hope of benefit.
And equally adapted are the offspring to the pro-
creators; and this is the way of the increasing love
of children, through the good nurture which is very
hopeful.

‘And so, also, are those who are born of father
and daughter, ov son and mother. Light flashed
Sorth (gastd) or unflashed (aparvakhtd) is always
seen at the time when z¢ zs much exposed, and
pleased is 4e who has a child of Azs child, even when
it is from some one of a different race and different
SESE ORE el a ROPE SOE SOT
to speak of four species in the next sentence; here it seems to
have ‘six’ in ciphers, but the first cipher can also be read aé, the
conditional suffix to the verb which immediately precedes the
ciphers in the Pahlavi text, and the second cipher is merely ‘three,’


which corresponds to the three possible kinds of first cousins that
are about to be detailed in the text.

* Reading zak-t instead of zits (which might be read zakth
if there were such a word),

' ® Literally ‘brother.’ ® Literally ‘sister,’

* Reading zak-? instead of zts, as before. This is Dastfr
Peshotanji’s fourth species of cousinship, which he understands as
meaning second cousins.

° Reading 13, by dividing the Pahlavi cipher for ‘four’ into
two parts, both here and near the end of the sentence. This
paragraph can hardly be understood otherwise than referring to
the present form of Khvétfik-das, the marriage of first cousins.


III]. MEANING OF KHV&TOK-DAS. 405


country. That, too, Zas then become much delight
(vayag) which is expedient, that pleasure, sweet-
ness, and joy which are owing to a son that a man
begets from a daughter of his own, who is also a
brother of that same mother; and he who is born
of a son and mother is also a brother of that same
father; this is a way of much pleasure, which is a
blessing of the joy, azd@ no harm is therein ordained
that is more than the advantage, and no vice that is
more than the well-doing (khfip g4r). And if it
be said that it is of evil appearance, it should be
observed that when! a wound occurs in the sexual
part of a mother, or sister, or daughter, and she
flees (fravéd) from a medical man, and there is no
opportunity for him to apply a seton (palit6), and
her father, or son, or brother is instructed in similar
surgery, which is more evil zz appearance, when they
touch the part with the hand, and apply a seton, or
when a strange man does so?

‘And, when z¢ is desirable to effect their union,
which is the less remarkable (kam hfi-zanakhiktar)
in evil appearance, when they are united (ham-
dvadi-hénd) by them in secret, such as when the
hearing of their written contract (nipist6) of wife-
hood and husbandhood? is accomplished in the back-
ground (dar ptistd), or when the sound of drums
and trumpets acquaints the whole district, where


ee


1 Reading amat instead of mfin, ‘ who,’ (see Dd. LXII, 4 n.)

2 Showing that the practice advocated was understood to be
a regular marriage (performed in private probably on account of
the authorities being of a foreign faith) and not any kind of
irregular intercourse. It is here approvingly contrasted with the
noisy celebration of a marriage with a person of foreign faith, in
accordance with foreign customs.


406 APPENDIX.


these people are renowned, that such an Arfman?
intends to effect such a purpose with the daughter,
sister, or mother of such a Parst man?

‘On-this account of less evil appearance is even
the good appearance which is to be mutually prac-
tised; and after the mode is seen, even the advan-
tageousness in the accomplishment of the daily duty
of concealing disgrace, the mutual desire, the mutual
advantage and harm, and the contentment which
arise as to whatever has happened are also mutual
assistance. Some, with a husband and faint-hearted-
ness, have a disposition (sind) of incapability, and
the diligence which is in their reverence of the
husband, who is ruler of the family (banag shah),
is due even to the supremacy which he would set
over them through the severity of a husband. Very
many others, too, who are strange women, are not
content with a custom (vag) of this description; for
they demand even ornaments to cover and clothe
the bold and active ones, and slaves, dyes, perfumes,
extensive preparations, and many other things of
house-mistresses which are according to their de-
sire, though z¢ is not possible they should receive
them. And, if zt be not possible, they would not
accept retrenchment ; and, if they should not accept
retrenchment, it hurries ov brawling, abuse, and
ugly words about this, and even uninterrupted false-
hood (avisistak-i£ zdr) is diffused as regards it;
of the secrets, moreover, which they conceal they
preserve night and day a bad representation, and
unobservantly. They shall take the bad wife to


Reece ee Se


* A native of Asia Minor, or any other part of the eastern
empire of the Romans.


#


Ill. MEANING OF KHVETUK-DaS. 407


pe


the house of er father and mother, the husband
is dragged to the judges, avd they shall form a dis-
trict assembly (shat76 angézd) about it. And lest
he should speak thus: “I will release her from wife-
hood with met,” vice and fraud of many kinds and
the misery of deformity are the faults which are also
secretly attributed to him.

“A wife of those three classes? is to be provided,
since they would not do even one of these things °;
on which account, even through advantageousness,
virtuous living, precious abundance, dignity, and
innocence, mutual labour is manifestly mighty ana
strong.

‘And if it be said that,“ with all this which you
explain, there is also, afterwards, a depravity (dar-
vakh) which is hideous,” it should be understood
in the mind that hideousness and beauteousness
are specially those ¢sémgs which do not exist in
themselves, but through some one’s habit of taking
up an opinion and belief. The hideous children of
many are in the ideas of procreation exceedingly
handsome, and the handsome forms of many are in
the ideas of a housekeeper (khandp4nd) exceed-
ingly ugly. We consider him also as ove of our
enemies when any one walks naked in the country,
which you consider hideous ; but the naked skins of


Be eG VO eS ee ee


1 That is, lest he should pronounce her divorce.

2 The three nearest degrees of relationship must be meant,
as the sequel admits the possibility of the union being considered
objectionable; otherwise, the three kinds of first cousins might be
understood.

_® As a special pleader for marriage between near relations the
apologist feels himself bound to argue that all bad wives must have
been strangers to the family before marriage.


408 APPENDIX.


the country call 42m handsome whose garments,
which seem to them hideous, have fallen of And
we are ¢hey in whose ideas a nose level with the face
is ugly, du¢ they who account a prominent nose ugly,
and say it is a walling ¢Za¢ reaches between the two
eyes, remain selecting a handsome ove. And con-
cerning handsomeness and ugliness in themselves,
which are only through having taken wp an opinion
and belief, cere is a change even through time and
place; for amy one of the ancients whose head was
shaved was as z¢ were ugly, and it was so settled by
law that z¢ was a sin worthy of death for them?;
then its habits (sand) did not direct the customs of
the country to shave the head of a man, du¢ now
there is a sage who has considered z¢ as handsome
and even a good work. Whoever is not clear that
zt is hideous is to think, about something threaten-
ing (girai), that z¢ is even so not in itself, but
through wha¢ zs taken into themselves they con-
sider that z¢ is hideous.

‘Then for us the good work of that thing’, of
which 2 is cognizable that it is so ordained by the
creator, has z¢s recompense; it is the protector of
the race, axd the family is more perfect; z¢s nature


* That is, those who admire flat noses select their beauties
accordingly. Beauty being merely a matter of taste, which varies
with the whim of the individual and the fashion of the period,

* This law was evidently becoming obsolete at the time the
apologist was writing, and is now wholly forgotten. All Parsi
laymen have their heads shaved at the present time, although the
priests merely have their hair closely cut. This change of custom,
in a matter settled by religious law, should warn the Parsis not
to deny the possibility of other complete alterations having taken
place in their religious customs.

° Khvétik-das,


Ill. MEANING OF KHVE&TOK-DAS. 409


is without vexation (apizar) and gathering affec-
tion, an advantage to the child—the lineage deng
exalted—gathering (avarétin) hope, offspring, and
pleasure 7z¢ is sweetness fo the procreator, and the
joy is most complete; less is the harm azd more the
advantage, little the pretence and much the skill of
the graceful blandishments (n4z4n6) which are ap-
parent, aiding and procuring assistance (bangisn6),
averting disaster, and conducting affairs; less is the
fear, through itself is itself illustrious, and the stead-
fast shall abandon crime (Zam). And all our fathers
and grandfathers, by whom the same practice was
lawfully cherished, maintained z# handsomely in ¢hezr
homes; and to think of mankind only as regards
some assistance is the enlightenment of the stead-
fast, a reason which is exhibiting the evidence of
wisdom, that no practice of it! is not expedient.
‘And if it be said that the law? Aas afterwards
commanded as regards that custom thus: “ Ye shall
not practise z#/” every one who is cognizant of that
command is to consider z¢ current; du¢ we are not
cognizant of that command, and éy an intelligent
person (khaparvaraké) this should also be seen
minutely, through correct observation, that all the
knowledge of men has arisen from Khvéttk-das.
For knowledge is generated by the union of instinc-
tive wisdom and acquired wisdom'; instinctive wis-
dom is the female, avd acquired wisdom the male ;
and on this account, since both are an achievement
by the creator, they are sister and brother. And


eo Ee ee


1 Khvéttik-das.
2 Perhaps the law of the foreign conquerors is meant.
® See Dd. XXXVII, 35, XL, 3.


410 APPENDIX.


also of everything worldly the existence, maturing,
and arrangement are due to union in proportion ;
water, which is female, and fire, which is male},
are accounted sister azd brother in combination,
and they seem as though one restrains them from
Khvéttk-das, unless, through being dissipated them-
selves?, seed—which is progeny—arises therefrom ;
and owing to a mutual proportionableness of water
and fire is the power in the brain, for if the water be
more it rots 22 away, avd if the fire be more it burns
2¢ away.’

This elaborate defence of Khvétik-das shows
clearly that, at the time it was written (about a
thousand years ago), that custom was understood to
include actual marriages between the nearest rela-
tives, although those between first cousins appear
to be also referred to.

In the r95th* chapter of the third book of the
Dinkavd we are told that the eighth of the ten
admonitions, delivered to mankind by Zarattst, was
this:—‘For the sake of much terrifying of the
demons, and much lodgment of the blessing of the
holy‘ in one’s body, Khvéttik-das is to be practised.’
And the following chapter informs us, that ‘ opposed
to that admonition of the righteous Zarattist, of prac-
tising Khvétdk-das for the sake of much terrifying


* pee Dd. XCIIL. ran,

® Into the forms of moisture and warmth in the body. Water and
fire in their ordinary state being incapable of combination.

* This will be the 193rd chapter in Dasttir Peshotanji’s edition,
because his numbers do not commence at the beginning of the
book. A similar difference will be found in the numbering of all
other chapters of the third book of the Dinkard,

* The technical name of Yas, LIX.


Ill, MEANING OF KHVETOK-DAS. A4II


of the demons from the body of man, and the lodg-
ment of the blessing of the holy in the body, the
wicked wizard Akhtd1, the enemy of the good man
on account of the perplexing living which would
arise from his practising Khvétik-das, preferred not
practising Khvétik-das.’

The practice is also mentioned in the 287th chapter
of the same book, in the following passage :—‘ The
welfare of the aggregate of one’s own limb-forma-
tions—those which es¢ through no labour of one’s
own, azd have not come to the aid of those not
possessing ¢hem (anafsmandan) owing to their own
want of gratitude—even ove of a previous formation
has to eulogize suitably; axd this which as come,
completely establishing (spér-nih) the Avesta, one
calls equally splendid, by the most modestly com-
prehensive appellation of Khvéttk-das.’

In the sixth book of the Dinkard, which professes
to be a summary of the opinions of those of the
primitive faith’, we are told that, ‘when the good
work of Khvétik-das shall diminish, darkness will
increase and light will diminish.’

In the seventh book of the Dinkavd, which relates
the marvels of the Mazda-worshipping religion, we
are informed that it was ‘recounted how—Gayé6-
mara? having passed away—it was declared secondly,
as regards worldly dezugs, to Masyé and Masyadé?,
the first progeny of GAyémard, by the word of
Atharmazd—that is, he spoke to them when they


1 Ay, Akhtya of Aban Yt. 82, who propounded ninety-nine
enigmas to Yoist6 of the Fryans (see Dd. XC, 3).

2 See Dd. XCIV, rn.

8 The sole-created man (see Dd. II, 10, XXXVII, 82).

4 See p. 402, note 1.


412 APPENDIX.


were produced by him—thus: “ You are the men I
produce, you are the parents of all bodily life, and
so you men shall not worship the demons, for the
possession of complete mindfulness! has bcen per-
fectly supplied to you by me, so that you may quite
full-mindfully observe duty and decrees.” And the
creativeness of Atharmazd was extolled by them,
and they advanced in diligence ; they also performed
the will of the creator, they carved (parkavinid6)
advantage owt of the many duties of the world, and
practised Khvétik-das through procreation and the
union and complete progress of the creations in the
world, which are the best good works of mankind.’
The following passage also occurs in the same
book :—‘ Then Zarattist, on becoming exalted, called
out unto the material world of righteousness to extol
_ righteousness and downcast are the demons; and,
“homage Jeng the Mazda-worship of Zarattist, the
_ ceremonial and praise of the archangels are the best
for you, I assert; and, as ¢o deprecation (ayazisnth)
of the demons, Khvéttik-das is even the best intima-
tion, so that, from the information which is given as
¢o the trustworthiness of a good work, the greatest
is the most intimate of them, hose of father and
daughter, son azd she who bore Aim?, and brother
and sister.” J¢ zs declared that, upon those words,
innumerable demon-worshipping Kiks and Karaps?
disputed (sdrisidd) with Zarattst and strove for his
death, just like this which revelation states :—“ It is
then the multitude clamoured (mar bara virad)
who are in the vicinity of the seat of Tar, the well-


ee ee eee


* See p. 396, note 2. * See p. 400, note 1.
Bsee p./384, note ia,


*


III. MEANING OF KHVETOK-DAS, 413


afflicting’ holder of decision; and the shame of the
brother of Tar arose, like ¢hat of a man whose
shame was that they spoke of his Khvétik-das so
that he might perform it. This Tar was Ttr-t
Atrvaita-sang’, the little-giving, who was like a
great sovereign of that quarter; and he maintained
many troops and much power. And the multitude
told him they would seize the great ove from him
who is little’. Bu¢ Thr-i Atirvaita-sang, the little-
giving and well-afflicting, spoke thus :—‘ Should I
thereupon smite him, this great ome who mingles
together those propitious words for us—where we
are thus without doubt as ¢o one thing therein, such
as Khvéttik-das, that it is not necessary to perform
zZ—it would make us ever doubtful that it mght be
necessary to perform it.’ .... And Zaratist spoke
to him thus: ‘I am not always that reserved speaker,
by whom that I Zave mentioned is the most propi-
tious ¢iing to be obtained; and inward speaking
and managing the temper are a Khvéttik-das‘, and
the high-priest who has performed 7z¢ is to perform
the ceremonial.’”’ ‘This passage attributes to Zara-
tist himself the enforcement of next-of-kin marriage,
but it is hardly necessary to point out that the Din-
kard only records a tradition to that effect; which


1 The word hfi-nésak6 is the Pahlavi equivalent of Av. hu-
nusta (Yas. L, ro, b), but the meaning of both words is uncertain,
This Tfir seems to have been more friendly to Zaratist than the
Tiirdnians were in general, but he appears not to be mentioned in
the extant Avesta.

. 2 As this epithet has not been found in the extant Avesta, the
reading is uncertain.

8 Meaning that they demanded possession of Zaratfst in an
insolent manner.

* In a figurative sense.


A414 APPENDIX.


record may be quoted as evidence of the former
existence of such a tradition, but not as testimony
for its truth. It is also worthy of notice that this
tradition clearly shows that such marriages were
distasteful to the people in general; but this might
naturally be inferred from the efforts made by reli-
gious writers to assert the extraordinary merit of
Khvétik-das, because customs which are popular
and universal require no such special recommenda-
tion from the priesthood.

In the Dadistan-i Dintk (XX XVII, 82, LXIV, 6,
LXV, 2, LXXVII, 4, 5) allusions are made to the
Khvétidad! of brother and sister, formed by the
progenitors of mankind. Weare also told that Khvé-
tidad is to be practised till the end of the world,
and that to occasion it among others is an effectual
atonement for heinous sin? (Dd. LX XVII, 6, 7,
LXXVIII, 19); but it is not certain that the term
is applied in these latter passages to marriages be-
tween the zearest relatives.

For later particulars about Khvétik-das we have
to descend to the darkest ages of Mazda-worship,
those in which the Rivayats, or records of religious
legends, customs, and decisions, began to be com-
piled. Of the earlier Rivdyats, such as the Shdyast
La-shayast and Vigirkard-t Dintk, which were written
in Pahlavi, few remain extant; but the later ones,
written in Persian, are more numerous and very
voluminous.

A Pahlavi Riva4yat, which precedes the DAdistAn-t
Dinik in many MSS. of that work, devotes several


—. ee eeSSSS——s


* Another form of the word Khvéttk-das (see p. 390).
” This is also stated in Sls. VIII, 18.


EI


Ill. MEANING OF KHVETOK-DAS. 415


pages to the subject of Khvétid4d, which fully con-
firm the statements of the defender of the practice,
quoted above from the Dinkavd (III, Ixxxii). The
age of this Pahlavi Rivayat is quite uncertain ; it is
found in MSS. written in the sixteenth century, but,
as it does not mention the marriage of first cousins,
it was probably compiled at a much earlier period,
more especially as it is written in fairly grammatical
Pahlavi. The following extracts will be sufficient
to show how far it confirms the statements of the
Dinkard :—

‘Of the good works of an infidel this is the
greatest, when he comes out from the habit of infi-
delity into the good religion ; and of one of the good
religion, remaining backward (akhav-mAan) a¢ the
time when his ritual is performed, this is a great
good work, when he performs a Khvétidad; for
through that Khvéttidad, which is so valuable a
token of Mazda-worship, is the destruction of de-
mons. And of Attharmazd zt is declared, as regards
the performance of Khvétidad, that, when Zarattst
sat before Athaymazd?!, and Vohiman, Ardavahist,
Shatvaiv6, Horvadad, Amerédad, and Spendarmad@?
sat around Atthaymazd, and Spendaymad sat by his
side, she had also laid a hand on his neck, and Zara-
tOst asked Atthaymazd about it thus: “ Who is this
that sits beside thee, and thou wouldst be such a
friend to her, and she also would be such a friend
to thee? Thou, who art Atharmazd, turnest not


thy eyes away from her, and she turns not away
Re
1 Ashe is said to have done in heaven, when receiving instruc-


tion in the religion.
2 The archangels (see Dd. XLVIII, 1 n), of whom Spendarmad


is said to be a female (see p. 393, note 2).


A16 : APPENDIX.


from thee; thou, who art Aftthaymazd, dost not re-
lease her from ¢Zy hand, and she does not release
thee from fey hand?.” And Atharvmazd said: “This
is Spendaymad, who is my daughter, the house-
mistress of my heaven, and mother of the crea-
tures?.” Zaratist spoke thus: “ When they say, in
the world, this is a very perplexing thing, how is it
proclaimed by thee—thee who art Athaymazd—for
thee thyself?” Atharmazd spoke thus: “O Zara-
tist! this should have become the best-enjoyed
thing of mankind. When, since my original creation,
Mahariya azd Mahariyadih® had performed it, you,
also, should have performed it; because although
mankind ave turned away from that thing‘, yet
they should not have turned away. Just as Maha-
riya and Mahariyadéih had performed Khvétidad,
mankind should have performed it, avd all mankind
would have known their own lineage and race, and
a brother would never be deserted by the affection
of his brother, zov a sister dy chat of her sister. For
all nothingness, emptiness®, and drought ave come
unto mankind from the deadly ove (mar), when men
have come to them from a different country, from
a different town, oy from a different district, and
have married their women; and when they shall
have carried away their women, and they have


eS ee ee


* This legend is an instance of the close proximity of super-
stition to profanity, among uneducated and imaginative people.

* She being a representative of the earth.

* See p. 402, note 1.

* That is, from marriage of the nearest relations, which is
admitted, throughout these extracts, to be distasteful to the people ;
hence the vehemence with which it is advocated.

AA A


® Literally ‘air-stuffing’ (vaé-akinth).


III. MEANING OF KHVETOK-DAS. 417


wailed together about this, thus: ‘ They will always
carry our daughters into perversion.’ ”

‘This, too, zs sazd, that Khvétiddd is so miracu-
lous that z¢ is the preservation of the most grievous
sin—such as witchcraft and ¢hat worthy of death—
from hell. And the want of protection (avipa-
harih) from hell of ove unprotected from Aharman
and the demons arises at that time when, owing to
what occurs when he is begged by some one to exer-
cise witchcraft, “e is made worthy of death. And
‘when they shall perform Khvétid4d, when the
Khvéttidad is owing to him’, the unprotected one
is preserved from the prison of hell, from Aharman
and the demons; so miraculous is Khvétidad. ©

‘In a passage z¢ is declared, that Athavmazd
spoke unto Zarattist thus: “ These are the best four
things: the ceremonial worship of Athavmazd, the
lord; presenting firewood, incense, and holy-water
to the fire; propitiating a righteous man*; and one
who performs Khvéttidad with her who bore “zm,
or a daughter, or with a sister. And of all those
he is the greatest, best, and most perfect who shall
perform Khvéttidaéd. . .. When Sdshans comes*
all mankind w2// perform Khvétidad, and every
fiend will perish through the miracle and power
of Khvéttidad.’

It is then explained why the several merits of the


1 This fear of perversion to another faith was, no doubt, the
real cause of the vehement advocacy of family marriages by the


priesthood.
2 That is, when he has arranged the next-of-kin marriage of


others, before his death.
8 That is, a priest.
‘ Shortly before the resurrection (see Dd. I, 10).


[18] Ee


418 APPENDIX.


three classes of Khvéttidad are considered to stand
in the same order as that in which the classes are
mentioned in the preceding paragraph; also that
the third class includes the case of half brothers
and sisters, and the second that of an illegitimate
daughter. After this we find the following legend:—

‘And Khvétiddd is so miraculous, that zt is de-
clared, regarding Yim’, that, when the glory of his
sovereignty had departed from him, he went out to
the precincts (var) of the ocean with Yimak, his
sister, 72 order to flee from the people, demons, and
witches of the assembly of Dahak*.. And they were
sought by them in hell and not seen; and others
sought them among mankind, water, earth, and
cattle, among trees, in the mountains, and in the
towns, but they were not seen by them. Then
Aharman shouted thus: “I think thus, that Yim
is travelling in the precincts of the ocean.” And
a demon and a witch, who stood among them, spoke
thus: “We wll go and seek Yim.” And they
rushed off and went; and when they came unto
those precincts where Yim was—the precincts where
the water of Tir? was—Yim spoke thus: “ Who are


? The third sovereign of the world, after Gdyémard (see Dd. II,
10). This legend is also mentioned in Bd. XXIII, 1, as explaining
the origin of the ape and bear.

* The foreign king, or dynasty, that conquered Yim (see Dd.
XXXVII, 97 n).

* Evidently intended for Tistar, a personification of the star
Sirius, who is supposed to bring the rain from the ocean (see Dd.
XCHI, 1-17). Strictly speaking Tir is the planet Mercury, the
opponent of Tistar, whose name is given to the fourth month, and
thirteenth day of the month, in the Parsi year (see Bd. V, 1, VII, 2,
XXVII, 24); but the confusion between the two names is not
uncommon in the later books (comp. Sls. XXII, 13 with XXIII, 2).


III. MEANING OF KHVETOK-DAS. 419


you?” And they spoke thus: “We are those who
are just like thee, who had to flee from the hands of
the demons; we, too, have fled away from the
demons, and we are alone. Do thou give this
sister in marriage to me, while I also give this one
unto thee!” And Yim, therefore, when the demons
were not recognised by him from mankind, made
the witch his own wife, and gave his sister unto the
demon as wife. From Yim and that witch were
born the bear, the ape, Gandarep!, axd Géstbar? ;
and from Yimak and that demon were born the
tortoise (gasaf), the cat, the hawk (gaving), the
frog, the weevil (divak6), and also as many more
noxious creatures, until Yimak saw that that demon
was evil, and it was necessary to demand a divorce
(zan-taka) from him. And one day, when Yim and
that demon had become drunk with wine, she ex-
changed her own position and clothing with those
of the witch; and when Yim came he was drunk,
and unwittingly lay with Yimak, who was his sister,
and they came to a decision as ¢o the good work of
Khvétidad; many demons were quite crushed and
died, and they rushed away at once, and fell back
to hell.’

The fact, that the zealous writer felt that he had
to force his opinions upon an unwilling people, is
betrayed by the exaggerated language he uses in
the following statements :—

‘This, too, is declared by the Avesta, that Zara-
tist enquired of Afthaymazd thus: “ Many thoughts,
many words, avd many deeds are mentioned by


1 See p. 371, note 3.
2 Not identified, and the reading is, therefore, uncertain,
1, (Se


420 . APPENDIX.


thee—thee who art Atharymazd—that it is necessary
to think, speak, and do; of all such thoughts, words,
and deeds which is the best, when oze shall think,
speak, ov do z#?” Athaymazd spoke thus: “ Many
thoughts, many words, and many deeds should be
proclaimed by me, O Zarattist! dz, of those thoughts,
words, and deeds which it is necessary to think,
speak, and do, that which is best and most perfect
one performs by Khvéttidad. For z¢is declared that,
the first time when he goes near to it, a thousand
demons will die, and two thousand wizards and
_ witches ; when he goes near ¢o it twice, two thou-
sand demons will die, azd four thousand wizards
and witches ; when he goes near to 7z¢ three times,
three thousand demons will die, azd six thousand
wizards and witches; and when he goes near to it
four times z¢ is known ¢Za¢ the man and woman
become righteous 1.”

‘. . . . Owing to the performance of Khvétadad
there arises a destruction of demons equivalent Zo a
stoppage of creation; and though, afterwards, some
of those men azd women shall become wizards, or
unlawfully slaughter a thousand sheep and beasts of
burden at one time, or shall present holy-water to
the demons, ye¢, on account of that destruction and
vexation of the demons, which has occurred to them
owing to the Khvéttidad, it does not become com-
fortable to them while completed; and z¢ is not
believed by them that “the souls of those people
will come to us.”


‘Whoever keeps one year in a marriage of Khvé-


* Or, as stated in the Appendix to the Shayast La-shayast (Sls.
XVIII, 4), they ‘zz not become parted from the possession of
Afttharmagd and the archangels,’


Ill. MEANING OF KHVETOK-DAS. 421


tidad becomes just as though one-third of all this
world, with the water, with the trees, and with the
corn, had been given by him, as a righteous gift,
unto a righteous man. When he keeps two years in
the marriage z¢ is as though two-thirds of this world,
with the water, trees, avd corn, had been given by
him unto a righteous man. When he keeps three
years in the marriage z¢ is as though all this world,
with the water, with the trees, azd with everything,
had been given éy Azm, as a righteous gift, unto a
righteous man. Axzd when he keeps four years
in his marriage, and his ritual’ is performed, z¢ is
known ¢hat his soul thereby goes unto the supreme
heaven (garédman); and when the ritual zs not
performed, it goes thereby to the ordinary heaven
(vahisté).

‘Zarattist enquired of Atharmazd thus: “As ¢o
the man who practises Khvétidad, and his ritual is
performed, avd he also offers a ceremonial (yazisn6-
aé), is the good work of it such as z/ ove without
Khvéttdad had offered zt, or which way is it?”
Attharvmazd said: “/¢ is just as though a hundred
men without Khvétidad had offered it.”

‘Zaratist enquired this, also, of Adharmazd, that
is: “How is the benediction (4fvin6) which a man
who practises Khvétidad shall offer?” Atharmazd
spoke thus: “As though a hundred men without
Khvéttdad should offer the benediction.”

‘And this, too, was asked by him, that is: “As
to them who render assistance, azad one meditates
and attains to Khvéttdad through them, and one


1 The proper ceremonies after his death, or for his living soul
during his lifetime (see Dd. XXVIII, LXXXI).


422 APPENDIX.


performs Khvéttid4éd on account of their statements,
how 1s ¢hezy good work?” Adhaymazd spoke thus :
“ Like 42s who keeps in food and clothing, for one
winter, a hundred priests—each of which priests has
a hundred disciples—such is his good work.”

‘Zaratist enquired this, also, of Aflharmazd, that
is: ““4s ¢o them who keep a man back fvom per-
forming Khvétidad, avd owing to their statements
he shall not perform Khvéttidad, what is their sin ?”
Atharmazd spoke* thus: “ Their place is hell.”

‘In a passage z¢ is declared that, wiser than the
wise, azd more virtuous than the virtuous is Ze in
whose thoughts, words, azd deeds the demons are
less predominant; azd Aharman and the demons
are less predominant in the body of him who prac-
tises Khvétidad, and his ritual ? is performed.

‘/t is declared by revelation that a¢ the time when
Zarattist came out from the presence of Athaymazd,
the lord, into a worldly place where he travelled, he
spoke this, that is: “Extol the religion! and you
should perform Khvétiiddd. I speak of the good
and those existing zz the religion; as ¢o the negli-
gent, the vile, and those in perplexity, this is said,
that a thing so wondrous azd important as that
which is in our law of Khvétddad could not be for
performance. This is a sublime (4irag) custom,
and, as the best of all things, ove asserts that it is
necessary to perform it. Zo me, also, this is mani-
fest when, through all faith zz the law of those
existing zz the religion’, that which is called by


* The Pahlavi text is imperfect. 2 See p. 421, note r.
* That is, the general law of Mazda-worship, as distinguished
from what he is advocating as a peculiarly religious law sanctioned


EI


Ill. MEANING OF KHVETOK-DAS. 423


them a very heinous sin, through faith zz this law of
the good, is that which is called the most perfect and
best good work of Mazda-worship.”

‘This, too, is declared by revelation, that Athav-
mazd spoke unto Zaratfist thus: “You should cause
the performance of duties avd good works.’ And
Zaratist spoke thus: “Which duty azd good work
shalPl do first?” Atharmazd spoke thus: “Khvé-
ttidad; because that duty azd good work is to be
performed in the foremost place of all, for, in the
end, it happens through Khvétidad, when all who
are in the world attain unto the religion ?.”

‘This, too, is declared by revelation, that Zarattst
spoke unto Atthaymazd thus: “In my eyes 2¢ is an
evil (vad) which is performed, and 2 2s perplexing
that I should make Khvétidad as z¢ were fully cur-
rent among mankind.” Atihaymazd spoke thus :
“In my eyes, also, 2¢ is just as 2 thine; but for
this reason—when out of everything perfect ¢here is
some miserable evil 2 for thee—it should not seem so.
Do thou be diligent in performing Khvétidad, and
others, also, will perform 7¢ diligently.” ’

The unpopularity of the practice advocated could
hardly be more fully admitted than in this last para-
graph, nor the objection more irrationally and dog-
matically disposed of. As for the numerous quota-
tions, which the compiler of this Pahlavi Rivayat


by the priests (‘the good’). This is evidently an admission that
the practice advocated was contrary to the ordinary laws of Mazda-
worship itself.
1 As Pahlavi writers expect them to do before the resurrection.
2 Reading vad6-1 vésht; but it may be ‘ something is difficutt
and hard’ (tang va sakht).


A424 APPENDIX.


professes to take from the Parsi scriptures, it is
hardly necessary to remark that their authenticity
must be accepted with great reserve.

Persian Rivayats, copied in the seventeenth cen-
tury, advocate the marriage of first cousins, and
allude vaguely to those between nearer relatives as
long extinct, though most of their remarks merely
recommend the performance of Khédyédath 1,4with-
out explaining the meaning of the term. Thus, we
are informed that a person worthy of death can
perform Khédyédath as a good work, but it is better
if followed by the Bareshntim ceremony?. An un-
clean person can do the same, but the Bareshniim
should precede the performance, so as to avoid sins
arising from the uncleanness. The performance
also destroys demons, wizards, and witches; and
if arranged by any one, at his own expense, for
another person, it is-as meritorious as if performed
by himself. But the following quotations are more
descriptive of the practice ?:—

‘Again, whereas the great wisdom of the king and
of the assembly of priests fully understands that the
ceremony of all the religious rites‘ is a great good
work, besides that which is called Khédyddath, yet,
in these days, both have fallen out of their hands ;
but they will make an endeavour, so that they may
form connection with their own, and on account of


” The Persian form of the word Khvéttik-das. It is also written
Khetyddath in some passages, and Khétvadat in others,

” The great ceremony of purification (see App. IV).

* The Persian Rivayat from which all this information has been
extracted is Mro (fol. 50).

* See Dd. XLIV, 2 n.


i
Ill. MEANING OF KHVETOK-DAS. A25


the Musulmans the connection is a medium ove},
better than that of an infidel. And Ormazd has
said that dy as much as the connection is nearer
zt 2s more of a good work; and they display ¢her
endeavour and effort, and give the son of a brother
and daughter of a brother Zo each other. And just
as this zs sazd: “I establish the performer of Khéd-
yédath, I establish the patrol of the country’,” even
on this account they certainly display an endeavour.

‘Query:—“ How are the connections that relations
form?” Reply :—‘“A brother’s children with a bro-
ther’s children and a sister’s children, and relations
with one another form connections, avd it is proper
for them.”

‘Khédyédath is that which is a great good work,
and has fallen out of their hands, owing to the reason
that there is no king of the good religion; and if it
be so they will make an endeavour, and will form
connections with their own, and will give the son of
a brother and daughter of a brother to each other,
and if not it is not proper; and every such connec-
tion as is nearer is more of a good work. And the
mode they will act who are at first without a king
will be an infidel ove, and to form connections among
themselves will be very difficult now he (the king)
is a Musulman, du¢ that which is nearer is better
and more of a good work.’


1 This seems to be an allusion to some interference of the
Muhammadan government with marriages of those next of kin.
A similar allusion occurs in the next paragraph but one, which,
with most of this paragraph, is also found in M7, fols. 229b, 2304.

2 This Avesta quotation, from Visp. III, 18, 19, is as follows :-—
‘hvattvadathem Astaya, danhdurvaésem 4stdya;’ and the meaning
of the last term is uncertain.


426 _APPENDIX.


These quotations indicate that a great change had
crept over the meaning of Khvétik-das since the
dark ages of the Pahlavi Riv4yat, previously quoted,
although a tradition of the old meaning still lingered
in the minds of the writers. The modern meaning
is, however, most completely explained in a passage,
appended to a Persian version of Aéshm’s complaint
to Aharman, regarding the difficulty of destroying
the effect of the season-festivals, the sacred feast,
and Khvétik-das (Sls. XVIII). After Aharman has
confessed his inability to suggest a means of de-
stroying the merit of the last, the Persian writer
adds the following particulars :—

‘Therefore it is necessary to understand, that the
chief Khétvadat is that of a sister’s daughter and
brother's son; a medium Khétvadat is that of a
brother’s son and a younger brother’s daughter, or
of a sister’s son and a younger sister’s daughter;
and inferior to a medium Khétvadat is that of a
sister's son and a younger brother's daughter. It is
necessary to know that any person who performs
Khétvadat, if 4zs soul be f¢ for hell, will arrive
among the ever-stationary; if it be ove of the ever-
Stationary it will arrive at heaven. Another parti-
cular is to be added: ifany one, in departing, settles
and strives for the connection of Khétvadat of a
next brother it is a good work of a thousand Tané-
pthars?; if any one strives to break off the connec-
tion of Khétvadat he is worthy of death.’


1 See Dd. XX, 3.

* See Dd. LXXVIII, 13. Geldner in his Studien zum Avesta,
I, pp. 3-12, suggests that the original meaning of Av. tanupere-
tha and peshétanu was ‘outcast ;’ but, although these words are
translated by Pahl. tanapfihar, it is doubtful whether this last


III. MEANING OF KHVf&TOK-pDas. 427


With this quotation, which occurs in a MS.+ written
A.D. 1723, we may conclude our examination of all
passages in the Parsi scriptures referring to Khvé-
tdik-das, the result of which may be summarized as
follows :— |

First, the term does not occur at all in the oldest
part of the Avesta, and when it is mentioned in the
later portion it is noticed merely as a good work
which is highly meritorious, without any allusion to
its nature; only one passage (Vend. VIII, 36) indi-
cating that both men and women can participate in
it. So far, therefore, as can be ascertained from the
extant fragments of the Avesta—the only internal
authority regarding the ancient practices of Mazda-
worship—the Parsis are perfectly justified in be-
lieving that their religion did not originally sanction
marriages between those who are next of kin,
provided they choose to ignore the statements of
foreigners, as based upon imperfect information.

Second, when we descend to the Pahlavi transla-
tions and writings of the better class, which, in their
present form, probably range from the sixth to the
ninth century, we find many allusions to Khvétak-
das between those next of kin, and only one obscure
reference to the marriage of first cousins*, Mar-
riages between the nearest relations are defended
chiefly by reference to mythical and metaphorical


een ee ee A ee


word be a mere transcript of tanuperetha (which ought to have
been tanapahar), or whether it expresses the different idea of
tan-apfthar, ‘a person without a bridge 40 heaven, which might
have been that adopted by the Pahlavi translators of the Vendidad;
an outcast in this world being very liable to be considered as an
outcast from the next.

1 Ms, fols. 54, 55- 2 In Dk. III, Ixxxii (see p. 404).


428 APPENDIX.


statements regarding the creation, and to the prac-
tice of the progenitors of mankind; they are also
advocated with all the warmth and vehemence that
usually indicate much difficulty in convincing the
laity, and this zealous vehemence increases as we
descend to the dark ages of the Pahlavi Rivayat}, ©
the compilation of which may perhaps be attributed
to some writer of the thirteenth or fourteenth cen-
tury. Unless, therefore, the Parsis determine to
reject the evidence of such Pahlavi works as the
Pahlavi Yasna, the book of Arda-Viraf, the Dinkard,
and the Dadistan-i Dinik, or to attribute those books
to heretical writers, they must admit that their
priests, in the later years of the Sasanian dynasty,
and for some centuries subsequently, strongly advo-
cated such next-of-kin marriages, though, probably,
with little success. That a practice now reprobated
by all Parsis should have been formerly advocated
by their priests, as a religious duty, need not excite
the surprise of those who consider how slavery has
been advocated by many Christians, on scriptural
grounds, within the present generation, and how the
execution of supposed witches was similarly advo-
cated a few generations ago. ;

Third, as we come to the modern writings of the
Persian Rivayats, which may have commenced about
the fifteenth century, we find the present form of
Khvétik-das, the marriage of first cousins (which
was only slightly mentioned in the Dinkard of the
ninth century), the only form in use: though obscure
allusions are made to the other forms as being long
extinct.


' 7 See pp. 415-423.


Ill. MEANING OF KHVETOK-DAS. 429


At whatever period the practice of next-of-kin
marriage may have originated there were evidently
two reasons for its establishment and continuance;
one was the indispensable necessity of offspring},
unfettered by duties towards any other family, for
the purpose of maintaining the necessary periodical
ceremonies for the souls of those passed away; the
other was the wish of preventing any risk of reli-
gious perversion consequent upon marrying into
a family of strangers or infidels. Both of these
reasons must have become intensified as the
Mazda-worshippers diminished in numbers, hence
the increasing vehemence of priestly advocacy, until
the foreign conquerors probably interfered, and put
a stop to the practice.

That such marriages were not unusual among
other races, in ancient times, we learn from many
tales in Greek-and Roman mythology, from the
usual practice of the Greek dynasty of the Ptolemies
in Egypt, and even from the laws prohibiting such
connections in Lev. xviii. 6-16, which, as laws are
not made to prohibit practices that do not exist,
would hardly have been written unless the children
of Israel had at one time adopted the custom to
some slight extent. That Parsis now deny the
existence of such marriages among their ancestors
proves that they no longer approve the custom, but
does not affect the historical evidence of its former


1 The oriental feeling of such a necessity, for the mere purpose
of perpetuating the family, is abundantly manifested in the story of
Lot’s daughters (Gen. xix. 30-38), which is related without re-
proval by its writer. Also by the exceptional law requiring a man
to marry his brother’s wife, when the brother has died childless
(Deut. xxv. 5-10).


430 APPENDIX.


existence. Christians no longer approve the perse-
cution and execution of women for the imaginary
crime of witchcraft, but it would be both childish
and useless for them to deny that their ancestors
committed hundreds of such judicial murders less
than two centuries ago.


IV. THE BARESHNOM CEREMONY. 431


IV. Tue Baresuniom CEREMONY.


THE great ceremony of purification for any Parsi
man or woman who has become unclean by contact
with the dead, or through any other serious de-
filement, lasts for nine nights, and is called the
Bareshnim, which is the Avesta name for the ‘top’
of the head, the first part of the body appointed to
be washed in the ceremony, after the hands. The
description of this ceremony, given in Pahl. Vend.
IX, 1-145, which does not differ very materially
from the rite still in use, is as follows! :—

Pahl. Vend. IX, 1. Zaratist enquired of Athav-
mazd thus : ‘O Atthavmazd, propitious spirit! creator
of the material world! who art the righteous one [of
righteousness!’ that is, Afharmazd is the righteous
creator through invocation, avd the rest through
praise]. 2. ‘How, when in the material existence
they see a [clean] man together with [that which is
polluted], (3) how shall they purify him clean who


Observing that the passages in brackets do not occur in the
Avesta text, but are added by the Pahlavi translators; and that the
sections are numbered to correspond with the alternating Avesta
and Pahlavi sections in the MSS., which is the division adopted in
Spiegel’s edition of the texts. The readings adopted are those of
L4, wherever they are not defective; this MS. was written about
A.D. 1324, and differs occasionally from Spiegel’s printed text ;
it begins the ninth fargard with the following heading :—‘ May it
be fortunate! may it destroy the corruption (nasfs) which rushes
on from a dead dog and men on to the living! May the pure, good
religion of the Mazda-worshippers be triumphant |’


432 APPENDIX.


is with ¢hat fraught with corruption [together with
pollution] owing to that dead body? [that is, how
should they make zm thoroughly clean ?]’

4. And Atthaymazd spoke thus: ‘A righteous
man, O Zarattst the Spitaman! [a purifier], (5) who
is a speaker [that is, it is possible for him to speak] -
a true-speaker [that is, falsehood is little spoken by
him], an enquirer of the liturgy [that is, the ritual —
is performed by him], azd righteous, (6) he who
specially understands the purification of the religion
of the Mazda-worshippers [that is, he knows the rite],
(7) such a one shall cut up the plants on the fruitful
earth, (8) for a length of nine separate reeds? in
every one of the four directions, (9) at a place on
this earth which is most devoid of water, most
devoid of trees, land most purified [from bodily
refuse]?, azd with the driest ground [that is, there
is no damp in that extent of it], 10. Even where
least upon the paths do cattle and beasts of burden
step forth, and the fire of Afthaymazd, the sacred
twigs® spread forth with righteousness, and the
righteous man* do least exist.

tr, ‘Creator of the material world! chou righteous
one! how far from the fire? how far from the
_ water ? how far from the sacred twigs spread forth


* Which would be 42 feet (see Dd. XLIII, 5 n); but the phrase
gvid nai (which, in Pahl. Vend.VII, go, has become gvid hana by
misreading gvid6-aé, and then substituting Huz. hana for Paz.
aé) is merely an attempted translation of Av. vib4zu, which latter
appears to mean the ‘two arms’ outstretched, or a fathom. So the
‘separate reed’ should be understood as a longer kind of reed,
equal to a fathom, instead of 4 feet 8 inches.

* See Dd. XLVIII, 19 n. L4 omits this clause altogether,

* See Dd. XLUI, gu:

* Any priest not engaged in the purification,


IV. THE BARESHNOM CEREMONY. 433


eee mere ee
with righteousness? how far from a man of the
righteous ?’

12. And Attharvmazd spoke thus: ‘Thirty steps!
from the fire, thirty steps from the water, thirty steps
from the sacred twigs spread forth with righteous-
ness, and three steps? from the men of the righteous.
13. The cutting out for the first hole [for bull’s
urine]*, after the coming on of summer, is two
finger-dreadths in excavation; after the coming on
of hail-fraught (s6ngag 4n-hémand) winter 2 is as
at were a cup of four finger-dreadths*, 14. So also
for the second hole, for the third hole, for the fourth
hole, the fifth, azd the sixth.’


‘How much is ove such hole from another hole® ad


‘As much as one step onwards.’
errr aaa gis g ak oP ek ee

*' As the step is three feet (see § 15), and the foot, being four-
teen finger-breadths (see Bd. XXVI, 3 n), may be taken as 10}
inches, these thirty steps would be nearly 79 English feet.

* That is, 7 feet 10% inches. This diminution of distance enables
a purifying priest to stand near enough to an unclean person to
hand him the purifying liquid ina ladle tied to a stick (see §§ 40-42),
without going within the furrows traced around the holes or ablu-
tion seats at the same distance of three steps (see §§ 21-23).

* That is, at which the unclean person is sprinkled with the
urine (see §§ 48-116). The urine should be that of a bull, accord-
ing to Vend. XIX, 70; but Vend. VIII, 35, 36 state that it may
be that of cattle or draught oxen, generally, or even that of those
who perform Khvétfik-das (see p. 391). At the present time the
term magh, which means ‘a hole’ in the Avesta, is applied to the
stones which are used as ablution seats for squatting upon.

* The greater depth of the hole for catching the ablution drop-
pings in the winter, would provide for the larger quantity of liquid
that could not sink into the soil, or evaporate, during the tedious
washing, owing to the soil and air being damper than in summer.

° The probable positions of these holes, and of the furrows
enclosing them, are shown upon the plan of the Bareshnim G4h
on p. 435, which differs but little from the plan still in use.


[18] Ff


434 APPENDIX.


15. ‘What kind of one step ?’

‘Just like three feet.’

16..‘The cutting out of the three other holes
[which are for water], (17) after the coming on of
summer, is as much as two finger-dveadths in exca-
vation; after the coming on of hail-fraught winter
zt is as much as four finger-dreadths.’

18. ‘How much from those former oves [for bull’s
urine] ?”

‘As much as three steps.’

19. ‘What kind of three steps ?’

‘As much as the steps ove plants in walking with
the steps he would take.’

20. ‘What kind of walking with steps ?’

‘Just like nine feet.’

21. ‘Thou shalt also plough up a furrow with the
blade due to Shatryévair!’

22. ‘How much from the holes ?’

‘As much as three steps.’

‘What kind of three steps ?’

‘As much as zz walking with the steps ove would
take and plant.

23. ‘How much is the walking with steps ?’

‘As much as nine feet.’

24. ‘ Then, afterwards, is the ploughing up of the
twelve furrows. 25. By the ploughing up of three
from among ¢hem three holes are separated within
them. 26. Thou shalt plough up three from among
them with six holes separated within. 27. Thou
shalt plough up three from among them with nine
holes separated within. 28. Azd thou shalt plough


1 That is, made of metal, which is under the special protection
of the archangel Shatrvyévair or Shatvaird (see Dd. XLVIII, 17 n).


rr


430


nV


THE BARESHNOM CEREMONY.


PLan oF Baresuntm GAu.


‘Kpoq oy} Surdap 10; Ysnp Jo spnypuvy us9IjZy Suryda1[09 x0y aoeyd ‘q

‘sdays 20143 Jo saoeds sary} 94} UO souO}s Jo spoT aeiy ‘Ss ‘Sg ‘Ss

‘sI9Y30 oY} woy sdo}s sory} puv yrede daqs ouo ‘197vM 10} ‘soto WOyINOS e219} “-O ‘O'O
yaede days auo ‘ourm sjjnq 10} ‘safoy ulsqj0U XIS ‘OC ‘OO ‘O‘'O ‘O


436 APPENDIX.

CE a ee eee
up three, within which are the [three] holes that
are apart, [which are for water, and] beyond [those
within, which are for bull’s urine]".

29. ‘Thou shalt carry three loads of stones on to
those spaces of nine feet?, as an approach /o the
holes; (30) ov potsherds, or knotty avd massive
blocks, or a clod of the earth of Vistasp, or [a pot or
something of] any hard earth whatever.

31. ‘Afterwards, he who has been by the dead
shall come to that approach, which is the approach
to the holes. 32. Thereupon thou, O Zarattist!
hast to stand up more aside, by the furrows®.


1 The arrangement, here described, is that of six holes in a row,
one step apart; then an interval of three steps, followed by three
more holes, one step apart, in the same line. This row of nine
holes, from north to south (see § 132, é), is surrounded by three
furrows, the first six holes and the last three are both surrounded
by a second series of three furrows, and the first three holes are
surrounded by a third series of three furrows. And these furrows
are not less than three steps from the holes in any place, except

where they separate the three series of holes from each other.
_ The object of the furrows, which are scored during the recitation
of certain formulas (see § 132, 7, g), is to prevent the fiend of cor-
ruption from forcing its way from the unclean person within the
furrows to any other person outside them. And, as the fiend is
supposed to be strongest at first, and to become gradually weak-
ened by the progress of the purification (see § 119), the first three
holes are surrounded by the strongest barrier of nine furrows.

* There were three such spaces, one between the furrows and
the first hole, one betweén the sixth and seventh holes, and one
between the last hole and the furrows (see the plan). It is not dis-
tinctly stated that these stones were to be distributed, as ablution
seats, to each of the nine stations, as at present; but this was
probably intended. At the present time an additional group of
stones is placed outside the furrows, at the entrance to the north,
as a station for the preliminary washing. .

* That is, the priest is to stand outside, to the right (see § 132, 2),
but close to the furrows.


IV. THE BARESHNOM CEREMONY. 438


33. Then these words are to be murmured [4y chee,
that is]: “ Praise to Spendaymad?, the propitious!”
34. And he who has deen by the dead shall speak in
reply to it thus: “ Praise to Spendarmad, the propi-
tious!” 35. Then the fiend becomes disabled by
every word [of each repetition]; (36) the smiting of
the evil spirit, the wicked one, is owing to it; (37) the
smiting of Aeshm?, the impetuous assailant, is owing
to it; (38) the smiting of the Mazinikan demons*
is owing to it; (39) the smiting of all the demons is
owing to it. ;

40. ‘Afterwards, thou shalt sprinkle bull’s urine
upon Azm with an iron, or with a leaden, /adle, 41. /f
thou shalt sprinkle upon Aim with a leaden one*, thou
shalt strongly demand, O Zarattist! the stem of a
reed whose nine customary parts (pisak) you have
mentioned ® [as nine knots]; (42) and one should tie
that leaden /ad/e strongly on z¢s foremost part®.

43. ‘He shall first wash over his hands [even to
the elbows], 44. When he does not wash over his
hands, (45) he then makes all his own body impure
[and polluted]. 46. When he shall have washed over
his hands for three times, (47) then, when ¢Zy hands


1 See p. 393, note 2. This exclamation is a Pahlavi version of
a quotation from the Gathas (Yas. XLVIII, ro, c).

2 The demon of wrath (see Dd. XXXVII, 44).

8 See Dd. XXXVII, 81. This passage (§§ 36-39) is quoted
from Yas. XXVII, 2, LVI, xii, 5.

4 These words are omitted in the Pahlavi text, but occur in the
Avesta.

5 Or, perhaps, ‘murmured over’ with prayers.

6 This nine-knotted reed, or stick, must be so long that the
ladle, tied to its end, can easily reach the unclean person at the
holes, when the stick is held by the priest who stands outside


the furrows.


438 APPENDIX.


shall have been washed over, (48) thou shalt sprinkle
him on the front of the top of his head, [as far as the
hair has grown.] 49. Then the fiend of corruption!
rushes in front, upon some of the space between the
brows of that man.

50. ‘Thou shalt sprinkle in front, on some of the »
space between the brows of that man, [from the
place where the hair has grown, as far as to the
ears backwards, avd both cheeks at the bottom.]
51. Then the fiend of corruption rushes upon the
back of his head.

52. ‘Thou shalt sprinkle on the back of his head,
[from the place where the hair has grown, casting
(stunak) one-fourth to the spine.] 53. Then the
fiend of corruption rushes in front upon his jaws.

54. ‘Thou shalt sprinkle in front, on. his jaws,
[both cheeks as far as to the ears backwards, casting
one-fourth unto the throat.] 55. Then the fiend of
corruption rushes upon his right ear.

56. ‘Thou shalt sprinkle on his right ear. 57.
Then the fiend of corruption rushes upon his left
ear.

58. ‘Thou shalt sprinkle on his left ear, [just as
the ear is turned, casting one-fourth to the liquid2.]


* The Nasfs fiend (see Dd. XVII, 7).

* The word, both here and in § 68, must be Av. Afs, ‘water,’
and not a Pazand term for any part of the body, as any such term
would be inadmissible in § 68. It would seem as if a smaller
supply of liquid were requisite for the ears than for the other
customary parts, so that a quarter of the supply is directed to be
returned to the vessel holding the liquid. The remarks made by
the Pahlavi translator, upon the sprinkling of the left-hand mem-
bers of the body, are evidently intended also to apply, in nearly all
cases, to the sprinkling of the right-hand members.


y
IV. THE BARESHNOM CEREMONY. 439


59. Then the fiend of corruption rushes upon his
right shoulder.

60. ‘Thou shalt sprinkle on his right shoulder.
61. Then the fiend of corruption rushes upon his
left shoulder.

62. ‘Thou shalt sprinkle on his left shoulder, [ox
the side in front, just as it is turned, even unto the
elbow.] 63. Then the fiend of corruption rushes
upon his right armpit.

64. ‘Thou shalt sprinkle on his right armpit.
65. Then the fiend of corruption rushes upon his
left armpit.

66. ‘ Thou shalt sprinkle on his left armpit, [as far
as the hair has grown.] 67. Then the fiend of cor-
ruption rushes in front upon his chest.

68. ‘Thou shalt sprinkle in front on his chest,
[half the liquid to the shoulders, and half to the
region of the throat, within three finger-dreadths of
the face!.] 69. Then the fiend of corruption rushes
upon his back.

70. ‘Thou shalt sprinkle on-his back, [from the
slender fart of the spine unto the anus.] 71. Then
the fiend of corruption rushes upon his right nipple.

#5, ‘Thou shalt sprinkle on his right nipple. 73.
Then the fiend of corruption rushes upon his left
nipple.

74. ‘Thou shalt sprinkle on his left nipple, [just
as the nipple shall be turned; azd those of women
(zanagan®) are to be held up.| 75. Then the fiend
of corruption rushes upon his right side.

76. ‘Thou shalt sprinkle on his right side. 77. Then
the fiend of corruption rushes upon his left side.
eee es eee


1 Reading dimak, but it may be gAmak (compare Pers. gam,
‘jaw’). L4 has gimak.


440 APPENDIX.


78. “Thou shalt sprinkle on his left side; [this,
moreover, is because one specially recites for ever
on that side.) 79. Then the fiend of corruption
rushes. upon his right hip}.

80. ‘Thou shalt sprinkle on his right hip. 81.
Then the fiend of corruption rushes upon his left .
hip.

82. ‘Thou shalt sprinkle on his left hip, [just as it
is turned, as far as to the hollow? of it (gttyak-i
valman) below the thigh.] 83. Then the fiend of
corruption rushes upon his sexual part.

84. ‘Thou shalt sprinkle on his sexual part. 85. If
it be a male, thou shalt sprinkle behind it before-
hand, and in front of it afterwards : (86) and if it be
a female, thou shalt sprinkle in front of it before-
hand, and behind it afterwards; [ox this occasion
half is for the front and half for behind, and it is
rubbed in in front.] 87. Then the fiend of corrup-
tion rushes upon his right thigh.

88. ‘Thou shalt sprinkle on his right thigh.
89. Then the fiend of corruption rushes upon his
left thigh.

90. ‘Thou shalt sprinkle on his left thigh, [from
the prominence (gdh4k) below the thigh to ‘the
knee.] 91. Then the fiend of corruption rushes
upon his right knee.

92. ‘Thou shalt sprinkle on his right knee. 93.
Then the fiend of corruption rushes upon his left
knee.


ee eee
* Reading srinak, as in Pahl. Vend. VIII, 178-182; but here
the word is four times written sinak.
* Or, perhaps, ‘prominence’ is meant, as in § 90; although the
two words giyak and géh4k are written differently, they refer
probably to the same part.


Pa


IV. THE BARESHNOM CEREMONY. . A4I


94. ‘Thou shalt sprinkle on his left knee, [above
Just as it is turned, azd below the slender fart;
there are some who would say thus: “As much
above it as below.”] 95. Then the fiend of corrup-
tion rushes upon his right shin.

96. ‘Thou shalt sprinkle on his right shin. 97.
Then the fiend of corruption rushes upon his left
shin.

98. ‘Thou shalt sprinkle on his left shin, [from
the knee unto the place where the leg axd foot
unite.] 99. Then the fiend of corruption rushes
upon his right ankle}.

100. ‘Thou shalt sprinkle on his right ankle.
rot. Then the fiend of corruption rushes upon his
left ankle.

102. ‘Thou shalt sprinkle on his left ankle, [just
as the leg and foot unite, that is, while the ten toes
are back to the ground.] 103. Then the fiend of
corruption rushes upon his right instep.

104. ‘Thou shalt sprinkle on his right instep.
105. Then the fiend of corruption rushes upon his
left instep.

106. ‘ Thou shalt sprinkle on his left instep, [from
the place where the leg azd foot unite, to the end of
his toes.] 107. Then the fiend of corruption turns
dejected under the sole of the foot, and its likeness is
as zt were the wing of a fly’s body.

108. ‘The toes Jeng held quite in union with
the ground, his heel is held up from the ground.
109. Thou shalt sprinkle on his right sole. 110.
Then the fiend of corruption rushes upon his
left sole.


1 The word zang means rather ‘the lower part of the leg.’


442 APPENDIX.


t11. ‘Thou shalt sprinkle on his left sole. 112.
Then the fiend of corruption turns dejected under
the toes, avd its likeness is as z¢ were the wing of
a fly.

113. ‘ The heel dezzg held quite in union with the
ground, his toes are held up from the ground. 114.
Thou shalt sprinkle on his right toes. 115. Then
the fiend of corruption rushes upon his left toes.

116. ‘Thou shalt sprinkle on his left toes. 117.
Then the fiend of corruption returns dejected to
the northern quarter in the shape of a raging fly,
bandy-legged, lean-hipped, illimitably spotted, so that
spot is joined to spot, like the most tawdry! noxious
creature, avd most filthy.

118. ‘Then these words are to be murmured,
which are most triumphant azd most healing? :—

‘“ As is the will of the patron spirit [as is the will
of Athaymazd],so should be the earthly master [so
should be the high priest], owing to whatever are
the duty axd good works of righteousness ; [that is,
he is always to perform duty and good works as
authoritatively as the will of Athaymazd.] That
which is the gift of good thought is the work of
both existences [and the work] of Atthaymazd; [that
is, the reward and recompense they give to good
thought, they give also to him; there are some who
would say thus: ‘It is the possession of good thought.’]


* Reading bég-4kinttim, ‘most stuffed with ostentation,’ as in
L4. In AV. XVII, 12 the word can be read bazak-ayfntim,
‘most sin-accustomed,’

* Only the initial and final words of the Avesta of the following
passages are given in the MSS. here, but they are given at length,
with their Pahlavi translation, in Vend. VIII, 49-62, whence the
Pahlavi version is here taken.


IV. THE BARESHNUM CEREMONY. 443


The sovereignty is given to Athavmazd, [that is,
Atharmazd has made the ruler for himself,] who
has given protection azd nourishment to the poor,
[that is, he would provide assistance avd intercession
for them. ]!

‘“Who is given to me by thee, O Atthavmazd! as
a protection ? [when? I shall do duty azd good works,
who would provide me protection ?]}—when I am in
custody of the malice of that wicked [Aharman, that
is, he retains malice with me in 4s thoughts]—other
than thy fire azd good thought? [this I know, that
they would do so on account of you; but, apart from
you, who would provide me protection ?] When in
their employ I invoke righteousness, O Atiharmazd!
[that is, I shall do duty axzd good works, who would
provide me protection?] That which thou shalt
proclaim to me as religion through a high-priest
[this I say, that is, preach religion through a high-
priest]°.

‘« Who is the smiter with triumph, through this
thy teaching of protection? [that is, so fay as is
declared by the revelation of scripture, who should
inflict the punishment for sinners ?] With clearness
the superintendence (radth) of the creation in both
existences is to be taught to me, [that is, it is neces-
sary for thee to give unto me the high-priesthood
here and there*.] The arrival of virtuous obedience
(Srésh), with good thought (Vohiman), is here,


1 This paragraph is the Pahlavi version of the Ahunavar, or
Yatha-ahfi-vairy6 formula (see p. 385).

2 Reading amat, instead of mfin, ‘who,’ (see Dd. LXII, 4 n.)

8 This paragraph is the Pahlavi version of the Kem-na-mazda
stanza of the Gathas (Yas. XLV, 7).

4 Both in this world and the next.


oy 2 ae


444 APPENDIX.


[that is, it is necessary for thee to give Vistasp!
unto me as assistance.| O Adhavmazd! [the arrival
of] that ove [is according to my wish], who is he
according to the wish of every one, [¢at Sdéshans?
that shall be necessary for every one, so that they
may thereby convey away their misery, the misery z¢
is possible he should convey away from every one. ]®

‘“Let us de guarded from the most afflicting one
[here, aud apart from the sinners], O Athaymazd
and Spendarmad*! [that is, keep us away from the
harm of the evil spirit !] Perish, thou demon fiend!
[as I speak in front of thee.] Perish, thou race of
the demons! [that is, their race is from that place.]®
_ Perish, thou work transformed by the demons [for
uselessness]! Perish, thou woré produced by the
demons [Aeretofore and hereafter! this produced
without the sacred beings, and produced by them
(the demons) even for uselessness]. Perish utterly,
thou fiend! [that is, mayst thou become invisible !]
Perish utterly, thou fiend! [that is, rush away from
here, aza mayst thou become invisible on any path !]
Perish utterly and apart, thou fiend! [that is, stand
not again on any path!] Thou shalt perish again
to the north! [the path was mentioned thus: ‘Go
zw the direction of the north!’] do not destroy the
material world of righteousness®!”

* The king in the time of Zaratfist (see Dd. XXXVIL, 36).


* The last of the future apostles (see Dd. II, ro).

* This paragraph is the Pahlavi version of a passage in the
Gathas (Yas. XLIII, 16, b-e).

* See p. 393, note 2.

° From hell, the place of the demons.

* It appears from what follows, in § 120, that the whole of the
sprinklings and exorcisms, detailed in $$ 33-118, are to be repeated
at each of the first six holes,


IV. THE BARESHNOM CEREMONY. 445


119. ‘At the first hole the man becomes freer
from the fend of corruption, [that is, it shall depart
a little from his body, like a flock when they dis-
perse it.]

120. ‘Then these words are to be murmured by thee,
rc. [as in §§ 33-118. AZ] the second [hole, &c., as in
§ 119. And the same routine ts to be followed at] the
third, fourth, fifth, and sixth |holes}}.

‘Afterwards he shall sit—he who “as deen by the
dead—within the precinct (sitv4) of the holes? apart
from those holes [which are for bull’s urine]. 121. So
much from that [of the previous oves for bull’s urine]
as four finger-breadths*, 122. They shall also dig up
those full diggings up of this earth, [they should
accomplish this well.] 123. They shall scrape toge-
ther fifteen handfuls of the earth, [so that they shall
quite dislodge the damp purely.]* 124. And they
shall remain about it the whole erzod from that “me
until che é¢me when the hair on his head shall become .
dry, (125) and until ¢he tme when the wet earth on
his body shall become dry.

126. ‘Then he who has deen by the dead shall
come to that approach to those other holes [which
are for water]. 127. At the first hole he shall then
purify over his own body once with water. 128. At
the second hole he shall then purify over his own


1 This paragraph is omitted in the Pahlavi text, being merely
given in the Avesta (for the sake of brevity) so far as the words
are not included in the brackets.

2 The three holes for washing with water.

8 That is, three English inches south of the six furrows which
separate the first six holes from the last three, at the point D on
the plan.

4 That is, the person undergoing purification shall be rubbed
with dust until he is quite dry.


446 APPENDIX.


body twice with water. 129. At the third hole he
shall then purify over his own body thrice with
water.

130.‘ Afterwards, he who is perfumed with san-
darac (rasn6)1, or benzoin, or aloes?, or any other
of the most odoriferous of plants, (131) shall then
put on 4zs clothes. 132. Then he who has been by
the dead shall come to that approach, the approach
to his abode?,’

[@. The clothing is always cleansed by the
Khshvash-maunghé (“the six-months’ process”) 4.

6. Afarg® said two purifiers are requisite®, and of
the two he is suitable who has performed the ritual ;
thus they have been very unanimous; when he
scores the furrow, washes that wwclean person in the
customary places, and utters the Avesta he has per-
formed it; the other, when he has not performed 7,


a a ee eee
* Av. urvasna (which is translated by Pahl. rasn6) is supposed,
in India, to mean sandal-wood.

* These are supposed, in India, to be the two substances meant
by the Av. vohfi-gaona and vohti-kereti, which are merely
transcribed by the Pahl. hfi-gén and hfi-keret. The Avesta text
adds a fourth perfume, named hadh4 naépata, which is under-
stood to mean the pomegranate bush, although that plant seems
to yield no perfume.

° For the continuation of the instructions see § 133; the text
being here interrupted by a long Pahlavi commentary on the whole
of the foregoing description of the ceremony.

* This sentence is evidently incomplete in the Pahlavi text.
The process is thus described in Pahl. Vend. VII, 36 :—‘If it be
that 2/ is woven, they shall wash 2¥ over six times with bull’s urine,
they shall scrape together six times on the earth wyth 2 [so that
they quite dislodge its moisture purely], they shall wash 2¥ over six
times with water, and they shall perfume over 7 six months at
a window in the house.’ For the Avesta version of this descrip-
tion, which is nearly the same, see Sls. Il, 9g 1.

b See wpalsev, ty * See Ep. lj vi, 41h, re


IV. THE BARESHNOM CEREMONY. 447


is unsuitable; when ¢heve shall also be one who is
suitable! he fully solemnizes a Vendidad service, for
this purpose, with a dedication (shnumand) Zo
Srdésh.

c. For every single person, at the least, one cup,
alike of water and bull’s urine, is to be set down zz
that place’, and at the beginning of its consecration 2¢
is to be thoroughly inspected, and at the Vendidad
zt is to be thoroughly inspected*; afterwards, when it
is covered, z¢ is also well; the pebbles cast into z¢#
they should carry back to the holy-water, there is
no use for them; when thoroughly consecrated it is
always suitable, until it becomes quite fetid’.

d. For the avoidance of an unsecluded (agfb4l)
menstruous woman nava vibazva dragé (‘the
length of nine fathoms’)® from her is necessary,
when she stands nearest ; in a wild spot the herbage
is to be dug up’; when they shall make ¢he purifying
place in the town, and a path, or a stream, or a wall
does not extend into it, it is suitable; and the cleanly
plucking up of its small trees, extracting ¢hem in the
daytime with recitation of the Avesta of Zarattst®
—those which are thick not existing among the
holes—is proper.

e. And every one who digs the holes, with what-
ever he digs, and whenever he digs, is suitable; four
finger-breadths and two finger-dreadzhs® is no matter;


1 See Ep. I, vi, 7. 2 See Ep. I, vii, r.

8 4 has ‘7f is to be taken up, by omitting the first letter of
nikfrisn6.

4 See Ep. I, vii, 16, II, iii, 12. 5 See Ep. I, viii, 1-6.

$ See §'8. 7 See'§ %

8 These twelve words do not occur in L4.

SESEeS 19:


448 APPENDIX.


each hole is at a minimum azstance of three feet}, at
a maximum as much as ove thoroughly purifies his
body in; and ¢hey are to be formed in it from the
north, and are to be dug in the direction towards its
more southern side.

f. In the daydeme is the purifiers scoring of the
furrows, and with a blade ¢hey are to be scored; with
the recital of the Avesta? they are to be scored; in
the day ¢hey are to be scored®; in that day dhey are
to be scored, when a furrow is scored, three Ashem-
vohtis*, the Fravarané®, whatever period of the day
one considers z¢ to de, the dedication ¢o Srésh®, and
its zwward prayer’ are to be taken up zxwardly.

g. ft is also to be done inside it from the north,
and its end is to be passed back at the end; /or
every single furrow ¢here is one Yatha-ahd-vairyé 8
at the least, and at the most as many as are possible
for it; a furrow is not to be scored again for a
furrow, until z¢ is to be put into use; whenever it
is fully disturbed z¢ is to be scored again with the
recital of its Avesta; when prepared for use and one
scores 7¢ again it is no matter.


Sa de ee

EDGC SS Ea, TEs

2 The Ahunavar or Yatha-ahfi-vairyé (see § g’.

$ So in Lg. * See Dd. LXXIX, 1, note.

° That is, the profession of faith (Yas. I, 65), which is as fol-
lows :—‘T will profess myself a Zarathustrian Mazda-worshipper,
opposed to the demons avd of the Ahura faith’ This is followed
by the dedication to the period of the day, which is given for the
first period only in Yas. I, 66, 67; the dedications for the other
periods will be found in Gah II-V, x,

e Sin ry,

" See Dd. XL, 5, note. All the prayers here detailed are to be
murmured merely as a preliminary spell, but while each furrow is
being scored a further formula is to be recited (see § g).

*-See pp. 385-386. :


IV. THE BARESHNOM CEREMONY. 449


#. Once the outside of the body is to be made
quite clean from the bodily refuse! of the world; and
the hair dezug tied up—it is no use to cut the pubes
(nihand)—Ze is also to be brought into it (the
precinct) from the north to the holes.

2. The purifier stands up on the right-hand side,
and when he retains the zwward prayer from scoring
the furrows? it is proper; when not, the prayer to be
taken zxwardly by him—which is his utterance of
Nemas#a ya Armaitis izd#A (‘and the homage which
is devotion and nourishment’)’—is also that which is
to be uttered dy the unclean person; and when he
is not able to speak, z¢ is both times to be uttered
for hem.

j. And his hands are to be thoroughly washed
three times, not in the inside; as fo the other cus-
tomary farts (pisak) Afarg has said three times, not
in the inside, da¢ Méddk-mah* one time; also the
water avd bull’s urine, such as are necessary for him,
are to be conveyed on to him; and a portion (bah-
rak) is to be preserved for him away from the body,
and, when anything comes upon him, a little bull’s
urine is to be dropped down upon him; likewise,


* See Dd. XLVIII, 19 n.

* That is, when he has not broken its spell by talking, since he
began the scoring.

* These are the Avesta words from Yas. XLVIII, ro, c, of which
the Pahlavi version is given in §§ 33, 34.

* Written Médyék-mah in Ep. I, v, 1. The statement here attri-
buted to Méd6k-mah is ascribed to Afarg in Ep. I, vi, 7, 9, II, ii, 6,
but Afarg is there said to be ‘the prior deponent,’ as he is here ;
we should, therefore, probably transpose the ‘three times’ and ‘one
time’ in our text ; the blunder having originated from the frequent
substitution of hana for aé in Pahlavi, both meaning ‘ this,’ while
aé also means ‘one’ and is the cipher for ‘3.’


[18] Oe


450 APPENDIX.


any customary fart, whl bang washed by him, is to
be preserved from that which is not washed ; when
it comes upon it, it is improper.

k, When a drop of water (a0 ytiigak6-1) shall
remain upon Aim, his hand -is to be thoroughly
rubbed over it; when at the same hole and he
becomes doubtful as to a customary part!, when he
knows which, it is to be washed by him again, and
from that onwards ¢hey are always to be washed
again by him; when he does not know whch, the
beginning of ¢he washing at the hole is to be done
again by him, and when he comes unto that which
he did before, when he knows z¢, he is also to go
again to that after it, from his doing again of the
beginning of the washing at the hole; when he
becomes doubtful as to the hole, he is to go back to
that which is not doubtful. |

7. And when they go from hole to hole, the dog?
is to be held once, the Avesta*® of the purifier is to
be spoken, and it is to be done by him thus :—When
he arrives at the place, z¢ is done by him; when not,
the head is to be done thoroughly—there are some
who would say thus: ‘In the same hole the head is
to be done thoroughly ’—and all four feet of the dog
are to be put by him into the hole’; he is also to sit
down within four finger-dveadths*, and the Pawzkadasa
zem6 hazkanayen (‘fifteen ¢zmes of earth they shall


1 That is, when he is doubtful which he washed last.

* The dog is not mentioned in the Avesta account of the Baresh-
nim in Vend. [X, but it is ordered to be brought before the unclean
person in another such account in Vend. VIII, 120, 123. The use
of the dog is that its sight or touch is supposed to destroy or drive
away the 'N asts, or fiend of corruption.

* The exorcism in § 118. “Bee § rea


~~


IV. THE BARESHNUM CEREMONY. 45I-
eee ee ee ee ee
scrape together’)! are to be well completed by him,
at is also to be thoroughly done by him, and 4e is to
be fully guarded while he properly azd thoroughly
well perseveres.

m. And, after it, he is to go unto the holes for
water; the different times with water are just like
the different holes for bull’s urine, except holding
the dog; the dog, too, works for Az inside,

a. When he seeks for it, 7#? is to be thoroughly
warmed for him; when he hungers for it, bread is to
be given to him; when ¢he necessity of making water
arises, something is to be held unto him; when, on
account of his imperfect strength (vad zérih), he is
quite unable to wash, some one is to sit down inside
with him; when Ze is only just® washed, he is to
come into his position therein before, the zzward
prayer is to be spoken out by him, and the zxward
prayer is to be again offered by him, his customary
parts are also washed, and are to be considered as
washed, |

o. When he shall keep on for three washings‘,
though not clean, it is not improper; when he does
not attain three washings, it is not proper; when
the enclosure is not to be formed to the north °, it is
not proper; when oe shall not solemnize the Vendi-
dad service ®, it is not proper.

p. When the purifier shall not have performed the
ritual, it is not proper; when the purifier is not a
man, it is not proper.


* The Avesta version of § 123.
2 The water, apparently.
° Perhaps it should be kand tak, ‘several times,’ instead of
Atgfin tak, ‘only just.’
* See §§ 136, 140, 144. 5 See § ¢. ® See $0.
Gg2


452 ‘ APPENDIX.


g. When he shall not wash on the customary
parts, it is not proper; when he does not utter
the Avesta, it is not proper; and when the dog! is
not held, it is not proper; when ¢here is no digging
of the holes, it is not proper; when he does not
perform the Pazadasa zemé hazkanayen (‘fifteen
times of earth they shall scrape together’)?, it is not
proper.

vy, When z¢ is not the purifier who scores the
furrows, and he does not score fhem with a blade ?,
nor does he score them with the recitation of the
Avesta, nor does he score them in the dayt¢zme, it is
not proper.

s. When he shall see azythzng impure in the hole,
it is not proper; when they shall cause rain ¢o come
within a hole for bull’s urine, it is not proper; when
night shall come in upon him, it is not proper;
when in everything ¢here is suitableness, but as to
one thing doubt arises, through that suitableness it
is not proper. |

' 133. ‘ffe* is to sit down in the place of the
secluded (arméstan6) °, within the precinct (sitva)
of is abode, apart from the other Mazda-worship-
pers. 134. He shall not come with authorization to
fire, nor to water, nor to earth, nor to animals, nor
to plants, nor to a righteous man, nor to a righteous


pee. de * See § 123. 5 pee 87;

* He who has been by the dead, as stated in § 132, in connec-
tion with which this sentence is to be read; the foregoing §§ a-s
being interpolated by the Pahlavi translators.

° The original meaning of armést was probably ‘mast sta-
tionary,’ as it is a term applied to water in tanks, helpless cripples,
and insane people, as well as to unclean persons who have to
remain apart from their friends (see Sls. II, 98 n).


IV. THE BARESHNUM CEREMONY, 453


woman, (135) at all from that “me, until the time
when his three nights shall fully elapse.

136. ‘ After those three nights he shall wash over
fis body, and fzs clothes are purified over in such a
way as with bull’s urine and also with water. 137.
He shall sit in the place of the secluded, within the
precinct of 4zs abode, apart from the other Mazda-
worshippers. 138. He shall not come with authoriza-
tion to fire, G’c. [just as has dcen written zm § 134],
(139) at all from that “me, until te time when his
six nights shall fully elapse.

140. ‘After those six nights’ he shall wash over
his body, and fzs clothes are purified over tn such a
way as with bull’s urine and also with water. 141-
143. He shall sit in the place of the secluded [just
as has been written 2x §) 133-135] usted the time when
his nine nights shall fully elapse.

144. ‘Then, after the nine nights, he shall wash
over his body, and fis clothes are purified over im
such a way as with bull's urine and also with
water. 145. Then he shall come with authoriza-
tion unto fire, unto water, unto earth, unto animals,
unto plants, unto a righteous man, unto a righteous
woman.’

Besides the above fully detailed description of
the Bareshntim ceremony we find two other accounts
of the rite, in the Vendidad. Of these the most
detailed is contained in Vend. VIII, 117-228, which
mentions the use of the dog’, the nine holes, the
washing with bull’s urine and water, and all the


Sines nen EE


1 The MSS. omit several words, when sentences are repeated,
for the sake of brevity.
2 See § / above,


454 APPENDIX.


detail of driving the fiend of corruption from one
part of the body to another (by sprinkling with ‘the
good waters’) till it flies away to the north as in
Vend. IX, 117. But it omits the description of the
purifier, the dimensions of the purifying place, the
scoring of the furrows, the placing of the stones,
the exorcism}, the seclusion for nine nights, and all
the washings after the first day.

The other account, which is much shorter, is given
in Vend. XIX, 67-84. It specifies that the urine
must be that of a young bull, and that the purifier
must score a furrow; it mentions the recitation of a
hundred Ashem-vohiis and two hundred Yatha-aht-
vairyés, four washings with bull’s urine and two
with water, nine nights’ exposure, followed by atten-
tion to the fire and fumigation, when the man
clothes himself while paying homage to the sacred
beings, and is clean; but no other details are given.


1 That is, the exorcism is not found in the Pahlavi version, but -
is introduced in the Vendidad sadah in an abbreviated form, pos-
sibly copied from Vend. IX, 118.


V. FINDING A CORPSE IN “THE WILDERNESS. 455


V. Frnpinc A Corpse IN THE WILDERNESS.


THE controversy between MA4ntsfthar and his
brother, ZAd-sparam, of which the Epistles of Mant-
skihar are the only portion extant, turned chiefly
upon the meaning to be attached to Vend. VIII,
271-2991, and whether the mode of purification
therein detailed was a sufficient substitute, or merely
a preparation, for the Bareshnfiim ceremony. The
following is a translation of the Pahlavi version of
this passage ?:—

Pahl. Vend. VIII, 271. ‘O creator! how are those
men purified, O righteous Athaymazd! who shall
stand by a corpse, in a distant place, upon a wild
spot 3?’

272. And Atharymazd spoke thus: ‘They are
purified, O righteous Zarattist!’

273. ‘But when so? [that is, how will sach a one
become clean ?]’

274. ‘If a corpse-eating dog, or a corpse-eating
bird, Aas attacked that corpse, (275) ¢e man shall
then purify over his own body with bull’s urine,
(276) thirty times by washing forwards [wth the
bull’s urine], avd thirty times by washing over *, [and


1 See Sacred Books of the East, vol. iv, pp. 116-118.

2 Subject to the same observations as those detailed in p. 431 n.

3 Reading pavan vaskar, but the MSS., by omitting a stroke,
have pavan sikar, ‘ on the chase.’

4 So here, but ‘washing backwards’ in § 279; and in Ep. i;
iv, 2 we find ‘upwards’ and ‘downwards,’ instead of ‘forwards’
and ‘backwards.’ The Pahlavi translators were evidently doubtful
whether the Av. upasnateé (see Ep. II, iii, 2) meant ‘ washing
over, backwards, or downwards.’


456 APPENDIX.


Ais hand shall rub over it.] 277. Of the topmost
part of him is the washing over, [that is, the wash-
ing of his head is that regarding which ‘here is
a mention through this study-causing (hdishkar)
exclamation. ]?

278. ‘If a corpse-eating dog, or a corpse-eating
bird, Zas not attacked that corpse, (279) he shall
purvfy fifteen times by washing forwards, and fifteen
times by washing backwards, [and /zs hand shall rub
over it.]

280. ‘He shall run the first mile (hdsar)%. 281.
He shall then run forwards, [when the PazZadasa
(“fifteen é2mes”) shall be performedbyhim.] 282. 4nd
when he shall thus stop opposite any one whomso-
ever of the material existence *, he shall be prepared
with a loud issue of words, (283) thus: “I have thus
stood close by the body of him who is dead; I am
no wisher for z¢ by thought, I am no wisher for zé by
word, I am no wisher for z¢ by deed, [that is, z¢ is
not possible for me éo de as though washed.] 284. It
demands purification for me, [that is, wash me
thoroughly!]” 285. When he runs, the first he shall
reach, (286) if they do not grant him purification,
share one-third of that deed of his, [that is, of all that
sin, not possible for him ¢o dear, except when they
shall perform Ais purification, one part in three is
theirs at 2¢s origin. ] .
_ 287. ‘He runs the second mile [while he runs for


* Implying that the Pahlavi translators had found the use of
Av. aghrya for ‘head’ rather perplexing.

* The hasar was ‘a thousand steps of the two feet’ (see Bd,
XXVI, 1, note), and was, therefore, about an English mile.

* That is, any human being,

* See Ep. Ip ii, ro.


V. FINDING A CORPSE IN THE WILDERNESS. 457


zt). 288. He runs, avd a second time he reaches
people. 289. If they do not grant him purification,
(290) they share a half! of that deed of his, [that is,
of all that sin, not possible for him éo dear, except
when they shall perform Azs purification, as it were a
half is even for them at zés origin. ]

291. ‘He shall run the third mile [while he runs
for z¢|.. 292. When he runs, the third he shall reach,
(293) if they do not grant him purification, share all?
that deed of his, [that is, all that sin which 2z¢ is
not possible for him ¢o dcar, except when they
shall perform 47s purification, is ever theirs at tts
origin. |

294. ‘He shall then run forwards®. 295. He
shall thus stop opposite some people of the next
house, village, tribe, ov district, azd he shall be
prepared with a loud issue of words, (296) thus:
“T have thus stood close by the body of him who is
dead; (297) Iam no wisher for z¢ by thought, I am
no wisher for zt by word, I am no wisher for z¢ by
deed, [that is, z¢ is not possible /o dear without
washing.] 298. It demands purification for me,
[that is, wash me thoroughly!]” 299. If they do
not grant him purification, he shall then purify over
his own body with bull’s urine, ad also with water;
thus he shall be thoroughly purified over *.’

[a. He shall go three miles; it is not allowable to
walk back to zs district, until he Zas fully striven


1 That is, half of the two-thirds remaining with him, or one-
third of the whole original trespass.

2 That is, all the remaining one-third of the original trespass.

8 See Ep. II, iii, 3.

4 What follows is a commentary,’ by the Pahlavi translators, on
the whole passage.


458 APPENDIX,


with three persons, and all that sin, not possible for
him ¢o dear, except when they shall perform 47s
purification, is theirs at z¢s origin. |

6. When thus thoroughly washed by himseéf,
his duty even then is the work frakairi frakere-
naod, vastré verezyéid (‘he should accomplish °
with perseverance, he should cultivate in the pas-
tures 1’); there are some who would say thus: ‘He is
always for the performance of work, and abstinence
from the ceremonies of others is for him®.’]


* Quoted from Vend. XIX, 140, where the words ‘sheep’s food
and food for oxen’ are added.

* A person so purified by himself, after vainly seeking a proper
purifier, is, therefore, only fit for the ordinary labours of life, and
must avoid all religious celebrations till properly purified by the
Bareshnim ceremony. This was the opinion of MAnfsfihar, but
it is based upon a Pahlavi commentary, and not upon the Avesta
text, which is not clear upon this point.


OBSERVATIONS:


t. The references in this index are to the pages of the introduction
and appendix, and to the chapters and sections of the translations; the
chapters being denoted by the larger ciphers, or by roman type.

2. References to passages which contain special information are given
in parentheses, when the reference is not the first one.

3. Though different forms of the same name may occur in the trans-
lations, only one form is usually given in the index, to which the references
to all forms are attached; except when the forms differ so much as-to
require to be widely separated in the index.

4. Pazand forms are printed in italics, as their orthography is usually
corrupt. In all such italicised names any letters which would elsewhere
be italic are printed in roman type.

5. Abbreviations used are :—Ap. for Appendix; AV. for Arda-Viraf;
Av. for Avesta word; Byt. for Bahman Yast; com. for commentator;
Cor. for Corrections; Dd. for Dadistan-i-Dinik ; Dk. for Dinkard aDie
for Doctor; Ep. for Epistle; ins. for inscription; lun. man. for lunar
mansion; m, for mountain; meas. for measure ; Mkh. for Mainyé-i
Khard; n for foot-note; Pahl. for Pahlavi ; Pers. for Persian; Prof. for
Professor; r. for river; Riv. for Rivayat ; Sans. for Sanskrit word ; trans,
for translation ; Vend. for Vendidad; Visp. for Visparad; Yas. for Yasna.


INDEX.


Aban nyayis, Dd. 78, ron.

Ablution, Dd. 45, 6; 48, 9, 14, 203
pet vin t6< Vl, 0, 23) Ap.
383. — holes, Ep. I, ix, 7n; Ap.
433-436, 444 D, 445, 447-453. —
in Bareshniim, Ap. 437-454.—in
melted metal, Dd. 32, 13; 37,
IIO, I11, 113.— seats, Ep. I,
ix, 73" 11, iii, r2, iv, 6 ne III, 6,
20; Ap. 433n, 436n.

Abode of fires, Dd. 48, 11; 81, 17,
18.

Abortion, Dd. 78, 7.

Abraham, Dd. 37, 90.

Abyss, Dd. 37, 9, 24.

Account of the soul, Dd. 8, 6; 18,
2; 14,1-5; 20, 3; 22, 2; 24,5;
25,5; 28, 5,6; 30, 3; 31, 2,
10, 113 32, 4.

Adam, Dd. 44, 16 n.

Adarbig4n, Jand, Dd. 21, 2n.

Ad-fravakhshya, Av., Ap. 370.

Adharmah, man, Dd. On.

Adopted daughter, Dd. 56, 6.

— son, Dd. 54, 4, 9, 13; 56, 2, 5, 6,
8; 58, 3-5; 59, 1-3; 60, 1, 3;
61, 3; 62, 6, 7.

— sonship, Dd. 54, 13, 14; 56, 1-33
60, 2, 3.

Adoption, Dd. 56, 2, 6; 57, 1-4;
58,1, 5; 59, 3; G1, 2.

Adést, see Fire-stand.

Adultery, Dd. 72, 5; 78, 1-19.

Adversary, Dd. 87, 31; 94, 7.


Aérpat, Int. 13; Dd. On. See
Priest.
— khiédai, Int. 13; Dd. On. See


Priestly lordship.

Aéshm, demon, Dd. 87, 44, 52, 104;
94,1n; Ap. 426, 437. :

Afarg, com., Ep. I, ii, 5, v, 1, 6, Vl, 1,
2,4, 7,9, II; vii, 1, 18, Ix, I, 5)
6, 10, 15, X, 13; IT, ii, 5-8, mm,
rn; IlI,7; Ap. 446, 449.

Afrasiyab, king, Dd. 70, 3 n.

Afrin, see Benediction.

—} dahman, Dd. 31, 1 n.
Blessing of the holy.


See


Afringan, rite, Dd. 47, rn.

Aghrérad, man, Dd. 90, 3 n.

Aharman, Dd. 19, 1, 2, 5-7; 27, 6;
87, 16, 20, 59; 65, 5; 72, 2;
77, 11,123 94, 8,103 Ap. 374,
376-378, 384, 392, 417, 418,


426, 443.

Aharm6k6, Dd. 72,9n. See Apos-
tate.

Ahunavar, Dd. 48, 30n; Ap. 386n,
443 N, 448 n.

Ahura, Av., Ap. 448 n.

Ahura-mazda, Av., Dd. 79, 1n; Ap.
374n, 385, 387. See Athar-
mazd.

Ahv6, Dd. 1,205°7,'7; 29, 13 31,7:
See Patron spirit.

Ahvoth, Dd. 5, 5. See Spiritual
life.

Aindar, demon, Ep. I, x, 9.

Atran-vég, land, Dd. 21, 2; 99, 3 n,
4, 8n.

Airyema, Av., Ep. I, vii, ro.

Akhrtirag, man, Ap. 375.

Akhtya, man, Dd. 90, 3n; Ap. 4110.

Ak6émané, demon, Dd. 37, 44, 53;
94, 1n; Ep. I, x, 9n.

Albirz m., Dd. 20, 3; 21, 2; 37,
118 n; 92, 5.

Aloes, Ap. 446.

Amerédad, angel, Dd. 48, 1n; Ap.


415.

Amesha-spentas, Dd. 31, 5n. See
Archangels.

Andhita, angel, Dd. 31, 7 n.

Andarvaé, Dd. 98, 7.

Andreas, Dr., Ap. 399 n.

Angel of wind, Ap. 372 n.

Angels, Dd. 1, 0; 2, 13; 3, 13, 15;
4,3; 5,5; 17,2; 20, 3n; 26,
3,43 28,4; 81,15; 37, 32,
86, 87, 114, 131, 1325 89, II, 25,
28,29; 42,1; 48, 120, 27, 29;
64, 6; 65,5; 75,1, 2; 81,10;
82, 4,5; 85, 3; 89, 2; 94, 12;
Ep. I, iv, 1, x, 3) Xi, 113 I, v, 125
Ap. 379 n; army of, Dd. 37, 58,
64, 107n; fortress of, Dd. 389, -


462


PAHLAVI TEXTS.


18; earthly, Dd.1, 0; heavenly,
Dd. 1,0; 4, 3; 37, 50; 48, 8;
93, 10; primeval, Dd. 73, 3;
spiritual, Ep. I, 0, xi, 12; II, ix,
13; Ap. 378; worldly, Ep. I, 0,
iv, Aig a2; LL, 1x,23): Ap, 373.
See Sacred beings.

Angra-mainyu, Av., Ap. 385. See
Evil spirit.

Aniran day, Dd. 48, 7.

Anoshirvan, Ep. I, iv, 17 n.

Anquetil Duperron, Dd. 48, 16 n.

Aogemadaééa, Av., Dd. 31, 1 n.

Aéshanar, man, Dd. 37, 35.

Aéshnér, man, Dd. 48, 33.

Apaésh, demon, Dd. 98, 11, 13 n.

Ape, origin of, Ap. 418n, 419.

Apostates, Dd. 72, 9; Ep. II, v, 13;
Ap. 384.

Apostles, Dd. 2,10 n, 11 n; 87, 43,
roo nN; 89, 27; 48, 30, 31; Ep.
I,v, 3n; II, ili, 1; Ap. 369, 386,


444 n,

Aquarius, Ep. I], ii, 9 n.

Arab horse, Ap. 403.

Archangel, Dd. 14, 2; 81, 5; 72,
ton; Ep. I, iii, rn; Ap. 380n,
434n; female, Dd, 94, 2n; Ap.


393 n.

Archangels, Dd. 29, 2; 87, 26; 48,
9; 48, (1,) 3; 78, 35 74, 1, 2;
93, 13,14; 94,12; Ep. I, x, 9,
Kilo sev) Rass ikon aA Ds
377N, 412, 415, 420n; om-
niscient, Dd, 74, 3; seven, Dd.
43, 8, 9.

Ard, angel, Dd. 8, 13, 14; 94, (2.)

Ardashir-i Papakan, king, Dd. 88,


aie

Ardashir-khurrah, town, Dd. 88,7n.

Ardavahist, angel, Dd. 48, 1n; Ap.
415.

Arda-Viraf,man, Int. 28; Dd. 81, 4n;
Ep. I, iv, 17n; Ap. 397, 428.

Ardibahist, angel, Ap. 379 n, 380n.

Arekdvisiir water, Dd. 87, 118; 92,
1-3, 5-

Arez6-shamana, man, Ap. 370.

Arezir m., Dd. 88, 5.

Aries, Ep. I], ii, 9 n.

Armést, Ap. 452. See Secluded.

Artakhshatar-gadman, town, Dd.
88, 7.

Ariim, land, Ep. II, viii, 5.

Artiman, Ap. 406.

Arvand r., Dd. 92, 2.


Arvis, Dd. 48, 13n. See Atirvés.
Aryans, glory of, Dd. 30, 3 n.
Arzah, region, Dd. 36, 5.
Asam-i Yamahust, chief, Dd. 90, 3 n.
Ashavazang, chief, Dd. 90, 3.
Ashavazd, chief, Dd. 90, 3 n, 8 n.
Ashem-vohi, Av., Dd. 48, 32 n; 79,
7; Ap. 371 n, 3720, 448, 4545
translated, Dd.79,1n; Ap. 385.
Ashes of sacred fire, Ep. I, vii, 16 n,
Ashisang, angel, Dd. 94, 2n. See
Ard


Asia Minor, Int. 27; Ep. II, viii, 5n;

. _ Ap. 406 n.

Aslesha, lun. man., Ep. II, ii, 9 n.'

Ass, Ep. 15 viii, 3:

Assembly, Int. 25, 27; Ep. I, iv, 14;
II, i, 8, 10-12, v, ron; Ap. 407,


424.

Astad, angel, Dd. 80, 2, 3; 44, 20n.

Ast6-vidad, demon, Dd. 28, 3 n;
80, 4; 87, 44, 51, 52, 81, 83 n,
98, 106, 108. _.-

Asvini, lun. man., Ep. II, ii, 9 n.

Atas nyayis, Dd. 48, 21n; 78, 19n.

Atonement for sin, Dd. 12, 2; 18, 2,
33 15,53; 31, 10; 72, 11; 75, 5;
148; 17, 19; Ap. 4z4.

Atrat, man, Ap. 369 n.

Atir (fire), Dd. 48, 10; day, Dd.

, . 43; 7.

Atfir-frébag-i Farukhézadan, priest,
Int. 27; Dd. 88, 8; Ep. I, iii,

ps

Attiro-bfigéd; priest, Ep. I, x, 8.

— frdbag-vindad, priest, Ep. I, x, 8.

— mahan, man, Int. 22; Dd. 0.

— pad, man, Int. 26; Ep. Il, v, 14,
1x DT.

—-—i Hémidan, priest, Int. 27;
Dd, 44, 20n; Ap. 399 n.

— — f Maraspendan, priest, Dd. 87,

6


36.
Atharmazd, Dd.1,0; 2, 5,7; 22,
1; 28, 5n; 381, 5, 8, 11; 36,7;
87, 22, 43, 44n, 95n; 40, 7n;
48, 1,3; 64, 3; 93,13n; 94,
8, 10; Ep. I, iv, 11, x, 9n; II,
1, 14, lil, 155 Ap. 373, 377, 384,
386, 392, 393, 396, 4o2n, 411,
412, 415, 442-444; army of, Dd.
87, 67; beneficent, Dd. 87, 9;
created by, Dd. 87, 117; Ep. I,
vii, 11; creatures of, Dd.17, 18,
20; 87, 13n, 66; Ep. I, iv, 2;
domestic of, Dd. 81, 1, 5; fire


INDEX.


463


of, Dd. 2,1; Ap. 4323 in endless
light, Dd. 31, 24; in Gardd-
man, Dd.1, 3 n; 94,12; nature
of, Dd. 19, 1-7; priests of, Ep.
I, iv, 10, rz, 153 propitiation of,
Dd. 48, 22; service of, Dd. 39,
16, 28; speaks, Dd. 7, 3; talks
with Keresasp, Ap. 374, 376-
378; talks with Zarattst, Dd. 7,
Tap. 15 Vil. tO, 12is Ap. 372,
373s 379, 381, 415-417, 419-423,
431-433, 455; the creator, Dd.
1,0; 14,5; 31, 5,6; 36,7; 37,
12, 75; 94, 1n, 14; Ep. I, 0,
mina C0 x, 13, 643) TLL, 225
Ap. 393 0; the lord, Dd. 94, 7n;
Ap. 384, 4223; two spirits of, Dd.
2,11n; Ep. I, ii, 1n; wisdom


of, Dd. 87, 19; worship of, Ap.


AE Ts
Atharmazd day, Dd. 43, 7.
Afirvadasp, man, Dd. 78, 2.
Afirvaram, Dd. 48, 16.
Airvés (ceremonial area), Dd. 48,


Easel A

Afishahin gah, Dd. 30, 2, 3.

Atishdastar m., Dd. 80, 2; 37, 118.

Ais,hindim m., Dd. 37,118 n; 92, 5.

Avan (waters), Dd. 48, 10; day, Dd.
43, 7,11 n; month, Dd. 48, 10,
oie tv 10) De OI

Avdem, \an. man., Ep. II, ii, 9 n.

Avénak, lun. man., Ep. II, ii, 9, ro.

Avesta, Dd. 30, 4n; 71, 31; 81,
19n; Ep. I, iii, 8n, v, 8n; II,
ii, 13 n, iv, 1, V, 14 0, Vii, 5, ix,
7n; Ap. 369, 370, 391, 392;
394, 397, 411, 413 N, 419)
427, 437n;— and Zand, Dd.
45,2; Ep. I, iv, 11; I], ili, 14.0,
ix, 10; — formula, Ap. 385-387;
Khurdah, Ap. 385 n; — phrases,
Ep. I, vii, 4n; Ap. 385, 449 2,
451; recital of, Dd. 45, 6; 47,
1, 4-6, 9; 48, 23, 28, 315 66, I,
3; 85, 4; Ep. I, vii, 10, X, 35
Ap. 446-448, 450; — text, Ep.
I, iv, 33 H, ili, 2m; Ap. 393,
442 0, 445 n;— word, Ap. 390.

Avesta names, Dd. 2, 10n; 3, 130;
17,7n; 20, 3n; 80,2n; 31,
14n; 36, 3n, 4n; 87, 22n,
35 0, 36n, 44n,52n, 80n-82n,
97, 1orn, rion, 118n; 44,
16n; 48, 13n, 33n; 70, 3n;
72, 4n, 5n, 9n; 90, 3n, 8n;


92, 5n; 93, 11n; Ap. 411n,
431, 433 0.
Avrak,.Jun, man., Ep. II, ii, 9 n.
Az, demon, Dd. 87, 51.
Ag-t Dahak, king, Dd. 17, 6n; 65,
5; 72,3; 75,2. See Dahak.
Azi Srfivar, Dd. 72, 4. See Srtivar.


Bahman Yast, Ap. 399.

Baké nask, Ap. 371 n, 395, 397-

Balance of good works and sin, Dd.
8, 1, 2, 43 18, 3, 4.

Barazd, man, Dd. 90, 8 n.

Bareshnfim ceremony, Int. 29; Dd.
23, 3n; 39, 8n; 81,16; Ep.I,
ile OOM Avs ily, Wl, anT, vil, Aaa
7M, Xint Dy Laity mn, roma,
Oe IN, e4 Ny L2T, wiv, eOrmisee WIE
3-5, 8-12, 14, 15, 17, 20; Ap.
424, (431-455,) 458

— gah, Ap. 433 n; plan of, Ap. 435.

Bares6ém, see Sacred twigs.

— dan, Dd. 438, 5 n.

Bargaining, Dd. 52, 1-4.

Bastard, Dd. 78, 8-12.

Bayak, demon, Dd. 78, 2 n.

Bear, origin of, Ap. 418 n, 419.

Benediction, Ep. I, ii, 1, 4; Ap.
421.

Beneficent angel, Dd. 64, 6.

— spirit, Dd. 2, 11; 36, 7; 37, 31 n,
05; 1008 Bip. 1, i) 0 ne

Benzoin, Ap. 446.

Berezyarsti, man, Dd. 90, 8 n.

Best existence, Dd.1, 3; 14, 7, 8;
16, 6; 41, 10; 42, 2; 74, 2;
Ap. 374.

Blessing of the holy, Ap. 410, 411.

Bodily refuse, Dd. 48, 19, 20; 78,
14; Ep. I, viii, 1-3, 55 II, iv, 35
Ap. 432, 449.

Bédy6zéd sin, Dd. 49, 5n; 53, 5 n.

Bombay, Dd. On; 6,2n; 81,1n;
Ep. I], ii, 9 n; Ap. 383 n, 392 n.

Bone-receptacle, Dd. 18, 3, 4.

Boundless time, Int. 24.

Brahmanical thread, Dd. 39, 30n.

Bridge, see Kinvad bridge.

Bull’s urine, Dd. 48, 9n, 33 n; Ep. 1,
ii, 6n, vii, 1, 4, 9, 14, 16, viii,
x4; 6, 1%, 6, %, 33. 11, iL, 2, Bs
g, 10, 123 III, 1, 6, 20; Ap. 391,
4337-437) 445, 4450, 447, 449,
451-455, 457-

Bundahis, Int. 27; Dd. 21, 2n; 48,
25n. See also Sad-dar.


464


PAHLAVI TEXTS.


Bishasp, fiend, Dd. 87, 44, 51.
Bit, demon, Dd. 89, 28 n.


Cancer, Ep. I], ii, 9 n.
Carrion-crows, how purified, Dd. 17,


THAT

Caspian Sea, Dd. 87, 44 n.

Cat, origin of, Ap. 419.

Cattle-dealing, Dd. 58, 1-6.

Celestial spirit (ahv6), Dd. 37, 17.

Ceremonial (yazisn), Dd. 47,10; 48,
4,8, 10, II, 14, 22, 26 n, 29, 34,
35) 38; 66, 8-10, 13, 14, 18, 23,
325212, UP, M2s 79, TognSl, 73%
4, 6, 8, 10-12, 15-18; 82, 1, 2,
4,5; 83,2; 84,1, 2,4; 85,1,
2, 4, 53 86, 2-5, 8; 87, 1, 2;
88, 10; Ep. II, ix, 103 III, 13;
AP. 413,417, 421 ; — apparatus,
Ep. I, iv, 3 n.

— area, Dd. 48, 21 n. See Atirvés.

Ceremonies, after a death, Dd. 23,
4n; 81,5n; Ap. 429; —(yast6),
Dd. 80, 1; Ap. 397 ; — (yazisn),
Dd. 44, 9; 46, 5; 54, 10; Ep.
I, ivy:o.ng VAps 458.35. ans
nual, Dd. 54, 5; — — of the
sacred beings, Dd. 66, 17; —
— sacred, Dd. 87, 32; 44, 2,
43 Ep. IE, )ai7n:

Ceremony, Ep. I, viii, 6 n; II, iii,
70, 9n; Ap. 431, 446n3; of
guardian spirits, Dd. 28,7; 48,
40; 81,15; of Srdsh, Dd. 28,
I, 6; 29, 1; 48,40 n; 81,1n,
12-14; of the three nights, Dd.
28, 1, 5-7; Ap. 421 0; for living
soul, Dd. 81, 1, 8, 10-12; Ap,
421 n;— (yasté), Dd. 79, 4, 6;
80, 2; 81, 11; -— of Gété-
kharid, Dd. 79, 4, 53 80, 2
i of Nabat Dd. 7054 he
(yazisn), Dd. 48, 1, 2, 23, 36;
86, 7n; —— of the sacred
beings, Dd. 44, 7, 8; 48, 24;
— — of the waters, Dd. 78, 19;
— + sacred, Dd. 22, 1; 28,
4, 55 44, 17; 45, 6; 47, 9;
485515 3,0 $503) 7B ae -See
Bareshntim.

Ch in Oriental words is printed K.

China, Int. 27; Ep. II, i, 12 n, viii, 5.

Christianity, Int. 24.

Christians, Int. 26; Dd. 12, 5 n; 19,
In; 387,90; Ap. 428, 430.


Cleansing, Dd. 40, 1, 6, 8,13, 14.
Clouds, Dd. 98, 1, 3, 4.
Co-existent one, Dd. 37, 21, 26;
Ep: lina: ;
Commentaries, Dd. 71, 2n, 3 n; Ep.
I, iv, 1rn, v, 8n, vi, rn; Ap.
457n. See Pahlavi.
Commentary (zand), Dd.1, 7; 44, 2;
45, 5, 6; 47, 1, 2, 4-6, 8-10;—.
(Aastakd), Ep. I, v, 6n.
Commentators, Ep. I, ii, 5n, iv, 17n,
Vv, In, vi, In, x, ron; II, ii, ron,
13 n, ix, 7n; Ap. 397.
Complete mindfulness, Ap. 412.
Conjunctions of planets, Ep, II, ii,
IO, IT.
Consecrating sacred cakes, Dd. 28,
E530; 55 179) 72 1Bilsiagenee
Constantly-beneficial place, Dd. 26,
3; 31, 24n;— space, Dd. 87,
22, 24-- (3353:

Corn-dealing, Dd. 49, 1-10.

Corpse-eating dogs and birds, Dd.
15, ° 1,945.53 1613973 ATs
17, 19; 18, 1-3; Ap. 455,
456.

Creation of man, Dd. 64, 1-7.

Creator, Dd. 1, 0; 2, 4, 7, 11; 3,
2-4, 6, 7, 8n, 10, 18, 20; 4, 2;
7; 2, 3, 53 14,5; 19,5; 21,4;
22, 3, 4; 29, 2; 31, 5-7; 36,
73 37, 4, 6, t2, 16, 17, 22, 26,
37, 64, 65, 67, 75, 84, 96, 112-
II4, 131; 39, 2, 18; 64, 4;
65, 4,53; 73, 35 75, 33 77,43
91, 9, 10; 98, 13; 94, 14; Ep.
1,0, x1,.723 Myixyig, 145 Tie
22; Ap. 379n, 386, 401, 408,
409, 412, 431, 432, 455.


Dadistan-? Dinik, Dd. 94, rn; Ap.
3735 394, 399N, 414, 4283 con-
tents, Int. 22, 23; Gugarati
trans., Int. 24; how composed,
Dd. 1, 18-27; MSS., Int. 15-18;
two versions, Int.15, 19; written
at Shiraz, Dd. 1, 17 n.

Daéva-worshippers, Dd. 82, 4 n.

Dahak, king, Dd. 2, 10n; 86, 3; 37,
(97,) t2z; 72, 5; 78, 2; Ap.
372, 374, 378, 418. See Az-t
Dahak.

Dahikan, Int. 16.

Dahman 4frin, see Blessing of the
holy.


INDEX,


465


ce ay ete ee els a


Daitih peak, Dd. 20, 3n; 21, 1, 2;
34, Ts 4.

— river, Dd. 21, 2n; 90, 4.

Dakhma, see Depository.

Damdad nask, Dd. 48, 25 n.

Danayan, Ap. 370.

Daraga r., Dd. 21, 2n.

Darmesteter, Prof. J., Vend. trans.,
Dd. 20, 3n; 31, 5n,24n; 82,
4n; 88, 4n, 5n; 89, 19n;
foy3 0 Ep. 1, siv, 3,

Dastantk, man, Ap. 370, 372.

Dates of Pahlavi books, Int. 27, 28;
Ep. I, iv, 17 n; Ap. 392 n, 394,
397-399, 415, 427; 428.

David, Ap. 390.

Deadly one, Dd. 86, 8.

Dead matter, Dd. 15,5; 17, 7, 10,
Beco na tG, 2 Ip, Te ii, 3,
6n.

Death demon, Dd. 23, 3n; 80, 4n.

— of the wicked, Dd. 20, 2n.

Wecree, Ep.) iv, 7, Vv; 1 Dy Xs 75 F;

COL ers) solids Te lV,) 1
V, 2, 7, 12, Vl, 4, Vil, 4.

Decrepitude demon, Dd. 28, 3.

Dedications, Dd. 80,1; 438, 3, 4,
7-115 Ap. 447, 448.

Demon, Dd. 14, 6n; 30, 4n; 34,
43; 37, 49, 81, 85, 97, 103, 108-
PEO 120, 12215 0, 17 295 Lis
Sato 12>) O93; 11-135 Kp. 11;
flies My iv.3 > Ap. 3721, 38%,
418, 419, 444.

— of demons, Dd. 87, 49, 53, 56;
Ap. 392.

Demons, Dd. 6, 3, 4; 16, 7; 17, 2,
3, 20; 25, 5n; 27, 5,6; 32,
5,14; 88, 3-5; 87, 20, 27-29,
46, 53, 54) 59,73, 81,85, 87, 935
I02, 105, 1103 39, 11, 20; 41,
5; 45, 7; 48, 5, 12m, 16, 295
65, 5; 78, 3; 74; 2, 3; 75, 25
76, 3; 81, 11; 93, 1; Ap. 377,
378, 402, 410-412, 415, 417-420,
422, 424, 437, 444; coupled
with-fiends, see Fiends.

Demon-worshippers, Dd. 57, 4;
63, 5n.

Departure of the righteous, Dd. 20,


2n.

Depository for the dead, Dd. 15, 5n;
18, 4n.

Destiny, Dd. 71, 1-4.

Destroyer, Dd. 17, 7; Ap. 395, 401.

Deuteronomy, book, Ap. 429 n.


[18]


Dimavand m., Dd. 87, 97n; Ap.


372n.

Dinkard, book, Int. 19, 27, 29; Dd.
61, 3n; Ap. 389n, 415, 4285
editor of, Int, 27; Dd. 88,
8n; Ep. I, iii, 9n ; quoted, see
Quotations.

Diné, angel, Dd. 94, 2.

Director of the priests, Int. 13; Dd.
On; 1, 10n; 45,(5;) 94, 13;
Epil, ix, 12,

Dirhams, Dd. 52, 1, 2; 60, 3; 66,
2 j=l 75 205 2 hy Ses LO hones

_ 82,1; 88, 1-3, 5-7, 9-11.

Disciples, Dd. 1, 3, 4, 17; 45, 1-6;
46, 5; 66, 3, I1, 21, 24, 25, 30,
33; 81,11; 85, 7; 86, 3, 6,
SSS; 9.0127) Ep. Liters
Ill,:16; Ap. 422.

Discipleship, Dd. 45, 1-3; 88, 9;
ES psLTS) v5.5

Divorce, Ap. 407 n, 419.

Dog, shown to the dead, Dd.17, 20;
18, 2; used in Bareshntim, Ap.
450-453.

Dowry, Dd. 52, rn.

Drayan-gtiyisnith sin, Dd. 79, 8 n.

Drén, see Sacred cake.

Driigdskan, Dd. 38, 4.

Drunkenness, Dd. 50, 3, 4; 51,
I-II.

Drying with dust, Ap. 435, 445,
446 N, 450-452.

Dfibasrtiged nask, Ap. 394,

Diis-haikht, grade of hell, Dd, 91, 3n.

Dyazdah-hémast, rite, Dd. 48, 25;
78, 19; 81,15.


Eating, desisting from, Dd. 385, 3;
with a spoon, Dd. 28, 5.

Eclipses, Dd. 69, 1-4.

Egypt, Ap. 429.

Elohim, Dd. 1, 3 n.

Endless light, Dd. 31, 24; 387, 22,
24; 64, 3; 91, 3 n, 4.

Enoch, Dd. 44, 16 n.

Epistle, Ddali 27s Lepomis) 2,
ii, 1, iv, 7, V, 1, Vi, I, Xi, 1, 2, 5,
LOr LI O51, a 3, Y) 10 N, Vil, 2,
viii, 1, ix, oi Lea 1s

Epistles of Mantskihar, Int. xxv-
xxviii; Ap. 394, 455.

Eradication of life, Dd. 15, 1, 3;
28, 3; of sin, Dd. 12, 1, 2, 5.

Ever-stationary, Dd. 20, 3; 37,30n;
Ap. 426; of the righteous, Dd,


Hh


466


PAHLAVI TEXTS.


24, 6; of the wicked, Dd. 24,
6n;3 38, 2.

Evil beings, Ap. 384.

— one, Dd. 32, 7; 37, 102.

— spirit, Dd. 2,11; 3,8; 7, 3; 19,
In; 85, 2; 37, 21N, 31N, 53,
83,96, 120; 48, 1, 22; 64, 5n;
70, 2n; 72, 9n; Ep. I, ii, rn,
43; Ap. 437) 444-

— spirits, Dd. 37, 66.

— thoughts, words, and deeds, Dd.
2,6; 20, 2; 24,6; 25,4; Ap
384, 387. ”

Exorcism, Ep. I, vi, 6; II, ii, 7; Ap.
442-444, 450N, 454.

Exposure of the dead, Dd. 15, 1-6;
16, 1-8; 17, 1-20; 18, 1-4.


Farhank, woman, Dd. 48, 33.

Farmadar, Int. 13; Dd. On,
Director.

Farm4n sin, Dd. 40, 4n; 79, (9 n.)

Farukhiizad, priest, Int. 27; Dd. 88,
8; Ep. I, iii, 9.

Fastening corpses to the ground, Dd.
LS Lyles

Fathom, meas., Ap. 432, 447.

Female things, see Male.

Fever demon, Dd. 23,3.

Fiend, a, Dd. 37, 49, 120; 94, 1;
— of corruption, Dd. 17, 7n;
Ap. 4360, 437-442, 444, 445,
450n, 454; —, the (archfiend),
Dd. 1, 3, 6,143 2, 5,7, 113 8,
7,193 7, 3; 22,4; 81, 8; 32,
7, L2** Shy 75 L2y 135 FAD, 17-205
22, 24, 25, 28, 29, 37) 44, 50,
59, 64-67, 72, 75-77, 79, 81, 83,
93,99) III, 112, 114, 116 N, 1233
389, 16; 42,6; 48, 24; 75, 3,
4; 77,2, 8,10n; 91, 8; 94, 8n;
Ep. 1, ii, 2, 4, 5,133 ¥, 33 Ap.
395; — the (inferior), Dd. 32,
11; 39, 28; 94, 2; Ap. 395.

Fiends, Dd. 19, 7; 32, 12; 87, 61,
74, 80, 84, 106; 39, 13; 48, 27,
37; 86, 7; 94, 4; Ap. 417;
coupled with demons, Dd. 2,
13; 16, 8; 27, 2; 87, 44, 55,
57, 97, 104, 108; 89, 13, 14;
48, 1; 72, 10; 94, 3, 4; Ap.


See


384.
Fifty-seven years’ preparation for
resurrection, Dd. 36, 5, 7 n.
Finger-breadth, meas., Ap. 433, 434,


439) 4455 447, 450.


Fire angel, Ap. 372-374, 376, 377,
3795 380, 393 1, 443.

— for ceremonies, Dd. 28, 5; 438,
I, 2,53 48, 15, 21, 23; 78, 193
88,. 6.:: Ep: I, viii), 33 EG;
17; Ap. 417, 432, 433-

— priest, Dd. 64, 3, 4.

— stand, Dd. 48, 15.

— temple, Dd. 81, 17 n. See Abode.

— to protect infants, Dd. 28, 2n. ~

— wood, Dd. 48, 6; 48, 15; Ep.
1] 3% 36° Api aie

Firmament, Dd. 91, 2 n.

Foot, meas., Dd. 48, 5; Ap. 433n,
434; 436, 448.

Foreign conquerors, Ap. 409 n, 429;
— faith, Dd. 41,1, 3; 42, 1, 3;
Ap. 405n; — habits, Dd. 78, 8,
9; Ep. Il, 1, 17; — woman,
Dd 78,3515:

Foreigners, Dd. 41, 3 n, 6n; 50, 1,
4-9) 3) E, 24-5.

Fourth day after death, Dd. 81, 15.

—night after death, Dd. 11, 1;
Rs Par oe

Fradadafsh, region, Dd. 86, 5.

Fradad-gadman, man, Dd. 86, 4, 5.

— Avarend, man, Dd. 36, 4 n.

Fradakhst6, chief, Dd. 90, 3, 8 n.

Frashakard, see Renovation.

Frastyav, king, Dd. 70, 3; 90, 3 n.

Frasnateé, Av., Ep. II, iii, 2.

Frayak, man, Dd. 87, 35.

Fravarané, Av., Ap. 448.

Frayardigan, rite, Dd. 44, 2 n.

Fravardin, month, Dd. 48, 7 n.

Frayashi, “Av.. Dd. 233 ne
Guardian spirit.

Frayar (morning), Dd. 48, 26.

Frédiin, king, Dd. 2, 10; 87, 35,
80, 97; 65, 5.

Frébak fire, Ap. 373 n.

Frog, origin of, Ap. 419.

Fryan, man, Dd. 90, 3; Ap. 411 n.

Furrows,. Ep. III, 6; Api 433n,
434, 436, 4370, 445, 446, 448,
449, 452, 454.

Future existence, Dd. 2, 13 n; 14,
6; 32, 2; Ap. 382.


See


Gaévani, man, Dd. 86, 3-n.

Gah, see Period of the day.

Gahanbars, Dd. 44, 2n. See Sea-
son-festivals.

Gandarep, monster, Ap. 370, 371,
374-376, 381, 419.


INDEX. 467


Garédmfan, Dd. 1, 3n; 20, 3. See
Heaven, supreme and highest.

Garsdasp, hero, Ap. 369n.

Gatha dialect, Ap. 387 n.

Gathas, Dd. 40, 5n; 79, 7; Ep. I,
vil, ton; Ap. 370N-372'N, 390.
See Sacred hymns.

Gayémard, man, Dd. 2, 10, 12; 4,
6; 28, 7; 36, 2; 87, 35.n, 46,
82; 64, 2, 5-7; Ap. 393 n, 401,
402, 411, 418 Nn.

Geiger, Dr., Dd. 31, rn.

Geldner, Dr., Ap. 426.

Genesis, book,. Dd. 1, 3n; 87,22n;
91, 2n; Ap. 393 n, 429 Nn.

Gerésasp6, hero, Ap. 371n.
Keresasp.

Gét6-kharid, rite, Dd. 79, 4, 5; 80,
ape LM er ne

Geus urva, Av., Ap. 380 n.

Giw, man, Dd. 36, 3 n.

God, Dd.1,3n; Ap. 4013 Cor. 479.

Gékarn, tree, Dd. 37, 100 n; 48, 16.

Géméz, see Bull’s urine.

Good religion, Dd. 1, 1, 173 5, 1;
87, 22; 41, 10; 42, 1, 3; 47,
Te 5S, f,.2, 5; S6h 25) 67,2);
61, 3; 62,1; 66,15, 19: 75,
5; 78, 9,18, 19; 81,173 88,
8; 90, 2; 94,12; Ep. I, iii, ro,
Wile ae, O55) Eb iS SEO, VL, 55
Ill, 21; Ap. 401, 415, 425.

—= spirit, Dd. 3,.17%;, 7, 75.30,. 45
42, 6.

— spirits, Dd.1, 23; 16, 8; 37, 66;
48,4; 91, 8.

— thoughts, words, and deeds, Dd.
2; 6,123 8, 10; 15, 2; 20, 2; 24,
4,6; 25, 4; 38, 2; Ap. 387.

— works, Dd. 1, 4, 7; 5, 2, 33 8;
1-6; 9, 3; 10,1, 2; 11,14, 2;
12, 1-53; 18, 1-4; 14,1, 2, 4;
15, 2, 3, 53 20,.3; 22,1; 24,
2, 3; 25, 3,4; 31, 2, 4, 10,17,
19, 20; 32, 7, 15,16 n; 34, 3;
37, 128; 38, 1, 35 42, 3,4; 46,
2; 48,11; 50, 3, 4; 54, 10;
66, 24; 72,12; 75,505 76, I,
3, 45 80, 2; 81, 9, 10, 14, 18 5
82, 3; 84, 3,4; 85,2, 3; 89,
3; 90,7; 94,7, 8n; pele 15
3, 4,-1¥,.53) TI, ili, 3; III, 15;
AP, 391, 392, 399, 402, 411, 412,
415, 419, 421-427, 442, 443-

G6patd, land, Dd. 90, 4, 8 n.

Gépatshah, chief, Dd. 90, 3, 4.


See


Gér, town, Dd. 88, 7 n.

Gés-atirvan, angel, Ap. 380.

Gésna-gam, priest, Dd. On.
Ytidan-Yim.

Gost-? Fry4né, chief, Dd. 90, 3 n.

Gosfibar, Ap. 419.

Grades in heaven, Dd. 20, 4n; 34, 3.

— in hell, Dd. 20, 4n; 388, 2-5.

Greeks, Ap. 389, 429.

Growth of good works, Dd. 12, 1,


See


2, 45 5-

— of sin, Dd. 12, 5.

Guardian, Dd. 56, 9; 61, 3; 62,
5-73 Ep. II, viii, 2.

— spirit, Dd. 2, 5; 3, 9; 387, 80;
— spirits, Dd. 17, 6; 31,15 n;
87, 80, 131, 1323 91,10; Ap.
369; ——, righteous, Dd. 17,
6n; 28,7; 37, 34; 48, 1, 21,
403 81, 13,15; 82, 5; 94, 12;
Ep. flax t3s

Guardianship, Dd. 54, 6, 9, 11; 56,
Ty 45 5975 58, I, 53 61, 1,35 62,
5,6; Ep. II, viii, 2, 3, ix, 4, 5.

Giisna-dam, priest, Int. 13, Dd. On.

Gustasp, king, Dd. 87, 36n. See
Vistasp.


Gamasp, priest, Dd. 44, 16; Ap. 380.
Gédan-dam, priest, Dd. On.
Guvan-Gam, priest, Dd. On.


Hadhanaépata, Av., Dd. 48, 16n;
Ap. 446n. See Pomegranate.

Hadbayds, ox, Dd. 81, 13 0; 87, (99,)
119; 48, 345; 90, 4.

HAdokht nask, Dd. 48, 25; 94,14 n.

Hamémial sin, Dd. 14, 3 n.

Hamistakan, Dd. 20, 3; 33, 2n. See
Ever-stationary.

Haosravangh, man, Ap: 375n.

Hara-berezaiti m., Dd. 20, 3 n.

Harlez, Prof. C. de, Dd. 33, 4n; Ap.
369 n.

HAsar, meas., Ap. 456n. See Mile.

Hashi-dava, Ap. 375 0.

Haug’s Essays, Dd. 31, 1n; 37, 48n;
89, 11n, 21n; 43, 5n, 7n; 47,
rn; 48, 21n, 30n, 310; 72,
4n; Ap. 370n, 384 n.

Havan gah, Dd. 48, 26n.

Hawk, origin of, Ap. 419.

Heaven (vahist), Dd.1, 3n; 6,7, 8;
14,7; 20, 3; 24, 6; 26, (1-55)
27, 4n; S81, 1-4, 9, 10, 12, 15,
17, 240, 25; 33, 2n; 34,1; 387,


eee


468


PAHLAVI TEXTS.


38, 43, 75, 79; 88, rn; 44,
20n, 22n; 94, 9,10; Ap. 376-
379, 397, 4150, 421, 426; grades
in, Dd. 20, 4n; 34, 3.

Heaven (garédman), highest, Dd. 1,
3n;—supreme, Dd. 20, 3; 24,
6; 81, 4,15, 17, 22, 24, 253 87,
25, 50; 38, 1n, 4n; 80, 2; 94,
12; Ap. 374, 376-378, 421.

Hell, Dd. 6, 6, 8; 14, 6, 7; 20, 4;
21, 8; 25, 2,6; 27, (1-73) 82,
I, 3, 4, 7,10, 143 38, I, 2n, 5;
34, 1; 37, 108, 110, 120; 41,
LOW TO, 20,316 De Oo leuoutre
94, 9, 10; Ap. 373, 397, 417-
419, 422, 426, 444; grades in,
Dd. 20, 4; 88, 2-5.

Heretic, Ep. III, r9.

Hér-frévag, priest, Ep. I, iii, 9.

Heterodox, Ep. II, ix, 8.

Higar, see Bodily refuse.

High-priest, Int. 13, 14, 27; Dd.
Ofn 3 yi 4 Myr t zllek 20,
21; 3, 16; 22, 5; 39, 23; 41,
Ee Sey visa ny yn vis ys
93, 15; Ep. I, on, iii, 2n, 7, vi,
5» vii, 4, 1X, 10, 13,15, X, 85 II, i,
9,1, 91, V, 4, Vi, 1; Ap. 401, 413,
442, 443 ; — supreme, Int. 13.

High-priesthood, Dd. 89, 1; Ep. II,
ix, 5; Ap. 443; — supreme, Ep.

5 Uy Teas

High-priests, Int. 27; Dd. 1, 6, 20,
21; 3,145 21, 2; 23, 3; 27,7;
87, 62,107; 39, 8; 42, 6; 48,
34; 65, 5; 71, 3; 76, 2; 88, 6;
89,1; 94, 12,13; Ep. I, ii, 4,
6, 12, iv, 7, 10, 14, 16, 18, V, 1-3,
vi, 2, 3, vii, 5, 6, 14, Vili, 7, ix,
4, 9, TI, 15, X, 6, 7) 9, 10, 12;
II, U, 2, 7, ll, 4,14, V, 2, 4, Vi,
5, ix, 8; III, 2, 5, 7, 16; Ap. 397.

Highwaymen, Ap. 376.

Hikhar, see Bodily refuse.

Hindiis, Dd. 39, 30n; Ep. I, viii, 3 n.

Hindva m., Dd. 92, 5 n.

Hitaspa, man, Ap. 370.

Hoffmann, Prof. G., Dd. On; Ep. I,
xi, 6n.

Holes (magha), see Ablution holes.

Holy-water, Dd. 48, 30, 32n, 34;
66, 15,17, 20, 25, 32; 78, 19;
88,1, 3, 5) 6, 9; Ep. I, ii, 3,
13, vill, rn; Ap. 417, 420, 447.

Hom juice, Dd. 48, 5n, 16 n, 27,
30, 31; — mortar, Dd. 48, 14,


16n, 31;— pestle, Dd. 48,
31n;—plant, Dd. 48, 16;—
twigs, Dd. 48, 14n, 16 n, 30n-
32n; Ep. III, 14; white, Dd.
31, 13n; 37, 100.

Horvadad, angel, Dd. 48,1n; Ap.
415; month, Ep. III, ar.

Hdéshang, king, Dd. 2, 10; 87, 35;
65


25:

Household attendance, Dd. 31, 8;°
37, 16, 17, 21; — attendant,
Dd. 31, 1, 53; 32, 7; 48, 1;
48, 41; Ep. I, iii, 9.

Hagar 0m. 9 Dd, J875,473 a5
Hakhir.

Hakhir m., Dd. 92, 5. See Hagar.

Hiiman, priest, Dd. 44, 20.

Hunus, Ap. 370, 371.

Hiish, beverage, Dd. 81, 13 n.

Hiishédar, apostle, Dd. 2, 10; 387,
36, 43, 94n; 48, 30; 66, 10n;
Ep El, ii;2n. —-

Hishédar-mah, apostle, Dd. 2, 10;
37, 35, 43, 940, 97N; 48, 30;
Ep.-4l, tir n.

Hasparim nask, Int. 24; Dd. 61,
3s 66, mnt

Hvaétvadatha, Av., Dd. 65, 1n; Ap.
387 N, 390, 391.

Hvare-£aéshman, man, Dd. 2, 10n;
36, 4n.

Hyvembya, title, Dd. 90, 3 n.

Hvévas, family, Dd. 44, 16.


See


Ibairaz, man, Dd. 90, 8 n.

Immortal rulers, Dd. 87, 101 n;
90, 3.

Incense, Ep. II, ix, 3; Ap. 417.

India, Dd. 18, 4n; Ap. 446 n.

Indian Antiquary, Dd, On; Ep. I,
xi, 6 n.

Indra, demon, Ep. I, x, 9 n.

Infanticide, Dd. 78, 5.

Infidel, Dd. 50,1, 4; Ap. 415, 425.

Infidelity, Dd. 41, 3n; 50, 3; 78,
8,9,19; Ap. 415.

Inheritance, Dd. 54, 9-11; 56, 8,9;
62, 1-4.

Inspiration, Dd. 71, 3n; Ep. I, iii.
40, 5n.

Inward prayer (vag), Dd. 40, 5, 7 n,
9n; 79,10, 2, 4,7,8n; Ep. I,

X15 Ap. 448, 449, 451.

Iran, Int. 14, 25; Dd. 86, 7 n; 37,
94N; 53, 6; 66,15; 88, 1;
90, 6; 94,12; Ep. II, i, 16,


INDEX.


iv, 4-6, v, 13, Vi, 4, Vil, 6, viii, 4,
PKG EEL LE rek3) P75 20s, 2h
Iranians, Dd. 86, 7n; 90, 3 n.
Israelites, Ap. 390, 429.
Itha, Av., Dd. 79, 1-4, 7, 8, 9 n.


J in Oriental words is printed G.
Jamaspji Minochiharji, Dastfir, Dd.
48, 25n; Ap. 383 n, 392n.

Jew, Int. 26; Ap. 399.
Jude, epistle, Dd. 44, 16 n.
Judges, Dd. 1, 6; Ap. 407.


Kahtsar, lun. man., Ep. II, ii, 9 n.

Kai-Apivéh, prince, Dd. 48, 33 n.

— Kats, king, Dd. 37, 36 n.

— Kavéad, king, Dd. 37, 35; 48, 33.
See Kavad.

— Khiisrét, king, Dd. 36, 3; 37, 36;
90, 6, 8n.

— Vistasp, king, Dd. 37, 36; 44,
16n. See Vistasp.

Kalpa, Sans., Ap. 384 n.

Kamak, bird, Ap. 378 n, 381.

Kamak-stid, man, Dd. 36, 4, 5.

— vakhshisn, man, Dd. 36, 4, 5.

Kangdez, land, Dd. 37, 36n; 90, 3n,
5, 8n.

Kazheri caves, Dd. On; Ep. I, xi,


6n.
Kapéd, wolf, Ap. 381.
Kapil, town, Ap. 373.
Karap, title, Dd. 72, 8; Ap. 384,


412.

Kavad, king, Ep. I, iv, 17. See Kai-
Kavad.

Kavi, title, Ap. 384 n.

K4vulistan, land, Ap. 373 n.

Kayanians, Dd. 90, 5.

Kem-na-mazda, stanza, Ap. 443.

Keresisp, hero, Int. 18, 19, 28; Dd.
17, 6; 36, 3; 87, 35, 97; 48,
4rn; 72, 4n; Ap. 369-381.

Késhvars, Dd. 36, 5n. See Regions.

Khan, platform, Dd. 48, 14; 66,


a7.
Khavzé, Av., Dd. 78, 3n; 74, 2 n.
Khor sin, Dd. 78, 14 n.
Khrafstras, see Noxious creatures,
Khrfitasp, man, Dd. 78, 2 n.
Khshnfiman6, see Shntimano.
Khshvash-maunghé process, Ap. 446.
Khimbik, title, Dd. 90, 3, 8 n.
Khar, day, Dd. 48, ro.
KhurAs4n, land, Int. 14, 25; Ep. II,
i, 2n, 120, V, 30.


469


‘Khurdah Avesta, Ap. 385 n.


Khir-éashm, man, Dd. 2,103; 36,


45 5-

Khiisré6 Néshirvan, king, Int. 27;
Ep. I, iv, 17; Ap. 394, 397-
Khvantras, region, Dd. 36, 5, 7; 90,

3, 8n; Ep. I, i, 5.

Khvapar (persistent), Dd. 19, 7 n.

Khvarizem, land, Ap. 373 n.

Khvétfik-das, Int. 18, 19, 28, 29;
Dd. 65, 1n; Ap. 389-430,
433 n. See Next-of-kin mar-
riage.

Kik, title, Ap. 384, 412.

Kirman, land and town, Int. 13, 16,
17,25, 27> Dd. On> 94,13; Ep.
Toms Ui, i, rasixsenoe hE are

Knathaiti, witch, Ap. 369.

Kiisan, town, Ep. II, i, 12 n.

Kiistik, Dd. 39, 7, 29; Ap. 383-387.
See Sacred thread-girdle.


Kakad-t Daitik m., Dd. 21, 2 n. See
Daitih peak.

Kamrés, bird, Dd. 90, 3 n.

Kinvad bridge, Dd. 20, 3; 21, (1-73)
22, 2n; 24, 2,6; 25, 2,6; 32,
4; 84, 3,4; 42, 2n; 44, 20n;
81,18n; 85, 7n; Ep. I, ili, 95
Dery 7 De

Kitrav6k6-mtyan6 r., Dd. 90, 3.


Ladle for sprinkling, Ap. 437.

Lamp for ceremonies, Dd. 48, 2, 6.

Leader of the religion, Int. 13, 22,
273; Dd. On; 1, 6,10, 23, 24;
44, 20n; 45, 5; 88, 8; Ep.
Ty ini, roy vil,) 53) DDS vis) 135
12 0.

Leadership of ditto, Ep. I, ix, 5.

Lethargy, demon, Dd. 23, 3.

Leviticus, book, Ap. 429.

Libertinism, Dd. 78, 14, 15.

Liturgy, Dd. 2, 8; Ap. 432.

Loharasp, king, Dd. 78, 2 n.

Lord, Dd.1, 20; Ap. 384, 385, 422.

Luke, gospel, Ap. 398.

Lunar mansions, Ep. II, ii, 9 n.


Magh, Ap. 433 n- See Ablution seat.

M4h-rfi, Dd. 43, 5 n; 48, 14, 17.

Maiden meeting the soul, Dd. 20,
3n; 21,6; 24,5; 25, 5.

Maidhy6-zaremaya, season, Dd. 81,
140.

Maidyok-zarem butter, Dd. 31, 13.


470


Mainy6-i Khard, book, Ap. 381, 398.

Male and female things, Dd. 93,
13n; Ap. 409, 410.

Malkés, Dd. 37, 94; Cor. 479.

Manicheans, Ep. II, i, 12 n.

Mansar (text, liturgy), Dd. 1,7; 2, 8.

Manuscripts described, Int. 14-19,


29, 30.

MaAnfisfihar, author, Int. 13-15, 19,
g2-28: Dd..0; 1a, 20,175
94) 135 Ep; 1,)0,.x1) 125’ £1; .0,
j, 11D, V, 10M, 1x, 1,125 I11,0,
1, 21; Ap. 455, 458 n.

— king, Dd. 87, 35.

Marhaya, man, Dd. 87, 82; 64, 2n;
Ap. 416. See Mashyath.

Marhtyéih, woman, Dd. 87, 82; 64,
2n; Ap. 416. See Mashyayéih.

Mark, gospel, Dd. 37, 106 n; Ap. 398.

Marriage, see Next-of-kin; of
cousins, Ap. 404, 407, 415,
424-428,

Mars, planet, Ep. IJ, ii, 9, ro.

Marv, town, Ep. II, v, 3 n.

Mas’audt, Ep. II, i, r2 n.

Mashyaih, man, Dd. 64, 2, 6n; 65,
2; 77, 43 Ap. 402, 411. See
Marhaya.

Mashyayéth, woman, Dd..64, 2, 6n;
65, 2; 77, 4; Ap. 402, 411. See

: Marhiyéith.

Master (rad), Dd. 1, 20; 44, 13;
Ap. 385, 442.


Mazda, Ap. 385, 387. See Atihar-
mazd.

Mazdak, heretic, Ep. I, iv,17.n; II,
i, 127.


Mazda-worship, Int. 24; Dd. 1, 3;
2,11; 21, 2n; 89, 8n; 94,
tn; Ep. MW, i,ran; Ap. 386,
412, 414, 415, 422, 423, 427.

— worshipper, Dd. 3,18; 4, 2; 48
333 75, 3n; Ap. 387, 448 n.

— worshippers, Int. 14, 24-27; Dd.
2,15; 4, 4; 5, 23 22,1, 3;
837, 36 n, 48, 93; 39,12; 41,
1,7; 42,1; 44,13; 45, 2n,
6n; 48, 39; 66, 10n; 72, 2;
90, 8n; Ep. I, ii, 12, iii, La
vill, tn, x, 11-133 II, i,6; Ap.
398, 429, 431 N, 432, 452, 453.

— worshipping literature, Dd. 61,
3n;— — religion, Int. 13, 23 ;
Dd. 1, 23n; Ep. 1, xi, 9; II,
vl, 2n; Ap. 387, 400, 4113
— — superiors, Dd. 41, 9.


*)


PAHLAVI TEXTS.


Mazendaran, land, Dd. 87, 44.

Mazinikan demons, Dd. 87, 81; Ap.
437+

Meat-offering, Ep. IT, ix, 3.

Médy6k-mah, com., Ep. I, v, 1, 6,
8, V1, 3) 7-9;°T1, Vil, 1, 1X, 1-208
4, 7, 10, 12-143 II, ii, 5-8, iii,
rn; III, 7; Ap. 449.

Melted metal ablution, Dd. 32, 12,°
135 37, 120,

Menstruation, Dd. 78, 4.

Menstruous woman, Ap. 447.

Mercury, planet, Ap. 418 n.

Messiah, Dd. 87, 90, 91.

Metals, origin of, Dd. 64, 7.

Meteors, Dd. 87, 55.

Mile (hasar), Ep. II, iii, 3; Ap. 456,


457.

Milk, food, Dd. 28, 5.

Millenniums, Dd. 37, 11 n, 33, 97 0;
64, 4; 66,10; 90, 7.

Miscarriage, Dd. 78, 6.

Mitékht, demon, Dd. 87, 50, 51n,


53.

Mitré, angel, Dd. 14, 3; 81,11; the
sun, Dd. 81, 14.

— khfrshéd, man, Int. 22, 23; Dd.0.

Mobad, see Priest, officiating.

— of mdbads, Dd. 44, 21 n; Ep. I,
iv, 15 n.

Moon’s influence, Dd. 71, 2.

Mountains, growth of, Dd. 70, 2.

Muhammadan conquest, Dd. 88,
8n; Ap. 399.

Muhammadans, Int. 26; Ep. I, viii,


Bene
Mispar, comet, Dd. 87, 55 n.
Musulmans, Ap. 425.

Myazd, see Sacred feast.


Nabar, rite, Dd. 79, 4,12. See N6é-
nabar.

Naivtak r., Dd. 90, 3 n, 8 n.

Nakistyya, demon, Ep. I, x,.9. See
Natinghas.

Naqs-i Rustam ins., Dd. 91, 3n;
Cor. 479.

Naremanau, title, Dd. 72, 4n; Ap.


Nasai, see Dead matter.

Nask, Dd. 48, 25 n; Tt, 3m Ap,
371m; named, Int. 24; Dd.
48, 25n; 61, 3; 66,1n; 71,
3n; 94,14n; Ep. I, viii, 1, 6,
73 AP. 373, 394, 395, 397. See
Scripture.


INDEX.


471


Nasks, Int. 24; Dd.87, 36n; 45,
2m; 47,103 Ep. 4, a, 75° Ap.
370N, 371 1, 394.

Nasfis, demon, Dd. 17, 7, 8, 20n;
48, 8n; Ep. I, iv, 3; Ap. 438n,
450N.

NAatinghas, demon, Dd. 94, 2n. See
Nakisiyya.

Next-of-kin marriage, Int. 28; Dd.
837, 82; 65, 1-5; 77,6; 78,19;
Ap. 387, 413, 427-429; de-
fined, Ap. 401, 402, 404, 405,
412,417. See Khvéttik-das.

Nihtv, demon, Dd. 37, 52.

Nikhshahpfr, com., Int. 28; Ep. II,
i, 2n; Ap. 397.

Nine nights’ seclusion, Ap. 453,


454.

Nirang-i kusti, Int. 28; Dd. 39,
19 n, 27n; Ap. 383-388.

Nirangistan, book, Int. 238; Dd. 66,
1; 83,1 n; Ep. I, iv, 15 n,


170.

Nishahpfihar, com., Int. 27; Ep. I,
iv, 15,17; man, Ep. ll, i, an;
town, Ep. II, i, 2n, v, 32.

Nishaptir, town, Dd. 52,1; Ep. LI
iv, 170.

Nivik, man, Ap. 370, 372.

NivshahpGhar, man or town, Int.
14, Ep. 1, 4, 2-

Niyaz, demon, Dd. 37, 52; 17, 8.

Noldeke, Prof., Dd. 88, 7n; 94,
13; Ep. I, iv,17n}3 Cor. 479.

Nonabar, rite, Dd. 79, 4,11. See
Nabar.

Noosing the soul, Dd. 23, 3.

North, Dd. 25,5n; Ap. 442, 444;
448, 449, 451, 454+ :

Néshirvan, title, Int. 27; Ep. I, iv,
170.

Noxious creatures, Dd. 17, 12 n, 16;
18, 3; 37, 52.


Ocean, Dd. 48, 32; 92, 2, 5; 93,
2, 3, 8, 11m; Ap. 418. See
Wide-formed.

Omniscient wisdom, Dd. 87, 43, 755
39, 11.

Ordeal by poison, Dd. 37, 74.

Original good work, Dd. 12, 1, 5.

— sin, Dd. 12, 5.

Orion, Dd. 87, 48n; 39,11 n.

Ormazd, Ap. 425. See Atiharmazd.

Ouseley, Sir W., Int. 25; psd;
on.


Padramgés, lun. man., Ep. II, ii,
g-1I.

Pahlavi book, Ap. 398; commen-
taries, Dd. 45, 2n; 66, In;
71, 3n; Ap. 446n, 4580; in-
scriptions, Dd. On; Ep. I, xi,
6n; language, Dd. 22, 2n; 45,
2n; Ap. 415; legend, Ap. 373-
381; literature, Int. 29; Dd. 2,
tr n; text, Dd. 16, 4n; -37,
97n; 89, 5n; 54,110; Ap.
403 N, 404 n, 422 N, 445 1;
translations, Dd. 45, 2n; 71,
3n; Ep. I, iv, 3, vii, 4n; Ap.
391, 396n, 427, 442; trans-
lators, Ap. 392N, 393, 4270,
4311, 4380, 452N, 456N, 4570;
version, Ap. 372, 381n, 392 n,
394, 397, 442N, 455; works,
Ap. 428; writers, Int. 28; Dd.
Wily zeae Ven ing Atos Ziel?
writing, Dd. 42, 1n; 46, 50;
66, 22n; Ap. 449n.

Papak, man, Dd. 88, 7 n.

Pars, land, Int. 13, 22,27; Dd. On,
1, 10n, 17n; 45,5; 66, 3,15,
al, 28; 88,1; 89,1; 94, 135
Ep. I, on, xi,'7; UH, 4, 8, v, 2,
Remy bey wae ORS oi

Parsadga, chief, Dd. 90, 3 n.

Parsi, Ep. I, xi, 6n; Ap. 383, 398 n,
406, 431; scriptures, Ap. 427;
year, Dd. 1, 17 n; 31, 14.05 47,
7n; 81,1n; Ep. 1, xi, 120;
Il, i, 2n; II],21n; Ap.418n.

Parsis, Dd. On; 2, ron; 6, 2n;
43, 5n; Ep. I, viii, 3m; 11, ii,
gn; Ap. 389, 390, 4080, 427-


429.

Pasind, wolf, Ap. 381 n.

Patit, Dd. 41, 5n; Ap. 385n. See
Renunciation.

Patron spirit (ahv6), Dd. 81, 7, 18;
89, 13, 25; 44, 20; Ep.], v,
3,45 Ap. 385, 442.

PAatirvagirya, man, Dd. 48, 33.

Pazand, Dd. 87, 99n; 90,3n; Ep.
IL, ii, 9 n, iv, 3n; Ap. 384, 438 n.

Pebbles used in Bareshntim, Ep. I,
vii, 16, 17, ix, 6; II, ili, 123 Ap.


447.

Period of the day, Dd. 48, 3, 8, 9;
Ap. 448.
Persian version, Ap. 373-380; wr:ter,

Ap. 426.
Persians, Ap. 389, 399-


472


PAHLAVI TEXTS.


re er ee


Peshotanji Behramji, Dasttir, Int.
17n, 30; Dd. 6, 2n; 44, 2n;
Sern; Bp. ll vaio ms) Ap:
389 n, 392 N, 399 N, 403 N, 404 n,


410 n.
Peshyétanti, chief, Dd. 87, 36; 90,


3,5, 7, 8n.

Pésinds, land, Dd. 90, 8n. See
Pésyansai.

Pésfipa?, Int. 13; Dd. On; 1, ro.
See Leader.

Pésyansai, land, Dd. 17, 6 n; 90, 3 n.
See Pésinas.

Phases of the moon, Dd. 68, 1-6.

Pig, Ep. I, viii, 3.

Pirfizabad, town, Dd. 88, 7 n.

Pisin, land, Dd. 17, 6 n.

Pitaona, man, Ap. 370.

Pleiades, Dd. 37, 48; 39, 11 n.

Pomegranate bush, Dd. 48, 16; Ap.
446 n.

Pontiff (rad), Int. 13; Dd. On; 1,
6; 94, 13,14; Ep. II, ix, 14;
TDL 22!

Portidakhstdih, man, Dd. 90, 3, 8 n.

Poryddkéshih, see Primitive faith,

Prayer before eating, Dd. 79, 1 n;
imperfect, Dd. 79, 1-12. See
Inward prayer.

Priest, Dd. 79, 4n; 86, 4n; Ap.
417 1, 432 n, 436 n, 4370; (aér-
pat), Int. 13; Dd. On; 45, ue
3-6; 66, 1, 2, 18, 20, 33; 88,
53 Ep. T, o; II, 0, i, 17, iii, 4;
9 0, 1x, 3; Ap. 373, 400; (maga-
vag), Ep. I, iv, 11, vi, 6. See
High-priest.

— chief, Dd. 88, 4n, 6n; (médbad
of mdbads), Dd. 44, 21; Ep. I,
x, 8.

— officiating (magdpat), Dd. 44,1;
45, 53 (z0td), Dd. 48, T3, 020;
23; 66,4; Ep. II, viii, 3; — —
supreme, Ep. I, iv, 15; see mé-
bad of mébads.

Priesthood, Ep. I, i, rons Th is,
3m; Ap. 4143 (aérpatth), Dd.
45, 1-4; 46,1, 4, 5 n; (asra-~
voih), Dd. 71, 3; Ep. Lat ey


5
Priestly duties, Dd. 45, 1; 46,2; 88,


In.

— lordship, Int. 13; Dd. On; Ep.
I], i, 1, 2, 4, 16, ii, 3, vi, 35
III, o.


— men, Dd.1, 5n, 21; 66, 6, 12,


17; 83, 1-6; 88, 4; Ep. I, iii,
10, iv, 7, TO, X, 3, 5, 13, Xl, I, 3,
4, 8; II, i, 8, v, 4. Se

Priests, Dd. 66, 30n; Ep. I, ii, 6n;
II, v,14n; Ap. 424, 428; (aér-
patan), Dd.1, 7; 45, 2, 3, 5;
46,2; 66, 26; 85, 7; Ep. I, x,
73 II,ii,7; Ap. 422; (asrav6an),
Dd. 45, 5; 46, 6; (magavogan), «
Ep. I, vi, 6; (magdpat4n), Dd.

0s

— officiating (magédpatan), Dd. 45,
5; Ep. I, iv, 10, 15; (zétan),
Dd. 48, 21.

Priestship, officiating, Ep. I, iv, rz.

Primeval ox, Dd. 87, 46; 69, 2, 3;
Ap. 380 n.

— religion (kadmon diné), Ep. I, xi,


9.
Primitive faith, Dd. 1, 23; 41, 10;
94,1, 7n, 12,13; Ep. I, iv, 4,
6, 10, vi, 6, ix, 13, 15, x, 6,10.
II, iii, 14; III, 5, 7,16, 23; Ap.


411.

Producers of the renovation, Dd. 36,
I-7.

Proper and improper, Dd. 44, 2;
47, 2, 4, 9. See Shayast La-
shayast.

Propitiations, Dd. 29, 1; 30, 2; 48,
21n. See Dedications.

Ptolemies, Ap. 429.

Punishment for sin, Dd. 6, 5, 63 13,
I, 43 14, 1, 6-8; 19, 7; 20, 2;
24, 4,6; 27,1, 5,6; 32, 2, 9,
TI, 14; 38, 3; 41, 5, 8; Ap.


443.
Purifier, Ep. I, ii, 6, 9, iv, 4, 8, 9, vi,
T, 3) 4) 7, VU, 7, 9, 17, ix, 4, x,
35 Il, HN, I, 3, 7, 8, ili, 3, 10-12,
Iv, 4-6, vii, 5, 6, ix, 9; III, 6, 8,
93 AP. 432, 433 n, 446, 449, 451,
452, 454.
Purifying cup, Dd. 89, 8; Ep. I, vii,
Ay xoalae ;
Pitik sea, Dd.17, 18 n,


Qandahar, town, Dd. 17, 6 n.

Quotations from AV., Dd. 74, 313
AP. 397, 398.

— from Byt., Dd., 37, 43 n.

k., Dd. 44, 20n; 90, 8n;

94, 1-11; Ep. I, viii, Mieps
370-372, 394-397, 399-413,

— —Mkh., Dd. 87, 28n; 90, 305
Ap. 381, 382, 399.


INDEX.


473


Quotations from Pahl. Riv., Ep. III,
1rn; Ap. 373-381, 415-423.

— — Pahl. Vend., Dd. 17, 3; 31,
24n3 89, 21; 41, 9,10; Ep.],
i35085,20,, v.35 Vila, %, 10-121,
AP. 392, 4317453, 455-458.

— — Pahl. Yas., Ap. 392, 393, 4375
442-444.

—— — Pers. Riv., Dd. $37, 940; Ap.
373 N-380 Nn, 424, 425.

— — Vend., Dd. 20, 3n; 30, 4n;
81,5n; 82, 4n; 338, 5n; 72,
Rengmiepal, iv. 3s Ll, dil, 5, Vi,
2n; Ap. 391.

— — Visp., Ap. 425 n.

— — Yas., Dd. 28, 7 ; 37, 48n; 39,
12; 79, 1n; Ap. 385-387, 391,
448 n, 449.

— not identified, Dd. 4, 4, 5; 7, 3,
4,73 12, 3-5; 19, 3; 32, 13;
37, 1213; 39, 11, 23; 41, 10;
42,7; 44, 12,21; 45,5; 93,
15-17; Ep. I, iii, 8, 9, vii, 4, Vili,
77m LMA Ge er


Rad (master, pontiff), Int. 13; Dd.
On; 1,6,20; 36,2; 44,130;
94, 13.

Rai, town, Int. 27; Ep. II, i, 13.

Rain, Dd. 48, 32; 90, 3 n; 93, 1-17;
Ap. 378, 452.

Rainbow, Dd. 67, 1-3; 91, 2n, 8n.

RAam, angel, Dd. 28, 2n; 380, 4n.

Raofas-£aéshman, man, Dd. 2, 10 n;
36, 4 n.

Rapithvan, rite, Dd. 44, 2 n.

Rashnii, angel, Dd. 14, 4; 21, 40;
30, 2, 3n; 81, 11; 87, 42n;
44, 20n; 78, 17n; Ep. ity ais

Ready money, Dd. 52, 4 n.

Recompense for good works, Dd. 5,
3; 6,5, 7; 12,4; 18,1; 31, 25;
Ap. 442.

Reed, meas., Dd. 21, 3, 5; 48, 5;
Ap. 395, 432+

Regions of the earth, Dd. 36, 5 n,
6, 7; 92, 6.

Religious rites (dind), Dd. 39, 25;
42,6; 47,1; SO, 2; 90,6; Ep.
fyi, os 11,18 3 all, Dad.
44, 2, 4,5,7,93 46,5; 54,5;
6G, 1-4, 6, 7, II, 12, 15, 17, 19-
22, 25, 27, 30-325 78, 19; 81,
14; 88, 1-6; 85, 5-7; 86, 2, 3,
6,7; 88, 1, 3, 5-7, 9-113 Ap.
A424.


Renovation of the universe, Dd. 1,
3; 2, 8, 10, 13,15; 3,18; 4,5;
7, 25 81, 10, 163 32,6, 10, 125
35, 2,35 36, 1-4, 6; 37, 22, 38,
98, 107, 1203 89, 13; 41, 6;
48, 4, 16; 77, 6,7; Ap. 400,
40.

Renunciation of sin, Dd. 41, 5, 7, 10,
113; 48, 20; 78, 17; 79, 10;
Ep. III, 18, 20; Ap. 380, 384,


385.

Resurrection, Dd. 1, 3; 2, 8, 10n;
8,1n; 18,4; 14,6n; 16,7, 8;
19, 7; 81, 13 n, 25; 32, 10; 35,
1; 87, 1, 3, 100; 75, 3-5; Ep.
II, iii, 1n; Ap. 378, 382, 417 n,


423 nN.

Retribution, Dd. 12, 2; 41,.9, 113
75, 53 78, 1,175 79,3, 103) Ep,
II, iii, 4.

Righteous gifts, Dd. 44, 19; 46, 5,

are 60, 2; 84, 3; Ap. 421.

Ritual, Dd. 45, 6; Ap. 415, 421, 422,

432) 446.

Rivayat, Pahl., Int. 15, 18, 28; Ap.
373) 414, 415, 423, 426, 4285
quoted, see Quotations.

— Pers., Int. 28; Dd. 52, 1n; 81,
13n; Ep. I, vi, rn, vii, 8n, 160;
Ap. 373, 381, 414, 424, 4285
quoted, see Quotations,

River-beds, Dd. 70, 1-5.

Romans, Ep. II, viii, 5 n; Ap. 406 n,


429.
Réshan6-fashm, man, Dd. 2, 10 ; 36,


by Bs
Rfbanik sin, Dd. 14, 3 n.
Rustam, hero, Ap. 369 n.


Sacred being (yédatd), Dd. 39, 6.

— beings (yazdan), Dd. 1, 3, 6, 7,
25; 2, 10, 113 8, 162 U7. 203
22, 1, 2, 53 26, 25 31, 1805
87, 10, 21, 58, 72-74, 88, 97,98,
108; 39, 8, 19, 23, 325 40, 3,
6-8, 12; 41,9; 44, 7,85; 45,7;
AG, 3; 48, 4, 5, 20-22, 24, 26,
37, 383 66, 17, 23; Val AB Yas
2,7; 79,123 85, 2,5; 86, 8;
87, 2; 88, 10; 93, 15; Ep. I,
0, 1, I, 3, 5, li, 4, 145 II, i, 1, 2,
vi, I, Vill, 2, 5 ; Lilo 2eceeps
400, 444, 454. See Angels.

— cake (drén), Dd. 28, 1; 30, (1,)
2,4; 43, 1-4, 6, 73 79, 7, 11;
81, 13-15.


474


Sacred ceremony, see Ceremony.

— feast (myazd), Dd. 47,1; 82, 4;
83, 4; 84,4; Ap. 426.

— fire, Dd. 48, 11 n, 34, 39; 66, 21;

~81, 18n; 89, 1; 90,.2,65 Ep.

I) diipaa, 13, 143 D1, will, 3.

— hymns (gathas), Dd. 20, 35 51,
9; 79,7; 85, 45 Ep. I, ii, 12;
Ap. 399, 397.

— milk, Dd. 48, 33.

— shirt, Dd. 39, 19 n, 213 40,1, 2.

— thread-girdle (kisttk), Dd. 89, 1,
19-25, 27,30; 40, 1,3; 43,5n;
Ap. 383.

— twigs (baresdm), Dd. 48, 5; 48,
4,17; Ep: d5siv,<35 DMT, x,
135 Ap. 432, 433.

Sad-darband-i Huish, book, Ap. 373n.

Sad-dar Bundahis, book, Dd.79, 4 n.

Sadvastaran assembly, Dd. 14, 5 n.

Saéna bird, Dd. 90, 3 n.

Sagastan, land, Dd. 30, 2 n.

Sakadtim nask, Int. 24; Ep. I, viii,
15 05, Yh

Sam, man, Ap. 369 n.

Sam, man, Dd. 48, 413 Ap. 381.

Saman, title, Dd. 17, 6; 86, 3; 87,
973; 48, 41n; Ap. 369.

‘Sandal-wood, Ap. 446 n.

Sandarac, Ap. 446.

Saoshyas, apostle, Ap. 369.

Sarakhs, town, Int. 13, 25, 27; Ep.
Sai enetn,wv,se

Sarsaok, ox, Dd. 87, 99 n.

Sari, demon, Ep. I, x, 9.

Sasanian dynasty, Ap. 428.

— inscription, Dd. 91, 3n; Cor. 479.

Satan, Dd. 87, 106 n.

Sata-taraka, lun. man., Ep. II, ii, 9 n.

Saturn, planet, Ep. II, ii, 9, ro.

Satvaharan, lun. man., Ep. II,.ii, 9-
TH.

Saukavastdn, land, Dd. 90, 4 n.

Savah, region, Dd. 36, 5.

Scripture (avesta), Ap. 443; (nask),
Dd. 48, 25, 28, 34, 38; 61, 3.

Season-festivals, Dd. 39, 1 n; 47,
(73) 48,8; Ep. I, viii, 33 Ap.

26,


4
Secluded, place of the, Ap. 452, 453.
Seeds, see Source and Tree,

Ség, demon, Dd. 39, 28 n.
Selections of Zad-sparam, book, Int.

14,15; Ep.IIl,23n; Ap. 394.
Shahnamah, book, Dd. 17, 6 n;

87,970; 70, 3n; Ap. 369n.


PAHLAVI TEXTS.


Shahptihar, priest, Int. 13; Ep. I,
iii, 10,

Shatvair6, angel, Dd. 48, 1n, 17 0;
Ap. 415, 434; month, Dd. 1,
17.

Shaving the head, Ap. 408.

Shayast La-shayast, book, Dd. 44,
2n; Ap. 414, 420m. ~See
Proper and improper. .

Shiraz, town, Int. 14, 22, 25, 27;
Dd. 1,173 88,7 nsp. Dae
135 D1, i,.13,%) 35-45 70, vie


tse

Shniiman6 (dedication, propitiation),
Dd. 29, 1; 80, 1.

Showing a dog to the dead, Dd. 17,
20; 18, 2.

Sin, Dd. 1, 2; 12, 33.15,4,.252
2,33; 25, 3; 82,6; 387,79; 40,
4; 45, 6; 50,3; 75,2; 78,14,
15; 79, 2, 3; 89,1; 94,7, 8n;
Ep. I, viii, 2,93 I, i, is Ap:
372, 378, 3800, 399, 422, 4245
account of, Dd. 18, 1-4; 14, 1,
2, 4; 81, 2, 10; accumulation
of, Dd. 82, 12; 34, 43 87, 111;
affecting accusers, Dd. 14, 3e
atonement for, Dd. 12, 2, 4;
16, 4; 44, 8,10;'72, 11; 75, 53
78, 17, 19; 79, 12; Ap. 414;
confinement of, Dd. 89, 10, 20,
23; deliverance from, Ep. 1, ii,
5; demons of, Dd. 32, 5, 11, 12;
34, 4; 37,110; grievous, Dd.
39,1; 50, 2; 78,16; 79, 8;
Ep. WI, rr n3 Ap. 417; growth
of, Dd. 11, 2; 12,5; 37, 109;
heinous, Dd. 49, 4, 5 ; Higssuln 2p
76,3; 17,4; 78,23 Ap. Aas
impotence of, Dd. 87, 112;
imputed, Dd. 42, 4; 51, 4; 78,
9, 10; Ap. 456-458; of apos-
tasy, Dd. 41, 1-6; of running
about uncovered, Dd. 40, 1, ae
source of, Ep. I, ii, 3; store of,
Dd. 25,5; washing away of,
Dd. 37, 111. See Bédyézéd,
Drayan-gfiyisnih, Eradication,
Farman, Hamémél, Khor, Ori-
ginal, Punishment, Renuncia-
tion, Retribution, Tanap@har.

Sinfulness, Dd. 25, 6; 48, 19; 71,
2,45 72, 10; 77,12; 78, 1, 15,
18; 79,8; Ep. II, ix, 2; ior

_ Ap. 379.
Sinners, put to death, see Slaying.


INDEX.


475


ee eR a a


Sinners, seven heinous, Dd. 72, 2-9.
Sirius, star, Dd. 98,1 n; Ap. 418 n.
Sirkan, town, Int. 14, 25-27; Ep. I,
o, xi, 4n; IT, i, 4, 120, v, 2,50,
9, 14, Vi, 40, Vil, I, 3, Vil, 1.
Str6ézah, Dd. 48, 7n; 79, 4n.
Siyavash, prince, Dd. 87, 36; 90,
5, 6n.
Sky, nature of, Dd. 91, 1-3, 8-10;
three parts of, Dd. 37, 24-31,
45, 46; 39, 14, 15.n; 73, 20.
Slaying heinous sinners, Dd. 76, 1-4.
Snavidhaka, man, Ap. 370.
Solomon, king, Dd. 89, 17n; Ap.


390.

Soma, plant, Dd. 48, 16 n.

Séshans, apostle, Dd. 2, 10, 12, 13;
4,6; 28,7; 36, 4,5; 87, 36,
43, 100n; 48, 30; Ep. Iv, 3;
Il, iii, rn; Ap. 417, 444; com.,
Ep. I, v, 1, 6, vi, 1, 2, 1X, I, 4,
Te ldaclinsy = LAH,

Soul, Dd. 3,8; 5, 5; 8, 4-6; 9,1,
4; 12, 3, 43 14, 6, 7; 15, 2;
16, 1-4; 23,7; 24, 1-4, 50;
25, 1-45 27,5, 6; 28, 2, 5,73
31, 1, 4, 7, 8, 15-17, 205 32, 4,
16; 87,79, 108; 38, 3; 41, 8;
42, 2,6; 44,22; 46, 2; 52, 3;
72, 11n, 12; 75, 5; 82, 4,53
85, 7; 86,5; 94, 6,11; Ep.1,
iH, 5, 4, 257,21, X, 125 1, ili,
6, V, 11, 12, vili, 5n; Ap. 421.

Souls, Dd. 14, 6; 19,1, 4; 21, 9;
23, 6; 31, 8; 82,12; 37, 50,
131, 132; 44, 20, 22; 86, 8;
Ap. 420.

Source of all seeds, Dd. 92, 3.

Spear, meas., Dd. 21,5; Ap. 395.

Spell, Dd. 40, 5n,9n; 79,1n, 8n;
Ap. 448 n, 449 n.

Spendarmad, angel, Dd. 48, rn;
64, 6 n; 94, 2 ; App. (393s) 399,
4OT, 402, 415, 416, 437, 4443
day and month, Ep. I, xi, 12.

Spiegel, Prof., Ap. 431 n.

Spirit of air, Dd. 28, 2, 5; 30, 4n;
31, 4 n.

Spiritual counterpart, Dd. 28, 5 n.

— faculties (ahv6), Dd. 7, 7.

— life (ahv6), Dd.94, 1, 2; Ep. III,
rn, 5; (ahvoih), Dd. 5,5; Ep.
I, iv, 1; (hfik6), Dd. 16, 4, 6;
17, 43 Ep. I, v, 4.

— men, Dd. 1, 5, 7-

— wisdom, Dd. 37, 19.


Spitama, title, Dd. 36, 2 n.

Spitaman, title, see Zarattist.

Srésh, angel, Dd. 3, 13, 14; 6, 20;
14, 4; 28, 1,5, 6; 29, 1, 2;
81, 11; 44, 20n; 79, 4n; 81,
12-143; 94,1n; Ap. 443; 447)


448.

Srésh6-Aaranam, Dd. 79, 9 n.

Srfivar, snake, Dd. 72, 4; Ap. 379,
371, 374) 381.

Star station in the sky, Dd. 92, 5.

Step, meas., Ap. 433-435) 436 D.

Stipend, Dd. 44, 4, 6-8, 11, 12, 14-
17; 66, 6; 83, 4,6; 85, 4-6;
86, 2, 4; 87, 2; 88, 13.

Stir (tetradrachm), Dd. 52, 1 0;
56, 2,9; 59, 2; 78, 13-155
79, 9.

Sidkar nask, Int. 28; Dd. 90, 8n;
Ap. 370, 371 0, 372, 373-

Supreme high-priest, Int. 13; Ep.
I, 1, 9m, 132.


Takhmérup, king, Dd. 2, 10; 37,
353; 85, 5.

Tanaptihar sin, Dd. 40, 4; 78,
(135) 79,9; Ap. (426.)

Tap, demon, Dd. 37, 51.

Tardmat, demon, Dd. 89, 28 n;
94, 2.

TAtirév, demon, Ep. I, x, 9.

Taurus, Dd. 31, 14.

Teheran, town, Ep. I, i, 13 n.

Tehmuras Dinshawji Anklesaria,
Mr., Int. 16, 24; Ep. Il, 11;


Ap. 3730.

Text (avistak), Dd. 48, 25, 38; 78,
13; (mansar), Dd. 1, 7.

Third night after death, Dd. 8, 1;
13, 2; 20, 3; Sl, 14.

Thraétaona, king, Dd. 2, 10n; 87,


97 0.

Three days after a death, Dd. 28, 1 ;
48, 40; 81, 3-8, 10, 12-14.

— nights’ account, Dd. 14, 4, 5;


28, 5.

— — after death, Dd. 8, 4; 16, 7;
20,2; 24, 1-5; 26, 1-5; 55, 1,
2; 72,11; 78,170.

— — punishment, Dd. 14, 6n, 7;
41, 8.

Thrita, man, Ap. 369.

Tigris, river, Dd. 92, 2 n.

Time, unlimited, Dd. 37, 16.

Tir, angel, Ap. 418; month, Dd. 1,
17.


476


PAHLAVI TEXTS.


SS eee


Tistar, angel, Dd. 48, 32 n; 90, 3n;
93, 1, 2, 7, 10, II, 13, 15,17;
Ap. 418 n.

Tortoise, origin of, Ap. 419.

Transliteration of Pahlavi, Int. 20-
2

Tree of all seeds, Dd. 17,18 n;


90, 3 n.

Tughazghuz, tribe, Int. 14, 25, 27-3
Ep. 11, 12,75 3 n

Tir, Dd. 70, 3; 90, 3 n.

—i Afrvaita-sang, man, Ap. 412,
413.

— 1 Bradar-vakhsh, man, Dd. 72, 8.

Tran, land, Dd. 90, 6.

Taranians, Ap. 413 n.

Tas, man, Dd. 36, 3; Ap. 371 n.


Udai, woman, Dd. 78, 2 n.
Ukhshyad-ereta, apostle, Dd. 2, Ion.
~— hemangh, apostle, Dd. 2, 10 n.
Unnatural intercourse, Dd. 72, E, 6;

7, 10-12; 78, 1-3; 74, 1-33 75,
112,55 16,14 77, 1, 9-126
Upasnateé, Av., Ep. II, iii, 2, ix 2s
Urvakhshaya, man, Ap. 369, 370.
Urvasna, Av., Ap. 446 n.
Urvis lake, Dd. 87, 118 n.
Ushi-darena m., Dd. 30, 2n.


Vadak, woman, Dd. 72,5; 78, 2.

Vadhaghana, title, Dd. 72, 5n.

Vaé the bad, demon, Dd. 30, 4;
37, 44, 52; Ep, II, iii, 15,
Viii, 5.

— the good, angel, Dd. 28, 2n; 80,
(43) 81, 4n; 86, 3; 44, 20n.

Vaéska, land, Ap. 371 n.

Vag, see Inward prayer.

Vahram, angel, Dd. 31, 7 n.

Vahram-shAd, priest, Ep. I, iii, ron.

Varahran, angel, Dd. 81, 7; fire of,
Dd. 48, 34 n, 39n; 81, 18; 90,
2n, 6n.

Varedad-gadman, man, Dd. 36, 4, 5.

Varedad-hvarend, man, Dd. 86, 4 n.

Varend, demon, Dd. 87, 443; 94, 2.

Vareshava, man, Ap. 370.

Varstmansar nask, Ap. 371 Nn, 394.

Vendidad, book, Dd. 45, 6n; 47,
tn; 71,2n,3n; 78,130; Ep.
I, iv, 13 mn; Ap. 372 n, 453;
service, Dd. 48, 26 n; pall
Vil, ‘ho, 12) 13 S11, ix} ton; Ap.
447, 451. See Quotations,

— Pahlavi, Int. 28, 29; Ep, I, iv,


17 N,v, 1n,8n; Ap. 394, 427 n.
See Quotations.

Vendidad sadah, book, Ap. 372 n.

Verethraghna, angel, Dd. 81, 7 n.

Vesk6, land, Ap. 371.

Vévan, man, Dd. 86, 3.

Vibazu, meas., Ap. 432 n, 447.

Vidadafsh, region, Dd. 36, 5.

Vidbirisd, man, Dd. 48, 33.

Vigirkard-i Dinitk, book, Ap. 414.

Vikaya, Av., Ep. I, vi, 6; II, ii, 7.

Vipinidak, Dd. 72, 7.

Viptak, Dd. 72, 6.

Viraf, priest, Ap. 397, 398.

Visparad, book, Dd. 89, 1 n ; service,
Dd. 45, 6; 81, 13.

Vistasp, king, Dd. 78, 2n; 90, 8n;
Ap. 3730, 380, 4443 earth of,
Ap. 436. See Kai-Vistasp.

— yast, book, Dd. 47,1 n; Pahlayi,
Ap. 392 n.

‘ivangha, man, Dd. 87, 95; 39,

6


16,

Vizarash, demon, Dd. 80, 4 n; 82,
4,73 387, 44; Ep. II, v, 13 n.

Vobu-fryan fire, Dd. 17, 18 n; 48,
340.

Vohfi-gaona, scent, Ap. 446 n.

— kereti, scent, Ap. 446 n.

Vohiiman, angel, Dd. 3, 13, TAs Gs
17; 7,73; 14, 2; 31,5, 113; 40,
2; 48, 1n; 72, 10n; 94, In;
Ep. I, ili, 1; Ap. 415, 443;
man, Ap. 393.

Vohfiman’s garment, Dd. 39, 19;
40, 2n; 48, 9.

Voribarst, region, Dd. 36, 5.

Vortigarst, region, Dd. 36, 5.

Vouru-nemé, man, Dd. 36, 4n.

— sav6, man, Dd. 86, 4 n.


Weevil, origin of, Ap. 419.

Westergaard, Prof., Int. 15, 29 ; Dd:
48, 25n; Cor. 479.

Whirlwinds, Dd. 98, 7=9.

Wide-formed ocean, Dd. 17, 18 n;
92, 2,5. See Ocean.

Wife, only child, Dd. 54, 1303 pri-
vileged, Dd. 54, 9, 13 n ; 55, 2;
56, 2,8; 58, 3; 62, 3,45 81,
4; serving, Dd. 56, 4 n, 7.

Will (testament), Dd. 54,9; 62, 3.

Wind, angel, Ap. 372 n; demon, Ap.
372, 376, 377.

Wine-drinking, Dd. 50, 3; 51, 1-11,

— selling, Dd. 50, 1-4,


INDEX.


477


eee


Wisdom, acquired and instinctive,
Dd. 40, 3n; Ap. 409.

Witchcraft, Ap. 417, 430,

Witches, Dd. 24, 5 ; 87, 55, 56; 89,
1r; Ap. 384, 418-420, 424,
428,

Wives, five kinds, Dd. 54, 9 n.

Wizards, Dd. 72, 8; Ap. 384, 420,


424.

Worst ao Dd. 14, 7; 38, 3;
41,5

Worthy oF as Dd. 41, 3,5; 42,
Ge Ol, 25:4, 76, a3 Ep. lll, 19;
Ap. 392, 408, 417, 424, 426.


Yakhmayisad, chief, Dd. 90, 3, 8 n.

Yasna, book, Dd. 39, rn; Ap. 384n;
rite, Dd. 45, 6n; 48, 26n;
Ep. I], ix, ron. See Quota-
tions.

— haptangh§iti, Ap. 371 n.

— Pahlavi, Ap. 394, 428.
tations.

Yast6, see Ceremony.

Yatha-ahfi-vairy6 formula, Ap. 371n,
386 n, 448,454. See Ahunayar.

Yazdakard, king, Int. 14; Ep. II,


See Quo-


21,

Yazdan, see Angels, Sacred beings.

— panak, man, Int. 25; Ep. I, xi, 6,
10.

Yazisn, see Ceremonial.

Yénhé-hatam formula, Ap. 371 n.

Yim, king, Dd. 2, 19; 36, 2; 37, 35,
80, 94N, 953 39, E6,.22, 23, 295
65, 5; Ap. 418, 419; “his en-
closure, Dd. 37, 95.

Yimak, queen, Ap. 418, 479.

Y6st6, chief, Dd. 90, 3, 8n; Ap.


41rn.
Yfidan-Yim, priest, Int. 73; Dd. 0;
1,1; 94,13; Ep. I, 9, iii, 10,


Vii, 5, xi, 12; Il, 0, ix, 123 III,
Oven ana s


Zad-sparam, priest, Int. 13-16, 19,
25-27; Ep. I, 0, i, 2n, ii, 6n,
IV; 7 D5 8n,¥, 10,50, 70, x, 30,
T3sn;. xt, 3n, 10n; II, 0, i, 2n,
TNE AMS: iy. TN, Y, 3 Dy, 14 2,
be an, ix Sane Lil es a7 Ap,
» 455.
Zatrié, tenon Dd.87,52; Ep. 1, x;9:
Zand, Da. 1, 7; 45, (2 :) 66, 1, 33
Ep. Tsive os if ili, 14 N, 1x, Io.
Zarattist, apostle, Dd. 1, 23n; 2,
(z0o,) 1rn, 12; 4,6; 48, 16,
30; 94,14; Ep. Il, i, 14, v, 11;
Ap. 369, 386, 410, 444n; ad-
dressed by evil spirit, Dd. 72,
5n; Avesta of, Ap. 447; blessed
(yast6-fravahar), Dd. 48, 30;
his early home, Dd. 21, 2n;
his origin, Dd, 48,16; law
Of Ep; Ul, iv, 11, 215 perfect
(pasham), Ep. II, ix, ro. ANA
233 preaches, Ap. 412, 413;


righteous, Dd. 37, 36; sees
Keresasp, Ap. 371-373, 379-
381; slain, Dd. 72, 8n; talks


with Atharmazd, Dd. 173 Ep.
I, iii, 8, vii, ro-12; HI, i, 10;
Ap. 381, 415-417, 419-423, 431,
436, 437, 455; the Spitaman,
Dd. 4, 4; 19,3; 36, (2;) 37,
43; 89, 19, 23; 94, 14; Ep. I,
1V;035 X09 Ll, Vip ay tks EA
22; Ap. 379, 380 Ny 4325

_ supreme, Eps lve he

— the club-footed, priest, Int. 26;
Ep. I, i, 13.

Zareméya, month, Int. 24; Dd. 31,


14.

Zarman, demon, Dd. 87, 44, 52.
Zindah-ravan rites, Dd, 81, 1 n.
Zor, see Holy-water.
Zoroastrian religion, Int. 14.
Zoroastrians, Int. 14.

ZO6t6, see Priest, officiating.


CGURREGCTIONS:


P. 66, line 15; p. 67, 1. 7; for ‘Mitré’ read ‘ Mitré,’

P. 108, lines 1, 3, for ‘the Supreme Being’ and ‘the Being’ read ‘God
(yédat6),’ and cancel note 1.

P. rog, note 2, add ‘ Malkés has also been read Markfis and traced to
Av. mahrkfisé (see Fragment VIII, 2 in Westergaard’s Zend-
Avesta, p. 334), which appears to be the title of some demon,
regarding whom very little can be ascertained from the text that
mentions him.’

P. 143, 1.12; 145, 1.6; 150, note 6; 252, 1.63; 289, note 2; 318, ll. 26,
27; 346, 1. 243 for ‘Atér’ and ‘ Atéré’ read ‘ Atar’ and ‘ Atér.’

The following emendations depend upon the meaning to be attached
to the word vaspéharak, or vasptharak, which in Mkh. I, 7 was
traced to Pers. b4, ‘ with,’ and sipihrah, ‘sphere, world, universe,’ and
supposed to mean ‘world-renowned,’ being rendered by vikhyatimatin

Sanskrit. The objections to this etymology are that Pers. ba is Pahl.

avak (not v4), which is nearly always replaced by Huz. levatman,

and that vasp fihar appears to be the correct form of the word vasptr,
which explains the Huz. barbété, literally ‘son of the house’ in the

Pahlavi Farhang (p. 9, ed. H.); the latter word having been the highest

title of the Persian nobility, probably confined to the heads of seven

families (see Noldeke’s Geschichte der Perser und Araber zur Zeit der

Sasaniden, pp. 71, 501). Such nobles are called barbét4n in the Ha-

giabad inscription, line 6, and vaspfharakan in the Naqs-i Rustam

inscription, line 6; they may perhaps be styled ‘princes,’ and their title,
vAsptihar, may be traced to the ancient Persian equivalent of Av. vis6
puthra (Vend. VII, 114), literally “son of the village or borough.’ It
may be noted, however, that the word ‘sphere’ does really occur in

a form very similar to this title, in the word aspiharakanikiha, ‘as

regards the spheres,’ in Dd. 69, 4.

P. 78, ll. r1-13, read ‘But those who are the more princely (vaspt-
harakaniktar) producers of the renovation are said to be
seven...

P. or, ll. 11, 12, read ‘.. . and he made the princes (vaspGharakaniha)
contented.’


480 CORRECTIONS.


P. 172, ll. 26, 27, read ‘. .. a minder of the princes of the religion (din-
vasptiharak4n6), the angels, and with pure thoughts .. .”

P. 262, ll. 15, 16, read ‘... and its position is most princely (vaspfi-
harakaniktar).’

P. 281, ll. 17, 18, read ‘On account of the princeliness (vasptihara-
kanith) of the good people of Khvaniras . . .’

P, 289, ll. 14,15, read ‘. .. 1 am more applauding the princes (vaspf-
harakdn6-z4htar) about the property of the profession . . .’

P. 306, ll. 23, 24, read‘... to keep in use the equal measure which is
more the custom of his own superiors (nafsman vaspthara-
kantar).’


ee ° e so @ B10 em. eee eo “9 e j K ° e @ ° u e ° e e Oe oe ee 8 6 @ SITVSe AT ee 21
qos ; 3 2: oot oie 7 CC -+-eqendse “ gf
s, eres ee a) > ¢%) R ik A 6b Civichleccuecon tiem Cake se emaw cl
a yy ° . ° ° ee oe ee 8 Ss YY ere ate) mer 0.5, 0) <6) we ate eyeadse 66 F I
4 . . bg 2 —a) a b ae yt a x Crate a Dis iiet Yoxa van oe ee smnudy, el
. (‘029 ‘soyeyeTed)
ee SeeyeoOIpowm soeleinjjnsy
ic
2 reere 7 ec 8 eo 8 8 eee cia om eee fe eee ov ie) wae Y, ee @ oe e @ snyeorly STU] «6 ZI
S e- u =) a Aono uno acail) socce ll mreoen 1, -s +] +++ + gnqvowy sodse 6 Il
a oe a m2 2 ey eae ‘shh eiuie/ ie an O Aer carl acter q, ee ee sipeoney SIUOT oe OL
rs Pa u 2 =) a oewanas OAs IMPGROD my Perl ete eG q, e's) ee STTBONeT qodse “6 6
as ee N \ | ee eee ° 8 6 fe WS OL Be (OO: 267 Oe STUOT ce 8
A sy “Y u P g = (ay mR). 3 eice a aime see it CP tie! eoue rodse snyimdg 2
a N) or]
a oe e@ eee ee eee ee © ace s oe 8 e Oe (su) a 0 oF fee ee Tare 6 are ST[BSB NT 9 eH
- A oe cl a) 9 arf ceee eee Ste: 6: 18) |) hehe b ee ee e 8 S[el qei- 0. im34n 9) c
7, oe. C ohetse eee a 4 & o-Fei ce ted)| Sei meo ce y3 Oi oO “5 CO Ot eyerdse 66 ca
: ae %. é oe S C a le @ 6) 8 6. e, @ Vo Fe ||) ae Our Cs HOMO eee e eIpa ¢
< "1 c e Cae ik se iS9) Bb ECR hl neha ts Wy ose ee ow eyeridse 66 Z
I x € @ @ 6 ¢ Yo Can Re year nen 4 6 Ve \6,) 8 0°76 Ce a et War) sInuay, I
te “SsoTB.inqyny
op)
G ae | Raa ay (ae ae SC EN ye | eae ge eee a er cm
< } “SSPID III | *SStID II] ‘SSe1D I (oe)
is ‘asauryD | ‘mozqoyT | ‘olqvay | ‘uersiog | yAoryeq |  spuez “ywesueg | Cs ‘SINVNOSNOD faa


“LHAVHdIV AUVNOISSIN


‘LSV@] JHL JO SHOOG AIAOVS TNL AO
AHL YOd GALOGY SLULVHATY IVLINGIYQ AO NOLLVUALIISNVAL


4


_ SNOLLWISNVY


TRANSLITERATION OF ORIENTAL ALPHABETS


482


ee ee eee ——_—


8 d oD (epee op Rk oe ee lee e g fe
oe 8 eee eee 270% eee oe 2 se oee Ty Cyd Das | | ae £
eee eee ee » eee eee eoeee i'd ee @ 6 7 eee ee
I 4 c C CeCe Me 2 oe eel eee I Q
u C a) (a) ( f be aces | or a] eee
ee ee ¢ ¢ eee oe ee eee Ha oe of eee] *
ee | Wala Fee Pina acer a s mh [ose mle e | ap ie
SEES Dali f “ ¢ e d ec eeleee Pp :
qt ee @ oe cg


2 eee [eee c .
eo e ane cD eet) is “eee s oniet ie |.
CVG Oallern 0.0 Ee ee: PN (Ceo EA et a PRPL YN celia (A) ev ele
eee eee oee eee eee eee e@ oeeleeee (4) ee «| @


"SSEID JII | ‘SSeID IT} ‘SSPID I
‘esouryd | ‘morqazy | ‘oiqery | ‘ueisiog | “1491y9q “pueZ ‘yrysues | ———————_,—____


| “LHAVHd1V AUVNOISSIN


***gsnumuedse  “ “ Le
*** [ snummodse “ 9¢
cee eee siuT « S&
ices es py goede «OE Ee
seers 7 gzodse snquidg ge
2+ +2 syour £ tas
° 9+ + Tsijou oe Ig
sees eee © sreooatmg 0¢
coe e eee ee ogreseN GZ
oe + > © gomiqigey **  9z
eee e+ canendss yz
meee eee ees epowy gz
s 99 sie) « yapnqtese “ or
oe 2 ss 9 mendey © -<77
Aye Fin ee wae STOP Lee
‘soley ued


* SNYSIQIsse StUsy eae AA
* snyeriqisse odse Te
£9809: 05.0). MAN STOO 6é 0Z


sees ee © godse snqidg 6


O10; © 6.858 2:6 ST[VOOATUIOS ST


+(pan127u09)
SLNVYNOSNOD


483


FOR THE SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST.


7 e-°
6e@e (S


yz
ys


exe)? + 889 * BAIEST A ES
oP ep mons aoe BICASIOE OG
cee sega & Lg
- s+ gadse snymidg 9g
> eyeaidse “ Sg
se 9* * SITeOOATUIIG FG
sees © e stesen eg
coe -eulissmuay, ZG
* ejemdse “* JG
DO OS OC Oe Lae INE (KS
> eyeudse “ 6f


ee! ©, 6.8 eset e smuoy, Sp
"SOTBIQe'T


OS EORS OT e) | $f Lv
‘++ godse snqiuidg 97
wordoRIp os Sv


ee eyeory ce bP
‘ss © siTeooATWIEg EF


cos ses ss gregEN CF
CPi eyerdse se I?


esse eae 99S BOM P
S20h*. MiSHUSG 2a Sn Ee
eee eee @ smug, 8g


(osp ‘sopenSurq)


eeyeoyIpoul soyeyueq.


|


arama aca india iia (hdtema nineae Gieieendnass Wieeatien Maaimiain saan Visas iekaebeaatapeati aot napactecciomy Vsuamompibmamsaiaste
Dope a eevee h eae 9) | catenin planers [Re neSeyL eae as) (nimmer ee mney cere eee © Boel sIpeiqey 9Z
Salata Me neder gol erarah ree | itesee mane TMiectae tellhnety entet aia I maahsact see MPerttety at icles I # a horns) Se si oqouTE STB TET Ce
Seog [Stare [ow owed cote Carl von) eed ew ariedy alt te e | Patri Np ee ree tape coe se © BLOBIT sITRANyINH FF
CHC Ae A AIS OE aera 4 te ss erie ye) 5 19) Pia nb [oe 82. (OID 66 R ce €%
et ach Moe lca Me ton sehearll Salm oils @ att rina al MER RM ea rag ee TLSE TR gly Ea “ ZS
ay | ee ee |e hp) me et ea (nv) | ny stTerqvy-ornyjns snsuoyyydiq [Z


TRANSLITERATION OF ORIENTAL ALPHABETS,


484


Aue Agifece oer |lecec q see le eee} eee] O | & % * * STAD STTVIQRI-oINyINy GT


eye 6 ie . oF ae ( @ iS one: ee (0) (ne) 9 e. @ @% eSU0T ‘ce 02
on a one ae 18 cpery a si mine, 0 oe @ ey at er + « « |(1Q) 10 66 66 SI


Igstigd ss * [ae wae fee ana rete te cee lee eel ee © I (Q)I0 “6 “c LI
pr Pe east ee Ah bee es ices ae ee Oa Bae ae Pata) TG siyeyeped-oinyjns snsuoyyydiq OT
9 io" llvaay Sales Behe he mR ‘a SAL ee (a) |(te)g | °° * B8uoy ae Cl
5 PE i ls oes (2) 3(0)3 oye) (ei av olue orl lhe) oto neo * * * staosq sipeyeped-ornyyny) FT
Q & ra ned ( é tay oe ee (n) rf] cutee seuersnr> PR ONOT 66 el
“ a ee (ie < | lee ate 05 oy Ona tee we  ethacn siretciary 2]
Ba reilcome io lege hee Miwetteeadbiets: otlliais’ dad's: bl] 0 Pies si utena'eMiceneneal\t y aet| Meme kath emer OLLOT fe IL
real scahe eg wal crests bw piel ste tepen Ts oe (Niece tel sepa ap tiene * fat STARE SerLOarT ag)
aghast" wwil| Wer are ll let eM oops cars| weno mens wa eD et ects ohio | cal egy AEA SO RCN sh 0(0) fe a? 6
Here [visite alge teed cote. evi s op <* whcraerie lal | abel sere” ¢ fey toinecarl| ey ener oc ee SERA IC RirEd Ong
1 ae ap) ct») C ¢ = sete) ce (2) I pieis pe 2 6 BATTOT “< Z
7 tg feed Es Pe yer 5 ge fees efeee] op fees e e+ + + eraoaq sreered 9
e = 5} 3) or nw bs |¢ ++] (9) e tee ee + BBu0T 6 c
Tg een et ieee LC Bgl ae eee ae oe ee Sik sree
RSE ORION coa eC OM MU fy poe ac eure tli teselees sil! Bicans Q PS FOOSE EAL HE oe g
shave | & G del towe- Op Onp Gas wel Gocco | OD oo oh oa 2 eee gryeyered-o8ukiey Z
e seb Mterraia | @eete | s, & will egoyiontaina illo knGes Nite tolavees| sicat ol irc pi lalieh sine keh ae eh 2iks “Rr Bas TIOA aay
: "sei IIE | ‘sse1D | “SSeIDT
sasoury | ‘marqay | ‘siqery | ‘ueisieg | TAeTWDg +pusz “RES | Saar "STAMOA *


SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST


TRANSLATED BY VARIOUS ORIENTAL SCHOLARS


AND EDITED BY


RHE. RIGHT HON.


F. MAX MULLER.


** This Series is published with the sanction and co-operation of the Secretary of
State for India in Council.


REPORT presented to the ACADEMIE DES INSCRIPTIONS, May 11,
1883, by M. ERNEST RENAN.


‘M. Renan présente trois nouveaux
volumes de la grande collection des
“Livres sacrés de lOrient” (Sacred
Books of the East), que dirige a Oxford,
avec une si vaste érudition et une critique
si sfire, le savant associé de l’Académie
des Inscriptions, M. Max Miiller.... La
premiére série de ce beau recueil, com-
posée de 24 volumes, est presque achevée.
M. Max Miiller se propose d’en publier


une seconde, dont Vintérét historique et
religieux ne sera pas moindre. M. Max
Miiller a su se procurer la collaboration
des savans les plus éminens d’Europe et
d’Asie. L’Université d’Oxford, que cette
grande publication honore au plus haut
degré, doit tenir 4 continuer dans les plus
larges proportions une ceuvre aussi philo-
sophiquement concnue que savamment
exécutée.’


EXTRACT from the QUARTERLY REVIEW.


‘We rejoice to notice that a second
series of these translations has been an-
nounced and has actually begun to appear.
The stones, at least, out of which a stately
edifice may hereafter arise, are here being
brought together. Prof. Max Miiller has
deserved well of scientific history. Not
a few minds owe to his enticing words
their first attraction to this branch of
study. But no work of his, not even the


great edition of the Rig-Veda, can com-
pare in importance or in usefulness with
this English translation of the Sacred
Books of the East, which has been devised
by his foresight, successfully brought so
far by his persuasive and organising
power, and will, we trust, by the assist-
ance of the distinguished scholars he has
gathered round him, be carried in due
time to a happy completion.’


Professor E. HARDY, Inaugural Lecture in the University of Freiburg, 1887.


‘Die allgemeine vergleichende Reli-
gionswissenschaft datirt von jenem gross-
artigen, in seiner Art einzig dastehenden
Unternehmen, zu welchem auf Anregung
Max Miillers im Jahre 1874 auf dem


internationalen Orientalistencongress in
London der Grundstein gelegt worden
war, die Ubersetzung der heiligen Biicher
des Ostens’ (the Sacred Books of the
Last).


The Hon. ALBERT S. G. CANNING, ‘Words on Existing Religions.’


‘ The recent publication of the “Sacred
Books of the East” in English is surely


a great event in the annals of theological
literature.’


Orford
AT THE CLARENDON PRESS
LONDON: HENRY FROWDE
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS WAREHOUSE, AMEN CORNER, E.C,


2 SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST:


FIRST SERIES.


vou. 1. The Upanishads.
Translated by F. Max Miter. Part I. The KAdndogya- |
upanishad, The Talavakara-upanishad, The Aitareya-dranyaka,
The Kaushitaki-brahmaza-upanishad, and The Vagasaneyi-
samhita-upanishad. Second Edition. 8vo, cloth, 10s. 6d.


The Upanishads contain the philosophy of the Veda. Ti hey have
become the foundation of the later Vedénta doctrines, and indirectly
of Buddhism. Schopenhauer, speaking of the Upanishads, SAYS 2
‘In the whole world there is no study so beneficial and so elevating
as that of the Upanishads. It has been the solace of my life, tt will
be the solace of my death.


[See also Vol. XV.]


Vou. 11. The Sacred Laws of the Aryas,


As taught in the Schools of Apastamba, Gautama, VAsishé/a,
and Baudhayana. Translated by Grore Buuter. Part I.
Apastamba and Gautama. Second Eaztion. 8vo, cloth, ros. 6d.


The- Sacred Laws of the Aryas contain the original treatises on
which the Laws of Manu and other lawgivers were founded.


[See also Vol. XIV. ]


VoL. Ill. a he Seis Books of China.


The Texts of Confucianism. Translated by James Lrcer.
Part I. The Shit King, The Religious Portions of the Shih
King, and The Hsido King. 8vo, cloth, 12s. 6d.
Confucius was a collector of ancient traditions, not the founder of
a new religion. As he lived in the sixth and jifth centurtes B.C.
his works are of untque interest Sor the study of Ethology.
[See also Vols. XVI, XXVII, XXVIII, XXXIX, and XL]


Vou. IV. The Zend-Avesta.


Translated by James Darmesteter. Part I. The Vendidad.
Second Edition, 8vo, cloth, 14s.


The Zend-Avesta contains the relics of whal was the religion of
Cyrus, Darius, and Xerxes,


and, but for the battle of Marathon,


EDITED BY F. MAX MULLER. 3


might have become the religion of Europe. It forms to the present
day the sacred book of the Parsts, the so-called fire-worshippers.


[See also Vols. XXIII and XXXI.]


Vou. V. “Pahlavi Texts.
Translated by E. W. West. Part I. The Bundahis, Bahman
Yast, and Shayast l4-shayast. 8vo, cloth, 125. 6d.


The Pahlavi Texts comprise the theological literature of the revival
of Zoroaster’s religion, beginning with the Sassanian dynasty. They
are important for a study of Gnosticism.


[See also Vols. XVIII, XXIV, XXXVII, and XLVII.]


Vous. VI any Ix. The Qur'an.
PartsIand IJ. Translated by E.H.Patmer. 8vo, cloth, 21s.


This translation, carried out according to his own peculiar views
of the origin of the Qur’dn, was the last great work of E. 7. Palmer,
before he was murdered in Egypt.


[*,* Vols. VI and IX can only be supplied as part of a complete set of
the First Series.]


vou. vit. The Institutes of Vishzu.
Translated by Jutius Jotty. 8vo, cloth, ros. 6d.


A collection of legal aphorisms, closely connected with one of the
oldest Vedic schools, the Kathas, but considerably added to i later
time. Of importance for a critical study of the Laws of Manu.


Vou. vit. The Bhagavadgita, with The Sanatsugatiya,
and The Anugita.
Translated by KAasuinArn Trimpak Terane. Second Edition.
8vo, cloth, ros. 6d.
The earliest philosophical and religious poem of India. It has been
paraphrased in Arnold’s ‘Song Celestial.’


vou. X. The Dhammapada,
Translated from Pali by F. Max Murrer; and
The Sutta-Nipata,
Translated from P4li by V. Fausséti ; being Canonical Books
of the Buddhists. Second Edztion. 8vo, cloth, ros. 6d.


The Dhammapada contains the quintessence of Buddhist morality.
The Sutta-Nipdta gives the authentic teaching of Buddha on some
of the fundamental principles of religion.


4 SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST:


Vou. XI. Buddhist Suttas. :
Translated from Pali by T. W. Ruys Davins. 1. The Mahda-
parinibbana Suttanta; 2, The Dhamma-sakka-ppavattana
Sutta. 3. The Tevigga Suttanta; 4. The Akankheyya Sutta ;
5. The Xetokhila Sutta; 6. The Maha-sudassana Suttanta ;
7. The Sabbasava Sutta. 8vo, cloth, ros. 6d.


A collection of the most important religious, moral, and philosophical
discourses taken from the sacred canon of the Buddhists.


vou. X11. The Satapatha-Brahmama, according to the
Text of the Madhyandina School.


Translated by Jutius Eecrrine. Part I. Books I and II.
8vo, cloth, 12s. 6d.


A minute account of the sacrificial ceremonies of the Vedic age.
Lt contains the earliest account of the Deluge in India.


[See also Vols. XXVI, XLI, XLII, and XLIV.]


Vou. XIII. Vinaya Texts.


Translated from the Pali by T. W. Ruys Davins and HERMANN
OLpENBERG. Part I. The Patimokkha. The Mahavagga, I-IV.
8vo, cloth, 1os. 6d.


The Vinaya Texis give for the Jirsi time a translation of the moral
code of the Buddhist religion as settled tn the third century B.C.
[See also Vols. XVII and XX.]


vou. XIv. The Sacred Laws of the Aryas,
As taught in the Schools of Apastamba, Gautama, VAsish/ha,
and Baudhayana. Translated by Grore Biurer. Part II.


Vasish/ha and Baudhayana. 8vo, cloth, ros. 6d.

Vou. XV. The Upanishads.
Translated by F. Max Mttrzr. Part II. The Kazha-upanishad,
The Muzdaka-upanishad, The Taittirtyaka-upanishad, The


Brchadaranyaka-upanishad, The Svetasvatara-upanishad, The
Pras#a-upanishad, and The Maitrayava-brahmama-upanishad,


Svo, cloth, ros. 6d.
Vou. XVI. The Sacred Books of China.


The Texts of Confucianism, Translated by James Lzece,
Part II. The Yt King. 8vo, cloth, ros. 6d.


[See also Vols. XXVII, XXVIII]
VoL. XVII. Vinaya Texts.


Translated from the Péli by T. W. Ruys Davips and HERMANN


OLDENBERG. PartII. The Mahavagega, V-X. The Xulla
I-III. 8vo, cloth. ros. 6d, had thes:


EDITED BY F. MAX MULLER,


On


Von. xvitt. Pahlavi Texts.


Translated by E,W. West. Part Il. The Dadistan-i Dinik
and The Epistles of Mantissthar. 8vo, cloth, 12s. 6d.


Von, XIX. The Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.
A Life of Buddha by Asvaghosha Bodhisattva, translated from
Sanskrit into Chinese by Dharmaraksha, a.p. 420, and from
Chinese into English by Samuret Brat. 8vo, cloth, ros. 6d.
This life of Buddha was translated from Sanskrit into Chinese,
A.D. 420. Jt contains many legends, some of which show a certain
similarity to the Evangelium infanttae, §c.


Mot xx. Vinaya Texts.


Translated from the Pali by T. W. Ruys Davips and Hermann


Oxpenserc. Part III. The Aullavagga, IV-XII. 8vo, cloth,
tos. 6d,


Vou, XXI. The Saddharma-puzdarika ; or, The Lotus
of the True Law.


Translated by H. Kern. 8vo, cloth, 12s. 6d.
‘ The Lotus of the True Law,’ a canonical book of the Northern
Buddhists, translated from Sanskrit. There ts a Chinese transla-
tion of this book which was finished as early as the year 286 A.D.


Vou, XXII. Gaina-Sitras.
Translated from Prakrit by Hermann Jacosr. Part I. The
Akaranga-Sfitra and The Kalpa-Sftra. 8vo, cloth, ros. 6d.


The religion of the Gainas was founded by a contemporary of Buddha.
It still counts numerous adherents tn India, while there are no
Buddhists left in India proper.


[See Vol. XLV.]


Vou. XXIII, The Zend-Avesta.


Translated by James DarmesteTER. Part II. The Sirézahs,
Yasts, and Nyayis. 8vo, cloth, tos. 6d.


Vou. Xxiv. Pahlavi Texts.


Translated by E. W. West. Part III. Dina-i Matndg-
Khirad, Sikand-gfimantk Vigar, and Sad Dar. 8vo, cloth,
10s. 6d. -


6 SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST:


SECOND SERIBES.


Vou. XXV. Manu.
Translated by Grore Bijuter. 8vo, cloth, 21.
This translation ts founded on that of Sir William Jones, which
has been carefully revised and corrected with the help of seven native
Commentaries. An Appendix contains all the quotations from Manu
which are found in the Hindu Law-books, translated Jor the use of
the Law Courts in India. Another Appendix gives a synopsts of
parallel passages from the six Dharma-stitras, the other Smriizs,
the Upanishads, the Mahdbhéraia, §.

Vou. XXVI. The Satapatha-Brahmaza.

Translated by Jutrus Ecertinc. Part II. Books II and IV.
8vo, cloth, ras. 6d.

VOLS, XXVIT anD XXVIII. The Sacred Books of China.
The Texts of Confucianism. Translated by James Lecer. Parts
IIlandIV. The Li X73, or Collection of Treatises on the Rules
of Propriety, or Ceremonial Usages. 8vo, cloth, 255.

vou. XXIxX, The Gvrzhya-Sitras, Rules of Vedic

Domestic Ceremonies.
Part I. Sankhayana, Asvalayana, Paraskara, Khadira. Trans-
lated by Hermann OLpENBERG. 8vo, cloth, 12s. 6d.

vou. Xxx. The Gvzhya-Sitras, Rules of Vedic

Domestic Ceremonies. a
Part II. Gobhila, Hirazyakesin, Apastamba. Translated by
HERMANN OLDENBERG. Apastamba, Yagéia-paribhash4-sftras.
Translated by F. Max Mixter. 8vo, cloth, 12s. 6d.
These rules of Domestic Ceremonies describe the home life of the
ancient Aryas with a completeness and accuracy unmatched in any
other literature. Some of these rules have been incorporated in the
ancient Law-books.

Vou. XXXI. The Zend-Avesta.

Part III. The Yasna, Visparad, Afrinagan, Gahs, and
Miscellaneous Fragments. Translated by L. H. Mitts.  8vo,
cloth, 12s. 6d. ‘

Vou, XXXII. Vedic Hymns.

Translated by F. Max Mizz. Part I. 8vo, cloth, 18s. 6d.
[See also Vol. XLVI]
Vou. XXxIII. The Minor Law-books.


Translated by Juxivus Jotiy. Part I, Narada, Brzhaspati.
8vo, cloth, ros. 6d.


EDITED BY F. MAX MULLER, ¥


Von. XXxIv. The Ved4nta-Sitras, with the Com-
mentary by Sankarafarya. Part I.
Translated by G. Turpaut. 8vo, cloth, 125. 6d.
[See also Vol. XX XVIII]
Vols. XXXV AND XXXVI. The Questions of King
Milinda.
Translated from the Pali by T. W. Ruys Davis.
Part I. 8vo, cloth, ros. 6d. Part II. 8vo, cloth, 12s. 6d.

Von. Xxxvir, Pahlavi Texts.

Translated by E. W. West. Part IV. The Contents of the
Nasks, as stated in the Eighth and Ninth Books of the
Dinkard. 15s.

Vou. XXXVIII, The Vedanta-Sitras. Part II. 8vo,
cloth, with full Index to both Parts, 12s. 6d.

Vous. XXXIX awp XL. The Sacred Books of China.
The Texts of Taoism. ‘Translated by James Leccxr. $vo,
cloth, 21s.

Vou, XLI. The Satapatha-Brahmavza. Part III.
Translated by Jutius Eccxrine. 8vo, cloth, 12s. 6d.


Vou. XLII, Hymns of the Atharva-veda.
Translated by M. Broomrietp. 8vo, cloth, 2ts.


VOL. xb. The Satapatha-Brahmaza.
Translated by Jutrus Eccetine. Part IV. . Books VIII,
IX, and X, 12s. 6d.
vou. XLIV. The Satapatha-Brahmava. Part V.
[early ready.|
vou. XLV. The Gaina-Sitras.
Translated from Prakrzt, by Hermann Jacosr. Part I. The
Uttaradhyayana Sfitra, The Stitrakrstanga Sfitra. 8vo, cloth,
12s. 6d.
Vou. XLVI. Vedic Hymns. Part II. 8vo, cloth, 14s.
vou. xLviI. Pahlavi Texts.
Translated by E. W. West. Part V. Marvels of Zoroas-
trianism. 8s. 6d.
Vou. XLVIU. The Vedanta-Sitras, with Ramanuga’s
Sribhashya.
Translated by G. THiBavuT. [Ln the Press.]
vou. XLIX. Buddhist Mahayana Texts. Buddha-
harita, translated by E. B. CowE tt. Sukhavatt-vytha, Vagrakkhe-
dika, &c., translated by F. Max Murrer. Amitayur-Dhyana-
Sfitra, translated by J. Taxaxusu. 8vo, cloth, 12s. 6d,


8 RECENT ORIENTAL WORKS.


Anecdota Oxvoniensta.
ARYAN SERIES.
Buddhist Texts from Fapan. 1. Vagrakkhedika ; The
Diamond-Cutter.
Edited by F. Max Miier, M.A. Small 4to, 35. 6d.
One of the most famous metaphysical treatises of the Mahayana Buddhists.
Buddhist Texts from Fapan. 11. Sukhavati-Vytha :
Description of Sukhivatt, the Land of Bliss.
Edited by F. Max Miirier, M.A., and Bunyiuv Nanyio. With
two Appendices: (1) Text and Translation of Sanghavarman’s
Chinese Version of the Poetical Portions of the Sukh4vati-
Vytiha ; (2) Sanskrit Text of the Smaller Sukhdvati-Vytha.


Small 4to, 7s. 6d.
The editio princeps of the Sacred Book of one of the largest and most
influential sects of Buddhism, numbering more than ten millions of followers
in Japan alone.


Buddhist Texts from Fapan. U1. The Ancient Palm-
Leaves containing the Prag#a-Paramita-H7idaya-
Stitra and the Ushnisha-Vigaya-Dharazi.

Edited by F. Max Miixzer, M.A., and Buyyiu Nanjio, M.A.
With an Appendix by G. Binzer, C.LE. With many Plates.


Small 4to, ros.
Contains facsimiles of the oldest Sanskrit MS, at present known.


Dharma-Samgraha, an Ancient Collection of Buddhist
Technical Terms.
Prepared for publication by Kenyru Kasawara, a Buddhist
Priest from Japan, and, after his death, edited by F. Max
Mixrrr and H. Wenzer. Small 4to, 75. 6d.
Katyayana’s Sarvanukramami of the Rigveda.
With Extracts from Shadgurusishya’s Commentary entitled
Vedarthadtpika. Edited by A. A. Macponett, M.A., Ph.D. 16s.
The Buddha-Xarita of Asvaghosha.
Edited, from three MSS., by E. B. Cowerr, M.A. ras. 6d.
The Mantrapatha, or the Prayer Book of the Apa- >
stambins.
Edited, together with the Commentary of Haradatta, and
translated by M. Winrernirz, Ph.D. Z%st Part, Introduc-
tion, Sanskrit Text, Varietas Lectionis, and Appendices.
Small quarto, ros. 6d.


Orford
AT THE CLARENDON PRESS


LONDON: HENRY FROWDE ;
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS WAREHOUSE, AMEN CORNER, E.C,


Gatversity ot southern California


om

;}oic
gag
viF


THEOLOGY LIBRARY
SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY AT CLAREMONT
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA


a. a Pa - 4
fps ee ree See tn ee ee CS ea eer


iain aS inne iysiaey 14s ialagrearareiok jemaaramany ae patina


‘
4


Lil enema i te a


a en ee, oe ae ee PN
